The EMBO Journal Peer Review Process File - EMBO - 2012 - 82043 © European Molecular Biology Organization 1 Manuscript EMBO - 2012 - 82043 Molecular basis for SNX - BAR - mediated assembly of distinct endosomal sorting tubules . Jan R . T . van Weering , Richard B . Sessions , Colin J . Traer , Daniel P . Kloer , Vikram K . Bhatia , Dimitrios Stamou , Sven R . Carlsson , James H . Hurley and Peter J . Cullen Corresponding author : Peter Cullen , University of Bristol Review timeline : Submission date : 16 May 2012 Editorial Decision : 15 June 2012 Revision received : 05 September 2012 Editorial Decision : 13 September 2012 Revision received : 21 September 2012 Accepted : 25 September 2012 Transaction Report : ( Note : With the exception of the correction of typographical or spelling errors that could be a source of ambiguity , letters and reports are not edited . The original formatting of letters and referee reports may not be reflected in this compilation . ) 1st Editorial Decision 15 June 2012 Thank you for submitting your manuscript for consideration by The EMBO Journal . Three referees have now evaluated it , and their comments are shown below . As you will see , the referees all consider the study as interesting and important and would support its publication here after appropriate revision . Given the referees ' positive recommendations , I would like to invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points put forward by the referees in an adequate manner and to their satisfaction . In particular , it will be important to include in vivo ( cell culture ) data along the lines suggested by referee 2 to strengthen the functional and physiological aspect of the study and to address the mechanistic points raised by the other two referees . Please do not hesitate to get back to us at any time in case you would like to discuss any aspect of the revision further . I should add that it is EMBO Journal policy to allow only a single round of revision and that acceptance of your manuscript will therefore depend on the completeness of your responses in this revised version . When preparing your letter of response to the referees ' comments , please bear in mind that this will form part of the Peer Review Process File , and will therefore be available online to the community . For more details on our Transparent Editorial Process , please visit our website : http : / / www . nature . com / emboj / about / process . html We generally allow three months as standard revision time . As a matter of policy , competing manuscripts published during this period will not negatively impact on our assessment of the The EMBO Journal Peer Review Process File - EMBO - 2012 - 82043 © European Molecular Biology Organization 2 conceptual advance presented by your study . However , we request that you contact the editor as soon as possible upon publication of any related work , to discuss how to proceed . Should you foresee a problem in meeting this three - month deadline , please let us know in advance and we may be able to grant an extension . Thank you for the opportunity to consider your work for publication . I look forward to your revision . Yours sincerely , Editor The EMBO Journal _ _ _ _ _ REFEREE REPORTS : Referee # 1 ( Remarks to the Author ) : The manuscript by van Weering et al . describes a global analysis of the entire SNX - BAR protein family , which includes proteins that are involved in generating and organizing the tubular endosomal network . By comparing the tubulation activity of all twelve human SNX - BAR proteins , the authors demonstrate that only a subset of proteins facilitates vesicle - to - tubule transitions , while others only bind to vesicles without deforming them . A new crystal structure of the BAR domain of SNX1 and structure - based modeling reveals further heterogeneity within the SNX - BAR family . The structural analysis provides a rationale for the distinct homo - and heterodimerization preferences , which the authors observed in SNX - BAR family - wide pull - down experiments . They also identify an amphipathic helix as a conserved feature of SNX - BAR proteins . Finally , they establish the importance of the BAR domain tip region as another determining factor that distinguishes tubulation - active vs inactive SNX - BAR proteins . Overall , this is a well - written , comprehensive manuscript , providing valuable insight into the molecular mechanisms that act in concert to generate a compartmentalized endosomal network . It demonstrates the importance of three conserved features within the SNX - BAR family : 1 . Dimerization of the BAR domains ; 2 . Membrane interactions involving an amphipathic helix ; and 3 . The tip region of the BAR domain dimer . It is also an interesting study with regard to the evolution of SNX - BAR proteins . Altogether , it will be of great interest to the field . There are several points the authors may want to consider : 1 . It is clear from the data that the distal tip region of the BAR dimer is an important feature for the tubulation activity of a subset of SNX - BAR domain proteins . In particular , the authors show that the tip of the tubulating SNX1 , introduced into an otherwise tubulation - incompetent SNX - BAR protein , confers tubulation activity . I am just not convinced that the authors have demonstrated unambiguously that the positive effect of the tips is due to lattice contacts or tip - to - tip interactions . The experimental evidence and analysis is probably the weakest point of the manuscript , although I acknowledge the complexity of proofing this point beyond doubt ( given the cooperativity that is built into this system ) . Yet , an alternative worth discussing is the more trivial explanation that introducing two positively charged residues at the tips may increase membrane affinity , especially at these critical locations on the BAR domain dimer . While it is an elegant solution for the generation of distinct membrane compartments or tubules , I am not sure that one has to infer tip - to - tip interactions as the underlying mechanism . I suggest a less biased discussion regarding this point . 2 . Is it sufficient to mutate two Snx5 tip residues to lysines ( rather than swapping out the entire tip region ) ? 3 . Figure 7D : How does the SNX1 - K442 / 445A mutant behave in liposome pelleting assays ? 4 . The SNX1 crystal structure and SNX5 homology model highlight the importance of charged residues in the BAR domain dimer interface , which destabilize SNX1 homodimers in favor of the formation of SNX1 - SNX5 complexes . Have the authors attempted the modeling of SNX1 - SNX5 The EMBO Journal Peer Review Process File - EMBO - 2012 - 82043 © European Molecular Biology Organization 3 heterodimers ? Such an analysis may reveal secondary interactions important for high - affinity heterodimerization . 5 . There is very little discussion regarding the functional roles of the PX domain , which is present in the SNX - BAR proteins . Is it possible that a difference in their affinity for certain phosphatidylinositol phosphate head groups could account for homomeric ( lattice ) interactions , as part of a conincidence detection mechanism and the generation of distinct endosomal tubules ? 6 . Given the nature of the work , the reader would benefit from a final table summarizing the results . Such a table could list the isoform - specific membrane deformation potential , dimerization preferences , domain makeup of the SNX - BAR proteins , and the sequence of the amphipathic helix . 7 . Is it possible that the non - tubulating SNX - BAR proteins are autoinhibited , rather than inactive ? A functional comparison between full - length and PX - BAR domains would address this question . 8 . The authors mention differences between the SNX1 - BAR domain structure and the previously published SNX9 - PX - BAR domain structures ( Pylypenko et al . , EMBO J , 2007 ) . Illustrating a side - by - side comparison would be a valuable addition to Figure 4 . 9 . The authors mention the possibility of conformational changes within the BAR domain dimer ( in the results section dealing with the SNX1 crystal structure ) and tip - to - tip interactions of SNX - BAR proteins ( in the discussion ) . Both aspects have been described for SNX9 previously ( Wang et al . , Structure , 2008 ) , and the author could consider discussing these independent results in the present context . 10 . Could the authors comment on the poor correlation of hydrophobic extent of the amphipathic helix and tubulation activity / tube diameter ? 11 . What would happen when liposomes were presented with two tubulation capable SNX - BAR proteins with distinct curvature prefences ? 12 . As a final comment , on the philosophical side , considering the hetero - dimerization of SNX - BAR proteins ( especially of tubulation - active and inactive isoforms ) , could the authors discuss a functional consequence for the cell ? Referee # 2 ( Remarks to the Author ) : Van Weering et al . Molecular insight into the SNX - BAR - mediated formation of distinct endosomal sorting tubules . In this manuscript the authors report an extensive study of the mechanics of tubules formation by Sorting nexin proteins using in - vitro assays . This work builds on and extends what has been published previously that Sorting nexins of the Snx - BAR family can mediate tubule formation from endosomes and other organelles . The approach of conducting the experiments using an in - vitro system of liposome binding / tubulation is both a strength and a weakness . Clearly in order to study the ability of individual Sorting nexin proteins to mediate tubule formation , an in vitro approach is appropriate . However , this approach and the conclusions that can be drawn from it , is also limited by virtue of the fact that in - vivo , tubule formation involves a multitude of factors including key roles for the cytoskeleton and possibly other proteins such as clathrin . Given the extensive and detailed nature of the study by Van Weering et al . , it would be wrong to suggest that the study is too preliminary but I do think that some additional data that explores the requirements of tubule formation in vivo would strengthen the study and broaden its appeal . Major points : 1 . Is there any evidence that Snx1 operates as a homo dimer in vivo ? Much of the in - vitro evidence presented involves use of a single sorting nexin protein added to liposomes . The conclusions drawn from this approach are open to question however as , in vivo , Snx1 associates with Snx5 or Snx6 . The EMBO Journal Peer Review Process File - EMBO - 2012 - 82043 © European Molecular Biology Organization 4 The yeast homolog of Snx1 is Vps5p that functions as an obligate heterodimer with Vps17p . I think the authors should exercise caution and restraint when interpreting their data regarding the tubulation observed when single sorting nexin proteins are tested in their assay . 2 . A set of experiments that the authors could perform that would exploit the in - vitro system fully is to test the effect of different splice variants of sorting nexin proteins on tubulation . For example , Snx1 is alternatively spliced to generate three variants , could the authors test these different variants in the tubulation assay to explore whether the different variants confer different biological properties ? 3 . Could the authors test some of the mutations they made in the amphipathic helices or tip - loop residues in an in vivo situation ? The authors have experience of imaging tubule formation using GFP - tagged constructs . Whilst I accept there are limitations to how much can be learned in a relatively ' dirty ' whole - cell system , extending the observations made through the in - vitro assays to the cell would add much to the biological relevance of the study . 4 . How do the observed liposome - derived tubules for Snx9 , Snx18 and Snx33 compare to the in - vivo situation ? Clearly Snx1 - tubules formed in - vitro are a good fit for the in - vivo tubules observed , but does this hold true for the other sorting nexins investigated ? 5 . It looks to me that Snx8 is somehow better at binding to liposomes that many other Snx proteins tested . Is this real ? Is there an explanation for this observation ? 6 . The model at the end suggests that tubules generated by different snx proteins can form from the same endosome . Can this be tested in vitro using , for example , recombinant Snx1 and Snx4 simultaneously to determine if the model is valid . It would be necessary in such an assay to label the tubules formed with antibodies and this may be a limiting factor but it should be possible to express the recombinant proteins with epitope tags to aid detection . 7 . A minor point really but I think the title is a little strange . I ' m not sure what a " molecular insight " is . I would suggest that a change in the wording that reflects the findings is appropriate ; for example , " In vitro analysis of SNX - BAR assembly reveals insights into the molecular mechanisms of distinct endosomal tubule formation . " Referee # 3 ( Remarks to the Author ) : The manuscript by Van Weering et al evaluates systematically the membrane binding and remodeling activities of the mammalian SNX - BAR proteins . Their contribution clarifies the nature of the hetero - and homo - dimers formed within the family - - with implications for understanding sorting specificity within the endosomal system . Moreover , their observations are consistent with a large number of reports that focus on three mechanisms at work in membrane re - modeling : 1 ) the specificity of BAR domain dimer - interfaces and the resulting degree of overall curvature generated by dimerization ; 2 ) the insertion of amphipathic helices into one leaflet to buckle the membrane ; and 3 ) the propagation of local curvature over longer length scales by higher - order oligomer formation between neighboring BAR domains . The work reported is a useful step forward , although I have two major comments : 1 ) Several membrane - binding proteins that tubulate liposomes in vitro will also vesiculate liposomes . The balance between stable tubules versus small vesicles depends on a few factors , including lipid - to - protein ratio , lipid species within the model membranes , temperature and the melting point of the abundant lipid species used , and finally the mechanical forces involved in depositing onto charged TEM grids and subsequent dessication and staining . To my eye , the negative stain TEM for all the Snxs ( including the non - tubulating Snx5 , Snx7 , Snx30 and Snx5 - AA ) suggest some degree of small vesicle formation . It seems critical to me to evaluate this for this paper . There are many ways of doing so , including 1 ) reverse sedimentation centrifugation , 2 ) light scattering , 3 ) cryo - TEM , 4 ) evaluating the lipid content of the supernatant versus the pellet of a sedimentation assay ( See Boucrot et al Cell 2012 for example ) . 2 ) While I agree with their overall view of the importance of higher - order oligomer / coat formation , this manuscript does not report a compelling loss - of - function mutant for coat formation . The two tip lysines that were mutated may be involved in electrostatic attraction to the membrane rather than coat formation ( though even the double mutant does not appear to have a l - o - f phenotype ) . The chimera that confers tubulation competence to Snx5 is notable , but the chimera involves a large region ( 41 amino acids ) . As with F - BAR and N - BAR proteins that appear to form helical coats , the authors could notably strengthen their claim for the sorting nexins if they identified key residues that The EMBO Journal Peer Review Process File - EMBO - 2012 - 82043 © European Molecular Biology Organization 5 mediate specific inter - subunit interactions and show that mutants have phenotypes in vitro and in living cells . Minor comments : 1 ) Fig 6C , some of the TEM panels are too " red " , suggesting an unusual color balance . 2 ) I believe there is a spelling error on Page 13 , the last fifth , " from " should be form . 1st Revision - authors ' response 05 September 2012 Referee comments are quoted in italic . Referee # 1 ( Remarks to the Author ) : The manuscript by van Weering et al . describes a global analysis of the entire SNX - BAR protein family , which includes proteins that are involved in generating and organizing the tubular endosomal network . By comparing the tubulation activity of all twelve human SNX - BAR proteins , the authors demonstrate that only a subset of proteins facilitates vesicle - to - tubule transitions , while others only bind to vesicles without deforming them . A new crystal structure of the BAR domain of SNX1 and structure - based modeling reveals further heterogeneity within the SNX - BAR family . The structural analysis provides a rationale for the distinct homo - and heterodimerization preferences , which the authors observed in SNX - BAR family - wide pull - down experiments . They also identify an amphipathic helix as a conserved feature of SNX - BAR proteins . Finally , they establish the importance of the BAR domain tip region as another determining factor that distinguishes tubulation - active vs inactive SNX - BAR proteins . Overall , this is a well - written , comprehensive manuscript , providing valuable insight into the molecular mechanisms that act in concert to generate a compartmentalized endosomal network . It demonstrates the importance of three conserved features within the SNX - BAR family : 1 . Dimerization of the BAR domains ; 2 . Membrane interactions involving an amphipathic helix ; and 3 . The tip region of the BAR domain dimer . It is also an interesting study with regard to the evolution of SNX - BAR proteins . Altogether , it will be of great interest to the field . There are several points the authors may want to consider : 1 . It is clear from the data that the distal tip region of the BAR dimer is an important feature for the tubulation activity of a subset of SNX - BAR domain proteins . In particular , the authors show that the tip of the tubulating SNX1 , introduced into an otherwise tubulation - incompetent SNX - BAR protein , confers tubulation activity . I am just not convinced that the authors have demonstrated unambiguously that the positive effect of the tips is due to lattice contacts or tip - to - tip interactions . The experimental evidence and analysis is probably the weakest point of the manuscript , although I acknowledge the complexity of proofing this point beyond doubt ( given the cooperativity that is built into this system ) . Yet , an alternative worth discussing is the more trivial explanation that introducing two positively charged residues at the tips may increase membrane affinity , especially at these critical locations on the BAR domain dimer . While it is an elegant solution for the generation of distinct membrane compartments or tubules , I am not sure that one has to infer tip - to - tip interactions as the underlying mechanism . I suggest a less biased discussion regarding this point . We have altered the discussion to reflect the point raised by the reviewer . Indeed , we cannot exclude that the tip - loop region of SNX1 in the SNX5 - BAR domain regulates interactions - other then the tip - to - tip contacts - to further stabilize the membrane tubule . It is however unlikely that K442 or K445 are responsible for this effect , as we show that these residues are dispensable for the membrane remodeling The EMBO Journal Peer Review Process File - EMBO - 2012 - 82043 © European Molecular Biology Organization 6 capacity of SNX1 ( Figure 7B , and see also comment below ) . Furthermore , the liposome sedimentation assays do not indicate a difference in membrane association between SNX5 - WT and SNX5 - 1TIP , suggesting that a protein - protein interaction ( s ) is / are responsible for the gain - of - function of this SNX5 mutant rather than a general increase in membrane association . 2 . Is it sufficient to mutate two Snx5 tip residues to lysines ( rather than swapping out the entire tip region ) ? To clarify the difference between SNX5 - WT and SNX5 - 1TIP mutant , we have included the amino - acid alignment of the tip - loop region of these proteins and the charge distribution of the SNX5 - WT and SNX5 - 1TIP in a new supplementary figure ( Supplementary Figure S7 ) . These show that the predicted tip - loop regions of SNX5 have very similar charge distribution to that observed with SNX1 . More specifically , the tip - loop region contains similar positioned lysines as SNX1 ( SNX5 K332 / K334 ) , indicating that the presence of lysines in the tip - loop region is apparently not different between these SNX - BARs . 3 . Figure 7D : How does the SNX1 - K442 / 445A mutant behave in liposome pelleting assays ? We have included the SNX1 - K442 / 445A sedimentation data in a revised Figure 7D , confirming that the mutant associates with liposomes to a similar extent as wild - type . 4 . The SNX1 crystal structure and SNX5 homology model highlight the importance of charged residues in the BAR domain dimer interface , which destabilize SNX1 homodimers in favor of the formation of SNX1 - SNX5 complexes . Have the authors attempted the modeling of SNX1 - SNX5 heterodimers ? Such an analysis may reveal secondary interactions important for high - affinity heterodimerization . The sequence homology among the BAR domains of SNX - BAR proteins is low ( less then 20 % ) , which makes molecular modeling very challenging . For this reason , we only included data from the SNX5 homology model that we could experimentally verify in immuno - precipitation and / or membrane remodeling assays . We have however fitted the SNX1 crystal structure and the SNX5 homology model to construct a SNX1 : SNX5 heterodimer model and , apart from the charged SNX1 R337 and SNX5 E280 / E383 residues , no obvious residues stand out as contributing to the specific SNX1 : SNX5 dimerization . However , we prefer not to include this " mixed " SNX1 : SNX5 dimer model because it could be misleading due to the uncertainties outlined above . 5 . There is very little discussion regarding the functional roles of the PX domain , which is present in the SNX - BAR proteins . Is it possible that a difference in their affinity for certain phosphatidylinositol phosphate head groups could account for homomeric ( lattice ) interactions , as part of a conincidence detection mechanism and the generation of distinct endosomal tubules ? Phosphoinositide binding to the PX domain is crucial for the recruitment of SNX - BAR proteins to different membrane domains of the endocytic network . For example , SNX9 associates with PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 and is mainly localized to endocytic pits on the plasma membrane ( Yarar et al . , ( 2008 ) Traffic 9 , 133 - 146 ; Nunez et al . , ( 2011 ) Traffic 12 , 1868 - 1878 ) , while SNX1 has affinity for PtdIns ( 3 ) P ( and PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P 2 ) and is associated with early and early - to - late transition endosomes ( Cozier et al . , ( 2002 ) J Biol Chem 277 , 48730 - 48736 ; Mari et al . , ( 2008 ) Traffic 9 , 380 - 393 ; van Weering et al . , ( 2012 ) Traffic 13 , 94 - 107 ) . For these proteins , the formation of tubules on spatially separated compartments will therefore be determined , in part , by their distinct phosphoinositide - binding profiles . However for other SNX - BARs , for example the PtdIns ( 3 ) P - binding SNX4 and SNX8 , co - localisation is observed with SNX1 on PtdIns ( 3 ) P - enriched endosomes ( Traer et al . , ( 2007 ) Nat Cell Biol 9 , 1370 - 1380 ; van Weering et al . , ( 2012 ) Traffic 13 , 94 - 107 ) . From these compartments live cell imaging has revealed the formation of distinct tubules emanating from the same endosomal vacuole , for instance distinct SNX1 - and SNX4 - The EMBO Journal Peer Review Process File - EMBO - 2012 - 82043 © European Molecular Biology Organization 7 decorated tubules ( Traer et al . , ( 2007 ) Nat Cell Biol 9 , 1370 - 1380 ) . In these cases , differences in phosphoinositide - binding would appear insufficient to explain the formation of such distinct tubules ( Note : the Folch bovine brain lipid extracts used in the present study contains a number of phosphoinositides including PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ) . Finally , it is worth noting that there is no correlation between phosphoinositide binding profiles and the ability of SNX - BARs to drive tubulation : for example SNX4 ( forms tubules ) and SNX7 ( does not form tubules ) each associate with PtdIns ( 3 ) P ( Xu et al . , ( 2001 ) Nat Cell Biol 3 , 658 - 666 ; Traer et al . , ( 2007 ) Nat Cell Biol 9 , 1370 - 1380 ) . Also , by selective mutation of the BAR domain of the non - tubulating SNX5 we have engineered a SNX5 mutant capable of remodeling membranes ; in this instance , the SNX5 PX domain was common to both wild - type and mutant proteins , again consistent with variation in phosphoinositide - binding not being a major determinant in lattice formation . 6 . Given the nature of the work , the reader would benefit from a final table summarizing the results . Such a table could list the isoform - specific membrane deformation potential , dimerization preferences , domain makeup of the SNX - BAR proteins , and the sequence of the amphipathic helix . We have included an overview of the data presented in new Table III and an outline of the domain structure of the human SNX - BAR proteins in Supplementary Figure 3A . 7 . Is it possible that the non - tubulating SNX - BAR proteins are autoinhibited , rather than inactive ? A functional comparison between full - length and PX - BAR domains would address this question . The non - tubulating SNX5 is composed almost exclusively of PX and BAR domains . Of the 404 amino acids encoding for the SNX - BAR , the PX domain stretches from residue 32 - 169 and the BAR domain from 179 - 393 , leaving 31 N - terminal and 10 C - terminal residues outside these annotated domains ( Supplementary Figure 3A ) . Since these residues are also present in the SNX5AA - 1TIP mutant that can remodel liposomes into tubules ( Fig . 7C ) , we have no evidence that these residues are inhibiting SNX5 - WT to form membrane tubules . 8 . The authors mention differences between the SNX1 - BAR domain structure and the previously published SNX9 - PX - BAR domain structures ( Pylypenko et al . , EMBO J , 2007 ) . Illustrating a side - by - side comparison would be a valuable addition to Figure 4 . We have included the side view of the SNX9 - BAR dimer in Figure 4B to illustrate the comparison to the SNX1 - BAR dimer . 9 . The authors mention the possibility of conformational changes within the BAR domain dimer ( in the results section dealing with the SNX1 crystal structure ) and tip - to - tip interactions of SNX - BAR proteins ( in the discussion ) . Both aspects have been described for SNX9 previously ( Wang et al . , Structure , 2008 ) , and the author could consider discussing these independent results in the present context . We have highlighted this in the discussion . 10 . Could the authors comment on the poor correlation of hydrophobic extent of the amphipathic helix and tubulation activity / tube diameter ? The amphipathic helix , the PX domain and the BAR - domain all contribute to the membrane remodeling as shown in the present study and by others ( e . g . Carlton et al ( 2004 ) Curr Biol 14 , 1791 - 1800 ; Pylypenko et al . , ( 2007 ) EMBO J 26 , 4788 - 4800 ) . It is clear that a functional amphipathic helix is essential for membrane remodeling , but tubule diameter will most likely be determined by the geometry of the SNX - BAR oligomer . Such regulation of tubule diameter has been suggested for F - BAR domains ( Frost et al . , ( 2008 ) Cell 132 , 807 - 817 ) . We have added this comment in the discussion . The EMBO Journal Peer Review Process File - EMBO - 2012 - 82043 © European Molecular Biology Organization 8 11 . What would happen when liposomes were presented with two tubulation capable SNX - BAR proteins with distinct curvature prefences ? We have included new experimental data of preincubating SNX9 ( forming ~ 60 nm tubules ) with SNX33 ( forming ~ 20 nm tubules ) before adding the protein mixture to the liposomes . We observed two completely separated populations of tubules of ~ 20 nm and ~ 60 nm , respectively . These results suggest that SNX9 and SNX33 form two distinct sets of tubules in vitro , and do not mix identity . We have included these results in new Figure 7E and F . 12 . As a final comment , on the philosophical side , considering the hetero - dimerization of SNX - BAR proteins ( especially of tubulation - active and inactive isoforms ) , could the authors discuss a functional consequence for the cell ? Previous work from our lab has shown that the SNX1 - and SNX2 - retromer complexes carry different cargo ( Bujny et al . 2007 J Cell Sci 120 pp2010 - 21 ) . Hence , the expansion from one retromer containing the VPS5 - homodimer in T . brucei to 6 possible SNX - BAR heterodimer variants ( SNX1 or SNX2 , with SNX5 , SNX6 or SNX32 ) of retromer in mammalian cells could provide a mechanism for differential regulation of selective cargo trafficking through the retromer pathway . We have included this point in the discussion . Referee # 2 ( Remarks to the Author ) : Van Weering et al . Molecular insight into the SNX - BAR - mediated formation of distinct endosomal sorting tubules . In this manuscript the authors report an extensive study of the mechanics of tubules formation by Sorting nexin proteins using in - vitro assays . This work builds on and extends what has been published previously that Sorting nexins of the Snx - BAR family can mediate tubule formation from endosomes and other organelles . The approach of conducting the experiments using an in - vitro system of liposome binding / tubulation is both a strength and a weakness . Clearly in order to study the ability of individual Sorting nexin proteins to mediate tubule formation , an in vitro approach is appropriate . However , this approach and the conclusions that can be drawn from it , is also limited by virtue of the fact that in - vivo , tubule formation involves a multitude of factors including key roles for the cytoskeleton and possibly other proteins such as clathrin . Given the extensive and detailed nature of the study by Van Weering et al . , it would be wrong to suggest that the study is too preliminary but I do think that some additional data that explores the requirements of tubule formation in vivo would strengthen the study and broaden its appeal . Major points : 1 . Is there any evidence that Snx1 operates as a homo dimer in vivo ? Much of the in - vitro evidence presented involves use of a single sorting nexin protein added to liposomes . The conclusions drawn from this approach are open to question however as , in vivo , Snx1 associates with Snx5 or Snx6 . The yeast homolog of Snx1 is Vps5p that functions as an obligate heterodimer with Vps17p . I think the authors should exercise caution and restraint when interpreting their data regarding the tubulation observed when single sorting nexin proteins are tested in their assay . The reviewer is correct in that in vivo SNX1 forms preferential dimers with SNX5 or SNX6 rather then forming homodimers ( Wassmer et al . , ( 2007 ) J Cell Sci 120 , 45 - 54 ; Wassmer et al . , ( 2009 ) Dev Cell 17 , 110 - 122 ) and that , by taking an in vitro approach , our experimental conditions are not identical to the The EMBO Journal Peer Review Process File - EMBO - 2012 - 82043 © European Molecular Biology Organization 9 remodeling of endosomal membranes occurring in the living cell . That said , SNX5 - and SNX30 - homodimers still cannot remodel membranes in vitro , and overexpression of SNX5 in HeLa cells does not produce excessive endosomal tubulation as is observed for SNX1 ( new Supplementary Figure S6 ) , suggesting that SNX5 indeed lacks the intrinsic ability to remodel membranes . We have included this comment in the discussion . 2 . A set of experiments that the authors could perform that would exploit the in - vitro system fully is to test the effect of different splice variants of sorting nexin proteins on tubulation . For example , Snx1 is alternatively spliced to generate three variants , could the authors test these different variants in the tubulation assay to explore whether the different variants confer different biological properties ? The experiments described in this study have been performed with the SNX1A variant . Compared to SNX1A , the SNX1B splice variant lacks residues 91 - 155 , which is in the region leading up to the annotated PX domain . Splice variant SNX1D contains 25 extra residues at the C - terminus compared to SNX1A . Both splice variants contain a BAR domain that is identical to SNX1A , including the amphipathic helix region , the charged arginine in the BAR - dimer interface and the identical tip - loop region . Given that these splice variants all contain the PX - BAR unit , the basic function of membrane association and remodeling is predicted to be similar to the SNX1A isoform . Differences in N - and C - terminal residues may well prove to be functionally important with regard to protein : protein interactions , but addressing this is beyond the scope of the current study . 3 . Could the authors test some of the mutations they made in the amphipathic helices or tip - loop residues in an in vivo situation ? The authors have experience of imaging tubule formation using GFP - tagged constructs . Whilst I accept there are limitations to how much can be learned in a relatively ' dirty ' whole - cell system , extending the observations made through the in - vitro assays to the cell would add much to the biological relevance of the study . Previously published work on the amphipathic helix of SNX9 has established that mutants targeting the helix ( e . g . F208A / F211A ) retain liposome association but fail to induce tubulation ( Pylypenko et al . , ( 2007 ) EMBO J 26 , 4788 - 4800 ) . Moreover , while the F208A / F211A mutant is unable to induce tubulation when expressed in cells , it also has a reduced ability to associate with membranes ( see Fig . 5 in Pylypenko et al . , ( 2007 ) ) . Consistent with this , when the amphipathic helix mutants of SNX8 is expressed in HeLa cells as a GFP - fusion protein , association to endosomes is retained but one no longer observes the extensive membrane tubulation that is readily apparent with the wild - type protein ( Supplementary Figure S6 ) . Similar to SNX9 , SNX5 - dAH and SNX1 - dAH expression did not induce GFP - decorated tubules but interpretation of these data was compromised by the predominant cytosolic distribution of these mutants . Together these results indicate that in vivo the AH is vital for the membrane tubulating properties of SNX8 , and for some SNX - BARs this helix also contributes to membrane association . These new data are included and discussed in the revised manuscript . 4 . How do the observed liposome - derived tubules for Snx9 , Snx18 and Snx33 compare to the in - vivo situation ? Clearly Snx1 - tubules formed in - vitro are a good fit for the in - vivo tubules observed , but does this hold true for the other sorting nexins investigated ? SNX9 , SNX18 and SNX33 form the SH3 - SNX - BAR subfamily , and have been suggested to play roles in endocytosis ( Lundmark and Carlsson , ( 2009 ) J Cell Sci 122 , 5 - 11 ) , and most recently the progression and completion of mitosis ( Ma and Chircip ( 2012 ) J Cell Sci PMID : 22718350 ) . Endocytosis proceeds through a variety of stages that differ in molecular composition and level of membrane curvature . SNX9 begins to be recruited to clathrin - coated pits just prior to scission , peaking approximately 12 seconds after scission ( Taylor et al . , ( 2011 ) PLoS Biol 9 , e1000604 ) . The timed recruitment of SNX9 , mediated through the ability to sense the high membrane curvature formed during these late - stages of clathrin - mediated endocytosis , is argued to regulate further membrane remodeling and co - ordinate dynamin The EMBO Journal Peer Review Process File - EMBO - 2012 - 82043 © European Molecular Biology Organization 10 activity with a localized burst of actin polymerization that is necessary for efficient scission of clathrin - coated pits . In line with this , SNX9 is enriched in purified fraction of clathrin - coated vesicles of 50 - 100 nm diameter ( Hirst et al . , ( 2003 ) Mol Biol Cell 14 , 625 - 641 ) , and is associated with EpsF induced tubules of ~ 50 nm diameter ( Alto et al ( 2007 ) J Cell Biol 178 , 1265 - 1278 – EpsF is an effector of enteropathogenic Escherichia coli ) . The geometry of these structures correlates well with the tubules formed from liposomes by SNX9 in vitro ( Figure 2C ) . Using similar in vitro liposome assays , Willenborg and colleagues ( Willenborg et al . , ( 2011 ) J Cell Biol 195 , 71 - 86 ) have documented that SNX18 forms tubules with comparable diameters to those observed in our study , but as no immunoEM data is available for SNX18 ( or SNX33 ) , a correlation of in vitro structures with the corresponding tubular / vesicular structures observed in fixed cell is not possible . 5 . It looks to me that Snx8 is somehow better at binding to liposomes that many other Snx proteins tested . Is this real ? Is there an explanation for this observation ? From the liposome sedimentation assays we do not find a clear difference in membrane association of SNX8 compared to other SNX - BARs . The example shown in Figure 6E is in that sense not representative , we therefore replaced the example coomassie gel with another example . 6 . The model at the end suggests that tubules generated by different snx proteins can form from the same endosome . Can this be tested in vitro using , for example , recombinant Snx1 and Snx4 simultaneously to determine if the model is valid . It would be necessary in such an assay to label the tubules formed with antibodies and this may be a limiting factor but it should be possible to express the recombinant proteins with epitope tags to aid detection . We have tested various methods to address this question : • Immuno - gold labeling of liposomes incubated with SNX1 and SNX8 proved difficult due to the high amount of protein absorbed by the carbon film on the EM grid , resulting in high levels of background gold label in the absence of liposomes . • Visualization of different tubules by fluorescence microscopy , labeling recombinant SNX - BAR proteins with fluorescent dyes ( Alexa labeling kits , 488 and 594 nm ( Molecular Probes ) ) , resulted in the SNX - BAR proteins precipitated upon labeling , rendering them non - functional in membrane remodeling assays . • Exploiting the largest difference in tubule diameter within the SNX - BAR family , SNX9 - and SNX33 - decorated tubules ( ~ 60 nm and ~ 20 nm diameter , respectively ) , to allow morphological recognition of tubule - identity was however successful . When a pre - incubated mix of these proteins was exposed to liposomes , two clearly distinct populations of tubules were observed of ~ 20 and ~ 60 nm diameter ( data included in revised Figure 7E , F ) . These data indicate that distinct SNX - BAR - decorated tubules are formed simultaneously in vitro , without mixing of their molecular identity . 7 . A minor point really but I think the title is a little strange . I ' m not sure what a " molecular insight " is . I would suggest that a change in the wording that reflects the findings is appropriate ; for example , " In vitro analysis of SNX - BAR assembly reveals insights into the molecular mechanisms of distinct endosomal tubule formation . " We have changed the title to " In vitro SNX - BAR assembly reveals molecular details of distinct endosomal tubule formation " . Referee # 3 ( Remarks to the Author ) : The manuscript by Van Weering et al evaluates systematically the membrane binding and remodeling The EMBO Journal Peer Review Process File - EMBO - 2012 - 82043 © European Molecular Biology Organization 11 activities of the mammalian SNX - BAR proteins . Their contribution clarifies the nature of the hetero - and homo - dimers formed within the family - - with implications for understanding sorting specificity within the endosomal system . Moreover , their observations are consistent with a large number of reports that focus on three mechanisms at work in membrane re - modeling : 1 ) the specificity of BAR domain dimer - interfaces and the resulting degree of overall curvature generated by dimerization ; 2 ) the insertion of amphipathic helices into one leaflet to buckle the membrane ; and 3 ) the propagation of local curvature over longer length scales by higher - order oligomer formation between neighboring BAR domains . The work reported is a useful step forward , although I have two major comments : 1 ) Several membrane - binding proteins that tubulate liposomes in vitro will also vesiculate liposomes . The balance between stable tubules versus small vesicles depends on a few factors , including lipid - to - protein ratio , lipid species within the model membranes , temperature and the melting point of the abundant lipid species used , and finally the mechanical forces involved in depositing onto charged TEM grids and subsequent dessication and staining . To my eye , the negative stain TEM for all the Snxs ( including the non - tubulating Snx5 , Snx7 , Snx30 and Snx5 - AA ) suggest some degree of small vesicle formation . It seems critical to me to evaluate this for this paper . There are many ways of doing so , including 1 ) reverse sedimentation centrifugation , 2 ) light scattering , 3 ) cryo - TEM , 4 ) evaluating the lipid content of the supernatant versus the pellet of a sedimentation assay ( See Boucrot et al Cell 2012 for example ) . We tested the vesiculation of liposomes by SNX1 ( forms tubules ) and SNX5 ( does not form tubules ) in our liposome preparation according to the suggested sedimentation assay ( Boucrot et al . , 2012 ) . We did not observe a difference in the amount of small vesicles observed in the supernatant after spinning down the liposomes incubated with SNX1 , SNX5 , or buffer control , suggesting that these small vesicles are present in the liposome preparation independent of the SNX - BAR added to the mix . Most likely they are formed upon sonication of the rehydrated lipid - cake generating a suspension of lipid structures of many shapes and sizes . On extruding this suspension through 200 nm cut - off filters , these vesicles are smaller then the filter pore and hence remain in the liposome preparation . We included these new data , and a discussion of this alternative hypothesis on the absence of tubules after SNX5 incubation , in the manuscript and new supplementary Figure S2 . 2 ) While I agree with their overall view of the importance of higher - order oligomer / coat formation , this manuscript does not report a compelling loss - of - function mutant for coat formation . The two tip lysines that were mutated may be involved in electrostatic attraction to the membrane rather than coat formation ( though even the double mutant does not appear to have a l - o - f phenotype ) . The chimera that confers tubulation competence to Snx5 is notable , but the chimera involves a large region ( 41 amino acids ) . As with F - BAR and N - BAR proteins that appear to form helical coats , the authors could notably strengthen their claim for the sorting nexins if they identified key residues that mediate specific inter - subunit interactions and show that mutants have phenotypes in vitro and in living cells . While we agree with the reviewer’s comments , identifying key residues for specific inter - subunit interactions would constitute a massive undertaking . This statement is based on the following : • The papers to which the reviewer refers ( Frost et al . , ( 2008 ) Cell 132 , 807 - 817 ; Min et al . , ( 2012 ) Cell 149 , 137 - 145 ) have based their mutagenic strategies on interactions inferred from cryo - EM structures . Without an equivalent SNX - BAR structure identifying equivalent residues would require an extensive , essentially ‘blind’ mutagenic screen . • This is further compounded by the fact that the SNX - BARs helical coats are predicted to be inherently different to those of F - BAR and N - BAR since the BAR domain of SNX - BARs lies adjacent to the PX domain ( see structure of the SNX9 PX - BAR unit ( Pylypenko et al . , ( 2007 ) EMBO J 26 , 4788 - 4800 ) ) . The necessity to accommodate the PX domain will almost certainly mean that inter - subunit interactions are distinct to those described for the F - BAR and N - BAR . Using the published N - BAR and F - BAR inter - subunit interactions as a guide to describe the The EMBO Journal Peer Review Process File - EMBO - 2012 - 82043 © European Molecular Biology Organization 12 SNX - BAR interactions is therefore unlikely to succeed . It is for these reasons that in the present study we chose , as the reviewer acknowledges , to focus our attention on the tip - loop interactions . Overall , we therefore respectively conclude that without a cryoEM structure identifying precise residues necessary for inter - subunit interactions is way beyond the scope of the present study . Minor comments : 1 ) Fig 6C , some of the TEM panels are too " red " , suggesting an unusual color balance . We corrected the colour balance or CMYK conversion of these grey scale images . 2 ) I believe there is a spelling error on Page 13 , the last fifth , " from " should be form . We have corrected this spelling mistake . 2nd Editorial Decision 13 September 2012 Thank you for sending us your revised manuscript . Referee 2 has now seen it again , and you will be pleased to learn that in his / her view you have addressed all criticisms in a satisfactory manner and that the paper will therefore be publishable in The EMBO Journal . Still , he / she puts forward a few minor points ( please see below ) that you may wish to consider addressing in an amended version of the manuscript . Furthermore , there are a number of editorial issues that need further attention : * Please include a conflict of interest statement into the main body of the manuscript text after the author contribution section . * Please fuse the supplementary figures together with the supplementary figure legends to one supplementary material file and remove the supplementary figure legends from the main manuscript text file . * You may still wish to simplify the title . One suggestion would be : ' Molecular basis for SNX - BAR - mediated formation of distinct ( specific ? ) endosomal sorting tubules ' * We now encourage the publication of source data , particularly for electrophoretic gels and blots , with the aim of making primary data more accessible and transparent to the reader . Would you be willing to provide files comprising the original , uncropped and unprocessed scans of all gels used in the figures ? We would need 1 file per figure ( which can be a composite of source data from several panels ) in jpg , gif or PDF format , uploaded as " Source data files " . The gels should be labelled with the appropriate figure / panel number , and should have molecular weight markers ; further annotation would clearly be useful but is not essential . These files will be published online with the article as a supplementary " Source Data " . Please let me know if you have any questions about this policy . Thank you very much for your kind cooperation at this late stage and for considering our journal for publication of your work . Yours sincerely , Editor The EMBO Journal _ _ _ _ _ The EMBO Journal Peer Review Process File - EMBO - 2012 - 82043 © European Molecular Biology Organization 13 REFEREE REPORTS : Referee # 2 ( Remarks to the Author ) : The revised version of the manuscript by van Weering et al . has addressed most of the comments I raised in my initial review . I have only three fairly minor suggestions : 1 . Could the authors suggest or speculate as to why Snx33 produces such thin tubules when compared to Snx9 and Snx18 . What is it about Snx33 that causes this Snx protein to behave so differently ? The differences may illuminate the process of tubule formation or may yield insights into the geometry of sorting nexin oligomerization and therefore merits greater discussion than the manuscript currently provides . 2 . The paper describing the characterization of VPS5 and VPS17 in yeast ( PMID : 12181349 ) should probably be added to the list of citations . 3 . There is a typo in the legend for Figure 1c , " Homo sampiens " 2nd Revision - authors ' response 21 September 2012 Many thanks for accepting our revised manuscript " Molecular basis for SNX - BAR - mediated assembly of distinct endosomal sorting tubules " for publication in the EMBO Journal . We are happy that you and the reviewers are satisfied with the corrections we have made to the manuscript . Based on the final suggestions we have made the following changes to the work : - We changed the title to " Molecular basis for SNX - BAR - mediated assembly of distinct endosomal sorting tubules " . - We spotted an error in figure 7D , where SNX1 - K442A gel was annotated with both SNX1 - K442A and SNX1 - K445A . We replaced the SNX1 - K445A gel for the correct corresponding experiment . - We added a conflict of interest statement . - We moved the supplementary figure legends to the supplementary figures . - We included the original uncropped blot / gel scans of the images used in the figures as source data . - We included the PDB code for the SNX1 homodimer structure . - We made the small adjustments suggested by referee 2 as stated below . With these adjustments , we hope that the new manuscript is now suitable for publication . Referee comments are quoted in italic . Referee # 2 ( Remarks to the Author ) : The revised version of the manuscript by van Weering et al . has addressed most of the comments I raised in my initial review . I have only three fairly minor suggestions : 1 . Could the authors suggest or speculate as to why Snx33 produces such thin tubules when compared to Snx9 and Snx18 . What is it about Snx33 that causes this Snx protein to behave so differently ? The differences may illuminate the process of tubule formation or may yield insights into the geometry of sorting nexin oligomerization and therefore merits greater discussion than the manuscript currently provides . We do not know the reason why SNX33 - induced tubules are so much thinner compared to SNX9 or The EMBO Journal Peer Review Process File - EMBO - 2012 - 82043 © European Molecular Biology Organization 14 SNX18 - decorated tubules . Potentially , the SNX33 - BAR dimer structure is more curved then the dimer of SNX9 , or the SNX33 oligomer might organized differently that stabilized high membrane curvature . We have put forward these two possible explanations for the difference in tubule diameter in the results section that discusses these results . 2 . The paper describing the characterization of VPS5 and VPS17 in yeast ( PMID : 12181349 ) should probably be added to the list of citations . We included this citation . 3 . There is a typo in the legend for Figure 1c , " Homo sampiens " We corrected this typo .