Development of Analogical Problem - Solving Skill Author ( s ) : Keith J . Holyoak , Ellen N . Junn and Dorrit O . Billman Reviewed work ( s ) : Source : Child Development , Vol . 55 , No . 6 ( Dec . , 1984 ) , pp . 2042 - 2055 Published by : Wiley on behalf of the Society for Research in Child Development Stable URL : http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 1129778 . Accessed : 30 / 11 / 2012 13 : 48 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use , available at . http : / / www . jstor . org / page / info / about / policies / terms . jsp . JSTOR is a not - for - profit service that helps scholars , researchers , and students discover , use , and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive . We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship . For more information about JSTOR , please contact support @ jstor . org . . Wiley and Society for Research in Child Development are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize , preserve and extend access to Child Development . http : / / www . jstor . org This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192 . 168 . 82 . 217 on Fri , 30 Nov 2012 13 : 48 : 38 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Development of Analogical Problem - Solving Skill Keith J . Holyoak University of Michigan Ellen N . Junn Princeton Unive - sity Dorrit O . Billman University of Pennsylvania HOLYOAK , KEITH J . ; JUNN , ELLEN N . ; and BILLMAN , DOR(cid:127)gT O . Development of Analogical Problem - Solving Skill . CHILD DEVELOPMENT , 1984 , 55 , 2042 - 2055 . 3 experiments were performed to assess children ' s ability to solve a problem by analogy to a superficially dissimilar situation . Preschoolers and fifth and sixth graders were asked to solve a problem that allowed multiple solutions . Some subjects were first read a story that included an analogous problem and its solution . When the mapping between the relations involved in the corresponding solutions was relatively simple , and the corresponding instruments were perceptually and functionally similar , even preschoolers were able to use the analogy to derive a solution to the transfer problem ( Experiment 1 ) . Furthermore , salient similarity of the instruments was neither sufficient ( Experiment 2 ) nor necessary ( Experi - ment 3 ) for success by preschool subjects . When the story analog mapped well onto the transfer problem , 4 - year - olds were often able to generate a solution that required transformation of an object with little perceptual or semantic similarity to the instrument used in the base analog ( Experiment 3 ) . The older children used analogies in a manner qualitatively similar to that observed in compara - ble studies with adults ( Experiment 1 ) , whereas the younger children exhibited different limita - tions . Analogical thinking is widely recognized as a hallmark of human intelligence , and as such the course of its development is a topic of clear importance . The developmental litera - ture in this area has almost exclusively con - cerned itself with " analogy problems " of the sort used in intelligence tests , most commonly " proportional " analogies of the form A : B : : C : ? ( for a brief review , see Sternberg , 1982 ) . The consensus of most of this research is that chil - dren have great difficulty solving even simple analogy problems prior to at least age 9 ( Levinson & Carpenter , 1974 ; Lunzer , 1965 ; Piaget , Montangero , & Billeter , 1977 ; Stern - berg & Rifkin , 1979 ) . Experimental studies of the development of metaphorical comprehen - sion indicate that performance is generally poor prior to middle childhood ( Winner , Rosenstiel , & Gardner , 1976 ) , unless the metaphor is based on salient perceptual similarities ( Vosniadou & Ortony , 1983 ) . However , some sensitivity to analogical relations is apparently within the competence of very young children . The essence of analogical thinking is the transfer of knowl - edge from one situation to another by a pro - cess of mapping - finding a partial set of corre - spondences between the elements ( objects , attributes and relations ) that form the mental representations of the two situations ( Hesse , 1966 ) . Mapping processes seem to underlie both social modeling ( Holyoak & Gordon , 1984 ) and " make - believe " play , which are clearly exhibited by 3 - year - olds ( Garvey , 1977 ) . For example , when a girl pretends to be the mother of her doll , she modulates her behavior to bring it into correspondence with This research was supported by NIMH Research Scientist Development Award 1 - K02 - MH00342 - 03 and NSF grant BNS - 8216068 , both to K . J . Holyoak . Mary Gick provided both valuable advice on the experimental design and comments on an earlier draft . Robert Sternberg and several anonymous referees also provided helpful comments . Tsila Evers assisted in testing subjects . We are grateful for the cooperation of the students and teachers of Ann Arbor Action Child Care , Jack and Jill Learning Center , Little Lamb Nursery , Perry Nursery School , Pound House Child Care Center ( all in Ann Arbor , Michigan ) , Maplewood Elementary School of Jenison , Michigan , and Chapin School of Princeton , New Jersey . Reprint requests should be sent to K . J . Holyoak , University of Michigan , Human Performance Center , 330 Packard Road , Ann Arbor , Michigan 48104 . [ Child Development , 1984 , 55 , 2042 - 2055 . ? 1984 by the Society for Research in Child Development , Inc . All rights reserved . 0009 - 3920 / 84 / 5506 - 0014 $ 01 . 00 ] This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192 . 168 . 82 . 217 on Fri , 30 Nov 2012 13 : 48 : 38 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Holyoak , Junn , and Billman 2043 that of an appropriate adult , while making the doll " behave " like an infant . Gentner ( 1977 ) demonstrated that 4 - year - olds could respond appropriately when they were shown a pic - ture of a mountain and asked such questions as , " If the mountain had a knee , where would it be ? " ( i . e . , the children preserved relative spatial positions when mapping human body parts onto the picture ) . Gentner ' s task seems very similar to pretend play . Young children ' s success in her study may reflect the simplicity of the higher - order relation between the mapped relations , which was typically iden - tity on such perceptual dimensions as relative height . Understanding analogical thinking re - quires more naturalistic experimental para - digms than the proportional format that has typically been employed . While a great deal of work has been done on the solving of anal - ogy problems , relatively little has been done on the use of analogy in solving problems , by children or adults . Yet in everyday life a pri - mary function of analogical thinking is not to " solve analogies " ( unless one is taking an in - telligence test ) but rather to help solve novel problems by relating them to known situa - tions , which may sometimes be drawn from very different semantic domains . Analogies in science ( e . g . , the analogy between the motion of billiard balls and of gas particles ) involve the use of one situation as a framework for constructing a causal model of another ( Op - penheimer , 1956 ) . Recent studies have begun to investigate the processes by which adults solve problems by analogy . A paradigm that has been used to study analogical problem solving by college students involves having subjects solve a problem after reading a story describing an analogous problem and its solution ( Gick & Holyoak , 1980 , 1983 ) . For example , Gick and Holyoak ( 1980 ) had subjects attempt to solve Duncker ' s ( 1945 ) " radiation problem " after reading about an analogous military problem . The radiation problem allows a variety of po - tential solution plans . By varying the solution to the military problem provided in the story analog , Gick and Holyoak were able selec - tively to facilitate discovery of particular solu - tions to the radiation problem . While most subjects were clearly able to solve the radia - tion problem by analogy , many failed to notice the relevance of the story until given a hint to use it . In addition , lessening the degree of cor - respondence between the two problem situa - tions reduced the frequency with which sub - jects produced the analogous solution . The present study adapted the paradigm developed by Gick and Holyoak ( 1980 , 1983 ) to investigate the development of analogical problem - solving skill . Our aims in the three experiments reported below were twofold . First , we wished to determine at what age children are first able to apply simple analogies to perform a goal - directed problem - solving task . The earlier the age of success , the more likely it is that analogy provides a potential mechanism for early cognitive de - velopment . Second , we sought to answer more analytic questions concerning the condi - tions under which young children succeed or fail in using analogies and the components of analogy use that pose particular difficulty . The latter aspect of the study was guided by Holy - oak ' s ( 1984 ) analysis of the components re - quired to solve a problem by analogy . These are ( 1 ) constructing mental representations of a known analog ( the base ) and of the novel analogous problem ( the target ) , ( 2 ) noticing the potential analogy between the base and target , ( 3 ) constructing an initial partial map - ping between the elements of the base and the target , and ( 4 ) extending the mapping to construct a solution procedure appropriate for the target problem . Experiment 1 Experiment 1 was designed to assess the abilities of children at two different age levels to use analogies to solve problems . Method Transfer problem . - The transfer prob - lem used in this study , the " ball problem , " was adapted from the " pea problem " dis - cussed by Raaheim ( 1974 ) . Two bowls were set on a table , one within the child ' s reach and one farther away . One bowl contained a num - ber of small gumballs , and the other was empty . Also on the table were an aluminum walking cane , a large rectangular sheet of heavy paper ( posterboard ) , a hollow card - board tube long enough to reach the farther bowl , child - safe scissors , string , tape , paper clips , and rubber bands . The subjects ' task was to devise as many ways as possible , using the materials provided , of transferring the balls from the filled to the empty bowl with - out leaving their seat . Like the radiation prob - lem used with adults by Gick and Holyoak ( 1980 ) , the ball problem allows multiple solu - tions , making it possible to facilitate alterna - tive solutions selectively by varying the prior analog . However , the ball problem is less complex and requires motoric rather than ver - bal solutions , making it more suitable for use with young children . Story analogs . - Two stories were used as base analogs . Each was a picture - book fairy This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192 . 168 . 82 . 217 on Fri , 30 Nov 2012 13 : 48 : 38 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 2044 Child Development tale , written and illustrated by the second au - thor . The text of the two stories is provided in the Appendix . The beginning of each story was the same and concerned a genie who wished to move his home from one bottle to another . The genie faced the problem of safely transferring a number of precious jewels to the new bottle . The two stories de - scribed different solutions used by the genie . In the " magic staff " story the genie used his magic staff to pull the new bottle over to th6 side of the old one . In the " magic carpet " story he commanded his magic carpet to roll itself into a tube , placed it so as to form a " hol - low bridge " between the two bottles , and then rolled his jewels through it . Each story was accompanied by a series of colored pic - tures illustrating the story . Each step in the solution was clearly depicted . Analogical correspondences . - Table 1 presents a schematic outline of the major analogical correspondences between the two stories and the ball problem , including the main analogous solutions to the latter . Each problem and solution is organized in terms of an abstract " problem schema , " consisting of an initial state , solution plan , and outcome . The representation in Table 1 is an abstrac - tiofi that omits the various noncorrespon - dences between the story analogs and the ball problem ( e . g . , the genie has magical powers whereas the child does not ; the child has available items such as scissors that do not map onto objects in the story ) . To use these analogies the genie can be mapped with the child , the jewels with balls , the bottles with bowls , and ( depending on which story is provided ) the magic staff with the cane or else the magic carpet with the sheet of paper . The relations involving the above objects ( e . g . , transferring ) can also be mapped . These correspondences can be used to construct a solution to the ball problem . The solution suggested by the magic staff story is to use the cane to draw one bowl closer to the other ; that suggested by the magic carpet story is to roll the sheet of paper to form a tube , position the tube between the two bowls , and then roll the balls through the tube . Accordingly , successful use of a story analog should be evidenced by an increase in the frequency with which the analogous solu - tion to the transfer problem is generated by subjects . The materials provided with the ball problem afford a second solution that is par - tially analogous to the magic carpet story ; the balls can simply be rolled down the cardboard tube . This tube solution is a somewhat less complete analogy than is the rolled paper so - lution , since it does not involve construction of a tube . But for this very reason the tube solution requires a less detailed mapping ; it can be viewed as a " shortcut " procedure based on a mapping with the later stages of the genie ' s solution . In addition , the card - board tube probably appears more similar to the carpet rolled into a tube than does the sheet of paper to the flat carpet . The tube solu - tion should therefore be easier to produce than the rolled paper solution , given the magic carpet analog . Procedure . - Each child was tested indi - vidually in a session lasting 10 - 20 min . In the magic staff and magic carpet conditions , the experimenter first read the appropriate story TABLE 1 SCHEMATIC OUTLINE OF BALL PROBLEM SHOWING CORRESPONDENCES WITH ANALOGOUS STORIES Story Analogs Ball Problem Initial state : Goal . . . . . . . . . . . Genie wishes to transfer jewels Child wishes to transfer balls from from one bottle to another . one bowl to another . Resources . . . . . . Magic staff / magic carpet . Walking cane / sheet of paper . Constraint . . . . . . Must not drop or lose jewels . Must not drop or lose any balls . Solution plan 1 . . . Genie ( a ) uses magic staff to pull Child ( a ) uses cane to pull goal bowl goal bottle closer to initial bottle ; closer to initial bowl ; ( b ) drops jewels into goal bottle . ( b ) drops balls into goal bowl . Solution plan 2 . . . . Genie ( a ) rolls magic carpet to Child ( a ) rolls sheet of paper to form form a long hollow tube ; long hollow tube ; ( b ) places tube so it extends from ( b ) places tube so it extends from initial bottle to goal bottle ; initial bowl to goal bowl ; ( c ) rolls jewels through tube to goal ( c ) rolls balls through tube to goal bottle . bowl . Outcome . . . . . . . . . Jewels are transferred safely . Balls are transferred safely . This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192 . 168 . 82 . 217 on Fri , 30 Nov 2012 13 : 48 : 38 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Holyoak , Junn , and Billman 2045 to the child , pointing to the accompanying pictures . To ensure that the children under - stood the story , they were asked to retell it to the experimenter , who questioned them about any major aspects that they omitted . Some of the younger children required an ex - planation of what a " genie " was , but all sub - jects appeared to understand the story by the end of the initial part of the session . Subjects in the two story conditions then were presented with the ball problem ; those in the control condition were given the ball problem without any prior story . The child was seated next to the filled bowl and asked to remain in the chair , so as not to be able to simply reach to the empty bowl . The problem was introduced as a game involving moving the balls from the nearer to the farther bowl , using any of the materials on the table . The experimenter pointed to each of the objects individually , but did not name them . Subjects were encouraged to manipulate the available objects freely and to produce as many possible solutions as they could . To separate children ' s ability to notice the analogy from their ability to apply it , those in the story conditions were not immediately told that the story was related to the problem . However , if they appeared to run out of ideas without producing the analo - gous solution , the experimenter gave two pro - gressively more specific hints : " Does any - thing in the story help ? " and " What did the genie do and could you do anything like that ? " If the child produced an analogous so - lution , the experimenter asked how the child arrived at it . The experimenter recorded all solution attempts in order of occurrence , noted the timing of hints , and recorded perti - nent comments by the subject . The session lasted until the child appeared to be unable to come up with any further possible solutions . Subjects . - Forty - eight subjects were tested , divided into two age groups , with ap - proximately equal proportions of boys and girls within each age level and experimental condition . The younger group consisted of preschool children in nursery schools and a kindergarten , ranging in age from 4 - 7 to 6 - 0 , with a median age of 5 - 6 . The older subjects were fifth and sixth graders , ranging in age from 10 - 0 to 12 - 0 , with a median of 11 - 0 . The 30 preschool subjects were divided equally among the two story conditions and the con - trol condition . Of the 18 older subjects , 10 served in the magic carpet condition and eight in the control condition . The magic staff story was not used with the older subjects after it became apparent that performance by youn - ger subjects in that condition was near the ceiling . The procedure was also piloted with sev - eral children still younger in age ( 3 - 2 to 4 - 4 ) . Since it proved difficult to ensure that these subjects understood the stories and transfer problem , the attempt to use such young chil - dren was terminated . Results and Discussion Frequencies of analogous solutions . - The major results concern the frequencies with which the three critical solutions - use of the cane , rolled paper , and the cardboard tube - were produced by subjects in the vari - ous conditions . These frequencies are pre - sented in Table 2 , broken down by solutions given before and after the first hint to consider the story . All the solutions reported in Table 2 were executed successfully . Since subjects were asked to give multiple solutions , some subjects produced more than one of the target solutions . All significance levels reported in this paper for differences in solution frequen - cies are based on Fisher ' s exact probability test . The preschoolers were clearly able to de - rive the cane solution to the ball problem by applying the magic staff analog . All 10 of the subjects who were given the magic staff story produced the cane solution , as opposed to only one subject in each of the other two con - ditions , p < . 001 for each comparison . Five of the magic staff subjects gave the cane solution without any hints to use the story . There was also evidence that the magic staff analog created a " set " effect , in that the frequency of the nonanalogous tube solution was reduced relative to the control condition , p < . 05 . Gick and Holyoak ( 1980 ) found similar evidence in - dicating that story analogs can decrease the frequency with which adult subjects produce nonanalogous solutions . The magic carpet story , on the other hand , had a much less clear effect on solution frequencies for the preschool subjects . Three subjects produced the analogous rolled paper solution when given the story ( all without hints ) , as opposed to just one subject in the control condition and none in the magic staff condition . This difference , while suggestive , involved frequencies too small to merit statis - tical comparisons . Nine of the 10 magic carpet subjects generated the partially analogous so - lution , use of the tube ; however , this may not have reflected use of the analogy , since eight of the 10 control subjects produced the same solution without any prior analog . This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192 . 168 . 82 . 217 on Fri , 30 Nov 2012 13 : 48 : 38 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 0 oOCIOC M C00 r - - F - : o - I z UF - o z E - a II looc ) 0 - 0 t . % z 0 o 3 : . (cid:127) - z , , a . W k - l 0 ~ . 0 v , ~ ~ . 0 ( ~ O - I . 1 1 v ~ oU CrC c ~ u d , ? Oc ? c P3 k 0 0 CvC , ~ 0C e t - l all I 0 This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192 . 168 . 82 . 217 on Fri , 30 Nov 2012 13 : 48 : 38 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Holyoak , Junn , and Billman 2047 It is possible that discovery of the tube solution may have tended to block generation of the rolled paper solution by subjects in the magic carpet condition ; for this reason , the tube was not presented to subjects in Experi - ments 2 and 3 . In addition , there are several reasons to view the analogy with the magic staff story as simpler than that with the magic carpet story . The staff and cane share more perceptual and functional attributes than do the magic carpet and sheet of paper , which should facilitate the mapping process in the former case . In addition , the latter solution in - volves the construction of a more elaborate sequence of mappings between relations ( first forming the tube , then positioning it , then rolling the balls through ) . The difficulty of ar - riving at the rolled paper solution may also be increased by the fact that the solution proce - dure in the story analog allows a less than complete mapping ( the genie forms a tube by a simple command , whereas the child must actually roll the paper and decide how to keep it rolled , perhaps by using a rubber band ) . In contrast to the younger subjects , those in the older age group were clearly able to generate solutions on the basis of the analogy between the magic carpet story and the ball problem . All 10 of the subjects given the story produced both the rolled paper and tube solu - tions , whereas none of the control subjects produced either , p < . 001 for both compari - sons . Eight subjects in the story condition gave the tube solution immediately as their first solution , and nine gave it prior to a hint to use the story . The rolled paper solution ap - peared more difficult , as all but three children required a hint before they generated it . The frequency of the latter solution for the magic carpet condition increased significantly across the two age groups , p < . 001 . In addition , four of the story subjects at the older age level also tried to turn the hollow aluminum cane into a tube by removing the stoppers from its ends , a solution none of the control subjects at - tempted . These subjects thus gave evidence of having used the story analog and transfer problem to induce a general " schema " for various types of tube solutions . ( See Gick & Holyoak [ 1983 ] for discussion of the relation - ship between analogical thinking and schema induction . ) In general , the older age group had difficulty in noticing a potentially useful analogy , but not ii applying it , as has been observed in comparable experiments with adults ( Gick & Holyoak , 1980 , 1983 ) . One surprising feature of the results was the apparent decrease in the frequency of the tube solution from the younger to the older control group ( eight out of 10 vs . zero out of eight subjects ) . We have no firm explanation for this trend . It may be that the younger chil - dren had had more recent experiences manip - ulating similar tubes in art classes or that the older children had developed competing asso - ciations that led to increased functional fixedness . Also , the older control subjects pro - duced more total solution attempts ( see be - low ) , some of which may have blocked gener - ation of the tube solution . The older subjects did not simply ignore the tube , however , as four of the eight used it in some other way ( three used it as a scoop and one as a blow - pipe ) . Other solution attempts . - As would be expected given the variety of materials avail - able , subjects made numerous types of solu - tion attempts other than those related to the story analogs . Some of these were crude , such as throwing the balls ; some were more cre - ative , such as using the tape dispenser as a scoop ; many were unduly optimistic , such as using a paper clip as a catapult . Total number of solution attempts ( not counting repetitions of the same solution ) did not differ signifi - cantly across conditions within either age level . The number increased substantially ( means of 2 . 95 vs . 5 . 00 ) from the younger to the older age level , F ( 1 , 36 ) = 12 . 4 , p < . 01 , for the two comparable conditions ( control and magic carpet ) . A different pattern emerged when only successful solutions were scored . These included the solution types presented in Table 2 plus several others , such as rolling the ball across the unfolded paper to the bowl . For the younger subjects , the mean number of successful solutions was 1 . 70 for both story conditions and 1 . 30 for the control condition . These differences were not statistically sig - nificant . For the older subjects , the means were 2 . 20 for the magic carpet condition and . 38 for the control condition , F ( 1 , 18 ) = 43 . 3 , p < . 001 . The older control subjects thus tended to produce a large number of different solu - tion attempts , but few that were actually suc - cessful - fewer , in fact , than the younger con - trol subjects , F ( 1 , 16 ) = 5 . 08 , p < . 05 . This difference reflects the fact that the older con - trol subjects did not produce the tube solu - tion , as noted above . In contrast , for the magic carpet condition the older age group pro - duced significantly more successful solutions than did the younger group , F ( 1 , 18 ) = 6 . 08 , p < . 05 , largely because of the greater success of the older group in generating the analogous rolled paper solution . Process of applying analogies . - Subjects ' spontaneous comments and responses to This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192 . 168 . 82 . 217 on Fri , 30 Nov 2012 13 : 48 : 38 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 2048 Child Development questions were scrutinized for evidence re - garding the process of analogical problem solving . All subjects in the magic carpet con - dition at the older age level were clearly aware that their analogous solutions had been suggested by the story ; most seemed sur - prised that the experimenter needed to ask . Seven of the 10 magic staff subjects in the younger group indicated in some way that they noticed a relation between the story and the target problem , as did two of the three successful magic carpet subjects . Many sub - jects at both age levels exhibited behavioral signs of excitement and triumph after generat - ing an analogous solution . A few of the younger subjects made spon - taneous comments that revealed details of the mapping process . Several children referred to the bowls on the table as " bottles , " suggesting a mapping with the prior story . One child in the magic carpet condition said he produced the tube solution " ' Cause I saw the genie roll his towel . " Two subjects in the magic staff condition referred to the cane as a " magical cane " ; and another exclaimed , " Just like the genie ! " after producing the cane solution . Perhaps the most revealing protocol was obtained from one of the very young pilot sub - jects , a girl aged 4 - 4 who was given the magic carpet story . After being introduced to the transfer problem , she immediately picked up the cardboard tube and rolled the balls down , saying , " Let ' s pretend they ' re real jewels . " Later in the session she said , " That will be a magic carpet , " and then laughed as she picked up the paper , rolled it , and asked the experi - menter to help tape it . " That ' s the way the genie did it , " she cried as she rolled the ball through the newly constructed tube . " I did it just like the genie . " Here the process of analogical mapping is transparently revealed . Two instances of control subjects drawing analogies to extraexperimental situations were noted . One preschooler began the problem by exclaiming , " I know ! " and then giving the tube solution and no others . When asked why she solved the problem this way , the girl re - plied , " ' Cause I always do that . I use marbles at home . " A sixth grader , the only subject to use the tube as a blowpipe , said she got the idea because " It ' s sort of . . . like a pea - shooter . " These observations are consistent with the possibility that children also use analogies to solve problems outside of the lab - oratory situation . Experiment 2 The results of Experiment 1 indicate that 11 - year - olds can use an analogy between superficially dissimilar problems to derive a solution to a transfer problem in a manner qualitatively similar to adult performance . This skill is less developed in preschoolers . Experiments 2 and 3 were designed to pro - vide a more detailed assessment of the fac - tors that influence the success or failure of younger children in using analogies . The strongest evidence from Experiment 1 that preschoolers have some degree of skill in solving problems by analogy came from the magic staff condition , in which all subjects produced the analogous cane solution . It may be objected , however , that this positive result was critically dependent on the salient per - ceptual and functional similarity between the staff illustrated in the story analog and the cane available to solve the target problem . Perhaps the young children did not attend to the detailed correspondences between the base analog and the target but rather followed a simple strategy of using an object with sa - lient similarities to the instrument in the story . Experiment 2 tested this possibility by com - paring the effectiveness of the magic staff story used in Experiment 1 with that of other versions in which the analogical correspon - dences with the ball problem were less com - plete , even though the staff was used in ex - actly the same way . If young children follow a simple strategy of using an object functionally and / or perceptually similar to the instrument depicted in the prior story , they should gener - ate the cane solution with equal frequency across all story conditions . However , if the children are in fact mapping relations be - tween the base and target , the stories with re - duced correspondences will lead to fewer cane solutions . Gick and Holyoak ( 1980 ) found that adult subjects are sensitive to varia - tions in the degree of analogical correspon - dence between a story analog and target prob - lem . Method Story analogs . - Three illustrated stories were used as base analogs : the original magic staff story used in Experiment 1 and two new versions ( see Appendix ) . All of the stories in - volved a genie who used his magic staff to pull a new bottle up next to his old one and then dropped jewels from the old bottle into the new one . Thus all the stories contained elements that can be mapped onto the cane solution to the ball problem . However , the two new versions differed from the original story in that they introduced changes that less - ened the degree of analogical correspondence with the transfer problem . In the extra - character version , a friend of the genie is in - troduced into the story . Although the basic This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192 . 168 . 82 . 217 on Fri , 30 Nov 2012 13 : 48 : 38 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Holyoak , Junn , and Billman 2049 plot is identical to that of the original version , the friend is an element of the base analog that does not map onto the subsequent transfer problem . The altered - goal version also in - troduces the friend as an additional character , but in addition the primary goal of the genie is changed . The genie is now trying to move into a new bottle big enough to share with his friend ; the transfer of jewels is treated in a relatively incidental manner . Accordingly , the altered - goal version is less analogous to the ball problem than either of the other stories . Design and procedure . - - Subjects served in one of three conditions , receiving either the original version of the magic staff story , the extra - character version , or the altered - goal version . The transfer problem was identical to the ball problem as it was presented in Exper - iment 1 , except that the tube was not among the objects available to the child , whereas a coffee scoop and a long dowel with a slit at one end were included . The procedure was identical to that of the story conditions in Ex - periment 1 , except that a more prolonged hint sequence was used if the child failed to pro - duce the cane solution in response to even the second hint ( i . e . , " What did the genie do ? " ) . The second hint was repeated several times using slightly different wordings ( e . g . , " Could you do what the genie did ? " ) before the ses - sion was terminated . No control group was run because the opposing hypotheses being tested depend solely on differences in solu - tion frequencies among the story conditions . Subjects . - - Eighteen kindergartners and first graders , with approximately equal pro - portions of boys and girls across conditions , served as subjects . They ranged in age from 5 - 4 to 7 - 2 , with a median age of 6 - 4 , and thus were approximately 1 year older than the pre - schoolers used in Experiment 1 . Eight sub - jects received the original version , and five received each of the other two versions . Results and Discussion All children were able to repeat the gist of the story to the experimenter and men - tioned the use of the cane to move the bottle and transfer the jewels . Comprehension ap - peared equally good for all three versions . All subjects who received one of the two new ver - sions mentioned the genie ' s friend in retelling the story , indicating that they attended to that aspect of the story . The result of central interest involves the frequency of the cane solution across the three conditions . As the data in Table 3 indicate , all eight children in the original condition generated the cane solution , compared with only one of five subjects in each of the other conditions . The difference in solution fre - quencies between the original condition and the other two combined ( 100 % vs . 20 % ) was highly significant , p = . 001 . The striking decrement in performance associated with the two new versions ( espe - cially the extra - character version , which in - volved only a relatively small change in the completeness of the mapping ) clearly indi - cates that the cane solution does not result simply from task demands or leading prompts from the experimenter . Protocols for these conditions indicated that subjects often failed to generate the cane solution despite a great deal of problem - solving effort and extensive hints from the experimenter . With respect to effort , the mean number of total solution at - tempts ( including repetitions ) was almost twice as large for subjects who received the new versions than for those who received the original ( 5 . 13 for the original version , 10 . 40 for the extra - character version , and 11 . 40 for the altered - goal version ) . The difference between the original condition and the other two was significant , F ( 1 , 16 ) = 7 . 81 , p < . 02 , indicating that subjects in the latter conditions expended more overall effort . The same pattern was ap - parent when mean number of nonredundant attempts was compared ( means of 5 . 13 , 7 . 40 , and 9 . 00 for the original , extra - character , and altered - goal conditions , respectively ) . No sub - jects in Experiment 2 produced successful so - lutions other than the cane solution ( e . g . , none produced the rolled paper solution ) . In an attempt to determine just how difficult it might be to elicit the cane solution with a weak analogy , the session for one sub - ject in the altered - goal condition was ex - tended . This subject failed to generate the TABLE 3 NUMBER OF SUBJECTS PRODUCING CANE SOLUTION , EXPERIMENT 2 Story Version Pre - hint Post - hint Total Original ( N = 8 ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 7 8 Extra - character ( N = 5 ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 1 1 Altered - goal ( N = 5 ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 1 1 This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192 . 168 . 82 . 217 on Fri , 30 Nov 2012 13 : 48 : 38 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 2050 Child Development cane solution by the conclusion of the stan - dard procedure . Further prompts were then given in an extended session lasting a total of 35 min . The subject eventually generated the cane solution , but only after it was virtually " given away " by the experimenter . The sub - ject noticed the cane at the very beginning of the problem - solving session , mapped ele - ments of the story with elements of the target problem , was led to consider the general idea of moving a bowl , and even the idea of using a hook , yet still did not generate the cane solu - tion . The solution was finally given only after extensive prompting and a total of 18 prior solution attempts . The results of Experiment 2 clearly indi - cate that perceptual and functional similarity between objects in the base and target analogs is not by itself sufficient to elicit the analogous solution reliably . Rather , young children are sensitive to the degree of correspondence of multiple components . Preschoolers ' skills are fragile and easily disrupted . Mismatch of goals or protagonists impairs performance de - spite perceptual and functional similarity of objects . Furthermore , children typically re - quire hints to consider the prior problem . Experiment 3 Experiment 3 tested whether children could use a story analog to derive the more complex rolled paper solution . The results of Experiment 2 indicate that perceptual and functional similarity of elements is not a sufficient condition for analogical transfer , but they do not exclude its necessity . Whereas Ex - periment 2 was designed to find conditions under which it is relatively difficult to gener - ate the cane solution by analogy , Experiment 3 was designed to find conditions in which it is possible for young children to generate the rolled paper solution . Several aspects of the procedure were altered to investigate this more complex solution , which involves less similarity between story and solution . In Experiment 1 the magic carpet story did not clearly elicit a significant number of rolled paper solutions among the preschool subjects . At most , subjects mapped from the constructed tube in the story to the con - structed tube on the table . In Experiment 3 a constructed tube was not presented . New ver - sions of the story were written , one involving rolling a carpet and the other a blanket . The perceptual similarities between magic staff and cane and between constructed tube in the story and tube in the task ( Experiment 1 ) seem much greater than between a blanket or a carpet on the floor and the sheet of paper on the table . The standard functions of carpet and blanket are clearly different from a piece of paper . Of course , in an analogy between two tasks involving the manipulation of concrete objects , there must be some similarity among objects , such as " rollability , " for the solution in one to be relevant to the other . Slightly younger subjects were used in Experiment 3 than in Experiment 1 , but sev - eral additional changes were introduced to facilitate discovery of the target solution . New story analogs were written involving charac - ters more familiar to the subjects than genies . In addition , some subjects received two story analogs rather than just one , a manipulation that facilitates transfer for adult subjects ( Gick and Holyoak , 1983 ) . The tube was not in - cluded among the objects the child could use , to ensure that its availability did not block generation of the rolled paper solution . Method Story analogs . - Two new stories were written and illustrated ( see Appendix ) , based on characters from the Peanuts cartoon strip and the Muppets television program . In " Woodstock ' s Eggs , " Snoopy rolls up a blan - ket and uses it to transfer eggs to a nest . In " Miss Piggy ' s Jewels , " Miss Piggy rolls up a carpet and uses it to transfer jewels to a safe . Neither story contains elements with salient perceptual or functional similarities to those required for the analogous solution to the ball problem ( i . e . , rolling a piece of paper into a tube to transfer gumballs ) . Design and procedure . - Subjects served in one of three conditions . Those in the one - analog condition received one of the two story analogs prior to the transfer problem ; those in the two - analog condition received both stories ; and those in the control condition at - tempted to solve the ball problem without any prior story . Within the one - analog condition each of the two stories was used equally often ; and within the two - analog condition each or - der of the two stories was used equally often . The story or stories were read to subjects in the same manner as in the previous experi - ments . After each story , subjects were asked to retell it . Children in the two - analog condi - tion were not told that the two stories were related to each other . The transfer problem was then administered . No constructed tube was provided , but a new " obvious " solution was added . The coffee scoop and dowel used in Experiment 2 were hooked together to make a long - handled scoop that could be used to transfer the gumballs . This " obvious " po - tential solution was intended to ensure that This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192 . 168 . 82 . 217 on Fri , 30 Nov 2012 13 : 48 : 38 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Holyoak , Junn , and Billman 2051 subjects did not become discouraged by fail - ure to find any successful solution . Subjects . - Twenty - four subjects , ranging in age from 4 - 1 to 5 - 0 , served as subjects . Twelve subjects were assigned to the control condition , and six were assigned to each of the other two conditions . Results and Discussion As in the previous experiments , all sub - jects appeared to comprehend the stories readily . Table 4 presents the number of sub - jects in each of the conditions who generated the rolled paper solution either before or after a hint to use the story . The results clearly indi - cate that the preschoolers used the story analogs to construct the critical solution . Over - all , seven of the 12 subjects who received analogs ( either one or two ) produced the rolled paper solution , as contrasted with zero of the 12 control subjects . Fisher ' s exact prob - ability test showed the number of critical solu - tions to be significantly higher for the analog conditions than the control condition , p = . 002 for total solutions , p < . 05 for solutions prior to any hint . The fact that the advantage of the analog conditions was significant even for pre - hint solutions is evidence against the possibility that the result simply resulted from more extensive prompting of subjects in the analog conditions than those in the control condition . The frequencies involved in the one - analog and two - analog conditions were too small to yield statistically significant dif - ferences between them . Although the story analogs were clearly effective in eliciting the rolled paper solution , performance was less than perfect . The sub - jects who failed to produce the critical solu - tion did so despite prompting to use the story and to " do the same thing as Snoopy / Miss Piggy . " One child responded to the sugges - tion , " Could the story help ? " by retrieving two pictures that had been used to illustrate the story and using them to push the balls around . Another child repeated that Miss Piggy rolled up the carpet to make a tube , but denied that he could do anything like that . Another responded to prompts by saying he could roll a blanket up , but that there was no blanket on the table . Such protocols suggest that the preschoolers sometimes had difficulty performing the mappings required to use a story analog when the corresponding ele - ments lacked obvious perceptual and func - tional similarities . The total number of successful solutions , which mainly consisted of use of the long - handled scoop in addition to rolling of the pa - per , also tended to be higher for the analog groups than for the control group ( means of 1 . 42 and . 75 solutions per subject , respec - tively ) , although the difference fell short of significance , F ( 1 , 22 ) = 3 . 06 , p = . 09 . General Discussion This study has implications for the devel - opment of analogical reasoning skills and for the potential contribution of analogical rea - soning to other aspects of development . The study demonstrates that even preschoolers can use analogies to solve problems . It also begins to diagnose when children are likely to succeed or fail in using analogies and how the factors limiting successful performance change with age . For 11 - year - olds , the factor limiting per - formance on our simple problem seems to be the same as for adults solving more complex problems ( Gick & Holyoak , 1980 , 1983 ) . Like adults , our subjects frequently failed to notice that two situations might be analogous . Once the analogy was pointed out , the 11 - year - old subjects were uniformly able to carry out the necessary mapping much as adults do . The situation is not so simple with young - er children . The 4 - 6 - year - olds did demon - strate considerable ability in analogical prob - lem solving . However , their ability is more fragile , varies more from child to child , and is limited by different factors . The results of Ex - periment 1 suggest that preschoolers are able to solve a problem by analogy if the mapping between the relations involved in the corre - TABLE 4 NUMBER OF SUBJECTS PRODUCING ROLLED PAPER SOLUTION , EXPERIMENT 3 Condition Pre - hint Post - hint Total Control ( N = 12 ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 One analog ( N = 6 ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 2 3 Two analogs ( N = 6 ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 1 4 NOTE . - Hints to use stories were only given in the story conditions , not in control condition . This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192 . 168 . 82 . 217 on Fri , 30 Nov 2012 13 : 48 : 38 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 2052 Child Development sponding solutions is relatively simple and the corresponding instruments are perceptu - ally and functionally similar ( the magic staff condition ) . Experiment 2 demonstrated that such similarity of instruments is not a suffi - cient condition for success ; rather , young chil - dren are extremely sensitive to the com - pleteness of the overall mapping between the base and target analogs . The difficulties young children encounter in using analogies are therefore not attributable to their use of a sim - ple strategy of using an object with salient similarities to the instrument depicted in the prior story . Experiment 3 demonstrated that a high degree of perceptual and functional similarity is not a necessary condition for analogical transfer , even for children as young as 4 years old . When the story analogs mapped well onto the target problem , these young subjects were often able to generate the rolled paper solu - tion . This solution requires a relatively com - plex mapping involving the transformation of an object ( paper ) that has relatively little per - ceptual or semantic similarity to the in - struments used in the base analog ( either a blanket or a carpet ) . Taken together , the experiments demonstrate that children as young as 4 years old can solve a problem by analogy to a superficially dissimilar problem and that a high degree of perceptual and func - tional similarity of the corresponding instru - ments is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for success ( although it may well be helpful ) . The performance of the young children , unlike the 11 - year - old subjects , was highly variable . Some 4 - year - olds spontaneously noticed and elaborated the set of mappings in the most difficult problem . At the other ex - treme was the child who responded to re - peated prompts to " see if the story could help " by fetching the cards that had been used to illustrate the story and using them to push the balls . There are many possible sources for such variability in performance . Children differ in their familiarity with meet - ing the task demands of arbitrary adult - set goals . They differ in their experience with the story characters used in the base analogs and with the object - oriented " engineering " play required by the transfer problem . More re - search is required to determine which of the various possible factors are most critical . Although young children did not always notice the analogy spontaneously , this did not seem to be the component that most severely restricted their performance . When prompted to use the story , many children could retell it , mentioning the important elements . How - ever , some rejected the idea that the story could be related to the problem . Others made a partial mapping ( from jewels to balls , for ex - ample ) , but were unable to progress further . Such failures might be based on memory limi - tations that prevented children from simulta - neously attending to and coordinating the components of the analogs . Alternatively , the differences between the contexts of the story - reading task and the ball - transfer game may have made the mapping seem implausible . With age the limitations on successful analogical problem solving seem to shift from the mapping processes to the decision pro - cesses involved in initiating an attempt at mapping . This represents a change from de - velopment of " tactical " context - dependent skills ( e . g . , the ability to perform a mapping ) to development of " strategic " skills related to the circumstances for appropriate application . Similar shifts from learning local skills to learning appropriate contexts of use are found in many other aspects of cognitive develop - ment , such as number skills ( Gelman & Gal - listel , 1978 ) and communication skills ( Shatz , 1978 ) . The use of somewhat open - ended tasks and interview procedures provides a sensitive method for discovering children ' s abilities . However , when using a procedure responsive to a complex set of the child ' s activities rather than a simple criterion , the effects of variation in procedure are hard to assess . One concern is whether experimenter bias might have pref - erentially guided children to the " desired " so - lution , via unintentional cues . The magnitude of any such effect cannot be assessed from our data , but one finding argues against its impor - tance . In Experiment 2 , more solutions were attempted in the two altered conditions than in the original conditions , even though more analogous solutions were produced in the lat - ter condition . The greater number of solutions elicited in the altered conditions might have reflected a bias of the experimenter to keep trying to evoke solutions when the target solu - tion was not achieved , but argues against any simple account of experimenter attention evoking the " desired " response . Our results indicate that under optimal circumstances children as young as 4 years old can make substantial use of analogies to solve problems . Analogical problem solving may in fact provide a basic mechanism for cognitive development . Analogy use allows the goal - directed transfer of information from a domain that is well understood to a novel domain that is not yet understood . Furthermore , there is This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192 . 168 . 82 . 217 on Fri , 30 Nov 2012 13 : 48 : 38 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Holyoak , Junn , and Billman 2053 evidence that analogical mapping between two concrete problems fosters the construc - tion of a more abstract knowledge structure that describes the commonalities between the two domains ( Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ) . This new knowledge structure facilitates subse - quent transfer of knowledge to additional novel domains . The overall process of detect - ing analogies , finding mappings , and con - structing new knowledge structures would yield " skill hierarchies " similar to those pos - tulated in Fischer ' s ( 1980 ) theory of cognitive development . Our results generally support the possibility that analogical transfer is a po - tential mechanism for developmental change for preschoolers . The results have important implications for educational practice , suggest - ing that children are ready to benefit poten - tially from the use of analogy as an instruc - tional device by the time they enter school . However , teachers need to be aware of the kinds of noticing and mapping difficulties that young children are especially likely to en - counter . Appendix Story Analogs Two Story Analogs to the Ball Problem Used in Experiment 1 Beginning - both stories . - Once upon a time there lived a magical genie . He was a very old , wise , and rich genie indeed . One day while he was polishing his home , which was actually a bottle , he decided he would like to find an even bigger and better home to live in . So he began searching far and wide for another bottle . Finally he found the perfect home . It was larger , prettier , and not too far away from his old bottle . The genie was very excited and began moving his belongings right away . But now the genie had a problem . He had a great many beautiful and very precious jewels in his old home . He had to somehow get all the jewels from his old bottle to the new bottle without dropping or losing a single jewel . After thinking a bit , the genie came up with a wonderful idea . Continuation - magic staff story . - He began searching for his magic staff , or wand . He then commanded his staff to stretch itself from his old home to his new home . Next , the genie tugged and pulled on his magical staff until at last he pulled the new bottle right up next to his old bottle . At once , the genie began gathering his jewels together in his old home and simply dropped them carefully into his new home right next to him . When all his jewels were safely tucked away in his new home , the genie settled in happily . In fact , I ' m sure you can still find him sitting in his new , bigger , and better bottle with all his jewels and smiling contentedly even today ! Continuation - magic carpet story . - He searched for his magic carpet . Then he commanded it to roll itself up into a long hollow tube . Next the genie commanded his flying carpet to place one end at his old home and the other end at his new home so that it formed a sort of hollow bridge between the two bottles . Then , the genie very carefully took one jewel from inside his old home and placed it into the opening of his carpet . At once , the jewel began tumbling and rolling through the carpet tube until it reached his new home and plopped safely inside . The genie grinned happily and began rolling all his jewels through the carpet into his new home . In fact , I ' m sure you can still find him sitting in his new , bigger and better bottle with all his jewels and smiling contentedly even today ! Two Additional Versions of the " Staff " Story Used in Experiment 2 Extra - character version . - Once upon a time there lived a magical genie . He was a very old , wise , and rich genie indeed . One day while he was polishing his home , which was actually a bottle , an old friend came up . The genie told his friend , " I ' m going to look for a bigger and better home to live in . Will you help me look ? " So they began searching far and wide for another bottle . Finally the genie found the perfect home . It was larger , prettier , and not too far away from his old bottle . The genie was very excited and wanted to begin moving his be - longings right away . But now the genie had a prob - lem . He had a great many beautiful and very pre - cious jewels in his old home . He had to somehow get all the jewels from his old bottle to the new bottle without dropping or losing a single jewel . After thinking a bit , the genie came up with a wonderful idea . He began searching for his magic staff , or wand . He then commanded his staff to stretch itself from his old home to his new home . Next , the genie tugged and pulled on his magical staff until at last he pulled the new bottle right up next to his old bottle . At once , the genie began gathering his jewels together in his old home and simply dropped them carefully into his new home right next to him . When all his jewels were safely tucked away in his new home , the genie settled in happily . He invited his friend to come in and ad - mire his new home . His friend came in and said , " What a good house for you ! " I ' m sure you can still find the genie sitting in his new bigger and better bottle with all his jewels and smiling contentedly even today ! Altered - goal version . - Once upon a time there lived a magical genie . He was a very old , wise , and rich genie indeed . One day while he was polishing his home , which was actually a bottle , an old friend came up . The genie and his friend had lived together long ago . They talked about how much fun it had been to play and do magic together . The genie ' s friend said , " I ' m looking for a new home right now . " The genie said , " Let ' s find a bot - tle big enough for both of us . Then we can live together and have fun again . " They began searching far and wide for a bigger bottle . They searched and they searched . Finally they found the perfect home , a bottle that was big enough for both of them . The genie was very excited . He wanted to move all his belongings right away so he and his friend could This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192 . 168 . 82 . 217 on Fri , 30 Nov 2012 13 : 48 : 38 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 2054 Child Development settle in . But the bottle was very far away and the genie had many beautiful jewels to move . It would be a lot easier for the genie to move if his new home was closer to his old one . Now the genie had a prob - " lem . How could he get his new bottle up close to his old bottle ? After thinking a bit the genie came up with a wonderful idea . He began searching for his magic staff , or wand . He then commanded his staff to stretch itself from his old home to their new home . Next , the genie tugged and pulled on his magical staff until at last he pulled the new bottle right up next to his old bottle . Then the genie was happy . He could move in no time at all . He gathered up his jewels in his old home and dropped them carefully into their new home right next to him . Then the genie said to his friend , " What a won - derful home ! Now we can play and do magic to - gether every day . " The genie ' s friend just smiled and smiled . I ' m sure you can still find the two of them sitting in their bigger bottle playing and doing magic even today ! Two Story Analogs Used in Experiment 3 Woodstock ' s eggs . - Woodstock had built a nest on top of Snoopy ' s doghouse . She had put her eggs in it and was waiting for them to hatch and the baby birds to come out . But Snoopy was unhappy about all this . The nest was in the way when he tried to lie down . And Snoopy was afraid that when the baby birds arrived , they would make so much noise with their chirping that he wouldn ' t be able to sleep at all ! Woodstock didn ' t want to get Snoopy upset , and so she agreed that the eggs would have to be moved . So she built a new nest in a tree a little ways from Snoopy ' s house . But now there was one prob - lem , and a very serious one . How would they move the eggs safely from Snoopy ' s rooftop to the new nest in the tree ? Snoopy and Woodstock were both afraid that the eggs would get broken if they tried to carry them down from the roof and up the tree . They both thought and thought . Then Snoopy had a great idea . While Woodstock hovered in the air watching , Snoopy took a blanket and rolled it up . Then he tossed it across so that it hooked on a branch of the tree . The rolled blanket stretched right across to the new nest . Then Snoopy carefully rolled the eggs one by one through the rolled blan - ket into the nest in the tree . All the eggs were soon moved safely . Woodstock liked her new tree nest , and Snoopy was finally able to sleep comfortably again on his rooftop . Miss Piggy ' s jewels . - Miss Piggy ' s most pre - cious possessions were her jewels . She kept them in a jewel box on top of her dresser . She decided they weren ' t very safe there , so she wanted to move them to a strong safe on the other side of the room . Miss Piggy started to carry a few of her jewels across the room to the safe . But just then Gonzo went run - ning through the room , with Fozzy Bear chasing him . They almost knocked Miss Piggy down . She was afraid they would come back at any moment and make her drop some jewels and lose them . She had so many jewels - how could she get them all over to the safe quickly and safely ? Suddenly Miss Piggy had a great idea . She rolled up her carpet off the floor and picked it up . The carpet just reached from her jewel box to the safe . Then Miss Piggy quickly rolled her jewels through the rolled carpet and into the safe . She was finished in a jiffy , before Fozzy Bear and Gonzo came back . The jewels were safe , and Miss Piggy was very happy . References Duncker , K . On problem solving . Psychological Monographs , 1945 , 58 ( 5 , Whole No . 270 ) . Fischer , K . W . A theory of cognitive development : The control and construction of hierarchies of skills . Psychological Review , 1980 , 87 , 477 - 531 . Garvey , C . Play . Cambridge , Mass . : Harvard Uni - versity Press , 1980 . Gelman , R . , & Gallistel , C . R . The child ' s under - standing of number . Cambridge , Mass . : Har - vard University Press , 1978 . Gentner , D . Children ' s performance on a spatial analogies task . Child Development , 1977 , 48 , 1034 - 1039 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . Analogical problem solving . Cognitive Psychology , 1980 , 12 , 306 - 355 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognitive Psychology , 1983 , 15 , 1 - 38 . Hesse , M . B . Models and analogies in science . Notre Dame , Ind . : University of Notre Dame Press , 1966 . Holyoak , K . J . Analogical thinking and human intel - ligence . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Advances in the psychology of human intelligence ( Vol . 2 ) . Hillsdale , N . J . : Erlbaum , 1984 . Holyoak , K . J . , & Gordon , P . C . Information process - ing and social cognition . In R . S . Wyer , Jr . & T . K . Srull ( Eds . ) , Handbook of social cogni - tion . Hillsdale , N . J . : Erlbaum , 1984 . Levinson , P . J . , & Carpenter , R . L . An analysis of analogical reasoning in chilaren . Child Devel - opment , 1974 , 45 , 857 - 861 . Lunzer , E . A . Problems of formal reasoning in test situations . In P . H . Mussen ( Ed . ) , European re - search in cognitive development . Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Develop - ment , 1965 , 30 ( 2 , Serial No . 100 ) . Oppenheimer , J . R . Analogy in science . American Psychologist , 1965 , 11 , 127 - 135 . Piaget , J . , with Montangero , J . , & Billeter , J . Les correlats . In J . Piaget , L ' Abstraction reflechis - sante . Paris : Presses Universitaires de France , 1977 . Raaheim , K . Problem solving and intelligence . Oslo : Universitetsforlaget , 1974 . Shatz , M . The relationship between cognitive pro - This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192 . 168 . 82 . 217 on Fri , 30 Nov 2012 13 : 48 : 38 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Holyoak , Junn , and Billman 2055 cesses and the development of communication skills . In B . Keasey ( Ed . ) , Nebaska sym - posium on motivation , 1977 . Lincoln : Univer - sity of Nebraska Press , 1978 . Sternberg , R . J . Reasoning , problem solving , and intelligence . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Hand - book of human intelligence . Cambridge : Cam - bridge University Press , 1982 . Sternberg , R . J . , & Rifkin , B . The development of analogical reasoning processes . Journal of Ex - perimental Child Psychology , 1979 , 27 , 195 - 232 . Vosniadou , S . , & Ortony , A . The emergence of the literal - metaphorical - anomalous distinction in young children . Child Development , 1983 , 54 , 154 - 161 . Winner , E . , Rosenstiel , A . K . , & Gardner , H . The development of metaphoric understanding . De - velopmental Psychology , 1976 , 2 , 289 - 297 . This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192 . 168 . 82 . 217 on Fri , 30 Nov 2012 13 : 48 : 38 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions