METHODS ARTICLE published : 17 April 2012 doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2012 . 00111 A practical guide to calculating Cohen’s f 2 , a measure of local effect size , from PROC MIXED Arielle S . Selya 1 * , Jennifer S . Rose 1 , Lisa C . Dierker 1 , Donald Hedeker 2 and Robin J . Mermelstein 2 1 Psychology Department , Wesleyan University , Middletown , CT , USA 2 Institute for Health Research and Policy , University of Illinois at Chicago , Chicago , IL , USA Edited by : Jeremy Miles , Research and Development Corporation , USA Reviewed by : Anne C . Black , Yale University School of Medicine , USA Daniel Saverio John Costa , University of Sydney , Australia * Correspondence : Arielle S . Selya , Psychology Department , Wesleyan University , 207 High Street , Middletown , CT 06459 , USA . e - mail : aselya @ wesleyan . edu Reporting effect sizes in scientiﬁc articles is increasingly widespread and encouraged by journals ; however , choosing an effect size for analyses such as mixed - effects regression modeling and hierarchical linear modeling can be difﬁcult . One relatively uncommon , but very informative , standardized measure of effect size is Cohen’s f 2 , which allows an eval - uation of local effect size , i . e . , one variable’s effect size within the context of a multivariate regression model . Unfortunately , this measure is often not readily accessible from com - monly used software for repeated - measures or hierarchical data analysis . In this guide , we illustrate how to extract Cohen’s f 2 for two variables within a mixed - effects regression model using PROC MIXED in SAS ® software . Two examples of calculating Cohen’s f 2 for different research questions are shown , using data from a longitudinal cohort study of smok - ing development in adolescents . This tutorial is designed to facilitate the calculation and reporting of effect sizes for single variables within mixed - effects multiple regression mod - els , and is relevant for analyses of repeated - measures or hierarchical / multilevel data that are common in experimental psychology , observational research , and clinical or intervention studies . Keywords : Cohen’s f 2 , effect size , hierarchical linear modeling , mixed - effects regression , PROC MIXED , R 2 , SAS INTRODUCTION Effect sizes are an important complement to null hypothesis sig - niﬁcance testing ( e . g . , p - values ) , in that they offer a measure of practical signiﬁcance in terms of the magnitude of the effect , and are independent of sample size . As an additional beneﬁt , dimen - sionless , or standardized measures of effect size allow direct com - parison of two or more quantities , for example variables measured on different scales or independent studies in a meta - analysis . The statistical community has long encouraged researchers to report effect sizes ( Wilkinson and Task Force on Statistical Inference , 1999 ; Kline , 2004 ; Nakagawa and Cuthill , 2007 ) , and scientiﬁc journals are increasingly requesting or requiring authors to report them along with p - values ( e . g . , Snyder , 2000 ; Huberty , 2002 ; Fidler et al . , 2005 ) . One practical difﬁculty for researchers who wish to include effect size in their results is the large number of potential measures available . Kirk ( 1996 ) reported 40 different effect size measures , of which several may be appropriate for any given data struc - ture . For example , four effect size measures exist for dichotomous outcomes ( Pace , 2011 ) , three for continuous outcomes across groups ( Huberty , 2002 ) , and still others for multilevel data , for which there is often no consensus on which is most appropri - ate ( Peugh , 2010 ) . Three commonly used types of effect size are suitable for the majority of relatively simple analyses , and fall into the r family ( measures of correlation between continuous variables ) , the d family ( standardizedmeandifferencesinacontin - uous dependent variable across levels of a categorical independent variable ) , or ratio statistics ( measures of comparative risk for dichotomous outcomes ; Rosenthal , 1994 ; Nakagawa and Cuthill , 2007 ) . However , these frequently used measures of effect size are inap - propriate for more complex data structures such as hierarchical data , which may consist of observations nested within subjects ( e . g . , repeated observations of the same participants ) or observa - tions nested within groups ( e . g . , observational studies of students within different classrooms ) . Additionally , many effect sizes are unable to address research questions which may involve compet - ing effect sizes of different variables within the same multivariate model , rather than a variable’s effect size for the overall model ; this distinctionhasbeendescribedaslocalvs . globaleffectsizes ( Peugh , 2010 ) . A researcher developing an intervention program with lim - ited resources , for example , may wish to know which of many simultaneous risk factors has the largest effect on the outcome to determine which intervention strategy may be most effective . Once a suitable effect size measure has been chosen , researchers unfamiliar with effect sizes often face practical challenges in obtaining or calculating their values . Effect sizes are often not directly provided by statistical software output of multivariate regression analyses . In some cases , even statistics which could be used to calculate effect sizes ( e . g . , R 2 , the proportion of variance accounted for , in a multiple regression ) are not readily accessible from the output . Additional caution is needed when calculat - ing effect sizes using hierarchical or repeated - measures data , as researchers must account for variance accounted for by differ - ent sources , for example ﬁxed effects vs . random effects in a mixed - effects regression model . www . frontiersin . org April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 111 | 1 Selya et al . Cohen’s f 2 from PROC MIXED This article ﬁrst explains the choice of Cohen’s f 2 as a use - ful measure of local effect size appropriate for hierarchical and repeated - measures data . Next , a step - by - step guide is provided for calculating Cohen’s f 2 from PROC MIXED in SAS software , a popularandpowerfultoolformixed - effectsregressionmodelsand hierarchical linear models . Finally , using data from a longitudinal cohort study of adolescent smoking to compare local effect sizes of separate variables , two examples are given in which Cohen’s f 2 is calculated to answer variants of this research question . METHODS DATA AND RESEARCH QUESTION Data were drawn from the Social - Emotional Contexts of Adoles - cent Smoking Patterns ( SECASP ) Study which has been described elsewhere ( e . g . , Dierker and Mermelstein , 2010 ) . Brieﬂy , sam - pling was conducted within high schools in the greater Chicago metropolitan area , and was designed to obtain a racially and ethni - cally diverse sample of adolescents who were at the earliest stages of smoking exposure . The ﬁnal sample included 1 , 263 students across 16 high schools , and the current focus is on experimen - tal and light smokers ( N = 726 at baseline who had smoked in the past 90 days , but not more than 5 cigarettes / day and on a daily basis ) . Follow - up assessments were conducted at 6 , 15 , and 24 months following baseline . Though the full study also contains other smoking status groups and later assessment waves , for sim - plicity , the demonstrations presented below will be restricted to these observations . Measures of interest include smoking frequency ( number of days out of the past 30 on which the adolescent smoked ) , smoking quantity ( number of cigarettes smoked in the past 7 days ) , nicotine dependence syndrome scale ( NDSS ; mean of 10 nicotine depen - dence items assessed on a four - point Likert - type scale ) modiﬁed for use in adolescents ( Sterling et al . , 2009 ) , and gender . Smok - ing frequency , smoking quantity , and NDSS score were assessed at each follow - up assessment . Additionally , a categorical variable indicating the assessment ( baseline , 6 , 15 , or 24 month follow - up ) is included in the repeated - measures analyses . The research questions involve the independent effects of smoking quantity and nicotine dependence on the dependent variable of smoking frequency , while controlling for gender . The example analyses below will address whether smoking quantity or nicotine dependence ( as measured by the NDSS ) , relative to each other , has a greater association with smoking frequency ( 1 ) within a single assessment and ( 2 ) in general across each of the four assessments . CHOOSING A MEASURE OF EFFECT SIZE As the dependent variable is continuous , an effect size in the d fam - ilyof standardizedmeandifferencesmightbeconsideredﬁrst . This effect size measure has been used elsewhere in the context of mul - tivariate mixed - effects regression models using repeated measures of subjects , for example mean differences in an outcome across groups ( Friedmann et al . , 2008 ) ; however , it is inadequate for the current research question for the following reasons . First , it is a comparison of groups and thus requires the independent variable of interest to be categorical . While effect sizes of different assess - ment waves may be of tangential interest to the research topic , the primary question relates to the continuous variables of smok - ing quantity and nicotine dependence . Second , standardized mean differences cannot determine local effect sizes , that is , individual effect sizes of particular variables within a multivariate model that includes other categorical and continuous independent variables . Cohen’s f 2 ( Cohen , 1988 ) is appropriate for calculating the effect size within a multiple regression model in which the independent variable of interest and the dependent variable are both continuous . Cohen’s f 2 is commonly presented in a form appropriate for global effect size : f 2 = R 2 1 − R 2 . ( 1 ) However , the variation of Cohen’s f 2 measuring local effect size is much more relevant to the research question : f 2 = R 2 AB − R 2 A 1 − R 2 AB ( 2 ) where B is the variable of interest ( i . e . , either smoking quantity or nicotine dependence score ) , A is the set of all other vari - ables ( i . e . , gender and depending on what B is at the moment , nicotine dependence score or smoking quantity ) , R 2 AB is the pro - portion of variance accounted for by A and B together ( relative to a model with no regressors ) , and R 2 A is the proportion of variance accounted for by A ( relative to a model with no regressors ) . Thus , the numerator of ( 2 ) reﬂects the proportion of variance uniquely accounted for by B , over and above that of all other variables ( Cohen , 1988 ) . EXTRACTING COHEN’S f 2 FROM PROC MIXED The PROC MIXED procedure in SAS software is used in this guide , as it is a powerful and widely used tool for running mixed - effects regression models and hierarchical linear models . It is important to note that PROC MIXED assumes the dependent variable to be continuous and approximately normally distributed ; thus , the calculations described in the examples below are for continuous dependent variables . As the calculation for Cohen’s f 2 is based on R 2 values of different versions of the full regression model , it is necessary to extract R 2 from the output of PROC MIXED in SAS . Though R 2 is not output directly , it is the proportion of variance accounted for by the regressors in the model and can thus be cal - culated using the residual variance of the full model ( V full ) and the residual variance of the model with no regressors ( V null ) : R 2 = V null − V full V null ( 3 ) Calculating Cohen’s f 2 in Eq . 2 requires both R 2 AB and R 2 A , thus several variants of the regression must be run in order to obtain V AB ( residual variance of the model containing A and B together ) , V A ( residual variance of the model without B ) for each B , and V null ( residual variance of the model without regressors ) . Once these residual variances are obtained , R 2 AB and R 2 A can be calcu - lated as in Eq . 3 , and these in turn can be used to calculate Cohen’s f 2 as in Eq . 2 . Frontiers in Psychology | Quantitative Psychology and Measurement April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 111 | 2 Selya et al . Cohen’s f 2 from PROC MIXED A further consideration when using a mixed - effects regression model or hierarchical linear model is that the reduction of vari - ance between V full and V null must be assured to be from only the ﬁxed effects , and not from the random effects . It is possible that , after removing regressors , the random effects account for more than their previous share of the now - increased total resid - ual variance . To accurately assess the reduction in variance due to the ﬁxed effects of the variable of interest , it is therefore neces - sary to hold constant the variance accounted for by random effects when running the A - only or null models . For example , in a mixed - effects regression model that involves ﬁxed effects of variables A and B , and random intercepts across subjects , A - only and null models must have the same random subject effects as the full AB model . DEMONSTRATIONS EXAMPLE 1 : EFFECT SIZES OF SMOKING QUANTITY AND NICOTINE DEPENDENCE WITHIN ASSESSMENT WAVES Themainresearchquestioniswhethersmokingquantityandnico - tine dependence have time - varying effects on smoking frequency . The motivation for obtaining effect sizes is to supplement results from a previously run mixed - effects regression model investigat - ing these variables’ interactions with time ( among other terms ) . Random effects included slope and intercept which were allowed to vary by subject . The analysis showed signiﬁcant time - varying effects ; that is , the strengths of associations that smoking quan - tity and nicotine dependence score have with smoking frequency change over time . For this reason , obtaining local effect sizes for ( 1 ) smokingquantityand ( 2 ) thenicotinedependencescore within each assessment wave is helpful to better characterize exactly how their relationships with smoking frequency change over time as well as how they compare to each other . Since evaluating effect sizes within each assessment wave no longer involves repeated measures , there are no random effects to ﬁx and thus the reduction in variance is purely due to the ﬁxed effects . First , R 2 AB is calculated for smoking quantity at the baseline wave . This involves ﬁnding V AB and V null . To ﬁnd V AB , a multiple regression model is run at the baseline wave : if time = 0 ; PROC MIXED data = new method = ml ; class id time gender ; model SmkFreq = SmkQuant NDSS gender / solution cl ; run ; V AB is printed in the output and is shown in Table 1 ; the value is 18 . 3555 . By modifying the model statement , values can be obtained for V null as well as the variance of the model excluding smoking quantity ( denoted as V - SQ rather than V A , which in this example can refer to excluding smoking quantity or excluding the nicotine dependence score ) . Table 1 | V AB at baseline in example 1 . Covariance parameter estimates Cov parm Estimate Residual 18 . 3555 Calculating R 2 and f 2 values from the residual variance esti - mates can be automated by using the SAS output delivery system ( ODS ) to store the desired parameters in separate data sets , and subsequently using a merged dataset of variances to calculate R 2 and f 2 using Eqs 3 and 2 , respectively . The following syntax calculating R 2 and f 2 for smoking quantity illustrates this : if time = 0 ; ∗ Obtain V AB ods output CovParms = VABex1SQ ; PROC MIXED data = new method = ml ; class id time gender ; model smkFreq = smkQuant NDSS gender / solution cl ; run ; quit ; ods output close ; ∗ Obtain V - SQ ; ods output CovParms = VAex1SQ ; PROC MIXED data = new method = ml ; class id time gender ; model smkFreq = NDSS gender / solution cl ; run ; quit ; ods output close ; ∗ Obtain V null ; ods output CovParms = VnullEx1SQ ; PROC MIXED data = new method = ml ; class id time gender ; model smkFreq = / solution cl ; run ; quit ; ods output close ; ∗ Merge datasets for V AB , V - SQ , and V null into one dataset , while renaming the variable name“Estimate”with unique names ; DATA VallEx1SQ ; merge VABex1SQ ( rename = ( Estimate = VAB ) ) VAex1SQ ( rename = ( Estimate = VA ) ) VnullEx1SQ ( rename = ( Estimate = Vnull ) ) ; by CovParm ; DROP CovParm ; run ; ∗ Calclulate R 2 AB , R 2 - SQ , and f 2SQ from the merged dataset and save to a new dataset ; DATA resultsEx1SQ ; set VallEx1SQ ; DROP VAB VA Vnull ; R2AB = ( Vnull - VAB ) / Vnull ; R2A = ( Vnull - VA ) / Vnull ; f2 = ( R2AB - R2A ) / ( 1 - R2AB ) ; run ; ∗ Print the results to the Results window PROC PRINT data = resultsEx1SQ ; run ; This procedure reveals that at the baseline wave , Cohen’s local f 2 for smoking quantity is 0 . 69 ( Table 2 ) . www . frontiersin . org April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 111 | 3 Selya et al . Cohen’s f 2 from PROC MIXED Calculating R 2 - ND and Cohen’s f 2 for nicotine dependence sim - ply requires appropriate modiﬁcations to dataset names and to the model statement in the syntax above . Since V AB and V null are the same regardless of the variable of interest , only the model state - ment for V A must be modiﬁed to hold out nicotine dependence from the model rather than smoking quantity : ∗ Obtain V - ND ; ods output CovParms = VAex1ND ; PROC MIXED data = new method = ml ; class id time gender ; model smkFreq = smkQuant gender / solution cl ; run ; quit ; ods output close ; Cohen’s local f 2 for nicotine dependence is 0 . 32 ( Table 3 ) . Repeating this process for the remaining assessment waves yields the local effect sizes for smoking quantity and nicotine dependence over time ( Table 4 ) . This allows a direct comparison of the two regressors , revealing that at the baseline wave , smoking quantity has a stronger relationship with smoking frequency than does nicotine dependence , while two years later , nicotine depen - dence has a stronger relationship with smoking frequency than doessmokingquantity . Thesevaluessignifyapproximatelymoder - ate ( f 2 ≥ 0 . 15 ) to large ( f 2 ≥ 0 . 35 ) effect sizes according to Cohen’s ( 1988 ) guidelines . As a cautionary note , stratifying models by assessment wave is appropriate for calculating effect sizes of the original mixed - effects regression model only because the original model ( 1 ) used time Table 2 | R 2 AB , R 2 − SQ , and Cohen’s f 2 values for smoking quantity at baseline in example 1 . Obs R 2 AB R 2 A f 2 1 0 . 74650 0 . 57232 0 . 68711 Table 3 | R 2 AB , R 2 − ND , and Cohen’s f 2 values for nicotine dependence at baseline in example 1 . Obs R 2 AB R 2 A f 2 1 0 . 74650 0 . 66663 0 . 31507 Table 4 | Effect sizes for smoking quantity and nicotine dependence within assessment waves . Cohen’s f 2 for smoking quantity Cohen’s f 2 for nicotine dependence Baseline wave 0 . 69 0 . 32 6 - Month wave 0 . 48 0 . 46 15 - Month wave 0 . 15 0 . 80 24 - Month wave 0 . 15 0 . 70 Cohen’s f 2 for local effect sizes of smoking quantity and nicotine dependence within a multiple regression performed within each assessment wave are shown . According to Cohen’s ( 1988 ) guidelines , f 2 ≥ 0 . 02 , f 2 ≥ 0 . 15 , and f 2 ≥ 0 . 35 represent small , medium , and large effect sizes , respectively . as a categorical variable ( due to the irregular intervals between assessment waves ) and ( 2 ) allowed smoking quantity and nicotine dependence to vary over time ( i . e . , included interactions between these variables and time ) . Had time been continuous or the regres - sors had not been allowed to vary over time , the effect sizes in Table 4 would be less consistent with the original model , possibly resulting in inaccurate estimates of effect size . EXAMPLE 2 : EFFECT SIZES OF SMOKING QUANTITY AND NICOTINE DEPENDENCE ACROSS TIME Having obtained local effect sizes within each assessment wave , the current question is whether smoking quantity or nicotine depen - dence has the greater effect across assessments . To calculate this , random effects must be held constant between R 2 AB and R 2 A so that the change in variance after adding either smoking quantity or the nicotine dependence score reﬂects only a change in the vari - ance due to ﬁxed effects . This example thus extends the procedure described in example 1 to include random effects and repeated measures in the calculation of Cohen’s f 2 . First , the full AB model must be run in order to obtain the val - ues of random effect variance at which subsequent models must be ﬁxed . Thecovarianceparametersinthisexampleincludebothran - dom effect variances ( due to the inclusion of random slopes and intercepts across subjects ) and residual variance ; these parameters can be saved into a new dataset using ODS ( Table 5 ) . Calculation of R 2 AB and R 2 A is based on the residual variance ( V AB = 20 . 2417 ) ; however , the random effect variance must be held at the values shown in Table 5 when running the A - only and null models in order to accurately measure the reduction of resid - ual variance . Using the parms statement , the covariance dataset from the full AB model can be read into in the V A and V null , in order to ﬁx the random effect variance . The following syntax runs the mixed models , holding the random effects constant , merges the residual variance from each model , and calculates R 2 AB , R 2 - SQ , and Cohen’s f 2 for smoking quantity across all assessment waves . PROC SORT data = new ; by id ; ∗ Obtain V AB ; ods output CovParms = VABex2SQ ; PROC MIXED data = new method = ml ; class id time gender ; modelsmkFreq = smkQuantNDSSgendertimesmkQuant ∗ time NDSS ∗ time gender ∗ time / solution cl ; random int wave / SUBJECT = id type = un ; run ; quit ; ods output close ; Table 5 | Covariance dataset for the full AB model in example 2 . Cov parm Subject Estimate UN ( 1 , 1 ) id 2 . 3419 UN ( 2 , 1 ) id 1 . 8809 UN ( 2 , 2 ) id 0 . 8706 Residual 20 . 2417 Frontiers in Psychology | Quantitative Psychology and Measurement April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 111 | 4 Selya et al . Cohen’s f 2 from PROC MIXED ∗ Obtain V - SQ ; ods output CovParms = VAex2SQ ; PROC MIXED data = new method = ml ; class id time gender ; model smkFreq = NDSS gender time NDSS ∗ time gender ∗ time / solution cl ; random int wave / SUBJECT = id type = un ; parms / parmsdata = VABex2SQ hold = 1 , 2 , 3 ; run ; quit ; ods output close ; ∗ Obtain V null ; ods output CovParms = VnullEx2SQ ; PROC MIXED data = new method = ml ; class id time gender ; model smkFreq = / solution cl ; random int wave / SUBJECT = id type = un ; parms / parmsdata = VABex2SQ hold = 1 , 2 , 3 ; run ; quit ; ods output close ; ∗ Select the residual variance and discard the random - effects variances ; DATA VABex2SQ ; set VABex2SQ ; if CovParm = " Residual " ; run ; DATA VAex2SQ ; set VAex2SQ ; if CovParm = ’Residual’ ; run ; DATA VnullEx2SQ ; set VnullEx2SQ ; if CovParm = ’Residual’ ; run ; ∗ Merge datasets for V AB , V - SQ , and V null into one dataset , while renaming the variable name“Estimate”with unique names ; DATA VallEx2SQ ; mergeVABex2SQ ( rename = ( Estimate = VAB ) ) VAex2SQ ( rename = ( Estimate = VA ) ) VnullEx2SQ ( rename = ( Estimate = Vnull ) ) ; by CovParm ; DROP CovParm Subject ; run ; ∗ Calclulate R 2 AB , R 2 − SQ and f 2 SQ from the merged dataset and save to a new dataset ; DATA resultsExSQ ; set VallEx2SQ ; DROP VAB VA Vnull ; R2AB = ( Vnull - VAB ) / Vnull ; R2A = ( Vnull - VA ) / Vnull ; f2 = ( R2AB - R2A ) / ( 1 - R2AB ) ; run ; ∗ Print the results to the Results window PROC PRINT data = resultsExSQ ; run ; Finally , R 2 AB , R 2 - ND , and Cohen’s local f 2 for nicotine depen - dence can be obtained by modifying the A - only model above to withhold nicotine dependence rather than smoking quantity from the model as shown below ; aside from ﬁle names , no other mod - iﬁcations are necessary as the full AB model and the null models are the same for smoking quantity and nicotine dependence . ∗ Obtain V - ND ; ods output CovParms = VAex2ND ; PROC MIXED data = new method = ml ; class id time gender ; model smkFreq = smkQuant gender time smkQuant ∗ time gender ∗ time / solution cl ; random int wave / SUBJECT = id type = un ; parms / parmsdata = VABex2ND hold = 1 , 2 , 3 ; run ; quit ; ods output close ; These results show that , across assessment waves , nicotine dependence score ( f 2 = 0 . 44 ) has a slightly greater impact on smoking frequency than does smoking quantity ( f 2 = 0 . 37 ) , though both have large effect sizes . CONCLUSION In this guide , Cohen’s f 2 was chosen as an appropriate measure of local effect size for variables within a multivariate , mixed - effects regression model . However , it is important to note caveats to this approach . First , some statisticians have objected to stan - dardized effect size , as it can be reduced by variables with low reliability / high variance , and is unstable across studies with dif - ferent designs , such that repeated - measures studies typically yield strongereffectsizescomparedtoanequivalentindependentdesign ( Baguley , 2009 ) . Additionally , standardized effect size can be dis - torted by the sampling procedure ( e . g . , sampling from a trun - cated distribution , sampling from the tails of the distribution , or restricting to a subset of the population ; Baguley , 2009 ) , and thus generalizing standardized effect sizes should be done with caution . A second caveat is that effect size measures other than Cohen’s f 2 may be appropriate for similar analyses . Previous literature has suggested as a local effect size the proportional reduction in variance ( PRV ) after the variable of interest has been added to a mixed - effects model or hierarchical linear model , compared to an A - only model ( Peugh , 2010 ) . PRV is related to Cohen’s f 2 through R 2 - type measures , but has disadvantages for these particular cur - rent research questions . Speciﬁcally , PRV does not incorporate the total variance of the model prior to adding regressors , thus a given value of PRV may indicate different effect sizes relative to the over - all model , depending on the variance of the intercept - only model . As a result , Cohen’s f 2 is standardized with respect to the total vari - ance , allowing more accurate comparison of effect sizes between variables within the model as a whole . Despite the widespread use of repeated - measures data and hierarchical or multilevel data in experimental , observational , and clinical research , reporting effect sizes presents challenges to researchers unfamiliar with this topic . These challenges can www . frontiersin . org April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 111 | 5 Selya et al . Cohen’s f 2 from PROC MIXED start with the initial process of choosing which measure out of many is most appropriate for the data , the analysis , and the research question . Though effect size measures appropriate for repeated - measures or multilevel data have already been proposed ( Cohen , 1988 ; Nakagawa and Cuthill , 2007 ; Peugh , 2010 ) and can be directly or indirectly obtained through common statistical software packages , existing sources rarely provide comprehensive information about these processes that are accessible to naïve researchers . This article presents a practical guide to calculating Cohen’s f 2 , an effect size measure for a single variable within a multivariate , mixed - effects regression model , from the output of PROC MIXED in SAS software . This guide is intended for researchers in a wide variety of scientiﬁc ﬁelds who are unfamiliar with effect sizes , and aims to facilitate effect size reporting in analy - ses that are commonly performed , yet too complex for standard measures of effect size . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This research was supported by Project Grant P01 CA098262 ( Mermelstein ) from the National Cancer Institute ; R01 DA022313 A2 ( Dierker ) , R01 DA022313 S1 ( Dierker ) , and R21 DA029834 - 01 ( Rose ) from the National Institute on Drug Abuse ; and Center Grant P50 DA010075 awarded to Penn State University . REFERENCES Baguley , T . ( 2009 ) . Standardized or simple effect size : what should be reported ? Br . J . Psychol . 100 , 603 – 617 . Cohen , J . E . ( 1988 ) . Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Dierker , L . , and Mermelstein , R . ( 2010 ) . Early emerging nicotine - dependence symptoms : a signal of propensity for chronic smoking behavior in adolescents . J . Pediatr . 156 , 818 – 822 . Fidler , F . , Cumming , G . , Thomason , N . , Pannuzzo , D . , Smith , J . , Fyffe , P . , Edmonds , H . , Harrington , C . , and Schmitt , R . ( 2005 ) . Toward improved statistical reporting in the journal of consulting and clinical psychology . J . Consult . Clin . Psychol . 73 , 136 – 143 . Friedmann , P . D . , Rose , J . S . , Swift , R . , Stout , R . L . , Millman , R . P . , andStein , M . D . ( 2008 ) . Trazodone for sleep disturbance after alcohol detoxi - ﬁcation : a double - blind , placebo - controlled trial . Alcohol . Clin . Exp . Res . 32 , 1652 – 1660 . Huberty , C . J . ( 2002 ) . A history of effect size indices . Educ . Psychol . Meas . 62 , 227 – 240 . Kirk , R . E . ( 1996 ) . Practicalsigniﬁcance : a concept whose time has come . Educ . Psychol . Meas . 56 , 746 – 759 . Kline , R . B . ( 2004 ) . Beyond Signiﬁcance Testing . Washington : American Psy - chological Association . Nakagawa , S . , and Cuthill , I . C . ( 2007 ) . Effect size , conﬁdence interval and statistical signiﬁcance : a practical guideforbiologists . Biol . Rev . Camb . Philos . Soc . 82 , 591 – 605 . Pace , N . L . ( 2011 ) . Researchmethodsfor meta - analyses . Best Pract . Res . Clin . Anaesthesiol . 25 , 523 – 533 . Peugh , J . L . ( 2010 ) . A practical guide to multilevel modeling . J . Sch . Psychol . 48 , 85 – 112 . Rosenthal , R . ( 1994 ) . “Parametric mea - suresof effectsize , ”in TheHandbook of Research Synthesis , eds . H . Cooper and L . V . Hedges ( New York : Russel Sage Foundation ) , 231 – 245 . Snyder , P . ( 2000 ) . Guidelinesforreport - ing results of group quantitative investigations . J . Early Interv . 23 , 145 – 150 . Sterling , K . L . , Mermelstein , R . , Turner , L . , Diviak , K . , Flay , B . , and Shiffman , S . ( 2009 ) . Examiningthepsychome - tric properties and predictive valid - ity of a youth - speciﬁc version of the nicotinedependencesyndromescale ( NDSS ) among teens with varying levels of smoking . Addict . Behav . 34 , 616 – 619 . Wilkinson , L . , and Task Force on Sta - tistical Inference . ( 1999 ) . Statisti - cal methods in psychology journals : guidelines and explanations . Am . Psychol . 54 , 594 – 604 . Conﬂict of Interest Statement : The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any com - mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential con - ﬂict of interest . Received : 22 February 2012 ; paper pend - ing published : 14 March 2012 ; accepted : 27March2012 ; publishedonline : 17April 2012 . Citation : Selya AS , Rose JS , Dierker LC , Hedeker D and Mermelstein RJ ( 2012 ) A practical guide to calculating Cohen’s f 2 , a measure of local effect size , from PROC MIXED . Front . Psychology 3 : 111 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2012 . 00111 This article was submitted to Frontiers inQuantitativePsychologyandMeasure - ment , a specialty of Frontiers in Psychol - ogy . Copyright © 2012 Selya , Rose , Dierker , Hedeker and Mermelstein . This is an open - access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribu - tionNonCommercialLicense , whichper - mits non - commercial use , distribution , and reproduction in other forums , pro - vided the original authors and source are credited . Frontiers in Psychology | Quantitative Psychology and Measurement April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 111 | 6