INTRODUCTION Glycosylphosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) - anchored proteins seem to be endocytosed by different mechanisms . Some GPI - anchored proteins have been reported to be taken up by caveolae ( Mayor et al . , 1994 ; Parton et al . , 1994 ; Stahl and Mueller , 1995 ) , other GPI - anchored proteins are found in domains outside caveolae ( Parton et al . , 1994 ; Schnitzer et al . , 1995 ; Poussin et al . , 1998 ) . Endocytosis of GPI - anchored proteins in lymphocytes which have neither caveolar structures nor caveolin occurs by clathrin - independent endocytosis ( Deckert et al . , 1996 ) . It has however , been speculated that cells without caveolae have cholesterol - rich rafts that may have some properties in common with caveolae ( Carter and Sorkin , 1998 ) . Internalization of GPI - anchored proteins via the clathrin - dependent pathway has also been reported ( van den Bosch et al . , 1988 ; Makiya et al . , 1992 ) . The GPI - linked chicken protein chPrPc was found in clathrin - coated vesicles in chicken brain and in neuroblastoma cells ( Shyng et al . , 1994 ) , and it was reported that this was due to an interaction of the protein with a transmembrane protein that was naturally included in these vesicles ( Nosjean et al . , 1997 ) . It has also been reported that the GPI - linked urokinase - type plasminogen activator receptor is internalized by both clathrin - dependent and - independent mechanisms ( Vilhardt et al . , 1999 ) . Thus , the process of internalization of GPI - anchored proteins is still poorly understood . Some transmembrane proteins have been modiﬁed to become GPI - anchored in order to study the functional role of the transmembrane domain . For the CD4 receptor there was no change in the function whether the protein was integrated in normal form or anchored to the membrane via a GPI - moiety ( Keller et al . , 1992 ) . In contrast , when the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains of the inﬂuenza hemagglutinin were replaced by a GPI - anchor , the receptor binding activity of the protein was abolished ( Kemble et al . , 1993 ) . Diphtheria toxin ( DT ) is synthesized by Corynebacterium diphtheria as a single - chain protein with a molecular mass of 58 , 342 ( Greenﬁeld et al . , 1983 ) . After proteolytic processing 3899 Journal of Cell Science 112 , 3899 - 3909 ( 1999 ) Printed in Great Britain © The Company of Biologists Limited 1999 JCS0614 We have here used diphtheria toxin as a tool to investigate the type of endocytosis used by a glyco - sylphosphatidylinositol - linked molecule , a glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol - linked version of the diphtheria toxin receptor that is able to mediate intoxication . The receptor is expressed in HeLa cells where clathrin - dependent endocytosis can be blocked by overexpression of mutant dynamin . Diphtheria toxin intoxicates cells by ﬁrst binding to cell - surface receptors , then the toxin is endocytosed , and upon exposure to low endosomal pH , the toxin enters the cytosol where it inhibits protein synthesis . Inhibition of protein synthesis by the toxin can therefore be used to probe the entry of the glycosylphosphatidylinositol - linked receptor into an acidic compartment . Furthermore , degradation of the toxin can be used as an indicator of entry into the endosomal / lysosomal compartment . The data show that although expression of mutant dynamin inhibits intoxication mediated via the wild - type receptors , mutant dynamin does not affect intoxication or endocytosis and degradation of diphtheria toxin bound to the glycosylphosphatidylinositol - linked receptor . Confocal microscopy demonstrated that diphtheria toxin is transported to vesicles containing EEA1 , a marker for early endosomes . Biochemical and ultrastructural studies of the HeLa cells used reveal that they have very low levels of caveolin - 1 and that they contain very few if any caveolae at the cell surface . Furthermore , the endocytic uptake of diphtheria toxin bound to the glycosylphosphatidylinositol - linked receptor was not reduced by methyl - bb - cyclodextrin or by nystatin which both disrupt caveolar structure and functions . Thus , uptake of a glycosylphosphatidylinositol - linked protein , in this case the diphtheria toxin receptor , into the endosomal / lysosomal system can occur independently of both caveolae and clathrin - coated vesicles . Key words : Clathrin , Endocytosis , Clathrin - independent endocytosis , GPI - anchor , Diphtheria toxin SUMMARY Endocytic mechanisms responsible for uptake of GPI - linked diphtheria toxin receptor Grethe Skretting 1 , Maria Lyngaas Torgersen 1 , Bo van Deurs 2 and Kirsten Sandvig 1 , * 1 Institute for Cancer Research at The Norwegian Radium Hospital , Montebello , 0310 Oslo , Norway 2 Structural Cell Biology Unit , Department of Medical Anatomy , The Panum Institute , University of Copenhagen , DK - 2200 Copenhagen N , Denmark * Author for correspondence ( e - mail : ksandvig @ radium . uio . no ) Accepted 13 September ; published on WWW 3 November 1999 3900 the protein consists of two fragments linked by a disulﬁde bond , the A fragment ( M r = 21 , 145 ) containing the catalytic domain of the toxin ( Collier , 1975 ) and the receptor binding / translocation mediating B fragment ( M r = 37 , 240 ) ( Choe et al . , 1992 ) . The mechanism of DT cytotoxicity can be divided into three steps ( i ) binding of DT to speciﬁc cell - surface receptors , ( ii ) internalization of the toxin - receptor complexes , and ( iii ) translocation of the A fragment from endosomes into the cytosol where it inhibits protein synthesis by ADP - ribosylation of elongation factor 2 . The DT receptor ( DTR ) was ﬁrst cloned from the highly toxin - sensitive monkey Vero cells and appeared to be identical to the heparin - binding EGF - like growth factor ( HB - EGF ) precursor ( Naglich et al . , 1992 ) . DT has been visualized in clathrin - coated pits ( Morris et al . , 1985 ) , and the toxin was reported to enter cells by clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Moya et al . , 1985 ; Simpson et al . , 1998 ) . Previously , Lanzrein et al . ( 1996 ) found that DT could be taken up by a mutated receptor where the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains had been replaced by a GPI - moiety , although it was much less toxic to cells than when bound to wild - type receptors . Thus DT can be used as a probe to study the uptake of the GPI - linked DTR . To investigate which mechanism that is responsible for uptake of the GPI - anchored DTR , we have used HeLa K44A cells ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) . Upon removal of tetracycline these cells overexpress a mutant dynamin which blocks the formation of clathrin - coated vesicles and thereby inhibits clathrin - dependent endocytosis ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) . Our results show that the entry and intoxication of DT via this GPI - DTR occur with the same efficiency whether mutant dynamin is expressed or not . We also demonstrate that DT bound to the GPI - anchored receptor enters the early endosomes and lysosomal compartments and that the internalization occurs via a pathway independent of caveolae . MATERIALS AND METHODS Materials 125 Iodine was obtained from New England Nuclear , Research Products , Wilmington , DE , USA . Phosphatidylinositol - speciﬁc phospholipase C , puromycin , geneticin , pronase , tetracycline , staurosporine , nocodazole , MESNA ( 2 - mercaptoethanesulfonicacid , sodium salt ) , methyl - b - cyclodextrin , cytochalasin D and E , forskolin , nystatin , Hepes , baﬁlomycin A 1 and mannosamine were from Sigma , Chemical Co . , St Louis , MO , USA . Hygromycin was from Boehringer Mannheim . [ 3 H ] leucine and ( 1 a , 1 b ( n ) - [ 3 H ] ) - cholesterol was obtained from The Radiochemical Centre , Amersham , United Kingdom . The human auto - immune serum against EEA1 was from a patient with subacute cutanous systemic lupus erythematosus identiﬁed in the Monash Clinical Immunology Laboratory ( Mu et al . , 1995 ) and was a gift from Ban - Hock Toh , Monash University , Melbourne , Australia . Cell cultures The HeLa K44A cells were grown and maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10 % fetal calf serum , 100 units / ml penicillin , 100 m g / ml streptomycin , 2 mM L - glutamine , 0 . 2 m g / ml puromycin , 0 . 4 mg / ml geneticin and 1 m g / ml tetracycline in 5 % CO 2 . Two days prior to experiments the cells were plated with and without tetracycline into 12 and 24 wells plates at a density of 7 · 10 4 and 3 · 10 4 cells / well , respectively . Plasmid constructions The plasmid pLTRGPI encoding the DTR with the GPI anchor , was made by Lanzrein et al . ( 1996 ) . Cell transfections HeLa K44A cells were used for transfection with pLTRGPI . The cells were cotransfected with pCEP4 ( Invitrogen BV , Leek , the Netherlands ) containing the hygromycin resistance gene . Cotransfections were performed using the DOTAP transfection kit ( Boehringer , Mannheim ) according to the manufacturers instructions , using 2 m g / ml plasmid constructions and 0 . 2 m g / ml pCEP4 . Hygromycin - resistant clones were selected and screened for binding of 125 I - DT . Positive clones were puriﬁed further by recloning . Labeling and nicking of diphtheria toxin DT was labeled by the iodogen method ( Fraker and Speck , 1978 ) to a speciﬁc activity of 10 , 000 - 20 , 000 cpm / ng toxin . DT ( 1 . 1 mg / ml ) was nicked with trypsin ( 0 . 5 m g / ml ) at 37 (cid:176) C for 30 minutes . The reaction was stopped by adding soybean trypsin inhibitor ( 25 m g / ml ) . Binding of diphtheria toxin Cells were incubated for 20 minutes at room temperature with 125 I - labeled toxin ( 300 ng / ml ) in Hepes medium in the presence or absence of 10 m g / ml unlabelled toxin . The cells were then washed four times with Hepes medium , lysed in 0 . 1 M KOH and the radioactivity was measured . Measurements of cytotoxicity of internalized toxin Cells were incubated with increasing amounts of DT at 37 (cid:176) C for 24 hours followed by incorporation of [ 3 H ] leucine ( 1 - 2 m Ci / ml ) for 30 minutes at 37 (cid:176) C in leucine - free Hepes medium . The cells were then incubated for 10 minutes with 5 % TCA followed by a brief wash in the same solution . The precipitated material was dissolved in 0 . 1 M KOH and the radioactivity was measured . Measurement of cytotoxicity of toxin translocated from the plasma membrane by low pH pulse Cells were incubated with increasing concentrations of nicked toxin in Hepes medium for 40 minutes at 4 (cid:176) C . The cells were then washed four times and incubated for 8 minutes in Hepes medium , pH 4 . 8 , at 37 (cid:176) C . After a brief wash the cells were incubated for 6 hours in Hepes medium containing 5 m M monensin at 37 (cid:176) C . The cells were then incubated for 30 minutes at 37 (cid:176) C in leucine - free Hepes medium supplemented with 1 - 2 m Ci [ 3 H ] leucine / ml . The cells were incubated for 10 minutes with 5 % TCA followed by a brief wash in the same solution . Precipitated material was dissolved in 0 . 1 M KOH and the radioactivity was measured . Measurement of the endocytic rate of DT and CT The cells were washed twice with Hepes medium , and they were then incubated with radiolabeled DT ( 10 , 000 - 20 , 000 cpm / ng ) for 60 minutes at 4 (cid:176) C . The cells were washed four times in ice - cold Hepes medium and incubated for the indicated times at 37 (cid:176) C . Then they were incubated with Hepes medium containing 10 mg / ml pronase for 30 minutes at room temperature to remove surface - bound toxin . The cell suspension was centrifuged and the radioactivity was measured both in the supernatant and in the pellet . Endocytosis of cholera toxin ( CT ) was measured using the ORIGEN analyzer ( IGEN Inc . , Rockville , Md . ) which is based on electrochemiluminescence detection . CT was labeled with N - hydroxysuccinimide ester - activated tris ( bipyridine ) chelated ruthenium ( II ) TAG ( IGEN Inc . ) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations and simultanously biotinylated with the reducable ImmunoPure NHS - SS - Biotin ( Pierce ) . For endocytosis , cells were washed twice with Hepes medium and incubated with the TAG - labeled CT ( 6 . 25 ng / ml ) in the presence of BSA ( 2 mg / ml ) for 15 minutes at 37°C . Half of the wells were then treated with 0 . 1 M G . Skretting and others 3901 Endocytosis of GPI - anchored DT receptor MESNA for 1 hour to reduce the SS - linked biotin in cell surface - bound toxin ( Smythe et al . , 1992 ) . Only toxin which is TAG - labeled and still biotinylated is detected in the cell lysate using streptavidin beads ( Dynal , Oslo , Norway ) and ORIGEN Analyzer ( IGEN Inc . ) . Cells treated with MESNA give the amount of endocytosed toxin , while untreated cells give the total amount of toxin associated with the cells . Transferrin ( Tf ) was TAG - labeled as described for CT and biotinylated with ORIGEN Biotin - LC - Sulfo NHS Ester ( IGEN Inc . ) After 5 minutes endocytosis , the surfacebound Tf was removed in half of the wells by pronase ( 2 mg / ml ) . The amount of endocytosed Tf was then determined using the ORIGEN Analyzer . Effect of methyl - bb - cyclodextrin on plasma membrane cholesterol The cells were preincubated in Hepes with 0 . 2 % BSA for 10 minutes and then incubated for 15 minutes at 37 (cid:176) C in Hepes with 1 m Ci ( 1 a , 1 b ( n ) - [ 3 H ] ) - cholesterol to label the plasma membrane ( Rodal et al . , 1999 ) . Cells were subsequently washed thoroughly and incubated at 37 (cid:176) C for 30 minutes in the presence or absence of methyl - b - cyclodextrin ( 10 mM ) . After washing , the cells were lysed and the lysates were mixed with EcoLite + scintillation mixture and counted in a scintillation counter ( Rodal et al . , 1999 ) . Measurement of the degradation rate of the DT The cells were incubated with radiolabeled DT ( 10 , 000 - 20 , 000 cpm / ng ) for 40 minutes at 4 (cid:176) C in Hepes medium . They were washed four times followed by incubation at 37 (cid:176) C in Hepes medium for various times . The soluble proteins in the medium were precipitated with TCA , and the radioactivity was measured both in the pellet and the supernatant . Immunoﬂuorescence and confocal microscopy DT was labeled with Cy3 dye according to the instructions from the manufacturer ( Amersham LIFE SCIENCE ) . Cells , grown on coverslips , were incubated with Cy3 labeled DT for 40 minutes at 4 (cid:176) C in Hepes medium . They were washed four times and after incubation at 37 (cid:176) C in Hepes medium for 30 minutes they were ﬁxed in 3 % formaldehyde . The cells were permeabilized in 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 and incubated with human anti - EEA1 . The antibody was visualized with anti - human IgG FITC ( Jackson Immunoresearch ) . Colocalization of the two ﬂuorescence signals was analyzed by TCS - NT Leika confocal scanning laser - beam microscope equipped with a 100 · objective and a Kr / Ar laser at the excitation wavelengths of 488 nm for FITC and 563 nm for Cy3 . The images shown were prepared from the confocal data ﬁles using Adobe Photoshop , without any alteration of the original ﬂuorescent data . Western blot Cells were scraped off in phosphate buffered saline ( PBS ) and lysed in sample buffer containing 100 mM DTT . The samples were heated to 100 (cid:176) C for 5 minutes . Similar amounts of protein were loaded in each lane on a 4 - 20 % gradient polyacrylamide gel ( Novex , San Diego ) . The proteins were immobilized on Hybond TM ECL TM nitrocellulose membrane ( Radiochemical Centre , Amersham , United Kingdom ) by semi - dry transfer and processed for western blotting . The membrane was blocked in 5 % non - fat milk ( Bio - Rad , Hercules , USA ) in PBS with 0 . 1 % Tween - 20 . The primary antibody , a polyclonal antibody against caveolin ( Transduction Laboratories , Lexington , USA ) , was diluted 1 : 10 , 000 in the same solution . As secondary antibody , horseradish peroxidase - linked donkey anti - rabbit whole antibody ( Radiochemical Centre , Amersham , United Kingdom ) diluted 1 : 1500 was used . ECL TM ( Radiochemical Centre , Amersham , United Kingdom ) was used for immunodetection . Electron microscopy Conﬂuent cultures of HeLa K44A , MDCKII and non - transfected HeLa cells were rinsed with PBS and ﬁxed with 2 % formaldehyde and 0 . 1 % glutaraldehyde in 0 . 1 M sodium phosphate buffer , pH 7 . 2 . Following ﬁxation , the cells were postﬁxed in OsO 4 , contrasted in a graded series of ethanol and embedded in epon ( van Deurs et al . , 1993 ) . Sections were cut and collected on Formvar - coated mesh grids and examined in a Philips CM 100 electron microscope . RESULTS In order to study the endocytic mechanism involved in the uptake of DT bound to a GPI - linked receptor , we have used the HeLa K44A cells . In the absence of tetracycline these cells overexpress a mutant of dynamin which is unable to bind and hydrolyze GTP , leading to a block in clathrin - dependent endocytosis ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) . A DTR with a GPI - anchor was transfected into the cells . The transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains of the DT receptor have been replaced with 37 amino acids from the decay accelerating factor which signals GPI - anchoring ( Lanzrein et al . , 1996 ) . HeLa K44A cells have normal DT receptors , but they are so few that although they can mediate intoxication of the cells ( see below ) they cannot be measured by using 125 I - DT ( data not shown ) and will therefore not contribute to the measurements of toxin binding in cells expressing the GPI - linked DTR . Expression of DTR - GPI in HeLa K44A cells HeLa K44A cells were co - transfected with a vector pCEP4 containing the hygromycin resistance gene and a vector containing the receptor which becomes GPI - anchored ( DTR - GPI ) ( Lanzrein et al . , 1996 ) . Clones were selected and the binding of 125 I - DT was measured . HeLa K44A cells are DT sensitive but as explained above the number of receptors is not high enough to allow measurement of speciﬁc binding . The DTR - GPI cell line which was selected had 2 - 3 · 10 5 binding sites pr cell ( Fig . 1A ) and expressed high levels of DTR mRNA whereas the mock transfected cells had no measurable toxin binding and low levels of mRNA ( data not shown ) . Measurements of 125 I - transferrin endocytosis were performed to test that clathrin - dependent endocytosis actually was inhibited in the selected clone upon expression of mutant dynamin ( data not shown ) . To check that DTR - GPI is inserted into the membrane by a GPI - anchor , the cells were treated with a phosphatidylinositol - speciﬁc phospholipase C ( PI - PLC ) followed by binding of 125 I - DT to the cells . Fig . 1B shows that binding of 125 I - DT was reduced by 50 % at the highest concentration of PI - PLC . For NIH 3T3 cells overexpressing the DTR - GPI , it was recently shown that the decrease in binding of 125 I - DT after treatment of the cells with PI - PLC was dependent on the presence of heparin ( Lanzrein et al . , 1996 ) . This was not the case for HeLa K44A cells as the decrease in binding was similar whether or not heparin was present ( data not shown ) . We also treated the cells with mannosamine which blocks the incorporation of glycosylphosphatidylinositol into GPI - anchored proteins ( Lisanti et al . , 1991 ) . This treatment also reduced the binding of 125 I - DT by 50 % as shown in Fig . 1C . It is a common ﬁnding that complete removal of GPI - linked proteins is difficult to obtain ( see discussion ) . Effect of mutant dynamin on the cytotoxic effect of DT To test whether mutant dynamin and a block in clathrin - 3902 dependent endocytosis would affect toxicity of DT mediated by wild - type receptors and GPI - linked receptors , both HeLa K44A cells that were transfected with the vector conferring hygromycin resistance only and the cells expressing the GPI - linked receptor , were incubated for 2 days in the presence or absence of tetracycline to allow expression of mutant dynamin . Then nicked DT was added to the cells , and the toxicity was measured after 24 hours incubation ( Fig . 2 ) . As shown , HeLa K44A cells that only have wild - type DT receptors were protected against DT when the clathrin - dependent endocytosis was blocked by expression of mutant dynamin ( Fig . 2A ) . This is in agreement with the results from Simpson et al . ( 1998 ) showing that COS - 7y cells transiently expressing the mutant dynamin were protected against DT . In contrast , the cytotoxic effect of DT on the DTR - GPI cells was the same whether or not the dynamin mutant was expressed , indicating that the DTR - GPI was internalized by a clathrin - independent pathway ( Fig . 2B ) . Previously it was reported that the DT receptor do not recycle in Vero cells ( Ronnberg and Middlebrook , 1989 ) . However , with respect to receptor recycling , it cannot be ruled out that there are variations among different cell types ( Lyall et al . , 1985 ; Teslenko et al . , 1987 ; Lai et al . , 1989 ) . Thus it could not be excluded that expression of mutant dynamin somehow would affect a possible recycling of the wild - type DTR after binding of toxin in these cells , and that this might reduce the number of wild - type receptors during a 24 hour incubation with toxin continuously present in the medium . We therefore performed an experiment where nicked DT was prebound to cells at 0 (cid:176) C , unbound toxin was removed , and the cells were incubated overnight . The effect of mutant dynamin was essentially the same in this type of experiment ; overexpression of mutant dynamin protected against toxin bound to wild - type receptor only ( Fig . 3A ) , and there was no protection against DT bound to GPI - linked DTR ( Fig . 3B ) . The possibility existed that the GTPase deﬁcient dynamin molecule in some way could have a direct inhibitory effect on membrane translocation of DT bound to wild - type receptors . We therefore tested whether DT would intoxicate cells with and without mutant dynamin to the same extent when toxin - receptor complexes at the cell surface were exposed to low pH to induce translocation of toxin directly through the cell surface , presumably circumventing the endocytic step ( Draper and Simon , 1980 ; Sandvig and Olsnes , 1980 ) . As shown in Fig . 4A , when HeLa K44A cells were incubated with and without tetracycline for 2 days and DT entry was induced by low pH , there was no difference in intoxication when the toxin was bound to wild - type receptors . Thus mutant dynamin does not interfere with the translocation as such . This experiment is also essential to exclude the possibility that the protection against DT caused by mutant dynamin in the experiments shown in G . Skretting and others 125 I - D T c on c en t r a t i on ( ng / m l ) 0 200 400 600 800 1000 125 I - D T bound ( c p m x 1 0 - 3 ) 0 50 100 150 200 250 P I - P L C c on c en t r a t i on ( U / m l ) 125 I - D T bound ( % o f t o t a l bound ) 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 M anno s a m i ne ( mM ) 0 0 . 1 1 4 0 6 C B A Fig . 1 . Expression of GPI - anchored DT - receptors in HeLa K44A cells . ( A ) Cells were incubated with increasing concentrations of 125 I - DT in Hepes medium in the absence ( d ) or presence ( s ) of excess unlabelled DT ( 10 mg / ml ) for 20 minutes at room temperature . The cells were washed followed by lysis in 0 . 1 M KOH and the radioactivity associated with the cells was then measured . . , speciﬁcally bound 125 I - DT . ( B ) Removal of the GPI - anchor by PI - PLC . Cells were incubated in Hepes medium containing 0 , 0 . 1 , 1 or 4 U / ml of PI - PLC for 1 hour at 37°C . The medium was replaced by Hepes medium containing 125 I - DT ( 300 ng / ml ) , and the cells were incubated at 4°C for 40 minutes . Then the cells were washed with Hepes medium , lysed in 0 . 1 M KOH and the radioactivity associated with the cells was measured . ( C ) Effect of mannosamine on 125 I - DT binding . Cells were incubated in DMEM containing 6 mM mannosamine for 3 days . Then the medium was replaced by Hepes medium containing 125 I - DT ( 300 ng / ml ) and incubated at 4°C for 40 minutes . The cells were washed with Hepes medium , lysed in 0 . 1 M KOH and the radioactivity associated with the cells was measured . Results in B and C are expressed as percentage of speciﬁc binding of 125 I - DT in control cells , incubated without PI - PLC or mannosamine , respectively . The bars represent deviations between duplicates . Fig . 2 . Effect of mutant dynamin on intoxication via wild - type DT - receptors and GPI - anchored receptors with continuous incubation with DT . Control cells ( A ) and cells expressing the GPI - anchored DT - receptor ( B ) were grown for two days with ( s ) or without ( d ) tetracycline . The cells were then incubated with increasing concentrations of nicked DT in DMEM for 24 hours at 37°C followed by incorporation of [ 3 H ] leucine for 30 minutes at 37°C . The results are expressed as percentage of control without toxin . The bars represent deviations between duplicates . 3903 Endocytosis of GPI - anchored DT receptor Figs 2A and 3A is not due to a reduction in the number of surface receptors . Similarly , as shown in Fig . 4B , there was no difference in toxicity when the toxin was bound to cells containing GPI - linked receptors and entry was induced by exposure to low pH . Interestingly , these cells were , although incubated only for 6 hours after the low pH pulse , intoxicated with lower DT concentrations than during a continuous incubation with toxin for 24 hours ( Fig . 2 ) . This probably reﬂects the low endocytic uptake of this receptor ( see below ) . Endocytosis of DT bound to the GPI - linked receptor GPI - anchored proteins have been visualized in clathrin - coated pits and vesicles and in the endosomal system ( Makiya et al . , 1992 ) , but it is in most cases not clear to which extent the clathrin - dependent pathway contributes to the uptake of these molecules . We therefore investigated whether inhibition of clathrin - mediated endocytosis in HeLa K44A cells overexpressing mutant dynamin had any effect on the uptake of DT bound to the GPI - linked receptors . Cells transfected with DTR - GPI were incubated in the presence or absence of tetracycline for 2 days followed by incubation with 125 I - DT for 1 hour at 4 (cid:176) C . Unbound toxin was removed , and the cells were incubated for various periods of time at 37 (cid:176) C to allow endocytosis of the toxin - receptor complexes to occur . As shown in Fig . 5 , DT was endocytosed at quite a low rate ( 7 % in 20 minutes ) when bound to the GPI - anchored receptor , and the rate was not signiﬁcantly changed by expression of mutant dynamin and inhibition of clathrin - dependent endocytosis . The apparently low intracellular amount of DT after 1 hour is most likely due to degradation ( see below ) and therefore the rate of endocytosis was estimated from the early time points where the toxin is not yet transported to lysosomes . Furthermore , the initial amount of bound DT was similar in cells expressing the dynamin mutant and in non - expressing cells , demonstrating that the number of GPI - linked binding sites for the toxin is not affected by blocking the clathrin - mediated endocytosis . If a signiﬁcant fraction of the GPI - linked receptor was internalized by clathrin - dependent endocytosis , one would expect that inhibition of this pathway would increase the number of binding sites for DT . That has previously been shown to be the case with transferrin receptors ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) . Thus , the experiments indicate that diphtheria toxin bound to the GPI - linked receptor is endocytosed mainly by clathrin - independent endocytosis . Since GPI - linked proteins have been visualized in caveolae and since it has been reported that caveolae have a proton pump ( Mineo and Anderson , 1996 ) it could not be excluded that DT was translocated from these structures . Furthermore , since endocytosis might also occur from these structures , we investigated to what extent caveolin - 1 and caveolae were present in the cells here studied . As shown in Fig . 6 , the amount of caveolin in HeLa K44A cells was below the level of detection in western blots irrespective of whether tetracycline was present or absent ( Fig . 6B , lane 2 and 3 ) . As positive controls we included a wild - type HeLa cell line ( HeLa cells which had not been transfected with neither the transactivator nor the dynamin mutant ) which contained only small amounts of caveolin ( lane 4 ) as well as MDCK - II cells which contain relatively large amounts of caveolin ( lane 1 ) . By thin section electron microscopy the frequency of caveolae / mm cell surface length was measured . As shown in Fig . 6A , caveolae are very characteristic , small ( 50 - 80 nm ) , surface - connected structures which are readily distinguished from clathrin - coated pits . Although there may not be a simple correlation between caveolin expression and the frequency of caveolae ( Vogel et al . , 1998 ) , the quantitative data on caveolae ﬁtted the western D T c on c en t r a t i on ( ng / m l ) 1 10 100 3 H - l eu c i ne i n c o r po r a t i on ( % o f c on t r o l ) 0 20 40 60 80 100 1 10 100 A B Fig . 3 . Effect of mutant dynamin on intoxication via wild - type DT - receptors and GPI - anchored receptors with prebound DT . Control cells ( A ) and cells expressing the GPI - anchored DT - receptor ( B ) were grown for two days with ( s ) or without ( d ) tetracycline . The cells were then incubated with various concentrations of nicked DT for 20 minutes at room temperature . The cells were washed and incubated in DMEM for 24 hours at 37°C . The incorporation of [ 3 H ] leucine during a time period of 30 minutes , was then measured . The results are expressed as percentage of controls without toxin . The bars represent deviations between duplicates . Fig . 4 . Effect of mutant dynamin on low pH induced translocation of DT from the cell surface after binding of DT to wild - type and GPI - anchored receptors . Control cells ( A ) and cells expressing the GPI - anchored DT - receptor ( B ) were grown for two days with ( s ) or without ( d ) tetracycline . The cells were then incubated with increasing concentrations of nicked DT for 40 minutes at 4°C . The cells were washed and then exposed to medium pH 4 . 8 for 8 minutes at 37°C followed by incubation in Hepes medium containing 5 m M monensin for 5 hours at 37°C . Their ability to incorporate [ 3 H ] leucine was then measured . The results are expressed as percentage of controls without toxin . The bars represent deviations between duplicates . 3904 blot quite nicely . Thus , in the wild - type HeLa cells moderate amounts of caveolae were found whereas the HeLa K44A cells very rarely contained caveolae ( about 0 . 012 caveolae / m m cell surface ) ( Fig . 6C , columns 2 and 3 ) . In contrast , caveolae are quite frequent in MDCK - II cells ( Fig . 6C , column 1 ) . Thus the clathrin - independent uptake of DTR - GPI in HeLa K44A cells also seems to be independent of caveolin / caveolae . Moreover , the structure of caveolae is dependent on cholesterol and both addition of nystatin ( Rothberg et al . , 1992 ) , which makes complexes with cholesterol , and methyl - b - cyclodextrin , which extracts cholesterol from the membrane , disrupt the caveolar structure ( Klein et al . , 1995 ; Ohtani et al . , 1989 ; Rodal et al . , 1999 ) . To determine whether internalization of DTR - GPI is dependent on cholesterol - rich membrane domains , cells expressing DTR - GPI were incubated 30 minutes at 37 (cid:176) C with nystatin ( 25 m g / ml ) or methyl - b - cyclodextrin ( 10 mM ) followed by incubation with 125 I - DT . Neither of the drugs had any effect on the internalization of DT ( Table 1 ) . To measure the amount of cholesterol that was extracted by methyl - b - cyclodextrin , [ 3 H ] cholesterol was incorporated into the plasma membrane before incubation with methyl - b - cyclodextrin . This treatment lead to extraction of 60 % [ 3 H ] - labeled cholesterol . Tf endocytosis in the DTR - GPI cells treated with methyl - b - cyclodextrin was also reduced by 70 % as previously found for the K44A cells before transfection with the DTR - GPI ( Rodal et al . , 1999 ) . We also measured endocytosis of CT in the DTR - GPI cells after treatment with methyl - b - cyclodextrin . This toxin has been found associated with lipid domains in the membrane and we found that endocytosis of CT was reduced to 44 % . It has previously been shown that the actin cytoskeleton plays a role in different steps along the endocytic pathways . The actin - disrupting agents cytochalasin D and E have been reported to affect clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Lamaze et al . , 1997 ) , and cytochalasin D has also been shown to decrease clathrin - independent endocytosis in Vero cells and Hep - 2 ( Sandvig and van Deurs , 1990 ; van Deurs et al . , 1995 ) as well as macropinocytosis ( Poussin et al . , 1998 ) . Furthermore , cytochalasin H has been reported to inhibit endocytosis of a GPI - linked protein ( Deckert et al . , 1996 ) . When HeLa K44A cells expressing the DTR - GPI were treated with 10 m M cytochalasin D or E for 30 minutes at 37 (cid:176) C followed by incubation with 125 I - DT , there was a 50 - 60 % decrease in the amount of toxin endocytosed after 30 minutes ( Fig . 7 ) . This decrease was independent on whether the dynamin mutant was expressed or not ( data not shown ) . Microtubule disrupting drugs such as nocodazole and colchicine , have been shown to affect clathrin - dependent endocytosis in some cells but not in others ( Subtil and Dautry - Varsat , 1997 ) . Although nocodazole was not found to inhibit ricin uptake in Hep - 2 cells , little is known about the importance of microtubules in clathrin - independent endocytosis ( van Deurs et al . , 1995 ) . When HeLa cells expressing DTR - GPI were treated for 30 minutes at 37 (cid:176) C with 10 m M nocodazole followed by incubation with 125 I - DT there was no effect on the endocytosis of DT ( Table 1 ) . The protein kinase C inhibitor , staurosporine , and the activator of the protein kinase A , forskolin , have previously been found to inhibit the clathrin - independent internalization of GPI - anchored proteins in lymphocytes ( Deckert et al . , 1996 ) . However , treating the DTR - GPI cells with 100 nM staurosporine or 10 m M forskolin G . Skretting and others T i m e ( m i n ) 5 25 45 65 E ndo cy t o s ed 125 I - D T ( % o f c e ll - a ss o c i a t ed t o x i n ) 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 Fig . 5 . Endocytosis of DT bound to GPI - anchored receptors . Cells expressing the GPI - anchored DT - receptors were grown with ( s ) or without ( d ) tetracycline for two days . The cells were incubated with 125 I - DT ( 300 ng / ml ) for 1 hour at 4°C followed by incubation at 37°C to allow endocytosis of bound toxin . After various time points the cells were treated with pronase ( 10 mg / ml ) to remove surface - bound toxin and the cell - associated radioactivity was measured . Results are expressed as percentage DT endocytosed of total bound toxin . The bars represent deviations between duplicates . Fig . 6 . Caveolae and expression of caveolin - 1 in HeLa K44A cells . ( A ) Electron micrograph of a non - transfected wild - type HeLa cell line showing a caveolae ( Cav ) and a clathrin - coated pit ( Cp ) . Bar , 100 nm . ( B ) Western blot of polarized ﬁlter - grown MDCK - II cells ( lane 1 ) , K44A cells grown in the presence of tetracycline ( lane 2 ) , K44A cells grown in the absence of tetracycline ( lane 3 ) and the wild - type HeLa cells shown in A ( lane 4 ) using an antibody against caveolin - 1 ( 21 kDa ; arrow ) . ( C ) Quantitative data on the number of caveolae per mm cell surface of the same cell lines ( 1 - 4 ) as shown in B . Please note that since caveolae are present only on the basolateral surface of MDCK - II cells , the value for these cells represents number of caveolae per mm ﬁlter length rather than per total surface ( Vogel et al . , 1998 ) . 3905 Endocytosis of GPI - anchored DT receptor for 30 minutes at 37 (cid:176) C followed by incubation with 125 I - DT did not reveal any differences in the endocytic uptake of DT ( Table 1 ) . These results indicate that DT bound to the GPI - DT receptor is internalized by a clathrin - independent pathway that is partially sensitive to disruption of actin ﬁlaments and that functions when cholesterol is either removed by cyclodextrin or complexed by nystatin . The internalization is not affected by disruption of microtubules , activation of protein kinase A , or inhibition of protein kinase C . Endosomal and lysosomal targeting of DT bound to GPI - DTR To see if clathrin - independent endocytosis of DT bound to GPI - DTR mediates transport to early endosomes containing the marker EEA1 ( Mu et al . , 1995 ) , we used confocal microscopy . The cells were incubated for 2 days in the presence or absence of tetracycline followed by incubation with Cy3 - labeled DT for 40 minutes at 4 (cid:176) C . Unbound toxin was removed and the cells were incubated for 30 minutes at 37 (cid:176) C to allow endocytosis of the DT - receptor complex . The cells were ﬁxed and labeled with an antibody against early endosomes , human anti - EEA1 , followed by a ﬂuorescein - conjugated secondary antibody against human IgG . Confocal analysis revealed that there was partial colocalization of endocytosed DT with the EEA1 protein , suggesting that also DT taken up by the GPI - linked receptor enters early endosomes after internalization ( Fig . 8 ) . It has previously been shown that the EGF receptor internalized by clathrin - dependent endocytosis is sorted to lysosomes and degraded whereas EGF receptor internalized by clathrin - independent endocytosis seems to be stable ( Vieira et al . , 1996 ) . This may be due to the slower kinetics of uptake by clathrin - independent endocytosis , but it can also not be excluded that molecules internalized by different pathways end up in different compartments . Thus it was suggested that CD4 ( a transmembrane protein ) and CD4DAF ( a GPI - linked molecule ) were internalized to two different populations of endosomes ( Keller et al . , 1992 ) . We therefore tested whether DT internalization via DTR - GPI leads to degradation of DT and whether this degradation is affected by mutant dynamin . For this purpose , DTR - GPI cells with and without expression of mutant dynamin were incubated with 125 I - DT for 1 hour at 4 (cid:176) C followed by incubation of the cells for various times at 37 (cid:176) C . Fig . 9A shows that the toxin is degraded relatively rapidly considering the low rate of internalization , and the data show that there was no differences in the rate of degradation whether mutant dynamin was expressed or not . Since DT requires low pH for translocation to the cytosol , the possibility also existed that the relatively low efficiency of the GPI - linked receptors in mediating toxicity could be due to transport of some of the internalized DTR - GPI to a compartment with neutral or high pH . However , as shown in Fig . 9B , the toxin degradation is dependent on low pH . When the cells were incubated with baﬁlomycin A 1 , a speciﬁc inhibitor of the vacuolar type H + - ATPase ( Bowman et al . , 1988 ) , degradation was inhibited whether or not there was overexpression of mutant dynamin . This indicates that toxin bound to the GPI - anchored receptor is transported to the endosomal / lysosomal compartments of the cell and the data are therefore in agreement with our observations made by confocal microscopy . DISCUSSION Endocytosis of GPI - anchored proteins is still not well understood although most GPI - anchored proteins seem to be internalized mainly via non - clathrin coated pits , either by caveolae or by other non - coated structures ( Parton et al . , 1994 ; Stahl and Mueller , 1995 ; Deckert et al . , 1996 ) . The aim of the present study was to analyze the internalization process of DT bound to a GPI - anchored version of the diphtheria toxin receptor which normally has a transmembrane and a cytoplasmic domain ( Naglich et al . , 1992 ) . We utilized HeLa K44A cells that can be induced to overexpress a mutant dynamin which inhibits clathrin - dependent endocytosis ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) . These cells were transfected with a DT receptor where the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains had been replaced by a sequence signaling GPI - anchoring ( Lanzrein et al . , 1996 ) . That the DT receptors really are GPI - linked was conﬁrmed by their partial removal by GPI - speciﬁc phospholipase C and by the inhibition of their appearance by Table 1 . Endocytosis of DT bound to GPI - anchored receptors in cells treated with different compounds Compound ( concentration ) DT endocytosed ( % of ctr ) Nocodazole ( 10 m M ) 99 . 6±0 . 4 Nystatin ( 25 m g / ml ) 88 . 9±0 . 2 Methyl - b - cyclodextrin ( 10 mM ) 109 . 6±12 . 0 Staurosporine ( 100 nM ) 91 . 3±1 . 0 Forskolin ( 10 m M ) 94 . 8±5 . 2 The cells were preincubated with methyl - b - cyclodextrin for 15 minutes or with the other compounds for 30 minutes in Hepes medium at 37 (cid:176) C , the 125 I - labeled toxin was added and endocytosis was measured after 30 minutes as described in Materials and Methods . s . d . represents deviations between triplicates in representative experiments . c t r cy t o D cy t o E D T endo cy t o s ed ( % o f c t r ) 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 Fig . 7 . Effect of actin - disrupting drugs on the internalization of DT bound to GPI - anchored receptors . Cells were treated with 10 m M cytochalasin D or E for 30 minutes at 37 (cid:176) C , incubated with 125 I - DT ( 300 ng / ml ) for 40 minutes at 4 (cid:176) C , and after removal of unbound toxin , the cells were incubated at 37 (cid:176) C for 30 minutes to allow internalization of the toxin . The cells were treated with pronase ( 10 mg / ml ) to remove surface - bound toxin and the cell - associated radioactivity was measured . Results are presented as % of control . The bars represent deviations between duplicates . 3906 mannosamine which interferes with formation of GPI - linked molecules ( Lisanti et al . , 1991 ) . That the phospholipase only removed a fraction of the receptors is in agreement with previous reports showing that the efficiency of the removal can be dependent both on the speciﬁc protein and the cell type in which it is found ( Airas et al . , 1997 ) . Mock transfected cells were protected against DT when the formation of clathrin - coated vesicles was blocked by expression of mutant dynamin . These results are in agreement with those of Simpson et al . ( 1998 ) and with older studies indicating involvement of clathrin - coated pits in DT entry ( Moya et al . , 1985 ; Morris et al . , 1985 ) . In contrast , the cytotoxicity of DT bound to the GPI - linked receptor was the same whether mutant dynamin was expressed or not , suggesting that the DT - receptor complex entered the cells by a clathrin - independent pathway . Although DTR - GPI cells overexpress the receptor there is no corresponding increase in the sensitivity to the toxin compared to the mock - transfected cells which only have low amounts of endogenous wild - type receptors . This is probably due to the lower efficiency of DTR - GPI in mediating translocation of DT across the membrane and the low rate of endocytosis of this complex . Low pH - induced entry of DT bound to GPI - linked DT - receptors has been estimated to be 6 times less efficient than entry of toxin bound to wild - type receptors ( Lanzrein et al . , 1996 ) . It is not clear why clathrin - dependent endocytosis is important for efficient intoxication with diphtheria toxin bound to the wild - type receptor . Since proteins internalized by clathrin - dependent and clathrin - independent endocytosis can end up in the same endosomes from where diphtheria toxin is thought to be translocated to the cytosol ( Draper and Simon , 1980 ; Sandvig and Olsnes , 1980 ; Hansen et al . , 1993 ) . Endocytosis of DT has been reported to occur at a relatively low rate that is independent of the presence of the cytoplasmic part of the receptor ( Almond and Eidels , 1994 ) . In fact , the uptake was suggested to represent bulk membrane ﬂow . However , Tyr 192 and surrounding amino acids in the cytoplasmic tail of the receptor are important for the intoxication process ( Almond and Eidels , 1994 ) . The possibility exists that the clathrin - dependent pathway might function to bring the receptor in proximity with other proteins of importance for efficient toxin translocation . Also , it has recently been reported that D1 and D2 dopamine receptors can be taken up by different endocytic mechanisms in the same cell ( Vickery and von Zastrow , 1999 ) , and the authors speculate on whether the two pathways meet or not in these cells . Furthermore , it has been suggested that G . Skretting and others Fig . 8 . Immunoﬂuorescence and confocal studies of the internalization of DT bound to GPI - anchored receptors . Cells were incubated with Cy3 - labelled DT for 40 minutes at 4°C . Cells were then washed and the DT - receptor complex was allowed to internalize for 30 minutes at 37°C . After ﬁxation the cells were incubated with human anti - EEA1 which was visualized using anti - human IgG FITC . ( A ) shows EEA1 in early endosomes , ( B ) internalized DT and ( C ) shows colocalization of the two signals . T i m e ( m i n ) 0 100 200 300 400 D eg r aded 125 I - D T ( % o f t o t a l bound ) 0 10 20 30 40 50 D e g r a ded 125 I - D T ( % o f t o t a l bound ) 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 w i t h t e t w i t hou t t e t c on t r o l B a f A 1 Fig . 9 . Degradation of DT bound to GPI - anchored receptors . Cells expressing the GPI - anchored DT - receptors were grown with ( s ) or without ( d ) tetracycline for two days . The cells were incubated with 125 I - DT ( 300 ng / ml ) for 30 minutes at 4°C to allow the toxin to bind . ( A ) , the cells were then incubated for various time points in Hepes medium at 37°C , the proteins in the medium were precipitated with TCA and the radioactivity in the supernatant was measured . ( B ) , effect of baﬁlomycin A 1 on degradation . Cells were preincubated with or without 1 mM baﬁlomycin A 1 at 4°C for 45 minutes . The cells were incubated with 125 I - DT ( 300 ng / ml ) for 30 minutes at 4°C to allow the toxin to bind . The cells were then incubated in Hepes medium with or without baﬁlomycin A 1 for 1 hour at 37°C and the soluble proteins in the medium were precipitated with TCA . Results are expressed as percentage of DT degraded of total bound toxin . The bars represent deviations between duplicates . 3907 Endocytosis of GPI - anchored DT receptor cholera toxin internalized by clathrin - coated pits is unable to intoxicate the cells , in contrast to toxin internalized by other endocytic pathways ( Orlandi and Fishman , 1998 ) . CD9 has in some cells been shown to increase binding and toxicity of DT ( Iwamoto et al . , 1994 ; Brown et al . , 1993 ) . It is , however , not known whether a similar effect would be obtained with the GPI - anchored receptor . Expression of mutant dynamin does not in itself inhibit translocation of toxin bound to the wild - type receptors through the membrane since entry of surface - bound toxin to the cytosol occurred efficiently upon exposure to low pH . Thus , cells with and without mutant dynamin were equally sensitive to DT when direct translocation was induced . An interesting question is whether the toxin - receptor complex upon exposure to low pH could be rapidly internalized via clathrin - coated pits followed by translocation of the toxin after closure of the clathrin - coated vesicles . The experiments shown here indicate that this is not the case since low pH - induced translocation can occur when clathrin - dependent endocytosis is blocked . Little is known about the mechanism of internalization of GPI - anchored proteins . It seems likely that the behaviour of a GPI - anchored protein might be dependent both on the protein part of the molecule and the cell type in which it is found . The rates of internalization of GPI - anchored proteins seem to vary ( Li et al . , 1994 ; Rijnboutt et al . , 1996 ; Keller and Simons , 1998 ) . To which extent this might be due to the presence of caveolae is not known . The frequency of caveolae varies from one cell type to another ( Parton , 1996 ) , and so far there is evidence for pinching off of caveolae in endothelial cells and hepatocytes ( Schnitzer et al . , 1996 ; Henley et al . , 1998 ) . Although the HeLa K44A cells studied here had very few caveolae , the possibility existed that DT could be taken up by the few caveolae that might be present . However , treating the cells with the caveolae - disrupting drugs methyl - b - cyclodextrin ( Ohtani et al . , 1989 ; Klein et al . , 1995 ; Rodal et al . , 1999 ) and nystatin ( Rothberg et al . , 1992 ) , did not change the endocytic rate of DT bound to GPI - anchored receptors indicating an internalization pathway independent of caveolae . Also , it was recently shown that mutant dynamin inhibits uptake from caveolae ( Oh et al . , 1998 ; Henley et al . , 1998 ) . Thus , upon expression of mutant dynamin not only clathrin - dependent endocytosis but also uptake from caveolae is blocked , and our data clearly showed that endocytosis of DT bound to DTR - GPI occurred to the same extent whether or not mutant dynamin was expressed . Recent results showed that extraction of cholesterol from cells with methyl - b - cyclodextrin perturbed not only caveolae structure but also the clathrin - dependent endocytosis in a number of cell types ( Rodal et al . , 1999 ) . As shown here , treatment of DTR - GPI cells with methyl - b - cyclodextrin clearly affected these cells in the same way since both the level of cholesterol and the endocytosis of transferrin was reduced . Methyl - b - cyclodextrin treatment also lead to a reduction of 56 % in the endocytosis of CT . However , we do not know whether this reduction is due to an inhibition of uptake via caveolae or clathrin - dependent endocytosis since the toxin has been shown to be internalized by both pathways ( Parton , 1994 ; Orlandi and Fishman , 1998 ) . The lack of effect of methyl - b - cyclodextrin on uptake of DT bound to DTR - GPI is in agreement with the results obtained by expression of mutant dynamin ; the entry is independent of uptake from clathrin - coated pits . The possibility existed that a weak interaction of the external part of the DT - receptor with a molecule transported to clathrin - coated pits was inhibited by inclusion of the GPI - linked DT - receptor into lipid microdomains and that the endocytosis therefore occurs mainly by a clathrin - independent process . The ﬁnding that cholesterol extraction by methyl - b - cyclodextrin or addition of nystatin have no effect on the entry suggests that this is not the case . It is , however , possible that the level of expression of the GPI - linked diphtheria toxin receptor is important for the entry route . Since ricin endocytosis in the same cells seems to occur at a rate of 20 % / hour when the clathrin - dependent endocytosis is blocked by overexpression of mutant dynamin ( Llorente et al . , 1998 ) , the uptake of the GPI - linked receptor seems to occur at about the same rate as the uptake of membrane in general . The actin cytoskeleton can be involved in both clathrin - dependent and - independent endocytosis ( Sandvig and van Deurs , 1990 ; van Deurs et al . , 1995 ; Lamaze et al . , 1997 ) . As shown here , intact actin ﬁlaments are important for the endocytic uptake of DTR - GPI since both cytochalasin D and E inhibited the DT internalization . Similarly , in lymphoid cells where caveolae and caveolin are not detectable , an actin disrupting agent inhibited the internalization of GPI - anchored proteins ( Deckert et al . , 1996 ) . In contrast to the results shown here , the internalization of CD59 in lymphocytes was reduced by inhibition of protein kinase C or by stimulation of protein kinase A indicating that the uptake of different GPI - linked proteins is differentially regulated . The differences might also be due to the cell type studied . Only a fraction of DT bound to wild - type receptors is translocated to the cytosol upon exposure to low pH ( Moskaug et al . , 1988 ) . Another fraction of the toxin is rapidly degraded , presumably after transport to lysosomes ( Middlebrook et al . , 1978 ) . The possibility existed that a fraction of DT bound to the GPI - linked receptors was internalized to a compartment that did not transfer material to lysosomes although toxin entry into early endosomes was demonstrated by partial colocalization of EEA1 and DT . We therefore measured the rate of degradation of DT bound to DTR - GPI , and as shown , DT is rapidly degraded and the degradation was the same whether or not mutant dynamin was expressed . This is in agreement with the data showing that the majority of the molecules are internalized by clathrin - independent endocytosis and also with previous reports showing that transport from endosomes to lysosomes seems to be unaffected by expression of mutant dynamin ( Damke et al . , 1994 ; Llorente et al . , 1998 ) . The degradation of DT was inhibited by baﬁlomycin A 1 . It has been reported that baﬁlomycin A 1 not only block the vesicular proton pump but also the formation of endosomal carrier vesicles in BHK cells ( Clague et al . , 1994 ) . In contrast , baﬁlomycin A 1 was found to inhibit transport of molecules from late endosomes to lysosomes in HepG2 cells and HEp - 2 cells ( van Weert et al . , 1995 ; van Deurs et al . , 1996 ) . We have not been studying the transport mechanism from early to late endosomes and lysosomes in our transfected HeLa cells , but clearly , the degradation of DT bound to DTR - GPI is dependent on the activity of the proton pump . We conclude that uptake and degradation of DT bound to the GPI - linked DT receptor and the subsequent DT induced intoxication , are mediated by a process which is independent of caveolae and clathrin - coated pits / vesicles and which 3908 transfers DT to early endosomes and lysosomes . The uptake of DT bound to GPI - DTR is controlled by the actin cytoskeleton but seems to be resistant to depolymerization of microtubules . We are grateful to Ulla Vogel for performing the western blots and to Alicia Llorente for critical reading of the manuscript . This work was supported by The Norwegian Cancer Society , The Norwegian Research Council for Science and the Humanities , Torsteds legacy , the Blix legacy , The Jahre Foundation , Novo Nordisk Foundation , Jeanette and Søren Bothners Legacy , The Danish Cancer Society , The Danish Medical Research Council and the Human Frontier Science Program ( RG 404 / 96M ) . REFERENCES Airas , L . , Niemela , J . , Salmi , M . , Puurunen , T . , Smith , D . J . and Jalkanen , S . ( 1997 ) . Differential regulation and function of CD73 , a glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol - linked 70 - kD adhesion molecule , on lymphocytes and endothelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 421 - 431 . Almond , B . D . and Eidels , L . ( 1994 ) . The cytoplasmic domain of the diphtheria toxin receptor ( HB - EGF precursor ) is not required for receptor - mediated endocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 26635 - 26641 . Bowman , E . J . , Siebers , A . and Altendorf , K . ( 1988 ) . Baﬁlomycins : a class of inhibitors of membrane ATPases from microorganisms , animal cells , and plant cells . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . USA 85 , 7972 - 7976 . Brown , J . G . , Almond , B . D . , Naglich , J . G . and Eidels , L . ( 1993 ) . Hypersensitivity to diphtheria toxin by mouse cells expressing both diphtheria toxin receptor and CD9 antigen . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . USA 90 , 8184 - 8188 . Carter , R . E . and Sorkin , A . ( 1998 ) . Endocytosis of functional epidermal growth factor receptor - green ﬂuorescent protein chimera . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 35000 - 35007 . Choe , S . , Bennett , M . J . , Fujii , G . , Curmi , P . M . , Kantardjieff , K . A . , Collier , R . J . and Eisenberg , D . ( 1992 ) . The crystal structure of diphtheria toxin . Nature 357 , 216 - 222 . Clague , M . J . , Urbe , S . , Aniento , F . and Gruenberg , J . ( 1994 ) . Vacuolar ATPase activity is required for endosomal carrier vesicle formation . J Biol . Chem . 269 , 21 - 24 . Collier , R . J . ( 1975 ) . Diphtheria toxin : mode of action and structure . Bacteriol . Rev . 39 , 54 - 85 . Damke , H . , Baba , T . , Warnock , D . E . and Schmid , S . L . ( 1994 ) . Induction of mutant dynamin speciﬁcally blocks endocytic coated vesicle formation . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 915 - 934 . Deckert , M . , Ticchioni , M . and Bernard , A . ( 1996 ) . Endocytosis of GPI - anchored proteins in human lymphocytes : role of glycolipid - based domains , actin cytoskeleton , and protein kinases . J . Cell Biol . 133 , 791 - 799 . Draper , R . K . and Simon , M . I . ( 1980 ) . The entry of diphtheria toxin into the mammalian cell cytoplasm : evidence for lysosomal involvement . J . Cell Biol . 87 , 849 - 854 . Fraker , P . J . and Speck , J . C . Jr ( 1978 ) . Protein and cell membrane iodinations with a sparingly soluble chloroamide , 1 , 3 , 4 , 6 - tetrachloro - 3a , 6a - diphrenylglycoluril . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 80 , 849 - 857 . Greenﬁeld , L . , Bjorn , M . J . , Horn , G . , Fong , D . , Buck , G . A . , Collier , R . J . and Kaplan , D . A . ( 1983 ) . Nucleotide sequence of the structural gene for diphtheria toxin carried by corynebacteriophage beta . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . USA 80 , 6853 - 6857 . Hansen , S . H . , Sandvig , K . and van Deurs , B . ( 1993 ) . Molecules internalized by clathrin - independent endocytosis are delivered to endosomes containing transferrin receptors . J . Cell Biol . 123 , 89 - 97 . Henley , J . R . , Krueger , E . W . , Oswald , B . J . and McNiven , M . A . ( 1998 ) . Dynamin - mediated internalization of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 85 - 99 . Iwamoto , R . , Higashiyama , S . , Mitamura , T . , Taniguchi , N . , Klagsbrun , M . and Mekada , E . ( 1994 ) . Heparin - binding EGF - like growth factor , which acts as the diphtheria toxin receptor , forms a complex with membrane protein DRAP27 / CD9 , which up - regulates functional receptors and diphtheria toxin sensitivity . EMBO J . 13 , 2322 - 2330 . Keller , G . A . , Siegel , M . W . and Caras , I . W . ( 1992 ) . Endocytosis of glycophospholipid - anchored and transmembrane forms of CD4 by different endocytic pathways . EMBO J . 11 , 863 - 874 . Keller , P . and Simons , K . ( 1998 ) . Cholesterol is required for surface transport of inﬂuenza virus hemagglutinin . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 1357 - 1367 . Kemble , G . W . , Henis , Y . I . and White , J . M . ( 1993 ) . GPI - and transmembrane - anchored inﬂuenza hemagglutinin differ in structure and receptor binding activity . J . Cell Biol . 122 , 1253 - 1265 . Klein , U . , Gimpl , G . and Fahrenholz , F . ( 1995 ) . Alteration of the myometrial plasma membrane cholesterol content with b - cyclodextrin modulates the binding affinity of the oxytocin receptor . Biochemistry 34 , 13784 - 13793 . Lai , W . H . , Cameron , P . H . , Wada , I . , Doherty , J . J . 2 . , Kay , D . G . , Posner , B . I . and Bergeron , J . J . ( 1989 ) . Ligand - mediated internalization , recycling and downregulation of the epidermal growth factor receptor in vivo . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 2741 - 2749 . Lamaze , C . , Fujimoto , L . M . , Yin , H . L . and Schmid , S . L . ( 1997 ) . The actin cytoskeleton is required for receptor - mediated endocytosis in mammalian cells . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 20332 - 20335 . Lanzrein , M . , Sand , O . and Olsnes , S . ( 1996 ) . GPI - anchored diphtheria toxin receptor allows membrane translocation of the toxin without detectable ion channel activity . EMBO J . 15 , 725 - 734 . Li , H . , Kuo , A . , Kochan , J . , Strickland , D . , Kariko , K . , Barnathan , E . S . and Cines , D . B . ( 1994 ) . Endocytosis of urokinase - plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 complexes bound to a chimeric transmembrane urokinase receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 8153 - 8158 . Lisanti , M . P . , Field , M . C . , Caras , I . W . , Menon , A . K . and Rodriguez - Boulan , E . ( 1991 ) . Mannosamine , a novel inhibitor of glycosylphosphatidylinositol incorporation into proteins . EMBO J . 10 , 1969 - 1977 . Llorente , A . , Rapak , A . , Schmid , S . L . , van Deurs , B . and Sandvig , K . ( 1998 ) . Expression of mutant dynamin inhibits toxicity and transport of endocytosed ricin to the Golgi apparatus . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 553 - 563 . Lyall , R . M . , Pastan , I . and Willingham , M . C . ( 1985 ) . EGF induces receptor down - regulation with no receptor recycling in KB cells . J . Cell Physiol . 122 , 166 - 170 . Makiya , R . , Thornell , L . E . and Stigbrand , T . ( 1992 ) . Placental alkaline phosphatase , a GPI - anchored protein , is clustered in clathrin - coated vesicles . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 183 , 803 - 808 . Mayor , S . , Rothberg , K . G . and Maxﬁeld , F . R . ( 1994 ) . Sequestration of GPI - anchored proteins in caveolae triggered by cross - linking . Science 264 , 1948 - 1951 . Middlebrook , J . L . , Dorland , R . B . and Leppla , S . H . ( 1978 ) . Association of diphtheria toxin with Vero cells . Demonstration of a receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 253 , 7325 - 7330 . Mineo , C . and Anderson , R . G . ( 1996 ) . A vacuolar - type proton ATPase mediates acidiﬁcation of plasmalemmal vesicles during potocytosis . Exp . Cell Res . 224 , 237 - 242 . Morris , R . E . , Gerstein , A . S . , Bonventre , P . F . and Saelinger , C . B . ( 1985 ) . Receptor - mediated entry of diphtheria toxin into monkey kidney ( Vero ) cells : electron microscopic evaluation . Infect . Immun . 50 , 721 - 727 . Moskaug , J . O . , Sandvig , K . and Olsnes , S . ( 1988 ) . Low pH - induced release of diphtheria toxin A - fragment in Vero cells . Biochemical evidence for transfer to the cytosol . J . Biol . Chem . 263 , 2518 - 2525 . Moya , M . , Dautry - Varsat , A . , Goud , B . , Louvard , D . and Boquet , P . ( 1985 ) . Inhibition of coated pit formation in Hep2 cells blocks the cytotoxicity of Diphtheria toxin but not that of ricin toxin . J . Cell Biol . 101 , 548 - 559 . Mu , F . T . , Callaghan , J . M . , Steele - Mortimer , O . , Stenmark , H . , Parton , R . G . , Campell , P . L . , McCluskey , J . , Yeo , J . P . , Tock , E . P . and Toh , B . H . ( 1995 ) . EEA1 , an early endosome - associated protein . EEA1 is a conserved alpha - helical peripheral membrane protein ﬂanked by cysteine ‘ﬁngers’ and contains a calmodulin - binding IQ motif . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 13503 - 13511 . Naglich , J . G . , Metherall , J . E . , Russell , D . W . and Eidels , L . ( 1992 ) . Expression cloning of a diphtheria toxin receptor : identity with a heparin - binding EGF - like growth factor precursor . Cell 69 , 1051 - 1061 . Nosjean , O . , Briolay , A . and Roux , B . ( 1997 ) . Mammalian GPI proteins : sorting , membrane residence and functions . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1331 , 153 - 186 . Oh , P . , McIntosh , D . P . and Schnitzer , J . E . ( 1998 ) . Dynamin at the neck of caveolae mediates their budding to form transport vesicles by GTP - driven ﬁssion from the plasma membrane of endothelium . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 101 - 114 . Ohtani , Y . , Irie , T . , Uekama , K . , Fukunaga , K . and Pitha , J . ( 1989 ) . Differential effects of a - , b - and g - cyclodextrins on human erythrocytes . Eur . J . Biochem . 186 , 17 - 22 . G . Skretting and others 3909 Endocytosis of GPI - anchored DT receptor Orlandi , P . A . and Fishman , P . H . ( 1998 ) . Filipin - dependent inhibition of cholera toxin : evidence for toxin internalization and activation through caveolae - like domains . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 905 - 915 . Parton , R . G . ( 1994 ) . Ultrastructural localization of gangliosides ; GM 1 is concentrated in caveolae . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 42 , 155 - 166 . Parton , R . G . , Joggerst , B . and Simons , K . ( 1994 ) . Regulated internalization of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 1199 - 1215 . Parton , R . G . ( 1996 ) . Caveolae and caveolins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 8 , 542 - 548 . Poussin , C . , Foti , M . , Carpentier , J . L . and Pugin , J . ( 1998 ) . CD14 - dependent endotoxin internalization via a macropinocytic pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 20285 - 20291 . Rijnboutt , S . , Jansen , G . , Posthuma , G . , Hynes , J . B . , Schornagel , J . H . and Strous , G . J . ( 1996 ) . Endocytosis of GPI - linked membrane folate receptor - alpha . J . Cell Biol . 132 , 35 - 47 . Rodal , S . K . , Skretting , G . , Garred , O . , Vilhardt , F . , van Deurs , B . and Sandvig , K . ( 1999 ) . Extraction of cholestrol with methyl - b - cyclodextrin perturbs the formation of clathrin - coated endocytic vesicles . Mol . Biol . Cell . 10 , 961 - 974 . Ronnberg , B . J . and Middlebrook , J . L . ( 1989 ) . Cellular regulation of diphtheria toxin cell surface receptors . Toxicon . 27 , 1377 - 1388 . Rothberg , K . G . , Heuser , J . E . , Donzell , W . C . , Ying , Y . S . , Glenny , J . R . and Anderson , R . G . ( 1992 ) . Caveolin , a protein component of caveolae membrane coats . Cell 68 , 673 - 682 . Sandvig , K . and Olsnes , S . ( 1980 ) . Diphtheria toxin entry into cells is facilitated by low pH . J . Cell Biol . 87 , 828 - 832 . Sandvig , K . and van Deurs , B . ( 1990 ) . Selective modulation of the endocytic uptake of ricin and ﬂuid phase markers without alteration in transferrin endocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 265 , 6382 - 6388 . Schnitzer , J . E . , McIntosh , D . P . , Dvorak , A . M . , Liu , J . and Oh , P . ( 1995 ) . Separation of caveolae from associated microdomains of GPI - anchored proteins . Science 269 , 1435 - 1439 . Schnitzer , J . E . , Oh , P . and McIntosh , D . P . ( 1996 ) . Role of GTP hydrolysis in ﬁssion of caveolae directly from plasma membranes . Science 274 , 239 - 242 . Shyng , S . L . , Heuser , J . E . and Harris , D . A . ( 1994 ) . A glycolipid - anchored prion protein is endocytosed via clathrin - coated pits . J . Cell Biol . 125 , 1239 - 1250 . Smythe , E . , Redelmeier , T . E . and Schmid , S . L . ( 1992 ) . Receptor - mediated endocytosis in semiintact cells . Meth . Enzymol . 219 , 223 - 234 . Simpson , J . C . , Smith , D . C . , Roberts , L . M . and Lord , J . M . ( 1998 ) . Expression of mutant dynamin protects cells against diphtheria toxin but not against ricin . Exp . Cell Res . 239 , 293 - 300 . Stahl , A . and Mueller , B . M . ( 1995 ) . The urokinase - type plasminogen activator receptor , a GPI - linked protein , is localized in caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 129 , 335 - 344 . Subtil , A . and Dautry - Varsat , A . ( 1997 ) . Microtubule depolymerization inhibits clathrin coated - pit internalization in non - adherent cell lines while interleukin 2 endocytosis is not affected . J . Cell Sci . 110 , 2441 - 2447 . Teslenko , L . V . , Kornilova , E . S . , Sorkin , A . D . and Nikolsky , N . N . ( 1987 ) . Recycling of epidermal growth factor in A431 cells . FEBS Lett . 221 , 105 - 109 . van den Bosch , R . A . , du Maine , A . P . , Geuze , H . J . , van der Ende , A . and Strous , G . J . ( 1988 ) . Recycling of 5’ - nuceotidase in a rat hepatoma cell line . EMBO J . 7 , 3345 - 3351 . van Deurs , B . , Holm , P . K . , Kayser , L . , Sandvig , K . and Hansen , S . H . ( 1993 ) . Multivesicular bodies in HEp - 2 cells are maturing endosomes . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 61 , 208 - 224 . van Deurs , B . , Holm , P . K . , Kayser , L . and Sandvig , K . ( 1995 ) . Delivery to lysosomes in the human carcinoma cell line HEp - 2 involves an actin ﬁlament - facilitated fusion between mature endosomes and preexisting lysosomes . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 66 , 309 - 323 . van Deurs , B . , Holm , P . K . and Sandvig , K . ( 1996 ) . Inhibition of the vacuolar H + ase with baﬁlomycin reduces delivery of internalized molecules from mature multivesicular endosomes to lysosomes in HEp - 2 cells . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 69 , 343 - 350 . van Weert , A . W . M . , Dunn , K . A . , Geuze , H . J . , Maxﬁeld , F . R . and Stoorvogel , W . ( 1995 ) . Transport from late endosomes to lysosomes , but not sorting of integral proteins in endosomes , depends on the vacuolar proton pump . J . Cell Biol . 130 , 821 - 834 . Vickery , R . G . and von Zastrow , M . ( 1999 ) . Distinct dynamin - dependent and - independent mechanisms target structurally homologous dopamine receptors to different endocytic membranes . J . Cell Biol . 144 , 31 - 43 . Vieira , A . V . , Lamaze , C . and Schmid , S . L . ( 1996 ) . Control of EGF receptor signaling by clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Science 274 , 2086 - 2089 . Vilhardt , F . , Nielsen , M . , Sandvig , K . and van Deurs , B . ( 1999 ) . Urokinase - type plasminogen activator receptor is internalized by different mechanisms in polarized and non - polarized Madin - Darby canine kidney epithelial cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 179 - 195 . Vogel , U . , Sandvig , K . and van Deurs , B . ( 1998 ) . Expression of caveolin - 1 and polarized formation of invaginated caveolae in Caco - 2 and MDCK II cells . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 825 - 832 .