Font Size : AAAI Publications , First AAAI Conference on Human Computation and Crowdsourcing HOME ABOUT LOG IN ACCOUNT SEARCH ARCHIVE ANNOUNCEMENTS Home > AAAI Conference on Human Computation and Crowdsourcing > First AAAI Conference on Human Computation and Crowdsourcing > Full Papers > Araujo 99designs : An Analysis of Creative Competition in Crowdsourced Design Ricardo Matsumura Araujo Last modified : 2013 - 11 - 03 Abstract We provide a study of crowdsourced design based on the popular service 99designs , a website where users create design contests for other users to submit their ideas for evaluation , competing for a monetary amount offered . By quantitatively analyzing a large number of contests , we report on the dynamics of the interactions between contests and designers . We show results on the effects of different financial incentives and contests ' properties on the number and quality of submissions , as well as on how rewards are distributed across designers . We find that higher financial incentives do not translate to more effort by individual designers , but nonetheless have an impact on the quality outcome of contests by attracting a larger pool of designers . We also show that a majority of contests are dominated by a disproportionate few designers , which are both more active and effective in the service . Keywords crowdsourcing ; 99designs ; quantitative analysis Full Text : PDF 99designs — Our own design crowdsourcing community for logos , clothing & merchandise , packaging , site design and more . Upwork — Geared towards freelancers of any profession : accounting , web developers , customer service , sales and marketing and so on . Fiverr — A mixed bag of microlabor : the site started as a means to connect people over small odd jobs ( to the tune of five dollars ) , but blew up into a site rivalling the best job placement agencies . Matt Ellis is a freelance content writer , specializing in web design and ecommerce . For over a decade he ' s been sharing his industry knowledge through ebooks , website copy , and blog articles just like this one . You can learn more about his career and writing services at https : / / www . mattelliscontentwriter . com / . Context : Crowdsourcing , or tapping into the power of the crowd for problem solving , has gained ever - increasing attraction since it was first introduced . Crowdsourcing has been used in different disciplines , and it is becoming well - accepted in the marketplace as a new business model which utilizes Human Intelligence Tasks ( HITs ) . Objective : While both academia and industry have extensively delved into different aspects of crowdsourcing , there seems to be no common understanding of what crowdsourcing really means and what core and optional features it has . 99designs : An analysis of creative competition in crowdsourced design