Routine Perioperative Pulmonary Artery Catheterization Has No Effect on Rate of Complications in Vascular Surgery : A Meta - Analysis JAMES E . BARONE , M . D . , F . A . C . S . , F . C . C . M . , * t JAMES B . TUCKER , M . B . A . , * DENNIS RASSIAS , M . D . , * PHILIP R . CORVO , M . D . * t From the Departments of Surgery , " The Stamford Hospital , Stamford , CT and tColumbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons , New York , New York Despite widespread use pulmonary artery catheterization has not been proven to reduce compli cations or mortality . One study supported the use of routine preoperative pulmonary artery catheterization in moderate - risk vascular surgery patients ; several other studies have reported that pulmonary artery catheterization is not efficacious . Our goal was to scrutinize the data using meta - analysis . This is a systematic review of the literature . MEDLINE was searched for all articles on pulmonary artery catheterization , optimization , oxygen delivery , and preoperative preparation of vascular surgery patients . Data from papers judged appropriate for inclusion were analyzed using a computer program , Easy MA . Complications were defined as only those that could have reasonably have been prevented by or resulted from pulmonary artery catheterization . Of hun dreds of possible papers only four were found to be adequate randomized prospective studies with similar exclusions , therapeutic endpoints , and interpretable complication and mortality rates . Controls included 174 patients versus 211 in the protocol group . Power analysis showed that the combined sample sizes were adequate . The meta - analysis demonstrates that the studies are homogeneous . The use of a pulmonary artery catheter does not prevent morbidity or mortality . Of the studies providing data on the amount of intravenous fluid administered three reported that statistically significantly more fluid was given to patients who underwent pulmonary artery catheterization . Meta - analysis indicates that in moderate - risk vascular surgery patients routine preoperative pulmonary artery catheterization is not associated with improved outcomes . T HE PULMONARY ARTERY CATHETER continues to gen erate much discussion . The device was introduced 30 years ago , and despite numerous publications in cluding the report from a " consensus conference " 1 no agreement has been reached regarding its appropriate use . Numerous studies in critically ill and periopera tive patients have reached conflicting conclusions . The heterogeneity of different patient populations and the use of dissimilar treatment strategies have made the analysis of the efficacy of pulmonary artery catheter ization difficult . A recent systematic review concluded Presented at a poster session during the 29th Annual Education al and Scientific Symposium of the Society of Critical Care Medi cine , Orlando , Florida , February 11 - 15 , 2000 . Address correspondence and reprint requests to James E . Ba rone , M . D . , The Stamford Hospital , 190 West Broad Street , Stam ford , CT 06902 . that maximization of oxygen delivery based on data derived from pulmonary artery catheterization in criti cally ill patients did not lead to improved mortality rates . ' That study analyzed seven papers of varying quality and patient characteristics . One area in which similar populations and treatment strategies have been studied is the perioperative use of pulmonary artery catheterization in vascular surgery . Our group has had an interest in perioperative pulmonary artery catheter ization " and decided to perform a systematic review of the literature on this topic . The most common type of systematic review of the literature is meta - analysis . Although it is subject to criticism because of such potential problems as bias , lack of standardization , emphasis on review of only published studies , and other concerns regarding meth odology meta - analysis can be useful . Pooling of data from numerous small studies if they can be shown to be relatively homogeneous can enable meta - analysis to reach conclusions with a reasonable power . 674 No . 7 PERIOPERATIVE PULMONARY ARTERY CATHETERIZATION Barone et el . 675 Methods An attempt was made to discover all citations re garding the perioperative use of pulmonary artery catheterization in the literature since the introduction of the device in 1970 . A MEDLINE search was per formed using key words ( pulmonary artery catheter , Swan - Ganz , perioperative , preoperative , operating room , oxygen delivery , oxygen consumption , and vas cular surgery ) and Boolean phrases . The bibliogra phies of recent articles on this subject were scruti nized . The extensive files of one of the senior authors ( J . E . B . ) who has had a career - long interest in pulmo nary artery catheterization and critical care were also reviewed for pertinent references . Only papers in En glish were included . To minimize heterogeneity only papers that were randomized and prospective , de scribed specific therapeutic goals , and were confined to vascular surgery patients were included . Of the papers selected for the meta - analysis re ported complications were evaluated in an effort to identify adverse events that could reasonably have been expected to have been prevented by or resulted from pulmonary artery catheterization . The studies were assessed for quality using a modification of the method of Heyland et aJ . 2 The modification was that papers were given partial credit , or a score of one , if the randomization was less than a true random num ber - based technique but was at least an attempt to randomize in a somewhat acceptable fashion . Power was calculated using the formula ( 2 . 8IPI - P 2 ) 2 X [ PI X ( 100 - PI ) + P 2 x ( 100 - P 2 ) ] . 4 ( PI = percentage of events in the controls , P 2 = percentage of events in the intervention group . ) The power calculation deter mined that to achieve a 10 per cent reduction in com plications ( from 15 % to 5 % ) with an < X of 0 . 05 and a TABLE 1 . Excluded Studies 13 of 0 . 20 a minimum of 137 patients in each arm of the study would be required . The meta - analysis was performed using EasyMA software . " The Mantel Haenszel test was used for the meta - analysis , and T tests were used for analysis of interval data with sig nificant P values at the 0 . 05 level . Results Of the many possible papers only four > - 9 fulfilled the inclusion criteria of randomized prospective stud ies of vascular surgery patients who underwent peri operative insertion of pulmonary artery catheters with specific therapeutic - endpoints for the protocol and control groups . Table 1 lists major studies that in volved perioperative pulmonary artery catheterization but were eliminated from the study for various rea sons . Table 2 illustrates the relevant features of the studies included in the meta - analysis . Quality scores ? for certain important features of each paper were as signed as follows : the Berlauk et al . " paper was given low scores for randomization ( bias was admitted in the Discussion section of the paper ) and lack of descrip tion of cointerventions ( the pulmonary artery catheter patients with angina received nitroglycerin , a fact that did not appear in the paper " ) ; the Bender et al . " paper was downgraded because the randomization was " by the intensivist " ; the Ziegler et al . ? paper did not de scribe the method of randomization which was subse quently described as " . . . picking envelopes out of a hat with a 50 / 50 mix each time " ( L . Flancbaum , per sonal communication ) . None of the studies was blinded for the obvious reason that the absence of a pulmonary artery catheter in the control patients , ex cept for the control patients in the Ziegler paper , was apparent . The four studies excluded patients who had Wilsorr ' " Mixed surgical patients Yang ' " Vascular and general surgery Lead Author Adams 22 Aronis " Boyd 23 Del Guercio / " Flancbaurrr " Granr " Hesdorffer ' " Isaacson 10 Joyce ! ' Mostafa ' " Shoemaker " Shoemaker ' ? Tuman ! ' Whittemore ' ? Study Population Aortic surgery patients Mixed surgical patients " High - risk " surgical patients Surgical patients > 65 years old General surgery Aortic surgery patients Aortic aneurysm surgery Aortic surgery patients Aortic surgery patients Aortic aneurysm surgery " High - risk " surgical patients " High - risk " surgical patients CABG patients Aortic aneurysm surgery Reasons for Exclusion Not randomized , all patients received only a central line RetrospectiveExcludedpatients were not described , some patients entered after surgery Not randomized RetrospectiveNotrandomizedNotrandomized , historical controls Treatment goals in protocol patients not stated Treatment goals in protocol patients not stated Not randomized , no control group Not randomized , some patients entered after surgery Not adequately randomized Not randomized , treatment goals not stated Not randomized , historical controls Only l / 3 had vascular surgery , albumin used for fluid loading , some control patients were not treated in intensive care units Not randomized CABG , coronary artery bypass graft . 676 THE AMERICAN SURGEON July 2001 Vol . 67 TABLE 2 . Studies Included in the Meta - Analysis Lead Author Berlauk ' ' Bender " Valentine12 Ziegler9 Total Study Population Aortic or lower limb revascularization Aortic or lower limb revascularization Aortic surgery Aortic or limb salvage surgery Modified Heyland et al . 2 Quality Score 6 6 II 8 Interventions Protocol / Control PAC 3 to 12 h preop , PAOP 8 - 15 , CI > 2 . 8 , SVR < llOO / central venous line only PAC morning of surgery , PAOP 8 - 14 , CI > 2 . 8 , SVR < ll00 / central venous line only PAC > 14 h preop , PAOP 8 - 15 , CI > 2 . 8 , SVR < ll00 / peripheral intravenous line PAC > 12 h preop , Hgb > 10 g , PAOP > 12 , Svo ; > 65 % / PAC only No . of Patients Protocol / Control 68121 51 / 53 60 / 60 32 / 40 211 / 174 PAC , pulmonary artery catheter ; h , hours ; preop , preoperative ; PAOP , gulmonary artery occlusion pressure ( mmHg ) ; CI , cardiac index ( Umin / m 2 ) ; SVR , systemic vascular resistance ( dynes - sec / em ) ; Hgb , hemoglobin concentration ( grn / dL ) ; Svoj , mixed venous oxygen saturation . suffered a myocardial infarction within 3 months , had undergone a coronary artery bypass graft within 6 months , or had uncompensated congestive heart fail ure or unstable angina . The meta - analysis shows that for mortality there was no difference between patients who underwent preoperative pulmonary artery catheterization and controls ( Fig . 1 ) . The number of patients with postop erative complications was also not statistically signifi cantly different ( Fig . 2 ) . The figures also depict the Breslow and Day heterogeneity calculations . A P of > 0 . 05 indicates that the studies were not heteroge neous ; rather , they were homogeneous . Categorization of intraoperative complications was quite variable in the papers . For example , intraoperative arrhythmias were listed as complications , but their severity and importance relative to outcome could not be judged . Also , the exact numbers of patients with intraoperative complications were not clearly listed in each paper . For these reasons intraoperative complications could not be subjected to meta - analysis . Table 3 illustrates the intraoperative complications reported in each study with no attempt to undertake statistical analysis . For analysis of intravenous fluid administration two additional randomized prospective studies were in cluded . These two studies , Isaacson et al . 10 and Joyce et al . 11 were not included in the meta - analysis of mor tality and complications because they did not use spe cific therapeutic goals for either the patients undergo ing pulmonary artery catheterization or the control patients . The five studies reporting amounts of intra venous fluid given to patients are listed in Table 4 . In FIG . 1 . Meta - analysis of patient mortality . The papers are ho mogeneous . CI , confidence interval ; MA , meta - analysis . Refer ences : Valentine et al . . ' 2 Ziegler et al . , 9 Bender et al . , 8 Berlauk et al . " figure 1 III - . Iow • Day heterogeneity p = 0 . 81 Figure 2 Breslow & Day heterogeneity p = 0 . 18 FIG . 2 . Meta - analysis of patients with complications . The pa pers are homogeneous . CI , confidence interval ; MA , meta analysis . References : Valentine et al . , ' ? Ziegler et al . , ? Bender et al . , " Berlauk et al . 6 No . 7 PERIOPERATIVE PULMONARY ARTERY CATHETERIZATION Barone et a / . 677 TABLE 3 . Intraoperative Complications ; Tachycardia and Bradycardia Are Included in the Category " Arrhythmia " Lead Author GrouplNo . Hypotension Arrhythmia ST changes Total No . Berlauk ? PAC / 68 22 23 0 45 Control / 21 10 12 0 22 Benders PAC / 51 0 5 5 10 Control / 53 0 3 1 4 Valentine 12 * PAC / 60 4 6 0 10 Control / 60 3 0 0 3 Ziegler 9 PAC / 32 5 1 1 7 Control / 40 6 0 2 8 PAC , pulmonary artery catheter . * One episode of bronchospasm occurred in the PAC group of Valentine et al . " This was excluded from the table because it was not likely to have been caused or prevented by PAC . three of the studies patients with pulmonary artery catheters received statistically significantly more fluid than those in the control group . Specifically in the study of Valentine et aJ . l2 patients with pulmonary artery catheters received 2 . 5 times more fluid than the control patients in the preoperative interval and 25 per cent more fluid in the postoperative period . Similarly Joyce et al . II showed that statistically significantly more fluid was given to patients with pulmonary artery catheters in both the intraoperative and postoperative periods . The studies by Bender et al . 8 and Berlauk et al . ? reported perioperative fluid administration as to tals instead of by intervals . In the Bender et al . " study patients who underwent pulmonary artery catheteriza tion received significantly more fluid . Discussion The pulmonary artery catheter was introduced into clinical medicine 30 years ago . P In the last 15 years controversy has arisen regarding the efficacy and safety of the device . 14 . 15 Proponents of its use main tain that measurement of pulmonary artery occlusion pressure and cardiac output as well as the use of cal culations of parameters based on numbers derived from these measurements can significantly improve outcomes in critically ill patients . Detractors point out that very few randomized prospective studies investi gating the use of pulmonary artery catheterization have been published and the published studies have yielded conflicting results . In addition studies 16 have revealed that many physicians lack sufficient knowl edge to use the pulmonary artery catheter correctly . This meta - analysis is an attempt to help clarify the situation . The routine use of pulmonary artery cath eterization in moderately ill vascular surgery patients in the perioperative period was selected for review because of the fact that several papers have been writ ten on this subject . These papers have dealt with simi lar groups , moderate - risk patients undergoing aortic and lower limb revascularization , and have focused on fairly similar therapeutic endpoints . The meta - analysis failed to show any improvement with the use of pul - monary artery catheterization in two categories of pa tient outcome : complications and mortality . Of the five studies reporting amounts of intravenous fluid ad ministered three showed that statistically significantly larger amounts of fluid were given to patients who had pulmonary artery catheters in place . The first randomized study of perioperative pulmo nary artery catheterization with specific therapeutic goals was that of Berlauk et al . 6 In addition to the randomization issues and the use of nitroglycerin in the protocol patients mentioned above the authors sug gested that the complication of graft thrombosis could have been prevented by pulmonary artery catheteriza tion . Although there is some logic to this in that a low - flow state might possibly affect graft patency no scientific data confirming that this complication can be prevented by pulmonary artery catheterization have been published . In fact the four instances of graft thrombosis in Berlauk ' s control patients - were treated with re - exploration and successful thrombectomy , yet the patients did not undergo pulmonary artery cath eterization at the time of the second surgery . For these TABLE 4 . Intravenous Fluid Administration Pulmonary Lead Author Artery Catheter Control P Valentine ' < " Preoperative 2620 ± 150 1010 ± 50 < 0 . 001 Intraoperative 5700 ± 290 6030 ± 280 0 . 415 Post < reerative 5100 ± 270 4060 ± 190 0 . 002 Bender * 5137 ± 315 3789 ± 306 0 . 003 Isaacson " t Preoperative 4898 ± 1247 4882 ± 1581 0 . 955 Postoperative 3308 ± 1547 2979 ± 1044 0 . 208 JoycelltIntraoperative 4960 ± 905 4205 ± 1097 0 . 029 Postoferative 3600 ± 100 2500 ± 410 < 0 . 001 Berlauk t 2756 ± 1426 2636 ± 897 NS ( Group 1 ) 2418 ± 1080 ( Group 2 ) NS , not significant . * Mean ± standard error of the mean . t Mean ± standard deviation . 678 THE AMERICAN SURGEON July 2001 Vol . 67 reasons the meta - analysis did not include graft throm bosis in the tabulation of complications . The papers by Bender et al . 8 and Ziegler et al . 9 appeared in 1997 . Bender et al . 8 attempted to repro duce the study of Berlauk et al . " with similar patients and therapeutic goals . Bender et al . 8 found no differ ences in death or complication rates , including the incidence of graft thrombosis . Despite the less - than ideal randomization method of Bender et al . " the paper was considered acceptable as an evidence - based medi cine Class I study by Trunkey in his published discus sion . ! ? Ziegler et al . 9 studied similar patients but used somewhat different treatment endpoints in the pulmo nary artery catheterization group . The paper is unique in that all control patients received a pulmonary artery catheter but were not " optimized . " While not de scribed in the original paper , the randomization pro cess is at least a " pseudorandomization " as described by Choi et al . ! " and Detsky et al . ! ? Rates of intraop erative and postoperative complications and deaths did not differ between the two study groups . In 1998 Valentine et al . ' ? performed what is prob ably the best of the prospective randomized trials of pulmonary artery catheterization . Exclusion criteria were clearly listed , and exclusions were accounted for . Preoperative cardiac evaluation was extensive . Ran domization was by sealed envelope . All patients un derwent aortic surgery . The treatment algorithm uti lized by Berlauk et al . " was employed . Patients in the pulmonary artery catheterization group had signifi cantly more intraoperative complications and received significantly more intravenous fluid in the pre - and postoperative periods . Postoperative complication rates did not differ significantly . Also mentioned in this study was a significantly higher rate of catheter associated complications in the pulmonary artery cath eter group including two episodes of catheter - related sepsis and one pneumothorax after insertion . The papers of Isaacson et al . 10 and Joyce et al . II were not included in the meta - analysis for complica tions and mortality because they did not have specific treatment goals for the pulmonary artery catheter pa tients . They were essentially observational studies . Data from these studies were included in the analysis of fluid management because they reflect the reality of patient care in that most patients who receive a pul monary artery catheter will be given large amounts of intravenous fluids . Only one of the papers in the meta - analysis included information about the financial implications of peri operative pulmonary artery catheterization . Berlauk et al . " suggested that there was no significant difference in mean hospital charges between patients undergoing preoperative pulmonary artery catheterization and those having only insertion of central venous lines . The lack of a difference was attributed to the fact that more patients in the central venous line group experi enced complications . They also stated that all of the patients had comorbidities that contributed to their hospital length of stay . If the meta - analysis is valid and no difference in complication rates exists between patients undergoing perioperative pulmonary artery catheterization and those treated without such inter vention it is highly likely that pulmonary artery cath eterization would generate increased costs and charges - - - especially if the device is inserted in an in tensive care unit on the day before surgery . The technique of meta - analysis can be criticized . We attempted to minimize criticism of this meta analysis by following the guidelines of Sacks et al . 20 The following recommendations of Sacks were uti lized : criteria for inclusion of studies were established before the meta - analysis was undertaken ; the literature review included sources beyond the simple computer search of MEDLINE ; major excluded trials were listed ; only randomized trials were included ; details of patient characteristics were mentioned ; criteria for pooling were included in methods ; heterogeneity was accounted for ; two authors selected and reviewed the papers ; the Mantel - Haenszel test was utilized for sta tistical analysis ; the possibility of a Type II error was considered by performing a power analysis ; data were reported using confidence intervals ; papers were as sessed for quality using a method reported by others " ; and the impact of costs of the intervention was dis cussed . A recent paper " demonstrated the efficacy of peri operative 13 - blockade in reducing perioperative com plications and deaths in high - risk vascular surgery pa tients . 13 - Blockade would seem to be the antithesis of " optimization " because the former utilizes drugs that reduce cardiac output and the latter attempts to induce higher cardiac output through the administration of intravenous fluids and inotropic drugs . Perhaps this helps explain why studies of moderate - risk patients undergoing vascular surgery do not experience fewer complications with " optimization " when examined with meta - analysis . On the basis of the lack of proven efficacy of and the potential increased costs associated with perioper ative pulmonary artery catheterization the procedure can no longer be justified in moderate - risk patients . REFERENCES 1 . Pulmonary Artery Catheter Consensus Conference Partici pants . Pulmonary Artery Catheter Consensus Conference : Consen sus statement . Crit Care Med 1997 ; 25 : 910 - 24 . 2 . Heyland DK , Cook OJ , King D , et al . Maximizing oxygen No . 7 PERIOPERATIVE PULMONARY ARTERY CATHETERIZATION Barone et al . 679 delivery in critically ill patients : A methodologic appraisal of the evidence . Crit Care Med 1996 ; 24 : 517 - 24 . 3 . Aronis M , Corvo P , Barone JE , et al . Preoperative pulmonary artery catheterization has no impact on , outcome . Contemp Surg 1998 ; 53 : 25 - 9 . 4 . Evans M , Pollock AV . A score system for evaluating ran domized controlled clinical trials of prophylaxis of abdominal sur gical wounds . Br J Surg 1985 ; 72 : 256 - 60 . 5 . Cucherat M , Boissel J - P , Leizorovicz A , Haugh MC . Easy MA : A program for the meta - analysis of clinical trials . Comput Methods Progr Biomed 1997 ; 53 : 187 - 90 . 6 . Berlauk JF , Abrams JH , Gilmour 11 , et al . Preoperative op timization of cardiovascular hemodynamics improves outcome in peripheral vascular surgery . Ann Surg 1991 ; 214 : 290 - 9 . 7 . Berlauk JF . Reply to letter . Ann Surg 1992 ; 216 : 103 . 8 . Bender JS , Smith - Meek MA , Jones CEoRoutine pulmonary artery catheterization does not reduce morbidity and mortality of elective vascular surgery . Ann Surg 1997 ; 226 : 229 - 37 . 9 . Ziegler DW , Wright JG , Choban PS , Flancbaum L . A . pro spective randomized trial of preoperative " optimization " of cardiac function in patients undergoing elective peripheral vascular sur gery . Surgery 1997 ; 22 : 584 - 92 . 10 . Isaacson 11 , Lowdon JD , Berry AJ , et al . The value of pulmonary artery and central venous monitoring in patients under going abdominal aortic reconstructive surgery : A comparative study of two selected , randomized groups . J Vase Surg 1990 ; 12 : 754 - 60 . 11 . Joyce WP , Provan JL , Ameli PM , et al . The role of central haemodynamic monitoring in abdominal aortic surgery : A pro spective randomised study . Eur J Vase Surg 1990 ; 4 : 633 - 636 . 12 . Valentine RJ , Duke ML , Inman MH , et al . Effectiveness of pulmonary artery catheters in aortic surgery : A randomized trial . J Vase Surg 1998 ; 27 : 203 - 12 . 13 . Swan HJ , Ganz W , Forrester J , et al . Catheterization of the heart in man with use of a flow - directed balloon - tipped catheter . N Engl J Med 1970 ; 283 : 447 - 51 . 14 . Robin ED . The cult of the Swan - Ganz catheter : Overuse and abuse of pulmonary flow catheters . Ann Intern Med 1985 ; 103 : 445 - 9 . 15 . Conners Af , SperoffT , Dawson NV , et al . The effectiveness of right heart catheterization in the initial care of critically ill patients . JAMA 1996 ; 276 : 889 - 97 . 16 . Iberti TJ , Fischer EP , Leibowitz AB , et al . A multicenter study of physicians ' knowledge of the pulmonary artery catheter . JAMA 1990 ; 264 : 2928 - 32 . 17 . Trunkey D . Discussion of Bender et al . Ann Surg 1997 ; 226 : 236 . 18 . Choi PT , Yip G , Quinonez LG , Cook DJ . Crystalloids vs colloids in fluid resuscitation : A systematic review . Crit Care Med 1999 ; 27 : 200 - 10 . 19 . Detsky AS , Naylor CD , O ' Rourke K , et al . Incorporating variations in the quality of individual randomized trials into meta analysis . J Clin Epidemiol 1992 ; 45 : 255 - 65 . 20 . Sacks HS , Berrier J , Reitman D , et al . Meta - analysis of randomized controlled trials . N Engl J Med 1987 ; 316 : 450 - 5 . 21 . Poldermans D , Boersma E , Bax JJ , et al . The effect of bisoprolol on perioperative mortality and myocardial infarction in high - risk patients undergoing vascular surgery . N Engl J Med 1999 ; 341 : 1789 - 94 . 22 . Adams JG , Clifford EJ , Henry RS , Poulos E . Selective monitoring in abdominal aortic surgery . Am Surg 1993 ; 59 : 559 - 63 . 23 . Boyd 0 , Grounds RM , Bennett ED . A randomized clinical trial of the effect of deliberate perioperative increase of oxygen delivery on mortality in high - risk surgical patients . JAMA 1993 ; 270 : 2699 - 707 . 24 . Del Guercio LR , Cohn JD . Monitoring operative risk in the elderly . JAMA 1980 ; 243 : 1350 - 5 . 25 . Flancbaum L , Ziegler DW , Choban PS . Preoperative inten sive care unit admission and hemodynamic monitoring in patients scheduled for major elective noncardiac surgery : A retrospective review of 95 patients . J Cardiothorac Vase Anesth 1998 ; 12 : 3 - 9 . 26 . Grant KC . Utility and application of pulmonary artery cath eterization in aortic and aorto - iliac disease . Can J Surg 1986 ; 29 : 256 - 8 . 27 . Hesdorffer CS , Milne JF , Meyers AM , et al . The value of Swan - Ganz catheterization and volume loading in preventing renal failure in patients undergoing abdominal aneurysmectomy . Clin Nephrol 1987 ; 28 : 272 - 6 . 28 . Mostafa G , Kumar M , Schlotthauer J , Murray MJ . The utility of hemodynamic measurements acquired by pulmonary ar tery catheterization . Am J Surg 1998 ; 175 : 293 - 6 . 29 . Shoemaker WC , Appel PL , Kram HB , et al . Prospective trial of supranormal values of survivors as therapeutic goals in high - risk surgical patients . Chest 1998 ; 94 : 1176 - 86 . 30 . Shoemaker WC , Appel PL , Kram HB . Hemodynamic and oxygen transport responses in survivors and non - survivors in high risk surgery . Crit Care Med 1993 ; 21 : 997 - 9 . 31 . Tuman KJ , McCarthy RJ , Spiess BD , et al . Effective pul monary artery catheterization on outcome and patients undergoing coronary artery surgery . Anesthesiology 1989 ; 70 : 199 - 206 . 32 . Whittemore AD , Cloes AW , Hechtman HB , Mannick HAA . Aortic aneurysm repair : Reduced operative mortality associated with maintenance ofoptimal cardiac performance . Ann Surg 1980 ; 192 : 414 - 21 . 33 . Wilson J , Woods I , Fawcett J , et al . Reducing the risk of major elective surgery : Randomised controlled trial of preopera tive optimisation of oxygen delivery . BMJ 1999 ; 318 : 1099 - 1103 . 34 . Yang SC , Puri VK . Role of preoperative hemodynamic monitoring in intraoperative fluid management . Ann Surg 1986 ; 52 : 536 - 40 .