[ CANCER RESEARCH62 , 669 – 674 , February 1 , 2002 ] Essential Role of Neural Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein in Podosome Formation and Degradation of Extracellular Matrix in src - transformed Fibroblasts 1 Kiyohito Mizutani , Hiroaki Miki , Hong He , Hiroshi Maruta , and Tadaomi Takenawa 2 Department of Biochemistry , Institute of Medical Science , University of Tokyo , Tokyo 108 - 8639 , Japan [ K . M . , H . M . , T . T . ] ; PRESTO [ H . M . ] and CREST [ T . T . ] , Japan Science and Technology Corporation , Saitama 332 - 0012 Japan ; and Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research , PO Royal Melbourne Hospital , Victoria 3050 , Australia [ H . H . , H . Ma . ] ABSTRACT Transformation of cells by the src oncogene causes dramatic changes in adhesive structures . In v - src - transformed 3Y1 rat fibroblasts ( 3Y1 - src ) , there are actin - rich protrusive structures called podosomes by which attachment to the extracellular matrix is thought to occur . In this study , we found that neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) colo - calizes with filamentous actin ( F - actin ) in podosomes . Expression of dom - inant - negative mutants of N - WASP , (cid:1) cof N - WASP and (cid:1) VPH N - WASP , both of which are incapable of activating the Arp2 / 3 complex , suppressed podosome formation , suggesting that N - WASP is essential in this process . Localization of N - WASP in podosomes appears to be attributable to interaction between N - WASP and the SH3 domain of cortactin . Indeed , microinjection of the cortactin SH3 domain suppressed podosome forma - tion . We also observed that 3Y1 - src cells cultured on fibronectin degrade the fibronectin primarily at the podosomes and that the inhibition of podosome formation by (cid:1) cof N - WASP abolishes the fibronectin degrada - tion . These results suggest the importance of N - WASP in podosome formation and extracellular matrix degradation , which are processes thought to underlie the invasive phenotype of 3Y1 - src cells . INTRODUCTION Attachment of cells to the ECM 3 is a critical event that controls their survival , growth , and migration . For instance , detachment of normal epithelial cells , but not transformed cells , from the ECM leads to an apoptosis called as anoikis ( 1 ) . Cells use several types of adhesive structures that are classified primarily according to morpho - logical criteria . Podosomes are known to occur specifically in mono - cyte - derived hematopoietic cells including macrophages and oste - oclasts ( 2 ) . Podosomes contain an adhesive receptor , integrin ( 3 ) , and several actin - regulating proteins such as cortactin ( 4 ) , talin ( 3 ) , and vinculin ( 3 ) that link integrin to the actin cytoskeleton . One important characteristic of podosomes is their dynamic nature . They are rapidly constructed and destroyed , and therefore , they have been thought suitable for transient adhesions during cellular motility but not for generating intimate and stable attachments to the extracellular envi - ronment . Several recently published reports have documented the importance of the WASP for formation of podosomes in macrophages , although many other actin - regulating proteins are also known to accumulate in podosomes . WASP was originally identified as the causative gene product for the hereditary X - linked disease Wiskott - Aldrich syn - drome , which is characterized by thrombocytopenia , eczema , and immunodeficiency ( 5 ) . WASP is expressed exclusively in hematopoi - etic cells ( 5 ) . We subsequently identified a ubiquitously expressed WASP - homologous protein , N - WASP ( 6 ) , and the WASP / N - WASP - related proteins WAVE / Scars ( WAVE1 , WAVE2 , and WAVE3 ; Refs . 7 , 8 ) . This family of proteins possesses a common domain for activating the Arp2 / 3 complex , which induces rapid polymerization of actin in vitro and in vivo ( 9 – 11 ) . Macrophages obtained from Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome patients show a specific defect in podosome for - mation ( 12 ) and directed movement induced by chemoattractant ( 13 ) . In addition , Cdc42 , an upstream regulator of WASP , and the Arp2 / 3 complex , an effector molecule of WASP for inducing rapid actin polymerization , are reported to play critical roles in podosome for - mation ( 13 , 14 ) . Therefore , macrophages appear to use the Cdc42 / WASP pathway to activate the Arp2 / 3 complex and induce rapid actin polymerization in podosomes . Podosome formation has also been observed in cells transformed by v - src oncogenes ( 15 ) . One of the primary substrates for activated Src family tyrosine kinases is cortactin ( 16 ) , which bundles actin fila - ments ( F - actin ; Ref . 17 ) . As mentioned above , cortactin is concen - trated in podosomes ( 4 ) . Cortactin contains an SH3 domain at its COOH terminus , which binds a few proteins such as the neuronal CortBP1 that contain Pro - rich motifs ( 18 ) , although the precise phys - iological role of their interaction still remains to be clarified . In addition , cortactin associates directly with and activates , though weakly , the Arp2 / 3 complex via its NH 2 - terminal acidic region , which is similar to regions found in WASP family proteins ( 19 ) . Therefore , a similar mechanism to activate the Arp2 / 3 complex appears to exist both in podosomes of src - transformed cells and in macrophages . It remains unclear , however , whether cortactin alone is sufficient to activate the Arp2 / 3 complex and cause formation of podosomes in src - transformed cells . We hypothesized that some WASP family proteins may play a role in podosome formation in src - transformed cells . In the present study , we found that N - WASP accumulates in podosomes in rat 3Y1 fibro - blasts transformed with v - src ( 3Y1 - src ) . Expression of dominant - negative N - WASP mutants that cannot activate the Arp2 / 3 complex suppresses podosome formation . In addition , we found that 3Y1 - src cells degrade fibronectin primarily at the podosomes and that sup - pression of podosome formation by N - WASP mutants abolishes fibronectin degradation . MATERIALS AND METHODS Antibodies and Recombinant Proteins . The polyclonal anti - N - WASP antibody and anti - WAVE antibody were made as described previously ( 7 , 20 ) . The anti - (cid:1) - galactosidase and the anti - GST polyclonal antibodies were pur - chased from Chemicon and Santa Cruz , respectively . The anti - p80 / 85 ( cortac - tin ) and the anti - Myc monoclonal antibody were from Upstate Biotechnology and Santa Cruz Biotechnology , respectively . Secondary antibodies conjugated to alkaline phosphatase ( used in Western blotting ) and fluorescein ( used in immunofluorescence microscopy ) were from Promega and Cappel , respec - tively . GST - SH3 cortactin , GST - SH3 IRSp53 , and GST - SH3 p85 were pre - pared as described previously ( 21 , 22 ) . Binding Assay . GST - fusion proteins were immobilized on 20 (cid:2) l of gluta - thione - Sepharose 4B beads ( Amersham Pharmacia ) and mixed with 3Y1 - src cell lysates . After being washed in lysis buffer , the beads were suspended in Received 3 / 23 / 01 ; accepted 12 / 4 / 01 . The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges . This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance with 18 U . S . C . Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact . 1 This study was supported in part by a Grant - in - Aid for Cancer Research from the Ministry of Education , Science , Sports and Culture of Japan , and in part by a Grant - in - Aid Research for the Future Program from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Sciences . 2 To whom requests for reprints should be addressed , at Department of Biochemistry , Institute of Medical Science , University of Tokyo , 4 - 6 - 1 Shirokanedai , Minato - ku , Tokyo 108 - 8639 , Japan . Phone : 81 - 3 - 5449 - 5510 ; Fax : 81 - 3 - 5449 - 5417 ; E - mail : takenawa @ ims . u - tokyo . ac . jp . 3 The abbreviations used are : ECM , extracellular matrix ; F - actin , filamentous actin ; GST , glutathione S - transferase ; WASP , Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ; N - WASP , neural WASP ; WT , wild type . 669 on July 22 , 2017 . © 2002 American Association for Cancer Research . cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from SDS sample buffer and subjected to SDS - PAGE , followed by Coomassie brilliant blue staining or Western blot analysis . Immunoprecipitation . Anti - N - WASP antibody or anti - Myc antibody was added to cell lysates from 3Y1 - src cells or COS7 cells and incubated for 2 h at 4°C with rotation . Agarose beads conjugated with protein A ( for anti - N - WASP ) or protein G ( for anti - Myc ; Pierce ) were then added , and the mixture was incubated for an additional 2 h . The beads were washed with lysis buffer and suspended in SDS sample buffer . Transient Expression in 3Y1 - src Cells . WT , (cid:1) cof , and (cid:1) VPH N - WASP - expressing plasmids were constructed as described previously ( 6 , 23 , 24 ) . As a control , Lac - Z - expressing plasmid was also constructed . Two (cid:2) g of each recombinant plasmid were transfected into 3Y1 - src cells with Lipofectamine 2000 ( Life Technologies , Inc . ) reagents . Twenty - four h after transfection , the cells were fixed with formaldehyde . For immunoprecipitation assay , WT and (cid:1) SH3 Myc - tagged , cortactin - expressing plasmids were constructed in pEF - BOS plasmid vector and transfected into COS7 cells with Lipofectamine 2000 reagents . Microinjection of 3Y1 - src Cells . GST - fusion proteins ( 3 . 0 mg / ml ) were microinjected with a Micromanipulator 5171 ( Eppendorf ) with Femtotip nee - dles . After injection , the cells were cultured for an additional 1 h and then fixed . In Vitro ECM Degradation Assay . 3Y1 - src cells were seeded on FITC - fibronectin - coated glass coverslips for in vitro ECM degradation assay as described previously ( 25 ) . To quantify the degraded area of FITC - fibronectin , we used NIH - image 1 . 62f and calculated the percentage of degraded area / cell area . Immunofluorescence Microscopy . Cells cultured on coverslips were fixed in 3 . 7 % formaldehyde in PBS for 20 min and permeabilized with 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 in PBS . The cells were then incubated with primary antibody , followed by appropriate secondary antibodies . To visualize actin filaments , rhodamine - conjugated phalloidin ( Molecular Probes ) was used . To observe stained cells , a laser scanning confocal imaging system ( Bio - Rad ) was used . RESULTS Localization of N - WASP in Podosomes in 3Y1 - src Cells . We first determined which members of the WASP family were present in 3Y1 - src cells by Western blotting with anti - WASP , anti - N - WASP , and pan anti - WAVE antibodies ( this pan anti - WAVE antibody rec - ognizes all isoforms of WAVEs ; data not shown ) . We found that the anti - N - WASP and anti - WAVE antibodies specifically recognized en - dogenous N - WASP and WAVEs , respectively , in both 3Y1 and 3Y1 - src cells ( data not shown ) . As expected , we observed no positive signal with the anti - WASP antibody ( data not shown ) . We then used immunofluorescence microscopic analyses to determine whether N - WASP and / or WAVEs were localized to podosomes . As mentioned earlier , podosomes are rich in F - actin and can be visualized clearly with phalloidin staining as dot like . As shown in Fig . 1 A , most Fig . 1 . Localization of N - WASP in podosomes of 3Y1 - src cells . A , 3Y1 and 3Y1 - src cells were stained with anti - N - WASP antibody and anti - WAVE antibody , respectively . To visualize actin filaments , the cells were double - stained with rhodamine - phalloidin . B , 3Y1 and 3Y1 - src cells were stained with anti - N - WASP antibody , anti - cortactin antibody , and phalloidin . Fig . 2 . Ectopic expression of the N - WASP mu - tants in 3Y1 - src cells . A , WT , (cid:1) cof , and (cid:1) VPH N - WASP were expressed transiently in 3Y1 - src cells . Twenty - four h after transfection , the cells were fixed and stained with anti - N - WASP anti - body and phalloidin . B , cells expressing N - WASP were counted and classified according to the mor - phology of their podosomes as normal , large , or no podosome . Bars , SD . 670 ESSENTIAL ROLE OF N - WASP IN PODOSOME FORMATION on July 22 , 2017 . © 2002 American Association for Cancer Research . cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from endogenous N - WASP was colocalized with dot - like accumulations of F - actin in 3Y1 - src cells , whereas WAVEs did not show similar colocalization . This was not observed in parental 3Y1 cells . To confirm that the dot - like structures containing N - WASP and F - actin were podosomes , we stained 3Y1 - src cells with anti - cortactin anti - body . Cortactin has been shown to be concentrated in podosomes ( 4 ) , and therefore , many investigators have used cortactin as a podosome marker . Triple staining with anti - N - WASP antibody , anti - cortactin antibody , and phalloidin showed that a significant amount of endog - enous N - WASP had accumulated in cortactin - positive podosomes ( Fig . 1 B ) . These results indicate that N - WASP is localized specifically to podosomes and suggest that N - WASP may play an important role in the formation of podosomes . Inhibition of Podosome Formation by Overexpression of (cid:1) cof and (cid:1) VPH N - WASP . We next examined whether N - WASP is re - quired for podosome formation . We used the (cid:1) cof and the (cid:1) VPH mutant forms of N - WASP , which lack regions essential to induce Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated rapid actin polymerization ( 10 ) . Previous studies have shown that the ectopic expression of these mutants suppresses various N - WASP - dependent cell biological events includ - ing Cdc42 - induced formation of filopodia ( 23 ) , intracellular motility of Shigella flexneri ( 26 ) , epidermal growth factor - induced formation of filopodia ( 24 ) , and nerve growth factor - induced neurite extension ( 27 ) . As shown in Fig . 2 A , expression of either (cid:1) cof or (cid:1) VPH N - WASP disrupted formation of podosomes . This disruption was not an artifact attributable to ectopic expression because podosomes were still observed in Lac - Z - expressing control cells . The proportions of podosome - forming cells were determined for control ( Lac - Z ) , WT N - WASP - , (cid:1) cof N - WASP - , and (cid:1) VPH N - WASP - expressing cells . Eighty - four % of Lac - Z - expressing control cells showed podosome formation . In (cid:1) cof - and (cid:1) VPH N - WASP - expressing cells , the pro - portions were reduced significantly to 22 and 23 % , respectively . In contrast , expression of WT N - WASP in 3Y1 - src cells resulted in large podosome - like accumulations of F - actin in 75 % of cells ( Fig . 2 B ) , whereas expression of N - WASP in 3Y1 cells did not cause any significant change in accumulation of F - actin . It is unclear if the unusually large accumulations of F - actin we observed function in the same manner as that of normal - sized podosomes . However , cortactin , a podosome marker , colocalized with the large F - actin accumulations ( data not shown ) , suggesting that these F - actin accumulations may be large podosomes . The data with the mutants strongly suggest that N - WASP is involved in podosome formation by regulating actin polymerization through the Arp2 / 3 complex . Interaction of N - WASP and Cortactin . An SH3 domain is pres - ent in the COOH - terminal region of cortactin , and N - WASP has a proline - rich region to which several SH3 proteins bind . We speculated that the SH3 domain of cortactin may interact with N - WASP and participate in N - WASP localization in podosomes . Indeed , pull - down assays with GST - fusion proteins containing the cortactin SH3 domain revealed specific binding to N - WASP but not to WAVEs ( Fig . 3 A ) . To investigate further whether N - WASP can interact directly with cortactin , we performed a Far - Western blot assay . Recombinant His - tagged N - WASP proteins were blotted onto a membrane filter , and the membrane filter was overlaid with GST - SH3 cortactin . As shown in Fig . 3 B , cortactin SH3 domain binds directly to N - WASP , but control GST does not . We then examined whether endogenous cortactin and N - WASP form a protein complex in 3Y1 - src cells . 3Y1 - src cell lysates were immuno - precipitated with anti - N - WASP antibody , and the precipitates were sub - jected to Western blot analysis with anti - cortactin antibody . As shown in Fig . 3 C , a significant amount of cortactin was coimmunoprecipitated with anti - N - WASP antibody , indicating in vivo formation of cortactin / N - WASP complexes . To investigate whether the in vivo interaction occurs via the SH3 domain of cortactin , we prepared Myc - tagged cor - tactin expression constructs of WT and a mutant lacking the SH3 domain ( (cid:1) SH3 ) . We then expressed N - WASP alone or with Myc - cortactin ( WT or (cid:1) SH3 ) and performed immunoprecipitation with anti - Myc antibody . Examination of the immunoprecipitates with anti - N - WASP antibody revealed that N - WASP was coimmunoprecipitated with Myc - cortactin ( WT ) but not with Myc - cortactin ( (cid:1) SH3 ; Fig . 3 D ) , indicating that the SH3 domain is essential for in vivo binding between N - WASP and cortactin . If cortactin through its SH3 domain recruits N - WASP in podo - Fig . 3 . Association of N - WASP with the SH3 domain of cortactin . A , 3Y1 - src cell lysates were mixed with GST - SH3 cortactin protein immobilized on beads , and bound proteins were analyzed by Western blotting with anti - N - WASP and anti - WAVE antibod - ies . B , recombinant His - tagged N - WASP proteins ( right lane ) were analyzed by far - Western blot with GST ( 100 n M ) , GST cortactin SH3 ( 10 and 100 n M ) or without proteins ( (cid:2) ) . Detection was by an anti - GST antibody . C , 3Y1 - src cell lysates were mixed with anti - N - WASP antibody ( or control preimmune rabbit serum ) and incubated for 2 h with rotation . Protein A - conjugated agarose beads were then added and incubated for an additional 2 h . Proteins bound to the beads were analyzed by Western blotting with anti - cortactin and anti - N - WASP antibodies . D , N - WASP alone or with Myc - cortactin ( WT or (cid:1) SH3 ) were coexpressed in COS7 cells and then immunoprecipitated with anti - Myc antibody . The precipitates were analyzed by immunoblotting . 671 ESSENTIAL ROLE OF N - WASP IN PODOSOME FORMATION on July 22 , 2017 . © 2002 American Association for Cancer Research . cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from somes , inhibition of binding between cortactin and N - WASP should suppress podosome formation . Indeed , microinjection of a GST - fusion protein containing the SH3 domain of cortactin inhibited po - dosome formation in 3Y1 - src cells , but microinjection of other SH3 domain proteins that do not interact with N - WASP , such as those of IRSp53 or p85 regulatory subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase ( 22 ) , did not interfere with podosome formation ( Fig . 4 ) . These data suggest that the interaction between N - WASP and cortactin is impor - tant for podosome formation . Suppression of ECM Degradation by (cid:1) cof N - WASP . During tumor metastasis , degradation of the ECM is considered a key process for malignant cells to escape from the primary tumor and to invade into other organs . In some tumor cell lines , proteolytic activity has been observed at protrusive cellular sites that are structurally similar to podosomes ( 25 ) . To determine whether podosomes in 3Y1 - src cells possess localized ECM degradation activity , we performed an in vitro ECM degradation assay in which we first coated glass coverslips with FITC - conjugated fibronectin and then seeded 3Y1 - src cells onto the coverslips . ECM degradation was visualized as black areas against the uniformly fluorescent fibronectin . The results of these experiments are shown in Fig . 5 A . ECM degradation occurred in a dot - like manner , and most degraded areas colocalized with F - actin - rich podosomes . Incomplete overlap may be attributable to cell movement during the ECM degradation assay . This result strongly suggests that 3Y1 - src cells degrade the ECM at podosomes . We then examined whether podosomes are essential for inducing ECM degradation . Because expression of (cid:1) cof N - WASP suppressed podosome formation and expression of WT N - WASP induced unusu - ally large accumulation of actin filaments ( Fig . 2 A ) , we expressed WT or (cid:1) cof N - WASP in 3Y1 - src cells and subjected the cells to the in vitro ECM degradation assay . As shown in Fig . 5 B , 3Y1 - src cells expressing control Lac - Z showed normal podosome formation . In contrast , WT N - WASP - expressing cells formed large accumulation of actin filaments , where ECM degradation occurred . On the other hand , 3Y1 - src cells expressing (cid:1) cof N - WASP did not form podosomes , and ECM degradation was also suppressed . The percentages of degraded area in Lac - Z - , WT N - WASP - , and (cid:1) cof N - WASP - expressing cells were 3 . 6 , 11 , and 0 . 9 % , respectively ( Fig . 5 C ) . These data confirm the importance of podosomes in ECM degradation and suggest that N - WASP may play an important role in tumor metastasis through regulation of podosomes that degrade ECM . DISCUSSION In the present study , we found that N - WASP , a ubiquitously ex - pressed WASP homologue , plays an essential role in podosome for - mation in 3Y1 - src cells . Our results are similar to those of a recent report on the role of WASP in macrophages ( 12 ) . We also found that cortactin binds to N - WASP through its COOH - terminal SH3 domain . In this context , it would be of interest to note that HS1 , a cortactin - related protein expressed exclusively in hematopoietic cells ( 21 ) , is also localized in podosomes of macrophages , binds WASP through its COOH - terminal SH3 domain , and microinjection of the HS1 SH3 Fig . 4 . Inhibition of podosome formation by microinjection of GST - SH3 cortactin . A , immunofluorescence staining of cells in - jected with GST or GST - SH3 proteins . GST - fusion proteins were detected with anti - GST antibody . Actin filaments were detected with phalloidin . B , GST - fusion proteins used in this experiment . C , percentage of podosome - forming 3Y1 - src cells among cells injected with GST - fusion proteins . Bars , SD . 672 ESSENTIAL ROLE OF N - WASP IN PODOSOME FORMATION on July 22 , 2017 . © 2002 American Association for Cancer Research . cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from domain strongly blocks the formation of podosomes , 4 suggesting the general role of both cortactin family and WASP family of actin - binding proteins in podosome formation in rapidly migrating cells . A previous report noted that cortactin binds directly to Arp2 / 3 complex via its acidic NH 2 - terminal region ( 19 ) . It is likely that cortactin links N - WASP to the effector Arp2 / 3 complex . Although N - WASP can bind and activate the Arp2 / 3 complex directly ( 10 ) , indirect association through cortactin should facilitate the activation of Arp2 / 3 complex by N - WASP . Therefore , it is reasonable that cortactin recruits N - WASP to the site where the Arp2 / 3 complex is localized and induces a strong activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex by N - WASP . Weed et al . ( 19 ) reported that cortactin is recruited via its NH 2 - terminal region to lamellipodia through an interaction with the Arp2 / 3 complex , which supports the idea that cortactin plays an important role in determining the localization of N - WASP in vivo . It may also be that cortactin activates N - WASP , because several SH3 domain - containing proteins , such as Grb2 / Ash , WISH , and Nck , have been shown to activate N - WASP ( 28 – 30 ) . We , however , found that cortactin has little , if any , ability to activate N - WASP ( data not shown ) . We showed that podosomes in 3Y1 - src cells possess proteolytic activity for degradation of the ECM . Chen ( 25 ) reported previously that ECM - degrading activity is concentrated in podosome - like pro - trusive structures that the author termed “invadopodia . ” Because Chen used v - src - transformed cells to observe the invadopodia , we believe that invadopodia are podosomes . One important question is whether podosome - like structures are essential for degradation of the ECM . In the present study , we addressed this question by suppressing podo - some formation with an N - WASP dominant - negative mutant . Expres - 4 S . Linder , H . He , T . Watanabe , A . Abo , M . Aepfelbacher , and H . Maruta . HS1 forms a complex with WASP to organize podosomes in macrophages , manuscript in preparation . Fig . 5 . Proteolytic activity of 3Y1 - src cell po - dosomes . A , 3Y1 and 3Y1 - src cells were seeded on FITC - fibronectin - coated coverslips . The cells were cultured for 1 day and then fixed . To visualize actin filaments , the cells were stained with phalloidin . Arrowheads , areas of degraded fibronectin that overlap with podosomes . B , WT and (cid:1) cof N - WASP - expressing plasmids ( or control Lac - Z - expressing plasmids ) were transfected into 3Y1 - src cells . Twenty - four h after transfection , the cells were subjected to the in vitro ECM degradation assay . C , percentage of degraded area / cell area . By using NIH - image 1 . 62f , the degraded areas of FITC - fibronectin were quantified . Bars , SD . 673 ESSENTIAL ROLE OF N - WASP IN PODOSOME FORMATION on July 22 , 2017 . © 2002 American Association for Cancer Research . cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from sion of (cid:1) cof N - WASP abolishes both formation of podosomes and degradation of fibronectin that normally occurs at the locations of podosomes . In addition , expression of WT N - WASP induces large podosome - like accumulation of actin filaments and enhances signif - icantly the degradation of ECM . These results strongly suggest the importance of podosomes in ECM degradation . It remains unclear why inhibition of podosomes also blocks fibronectin degradation . It is possible that matrix proteases must be concentrated in the podosomes to function . Some matrix metalloproteinases are reported to accumu - late at significant levels in podosomes ( 31 ) . Podosomes have long been thought to mediate adhesion to the ECM . A recent detailed electron microscopic study indicated that the central areas of podosomes invaginate into cells , and Ochoa et al . ( 32 ) suggested that these may be sites where dynamic membrane traffick - ing , including endocytosis , occurs . These possible functions are not contradictory to each other . Podosomes may first attach to the ECM and then “sense” the environment by sampling the surrounding ma - terial through endocytosis . Because cells are normally surrounded by the ECM , it seems reasonable that podosomes may have multiple functions and that the inhibition of podosomes leads to inability of ECM degradation . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We are grateful to Dr . Stefan Linder for his unpublished information on the HS1 - WASP interaction . REFERENCES 1 . Frisch , S . M . , and Francis , H . Disruption of epithelial cell - matrix interactions induces apoptosis . J . Cell Biol . , 124 : 619 – 626 , 1994 . 2 . Gaidano , G . , Bergui , L . , Schena , M . , Gaboli , M . , Cremona , O . , Marchisio , P . C . , and Caligaris - Cappio , F . Integrin distribution and cytoskeleton organization in normal and malignant monocytes . Leukemia ( Baltimore ) , 4 : 682 – 687 , 1990 . 3 . Marchisio , P . C . , Bergui , L . , Corbascio , G . C . , Cremona , O . , D’Urso , N . , Schena , M . , Tesio , L . , and Caligaris - Cappio , F . Vinculin , talin , and integrins are localized at specific adhesion sites of malignant B lymphocytes . Blood , 72 : 830 – 833 , 1988 . 4 . Hiura , K . , Lim , S . S . , Little , S . P . , Lin , S . , and Sato , M . Differentiation dependent expression of tensin and cortactin in chicken osteoclasts . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton , 30 : 272 – 284 , 1995 . 5 . Derry , J . M . , Ochs , H . D . , and Francke , U . Isolation of a novel gene mutated in Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome . Cell , 78 : 635 – 644 , 1994 . 6 . Miki , H . , Miura , K . , and Takenawa , T . N - WASP , a novel actin - depolymerizing protein , regulates the cortical cytoskeletal rearrangement in a PIP2 - dependent manner downstream of tyrosine kinases . EMBO J . , 15 : 5326 – 5335 , 1996 . 7 . Miki , H . , Suetsugu , S . , and Takenawa , T . WAVE , a novel WASP - family protein involved in actin reorganization induced by Rac . EMBO J . , 17 : 6935 – 6941 , 1998 . 8 . Suetsugu , S . , Miki , H . , and Takenawa , T . Identification of two human WAVE / SCAR homologues as general actin regulatory molecules which associate with the Arp2 / 3 complex . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . , 260 : 296 – 302 , 1999 . 9 . Machesky , L . M . , Mullins , R . D . , Higgs , H . N . , Kaiser , D . A . , Blanchoin , L . , May , R . C . , Hall , M . E . , and Pollard , T . D . Scar , a WASP - related protein , activates nucleation of actin filaments by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 96 : 3739 – 3744 , 1999 . 10 . Rohatgi , R . , Ma , L . , Miki , H . , Lopez , M . , Kirchhausen , T . , Takenawa , T . , and Kirschner , M . W . The interaction between N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 complex links Cdc42 - dependent signals to actin assembly . Cell , 97 : 221 – 231 , 1999 . 11 . Yrar , D . , To , W . , Abo , A . , and Welch , M . D . The Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein directs actin - based motility by stimulating actin nucleation with the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . , 9 : 555 – 558 , 1999 . 12 . Linder , S . , Nelson , D . , Weiss , M . , and Aepfelbacher , M . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein regulates podosomes in primary human macrophages . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 96 : 9648 – 9653 , 1999 . 13 . Zicha , D . , Allen , W . E . , Brickell , P . M . , Kinnon , C . , Dunn , G . A . , Jones , G . E . , and Thrasher , A . J . Chemotaxis of macrophages is abolished in the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome . Br . J . Haematol . , 101 : 659 – 665 , 1998 . 14 . Linder , S . , Higgs , H . , Hufner , K . , Schwarz , K . , Pannicke , U . , and Aepfelbacher , M . The polarization defect of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome macrophages is linked to dislocalization of the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Immunol . , 165 : 221 – 225 , 2000 . 15 . Tarone , G . , Cirillo , D . , Giancotti , F . G . , Comoglio , P . M . , and Marchisio , P . C . Rous sarcoma virus - transformed fibroblasts adhere primarily at discrete protrusions of the ventral membrane called podosomes . Exp . Cell . Res . , 159 : 141 – 157 , 1985 . 16 . Wu , H . , and Parsons , J . T . Cortactin , an 80 / 85 - kilodalton pp60src substrate , is a filamentous actin - binding protein enriched in the cell cortex . J . Cell Biol . , 120 : 1417 – 1426 , 1993 . 17 . Huang , C . , Ni , Y . , Wang , T . , Gao , Y . , Haudenschild , C . , and Zhan , X . Down - regulation of the filamentous actin cross - linking activity of cortactin by Src - mediated tyrosine phosphorylation . J . Biol . Chem . , 272 : 13911 – 13915 , 1997 . 18 . Du , Y . , Weed , S . A . , Xiong , W . , Marshall , T . , and Parsons , J . T . Identification of a novel cortactin SH3 domain - binding protein and its localization to growth cones of cultured neurons . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 18 : 5838 – 5851 , 1998 . 19 . Weed , S . A . , Karginov , A . V . , Schafer , D . A . , Weaver , A . M . , Kinley , A . W . , Cooper , J . A . , and Parsons , J . T . Cortactin localization to sites of actin assembly in lamelli - podia requires interaction with F - actin and the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Cell Biol . , 151 : 29 – 40 , 2000 . 20 . Fukuoka , M . , Miki , H . , and Takenawa , T . Identification of N - WASP homologs in human and rat brain . Gene ( Amst . ) , 196 : 43 – 48 , 1997 . 21 . He , H . , Watanabe , T . , Zhan , X . , Huang , C . , Schuuring , E . , Fukami , K . , Takenawa , T . , Kumar , C . C . , Simpson , R . J . , and Maruta , H . Role of phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate in Ras / Rac - induced disruption of the cortactin - actomyosin II complex and malignant transformation . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 18 : 3829 – 3837 , 1998 . 22 . Miki , H . , Yamaguchi , H . , Suetsugu , S . , and Takenawa , T . IRSp53 is an essential intermediate between Rac and WAVE in the regulation of membrane ruffling . Nature ( Lond . ) , 408 : 732 – 735 , 2000 . 23 . Miki , H . , Sasaki , T . , Takai , Y . , and Takenawa , T . Induction of filopodium formation by a WASP - related actin - depolymerizing protein N - WASP . Nature ( Lond . ) , 391 : 93 – 96 , 1998 . 24 . Miki , H . , and Takenawa , T . Direct binding of the verprolin - homology domain in N - WASP to actin is essential for cytoskeletal reorganization . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . , 243 : 73 – 78 , 1998 . 25 . Chen , W . T . Proteolytic activity of specialized surface protrusions formed at rosette contact sites of transformed cells . J . Exp . Zool . , 251 : 167 – 185 , 1989 . 26 . Suzuki , T . , Miki , H . , Takenawa , T . , and Sasakawa , C . Neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein is implicated in the actin - based motility of Shigella flexneri . EMBO J . , 17 : 2767 – 2776 , 1998 . 27 . Banzai , Y . , Miki , H . , Yamaguchi , H . , and Takenawa , T . Essential role of neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein in neurite extension in PC12 cells and rat hip - pocampal primary culture cells . J . Biol . Chem . , 275 : 11987 – 11992 , 2000 . 28 . Carlier , M . F . , Nioche , P . , Broutin - L’Hermite , I . , Boujemaa , R . , Le , Clainche , C . , Egile , C . , Garbay , C . , Ducruix , A . , Sansonetti , P . , and Pantaloni , D . GRB2 links signaling to actin assembly by enhancing interaction of neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) with actin - related protein ( ARP2 / 3 ) complex . J . Biol . Chem . , 275 : 21946 – 21952 , 2000 . 29 . Fukuoka , M . , Suetsugu , S . , Miki , H . , Fukami , K . , Endo , T . , and Takenawa , T . A novel neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) binding protein , WISH , induces Arp2 / 3 complex activation independent of Cdc42 . J . Cell Biol . , 152 : 471 – 482 , 2001 . 30 . Rohatgi , R . , Nollau , P . , Ho , H . Y . , Kirschner , M . W . , and Mayer , B . J . Nck and phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate synergistically activate actin polymerization through the N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 pathway . J . Biol . Chem . , 276 : 26448 – 26452 , 2001 . 31 . Monsky , W . L . , Kelly , T . , Lin , C . Y . , Yeh , Y . , Stetler - Stevenson , W . G . , Mueller , S . C . , and Chen , W . T . Binding and localization of M r 72 , 000 matrix metalloprotein - ase at cell surface invadopodia . Cancer Res . , 53 : 3159 – 3164 , 1993 . 32 . Ochoa , G . C . , Slepnev , V . I . , Neff , L . , Ringstad , N . , Takei , K . , Daniell , L . , Kim , W . , Cao , H . , McNiven , M . , Baron , R . , and De Camilli , P . A functional link between dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton at podosomes . J . Cell Biol . , 150 : 377 – 389 , 2000 . 674 ESSENTIAL ROLE OF N - WASP IN PODOSOME FORMATION on July 22 , 2017 . © 2002 American Association for Cancer Research . cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from 2002 ; 62 : 669 - 674 . Cancer Res Kiyohito Mizutani , Hiroaki Miki , Hong He , et al . - transformed Fibroblasts src in Podosome Formation and Degradation of Extracellular Matrix Essential Role of Neural Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein in Updated version http : / / cancerres . aacrjournals . org / content / 62 / 3 / 669 Access the most recent version of this article at : Cited articles http : / / cancerres . aacrjournals . org / content / 62 / 3 / 669 . full # ref - list - 1 This article cites 32 articles , 17 of which you can access for free at : Citing articles http : / / cancerres . aacrjournals . org / content / 62 / 3 / 669 . full # related - urls This article has been cited by 60 HighWire - hosted articles . Access the articles at : E - mail alerts related to this article or journal . Sign up to receive free email - alerts SubscriptionsReprints and . pubs @ aacr . org Department at To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal , contact the AACR Publications Permissions . permissions @ aacr . org Department at To request permission to re - use all or part of this article , contact the AACR Publications on July 22 , 2017 . © 2002 American Association for Cancer Research . cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from