University of Massachusetts Medical School eScholarship @ UMMS Open Access Articles Open Access Publications by UMMS Authors 5 - 16 - 2001 Nascent focal adhesions are responsible for the generation of strong propulsive forces in migrating fibroblasts Karen A . Beningo University of Massachusetts Medical School Micah Dembo Irina N . Kaverina See next page for additional authors Follow this and additional works at : http : / / escholarship . umassmed . edu / oapubs Part of the Cell Biology Commons , and the Physiology Commons This material is brought to you by eScholarship @ UMMS . It has been accepted for inclusion in Open Access Articles by an authorized administrator of eScholarship @ UMMS . For more information , please contact Lisa . Palmer @ umassmed . edu . Repository Citation Beningo , Karen A . ; Dembo , Micah ; Kaverina , Irina N . ; Small , J . Victor ; and Wang , Yu - Li , " Nascent focal adhesions are responsible for the generation of strong propulsive forces in migrating fibroblasts " ( 2001 ) . Open Access Articles . 927 . http : / / escholarship . umassmed . edu / oapubs / 927 Nascent focal adhesions are responsible for the generation of strong propulsive forces in migrating fibroblasts Authors Karen A . Beningo , Micah Dembo , Irina N . Kaverina , J . Victor Small , and Yu - Li Wang This article is available at eScholarship @ UMMS : http : / / escholarship . umassmed . edu / oapubs / 927 JCB ª The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 2001 / 05 / 881 / 7 $ 5 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 153 , Number 4 , May 14 , 2001 881 – 887 http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / 153 / 4 / 881 881 Report Nascent Focal Adhesions Are Responsible for the Generation of Strong Propulsive Forces in Migrating Fibroblasts Karen A . Beningo , * Micah Dembo , ‡ Irina Kaverina , § J . Victor Small , § and Yu - li Wang * * Department of Physiology , University of Massachusetts Medical School , Worcester , Masachusetts 01605 ; ‡ Department of Biomedical Engineering , Boston University , Boston , Massachusetts 02215 ; and § Institute of Molecular Biology , Austrian Academy of Sciences , A - 5020 Salzburg , Austria Abstract . Fibroblast migration involves complex me - chanical interactions with the underlying substrate . Al - though tight substrate contact at focal adhesions has been studied for decades , the role of focal adhesions in force transduction remains unclear . To address this ques - tion , we have mapped traction stress generated by ﬁbro - blasts expressing green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) - zyxin . Surprisingly , the overall distribution of focal adhesions only partially resembles the distribution of traction stress . In addition , detailed analysis reveals that the faint , small adhesions near the leading edge transmit strong propulsive tractions , whereas large , bright , ma - ture focal adhesions exert weaker forces . This inverse relationship is unique to the leading edge of motile cells , and is not observed in the trailing edge or in stationary cells . Furthermore , time - lapse analysis indicates that traction forces decrease soon after the appearance of fo - cal adhesions , whereas the size and zyxin concentration increase . As focal adhesions mature , changes in struc - ture , protein content , or phosphorylation may cause the focal adhesion to change its function from the transmis - sion of strong propulsive forces , to a passive anchorage device for maintaining a spread cell morphology . Key words : focal adhesions • cell movement • cell ad - hesion molecules • actomyosin • ﬂuorescence microscopy Introduction Cell migration plays an important role in many biological events , including embryonic development , wound healing , immunological responses , and cancer metastasis ( Martin , 1997 ; Bray , 2001 ) . Although it is generally recognized that the process involves complex mechanical interactions be - tween cells and the underlying substrate ( Lauffenberger and Horwitz , 1996 ; Elson et al . , 1997 ; Galbraith and Sheetz , 1998 ; Sheetz et al . , 1998 ) , little is known about the source of these forces and how they are coordinated during directional mi - gration . Studies with interference reflection microscopy ( IRM ) 1 have long indicated that many cultured cells estab - lish discrete contact sites—focal adhesions—where the cell membrane lies within 30 nm of the substrate ( Abercrombie and Dunn , 1975 ; Izzard and Lochner , 1976 ) . Through their association with the extracellular matrix via integrins and the actin - myosin cytoskeleton , focal adhesions constitute poten - tial foci at which contractile forces are exerted on the sub - strate ( Burridge and Chrzanowska - Wodnicka , 1995 ; Miya - moto et al . , 1995 ; Schoenwaelder and Burridge , 1999 ) . Although it is clear that focal adhesions are involved in anchoring cells to the substrate , little is known about ac - tive contractile forces that might be transmitted through these structures to propel directional movements . A par - ticularly intriguing issue is that , during the migration of a fibroblast , mechanical interactions at hundreds of focal ad - hesions must be coordinated in order to maintain both the direction of migration and the morphology of the cell in an efficient manner . To address this question , it is crucial to generate maps of both dynamic focal adhesions under a migrating fibroblast , and traction forces that a cell exerts on the substrate . We have now achieved this goal by com - bining recent developments in mapping traction forces and in green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) technology . Address correspondence to Yu - li Wang , University of Massachusetts Medical School , 377 Plantation St . , Suite 327 , Worcester , MA 01605 . Tel . : ( 508 ) 856 - 8781 . Fax : ( 508 ) 856 - 8774 . E - mail : yuli . wang @ umassmed . edu This work was presented at the 43rd Annual Meeting of the American Society of Cell Biology in San Francisco , CA , December , 2000 . 1 Abbreviations used in this paper : GFP , green fluorescent protein ; IRM , interference reflection microscopy . on J u l y 8 , 2008 www . j c b . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 14 , 2001 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 153 , 2001 882 The output of the mechanical forces exerted by a mi - grating cell can be detected on elastic substrates . Early ap - plications of wrinkling silicone sheets serve as a crude way to detect forces , but provide little or no quantitative infor - mation ( Harris et al . , 1980 ; Burton and Taylor , 1997 ) . Im - provements in technology , mainly as a result of embedding beads into flexible substrates , have since allowed quantifi - cation of forces through large scale matrix computation that converts maps of substrate deformation ( detected as local bead movements ) into maps of traction stress ( force per unit area ; Oliver et al . , 1998 ; Dembo and Wang , 1999 ) . The technique has further been refined into a form of mi - croscopy , in order to provide images or movies of the mag - nitudes of traction stress at a temporal resolution within 1 min ( Munevar et al . , 2001 ) . We have applied this approach to address several important questions . First , we asked if strong propulsive forces can be detected at focal adhe - sions , and if larger focal adhesions generate stronger trac - tion forces . Second , we analyzed how forces exerted by fo - cal adhesions in different regions are coordinated during cell migration : specifically , whether all focal adhesions ex - ert forces in a similar manner , or whether a subset of adhe - sions is responsible for cell migration . Our results suggest that small , nascent focal adhesions at the leading edge ex - ert transient forces to move the cell forward , whereas ma - ture focal adhesions serve primarily as anchors to the sub - strate . This strategy allows the fibroblasts to migrate efficiently and responsively , without complex coordination of the mechanical output among the adhesion foci . Materials and Methods Cell Culture and Immunofluorescence Goldfish fin fibroblast cells ( CAR , CCL71 ; American Type Culture Col - lection ) were stably transfected with enhanced GFP - zyxin and maintained as described previously ( Kaverina et al . , 1999 ) . For paxillin and vinculin immunofluorescence , cells were plated on collagen - coated coverglass and were processed as described previously ( Pelham and Wang , 1997 , 1999 ) using antibodies from Sigma - Aldrich . Preparation of Polyacrylamide Substrates Flexible polyacrylamide substrates were prepared and coated with type I collagen as described by Wang and Pelham ( 1998 ) , with the following mod - ifications : ( a ) a concentration of 5 % acrylamide and 0 . 08 % bisacrylamide was used ; and ( b ) the concentration of fluorescent latex beads was in - creased by 6 . 25 - fold in order to obtain a higher density of deformation vec - tors . The substrate had a Young’s modulus of 2 . 4 3 10 4 newtons / m 2 , mea - sured as in our previous studies ( Lo et al . , 2000 ) . This flexibility was high enough to allow reliable determination of traction - induced deformation , but not to induce drastic changes in cell morphology or growth as reported previously with softer surfaces ( Pelham and Wang , 1997 ; Wang et al . , 2000 ) . Microscopy Cells plated on polyacrylamide substrates were observed with an Axiovert 100TV microscope ( Carl Zeiss , Inc . ) . A Nikon 60 3 Plan - Apo water im - mersion objective lens was used to overcome the spherical aberration in - troduced by the polyacrylamide substrate . GFP - zyxin was detected with an optimized GFP filter set , and the red fluorescent beads were detected with a TRITC filter set ( Chroma Technologies ) . A 100 - W quartz halogen lamp was used for epiillumination in order to minimize radiation damage to the cell . Fluorescence images were collected using a cooled CCD cam - era with an EEV57 back - illuminated chip and an ST133 controller ( Roper Scientific ) , at intervals of 1 – 2 min for 30 – 60 min . Each pixel on the camera images an area of 0 . 2 3 0 . 2 m m . At the end of recording , the cell was re - moved with a microneedle in order to record the distribution of beads without cellular traction forces . IRM of fixed cells on glass coverslips was performed by removing the emission filter from the fluorescence filter , and reducing the size of the epiillumination field diaphragm . Calculation of Traction Stress and Monte Carlo Simulation Traction stress was determined as described previously ( Dembo and Wang , 1999 ; Munevar et al . , 2001 ) . In brief , deformation of the substrate was determined as a matrix of vectors , by comparing the distribution of embedded beads in the presence and absence of the cell . The vectors were generated at a density of one per 2 . 25 m m 2 , where the deformation was at a density of at least two pixels along the x or y direction , and one per 9 m m 2 elsewhere . The projected area of the cell was then divided into small quadrilaterals with a center - to - center distance of 1 – 2 m m . Traction stress at the center of each quadrilateral was assigned with a maximum likeli - hood algorithm using a supercomputer , such that the combination of trac - tion stress across the cell yielded the observed pattern of substrate defor - mation ( Dembo and Wang , 1999 ) . Traction stress between the centers of quadrilaterals was then generated by interpolation . After rendering the magnitude of traction stress as different intensities or colors , the distribu - tion of traction stress was visualized as either a map of vectors or as an im - age . To analyze the relationship between traction stress and the intensity of zyxin , the pixel with the highest intensity of GFP - zyxin within a focal adhesion was determined and was plotted against the corresponding mag - nitude of traction stress . Monte Carlo simulation was performed by assigning 16 force vectors of various magnitudes at random locations within a 35 3 35 m m square . The stiffness of the substrate was assumed to be identical to that used in the experiment . To simulate the situation in a real cell , a bias in direction was imposed such that these forces have a tendency to parallel one another in a local region and to point toward the center of the square . Exact displace - ment vectors of the substrate were calculated at a density of one per 2 . 8 m m 2 . Each vector was averaged with neighboring vectors within an area of 6 . 5 3 6 . 5 m m . This occurs during the actual detection of substrate defor - mation , based on the cross correlation of bead patterns in finite areas . Gaussian random noise equivalent to 0 . 3 pixel ( 0 . 065 m m ) was then added to the x and y components of the displacement , and the magnitude was rounded to the nearest equivalent number of pixels . These modified dis - placements were then used as the basis for reconstructing the original traction field . Results Calculation of Traction Stress Traction stress was determined by plating cells on collagen I – coated flexible polyacrylamide substrates , and analyzing the pattern of substrate deformation as a result of forces exerted by the cell . Although the exact cell behavior may differ from that seen on glass or plastic surfaces ( Pelham and Wang , 1997 ) , it is likely to be closer to the behavior of cells migrating on flexible basement membranes or tissue surfaces . The calculation made no a priori assumption about the distribution or magnitude of traction stress , other than the confinement of traction stress within the cell boundary , and the global balance of forces and torques ( Dembo and Wang , 1999 ) . This allowed us to de - termine the relationship between traction stress and focal adhesions in an unbiased manner . The resolution of traction stress calculation was tested with Monte Carlo simulation . Hypothetical delta traction forces , similar in pattern and magnitude to what were ob - served with 3T3 fibroblasts ( Dembo and Wang , 1999 ) , were applied to a defined area of a flexible surface . The deformation was calculated and degraded to mimic the loss of resolution during data collection ( Materials and Methods ) . The modified deformation map was then treated as data for the calculation of a reconstructed trac - on J u l y 8 , 2008 www . j c b . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 14 , 2001 Beningo et al . Traction Forces at Nascent Focal Adhesions 883 tion stress distribution , which was compared with the orig - inal traction field . The results from 30 such simulations un - der various conditions indicated that our measurements were able to resolve pairs of delta function tractions , with a similar magnitude and orientation , separated by 5 – 6 m m ( Fig . 1 ) . The resolution of perpendicular forces was ap - proximately two times better . As long as the deformation was higher than the noise , the resolution was not signifi - cantly affected by the stress magnitude . Adhesion Plaques and Traction Stress Show Different Distributions Since IRM does not work well at the interface of polyacryl - amide and cell membrane , we used a transfected goldfish fi - broblast line ( CAR ) that stably expresses GFP - zyxin ( a known component of focal adhesions ; Kaverina et al . , 1999 ) , for the detection of focal adhesions . When these cells were plated on glass , fluorescent plaques of GFP - zyxin cor - related directly with dark plaques of focal adhesions re - vealed by IRM ( Fig . 2 , a and b ) . Moreover , immunostaining of these cells for paxillin ( Fig . 2 , c and d ) or vinculin ( not shown ) , two other components of focal adhesions , showed a similar distribution as that for GFP - zyxin throughout the cell . These results are consistent with previous characteriza - tion of zyxin ( Beckerle , 1986 , 1997 ) , and establish GFP - zyxin as a general marker for focal adhesions . Fig . 3 shows focal adhesions of a typical migrating gold - fish fibroblast , and the corresponding distribution of trac - tion stress displayed as vectorial plots as well as pseu - docolor images , with the magnitude of traction stress rendered as different colors . The general pattern of trac - tion stress was similar to that observed with 3T3 cells ( Dembo and Wang , 1999 ) . One unique feature of CAR cells is the lack of a sharp boundary between leading lamellipodia and lamella . Small , nascent focal adhesions form continuously and asynchronously in an area 10 – 20 m m from the leading edge , some of which develop into prominent focal adhesions that remain stationary as the cell migrates forward , whereas others disappear after a Figure 1 . Monte Carlo simulation of traction stress analysis . Small patches of traction stress were first assigned at random locations within a square area ( a and b ) . Exact deformation matrix was generated from this map at a finite resolution and density ( c ) . After applying random noise and neighborhood av - eraging to mimic the resolution limit of the mea - surements ( d ) , the modified deformation matrix was used to calculate the original traction stress ( e and f ) . A pair of forces separated by z 4 . 4 m m appears as a single large patch ( arrowheads ) , whereas a pair separated by z 8 . 0 m m is clearly resolved ( arrows ) . Panels b and f show color rendering of the magni - tude , with red corresponding to strong traction stress and blue corresponding to weak traction stress . Bars : ( a ) 4 3 10 6 dyn / cm 2 ; ( b ) 20 m m ( dis - tance between traction forces ) ; ( c ) 2 m m ( substrate deformation ) ; ( e ) 2 3 10 5 dyn / cm 2 calculated trac - tion stress . on J u l y 8 , 2008 www . j c b . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 14 , 2001 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 153 , 2001 884 short period of time . Therefore , this region contains focal adhesions of different sizes and ages . Strong traction stresses were detected near the leading edge and at the tip of the tail . Unlike forces at the tail of 3T3 cells which were sporadic and variable ( Dembo and Wang , 1999 ; Munevar et al . , 2001 ) , strong forces were con - sistently present at the tail of CAR cells . We suspect that this difference may be due to different density , stability , or distribution of focal adhesions in the tail region between the two cell lines . In some CAR cells , patches of strong traction also colocalized with focal adhesions along the lat - eral edge . However , as in 3T3 cells , the distribution of pro - pulsive forces was limited only to the frontal region of the cell , whereas focal adhesions in the central and rear regions mediated predominantly resisting forces to cell migration . In addition , comparison between images of adhesions and traction stress indicated that there were numerous bright adhesion sites with little or no traction stress ( Fig . 3 , filled arrows ) , and that there were also patches of strong traction stress near the leading edge without a corresponding high intensity of GFP - zyxin ( Fig . 3 , open arrows ) . These differ - ences cannot be explained by the limit in spatial resolution of traction analysis . They indicate that there is no simple relationship between the magnitude of traction stress and the size or zyxin concentration of the focal adhesion , when the whole cell is elevated . Smaller , Fainter Plaques Exert Strong Traction Forces in the Leading Lamella To further determine the relationship between traction stress and the intensity of GFP - zyxin , we focused on the frontal lamella region where propulsive forces for cell mi - gration were located . Contrary to our initial speculation , scatter plots of traction stress versus zyxin intensity showed a reverse relationship . Despite the spread of the data points , due in part to the limited spatial resolution relative to the high density of focal adhesions in this region and the heterogeneity of plaques , it was clear that faint fo - cal adhesions generally exerted stronger traction stress than did bright focal adhesions ( Fig . 4 a ) . Analysis of the length of focal adhesions yielded a similar inverse relation - ship with traction stress ( Fig . 4 b ) . From the high magnifi - cation view of the leading lamella ( Fig . 4 d ) , it was also clear that traction stress was not simply a function of the distance from the leading edge . Furthermore , when similar analysis was applied to the tail region , the inverse relation - ship between GFP - zyxin intensity and traction stress was no longer detected ( Fig . 4 c ) . Traction Stress Diminishes during the Maturation of Focal Adhesion The reverse relationship between traction stress and GFP - zyxin in the leading lamella suggests that traction forces may be coupled to the maturation of focal adhesions , during which the size and protein concentration increase . There - fore , we followed temporal changes of traction stress and the intensity of GFP - zyxin at specific nascent focal adhe - sions during their maturation . By studying isolated focal ad - hesions one at a time , we were also able to avoid the prob - lem associated with the heterogeneity of focal adhesions . Fig . 4 , e and f , shows a typical result of such temporal analy - sis . The traction stress increased briefly after the initial ap - pearance of a focal adhesion , reaching a peak 5 min after the initial detection , then decreased to a background , whereas Figure 2 . GFP - zyxin as a marker for focal adhe - sions . Fish fin fibroblasts transfected with GFP - zyxin were plated on collagen - coated coverslips . IRM ( b ) shows the localization of GFP - zyxin at both large and small focal adhesions ( a ) . Immuno - fluorescence staining of paxillin ( d ) shows a similar colocalization with GFP - zyxin ( c ) at the leading edge . Bars , 10 m m . on J u l y 8 , 2008 www . j c b . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 14 , 2001 Beningo et al . Traction Forces at Nascent Focal Adhesions 885 the intensity of GFP - zyxin increased continuously to reach a plateau ( Fig . 4 e ) . This behavior was observed with a total of 15 nascent plaques analyzed for a period of 30 – 45 min . Discussion Our results demonstrate that mechanical interactions be - tween focal adhesions and the substrate undergo both quantitative and qualitative changes after their initial ap - pearance near the leading edge . We observed that nascent focal adhesions , which have been referred to as focal com - plexes in some studies ( Small et al . , 1998 ) , apply strong pro - pulsive traction to drive cell migration . Subsequently , this force decreases , whereas the size of many focal adhesions continues to increase as they mature into large plaques . Eventually most of the stationary focal adhesions become centrally localized in a migrating cell and , despite their persistent substrate adhesion , exert only resistive forces against forward migration . Consistent with these results , observations of spontaneous and induced local release indi - cated that anterior propulsive forces are generated by ac - tive contractions , whereas forces at the tail reflect passive resistance to the frontal forces ( Munevar , S . , Y . - l . Wang , and M . Dembo , manuscript in preparation ) . The resistive loads are likely distributed among central / posterior adhe - sion sites and may show a positive correlation with the size of focal adhesions under certain conditions , although such a relationship was not detectable in the present study except for the strong forces at the tip of the tail . Although several models have been proposed to explain the coordination of fibroblast migration , most of them are vague with respect to cell – substrate mechanical interac - tions . Although it is commonly assumed that such interac - tions are mediated by focal adhesions , our observations suggest a more complex relationship between adhesions and propulsive forces during the cyclic process of cell mi - gration ( Fig . 5 ) . The process begins with the extension of the lamellipodia and the engagement of the integrins with the extracellular matrix . Subsequent recruitment of cyto - skeletal components at nascent focal adhesions ( Miya - moto et al . , 1995 ) causes the generation of a pulse of propulsive traction force on the substrate . These focal ad - hesions may also be mobile under some conditions ( Davies et al . , 1994 ; Smilenov et al . , 1999 ; Zamir et al . , 2000 ) . The plaques then either disassemble or mature into large focal adhesions , whose function changes from active propulsion into passive anchorage . This mechanism has several significant advantages . First , a division of labor be - Figure 3 . Differences be - tween the distribution of traction stress and focal ad - hesions . Distributions of trac - tion stress at 0 , 6 , and 10 min are shown as either vector maps ( a , d , and g ) , or color images after converting the magnitude into colors ( b , e , and h ) . The corresponding distributions of GFP - zyxin show only a limited correla - tion with traction stress ( c , f , and i ) . Some focal adhesions contain a low concentration of GFP - zyxin but generate strong forces ( open arrow ) , whereas other focal adhesions show strong GFP - zyxin local - ization but generate relatively weak forces ( filled arrows ) . Arrow in g , 10 5 dyn / cm 2 . Bar , 20 m m . on J u l y 8 , 2008 www . j c b . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 14 , 2001 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 153 , 2001 886 Figure 4 . Relationship between the intensity of GFP - zyxin and traction stress . Relationship be - tween the intensity of GFP - zyxin at focal adhe - sions and the corresponding traction stress is shown as scatter plots in the leading lamella ( a ) or tail region ( c ) . Each point represents a single fo - cal adhesion and is presented as percentage of the maximum within a given cell . The propulsive trac - tion stress in the leading lamella shows an inverse relationship with the intensity of GFP - zyxin ( a ) , whereas the resistive traction at the tail shows no such relationship ( c ) . The plot was generated with measurements from five cells . The relationship between the long dimension of the focal adhesion plaque and traction stress shows a similar inverse relationship in the leading lamella ( b ) . Panel d shows a high magnification image of GFP - zyxin in a leading lamella , with several focal adhesions labeled with their respective intensity ( first num - ber in parenthesis ) and traction stress ( second number in parenthesis ) , both represented as per - centage of the maximum . The intensity of GFP - zyxin at a focal adhesion ( j ) increases after its initial appearance to reach a plateau , whereas the corresponding traction stress ( d ) shows a brief increase followed by a steady decline ( e ) . Both the fluorescence intensity and traction stress are indicated as percentage of the maximum for that cell . Panel f shows images of this process in a sep - arate cell . Transient traction stress appears at a nascent focal adhesion , which continues to de - velop as the traction stress decreases to the back - ground level ( arrowheads ) . Some focal adhesions disappear concomitantly with the decrease of traction stress ( arrows ) . The color bar shows the relationship between colors and the magnitude of traction stress in dyn / cm 2 . Time in minutes is indicated . Bar , 5 m m . Figure 5 . Relationship between focal adhesions and mechanical forces during fibroblast migration . The formation of focal adhe - sions , accompanied by the generation of a pulse of propulsive forces , drives the forward movement . Cell migration is sustained by repeated formation of nascent focal adhesions , and thus re - peated pulses of propulsive forces . Mature focal adhesions play only a passive role in anchoring cells to the substrate . on J u l y 8 , 2008 www . j c b . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 14 , 2001 Beningo et al . Traction Forces at Nascent Focal Adhesions 887 tween propulsive adhesions and anchorage adhesions at the leading edge , which was speculated previously ( Rott - ner et al . , 1999 ) , would allow the cell to migrate while maintaining its spread morphology . Second , since cell mi - gration is driven by transient pulses of propulsive forces in the leading lamella , minimal coordination is required among mechanical interactions at a multitude of focal ad - hesions . Finally , our mechanism facilitates rapid reorienta - tion in response to environmental cues , simply by shifting the assembly of nascent focal adhesions to a new protru - sive region . Because large , mature focal adhesions take a long time to assemble and are essentially fixed in orienta - tion and position ( Smilenov et al . , 1999 ) , it is very difficult to see how the traction forces and cell migration can change and adapt if such mature adhesions are responsible for propelling forward movement . It will be important to understand the mechanism for the regulation of propulsive forces at nascent focal adhe - sions . Because actin filaments remain associated with ma - ture focal adhesions , the contractile forces are either turned off or become disengaged from the extracellular matrix ( Smilenov et al . , 1999 ) , e . g . , through absorption of the forces by a rigid cortex or other cytoskeletal structures . More importantly , the transition in mechanical character - istics during the maturation of focal adhesion may not oc - cur spontaneously , but in response to specific signals . The discovery of transient contacts between microtubules and newly assembled focal adhesions is particularly relevant in this regard ( Bershadsky et al . , 1996 ; Kaverina et al . , 1998 , 1999 ) . Furthermore , it is becoming clear that focal adhe - sions are not invariable but heterogeneous structures , showing intriguing changes in their morphology , protein composition , and phosphorylation states in response to chemical or physical parameters ( Zamir et al . , 1999 , 2000 ; Katz et al . , 2000 ) . Although zyxin , vinculin , and paxillin appear to be present as fundamental building blocks , it is likely that other proteins may correlate positively with propulsive forces , and therefore play a role in the regula - tion of cell – substrate mechanical interactions . A detailed account of such changes in relation to traction forces would likely yield significant insights into the mechanism of fibroblast migration . The authors wish to thank the Boston University Center for Scientific Computing for the use of their supercomputer facilities . This study was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health to Y . - l . Wang , K . A . Beningo , and M . Dembo . Submitted : 5 February 2001 Revised : 27 March 2001 Accepted : 28 March 2001 Note added in proof : A recent paper ( Balaban , N . Q . , U . S . Schwartz , D . Riveline , P . Goichberg , G . Tzur , I . Sabanay , D . Mahalu , S . Safran , A . Ber - shadsky , L . Addadi , and B . Geiger . 2001 . Force and focal adhesion assem - bly : a close relationship studied using elastic micropatterened substrates . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 : 466 – 473 ) describes the measurements of traction forces in relatively stationary cells . See In Brief for a discussion of the relationship between the two studies . References Abercrombie , M . , and G . A . Dunn . 1975 . Adhesions of fibroblasts to substra - tum during contact inhibition observed by interference reflection micros - copy . Exp . Cell Res . 92 : 57 – 62 . Beckerle , M . C . 1986 . Identification of a new protein localized at sites of cell – substrate adhesion . J . Cell Biol . 103 : 1679 – 1687 . Beckerle , M . C . 1997 . Zyxin , zinc fingers at sites of cell adhesions . Bioessays . 19 : 949 – 957 . Bershadsky , A . , A . Chavsovsky , E . Becker , A . Lyubimova , and B . Geiger . 1996 . Involvement of microtubules in the control of adhesion - dependent signal transduction . Curr . Biol . 6 : 1279 – 1289 . Bray , D . 2001 . Cell Movement : From Molecules to Motility . M . Day , editor . 2nd ed . Garland Publishing , New York . 400 pp . Burridge , K . , and M . Chrzanowska - Wodnicka . 1995 . Focal adhesions , contrac - tility and signaling . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 12 : 463 – 519 . Burton , K . , and D . L . Taylor . 1997 . Traction forces of cytokinesis measured with optically modified elastic substrata . Nature . 385 : 450 – 454 . Davies , P . F . , A . Robotewskyj , and M . L . Griem . 1994 . Quantitative studies of endothelial cell adhesion : directional remodeling of focal adhesion sites in response to flow forces . J . Clin . Invest . 93 : 2031 – 2038 . Dembo , M . , and Y . - l . Wang . 1999 . Stresses at the cell - to - substrate interface during locomotion of fibroblasts . Biophys . J . 76 : 2307 – 2316 . Elson , E . L . , S . F . Felder , P . Y . Jay , M . S . Kolodney , and C . Pasternak . 1997 . Forces in cell locomotion . Biochem . Soc . Symp . 65 : 299 – 314 . Galbraith , C . G . , and M . P . Sheetz . 1998 . Forces on adhesive contacts affect cell function . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 10 : 566 – 571 . Harris , A . K . , P . Wild , and D . Stopak . 1980 . Silicone rubber substrata : a new wrinkle in the study of cell locomotion . Science . 208 : 177 – 179 . Izzard , C . S . , and L . R . Lochner . 1976 . Cell - to - substrate contacts in living fibro - blasts : an interference reflection study with an evaluation of the technique . J . Cell Sci . 21 : 129 – 159 . Katz , B . Z . , E . Zamir , A . Bershadsky , Z . Kam , K . M . Yamada , and B . Geiger . 2000 . Physical state of the extracellular matrix regulates the structure and mo - lecular composition of cell - matrix adhesions . Mol . Biol . Cell . 11 : 1047 – 1060 . Kaverina , I . , K . Rottner , and J . V . Small . 1998 . Targeting , capture , and stabiliza - tion of microtubules at early focal adhesions . J . Cell Biol . 142 : 181 – 190 . Kaverina , I . , O . Krylyshkina , and J . V . Small . 1999 . Microtubule targeting of substrate contacts promotes their relaxation and dissociation . J . Cell Biol . 146 : 1033 – 1043 . Lauffenberger , D . A . , and A . F . Horwitz . 1996 . Cell migration : a physically inte - grated molecular process . Cell . 84 : 359 – 369 . Lo , C . - M . , H . - B . Wang , M . Dembo , and Y . - l . Wang . 2000 . Cell movement is guided by the rigidity of the substrate . Biophys . J . 79 : 144 – 152 . Martin , P . 1997 . Wound healing : aiming for perfect skin regeneration . Science . 276 : 75 – 81 . Miyamoto , S . , S . K . Akiyama , and K . M . Yamada . 1995 . Integrin function : mo - lecular hierarchies of cytoskeletal and signaling molecules . J . Cell Biol . 131 : 791 – 805 . Munevar , S . , Y . - l . Wang , and M . Dembo . 2001 . Traction force microscopy of migrating normal and H - ras transformed 3T3 fibroblasts . Biophys . J . 80 : 1744 – 1757 . Oliver , T . , K . Jacobson , and M . Dembo . 1998 . Design and use of substrata to measure traction forces exerted by cultured cells . Methods Enzymol . 298 : 497 – 521 . Pelham , R . J . , and Y . - l . Wang . 1997 . Cell locomotion and focal adhesions are regulated by substrate flexibility . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 94 : 13661 – 13665 . Pelham , R . J . , and Y . - l . Wang . 1999 . High resolution detection of mechanical forces exerted by locomoting fibroblasts on the substrate . Mol . Biol . Cell . 10 : 935 – 945 . Rottner , K . , A . Hall , and J . V . Small . 1999 . Interplay between Rac and Rho in the control of substrate contact dynamics . Curr . Biol . 9 : 640 – 648 . Schoenwaelder , S . M . , and K . Burridge . 1999 . Bidirectional signaling between the cytoskeleton and integrins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 11 : 274 – 286 . Sheetz , M . P . , D . P . Felsenfeld , and C . G . Galbraith . 1998 . Cell migration : regula - tion of force on extracellular - matrix - integrin complexes . Trends Cell Biol . 8 : 51 – 54 . Small , J . V . , K . Rottner , I . Kaverina , and K . I . Anderson . 1998 . Assembling an actin cytoskeleton for cell attachment and movement . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1440 : 271 – 281 . Smilenov , L . B . , A . Mikhailov , R . J . Pelham , E . E . Mercantonio , and G . G . Gun - dersen . 1999 . Focal adhesion motility revealed in stationary fibroblasts . Sci - ence . 286 : 1172 – 1174 . Wang , H . - B . , M . Dembo , and Y . - l . Wang . 2000 . Substrate flexibility regulates growth and apoptosis of normal but not transformed cells . Am . J . Physiol . 279 : C1345 – C1350 . Wang , Y . - l . , and R . J . Pelham . 1998 . Preparation of a flexible , porous poly - acrylamide substrate for mechanical studies of cultured cells . Methods Enzy - mol . 298 : 489 – 496 . Zamir , E . , B . Z . Katz , S . Aota , K . M . Yamada , B . Geiger , and Z . Kam . 1999 . Mo - lecular diversity of cell - matrix adhesions . J . Cell Sci . 112 : 1655 – 1669 . Zamir , E . , M . Katz , Y . Posen , N . Erez , K . M . Yamada , B . Z . Katz , S . Lin , D . C . Lin , A . Bershadsky , Z . Kam , and B . Geiger . 2000 . Dynamics and segrega - tion of cell - matrix adhesions in cultured fibroblasts . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 : 191 – 196 . on J u l y 8 , 2008 www . j c b . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 14 , 2001