Matthias Selbach , Stefan Moese , Robert Hurwitz , Christof R . Hauck 1 , Thomas F . Meyer 2 and Steffen Backert Max - Planck - Institut fu¨r Infektionsbiologie , Abt . Molekulare Biologie , Schumannstrasse 20 / 21 , D - 10117 Berlin and 1 Zentrum fu¨r Infektionsforschung , Universita¨t Wu¨rzburg , Ro¨ntgenring 11 , D - 97070 Wu¨rzburg , Germany 2 Corresponding author e - mail : meyer @ mpiib - berlin . mpg . de The gastric pathogen Helicobacter pylori translocates the CagA protein into epithelial cells by a type IV secretion process . Translocated CagA is tyrosine phos - phorylated ( CagA P - Tyr ) on speciﬁc EPIYA sequence repeats by Src family tyrosine kinases . Phos - phorylation of CagA induces the dephosphorylation of as yet unidentiﬁed cellular proteins , rearrangements of the host cell actin cytoskeleton and cell scattering . We show here that CagA P - Tyr inhibits the catalytic activity of c - Src in vivo and in vitro . c - Src inactivation leads to tyrosine dephosphorylation of the actin binding protein cortactin . Concomitantly , cortactin is speciﬁcally redistributed to actin - rich cellular protru - sions . c - Src inactivation and cortactin dephosphoryl - ation are required for rearrangements of the actin cytoskeleton . Moreover , CagA P - Tyr - mediated c - Src inhibition downregulates further CagA phosphoryl - ation through a negative feedback loop . This is the ﬁrst report of a bacterial virulence factor that inhibits signalling of a eukaryotic tyrosine kinase and on a role of c - Src inactivation in host cell cytoskeletal rearrangements . Keywords : actin cytoskeleton / molecular pathogenesis / type IV secretion / tyrosine phosphorylation Introduction Type III and type IV secretion systems mediate the direct injection of virulence factors into host cells and play a key role in the pathogenesis of numerous bacteria that infect plants or animals ( Finlay and Falkow , 1997 ; Lee and Schneewind , 2001 ) . Type III secretion systems translocate protein effectors through a syringe - like device and have been detected in pathogens such as Yersinia and Salmonella species , Shigella ﬂexneri , enteropathogenic Escherichia coli ( EPEC ) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa ( Hueck , 1998 ; Kubori et al . , 1998 ; Galan and Collmer , 1999 ; Cornelis and van Gijsegem , 2000 ) . Type IV secre - tion systems are functionally related but evolutionary distinct from type III machineries and mediate the transfer of DNA and / or proteins into the host cell cytoplasm ( Burns , 1999 ; Christie and Vogel , 2000 ) . The prototypic member of the latter transporter family is that of Agrobacterium tumefaciens , consisting of assembled VirB and VirD proteins that drive the translocation of the oncogenic transfer ( T ) - DNA – protein complex into plant cells . Until now , only a few secreted protein effectors of type IV transporters have been described , such as pertussis toxin of Bordetella pertussis ( Burns , 1999 ) , DotA and RalF from Legionella pneumophila ( Nagai and Roy , 2001 ; Nagai et al . , 2002 ) and CagA from the gastric pathogen Helicobacter pylori ( Segal et al . , 1999 ; Asahi et al . , 2000 ; Backert et al . , 2000 ; Odenbreit et al . , 2000 ; Stein et al . , 2000 ) . In H . pylori , type I strains harbour the cag ( cytotoxin - associated genes ) pathogenicity island ( cag PAI ) , whereas type II strains lack the entire cag PAI ( Censini et al . , 1996 ; Akopyants et al . , 1998 ) . Among several H . pylori virulence determinants , like VacA or NapA ( Montecucco and Rappuoli , 2001 ) , the cag PAI has raised special interest because cag PAI positive - isolates signiﬁcantly increase the risk of infected patients developing severe gastritis , peptic ulcer disease or even gastric cancer ( Peek and Blaser , 2002 ) . Accordingly , WHO has classiﬁed H . pylori as a class I carcinogen ( IARC , 1994 ) . The cag PAI encodes homologs of a VirB / D complex known from other type IV secretion systems , the 120 – 150 kDa immuno - dominant antigen CagA and several other proteins with unknown functions ( Censini et al . , 1996 ) . It is now well established that H . pylori actively injects CagA into target cells in a cag PAI - dependent manner ( Montecucco and Rappuoli , 2001 ) . Furthermore , this H . pylori type IV secretion system stimulates the production of pro - inﬂammatory cytokines and chemokines by infected host cells in a CagA / VirD4 - independent manner , possibly by translocating another as yet unknown factor or by direct activation of a cell surface receptor ( Crabtree et al . , 1995 ; Censini et al . , 1996 ; Selbach et al . , 2002a ) . Systematic mutagenesis has revealed that many genes throughout the whole cag PAI are essential for both CagA translocation and the induction of pro - inﬂammatory responses ( Fischer et al . , 2001 ; Selbach et al . , 2002a ) . Upon translocation into the host cell cytosol , CagA undergoes tyrosine phosphorylation ( Segal et al . , 1999 ; Asahi et al . , 2000 ; Backert et al . , 2000 ; Odenbreit et al . , 2000 ; Stein et al . , 2000 ) . Phosphorylation of CagA occurs within the C - terminus of the protein and is mediated by members of the Src family of tyrosine kinases ( Selbach et al . , 2002b ; Stein et al . , 2002 ) . The major phosphoryl - ation motif is a cluster of Glu - Pro - Ile - Tyr - Ala ( EPIYA ) sequence repeats that share homology to c - Src consensus phosphorylation sites . The number of these EPIYA motifs varies from 1 – 5 repeat units depending on the individual CagA protein species ( Covacci et al . , 1993 ; Selbach et al . , 2002b ; Stein et al . , 2002 ) . For example , Y972 was identiﬁed as the most important phosphorylation site in CagA from the TIGR H . pylori strain ( Backert et al . , 2001 ) . The Helicobacter pylori CagA protein induces cortactin dephosphorylation and actin rearrangement by c - Src inactivation The EMBO Journal Vol . 22 No . 3 pp . 515 – 528 , 2002 ª European Molecular Biology Organization 515 CagA phosphorylation was found to be a prerequisite for the induction of actin cytoskeletal rearrangements in AGS gastric epithelial cells ( Backert et al . , 2001 ; Stein et al . , 2002 ) . The characteristic morphology of infected cells has been referred to as the ‘hummingbird phenotype’ ( Segal et al . , 1999 ) . This phenotype resembles hepatocyte growth Fig . 1 . Helicobacter pylori - induced cytoskeletal rearrangements depend on CagA tyrosine phosphorylation and are associated with dephosphorylation of p80 . ( A ) Live cell imaging of an AGS cell cluster infected by wild - type H . pylori reveals cell elongation and scattering . ( B ) An isogenic cagA gene mutant does not stimulate this response . Complementation with wild - type cagA ( P1 D cagA / cagA ) but not cagA lacking the tyrosine phosphorylation site ( P1 D cagA / cagA Y972F ) restores the phenotype . ( C ) HGF ( 20 pM ) induced scattering of MDCK but not AGS cells . Treatment of cells with cycloheximide ( 10 m g / ml ) prevents HGF - induced MDCK cell scattering but not the H . pylori - induced phenotype in AGS cells . ( D ) The time course of CagA tyrosine phosphorylation ( ﬁlled arrowhead ) parallels dephosphorylation of p80 ( open arrowhead ) . In order to distinguish CagA P - Tyr from a 120 kDa host cell protein ( asterisk ) CagA was also immunoprecipitated ( lower panels ) . ( E ) Effect of different H . pylori mutants on the tyrosine phosphorylation pattern of AGS cells . Dephosphorylation of p80 strictly correlates with CagA phosphorylation . a - tubulin blots served as loading controls . Scale bars : 20 m m . M . Selbach et al . 516 factor ( HGF ) - induced scattering of Madin – Darby Canine Kidney ( MDCK ) cells . HGF binds to the HGF receptor c - Met and activates a signalling cascade which ultimately leads to the dissociation of epithelial cells ( Weidner et al . , 1990 ; Stella and Comoglio , 1999 ) . However , the mech - anism by which H . pylori induces scattering of AGS cells is not understood . Recently , the protein tyrosine phosphatase ( PTPase ) Shp - 2 was shown to bind speciﬁcally to transiently expressed CagA P - Tyr via its src homology 2 ( SH2 ) domain followed by the activation of the Shp - 2 PTPase activity ( Higashi et al . , 2002 ) . Independent reports have demonstrated that CagA P - Tyr initiates the dephos - phorylation of several as yet unidentiﬁed host cell proteins ( Backert et al . , 2000 ; Pu¨ls et al . , 2002 ) . How - ever , whether the latter events are linked to the activation of Shp - 2 and the induction of cytoskeletal rearrangements or if actin binding proteins like the Arp2 / 3 ( actin related protein ) complex and N - WASP might play a role in this scenario remains to be clariﬁed ( Stein et al . , 2002 ) . Here we identify cortactin , an actin binding protein and c - Src substrate , to be dephosphorylated in a CagA P - Tyr - dependent manner . Signiﬁcantly , the subcellular location of cortactin changes upon H . pylori infection , implicating an important role of this protein for the CagA - mediated rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton . Moreover , we show that phosphorylation of CagA leads to inhibition of c - Src resulting in cortactin dephosphorylation . Since activated c - Src prevents both cortactin dephosphorylation and cytoskeletal rearrangements , these events are critically involved in CagA P - Tyr - induced signalling to the host cell cytoskeleton . Results CagA P - Tyr induces cytoskeletal rearrangements and host protein dephosphorylation AGS gastric epithelial cells acquire an elongated shape with needle - like protrusions upon infection with wild - type H . pylori . We followed these changes in morphology by live cell imaging ( Figure 1A ) . After bacterial attachment the cells lose their cell – cell contacts and start migrating . This cell scattering effect was fully established after 240 min infection with wild - type bacteria . Induction of these cytoskeletal rearrangements were not observed in cells infected with isogenic P1 D cagA mutant ( Figure 1B ) . Complementation of our cagA mutant with wild - type cagA ( P1 D cagA / cagA ) restored the cellular phenotype ( Backert et al . , 2001 ) . However , H . pylori P1 D cagA expressing cagA mutated at the known phosphorylation site ( P1 D cagA / cagA Y972F ) did not induce cytoskeletal rearrangements ( Figure 1B , lower panel ) , indicating that both CagA translocation and phosphorylation at Y972 are essential . The morphology of infected AGS cells is reminiscent of cell scattering induced by HGF receptor ( c - Met ) signal - ling . In MDCK cells , the morphogenic properties of HGF depend on gene transcription and translation ( Rosen et al . , 1990 ) . Thus , we sought to explore whether CagA P - Tyr stimulates an HGF - like response in AGS cells . As expected , cell scattering was induced in HGF - treated MDCK control cells , however , exposure of AGS cells to 20 – 100 pmol HGF did not induce cell scattering ( Figure 1C , middle panel ) . Cell scattering was blocked by addition of the protein translation inhibitor cyclohex - imide in HGF - stimulated MDCK cells but not in AGS cells infected with H . pylori ( Figure 1C , lower panel ) . Thus , scattering of infected AGS cells does not require protein biosynthesis . Therefore , the cellular mechanisms of H . pylori - induced scattering of AGS cells and HGF - induced scattering of MDCK cells are considerably different . Our ﬁndings suggested that the CagA P - Tyr - induced cellular phenotype involves an early host response that is independent of de novo protein synthesis . In order to pinpoint early host signalling events upon accumulation of intracellular CagA P - Tyr , we ﬁrst investigated tyrosine phosphorylation in AGS cells infected with wild - type H . pylori in a time course ( Figure 1D ) . CagA phos - phorylation was determined both in whole cell lysates ( upper panel ) and in anti - CagA immunoprecipitates ( lower panel ) . We found that accumulating amounts of CagA P - Tyr were temporally correlated with the dephosphorylation of an ~ 80 kDa host cell protein p80 ( upper panel , open arrowhead ) upon infection with wild - type H . pylori . Like the cytoskeletal rearrangements , dephosphorylation of p80 required CagA phosphorylation on Y972 because the P1 D cagA / cagA Y972F mutant had no effect ( Figure 1E ) . These results raised the possibility that CagA phosphoryl - ation , dephosphorylation of p80 and rearrangements of the Fig . 2 . Cortactin is speciﬁcally dephosphorylated upon infection with wild - type H . pylori . Cortactin was immunoprecipitated from infected AGS cells with a monoclonal anti - cortactin antibody . Probing with a phosphotyrosine - speciﬁc antibody reveals dephosphorylation of cortactin ( A ) . The anti - cortactin blot shows that equal amounts of cor - tactin were precipitated ( B ) . Tyrosine phosphorylation pattern of whole cell lysates are shown as control ( C ) . Arrows indicate the position of cortactin on the gels . CagA targets tyrosine kinase signalling 517 Fig . 3 . Cytoskeletal rearrangements are associated with cortactin re - localization . AGS cells infected with wild - type H . pylori ( A , C , E and G ) or the isogenic cagA mutant ( B , D , F and H ) were stained with anti - cortactin antibody ( A and B ) , phalloidin ( C and D ) and anti - H . pylori antiserum ( E and F ) . Confocal laser scanning microscopy reveals cortactin co - localization with F - actin at the tip and the base of the protrusions ( G , arrowheads ) . In cells infected with the cagA mutant , cortactin has a spot - like distribution throughout the cytoplasm ( H , arrows ) . Scale bar : 10 m m . M . Selbach et al . 518 actin cytoskeleton might be functionally related to each other . Cortactin is the dephosphorylated host protein p80 We hypothesized that p80 dephosphorylation might be crucial for H . pylori - induced actin cytoskeletal rearrange - ments to occur and sought to identify this protein . Cortactin is an 80 kDa actin binding protein that has recently emerged as a central regulator of the actin cytoskeleton since it has been shown to stimulate the actin nucleation activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Uruno et al . , 2001 ; Weaver et al . , 2001 ) . To test whether cortactin is the dephosphorylated host cell protein , AGS cells were infected with wild - type H . pylori and cag PAI mutant strains for 6 h followed by immunoprecipitation of cortactin and western blotting using an anti - phospho - tyrosine antibody . Indeed , wild - type H . pylori but not the P1 D cagA and P1 D virB11 mutants induced the dephos - phorylation of cortactin ( Figure 2A ) . As a control , reprobing of the blot with an anti - cortactin antibody revealed similar amounts of cortactin present in the immunoprecipitates ( Figure 2B ) . Respective phospho - tyrosine patterns of whole cell lysates are given for comparison ( Figure 2C ) . Thus , CagA P - Tyr induces the dephosphorylation of the actin binding protein cortactin . Cortactin is recruited to the tips of needle - like protrusions in infected AGS cells In order to investigate the cellular localization of cortactin in AGS cells upon infection with H . pylori , confocal laser scanning microscopy was applied . In AGS cells infected with wild - type bacteria , cortactin predominantly co - localized with ﬁlamentous actin ( F - actin ) at the tip and at the base of the characteristic cellular protrusions ( Figure 3A , C and G , arrowheads ) . In contrast , in non - Fig . 4 . Cortactin dephosphorylation is independent of the PTPase Shp - 2 . Cells were transfected with a shp - 2 construct deleted in the phosphatase domain ( shp - 2 D PTPase ) that acts in a dominant - negative manner . ( A ) Shp - 2 D PTPase is expressed in AGS cells ( upper panel , open arrowhead ) and migrates below endogenous Shp - 2 ( ﬁlled arrowhead ) . Shp - 2 D PTPase does not signiﬁcantly affect CagA tyrosine phosphorylation ( lower panels , arrow ) . ( B ) Helicobacter pylori induces cortactin dephosphorylation ( arrow ) irrespective of Shp - 2 D PTPase expression . ( C ) As a control for dominant - negative function Shp - 2 D PTPase - induced repression of basal MAPK activity was assayed with an activation speciﬁc antibody . a - tubulin blots served as loading controls . ( D ) Cells were infected with H . pylori , transfected with a CagA expression construct or transfected and infected simultaneously . Only CagA P - Tyr translocated by live bacteria ( open arrowhead ) , but not transfected CagA P - Tyr ( closed arrowhead ) , induced cortactin dephosphorylation ( arrow ) . Conversely , only transfected but not translocated CagA P - Tyr co - immunoprecipitated with Shp - 2 ( right panels ) . CagA targets tyrosine kinase signalling 519 infected AGS cells ( data not shown ) or cells infected with the cagA mutant , cortactin was predominantly detected in a spot - like pattern which did not extensively co - localize with F - actin ( Figure 3B , D and H , arrows ) . Thus , cortactin is signiﬁcantly redistributed in AGS cells and co - localizes with F - actin upon wild - type infection . Dephosphorylation of cortactin proceeds in a Shp - 2 - independent manner Overexpressed CagA P - Tyr in AGS cells has been reported to co - immunoprecipitate with Shp - 2 ( Higashi et al . , 2002 ) . This suggested that CagA P - Tyr - induced activation of Shp - 2 could mediate the dephosphorylation of cortactin . In order to test whether Shp - 2 is involved in the dephosphorylation of cortactin , we speciﬁcally inhibited Shp - 2 by over - expression of a dominant - negative Shp - 2 construct ( shp - 2 D PTPase ) . This construct encodes a truncated Shp - 2 protein deleted in the catalytic PTPase domain and has been shown to inhibit the activity of endogenous Shp - 2 in a dominant - negative manner ( Tang et al . , 1995 ) . We have used this PTPase deletion construct , rather than serine substitution of the catalytic cysteine , because Cys to Ser mutants can sequester substrates ( Bliska et al . , 1992 ) . Moreover , transiently transfected Shp - 2 D PTPase ( open arrowhead ) can be readily distinguished from endogenous Shp - 2 ( ﬁlled arrowhead ) due to its smaller size ( Figure 4A , upper panel ) . Importantly , we found that expression of Shp - 2 D PTPase had no signiﬁcant effect on the amount of CagA P - Tyr in infected samples ( Figure 4A , arrow ) nor on tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin ( Figure 4B , arrow ) . As a control for the dominant - negative function of this construct we analysed the basal levels of active p44 / p42 mitogen - activated protein kinases ( MAPK ) with an acti - vation - speciﬁc antibody ( Cai et al . , 2002 ) . In agreement with its dominant - negative function , we found that Shp - 2 D PTPase expression signiﬁcantly reduced MAPK activation in AGS cells ( Figure 4C ) . Collectively , these results indicated that CagA P - Tyr - induced cortactin dephos - phorylation is independent of Shp - 2 catalytic activity . In order to analyse whether translocated CagA P - Tyr interacts with Shp - 2 as has been reported for transfected CagA by Higashi et al . ( 2002 ) , we compared whole cell lysates from infected and transfected cells . We were able to distinguish the two CagA species due to their different sizes ( Figure 4D , left panel ) . While both translocated ( open arrowhead ) and transfected CagA ( closed arrow - head ) were tyrosine phosphorylated , only translocated CagA induced cortactin dephosphorylation ( arrow ) . However , despite the higher amount of translocated CagA P - Tyr , only transfected CagA P - Tyr co - immunoprecipi - Fig . 5 . CagA P - Tyr - speciﬁc inactivation of c - Src . ( A ) The catalytic activity of immunoprecipitated c - Src was determined by an in vitro kinase assay with [ g - 32 P ] ATP . Helicobacter pylori wild - type infection strongly reduces c - Src autophosphorylation ( upper panel , arrow ) . Blotting with a c - Src - speciﬁc antibody shows that similar amounts of c - Src were precipitated ( lower panel , arrow ) . The arrowhead marks the immunoglobulin heavy chain . ( B ) Western blotting with phosphospeciﬁc anti - c - Src antibodies revealed that H . pylori induces c - Src inactivation by dephosphorylation of Y418 ( upper panel ) and phosphorylation of Y527 ( lower panel ) . ( C ) Effect of CagA phosphorylation ( ﬁlled arrowhead ) on c - Src inactivation . Only bacteria complemented with wild - type cagA ( P1 D cag A / cagA ) , but not cagA mutated in the phosphorylation site ( P1 D cag A / cagA Y972F ) induced Y418 dephosphorylation in c - Src ( open arrowhead ) . M . Selbach et al . 520 tated with Shp - 2 ( right panels ) . These results strongly suggest that translocated CagA from the H . pylori strain P1 and the TIGR strain 26695 ( not shown ) induces cortactin dephosphorylation in a Shp - 2 - independent manner . AGS cells infected with H . pylori revealed strongly reduced c - Src activity Protein tyrosine phosphorylation is regulated by both protein tyrosine kinases and PTPases . We did not detect PTPase activity in immunoprecipitated CagA nor in CagA P - Tyr ( data not shown ) . Thus , we considered the possibility that H . pylori might induce the dephosphoryla - tion of cortactin by inactivation of its cellular kinase . As cortactin has been reported to be a c - Src substrate ( Wu et al . , 1991 ) , we wanted to determine the catalytic activity of c - Src during infection . For this purpose , c - Src was immunoprecipitated from whole cell lysates with a c - Src - speciﬁc antibody . The catalytic activity of precipitated c - Src was determined by an in vitro autophosphorylation assay in the presence of [ g - 32 P ] ATP ( Figure 5A ) . We found that infection with wild - type H . pylori , but not P1 D cagA and P1 D virB11 mutants inhibited the catalytic activity of c - Src ( Figure 5A , upper panel , arrow ) . As a control , reprobing of the blot with a c - Src - speciﬁc antibody veriﬁed that equal amounts of c - Src were present ( Figure 5A , lower panel , arrow ) . Thus , H . pylori inhibits the catalytic activity of c - Src in a CagA - dependent manner . Phosphorylation of CagA at Y972 results in the inactivation of c - Src c - Src contains two important tyrosine phosphorylation sites with opposing effects on protein conformation and catalytic activity ( Hunter , 1987 ) . The activity of c - Src is repressed through intramolecular interactions between its SH2 and SH3 domains with a C - terminal tyrosine residue ( Y527 ) and the SH2 - kinase linker sequence , respectively ( Hubbard , 1999 ) . Autophosphorylation occurs at Y418 and leads to the activation of the kinase , whereas phosphorylation of Y527 ( numbering according to chicken c - Src ) by Csk inhibits Src kinase activity ( Nada et al . , 1991 ) . In order to investigate the molecular mechanism of CagA - induced Src inactivation , we determined the phos - phorylation status of Y418 and Y527 with phosphospeciﬁc antibodies . We found that wild - type H . pylori induced both dephosphorylation of Y418 and phosphorylation of Y527 ( Figure 5B , arrowheads ) . Thus , H . pylori - mediated c - Src inactivation involves both dephosphorylation of the Src autophosphorylation site and phosphorylation of the inhibitory C - terminal residue Y527 . In order to determine whether CagA phosphorylation at Y972 is essential for the inhibition of c - Src , we infected AGS cells with cagA mutants that have been complemented either with wild - type cagA ( P1 D cagA / cagA ) or with cagA lacking the phosphorylation site ( P1 D cagA / cagA Y972F ) . Again , infection with P1 D cagA / cagA induced Src inactivation ( Figure 5C , open arrowhead ) . In contrast , the CagA phosphorylation - deﬁcient mutant P1 D cagA / cagA Y972F did not inactivate Src . Therefore , we concluded that the inactivation of c - Src is speciﬁcally induced by CagA phosphorylated on Y972 . CagA phosphorylation is regulated through c - Src inactivation via a negative feedback loop Since c - Src is the cellular kinase of CagA ( Selbach et al . , 2002b ; Stein et al . , 2002 ) and is subsequently inactivated by CagA P - Tyr , we might have detected a negative feedback loop which could explain how phosphorylation of injected CagA is regulated . In order to test this hypothesis , we analysed the temporal correlation between CagA phos - phorylation , Src inactivation , and dephosphorylation of cortactin ( Figure 6A ) . The time course shows gradually increasing amounts of injected CagA P - Tyr between 1 – 3 h of AGS cell infection with wild - type H . pylori ( Figure 6A , ﬁlled arrowhead ) . Again , cortactin was dephosphorylated over time ( open arrowhead ) . Reprobing of the same membrane with a phosphospeciﬁc antibody recognizing Fig . 6 . CagA P - Tyr - induced c - Src inactivation inhibits succeeding CagA phosphorylation . ( A ) A time course reveals that accumulation of CagA P - Tyr ( ﬁlled arrowhead ) in the host cell correlates with the degree of cortactin dephosphorylation ( open arrowhead ) and c - Src inactivation ( arrow ) . The asterisk denotes a 120 kDa host cell protein . ( B ) CagA P - Tyr inhibits succeeding CagA phosphorylation . Cells infected with the P1 strains were lysed , combined with an excess of lysate derived from the H . pylori strain P282 and in vitro phosphorylation reactions were performed . Tyrosine phosphorylation of CagA from the strain P282 ( ﬁlled arrow ) and P1 ( open arrow ) was analysed . P1 wild - type infection strongly reduced phosphorylation of CagA from strain P282 ( second lane ) . The AGS cell control marked with an asterisk was not incubated with P282 lysate ( last lane ) . Similar amounts of CagA and host cell lysates were present in anti - CagA and anti - a - tubulin blots ( lower panels ) . CagA targets tyrosine kinase signalling 521 Src phosphorylated on Y418 ( active Src ) revealed that the amount of active Src decreased drastically between 1 – 3 h after infection with wild - type H . pylori ( Figure 6A , arrow ) . This suggests that there are two processes in infected AGS cells which occur in parallel : ( i ) CagA is phosphorylated by active Src at early stages of infection ; and ( ii ) c - Src is gradually inactivated by the accumulation of CagA P - Tyr within the host cell . To test whether a negative feedback loop regulates CagA phosphorylation , we investigated the effect of CagA P - Tyr - induced Src inhibition on the Src - mediated phosphorylation of a second CagA protein species from another H . pylori strain . For this purpose , AGS cells were infected with wild - type H . pylori strain P1 , P1 D cagA , and P1 D virB11 mutants at an m . o . i . of 100 . After 6 h , the infected cells were harvested , lysed and incubated with an excess of H . pylori lysate prepared from strain P282 in an in vitro phosphorylation reaction . These two H . pylori strains have been chosen because their CagA is phos - phorylated to a similar extent during infection ( data not shown ) and the individual CagA protein species can be easily distinguished by their different sizes ; 130 kDa ( strain P1 , open arrow ) and 150 kDa ( P282 , ﬁlled arrow ) , respectively ( Figure 6B ) . The results show that lysates from non - infected AGS cells or cells infected with P1 D cagA or P1 D virB11 mutants strongly phosphorylated CagA from strain P282 in vitro . In contrast , a markedly reduced phosphorylation of CagA from strain P282 was observed when lysate of AGS cells infected with wild - type P1 was used . Anti - CagA and anti - tubulin blots veriﬁed that identical amounts of P282 and host cell lysates were present . Thus , CagA P - Tyr inhibits further CagA phos - phorylation by modulating c - Src activity through a negative feedback loop . Puriﬁed CagA inhibits c - Src in vitro In order to determine whether CagA can inactivate c - Src in the absence of other cellular factors we performed in vitro experiments . For this purpose , we puriﬁed CagA and incubated it with recombinant c - Src . The catalytic activity of c - Src was determined by autophosphorylation . When CagA was incubated with c - Src in the presence of [ g - 32 P ] ATP , c - Src activity was reduced as compared with incubation of c - Src without CagA ( Figure 7A , open arrowhead ) . Densitometric analysis revealed that this reduction was < 3 - fold . Next , we wanted to know whether this inhibitory function depends on CagA phosphorylation . Therefore we tyrosine phosphorylatedCagA in vitro by pre - incubation with c - Src and non - radioactive ATP . After 25 min , [ g - 32 P ] ATP was added and c - Src activity was determined by autophosphorylation . We found that previ - ous in vitro phosphorylation of CagA signiﬁcantly enhanced its inhibitory effect on c - Src activity ( Figure 7B , open arrowhead ) . As a control , c - Src was pre - incubated with non - radioactive ATP alone for 25 min before the CagA / [ g - 32 P ] ATP mix was added . Coomassie Blue staining of the exposed gels shows that identical amounts of CagA were loaded . Collectively , these results demonstrate that CagA P - Tyr can directly inhibit c - Src , thereby providing a direct molecular link between both proteins . c - Src inactivation is essential for cortactin dephosphorylation Because CagA translocation and phosphorylation resulted in both c - Src inactivation and dephosphorylation of the Src substrate cortactin , it seems plausible to assume that CagA induces cortactin dephosphorylation by inactivating c - Src . To prove this hypothesis , we transiently expressed an activated Src construct ( src Y527F ) in AGS cells , infected these cells with H . pylori and analysed cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation and the Src kinase activation status ( Figure 8 ) . Our data show that while H . pylori induced the dephosphorylation of cortactin in mock - transfected cells , expression of SrcY527F prevented cortactin dephos - phorylation ( Figure 8 , upper panel , open arrowhead ) . Helicobacter pylori inhibited endogenous Src but was unable to inactivate the transiently expressed c - SrcY527F ( Figure 8 , second panel , arrow ) . Therefore , H . pylori induces the dephosphorylation of cortactin by inhibiting the tyrosine kinase c - Src . Interestingly , transfection of a wild - type c - Src construct did not lead to a signiﬁcant increase in cortactin phosphorylation . Moreover , in AGS cells expressing the src Y527F construct , CagA became hyperphosphorylated ( Figure 8 , upper panel , ﬁlled Fig . 7 . Puriﬁed CagA inhibits recombinant c - Src activity in vitro . ( A ) Puriﬁed CagA signiﬁcantly reduced autophosphorylation of recombinant c - Src ( open arrowhead ) . ( B ) Puriﬁed CagA was phosphorylated ( CagA P - Tyr ) with nonradioactive ATP before addition of [ g - 32 P ] ATP ( ﬁrst lane ) . CagA P - Tyr had a marked inhibitory effect on c - Src activity . The lower panels show Coomassie Blue stains of the exposed gels to ensure equal amounts of CagA were loaded . M . Selbach et al . 522 arrowhead ) , indicating that the feedback inhibition which under normal conditions regulates CagA phosphorylation was disrupted . Blots were stripped and reprobed with anti - c - Src , anti - cortactin , anti - CagA and anti - tubulin anti - bodies as loading controls , thereby excluding artefacts ( Figure 8 , lower panels ) . c - Src inactivation is essential for cytoskeletal rearrangements In order to determine the role of Src inactivation and cortactin dephosphorylation for the rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton , AGS cells were transfected with c - src constructs ( wild - type and src Y527F ) , infected with H . pylori and analysed by immunoﬂuorescence microscopy ( Figure 9 ) . For the staining procedure we chose a low concentration of the c - Src - speciﬁc antibody that did not notably stain those cells expressing only endogenous c - Src levels . In this way we were able to distinguish between non - transfected cells and cells expressing the respective construct . To ensure that all AGS cells were equally infected , wild - type H . pylori were centrifuged onto the cells . We found that infected AGS cells overexpressing c - Src typically had the same elongated morphology as non - transfected control cells ( Figure 9A , B and C ) . In contrast , infected AGS cells expressing the active Src construct had a rounded phenotype ( arrow ) that was clearly distinct from the elongated shape ( arrowheads ) of neighbouring non - transfected cells ( Figure 9D , E and F ) . As a control , transfection of AGS cells with the src constructs without infection did not induce the formation of cellular protrusions ( data not shown ) . Thus , Src inhibition by H . pylori is essential for rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton . Discussion Direct injection of bacterial virulence factors into host cells has been described for two secretion machineries , termed type III and type IV ( Finlay and Falkow , 1997 ; Galan and Collmer , 1999 ; Christie and Vogel , 2000 ) . After translocation , these effector molecules target various components of eukaryotic signal transduction pathways in order to mediate bacterial attachment or entry , to transform the host cell or to block bacterial uptake by phagocytosis . Pathogenic H . pylori strains translocate CagA into gastric epithelial cells , thereby inducing cytoskeletal rearrangements that are thought to be involved in gastric disease ( Montecucco and Rappuoli , 2001 ; Peek and Blaser , 2002 ) . CagA has been shown to be phosphorylated on speciﬁc tyrosine residues by Src family kinases ( Selbach et al . , 2002b ; Stein et al . , 2002 ) , to interact with the PTPase Shp - 2 ( Higashi et al . , 2002 ) , and to induce dephosphorylation of as yet unidentiﬁed host proteins ( Backert et al . , 2000 ; Pu¨ls et al . , 2002 ) . Here we report that CagA targets eukaryotic tyrosine kinase signalling to induce cytoskeletal rearrangements . To our knowledge , this is the ﬁrst report of a bacterial virulence factor that speciﬁcally inhibits tyrosine kinase signalling . The model depicted in Figure 10 summarizes the experimental data of this study . Once H . pylori has attached to gastric epithelial cells , CagA is translocated into the host cell cytosol by the type IV transporter encoded in the cag PAI ( Segal et al . , 1999 ; Asahi et al . , 2000 ; Backert et al . , 2000 ; Odenbreit et al . , 2000 ; Stein et al . , 2000 ) . In this study , we show that phosphorylation of CagA at Y972 results in a marked inactivation of Src activity by a mechanism that involves both c - Src depho - sphorylation at Y418 and phosphorylation at Y527 . Phosphorylation of Y527 creates a binding site for the Src SH2 domain which stabilizes intramolecular inter - actions within the Src molecule that lead to a closed and catalytically inactive conformation ( Hunter , 1987 ; Hubbard , 1999 ) . Importantly , Src inactivation results in the dephosphorylation and redistribution of the actin binding protein cortactin . As the cytoskeletal rearrange - ments of AGS cells are independent of de novo host cell protein synthesis , c - Src inactivation , but not nuclear signalling , controls AGS cell scattering by modulating the organization of the actin cytoskeleton . Interestingly , Src plays two separate roles in CagA - induced host cell signalling . First , c - Src is the kinase of CagA and activates the CagA molecule by phosphoryl - ation of the EPIYA sequence motif . Secondly , phos - phorylated CagA induces deﬁned phosphorylation and dephosphorylation events within the c - Src molecule which Fig . 8 . CagA P - Tyr induces cortactin dephosphorylation through inactiva - tion of c - Src . AGS cells were transiently transfected with c - src or acti - vated src ( src Y527F ) constructs . The cells were either infected with the strain P1 or left uninfected . Activated src ( i ) induced the hyperphosphorylation of CagA ( ﬁlled arrowhead ) and Src ( arrow ) ; ( ii ) prevented cortactin dephosphorylation ( open arrowhead ) ; and ( iii ) prevented Src inactivation ( second panel , arrow ) . c - Src , cortactin , CagA and a - tubulin blots were performed as controls . CagA targets tyrosine kinase signalling 523 lead to the inactivation of c - Src . Both processes are distinct from each other because non - phosphorylated CagA is the substrate for c - Src while only CagA P - Tyr induces c - Src inactivation . Both processes together con - stitute a classical negative feedback loop , which provides an explanation for how the level of CagA P - Tyr accumula - tion within the host cell is regulated . Since CagA phosphorylation appears to be a prerequisite for its pathogenic effects , this feedback loop presumably plays an important role for the control of CagA cytotoxicity . The molecular mechanism underlying CagA P - Tyr - dependent inhibition of c - Src remains unclear . CagA has no signiﬁcant sequence homology to any known protein . A direct involvement of the C - terminal Src kinase Csk appears unlikely , as dominant - negative Csk had no apparent effect on CagA P - Tyr function ( our unpublished data ) . However , CagA P - Tyr could possibly interact with SH2 domain - containing proteins . Furthermore , CagA contains a PxxP motif which constitutes a potential binding site for SH3 domains ( Backert et al . , 2001 ) . Src family tyrosine kinases contain both a SH2 and a SH3 domain ( Hunter , 1987 ) . However , stable association of CagA P - Tyr with the Src SH2 and / or SH3 domains seems unlikely because this would stabilize the open conform - ation and therefore activate Src ( Xu et al . , 1999 ) . On the other hand , our observation that puriﬁed CagA can inhibit recombinant c - Src in vitro suggests that there is a direct interaction between both proteins . We suggest that the interaction between both proteins is transient and therefore difﬁcult to investigate with conventional methods like co - immunoprecipitation . We propose that CagA P - Tyr associ - ates with c - Src and shifts the equilibrium from the open conformation of the kinase to the closed and inactive form . In the living cell , this inactive conformation is subse - quently stabilized through phosphorylation of the negative regulation site in c - Src ( Y527 ) by the C - terminal Src kinase Csk ( Nada et al . , 1991 ) or through intermolecular autophosphorylation of the same site ( Osusky et al . , 1995 ) . It would be interesting to reveal the crystal structure of CagA P - Tyr in order to assess the structural basis of the interaction with c - Src . It has been reported previously that overexpressed CagA P - Tyr interacts with the PTPase Shp - 2 ( Higashi et al . , 2002 ) . Here we demonstrate that translocated CagA P - Tyr induces Src inactivation and cortactin dephosphorylation in a Shp - 2 - independent manner . The reason for the discrepancy between these observations is not clear . Possibly CagA derived from the strain NCTC11637 used by Higashi et al . ( 2002 ) has different properties compared with CagA from the strain P1 used in this study . Alternatively , translation of transfected CagA in the eukaryotic cytoplasm could effect post - translational modi - ﬁcation , conformation or subcellular localization of the protein . It is therefore unclear whether transfected CagA and injected CagA interact with the same host cell proteins . In any case , we observed that translocated CagA from the strains P1 and 26695 ( TIGR strain ) can induce cytoskeletal rearrangements although it does not co - precipitate with Shp - 2 . This indicates that Shp - 2 - independent mechanisms can also induce phenotypical changes . Interestingly , another group has recently reported a Shp - 2 - independent interaction of CagA from a different H . pylori strain with the adaptor protein Grb - 2 ( Mimuro et al . , 2002 ) . In contrast to c - Src inactivation , however , Grb - 2 binding is independent of CagA tyrosine phos - phorylation . Thus , CagA may have multiple functions and interfere with different eukaryotic signalling pathways . The phenotype of H . pylori - infected AGS cells resem - bles cell scattering observed for HGF - treated MDCK cells ( Weidner et al . , 1990 ; Stella and Comoglio , 1999 ) . Consequently , it has been suggested that CagA might interfere with or mimic HGF - induced intracellular signal - ling ( Segal et al . , 1999 ; Backert et al . , 2001 ) . In this context , it is interesting to note that cortactin co - immunoprecipitates with the HGF receptor c - Met and associates with c - Met in vitro ( Crostella et al . , 2001 ) . Fig . 9 . c - Src inactivation is essential for cytoskeletal rearrangements . AGS cells were transiently transfected with wild - type c - Src or constitutively active SrcY527F . Subsequently , the cells were infected with H . pylori , stained for F - actin ( B and E ) and Src expression ( C and F ) followed by epiﬂuorescence microscopy . While cells expressing c - Src showed characteristic actin - rich protrusions ( A , B and C ) , constitutively active Src prevented these H . pylori - induced cytoskeletal rearrangements ( D , E and F , arrow ) . Arrowheads indicate neighbouring non - transfected cells as internal control . Scale bar : 10 m m . M . Selbach et al . 524 Perhaps even more relevant , Src has been shown to be required for HGF - induced cell motility ( Cutrupi et al . , 2000 ) . However , we demonstrate here that cycloheximide , an inhibitor of eukaryotic protein translation and HGF - induced cell scattering of MDCK cells , did not abolish the H . pylori - induced cytoskeletal rearrangements within AGS cells . This suggests that AGS cell scattering involves an early host response that is independent of nuclear signalling events and de novo protein biosynthesis . Apart from regulating the level of CagA phosphoryl - ation , H . pylori - induced Src inactivation leads to a speciﬁc dephosphorylation of the Src substrate cortactin . Several other bacterial pathogens have been reported to modify cortactin phosphorylation and / or localization . For exam - ple , invasion of epithelial cells by Shigella ﬂexneri induces the tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin by a c - Src - mediated signalling pathway ( Dehio et al . , 1995 ) . Similarly , invasion of endothelial cells by Neisseria meningitidis stimulates cortactin phosphorylation in an ErbB2 / Src - dependent manner ( Hoffmann et al . , 2001 ) . On the other hand , enteropathogenic and enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli ( EPEC and EHEC , respectively ) recruit cortactin to the bacterial adhesion site without apparent changes of its tyrosine phosphorylation ( Cantarelli et al . , 2000 ) . Consequently , phosphorylation of cortactin seems to play a role in bacterial invasion ( Neisseria and Shigella ) while cortactin recruitment without tyrosine phosphoryl - ation is a common feature during attachment of extra - cellular bacteria ( EPEC and EHEC ) . To our knowledge , H . pylori is the ﬁrst known pathogen that speciﬁcally induces the dephosphorylation of cortactin . Similarly to Shigella and Neisseria , the activity of Src in infected cells determines the level of cortactin phosphorylation . In contrast to the latter pathogens , however , cortactin does not appear to be involved in H . pylori invasion or attachment . Although H . pylori can speciﬁcally enter host cells , this bacterium is a major extracellular pathogen with only few intracellular bacteria observed ( Su et al . , 1999 ; Kwok et al . , 2002 ) . We suggest that H . pylori - induced dephosphorylation and re - localization of cortactin may orchestrate more global rearrangements of the actin cytoskeleton within the entire host cell associated with AGS cell scattering . Cortactin binds F - actin and localizes to the sites of dynamic actin assembly ( Weed et al . , 2000 ) , but the mechanism by which cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation and dephosphorylation events modulate the architecture of the actin cytoskeleton is unknown . Dephosphorylation Fig . 10 . Model for CagA - induced signalling leading to the cytoskeletal rearrangements of gastric epithelial cells . Helicobacter pylori translocates CagA by a type IV secretion dependent process . CagA is tyrosine - phosphorylated by Src which also phosphorylates cortactin . CagA P - Tyr inactivates c - Src by a mechanism involving phosphorylation of Y527 and dephosphorylation of Y418 . Src inactivation prevents succeeding CagA phosphorylation and leads to cortactin dephosphorylation . Dephosphorylated cortactin has enhanced actin cross - linking and / or nucleation activity and may induce the characteristic rearrangements of the actin cytoskeleton involved in cell scattering , designated as the hummingbird phenotype . CagA targets tyrosine kinase signalling 525 of cortactin has been reported to increase its actin crosslinking activity in vitro ( Huang et al . , 1997 ) . Therefore , dephosphorylated cortactin could cross - link actin ﬁlaments into bundles found within the characteristic cellular extensions . In addition , cortactin has been shown to activate actin polymerization by the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Uruno et al . , 2001 ; Weaver et al . , 2001 ) . It will be interesting to determine whether tyrosine phosphorylation / dephosphorylation of cortactin plays a role in this process . However , CagA P - Tyr - mediated inactivation of c - Src may also affect cytoskeletal rearrangements through cortactin - independent mechanism ( s ) . For example , Src activity is required for the turnover of focal adhesions during cell migration ( Fincham and Frame , 1998 ) . Delayed focal adhesion disassembly could lead to the formation of F - actin - containing protrusions that remain attached to the extracellular matrix at the trailing edge of moving cells . Therefore , the combined effects of CagA P - Tyr - mediated c - Src inactivation and H . pylori - induced motogenic re - sponses ( Churin et al . , 2001 ) can explain the formation of the cellular phenotype . In summary , the characteristic changes in morphology of infected AGS cells resemble the process of oncogenic transformation . Since cagA - positive H . pylori are associ - ated with the onset of gastric cancer ( Montecucco and Rappuoli , 2001 ; Peek and Blaser , 2002 ) , it is tempting to speculate that CagA P - Tyr contributes to oncogenic trans - formation of infected cells by interfering with c - Src signalling to cortactin . Interestingly , the gene encoding cortactin is ampliﬁed in some human cancers and cortactin is suspected to play a major role in tumour invasion ( Schuuring et al . , 1993 ; Patel et al . , 1998 ) . It will be interesting to ﬁnd out how CagA P - Tyr - mediated disruption of Src signalling to cortactin could contribute to the onset of gastric cancer in vivo . Materials and methods Helicobacter pylori strains and cell culture The generation of isogenic H . pylori P1 mutants and cagA complementa - tion constructs has been described previously ( Backert et al . , 2001 ) . The H . pylori strain P282 was isolated from a duodenal ulcer patient . Helicobacter pylori were cultivated on horse serum agar plates under microaerophilic conditions by standard procedures . AGS and MDCK cells were cultivated in RPMI 1640 medium ( Invitrogen ) supplemented with 25 mMHEPESbuffer and 10 % fetalbovineserum ( Gibco ) for 2 days to reach monolayers of ~ 70 % conﬂuence . For microscopic studies , cells were seeded on acid - washed glass coverslips . Synchronized infection assays Helicobacter pylori were suspended in PBS and added to AGS cells at an m . o . i . of 100 . Bacteria were centrifuged onto the cells for 5 min at 800 g at room temperature . After incubation at 37 (cid:176) C in a 5 % CO 2 / 95 % air incubator for 5 – 12 h , cells were washed once with PBS and harvested in ice - cold PBS containing 1 mM Na 3 VO 4 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) and pelleted together with attached bacteria at 800 g for 5 min at 4 (cid:176) C . Transfection of AGS cells Cells were transiently transfected in 12 - or 6 - well tissue culture dishes using Lipofectamine 2000 according to the manufacturer’s instructions ( Invitrogen ) . Transfection rates were > 70 % as determined by co - transfection of a GFP construct . Dominant - negative Shp - 2 with a deletion in the catalytic PTPase domain ( Shp - 2 D PTPase ) was expressed from the vector pEBB ( Oh et al . , 1999 ) . The construct was a gift of B . Neel . Murine c - Src and constitutively active Src in the vector pNeoMSV ( Broome and Hunter , 1996 ) was provided by T . Hunter . Haemagglutinin - tagged CagA from the strain NCTC11637 in the vector pSP65SR a was given to us by M . Hatakeyama ( Higashi et al . , 2002 ) . Transfected cells were incubated at 37 (cid:176) C and 5 % CO 2 for 24 – 48 h before infection . Immunoprecipitation 1 3 10 7 AGS cells were lysed in Ripa buffer [ 25 mM HEPES , 0 . 1 % SDS , 0 . 5 % sodium deoxycholate , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 125 mM NaCl , 1 mM EDTA , 1 mM Na 3 VO 4 , Complete protease inhibitors ( Roche ) ] by 20 passages through a 20 - gauche syringe . Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at 12 000 g for 10 min . Lysates were pre - cleared with protein G – Sepharose ( Pharmacia ) for 30 min at 4 (cid:176) C . Two micrograms of monoclonal anti - cortactin or anti - Src ( Upstate ) antibodies were added to the supernatants and incubated overnight . Immune complexes were precipitated by the addition of protein G – Sepharose for 1 h and washed four times in Ripa buffer . Precipitates were either used for in vitro kinase assays or analysed by SDS – PAGE . In vitro phosphorylation assays In order to determine the c - Src activity in infected AGS cells , c - Src immunoprecipitates were washed once in kinase buffer [ 25 mM HEPES pH 7 . 0 , 150 mM NaCl , 10 mM MgCl 2 , 1 % NP - 40 , 5 mM DTT , 1 mM Na 3 VO 4 , Complete protease inhibitors ] and resuspended in 40 m l kinase buffer with 10 m Ci [ g - 32 P ] ATP ( Pharmacia ) . Reactions were incubated at 30 (cid:176) C for 30 min and stopped by the addition of reducing sample buffer and boiling . c - Src autophosphorylation was detected by SDS – PAGE and autoradiography . In order to determine the effect of H . pylori infection of AGS cells on further phosphorylation of CagA , 1 3 10 7 infected AGS cells ( m . o . i . of 100 ) were lysed in 1 ml of ice - cold kinase buffer by 20 passages through a 20 - gauche syringe . In parallel , 4 3 10 9 H . pylori cells from the strain P282 were resuspended in 2 ml of kinase buffer and lysed in the same manner . Forty microlitres of AGS cell lysates were combined with 60 m l of H . pylori lysate and 40 m M ATP was added . Reactions were incubated for 5 min at 30 (cid:176) C and analysed by SDS – PAGE and immunoblotting . CagA puriﬁcation For analysis of direct interaction with c - Src in vitro , CagA was extracted from a 2 l liquid broth culture ( OD = 0 . 8 ) of the H . pylori TIGR strain 26695 with 8 M Urea / 20 mM Tris – HCl pH 8 . 0 and puriﬁed under denaturing conditions by column chromatography on an anion exchange resin ( Source Q15 , Pharmacia ) followed by gel ﬁltration on a Superose12 HR10 / 30 column in the presence of 8 M Urea , 150 mM NaCl , 20 mM Tris – HCl pH 8 . 0 . Renaturation was performed by dialysis against kinase buffer ( 25 mM HEPES pH 7 . 0 , 150 mM NaCl , 10 mM MgCl 2 , 1 % NP - 40 , 5 mM DTT ) . Reactions with recombinant human c - Src ( Upstate ) and [ g - 32 P ] ATP were performed as described above . Immunoblotting SDS – PAGE , protein transfer to PVDF membranes and probing with primary and secondary antibodies was performed by standard procedures . We used monoclonal antibodies against phosphotyrosine ( Santa Cruz ) , c - Src ( Upstate ) , cortactin ( Upstate ) , Shp - 2 ( Santa Cruz ) , a - tubulin ( Sigma ) and phospho - p44 / 42 MAPK ( Cell Signaling ) . Rabbit polyclonal phosphospeciﬁc antisera against phosphorylated tyrosines 418 or 527 of Src were obtained from Biosource . CagA was detected with a polyclonal rabbit anti - CagA antibody ( Schu¨tzendeller Biochemica , Tu¨bingen , Germany ) . Horseradish peroxidase - conjugated anti - mouse or anti - rabbit secondary antibodies ( Amersham ) were used and detected with the Renaissance western blot kit system for ECL immunostaining ( ICN ) . Microscopy Immunostaining was performed using standard procedures . Polyclonal anti - H . pylori antiserum was obtained from Biomeda . Filamentous actin was detected with Alexa 488 - conjugated phalloidin ( MoBiTec ) . All secondary antibodies were purchased from Jackson Immunoresearch . Samples were analysed by confocal laser scanning microscopy using a Leica TCS SP microscope equipped with an argon / krypton mixed gas laser source ( Leica ) or by epiﬂuorescence microscopy with a Leica DM / R microscope . Acknowledgements We thank T . Hunter ( Salk Institute , La Jolla , CA ) , B . Neel ( Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA ) and M . Hatakeyama ( Hokkaido University , Sapporo , Japan ) for expression constructs . This work was supported by grants from the Fonds der Chemischen Industrie to T . F . M . and from the BMBF to C . R . H . M . Selbach et al . 526 References Akopyants , N . S . et al . ( 1998 ) Analyses of the cag pathogenicity island of Helicobacter pylori . Mol . Microbiol . , 28 , 37 – 53 . Asahi , M . et al . ( 2000 ) The Helicobacter pylori CagA protein can be tyrosine phosphorylated in gastric epithelial cells . J . Exp . Med . , 191 , 593 – 602 . Backert , S . , Ziska , E . , Brinkmann , V . , Zimny - Arndt , U . , Fauconnier , A . , Jungblut , P . R . , Naumann , M . and Meyer , T . F . ( 2000 ) Translocation of the Helicobacter pylori CagA protein in gastric epithelial cells by a type IV secretion apparatus . Cell Microbiol . , 2 , 155 – 164 . Backert , S . , Moese , S . , Selbach , M . , Brinkmann , V . and Meyer , T . F . ( 2001 ) Phosphorylation of tyrosine 972 of the Helicobacter pylori CagA protein is essential for induction of a scattering phenotype in gastric epithelial cells . Mol . Microbiol . , 42 , 631 – 644 . Bliska , J . B . , Clemens , J . C . , Dixon , J . E . and Falkow , S . ( 1992 ) The Yersinia tyrosine phosphatase : speciﬁcity of a bacterial virulence determinant for phosphoproteins in the J774A . 1 macrophage . J . Exp . Med . , 176 , 1625 – 1630 . Broome , M . A . and Hunter , T . ( 1996 ) Requirement for c - Src catalytic activity and the SH3 domain in platelet - derived growth factor BB and epidermal growth factor mitogenic signaling . J . Biol . Chem . , 271 , 16798 – 16806 . Burns , D . L . ( 1999 ) Biochemistry of type IV secretion . Curr . Opin . Microbiol . , 2 , 25 – 29 . Cai , T . , Nishida , K . , Hirano , T . and Khavari , P . A . ( 2002 ) Gab - 1 and Shp - 2 promote Ras / MAPK regulation of epidermal growth and differentiation . J . Cell Biol . , 159 , 103 – 112 . Cantarelli , V . V . , Takahashi , A . , Akeda , Y . , Nagayama , K . and Honda , T . ( 2000 ) Interaction of enteropathogenic or enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli with HeLa cells results in translocation of cortactin to the bacterial adherence site . Infect . Immun . , 68 , 382 – 386 . Censini , S . , Lange , C . , Xiang , Z . , Crabtree , J . E . , Ghiara , P . , Borodovsky , M . , Rappuoli , R . and Covacci , A . ( 1996 ) cag , a pathogenicity island of Helicobacter pylori , encodes type I - speciﬁc and disease - associated virulence factors . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 93 , 14648 – 14653 . Christie , P . J . and Vogel , J . P . ( 2000 ) Bacterial type IV secretion : conjugation systems adapted to deliver effector molecules to host cells . Trends Microbiol . , 8 , 354 – 360 . Churin , Y . , Kardalinou , E . , Meyer , T . F . and Naumann , M . ( 2001 ) Pathogenicity island - dependent activation of Rho GTPases Rac1 and Cdc42 in Helicobacter pylori infection . Mol . Microbiol . , 40 , 815 – 823 . Cornelis , G . R . and Van Gijsegem , F . ( 2000 ) Assembly and function of type III secretory systems . Annu . Rev . Microbiol . , 54 , 735 – 774 . Covacci , A . et al . ( 1993 ) Molecular characterization of the 128 - kDa immunodominant antigen of Helicobacter pylori associated with cytotoxicity and duodenal ulcer . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 90 , 5791 – 5795 . Crabtree , J . E . , Xiang , Z . , Lindley , I . J . , Tompkins , D . S . , Rappuoli , R . and Covacci , A . ( 1995 ) Induction of interleukin - 8 secretion from gastric epithelial cells by a cagA negative isogenic mutant of Helicobacter pylori . J . Clin . Pathol . , 48 , 967 – 969 . Crostella , L . , Lidder , S . , Williams , R . and Skouteris , G . G . ( 2001 ) Hepatocyte growth factor / scatter factor - induces phosphorylation of cortactin in A431 cells in a Src kinase - independent manner . Oncogene , 20 , 3735 – 3745 . Cutrupi , S . et al . ( 2000 ) Src - mediated activation of a - diacylglycerol kinase is required for hepatocyte growth factor - induced cell motility . EMBO J . , 19 , 4614 – 4622 . Dehio , C . , Prevost , M . C . and Sansonetti , P . J . ( 1995 ) Invasion of epithelial cells by Shigella ﬂexneri induces tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin by a pp60c - src - mediated signalling pathway . EMBO J . , 14 , 2471 – 2482 . Fincham , V . J . and Frame , M . C . ( 1998 ) The catalytic activity of Src is dispensible for translocation to focal adhesions but controls the turnover of these structures during cell motility . EMBO J . , 17 , 81 – 92 . Finlay , B . B . and Falkow , S . ( 1997 ) Common themes in microbial pathogenicity revisited . Microbiol . Mol . Biol . Rev . , 61 , 136 – 169 . Fischer , W . , Pu¨ls , J . , Buhrdorf , R . , Gebert , B . , Odenbreit , S . and Haas , R . ( 2001 ) Systematic mutagenesis of the Helicobacter pylori cag pathogenicity island : essential genes for CagA translocation in host cells and induction of interleukin - 8 . Mol . Microbiol . , 42 , 1337 – 1348 . Galan , J . E . and Collmer , A . ( 1999 ) Type III secretion machines : bacterial devices for protein delivery into host cells . Science , 284 , 1322 – 1328 . Higashi , H . , Tsutsumi , R . , Muto , S . , Sugiyama , T . , Azuma , T . , Asaka , M . and Hatakeyama , M . ( 2002 ) SHP - 2 tyrosine phosphatase as an intracellular target of Helicobacter pylori CagA protein . Science , 295 , 683 – 686 . Hoffmann , I . , Eugene , E . , Nassif , X . , Couraud , P . O . and Bourdoulous , S . ( 2001 ) Activation of ErbB2 receptor tyrosine kinase supports invasion of endothelial cells by Neisseria meningitidis . J . Cell Biol . , 155 , 133 – 143 . Huang , C . , Ni , Y . , Wang , T . , Gao , Y . , Haudenschild , C . C . and Zhan , X . ( 1997 ) Down - regulation of the ﬁlamentous actin cross - linking activity of cortactin by Src - mediated tyrosine phosphorylation . J . Biol . Chem . , 272 , 13911 – 13915 . Hubbard , S . R . ( 1999 ) Src autoinhibition : let us count the ways . Nat . Struct . Biol . , 6 , 711 – 714 . Hueck , C . J . ( 1998 ) Type III protein secretion systems in bacterial pathogens of animals and plants . Microbiol . Mol . Biol . Rev . , 62 , 379 – 433 . Hunter , T . ( 1987 ) A tail of two src’s : mutatis mutandis . Cell , 49 , 1 – 4 . IARC ( 1994 ) Schistomes , Liver Flukes and Helicobacter pylori . IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenesis Risks to Humans . 61 . IARC ( International Agency for Research on Cancer ) , Lyon , France . Kubori , T . , Matsushima , Y . , Nakamura , D . , Uralil , J . , Lara - Tejero , M . , Sukhan , A . , Galan , J . E . and Aizawa , S . I . ( 1998 ) Supramolecular structure of the Salmonella typhimurium type III protein secretion system . Science , 280 , 602 – 605 . Kwok , T . , Backert , S . , Schwarz , H . , Berger , J . and Meyer , T . F . ( 2002 ) Speciﬁc entry of Helicobacter pylori into cultured gastric epithelial cells via a zipper - like mechanism . Infect . Immun . , 70 , 2108 – 2120 . Lee , V . T . and Schneewind , O . ( 2001 ) Protein secretion and the pathogenesis of bacterial infections . Genes Dev . , 15 , 1725 – 1752 . Mimuro , H . , Suzuki , T . , Tanaka , J . , Asahi , M . , Haas , R . and Sasakawa , C . ( 2002 ) Grb2 is a key mediator of Helicobacter pylori CagA protein activities . Mol . Cell , 10 , 745 – 755 . Montecucco , C . and Rappuoli , R . ( 2001 ) Living dangerously : how Helicobacter pylori survives in the human stomach . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 2 , 457 – 466 . Nada , S . , Okada , M . , MacAuley , A . , Cooper , J . A . and Nakagawa , H . ( 1991 ) Cloning of a complementary DNA for a protein - tyrosine kinase that speciﬁcally phosphorylates a negative regulatory site of pp60c - src . Nature , 351 , 69 – 72 . Nagai , H . and Roy , C . R . ( 2001 ) The DotA protein from Legionella pneumophila is secreted by a novel process that requires the Dot / Icm transporter . EMBO J . , 20 , 5962 – 5970 . Nagai , H . , Kagan , J . C . , Zhu , X . , Kahn , R . A . and Roy , C . R . ( 2002 ) A bacterial guanine nucleotide exchange factor activates ARF on Legionella phagosomes . Science , 295 , 679 – 682 . Odenbreit , S . , Pu¨ls , J . , Sedlmaier , B . , Gerland , E . , Fischer , W . and Haas , R . ( 2000 ) Translocation of Helicobacter pylori CagA into gastric epithelial cells by type IV secretion . Science , 287 , 1497 – 1500 . Oh , E . S . et al . ( 1999 ) Regulation of early events in integrin signaling by protein tyrosine phosphatase Shp - 2 . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 19 , 3205 – 3215 . Osusky , M . , Taylor , S . J . and Shalloway , D . ( 1995 ) Autophosphorylation of puriﬁed c - Src at its primary negative regulation site . J . Biol . Chem . , 270 , 25729 – 25732 . Patel , A . S . , Schechter , G . L . , Wasilenko , W . J . and Somers , K . D . ( 1998 ) Overexpression of Ems1 / cortactin in NIH 3T3 ﬁbroblasts causes increased cell motility and invasion in vitro . Oncogene , 16 , 3227 – 3232 . Peek , R . M . , Jr and Blaser , M . J . ( 2002 ) Helicobacter pylori and gastrointestinal tract adenocarcinomas . Nat . Rev . Cancer , 2 , 28 – 37 . Pu¨ls , J . , Fischer , W . and Haas , R . ( 2002 ) Activation of Helicobacter pylori CagA by tyrosine phosphorylation is essential for dephosphorylation of host cell proteins in gastric epithelial cells . Mol . Microbiol . , 43 , 961 – 969 . Rosen , E . M . , Meromsky , L . , Goldberg , I . , Bhargava , M . and Setter , E . ( 1990 ) Studies on the mechanism of scatter factor . Effects of agents that modulate intracellular signal transduction , macromolecule synthesis and cytoskeleton assembly . J . Cell Sci . , 96 , 639 – 649 . Schuuring , E . , Verhoeven , E . , Litvinov , S . and Michalides , R . J . ( 1993 ) The product of the ems1 gene , ampliﬁed and overexpressed in human carcinomas , is homologous to a v - src substrate and is located in cell - substratum contact sites . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 13 , 2891 – 2898 . Segal , E . D . , Cha , J . , Lo , J . , Falkow , S . and Tompkins , L . S . ( 1999 ) Altered states : involvement of phosphorylated CagA in the induction of host cellular growth changes by Helicobacter pylori . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 96 , 14559 – 14564 . Selbach , M . , Moese , S . , Meyer , T . F . and Backert , S . ( 2002a ) Functional analysis of the Helicobacter pylori cag pathogenicity island reveals CagA targets tyrosine kinase signalling 527 both VirD4 - CagA - dependent and VirD4 - CagA - independent mechanisms . Infect . Immun . , 70 , 665 – 671 . Selbach , M . , Moese , S . , Hauck , C . R . , Meyer , T . F . and Backert , S . ( 2002b ) Src is the kinase of the Helicobacter pylori CagA protein in vitro and in vivo . J . Biol . Chem . , 277 , 6775 – 6778 . Stein , M . , Rappuoli , R . and Covacci , A . ( 2000 ) Tyrosine phosphorylation of the Helicobacter pylori CagA antigen after cag - driven host cell translocation . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 97 , 1263 – 1268 . Stein , M . , Bagnoli , F . , Halenbeck , R . , Rappuoli , R . , Fantl , W . J . and Covacci , A . ( 2002 ) c - Src / Lyn kinases activate Helicobacter pylori CagA through tyrosine phosphorylation of the EPIYA motifs . Mol . Microbiol . , 43 , 971 – 980 . Stella , M . C . and Comoglio , P . M . ( 1999 ) HGF : a multifunctional growth factor controlling cell scattering . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . , 31 , 1357 – 1362 . Su , B . , Johansson , S . , Fallman , M . , Patarroyo , M . , Granstrom , M . and Normark , S . ( 1999 ) Signal transduction - mediated adherence and entry of Helicobacter pylori into cultured cells . Gastroenterology , 117 , 595 – 604 . Tang , T . L . , Freeman , R . M . Jr , O’Reilly , A . M . , Neel , B . G . and Sokol , S . Y . ( 1995 ) The SH2 - containing protein - tyrosine phosphatase SH - PTP2 is required upstream of MAP kinase for early Xenopus development . Cell , 80 , 473 – 483 . Uruno , T . , Liu , J . , Zhang , P . , Fan , Yx . , Egile , C . , Li , R . , Mueller , S . C . and Zhan , X . ( 2001 ) Activation of Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin polymerization by cortactin . Nat . Cell Biol . , 3 , 259 – 266 . Weaver , A . M . , Karginov , A . V . , Kinley , A . W . , Weed , S . A . , Li , Y . , Parsons , J . T . and Cooper , J . A . ( 2001 ) Cortactin promotes and stabilizes Arp2 / 3 - induced actin ﬁlament network formation . Curr . Biol . , 11 , 370 – 374 . Weed , S . A . , Karginov , A . V . , Schafer , D . A . , Weaver , A . M . , Kinley , A . W . , Cooper , J . A . and Parsons , J . T . ( 2000 ) Cortactin localization to sites of actin assembly in lamellipodia requires interactions with F - actin and the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Cell Biol . , 151 , 29 – 40 . Weidner , K . M . , Behrens , J . , Vandekerckhove , J . and Birchmeier , W . ( 1990 ) Scatter factor : molecular characteristics and effect on the invasiveness of epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . , 111 , 2097 – 2108 . Wu , H . , Reynolds , A . B . , Kanner , S . B . , Vines , R . R . and Parsons , J . T . ( 1991 ) Identiﬁcation and characterization of a novel cytoskeleton - associated pp60src substrate . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 11 , 5113 – 5124 . Xu , W . , Doshi , A . , Lei , M . , Eck , M . J . and Harrison , S . C . ( 1999 ) Crystal structures of c - Src reveal features of its autoinhibitory mechanism . Mol . Cell , 3 , 629 – 638 . Received July 31 , 2002 ; revised November 8 , 2002 ; accepted December 3 , 2002 Note added in proof After completing the review process of this manuscript , Tsutsumi and co - workers [ Tsutsumi , R . , Higashi , H . , Higuchi , M . , Okada , M . and Hatakeyama , M . ( 2002 ) Attenuation of Helicobacter pylori CagA - SHP - 2 signaling by interaction between CagA and C - terminal Src kinase . J . Biol . Chem . ( epub ahead of print ) ] reported that CagA is capable of interacting with C - terminal Src kinase ( Csk ) when both proteins were overexpressed from constructs . They further showed that transfection of CagA stimulated Csk , which in turn inactivated Src kinase . Although we observed a direct inhibition of Src by CagA P - Tyr in vitro , activation of Csk could nicely explain our ﬁnding that Src is phosphorylated on Y527 . However , activation of Csk during H . pylori infection needs to be demonstrated in future experiments . M . Selbach et al . 528