Molecular Biology of the Cell Vol . 20 , 3209 – 3223 , July 15 , 2009 Cortactin Promotes Migration and Platelet - derived Growth Factor - induced Actin Reorganization by Signaling to Rho - GTPases Frank P . L . Lai , * † Malgorzata Szczodrak , * ‡ J . Margit Oelkers , * ‡ Markus Ladwein , * Filippo Acconcia , § (cid:1) Stefanie Benesch , ¶ Sonja Auinger , ¶ Jan Faix , # J . Victor Small , ¶ Simona Polo , § Theresia E . B . Stradal , @ and Klemens Rottner * * Cytoskeleton Dynamics Group , @ Signalling and Motility Group , Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research , D - 38124 Braunschweig , Germany ; § IFOM Foundation , The FIRC Institute for Molecular Oncology , 20139 Milan , Italy ; ¶ Institute of Molecular Biotechnology , Austrian Academy of Sciences , A - 1030 Vienna , Austria ; and # Institute for Biophysical Chemistry , Hannover Medical School , D - 30625 Hannover , Germany Submitted December 8 , 2008 ; Revised May 5 , 2009 ; Accepted May 11 , 2009 Monitoring Editor : David G . Drubin Dynamic actin rearrangements are initiated and maintained by actin ﬁlament nucleators , including the Arp2 / 3 - complex . This protein assembly is activated in vitro by distinct nucleation - promoting factors such as Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein / Scar family proteins or cortactin , but the relative in vivo functions of each of them remain controversial . Here , we report the conditional genetic disruption of murine cortactin , implicated previously in dynamic actin reorganizations driving lamellipodium protrusion and endocytosis . Unexpectedly , cortactin - deﬁcient cells showed little changes in overall cell morphology and growth . Ultrastructural analyses and live - cell imaging studies revealed unimpaired lamellipodial architecture , Rac - induced protrusion , and actin network turnover , although actin assembly rates in the lamellipodium were modestly increased . In contrast , platelet - derived growth factor - induced actin reorganization and Rac activation were impaired in cortactin null cells . In addition , cortactin deﬁciency caused reduction of Cdc42 activity and defects in random and directed cell migration . Reduced migration of cortactin null cells could be restored , at least in part , by active Rac and Cdc42 variants . Finally , cortactin removal did not affect the efﬁciency of receptor - mediated endocytosis . Together , we conclude that cortactin is fully dispensable for Arp2 / 3 - complex activation during lamellipodia protrusion or clathrin pit endocytosis . Furthermore , we propose that cortactin promotes cell migration indirectly , through contributing to activation of selected Rho - GTPases . INTRODUCTION Cell migration is a complex process requiring the coordi - nated activities of multiple cellular machines , driving actin polymerization , actin - myosin II - based force generation , and coupling to the extracellular matrix . However , the relative contribution of each of these machines to the different steps in the motility cycle is just beginning to emerge . Irrespective of the complexity of coordination of these activities , it is commonly agreed that protrusion at the cell front is initiated by localized actin polymerization , to form structures such as lamellipodia or rufﬂes ( Small et al . , 2002 ; Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ) . The best characterized factors driving the nucleation of actin ﬁlaments in vertebrate cells are the Arp2 / 3 - complex and formins ( Pollard , 2007 ) . Arp2 / 3 - complex activity is con - sidered essential for processes as diverse as lamellipodium protrusion , actin assembly during clathrin - mediated endo - cytosis , podosome formation , and different types of host – pathogen interaction ( Goley and Welch , 2006 ; Linder , 2007 ) . Activators of Arp2 / 3 - complex are termed nucleation pro - moting factors ( NPFs ) and are roughly subdivided into class I and II composed of classical members Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) / WASP family Verprolin - homol - ogous protein ( WAVE ) proteins and cortactin , respectively ( Welch and Mullins , 2002 ) . This distinction is derived , at least in part , from their mode of interaction with actin : the WH2 domains of class I and tandem repeat regions of class II NPFs bind to monomeric and ﬁlamentous actin ( F - actin ) , respectively ( Welch and Mullins , 2002 ; Goley and Welch , 2006 ; Ammer and Weed , 2008 ) . WASP and WAVE proteins have been studied in signiﬁcant detail , including the char - acterization of genetic mutations in the mouse ( Stradal et al . , 2004 ; Takenawa and Suetsugu , 2007 ) . In addition , exciting recent progress included the discovery of additional class I NPFs ( Linardopoulou et al . , 2007 ; Campellone et al . , 2008 ; Zuchero et al . , 2009 ) , which foster the view of great versatil - ity of Arp2 / 3 - complex function in cells . However , the pre - cise functions of the mammalian type II NPF cortactin have This article was published online ahead of print in MBC in Press ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E08 – 12 – 1180 ) on May 20 , 2009 . ‡ These authors contributed equally to this work . † Present addresses : Department of Developmental and Regenera - tive Biology , Institute of Medical Biology , 8A Biomedical Grove , 06 - 06 Immunos , Singapore 138648 ; (cid:2) Department of Biology , Univer - sity ROMA TRE , Viale G . Marconi 446 , I - 00146 Rome , Italy . Address correspondence to : Klemens Rottner ( klemens . rottner @ helmholtz - hzi . de ) . © 2009 by The American Society for Cell Biology 3209 remained controversial ( Cosen - Binker and Kapus , 2006 ; Ammer and Weed , 2008 ) . Initially identiﬁed as a tyrosine phosphorylated protein in v - Src – infected chicken embryo ﬁbroblasts ( Kanner et al . , 1990 ) , cortactin comprises an amino - terminal acidic domain , mediating Arp2 / 3 - complex binding ( Weed et al . , 2000 ) , fol - lowed by the F - actin binding region containing six and a half 37 amino acid repeats , an (cid:1) - helical domain , a proline - rich region , and a Src homology ( SH ) 3 domain at the distal carboxy terminus ( Wu et al . , 1991 ; Sparks et al . , 1996 ) . Cor - tactin mostly localizes to dynamic actin structures driven by Arp2 / 3 - complex ( Kaksonen et al . , 2000 ; Frischknecht and Way , 2001 ; Boyle et al . , 2007 ) . The SH3 domain was shown to interact with a plethora of proteins , including dynamin ( McNiven et al . , 2000 ) and neural ( N ) - WASP ( Mizutani et al . , 2002 ) , pointing at potential cortactin functions in endocyto - sis ( Zhu et al . , 2005 ) and migration ( Kowalski et al . , 2005 ) . In vitro assays have shown that cortactin promotes actin assembly by simultaneously binding to Arp2 / 3 - complex and actin ﬁlaments . It was proposed therefore that cortactin mediates both Arp2 / 3 - dependent nucleation and stabiliza - tion of Arp2 / 3 - induced ﬁlament branches ( Weaver et al . , 2001 ) . Cortactin can also activate N - WASP ( Kowalski et al . , 2005 ) , and both can synergistically activate Arp2 / 3 - complex in vitro ( Weaver et al . , 2002 ) . However , additional interac - tions observed for both cortactin and N - WASP with the family of WASP - interacting proteins ( WIP ) ( Anton et al . , 2007 ) , or for N - WASP and WIP with SH3 adaptors such as Nck complicate the picture of the precise composition and biochemical activities of potential cortactin - containing com - plexes in vivo ( Tehrani et al . , 2007 ) . Furthermore , the Arp2 / 3 - modulating function of cortactin may not be solely re - stricted to N - WASP – dependent processes , because cortactin accumulates in structures such as lamellipodia , which lack N - WASP ( Benesch et al . , 2005 ; Ladwein and Rottner , 2008 ) . The cortactin family comprises the ubiquitously expressed cortactin ( also called EMS in humans ) and the hematopoietic HS1 , which shares structural and functional features with cortactin , although its repeat region is shorter ( 3 . 5 repeats ) and , as opposed to cortactin , requires the (cid:1) - helical region for efﬁcient F - actin binding ( Hao et al . , 2005 ) . Cortactin and HS1 have recently been implicated in the regulation of several actin - dependent processes ( Cosen - Binker and Kapus , 2006 ; Ammer and Weed , 2008 ) , and are not always functionally redundant ( Tehrani et al . , 2006 ) . Consistently , conventional HS1 knockout mice are viable , although they display defects in T - cell proliferation and negative selection ( Taniuchi et al . , 1995 ) , recently concluded to derive from defective actin assembly and interleukin - 2 production ( Gomez et al . , 2006 ; Burkhardt et al . , 2008 ) . In addition , HS1 has important func - tions in natural killer cells ( Butler et al . , 2008 ) . Both cortactin and HS1 are phosphorylated on multiple sites , but the func - tional subtleties of these phosphorylation events are just beginning to emerge ( Martinez - Quiles et al . , 2004 ; Martin et al . , 2006 ; Boyle et al . , 2007 ; Tehrani et al . , 2007 ; Butler et al . , 2008 ; Kruchten et al . , 2008 ) . Cortactin knockdown by RNA interference supports its involvement in actin - dependent processes , including speciﬁc types of host – pathogen interaction ( Selbach and Backert , 2005 ; Cosen - Binker and Kapus , 2006 ) and lamellipodium protru - sion , although its precise mode of function in the latter process is controversial ( Bryce et al . , 2005 ; Kempiak et al . , 2005 ; Illes et al . , 2006 ; van Rossum et al . , 2006 ; Cai et al . , 2008 ) , due perhaps to differential efﬁcacy of cortactin down - regu - lation ( Cosen - Binker and Kapus , 2006 ) . To resolve this issue , and to deﬁne the precise functions of cortactin in Arp2 / 3 - dependent actin assembly in vivo , we conditionally targeted the murine cortactin gene , and we developed and characterized ﬁbroblast cell lines lacking cortactin . MATERIALS AND METHODS Antibodies Immunoblotting was performed according to standard protocols . Commer - cial primary antibodies were as follows : monoclonal anti - cortactin ( clone 4F - 11 ) ( Millipore , Billerica , MA ) ; monoclonal anti - Cdc42 ( clone 44 ) ( BD Bio - sciences Transduction Laboratories , Heidelberg , Germany ) ; monoclonal anti - RhoA ( Cytoskeleton , Denver , CO ) ; monoclonal anti - Rac1 ( clone 23A8 ) ( Biomol , Hamburg , Germany ) ; polyclonal anti - AKT , polyclonal anti - pAKTser473 , mono - clonal anti - p - extracellular signal - regulated kinase ( ERK ) 1 / 2 ( clone E10 ; Figure 7 ) , polyclonal anti - pERK1 / 2 ( Supplemental Figure 5 ) ( all Cell Signaling Technol - ogy , Danvers , MA ) ; polyclonal anti - ERK1 / 2 , monoclonal anti - actin ( clone AC - 15 ) , monoclonal anti - vinculin ( hVIN - 1 ) ( all Sigma Chemie , Deisenhofen , Ger - many ) ; polyclonal anti - dynamin 2 ( Abcam , Dresden , Germany ) ; monoclonal anti - (cid:1) - tubulin ( clone 3A2 ) ( Synaptic Systems , Go¨ttingen , Germany ) ; and mono - clonal anti - clathrin heavy chain ( clone 23 ) ( BD Biosciences Transduction Labo - ratories ) . Polyclonal anti - ArpC3 antibody was as described previously ( Pistor et al . , 2000 ) , and monoclonal anti - WAVE2 was kindly provided by Giorgio Scita ( IFOM , Milan , Italy ) . Polyclonalanti - Nap1wasasdescribedpreviously ( Steffen et al . , 2004 ) . Monoclonal anti - HS1 antibody was a kind gift from Dr . Daisuke Kitamura ( Tokyo University of Science , Tokyo Japan ) . Monoclonal antibodies speciﬁcforcortactinwereraisedusingpuriﬁed , full - lengthproteinandscreening with extracts from control and knockout ( KO ) ﬁbroblast cell lines as well as B16 - F1 mouse melanoma cells expressing either full - length , enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein ( EGFP ) - tagged cortactin or the EGFP - tagged N terminus of cortactin ( Supplemental Figure 1 ) . Monoclonal anti - N - WASP antibodies were as described previously ( Weiss et al . , 2009 ) . Protein Puriﬁcation Full - length glutathione transferase ( GST ) - tagged cortactin was expressed in Escherichia coli strain Rossetta ( Promega , Madison , WI ) and puriﬁed from bacterial extracts on glutathione - conjugated agarose ( Sigma Chemie ) by using standard procedures . The GST tag was cleaved by incubating the puriﬁed fusion protein with PreScission protease in phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) , pH 7 . 3 , supplemented with 1 mM dithiothreitol ( DTT ) and 1 mM EDTA overnight at 4°C . Subsequently , the GST tag was removed by gel ﬁltration on a S200 Sepharose column in the same buffer by using an A¨kta puriﬁer system ( GE Healthcare Europe , Munich , Germany ) . Cortactin - containing fractions were pooled and dialyzed against 25 mM Tris buffer , pH 7 . 5 , containing 150 mM NaCl , and 1 mM DTT . Protein concentration was calculated from the predicted extinction coefﬁcient ( Vector NTI software ; Invitrogen , Karlsruhe , Germany ) . Constitutively active Rac1 was also recombinantly expressed as a GST - fusion and cleaved and puriﬁed as described previously ( Steffen et al . , 2004 ) . Plasmids and Generation of Targeting Constructs EGFP - (cid:2) - actin and EGFP - C1 were purchased from Clontech ( Mountain View , CA ) . Constructs driving expression of EGFP - tagged cortactin and myc - tagged L61 - Rac1 ( pRK5 - myc - Rac1Q61L ) or L61 - Cdc42 ( pRK5 - myc - Cdc42Q61L ) were kindly provided by Ed Schuuring ( University Medical Center Groningen , Groningen , The Netherlands ) ( van Rossum et al . , 2003 ) and Laura M . Ma - chesky ( Cancer Research UK Beatson Institute for Cancer Research , Glasgow , United Kingdom ) , respectively . EGFP - ArpC5B ( EGFP - p16B ) was as described previously ( Rottner et al . , 2006 ) , mCherry - clathrin was generated by exchang - ing EGFP in an EGFP - clathrin construct , a gift from Dr . Ernst Ungewickell ( Hannover Medical School , Hannover , Germany ) for mCherry , kindly pro - vided by Dr . Roger Tsien ( Stanford University , Stanford , CA ) . For generation of EGFP - tagged , constitutively active Rac1 ( Q61L ) or Cdc42 ( Q61L ) , the human cDNAs harboring the respective mutations and lacking ATG were excised from pRK5 vectors ( see above ) , and each was fused into pEGFP - C1 ( Clontech ) . Full - length , murine cortactin ( Cttn , Ensembl accession no . ENS - MUSG00000031078 ) andtheN - terminalfragment ( residues1 - 146 ; Cttn - NT ) were generated by polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) ampliﬁcations using primer pairs F1 , 5 (cid:1) - GGCGAATTCTGATGTGGAAAGCCTCTGC - 3 (cid:1) and R1 , 5 (cid:1) - CCG - CTCGAGTCGACCCGGCGAACGTGGCGA - 3 (cid:1) and F1 , R2 , 5 (cid:1) - GGTGGATC - CTTCTGGGAG GCATGCTTC - 3 (cid:1) , respectively . For generation of GST - tagged full - length cortactin , the PCR - ampliﬁed fragment was subcloned into EcoRI and XbaI of pGEX - 6P2 vector ( GE Healthcare Europe ) . EGFP - tagged N - terminal cortactin was made by subcloning Cttn - NT into EcoR1 and BamHI sites of pEGFP - N1 vector ( Clontech ) . For generation of the targeting constructs , a 7 - kb genomic DNA fragment carrying cortactin gene exon 6 - 9 was used . A synthetic linker containing a loxP site was inserted into a HindIII site upstream of exon 7 . The neomycin ( Neo ) / puromycin ( Puro ) cassette containing the second loxP site and two ﬂanking ﬂp sites were inserted into the StuI site downstream of exon 7 . The completed DNA fragments containing the 7 - kb cortactin genomic DNA se - F . P . L . Lai et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3210 quence , the loxP and ﬂp sites with either Neo or Puro cassettes were sub - cloned into the pPNT targeting vector backbone ( Tybulewicz et al . , 1991 ) to generate ptCttn - Neo and ptCttn - Puro , respectively ( Figure 1A ) . The integrity of the targeting constructs was conﬁrmed both by restriction digests and sequencing of exons . Reverse transcription ( RT ) - PCR detection of HS1 ( Hcls1 , Ensembl accession no . ENSMUSG00000022831 ) was performed using the following primers : HS1fw , 5 (cid:1) - GGCTGAAGGCAAAATTTGAG - 3 (cid:1) and HS1rv , 5 (cid:1) - TCTCCCTCTGCATCCTCATC - 3 (cid:1) . Primers speciﬁc for SPIN90 ( Nckipsd , Ensembl accession no . ENSMUSG00000032598 ) were as follows : SPfw , 5 (cid:1) - CGAGGATCCATGTACCGCGCGCTGTA - 3 (cid:1) and SPrv , 5 (cid:1) - GCAGTCGAC - GCTGGGAACCTCTCCCA - 3 (cid:1) . Generation of Cttn ﬂ / ﬂ Embryonic Fibroblast Cells ES cells ( line IGD3 . 2 ) ( Hitz et al . , 2007 ) were modiﬁed by two rounds of homologous recombination by using ptCttn - Neo and - Puro constructs accord - ing to standard procedures . Double - targeted Cttn ﬂ / ﬂ ES ( F1 ) cells were dif - ferentiated in vivo by injection into C57BL / 6J host blastocysts , which were then transferred into pseudopregnant females . Targeted primary ﬁbroblasts were obtained from E 14 . 5 chimeric embryos and enriched by double selection with neomycin ( 500 (cid:3) g / ml ) and puromycin ( 5 (cid:3) g / ml ) . Double - targeted primary ﬁbroblasts were immortalized by retroviral transduction of SV40 LT antigen . Clonal Cttn del / del cell lines were obtained after adenoviral trans - duction of Cre recombinase ( kindly provided by Cord Brakebusch , University of Copenhagen , Copenhagen , Denmark ) . Genotyping Genomic DNA was prepared from cultured cell samples as described previ - ously ( DeChiara , 2001 ) . Genotyping for the ﬂoxed ( ﬂ ) and wild - type ( wt ) Cttn alleles was done with the following set of PCR primers : forward , fS , 5 (cid:1) - agggtctgaccatcatgtcc - 3 (cid:1) and reverse , fA , 5 (cid:1) - CCCGATTCGCAGCGCATCGCC - 3 (cid:1) , speciﬁc for the wild - type Cttn locus upstream of exon 7 . PCR products generated were (cid:2) 150 bp for the wt allele and (cid:2) 250 bp for the ﬂ allele ( Figure 1C ) . Cre deletion ( which removes exon 7 ) of the Cttn ﬂ allele results in an (cid:2) 500 - bp PCR product being generated using the same forward primer as described above , fS , and a reverse primer ( dA , 5 (cid:1) - ggtggatgtggaatgtgtg - 3 (cid:1) ) speciﬁc for the neomycin cassette . In the presence of the Cttn ﬂ allele , an (cid:2) 1 . 2 - kb PCR product is generated ( Figure 1C ) . Southern blot analysis of genomic DNA was performed as described previously ( DeChiara , 2001 ) . For the screening of ES cell clones , an upstream (cid:2) 1 - kb fragment lying beyond the regions of Cttn that had been cloned into the targeting vectors was used as probe for hybridization . Genomic DNA was digested with BamHI and BamHI (cid:3) BglII for the screening of ptCttn - Neo and ptCttn - Puro targeted clones , respectively . For the detection of Cre - deleted ﬁbroblast clones , genomic DNA was digested with HindIII and hybridized with the 1 - kb probe mentioned above . Cell Culture and Transfection Puromycin - resistant primary mouse embryonic feeder ( MEF ) cells ( 4D ) were purchased from Open Biosystems ( Huntsville , AL ) . Feeder and embryonic ﬁbroblast cells were maintained in DMEM ( Invitrogen ) containing 10 % fetal calf serum ( Sigma Chemie ) and 2 mM glutamine at 37°C in the presence of 5 % CO 2 . Fibroblast cells were transfected using Metafectene Pro ( Biontex , Mu - nich , Germany ) or FuGENE HD ( Roche Diagnostics , Mannheim , Germany ) according to manufacturer’s instructions . One day after transfection , cells were either ﬁxed and processed for immunolabeling or examined live by using an inverted microscope as described below . Fluorescence Microscopy , Assessment of Cell Morphology , and Data Analysis Immunolabeling experiments were performed essentially as described previ - ously ( Lommel et al . , 2001 ; Steffen et al . , 2004 ) . In brief , cells grown on Figure 1 . Sequential conditional targeting of both cor - tactin alleles in murine ES cells . ( A ) Targeting strategy for cortactin allele . Two targeting constructs carrying either a neomycin ( harboring an internal BglII site ) or a puromycin ( harboring an internal BamHI site ) resis - tance cassette are depicted to target the wild - type cor - tactin allele ( Cttn ) in two sequential targeting experi - ments in murine ES cells . ( B ) Genomic Southern on ES cells carrying two wild - type ( wt / wt ) cortactin alleles , one wild - type and one ﬂoxed ( harboring the neomycin cassette ) cortactin allele [ wt / ﬂ ( Neo ) ] , and two ﬂoxed [ ﬂ ( Neo ) / ﬂ ( Puro ) ] alleles ( 1 allele harboring a neomycin and the other allele a puromycin cassette ) . Genomic DNA extracted from each sample was digested with either BamHI alone , or BamHI together with BglII , and hybridized to the Southern probe ( corresponding to genomic DNA sequence outside the targeting vector ) as shown in A . Note that only the Puro ﬂoxed [ ﬂ ( Puro ) ] allele produced a lower hybridization band with BamHI digest alone , whereas both Neo [ ﬂ ( Neo ) ] and Puro [ ﬂ ( Puro ) ] ﬂoxed alleles resulted in a lower hybridization band when double digested with BamHI and BglII . ( C ) PCR genotyping of ES cells carrying the wild - type , sin - gle - targeted or double - targeted alleles . The top and bot - tom bands indicate the presence of ﬂoxed alleles ( Neo or Puro ) and the wild - type allele , respectively . Characterization of Cortactin Null Cells Vol . 20 , July 15 , 2009 3211 ﬁbronectin were ﬁxed with prewarmed formaldehyde ( 4 % ) in PBS for 20 min , extracted with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 ( 1 min ) , and stained with the indicated antibodies , phalloidin , or a combination . Secondary reagents were Alexa dye - labeled ( Alexa 350 , 488 , or 594 ) goat anti - mouse or anti - rabbit antibodies ( Invitrogen ) . For quantiﬁcation of PDGF - induced peripheral rufﬂing and focal adhesion reorganization , cells were seeded subconﬂuently onto ﬁbronectin - coated glass coverslips , starved , and treated with DMEM alone or DMEM containing 10 ng / ml PDGF ( PDGF - BB ; Sigma Chemie ) for 10 min , ﬁxed as described above , extracted with a mixture of 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 and 4 % formaldehyde for 1 min , and stained for vinculin and the actin cytoskeleton with phalloidin . Peripheral rufﬂing was classiﬁed essentially as described previously ( Bosse et al . , 2007 ) . In addition , cells were categorized according to the prominence of vinculin - positive adhesion sites as indicated . PDGF - in - duced dorsal rufﬂing was induced and quantiﬁed essentially as described above , except that cells were plated onto uncoated coverslips and treated for 5 min with DMEM or DMEM containing PDGF . Preparations were analyzed on an inverted microscope ( Axiovert 100TV ; Carl Zeiss , Jena , Germany ) by using a 63 (cid:4) / 1 . 4 or 100 (cid:4) / 1 . 4 plan - apochromatic objectives and equipped for epiﬂuorescence as described previously ( Steffen et al . , 2004 ) . Images were acquired with a back - illuminated , cooled charge - coupled - device camera ( TE - CCD 800PB ; Princeton Scientiﬁc Instruments , Princeton , NJ ) driven by IPLab software ( Scanalytics , Fairfax , VA ) . Data and images were processed using Excel 9 . 0 ( Microsoft , Redmond , WA ) and Adobe Photoshop 7 . 0 / CS software ( Adobe Systems , Mountain View , CA ) . Video - and Electron Microscopy , and Microinjection High - magniﬁcation video microscopy in combination with or without micro - injection was performed with cells mounted in an open , heated chamber ( Warner Instruments , Reading , United Kingdom ) at 37°C on an inverted microscope ( Axiovert 100TV ; Carl Zeiss ) essentially as described previously ( Steffen et al . , 2004 ) . Control or cortactin KO ﬁbroblasts with or without expressing EGFP - actin were recorded before and immediately after microin - jection of constitutively active Rac1 ( L61 - Rac1 ; 2 . 5 mg / ml ) by using phase contrast optics , epiﬂuorescence , or both . Supplemental movies were assem - bled using NIH Image ( http : / / rsb . info . nih . gov / nih - image / ) . Cell areas be - fore and after Rac1 microinjection were measured using CellProﬁler ( http : / / www . cellproﬁler . org / ) . Fluorescent recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) experiments were performed on a dual - headed , confocal microscope ( Fluo - View 1000 ; Olympus , Hamburg , Germany ) with cells cotransfected ( over - night ) with myc - tagged L61 - Rac1 and EGFP - actin or EGFP - p16B at a ratio of 2 : 1 , and analyzed as described previously ( Lai et al . , 2008 ) . Wound - healing and random cell migration assays were performed essen - tially as described previously ( Pankov et al . , 2005 ; Kopecki et al . , 2007 ) by using an AxioCam MRm camera ( Carl Zeiss ) on an Axiovert 200 automatic microscope equipped with closed heating and CO 2 perfusion devices . Maxi - mal wound closure rates corresponded to normalized slopes of linear equa - tions derived from regression analyses of the area over time plots shown in Figure 11B . Average wound closure rates were determined by dividing closed areas by required time . For reconstitution of the wound - healing defect , cor - tactin - deﬁcient cells were transfected either with EGFP alone , with EGFP - L61 - Rac1 or with EGFP – L61 - Cdc42 , and ﬂuorescence - activated cell sorting ( FACS ) sorted to enrich for EGFP - expressing cells . Wound - healing assays were per - formed in 12 - well plate holes 2 d after seeding of FACS - enriched cells . Data analysis was done using ImageJ ( http : / / rsb . info . nih . gov / ij / ) and CellPro - ﬁler . Total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy and quantiﬁca - tion of actin assembly events accompanying clathrin - mediated endocytosis were done as described previously ( Benesch et al . , 2005 ) . For electron microscopy , cells were plated on glass coverslips coated with Formvar and 50 (cid:3) g / ml ﬁbronectin ( Roche Diagnostics ) , extracted for 1 min with a mixture of 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 and 0 . 25 % glutaraldehyde in cytoskeleton buffer [ CB : 10 mM 2 - ( N - morpholino ) ethanesulfonic acid , pH : 6 . 1 , 150 mM NaCl , 5 mM EGTA , 5 mM glucose , and 5 mM MgCl 2 ] containing 1 (cid:3) g / ml phalloidin , ﬁxed for 15 min with 2 % glutaraldehyde in CB with 1 (cid:3) g / ml phalloidin , and processed for electron microscopy as described previously ( Auinger and Small , 2008 ) . Samples were negatively stained with sodium silicotungstate ( 2 % ; Agar Scientiﬁc , Stansted , Essex , United Kingdom ) and aurothioglucose ( 1 % ; Wako Chemicals , Du¨sseldorf , Germany ) at pH 7 . 0 . Cells were observed and imaged immediately in an electron microscope ( FEI Morgagni , Eindhoven , The Netherlands ) . GTPase Activation Assays Rho - GTPase activities were assessed using absorbance - based G - Lisa kits ( in - dividual assays for Cdc42 , Rac , and RhoA ; Cytoskeleton ) according to the manufacturer’s protocols . Expression levels of examined Rho - GTPases were independent of cortactin genotype ( our unpublished data ) . Conﬁrmatory pull - down assays shown in Supplemental Material determin - ing constitutive Cdc42 or Rac activities or PDGF - induced Rac activation were done as described previously ( Bosse et al . , 2007 ) . Pull - down of active RhoA was done using a commercial activation kit based on the Rho - binding domain ( RBD ) of rhotekin ( Cytoskeleton ) . Band intensities of active GTPase from at least four independent experiments were each normalized to input ( total GTPase ) , averaged , and expressed relative to levels in respective controls . Constitutive Ras activities in control and cortactin - deﬁcient cells were deter - mined indirectly through mitogen - activated protein / ERK phosphorylation relative to input ( (cid:1) - tubulin ) . 125 I - Epidermal Growth Factor ( EGF ) Internalization Assays and Quantiﬁcation of Surface EGF Receptor ( EGFR ) and EGFR Degradation Experiments were essentially as described previously ( Haglund et al . , 2003 ; Sigismund et al . , 2005 ) . In brief , cells were seeded in triplicates for each time point ( plus 1 well for assessment of nonspeciﬁc binding ) into 24 - well plates at a density so that the cells would reach 90 % conﬂuence the following day . The next day , cells were serum starved for at least 4 h in binding buffer ( DMEM , 0 . 1 % bovine serum albumin , and 20 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 5 ) and then incubated at 37°C in the presence of 1 ng / ml 125 I - EGF ( GE Healthcare ) in 300 (cid:3) l of binding buffer . After different times ( 2 , 4 , 6 , and 8 min ) , cells were put on ice , washed twice in cold PBS , and then incubated for 5 min at 4°C in 300 (cid:3) l of acidic wash solution ( 2 M acetic acid and 0 . 5 M NaCl , pH 2 . 5 ) . Then , the solution was removed and its radioactivity was measured . This sample rep - resents the amount of receptor - bound 125 I - EGF at the cell surface . Internalized 125 I - EGF was determined by cell lysis with 300 (cid:3) l of 1 M NaOH and mea - Figure 2 . Cortactin disruption and expression of regulators of the actin cytoskeleton or endocytosis . ( A ) Genomic Southern hybridiza - tion of immortalized ﬁbroblast clones before and after Cre - mediated deletion . Genomic DNA was digested with HindIII and hybridized to a radioactively labeled 1 - kb cortactin probe . Black , white , and gray arrowheads indicate wild - type cortactin allele , Cre - deleted cortactin allele and Neo - or Puro - targeted alleles , respectively . Lane 1 , wild - type cells ; lanes 2 – 6 , individual clones isolated upon Cre - recombinase – mediated cortactin gene deletion ; lane 7 , population pooled from clones 2 – 6 ; lane 8 , double cortactin allele - targeted ES cell clone ( genotype ﬂox / ﬂox ) ; and lane 9 , single cortactin allele - targeted ES cell clone ( genotype ﬂox / wt ) . ( B ) PCR genotyping using primers ﬂanking the ﬂoxed cortactin exon 7 . Top and bottom bands show the presence of ﬂoxed / wild - type and deleted alleles , respec - tively . Lanes are as described in A . ( C ) PCR genotyping using primers speciﬁc for cortactin exon 7 . A PCR product indicates the presence of either wild - type or ﬂoxed allele . Lanes are as described in A . ( D ) RT - PCR detection of cortactin mRNA . Top , middle and bottom panels refer to PCR reactions with primers speciﬁc for cortactin N - terminal and C - terminal parts , and SPIN90 ( loading control ) , respectively . Lanes 1 – 7 are as described in A . ( E ) Immu - noblotting with cortactin antibody 4F - 11 ( top ) compared with anti - (cid:1) - tubulin antibody ( bottom ) . Lanes 1 – 7 are as described in A . ( F ) Immunoblotting of control ( ﬂ / ﬂ ) and cortactin KO ﬁbroblast cells with actin and endocytic regulators as indicated ( Cla - HC , clathrin heavy chain ) . Anti - (cid:1) - tubulin was used as loading control . F . P . L . Lai et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3212 surement of radioactivity in the lysate . Nonspeciﬁc binding was measured at each time point in the presence of excess , nonradioactive EGF ( 200 (cid:4) ) . After correction for nonspeciﬁc binding , the rate of internalization was expressed as the ratio between internalized and surface - bound radioactivity . The number of EGF binding sites at the cell surface was determined by cell starvation as described above and incubation at 4°C for 6 h with 100 ng / ml 125 I - EGF , 10 ng / ml 125 I - EGF ( GE Healthcare ) , and 90 ng / ml cold EGF ( Sero - logicals , Norcross , GA ) . Cells were then washed three times with cold PBS and lysed in 1 M NaOH . The radioactivity measured in the lysate represents the amount of EGFR at the membrane . Nonspeciﬁc binding was determined in the presence of excess , nonradioactive EGF ( 300 (cid:4) ) subtracted from total radioactivity . EGF binding sites of wild - type and cortactin (cid:5) / (cid:5) MEF cells are expressed as receptors per cell . EGFR degradation was assessed upon EGF treatment ( 100 ng / ml ) for different time points as indicated . Densitometric analyses were aided by ImageJ software . Background - corrected EGFR intensities were normalized to vinculin intensities for each time point and expressed as percentage of the initial amount of EGFR at the cell surface . RESULTS Generation of Cortactin KO Fibroblast Cells To investigate cortactin loss of function , we decided to use a conditional genetic knockout system . Two targeting con - structs , harboring either a neomycin ( ptCttn - Neo ) or a pu - romycin resistance cassette ( ptCttn - Puro ) , were used to se - quentially replace in embryonic stem ( ES ) cells both wt alleles with mutated alleles harboring loxP - sites for recom - bination ( ﬂ ; see Figure 1A for targeting strategy ) . Genomic Southern hybridization and PCR conﬁrmed the presence of the corresponding alleles ( Figure 1 , B and C ) in double - targeted ES cells ( ﬂ / ﬂ ) . Cortactin ﬂ / ﬂ ES cells were subse - quently differentiated into ﬁbroblasts in vivo by isolation from chimeric day 14 embryos upon blastocyst injection and transfer . Cortactin wt / wt cells were successfully removed by a 14 - d treatment with G418 and puromycin , as conﬁrmed by Figure 3 . Cortactin is not essential for lamellipodium protrusion and stress ﬁber formation . ( A ) Morphology of control ( ﬂ / ﬂ ) and cortactin KO ﬁbroblast cells grown on plastic cell culture dishes . Bar , 50 (cid:3) m . ( B ) Phalloidin ( phall ) staining of ﬁxed control and KO cells on ﬁbronectin - coated glass coverslips . Arrows and arrowheads mark stress ﬁbers and lamellipodia , respectively . Bar , 10 (cid:3) m . ( C ) Immunolabeling with monoclonal anti - cortactin antibodies ( clone 289 ) conﬁrming loss of speciﬁc labeling in KO cells . ( D ) Electron microscopy of negatively stained whole - mount cytoskeletons of control and KO cells showing actin ﬁlament networks at the leading edge ( cell edges indicated by black arrows ) . Bar , 50 nm . Figure 4 . Rac1 - induced protrusion in the presence and absence of cortactin . ( A ) Representative individual frames from epiﬂuores - cence time - lapse movies of EGFP - actin – expressing control and KO cells before and after microinjection with constitutively active Rac1 ( injection at time 0 ) . Time is in minutes and seconds . White arrows highlight lamellipodia induced by this treatment in both cell types . Bar , 10 (cid:3) m . ( B ) Quantiﬁcation of cell area increase observed within 7 . 5 min after Rac injection . Data represent means (cid:6) SEM . Characterization of Cortactin Null Cells Vol . 20 , July 15 , 2009 3213 Figure 5 . Actin network turnover in lamellipodia of control and cortactin KO cells . ( A ) Representative examples of control ( ﬂ / ﬂ ) and cortactin - deﬁcient ( KO ) ﬁbroblasts coexpressing myc - tagged L61 - Rac1 and EGFP - actin , and subjected to FRAP experiments in the lamelli - podium . Note actin recovery from the lamellipodium front , as expected ( Wang , 1985 ; Lai et al . , 2008 ) , in both cell types . Time is in seconds ; bar , 2 (cid:3) m . ( B ) Quantiﬁcation of the rate of rearward actin movement based on FRAP experiments as shown in A . All data are means (cid:6) SEM ( error bars ) . Acceleration of actin ﬂow in the absence of cortactin was conﬁrmed to be statistically signiﬁcant ( * ) by one - sided two - sample t test ( p (cid:4) 0 . 023 ) . ( C ) Lamellipodial actin recovery as assessed by FRAP for a lamellipodial width of 1 . 6 (cid:3) m in control and cortactin null cells as indicated . Data are means and SEM measured for each time point and cell type as indicated ( n (cid:7) 4 ) . Linear curves correspond to best ﬁts of means ( black and red lines for cortactin KO and control cells , respectively ) . Fitted data followed equation : y (cid:7) a ( 1 (cid:5) exp ( (cid:5) bx ) ) , with a (cid:7) 1 . 0408 and b (cid:7) 0 . 033 in ﬂ / ﬂ , and a (cid:7) 1 . 1013 and b (cid:7) 0 . 044 in KO cells . t 1 / 2 values were calculated by solving the corresponding equations with a ﬂuorescence intensity of 50 % of the maximum recovery value derived from each ﬁtted curve . ( D ) Representative examples of control ( ﬂ / ﬂ ) and cortactin - deﬁcient ( KO ) ﬁbroblasts coexpressing myc - tagged L61 - Rac1 and the Arp2 / 3 - complex subunit p16B , and subjected to FRAP experiments in the lamellipodium . p16B ﬂuorescence recovers from the lamellipodium front as described in both cell types . ( E ) Quantiﬁcation of rearward movement of p16B as shown for actin above . All data are means (cid:6) SEM ( error bars ) . Increased ﬂow in cortactin null cells was statistically signiﬁcant , as conﬁrmed by one - sided two - sample t test ( p (cid:4) 0 . 046 ) . F . P . L . Lai et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3214 the absence of the wt allele by using PCR ( data not shown ) . Primary cortactin ﬂ / ﬂ ﬁbroblast cells were immortalized and infected with adenovirus - Cre ( Anton and Graham , 1995 ) to mediate site - speciﬁc recombination of the mutated allele to obtain individual and pooled ( from ﬁve individual clonal ﬁbroblast lines ) cortactin del / del ﬁbroblasts . PCR and genomic Southern conﬁrmed the deleted genotypes of each line indi - vidually and of the pooled population ( Figure 2A ) . Success - ful Cre recombinase - mediated deletion of exon 7 in the cortactin gene was expected to cause a stop in the reading frame resulting in a null allele . Indeed , no cortactin message was detectable by PCR , neither with primers complemen - tary to regions encoding the amino - terminal nor carboxy - terminal end of the protein , and we were unable to detect cortactin by Western blotting ( Figure 2 , B – E , and Supple - mental Figure S1 ) . To minimize potential clonal variations , all subsequent experiments were performed with a mixed population of parental cortactin ﬂ / ﬂ cells and pooled cortact - in del / del ( KO ) clones . Western blot analysis of total cell extracts from cortactin KO and control cells revealed no obvious changes in the expression levels of various prominent actin regulators and endocytic molecules ( Figure 2F ) . Furthermore , no HS1 mes - sage or protein , neither in control and nor cortactin KO ﬁbroblast cells was detected ( Supplemental Figure 2 ) . Cortactin Is Not Essential for Arp2 / 3 - Complex – dependent Actin Assembly in the Lamellipodium Cortactin has been implicated in driving lamellipodium pro - trusion and membrane rufﬂing , due to the dependence of these structures on Arp2 / 3 - complex - mediated actin assem - bly ( Goley and Welch , 2006 ; Steffen et al . , 2006 ) . Therefore , lamellipodium protrusion and membrane rufﬂing were ex - amined in various conditions and by using several methods . Interestingly , no gross morphological changes were initially observed between cortactin KO and control cells on plastic dishes ( Figure 3A ) . We thus explored the actin cytoskeleton in subconﬂuent cells growing on different substrates such as ﬁbronectin . In the absence of cortactin ( Figure 3C ) , the actin cytoskeleton seemed to be largely unchanged , with cortactin knockout cells forming lamellipodia and rufﬂes , ﬁlopodia ( data not shown ) , as well as focal adhesions and stress ﬁbers ( Figure 3B ; also see Figure 8A ) . Moreover , there was no discernible difference compared with control cells in the ultrastructure of the actin ﬁlament network in the lamelli - podia of cortactin - deﬁcient cells ( Figure 3D ) . These results suggested that cortactin - deﬁcient cells were able in principle to form lamellipodia . To assess potential quantitative changes in lamellipodia protrusion in the absence of cortactin , we ﬁrst performed video microscopy before and after microin - jection of constitutively active Rac1 . Rac1 injection caused a prominent and abrupt induction of smooth , peripheral la - mellipodia in both control and knockout cells ( see Supple - mental Video 1 ) , demonstrating that cortactin is dispensable for Rac - induced protrusion . Using cells ectopically express - ing EGFP - tagged actin ( Figure 4A and Supplemental Video 2 ) , we assayed lamellipodial actin polymerization in vivo . First , no signiﬁcant differences were observed in the increase in cell area caused by Rac injection between control and knockout cells ( Figure 4B ) , suggesting that Rac - induced ac - tin reorganization was unimpaired by cortactin deﬁciency . The efﬁciency of Rac - induced actin assembly in lamellipodia was directly measured by FRAP in cells coexpressing EGFP - actin and constitutively active Rac1 ( Figure 5A and Supple - mental Video 3 ) . Actin assembly at the lamellipodium tip directly correlates with the rearward movement of the bleached region ( Lai et al . , 2008 ) . Our FRAP measurements indicated that actin assembly in the lamellipodium was modestly increased in the absence of cortactin ( Figure 5B ) , resulting in a signiﬁcant reduction in the half - time of lamellipodial actin recovery in cortactin knockout cells compared with cortactin - expressing controls ( Figure 5C ; t 1 / 2 of 14 . 9 and 19 . 4 in KO and control , respectively ) . Although a molecular explanation for the observed in - crease in actin rearward ﬂow in cortactin null cells is lacking , these data demonstrate active lamellipodial actin polymerization in both the presence and absence of cor - tactin . Consistent with this and the view that Arp2 / 3 - complex is essential for Rac - induced , lamellipodial actin assembly ( Steffen et al . , 2006 ; Nicholson - Dykstra and Figure 6 . Actin recruitment to ccps in the absence of cortactin . ( A ) Representative TIRF images of control ( ﬂ / ﬂ ) and KO cells cotrans - fected with EGFP - actin ( actin ) and mCherry - clathrin ( cla ) showing cointernalization of actin and clathrin . Red and white arrows mark cointernalizing pits . Bar , 1 (cid:3) m . ( B ) Cointernalization of Arp2 / 3 - complex and clathrin in both control and cortactin KO cells as visualized by cotransfection with EGFP - ArpC5B ( p16B ) and mCherry - clathrin ( cla ) . Arrows and bar are as described in A . ( C ) Quantiﬁcation of actin recruitment to internalizing ccps . All data are means (cid:6) SEM . At least 240 individual pits and 16 cells were ana - lyzed for each cell type . Characterization of Cortactin Null Cells Vol . 20 , July 15 , 2009 3215 Higgs , 2008 ) , Arp2 / 3 - complex uniformly incorporated into the lamellipodia of both control and cortactin - deﬁ - cient cells ( our unpublished data ) . Furthermore , FRAP experiments with cells coexpress - ing constitutively active Rac1 and the Arp2 / 3 - complex subunit p16B revealed a similar increase of Arp2 / 3 - com - plex rearward ﬂow rate in the absence of cortactin ( Figure 5 , D and E , and Supplemental Video 4 ) . This was not unexpected if assuming identical lamellipodial turnover for actin and Arp2 / 3 - complex , which is incorporated into the network at the lamellipodium tip ( Figure 5D ; Lai et al . , 2008 ) . The additional genotype - independent acceleration of network ﬂow rates in p16B compared with actin ex - pressers ( Figure 5 , B and E ) is not due to differential behavior of actin and Arp2 / 3 - complex in individual cells , as proposed previously by others ( Cai et al . , 2008 ) , because simultaneous bleaching of both components in B16 - F1 lamellipodia conﬁrmed identical ﬂow rates ( our unpub - lished data ) . Cortactin Is Not Required for Clathrin - mediated Endocytosis Cortactin has also been shown to accumulate at internalizing clathrin - coated pits ( ccps ) ( Cao et al . , 2003 ; Merriﬁeld et al . , 2005 ; Zhu et al . , 2005 ) , suggestive of a role in Arp2 / 3 - com - plex activation at these sites . We ﬁrst tested whether both actin and Arp2 / 3 recruitment to ccps requires cortactin . Cortactin KO and control ﬁbroblast cells were cotransfected with EGFP - actin and mCherry - clathrin and then examined using TIRF microscopy . Interestingly , actin accumulation at ccps was robust in both control and cortactin KO cells ( Fig - ure 6A ) . Coexpression of EGFP - tagged p16B with mCherry - clathrin revealed that cortactin removal also had no effect on the accumulation of Arp2 / 3 - complex at ccps ( Figure 6B ) . To exclude potential quantitative differences in actin assembly frequencies accompanying clathrin - mediated endocytosis , as observed previously , for example , upon genetic deletion of N - WASP ( Benesch et al . , 2005 ) , we counted the average coincidence of actin accumulation with the internalization of individual clathrin - coated structures , which was (cid:2) 80 % in both the presence and absence of cortactin ( Figure 6C ) . These results demonstrated that cortactin is not required for actin polymerization accompanying clathrin - mediated en - docytosis . To explore a potential functional role for cortactin in this process , independently of the promotion of actin assembly , we initially looked at internalization of rhodam - ine - labeled EGF or transferrin , the latter being strictly clathrin - dependent . No obvious principal defects in li - gand internalization could be detected ( our unpublished data ) . To test for potential quantitative differences of re - ceptor - mediated endocytosis , the initial rate of EGF inter - nalization was measured using iodinated ligand , low doses ( 1 ng / ml ) of which induce internalization predom - inantly through the clathrin route ( Sigismund et al . , 2005 ) . However , cortactin deﬁciency did not affect the efﬁciency of EGF internalization ( Figure 7A ) . Importantly , these experiments were performed at subsaturating concentra - tions of the ligand in cortactin - expressing control cells , because cell surface receptor levels were strongly in - creased in cortactin null cells ( Figure 7B ) . The precise reasons for this are unknown , although no signiﬁcant defects in EGFR degradation were observed in the ab - Figure 7 . Cortactin is not required for clathrin - mediated endocytosis . ( A ) Kinetics of EGF internalization in control ( ﬂ / ﬂ ) and cortactin KO cells treated at the indicated time points with 1 ng / ml 125 I - EGF . Data are means (cid:6) SEM ( error bars ) of two independent experiments both performed in triplicate . The internalization constants ( K e ) are indicated in the panel . ( B ) EGFR numbers / cell measured as described in Materials and Methods . Data are means (cid:6) SEM ( error bars ) of two independent experiments both performed in triplicate . ( C ) Western blot analysis of EGFR degradation as well as Akt and ERK activation ( pAkt and pERK ) in control and cortactin knockout cells treated at the indicated time points with 100 ng / ml EGF . Total Akt , ERK , vinculin , and cortactin were included in the panel as blot normalization . Blots are representative of three independent experiments . ( D ) Densitometric analysis of EGFR degradation performed as described in Materials and Methods . Data are means (cid:6) SEM ( error bars ) of two independent experiments . F . P . L . Lai et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3216 sence of cortactin ( Figure 7 , C and D ) . Finally , EGF - induced signal transduction seemed intact in cortactin null cells , as exempliﬁed by ERK / mitogen - activated pro - tein kinase and Akt phosphorylation ( Figure 7C ) . Figure 8 . Cortactin deﬁciency abrogates PDGF - induced actin reorganization . ( A ) Effect of PDGF treatment on cell morphology ; cells were stained for the actin cytoskeleton ( phall ) and for focal adhesions with anti - vinculin antibodies . Arrows and arrowheads mark membrane rufﬂes and focal adhesions , respectively . Bars , 10 (cid:3) m . Note induction of rufﬂes and concomitant reduction of focal adhesions in control , but not in cortactin KO cells . ( B ) Quantiﬁcation of PDGF - treated control ( ﬂ / ﬂ ) and KO cells capable of forming membrane rufﬂes . All data are means (cid:6) SEM ( error bars ) . Two - sample two - sided t test , p (cid:4) 0 . 003 , (cid:2) 300 cells from three independent experiments categorized for each cell type . ( C ) Quantiﬁcation of PDGF - induced focal adhesion disassembly . All data are means (cid:6) SEM ( error bars ) . Two - sided two - sample t test , p (cid:4) 0 . 025 , (cid:8) 360 cells from three independent experiments categorized for each cell type . Characterization of Cortactin Null Cells Vol . 20 , July 15 , 2009 3217 Cortactin KO Cells Are Defective in Signaling to Actin Reorganization and Rho - GTPase Activation Although cortactin knockout cells did not fail to form lamel - lipodia or membrane rufﬂes upon microinjection or expres - sion of constitutively active Rac ( Figures 4 and 5 ) , defects in actin reorganization were unexpectedly detected when treating cells with growth factors such as PDGF . Lamellipo - dia and peripheral membrane rufﬂes , known to be driven by Rac , were readily induced by PDGF in serum - starved con - trol but not cortactin knockout cells ( Figure 8A ) . In addition , stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions were mostly dissolved after PDGF treatment in control cells , presumably due to the antagonism between Rac and Rho signaling observed pre - viously ( Rottner et al . , 1999 ; Wildenberg et al . , 2006 ) . This response was also less prominent in cortactin knockout cells ( Figure 8A ) . Quantiﬁcation of cells with rufﬂes or prominent focal adhesions observed upon PDGF treatment revealed a signiﬁcant decrease in the rufﬂing frequency in cells lacking cortactin ( Figure 8B ; p (cid:4) 0 . 003 ) and a strong defect in the dissolution of focal adhesions ( Figure 8C ; p (cid:4) 0 . 025 ) . Furthermore , and in accordance with previous observa - tions upon RNA interference - mediated cortactin deple - tion ( Boyle et al . , 2007 ) , cortactin null ﬁbroblasts showed a severe reduction in PDGF - induced dorsal rufﬂing ( Sup - plemental Figure 3 ) . All these data indicated that cortactin deﬁciency might cause defective signaling to Rac activa - tion . This was indeed the case , because PDGF - induced Rac activation as measured by G - LISA assay ( see Materials and Methods ) was suppressed in the absence of cortactin , although it was not abolished ( Figure 9A ) . Similar results were obtained using conventional PAK3 - CRIB pull - down ( Supplemental Figure 4 ) . Somewhat surprisingly , consti - tutive Rac - GTP - levels of cells growing in serum were not signiﬁcantly different in control and cortactin - deﬁcient cells . In contrast , constitutive Cdc42 activity was also severely suppressed in cortactin - deﬁcient cells , whereas RhoA or Ras signaling were not ( Figure 9 and Supple - mental Figure 5 ) . Collectively , these data suggest that defective PDGF - induced actin reorganization in cortactin null cells is caused , at least in part , by reduced Rac activation , low Cdc42 activity , or both . However , in spite of repeated attempts , we have failed to detect convincing Cdc42 activation effected by PDGF treatment in either cell type ( our unpublished data ) . Cortactin Deﬁciency Leads to Impaired Cell Migration Because cortactin seemed to affect actin reorganization events , at least downstream of PDGF signaling , we also explored potential functions in cell migration . To do this , cells were seeded subconﬂuently , and the tracks of individually mi - grating cells analyzed in a computer - aided manner . Inter - estingly , the speed of randomly migrating cells was re - duced in the absence of cortactin . Average velocity ( arithmetic mean as calculated from the accumulated dis - tance over time ) was 0 . 61 (cid:3) m / min ( SEM (cid:7) 0 . 01 ; n (cid:7) 109 ) and 0 . 49 (cid:3) m / min ( SEM (cid:7) 0 . 02 ; n (cid:7) 108 ) for control and cortactin KO cells , respectively ( p (cid:4) 0 . 0001 ) ( Figure 10A ) . The slight increase in directionality ( ﬂ / ﬂ 0 . 26 , SEM (cid:7) 0 . 01 vs . KO , ﬂ / ﬂ 0 . 29 , SEM (cid:7) 0 . 01 ) was not statistically sig - niﬁcant ( Figure 10B ) . The defect in migration rate was even more evident when color - coding individual tracks ( displayed in so called chemotaxis plots ) relative to the arithmetic mean of the migration of both cell types ( Figure 10C ) . This analysis revealed that 39 of 109 tracks of con - trols cells were slower than average , whereas the number of slower cells was signiﬁcantly increased in the knockout ( 80 of 108 ) . We also performed scratch - wound assays , which con - ﬁrmed reduced migration efﬁciency ( Figure 11A and Sup - plemental Video 5 ) . Average recovery curves summarizing wound closure rates for both cell types are shown in Figure 11B . The maximal wound healing rate , as extracted by re - gression analysis ( see Materials and Methods ) was reduced in cortactin KO cells to 67 . 7 % of the control cell population ( Figure 11C ) , with the difference conﬁrmed to be statistically signiﬁcant ( p (cid:4) 0 . 001 ) . These data showed a marked de - crease of cell migration rate , as induced here by scratching a wound into a conﬂuent monolayer , shown previously to be Figure 9 . PDGF - induced Rac activation and constitu - tive activities of selected Rho GTPases . ( A ) Determina - tion of active Rac levels ( Rac - GTP ) in starved control and cortactin knockout cells treated with DMEM alone or DMEM containing 10 ng / ml PDGF ( 10 min ) using G - LISA assay . Data are means (cid:6) SEM ( error bars ) and were statistically compared using two - sample two - sided t test . ( B – D ) Constitutive activities of selected Rho - GTPases in control ( ﬂ / ﬂ ) and cortactin KO cells as indicated ( G - LISA ) , all data are means (cid:6) SEM ( error bars ) . Reduction of Cdc42 activity in cortactin - deﬁcient cells was conﬁrmed statistically signiﬁcant using two - sided two - sample t test ( p (cid:4) 0 . 029 ) . F . P . L . Lai et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3218 accompanied by activation of Rho - GTPases such as Rac ( Kraynov et al . , 2000 ) . To explore whether this defect might be a direct consequence of reduced Rac activity in the ab - sence of cortactin , as observed after PDGF treatment ( see above ) , knockout cells were subjected to the wound - healing assay after transient transfection with EGFP alone or with EGFP - tagged , constitutively active Rac1 ( Figure 11D ) . Aver - age wound closure rates as assessed in these experiments were again signiﬁcantly reduced in EGFP - expressing cortac - tin knockout cells compared with ( EGFP - expressing ) control cells ( ﬂ / ﬂ ; p (cid:4) 0 . 001 ) . Interestingly , transient expression of constitutively active EGFP - Rac1 signiﬁcantly increased the performance of cortactin knockout cells , albeit not to the level of cortactin - expressing control cells ( Figure 11D ) . In contrast , active EGFP - Rac1 decreased the wound - healing efﬁciency of cortactin - expressing control cells ( ﬂ / ﬂ ) , demon - strating that the observed beneﬁcial effects of Rac activation for migration are dependent on context and restricted here to cells lacking cortactin . These data also highlight the re - quirement for precise tuning of Rac activity to promote effective migration . Finally , expression of constitutively ac - tive Cdc42 in cortactin null cells restored wound - healing rates even better than Rac1 , to almost 95 % of control cells ( Figure 11D ) . These results are thus consistent with the observed cooperative functions of Rac and Cdc42 small GT - Pases in the migration efﬁciency toward PDGF of primary Figure 10 . Cortactin deﬁciency reduces cell migration . ( A ) Box and whiskers plots showing migration rates of control ( ﬂ / ﬂ ) and cortactin KO cells in subconﬂuent cultures . The line within the box indicates median , the box boundaries contain 50 % ( 25 – 75 % ) and the whiskers 80 % ( 10 – 90 % ) of all measurements , whereas outlying points are shown as dots . The reduction of migration of KO cells was statistically signiﬁcant at p (cid:4) 0 . 0001 ; two - sided two - sample t test . ( B ) Directionality of control ( ﬂ / ﬂ ) and KO cells as indicated . Data are displayed as in A . Directionality was calculated by dividing net migration distance by total distance . ( C ) Chemotaxis plots of control ( ﬂ / ﬂ ) and KO cells in random migration assay . The position of each cell at time zero was centered at the origin of the grid and the tracks correspond to the movement of individual cells over time . Individual tracks slower or faster than the arithmetic mean of all tracks were displayed in red or black , respectively . The total duration of the movies was 495 min . Characterization of Cortactin Null Cells Vol . 20 , July 15 , 2009 3219 ﬁbroblasts ( Monypenny et al . , 2009 ) , and they strongly sug - gest that the migration defects in cortactin null cells ob - served here are due to defective signaling to Rho - GTPase activation rather than to problems in promoting or stabiliz - ing Arp2 / 3 - complex – dependent actin networks below the plasma membrane . DISCUSSION We report the generation of murine cell lines lacking a functional cortactin gene . Cre - recombinase – mediated abla - tion of exon 7 within the cortactin locus in conditionally gene - targeted , immortalized ﬁbroblasts resulted in unde - tectable levels of both cortactin message and protein . Nei - ther control nor cortactin KO ﬁbroblasts expressed the he - matopoietic cortactin homologue HS1 , excluding functional compensation by HS1 . To our surprise , cortactin removal failed to severely affect the ability of these cells to form a normal actin cytoskeleton . Most remarkably , lamellipodia , which are thought to require Arp2 / 3 - complex – dependent actin assembly ( Goley and Welch , 2006 ) showed no differences in their ultrastructural organization in the absence of this Arp2 / 3 - complex activa - tor ( Figure 3D ) . In addition , Rac injection induced robust lamellipodium formation , spreading and Arp2 / 3 - complex incorporation in both cell types ( Figures 4 and 5 ) . Cortactin was also shown previously to localize on endo - somal vesicles ( Kaksonen et al . , 2000 ) and clathrin - coated pits ( Cao et al . , 2003 ) . In addition , it is capable of interaction with several proteins implicated in endocytic processes , such as dynamin , N - WASP , cortBP1 / SHANK2 , or WIP ( Du et al . , 1998 ; McNiven et al . , 2000 ; Weaver et al . , 2002 ; Aspenstrom , 2005 ) . Due to its biochemical activity as an Arp2 / 3 - complex activator and the fact that its accumulation at ccps peaks at the time point of vesicle ﬁssion off the plasma membrane ( Merriﬁeld et al . , 2005 ) , cortactin was assumed to induce local actin assembly to facilitate the scission process . More - over , previous observations made in our laboratory have indicated an essential function in actin assembly at these sites for the Arp2 / 3 - complex , activation of which was only partly mediated by N - WASP ( Benesch et al . , 2005 ) . It was tempting to speculate therefore that cortactin could drive N - WASP – independent Arp2 / 3 - complex activation during clathrin pit internalization . Indeed , studies using RNA in - terference , antibody injections , or dominant - negative ap - proaches suggested an important function for cortactin in clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Cao et al . , 2003 ; Zhu et al . , 2005 , 2007 ) , although contradictory observations were also made ( Barroso et al . , 2006 ) . The results obtained here dem - onstrate that cortactin is not required for actin and Arp2 / 3 - complex assembly at clathrin - coated pits , and its removal did not even affect the frequency of actin recruitment to internalizing pit - like structures ( Figure 6 ) . Because the efﬁ - ciency of actin assembly is considered crucial for clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Merriﬁeld et al . , 2005 ; Yarar et al . , 2005 ) , these data are consistent with the lack of a phenotype when exploring the efﬁciency of EGF internalization ( Figure 7A ) . Without excluding potential modulatory functions , Figure 11 . Loss of cortactin function reduces wound healing efﬁciency . ( A ) Selected frames from wound healing movies for control ( ﬂ / ﬂ ) and cortactin KO cells . Time is in minutes ; bar , 100 (cid:3) m . ( B ) Average wound healing recovery curve for each cell population over time . KO cells take longer to cover the wounded area ( i . e . , reach 100 % ) . ( C ) Maximal wound closure rates derived from the individual wound closure curves shown in B ( see Materials and Methods ) . Data are means (cid:6) SEM ( error bars ) , and the differences between cell types were conﬁrmed to be statistically different by two - sided two - sample t test ( p (cid:4) 0 . 001 ) . ( D ) Average wound closure rates of control ( ﬂ / ﬂ ) or cortactin knock - out ( KO ) cells expressing EGFP alone ( as control ) or EGFP - tagged , constitutively active Rac1 or Cdc42 as indicated . Column colors corresponding to experimen - tal conditions are also given on the right in panel D . All data are means (cid:6) SEM ( error bars ) . Differences between cell types or conditions were conﬁrmed to be statisti - cally signiﬁcant by two - sided two - sample t test . n val - ues correspond to number of movies recorded in at least three independent experiments . F . P . L . Lai et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3220 these data reveal a nonessential role of cortactin at these sites . The precise function of cortactin in this context remains to be elucidated , not least , due to the increasing number of interacting partners identiﬁed ( Ammer and Weed , 2008 ) . For example , an interaction of cortactin with huntingtin - inter - acting protein 1 - related ( Hip1R ) was recently discovered , and both proteins seemed to inhibit actin assembly by cap - ping actin ﬁlament barbed ends in vitro . The actin ﬁlament capping and nucleating activities of cortactin were proposed to be spatially separated in vivo , although to both promote actin assembly at ccps ( Le Clainche et al . , 2007 ) . Interestingly , Hip1R knockdown was shown previously to generate ab - normally large actin tails nucleated at these sites , establish - ing this protein as a potent negative regulator of actin po - lymerization during endocytosis ( Engqvist - Goldstein et al . , 2004 ) . Because these exaggerated structures required cortac - tin , although it was not essential for the actin assembly at ccps observed here , we propose cortactin to execute ﬁne - tuning , perhaps in association with speciﬁc proteins or pro - tein complexes ( Le Clainche et al . , 2007 ; Ammer and Weed , 2008 ) , rather than constituting a decisive component of actin assembly accompanying clathrin - mediated endocytosis . In contrast to the structure and dynamics of constitutive or Rac - induced lamellipodia , the frequency of occurrence of lamellipodia and rufﬂes , induced , for example , by PDGF treatment , was abrogated by cortactin removal . The majority of cortactin KO cells ( (cid:8) 60 % ) did not form membrane rufﬂes after 10 min of PDGF treatment , whereas most control cells ( (cid:2) 90 % ) did . The impact of cortactin loss of function on PDGF - induced dorsal rufﬂing was even more severe ( Sup - plemental Figure 3 ) . Moreover , loss of stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions not unusually observed to accompany the induc - tion of membrane rufﬂing by growth factor treatment , also occurred much less prominent in cortactin - deﬁcient cells ( Figure 8 , A and C ) , suggesting that cortactin removal abro - gated the signaling pathway causing these various actin reorganizations observed upon PDGF treatment . This would also be in line with the recently established role in this signaling pathway for cortactin phosphorylation by Abl ki - nases ( Boyle et al . , 2007 ) . Because the efﬁciency of lamellipo - dial actin assembly and Arp2 / 3 - complex incorporation was not reduced upon injection or expression of constitutively active Rac1 , this deﬁciency likely occurs upstream or at the level of Rho - GTPase activation . Consistently , cortactin - deﬁ - cient cells displayed a marked decrease in Rac activation effected by PDGF treatment ( Figure 9A ) . Furthermore , cor - tactin null cells displayed a signiﬁcant reduction of active Cdc42 ( but not Rac , Ras , or RhoA ) levels in regular growth conditions . These data suggest that cortactin may operate in signaling to actin polymerization less downstream , and hence more indirectly than previously anticipated , i . e . , through contributing to the temporal or spatial regulation of activation of selected Rho GTPases ( such as Cdc42 or Rac ) , and not as an essential activator of Arp2 / 3 - complex ( Figure 5 ) . Consistent with such a scenario , both cortactin and HS1 have already been reported to interact with GEFs for Rho - family GTPases ( Hou et al . , 2003 ; Gomez et al . , 2006 ) . Nota - bly , the recruitment of Fgd1 to the cell periphery by inter - action with the SH3 domain of cortactin was proposed to contribute—upon multimerization—to a positive feedback cycle of cortactin - mediated actin assembly ( Kim et al . , 2004 ) . Although not necessarily restricted to the latter guanine nucleotide exchange factor ( GEF ) , these observations point toward a potential role for cortactin in signal ampliﬁcation through recruitment—not necessarily activation—of Rho - GTPase GEFs to sites of dynamic actin assembly . A potential function as “localizer” rather than stimulator of efﬁcient Rho - GTPase activation would explain the absence of protru - sion induction and evident Rho - GTPase activation by sole ectopic expression ( Lai et al . , 2008 ; our unpublished obser - vations ) . As we show , cortactin - deﬁcient cells displayed defects in the efﬁciency of cell migration , which could be reconstituted in part by ectopic expression of constitutively active Rac1 or Cdc42 . Given that EGFP - Rac1 / Cdc42 – transfected and FACS - sorted cortactin knockout cells had to grow to conﬂuence before the wound - healing assay could be performed , incom - plete reconstitution could derive , at least in part , from inho - mogeneous expression of the ectopic protein . Nevertheless , these data show that a good fraction of the cell migration defects in cortactin null cells can be explained by inefﬁcient signaling to selected Rho - GTPases , consistent with the ob - servations made upon PDGF stimulation ( see above ) . Al - though Cdc42 is not essential for cell migration in ﬁbroblasts ( Czuchra et al . , 2005 ) , our data add to increasing evidence that Cdc42 activity can contribute to migration efﬁciency in certain conditions or cell types ( Yang et al . , 2006 ; Monypenny et al . , 2009 ) . In summary , we show that cortactin deﬁciency leads to defects in migration and to suppression of peripheral or dorsal rufﬂing in response to PDGF . Surprisingly , however , no impairment of actin assembly in lamellipodia or rufﬂes was observed once they had formed , nor in other types of Arp2 / 3 - complex – dependent actin structures , e . g . , clathrin - coated pits . From these data , we suggest that cortactin op - erates in signal transduction upstream of activation of spe - ciﬁc Rho - family GTPases , rather than downstream , a novel role that may or may not involve its ability to activate Arp2 / 3 - complex – mediated actin assembly . Future studies will address this issue as well as the molecular link ( s ) me - diating this function . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Cord Brakebusch , Daisuke Kitamura , Laura Machesky , Ed Schuuring , Roger Tsien , and Ernst Ungewickell for reagents ; Giorgio Scita for helpful discussions and antibodies ; Ju¨rgen Wehland for support and for providing infrastructure ; Marlies Konradt and Christian Erck for generation of mono - clonal antibodies ; and Brigitte Denker for excellent technical assistance . We are also grateful to Werner Mu¨ller and Martin Hafner for valuable advice and discussion on mouse genetics and mutagenesis . This work was supported in part by grants from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft ( to K . R . , T . E . B . S . , and J . F . ) . M . S . was supported through a Marie Curie Early stage Training ( contract MEST - 2004 - 504990 ) of the European Community’s Sixth Framework Programme . REFERENCES Ammer , A . G . , and Weed , S . A . ( 2008 ) . Cortactin branches out : roles in regulating protrusive actin dynamics . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 65 , 687 – 707 . Anton , I . M . , Jones , G . E . , Wandosell , F . , Geha , R . , and Ramesh , N . ( 2007 ) . WASP - interacting protein ( WIP ) : working in polymerisation and much more . Trends Cell Biol . 17 , 555 – 562 . Anton , M . , and Graham , F . L . ( 1995 ) . Site - speciﬁc recombination mediated by an adenovirus vector expressing the Cre recombinase protein : a molecular switch for control of gene expression . J . Virol . 69 , 4600 – 4606 . Aspenstrom , P . ( 2005 ) . The verprolin family of proteins : regulators of cell morphogenesis and endocytosis . FEBS Lett . 579 , 5253 – 5259 . Auinger , S . , and Small , J . V . ( 2008 ) . Correlated light and electron microscopy of the actin cytoskeleton . Methods Cell Biol . 88 , 257 – 272 . Barroso , C . , Rodenbusch , S . E . , Welch , M . D . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2006 ) . A role for cortactin in Listeria monocytogenes invasion of NIH 3T3 cells , but not in its intracellular motility . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 63 , 231 – 243 . Benesch , S . , Polo , S . , Lai , F . P . , Anderson , K . I . , Stradal , T . E . , Wehland , J . , and Rottner , K . ( 2005 ) . N - WASP deﬁciency impairs EGF internalization and actin assembly at clathrin - coated pits . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 3103 – 3115 . Characterization of Cortactin Null Cells Vol . 20 , July 15 , 2009 3221 Bosse , T . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Cdc42 and phosphoinositide 3 - kinase drive Rac - medi - ated actin polymerization downstream of c - Met in distinct and common pathways . Mol . Cell . Biol . 27 , 6615 – 6628 . Boyle , S . N . , Michaud , G . A . , Schweitzer , B . , Predki , P . F . , and Koleske , A . J . ( 2007 ) . A critical role for cortactin phosphorylation by Abl - family kinases in PDGF - induced dorsal - wave formation . Curr . Biol . 17 , 445 – 451 . Bryce , N . S . , Clark , E . S . , Leysath , J . L . , Currie , J . D . , Webb , D . J . , and Weaver , A . M . ( 2005 ) . Cortactin promotes cell motility by enhancing lamellipodial persistence . Curr . Biol . 15 , 1276 – 1285 . Burkhardt , J . K . , Carrizosa , E . , and Shaffer , M . H . ( 2008 ) . The actin cytoskel - eton in T cell activation . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 26 , 233 – 259 . Butler , B . , Kastendieck , D . H . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2008 ) . Differently phosphor - ylated forms of the cortactin homolog HS1 mediate distinct functions in natural killer cells . Nat . Immunol . 9 , 887 – 897 . Cai , L . , Makhov , A . M . , Schafer , D . A . , and Bear , J . E . ( 2008 ) . Coronin 1B antagonizes cortactin and remodels Arp2 / 3 - containing actin branches in la - mellipodia . Cell 134 , 828 – 842 . Campellone , K . G . , Webb , N . J . , Znameroski , E . A . , and Welch , M . D . ( 2008 ) . WHAMM is an Arp2 / 3 complex activator that binds microtubules and func - tions in ER to Golgi transport . Cell 134 , 148 – 161 . Cao , H . , Orth , J . D . , Chen , J . , Weller , S . G . , Heuser , J . E . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 2003 ) . Cortactin is a component of clathrin - coated pits and participates in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Cell . Biol . 23 , 2162 – 2170 . Cosen - Binker , L . I . , and Kapus , A . ( 2006 ) . Cortactin : the gray eminence of the cytoskeleton . Physiology 21 , 352 – 361 . Czuchra , A . , Wu , X . , Meyer , H . , van Hengel , J . , Schroeder , T . , Geffers , R . , Rottner , K . , and Brakebusch , C . ( 2005 ) . Cdc42 is not essential for ﬁlopodium formation , directed migration , cell polarization , and mitosis in ﬁbroblastoid cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 4473 – 4484 . DeChiara , T . M . ( 2001 ) . Gene Knockout Protocols , Totowa , NJ : Humana Press . Du , Y . , Weed , S . A . , Xiong , W . C . , Marshall , T . D . , and Parsons , J . T . ( 1998 ) . Identiﬁcation of a novel cortactin SH3 domain - binding protein and its local - ization to growth cones of cultured neurons . Mol . Cell . Biol . 18 , 5838 – 5851 . Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . , Zhang , C . X . , Carreno , S . , Barroso , C . , Heuser , J . E . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2004 ) . RNAi - mediated Hip1R silencing results in stable association between the endocytic machinery and the actin assembly machin - ery . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 1666 – 1679 . Frischknecht , F . , and Way , M . ( 2001 ) . Surﬁng pathogens and the lessons learned for actin polymerization . Trends Cell Biol . 11 , 30 – 38 . Goley , E . D . , and Welch , M . D . ( 2006 ) . The ARP2 / 3 complex : an actin nucle - ator comes of age . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 713 – 726 . Gomez , T . S . , et al . ( 2006 ) . HS1 functions as an essential actin - regulatory adaptor protein at the immune synapse . Immunity 24 , 741 – 752 . Haglund , K . , Sigismund , S . , Polo , S . , Szymkiewicz , I . , Di Fiore , P . P . , and Dikic , I . ( 2003 ) . Multiple monoubiquitination of RTKs is sufﬁcient for their endocytosis and degradation . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 , 461 – 466 . Hao , J . J . , Zhu , J . , Zhou , K . , Smith , N . , and Zhan , X . ( 2005 ) . The coiled - coil domain is required for HS1 to bind to F - actin and activate Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 37988 – 37994 . Hitz , C . , Wurst , W . , and Kuhn , R . ( 2007 ) . Conditional brain - speciﬁc knock - down of MAPK using Cre / loxP regulated RNA interference . Nucleic Acids Res . 35 , e90 Hou , P . , Estrada , L . , Kinley , A . W . , Parsons , J . T . , Vojtek , A . B . , and Gorski , J . L . ( 2003 ) . Fgd1 , the Cdc42 GEF responsible for faciogenital dysplasia , directly interacts with cortactin and mAbp1 to modulate cell shape . Hum . Mol . Genet . 12 , 1981 – 1993 . Illes , A . , Enyedi , B . , Tamas , P . , Balazs , A . , Bogel , G . , Melinda , Lukacs , and Buday , L . ( 2006 ) . Cortactin is required for integrin - mediated cell spreading . Immunol Lett . 104 , 124 – 130 . Kaksonen , M . , Peng , H . B . , and Rauvala , H . ( 2000 ) . Association of cortactin with dynamic actin in lamellipodia and on endosomal vesicles . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 4421 – 4426 . Kanner , S . B . , Reynolds , A . B . , Vines , R . R . , and Parsons , J . T . ( 1990 ) . Mono - clonal antibodies to individual tyrosine - phosphorylated protein substrates of oncogene - encoded tyrosine kinases . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 87 , 3328 – 3332 . Kempiak , S . J . , Yamaguchi , H . , Sarmiento , C . , Sidani , M . , Ghosh , M . , Eddy , R . J . , Desmarais , V . , Way , M . , Condeelis , J . , and Segall , J . E . ( 2005 ) . A neural Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome protein - mediated pathway for localized activa - tion of actin polymerization that is regulated by cortactin . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 5836 – 5842 . Kim , K . , Hou , P . , Gorski , J . L . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2004 ) . Effect of Fgd1 on cortactin in Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin assembly . Biochemistry 43 , 2422 – 2427 . Kopecki , Z . , Luchetti , M . M . , Adams , D . H . , Strudwick , X . , Mantamadiotis , T . , Stoppacciaro , A . , Gabrielli , A . , Ramsay , R . G . , and Cowin , A . J . ( 2007 ) . Col - lagen loss and impaired wound healing is associated with c - Myb deﬁciency . J . Pathol . 211 , 351 – 361 . Kowalski , J . R . , Egile , C . , Gil , S . , Snapper , S . B . , Li , R . , and Thomas , S . M . ( 2005 ) . Cortactin regulates cell migration through activation of N - WASP . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 79 – 87 . Kraynov , V . S . , Chamberlain , C . , Bokoch , G . M . , Schwartz , M . A . , Slabaugh , S . , and Hahn , K . M . ( 2000 ) . Localized Rac activation dynamics visualized in living cells . Science 290 , 333 – 337 . Kruchten , A . E . , Krueger , E . W . , Wang , Y . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 2008 ) . Distinct phospho - forms of cortactin differentially regulate actin polymeriza - tion and focal adhesions . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 295 , C1113 – C1122 . Ladwein , M . , and Rottner , K . ( 2008 ) . On the Rho’d : the regulation of mem - brane protrusions by Rho - GTPases . FEBS Lett . 582 , 2066 – 2074 . Lai , F . P . , Szczodrak , M . , Block , J . , Faix , J . , Breitsprecher , D . , Mannherz , H . G . , Stradal , T . E . , Dunn , G . A . , Small , J . V . , and Rottner , K . ( 2008 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex interactions and actin network turnover in lamellipodia . EMBO J . 27 , 982 – 992 . Le Clainche , C . , Pauly , B . S . , Zhang , C . X . , Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . , Cunningham , K . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2007 ) . A Hip1R - cortactin complex negatively regulates actin assembly associated with endocytosis . EMBO J . 26 , 1199 – 1210 . Linardopoulou , E . V . , Parghi , S . S . , Friedman , C . , Osborn , G . E . , Parkhurst , S . M . , and Trask , B . J . ( 2007 ) . Human subtelomeric WASH genes encode a new subclass of the WASP family . PLoS Genet . 3 , e237 . Linder , S . ( 2007 ) . The matrix corroded : podosomes and invadopodia in ex - tracellular matrix degradation . Trends Cell Biol . 17 , 107 – 117 . Lommel , S . , Benesch , S . , Rottner , K . , Franz , T . , Wehland , J . , and Kuhn , R . ( 2001 ) . Actin pedestal formation by enteropathogenic Escherichia coli and intracellular motility of Shigella ﬂexneri are abolished in N - WASP - defective cells . EMBO Rep . 2 , 850 – 857 . Martin , K . H . , Jeffery , E . D . , Grigera , P . R . , Shabanowitz , J . , Hunt , D . F . , and Parsons , J . T . ( 2006 ) . Cortactin phosphorylation sites mapped by mass spec - trometry . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 2851 – 2853 . Martinez - Quiles , N . , Ho , H . Y . , Kirschner , M . W . , Ramesh , N . , and Geha , R . S . ( 2004 ) . Erk / Src phosphorylation of cortactin acts as a switch on - switch off mechanism that controls its ability to activate N - WASP . Mol . Cell . Biol . 24 , 5269 – 5280 . McNiven , M . A . , Kim , L . , Krueger , E . W . , Orth , J . D . , Cao , H . , and Wong , T . W . ( 2000 ) . Regulated interactions between dynamin and the actin - binding pro - tein cortactin modulate cell shape . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 187 – 198 . Merriﬁeld , C . J . , Perrais , D . , and Zenisek , D . ( 2005 ) . Coupling between clath - rin - coated - pit invagination , cortactin recruitment , and membrane scission observed in live cells . Cell 121 , 593 – 606 . Mizutani , K . , Miki , H . , He , H . , Maruta , H . , and Takenawa , T . ( 2002 ) . Essential role of neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein in podosome formation and degradation of extracellular matrix in src - transformed ﬁbroblasts . Cancer Res . 62 , 669 – 674 . Monypenny , J . , Zicha , D . , Higashida , C . , Oceguera - Yanez , F . , Narumiya , S . , and Watanabe , N . ( 2009 ) . Cdc42 and Rac family GTPases regulate mode and speed but not direction of primary ﬁbroblast migration during PDGF - depen - dent chemotaxis . Mol . Cell . Biol . 29 , 2730 – 2747 Nicholson - Dykstra , S . M . , and Higgs , H . N . ( 2008 ) . Arp2 depletion inhibits sheet - like protrusions but not linear protrusions of ﬁbroblasts and lympho - cytes . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 65 , 904 – 922 . Pankov , R . , Endo , Y . , Even - Ram , S . , Araki , M . , Clark , K . , Cukierman , E . , Matsumoto , K . , and Yamada , K . M . ( 2005 ) . A Rac switch regulates random versus directionally persistent cell migration . J . Cell Biol . 170 , 793 – 802 . Pistor , S . , Grobe , L . , Sechi , A . S . , Domann , E . , Gerstel , B . , Machesky , L . M . , Chakraborty , T . , and Wehland , J . ( 2000 ) . Mutations of arginine residues within the 146 - KKRRK - 150 motif of the ActA protein of Listeria monocyto - genes abolish intracellular motility by interfering with the recruitment of the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 3277 – 3287 . Pollard , T . D . ( 2007 ) . Regulation of actin ﬁlament assembly by Arp2 / 3 com - plex and formins . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 36 , 451 – 477 . Pollard , T . D . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments . Cell 112 , 453 – 465 . F . P . L . Lai et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3222 Rottner , K . , Hall , A . , and Small , J . V . ( 1999 ) . Interplay between Rac and Rho in the control of substrate contact dynamics . Curr . Biol . 9 , 640 – 648 . Rottner , K . , Kaverina , I . N . , and Stradal , T . E . B . ( 2006 ) . Cytoskeleton proteins . In : Cell Biology , A Laboratory Handbook , Vol . 3 , ed . J . E . Celis , London , United Kingdom : Elsevier Academic Press , 111 – 119 . Selbach , M . , and Backert , S . ( 2005 ) . Cortactin : an Achilles’ heel of the actin cytoskeleton targeted by pathogens . Trends Microbiol . 13 , 181 – 189 . Sigismund , S . , Woelk , T . , Puri , C . , Maspero , E . , Tacchetti , C . , Transidico , P . , Di Fiore , P . P . , and Polo , S . ( 2005 ) . Clathrin - independent endocytosis of ubiqui - tinated cargos . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 2760 – 2765 . Small , J . V . , Stradal , T . , Vignal , E . , and Rottner , K . ( 2002 ) . The lamellipodium : where motility begins . Trends Cell Biol . 12 , 112 – 120 . Sparks , A . B . , Rider , J . E . , Hoffman , N . G . , Fowlkes , D . M . , Quillam , L . A . , and Kay , B . K . ( 1996 ) . Distinct ligand preferences of Src homology 3 domains from Src , Yes , Abl , cortactin , p53bp2 , PLCgamma , Crk , and Grb2 . Proc . Natl . Acad Sci . USA 93 , 1540 – 1544 . Steffen , A . , Faix , J . , Resch , G . P . , Linkner , J . , Wehland , J . , Small , J . V . , Rottner , K . , and Stradal , T . E . ( 2006 ) . Filopodia formation in the absence of functional WAVE - and Arp2 / 3 - complexes . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 2581 – 2591 . Steffen , A . , Rottner , K . , Ehinger , J . , Innocenti , M . , Scita , G . , Wehland , J . , and Stradal , T . E . ( 2004 ) . Sra - 1 and Nap1 link Rac to actin assembly driving lamellipodia formation . EMBO J . 23 , 749 – 759 . Stradal , T . E . , Rottner , K . , Disanza , A . , Confalonieri , S . , Innocenti , M . , and Scita , G . ( 2004 ) . Regulation of actin dynamics by WASP and WAVE family proteins . Trends Cell Biol . 14 , 303 – 311 . Takenawa , T . , and Suetsugu , S . ( 2007 ) . The WASP - WAVE protein network : connecting the membrane to the cytoskeleton . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 , 37 – 48 . Taniuchi , I . , Kitamura , D . , Maekawa , Y . , Fukuda , T . , Kishi , H . , and Watanabe , T . ( 1995 ) . Antigen - receptor induced clonal expansion and deletion of lympho - cytes are impaired in mice lacking HS1 protein , a substrate of the antigen - receptor - coupled tyrosine kinases . EMBO J . 14 , 3664 – 3678 . Tehrani , S . , Faccio , R . , Chandrasekar , I . , Ross , F . P . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2006 ) . Cortactin has an essential and speciﬁc role in osteoclast actin assembly . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 2882 – 2895 . Tehrani , S . , Tomasevic , N . , Weed , S . , Sakowicz , R . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2007 ) . Src phosphorylation of cortactin enhances actin assembly . Proc . Natl . Acad Sci . USA 104 , 11933 – 11938 . Tybulewicz , V . L . , Crawford , C . E . , Jackson , P . K . , Bronson , R . T . , and Mulligan , R . C . ( 1991 ) . Neonatal lethality and lymphopenia in mice with a homozygous disruption of the c - abl proto - oncogene . Cell 65 , 1153 – 1163 . van Rossum , A . G . , de Graaf , J . H . , Schuuring - Scholtes , E . , Kluin , P . M . , Fan , Y . X . , Zhan , X . , Moolenaar , W . H . , and Schuuring , E . ( 2003 ) . Alternative splicing of the actin binding domain of human cortactin affects cell migration . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 45672 – 45679 . van Rossum , A . G . , Moolenaar , W . H . , and Schuuring , E . ( 2006 ) . Cortactin affects cell migration by regulating intercellular adhesion and cell spreading . Exp . Cell Res . 312 , 1658 – 1670 . Wang , Y . L . ( 1985 ) . Exchange of actin subunits at the leading edge of living ﬁbroblasts : possible role of treadmilling . J . Cell Biol . 101 , 597 – 602 . Weaver , A . M . , Heuser , J . E . , Karginov , A . V . , Lee , W . L . , Parsons , J . T . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2002 ) . Interaction of cortactin and N - WASp with Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 12 , 1270 – 1278 . Weaver , A . M . , Karginov , A . V . , Kinley , A . W . , Weed , S . A . , Li , Y . , Parsons , J . T . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2001 ) . Cortactin promotes and stabilizes Arp2 / 3 - induced actin ﬁlament network formation . Curr . Biol . 11 , 370 – 374 . Weed , S . A . , Karginov , A . V . , Schafer , D . A . , Weaver , A . M . , Kinley , A . W . , Cooper , J . A . , and Parsons , J . T . ( 2000 ) . Cortactin localization to sites of actin assembly in lamellipodia requires interactions with F - actin and the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 29 – 40 . Weiss , S . M . , et al . ( 2009 ) . IRSp53 links the enterohemorrhagic E . coli effectors Tir and EspFU for actin pedestal formation . Cell Host Microbe 5 , 244 – 258 . Welch , M . D . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2002 ) . Cellular control of actin nucleation . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 18 , 247 – 288 . Wildenberg , G . A . , Dohn , M . R . , Carnahan , R . H . , Davis , M . A . , Lobdell , N . A . , Settleman , J . , and Reynolds , A . B . ( 2006 ) . p120 - catenin and p190RhoGAP regulate cell - cell adhesion by coordinating antagonism between Rac and Rho . Cell 127 , 1027 – 1039 . Wu , H . , Reynolds , A . B . , Kanner , S . B . , Vines , R . R . , and Parsons , J . T . ( 1991 ) . Identiﬁcation and characterization of a novel cytoskeleton - associated pp60src substrate . Mol . Cell . Biol . 11 , 5113 – 5124 . Yang , L . , Wang , L . , and Zheng , Y . ( 2006 ) . Gene targeting of Cdc42 and Cdc42GAP afﬁrms the critical involvement of Cdc42 in ﬁlopodia induction , directed migration , and proliferation in primary mouse embryonic ﬁbro - blasts . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 4675 – 4685 . Yarar , D . , Waterman - Storer , C . M . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2005 ) . A dynamic actin cytoskeleton functions at multiple stages of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 964 – 975 . Zhu , J . , Yu , D . , Zeng , X . C . , Zhou , K . , and Zhan , X . ( 2007 ) . Receptor - mediated endocytosis involves tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 16086 – 16094 . Zhu , J . , Zhou , K . , Hao , J . J . , Liu , J . , Smith , N . , and Zhan , X . ( 2005 ) . Regulation of cortactin / dynamin interaction by actin polymerization during the ﬁssion of clathrin - coated pits . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 807 – 817 . Zuchero , J . B . , Coutts , A . S . , Quinlan , M . E . , Thangue , N . B . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2009 ) . p53 - cofactor JMY is a multifunctional actin nucleation factor . Nat . Cell Biol . 11 , 451 – 459 . Characterization of Cortactin Null Cells Vol . 20 , July 15 , 2009 3223