REVIEW ARTICLE OPEN Montessori education : a review of the evidence base Chloë Marshall 1 The Montessori educational method has existed for over 100 years , but evaluations of its effectiveness are scarce . This review paper has three aims , namely to ( 1 ) identify some key elements of the method , ( 2 ) review existing evaluations of Montessori education , and ( 3 ) review studies that do not explicitly evaluate Montessori education but which evaluate the key elements identi ﬁ ed in ( 1 ) . The goal of the paper is therefore to provide a review of the evidence base for Montessori education , with the dual aspirations of stimulating future research and helping teachers to better understand whether and why Montessori education might be effective . npj Science of Learning ( 2017 ) 2 : 11 ; doi : 10 . 1038 / s41539 - 017 - 0012 - 7 INTRODUCTION Maria Montessori ( 1870 – 1952 ) was by any measure an extra - ordinary individual . She initially resisted going into teaching — one of the few professions available to women in the late 19th century — and instead became one of the very ﬁ rst women to qualify as a medical doctor in Italy . As a doctor she specialised in psychiatry and paediatrics . While working with children with intellectual disabilities she gained the important insight that in order to learn , they required not medical treatment but rather an appropriate pedagogy . In 1900 , she was given the opportunity to begin developing her pedagogy when she was appointed director of an Orthophrenic school for developmentally disabled children in Rome . When her pupils did as well in their exams as typically developing pupils and praise was lavished upon her for this achievement , she did not lap up that praise ; rather , she wondered what it was about the education system in Italy that was failing children without disabilities . What was holding them back and preventing them from reaching their potential ? In 1907 she had the opportunity to start working with non - disabled children in a housing project located in a slum district of Rome . There , she set up her ﬁ rst ' Casa dei Bambini ' ( ' children ’ s house ' ) for 3 – 7 - year olds . She continued to develop her distinctive pedagogy based on a scienti ﬁ c approach of experimentation and observation . On the basis of this work , she argued that children pass through sensitive periods for learning and several stages of development , and that children ’ s self - construction can be fostered through engaging with self - directed activities in a specially prepared environment . There was international interest in this new way of teaching , and there are now thousands of Montessori schools ( predominantly for children aged 3 – 6 and 6 – 12 ) throughout the world . 1 – 4 Central to Montessori ’ s method of education is the dynamic triad of child , teacher and environment . One of the teacher ’ s roles is to guide the child through what Montessori termed the ' prepared environment , i . e . , a classroom and a way of learning that are designed to support the child ’ s intellectual , physical , emotional and social development through active exploration , choice and independent learning . One way of making sense of the Montessori method for the purposes of this review is to consider two of its important aspects : the learning materials , and the way in which the teacher and the design of the prepared environment promote children ’ s self - directed engagement with those materials . With respect to the learning materials , Montessori developed a set of manipulable objects designed to support children ’ s learning of sensorial concepts such as dimension , colour , shape and texture , and academic concepts of mathematics , literacy , science , geo - graphy and history . With respect to engagement , children learn by engaging hands - on with the materials most often individually , but also in pairs or small groups , during a 3 - h ' work cycle ' in which they are guided by the teacher to choose their own activities . They are given the freedom to choose what they work on , where they work , with whom they work , and for how long they work on any particular activity , all within the limits of the class rules . No competition is set up between children , and there is no system of extrinsic rewards or punishments . These two aspects — the learning materials themselves , and the nature of the learning — make Montessori classrooms look strikingly different to conven - tional classrooms . It should be noted that for Montessori the goal of education is to allow the child ’ s optimal development ( intellectual , physical , emotional and social ) to unfold . 2 This is a very different goal to that of most education systems today , where the focus is on attainment in academic subjects such as literacy and mathematics . Thus when we ask the question , as this review paper does , whether children bene ﬁ t more from a Montessori education than from a non - Montessori education , we need to bear in mind that the outcome measures used to capture effectiveness do not necessarily measure the things that Montessori deemed most important in education . Teachers and parents who choose the Montessori method may choose it for reasons that are not so amenable to evaluation . Despite its existence for over 100 years , peer - reviewed evaluations of Montessori education are few and they suffer from a number of methodological limitations , as will be discussed in Section 3 . This review has three aims , namely to ( 1 ) identify some key elements of the Montessori educational method , ( 2 ) review existing evaluations of Montessori education , and ( 3 ) review studies that do not explicitly evaluate Montessori education but which evaluate the key elements identi ﬁ ed in ( 1 ) . My goal is to provide a review of the scienti ﬁ c evidence base for Montessori education , with the dual aspirations of stimulating future research Received : 30 October 2016 Revised : 11 September 2017 Accepted : 12 September 2017 1 Department of Psychology and Human Development , UCL Institute of Education , University College London , London , UK Correspondence : Chloë Marshall ( chloe . marshall @ ucl . ac . uk ) www . nature . com / npjscilearn Published in partnership with The University of Queensland and helping teachers to better understand whether and why Montessori education might be effective . SOME KEY ELEMENTS OF THE MONTESSORI EDUCATIONAL METHOD The goal of this section is to isolate some key elements of the Montessori method , in order to better understand why , if Montessori education is effective , this might be , and what elements of it might usefully be evaluated by researchers . These are important considerations because there is considerable variability in how the Montessori method is implemented in different schools , and the name , which is not copyrighted , is frequently used without full adherence . 5 , 6 Nevertheless , some elements of the method might still be bene ﬁ cial , or could be successfully incorporated ( or , indeed , are already incorporated ) into schools that do not want to carry the name ' Montessori ' or to adhere fully to its principles . Pinpointing more precisely what — if anything — about the Montessori method is effective will enable a better understanding of why it works . Furthermore , it has been argued that there might be dangers in adopting wholesale and uncritically an educational method that originated over 100 years ago , in a world that was different in many ways to today ’ s . 7 If the method is to be adopted piecemeal , which pieces should be adopted ? As outlined previously , two important aspects of Montessori ’ s educational method are the learning materials , and the self - directed nature of children ’ s engagement with those materials . Some key elements of each of these aspects will now be considered in turn . The learning materials The ﬁ rst learning materials that the child is likely to encounter in the Montessori classroom are those that make up the practical life curriculum . These are activities that involve pouring different materials , using utensils such as scissors , tongs and tweezers , cleaning and polishing , preparing snacks , laying the table and washing dishes , arranging ﬂ owers , gardening , doing up and undoing clothes fastenings , and so on . Their aims , in addition to developing the child ’ s skills for independent living , are to build up the child ’ s gross and ﬁ ne motor control and eye - hand co - ordination , to introduce them to the cycle of selecting , initiating , completing and tidying up an activity ( of which more in the next section ) , and to introduce the rules for functioning in the social setting of the classroom . As the child settles into the cycle of work and shows the ability to focus on self - selected activities , the teacher will introduce the sensorial materials . The key feature of the sensorial materials is that each isolates just one concept for the child to focus on . The pink tower , for example , consists of ten cubes which differ only in their dimensions , the smallest being 1 cm 3 , the largest 10 cm 3 . In building the tower the child ’ s attention is being focused solely on the regular decrease in volume of successive cubes . There are no additional cues — different colours for example , or numbers written onto the faces of the cube — which might help the child to sequence the cubes accurately . Another piece of sensorial material , the sound boxes , contains six pairs of closed cylinders that vary in sound from soft to loud when shaken , and the task for the child is to ﬁ nd the matching pairs . Again , there is only one cue that the child can use to do this task : sound . The aim of the sensorial materials is not to bombard the child ’ s senses with stimuli ; on the contrary , they are tools designed for enabling the child to classify and put names to the stimuli that he will encounter on an everyday basis . The sensorial materials , are , furthermore , designed as prepara - tion for academic subjects . The long rods , which comprise ten red rods varying solely in length in 10 cm increments from 10 cm to 1 m , have an equivalent in the mathematics materials : the number rods , where the rods are divided into alternating 10 cm sections of red and blue so that they take on the numerical values 1 – 10 . The touchboards , which consist of alternate strips of sandpaper and smooth paper for the child to feel , are preparation for the sandpaper globe in geography — a globe where the land masses are made of rough sandpaper but the oceans and seas are smooth . The touchboards are also preparation for the sandpaper letters in literacy and sandpaper numerals in mathematics , which the child learns to trace with his index and middle ﬁ ngers . Key elements of the literacy curriculum include the introduction of writing before reading , the breaking down of the constituent skills of writing ( pencil control , letter formation , spelling ) before the child actually writes words on paper , and the use of phonics for teaching sound - letter correspondences . Grammar — parts of speech , morphology , sentence structure — are taught system - atically through teacher and child - made materials . In the mathematics curriculum , quantities 0 – 10 and their symbols are introduced separately before being combined , and large quantities and symbols ( tens , hundreds and thousands ) and fractions are introduced soon after , all through concrete materials . Operations ( addition , subtraction , multiplication , division , the calculation of square roots ) are again introduced using concrete materials , which the child can choose to stop using when he is able to succeed without that concrete support . Principles running throughout the design of these learning materials are that the child learns through movement and gains a concrete foundation with the aim of preparing him for learning more abstract concepts . A further design principle is that each piece of learning material has a ' control of error ' which alerts the child to any mistakes , thereby allowing self - correction with minimal teacher support . Self - directed engagement with the materials Important though the learning materials are , 8 they do not , in isolation , constitute the Montessori method because they need to be engaged with in a particular way . Montessori observed that the young child is capable of concentrating for long periods of time on activities that capture his spontaneous interest . 2 – 4 There are two features of the way that children engage with the learning materials that Montessori claimed promoted this concentration . The ﬁ rst is that there is a cycle of activity surrounding the use of each piece of material ( termed the ' internal work cycle ' 9 ) . If a child wishes to use the pink tower , for example , he will have to ﬁ nd a space on the ﬂ oor large enough to unroll the mat that will delineate his work area , carry the ten cubes of the pink tower individually to the mat from where they are stored , then build the tower . Once he has built the tower he is free to repeat this activity as many times as he likes . Other children may come and watch , and if he wishes they can join in with him , but he will be able to continue on his own if he prefers and for as long as he likes . When he has had enough , he will dismantle the pink tower and reassemble it in its original location , ready for another child to use . This repeated and self - chosen engagement with the material , the lack of interruption , and the requirement to set up the material and put it away afterwards , are key elements aimed at developing the child ’ s concentration . 10 The second feature which aims to promote concentration is that these cycles of activity take place during a 3 - h period of time ( termed the ' external work cycle ' 9 ) . During those 3 h children are mostly free to select activities on their own and with others , and to ﬁ nd their own rhythm of activity , moving freely around the classroom as they do so . One might wonder what the role of the teacher is during this period . Although the children have a great deal of freedom in what they do , their freedom is not unlimited . The teacher ’ s role is to guide children who are ﬁ nding it hard to select materials or who are disturbing others , to introduce new materials to children who are ready for a new challenge , and to Montessori education C Marshall 2 npj Science of Learning ( 2017 ) 11 Published in partnership with The University of Queensland 1234567890 conduct small - group lessons . Her decisions about what to teach are made on the basis of careful observations of the children . Although she might start the day with plans of what she will do during the work cycle , she will be led by her students and their needs , and there is no formal timetable . Hence the Montessori classroom is very different to the teacher - led conventional classroom with its highly structured day where short timeslots are devoted to each activity , the whole class is engaged in the same activities at the same time , and the teacher instructs at the front of the class . In summary , there are two aspects of Montessori classrooms that are very different to conventional classrooms : the learning materials themselves , and the individual , self - directed nature of the learning under the teacher ’ s expert guidance . All the elements described here — the features of the learning materials themselves ( e . g . , each piece of material isolates just one concept , each contains a control of error that allows for self - correction , learning proceeds from concrete to abstract concepts ) and the child - led manner of engagement with those materials ( e . g . , self - selection , repeated and active engagement , tidying up afterwards , freedom from interruption , lack of grades and extrinsic rewards ) might potentially bene ﬁ t development and learning over the teaching of the conventional classroom . We will return to many of the elements discussed here in the following two sections . ( This has necessarily been only a brief survey of some of the most important elements of the Montessori method . Readers wanting to ﬁ nd out more are again directed to refs . 2 – 4 ) . EVALUATIONS OF MONTESSORI EDUCATION There are few peer - reviewed evaluations of Montessori education , and the majority have been carried out in the USA . Some have evaluated children ’ s outcomes while those children were in Montessori settings , and others have evaluated Montessori - educated children after a period of subsequent conventional schooling . As a whole this body of research suffers from several methodological limitations . Firstly , few studies are longitudinal in design . Secondly , there are no good quality randomised control trials ; most researchers have instead tried to match participants in Montessori and comparison groups on as many likely confound - ing variables as possible . Thirdly , if children in the Montessori group do score higher than those in the non - Montessori group on a particular outcome measure , then assuming that that effect can be attributed to being in a Montessori classroom , what exactly is it about Montessori education that has caused the effect ? Mon - tessori education is a complex package — how can the speci ﬁ c elements which might be causing the effect be isolated ? At a very basic level — and drawing on two of the main aspects of Montessori education outlined above — is the effect due to the learning materials or to the self - directed way in which children engage with them ( and can the two be separated ) ? Fourthly , there are presumably differences between Montessori schools ( includ - ing the way in which the method is implemented ) that might in ﬂ uence children ’ s outcomes , but studies rarely include more than one Montessori school , and sometimes not more than one Montessori class . Fifthly , and relatedly , there is the issue of ' treatment ﬁ delity ' — what counts as a Montessori classroom ? Not all schools that call themselves ' Montessori ' adhere strictly to Montessori principles , have trained Montessori teachers , or are accredited by a professional organisation . A sixth , and again related , point is that children ’ s experiences in Montessori education will vary in terms of the length of time they spend in Montessori education , and the age at which they attend . Finally , the numbers of children participating in studies are usually small and quite narrow in terms of their demographics , making generalisation of any results problematic . These methodological issues are not limited to evaluations of Montessori education , of course — they are relevant to much of educational research . Of these , the lack of randomised control trials is particularly notable given the recognition of their importance in educa - tion . 11 , 12 Parents choose their child ’ s school for a host of different reasons , 13 and randomisation is important in the context of Montessori education because parents who choose a non - conventional school for their child might be different in relevant ways from parents who do not , for example in their views on child - rearing and aspirations for their child ’ s future . This means that if a study ﬁ nds a bene ﬁ t for Montessori education over conventional education this might re ﬂ ect a parent effect rather than a school effect . Furthermore , randomisation also controls for socio - economic status ( SES ) . Montessori schools are often fee - paying , which means that pupils are likely to come from higher SES families ; children from higher SES families are likely to do better in a variety of educational contexts . 14 – 16 A recent report found that even public ( i . e . , non - fee - paying ) Montessori schools in the USA are not representative of the racial and socioeconomic diversity of the neighbourhoods they serve . 17 However , random assignment of children to Montessori versus non - Montessori schools for the purposes of a randomised control trial would be very dif ﬁ cult to achieve because it would take away parental choice . Arguably the most robust evaluation of the Montessori method to date is that by Lillard and Else - Quest . 18 They compared children in Montessori and non - Montessori education and from two age groups — 5 and 12 - year olds — on a range of cognitive , academic , social and behavioural measures . Careful thought was given to how to overcome the lack of random assignment to the Montessori and non - Montessori groups . The authors ’ solution was to design their study around the school lottery that was already in place in that particular school district . All children had entered the Montessori school lottery ; those who were accepted were assigned to the Montessori group , and those who were not accepted were assigned to the comparison ( other education systems ) group . Post - hoc comparisons showed similar income levels in both sets of families . Although group differences were not found for all outcome measures , where they were found they favoured the Montessori group . For 5 - year olds , signi ﬁ cant group differences were found for certain academic skills ( namely letter - word identi ﬁ cation , phonological decoding ability , and math skills ) , a measure of executive function ( the card sort task ) , social skills ( as measured by social reasoning and positive shared play ) and theory of mind ( as measured by a false - belief task ) . For 12 - year olds , signi ﬁ cant group differences were found on measures of story writing and social skills . Furthermore , in a questionnaire that asked about how they felt about school , responses of children in the Montessori group indicated that they felt a greater sense of community . The authors concluded that ' at least when strictly implemented , Montessori education fosters social and academic skills that are equal or superior to those fostered by a pool of other types of schools ' . 18 Their study has been criticised for using just one Montessori school , 19 but Lillard and Else - Quest ’ s response is that the school was faithful to Montessori principles , which suggests that the results might be generalisable to other such schools . 20 That ﬁ delity might impact outcomes has long been of concern , 21 and was demonstrated empirically in a further , longitudinal , study , 6 that compared high ﬁ delity Montessori classes ( again , from just one school ) , ' supplemented ' Montessori classes ( which provided the Montessori materials plus conventional activities such as puzzles , games and worksheets ) , and conventional classrooms . Children in these classes were 3 – 6 years old , and they were tested at two time - points : towards the beginning and towards the end of the school year . Although the study lacked random assignment of children to groups , the groups were matched with respect to key parent variables such as parental education . As in Lillard and Else - Quest ’ s earlier study , 18 outcome measures tapped a range of social and academic skills related to school readiness ( i . e . , Montessori education C Marshall 3 Published in partnership with The University of Queensland npj Science of Learning ( 2017 ) 11 children ’ s preparedness to succeed in academic settings ) . There were two research questions : ﬁ rstly , do preschool children ’ s school readiness skills change during the academic year as a function of school type , and secondly , within Montessori schools , does the percentage of children using Montessori materials in a classroom predict children ’ s school readiness skills at the end of the academic year ? Overall , the answer to both questions was “ yes ” . Children in the high - ﬁ delity Montessori school , as compared with children in the other two types of school , showed signi ﬁ cantly greater gains on measures of executive function , reading , math , vocabulary , and social problem - solving . Furthermore , the degree to which children were engaged with Montessori materials signi ﬁ cantly predicted gains in executive function , reading and vocabulary . In other words , treatment ﬁ delity mattered : children gained fewer bene ﬁ ts from being in a Montessori school when they were engaged in non - Montessori activities . This study does not demonstrate de ﬁ nitively that the Mon - tessori materials drove the effect : there might have been other differences between the high and lower ﬁ delity classrooms — such as the teachers ’ interactions with their pupils — that were responsible for the difference in child outcomes . 6 In a move to explore the role of the Montessori materials further , a more recent experimental study 22 removed supplementary materials , to leave just the Montessori materials , from two of the three classrooms in a Montessori school that served 3 – 6 - year olds . Over a period of 4 months children in the classrooms from which supplementary materials were removed made signi ﬁ cantly greater gains than children from the unchanged classroom on tests of letter - word identi ﬁ cation and executive function , although not on measures of vocabulary , theory of mind , maths , or social problem - solving . The authors acknowledge weaknesses in the study design , including the small number of participants ( just 52 across the three classrooms ) and the short duration . Nevertheless , the study does provide a template for how future experimental manipula - tions of ﬁ delity to the Montessori method could be carried out . Fidelity is important because variation in how faithful Mon - tessori schools are to the ' ideal ' is likely to be an important factor in explaining why such mixed ﬁ ndings have been found in evaluations of the Montessori method . 6 For example , two early randomised control trials to evaluate Head Start in the USA did not ﬁ nd any immediate bene ﬁ t of Montessori preschool programmes over other types of preschool programmes . 23 , 24 In both pro - grammes , only 4 - year olds were included , whereas the ideal in Montessori preschool programmes is for 3 – 6 year olds to be taught in the same class in order to foster child - to - child tutoring . 6 Furthermore , in one of the programmes 23 the ideal 3 - h work cycle was reduced to just 30 min . 6 A more recent study of older children compared 8th grade Montessori and non - Montessori students matched for gender , ethnicity and socio - economic status . 25 The study found lower scores for Montessori students for English / Language Arts and no difference for maths scores , but the participating Montessori school altered the “ ideal ” by issuing evaluative grades to pupils and introducing non - Montessori activities . 6 These same limitations then make it dif ﬁ cult to interpret studies that have found ' later ' bene ﬁ ts for children who have been followed up after a subsequent period of conventional education . In one of the studies discussed earlier , 23 social and cognitive bene ﬁ ts did emerge for children who had previously attended Montessori preschools and then moved to conventional schools , but these bene ﬁ ts did not emerge until adolescence , while a follow - up study 26 found cognitive bene ﬁ ts in Montessori males only , again in adolescence . Although such ' sleeper effects ' have been widely reported in evaluations of early years interventions , they may be artefacts of simple measurement error and random ﬂ uctuations . 27 Importantly , if the argument is that lack of ﬁ delity to the Montessori method is responsible for studies not ﬁ nding signi ﬁ cant bene ﬁ ts of Montessori education at younger ages , it is not logical to then credit the Montessori method with any bene ﬁ ts that emerge in follow - up studies . Some studies report positive outcomes for certain curricular areas but not others . One , for example , investigated scores on maths , science , English and social studies tests in the ﬁ nal years of compulsory education , several years after children had left their Montessori classrooms . 28 Compared to the non - Montessori group ( who were matched for gender , socioeconomic status , race / ethnicity and high school attended ) , the Montessori group scored signi ﬁ cantly higher on maths and science , but no differences were found for English and social studies . What might explain this differential effect ? The authors suggested that the advantages for maths might be driven by the materials themselves , compared to how maths is taught in conventional classes . 28 Alternatively , or perhaps in addition , children in Montessori classrooms might spend more time engaged in maths and science activities compared to children in conventional classes , with the amount of time spent on English and social studies not differing . However , the authors were unable , within the design of their study , to provide details of exactly how much time children in the Montessori school had spent doing maths , science , English and social studies , in comparison to the time that children in conventional classes were spending on those subjects . Just as knowing what is going on in the Montessori classroom is vital to being able to interpret the ﬁ ndings of evaluations , so is knowing what is going on in the comparison classrooms . One of the earliest evaluations of Montessori education in the USA 29 speculated that Montessori would have found much to appreciate in one of the non - Montessori comparison classes , including its ' freedom for the children ( moving about ; working alone ) ; its planned environment ( innovative methods with tape recorder playback of children ’ s conversations ; live animals , etc . ) ; its non - punitive character ( an “ incorrect ” answer deserves help , not anger ; original answers are reinforced , but other answers are pursued ) ; and its emphasis on concentration ( the children sustained activity without direct supervision for relatively long periods of time ) ' . In some evaluations , the differences between Montessori and conventional classrooms might not actually be so great , which might explain why bene ﬁ ts of being educated in a Montessori classroom are not found . And even if the Montessori approach to teaching a particular curriculum area is different to those used in conventional classrooms , there are likely to be different , equally - effective approaches to teaching the same concepts . This is a suggested explanation for the ﬁ nding that although children in Montessori kindergartens had an advantage relative to their conventionally - educated peers for base - 10 understanding in mathematics , they did not maintain this advantage when tested 2 years later . 30 While most evaluations are interested in traditional academic outcomes or factors related to academic success such as executive functions , a small number have investigated creativity . For example , an old study 31 compared just 14 four and ﬁ ve - year - old children who attended a Montessori nursery school with 14 four and ﬁ ve - year olds who attended a conventional nursery school ( matched for a range of parental variables , including attitudes and parental control ) . In a non - verbal creativity task , involving picture construction , they were given a blank sheet of paper , a piece of red gummed paper in the shape of a curved jellybean , and a pencil . They were then asked to think of and draw a picture in which the red paper would form an integral part . Each child ’ s construction was rated for originality , elaboration , activity , and title adequacy , and these ratings were then combined into a ' creativity ' score . The group of conventionally - schooled children scored almost twice as high as the Montessori group . A second task involved the child giving verbal descriptions of seven objects : a red rubber ball , a green wooden cube , a short length of rope , a steel mirror , a piece of rectangular clear plastic , a piece of chalk , and a short length of plastic tubing . Each description was scored Montessori education C Marshall 4 npj Science of Learning ( 2017 ) 11 Published in partnership with The University of Queensland as to whether it was functional ( i . e . , focused on the object ’ s use ) or whether it was a description of the object ’ s physical characteristics ( i . e . , shape , colour , etc . ) . Like the non - verbal creativity task , this task differentiated the two groups : whereas the conventionally educated children gave more functional descriptions ( e . g . , for the cube : “ you play with it ” ) , the Montessori children gave more physical descriptions ( e . g . , “ it ’ s square , it ’ s made of wood , and it ’ s green ” ) . A third task , the Embedded Figure Test , involved the child ﬁ rst being presented with a stimulus ﬁ gure and then locating a similar ﬁ gure located in an embedding context . Both accuracy and speed were measured . While the two groups did not differ in the number of embedded ﬁ gures accurately located , the Montessori group completed the task signi ﬁ cantly more quickly . The fourth and ﬁ nal task required children to draw a picture of anything they wanted to . Drawings were coded for the presence or absence of geometric ﬁ gures and people . The Montessori group produced more geometric ﬁ gures , but fewer people , than the conventional group . The authors were careful not to cast judgement on the performance differences between the two groups . 31 They wrote that ' The study does , however , support the notion that differing preschool educational environments yield different outcomes ' and ' Montessori children responded to the emphasis in their programme upon the physical world and upon a de ﬁ nition of school as a place of work ; the Nursery School children responded on their part to the social emphasis and the opportunity for spontaneous expression of feeling ' . They did not , however , compare and contrast the particular features of the two educational settings that might have given rise to these differences . Creativity has been studied more recently in France . 32 Seven to twelve - year olds were tested longitudinally on ﬁ ve tasks tapping different aspects of creativity . ' Divergent ' thinking tasks required children to ( 1 ) think of unusual uses for a cardboard box , ( 2 ) come up with ideas for making a plain toy elephant more entertaining , and ( 3 ) make as many drawings as possible starting from pairs of parallel lines . ' Integrative ' thinking tasks required children to ( 1 ) invent a story based on a title that was provided to them , and ( 2 ) invent a drawing incorporating six particular shapes . Their sample was bigger than that of the previous study , 31 comprising 40 pupils from a Montessori school and 119 from two conventional schools , and pupils were tested in two consecutive years ( no information is provided about whether pupils from different schools were matched on any variable other than age ) . For both types of task and at both time - points the Montessori - educated children scored higher than the conventionally - educated children . Again , the authors made little attempt to pinpoint the precise differences between schools that might have caused such differences in performance . None of the studies discussed so far has attempted to isolate individual elements of the Montessori method that might be accounting for any of the positive effects that they ﬁ nd . There are several studies , however , that have focused on the practical life materials . A quasi - experimental study 33 demonstrated that the practical life materials can be ef ﬁ cacious in non - Montessori classrooms . More than 50 different practical life exercises were introduced into eight conventional kindergarten classes , while ﬁ ve conventional kindergarten classes were not given these materials and acted as a comparison group . The outcome measure was a ﬁ ne motor control task , the ' penny posting test ' , whereby the number of pennies that a child could pick up and post through a one - inch slot in a can in two 30 s trials was counted . At pre - test the treatment and comparison groups did not differ in the number of pennies posted , but at post - test 6 months later the treatment group achieved a higher score than the comparison group , indicating ﬁ ner motor control . A nice feature of this study is that teachers reported children in both groups spending the same amount of time on tasks designed to support ﬁ ne motor control development , suggesting that there was something speci ﬁ c to the design of the practical life materials that was more effective in this regard than the conventional kindergarten materials on offer . And because the preschools that had used the practical life activities had introduced no other elements of the Montessori method , the effect could be con ﬁ dently attributed to the practical life materials themselves . An extension of this study 34 investigated the potential bene ﬁ ts of the practical life materials for ﬁ ne motor control by comparing 5 - year olds in Montessori kindergarten programmes with 5 - year olds in a conventional programme ( reported to have similarities in teaching mission and pupil background characteristics ) on the ' ﬂ ag posting test ' . In this task , the child was given a solid hardwood tray covered with clay in which there were 12 pinholes . There were also 12 paper ﬂ ags mounted on pins , six to the right of the tray and six to the left , and the child ’ s task was to place the ﬂ ags one at time in the holes . The child received three scores : one for the amount of time taken to ﬁ nish the activity , one for the number of attempts it took the child to put each ﬂ ag into the hole , and one for hand dominance ( to receive a score of 1 ( established dominance ) the child had to consistently use the same hand to place all 12 ﬂ ags , whereas mixed dominance received a score of 0 ) . Children were pre - tested at the beginning of the school year and post - tested 8 months later . Despite the lack of random assignment to groups , the two groups did not differ on pre - test scores , but they did at post - test : at post - test the Montessori group were signi ﬁ cantly faster and signi ﬁ cantly more accurate at the task , and had more established hand dominance . However , no attempt was made to measure how frequently children in both groups engaged with materials and activities that were designed to support ﬁ ne motor control development . Furthermore , the children in the Montessori classrooms were at the age where they should also have been using the sensorial materials , some of which ( for example , the ' knobbed cylinders ' and ' geometric cabinet ' ) are manipulated by holding small knobs , and whose use could potentially enhance ﬁ ne motor control . At that age children would also have been using the ' insets for design ' , materials from the early literacy curriculum designed to enhance pencil control . Therefore , although the results of this study are consistent with the practical life materials enhancing ﬁ ne motor control , the study does not securely establish that they do . A further study 35 introduced practical life exercises into conventional kindergarten classes , while control kindergarten classes were not given these materials . 15 min were set aside in the experimental schools ’ timetable for using the practical life materials , and they were also available during free choice periods . This time the outcome measure at pre - test and post - test was not ﬁ ne motor skill but attention . There were bene ﬁ ts to attention of being in the experimental group , but only for girls — boys showed no such bene ﬁ ts . The differential gender impact of the practical life materials on the development of attention is puzzling . Girls did not appear to engage with the materials more than boys during the time that was set aside for using them , but no measure was taken of whether girls chose them more frequently than boys during the free choice periods . Similarly , there were no measure - ments of the time that children in both the experimental and control groups spent engaged in other activities that might have enhanced ﬁ ne motor control . Nor is it clear whether it was the ﬁ ne motor practice directly or rather the opportunity to select interesting activities ( the teachers in the experimental schools commented on how interesting the children found the practical life activities ) that was responsible for the bene ﬁ ts to attention that were recorded for girls . Finally , it has been found that young adolescents in Montessori middle schools show greater intrinsic motivation than their peers in conventional middle schools ( matched for an impressive array of background variables , including ethnicity , parental education and employment , home resources , parental involvement in Montessori education C Marshall 5 Published in partnership with The University of Queensland npj Science of Learning ( 2017 ) 11 school , and number of siblings ) . 36 The authors did not establish exactly which elements of the Montessori method might be responsible for this ﬁ nding , but they did speculate that the following might be relevant : “ students were provided at least 2 h per day to exercise choice and self - regulation ; none of the students received mandatory grades ; student grouping was primarily based on shared interests , not standardised tests ; and students collaborated often with other students ” . The authors did not evaluate the Montessori and non - Montessori groups on any measures of academic outcomes , but given the links between academic success and motivation at all stages of education ( they provide a useful review of this literature ) , this link would be worth investigating in Montessori schools . This section has discussed studies that have evaluated the Montessori method directly . To date there have been very few methodologically robust evaluations . Many suffer from limitations that make it challenging to interpret their ﬁ ndings , whether those ﬁ ndings are favourable , neutral or unfavourable towards the Montessori method . However , while randomised control trials could ( and should ) be designed to evaluate individual elements of the Montessori method , it is dif ﬁ cult to see how the random assignment of pupils to schools could work in practice ( hence the ingenuity of the study reported in ref . 18 ) . Nor could trials be appropriately blinded — teachers , and perhaps parents and pupils too , would know whether they were in the Montessori arm of the trial . In other words , although random assignment and blinding might work for speci ﬁ c interventions , it is hard to see how they could work for an entire school curriculum . Furthermore , given the complexity of identifying what it is that works , why it works , and for whom it works best , additional information , for example from observations of what children and teachers are actually doing in the classroom , would be needed for interpreting the results . EVALUATIONS OF KEY ELEMENTS OF MONTESSORI EDUCATION THAT ARE SHARED WITH OTHER EDUCATIONAL METHODS This ﬁ nal section examines studies that have not evaluated the Montessori method directly , but have evaluated other educational methods and interventions that share elements of the Montessori method . They , together with our growing understanding of the science underpinning learning , can add to the evidence base for Montessori education . Given the vast amount of research and the limited space in which to consider it , priority is given to systematic reviews and meta - analyses . One of the best - researched instructional techniques is the use of phonics for teaching children to read . Phonics is the explicit teaching of the letter - sound correspondences that allow the child to crack the alphabetic code . Montessori ’ s ﬁ rst schools were in Italy , and Italian orthography has relatively transparent one - to - one mappings between letters and sounds , making phonics a logical choice of method for teaching children the mechanics of reading and spelling . English orthography is , however , much less regular : the mappings between letters and sounds are many - to - many , and for this reason the use of phonics as a method of instruction has been challenged for English . 37 Nevertheless , there is overwhelm - ing evidence of its effectiveness despite English ’ s irregularities . 38 – 40 At the same time , great strides have been made in elucidating the neural mechanisms that underlie early reading and reading impairments , and these too demonstrate the importance to successful reading of integrating sound and visual representations . 41 As always in education , the devil is in the detail . Importantly , phonics programmes have the greatest impact on reading accuracy when they are systematic . 39 , 40 By ' systematic ' it is meant that letter - sound relationships are taught in an organised sequence , rather than being taught on an ad hoc as - and - when - needed basis . However , within systematic teaching of phonics there are two very different approaches : synthetic phonics and analytic phonics . Synthetic phonics starts from the parts and works up to the whole : children learn the sounds that correspond to letters or groups of letters and use this knowledge to sound out words from left to right . Analytic phonics starts from the whole and drills down to the parts : sound - letter relationships are inferred from sets of words which share a letter and sound , e . g . , hat , hen , hill , horse . Few randomised control trials have pitted synthetic and analytic phonics against one another , and it is not clear that either has the advantage . 40 The Montessori approach to teaching phonics is certainly systematic . Many schools in the UK , for example , use word lists drawn from Morris ’ s ' Phonics 44 ' . 42 , 43 Furthermore , the Montessori approach to phonics is synthetic rather than analytic : children are taught the sound - letter code before using it to encode words ( in spelling ) and decode them ( in reading ) . One of the criticisms of synthetic phonics is that it teaches letters and sounds removed from their meaningful language context , in a way that analytic phonics does not . 44 It has long been recognised that the goal of reading is comprehension . Reading for meaning requires both code - based skills and language skills such as vocabulary , morphology , syntax and inferencing skills , 45 and these two sets of skills are not rigidly separated , but rather interact at multiple levels . 46 Indeed , phonics instruction works best where it is integrated with text - level reading instruction . 39 , 40 The explicit teaching of phonics within a rich language context — both spoken and written — is central to the Montessori curriculum . No evaluations have yet pitted phonics teaching in the Montessori classroom versus phonics teaching in the conventional classroom , however , and so whether the former is differentially effective is not known . Research into writing supports Montessori ’ s view that writing involves a multitude of component skills , including handwriting , spelling , vocabulary and sentence construction . 47 , 48 Pro ﬁ ciency in these skills predicts the quality of children ’ s written composi - tions . 49 , 50 In the Montessori classroom these skills are worked on independently before being brought together , but they can continue to be practised independently . A growing body of research from conventional and special education classrooms demonstrates that the speci ﬁ c teaching of the component skills of writing improves the quality of children ’ s written compositions . 51 – 54 With respect to teaching mathematics to young children , there are many recommendations that Montessori teachers would recognise in their own classrooms , such as teaching geometry , number and operations using a developmental progression , and using progress monitoring to ensure that mathematics instruction builds on what each child knows . 55 Some of the recommended activities , such as ' help children to recognise , name , and compare shapes , and then teach them to combine and separate shapes ' 55 map exactly on to Montessori ’ s sensorial materials such as the geometric cabinet and the constructive triangles . Other activities such as ' encourage children to label collections with number words and numerals ' 55 map onto Montessori ’ s early mathematics material such as the number rods , the spindle box and the cards and counters . The importance of conceptual knowledge as the foundation for children being able to understand fractions has been stressed . 56 The Montessori fraction circles — which provide a sensorial experience with the fractions from one whole to ten tenths — provide just such a foundation , as do practical life exercises such as preparing snacks ( how should a banana be cut so that it can be shared between three children ? ) and folding napkins . Finally in this section , it is worth returning to the sustained attention and self - regulation that have been argued to character - ise children ’ s engagement with the learning materials in the Montessori classroom . 2 – 4 These are important parts of the complex cognitive construct of executive functions ( EFs ) , which Montessori education C Marshall 6 npj Science of Learning ( 2017 ) 11 Published in partnership with The University of Queensland also include inhibition , working memory and planning . Put simply , EFs are the set of processes that allow us to control our thoughts and actions in order to engage in motivated , goal - directed behaviour . That EFs are critical for academic success is backed by a wealth of research evidence . 57 – 61 Given this key role , EFs have become the target for a number of individually - administered interventions , full curricula , and add - ons to classroom curricula , such as CogMed ( Pearson Education , Upper Saddle River , NJ ) , Tools of the Mind , 62 PATHS ( PATHS Training LLC , Seattle , WA ) , music , yoga and martial arts . A review study compared these , including Montessori education , and concluded that compared to interventions such as CogMed that solely target EFs , ' school curricula hold the greatest promise for accessibility to all and intervening early enough to get children on a positive trajectory from the start and affecting EFs most broadly ' . 63 CONCLUSIONS Montessori education has been in existence for over a hundred years . Such longevity could well be due , at least in part , to its adaptability . 6 However , by its very nature , of course , greater adaptability means lower ﬁ delity . This paper has discussed evidence that children may bene ﬁ t cognitively and socially from Montessori education that is faithful to its creator ’ s principles , but it is less clear that adapted forms — which usually result in children spending less time engaged with self - chosen learning materials — are as effective . Nevertheless , studies suggest that the practical life materials can be usefully introduced into non - Montessori class - rooms to support the development of young children ’ s ﬁ ne motor skills and attention , and there is ample evidence from the wider educational literature that certain elements of the Montessori method — such as teaching early literacy through a phonic approach embedded in a rich language context , and providing a sensorial foundation for mathematics education — are effective . It has not been possible in this paper to give an exhaustive discussion of all the elements of Montessori education that might be bene ﬁ cial , for example the lack of extrinsic rewards , the reduced emphasis on academic testing and lack of competition between pupils , the 3 - year age - banding that fosters cross - age tutoring , or the presence of a trained teacher in the early years classroom . Where does this leave Montessori education more than 100 years after its birth , and more than 60 years after the death of its creator ? As others have noted , Montessori was a scientist who truly valued the scienti ﬁ c method and would not have expected her educational method to remain static . 64 Yet Montessori teachers often feel fear or uncertainty about being able to apply Montessori ’ s theories in new and innovative ways while still adhering to her underlying philosophical principles . 65 Ultimately , only empirical research , undertaken by teachers and researchers working together , can be our guide , because the questions that need answering are empirical in nature . Neuroscienti ﬁ c research — using neuroimaging methods which were not available in Montessori ’ s day — might also play a guiding role . For example , Montessori was prescient in her views that adolescence was a special time in development where the individual required a specially - designed form of education to address their needs . 66 Recent neuroimaging evidence points to adolescence as indeed being an important period for neural development , particularly for areas involved in executive functions and social cognition . 67 , 68 Montessori did not fully develop her ideas for the education of 12 – 18 - year olds during her lifetime , but it is an area where current Montessorians might be able to take over the reins . Although some Montessori schools take pupils up to the age of 18 , they are few and far between , and to my knowledge there are no published evaluations of their effectiveness . Developing a Montessori education for this age group in conjunction with the best of our current knowledge of developmental cognitive neuroscience has the potential to make a very positive contribution . Nor did Montessori consider using her method with the elderly . In the context of a rapidly aging population and increasing numbers of elderly adults with acquired cognitive impairments such as those that result from Alzheimer ’ s disease , 69 it is interesting to note that the Montessori method is now being adapted for use with dementia patients , with the aim of improving functioning in activities of daily living , such as feeding , and in cognition . There is strong evidence for a reduction in dif ﬁ culties with eating , weak evidence for bene ﬁ ts on cognition , and mixed evidence for bene ﬁ ts on constructive engagement and positive affect . 70 However , the quality of studies varies across domains ; those evaluating effects on cognition have been of rather poor quality so far , and they have not yet examined whether there might be long - term effects . Nevertheless , given the challenges to developing successful medication for patients with Alzheimer ’ s disease despite a detailed knowledge of changes in their neurobiology , it would be sensible to continue the search for successful behavioural interventions alongside that for medical interventions . 71 One method for delivering Montessori - based activities to the elderly is via inter - generational programmes , whereby older adults with dementia are supported in teaching Montessori - based lessons to preschool children . Bene ﬁ ts have been reported for the adults involved , 72 but whether the children also bene ﬁ t in particular ways from such inter - generational teaching has not been evaluated . Nor is it known whether a Montessori education in childhood or Montessori - based activities experienced in later life can protect the executive control circuits of the brain , as has been proposed for bilingualism . 73 A lifespan approach to the evaluation of the Montessori method involving both behavioural and neuroimaging methods might be valuable . In sum , there are many methodological challenges to carrying out good quality educational research , including good quality research on the Montessori method . Arguably the most obvious challenge to emerge from the literature reviewed here is the practical dif ﬁ culty of randomly allocating pupils to Montessori and non - Montessori schools in order to compare outcomes . The majority of studies have relied instead on trying to match pupils and teachers in Montessori and non - Montessori schools on a number of different variables , with the concomitant danger that unidenti ﬁ ed factors have contributed to any difference in outcomes . Even if randomisation is achievable , studies need to be conducted on a large enough scale to not only allow generalisations to be made beyond the particular schools studied , but to also allow investigation of which children the Montessori method suits best . On a more optimistic note , recent experimental studies — whereby features of existing Montessori classrooms are manipulated in some way , or features of the Montessori method are added to non - Montessori classrooms — hold promise for investigating the effectiveness of particular elements of the Montessori method . The evidence base can be strengthened yet further by drawing on research of educational interventions with which it shares certain elements , and by drawing on related research in the science of learning . National and regional education systems are beset by regular swings of the pendulum , for example towards and away from phonics , 74 and towards and away from children working individually . 75 This means that elements of the Montessori method will sometimes be in vogue and sometimes not . It is therefore particularly important that Montessori teachers understand the evidence base that supports , or does not support , their pedagogy . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS I dedicate this work to Sandra Nash Petrek ( 1939 – 2017 ) , an inspiring Montessorian . Montessori education C Marshall 7 Published in partnership with The University of Queensland npj Science of Learning ( 2017 ) 11 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION Competing interests : The author declares that they have no competing ﬁ nancial interests . Publisher ' s note : Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional af ﬁ liations . REFERENCES 1 . Foschi , R . Science and culture around Montessori ’ s ﬁ rst “ children ’ s houses ” in Rome ( 1907 – 1915 ) . J . Hist . Behav . Sci . 44 , 238 – 257 ( 2008 ) . 2 . Montessori , M . The Discovery of the Child ( Clio Press , Oxford , UK , 1912 / 1988 ) . 3 . Polk Lillard , P . Montessori : A ModernApproach ( Schocken Books , New York , NY , 1972 ) 4 . Standing , E . M . Montessori : Her Life and Work ( New American Library , New York , NY , 1957 ) 5 . Daoust , C . J . An Examination of Implementation Practices in Montessori early childhood education . Doctoral thesis , University of California , Berkeley ( 2004 ) . 6 . Lillard , A . S . Preschool children ’ s development in classic Montessori , supplemented Montessori , and conventional programs . J . School Psychol . 50 , 379 – 401 ( 2012 ) . 7 . McDermott , J . J . in Montessori : Her Life and Work ( ed Standing , E . M . ) ( New American Library , New York , NY , 1957 ) . 8 . Lillard , A . S . How important are the Montessori materials ? Montessori Life 20 , 20 – 25 ( 2008 ) . 9 . Cossentino , J . Big work : goodness , vocation and engagement in the Montessori method . Curric . Inq . 36 , 63 – 92 ( 2006 ) . 10 . Montessori , M . The Secret of Childhood ( Ballantine Books , New York , NY , 1966 ) . 11 . Goldacre , B . Building evidence into education . https : / / www . gov . uk / government / uploads / system / uploads / attachment _ data / ﬁ le / 193913 / Building _ evidence _ into _ education . pdf ( 2013 ) . 12 . Torgerson , C . J . & Torgerson , D . J . The need for randomised controlled trials in educational research . Br . J . Educ . Stud . 25 , 129 – 143 ( 2001 ) . 13 . Schneider , M . , Marschall , M . , Teske , P . & Roch , C . School choice and culture wars in the classroom : what different parents seek from education . Soc . Sci . Quaterly 79 , 489 – 501 ( 1998 ) . 14 . DeGarmo , D . S . , Forgatch , M . S . & Martinez , C . R . Parenting of divorced mothers as a link between social status and boys ’ academic outcomes : unpacking the effects of socioeconomic status . Child . Dev . 70 , 1231 – 1245 ( 1999 ) . 15 . Okpala , C . O . , Okpala , A . O . & Smith , F . E . Parental involvement , instructional expenditures , family socioeconomic attributes , and student achievement . J . Educ . Res . 95 , 110 – 115 ( 2001 ) . 16 . Sirin , S . R . Socioeconomic status and academic achievement : a metaanalyticre - view of research . Rev . Educ . Res . 75 , 417 – 453 ( 2005 ) . 17 . Debs , M . C . Racial and economic diversity in U . S . public Montessori schools . J . Montessori Res . 2 , 15 – 34 ( 2016 ) . 18 . Lillard , A . S . & Else - Quest , N . Evaluating Montessori education . Science 313 , 1893 – 1894 ( 2016 ) . 19 . Linderfors , P . Letter to the editor : studying students in Montessori schools . Sci - ence 315 , 596 ( 2007 ) . 20 . Lillard , A . S . & Else - Quest , N . Response to Lindenfors and MacKinnon . Science 315 , 596 – 597 ( 2007 ) . 21 . Pitcher , E . G . An evaluation of the Montessori method in schools for young children . Child . Educ . 42 , 489 – 492 ( 1966 ) . 22 . Lillard , A . S . & Heise , M . J . Removing supplementary materials from Montessori classrooms changed child outcomes . J . Montessori Res . 2 , 16 – 26 ( 2016 ) . 23 . Karnes , M . , Shewedel , A . & Williams , M . A . in As the Twig is Bent : Lasting Effects of Preschool Programs ( ed . Consortium for Longitudinal Studies ) ( Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ , 1983 ) . 24 . Miller , L . B . & Dyer , J . L . Four preschool programs : Their dimensions and effects . Monogr . Soc . Res . Child Dev . 40 , 1 – 170 ( 1975 ) . 25 . Lopata , C . , Wallace , N . V . & Finn , K . V . Comparison of academic achievement between Montessori and traditional education programs . J . Res . Child . Educ . 20 , 5 – 13 ( 2005 ) . 26 . Miller , L . B . & Bizzell , R . P . Long - term effects of four preschool programs : ninth - and tenth - grade results . Child . Dev . 55 , 1570 – 1587 ( 1984 ) . 27 . Clarke , A . D . B . & Clarke , A . M . “ Sleeper effects ” in development : fact or artefact ? Dev . Rev . 1 , 344 – 360 ( 1981 ) . 28 . Dohrmann , K . , Nishida , T . , Gartner , A . , Lipsky , D . & Grimm , K . High school out - comes for students in a public Montessori program . J . Res . Child . Educ . 22 , 205 – 217 ( 2007 ) . 29 . Banta , T . J . The Sands School Project : First Year Results ( Department of Psychology , University of Cincinnati , Cincinnati , OH , 1968 ) 30 . Laski , E . V . , Vasilyeva , M . & Schiffman , J . Longitudinal comparison of place - value and arithmetic knowledge in Montessori and non - Montessori students . J . Mont . Res . 2 , 1 – 15 ( 2016 ) . 31 . Dreyer , A . & Rigler , D . Cognitive performance in Montessori and nursery school children . J . Educ . Res . 62 , 411 – 416 ( 1969 ) . 32 . Besançon , M . & Lubart , T . Differences in the development of creative compe - tencies in children schooled in diverse learning environments . Learn . Ind . Diff . 18 , 391 – 399 ( 2008 ) . 33 . Rule , A . & Stewart , R . Effects of practical life materials on kindergartners ’ ﬁ ne motor skills . Early Child . Educ . J . 30 , 9 – 13 ( 2002 ) . 34 . Bhatia , P . , Davis , A . & Shamas - Brandt , E . Educational gymnastics : the effectiveness of Montessori practical life activities in developing ﬁ ne motor skills in kinder - gartners . Early Educ . Dev . 26 , 594 – 607 ( 2015 ) . 35 . Stewart , R . A . , Rule , A . C . & Giordano , D . A . The effect of ﬁ ne motor skill activities on kindergarten student attention . Early Child . Educ . J . 35 , 103 – 109 ( 2007 ) . 36 . Rathunde , K . & Csikszetnmihalyi , M . Middle school students ’ motivation and quality of experience : A comparison of Montessori and traditional school envir - onments . Am . J . Educ . 111 , 341 – 371 ( 2005 ) . 37 . Dombey , H . in Phonics : Practice , Research and Policy ( eds Lewis , M . & Ellis , S . ) ( Paul Chapman Publishing , London , UK , 2006 ) . 38 . Hattie , J . Visible Learning : A Synthesis of Over 800 Meta - Analyses Relating to Achievement ( Routledge , Abingdon , UK , 2008 ) . 39 . National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Report of the National Reading Panel . Teaching Children to Read : An Evidence - Based Assessment of the Scienti ﬁ c Research Literature on Reading and its Implications for Reading Instruction : Reports of the Subgroups . NIH Publication no . 00 – 4754 ( US Govern - ment Printing Of ﬁ ce , Washington , 2000 ) . 40 . Torgerson , C . J . , Brooks , G . & Hall , J . A Systematic Review of the Research Literature on the Use of Phonics in the Teaching of Reading and Spelling ( Department for Education and Skills , Shef ﬁ eld , UK , 2006 ) 41 . Dehaene , S . et al . How learning to read changes the cortical networks for vision and language . Science 330 , 1359 – 1364 ( 2010 ) . 42 . Morris , J . Phonics 44 for initial literacy in English . Reading 18 , 13 – 24 ( 1984 ) . 43 . Morris , J . The Morris - Montessori Word List ( London Montessori Centre , London , UK , 1990 ) . 44 . Wyse , D . & Styles , M . Synthetic phonics and the teaching of reading : the debate surrounding England ’ s ‘ Rose Report ’ . Literacy 41 , 35 – 42 ( 2007 ) . 45 . Gough , P . B . & Tunmer , W . E . Decoding , reading , and reading disability . Remedial Spec . Educ . 7 , 6 – 10 ( 1986 ) . 46 . Rumelhart , D . Toward an interactive model of reading . Technical Report No . 56 . ( San Diego Center for Human Information Processing , University of California at San Diego , San Diego , CA , 1976 ) . 47 . Hayes , J . & Flower , L . in Cognitive Processes in Writing ( eds Gregg , L . & Steinberg , E . ) ( Erlbaum , London , UK , 1980 ) . 48 . Berninger , V . W . & Swanson , H . L . in Children ’ s Writing : Toward a ProcessTheory of the Development of Skilled Writing ( ed Butter ﬁ eld , E . C . ) ( JAI Press , Bingley , UK , 1994 ) . 49 . Berninger , V . , Nagy , W . & Beers , S . Child writers ’ construction and reconstruction of single sentences and construction of multi - sentence texts : contributions of syntax and transcription to translation . Read . Writ . 102 , 151 – 182 ( 2011 ) . 50 . Medwell , J . & Wray , D . Handwriting - a forgotten language skill ? Lang . Educ . 22 , 34 – 47 ( 2008 ) . 51 . Andrews , R . et al . The effect of grammar teaching on writing development . Br . Educ . Res . J . 32 , 39 – 55 ( 2006 ) . 52 . Duin , A . H . & Graves , M . F . Intensive vocabulary instruction as a prewriting technique . Read . Res . Quaterly 22 , 311 – 330 ( 1987 ) . 53 . Graham , S . & Santangelo , T . Does spelling instruction make students better spellers , readers , and writers ? A meta - analytic review . Read . Writ . 27 , 1703 – 1743 ( 2014 ) . 54 . Wolf , B . , Abbott , R . D . & Berninger , V . W . Effective beginning handwriting instruction : multi - modal , consistent format for 2 years , and linked to spelling and composing . Read . Writ . 30 , 299 – 317 ( 2017 ) . 55 . Frye , D . et al . Teaching math to young children : a practice guide ( NCEE 2014 - 4005 ) . NationalCenter for Education Evaluation and RegionalAssistance ( NCEE ) , Institute of Education Sciences , U . S . Department of Education . http : / / whatworks . ed . gov ( 2013 ) . 56 . Siegler , R . et al . Developing effective fractions instruction for kindergarten through 8th grade : A practice guide ( NCEE # 2010 - 4039 ) . National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance , Institute of Education Sciences , U . S . Department of Education . Retrieved from http : / / ﬁ les . eric . ed . gov / fulltext / ED512043 . pdf ( 2010 ) . 57 . Blair , C . & Razza , R . P . Relating effortful control , executive function , and false belief understanding to emerging math and literacy ability in kindergarten . Child . Dev . 78 , 647 – 663 ( 2007 ) . 58 . Cragg , L . & Gilmore , C . Skills underlying mathematics : the role of executive function in the development of mathematics pro ﬁ ciency . Trends Neurosci . Educ . 3 , 63 – 68 ( 2014 ) . 59 . Gathercole , S . E . , Pickering , S . J . , Knight , C . & Stegmann , Z . Working memory skills and educational attainment : evidence from national curriculum assessments at 7 and 14 years of age . Appl . Cogn . Psychol . 18 , 1 – 16 ( 2004 ) . Montessori education C Marshall 8 npj Science of Learning ( 2017 ) 11 Published in partnership with The University of Queensland 60 . Locascio , G . , Mahone , E . M . , Eason , S . E . & Cutting , L . E . Executive dysfunction among children with reading comprehension de ﬁ cits . J . Learn . Disabil . 43 , 441 – 454 ( 2010 ) . 61 . Shaul , S . & Schwartz , M . The role of executive functions in school readiness among preschool - age children . Read . Writ . 27 , 749 – 768 ( 2014 ) . 62 . Bodrova , E . & Leong , D . J . Tools of the Mind : The Vygotskian Approach to Early Childhood Education 2nd edn ( Merrill / Prentice Hall , Upper Saddle River , NJ , 2007 ) 63 . Diamond , A . & Lee , K . Interventions shown to aid executive function develop - ment in children 4 to 12 years old . Science 333 , 959 – 964 ( 2011 ) . 64 . Elkind , D . Montessori education : abiding contributions and contemporary chal - lenges . Young . Child . 38 , 3 – 10 ( 1983 ) . 65 . Malm , B . Constructing professional identities : Montessori teachers ’ voices and visions . Scand . J . Educ . Res . 48 , 397 – 412 ( 2004 ) . 66 . Montessori , M . From Childhood to Adolescence : Including Erdkinder and the Function of The University ( Schocken books , New York , NY , 1973 ) . 67 . Blakemore , S . Imaging brain development : the adolescent brain . Neuroimage 61 , 397 – 406 ( 2012 ) . 68 . Paus , T . Mapping brain development and cognitive development during ado - lescence . Trends Cogn . Sci . 9 , 60 – 68 ( 2005 ) . 69 . Ferri , C . P . et al . Global prevalence of dementia : a Delphi consensus study . Lancet 366 , 2112 – 2117 ( 2005 ) . 70 . Sheppard , C . L . , McArthur , C . & Hitzig , S . L . A systematic review of Montessori - based activities for persons with dementia . J . Am . Med . Dir . Assoc . 17 , 117 – 122 ( 2016 ) . 71 . Cummings , J . L . , Morstorf , T . & Zhong , K . Alzheimer ’ s disease drug - development pipeline : few candidates , frequent failures . Alzheimers Res . Ther . 6 , 37 ( 2014 ) . 72 . Camp , C . J . et al . An intergenerational program for persons with dementia using Montessori methods . Gerontologist 37 , 688 – 692 ( 1997 ) . 73 . Gold , B . T . Lifelong bilingualism and neural reserve against Alzheimer ’ s disease : A review of ﬁ ndings and potential mechanisms . Behav . Brain Res . 281 , 9 – 15 ( 2015 ) . 74 . Seidenberg , M . S . The science of reading and its educational implications . Lang . Learn . Dev . 9 , 331 – 360 ( 2013 ) . 75 . Brehony , K . J . Montessori , individual work and individuality in the elementary school classroom . Hist . Educ . 29 , 115 – 128 ( 2000 ) . Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4 . 0 International License , which permits use , sharing , adaptation , distributionandreproductioninanymediumorformat , aslongasyougive appropriatecredittotheoriginalauthor ( s ) andthesource , providealinktotheCreative Commons license , and indicate if changes were made . The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article ’ s Creative Commons license , unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material . If material is not included in the article ’ sCreativeCommonslicenseandyourintendeduseisnotpermittedbystatutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use , you will need to obtain permission directly fromthecopyright holder . Toviewacopyofthislicense , visithttp : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / . © The Author ( s ) 2017 Montessori education C Marshall 9 Published in partnership with The University of Queensland npj Science of Learning ( 2017 ) 11