https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0963721417718261 Current Directions in Psychological Science2017 , Vol . 26 ( 6 ) 538 – 542 © The Author ( s ) 2017 Reprints and permissions : sagepub . com / journalsPermissions . nav DOI : 10 . 1177 / 0963721417718261 www . psychologicalscience . org / CDPS Over a third of Americans believe that global warming is a hoax ( Swift , 2013 ) , and over half believe that Lee Har - vey Oswald did not act alone in the assassination of John F . Kennedy ( Jensen , 2013 ) . These are examples of con - spiracy theories —explanations for important events that involve secret plots by powerful and malevolent groups ( e . g . , Goertzel , 1994 ) . In recent years , there has been growing interest in the psychological factors that drive the popularity of conspiracy theories , and in this article , we draw together and organize findings from this bur - geoning research . This research suggests that people may be drawn to conspiracy theories when—compared with nonconspiracy explanations—they promise to satisfy important social psychological motives that can be char - acterized as epistemic ( e . g . , the desire for understanding , accuracy , and subjective certainty ) , existential ( e . g . , the desire for control and security ) , and social ( e . g . , the desire to maintain a positive image of the self or group ) . This taxonomy , derived from system - justification theory ( Jost , Ledgerwood , & Hardin , 2008 ) , serves as a useful heuristic to classify the motives associated with conspir - acy belief . However , the comparatively scarce research examining the consequences of conspiracy theories does not indicate that they ultimately help people fulfill these motives . Epistemic Motives Finding causal explanations for events is a core part of building up a stable , accurate , and internally consistent understanding of the world ( Heider , 1958 ) . Specific epis - temic motives that causal explanations may serve include slaking curiosity when information is unavailable , reduc - ing uncertainty and bewilderment when available infor - mation is conflicting , finding meaning when events seem random , and defending beliefs from disconfirmation . Relevant to these motives , conspiracy theories have attri - butes that set them apart from other types of causal explanation . Albeit to varying degrees , they are specula - tive in that they posit actions that are hidden from public scrutiny , complex in that they postulate the coordination of multiple actors , and resistant to falsification in that they postulate that conspirators use stealth and disinfor - mation to cover up their actions—implying that people who try to debunk conspiracy theories may , themselves , be part of the conspiracy ( Lewandowsky et al . , 2015 ) . 718261 CDPXXX10 . 1177 / 0963721417718261 Douglas et al . The Psychology of Conspiracy Theories research - article 2017 Corresponding Author : Karen M . Douglas , School of Psychology , University of Kent , Canterbury , CT2 7NP , United Kingdom E - mail : k . douglas @ kent . ac . uk The Psychology of Conspiracy Theories Karen M . Douglas , Robbie M . Sutton , and Aleksandra Cichocka School of Psychology , University of Kent Abstract What psychological factors drive the popularity of conspiracy theories , which explain important events as secret plots by powerful and malevolent groups ? What are the psychological consequences of adopting these theories ? We review the current research and find that it answers the first of these questions more thoroughly than the second . Belief in conspiracy theories appears to be driven by motives that can be characterized as epistemic ( understanding one’s environment ) , existential ( being safe and in control of one’s environment ) , and social ( maintaining a positive image of the self and the social group ) . However , little research has investigated the consequences of conspiracy belief , and to date , this research does not indicate that conspiracy belief fulfills people’s motivations . Instead , for many people , conspiracy belief may be more appealing than satisfying . Further research is needed to determine for whom , and under what conditions , conspiracy theories may satisfy key psychological motives . Keywords conspiracy theories , conspiracy belief , motives , needs The Psychology of Conspiracy Theories 539 A related property of conspiracy theories is that they can protect cherished beliefs ( e . g . , vaccination is harmful ; climate change is not a serious concern ) by casting over - whelmingly disconfirmatory evidence ( e . g . , scientific findings ) as the product of a conspiracy ( Lewandowsky , Oberauer , & Gignac , 2013 ) . In general , empirically warranted ( vs . speculative ) , parsimonious ( vs . complex ) , and falsifiable explanations are stronger according to normative standards of causal explanation ( e . g . , in science ; see Grimes , 2016 ) . However , conspiracy theories appear to provide broad , internally consistent explanations that allow people to preserve beliefs in the face of uncertainty and contradiction . In keeping with this analysis , research suggests that belief in conspiracy theories is stronger when the motivation to find patterns in the environment is experimentally heightened ( Whitson & Galinsky , 2008 ) . It is also stronger among people who habitually seek meaning and patterns in the environment , including believers in paranormal phenomena ( e . g . , Bruder , Haffke , Neave , Nouripanah , & Imhoff , 2013 ; but see Dieguez , Wagner - Egger , & Gauvrit , 2015 ) . It also appears to be stronger when events are especially large in scale or significant and leave people dissatisfied with mundane , small - scale explanations ( Leman & Cinnirella , 2013 ) . Furthermore , the need for cognitive closure is associated with beliefs in salient con - spiracy theories for events that lack clear official explana - tions ( Marchlewska , Cichocka , & Kossowska , 2017 ) . Also , research suggests that conspiracy belief is stronger when people experience distress as a result of feeling uncertain ( van Prooijen & Jostmann , 2013 ) . Our analysis suggests that conspiracy theories may satisfy some epistemic motives at the expense of oth - ers—for example , by shielding beliefs from uncertainty while being less likely to be accurate . The epistemic drawbacks of conspiracy theories do not seem to be readily apparent to people who lack the ability or moti - vation to think critically and rationally . Conspiracy belief is correlated with lower levels of analytic thinking ( Swami , Voracek , Stieger , Tran , & Furnham , 2014 ) and lower levels of education ( Douglas , Sutton , Callan , Dawtry , & Harvey , 2016 ) . It is also associated with the tendency to overestimate the likelihood of co - occurring events ( Brotherton & French , 2014 ) and the tendency to perceive agency and intentionality where it does not exist ( Douglas et al . , 2016 ) . In light of their objective or normative limitations , how well do conspiracy theories satisfy the epistemic motives that draw people to them ? Relatively little research has addressed this question , and it suggests that they may be more appealing than satisfying . On one hand , extreme and entrenched attitude positions are associated with conspiracy beliefs , suggesting that they may help people defend beliefs from disconfirmation ( Uscinski , Klofstad , & Atkinson , 2016 ) . In contrast , recent experiments indicate that presenting people with per - suasive cases for conspiracy theories about vaccination ( Jolley & Douglas , 2014a ) and climate change ( Jolley & Douglas , 2014b ) increases their levels of uncertainty . Existential Motives As well as their purely epistemic purposes , causal explanations serve the need for people to feel safe and secure in their environment and to exert control over the environment as autonomous individuals and as members of collectives ( Tetlock , 2002 ) . Several early theories of conspiracy belief suggested that people turn to conspiracy theories for compensatory satisfaction when these needs are threatened . For example , people who lack instrumental control may be afforded some compensatory sense of control by conspiracy theories , because they offer them the opportunity to reject offi - cial narratives and feel that they possess an alternative account ( Goertzel , 1994 ) . Conspiracy theories may promise to make people feel safer as a form of cheater detection , in which dangerous and untrustworthy indi - viduals are recognized and the threat they posed is reduced or neutralized ( Bost & Prunier , 2013 ) . Research supports this account of the motivation behind conspiracy belief . Studies have shown that peo - ple are likely to turn to conspiracy theories when they are anxious ( Grzesiak - Feldman , 2013 ) and feel power - less ( Abalakina - Paap , Stephan , Craig , & Gregory , 1999 ) . Other research indicates that conspiracy belief is strongly related to lack of sociopolitical control or lack of psy - chological empowerment ( Bruder et al . , 2013 ) . Experi - ments have shown that compared with baseline conditions , conspiracy belief is heightened when people feel unable to control outcomes and is reduced when their sense of control is affirmed ( van Prooijen & Acker , 2015 ) . Unfortunately , research conducted thus far does not indicate that conspiracy belief effectively satisfies this motivation . On the contrary , experimental exposure to conspiracy theories appears to immediately suppress people’s sense of autonomy and control ( Douglas & Leite , 2017 ; Jolley & Douglas , 2014a , 2014b ) . These same studies have also shown that it makes people less inclined to take actions that , in the long run , might boost their autonomy and control . Specifically , they are less inclined to commit to their organizations and to engage in mainstream political processes such as voting and party politics . Furthermore , exposure to conspiracy theories may subtly undermine people’s autonomy in another way . Douglas and Sutton ( 2008 ) showed that people were effectively persuaded by proconspiracy material but were not aware that they had been per - suaded and falsely recalled that their preexposure beliefs were identical to their new beliefs . Since con - spiracy theories suggest that important outcomes are 540 Douglas et al . in the hands of malevolent forces who possess and exercise powers beyond legitimate limits , it would not be surprising if further research suggests that their effect is often disempowering . Social Motives Causal explanations , conspiracy explanations included , are also informed by various social motivations , includ - ing the desire to belong and to maintain a positive image of the self and the in - group . Scholars have sug - gested that conspiracy theories valorize the self and the in - group by allowing blame for negative outcomes to be attributed to others . Thus , they may help to uphold the image of the self and the in - group as competent and moral but as sabotaged by powerful and unscrupulous others . If this is the case , we can expect conspiracy theo - ries to be particularly appealing to people who find the positive image of their self or in - group to be threatened ( Cichocka , Marchlewska , & Golec de Zavala , 2016 ) . Research generally supports this expectation . Experi - mental results suggest that experiences of ostracism cause people to believe in superstitions and conspiracy theories , apparently as part of an effort to make sense of their experience ( Graeupner & Coman , 2017 ) . Mem - bers of groups who have objectively low ( vs . high ) status because of their ethnicity ( Crocker , Luhtanen , Broadnax , & Blaine , 1999 ) or income ( Uscinski & Parent , 2014 ) are more likely to endorse conspiracy theories . People on the losing ( vs . winning ) side of political pro - cesses also appear more likely to believe conspiracy theories ( Uscinski & Parent , 2014 ) . Conspiracy belief has also been linked to prejudice against powerful groups ( Imhoff & Bruder , 2014 ) and those perceived as enemies ( Kofta & Sedek , 2005 ) . These findings suggest that conspiracy theories may be recruited defensively , to relieve the self or in - group from a sense of culpability for their disadvantaged posi - tion . In keeping with this defensive motivation , con - spiracy belief is associated with narcissism—an inflated view of oneself that requires external validation and is linked to paranoid ideation ( Cichocka , Marchlewska , & Golec de Zavala , 2016 ) . Conspiracy belief is also pre - dicted by collective narcissism—a belief in the in - group’s greatness paired with a belief that other people do not appreciate it enough ( Cichocka , Marchlewska , Golec de Zavala , & Olechowski , 2016 ) . Groups who feel that they have been victimized are more likely to endorse con - spiracy theories about powerful out - groups ( Bilewicz , Winiewski , Kofta , & Wójcik , 2013 ) . Although people are clearly attracted to conspiracy theories when their social motivations are frustrated , it is not at all clear that adopting these theories is a fruitful way to fulfill these motivations . A feature of conspiracy theories is their negative , distrustful representation of other people and groups . Thus , it is plausible that they are not only a symptom but also a cause of the feelings of alienation and anomie—a feeling of personal unrest and lack of understanding of the social world—with which they are correlated ( e . g . , Abalakina - Paap et al . , 1999 ) . Experiments show that exposure to conspiracy theories decreases trust in governmental institutions , even if the conspiracy theories are unrelated to those institutions ( Einstein & Glick , 2015 ) . It also causes dis - enchantment with politicians and scientists ( Jolley & Douglas , 2014a ) . So far , therefore , empirical research suggests that conspiracy theories serve to erode social capital and may , if anything , frustrate people’s need to see themselves as valuable members of morally decent collectives . Summary , Caveats , and Future Research Research thus far has successfully articulated some of the motivations that , together with deficiencies in avail - able information , cognitive ability , and motivation to think critically , may contribute to conspiracy belief . Although scholars have theorized about the conse - quences of conspiracy beliefs for their adherents and the community , relatively little empirical research has been done to explore them . Nevertheless , preliminary work suggests that despite the allure of conspiracy beliefs for people who have heightened epistemic , existential , and social motives , they may ultimately thwart those motives further . In this sense , conspiracy theories might be seen as an ironic or self - defeating manifestation of motivated social cognition . There are grounds to expect further research to corroborate this preliminary picture since , as we have seen , conspiracy theories have some attributes that do not lend themselves to the fulfillment of these motives—for example , they are generally speculative and contrarian , represent the public as ignorant and at the mercy of unaccountable powers , and impute highly anti - social and cynical motives to other individuals . Nonetheless , there are also grounds to expect future research to show that conspiracy theories fulfill the needs of some people . The experimental research con - ducted thus far has sampled from populations ( under - graduate students and survey panelists ) that are not particularly disadvantaged or threatened and that gen - erally do not endorse conspiracy theories . For these people , conspiracy theories are likely to be experienced as unsettling , destabilizing , and potentially alienating . However , these people are not whom scholars have had in mind when they have argued that conspiracy theories may sometimes be adaptive . They include groups and individuals who are already alienated from society and for whom conspiracy theories may offer some compensation . These include disempowered The Psychology of Conspiracy Theories 541 groups who may use conspiracy theories to subvert dominance hierarchies by formulating their own under - standing of realities ( Sapountzis & Condor , 2013 ) and by fostering solidarity and collective action ( Adams , O’Brien , & Nelson , 2006 ) . In these communities , and indeed in online communities in which conspiracy theories represent normative or even official positions ( e . g . , the 9 / 11 Truth movement ) , conspiracy belief may offer an important source of belonging and shared real - ity . Furthermore , history has repeatedly shown that corporate and political elites do conspire against public interests . Conspiracy theories play an important role in bringing their misdeeds into the light . To conduct fair tests of the utility of conspiracy belief , controlled longitudinal and experimental investigations of disadvantaged and threatened populations are needed . In particular , future research needs to examine individuals whose psychological needs are chronically or experimentally threatened and determine whether conspiracy belief moves them closer to or further away from the fulfillment of these needs . In one such design , Jolley , Douglas , and Sutton ( 2017 ) exposed people to threats to the legitimacy of their social system . They found that the deleterious effects of these threats on satisfaction with the status quo were eliminated when participants were also exposed to conspiracy theories . Conspiracy theories therefore appeared to buffer people from the effects of threats to the status quo . Conclusion We have reviewed the current literature on the psycho - logical factors that appear to drive conspiracy belief . We conclude that conspiracy belief appears to stem to a large extent from epistemic , existential , and social motives . Research has yet to demonstrate that it effec - tively serves those motivations , and early indications are that it may often thwart them . It is possible , there - fore , that conspiracy belief is a self - defeating form of motivated social cognition . However , important ques - tions remain open , and more controlled research on the consequences of conspiracy beliefs is needed , par - ticularly on the vulnerable and disadvantaged popula - tions that have been identified as most likely to benefit from them . We hope that this review will serve as an organizing schema for future research on the psychol - ogy of conspiracy belief . Recommended Reading Bilewicz , M . , Cichocka , A . , & Soral , W . ( Eds . ) . ( 2015 ) . The psychology of conspiracy . New York , NY : Routledge . A comprehensive collection of empirical and review chap - ters by leading researchers on the psychology of con - spiracy theories . Brotherton , R . ( 2015 ) . Suspicious minds : Why we believe con - spiracy theories . London , England : Bloomsbury . A book on the psychology of conspiracy theories that was written by an academic psychologist for a general audience . Goertzel , T . ( 1994 ) . ( See References ) . A classic in the con - spiracy - theory literature . Sapountzis , A . , & Condor , S . ( 2013 ) . ( See References ) . A sympathetic perspective on conspiracy theories and their value in constructing alternative accounts of reality . Uscinski , J . E . , & Parent , J . M . ( 2014 ) . ( See References ) . A sustained and empirically informed analysis of conspiracy theories and politics . Wood , M . , Douglas , K . M . , & Sutton , R . M . ( 2012 ) . Dead and alive : Beliefs in contradictory conspiracy theories . Social Psychological & Personality Science , 3 , 767 – 773 . A highly cited recent article that has been influential in under - standing the cognitive underpinnings of conspiracy belief . Acknowledgments We thank the editor and four reviewers for their helpful comments on this article . Declaration of Conflicting Interests The author ( s ) declared that there were no conflicts of interest with respect to the authorship or the publication of this article . Funding This work was funded by the Centre for Research and Evi - dence on Security Threats ( Economic and Social Research Council Award ES / N009614 / 1 ) . References Abalakina - Paap , M . , Stephan , W . G . , Craig , T . , & Gregory , L . ( 1999 ) . Beliefs in conspiracies . Political Psychology , 20 , 637 – 647 . Adams , G . , O’Brien , L . T . , & Nelson , J . C . ( 2006 ) . Perceptions of racism in Hurricane Katrina : A liberation psychology analysis . Analyses of Social Issues and Public Policy , 6 , 215 – 235 . Bilewicz , M . , Winiewski , M . , Kofta , M . , & Wójcik , A . ( 2013 ) . Harmful ideas : The structure and consequences of anti - Semitic beliefs in Poland . Political Psychology , 34 , 821 – 839 . Bost , P . R . , & Prunier , S . G . ( 2013 ) . Rationality in conspir - acy beliefs : The role of perceived motive . Psychological Reports , 113 , 118 – 128 . Brotherton , R . , & French , C . C . ( 2014 ) . Belief in conspiracy theories and susceptibility to the conjunction fallacy . Applied Cognitive Psychology , 28 , 238 – 248 . Bruder , M . , Haffke , P . , Neave , N . , Nouripanah , N . , & Imhoff , R . ( 2013 ) . Measuring individual differences in generic beliefs in conspiracy theories across cultures : Conspiracy Mentality Questionnaire . Frontiers in Psychology , 4 , Article 225 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2013 . 00225 Cichocka , A . , Marchlewska , M . , & Golec de Zavala , A . ( 2016 ) . Does self - love or self - hate predict conspiracy beliefs ? Narcissism , self - esteem , and the endorsement of 542 Douglas et al . conspiracy theories . Social Psychological & Personality Science , 7 , 157 – 166 . Cichocka , A . , Marchlewska , M . , Golec de Zavala , A . , & Olechowski , M . ( 2016 ) . “They will not control us” : In - group positivity and belief in intergroup conspiracies . British Journal of Psychology , 107 , 556 – 576 . Crocker , J . , Luhtanen , R . , Broadnax , S . , & Blaine , B . E . ( 1999 ) . Belief in U . S . government conspiracies against Blacks among Black and White college students : Powerlessness or system blame ? Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 25 , 941 – 953 . Dieguez , S . , Wagner - Egger , P . , & Gauvrit , N . ( 2015 ) . Nothing happens by accident , or does it ? A low prior for ran - domness does not explain belief in conspiracy theories . Psychological Science , 26 , 1762 – 1770 . Douglas , K . M . , & Leite , A . C . ( 2017 ) . Suspicion in the work - place : Organizational conspiracy theories and work - related outcomes . British Journal of Psychology , 108 , 486 – 506 . Douglas , K . M . , & Sutton , R . M . ( 2008 ) . The hidden impact of conspiracy theories : Perceived and actual impact of theories surrounding the death of Princess Diana . Journal of Social Psychology , 148 , 210 – 221 . Douglas , K . M . , Sutton , R . M . , Callan , M . J . , Dawtry , R . J . , & Harvey , A . J . ( 2016 ) . Someone is pulling the strings : Hypersensitive agency detection and belief in conspiracy theories . Thinking & Reasoning , 22 , 57 – 77 . Einstein , K . L . , & Glick , D . M . ( 2015 ) . Do I think BLS data are BS ? The consequences of conspiracy theories . Political Behavior , 37 , 679 – 701 . Goertzel , T . ( 1994 ) . Belief in conspiracy theories . Political Psychology , 15 , 731 – 742 . Graeupner , D . , & Coman , A . ( 2017 ) . The dark side of mean - ing - making : How social exclusion leads to superstitious thinking . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 69 , 218 – 222 . Grimes , D . R . ( 2016 ) . On the viability of conspiratorial beliefs . PLOS ONE , 11 ( 3 ) , Article e0151003 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0147905 Grzesiak - Feldman , M . ( 2013 ) . The effect of high - anxiety situ - ations on conspiracy thinking . Current Psychology , 32 , 100 – 118 . Heider , F . ( 1958 ) . The psychology of interpersonal relations . New York , NY : John Wiley . Imhoff , R . , & Bruder , M . ( 2014 ) . Speaking ( un - ) truth to power : Conspiracy mentality as a generalised political attitude . European Journal of Personality , 28 , 25 – 43 . Jensen , T . ( 2013 ) . Democrats and Republicans differ on conspiracy theory beliefs . Retrieved from http : / / www . publicpolicypolling . com / polls / democrats - and - republicans - differ - on - conspiracy - theory - beliefs / Jolley , D . , & Douglas , K . M . ( 2014a ) . The effects of anti - vaccine conspiracy theories on vaccination intentions . PLOS ONE , 9 ( 2 ) , Article e89177 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0089177 Jolley , D . , & Douglas , K . M . ( 2014b ) . The social conse - quences of conspiracism : Exposure to conspiracy theo - ries decreases the intention to engage in politics and to reduce one’s carbon footprint . British Journal of Psychology , 105 , 35 – 56 . Jolley , D . , Douglas , K . M . , & Sutton , R . M . ( 2017 ) . Blaming a few bad apples to save a threatened barrel : The sys - tem - justifying function of conspiracy theories . Political Psychology . Advance online publication . doi : 10 . 1111 / pops . 12404 Jost , J . T . , Ledgerwood , A . , & Hardin , C . D . ( 2008 ) . Shared reality , system justification , and the relational basis of ide - ological beliefs . Social & Personality Psychology Compass , 2 , 171 – 186 . Kofta , M . , & Sedek , G . ( 2005 ) . Conspiracy stereotypes of Jews during systemic transformation in Poland . International Journal of Sociology , 35 , 40 – 64 . Leman , P . J . , & Cinnirella , M . ( 2013 ) . Beliefs in conspiracy theories and the need for cognitive closure . Frontiers in Psychology , 4 , Article 378 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2013 . 00378 Lewandowsky , S . , Cook , J . , Oberauer , K . , Brophy , S . , Lloyd , E . A . , & Marriott , M . ( 2015 ) . Recurrent fury : Conspiratorial discourse in the blogosphere triggered by research on the role of conspiracist ideation in climate denial . Journal of Social and Political Psychology , 3 , 142 – 178 . Lewandowsky , S . , Oberauer , K . , & Gignac , G . E . ( 2013 ) . NASA faked the moon landing—Therefore , ( climate ) science is a hoax : An anatomy of the motivated rejection of science . Psychological Science , 24 , 622 – 633 . Marchlewska , M . , Cichocka , A . , & Kossowska , M . ( 2017 ) . Addicted to answers : Need for cognitive closure and the endorsement of conspiracy beliefs . European Journal of Social Psychology . Advance online publication . doi : 10 . 1002 / ejsp . 2308 Sapountzis , A . , & Condor , S . ( 2013 ) . Conspiracy accounts as intergroup theories : Challenging dominant understand - ings of social power and political legitimacy . Political Psychology , 43 , 731 – 752 . Swami , V . , Voracek , M . , Stieger , S . , Tran , U . S . , & Furnham , A . ( 2014 ) . Analytic thinking reduces belief in conspiracy theories . Cognition , 133 , 572 – 585 . Swift , A . ( 2013 ) . Majority in U . S . still believe JFK killed in a conspiracy . Retrieved from http : / / www . gallup . com / poll / 165893 / majority - believe - jfk - killed - conspiracy . aspx Tetlock , P . E . ( 2002 ) . Social - functionalist frameworks for judg - ment and choice : The intuitive politician , theologian , and prosecutor . Psychological Review , 109 , 451 – 472 . Uscinski , J . E . , Klofstad , C . , & Atkinson , M . D . ( 2016 ) . What drives conspiratorial beliefs ? The role of informational cues and predispositions . Political Research Quarterly , 69 , 57 – 71 . Uscinski , J . E . , & Parent , J . M . ( 2014 ) . American conspiracy theories . New York , NY : Oxford University Press . van Prooijen , J . - W . , & Acker , M . ( 2015 ) . The influence of control on belief in conspiracy theories : Conceptual and applied extensions . Applied Cognitive Psychology , 29 , 753 – 761 . van Prooijen , J . - W . , & Jostmann , N . B . ( 2013 ) . Belief in conspiracy theories : The influence of uncertainty and perceived moral - ity . European Journal of Social Psychology , 43 , 109 – 115 . Whitson , J . A . , & Galinsky , A . D . ( 2008 ) . Lacking control increases illusory pattern perception . Science , 322 , 115 – 117 .