pubs . acs . org / Biochemistry Published on Web 08 / 26 / 2010 r 2010 American Chemical Society 8944 Biochemistry 2010 , 49 , 8944 – 8954 DOI : 10 . 1021 / bi1008062 ADP - Ribosylation of Cross - Linked Actin Generates Barbed - End Polymerization - Deficient F - Actin Oligomers † Alexandru A . Perieteanu , Danielle D . Visschedyk , A . Rod Merrill , and John F . Dawson * University of Guelph , Guelph , Ontario , Canada N1G 2W1 Received May 20 , 2010 ; Revised Manuscript Received August 21 , 2010 ABSTRACT : Actin filament subunit interfaces are required for the proper interaction between filamentous actin ( F - actin ) and actin binding proteins ( ABPs ) . The production of small F - actin complexes mimicking such interfaces would be a significant advance toward understanding the atomic interactions between F - actin and its many binding partners . We produced actin lateral dimers and trimers derived from F - actin and rendered polymerization - deficient by ADP - ribosylation of Arg - 177 . The degree of modification resulted in a moderate reduction in thermal stability . Calculated hydrodynamic radii were comparable to theoretical values derived from recent models of F - actin . Filament capping capabilities were retained and yielded pointed - end dissociation constants similar those of wild - type actin , suggesting native or near - native interfaces on the oligomers . Changes in DNase I binding affinity under low and high ionic strength suggested a high degree of conformational flexibility in the dimer and trimer . Polymer nucleation activity was lost upon ADP - ribosylation and rescued upon enzyme - mediated deADP - ribosylation , or upon binding to gelsolin , suggesting that interactions with actin binding proteins can overcome the inhibiting activities of ADP - ribosylation . The combined strategy of chemical cross - linking and ADP - ribosylation provides a minimalistic and reversible approach to engineering polymerization - deficient F - actin oligomers that are able to act as F - actin binding protein scaffolds . Actin is a eukaryotic protein that is essential for a myriad of biochemical processes such as cellular mobility , cytokinesis , sarcomere contraction , and protein transport ( 32 , 36 ) . Under physiological conditions , globular actin ( G - actin ) self - associates to form long double - stranded , right - handed helical actin fila - ments ( F - actin ) containing hundreds of actin subunits . In the cell , an array of actin binding proteins ( ABPs ) 1 control and / or take advantage of actin polymerization ( 5 ) . Two general classes of F - actin - specific ABPs exist : those that bind to the ends of filaments ( capping proteins ) and those that bind along the length of the filaments ( side - binding ABPs ) . In actin filaments , adjacent actin subunits are responsible for the formation of these critical ABP binding interfaces . The goal of this research is to develop short F - actin oligomers to serve as structural platforms for the elucidation of molecular interactions between F - actin and ABPs . Any strategy to this end involves two aspects : ( 1 ) covalent cross - linking of actin subunits in F - actin and ( 2 ) modification of the resulting actin oligomers to inhibit actin polymerization . The extent of these modifications must be strategically balanced with maintaining physiological interactions that are integral to F - actin function . Previous work has shown that an actin longitudinal ( or long - pitch ) dimer can be formed by covalently cross - linking Gln - 41 to Cys - 374 of adjacent protomers using N - ( 4 - azido - 2 - nitrophe - nyl ) putresceine ( ANP ) ( 11 ) . ANP - actin dimers were also shown to maintain some affinity for the N - terminal segment of gelsolin , deoxyribonuclease I ( DNase I ) , and myosin subfragment 1 ( 22 ) . Conversely , lateral ( or short - pitch ) actin dimers have been produced by covalently cross - linking Cys - 374 to Lys - 191 of adjacent protomers using N , N 0 - p - phenylenebismaleimide ( PBM ) ( 18 , 25 , 34 ) . Similarly , PBM trimers possessing both lateral and longitudinal contacts have been constructed and shown to act as filament nuclei , essentially increasing filament growth kinetics by circumventing slow nucleation events ( 8 , 18 ) . Three general modification strategies have been used to inhibit actin polymerization : translational modifications ( 14 , 29 , 41 ) , covalent posttranslational modifications ( 9 , 17 , 19 ) , and non - covalent posttranslational modifications ( 2 , 4 , 16 , 23 , 27 ) . Here , we employ a recently discovered mono - ADP - ribosyltransferase from Photorhabdus luminescens to specifically modify PBM - cross - linked actin oligomers ( 39 ) . ADP - ribosyltransferase en - zymes ( ADPRTs ) covalently transfer an ADP - ribose ( ADPr ) moiety from NAD þ to a target protein . ADP - ribosylation at Arg - 177 of actin is also catalyzed by a variety of other , classical ADPRTs such as Clostridium perfringens iota toxin , Clostridium botulinum C2 toxin , and Salmonella enterica virulence protein SpvB . In this work we use a combined strategy of PBM cross - linking and ADP - ribosylation to produce and purify polymerization - deficient short - pitch actin dimers ( ADPr dimer ) and actin trimers ( ADPr trimer ) . Both ADPr dimer and ADPr trimer were found to possess similar hydrodynamic radii to those calculated from structural data , suggesting that both species adopt a physio - logical conformation . While the modifications result in slightly decreased thermal stability and altered nucleotide exchange kinetics , the constructs possessed conformational flexibility and retained their ability to cap existing filament barbed ends . Finally , we found that the filament nucleation capabilities of actin dimers and trimers were abolished upon ADP - ribosylation † This work was supported by NSERCGrant 250188 - 04to J . F . D . and grants from HSFP , CIHR , and CCF to A . R . M . * Address correspondence to this author . Tel : ( 519 ) 824 - 4120 ext 58181 . Fax : ( 519 ) 837 - 1802 . E - mail : jdawso01 @ uoguelph . ca . 1 Abbreviations : PBM , N , N 0 - p - phenylenebismaleimide ; ADPr , ADP - ribosylated ; [ NBD ] , concentration based on nucleotide binding do - mains ; β - ME , 2 - mercaptoethanol ; DNaseI , deoxyribonucleaseI ; ABPs , actin binding proteins ; py - actin , pyrene iodoacetamide labeled actin ; ADPr - py - actin , ADP - ribosylated py - actin ; C c , critical concentration ; MWCO , molecular weight cutoff . Article Biochemistry , Vol . 49 , No . 41 , 2010 8945 but were rescued upon enzyme - mediated reversal of the ADP - ribosylation ( deADPr ) and upon structural remodeling induced by gelsolin binding . This study provides a minimalistic and rever - sible approach to engineering polymerization - deficient F - actin oligomers able to act as F - actin binding protein scaffolds . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Reagents . All reagents were purchased from either Sigma - Aldrich ( St . Louis , MO ) orFisherScientific ( Mississauga , Ontario , Canada ) . Chromatographic columns were supplied by GE Health - care ( Piscataway , NJ ) . Purifications were performed on an AKTA FPLC system . Protein concentrators ( 10 kDa MWCO ) were purchased from Millipore ( Billerica , MA ) . Protein Preparation . Skeletal muscle acetone powder was prepared from chicken breast as described by Spudich and Watt ( 37 ) . Actin concentrations were determined from absor - bance at 290 nm using an extinction coefficient of 67742 M - 1 cm - 1 or using the Bio - Rad protein assay ( Mississauga , Ontario , Canada ) . Actin samples in G - buffer ( 2 mM Tris - HCl , 0 . 2 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 0 . 2 mM 2 - mercaptoethanol , β - ME ) were frozen in liquid N 2 and stored at - 70 (cid:1) C unless used for cross - linking . Where applicable , we report concentrations based on the presence of high - affinity nucleotide binding domains [ NBD ] , allowing for differentiation between actin subunit concentration and the concentration of total complex . Photox was purified from insoluble inclusion bodies as pre - viously described ( 39 ) . The resulting protein was dialyzed into 20 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 5 , and 50 mM NaCl , concentrated to 0 . 2 - 1 . 0 mg / mL , and stored at - 70 (cid:1) C . Human gelsolin was prepared as described ( 26 ) and stored at - 70 (cid:1) C . ADPr trimer - gelsolin heterocomplexes were formed by incubating 1 : 1 ADPr trimer and gelsolin , followed by purifica - tion on a Superdex S200 column preequilibrated in buffer G - 10 ( 10 mM Tris - HCl , pH 8 . 0 , 0 . 2 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 0 . 2 mM β - ME , 0 . 2 mM NaN 3 , 0 . 25 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride ) with 50 mM NaCl . Purity and composition were assessed by native PAGE and SDS - PAGE ( data not shown ) . BovinepancreasdeoxyribonucleaseI ( DNaseI ) purchasedfrom Worthington Biochemical Corp . ( Lakewood , NJ ) was purified using a Superdex S200 gel chromatography column to remove traces of a higher molecular weight impurity ( data not shown ) . Samples were flash frozen in liquid N 2 and stored at - 70 (cid:1) C . Gelsolin and DNase I were thawed and exchanged into G - buffer using HiTrap desalting columns for native PAGE binding assays . Bio - Rad protein assay was employed for concentration determi - nation of gelsolin and DNase I . ADP - Ribosylation and De - ADP - ribosylation . Actin sam - ples were diluted to 25 - 100 μ M and the G - buffer Tris - HCl , pH 8 . 0 , concentration was increased to 10 mM . Samples were incubated with 20 - 200 nM photox ( 0 . 1 - 1 % v / v ) , and a 5 - 10 - fold molar excess of NAD þ was titrated into the sample mixture with slow stirring over a period of 15 min . Enzymatic activity was monitored uponadditionoftoxinusingfluorescence ( excitation305nm , emission 405 nm ) and the NAD þ analogue , etheno - NAD þ ( ε - NAD þ ) . ADPr - actin samples were exchanged into 20 mM 2 - ( N - mor - pholino ) ethanesulfonic acid , pH 6 . 5 , G - buffer supplemented with 30 nM nicotinamide . ADP - ribosylation reversal was in - itiated by the addition of 200 nM photox and allowed to proceed overnight at 4 (cid:1) C while being dialyzed against 30 nM nicotina - mide . Samples were then exchanged into G - buffer . Actin Cross - Linking with PBM . Chemical cross - linking of actin with PBM was performed as described ( 18 ) with some modifications . Actin ( 3 - 6 mg / mL ) was polymerized at pH 8 . 0 by the addition of 50 mM KCl and 2 mM MgCl 2 under ambient temperature for 1 - 3 h . Cross - linking of actin was initiated by the addition of 10 mM sodium tetraborate , pH 9 . 0 , and a 1 . 5 - fold molar excess of a 25 mM stock solution of PBM dissolved in DMF and terminated after 30 min at ambient temperature using a 150 - fold molar excess of β - ME over PBM . Cross - linked F - actin was harvested by centrifugation at 167424 g for 75 min and resuspended in G - buffer to a final concentration of 1 - 2 mg / mL . The resulting PBM - cross - linked actin mixture was dialyzed extensively over 3 - 4 days with at least five buffer exchanges to depolymerize cross - linked filaments . ADP - ribosylation was in - itiated as described above . Remaining F - actin was removed by centrifugation at 167424 g for 75 min . Samples were concentrated and applied to a Superdex S200 column preequilibrated in buffer G - 10 with 50 mM NaCl . Fractions containing ADPr dimer and ADPr trimer were pooled , and iterations of gel filtration were performed . As a final measure , polymerization was induced over a period of 30 min , and samples were centrifuged at 392000 g for 20 min . Supernatants ( 2 - 7 mg / mL ) were then dialyzed against buffer G - 10 , flash frozen in liquid N 2 , and stored at - 70 (cid:1) C . When utilized , samples were desalted into G - buffer and used within 2 days of thawing . Polymerization . Polymerization was monitored using three techniques . ( 1 ) Light Scattering Intensity Copolymerization . Actin ( 0 - 20 μ M ) and ADP - ribosylated actin ( 0 - 20 μ M ) were brought to ambient temperature , and polymerization was induced with a 10 - fold stock solution of polymerizationsalts ( 250 mM Tris - HCl , pH 8 . 0 , 500 mM KCl , 20 mM MgCl 2 , 2 mM ATP , and 10 mM EGTA ) , yielding F - buffer . Light scattering at 90 (cid:1) to the incident light beam was monitored using a pulsed - beam Varian Cary Eclipse fluorescence spectrophotometer ( Mississauga , Ontario , Canada ) at an excitation of 360 nm and emission of 360 nm . All solutions were passed through 0 . 22 μ m filters to minimize back - ground light scattering , and experiments were performed with a replicate number of n g 3 . ( 2 ) Pyrene Polymerization Assay . Skeletal actin was la - beled with pyrene iodoacetamide ( py - actin ) as previously de - scribed ( 3 ) . Actin samplesinG - buffer werediluted and broughtto 2 . 5 % py - actin prior to induction of polymerization . Polymeriza - tion of10 μ M [ NBD ] ofactin , ADPr - actin , ADPrdimer , orADPr trimer was initiated by the addition of stock polymerization salts . Fluorescence intensity was monitored using a Cary Eclipse spectrofluorometer at excitation and emission wavelengths of 347 and 407 nm , respectively . Nucleation experiments were similarly performed in triplicate with 5 μ M actin ( 2 . 5 % py - actin ) sub - stituted with 0 . 25 μ M [ NBD ] of the nuclei being examined . Pyrene fluorescence was also used for monitoring the copo - lymerization of actin and pyrene - labeled ADPr - actin ( ADPr - py - actin ) . Briefly , py - actin was ADP - ribosylated as described above and excess NAD þ removed by gel - filtration chromatog - raphy . Samples containing 2 μ M ADPr - py - actin and increasing concentrations of actin ( 0 - 50 μ M ) were monitored after the introduction of stock polymerization salts . Experiments were also performed using non - ADP - ribosylated py - actin . The ratios of the baseline - corrected steady - state ( 180 min ) change in fluor - escence ( Δ F ) intensities of ADPr - py - actin and py - actin were plotted against the concentration of unmodified actin ; a curve representing the proportion of ADPr - py - actin filament in - corporation was generated . Assembly curves generated using Sephadex S300 purified actin did not yield different results . 8946 Biochemistry , Vol . 49 , No . 41 , 2010 Perieteanu et al . ( 3 ) Polymerization Sedimentation Assay . Polymerization of20 μ M [ NBD ] actin , ADPr - actin , ADPr dimer , or ADPrtrimer was induced byincubating the samples inpolymerization salts for 3 h at room temperature . Samples were subjected to centrifuga - tion at 392000 g for 20 min . Supernatants and pellets were separated and analyzed by SDS - PAGE . Dual - Color Filament Capping Assay . The dual - color fila - ment capping assay was performed as described by Harris et al . ( 10 ) . Actin ( 4 μ M ) was polymerized for 4 h in F - buffer . Samples were diluted 2 - fold with 300 nM ADPr - actin , dimer , or trimer and allowed to incubate at ambient temperature for 5 min . Samples were again diluted 2 - fold with equimolar rhodamine - phalloidin . Samples were further diluted 10 - fold with 400 nM G - actin and 400 nM Alexa 488 - phalloidin and rapidly brought to F - buffer conditions using concentrated stock . The solution was allowed to incubate for 10 min before being diluted an additional 5 - fold with F - buffer supplemented with 3 mg / mL glucose , 120 μ g / mL glucose oxidase , and 18 μ g / mL catalase . The final mixture ( 1 μ L ) was loaded onto a 0 . 01 % poly - ( L - lysine ) - coated slide . Images were taken through rhodamine and fluorescein filters . The percent occurrence of two colored events was determined and plotted for each condition . At least six images were analyzed , totaling at least 300 independent filaments for each sample . The standard deviation of the mean percent occurrence was calcu - lated from the variance between images . Inhibition of Actin Nucleation Assay . Polymerization of actin in the presence of filament nuclei was monitored using an Applied Photophysics SX20 stopped - flow spectrofluorometer ( Surrey , U . K . ) set to an excitation wavelength of 350 nm and an emission cutoff filter of 395 nm . F - Actin ( 1 μ M , 5 % py - actin ) in 5 mM Tris - HCl , pH 8 . 0 , 4 mM MgCl 2 , 100 mM KCl , 0 . 2 mM ATP , and 0 . 2 mM β - ME was mixed with 1 volume of 3 μ M actin and 5 % py - actin in 5 mM Tris - HCl , pH 8 . 0 , 0 . 2 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM ATP , and 0 . 2 mM β - ME supplemented with 0 . 002 - 2 . 0 μ M ADPr - actin , ADPr dimer , or ADPr trimer . The rate of polymerization between 25 and 50 s was plotted against the concentration of ADP - ribosylated actin , and a binding isotherm was used to extrapolate the apparent dissociation constants ( K dapp ) for ADPr - actin and its oligomers to the barbed end of actin filaments . Assembly curves generated using Sephadex S300 purified actin did not yield different results . Acrylamide Gel Electrophoresis . SDS - PAGE was per - formed as described previously ( 20 ) and visualized by staining with Coomassie Brilliant Blue R250 or under UV light . Native PAGE was performed with 8 % nonreducing , nondenaturing acrylamide gels supplemented with 0 . 2 mM ATP and 0 . 2 mM CaCl 2 . Native PAGE electrophoresis was also performed on ice at low voltage ( < 80 V ) . Dynamic Light Scattering . Actin and ADPr - actin were purified using Sephadex S300 gel filtration chromatography . Peak fractions corresponding to the latter half of the monomeric peak were pooled and filtered through a 0 . 22 μ M filtration device . Concentrations were determined and adjusted to 0 . 25 mg / mL using filtered G - buffer . Similarly , column - purified ADPr dimer and ADPr trimer were thawed , diluted , and filtered . Dynamic light scattering measurements were performed on a Nano S Zetasizer ( Malvern , U . K . ) equipped with a 633 nm red laser and a 173 (cid:1) backscatter detector . A normal distribution fit of volume distribution measurements was used to determine the experimental Stokes radius of all samples . All radii were calcu - lated from n g 9 distribution measurements . Theoretical radii were calculated using HydroPRO version 7c ( 7 ) . Thermal Unfolding . The transition temperatures for actin and the various complexes were determined using a JASCO - 815 chiro - optical spectrometer equipped with a PTC - 424S / 15 Peltier temperature control unit . Actin protein species were dialyzed twice at4 (cid:1) C againsttheir respectivebuffers . Actin proteinspecies concentrations were adjusted to 0 . 16 mg / mL ( 3 . 8 μ M [ NBD ] ) using the appropriate buffer system . A scan rate of 1 (cid:1) C / min was applied , and the absorbance at 222 nm was monitored through a 1 mm quartz cuvette . The transition temperature was defined as the minima of a Weibull fit to the first derivative of the unfolding profile as described ( 30 ) . Transition temperatures were calculated from a minimum of three thermal scans . Nucleotide Release . Purified polymerization - deficient actin complexes were buffer - exchanged into nucleotide - free G - buffer using a HiTrap desalting column ( GE Healthcare , Piscataway , NJ ) . The protein - containing fractions were quickly pooled and supplemented with a final concentration of 0 . 2 mM ε - ATP . Samples were incubated for 3 - 5 h on ice , buffer exchanged into nucleotide - free G - buffer , and supplemented with 20 μ M ε - ATP . Samples were incubated for a minimum of 30 min prior to fluorometric analysis . Protein concentrations were determined , and samples were diluted to 2 μ M [ NBD ] . Sample measurements from three separate injections were recorded using an Applied Photophysics SX20 stopped - flow apparatus ( Surrey , U . K . ) with an excitation wavelength of 350 nm and an emission cutoff filter of 395 nm . DNase I Inhibition . DNase I inhibition was performed as described ( 26 ) . Activity measurements were performed with a replicate number n g 3 . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Actin - ADPr - Actin Copolymerization . ADP - ribosylated actin is known to copolymerize with unmodified actin , but a detailed analysis of the degree to which copolymerization occurs has not been conducted ( 1 ) . We sought to test this as it would pose as a potential obstacle to the production of polymerization - deficient actin oligomers . ADP - ribosylated actin labeled with pyrene on Cys - 374 ( ADPr - py - actin ) was used as a sensitive means to determine the extent of copolymerization . Polymeriza - tion of both py - actin and ADPr - py - actin ( 2 μ M ) was induced in the presence of increasing concentrations of unmodified actin ( 0 - 50 μ M ) and the maximum fluorescence recorded ( Figure 1A ) . The ratio of maximum fluorescence intensities was plotted against unmodified actin concentration to show the relative proportion of ADPr - py - actin incorporation into the filaments ( Figure1B ) . For 2 μ MADPr - py - actin , wefound a50 % efficiency of incorporation ( EI 0 . 5 ) of 18 μ M and an estimated EI 0 . 9 of 150 μ M . Therefore , at a 9 : 1 ratio of unmodified actin to ADPr - py - actin , 50 % of the available ADPr - actin was incorporated into actin filaments . Furthermore , > 90 % incorporation was extra - polated to occur only at ratios of actin to ADPr - py - actin of > 75 : 1 . An ADPr trimer modified with only one ADP - ribose would possess an actin to ADPr - actin ratio of 2 : 1 and , based on our data , would have an efficiency of incorporation < 18 % . Substoichiometric ADP - ribosylation of cross - linked actin dimers and trimers could potentially retain a small degree of polymeri - zability , and therefore a cautionary approach to producing polymerization - deficient oligomers should be taken . To gain an understanding of the effect that the presence of ADPr - actin has on the polymerization properties of actin , we used light scattering intensity ( LSI ) to monitor the salt - induced polymerization of 20 μ M total actin with varying ratios Article Biochemistry , Vol . 49 , No . 41 , 2010 8947 of ADPr - actin to actin ( Supporting Information Figure S1 ) . Given our previous observations of copolymerization , we could assume that some of the light scattering was due to ADPr - actin being incorporated into actin filaments . Utilizing our copolym - erization data from Figure 1B , we determined that only 7 - 11 % of the LSI was attributable to ADPr - actin copolymerization . The change in LSI ( Δ LSI ) upon the addition of polymerization salts was plotted as a function of unmodified actin concentration , and an apparent critical concentration ( C c ) of 0 . 87 ( 0 . 44 μ M was determined from the x - intercept of the plot ( Figure 1C ) . Further - more , the corrected change in LSI attributable only to unmodified actin polymerization was also plotted , and a similar C c of 1 . 16 μ M was calculated . Previously reported C c values for skeletal R - actin are 0 . 12 ( 0 . 07 and 0 . 60 ( 0 . 17 μ M for the barbed and pointed ends , respectively ( 31 ) . Sinceourcalculated C c valuesaresimilarto that of the pointed end of actin , it is likely that ADPr - actin caps actin filaments at their barbed ends , allowing them only to polymerize at the pointed end , a conclusion that has also been reached by other authors through different means ( 40 ) . Formation and Purification of ADP - Ribosylated PBM - Cross - Linked Actin Oligomer . Chemical cross - linking of actin with PBM was performed as described by Knight and Offer ( 18 ) . Reaction conditions were reexamined with the intention of maximizing trimer yields ( Supporting Information Figure S2 ) . In short , slightly increased trimer yields were found with longer reaction times . ADP - ribosylation of PBM - actin oligomers was detectable by UV visualization when using ε - NAD þ as the transferase substrate ( Figure 2A , inset ) indicating successful ADP - ribosyla - tion of PBM - actin dimers and trimers , as well as higher order oligomers . Using ε - NAD þ as a substrate , we were also able to monitor the enzymatic reaction in real time ( Figure 2A ) . Under the conditions tested , ADP - ribosylation reactions were largely completed within 30 min ; however , since it is not uncommon for cross - linked actin filaments toremainpartially oligomeric , longer reaction times were employed to allow for ADP - ribosylation of treadmilling filaments . Successive gel filtration chromatography steps were performed to separate discrete oligomeric species ( Figure 2B ) . While the procedure was labor - intensive , it was reproducible , andthe chromatographic steps could be automated using the computer - driven AKTA FPLC system . SDS - PAGE analysis of the progress of purification is shown in Figure 2C . ADPr dimer and ADPr trimer yields at critical stages of the purification process are summarized in Supporting Information Table S1 . The two - step strategy employing PBM cross - linking and ADP - ribosylation toproduce andpurify actindimersandtrimers yielded milligram quantities of highly pure actin dimers and trimers . An assessment of the impact of the introduced modifica - tions on the biochemical / biophysical properties of both ADPr dimer and ADPr trimer was conducted prior to using them as an ABP scaffold . PBM and ADP - Ribose Stoichiometry . The copolymeri - zation data presented above suggest that the degree to which actin dimers and trimers are ADP - ribosylated could play a role in rendering these oligomers polymerization - deficient . The extent to which the actin oligomers were modified was determined by mass spectrometry ( data not shown ) . A 1 : 1 ADP - ribose to actin stoichiometry was detected for both the ADPr dimer and ADPr trimer . Thus , it appears that photox is able to ADP - ribosylate each subunit in the complex , irrespective of steric constraints introduced by chemical cross - linking . Since at least one Arg - 177 is expected to be blocked in an F - actin conformation , the data suggest that , under low ionic strength , PBM dimers and trimers are conformationally flexible . Stoichiometric ADP - ribosylation may result in the disruption of intermolecular contacts ; however , it does provide two key advantages over substoichiometric ADP - ribosylation : ( 1 ) substoichiometric labeling may result in the retention of some polymerization especially in the case of the actin trimer , whereas this is not a concern when the oligomers are fully modified , and ( 2 ) stoichiometric modification of the oligo - mers eliminates concerns about the heterogeneity of the mod - ification . Furthermore , the presence of a cross - linking moiety may introduce enough covalent constraint to overcome any major perturbations introduced by the ADP - ribose . The extent of PBM cross - linking was also determined using mass spectrometry . ADPr dimer showed an equal mixture of F IGURE 1 : Copolymerization of actin and ADPr - actin . ( A ) The change in fluorescence intensity ( Δ F ) at steady state ( 180 min ) after copolymerization of 2 μ M py - actin ( b ) or ADPr - py - actin ( O ) with varying concentrations ( 0 - 50 μ M ) of unmodified skeletal actin . ( B ) The efficiency of filament incorporation of ADPr - py - actin plotted against the concentration of unmodified actin . EI 0 . 5 and EI 0 . 9 values of 18 and 150 μ M , respectively , were determined . ( C ) The change in light scattering intensity , Δ LSI , after 200 min was plotted against unmodified actin ( O ) where actin concentrations ranged from 5 . 00 to 16 . 67 μ MandsamplesweresupplementedADPr - actintoyieldatotal actin concentration of 20 μ M . The Δ LSI attributable to unmodified actin was calculated by correcting for the contribution associated with ADPr - actin incorporation into filaments ( b ) . The x - intercepts oflinearregressionrepresent apparentcriticalconcentrationsof0 . 87 ( 0 . 44 and 1 . 16 μ M for unaltered and corrected data , respectively . 8948 Biochemistry , Vol . 49 , No . 41 , 2010 Perieteanu et al . actin dimers containing either one or two reacted PBM mole - cules , while ∼ 25 % of ADPr trimers contained two reacted PBM molecules , and 75 % contained three reacted PBM molecules . In both cases , the additional cross - link is likely present on the available Cys - 374 of the barbed - end actin subunit . Dynamic Light Scattering . To ascertain the structural state of the ADPr - actin complexes , dynamic light scattering measure - ments were acquired for actin , ADPr - actin , its dimer , and its trimer ( Figure 3 ) . The measured hydrodynamic radii were compared with literature values and theoretical values from X - ray crystal structure data ( Table 1 , Supporting Information Figure S3 ) . The results for actin andADPr - actinareinagreement with previously determined values and theoretical values for monomeric actin ( 7 , 9 , 28 ) . Likewise , themeasuredhydrodynamic radius of 3 . 78 ( 0 . 22 nm for ADPr dimer agreed with theoretical values based on structural data and filament models ( 34 ) . In contrast , a measured radius of 4 . 84 ( 0 . 41 nm for the ADPr trimer differs slightly from that of 4 . 52 nm calculated for a trimer from the Oda filament model , suggesting that , under monomer promoting conditions , the ADPr trimer is in a slightly more open conformation , perhaps due to the presence of an internal ADP - ribose . Thermal Stability and Nucleotide Binding Affinity . Be - cause of the significant amount of modification , we assessed the effect of cross - linking and ADP - ribosylation on the stability of the actin species produced by monitoring for the loss of second - ary structure in the presence of a thermal gradient ( Figure 4A ) . ADP - ribosylation alone reduced the transition temperature ( T m ) of the monomer by 2 . 7 (cid:1) C . Both ADPr dimer and trimer possessed similar thermal stabilities , about 3 . 5 (cid:1) C lower than ADPr - actin and 5 . 2 (cid:1) C lower than unmodified actin , indicat - ing that both cross - linking and ADP - ribosylation are respon - sible for a decrease in thermal stability . Transition temper - atures ranging from 52 to 59 (cid:1) C are within the range of those tested for unmodified actin under various physiologically relevant conditions , indicating that the combined strategy of PBM cross - linking and ADP - ribosylation does not signifi - cantly destabilize the secondary structure of the oligomeric actin subunits ( 30 , 35 ) . The magnitude of the decrease in T m between actin and the ADPr dimer or ADPr trimer was larger than that attributable to ADP - ribosylation alone , implying that either the cross - linker or another actin molecule in close proximity acted to destabilize the protein . Current models suggest that actin unfolding is correlated with the lossofbound nucleotide ( 30 ) . The dissociationof ε - ATPfrom actin was monitored in the presence of excess ATP ( Figure 4B ) , F IGURE 2 : ADP - ribosylation and purification of PBM cross - linked skeletalactin . ( A ) Fluorescenceintensitytimecoursemeasurementof ADP - ribosylation of a 1 . 5 mg / mL PBM - actin mixture in the pre - senceof180 μ M ε - NAD þ and200nMphotox . SDS - PAGEofPBM cross - linked actin ( 1 . 5 mg / mL ) in 10 mM Tris - HCl and 180 μ M ε - NAD þ G - buffer in the absence or presence of 200 nM photox . In the presence of photox , UV visualization showed ADP - ribosylation of all actin species ( inset ) . Arrows indicate ADP - ribosylated actin monomer ( rM ) , dimer ( rD ) , and trimer ( rT ) species . ADPr - actin and its oligomers . ( B ) Chromatographic purification of the reac - tion mixture ( 0 ) , ADPr dimer ( O ) , and ADPr trimer ( ] ) over a HiLoad 26 / 60 Superdex 200 gel filtration column . ( C ) SDS - PAGE of fractions retrieved from the purification process . PBM P shows pelleted polymerization - competent actin proteins after cross - linking with PBM . ADPr S and ADPr P are supernatant and pellet fractions after photox treatment , with induction of polymerization prior to sedimentation . rM , rD , and rT represent purified ADPr monomer , dimer , and trimer . F IGURE 3 : Dynamic light scattering measurements show ADP - ribo - sylated actin oligomers adopt F - actin conformations . Dynamic light scattering was performed on 0 . 25 mg / mL ( A ) actin , ( B ) ADPr - actin , ( C ) ADPrdimer , and ( D ) ADPrtrimer . No significant increasein M r was observed upon ADP - ribosylation of actin . An increase in M r of 38 % and 77 % was detected for the ADPr dimer and ADPr trimer , respectively . Article Biochemistry , Vol . 49 , No . 41 , 2010 8949 and apparent dissociation rates ( k ε - ATP ) were calculated ( summarized in Table 1 ) . The increased rate of ε - ATP dissociation suggests that the presence of ADP - ribose at Arg - 177 destabilized actin by a mechanism involving decreased nucleotide affinity . These results stress the importance of the relationship between nucleotide binding affinity and actin stability and that careful consideration should be taken when engineering these types of oligomers . Polymerization of PBM - Cross - Linked ADPr - Actin Oli - gomers . Polymerization of ADPr - actin and its dimer and trimer was assessed using both pyrene - actin fluorescence and sedimenta - tion analysis . No distinguishable increase in pyrene fluorescence characteristic of actin polymerization was observed upon addi - tion of polymerization salts to ADPr - actin , dimer , or trimer ( Supporting Information Figure S4 ) . Sedimentation assays were performed to rule out the possibility that the pyrene fluorescence results were an artifact due to a deficiency in the interaction between pyrene - actin and ADPr - actin ( Figure 5A ) . Under poly - merizing conditions , unmodified actin readily sedimented and ADPr - modified actin and ADPr - actin oligomers remained in the supernatant , demonstrating that the ADP - ribosylation renders actin monomer , dimer , and trimer polymerization - deficient . The purification process includes polymerization / depolymerization cycles as well as chromatographic steps under conditions that favor polymerization . As a result , the purification conditions favor the purification of polymerization - deficient actin com - plexes . The purified products possessed a 1 : 1 ADP - ribose to actin stoichiometry and were subsequently shown to be polymeriza - tion - deficient . Copolymerization data suggest that substoichio - metrically modified actin dimers and trimers may retain some degree of polymerization competency , and it is likely that substiochiometric ADP - ribosylation was not detected because the purification process selected against it . ADPr - Actin Oligomers Cap Actin Filaments . Apparent C c values attained from copolymerization experiments ( Figure 1C ) suggested that ADPr - actin retained the ability to bind the barbed end of actin filaments , essentially capping barbed ends and increasing the apparent C c to a value equal to that of K d at the pointed end . Having shown that ADPr dimer and ADPr trimer lack the ability to polymerize , it was of interest to determine whether the capping activity seen with ADPr - actin was retained , as it would imply the presence of an intact pointed - end surface . Dual - color microscopy was performed in a manner similar to that described previously ( 10 ) . Rhodamine - phalloidin stabilized filaments were doped with a low concentration ( 0 . 4 μ M ) of actin to minimize pointed - end elongation ( Figure 5B ) . Actin elongat - ing from the barbed end of rhodamine - phalloidin actin filaments ( red ) was stabilized by Alexa 488 - phalloidin ( green ) . In the absence of ADP - ribosylated actins , 42 ( 8 % of the filaments were dual colored , suggesting that actin polymerized from the barbed end of these preformed rhodamine - phalloidin - bound actin filaments . In the presence of ADPr - actin , ADPr dimer , and ADPr trimer , the percent composition of dual - colored filaments decreased by approximately 75 % to 14 ( 4 % , 12 ( 4 % , and 13 ( 5 % , respectively ( Figure 5C ) . These results suggest that the ADP - ribosylated actin species act as barbed - end cappers . Binding of ADPr - actin and its dimer and trimer to F - actin was measured using a competitive nucleation assay ( Supporting Information Figure S5 ) . We found that the injection process on Table 1 : Summary of Experimentally and Structurally Determined Biophysical Properties of Actin , ADPr - Actin , and Its Oligomers a molecular radii binding terms thermal stability and nucleotide exchange species DLS M r ( nm ) M r c ( nm ) PDB K dapp ( μ M ) Δ G f ( eu ) Δ G s ( eu ) Δ S r ( eu / k ) T m ( (cid:1) C ) k ε - ATP ( (cid:2) 10 - 3 , s - 1 ) actin 2 . 73 ( 0 . 16 2 . 93 1NWK 0 . 121 b - 9 . 27 c 10 . 88 c - 26 . 52 c 58 . 7 ( 0 . 4 2 . 0 ( 0 . 1 2 . 99 2ZWH 64 . 2 ( 0 . 7 d ADPr - actin 2 . 86 ( 0 . 12 2 . 86 2GWJ 0 . 129 ( 0 . 031 - 9 . 24 10 . 96 - 26 . 80 56 . 0 ( 0 . 1 5 . 4 ( 0 . 7 ADPr dimer 3 . 78 ( 0 . 22 3 . 85 2Q36 0 . 030 ( 0 . 005 - 10 . 08 11 . 45 - 28 . 46 52 . 6 ( 0 . 1 6 . 1 ( 0 . 3 3 . 92 2ZWH ADPr trimer 4 . 84 ( 0 . 41 4 . 52 2ZWH 0 . 072 ( 0 . 016 - 9 . 57 11 . 88 - 29 . 93 52 . 3 ( 0 . 6 5 . 5 ( 0 . 2 a The PDB accession numbers for the structural database used in the calculations are reported . Apparent dissociation constants determined by the competitive nucleation assay are summarized , and the binding energy terms determined using M r and K dapp data sets are reported . Thermal stability and nucleotide exchange parameters are also reported . b Values acquired and / or calculated from ref 31 . c Theoretical values calculated from PDB : 1NWK ( 9 ) , 2ZWH ( 28 ) , 2GWJ ( 23 ) , and 2Q36 ( 34 ) . d Transition temperature for actin under polymer - inducing conditions . F IGURE 4 : ADPr - actin species exhibit decreased thermal stability due to lowered nucleotide affinity . ( A ) The T m of actin and ADP - ribosylated actin species was determined using circular dichroism . Representative isotherms for individual samples are shown . The T m for monomeric actin under these conditions was found to be 58 . 7 ( 0 . 4 (cid:1) C ( b ) . Under similar conditions , a decrease of approximately 2 . 7 (cid:1) C was observed with ADPr - actin ( O ) . A 6 . 1 and 6 . 4 (cid:1) C decrease was seen for ADPr dimer ( 2 ) and ADPr trimer ( Δ ) , respectively , compared to unmodified actin , and a 3 . 4 and 3 . 7 (cid:1) C decrease in T m whencomparedtoADPr - actin . Actinunderpolymerizingconditions is also shown ( 9 ) . ( B ) Nucleotide exchange of ε - ATP - bound actin species . Actin species are represented by symbols as described above . 8950 Biochemistry , Vol . 49 , No . 41 , 2010 Perieteanu et al . the stopped - flow device sheared actin filaments and was there - fore a convenient method for measuring rapid sheared F - actin - induced filament nucleation . The presence of increasing con - centrations of ADPr - actin oligomers resulted in a decrease in filament nucleation rates . This observation is presumably due to the binding of the ADPr - actin species and its subsequent partial inhibition of nucleation . A protein binding curve was generated by plotting the inhibi - tion of the rate of fluorescence change from 25 to 50 s versus the concentration of ADPr - actin oligomers ( Figure 5D ) . Binding isotherms yielded apparentdissociation constants ( K dapp ) of 0 . 129 ( 0 . 031 , 0 . 030 ( 0 . 005 , and 0 . 072 ( 0 . 016 μ M for ADPr - actin , dimer , and trimer , respectively . A dissociation constant ( also the C c ) of 0 . 121 μ M for actin monomer at the barbed end of actin filaments has been reported for conditions similar to those used here ( 31 ) . The data show that ADP - ribosylation of actin did not affect the interaction between the pointed end of the modified actin and the barbed end of the actin filament . Furthermore , the observed 4 - fold increase in capping activity of ADPr dimer compared to ADPr monomer suggests that the increased activity is a result of a concerted effect between the two actin subunits in the ADPr dimer and that capping activity is not simply the result of two independently acting tethered monomers . The K d for an actin trimer binding toa filament barbed endhas been reported to be 0 . 072 μ M ( 21 ) ; comparison with that measured for the ADPr trimer suggests that the ADPr moieties had no significant effect on its affinity for binding to the barbed end of actin filaments and , furthermore , that the actin trimer also possesses an intact pointed - end surface . The trimer showed a 2 . 5 - fold decreased affinity for the filament barbed end compared to the dimer . We sought to shed light on the matter because , theoretically , both species possess the same pointed - end binding surface which interacts with filament barbed ends . The dissociation constant can be related to Gibb’s free energy , Δ G f of binding , by the equation : K d ¼ exp - Δ G f = RT Using the determined values of K dapp , we calculated Δ G f for ADPr - actin and its oligomers using the above equation ( Table 1 ) . These data show that a change in Δ G f of 0 . 51 eu ( entropy units ) would be required to account for the observed difference in K dapp between the ADPr dimer and trimer . The term Δ G f can be described as the sum of the binding energy ( Δ G b ) and the entropic energy ( Δ G s ) ( 6 , 13 ) . Using our DLS measurements of molecular radius , the entropic costs associated with binding of ADPr dimer and trimer to the actin filament were calculated . The difference in Δ G s between ADPr dimer and ADPr trimer was 0 . 43 eu , suggesting that the observed difference in K dapp is accounted for by the additional mass in the trimer and that the ADPr dimer and trimer form similar longitudinal and lateral contacts with the F - actinbarbed end ( for a detailed explanation refer toSupporting Information ) . A key point of these observations is that under polymerization conditions capping activitymeasurements suggest that the actin dimer and trimer form similar pointed - end inter - faces that act in a concerted fashion to bind filament barbed ends . F IGURE 5 : ADP - ribosylation renders actin oligomers polymerization - deficient while retaining pointed - end activity . ( A ) SDS - PAGE analysis of pellet ( P ) and supernatant ( S ) fractions resulting from sedimentation of 10 μ M [ NBD ] actin species in the presence and absence of polymerization salts . ( B ) Fluorescence microscopy images from dual - color filament capping reactions containing 2 μ M actin incubated with F - buffer , stabilized with equimolar rhodamine - phalloidin ( red ) , in the presence of no cap ( - ) or 0 . 3 μ M either ADPr - actin , ADPr dimer , or ADPr trimer . These red filaments act as nuclei from which 0 . 4 μ M G - actin in the presence of Alexa 488 - phalloidin ( green ) can elongate as described in Experimental Procedures . ( C ) Histogram of the percentage of filaments containing both red and green tails from the experiments described in ( B ) . The proportionofdual - coloredfilamentsdecreasedbyapproximately75 % inthepresenceofADPr - actin , ADPrdimer , orADPrtrimer . Shownisthe average of at least 300 filaments from six images with standard deviation between images given as error bars . ( D ) Nucleation rate inhibition by ADPr - actin competition . Reactions were initiated by combining 1 μ M F - actin and 5 % py - actin with 1 volume of 3 μ M actin and 5 % py - actin , supplemented with increasing concentrations of ADPr - actin ( b ) , ADPr dimer ( 9 ) , or ADPr trimer ( 2 ) . Binding isotherms yielded apparent dissociationconstants ( K dapp ) of128 ( 30 , 30 ( 5 , and 72 ( 16nMfor ADPr - actin , ADPr dimer , and ADPr trimer , respectively . Standarderror of the ligand binding isotherm is reported . Article Biochemistry , Vol . 49 , No . 41 , 2010 8951 DNase I Binding . DNaseIformsabinarycomplexwithactin . The structurally sensitive DNase I binding loop on actin is buried when actin is in filamentous form , and therefore , DNase I binding is restricted to the pointed end of filaments , where the DNase I binding loop remains surface accessible ( Supporting Information Figure S3 ) . We utilized DNase I binding as a method for determining the structural compactness of the ADPr dimer and trimer , using native PAGE to visualize binding ( Figure 6 ) . Upon treatment with a 2 molar excess of DNase I , all actin species showed the presence of one discrete band , indicative of complex formation . Excess DNase I was observed in the presence of actin or ADPr - actin , since there is only one binding site on actin and the reaction mixture contained a 2 molar excess ofDNase I . No excess DNase I was observed in the case of the ADPr dimer , where two potential DNase I binding sites were present , suggesting that both binding sites are amenable to DNase I binding . Since the ADPr trimer possesses the same pointed - end surface as the dimer as well as an additional axial actin , we expected that it would bind at least as much or possibly more DNase I . Interestingly , in the case of ADPr trimer excess DNase I was observed . This implies that the ADPr trimer is able to bind DNase I to a lower extent than ADPr dimer even though it possesses the same pointed - end interface . The endonuclease activity of DNase I is inhibited upon actin binding ; therefore , by monitoring the DNase I activity in the pre - sence of actin complexes , we were able to measure DNase I binding affinities ( Figure 7A , Table 2 ) . The affinity of DNase I for actin and ADPr - actin did not change significantly , thus showing that the DNase I binding domain , which is typically considered to be struc - turally sensitive , is unaffected by ADP - ribosylation at Arg - 177 . Furthermore , under filament - forming conditions ( f - ) , the DNase I binding affinity for f - ADPr - actin was found to be unaffected . It is important to note that concentrations and IC 50 values are reported as [ NBD ] . To generate stoichiometry values , the follow - ing equation was applied : IC actin50 IC oligomer50 ð n Þ where n is the number of actin subunits present in the oligomer employed . DNase I binding affinities for the ADPr dimer and f - ADPr dimer ( Figure 7B ) were compared to those of the actin monomer . A DNase I : ADPr dimer stoichiometry of 1 . 96 : 1 was calculated , correlating with our observations using native PAGE . Increasing the ionic strength resulted in a 2 - fold increase in IC 50 , bringing the DNase I : f - ADPr dimer stoichiometry to 1 . 07 : 1 . Together , the data imply that f - ADPr dimer is in a state where both actin molecules are accessible to DNase I and that , under high ionic strength , the f - ADPr dimer adopts a closed architecture where only one DNase I binding site is accessible . A binding stoichi - ometry of 1 . 34 : 1 and 1 . 05 : 1 was calculated for ADPr trimer and f - ADPr trimer , respectively . These data also corroborate native PAGE observations . A comparison between ADPr dimer and trimer shows that the third actin molecule does not increase the binding affinity for DNase I but has the opposite effect ; it decreases the binding affinity of the oligomer for DNase I . This implies that the presence of the additional actin molecule results in a more structurally compact pointed end . It is possible that the addi - tional lateral and longitudinal contacts formed by the presence of the third cross - linked actin molecule could even induce a twist similar to that seen in the F - actin helix , even under nonpoly - merizing conditions . Furthermore , under conditions typically promoting filament formation , both the f - ADPr dimer and f - ADPr trimer are able to bind only one DNase I molecule , suggesting that they can adopt an even tighter conformation . These data validate the idea that both the ADPr dimer and trimer retain a degree of conformational flexibility which could play an important role in ABP binding studies . Furthermore , these results lend credence to our binding affinity calculations which suggested that , under polymerization conditions , the dimer and trimer share the same pointed - end interface . Gelsolin Binding and Nucleation Rescue . Gelsolinisa well - studied actin filament - severing protein and actin filament nu - cleator known to simultaneously bind multiple actin molecules ( for a review see ref 38 ) . Native PAGE was used to visualize the binding of gelsolin to actin , ADPr - actin , dimer , and trimer ( Figure 6 ) . Native PAGE showed that both actin and ADPr - actin form gelsolin - actin complexes with relative R f values of F IGURE 6 : DNase I and gelsolin bind ADP - ribosylated actin complexes . Actin complexes were incubated with a 2 - fold molar excess of either DNase I or gelsolin and reaction mixtures analyzed by native PAGE . In the presence of DNase I , predominant bands representative of DNase I - actin complexes are distinguishable for each actin construct . In the presence of gelsolin , actin , ADPr - actin , and its dimer and trimer show the appearance of actin - gelsolin complexes . R f values were calculated relative to DNase I mobility . 8952 Biochemistry , Vol . 49 , No . 41 , 2010 Perieteanu et al . - 1 . 17 and - 1 . 23 units , respectively . Previously , it has been reported that gelsolin forms a ternary complex with two actins in an antiparallel conformation ( 12 ) , and therefore we believe that the reported R f values are representative of a gelsolin antiparallel actin ternary complex . In the presence of gelsolin , ADPr dimer showed a major band at R f = - 2 . 1 and minor bands at - 1 . 38 and - 0 . 78 , where the band at - 0 . 78 appeared to be of equal intensity to that at R f = - 2 . 1 . To shed light on the stoichiometry of the complex formed between ADPr dimer and gelsolin , native PAGE was performed with increasing ratios of gelsolin to ADPr dimer . Interestingly , all protein complex bands appeared simultaneously , and dimer bands disappeared at ratios of gelsolin to actin g 1 ( Supporting Information Figure S6 ) , suggesting a near 1 : 1 binding ratio of gelsolin to ADPr dimer with at least two different modes of binding . Gelsolin possesses three actin binding domains : two bind monomeric actin , and the third binds only filamentous actin ( 33 ) . It has already been shown that the two monomer binding sites bind actin in an antiparallel conformation ( 12 ) , and it is unlikely that the lateral ADPr dimer would be able to adopt an antiparallel conformation . Therefore , it is possible that the two binding modes are representative of either of the two actin monomer binding sites on gelsolin binding to the dimer . ADPr trimer binding to gelsolin showed one major band at - 0 . 87 and a minor band at - 1 . 80 ( sometimes not observable ) , also with a binding stoichiometry of 1 : 1 ( Supporting Information Figure S6 ) . The nature of the increase in R f observed for the gelsolin trimer complex with respect to the gelsolin dimer complex is difficult to ascertain . Both dimer and trimer appear to form 1 : 1 complexes ; therefore , it is unlikely that the lower R f of the gelsolin dimer complex is due to multiple dimers binding . Native PAGE results are not necessarily representative of molecular weight but are more so representative of shape and charge . The addition of the axial actin in the trimer would result in an increased negative charge . It is possible that the gelsolin trimer complex adopts a more tightly packed conformation than the gelsolin dimer complex . An increase in charge , but not size , explains the increased R f for the gelsolin trimer complex . As mentioned prior , gelsolin possesses an F - actin binding domain . It is likely that the interface formed by the axially arranged actin subunits in the trimer forms an interface that is able to bind the F - actin binding domain of gelsolin . This would support the notion of a compact gelsolin - trimer complex . We probed for actin filament nucleation in the presence of the purified ADPr trimer - gelsolin heterocomplex ( Figure 8A ) . Nucleation by gelsolin is believed to occur through two main processes : ( 1 ) nucleus formation by binding and coordination of actin molecules and ( 2 ) severing of short actin filaments to form nuclei . As calcium is required for gelsolin binding to actin and for the maintenance of gelsolin severing , it can be said that both processes arecalcium - dependent . Once boundina gelsolin - actin complex , calcium is protected from chelation by EGTA , and thus gelsolin nucleation can , in that case , be considered calcium insensitive . We found that gelsolin prebound to actin acted as a strong filament nucleator in the presence of calcium and as a weak nucleator when severing is abolished ( no free Ca 2 þ ) . The ADPr trimer - gelsolin heterocomplex showed significant nuclea - tion activity , suggesting that the binding of gelsolin remodels the ADPr trimer structure to one that is nucleation competent . Furthermore , the nucleation activities of the ADPr trimer are unaltered in the presence or absence of calcium , showing that nucleation rescue is not dependent on severing . It is unlikely that the covalently cross - linked trimer is able to adopt the antiparallel conformation implicated in gelsolin - mediated actin coordina - tion ; therefore , we believe that the ADPr trimer - gelsolin com - plex may be similar to that expected from gelsolin binding to the barbed end of F - actin ( 12 , 24 ) . These results provide an example F IGURE 7 : DNase I inhibition by ADPr - actin oligomers shows con - formational flexibility in low and high ionic strengths . DNase I inhibition by ( A ) actin ( [ ) , ADPr - actin ( b ) , and ADPr - actin supple - mented with 50 mM KCl and 2 mM MgCl 2 ( f - , O ) , ( B ) ADPr dimer ( b ) and f - ADPr dimer ( O ) , and ( C ) ADPr trimer ( b ) and f - ADPr trimer ( O ) . Both DNase I binding domains on the actin dimer subunits were accessible at low ionic strengths ; however , at increased ionicstrength , ADPrdimershoweda2 - foldincreaseinDNaseIIC 50 . Atlow ionic strengthADPrtrimershowedhigherprotection onaper subunit basis than ADPr dimer , and an increase in ionic strength showed , as with the dimer , increased protection to DNase I . Table 2 : DNase I Inhibition IC 50 Determinations under Polymerizing ( þ ) and Nonpolymerizing ( - ) Conditions IC 50 ( nM ) binding ratio species - þ - þ actin 11 . 83 ( 0 . 78 ADPr - actin 10 . 98 ( 0 . 84 9 . 84 ( 2 . 37 1 . 08 ( 0 . 11 1 . 20 ( 0 . 30 ADPr dimer 12 . 10 ( 0 . 97 22 . 08 ( 0 . 77 1 . 96 ( 0 . 15 1 . 07 ( 0 . 07 ADPr trimer 26 . 43 ( 2 . 08 33 . 65 ( 1 . 79 1 . 34 ( 0 . 10 1 . 05 ( 0 . 07 Article Biochemistry , Vol . 49 , No . 41 , 2010 8953 of how these actin oligomers may be used to study the structure and function of F - actin binding proteins . Removal of ADP - Ribose and Nucleation Rescue . The presence of the ADP - ribose on Arg - 177 may interfere with the proper binding of ABPs , and therefore the removal of the ADP - ribose moiety may be desirable . Previous reports have described the enzyme - mediated removal of an ADP - ribose moiety from Arg - 177 of actin ( 15 ) . In the presence of nicotinamide , the reverse reaction to ADP - ribosylation is favored , and de - ADP - ribosyla - tion is possible , restoring the polymerization properties of actin . Treating the ADPr - actin oligomers with nicotinamide and photox resulted in a rescue of the filament nucleation properties of actin dimers and trimers , with the latter acting as more potent nuclei ( Figure 8B ) . These data suggest that removal of the ADP - ribose moieties from the ADPr - actin oligomers is possible . The degree of control and manageability offered by ADP - ribosyla - tion gives it an advantage over other methods for introducing polymerization deficiencies . CONCLUSION In summary , we provide a two - step process for the production of large quantities of polymerization - deficient F - actin oligomers . These oligomers retain their affinity for association with the barbed end of actin and also retain a certain degree of conforma - tion flexibility which is thought to be present in actin filaments . Furthermore , we show that both DNase I and gelsolin are able to bind these actin oligomers , with the latter producing a conforma - tional change responsible for nucleation rescue . We believe that , in the future , the polymerization - deficient F - actin trimer will be able to act as a scaffold for a variety of F - actin - side binding proteins such as myosin . The work presented will form the foundation for research involving the use of F - actin oligomers as an F - actin structural scaffold . ACKNOWLEDGMENT We thank Gerry Prentice for early preparations of photox and technical expertise . SUPPORTING INFORMATION AVAILABLE A detailed explanation of the theoretical energy requirements of the dimer and trimer and figures showing copolymeriza - tion traces of actin and ADPr - actin ( S1 ) , cross - linking reaction conditions ( S2 ) , structural model of the actin complexes ( S3 ) , polymerization traces for the inhibition of nucleation by ADPr - actin species ( S4 ) , pyrene fluorescence measurements of ADPr - actins ( S5 ) , and binding stoichiometry of gelsolin and ADPr dimer and trimer . This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http : / / pubs . acs . org . REFERENCES 1 . Ballweber , E . , Galla , M . , Aktories , K , Yeoh , S . , Weeds , A . G . , and Mannherz , H . G . ( 2001 ) Interaction of ADP - ribosylated actin with actin binding proteins . FEBS Lett . 508 , 131 – 135 . 2 . Chik , J . K . , Lindberg , U . , and Schutt , C . E . ( 1996 ) The structure of an open state of beta - actin at 2 . 65 A˚ resolution . J . Mol . Biol . 263 , 607 – 623 . 3 . Cooper , J . A . , Walker , S . B . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1983 ) Pyrene actin : documentation of the validity of a sensitive assay for actin polymeri - zation . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 4 , 253 – 262 . 4 . Dawson , J . F . , Sablin , E . P . , Spudich , J . A . , and Fletterick , R . J . ( 2003 ) StructureofanF - actintrimerdisruptedbygelsolin andimpli - cations for the mechanism of severing . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 1229 – 1238 . 5 . dos Remedios , C . G . , Chhabra , D , Kekic , M . , Dedova , I . V . , Tsubakihara , M . , Berry , D . A . , and Nosworthy , N . J . ( 2003 ) Actin binding proteins : regulation of cytoskeletal microfilaments . Physiol . Rev . 83 , 433 – 473 . 6 . Erickson , H . P . ( 1989 ) Co - operativity in protein - protein association . Thestructureandstabilityoftheactinfilament . J . Mol . Biol . 206 , 465 – 474 . 7 . Fernandes , M . X . , Ortega , A . , LopezMartinez , M . C . , andGarciadela , T . J . ( 2002 ) Calculation of hydrodynamic properties of small nucleic acids from their atomic structure . Nucleic Acids Res . 30 , 1782 – 1788 . 8 . Gilbert , H . R . , and Frieden , C . ( 1983 ) Preparation , purification and properties of a crosslinked trimer of G - actin . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 111 , 404 – 408 . 9 . Graceffa , P . , and Dominguez , R . ( 2003 ) Crystal structure of mono - meric actin in the ATP state . Structural basis of nucleotide - dependent actin dynamics . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 34172 – 34180 . 10 . Harris , E . S . , Li , F . , and Higgs , H . N . ( 2004 ) The mouse formin , FRLalpha , slows actin filament barbed end elongation , competes with capping protein , accelerates polymerization from monomers , and severs filaments . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 20076 – 20087 . 11 . Hegyi , G . , Mak , M . , Kim , E . , Elzinga , M . , Muhlrad , A . , and Reisler , E . ( 1998 ) Intrastrand cross - linked actin between Gln - 41 and Cys - 374 . I . Mapping of sites cross - linked in F - actin by N - ( 4 - azido - 2 - nitrophenyl ) putrescine . Biochemistry 37 , 17784 – 17792 . 12 . Hesterkamp , T , Weeds , A . G . , and Mannherz , H . G . ( 1993 ) The actin monomersintheternarygelsolin : 2actincomplexareinanantiparallel orientation . Eur . J . Biochem . 218 , 507 – 513 . 13 . Howard , J . ( 2001 ) Mechanics of Motor Proteins and the Cytoskeleton , Sinauer Associates : Sunderland . 14 . Joel , P . B . , Fagnant , P . M . , and Trybus , K . M . ( 2004 ) Expression of a nonpolymerizable actin mutant in Sf9 cells . Biochemistry 43 , 11554 – 11559 . 15 . Just , I . , Geipel , U . , Wegner , A . , and Aktories , K . ( 1990 ) De - ADP - ribosylation actin by Clostridium perfringens iota - toxin and Clostri - dium botulinum C2 toxin . Eur . J . Biochem . 192 , 723 – 727 . 16 . Kabsch , W . , Mannherz , H . G . , Suck , D . , Pai , E . F . , andHolmes , K . C . ( 1990 ) Atomic structure of the actin : DNase I complex . Nature 347 , 37 – 44 . F IGURE 8 : Rescue of filament assembly nucleation properties . ( A ) ADPr trimer lacks actin filament nucleation capabilities ( 0 , trimer ) . Gelsolininthe presence ( b , gel þ C ) and absence ofcalcium ( 2 , gel - C ) shows different nucleation capabilities owing to a lack of severing activity in the absence of calcium . ADPr trimer - gelsolin nucleation was also tested in the presence ( O , trimer : gel þ C ) and absence of calcium ( Δ , trimer : gel - C ) and showed little variance . ( B ) Actin filament elongation rates ( b ) in the presence of ADPr dimer ( O ) or ADPr trimer ( 2 ) lack nucleating activity . After removal of the ADP - ribose moiety from the actin oligomers , the nucleation activity of deADPr dimer ( Δ ) and deADPr trimer ( 9 ) was significantly increased . 8954 Biochemistry , Vol . 49 , No . 41 , 2010 Perieteanu et al . 17 . Klenchin , V . A . , Khaitlina , S . Y . , and Rayment , I . ( 2006 ) Crystal structure of polymerization - competent actin . J . Mol . Biol . 362 , 140 – 150 . 18 . Knight , P . , and Offer , G . ( 1978 ) p - NN 0 - phenylenebismaleimide , a specific cross - linking agent for F - actin . Biochem . J . 175 , 1023 – 1032 . 19 . Kudryashov , D . S . , and Reisler , E . ( 2003 ) Solution properties of tetramethylrhodamine - modified G - actin . Biophys . J . 85 , 2466 – 2475 . 20 . Laemmli , U . K . ( 1970 ) Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4 . Nature 227 , 680 – 685 . 21 . Lal , A . A . , Korn , E . D . , and Brenner , S . L . ( 1984 ) Rate constants for actin polymerization in ATP determined using cross - linked actin trimers as nuclei . J . Biol . Chem . 259 , 8794 – 8800 . 22 . Mannherz , H . G . , Ballweber , E . , Hegyi , G . , and Goody , R . S . ( 2008 ) Cross - linked long - pitch actin dimer forms stoichiometric complexes with gelsolin segment 1 and / or deoxyribonuclease I that nonproduc - tively interact with myosin subfragment 1 . Biochemistry 47 , 9335 – 9343 . 23 . Margarit , S . M . , Davidson , W . , Frego , L . , and Stebbins , C . E . ( 2006 ) A steric antagonism of actin polymerization by a salmonella virulence protein . Structure 14 , 1219 – 1229 . 24 . McGough , A . , Chiu , W . , and Way , M . ( 1998 ) Determination of the gelsolinbindingsiteonF - actin : implicationsforseveringandcapping . Biophys . J . 74 , 764 – 772 . 25 . Mockrin , S . C . , andKorn , E . D . ( 1981 ) Isolationandcharacterization of covalently cross - linked actin dimer . J . Biol . Chem . 256 , 8228 – 8233 . 26 . Morrison , S . S . , and Dawson , J . F . ( 2007 ) A high - throughput assay shows that DNase I binds actin monomers and polymers with similar affinity . Anal . Biochem . 364 , 159 – 164 . 27 . Nair , U . B . , Joel , P . B . , Wan , Q . , Lowey , S . , Rould , M . A . , and Trybus , K . M . ( 2008 ) Crystal structures of monomeric actin bound to cytochalasin D . J . Mol . Biol . 384 , 848 – 864 . 28 . Oda , T . , Iwasa , M . , Aihara , T . , Maeda , Y . , and Narita , A . ( 2009 ) The nature of the globular - to fibrous - actin transition . Nature 457 , 441 – 445 . 29 . Pengelly , K . , Loncar , A . , Perieteanu , A . A . , and Dawson , J . F . ( 2009 ) Cysteine engineering of actin self - assembly interfaces . Biochem . Cell Biol . 87 , 663 – 675 . 30 . Perieteanu , A . A . , Sweeting , B . , and Dawson , J . F . ( 2008 ) The real - time monitoring of the thermal unfolding of tetramethylrhodamine - labeled actin . Biochemistry 47 , 9688 – 9696 . 31 . Pollard , T . D . ( 1986 ) Rate constants for the reactions of ATP - and ADP - actin with the ends of actin filaments . J . Cell Biol . 103 , 2747 – 2754 . 32 . Pollard , T . D . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 1986 ) Actin and actin - binding proteins . A critical evaluation of mechanisms and functions . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 55 , 987 – 1035 . 33 . Pope , B . , Way , M . , and Weeds , A . G . ( 1991 ) Two of the three actin - binding domains of gelsolin bind to the same subdomain of actin . Implications of capping and severing mechanisms . FEBS Lett . 280 , 70 – 74 . 34 . Sawaya , M . R . , Kudryashov , D . S . , Pashkov , I . , Adisetiyo , H . , Reisler , E . , and Yeates , T . O . ( 2008 ) Multiple crystal structures of actin dimers and their implications for interactions in the actin filament . Acta Crystallogr . , Sect . D : Biol . Crystallogr . 64 , 454 – 465 . 35 . Schuler , H . , Lindberg , U . , Schutt , C . E . , and Karlsson , R . ( 2000 ) Thermal unfolding of G - actin monitored with the DNase I - inhibition assay stabilities of actin isoforms . Eur . J . Biochem . 267 , 476 – 486 . 36 . Sheterline , P . , Clayton , J . , and Sparrow , J . ( 1995 ) Actin . Protein Profile 2 , 1 – 103 . 37 . Spudich , J . A . , and Watt , S . ( 1971 ) The regulation of rabbit skeletal muscle contraction . I . Biochemical studies of the interaction of the tropomyosin - troponin complex with actin and the proteolytic frag - ments of myosin . J . Biol . Chem . 246 , 4866 – 4871 . 38 . Sun , H . Q . , Yamamoto , M . , Mejillano , M . , and Yin , H . L . ( 1999 ) Gelsolin , a multifunctional actin regulatory protein . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 33179 – 33182 . 39 . Visschedyk D . D . , Perieteanu A . A . , Turgeon Z . J . , Fieldhouse R . J . , DawsonJ . F . , andMerrillA . R . ( 2010 ) Photox : anovelactin - targeting mono - ADP - ribosyltransferase from Photorhabdus luminescens . J . Biol . Chem . 40 . Wegner , A , and Aktories , K . ( 1988 ) ADP - ribosylated actin caps the barbed ends of actin filaments . J . Biol . Chem . 263 , 13739 – 13742 . 41 . Wertman , K . F . , Drubin , D . G . , and Botstein , D . ( 1992 ) Systematic mutational analysis of the yeast ACT1 gene . Genetics 132 , 337 – 350 .