Articial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing http : / / journals . cambridge . org / AIE Additional services for Articial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing : Email alerts : Click here Subscriptions : Click here Commercial reprints : Click here Terms of use : Click here How do analogizing and mental simulation inuence team dynamics in innovative product design ? Hernan Casakin , Linden J . Ball , Bo T . Christensen and Petra Badke - Schaub Articial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing / Volume 29 / Special Issue 02 / May 2015 , pp 173 - 183 DOI : 10 . 1017 / S0890060415000050 , Published online : 27 April 2015 Link to this article : http : / / journals . cambridge . org / abstract _ S0890060415000050 How to cite this article : Hernan Casakin , Linden J . Ball , Bo T . Christensen and Petra Badke - Schaub ( 2015 ) . How do analogizing and mental simulation inuence team dynamics in innovative product design ? . Articial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing , 29 , pp 173 - 183 doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060415000050 Request Permissions : Click here Downloaded from http : / / journals . cambridge . org / AIE , IP address : 130 . 88 . 90 . 140 on 09 May 2015 How do analogizing and mental simulation influence team dynamics in innovative product design ? HERNAN CASAKIN , 1 LINDEN J . BALL , 2 BO T . CHRISTENSEN , 3 AND PETRA BADKE - SCHAUB 4 1 School of Architecture , Ariel University , Ariel , Israel 2 School of Psychology , University of Central Lancashire , Preston , United Kingdom 3 Department of Marketing , Copenhagen Business School , Copenhagen , Denmark 4 Faculty of Industrial Design Engineering , Delft University of Technology , Delft , the Netherlands ( R ECEIVED February 11 , 2014 ; A CCEPTED December 8 , 2014 ) Abstract The aim of this study was to gain further insight into how analogical reasoning and mental simulation , two cognitive strat - egies , influence team dynamics in innovative product design . A particular emphasis was placed on exploring the association between these two strategies and team cohesion and team collaboration . Analogies were coded for “analogical distance” ( i . e . , within domain or between domain ) and “analogical purpose” ( i . e . , problem identification , function finding , solution generation , and explanation ) . The results indicated that the presence of either analogizing or mental simulation was related to team cohesion and team collaboration , with mental simulation having an especially marked association with team col - laboration . Within - domain analogizing was found to enhance team collaboration , but it did not influence team cohesion . Furthermore , all types of analogical purpose showed a similar association with team cohesion , whereas solution generation and function finding had a stronger association with team collaboration . We propose that analogizing and mental simulations are strategies that serve valuable functions in engendering enhanced cohesion and collaboration , which might be expected to lead to more effective design outcomes , although this remains an empirical question in need of further corroboration . Keywords : Analogical Reasoning ; Engineering Design ; Mental Simulation ; Team Cohesion ; Team Collaboration 1 . INTRODUCTION The diversity of thinking among members of design teams can be capitalized upon through individuals establishing “shared understanding” ( Kleinsmann & Valkenburg , 2007 ) , which enables teams to handle the inherent ambiguity and complexity of design problems . A major challenge for design teams is , therefore , to ensure that members interact and communicate in ways that facilitate group collaboration and cohesion so as to permit maximal knowledge integration . In this paper , we hypothesize that successful collaboration and cohesion in design teams is supported by the deployment of two important reasoning strategies : analogizing and mental simulation . Analogizing is a powerful heuristic for idea gen - eration that promotes an understanding of unknown situations in terms of familiar ones ( Holyoak & Thagard , 1995 ) ; mental simulation is a cognitive mechanism that enables reasoning about how physical systems might behave without the need actually to construct such systems ( Gentner , 2002 ) . While research on analogizing and mental simulation abounds , little is known about how these strategies support team collabora - tion and cohesion . The study we report is a first step toward bridging this gap in our theoretical understanding . In addressing the aforementioned issues , we drew upon the DTRS7 data set ( McDonnell & Lloyd , 2009 ) , focusing on the transcripts of two meetings held by an engineering design team in a technology development company . The meetings concerned the generation of ideas for the design and use of an innovative product : a “digital pen” exploiting novel print - head technology , which was to be conceptualized by the team as something akin to an artist’s tool or a child’s toy . The design issues discussed centered on potential func - tional and behavioral aspects of the pen ( e . g . , its operational characteristics when used ) and aspects of its structure ( e . g . , its mechanical and electronic components , and software and in - terface features ) . The first team meeting lasted 1 h 38 min and involved seven members : three mechanical engineers , an ex - pert in electronics and business development , an ergonomics / usability expert , a business consultant who facilitated the Reprint requests to : Hernan Casakin , School of Architecture , Ariel Uni - versity , P . O . Box 3 , 44837 , Ariel , Israel . E - mail : casakin @ ariel . ac . il Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing ( 2015 ) , 29 , 173 – 183 . # Cambridge University Press 2015 0890 - 0604 / 15 doi : 10 . 1017 / S0890060415000050 173 meeting , and an industrial design student on an internship who was managing the project . The second team meeting lasted 1 h 41 min and also involved seven members . In this meeting , two of the mechanical engineers and the business consultant from the first meeting were replaced by three new members with expertise in electronics and software systems . 1 . 1 . Analogical reasoning , mental simulation , team collaboration , and team cohesion Analogizing involves the access , retrieval , and transfer of prior knowledge from a familiar situation ( the source ) to a sit - uation in need of elucidation ( the target ) . Establishing corre - spondences between known relations in the source and possi - ble relations in the target enables the new situation to be understood in terms of a known situation ( Holyoak & Tha - gard , 1995 ) . Depending on the distance between source and target , it is possible to classify analogies into those that are “within domain” ( source and target domains are close ) or “between domain” ( source and target domains are distant ) . Analogizing is viewed as essential for creative cognition ( Ho - lyoak & Thagard , 1995 ) , scientific discovery ( Dunbar & Blanchette , 2001 ) , and innovative design ( e . g . , Casakin & Goldschmidt , 1999 , 2000 ; Ball et al . , 2004 ; Casakin , 2004 ; Tseng et al . , 2008 ; Ball & Christensen , 2009 ; Helms et al . , 2009 ; Casakin , 2010 ) . In conceptual design , analogizing can be especially useful in providing an initial point of depar - ture into problem - solving activity ( Goldschmidt , 1995 ) . Casakin ( 2004 ) has also shown that expert designers make recourse to many between - domain visual sources , while novices tend to identify and retrieve analogies from within - domain visual sources . Analogizing has been studied in de - sign teams as well as in individuals , with evidence indicating its frequent use to support problem identification , problem solving , solution generation , function finding , and explaining ( Christensen & Schunn , 2007 ; Ball & Christensen , 2009 ) . Christensen and Schunn ( 2007 ) also showed that within - domain analogies dominate problem identification , while be - tween - domain analogies dominate in explanations . In general , analogizing in design helps to enrich the search space of ideas and can be viewed as a strategy that contributes to the attainment of a shared understanding among team members with regard to the task at hand . The role of analogiz - ing in facilitating this shared understanding will itself be mediated by the occurrence of communicative exchanges be - tween team members in relation to each other’s knowledge , and it is well known that effective design teams are adept at fluent information exchange ( e . g . , Stempfle & Badke - Schaub , 2002 ; Den Otter & Emmitt , 2008 ) , which also serves a vital role in promoting team cohesion ( Owen , 1985 ; Badke - Schaub et al . , 2007 , 2011 ) . Recent evidence also suggests that analogies reduce cognitive dissonance within design teams so as to propel members toward a particular point of view ( Goel & Wiltgen , 2014 ) . Such a dissonance - reduction role presum - ably also serves to engender team cohesion by bringing members’ divergent perspectives into alignment . Based on the assumption that analogizing will have a positive impact on enhancing information exchange and on dissonance re - duction , we predicted that it will also be strongly associated with the promotion of team collaboration and cohesion . To our knowledge , this prediction has not previously been investigated . Mental simulation is another strategy that is considered an efficient aid to problem solving ( Gentner , 2002 ; Trickett & Trafton , 2002 ; Clement , 2008 ; Nersessian , 2008 ) . It is char - acterized by a sequence of interdependent events or actions that are envisioned within a dynamic “mental model” with the aim of establishing cause – effect relations , thereby en - abling the reasoner to predict potential outputs . The mental models underpinning mental simulation are held in working memory and are structural analogues of physical systems ( Johnson - Laird , 1983 ; Richardson & Ball , 2009 ) . Mental sim - ulation can help designers imagine creative ideas and assess their viability , generally serving to aid in managing and re - solving uncertainties . Research has corroborated that mental simulation arises in situations associated with uncertainty and reduces such uncertainty , while also enabling designers to test ideas and evaluate and enrich possible solutions ( Chris - tensen & Schunn , 2007 , 2009 ; Ball et al . , 2010 ) . The various roles of mental simulation in design suggest that it should be important in enhancing communication and information ex - change connected with task clarification and shared under - standing . As with analogizing , we make the novel prediction that mental simulation will likewise be associated with in - creased collaboration and team cohesion . 2 . SUMMARY OF RESEARCH HYPOTHESES 2 . 1 . Analogical reasoning , mental simulation , and team cohesion As summarized above , we conjecture that analogizing will not only facilitate problem understanding and solution gen - eration in design but also enhance team cohesion by virtue of its capacity to enable fluent information exchange . Mental simulation is likewise known to have an important influence on idea generation and evaluation in design , and we again conjectured that this strategy would also make a measurable contribution to team cohesion . Our view is that a social group such as a design team will be in a state of cohesion when its members possess bonds linking them to one another , thereby preventing group fragmentation . More specifically , cohesion can be defined as the tendency for the group to be in unity while working toward a common goal ( Carron & Brawley , 2000 ; Beal et al . , 2003 ; Forsyth , 2010 ) . This definition re - flects a multiplicity of factors , such as the way in which team cohesion is dynamic ( i . e . , it changes over time in its strength ) , is instrumentally based ( i . e . , it is directed toward a purpose , whether this relates to the completion of a task or some social goal ) , and is emotionally charged ( i . e . , it is pleasing for members ) . H . Casakin et al . 174 An important role of teamwork in design concerns the creation and maintenance of a cohesive team climate ( Badke - Schaub et al . , 2011 ) such that members want to stay together to achieve ongoing and future work . Badke - Schaub et al . ( 2007 , 2011 ) refer to signals of group cohesive - ness being expressed through communicative acts ( e . g . , con - firmations ) and note that such signals “seem to be akin to the vocalization in non - human primates to coordinate group movements” ( Badke - Schaub et al . , 2011 , p . 182 ) . More spe - cifically , Badke - Schaub et al . ( 2011 ) define three communi - cative acts as vital for a cohesive climate : informal talk ( i . e . , communication that is not task related ) ; expressions of appre - ciation ( e . g . , “thanks , that’s an interesting idea” ) , which are positive , affective statements directed at a team member ; and expressions of confirmation ( e . g . , “yeah” or “agreed” ) , which present a positive evaluation , reinforcing conversa - tional flow . Our key prediction was that such conversational markers , particularly confirmatory and appreciative state - ments , would be significantly higher during or immediately after episodes of activity involving analogizing or mental simulation in comparison to transcript segments where anal - ogizing is absent . Note that we coded transcripts for conver - sational markers of team cohesion immediately after an analogizing or mental simulation episode on the assumption that such markers might be slightly delayed in relation to the occurrence of the analogy or simulation . What “immediately after” means in practice is that we included the five transcript segments following the analogy or mental simulation as if they were actually part of the analogy or mental simulation . Our operationalization of team cohesion in terms of in - creases in utterances signaling appreciation , confirmation , and the like is based on an assumption that such utterances have a functional role beyond the mere indication of engaged listing . This assumption is not uncontentious , because tradi - tionally a view has prevailed that confirmatory utterances such as “mm - hm” can only be interpreted as nonlexical , “backchannel” behaviors that register a listener’s acknow - ledgment of a speaker’s statements ( Gardner , 1997 ) . More re - cent evidence , however , supports a functional role for confirmatory utterances , whereby they designate a listener’s comprehension ( e . g . , Wolf , 2008 ) and facilitate idea genera - tion ( e . g . , Sannomiya et al . , 2003 ) , although we concede that these two studies were restricted to Japanese speakers , such that the extension ofthesefindingstoWesternspeakers remains unsupported at present . Nevertheless , we also note that the con - cept of backchannel responses has now broadened beyond a fo - cus on simple , nonlexical , vocalized sounds ( e . g . , “mm - hm” and “uh - huh” ) to include brief phrases or statements ( e . g . , “really”and“isthatso ? ” ) andevensubstantiverequestsforclar - ification or repetition ( e . g . , Young & Lee , 2004 ) . Such evidence suggests that it is legitimate to draw links between confirmatory and appreciative statements and the concept of cohesion in design teams ( cf . Badke - Schaub et al . , 2007 , 2011 ) . We also note that the frequency of back - channel utterances will vary , dependent on levels of confu - sion or misunderstanding ( Badke - Schaub et al . , 2007 ; Wolf , 2008 ; Badke - Schaub et al . , 2011 ) , again suggesting that these utterances provide valuable data when analyzing shared understanding and team cohesion . In this respect , we emphasize that a key focus of our study was to measure changes in team cohesion that align with the emergence and deterioration of shared understanding in team design ac - tivity . We contend that measuring confirmatory and affirma - tory utterances is highly suited to this goal and is superior to self - report measures ( e . g . , Bollen & Hoyle , 1990 ) that capture group cohesion over long time frames ( even years ) . As well as predicting associations between measures of team cohesion and the presence of analogizing or mental sim - ulation , we also predicted that analogizing will be associ - ated with lower levels of information exchange and shared understanding than simulation , such that conversational markers of team cohesion should be lower in ( or immediately after ) analogizing than simulation episodes . This speculative hypothesis derived from our assumption that analogizing seems to be a more “individualistic” strategy than simulation , with the latter arguably benefiting more readily from the con - tribution of others . 2 . 2 . Analogical reasoning , mental simulation , and team collaboration In operationalizing the concept of team collaboration for our analysis , we drew heavily on Kleinsmann and Valkenburg ( 2007 ) , where team collaboration refers to “actors” ( not nec - essarily just designers ) integrating their knowledge through communication in order to create shared understanding and effective design outcomes , rather than to attain the multifac - eted goals associated with team cohesion , which typically embody emotional , social , and cultural elements as well as possible task - focused components . In ouranalysis , we assume that whether analogizing or mental simulation contribute to team collaboration is specifically related to whether more than a single member participated in an episode of design activ - ity involving either of these strategies . We therefore imple - mented a dichotomous categorization of team collaboration in terms of its presence versus absence . This enabled us to deter - mine whether simulation was associated with increased collab - oration relative to analogizing , in line with our assumption that analogizing seems a more individualistic strategy . 2 . 3 . Analogical distance , analogical purpose , team cohesion , and team collaboration As explained earlier , analogical reasoning typically involves establishing relationships between apparently unconnected source and target domains . However , as the distance between these domains increases , the mapping of relations becomes less evident ( e . g . , Bearman et al . , 2007 ) . We therefore hy - pothesized that as the source to target distance increases dur - ing analogizing , then shared understanding arising through the evocation of the analogy will reduce . Very remote analo - gies might abstract objects and relations so far away from the Analogizing , simulation , and team dynamics 175 target domain as to have little value in enhancing team under - standing . As such , we predicted that episodes involving within - domain analogies would be associated with higher levels of team cohesion compared to episodes involving be - tween - domain analogies . For equivalent reasons , we also pre - dicted that more information exchange and therefore in - creased collaboration would arise during within - domain than during between - domain analogizing . Below we clarify our scheme for coding analogies in terms of the purpose that they appeared to serve , such as explaining an issue , generating a solution idea , or identifying novel de - sign functions ( cf . Ball & Christensen , 2009 ; Helms et al . , 2009 ; Vattam et al . , 2010 ) . Evoking an analogy for the sake of explanation would seem to involve less mutual exchange of information than developing an analogy for generating a solution or for function finding . That is , while the purpose of an explanatory analogy is certainly to enhance the under - standing of other team members ( i . e . , the end goal is collab - orative in nature ) , the fact that a single individual conveys this explanation to others means that episodes of explanatory anal - ogizing are ( paradoxically ) likely to be coded as “noncolla - borative . ” For this reason , we predicted lower levels of team collaboration and cohesion in the case of explanation analo - gies than for other analogy types . In relation to analogies linked to solution generation versus function finding , we had no grounds to make a directional prediction regarding the association between these analogy types and team cohe - sion or collaboration . 3 . TRANSCRIPT CODING A line - based segmentation scheme provided in the meeting transcripts was used to break up the meetings into discrete units of spoken discourse . A total of 3886 line segments were analyzed to address our research hypotheses . In the fol - lowing subsections , we present a description of the method - ology employed to code the transcripts for occurrences of analogies and mental simulations as well as for instances of team cohesion and team collaboration . 3 . 1 . Coding of analogies Analogies were coded using Ball and Christensen’s ( 2009 ) approach ( see also Christensen & Schunn , 2007 ) . When a de - signer mentioned a knowledge source that was different from the problem at hand and tried to transfer concepts from that source to the target domains , then the source was coded as an analogy . In addition , all analogies identified in the tran - scripts were coded for analogical distance by applying a bi - nary categorization scheme that included within - domain anal - ogies , in reference to mappings from sources belonging to the problem domain ( in the present transcripts the problem domain concerned processes , mechanisms , and artifacts relating to graphical production and printing ; see Extract 1 in Table 1 for an example ) ; and between - domain analogies , indicating mappings from sources that that were remote from the problem domain ( i . e . , sources having nothing to do with graphical production and printing ; see Extract 2 in Table 1 for an example ) . Analogies were also coded for analogical purpose in refer - ence to the analogy’s “function” or “goal . ” The code for ana - logical purpose involved Ball and Christensen’s ( 2009 ) scheme ( cf . Christensen & Schunn , 2007 ) , which included four categories : problem identification ( noticing a possible problem in the design , where the problem was taken from an analogous source domain ) ; function finding ( mapping new functions to the design via analogy ) ; explanation ( considering a concept retrieved from a source domain to explain an aspect of the target domain ) ; and solution generation ( transferring potential solution concepts from a source to the target domain ; for examples , see Ball & Christensen , 2009 ) . 3 . 2 . Coding of mental simulations We coded for mental simulation using Ball and Christensen’s ( 2009 ) scheme , which was adapted from Christensen and Schunn ( 2009 ) and Trickett and Trafton ( 2002 ) . Mental simula - tion is viewed as involving a succession of modifications to a mental representation , commencing with the construction of an initial representation ( e . g . , of a solution idea ) , followed by the modification and spatial transformation of that representa - tion , andendingwiththegenerationofachangedrepresentation ( e . g . , an adjustment to the solution idea ) . Typically , the initial representation , simulation run , and changed representation ex - tend over several transcript segments ( Ball & Christensen , 2009 ) . An example of a mental simulation episode is shown in Table 1 ( Extract 3 ) . A key characteristic of mental simulation isthatitencouragesreasoningaboutthenovelstatesofsolutions through afocus on theirattributes , visual qualities , or functions . Mental simulation can also enable reasoning about possible in - teractions between artifacts and end users ( Ball et al . , 2010 ) . 3 . 3 . Coding of cohesion Members of cohesive groups are more likely to engage in ac - tive communication , to pursue enhanced levels of informa - tion exchange , and to contribute to the development of a shared understanding of the task ( Owen , 1985 ) . Cohesion was coded using an extended version of Badke - Schaub et al . ’s ( 2011 ) scheme , and included utterances expressing ap - preciation such as statements approving of team members , in - cluding thanking them for ideas or explanations ( e . g . , “yeah OK that’s a good idea Tony” and “that’s an interesting point” ) ; utterances expressing confirmation , that is , affirming team members’ contributions or reinforcing the conversa - tional flow ( e . g . , “yeah no problem . . . stabilizers . . . like a bi - cycle yeah that’s a good idea” and “that’s true that works as well” ) ; utterancesexpressingrejectionsuchasdisapprovalabout an idea ( e . g . , “yeah but I think there are other things that we might like to do as well” and “no , no , no , you can just calibrate it you know” ) ; and utterances associated with giving help ( e . g . , “one of those [ tablet ] things that you write on is that what you H . Casakin et al . 176 mean ? ” ) . The cohesion measure was found to involve primarily confirmation utterances , which comprised 91 . 8 % of all cohe - sion statements , with 3 . 7 % expressing appreciation , 2 . 6 % ex - pressing rejection and 1 . 8 % expressing help . The uneven distri - bution of coherence codes made it impossible to pursue a detailed analysis of cohesion data at the level of different types of cohesion utterances , because expected counts were less than 5 % for chi - square tests , prohibiting their application . We there - fore focused solely on analyzing measures that aggregated across all team cohesion codes ( 831 instances in total ) . 3 . 4 . Coding of collaboration Transcripts were coded for the presence or absence of collab - oration in order to analyze how team members work as a so - cial group ( Casakin & Badke - Schaub , 2013 ) . To code for col - laboration , it was necessary to define an “episode” as a unit of analysis during which collaboration may or may not have arisen . In the present study , the unit of analysis related to ana - logizing and mental simulation episodes , with each being coded using a binary scheme designating either collaboration ( when two or more team members interacted during the epi - sode ) or no collaboration ( when only one member was iden - tified during the episode , and therefore utterances were restricted to those produced by one individual ) . 3 . 5 . Intercoder reliability checks For analogy and simulation codes , the third author acted as the primary coder , while an individual who was not associated Table 1 . Transcript extracts showing examples of within - domain analogizing ( Extract 1 ) , between - domain analogizing ( Extract 2 ) , and mental simulation ( Extract 3 ) Extract 1 1539 Tommy yeah the thing that we did a few years ago which had a kind of sort of 1540 forced balanced print head we tend to do fairly wide print heads to try and 1541 keep them in contact with the medium it appears a bit different less 1542 controlled 1543 Alan Mmm 1544 Tommy and on that we basically had a frame which brought the print head down 1545 brought the print head down 1546 Todd Yeah 1547 Tommy and then that’s right and so - 1548 Todd ( ) 1549 Tommy like this and then 1550 Todd Yeah Extract 2 1018 Tommy erm err the other , the other thing that we’ve seen in the past is erm er 1019 people program certain toys will be programmed with barcodes so you 1020 end up swiping it over barcodes 1021 Patrick Mmm 1022 Sandra oh yeah 1023 Tommy to build up sequences and bits and pieces , which 1024 Sandra ( going to be a ) huge library of patterns so you could scan the ones - 1025 Patrick yeah you could publish a book with patterns in with barcodes 1026 Tommy Yeah 1027 Patrick you can scan the right barcode Extract 3 1755 Tommy There’s two forces there isn’t there [ bangs it ] there’s sort of the 1756 momentum of the thing itself 1757 Alan mmm 1758 Tommy yeah it’s not going to be anything like this heavy is it 1759 Jack no well as I say you need to shock that down ( ) 1760 + + + 1761 Tommy er 1762 Jack You’re smash you’re gonna smash the edge of this protective sheath 1763 before this does anything in here 1764 Tommy yeah also they’re not that ( ) made out of ceramic and glass 1765 Jack mmm I think that’s—I think that the other other protective thing is whether 1766 they smash it off the table before momentum Analogizing , simulation , and team dynamics 177 with the research coded 1 h of data as a second coder . This secondary coder had received general training in the analysis of design transcripts and was also given some familiarization and practice with the present coding categories . For the team cohesion codes , the first and last authors served as primary and secondary coders . Kappa reliability coefficients are re - ported in Table 2 , where it can be seen that coding categories reached satisfactory levels of reliability ( i . e . , greater than 0 . 70 ) , with almost perfect reliability for analogical distance . Note that the coding of team collaboration was in all cases un - equivocal , such that it was unnecessary to subject this to a re - liability check . 4 . RESULTS 4 . 1 . Analogical reasoning and team cohesion A total of 147 analogies were identified in the transcripts , which ranged from 1 to 20 segments per analogy ( mean ¼ 3 . 5 segments ) . Because analogies represent 13 % of all seg - ments , it would appear that team members were fluent at using them . To examine whether analogies are associated with team cohesion , we constructed a contingency table cap - turing the percentage of cohesion utterances arising in coded segments where analogies were present relative to coded seg - ments where analogies were absent . The data indicated that 24 . 9 % of segments arising during analogies ( including the five segments immediately afterward ) were associated with team cohesion , whereas only 19 . 8 % of segments not linked to analogizing were associated with team cohesion . This dif - ference was highly reliable [ x 2 ( 1 ) ¼ 12 . 91 , p , 0 . 001 ] , sup - porting our hypothesis that analogizing is a strategy that en - hances team cohesion . 4 . 2 . Mental simulation and team cohesion To examine the relation between mental simulation and team cohesion , we constructed another contingency table to capture the percentage of cohesion utterances arising in coded segments where simulations were present relative to coded segments where simulations were absent . These data showed that 22 . 7 % of segments arising during mental simulations ( including the five segments immediately after - ward ) were associated with team cohesion , whereas 20 . 1 % of other segments not linked to mental simulation were associated with team cohesion . This difference was signifi - cant [ x 2 ( 1 ) ¼ 4 . 09 , p , 0 . 044 ] , supporting our hypothesis that mental simulation is another strategy that contributes to boosting team cohesion . We note that the difference in team cohesion utterances arising in mental simulation versus nonsimulation activity was of modest magnitude , despite its statistical reliability . To gain further insight into the link between mental simula - tion and enhanced team cohesion , we analyzed whether team cohesion was higher during the segments where mental simulation was present or during the five segments following the simulation episode . This analysis showed that it was the segments subsequent to the simulation that were driving the difference in team cohesion ; that is , team cohesion in the five segments after each simulation ( 29 . 18 % ) was reliably higher than team cohesion during simulations [ 20 . 1 % ; x 2 ( 1 ) ¼ 17 . 22 , p , 0 . 001 ] . As a further analysis of the association between mental sim - ulation and team cohesion , we examined whether there was a developmental progression over time with regard to in - stances of cohesion in the different component stages of a mental simulation . As discussed , a mental simulation is struc - tured temporally , progressing from an initial representation ( Stage 1 ) , to a mental model run ( Stage 2 ) , to a change of rep - resentation ( Stage 3 ) . Analyzing cohesion over the time course of the simulation revealed significant differences across the component stages [ x 2 ( 2 ) ¼ 8 . 54 , p , 0 . 014 ] , with the three stages being associated with an increasing per - centage of segments involving cohesion utterances , where Stage 1 ¼ 15 . 7 % , Stage 2 ¼ 21 . 5 % , and Stage 3 ¼ 23 . 7 % . Follow - up 2 (cid:2) 2 x 2 tests showed that initial representations had fewer instances of team cohesion compared to mental model runs [ x 2 ( 1 ) ¼ 4 . 87 , p , 0 . 027 ] and changes of repre - sentation [ x 2 ( 1 ) ¼ 8 . 39 , p , 0 . 004 ] . However , no difference was observed between mental model runs and changes of representations [ x 2 ( 1 ) ¼ 0 . 79 , ns ] . 4 . 3 . Contrasting analogizing and mental simulation in terms of team cohesion Out next analysis aimed to establish which of either analogiz - ing or mental simulation encourages a greater level of team cohesion . To pursue this analysis , we removed overlapping transcript segments containing evidence of both analogizing and simulation . The prediction that we articulated earlier in relation to this analysis was that analogizing would seem to be a more individualistic strategy than simulation , which might be expected to show a weaker association with team co - hesion . Our analysis failed to support this prediction [ x 2 ( 1 ) ¼ 3 . 13 , p ¼ 0 . 07 ] , with the marginally significant result sup - porting the opposite effect , with more team cohesion arising during analogizing ( 26 . 7 % ) than simulation ( 22 . 9 % ) . We concede that the statistical difference is weak and should be treated with caution , although we stress that the limitations Table 2 . Kappa coefficients for intercoder reliability Coding Category k Analogy 0 . 77 Analogy purpose 0 . 85 Analogical distance 0 . 99 Mental simulation 0 . 75 Simulation type 0 . 71 Team cohesion 0 . 72 H . Casakin et al . 178 of this analysis in no way undermine the statistical evidence reported earlier that was central to our thesis concerning a pre - dicted positive association between the respective strategies of analogizing and mental simulation and team cohesion . 4 . 4 . Contrasting analogizing and mental simulation in terms of team collaboration We also examined which of either analogizing or mental sim - ulation is associated with a greater degree of team collab - oration , following the same line of reasoning applied above for team cohesion . Again , any overlapping segments con - taining instances of both analogizing and simulation were removed from the analysis . Furthermore , this analysis was restricted to segments arising during actual analogizing or simulation episodes ( i . e . , the five subsequent segments were omitted ) . In addition , segments involving simple utter - ances expressing team cohesion ( e . g . , “yeah” ) were omitted , because such segments were not considered to contribute to design collaboration in any key way . The prediction that greater team collaboration would arise during mental simu - lation episodes than during analogizing episodes gained strong support [ x 2 ( 1 ) ¼ 46 . 43 , p , 0 . 0001 ] . The majority of mental simulation episodes were collaborative , whereas the majority of analogizing episodes were noncollaborative ( Table 3 ) . Analogizing episodes in the present transcripts usually in - volved fewer segments than mental simulation episodes , which means that there is a confound between the type of strategy ( simulation vs . analogizing ) and episode length . This confound needs to be taken seriously given that longer chains of natural dialogue may entail more frequent conversa - tional shifts between speakers . To examine this issue , we split all analogizing and mental simulation episodes according to their number of segments to form two categories : those with fewer than five segments and those with equal to or more than five segments . Subsequent analyses showed that for episode segment sizes fewer than five segments , analogies were significantly less collaborative ( 20 % collaborative ) compared to mental simulations [ 52 % collaborative ; x 2 ( 1 ) ¼ 11 . 01 , p , 0 . 0001 ] . For event segment sizes of equal to or more than five segments , analogies were likewise less col - laborative ( 69 % collaborative ) compared to mental simula - tions ( 77 % collaborative ) , although this effect was not reli - able [ x 2 ( 1 ) ¼ 0 . 75 , ns ] . These findings lend support to the claim that the differences in collaboration arising between analogizing and simulation are not merely attributable to a confounding with episode length . 4 . 5 . Analogical distance , team cohesion , and team collaboration An analysis of the 147 analogies in the transcripts revealed that whereas 84 % were between domain , only 16 % were within domain . Remote , between - domain analogies are con - sidered to have a positive impact on the novelty of design ideation ( Dahl & Wand Moreau , 2002 ; Christensen & Schunn , 2007 ) . The predominance of such analogies in the present transcripts may indicate that a high level of creative activity was being undertaken , which would align with the re - mit of the meetings , which concerned brainstorming and innovative product development ( McDonnell & Lloyd , 2009 ) . The present results , however , are not in line with those of Christensen and Schunn ( 2007 ) , who studied design meet - ings in the medical plastics domain and found that within - do - main and between - domain analogies were distributed fairly equally across the meetings . The inconsistency across studies may reflect differences in design domains , task goals , or the backgrounds of team members . To examine whether analogical closeness is associated with team cohesion , we compared within - domain versus be - tween - domain analogies in terms of the percentage of seg - ments they contained that involved cohesion utterances . Our prediction that analogical closeness contributes to en - hanced team cohesion was not supported because within - do - main analogies contained approximately the same amount of cohesion segments ( 16 . 6 % ) as between - domain analogies [ 16 . 2 % ; x 2 ( 1 ) ¼ 0 . 002 , ns ] . To determine whether analogical closeness is associated with team collaboration , we likewise compared within - domain versus between - domain analogies in terms of their level of collaborative involvement . The anal - ysis revealed that within - domain analogies were more fre - quently collaborative ( 58 % ) than between - domain analogies [ 35 % ; x 2 ( 1 ) ¼ 4 . 28 , p , 0 . 04 ] , supporting our prediction . 4 . 6 . Analogical purpose , team cohesion , and team collaboration The coding of analogies in terms of their purpose showed that 37 % concerned solution generation , 33 % concerned function finding , and 27 % concerned explanation , while only 3 % re - lated to problem identification . The latter proportion of anal - ogy - based problem identification episodes is manifestly lower than that reported by Christensen and Schunn ( 2007 ) . It is possible that in our study problem identification was not a major concern for designers , given that numerous prob - lems had already been assigned to the engineering design team as part of their design brief ( McDonnell & Lloyd , 2009 ) . In light of the very low number of problem identifica - tion analogies , these were omitted from any further analyses . To examine which categories of analogizing episodes were associated with team cohesion utterances , we compared the Table 3 . Number of collaborative versus noncollaborative episodes for the mental simulation category and for the analogizing category Collaborative Noncollaborative Mental simulation 94 36 Analogizing 46 101 Analogizing , simulation , and team dynamics 179 three remaining analogy categories in terms of the percentage of segments they contained that involved cohesion utterances . The analysis showed no significant differences among these three analogy categories [ x 2 ( 2 ) ¼ 2 . 62 , ns ] . We therefore failed to find support for our prediction that there would be reduced levels of cohesion in the explanation - oriented analogies com - pared to solution - generation or function - finding ones . To examine the association between analogical purpose and team collaboration , we compared the analogy categories in terms of their levels of collaborative involvement . The pre - diction that analogy types would differ was supported [ x 2 ( 2 ) ¼ 14 . 17 , p , . 001 ] . To ascertain where differences resided , we partitioned the overall analysis and conducted a series of 2 (cid:2) 2 x 2 tests . These clarified that a significantly greater percentage of analogies concerned with solution generation ( 50 % ) were collaborative versus analogies concerned with either explana - tion [ 19 % ; x 2 ( 1 ) ¼ 9 . 77 , p , 0 . 002 ] or function finding [ 21 % ; x 2 ( 1 ) ¼ 9 . 35 , p , 0 . 003 ] . However , no significant dif - ferences arose between analogies concerned with explana - tions versus function finding [ x 2 ( 1 ) ¼ 0 . 04 , ns ] . These results partially support our prediction that solution - genera - tion analogies would be more likely to be associated with col - laborative activity than would explanation analogies , al - though this prediction did not generalize to the contrast between function finding and explanation analogies . 5 . GENERAL DISCUSSION Our analysis of two product design meetings ( McDonnell & Lloyd , 2009 ) revealed that analogizing and mental simulation facilitated team cohesion , despite these strategies involving very different underlying reasoning processes . Perhaps a key reason for this is that each strategy promotes fluent com - munication exchanges among team members , bearing in mind that previous studies have shown how such fluent com - munication can play a significant role in the attainment of team cohesion ( e . g . , Badke - Schaub et al . , 2007 , 2011 ) . Pre - sumably , too , such fluent communication facilitates the inte - gration of individual knowledge to support the development of a shared understanding of the design task . Such observa - tions also complement our previous findings , showing that analogizing and mental simulation resolve situations of epis - temic uncertainty in design ( Ball & Christensen , 2009 ) . Detailed analyses of the mental simulation strategy showed significant differences in team cohesion across the three se - quential stages associated with enacting a simulation . The in - itial representation ( Stage 1 ) had fewer instances of team co - hesion compared to the mental model run ( Stage 2 ) and the change of representation ( Stage 3 ) , which supports the exis - tence of a temporal development to team cohesion during the implementation of a mental simulation . In this respect , it seems reasonable to suggest that a greater shared under - standing of the task was achieved by team members as the simulation unfolded over time . Detailed analyses of analogizing indicated that this strategy was beneficial for team cohesion no matter whether the ana - logical distance between the source and the target was close ( within domain ) or distant ( between domain ) . We had pre - dicted that close analogies would be more beneficial to team cohesion than would distant analogies , given that the latter involve source - to - target relational mappings that would be likely to be less immediately evident to all team members . It seems , however , that the contribution of analogizing to team cohesion is such that differences in analogical distance have little relevance . In relation to analogical purpose , we found that all analogy types ( function finding , solution gen - eration , and explanation ) showed similar associations with team cohesion . If anything , it might have been expected that the focus of the meetings on innovative design would have promoted higher levels of team cohesion for analogies involving the creative processes of function finding and solu - tion generation as opposed to explanation . Instead , however , all types of analogizing appear to have value in enhancing team cohesion and , presumably , shared understanding . In relation to team collaboration , we found that mental sim - ulation had a larger influence than analogizing . Reasoning by analogy , which is based on identifying , retrieving , map - ping , and transferring structural relations , is a mechanism that demands a high level of precision that can best be attained by an individual , limiting the participation of other team members in the analogizing process . In contrast , simulations are characterized by the dynamic development of mental models that are not based on exact estimations ( Gentner , 2002 ) , which may encourage the participation of team mem - bers in the process , thereby engendering the strong associa - tion that we observed between simulation and collaboration . Further analyses revealed that a larger number of collabo - rations were observed to develop during analogizing episodes characterized by solution generation than during those related to function finding or explanation . This finding confirms the power of solution - oriented analogical reasoning in creative design , with such analogizing acting as a potent strategy for idea generation that benefits from the synergetic , collabora - tive participation of team members . Analogical distance was also observed to influence team collaboration , with within - domain analogies enhancing collaboration signifi - cantly more than between - domain analogies . This finding is not so surprising given that the domain - specific nature of the analogy implies that more team members could share their domain - based knowledge and expertise with one another dur - ing the development of the analogy . Although we have presented evidence that analogizing and mental simulation have important associations with team co - hesion and collaboration , we nevertheless acknowledge that our results may not generalize beyond the product design meetings examined . Domain - specific factors and the detailed dynamics of differently constituted teams might well engen - der alternative patterns of findings . For example , there are important domain - specific biases in the use of visual versus verbal representations , such as evidence indicating that biologists working in design teams are more comfortable with textual representations of biological systems , whereas H . Casakin et al . 180 engineers working in the same teams prefer diagrammatic representations of the same systems ( Helms et al . , 2010 ) . Such preferences may also extend to analogizing and simula - tion and impact on team cohesion and collaboration . The rep - resentativeness of our results can only be addressed through research exploring the boundary conditions of our findings ( e . g . , studying different teams and design domains ) . A question of practical importance concerns whether de - sign teams can be encouraged to utilize analogies and mental simulations to benefit the establishment of a cohesive team climate and collaborative success . Although we are not aware of research that has investigated whether mental simulation can be promoted as a design strategy , when it comes to anal - ogizing , some prior research has examined the possibility of encouraging analogy use by design teams . For example , Or - merod et al . ( 1999 ; see also Ball et al . , 2001 ) report the devel - opment of a computer - based support tool to aid “design re - use” by facilitating the employment by design teams of within - domain and cross - domain analogies . A key aspect of their design reuse system was to introduce an element of “per - turbation” into the design process through the triggering of occasional “remote” analogies to previous products that pos - sessed only deep structural associations with a current design problem . Promoting analogy use in design is also a key aspect of research on so - called design rationale ( Ball et al . , 2001 ) , which is concerned with capturing design decision making and creative design development to inform subsequent pro - jects relating to similar tasks . Although the take - up of design rationale methods has been fraught in commercial design practice , it is increasingly the case that design companies are implementing design - capture processes that can benefit subsequent activity by promoting analogical reasoning based on prior design concepts . A related issue to that of promoting analogizing and mental simulation in design practice concerns the possibility of edu - cating design students in the application of these strategies . Casakin ( 2012 ) has extoled the virtues of analogy in design education , arguing that students are not always aware of the utility of analogical reasoning in design such that its appro - priation and implementation require training . Casakin ( 2012 ) has proposed an intervention program whose goal is to help students progressively develop the abilities required to use analogies spontaneously . The approach includes a number of training phases that involve gaining skills in basic cognitive operations ( e . g . , analysis of design principles from visual examples and finding commonalities between visual stimuli ) as well as gaining expertise in complex problem - oriented tasks ( e . g . , experiencing similar situations to the problem at hand ) . Of course , in design education , the discrep - ant knowledge and skills held by teachers versus students suggests that analogy - based training may need to be based on constructs that students can relate to . In this respect , we note that the research of Casakin and Goldschmidt ( 1999 ; see also Casakin , 2004 ) has directly compared the value of presenting a wide range of visual analogies to experienced ar - chitects and trainee students . The findings indicate that expo - sure to such analogies can be beneficial for students and pro - fessionals alike , lending further support to the view that training in analogy use can be a powerful tool in design edu - cation , and presumably in subsequent design practice too . It would be fascinating to examine how cueing analogizing or mental simulation in educational or practice - based con - texts might interact with other interventions , such as those aimed at facilitating group idea generation ( Linsey et al . , 2011 ) , collaborative idea - combination ( Kohn et al . , 2011 ) , or team convergence upon a single design solution ( Fu et al . , 2010 ) . One technique that may enhance the effective - ness of idea generation in group brainstorming is the decom - position of the task so that aspects of the problem are consid - ered sequentially rather than simultaneously ( Coskun et al . , 2000 ) . The potential for problem decomposition to benefit idea generation when combined with analogizing or mental simulation represents an important avenue of investigation . 6 . CONCLUSION There is little doubt that the strategies used by team members will have an influence on the team’s social processes . We aimed here to determine how analogizing and mental simula - tion strategies impact two key aspects of design team dynam - ics , that is , team cohesion and team collaboration . Our find - ings attest to the association between these two strategies and the emergence of team cohesion and collaboration , thereby extending previous work on team mental models , team cohesion , and collaboration in design ( Badke - Schaub et al . , 2011 ) and research on analogizing and mental simula - tion in design ( Christensen & Schunn , 2007 ; Ball & Christen - sen , 2009 ; Wiltschnig et al . , 2013 ) . We have suggested that our findings have important implications for design education and practice , although we concede that further research is es - sential to test the benefits of triggering analogizing and men - tal simulation in such contexts . REFERENCES Badke - Schaub , P . , Neumann , A . , & Lauche , K . ( 2011 ) . An observation - based method for measuring the sharedness of mental models in teams . In Coordination in Human and Primate Groups ( Boos , M . , Kolbe , M . , Kappeler , P . M . , & Ellwart , T . , Eds . ) , pp . 177 – 197 . Berlin : Springer – Ver - lag . Badke - Schaub , P . , Neumann , A . , Lauche , K . , & Mohammed , S . ( 2007 ) . Mental models in design teams : a valid approach to performance in de - sign collaboration ? CoDesign 3 ( 1 ) , 5 – 20 . Ball , L . J . , & Christensen , B . T . ( 2009 ) . Analogical reasoning and mental sim - ulation in design : two strategies linked to uncertainty resolution . Design Studies 30 ( 2 ) , 567 – 589 . Ball , L . J . , Lambell , N . J . , Ormerod , T . C . , Slavin , S . , & Mariani , J . A . ( 2001 ) . Representing design rationale to support innovative design re - use : a minimalist approach . Journal of Automation in Construction 10 ( 6 ) , 663 – 674 . Ball , L . J . , Onarheim , B . , & Christensen , B . T . ( 2010 ) . Design requirements , epistemic uncertaintyand solution development strategies in software de - sign . Design Studies 31 ( 6 ) , 567 – 589 . Ball , L . J . , Ormerod , T . C . , & Morley , N . J . ( 2004 ) . Spontaneousanalogisingin engineering design : a comparative analysis of experts and novices . De - sign Studies 25 ( 5 ) , 495 – 508 . Analogizing , simulation , and team dynamics 181 Beal , D . J . , Cohen , R . R . , Burke , M . J . , & McLendon , C . L . ( 2003 ) . Cohesion and performance in groups : a meta - analytic clarification of construct re - lations . Journal of Applied Psychology 88 ( 6 ) , 989 – 1004 . Bearman , C . R . , Ball , L . J . , & Ormerod , T . C . ( 2007 ) . The structure and func - tion of spontaneous analogising in domain - based problem solving . Thinking & Reasoning 13 ( 3 ) , 273 – 294 . Bollen , K . A . , & Hoyle , R . H . ( 1990 ) . Perceived cohesion : a conceptual and empirical examination . Social Forces 69 ( 2 ) , 479 – 504 . Carron , A . V . , & Brawley , L . R . ( 2000 ) . Cohesion : conceptual and measure - ment issues . Small Group Research 31 ( 1 ) , 89 – 106 . Casakin , H . ( 2004 ) . Visual analogy as a cognitive strategy in the design pro - cess : expertversusnoviceperformance . JournalofDesignResearch4 ( 2 ) . Casakin , H . ( 2010 ) . Visual analogy , visual displays , and the nature of design problems : the effect of expertise . Environment and PlanningB : Planning and Design 37 ( 1 ) , 170 – 188 . Casakin , H . ( 2012 ) . Visual analogy as a cognitive stimulator for idea genera - tion in design problem solving . In The Psychology of Problem Solving : AnInterdisciplinaryApproach ( Helie , S . , Ed . ) , NewYork : NovaScience . Casakin , H . , & Badke - Schaub , P . ( 2013 ) . The psychologyof creativity : men - tal models in design teams . In Psychology of Creativity ( Antonietti , A . , Colombo , B . , & Memmert , D . , Eds . ) , pp . 167 – 180 . New York : Nova Sci - ence . Casakin , H . , & Goldschmidt , G . , ( 1999 ) . Expertiseandthe visual useof anal - ogy : implications for design education . Design Studies 20 ( 2 ) , 153 – 175 . Casakin , H . , & Goldschmidt , G . ( 2000 ) . Reasoning by visual analogy in de - sign problem - solving : the role of guidance . Environment and Planning B : Planning and Design 27 ( 1 ) , 105 – 119 . Christensen , B . T . , & Schunn , C . D . ( 2007 ) . The relationshipofanalogical dis - tance to analogical function and pre - inventive structure : the case of engi - neering design . Memory & Cognition 35 ( 1 ) , 29 – 38 . Christensen , B . T . , & Schunn , C . D . ( 2009 ) . The role and impact of mental simulation in design . Applied Cognitive Psychology 23 ( 3 ) , 327 – 344 . Clement , J . J . ( 2008 ) . CreativeModelConstructioninScientistsandStudents : The Role of Imagery , Analogy , and Mental Simulation . Dordrecht : Springer . Coskun , H . , Paulus , P . B . , Brown , V . , & Sherwood , J . J . ( 2000 ) . Cognitive stimulation and problem presentation in idea - generating groups . Group Dynamics : Theory , Research , & Practice 4 ( 4 ) , 307 – 329 . Dahl , D . , & Wand Moreau , P . ( 2002 ) . The influence and value of analogical thinking during new product ideation . Journal of Marketing Research 39 ( 1 ) , 7 – 60 . Den Otter , A . , & Emmitt , S . ( 2008 ) . Design team communication and design task complexity : the preference for dialogues . Architectural Engineering and Design Management 4 ( 2 ) , 121 – 129 . Dunbar , K . , & Blanchette , I . ( 2001 ) . The in vivo / in vitro approach to cogni - tion : the case of analogy . Trends in Cognitive Sciences 5 ( 8 ) , 334 – 339 . Forsyth , D . R . ( 2010 ) . Group Dynamics , 5th ed . Wadsworth : Cengage Learn - ing . Fu , K . , Cagan , J . , & Kotovsky , K . ( 2010 ) . Design team convergence : the in - fluence of example solution quality . Journal of Mechanical Design 132 ( 11 ) , 111005 / 1 – 111005 / 11 . Gardner , R . ( 1997 ) . The conversation object mm : a weak and variable ac - knowledging token . Research on Language & Social Interaction 30 ( 2 ) , 131 – 156 . Gentner , D . ( 2002 ) . Psychology of mental models . In International Encyclo - pedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences ( Smelser , N . J . , & Bates , P . B . , Eds . ) , pp . 9683 – 9687 . Amsterdam : Elsevier . Goel , A . K . , & Wiltgen , B . ( 2014 ) . On the role of analogy in resolving cog - nitivedissonanceincollaborativeinterdisciplinarydesign . In Case - Based Reasoning Research and Development ( Lamontagne , L . , & Plaza , E . , Eds . ) , LNCS , Vol . 8765 , pp . 185 – 199 . Berlin : Springer – Verlag . Goldschmidt , G . ( 1995 ) . Visual displays for design : imagery , analogy and databases of visual images . In Visual Databases in Architecture ( Kouta - manis , A . , Timmermans , H . , & Vermeulen , I . , Eds . ) , pp . 53 – 74 . Alder - shot : Avebury . Helms , M . , Vattam , S . S . , & Goel , A . K . ( 2009 ) . Biologically inspired design : process and products . Design Studies 30 ( 5 ) , 606 – 622 . Helms , M . , Vattam , S . S . , & Goel , A . K . ( 2010 ) . The effect of functional mod - eling on understanding complex biological systems . Proc . ASME 2010 Int . Design Engineering Technical Conf . and Computers & Information in Engineering Conf . , pp . 107 – 115 , Montreal , August 15 – 18 , 2010 . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . ( 1995 ) . Mental Leaps : Analogy in Creative Thought . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Johnson - Laird , P . N . ( 1983 ) . Mental Models : Towards a Cognitive Science of Language , Inference , and Consciousness . Cambridge : Cambridge Uni - versity Press . Kleinsmann , M . S . , & Valkenburg , R . ( 2007 ) . Why do ( n’t ) actors in collabo - rative design understand each other ? An empirical study towards a better understanding of collaborative design . CoDesign 3 ( 1 ) , 59 – 73 . Kohn , N . W . , Paulus , P . B . , & Choi , Y . ( 2011 ) . Building on ideas of others : an examination of the idea combination process . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 47 ( 3 ) , 544 – 561 . Linsey , J . S . , Clauss , E . F . , Kurtoglu , T . , Murphy , J . T . , Wood , K . L . , & Mark - man , A . B . ( 2011 ) . An experimental study of group idea generation tech - niques : understanding the roles of idea representation and viewing methods . Journal of Mechanical Design 133 ( 3 ) , 031008 / 1 – 031008 / 15 . McDonnell , J . , & Lloyd , P . ( 2009 ) . About : Designing—Analysing Design Meetings . London : Taylor & Francis . Nersessian , N . J . ( 2008 ) . Creating Scientific Concepts . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Ormerod , T . C . , Mariani , J . A . , Ball , L . J . , & Lambell , N . J . ( 1999 ) . Desperado : three - in - oneindexingforinnovativedesign . Proc . 7thIFIPConf . Human - Computer Interaction—INTERACT ’99 ( Sasse , M . A . , & Johnson , C . , Eds . ) , pp . 336 – 343 . London : IOS Press . Owen , W . F . ( 1985 ) . Metaphor analysis of cohesiveness in small discussion groups . Small Group Research 16 ( 3 ) , 415 – 424 . Richardson , M . , & Ball , L . J . ( 2009 ) . Internal representations , external repre - sentations and ergonomics : towards a theoretical integration . Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics Science 10 ( 4 ) , 335 – 376 . Sannomiya , M . , Kawaguchi , A . , Yamakawa , I . , & Morita , Y . ( 2003 ) . Effect of backchannel utterances on facilitating idea - generation in Japanese think - aloud tasks . Psychological Reports 93 ( 1 ) , 41 – 46 . Stempfle , J . , & Badke - Schaub , P . ( 2002 ) . Thinking in design teams : an anal - ysis of team communication . Design Studies 23 ( 5 ) , 473 – 496 . Trickett , S . B . , & Trafton , J . G . ( 2002 ) . The instantiation anduseof conceptual simulations in evaluating hypotheses : movies - in - the - mind in scientific reasoning . Proc . 24th Annual Conf . Cognitive Science Society , pp . 878 – 883 . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Tseng , I . , Moss , J . , Cagan , J . , & Kotovsky , K . ( 2008 ) . The role of timing and analogical similarity in the stimulation of idea generation in design . De - sign Studies 29 ( 3 ) , 203 – 221 . Vattam , S . S . , Helms , M . E . , & Goel , A . K . ( 2010 ) . A content account of crea - tive analogies in biologically inspired design . Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing 24 ( 4 ) , 467 – 481 . Wiltschnig , S . , Christensen , B . T . , & Ball , L . J . ( 2013 ) . Collaborative problem - solution co - evolution in creative design . Design Studies 34 ( 5 ) , 515 – 542 . Wolf , J . P . ( 2008 ) . The effects of backchannels on fluency in L2 oral task pro - duction . System 36 ( 2 ) , 279 – 294 . Young , R . F . , & Lee , J . ( 2004 ) . Identifyingunitsininteraction : reactivetokens in Korean and English conversations . Journal of Sociolinguistics 8 ( 3 ) , 380 – 407 . Hernan Casakin is a Senior Lecturer in the School of Archi - tecture , Ariel University , Israel . He holds a BA in architecture and town planning from University of Mar del Plata , Argen - tina , and an MS and a DS in Architecture from the Technion IIT . He had appointments as a Research Fellow in the Depart - ment of Cognitive Sciences , Hamburg University , and the Environmental Simulation Laboratory , Tel Aviv University , and recently in the Faculty of Industrial Design Engineering , and the Faculty of Architecture , Delft University of Technol - ogy . Dr . Casakin is a board member of several international journals . His research interest and publications are in design thinking and creativity . Linden J . Ball is Dean of the School of Psychology at the University of Central Lancashire , Preston . He conducts laboratory - based experiments to investigate fundamental H . Casakin et al . 182 reasoning processes as well as real - world studies of expertise in domains such as design . Dr . Ball is Associate Editor of Thinking & Reasoning and the Journal of Cognitive Psychology and is a member of the editorial boards of Design Studies and CoDesign . He is also Editor for the Current Issues in Thinking & Reasoning book series published by Psychology Press . His research interests relate to the psychology of thinking , reasoning , and problem solving . Bo T . Christensen is an Associate Professor at Copenhagen Business School , where he studies creative processes . A cog - nitive psychologist by training , his research interests focus on creative cognitive processes such as analogy and simulation in a variety of creative industries . He uses ethnographic methods to study professionals performing creative tasks in their normal work environment , and then he analyzes the con - versations for cognitive operations . He also studies how con - sumers come to perceive creativity in objects . Bo has pub - lished in such international journals as Memory & Cogni - tion , Creativity Research Journal , the Journal of Applied Cognitive Psychology , the Journal of Engineering Design , and Design Studies . Petra Badke - Schaub is a Professor of design theory and methodology at Delft University of Technology . She has a background in cognitive and social psychology and attained her PhD at the University of Bamberg . Her main research aim is to understand designers and support design activity by embedding the social – cognitive context within designer - centered methodology . Dr . Badke - Schaub’s publications en - compass topics such as critical situations , problem solving and decision making of individuals and design teams in com - plex environments , sketching and the development of team mental models , and experience and creativity in design . She is an editorial board member of several design journals . Analogizing , simulation , and team dynamics 183