doi : 10 . 1136 / emj . 2007 . 046383 2007 ; 24 ; 477 - 479 Emerg . Med . J . Michele Twomey , Lee A Wallis and Jonathan E Myers triage scales Limitations in validating emergency department http : / / emj . bmj . com / cgi / content / full / 24 / 7 / 477 Updated information and services can be found at : These include : References http : / / emj . bmj . com / cgi / content / full / 24 / 7 / 477 # BIBL This article cites 16 articles , 5 of which can be accessed free at : Rapid responses http : / / emj . bmj . com / cgi / eletter - submit / 24 / 7 / 477 You can respond to this article at : http : / / emj . bmj . com / cgi / content / full / 24 / 7 / 477 # responses One rapid response has been posted to this article , which you can access for free at : service Email alerting top right corner of the article Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article - sign up in the box at the Topic collections ( 1864 articles ) Other accident and emergency medicine Articles on similar topics can be found in the following collections Notes http : / / journals . bmj . com / cgi / reprintform To order reprints of this article go to : http : / / journals . bmj . com / subscriptions / go to : Emergency Medicine Journal To subscribe to on 15 January 2008 emj . bmj . com Downloaded from ORIGINAL ARTICLE Limitations in validating emergency department triage scales Michele Twomey , Lee A Wallis , Jonathan E Myers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . See end of article for authors’ affiliations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Correspondence to : Michele Twomey , School of Public Health , University of Cape Town , Cape Town , South Africa ; satriage @ webmail . co . za Accepted 29 April 2007 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Emerg Med J 2007 ; 24 : 477 – 479 . doi : 10 . 1136 / emj . 2007 . 046383 Objective : To examine whether current validation methods of emergency department triage scales actually assess the instrument’s validity . Methods : Optimal methods of emergency department triage scale validation are examined in developed countries and their application to developing countries is considered . Results and conclusion : Numerous limitations are embedded in the process of validating triage scales . Methods of triage scale validation in developed countries may not be appropriate and repeatable in developing countries . Even in developed countries there are problems in conceptualising validation methods . A new consensus building validation approach has been constructed and recommended for a developing country setting . The Delphi method , a consensual validation process , is advanced as a more appropriate alternative for validating triage scales in developing countries . E mergency department ( ED ) triage is the process of sorting and filtering patients based on medical priority . It aims to determine a patient’s acuity level in order to facilitate timely and effective care before their condition worsens . A patient’s acuity level is defined as the urgency for effective care . In the ED triage setting effective care is defined as the provision of an intervention or treatment that reduces the patient’s urgency for care or prevents clinical deterioration . 1 If patients receive timely and effective care , triage has achieved its purpose ( as seen at point A in fig 1 ) . This illustration of triage is a highly simplified approach to a complex set of interrelationships . It is acknowledged that additional variables may influence optimal time to care and effectiveness of care significantly ( such as variability in triage nurse decisions ) . RELIABILITY The evaluation of a triage tool involves assessing reliability and validity . 2 Reliability refers to the degree to which repeated assessments of the same patient with a triage instrument will deliver the same acuity level . Inter - rater reliability determines whether there is significant variability between different triage officers rating the same patient , and intra - rater reliability assesses the variability within a single triage officer re - rating the same patient . Reliability makes no reference to a criterion , and so only illustrates consistency with triage repetition . It shows nothing about its validity ( whether it is a reflection of the truth ) . A measure can therefore be highly reliable without being valid . 3 Reliability can be estimated by evaluating different types of agreement . Percentage agreement , the k coefficient and the weighted k coefficient are three common ways of measuring agreement between raters , 4 but these measures can generate quite different values . Measuring only the percentage agree - ment is not recommended because it does not take into account agreement expected on chance alone . 5 The k coefficient considers both percentage agreement between raters and percentage agreement expected by chance ; unfortunately , it does not take into account the magnitude of disagreement , which may become significant in ordinal data . As a result , the weighted k coefficient has become the instrument of choice as it assigns different weights of agreement according to the magnitude of disagreement , and enables more explicit compar - isons between different studies . 4 While the majority of research in triage has focused on inter - rater and intra - rater reliability , which has its uses , it is of greater importance to determine whether a triage tool is in fact valid . We will therefore be focusing on the validity of a triage tool rather than its reliability . VALIDITY Validity refers to the degree with which the measured acuity level reflects the patient’s true acuity at the time of triage . The term valid implies that there is some sort of external reference or ‘‘gold standard’’ which by definition has absolute accuracy . 3 Studies that aim to see how closely an instrument approx - imates the truth , test criterion validity . Unfortunately it is not possible to measure the truth for patient acuity , 6 as there are myriad events that can occur from the time that a patient presents to the ED to the time of discharge ( including the length of time to initiation of care , the quality of that care , and Figure 1 Triage scales are most valuable at ( A ) , where triage facilitates optimal time to highly effective care , and least valuable at ( B ) , where triage facilitates delayed time and ineffective care . Abbreviations : ATS , Australasian Triage Scale ; CTAS , Canadian Triage Acuity Scale ; ED , emergency department ; ESI , Emergency Severity Index ; ETAT , Emergency Triage Assessment and Treatment ; MEWS , Modified Early Warning Score 477 www . emjonline . com on 15 January 2008 emj . bmj . com Downloaded from non - medical factors influencing disposal—for example , social factors ) . As a result , surrogate outcome markers have been used as criteria to assess validity . This has led to other ways of assessing validity for ED triage tools . The two most commonly found in the literature are tests of predictive or consensual validity . These have been approached in a unifying manner by Streiner and Norman , who reconceptualise a variety of notions of validity commonly used in the literature as construct validity . 7 There is a hierarchy of validity testing in which criterion is the best ( table 1 ) . Streiner and Norman have shown that unlike the traditional classification of validity , predictive , consensual and other types of validity are all seen as variants of construct validity . 7 Typically in developed countries , criterion validity methods are used . We will use Streiner and Norman’s conceptual framework to answer the following questions : N Do current methods of triage tool validation actually assess the validity and what are the limitations underlying these methods ? N How can these limitations be overcome with special reference to developing countries ? CURRENT METHODS OF TRIAGE TOOL ASSESSMENT AND THEIR LIMITATIONS A number of different triage systems are used in developed countries . To date , four reliable ordinal ED triage scales have been researched and published : the Australasian Triage Scale ( ATS ) , 8 the Canadian Triage Acuity Scale ( CTAS ) , 9 the Emergency Triage Scale ( aka Manchester Triage Scale ) 10 and the Emergency Severity Index ( ESI ) . 11 While there has been some focus on the reliability of triage tools , not much is published on their validity . Predictive validity ( a type of construct validity ) is the most frequently used method of assessing tools . 12 It considers the degree to which the triage acuity level is able to predict true acuity . Particular outcomes , or events with time - ordering , are selected as surrogate markers ( such as mortality rates , hospital admission rates , resource utilisation , and length of stay in hospital ) . There are methodological problems with the use of this type of validity as it does not always answer the core question : ‘‘Is the triage instrument able to measure what is supposed to be measured ? ’’ In patients it does not measure acuity at the time of assessment ( and is inherently confounded by the effectiveness of the health care intervention ) . Examples of predictive validity abound in the triage literature , as surrogate outcome markers are practical to measure and are claimed to be closely associated with true acuity . 3 This has compelled clinicians and researchers to utilise triage instruments as prediction tools . However , our ability to identify and measure the relationship between patient acuity level and outcome depends not only on the measurement of the surrogate outcome marker and the patient’s acuity level , but also very importantly on confounding variables such as variability in triage nurse decisions , and delayed and ineffective treatment . These may affect the surrogate outcome marker . HOW CAN THESE LIMITATIONS BE OVERCOME ? A detailed literature review revealed that very little has been published on triage in developing countries . The World Health Organization reports that triage research is not a priority in low - to middle - income countries . 13 They have accordingly developed the Emergency Triage Assessment and Treatment ( ETAT ) 14 for application to developing countries . While this subjective system has been successfully implemented in Malawi , countries like India , Brazil and South Africa have sought a more objective triage instrument based on physiology . They have either adopted the triage instrument from a developed country or modified it to their own local context and needs ( Patriacia Neto , Quinta D’or Hospital , Rio de Janeiro , May 2007 , personal communication ) . South Africa has adapted the Modified Early Warning Score ( MEWS ) as the South African Triage Scale after validating it on the local national population . 15 Some areas of Brazil have adopted the CTAS , others the ESI . During any validity testing an important distinction needs to be made between internal validity ( which refers to inferences about the source population ) , and external validity ( whether inferences may be generalised to people outside the source population ) . 16 A triage tool designed for a developed country may be valid in that context , leading to favourable results that are meaningful and have implications for action . If , however , the same triage tools were applied in a developing country , results may vary due to different resources and skills . Similarly results may vary when applying surrogate markers from developed countries to undertake validity testing in developing countries . This variability may increase the random error in both triage acuity level and outcome category ; it would therefore be more appropriate to apply a locally developed tool that is meaningful in the local context ( has internal validity ) , but that may not be applicable in a developed country ( lack of external validity ) . Whichever tool is used , an assessment of its usefulness in these settings is required . When selecting surrogate outcome markers ( such as mortality rates , hospital admission rates , resource utilisation , and length of stay in hospital ) , it is assumed that there is systematic record keeping , and that the care given is effective . While this may often be the case in developed countries , it is typically not the case in developing countries . Poor record keeping and ineffective care may have significant effects on surrogate outcome markers and patients’ final dispositions . Markers such as these are imperfect measures of patient acuity in the developing world . It is thus important to identify and measure all confounding variables that may be affecting the surrogate outcome marker : given the poor record keeping and lack of efficiency , this is unlikely to be feasible in developing countries . Delphi methodology The Delphi method was developed in the 1950s by the RAND Corporation in California , USA . 17 The technique has diversified and is being applied to more mainstream social sciences , in business and , in the last two decades , within the healthcare arena . 18 It is a consensus building technique designed to gain insight into a particular field to enable decision making in areas where published information is inadequate or non - existent . 19 The approach of the Delphi technique is to establish a panel of appro - priate experts that have agreed to complete an iterative process on a particular issue , with the key objective being to reach consen - sus . 20 Panellist anonymity is maintained throughout the process and controlled feedback is provided from each iterative round , resulting in a statistical aggregation of the group response . 18 The Delphi method is another form of construct validity that may be useful when assessing triage scales in developing countries . It allows the development of a surrogate ‘‘gold standard’’ determined by specialist panel consensus . The triage Table 1 Traditional validity testing versus Streiner and Norman’s framework Traditional Streiner and Norman Criterion Criterion ConstructPredictive Construct Consensual 478 Twomey , Wallis , Myers www . emjonline . com on 15 January 2008 emj . bmj . com Downloaded from tool’s validity may then be tested against this construct of true underlying acuity that is consensually arrived at . There appear to be only very few examples in the world literature that elaborate on the use of this form of construct validity . Wallis et al 21 used consensus from Delphi methodology to establish triage acuity levels against which to test pre - hospital mass casualty triage tools : such methodology may be used in ED triage tool assessment . There are several reasons why the Delphi methodology is best suited to assessing ED triage tools in developing countries . The Delphi technique eliminates potential bias due to individual group dynamics and is financially feasible . Limitations of the Delphi technique are mostly a result of poorly conducted studies rather than fundamental problems . One of the weaknesses cited is that the response rates can be low and often decrease as the rounds progress . However , non - response is typically very low in practice , since most researchers have personally obtained assurance of participation . Similarly attrition tends to be low and the researcher can easily ascertain the cause by talking with the dropouts . 22 Selection of the Delphi panel depends on the research question . Problems may arise with a lack of representativeness in that only experts with an interest and involvement will become participants . Another potential weakness of the Delphi as a consensus method is that it overlooks important minority issues because it tries to obtain consensus . 23 However , despite these limitations we believe that the Delphi process is the most appropriate form with which to test the validity of triage tools in the developing world . CONCLUSION In developing countries a form of construct validity derived from a consensual process appears to be the most appropriate form of validation of triage tools . This is due to lack of criteria for true acuity , confounding variables that relate to differential health care resources by level of development , and lack of external validity of other triage scales . 24 We propose the Delphi method when testing the South African Triage Scale . This is an example of construct validity testing in the developing world . Authors’ affiliations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Michele Twomey , School of Public Health , University of Cape Town , Cape Town , South Africa Lee A Wallis , Division of Emergency Medicine , University of Cape Town & Stellenbosch University , Capetown , South Africa Jonathan E Myers , Occupational and Environmental Health Research Unit , University of Cape Town , Capetown , South Africa Funding : None Competing interests : None Contributions : LW had the original idea ; MT wrote the first draft ; both authors contributed to the final article . REFERENCES 1 Bindman AB . Triage in accident and emergency departments . BMJ 1995 ; 311 : 404 . 2 Rutschmann OT , Kossovsky M , Geissbu¨hler A , et al . Interactive triage simulator revealed important variability in both process and outcome of emergency triage . J Clin Epid 2006 ; 59 : 615 – 21 . 3 Lewis RJ . Reliability and validity : meaning and measurement . Presented at 1999 Annual Meeting of the Society for Academic Emergency Medicine ( SAEM ) in Boston , Massachusetts . http : / / www . ambpeds . org / ReliabilityandValidity . pdf . 4 Jakobsson U , Westergren A . Statistical methods for assessing agreement for ordinal data . Scand J Caring Sci 2005 ; 19 : 427 – 31 . 5 Fernandes CB , Groth SJ , Johnson LA , et al . A uniform triage scale in emergency medicine , American College of Emergency Physicians , 1999 . http : / / www . acep . org / NR / rdonlyres / EE2B10F7 - 51BE - 42A8 - 94B7 - 779726144017 / 0 / triagescaleip . pdf . 6 Fernandes CM , Tanabe P , Gilboy N , et al . Five - level triage : a report from the ACEP / ENA five - level triage task force . J Emerg Nurs 2005 ; 31 : 39 – 50 . 7 Streiner DL , Norman GR . ‘‘Precision’’ and ‘‘accuracy’’ : Two terms that are neither . J Clin Epidemiol 2006 ; 59 : 327 – 30 . 8 Australasian College of Emergency Medicine , Guidelines for the Implementation of the Australasian Triage Scale in Emergency Departments . Australasian College of Emergency Medicine , 1998 . 9 Canadian Association of Emergency Physicians . Implementation guidelines for the Canadian Emergency Department Triage and Acuity Scale ( CTAS ) , Canadian Association of Emergency Physicians , 1998 . 10 Manchester Triage Group . Emergency triage . London : BMJ Publishing Group , 1997 . 11 Gilboy N , Tanabe P , Travers DA , et al . The Emergency Severity Index implementation handbook : a five - level triage system . Des Plaines , Illinois : Emergency Nurses Association , 2003 . 12 Fan J , Al Darrab A , Eva K , et al . Triage scales in the emergency department : a systematic review . Ann Emerg Med 2005 ; 46 : S41 . 13 Razzak , Junaid A , Kellermann , Arthur L . Emergency medical care in developing countries : is it worthwhile ? Bull World Health Organ 2002 ; 80 : 900 – 5 . 14 Robertson MA , Molyneux EM . Triage in the developing world – can it be done ? Arch Dis Child 2001 ; 85 : 208 – 13 . 15 Gottschalk SB , Wood D , de Vries S , et al . The cape triage score : a new triage system South Africa . Proposal from the cape triage group . Emerg Med J 2006 ; 23 : 149 – 53 . 16 Rothman KJ , Greenland S . Modern epidemiology . Philadelphia : Lippincott - Raven Publishers , 1998 : 115 – 47 . 17 Dalkey N , Helmer O . An experimental application of the Delphi method to the use of experts . Management Science 1963 ; 9 : 458 . 18 Jones J , Hunter D . Consensus methods for medical and health services research . BMJ 1995 ; 311 : 376 – 80 . 19 Pill J . The Delphi method : Substance , context , a critique and an annotated bibliography . Socio - Econ Plan Sci 1971 ; 5 : 57 – 71 . 20 Hasson F , Keeney S , McKenna H . Research guidelines for the Delphi survey technique . J Adv Nurs 2000 ; 32 : 1008 – 15 . 21 Wallis LA , Carley S , Hodgetts CT . A procedure based alternative to the injury severity score for major incident triage of children : results of a Delphi consensus process . Emerg Med J 2006 ; 23 : 291 – 5 . 22 Okoli C , Pawlowski S . The Delphi method as a research tool : an example , design considerations and applications . Information and Management 2004 ; 42 : 15 – 29 . 23 Van Teijlingen E , Pitchforth E , Bishop C , et al . Delphi method and nominal group techniques in family planning and reproductive health research . J Fam Plann Reprod Health Care 2006 ; 32 : 249252 . 24 Fernandes CB , Groth SJ , Johnson LA , et al . A uniform triage scale in emergency medicine . American College of Emergency Physicians , 1999 ; http : / / www . acep . org / NR / rdonlyres / EE2B10F7 - 51BE - 42A8 - 94B7 - 779726144017 / 0 / triagescaleip . pdf . Limitations in validating ED triage scales 479 www . emjonline . com on 15 January 2008 emj . bmj . com Downloaded from