Perspective on Decision Analysis Applications , 1990 - 2001 Donald L . Keefer 1 , Craig W . Kirkwood 1 , and James L . Corner 2 Forthcoming in Decision Analysis Copyright © INFORMS , 2002 November 2002 1 Department of Supply Chain Management , Arizona State University , Tempe , Arizona 85287 - 4706 . 2 Department of Management Systems , University of Waikato , Hamilton , New Zealand . Abstract This article identifies , and provides perspective on , trends and developments in decision analysis applications , based primarily on an exhaustive survey of decision analysis applications published from 1990 through 2001 in major English language operations research and closely related journals . It serves as a guide to those interested in recent applications in specific areas or in applications that illustrate the use of particular methods . We compare the characteristics of the applications articles surveyed here with those of applications articles appearing in a similar set of journals from 1970 - 1989 and conclude that the overall rate of publication of decision analysis applications has increased . In addition , we find that both the mix of application areas and the specific aspects of decision analysis that are emphasized in applications publications have shifted somewhat . We also identify and discuss noteworthy trends in , and developments affecting , published applications , including those in computer software and software - related tools , decision conferencing , stochastic trees , value - focused thinking , normative systems , organizational processes , and real options . We highlight several award - winning decision analysis applications and discuss formation of a new practitioner - oriented professional group . Finally , we present some concerns and thoughts on needs for the future to further advance decision analysis practice . 1 Perspective on Decision Analysis Applications , 1990 - 2001 1 . INTRODUCTION This article provides our perspective on the state of decision analysis applications , based primarily on a survey of applications articles published from 1990 through 2001 in major English language operations research journals and other closely related journals . We compare the results of this survey with an earlier survey by Corner and Kirkwood ( 1991 ) that covered a similar set of journals for the period 1970 through 1989 and identify noteworthy trends in , and developments affecting , decision analysis applications . A companion technical report by Keefer et al . ( 2002 ) provides short summaries of the individual applications articles . Based on our study , we believe that the state of decision analysis applications is healthy , and that there was a substantial increase in the rate of publication of decision analysis applications over the period 1990 - 2001 relative to 1970 - 1989 . Furthermore , there was also an expansion in the use of new methods , particularly those related to problem formulation , implementation , and computation . Thus , while certain decision analysis application areas have matured and applications therein have become somewhat routine , there continue to be new types of applications and use of new methods . This article also provides a guide to published applications of decision analysis for practitioners and instructors who are interested in specific areas of application or in applications illustrating specific decision analysis methods . In addition , it provides useful information for researchers interested in learning more about which research topics have impacted decision analysis applications . We use the term decision analysis to refer to a set of quantitative methods for analyzing decisions based on the axioms of consistent choice ( Clemen 1996 , Chapter 14 ; Kirkwood 1997 , Section 9 . 9 ) . Decision analysis is normative , rather than descriptive . That is , it provides a systematic quantitative approach to making better decisions , rather than a description of how unaided decisions are made . There is some subjectivity in deciding whether a particular application qualifies as an application of decision analysis . To be included , an application generally had to explicitly analyze alternatives for a decision 2 problem using judgmental probabilities and / or subjectively assessed utility / value functions . Ambiguous cases were resolved by including the article if , on balance , it took a decision analysis approach . There is also some subjectivity in deciding whether an article reports an application . Many of the surveyed articles report case histories of the use of decision analysis to address a specific decision problem , while other articles report on analysis that provided background or insights for policy making . This article does not address the analytic hierarchy process or multicriteria decision making , two approaches that are related to multiattribute decision analysis . The interested reader is referred to Mollaghasemi and Pet - Edwards ( 1997 ) or Yoon and Hwang ( 1995 ) for more information about those approaches . Brown ( 1992 ) and Howard ( 1992 ) , who are both prominent decision analysts , present differing philosophical views from a decision analysis perspective about the relationship between decision analysis and other decision - oriented methods , such as fuzzy logic and the analytic hierarchy process . This article is organized as follows : Section 2 considers background decision analysis references for applications work . Section 3 describes the applications articles that we surveyed for the period 1990 - 2001 by providing tables that show the application area and methods used for each application , as well as the overall characteristics of the set of applications , including a comparison with applications from the period 1970 - 1989 surveyed by Corner and Kirkwood ( 1991 ) . Section 4 provides our perspective relative to trends and developments in decision analysis applications that we observed , and Section 5 presents our views on needs and concerns for the future . Finally , Section 6 presents concluding remarks . 2 . BACKGROUND REFERENCES The vigor and continued development of decision analysis is demonstrated by the substantial number of textbooks and other references on decision analysis applications that were published during 1990 - 2001 . Decision analysis textbooks include Bell and Schleifer ( 1995 ) , Clemen ( 1996 ) , Golub ( 1997 ) , Goodwin and Wright ( 1998 ) , Marshall and Oliver ( 1995 ) , McNamee and Celona ( 1990 , 2001 ) , and Skinner ( 1999 ) . Kirkwood ( 1992 , 1999 ) provides brief introductions to decision analysis methods , while Hammond et al . ( 1999 ) provide a relatively non - quantitative introduction to systematic decision analysis 3 procedures . Keeney ( 1992 ) presents a value - focused approach to formulating decision problems , and Kirkwood ( 1997 ) reviews methods for analyzing decisions with multiple conflicting objectives , including spreadsheet procedures to implement these methods . Oliver and Smith ( 1990 ) address influence diagrams , which became widely used during the 1990s . In addition to these publications of general decision analysis methods , several publications specifically address probability assessment , approximation procedures , or utility / value function assessment . Shephard and Kirkwood ( 1994 ) provide an annotated transcript of a probability elicitation interview that illustrates standard probability elicitation procedures . Morgan and Henrion ( 1990 ) address specifics of probability assessment and communication about uncertainty in the context of policy analysis . Clemen et al . ( 2000 ) examine methods for assessing probabilistic dependence among pairs of random variables . Keefer ( 1994 ) discusses three - point approximations to represent continuous probability distributions in decision analysis problems , including those where risk preferences are important . Poland ( 1999 ) reviews an approximate probabilistic analysis procedure to reduce the assessment and computational complexity of decision analyses with many uncertainties , some of which may be dependent . This work draws upon “moment methods” described by Smith ( 1993 ) , whereby an approximation to the distribution of an output variable is obtained from its moments , which are calculated from moments of the ( assessed ) input distributions . Keefer ( 1991 ) presents a framework for addressing resource allocation decisions with risk aversion and probabilistic dependence . Borcherding et al . ( 1991 ) and Lai ( 2001 ) provide empirical comparisons of different methods for assessing weights for multiattribute utility and value functions . Edwards ( 1992 ) reviews theory and applications issues associated with using expected utility analysis . A number of other sources from 1990 - 2001 provide additional reference material relevant for applications . Corner and Corner ( 1995 ) summarize the characteristics of decision analysis applications from 1970 through 1989 that were surveyed by Corner and Kirkwood ( 1991 ) . Zeckhauser et al . ( 1996 ) include some papers of interest for decision analysis practice , including applications to public policy and 4 medical decision making . Magat et al . ( 1996 ) review a general approach for establishing a death - equivalent metric for valuing long - term health effects . Noonan and Vidich ( 1992 ) present a decision analysis framework for utilizing hazardous waste site assessment in real estate acquisition . Two web sites were established that provide additional information about decision analysis and its applications , one by the Decision Analysis Society of INFORMS ( www . informs . org / Society / DA ) and one by the Decision Analysis Affinity Group ( www . daag . net ) . 3 . APPLICATIONS ARTICLES AND PUBLICATIONS TRENDS This section summarizes characteristics of the decision analysis applications articles published in the operations research literature for the period 1990 - 2001 , and compares these to characteristics of applications articles published during the period 1970 - 1989 , as surveyed by Corner and Kirkwood ( 1991 ) . Table I shows the journals that were surveyed , and the number of decision analysis applications articles in each journal . The first four rows of this table provide overall summary data for each of the two time periods , including the number of years in each period , the number of journals covered , the total number of applications articles in all of the journals , and the total number of articles in the journals that were covered for both time periods ( the “common journals” ) . Note that row 3 of Table I lists 85 applications articles for the period 1970 - 1989 even though Corner and Kirkwood ( 1991 ) show 86 applications for that period . This is because Corner and Kirkwood include one article in the medical category that is a survey , rather than an application , and that article is not included in these comparisons . The remaining rows of the table relate to the number of applications articles for each journal . For these rows , the second column shows the number of applications articles identified in each journal by Corner and Kirkwood ( 1991 ) for the period 1970 - 1989 , the third column shows the number of articles that we identified in each journal for the period 1990 - 2001 , the fourth column shows the average number of applications articles published per year in each journal for the period 1970 - 1989 , and the fifth column shows this average for the period 1990 - 2001 . Finally , the sixth column shows the percent change in the average number of articles published each year from the period 1970 - 1989 to the period 1990 - 2001 . For 5 example , Table I shows that there were 18 decision analysis applications articles published in Interfaces during 1970 - 2001 , and 40 published in Interfaces during 1990 - 2001 . As the table also shows , this corresponds to an average of 18 / 20 = 0 . 90 articles per year during 1970 - 1989 and an average of 40 / 12 = 3 . 33 articles per year during 1990 - 2001 . Thus , as shown in the right - most column of the table , there was a ( 3 . 33 – 0 . 90 ) / 0 . 90 = 270 percent increase in the average number of decision analysis applications articles published per year in Interfaces from 1970 - 1989 to 1990 - 2001 . As row 3 shows , we identified 86 application articles in the sixteen journals that we surveyed for the period 1990 - 2001 . The set of journals that we surveyed is the same as the set covered for 1970 - 1989 by Corner and Kirkwood ( 1991 ) , except that we added the following six journals : 1 ) two new journals , the Journal of Multi - Criteria Decision Analysis and Military Operations Research , that started publishing during the 1990s , 2 ) Reliability Engineering and System Safety , Research • Technology Management , and Theory and Decision , which were added at the recommendation of knowledgeable individuals , and 3 ) IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management , which we feel is comparable to some of the other journals added . The third row in Table I shows that there was a 69 percent increase in the average number of decision analysis applications articles published per year from 1970 - 1989 to 1990 - 2001 . This substantial increase in the average publication rate may be somewhat overstated because of the six journals that were added for 1990 - 2001 . However , the fourth row in Table I shows that even without considering those six journals the average annual publication rate increased by 24 percent . This overall positive trend masks what may be a less positive trend , namely that applications publications appear to be concentrating in a smaller number of journals , most of which are published in the United States . In particular , 47 percent of the applications during 1990 - 2001 were published in Interfaces , while only 21 percent of the applications during 1970 - 1989 were published in that journal . Another 13 percent of the 1990 - 2001 articles appeared in Operations Research , primarily in its OR Practice Section ( 9 of 11 articles ) — which , like Interfaces , explicitly targets applications . And the new journal Military Operations Research came in third with 9 percent of the articles . There was a substantial 6 drop in the number of decision analysis applications articles published in the main European OR journals ( European Journal of Operational Research , Journal of the Operational Research Society , and Omega ) , with decision analysis applications virtually disappearing from those journals . While the new Journal of Multi - Criteria Decision Analysis , which is based in the United Kingdom , is publishing decision analysis applications , there appears to be an overall trend for a greater portion of the decision analysis applications to be published in U . S . journals , and especially in the INFORMS practice journal Interfaces . The increase in decision analysis applications published by Interfaces is partially explained by two milestones . First , in 1995 , the new regular column “Practice Abstracts” , edited by one of the current authors , began soliciting submissions . This produced 6 of the 40 Interfaces applications articles that we survey . Second , two special issues of Interfaces appeared during 1990 - 2001 ( November - December 1992 and November - December 1999 ) that focused on decision analysis applications . These special issues yielded an additional 12 of the 40 applications articles published in Interfaces . Of course , some of those articles might have been published in Interfaces even without the special issues . Also , even if the Practice Abstracts and special issues are ignored , the annual rate of publication of decision analysis applications in Interfaces increased substantially from 1970 - 1989 to 1990 - 2001 . Note , also , that there were two special decision analysis issues in journals during the period 1970 - 1989 ( the January - February 1980 issue of Operations Research and the April 1982 issue of the Journal of the Operational Research Society ) . Therefore , the overall count of decision analysis applications articles should not be significantly skewed by these special issues , and it is clear that there was a significant increase in the rate of publication of applications articles from 1970 - 1989 to 1990 - 2001 . Classification of Applications Areas , With Trends In Table II , each applications article that we surveyed for the period 1990 - 2001 is classified into exactly one of the applications areas or subareas shown in that table . The area / subarea selected for a particular article is the one that , on balance , is most emphasized in the article . This table is presented as a 7 guide for readers who are interested in finding applications articles that address specific applications areas . Brief summaries of all of these articles are included in the technical report by Keefer et al . ( 2002 ) . Table III compares the application area for the articles published during 1970 - 1989 ( Corner and Kirkwood 1991 ) with the application area for the articles that we surveyed . There are some differences in our classification scheme relative to the scheme used by Corner and Kirkwood because of shifts in decision analysis application areas between 1970 - 1989 and 1990 - 2001 . ( A classification category that is not used in one of the two survey articles is indicated in Table III with a “Not Applicable [ NA ] ” entry . ) However , we used similar classification areas to those in Corner and Kirkwood ( 1991 ) to the extent possible to facilitate comparisons between the two time periods . Because of the slightly different classification categories , as well as the addition of some new journals and the differing lengths of the two time periods compared in Table III , caution should be used in drawing conclusions about trends in applications . However , there are some significant points . First , within the Energy area , there appears to have been a shift toward applications in environmental risk , product and project selection , and strategy , and away from regulation and site selection . Overall , Energy continues to be a significant application area for decision analysis . Within Manufacturing and Services , R & D Project Selection applications increased during the period 1990 - 2001 to the extent that we include a separate category for these applications , which had not been needed by Corner and Kirkwood for the period 1970 - 1989 . Medical applications published in the OR literature dropped substantially between 1970 - 1989 and 1990 - 2001 . However , we believe this is because decision analysis methods are now so well established within the medical community that most medical decision analysis applications are published in specialized medical journals . Published Military applications increased from virtually none in the period 1970 - 1989 to the extent that the numbers now justify a separate Military category . This appears to be due in part to the new journal Military Operations Research which has published a substantial number of decision analysis applications since it was established in 1994 . Finally , while Public Policy applications 8 still continue at a substantial rate , there was not a sufficiently large number of these during 1990 - 2001 focused on Standard Setting to justify a separate subcategory for these . Methodological and Implementation Issues , With Trends Table IV lists those application articles that present significant detail about a particular decision analysis methodological or implementation issue . Many articles deal with nearly all of the methodological and implementation issues shown in that table , but an article is included in Table IV only if it provides detailed information on a topic . Thus , this table can be used to identify articles that emphasize a particular methodological or implementation issue . Articles are included in the strategy and / or objectives generation category if they discuss overall decision strategy and / or present an objectives or value hierarchy , or discuss the decision structuring process in detail . Articles are included in the problem structuring / formulation category if they describe and present a decision tree and / or influence diagram and discuss its development and use . The probability assessment category includes articles that discuss the elicitation of subjective probabilities , probabilistic dependence or independence , and / or risk assessment . Similarly , articles are listed in the utility assessment category if subjective utility / value functions or tradeoffs between attributes are discussed in depth . Articles are listed in the sensitivity analysis category if tornado or rainbow diagrams , or something similar , are presented and / or statistical or mathematical approaches to model sensitivity analysis are discussed . The communication / facilitation category includes articles that discuss the role of the analyst , how decision analysis facilitates the decision process , and / or how communication channels are opened due to the use of the approach . Articles are included in the group issues category if there is discussion about aggregating individual preferences into a group function , or discussion of the solicitation and treatment of multiple individual inputs into the preference or probability model . Finally , the implementation category includes articles that discuss post - modeling issues related to implementing chosen alternatives or the value of decision analysis techniques for the individuals or organization in their decision making efforts . 9 Table V compares the classifications of articles by methodological and implementation issues in Corner and Kirkwood’s ( 1991 ) survey of application during 1970 - 1989 with our classification for applications during 1990 - 2001 . As with the comparison of application areas in Table III , caution is warranted in interpreting Table V . Specifically , the classification categories that we use for our survey of 1990 - 2001 applications is somewhat different from Corner and Kirkwood’s classification categories because of changes in methodological and implementation issues that are emphasized in the articles . However , some general conclusions can be drawn about trends in methodological and implementation issues . First , Corner and Kirkwood’s classification categories “Problem Structuring / Formulation” and “Decision Trees” for the 1970 - 1989 applications do not adequately represent the corresponding topics in the 1990 - 2001 applications . A new classification category “Strategy and / or Objectives Generation” was added primarily because of the expanded use of value - focused thinking approaches in a variety of applications . Corner and Kirkwood’s category “Decision Trees” was expanded to “Problem Structuring / Formulation ( via Decision Trees and Influence Diagrams ) ” , primarily because of the expended use of influence diagrams during 1990 - 2001 . A new category “Sensitivity Analysis” was added due to the expanded discussion in the 1990 - 2001 articles of such sensitivity analysis methods as tornado and rainbow diagrams . Of course sensitivity analysis was well - recognized prior to 1990 as an important part of decision analysis , but it received substantially increased emphasis in the articles published in the 1990 - 2001 period relative to its emphasis in the 1970 - 1989 period . While we cannot say for certain why this is true , it seems reasonable that the expanded use of spreadsheets and personal computer decision analysis packages may have facilitated conducting and reporting sensitivity analyses . Finally , a new “Implementation” category was added because of the expanded consideration of this topic in published applications . Of course , implementation has always been important in applications . The increase in emphasis on implementation in the 1990 - 2001 publications relative to the 1970 - 1989 publications may be due in part to the increased concentration of articles in Interfaces , as well 10 as the substantial number of articles appearing in the new journal Military Operations Research , which appears to encourage emphasis on implementation issues . 4 . ADDITIONAL NOTEWORTHY TRENDS AND DEVELOPMENTS In the preceding section we discuss trends based primarily on counts and classifications of the applications articles that we surveyed . In this section , we draw more broadly on the contents of the applications articles to discuss a number of additional noteworthy trends and developments relevant to decision analysis applications and practice between 1990 and 2001 . In addition , we note developments in professional societies relevant to decision analysis practice and cite award - winning entries in practice competitions . The specific sources highlighted in this section , some of which are not applications articles , are those that fit within these trends and developments . As indicated above , the companion technical report to this article ( Keefer et al . 2002 ) contains brief summaries of all the applications articles that we surveyed , including additional information about those highlighted in this section . General Trends and Developments Computer Software and Related Tools . During the period 1990 - 2001 , increasingly powerful personal computer decision analysis software was developed , refined , and utilized in applications . This facilitated more widespread use of decision analysis tools developed in the 1980’s such as influence diagrams and strategy tables , and tornado diagrams for sensitivity analysis . It also facilitated structuring and analyzing larger decision analysis models . For example , in an analysis to help the New York Power Authority develop a 10 - year schedule for refueling its Indian Point 3 Nuclear Power Plant , Dunning et al . ( 2001 ) utilized software in applying a spectrum of decision analysis tools including strategy tables , an influence diagram , and a decision tree with over 200 million paths . Similarly , in a study to help Amgen select a strategy for developing and commercializing a new drug , Beccue ( 2001 ) employed a variety of software - based decision analysis tools including an influence diagram , a tornado diagram , and a decision tree with approximately 500 , 000 scenarios for each of eight key strategies that were identified via a strategy table . 11 Regarding overall software developments , Call and Miller ( 1990 ) discuss computational approaches to automating decision analysis calculation procedures . Stand - alone software packages using decision trees and / or influence diagrams that were developed or updated during the period 1990 - 2001 include DATA , DPL , and Supertree , and spreadsheet decision analysis add - ins include PrecisionTree and TreePlan . Even stand - alone packages are often used in conjunction with spreadsheet models , which are used pervasively in practice . Development also continued on the stand - alone software package Logical Decisions that specifically focuses on decisions with multiple objectives . Several of these packages are now available in conjunction with decision analysis or basic OR textbooks . Current information about these and other software packages can be obtained from the Decision Analysis Society web site or from the biennial surveys of decision analysis software in ORMS Today ( Maxwell 2002 ) . Decision Conferencing . A decision conference is an intensive computer - assisted group meeting , or workshop , focused on a specific decision problem and utilizing outside facilitators skilled in decision analysis and group facilitation techniques . The idea is to generate and evaluate alternatives in a structured fashion and use real - time quantitative models to help the group reach consensus on a preferred alternative while avoiding “groupthink” pitfalls . Decision conferences typically last about two days . Although originated prior to the period surveyed in this article , decision conferencing has become more prominent in applications in the OR literature during the period covered by this survey , perhaps in part due to improvements in computer software and hardware . This approach offers a powerful synthesis of techniques from decision analysis , decision support systems , and group management . Decision conferencing is most often applied in conjunction with multiattribute value models , and typically in the public sector . Bresnick et al . ( 1997 ) and Buede and Bresnick ( 1992 ) describe military applications utilizing decision conferences and multiattribute models . French ( 1996 ) and Hämäläinen et al . ( 2000 ) discuss the use of decision conferences and multiattribute analysis for nuclear accident management in conjunction with the RODOS project , a European initiative to build a decision support system for emergency response . Reagan - Cirinciona et al . ( 1991 ) and Quaddus et al . ( 1992 ) describe 12 multiattribute applications involving , respectively , strategic policy options for medical malpractice insurance for the New York State Insurance Department and strategic planning in a volunteer organization providing services to the disabled . Vári and Vecsenyi ( 1992 ) discuss the use of decision analysis methods in conjunction with 26 decision conferences on a variety of decision problems for manufacturing , services , and government organizations in Hungary . Stochastic Trees . Stochastic trees were developed during the period covered by our survey to aid medical decision making . They combine features of continuous - time Markov chains with those of decision trees and , in particular , enable time to be modeled as a continuum where health state transitions can occur at any instant . They retain the familiar rollback procedure for decision trees and can also accommodate risk preferences via utility functions . Hazen et al . ( 1998 ) and Pellissier et al . ( 1996 ) review stochastic tree analysis methods and their application to hip replacement surgery . This is an exciting development for decision analysis in an important application area . The basic assumption that health state transitions can occur at any moment in continuous time appears to be natural in the medical context , and the case for applying stochastic trees more widely to medical decision problems seems persuasive . Understandably , additional medical applications are likely to appear primarily in the medical literature rather than the OR literature . Methodological developments continue in this relatively new area , see for example Hazen ( 2000 ) . Value - Focused Thinking . Keeney ( 1992 , 1994 , 1999a , 2001 ) makes the case for using values as the primary driver for problem structuring and analysis , including the generation of alternatives , and provides methods to aid in this process , as well as illustrative examples . This value - focused thinking expands upon earlier work on multiattribute utility and value models and has been a major force in increasing the number and scope of multiattribute applications , as well as the quantity and quality of alternatives generated in decision analyses . 13 In particular , the book by Keeney ( 1992 ) on value - focused thinking , along with the spreadsheet - oriented text on multiobjective decision analysis by Kirkwood ( 1997 ) , appears to have been influential in military applications during the survey period . For example , Burk and Parnell ( 1997 ) , Davis et al . ( 2000 ) , Doyle et al . ( 2000 ) , Jackson et al . ( 1997 ) , Kerchner et al . ( 2001 ) , Parnell et al . ( 1998 ) , and Parnell et al . ( 2001 ) all describe military applications that make prominent use of value - focused thinking and multiattribute value models . All of these articles cite Keeney ( 1992 ) , and all except for Burk and Parnell ( 1997 ) cite Kirkwood ( 1997 ) . Baker et al . ( 2000 ) , Keeney ( 1999b ) , Keeney and McDaniels ( 1992 , 2001 ) , and Lehmkuhl et al . ( 2001 ) describe applications of value - focused thinking in other areas , including strategy and public policy . Drawing upon both the descriptive and prescriptive literature on decision making , Corner et al . ( 2001 ) suggest a dynamic synthesis of value - focused thinking with alternative - focused thinking . Interdisciplinary Trends and Developments Each of the following trends or developments links decision analysis methods with another discipline and thus is a synthesis of traditional decision analysis with another established discipline . Due to the interdisciplinary nature of these trends and developments , we include several sources beyond the OR applications literature that was considered in our survey . Normative Systems . Connections between decision analysis and artificial intelligence ( AI ) methods have been increasingly recognized , and this has led to significant research and applications , much of which has been published outside of the OR literature . There were a variety of creative applications involving combinations of decision analysis and AI methods over the period covered by our survey . Henrion et al . ( 1991 ) provide an extensive introduction to the connections between decision analysis and knowledge - based expert systems . Matzkevich and Abramson ( 1995 ) survey and synthesize research from the decision analysis and AI communities involving influence diagrams and belief networks . Their discussion of normative systems , which are AI systems based on influence diagrams or belief nets and 14 thus on Bayesian principles , is of particular interest . They provide brief descriptions of several implemented systems in areas including medical diagnosis , energy price and demand forecasting , and machine vision . Silverman ( 1994 ) focuses on approaches to unifying expert systems methods with mathematical modeling approaches to decision making , including decision analysis . Hedbert ( 1998 ) reviews decision analysis oriented work at Microsoft Research , including development of a Bayesian - based system for automating more responsive interfaces that was applied to the Office Assistant in Microsoft Office . This area appears to have great potential for additional applications . Further information about decision analysis methods in AI can be found at the web site of the Association for Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence ( www . auai . org ) . Organizational Processes . As decision analysis has matured , increasing attention has been devoted to specifying procedures for conducting and implementing decision analysis successfully in organizations . In large - scale strategic decision analyses in particular , a well - defined process is typically used for managing the efforts of , and the interactions between , carefully constructed teams composed of analysts , managers , and executives . Such a process is typically used first in structuring and analyzing the decision problem at hand and then in following through to manage and carry out recommended action plans and accompanying changes . Organizational processes for decision analysis were developed within decision analysis consulting and practitioner groups in the 1980s , but were not widely known outside these groups until the 1990s . Bodily and Allen ( 1999 ) review a dialogue process to manage the interaction between decision analysts and other stakeholders in a decision . Kusnic and Owen ( 1992 ) , Krumm and Rolle ( 1992 ) , and Skaf ( 1999 ) provide guidance on conducting and implementing large - scale decision analyses within major industrial firms , including the effective use of teams and large databases , as well as methods for dealing with multiple decision makers . Matheson and Matheson ( 1999 ) discuss the use of an outside - in approach to take better account of a company’s external environment during strategic decision analysis . Clemen and Kwit ( 2001 ) review the history of decision and risk analysis at Eastman Kodak Company 15 from the early 1980s until 2001 and summarize the characteristics of 178 projects conducted between 1990 and 1999 . In related work , Horowitz ( 1990 ) provides several different authors’ perspectives on organizational decision making from a decision analysis point of view . Bordley ( 2001 ) compares and contrasts conventional decision analysis as commonly applied in industrial practice with soft OR techniques and finds much in common between decision analysis and classical interactive planning . Kasanen et al . ( 2000 ) examine characteristics of six major real - world decision processes relative to common assumptions or myths in the multicriteria decision making and multiattribute utility fields , and suggest changes in assumptions and practices to make models from these fields more widely useful . Decision analysis frameworks for R & D organizational planning processes received particular attention . Bordley ( 1998 ) considers organizational issues related to using decision analysis for R & D project selection and emphasizes the benefits of stimulating researchers to develop better projects by improving communications . Matheson et al . ( 1994 ) , Matheson and Menke ( 1994 ) , and Menke ( 1994 ) review decision analysis approaches to R & D planning . Matheson and Matheson ( 1998 ) present a framework for applying decision analysis methods to R & D strategy . As a result of the work cited above , considerable additional guidance is now available concerning processes for successfully conducting and implementing a major decision analysis project within an organization . Real Options . During the period covered by this survey , the importance of modeling sequential decisions in conjunction with the resolution of uncertainties over time became more widely recognized . Downstream decision alternatives provide real options that can increase flexibility in managing real - world projects with evolving risks , and these real options are analogous to financial options . In R & D projects , for instance , the cost of conducting research can be viewed as the price of a call option to develop or commercialize a new product subsequently , and exercising this option incurs an additional cost ( the exercise price ) . Relevant methodologies for addressing decisions with real options include 16 larger decision trees , dynamic programming , and financial options methods ( Amram and Kulatilaka 1999 , Dixit and Pindyck 1994 , and Trigeorgis 1996 ) . Smith ( 1999 ) provides a concise nontechnical overview of the similarities and differences between conventional decision analysis and the real options approach . Several authors have pointed out the benefits of options thinking in providing more realistic evaluations than traditional analyses . For instance , Morris et al . ( 1991 ) use an options framework in conjunction with a simple decision tree to demonstrate that the riskier of two R & D projects having the same expected value is typically the better choice when sequencing is properly incorporated . Faulkner ( 1996 ) provides a brief , non - technical introduction to real options , and based on several years of experience at Eastman Kodak , describes the advantages of evaluating R & D projects as sequential adaptive strategies . Pauwels et al . ( 2000 ) illustrate the advantages of applying options thinking along with conventional decision analysis tools in emergency response situations by analyzing a simple two - period nuclear incident evacuation model . Benaroch ( 2001 ) presents methods for structuring and evaluating multiple , possibly interacting , operating options in technology investments and includes an illustrative example involving establishment of a web - based sales channel . Howard ( 1996 ) provides an overview of various types of options in decision problems and emphasizes the importance of recognizing and creating , as well as modeling , these options , and he illustrates several evaluation methods . Perdue et al . ( 1999 ) discuss a method using both options - pricing techniques and decision analysis tools in R & D planning . Smith and McCardle ( 1999 ) provide a tutorial introduction to option pricing methods and their integration with decision analysis methods , with a focus on evaluating oil and gas investments . Real options have also received attention outside the traditional journal literature , such as in various conferences of the Society of Petroleum Engineers ( SPE ) . ( Abstracts , as well as ordering instructions , for SPE conference papers are on the web at www . spe . org . ) For instance , Claeys and Walkup ( 1999 ) discuss framing techniques used to ensure that all key options and uncertainties are included and illustrate use of these on examples from several actual petroleum valuation efforts . Gallant et al . ( 1999 ) discuss learning models for analyzing dynamic complexity , that is changes in information 17 over time , and illustrate their use in exploration and production examples based on actual projects . Faiz ( 2000 ) discusses how real options valuation , a combination of options pricing theory and decision analysis , relates to other popular management tools , such as portfolio optimization , and provides illustrative real - world case studies . As suggested by Smith ( 1999 ) , both decision analysis and finance professionals could benefit from learning more about each other’s tools and incorporating them into models appropriately . Although a number of applications in our survey utilized real - options thinking in generating downstream options , we found only two articles that provided in - depth descriptions of applications where real options methods were combined with conventional decision analysis methods ( Perdue et al . 1999 and Smith and McCardle 1999 ) . Hence , the potential synergism has not yet had a major impact on published applications . Practice Competitions and Professional Societies In this section we highlight decision analysis applications that achieved significant recognition in practice competitions held by professional societies during the survey period . In addition , we discuss the founding and progress of a new professional group for decision analysis practitioners . Edelman Award Competition . During the period covered by this survey , three applications of decision analysis became finalists in the Franz Edelman Award competition held annually by INFORMS to recognize and reward outstanding examples of management science and operations research practice worldwide . Burnett et al . ( 1993 ) describe the long - term use of a project appraisal methodology ( PAM ) within the Gas Research Institute’s annual five - year R & D planning process . PAM calculates benefit - to - cost ratios for R & D projects at multiple levels of funding to aid in allocating the R & D budget , obtaining expected benefits at each level by using a multiattribute scoring function and judgmental probabilities for technical and commercial successes . The authors estimate that benefits from using PAM have been in the tens of billions of dollars . 18 Paté - Cornell and Fischbeck ( 1994 ) perform a probabilistic risk analysis of failure of the exterior surface tiles on the US space shuttle orbiter . Expert opinion and the experience of the first 30 shuttle flights were used to build a decomposed model of risk for various zones on the shuttle’s tile - bearing surface . The analysis showed that roughly 15 % of the tiles contribute 85 % of the risk of failure . The study further highlighted organizational factors that contribute to potential tile failure risks and led to various policy changes in the management and maintenance of the tiles . Von Winterfeldt and Schweitzer ( 1998 ) describe an analysis to help the U . S . Department of Energy choose which tritium - supply alternatives to pursue to replenish tritium for the U . S . nuclear weapons stockpile . Ten alternatives were evaluated with respect to production assurance , cost , and environmental impacts based in part on multiple - expert probability assessments and on results from a dynamic production - simulation model . The analysis was influential in shaping the final choice by the U . S . Secretary of Energy , and its defensibility helped avoid lawsuits from vendors whose alternatives were not chosen . As a result of his experience with this entry in the Edelman Award competition , von Winterfeldt worked to establish the Practice Award ( see below ) of the Decision Analysis Society of INFORMS ( DAS ) , while serving as the DAS Chair . We anticipate that the DAS Practice Award competition will stimulate additional entries from decision analysis in the Edelman Award competition in the future . Decision Analysis Society Practice Award . In 1999 , DAS inaugurated an annual Practice Award to recognize , promote , and publicize good decision analysis practice . The competition for the award begins with submission of a brief written summary of a recent decision analysis application and culminates with presentations by the finalists at a DAS - sponsored session at the annual INFORMS meeting . The winners of the first Practice Award in 1999 were Mazen A . Skaf of Navigant Consulting , Inc . , and Donald W . Spillman of Shell ( Oil ) Offshore , Inc . , for “A Portfolio Management Process and System for an Upstream Oil and Gas Organization . ” Described in Skaf ( 1999 ) , this project produced a portfolio management process and system that was used to help manage a large portfolio of upstream oil and gas assets in the 19 Gulf of Mexico through exploration , development , and production , and to provide analytical support for a variety of portfolio , lease - bidding , drilling , development , and resource - requirements decisions . The system utilizes a variety of decision analysis tools and concepts , and its use has significantly impacted the client organization , including value - added in the hundreds of millions of dollars . The winner in 2000 was David A . Mauney of Structural Integrity Associates , Inc . , for “Best Practices in the Application of Decision / Financial Analysis to Repair / Replacement Decisions of Plant Components . ” This work developed a process that uses optimization techniques in conjunction with a risk - based decision model to aid in planning the timing of major maintenance investments for fossil - fuel power plants . Where necessary , this process includes interviews tailored to obtain judgmental probability data from plant personnel most familiar with the components . Its application in the power industry has resulted in savings in the tens of millions of dollars . The 2001 winner was Eric Johnson of Pharsight Corporation for “Life Cycle Strategy Analysis , ” which is described in Johnson and Petty ( forthcoming ) . . In this study , consultants from Pharsight helped a client firm reach consensus on a development strategy for a cancer drug . They used a variety of decision analysis methods to construct and evaluate a manageable number of candidate strategies , and they subsequently succeeded in constructing a hybrid strategy with an expected NPV $ 50 million greater than that of any of the original candidate strategies and $ 100 million greater than that of the status quo strategy . Decision Analysis Affinity Group . No discussion of decision analysis practice over the 1990 - 2001 period would be complete without mentioning the Decision Analysis Affinity Group ( DAAG ) , which was founded in 1995 to promote the use of decision analysis in industry and to further the development and careers of industrial practitioners . Since 1995 , DAAG has held annual conferences focusing on the use and implementation of decision analysis within major corporations . This has successfully filled an important niche for decision analysis practitioners , and recent conferences have typically attracted 75 to 100 participants . Historically , in order to create an open and collegial atmosphere among peers , 20 attendance by consultants and academics was discouraged and was limited to those explicitly invited for some purpose such as a presentation . Beginning with the 2002 conference , this policy was liberalized ( Spradlin and Skinner 2001 ) . While some DAAG members are also members of DAS and / or INFORMS , most are not and have no desire to become members . Furthermore , most DAAG members have little or no interest in , or motivation for , publishing . Despite the differences in focus between DAS and DAAG , we hope the change in attendance policy for DAAG conferences will lead to more interaction and collaboration between these two groups . Additional information about DAAG and its conferences , including abstracts and presentations , is available at the DAAG web site ( www . daag . net ) . 5 . NEEDS AND CONCERNS In Sections 3 and 4 we identify a number of trends and developments in decision analysis applications and practice based primarily on our survey of the OR literature . These are predominately positive and thus encouraging for the future of decision analysis . In this section , we describe some needs and potential pitfalls for the continued advancement of decision analysis practice . These reflect our personal perspectives , and we hope what follows will stimulate discussion and debate , as well as additional research and action . Status in Companies and Universities It is well documented that the number of internal OR groups within corporations has decreased in recent years ( for example , see Fildes and Ranyard 2000 ) , and there is evidence that decision analysis groups are subject to the same factors that affect internal corporate OR groups . Recent examples where decision analysis groups have in effect been disbanded include Eastman Kodak ( Clemen and Kwit 2001 ) and General Motors ( Lieberman 2002 ) . Moreover , decision analysis itself , not just the corresponding internal group , has fallen in and out of favor in a number of corporations over the years . Spradlin ( 2001 ) suggests that many internal decision analysis consulting groups are likely to disappear unless they 21 redefine themselves to look like something else and that decision analyses , where done at all , will be done either by the business units themselves or by external consultants . Additional research into factors that influence the rise and fall of internal decision analysis groups and of decision analysis itself within corporations could help strengthen the position of decision analysis within corporations . Even among INFORMS members “decision analysis” does not convey the unambiguous meaning that “linear programming” or “queueing” does . For instance , Interfaces classifies many articles under decision analysis , presumably because they involve some sort of analysis of decisions , that we would not recognize as decision analysis . ( In fact , we found during our survey of applications that keyword searches in indices and even article abstracts were of limited value because of the differing definitions that various authors use for the term “decision analysis . ” ) The coverage of decision analysis in many OR / MS textbooks largely focuses on mechanics and mathematics and omits such important topics as problem structuring , probability assessment , cognitive biases , and discretization of continuous distributions . And computer scientists often do not mean what we mean when they use the term “decision trees . ” Hopefully , the contents of the new journal Decision Analysis will help to delineate the field more clearly . Since the founding of decision analysis , a small group of institutions have been the primary sources of ideas , methodological tools , and well - trained graduate students . [ See Raiffa ( 2002 ) for an interesting personal account of the origin and evolution of the field , including the origin of the “decision analysis” name . ] Our concern is that education for decision analysis practitioners and faculty appears to depend on specific individuals ; as retirements continue in academia and as acquisitions , reorientations , and retirements continue at decision analysis consulting firms , well - trained decision analysts may become harder to find — particularly those having both strong academic backgrounds and practical experience with applications . Development of tools , software , and innovations in organizational implementation , which have often come from the consulting firms , could also suffer . As an old country - music song asks , “Who’s gonna fill those shoes ? ” It is worth noting that the Decision Education Foundation 22 ( www . decisioneducation . org ) is focusing on educating high school students , as well as their teachers and parents , in better decision making approaches . This is certainly laudable , but it is not a replacement for strong decision analysis programs at the university level . Better Tools Here we briefly highlight two additional areas where we think further developments could significantly enhance the applicability of decision analysis in practice . ( Section 4 includes discussion of several noteworthy methodological developments that impacted decision analysis applications during the 1990 - 2001 period . Of course , further progress in those areas would also be welcome . ) First , better methods are needed for modeling and assessing probabilistic dependence among random variables . Whether the variables are discrete , continuous , or discrete representations of continuous variables , the size and complexity of the assessment task grows rapidly with the number of dependent random variables unless simplifying assumptions are made . In practice , independence is often assumed , and this is typically adequate if expected value is the sole criterion of choice and the output variable ( for example , NPV ) is a linear , or nearly linear , function of the random variables . However , assuming independence can introduce significant errors if substantial nonlinearities are present — which can affect the accuracy of the expected value — or if the entire distribution of the output variable is of interest due , for example , to risk aversion . Keefer ( 1991 ) shows that conditional independence , perfect positive dependence , and combinations thereof can be useful in modeling dependence in the context of bidding for oil and gas leases . In the context of business portfolios , Poland ( 1999 ) addresses inter - business dependencies by conditioning evaluations for individual businesses on “global” outcome scenarios for variables that impact multiple businesses , while treating business - specific random variables as independent across businesses . Recently , constructing approximate joint probability distributions via multivariate functions called copulas , which utilize dependence information such as correlations to combine univariate marginal distributions , has received considerable attention ( Clemen and Reilly 1999 , Clemen et al . 2000 , Reilly 2000 , Yi and Bier 1998 ) . This approach appears promising , especially for 23 continuous variables , but we have not yet seen a decision analysis application using copulas in the OR literature . Thus , despite some progress during the survey period in handling dependence , more work is needed in this area—especially work geared towards practitioners . Second , we continue to need more realistic methods for dealing with the time - dynamics of many decision problems . Sequential decision models have been part of the conceptual toolkit of decision analysis since its early days , and it is interesting to see the finance profession advancing real options methods as an alternative to decision analysis for these types of decisions . The difficulty with using decision analysis methods for such decisions seems to be the complexity and size of the models that are needed when conventional decision analysis methods are used . In Section 4 , we cited the use of real options methods , dynamic programming , and stochastic trees to address various types of time - dynamics . Use of system dynamics methods has also been proposed ( Howard et al . 1998 ) . Additional work on these approaches , combined with the increased capabilities that modern decision analysis software provides for constructing and analyzing large - scale decision analysis models , will hopefully facilitate better analyses of decisions with time dynamics . 6 . CONCLUDING REMARKS Although there are some institutional , educational , and methodological needs that merit further attention , our analysis of the applications articles we surveyed and of other sources , as presented above , shows that the state of decision analysis applications is healthy . Both the number of published applications and the rate of publication have increased . Furthermore , these applications cover a broad range of decisions in both the public and private sectors , and they demonstrate that decision analysis is increasingly used for a wide variety of strategic and tactical decisions . Readers interested in brief summaries for each of the surveyed applications articles are referred to the companion technical report by Keefer et al . ( 2002 ) . 24 ACKNOWLEDGMENT We thank Brian Bajuk , Daniel G . Brooks , Richard F . Deckro , Emilia Iovtcheva , Jeffrey M . Keisler , Jack M . Kloeber , Jr . , Gregory S . Parnell , Robert K . Perdue , and James E . Smith for their assistance in providing material for this article . We thank the editors and referees for their helpful comments and suggestions . We also thank the Departments of Management and Supply Chain Management at Arizona State University for their assistance . REFERENCES Amram , M , N . Kulatilaka . 1999 . Real Options : Managing Strategic Investment in an Uncertain World . Harvard Business School Press , Boston , MA . Baker , S . F . , S . G . Green , J . K . Lowe , V . E . Francis . 2000 . A value - focused approach for laboratory equipment purchases . Military Operations Research 5 ( 4 ) 43 - 56 . Balson , W . E . , J . L . Welsh , D . S . Wilson . 1992 . Using decision analysis and risk analysis to manage utility environmental risk . Interfaces 22 ( 6 ) 126 - 139 . Bana e Costa , C . A . 2001 . The uses of multi - criteria decision analysis to support the search for less conflicting policy options in a multi - actor context : Case study . Journal of Multi - Criteria Decision Analysis 10 111 - 125 . Beccue , P . 2001 . Choosing a development strategy for a new product at Amgen . In Keefer ( 2001b ) . Bell , D . E . , A . Schleifer , Jr . 1995 . Decision Making under Uncertainty , Course Technology , Inc . , Cambridge , MA . Benaroch , M . 2001 . Option - based management of technology investment risk . IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 48 ( 4 ) 428 - 444 . Bodily , S . E . , M . S . Allen . 1999 . A dialogue process for choosing value - creating strategies . Interfaces 29 ( 6 ) 16 - 28 . 25 Borcherding , K . , T . Eppel , D . von Winterfeldt . 1991 . Comparison of weighting judgments in multiattribute utility measurement . Management Science 37 1603 - 1619 . Bordley , R . F . 1998 . R & D project selection versus R & D project generation . IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 45 407 – 413 . Bordley , R . 2001 . Relating value - focused thinking and interactive planning . Journal of the Operational Research Society 52 1315 - 1326 . Borison , A . 1995 . Oglethorpe Power Corporation decides about investing in a major transmission system . Interfaces 25 ( 2 ) 25 - 36 . Bresnick , T . A . , D . M . Buede , A . A . Pisani , L . L . Smith , B . B . Wood . 1997 . Airborne and space - borne reconnaissance force mixes : A decision analysis approach . Military Operations Research 3 ( 4 ) 65 – 78 . Brown , G . M . 1997 . Evaluation of vision correction alternatives for myopic adults . Interfaces 27 ( 2 ) 66 - 84 . Brown , R . V . 1992 . The state of the art of decision analysis : A personal perspective . Interfaces 22 ( 6 ) 5 - 14 . Bruggink , P . R . 1997 . The contribution of project analysis to an R & D project at an industrial R & D center . In Keefer ( 1997 ) . Buede , D . M . , T . A . Bresnick . 1992 . Applications of decision analysis to the military systems acquisition process . Interfaces 22 ( 6 ) 110 - 125 . Burk , R . C . , G . Parnell . 1997 . Evaluating future military space technologies . Interfaces 27 ( 3 ) 60 - 73 . Burnett , W . M . , D . J . Monetta , B . G . Silverman . 1993 . How the Gas Research Institute ( GRI ) helped transform the US natural gas industry . Interfaces 23 ( 1 ) 44 - 58 . Call , H . J . , W . A . Miller . 1990 . A comparison of approaches and implementations for automating decision analysis . Reliability Engineering and System Safety . 30 115 – 162 . 26 Chien , C - F . , F . Sainfort . 1998 . Evaluating the desirability of meals : an illustrative multiattribute decision analysis procedure to assess portfolios with interdependent items . Journal of Multi - Criteria Decision Analysis 7 230 - 238 . Claeys , J . , G . Walkup , Jr . 1999 . Discovering real options in oilfield exploration and development . SPE paper 52956 . Presented at 1999 SPE Hydrocarbon Economics and Evaluation Symposium , Dallas , TX , March 20 - 23 , 1999 . Clemen , R . T . 1996 . Making Hard Decisions : An Introduction to Decision Analysis , 2 nd Edition , Duxbury Press , Belmont , CA . Clemen , R . T . , G . W . Fischer , R . L . Winkler . 2000 . Assessing dependence : Some experimental results . Management Science 46 ( 8 ) 1100 - 1115 . Clemen , R . T . , R . C . Kwit . 2001 . The value of decision analysis at Eastman Kodak Company , 1990 - 1999 . Interfaces 31 ( 5 ) 74 - 92 . Clemen , R . T . , T . Reilly . 1999 . Correlations and copulas for decision and risk analysis . Management Science 45 ( 2 ) 208 - 224 . Corner , J . , J . Buchanan , M . Henig . 2001 . Dynamic decision problem structuring . Journal of Multi - Criteria Decision Analysis 10 129 - 141 . Corner , J . L . , P . D . Corner . 1995 . Characteristics of decisions in decision analysis practice . Journal of the Operational Research Society 46 304 - 314 . Corner , J . L . , C . W . Kirkwood , 1991 . Decision analysis applications in the operations research literature , 1970 - 1989 . Operations Research 39 206 - 219 . Davis , C . C . , R . F . Deckro , J . A . Jackson . 1999 . A methodology for evaluating and enhancing C4 networks . Military Operations Research 4 ( 2 ) 45 – 60 . Davis , C . C . , R . F . Deckro , J . A . Jackson . 2000 . A value focused model for a C4 network . Journal of Multi - Criteria Decision Analysis 9 138 - 162 . 27 Dillon , R . , Y . Y . Haimes . 1996 . Risk of extreme events via multiobjective decision trees : application to telecommunications . IEEE Transactions on Systems , Man , and Cybernetics—Part A : Systems and Humans 26 262 - 271 . Dixit , A . K . , R . S . Pindyck . 1994 . Investment under Uncertainty . Princeton University Press , Princeton , NJ . Doyle , M . P . , R . F . Deckro , J . M . Kloeber , J . A . Jackson . 2000 . Measures of merit for offensive information operations courses of action . Military Operations Research 5 ( 2 ) 5 - 18 . Dunning , D . J . , S . Lockfort , Q . E . Ross , P . C . Beccue , J . S . Stonebraker . 2001 . New York Power Authority uses decision analysis to schedule refueling of its Indian Point 3 nuclear power plant . Interfaces 31 ( 5 ) 121 - 135 . Dyer , J . S . , T . Edmunds , J . C . Butler , J . Jia . 1998 . A multiattribute utility analysis of alternatives for the disposition of surplus weapons - grade plutonium . Operations Research 46 749 - 762 . Dyer , J . S . , R . N . Lund , J . B . Larsen , V . Kumar , R . P . Leone . 1990 . A decision support system for prioritizing oil and gas exploration activities . Operations Research 38 386 - 396 . Edwards , W ( Ed . ) . 1992 . Utility Theories : Measurements and Applications . Kluwer , Boston . Engemann , K . J . , H . E . Miller . 1992 . Operations risk management at a major bank . Interfaces 22 ( 6 ) 140 - 149 . Faiz , S . 2000 . Real options application : From successes in asset valuation to challenges for an enterprise - wide approach . SPE paper 62964 . Presented at the 2000 SPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition , Dallas , TX , October 1 - 4 , 2000 . Faulkner , T . W . 1996 . Applying ‘options thinking’ to R & D valuation . Research • Technology Management , 39 ( 3 ) 50 – 56 . Feinstein , C . D . 1990 . Deciding whether to test student athletes for drug use . Interfaces 20 ( 3 ) 80 - 87 . 28 Fildes , R . , J . Ranyard . 2000 . Internal OR consulting : Effective practice in a changing environment . Interfaces 30 ( 5 ) 34 - 50 . French , S . 1996 . Multi - attribute decision support in the event of a nuclear accident . Journal of Multi - Criteria Decision Analysis 5 39 - 57 . Gallant L . , H . Kieffel , R . Chatwin . Using learning models to capture dynamic complexity in petroleum exploration . SPE paper 52954 . Presented at 1999 SPE Hydrocarbon Economics and Evaluation Symposium , Dallas , TX , March 20 – 23 , 1999 . Golub , A . L . 1997 . Decision Analysis : An Integrated Approach , Wiley , New York . Goodwin , P . , G . Wright . 1998 . Decision Analysis for Management Judgment , 2 nd Edition , Wiley , Chichester . Griggs , B . J . , G . S . Parnell , L . J . Lehmkuhl . 1997 . An air mission planning algorithm using decision analysis and mixed integer programming . Operations Research 45 662 – 676 . Hall , N . G . , J . C . Hershey , L . G . Kessler , R . C . Stotts . 1992 . A model for making project funding decisions at the National Cancer Institute . Operations Research 40 1040 - 1052 . Hämäläinen , R . P . , M . R . K . Lindstedt , K . Sinkko . 2000 . Multiattribute risk analysis in nuclear emergency management . Risk Analysis 20 ( 4 ) 455 - 467 . Hammond , J . S . , R . L . Keeney , H . Raiffa . 1999 . Smart Choices : A Practical Guide to Making Better Decisions . Harvard Business School Press , Boston , MA . Hazen , G . 2000 . Preference factoring for stochastic trees . Management Science 46 ( 3 ) 389 - 403 . Hazen , G . B . , J . M . Pellissier , J . Sounderpandian . 1998 . Stochastic - tree models in medical decision making . Interfaces 28 ( 4 ) 64 - 80 . Hedbert , S . R . 1998 . Executive insight : Is AI going mainstream at last ? A look inside Microsoft Research . IEEE Intelligent Systems 13 ( 2 ) 21 – 25 . 29 Heger , A . S . , J . E . White . 1997 . Using influence diagrams for data worth analysis . Reliability Engineering and System Safety 55 195 – 202 . Henrion , M . , J . S . Breese , E . J . Horvitz . 1991 . Decision analysis and expert systems . AI Magazine 12 ( 4 ) 64 – 91 . Hess , S . W . 1993 . Swinging on the branch of a tree : project selection applications . Interfaces 23 ( 6 ) 5 - 12 . Horowitz , I . ( ed . ) . 1990 . Organization and Decision Theory . Kluwer Academic Publishers , Boston , MA . Howard , R . A . 1992 . Heathens , heretics , and cults : The religious spectrum of decision aiding . Interfaces 22 ( 6 ) 15 - 27 . Howard , R . A . 1996 . Options . In Zeckhauser et al . ( 1996 ) , pp . 81 - 101 . Howard , R . A . , M . B . Conn , M . Paich , J . E . Smith , J . M . Smith , “Panel discussion : Downstream decisions ( options ) & dynamic modeling , ” INFORMS Seattle Meeting , October 25 - 28 , 1998 ( complete transcript is available at www . informs . org / Society / DA ) . Hurley , W . J . 1998 . Optimal sequential decisions and the content of the fourth - and - goal conference . Interfaces 28 ( 6 ) 19 - 22 . Islei , G . , G . Lockett , B . Cox , S . Gisbourne , M . Stratford . 1991 . Modeling strategic decision making and performance measurements at ICI Pharmaceuticals . Interfaces 21 ( 6 ) 4 - 22 . Jackson , J . A . , J . M . Kloeber , Jr . , B . E . Ralston , R . F . Deckro . 1999 . Selecting a portfolio of technologies : an application of decision analysis . Decision Sciences 30 217 - 238 . Jackson , J . A . , G . S . Parnell , B . L . Jones , L . J . Lehmkuhl , H . W . Conley , J . M . Andrew . 1997 . Air force 2025 operational analysis . Military Operations Research 3 ( 4 ) 5 – 21 . Johnson , E . , N . Petty . Forthcoming . Apimoxin development strategy analysis . In Keefer ( forthcoming ) . Jones , M . , C . Hope , R . Hughes . 1990 . A multi - attribute value model for the study of UK energy policy . Journal of the Operational Research Society 41 919 - 929 . 30 Kasanen , E . , H . Wallenius , J . Wallenius , S . Zionts . 2000 . A study of high - level managerial decision processes , with implications for MCDM research . European Journal of Operational Research 120 496 - 510 . Keefer , D . L . 1991 . Resource allocation models with risk aversion and probabilistic dependence : offshore oil and gas bidding . Management Science 37 377 - 395 . Keefer , D . L . 1994 . Certainty equivalents for three - point discrete - distribution approximations . Management Science 40 760 - 773 . Keefer , D . L . 1995 . Facilities evaluation under uncertainty : pricing a refinery . Interfaces 25 ( 6 ) 57 - 66 . Keefer , D . L . 1997 . Practice abstracts . Interfaces 27 ( 2 ) 107 - 111 . Keefer , D . L . 1999 . Practice abstracts . Interfaces 29 ( 4 ) 96 - 98 . Keefer , D . L . 2000 . Practice abstracts . Interfaces 30 ( 5 ) 31 - 33 . Keefer , D . L . 2001a . Practice abstracts . Interfaces 31 ( 4 ) 109 - 111 . Keefer , D . L . 2001b . Practice abstracts . Interfaces 31 ( 5 ) 62 - 64 . Keefer , D . L . Forthcoming . Practice abstracts . Interfaces . Keefer , D . L . , C . W . Kirkwood , J . L . Corner . 2002 . Decision Analysis Applications in the Operations Research Literature , 1990 - 2001 . Department of Supply Chain Management , Arizona State University , Tempe , Arizona . Keefer , D . L . , F . B . Smith Jr . , H . B . Back . 1991 . Development and use of a modeling system to aid a major oil company in allocating bidding capital . Operations Research 39 28 - 41 . Keeney , R . L . 1992 . Value - Focused Thinking : A Path to Creative Decisionmaking . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA . Keeney , R . L . 1994 . Using values in operations research . Operations Research 42 793 - 813 . 31 Keeney , R . L . 1997 . Evaluating electromagnetic field implications for a transmission - line moratorium . IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 44 268 – 275 . Keeney , R . L . 1999a . The value of internet commerce to the customer . Management Science 45 533 - 542 . Keeney , R . L . 1999b . Developing a foundation for strategy at Seagate Software . Interfaces 29 ( 6 ) 4 - 15 . Keeney , R . L . 2000 . Evaluating customer acquisition at American Express using multiple objectives . In Keefer ( 2000 ) . Keeney , R . L . 2001 . Modeling values for telecommunications management . IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 48 ( 3 ) 370 - 379 . Keeney , R . L . , T . L . McDaniels . 1992 . Value - focused thinking about strategic decisions at BC Hydro . Interfaces 22 ( 6 ) 94 - 109 . Keeney , R . L . , T . L . McDaniels . 1999 . Identifying and structuring values to guide integrated resource planning at BC Gas . Operations Research 47 651 - 662 . Keeney , R . L . , T . L . McDaniels . 2001 . A framework to guide thinking and analysis regarding climate change policies . Risk Analysis 21 ( 6 ) 989 - 1000 . Keeney , R . L . , T . L . McDaniels , C . Swoveland . 1995 . Evaluating improvements in electric utility reliability at British Columbia Hydro . Operations Research 43 933 - 947 . Keeney , R . L , D . von Winterfeldt . 1991 . Eliciting probabilities from experts in complex technical problems . IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 38 191 – 201 . Keeney , R . L , D . von Winterfeldt . 1994 . Managing nuclear waste from power plants . Risk Analysis 14 107 - 130 . Keeney , R . L . , D . von Winterfeldt , T . Eppel . 1990 . Eliciting public values for complex policy decisions . Management Science 36 1011 - 1030 . 32 Keller , L . R . , C . W . Kirkwood . 1999 . The founding of INFORMS : a decision analysis perspective . Operations Research 47 16 - 28 . Kerchner , P . M . , R . F . Deckro , J . M . Kloeber . 2001 . Valuing psychological operations . Military Operations Research 6 ( 2 ) 45 - 65 . Kidd , J . B . , S . P . Prabhu . 1990 . A practical example of a multi - attribute decision aiding technique . Omega , The International Journal of Management Science 18 139 - 149 . Kirkwood , C . W . 1992 . An overview of methods for applied decision analysis . Interfaces 22 ( 6 ) 28 - 39 . Kirkwood , C . W . 1997 . Strategic Decision Making : Multiobjective Decision Analysis with Spreadsheets . Duxbury Press , Belmont , CA . Kirkwood , C . W . 1999 . Chapter 28 : decision analysis . In Sage and Rouse ( 1999 ) , 1119 - 1145 . Krumm , F . V . , C . F . Rolle . 1992 . Management and application of decision and risk analysis in Du Pont . Interfaces 22 ( 6 ) 84 - 93 . Kusnic , M . W . , D . Owen . 1992 . The unifying vision process : Value beyond traditional decision analysis in multiple - decision - maker - environments . Interfaces 22 ( 6 ) 150 – 166 . Lai , S . - K . 2001 . An empirical study of equivalence judgments vs . ratio judgments in decision analysis . Decision Sciences 32 ( 2 ) 277 - 302 . Lehmkuhl , L . , D . Lucia , J . Feldman . 2001 . Signals from space : the next – generation global positioning system . Military Operations Research 6 ( 4 ) 5 - 18 . Lieberman , J . 2002 . Marketing of DA at GM : Rise and fall . Presented at DAAG 2002 Conference , Las Vegas , NV , February 27 - March 1 , 2002 . Magat , W . A . , W . K . Viscusi , J . Huber . 1996 . A reference lottery metric for valuing health . Management Science 42 1118 - 1130 . Marshall , K . T . , R . M . Oliver . 1995 . Decision Making and Forecasting , with Emphasis on Model Building and Policy Analysis . McGraw - Hill , New York . 33 Matheson , D . , J . Matheson . 1998 . The Smart Organization : Creating Value Through Strategic R & D . Harvard Business School Press , Boston , MA . Matheson , D . , J . E . Matheson . 1999 . Outside - in strategic modeling . Interfaces 29 ( 6 ) 29 - 41 . Matheson , D . , J . E . Matheson , M . M . Menke . 1994 . Making excellent R & D decisions . Research • Technology Management , 37 ( 6 ) 21 – 24 . Matheson , J . E . , M . M . Menke . 1994 . Using decision quality principles to balance your R & D portfolio . Research • Technology Management , 37 ( 3 ) 38 – 43 . Matzkevich , I . , B . Abramson . 1995 . Decision analytic networks in artificial intelligence . Management Science 41 1 – 22 . Maxwell , D . T . 2002 . Decision analysis : Aiding insight VI — It’s not your grandfather’s decision analysis software . ORMS Today 29 ( 3 ) 44 - 51 . McDaniels , T . L . 1995 . Using judgment in resource management : a multiple objective analysis of a fisheries management decision . Operations Research 43 415 - 426 . McNamee , P . , J . Celona . 1990 . Decision Analysis with Supertree , 2 nd Edition . Scientific Press , South San Francisco , CA . McNamee , P . , J . Celona . 2001 . Decision Analysis for the Professional , 3 rd Edition . SmartOrg Inc . , Menlo Park , CA . Menke , M . M . 1994 . Improving R & D decisions and execution . Research • Technology Management , 37 ( 5 ) 25 – 32 . Millet , I . 1994 . A novena to Saint Anthony , or how to find inventory by not looking . Interfaces 24 ( 2 ) 69 - 75 . Mollaghasemi , M . , J . Pet - Edwards . 1997 . Technical Briefing : Making Multiple - Objective Decisions . IEEE Computer Society Press , Los Alamitos , CA . 34 Morgan , M . G . , M . Henrion . 1990 . Uncertainty : A Guide to Dealing with Uncertainty in Quantitative Risk and Policy Analysis . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , England . Morris , P . A . , E . O . Teisberg , A . L . Kolbe . 1991 . When choosing R & D projects , go with long shots . Research • Technology Management , 34 ( 1 ) 35 – 40 . Mulvey , J . M . 1994 . An asset - liability investment system . Interfaces 24 ( 3 ) 22 - 33 . Noonan , F . , C . A . Vidich . 1992 . Decision analysis for utilizing hazardous waste site assessments in real estate acquisition . Risk Analysis 12 245 - 251 . Oliver , R . M . , J . Q . Smith ( Eds . ) . 1990 . Influence Diagrams , Belief Nets , and Decision Analysis . Wiley , Chichester , England . Parnell , G . S . 2001 . Work - package - ranking system for the Department of Energy’s Office of Science and Technology . In Keefer ( 2001a ) . Parnell , G . S . , H . W . Conley , J . A . Jackson , L . J . Lehmkuhl , J . M . Andrew . 1998 . Foundations 2025 : A value model for evaluating future air and space forces . Management Science 44 1336 - 1350 . Parnell , G . S . , B . I . Gimeno , D . Westphal , J . A . Engelbrecht , R . Szafranski . 2001 . Multiple perspective R & D portfolio analysis for the National Reconnaissance Office’s technology enterprise . Military Operations Research 6 ( 3 ) 19 - 34 . Paté - Cornell , M . - E . , P . S . Fischbeck . 1994 . Risk management for the tiles of the space shuttle . Interfaces 24 ( 1 ) 64 - 86 . Pauwels , N . , B . Van de Walle , F . Hardeman , K . Soudan . 2000 . The implications of irreversibility in emergency response decisions . Theory and Decision 49 25 - 51 . Pellissier , J . M . , G . B . Hazen , R . W . Chang . 1996 . A continuous - risk decision analysis of total hip replacement . Journal of the Operational Research Society 47 ( 6 ) 776 - 793 . Perdue , R . K . , S . Kumar . 1999 . Decision analysis of high - level radioactive waste cleanup end points at the West Valley Demonstration Project waste tank farm . In Keefer ( 1999 ) . 35 Perdue , R . K . , W . J . McAllister , P . V . King , B . G . Berkey . 1999 . Valuation of R and D projects using options pricing and decision analysis models . Interfaces 29 ( 6 ) 57 - 74 . Poland , W . B . 1999 . Simple probabilistic evaluation of portfolio strategies . Interfaces 29 ( 6 ) 75 - 83 . Procaccia , H . , R . Cordier , S . Muller . 1997 . Application of Bayesian statistical decision theory for a maintenance optimization problem . Reliability Engineering and System Safety 55 143 – 149 . Quaddus , M . A . , D . J . Atkinson , M . Levy . 1992 . An application of decision conferencing to strategic planning for a voluntary organization . Interfaces 22 ( 6 ) 61 - 71 . Raiffa , H . 2002 . Decision analysis : a personal account of how it got stared and evolved . Operations Research 50 179 - 185 . Rayno , B . , G . S . Parnell , R . C . Burk , B . W . Woodruff . 1997 . A methodology to assess the utility of future space systems . Journal of Multi - Criteria Decision Analysis 6 344 - 354 . Reagan - Cirincione , P . , S . Schuman , G . P . Richardson , S . A . Dorf . 1991 . Decision modeling : tools for strategic thinking . Interfaces 21 ( 6 ) 52 – 65 . Reilly , T . 2000 . Sensitivity analysis for dependent variables . Decision Sciences 31 ( 3 ) 551 - 572 . Rios Insua , D . , K . A . Salewicz . 1995 . The operation of Lake Kariba : a multiobjective decision analysis . Journal of Multi - Criteria Decision Analysis 4 203 - 222 . Rzasa , P . V . , T . W . Faulkner , N . L . Sousa . 1990 . Analyzing R & D portfolios at Eastman Kodak . Research • Technology Management 33 ( 1 ) 27 – 32 . Sage , A . P . , W . B . Rouse ( Eds . ) . 1999 . Handbook of Systems Engineering and Management . Wiley , New York . Shephard , G . G . , C . W . Kirkwood . 1994 . Managing the judgmental probability elicitation process : a case study of analyst / manager interaction . IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 41 414 - 425 . 36 Silverman , B . G . 1994 . Unifying expert systems and the decision sciences . Operations Research 42 393 – 413 . Skaf , M . A . 1999 . Portfolio management in an upstream oil and gas organization . Interfaces 29 ( 6 ) 84 - 104 . Skinner , D . C . 1999 . Introduction to Decision Analysis , 2nd Edition . Probabilistic Publishing , Gainesville , FL . Smith , J . E . 1993 . Moment methods for decision analysis . Management Science 39 340 - 358 . Smith , J . E . 1999 . Much ado about options ? Decision Analysis Newsletter 18 ( 2 ) 4 - 5 , 8 . Available under Newsletter Archive at www . informs . org / Society / DA . Smith , J . E . , K . F . McCardle . 1999 . Options in the real world : lessons learned in evaluating oil and gas investments . Operations Research 47 1 - 15 . Smith , J . E . , R . L . Winkler . 1999 . Casey’s problem : interpreting and evaluating a new test . Interfaces 29 ( 3 ) 63 - 76 . Spector , B . I . 1993 . Decision analysis for practical negotiation application . Theory and Decision 34 183 – 199 . Spradlin , T . 2001 . Internal DA consultants ; What’s going to happen ? Presented at DAAG 2001 Conference , Houston , TX , May 16 - 18 , 2001 . Spradlin , C . T . , D . M . Kutoloski . 1999 . Action - oriented portfolio management . Research • Technology Management 42 ( 2 ) 26 – 32 . Spradlin , C . T . , D . C . Skinner . 2001 . Decision Analysis Affinity Group . Decision Analysis Newsletter 20 ( 2 - 3 ) 5 . Available under Newsletter Archive at www . informs . org / Society / DA . Stafira , Jr . , S . , G . S . Parnell , J . T . Moore . 1997 . A methodology for evaluating military systems in a counterproliferation role . Management Science 43 1420 - 1430 . 37 Stonebraker , J . S . , J . J . Sage , B . L . Leak . 1997 . Decision analysis provides insight to Ford Microelectronics Incorporated . In Keefer ( 1997 ) . Taha , H . A . , H . M . Wolf . 1996 . Evaluation of generator maintenance schedules at Entergy Electric System . Interfaces 26 ( 4 ) 56 - 65 . Taylor , A . C . , J . S . Evans , T . E . McKone . 1993 . The value of animal test information in environmental control decisions . Risk Analysis 13 403 - 412 . Thurston , D . H . 1990 . Multiattribute utility analysis in design management . IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 37 ( 4 ) 296 – 301 . Toland , R . J . , J . M . Kloeber Jr . , J . A . Jackson . 1998 . A comparative analysis of hazardous waste remediation alternatives . Interfaces 28 ( 5 ) 70 – 85 . Trigeorgis , L . 1996 . Real Options : Managerial Flexibility and Strategy in Resource Allocation . MIT press , Cambridge , MA . Vári , A . , J . Vecsenyi . 1992 . Experiences with decision conferencing in Hungary . Interfaces 22 ( 6 ) 72 - 83 . Von Winterfeldt , D . , E . Schweitzer . 1998 . An assessment of tritium supply alternatives in support of the US nuclear weapons stockpile . Interfaces 28 ( 1 ) 92 - 112 . Walls , M . R . , G . T . Morahan , J . S . Dyer . 1995 . Decision analysis of exploration opportunities in the onshore US at Phillips Petroleum Company . Interfaces 25 ( 6 ) 39 - 56 . Winkler , R . L . , T . S . Wallsten , R . G . Whitfield , H . M . Richmond , S . R . Hayes , A . S . Rosenbaum . 1995 . An assessment of the risk of chronic lung injury attributable to long - term ozone exposure . Operations Research 43 19 - 28 . Yassine , A . A . , K . R . Chelst , D . R . Falkenburg . 1999 . A decision analytic framework for evaluating concurrent engineering . IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 46 ( 2 ) 144 – 157 . 38 Yi , W . , V . M . Bier . 1998 . An application of copulas to accident precursor analysis . Management Science 44 ( 12 , Part 2 of 2 ) S257 - S270 . Yoon , K . P . , C . Hwang . 1995 . Multiple Attribute Decision Making : An Introduction . Sage Publications , Thousand Oaks , CA . Zeckhauser , R . J . , R . L . Keeney , J . K . Sebenius ( eds . ) . 1996 . Wise Choices : Decisions , Games , and Negotiations . Harvard Business School Press , Boston , MA . 39 Table I Number of Applications Articles , by Journal , With Trends Number of Articles Average Number of Articles Per Year 1970 - 1989 1990 - 2001 1970 - 1989 1990 - 2001 Percent Change Number of years covered 20 12 Number of journals covered 10 16 Total number of articles 85 86 4 . 25 7 . 17 69 Total no . of articles ( common journals ) 85 63 4 . 25 5 . 25 24 Decision Sciences 4 1 0 . 20 0 . 08 - 58 European Journal of OR 5 0 0 . 25 0 . 00 - 100 IEEE Trans . on Engineering Mgt . not covered 4 0 . 33 IEEE Trans . on SMC 7 1 0 . 35 0 . 08 - 76 Interfaces 18 40 0 . 90 3 . 33 270 Journal of MCDA not published 6 0 . 50 Journal of the OR Society 18 1 0 . 90 0 . 08 - 91 Management Science 10 4 0 . 50 0 . 33 - 33 Military OR not published 8 0 . 67 Omega 3 1 0 . 15 0 . 08 - 44 Operations Research 15 11 0 . 75 0 . 92 22 OR Letters 0 0 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 Reliability Engr & Sys Safety not covered 2 0 . 17 Research & Tech Mgt not covered 2 0 . 17 Risk Analysis 6 4 0 . 30 0 . 33 11 Theory and Decision not covered 1 0 . 08 40 Table II Application Articles Listed by Application Area Energy Bidding and Pricing : Keefer ( 1995 ) , Keefer et al . ( 1991 ) , Kidd and Prabhu ( 1990 ) . Environmental Risk : Balson et al . ( 1992 ) , French ( 1996 ) , Hämäläinen et al . ( 2000 ) , Keeney and von Winterfeldt ( 1991 ) , Procaccia et al . ( 1997 ) . Product and Project Selection : Borison ( 1995 ) , Burnett et al . ( 1993 ) , Dyer et al . ( 1990 ) , Keeney et al . ( 1995 ) , Parnell ( 2001 ) , Smith and McCardle ( 1999 ) , Walls et al . ( 1995 ) . Strategy : Keeney and McDaniels ( 1992 ) , Keeney and McDaniels ( 1999 ) , Skaf ( 1999 ) . Technology Choice : Dyer et al . ( 1998 ) , Jackson et al . ( 1999 ) , Perdue and Kumar ( 1999 ) , Toland et al . ( 1998 ) , von Winterfeldt and Schweitzer ( 1998 ) . Miscellaneous : Dunning et al . ( 2001 ) , Rios Insua and Salewicz ( 1995 ) , Taha and Wolf ( 1996 ) . Manufacturing and Services Finance : Engemann and Miller ( 1992 ) , Mulvey ( 1994 ) . Product Planning : Beccue ( 2001 ) , Dillon and Haimes ( 1996 ) , Keeney ( 2000 ) , Millet ( 1994 ) , Yassine et al . ( 1999 ) . R & D Project Selection : Bruggink ( 1997 ) , Hess ( 1993 ) , Islei et al . ( 1991 ) , Perdue et al . ( 1999 ) , Rzasa et al . ( 1990 ) , Spradlin and Kutoloski ( 1999 ) , Stonebraker et al . ( 1997 ) , Thurston ( 1990 ) . Strategy : Bodily and Allen ( 1999 ) , Clemen and Kwit ( 2001 ) , Keeney ( 1999b ) , Krumm and Rolle ( 1992 ) , Kusnic and Owen ( 1992 ) , Matheson and Matheson ( 1999 ) , Quaddus et al . ( 1992 ) . Miscellaneous : Chien and Sainfort ( 1998 ) . Medical Brown ( 1997 ) , Feinstein ( 1990 ) , Hazen et al . ( 1998 ) , Smith and Winkler ( 1999 ) , Winkler et al . ( 1995 ) . Military Bresnick et al . ( 1997 ) , Buede and Bresnick ( 1992 ) , Burk and Parnell ( 1997 ) , Davis et al . ( 1999 ) , Davis et al . ( 2000 ) , Doyle et al . ( 2000 ) , Griggs et al . ( 1997 ) , Jackson et al . ( 1997 ) , Kerchner et al . ( 2001 ) , Parnell et al . ( 1998 ) , Parnell et al . ( 2001 ) , Rayno et al . ( 1997 ) , Stafira et al . ( 1997 ) . Public Policy Bana e Costa ( 2001 ) , Hall et al . ( 1992 ) , Heger and White ( 1997 ) , Jones et al . ( 1990 ) , Keeney ( 1997 ) , Keeney and McDaniels ( 2001 ) , Keeney and von Winterfeldt ( 1994 ) , Keeney et al . ( 1990 ) , Lehmkuhl et al . ( 2001 ) , McDaniels ( 1995 ) , Reagan - Cirincione et al . ( 1991 ) , Spector ( 1993 ) , Taylor et al . ( 1993 ) . General Baker et al . ( 2000 ) , Hurley ( 1998 ) , Keller and Kirkwood ( 1999 ) , Matzkevich and Abramson ( 1995 ) , Paté - Cornell and Fischbeck ( 1994 ) , Vári and Vecsenyi ( 1992 ) . 41 Table III Number of Applications Articles by Application Area , With Trends Number of Articles 1970 - 1989 1990 - 2001 Energy 24 26 Bidding ( and Pricing ) 3 3 Environmental Risk NA * 5 Product and Project Selection 4 7 Regulation 5 NA Site Selection 8 NA Strategy NA 3 Technology Choice 4 5 Miscellaneous NA 3 Manufacturing and Services 16 23 Budget Allocation 3 NA Finance NA 2 Product Planning 4 5 R & D Project Selection NA 8 Strategy 5 7 Miscellaneous 4 1 Medical 16 5 Military NA 13 Public Policy 20 13 Standard Setting 8 NA Miscellaneous 12 13 General 9 6 * Not applicable . 42 Table IV Application Articles Addressing Methodological and Implementation Issues Strategy and / or Objectives Generation Baker et al . ( 2000 ) , Bana e Costa ( 2001 ) , Bodily and Allen ( 1999 ) , Bresnick et al . ( 1997 ) , Brown ( 1997 ) , Buede and Bresnick ( 1992 ) , Burk and Parnell ( 1997 ) , Burnett et al . ( 1993 ) , Chien and Sainfort ( 1998 ) , Davis et al . ( 1999 ) , Davis et al . ( 2000 ) , Doyle et al . ( 2000 ) , Dyer et al . ( 1998 ) , Dyer et al . ( 1990 ) , French ( 1996 ) , Hämäläinen et al . ( 2000 ) , Islei et al . ( 1991 ) , Jackson et al . ( 1997 ) , Jackson et al . ( 1999 ) , Jones et al . ( 1990 ) , Keeney ( 1999b ) , Keeney and McDaniels ( 1992 , 1999 , 2001 ) Keeney et al . ( 1995 ) , Keeney and von Winterfeldt ( 1994 ) , Keeney et al . ( 1990 ) , Keller and Kirkwood ( 1999 ) , Kerchner et al . ( 2001 ) , Krumm and Rolle ( 1992 ) , Kusnic and Owen ( 1992 ) , Lehmkuhl et al . ( 2001 ) , McDaniels ( 1995 ) , Parnell et al . ( 1998 ) , Parnell et al . ( 2001 ) , Perdue and Kumar ( 1999 ) , Rayno et al . ( 1997 ) , Reagan - Cirincione et al . ( 1991 ) , Skaf ( 1999 ) , Spector ( 1993 ) , Spradlin and Kutoloski ( 1999 ) , von Winterfeldt and Schweitzer ( 1998 ) . Problem Structuring / Formulation ( via Decision Trees and Influence Diagrams ) Balson et al . ( 1992 ) , Bodily and Allen ( 1999 ) , Borison ( 1995 ) , Brown ( 1997 ) , Dillon and Haimes ( 1996 ) , Dunning et al . ( 2001 ) , Dyer et al . ( 1998 ) , Dyer et al . ( 1990 ) , Engemann and Miller ( 1992 ) , Feinstein ( 1990 ) , Griggs et al . ( 1997 ) , Hazen et al . ( 1998 ) , Heger and White ( 1997 ) , Hess ( 1993 ) , Jackson et al . ( 1999 ) , Keefer ( 1995 ) , Keefer et al . ( 1991 ) , Keeney ( 1997 ) , Keeney et al . ( 1995 ) , Keeney and von Winterfeldt ( 1994 ) , Krumm and Rolle ( 1992 ) , Matheson and Matheson ( 1999 ) , Matzkevich and Abramson ( 1995 ) , Millet ( 1994 ) , Perdue et al . ( 1999 ) , Quaddus et al . ( 1992 ) , Rzasa et al . ( 1990 ) , Smith and McCardle ( 1999 ) , Smith and Winkler ( 1999 ) , Stafira et al . ( 1997 ) , Stonebraker et al . ( 1997 ) , Taylor et al . ( 1993 ) , Walls et al . ( 1995 ) , Yassine et al . ( 1999 ) . Probability Assessment Balson et al . ( 1992 ) , Chien and Sainfort ( 1998 ) , Dillon and Haimes ( 1996 ) , Dunning et al . ( 2001 ) , Dyer et al . ( 1990 ) , Feinstein ( 1990 ) , Keefer ( 1995 ) , Keeney et al . ( 1995 ) , Keeney and von Winterfeldt ( 1991 ) , Keeney and von Winterfeldt ( 1994 ) , McDaniels ( 1995 ) , Paté - Cornell and Fischbeck ( 1994 ) , Perdue et al . ( 1999 ) , Procaccia et al . ( 1997 ) , Smith and McCardle ( 1999 ) , Smith and Winkler ( 1999 ) , Stafira et al . ( 1997 ) , Taha and Wolf ( 1996 ) , Taylor et al . ( 1993 ) , von Winterfeldt and Schweitzer ( 1998 ) , Winkler et al . ( 1995 ) , Yassine et al . ( 1999 ) . Utility / Value Assessment Baker et al . ( 2000 ) , Bana e Costa ( 2001 ) , Bresnick et al . ( 1997 ) , Burk and Parnell ( 1997 ) , Doyle et al . ( 2000 ) , Dyer et al . ( 1998 ) , Dyer et al . ( 1990 ) , Hall et al . ( 1992 ) , Hämäläinen et al . ( 2000 ) , Hazen et al . ( 1998 ) , Jackson et al . ( 1997 ) , Jackson et al . ( 1999 ) , Keeney ( 2000 ) , Keeney and McDaniels ( 1992 ) , Keeney and McDaniels ( 1999 ) , Keeney et al . ( 1995 ) , Keeney and von Winterfeldt ( 1994 ) , Keeney et al . ( 1990 ) , Kerchner et al . ( 2001 ) , Kidd and Prabhu ( 1990 ) , Lehmkuhl et al . ( 2001 ) , McDaniels ( 1995 ) , Mulvey ( 1994 ) , Parnell et al . ( 1998 ) , Rayno et al . ( 1997 ) , Rios Insua and Salewicz ( 1995 ) , Thurston ( 1990 ) , Walls et al . ( 1995 ) . Sensitivity Analysis Baker et al . ( 2000 ) , Bana e Costa ( 2001 ) , Bodily and Allen ( 1999 ) , Brown ( 1997 ) , Doyle et al . ( 2000 ) , Dyer et al . ( 1998 ) , Hess ( 1993 ) , Jackson et al . ( 1999 ) , Keeney and von Winterfeldt ( 1994 ) , Kerchner et al . ( 2001 ) , Lehmkuhl et al . ( 2001 ) , McDaniels ( 1995 ) , Millet ( 1994 ) , Perdue et al . ( 1999 ) , Quaddus et al . ( 1992 ) , Reagan - Cirincione et al . ( 1991 ) , Smith and Winkler ( 1999 ) , Spradlin and Kutoloski ( 1999 ) , Stafira et al . ( 1997 ) , Taylor et al . ( 1993 ) , Thurston ( 1990 ) , Walls et al . ( 1995 ) , Yassine et al . ( 1999 ) . Communication / Facilitation Bodily and Allen ( 1999 ) , Borison ( 1995 ) , Bresnick et al . ( 1997 ) , Feinstein ( 1990 ) , French ( 1996 ) , Hämäläinen et al . ( 2000 ) , Islei et al . ( 1991 ) , Jones et al . ( 1990 ) , Keefer ( 1995 ) , Keefer et al . ( 1991 ) , Keeney ( 1999b ) , Keeney and McDaniels ( 1992 ) , Keeney and McDaniels ( 1999 ) , Keeney et al . ( 1995 ) , Keeney et al . ( 1990 ) , Keller and Kirkwood ( 1999 ) , Kerchner et al . ( 2001 ) , Krumm and Rolle ( 1992 ) , Kusnic and Owen ( 1992 ) , Lehmkuhl et al . ( 2001 ) , McDaniels ( 1995 ) , Quaddus et al . ( 1992 ) , Reagan - Cirincione et al . ( 1991 ) , Skaf ( 1999 ) , Spector ( 1993 ) , Spradlin and Kutoloski ( 1999 ) , Vári and Vecsenyi ( 1992 ) , von Winterfeldt and Schweitzer ( 1998 ) , Winkler et al . ( 1995 ) . Group Issues Baker et al . ( 2000 ) , Bana e Costa ( 2001 ) , Bresnick et al . ( 1997 ) , Hämäläinen et al . ( 2000 ) , Keeney and McDaniels ( 1999 ) , Keeney et al . ( 1990 ) , Keller and Kirkwood ( 1999 ) , Kusnic and Owen ( 1992 ) , Quaddus et al . ( 1992 ) , Reagan - Cirincione et al . ( 1991 ) , Vári and Vecsenyi ( 1992 ) , Winkler et al . ( 1995 ) . Implementation Baker et al . ( 2000 ) , Bodily and Allen ( 1999 ) , Burk and Parnell ( 1997 ) , Doyle et al . ( 2000 ) , Dyer et al . ( 1990 ) , Engemann and Miller ( 1992 ) , Islei et al . ( 1991 ) , Jackson et al . ( 1997 ) , Keefer et al . ( 1991 ) , Keeney and McDaniels ( 1992 ) , Keeney and McDaniels ( 1999 ) , Keeney et al . ( 1995 ) , Keeney and von Winterfeldt ( 1994 ) , Keeney et al . ( 1990 ) , Keller and Kirkwood ( 1999 ) , Kerchner et al . ( 2001 ) , Kusnic and Owen ( 1992 ) , Lehmkuhl et al . ( 2001 ) , Parnell et al . ( 1998 ) , Parnell et al . ( 2001 ) , Paté - Cornell and Fischbeck ( 1994 ) , Rzasa et al . ( 1990 ) , Skaf ( 1999 ) , Smith and Winkler ( 1999 ) , Spradlin and Kutoloski ( 1999 ) , Vári and Vecsenyi ( 1992 ) , Walls et al . ( 1995 ) . 43 Table V Number of Applications Articles by Methodological and Implementation Issue , With Trends Number of Articles 1970 - 1989 1990 - 2001 Strategy and / or Objectives Generation NA * 42 Problem Structuring / Formulation 24 34 Decision Trees 36 NA Probability Assessment 15 22 Utility / Value Assessment 28 28 Sensitivity Analysis NA 23 Communication / Facilitation 23 29 Group Decision Making ( Issues ) 13 12 Implementation NA 27 * Not applicable .