Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) Environment , Development and Sustainability ( 2022 ) 24 : 8625 – 8638 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10668 - 021 - 01802 - 5 1 3 Building capacity for transformative learning : lessons from crossdisciplinary and cross‑sector education and research Julie Thompson Klein 1 , 2 Received : 24 November 2020 / Accepted : 28 August 2021 / Published online : 13 October 2021 © The Author ( s ) , under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B . V . 2021 Abstract This contribution to the special issue on transformative learning is an analytical essay that bridges discourses of boundary crossing and urban sustainability . Part I establishes a base - line for understanding the nature of learning that occurs . It begins with interdisciplinary education , accounting for structures , pedagogies , and competencies . It then turns to trans - disciplinary education , accounting for multiple connotations of transdisciplinarity , propos - als for reform of the university , and insights from two urban sustainability projects . Part II focuses on prospects for transformation , beginning with a broad - based heuristic tool to guide definition and , prompted by the co - editors’ call to consider the role of new technolo - gies , virtual horizons . The final section presents the concepts of an ecology of spatializ - ing practices , a transdisciplinary orientation , double - and triple - loop learning , and meth - odological agility . The article ends with seven key take - aways from the foregoing analysis . Broadly speaking , transformative learning is inherently a constructivist process that fosters integrative , holistic , and reflexive capacity . The heterogeneity of structures and strategies that have emerged over time provides all parties with a rich portfolio of options for use in both existing institutions and new enclaves . Keywords Interdisciplinary · Transdisciplinary · Crossdisciplinary · Cross - sector · Learning · Transformation The theme of this special issue invites reflection on a question posed in the co - editors’ call for contributions . What is the potential of inter - and trans - disciplinarity for transforma - tive learning in urban sustainability ? Answering this question requires understanding the meaning of the two concepts and the nature of learning they foster . The article is not a history per se , a literature review , a case study , or a report . Rather , it is an analytical essay that bridges discourses of crossdisciplinarity and urban sustainability . As the co - editors * Julie Thompson Klein ad5820 @ wayne . edu 1 Department of English , Wayne State University , Detroit , Michigan , USA 2 Department of Environmental Systems Science , International Research Affiliate of Transdisciplinarity Lab , ETH - Zurich , Zürich , Switzerland S . I . : TRANSFORMATIVE LEARNING FOR URBAN SUSTAINABILITY 8626 J . T . Klein 1 3 also noted , boundary crossing is not limited to academic disciplines . The composite term crossdisciplinary refers to the familiar spectrum of multi - , inter - , and trans - disciplinary approaches . Because complex socio - environmental problems associated with urban sus - tainability require crossing both disciplinary and sector divides , the term cross - sector fur - ther acknowledges collaborations of the academy , government , industry , and communities . Part I presents an overview of crossdisciplinary learning . It begins by establishing a base - line of structures , pedagogies , and competencies associated with interdisciplinary educa - tion . The next section defines traits of transdisciplinary learning , accounting for multiple connotations of transdisciplinarity , proposals for reform of the university , and insights from two case studies of urban sustainability projects . Part II focuses on prospects for transfor - mation , beginning with a broad - based heuristic tool to guide definition and , prompted by the co - editors’ call to consider the role of new technologies and virtual horizons . The clos - ing section extends lessons from prior ones to conceptualize transformative learning as an ecology of spatializing practices , a transdisciplinary orientation , double - and triple - loop learning , and methodological agility . The multitude of structures and strategies that have emerged over time provides a rich portfolio of options for use in both existing and new institutions . Working with them , however , requires informed awareness of patterns of con - sensus documented in authoritative handbooks and case studies on inter - and trans - discipli - narity as well as sustainability . Failure to heed them results in an adhocracy of piece - meal approaches and diminished outcomes that perpetuate business - as - usual , thereby limiting possibilities for transformation . 1 Part I : defining interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary education Discussion begins with interdisciplinary education because that literature has a longer his - tory than its transdisciplinary counterpart , yielding lessons about alternatives to discipline - based departments that have developed over the course of a century , taking etymological evidence of the term “interdisciplinary” in the 1920s as a point of origin . The lessons span institutional structures , pedagogies , and related learning competencies . 2 Interdisciplinary education 2 . 1 Structures Dating from opening decades of the twentieth century , new structures beckoned transfor - mation of the academy ( summary based on Klein , 1990 ) . Early examples arose in gen - eral education and the core curriculum movement then interdisciplinary fields such as American studies and area studies in the 1930s and 1940s . During the 1960s and 1970s new interdisciplinary fields gained institutional foothold , including Black / women’s / and ethnic studies as well as urban studies and environmental studies . In addition , experimen - tal colleges formed and , in the boldest innovation , new universities fostering interdisci - plinary principles were founded at Sussex ( UK ) , Roskilde ( Denmark ) , Bielefeld ( Ger - many ) , Tsukuba ( Japan ) , and Wisconsin at Green Bay ( US ) . Although new initiatives did not result in revolutionary change throughout higher education , and many new universities experienced retrenchment to disciplinary priorities , they established precedents for alterna - tive structures . Their legacy continues in exemplary enclaves such as the Department of 8627 Building capacity for transformative learning : lessons from… 1 3 Thematic Studies at Linköping University , the Committee on Social Thought at the Univer - sity of Chicago , and the History of Consciousness program at the University of California , Santa Cruz . More recently , Arizona State University also reorganized around a federated design of transdisciplinary departments , centers , institutes , schools , and colleges including the first School of Sustainability established at a major university . The School structure , which also appeared in earlier institutional experiments , brings together disciplines and interdisciplinary fields around a designated subject or theme . Given the variety of exam - ples to no surprise , then , Karri Holley ( 2017 ) emphasized no single model exists today in her updated account of administering programs in the second edition of The Oxford Hand - book of Interdisciplinarity . Even the same type of structure varies . Programs , for example , range from a multidisciplinary , encyclopedic menu of separate disciplinary courses , with no effort to define connections , to free - standing units with seminars proactively focused on interdisciplinary integration . Holley further reported one structure—interdisciplinary fields—has experienced rapid growth since the mid - 1970s . In a rare longitudinal study of interdisciplinary majors , located in the US , Brint , et al . ( 2009 ) identified in particular upward trends in culture - and science - based fields including women’s / environment studies / and area studies as well as biomedical fields . The “studies” structure is heralded as a site for transformative change around complex concepts . They appear , however , in different formats . Urban studies , for example , is a discrete program with dedicated majors , minors , and concentrations . At the same time the concept of the urban appears across a wide expanse of disciplines and fields including architecture and design , geography and demography , sociology and anthropol - ogy , political science , and environmental studies . As a result , it may be the focus of a sin - gle course or a unit in other courses . Likewise , sustainability is the focus of dedicated pro - grams and it appears across an expanse of disciplines , fields , and professions . The form a concept takes depends on which manifestations and approaches are emphasized . Klein and Newell’s ( 1997 ) proposition that higher education has been shifting from a simple to a complex model factors expanding formats into conception of crossdisciplinarity . In a sim - ple model , interdisciplinary education was often located within a familiar structure , rang - ing from an autonomous institution , college , or center to departments and more often pro - grams . These enclaves continue , but interdisciplinary learning today is also occurring in an array of training modules , networks , research projects , and cross - sector partnerships with government , industry , and / or communities . Moreover , new transdisciplinary approaches , discussed further below , add to the current heterogeneity and increased visibility of cross - disciplinarity . In the case of urban sustainability , co - editors of this special issue acknowl - edged representing the city as a complex “systems of systems” recognizes multiple facets of sustainability behavior . Not all facets , though , become the basis of any one program in any one local institution . Furthermore , structure alone is not enough to foster transforma - tive learning . 2 . 2 Pedagogy and learning competencies In suggesting goals for this issue , the co - editors proclaimed education is becoming increas - ingly about creativity , critical thinking , communication , collaboration , and modern knowl - edge while including capacity to work with new technologies . Literature on interdiscipli - nary education affirms this contention . In a recent updated account of interdisciplinary pedagogy , Deborah DeZure ( 2017 ) reported the second decade of the twenty - first century was marked by significant increases in explicit integrative goals , methods to teach and assess them , and practice - oriented resources . There is no unique set of pedagogies , she 8628 J . T . Klein 1 3 added . Teachers employ an array of approaches DeZure dubbed “productive pedagogies” ( 2017 , p . 588 ) . Yet , their common feature is active and experiential learning : including col - laborative , cooperative , and team - based projects ; problem - and discovery - based learning ; field experiences such as internships , service learning , and study abroad ; as well as learn - ing communities . As a learner - centered model was increasingly adopted during the 1990s , teachers’ roles also shifted from a sage - on - the - stage to a coach or a guide - on - the - side over - seeing development of higher - order critical thinking skills . In addition , earlier efforts to promote diversity and multiculturalism during the 1970s prompted more inclusive pedago - gies , and even before then , two shifts in definition during the 1930s and 1940s that pres - aged current focus on integrative process in both inter - and trans - disciplinary education from unifying rather than unified approaches and from content to process integration . They also differentiated integration as a synthesis of accepted postulates from building new con - ceptual modes capable of producing a holistic experience . Broadly speaking , DeZure con - cluded , a shift in higher education has occurred from mastery of content to competencies that include an ability to integrate multiple sources of knowledge and information as well as engage in teamwork . The litany of competencies in literature on interdisciplinary education reveals a multi - tiered capacity that also provides a baseline for thinking about transdisciplinary competen - cies ( composite from Klein , 2021 ) : • To analyze a complex problem , question , or topic from multiple perspectives • To gather pertinent theories and methods • To make connections among them • To evaluate them critically for relevance to the task at hand in a reflexive manner • To integrate them into a more holistic understanding , solution , or product • To engage in mutual learning and work collaboratively with others • To grapple with differences and even outright conflict in approaches • To tolerate ambiguity and complexity while not settling for a single right answer • To cultivate lifelong skills for integration and collaboration . The first five competencies underscore the importance of identifying pertinent approaches and critically evaluating their relevance for a given task . In teamwork it also entails mutual learning while grappling with conflicting approaches . As the last two com - petencies also imply , learning is not transformative if it does not cultivate long - term capac - ity for working on complex problems or questions . Based on both literature review and hands - on work with teachers , Boix Mansilla ( 2017 ) concluded pragmatic constructionism is the epistemological foundation for interdisciplinary learning , aimed at advancing under - standing by deploying integrative skills rather than certifying or acquiring “true” knowl - edge claims . Tenets of constructivism and process - based learning are also prominent in literature on transdisciplinarity . 3 Transdisciplinary education The concept of transdisciplinarity ( TD ) was associated traditionally with the quest for uni - fied knowledge , though the term “transdisciplinarity” is dated conventionally to the first international seminar on problems of interdisciplinary teaching and research in 1970 . The core definition was “a common system of axioms for a set of disciplines” that transcends 8629 Building capacity for transformative learning : lessons from… 1 3 the narrow scope of disciplinary worldviews , exemplified by anthropology as a broad sci - ence ( Apostel , 1972 ) . Individual seminar participants differed , however . 3 . 1 Expanding definition In their individual glosses on definition , Andre Lichnerowicz ( 1972 ) advocated the Math - ematic as a universal interlanguage . Jean Piaget ( 1972 ) associated TD with a higher stage in epistemology of interdisciplinary relations based on a general theory of systems or structures , and Erich Jantsch ( 1972 ) imbued it with social purpose in a model of sci - ence and education based on feedback across systems labs and function - and discipline - oriented departments . At the time , Piaget considered transdisciplinarity yet to be realized and Jantsch did not find any institutionalized examples of a purpose - oriented model . By the final decade of the century , however , TD was no longer just a dream and purpose - oriented models were gaining traction . The term was also associated with synoptic disci - plines including philosophy , history , anthropology , and geography . It was a descriptor for a team - based healthcare . And , in the latter half of the twentieth century , new overarching frameworks emerged that go beyond “interdisciplinary” integration of existing disciplinary approaches : notable among them general systems theory , feminist theory , postmodernism , cultural critique , and sustainability . Each fostered a holistic approach to a particular subject with the intent of infusing new modes of thinking and acting into education and research : prominent among them general systems theory , feminist theory , cultural critique , and sus - tainability . In addition , two new connotations that differ arose . The first is Basarab Nicoles - cu’s ( 2010 ) theory informed by the worldview of complexity in science and conceptualized in three methodological pillars of multiple levels of reality , the logic of the included mid - dle , and complexity . This connotation is also transcultural and transreligious while advanc - ing a moral project , with efforts documented on the website of the International Center for Transdisciplinary Research founded in 1987 . The second definition differs . It arose in environmental research across German - speaking countries during the late 1980s and early 1990s , and to an extent related interests in the Netherlands and Sweden . This connota - tion has prioritized participation of social actors , readily apparent in Hirsch Hadorn et al . ’s ( 2008 ) authoritative Handbook of Transdisciplinary Research . In her Foreword to the book Jill Jäger of the Sustainable Europe Research Institute emphasized the importance of learn - ing to grapple with complex problems for the common good ( summary based on Klein , 2021 ) . Inevitably proposals for reforming the university emerged . Two decades after the ground - breaking 1970 international seminar on interdisciplinarity Robert Costanza ( 1990 ) imagined permanent colleges , departments , or programs of integrated studies coexisting with disciplinary departments and new inter / transdisciplinary fields or meta - disciplines . By 2000 , Scholz and Marks ( 2001 ) were advocating transdisciplinary colleges with labo - ratories where scientists and practitioners could work together on designated problems for limited periods of time . And , three years earlier participants in an International Congress at Locarno , Switzerland called for UNESCO and its member countries to infuse complex and transdisciplinary thought into all structures and programs . The university of tomorrow , they recommended , should cultivate a transdisciplinary attitude , introduce programs of teaching explicitly including TD , devote 10 % of teaching in each discipline to it , publish accounts of educational experiences , and build centers and ateliers comprised of researchers from all disciplines . Examples at a 2015 conference sponsored by the Network for Transdiscipli - nary Research ( td - net ) further illustrate the variety of forms of transdisciplinary learning 8630 J . T . Klein 1 3 ( Klein , 2017 ) . Presentations in a session on higher education focused on project - based teaching in urban transition labs , social learning and empowerment , and scenario map - ping . The rest of the program included an action - research project on food education for children , doctoral studies training researchers for a crossdisciplinary approach to complex societal challenges , capacity building in transdisciplinary teaching for sustainable regional development , and transdisciplinary learning in a Masters program concentrated on geog - raphy . In these and other examples , knowledge is not simply exchanged . Akin to collabo - rative forms of interdisciplinary education , it is constructed as individuals with differing views work together . Schauppenlehner - Kloyber and Penker ( 2015 ) associate the process of “social learning” with collective engagement and interaction , fostering co - creation of knowledge . It is a deeply reflective process that Mitchell et al . ( 2015 ) align with interac - tion and communication . Two case studies in the Handbook of Transdisciplinary Research illustrate learning that also occurs outside the classroom during the course of conducting research in collaboration with stakeholders , in addition to the relationship of sustainability and transdisciplinarity . 3 . 2 Case studies of crossdisciplinarity for urban sustainability Baccini and Oswald’s ( 2008 ) project—“Designing the Urban”—concentrated on urban development in a rural area of the Swiss Lowlands , moving beyond traditional focus on core cities and their peripheries to expand conception of urbanization . Learning the lan - guage and perceptions of participants from different backgrounds was crucial , even when using the same word . In this case that meant even basic terms such as “urban” and “city , ” as well as “landscape” as well as “project” or “process . ” Arriving at a shared definition of “urbanity ” was key to forging a common language that recognized an urban system is composed of a geogenic subsystem ( emergent from earth ) and anthropogenic subsystems ( emergent from humankind ) . It is an all - encompassing three - dimensional network marked by diverse physical and social links . The systems approach of Netzstadt provided a holis - tic transdisciplinary platform for improving urban living and transforming existing condi - tions . Moving from inter - to trans - disciplinarity , the authors added , was a notable feature of this project . When it began in the early 1990s ‘transdisciplinary’ was still not a widely recognized concept , so initial steps in 1994 were conceived as “interdisciplinary” attempts to integrate inputs from multiple disciplines . As the project progressed , though , academic leaders realized most criteria the community selected were framed as they were being con - ceptualized in the emergent field of transdisciplinary approaches to urban design . The Syn - oikos method for participatory workshops also complemented the Netzstadt method , by involving political , economic , and cultural figures of the region as partners at each stage . In drawing conclusions and offering recommendations , Baccini and Oswald acknowledged this kind of project is still difficult to realize within a university , in no small part due to the short evaluation period of three to four years for many projects and lack of appropri - ate criteria of evaluation among most academic research boards . Students earning Ph . D . s , in particular , need additional time to produce a thesis . Despite their projects increasing the average period of degree completion by roughly 20 % , students considered this added step worthwhile . Yet , as long as opportunities for working across boundaries and engag - ing stakeholders remain exceptions rather than a norm , prospects for transformation are limited . Després et al . ’s ( 2008 ) case study of retrofitting postwar suburbs in Quebec further illus - trates transdisciplinary learning involving academic and community members , in this case 8631 Building capacity for transformative learning : lessons from… 1 3 a project sponsored by the Interdisciplinary Research Group of Suburbs ( GIRBa ) at Uni - versité Laval . It was ambitious , combining scientific analysis , action research , and partici - patory design . The scope also spanned demographic , physical , and social characteristics of postwar suburbs in a complex schedule on three levels over 15 months of events involving researchers , students , and stakeholders . At the macro level of diagnosis , four initial one - day mini - colloquia and workshops involved decision makers and planners , aimed at deter - mining impact on the future of first - ring suburbs . At the meso - level , half - day meetings occurred with borough and local officials plus representatives of a development center , school board , and community services . Efforts to arrive at a collective definition or ori - entation with objectives for retrofitting included a participatory design session known as a charrette . The micro level involved neighborhood and community organizations , repre - sentatives of subgroups , and the population at large . Each event was a forum for learning that facilitated mutual understanding . During Phase 1 , GIRBa coordinated one - day mini - colloquia and workshops aimed at developing the diagnosis . Phase 2 turned to defining general orientations and objectives through a colloquium , workshop , and mini - charrettes . Subsequent focus - group interviews and an Internet survey moved in Phase 3 to orienting and mapping objectives for redevelopment plans and implementation strategies , aided by a workshop and design charrette that fostered learning in focus groups with local associa - tions of immigrants , teenagers , seniors , single mothers , and two shopping - mall managers . Two years after completion of the project , GIRBa conducted an internet - based survey to gain lessons from the process . One of the four clusters of 79 items in the survey asked spe - cifically about learning outcomes . Members of GIRBa reported gains in understanding the complexity of postwar suburbs , while stakeholders included learning about participative methods , diverse backgrounds and interests of participants , networking and collaboration , and issues surrounding postwar suburban planning . In drawing recommendations from the project , the authors exhorted universities to foster training professionals and research - ers to not only work together but also to create the kind of intersubjective knowledge that emerged . Taken together , the two case studies and foregoing sections raise the question of prospects for transformation . 4 Part II : prospects for transformation Despite the increased number and variety of spaces for crossdisciplinary and cross - sec - tor learning , the academic reward system continues to favor individual over collabora - tive achievements as well as basic research over applied knowledge in community - based work . Given these and other obstacles , to contemplate another question the co - editors posed , what might a sustainability mission look like for the future ? Two topics arise . The first – definition – emerges from Part I , while the second one – virtual horizons – responds to the co - editors’ call to consider the role of new technologies . 4 . 1 Definition Definition is crucial in the face of conflicted discourses , including inter - and trans - disci - plinarity as well as urban sustainability . To echo the co - editors , debate occurs within a large arena with heterogeneous approaches from different domains and forms of knowledge and expertise . The structures and strategies revealed in prior sections have produced a rich portfolio of organizational forms and pedagogies . However , individuals and groups are still 8632 J . T . Klein 1 3 often uncertain about definition of inter - and trans - disciplinarity , despite authoritative lit - erature . In focusing on the topic in science and policy discourses , Vienni Baptista , Fletcher , & Pohl ( submitted ) identified recurring features : prominent among them interdependence , co - operative labor , and mutual orientation to a shared purpose . The heuristic tool they pro - posed can guide definition of any endeavor based on answers to a generic set of questions : When ? ( phase and timeframe ) What ? ( core question , reason for integration , and understanding of ID / TD based on pur - pose ) Why ? ( motivations and underlying logics ) Who ? ( participants ) How ? ( methods and tools ) Where ? ( spaces of work and institutional contexts ) Conditions ? ( factors influencing ID / TD ) What Now ? ( future actions to manage different understandings and factors ) . In defining the What teachers and project leaders today often highlight the need to address complex problems , though frequently lack detailed guidance on the How of cross - ing boundaries including processes of integration and collaboration . The When and the Where of urban sustainability and other subjects also varies by venue : whether it be an aca - demic course or module , related approaches within other subject areas , preliminary training to acquaint participants in a project with pertinent methods and skills , or informal learning in the actual course of conducting research . The What and the Why also require contex - tualizing , not simply importing an a priori model or method . Two books aid in selecting appropriate resources . Bergmann , Knobloch , Krohn , Pohl , & Schramm ( 2010 , 2012 ) com - piled methods , instruments , tools , and strategies for transdisciplinary research : including hypothesis and model building , integrative assessment procedures , boundary objects and concepts , heuristics , research questions , artifacts and products , mutual learning , and stake - holder participation . Prior to that , McDonald , Bammer , & Deane ( 2009 ) focused on mech - anisms and strategies for communication : including Delphi technique , systems methodol - ogy , scenario planning , and forums for stakeholder participation such as citizens’ juries , consensus conferences , and consensus development panels . In adopting methods for sus - tainability , in particular , Verma and Raghubanshi ( 2018 ) advised economic , social , envi - ronmental , and / or institutional parameters must be considered as well . The meaning of sus - tainability also differs from country to country and economic strata . And , they added , the complexity of urban development means focus will vary depending on whether it is quality of life through social interaction and access to services , energy consumption , renewable energy and waste management , efficient transportation , green economies , environmental protection and restoration environmental justice and equity , community participation in policy decisions , or preservation of public space as well as cultural and natural heritage and water resources . In addition , Conditions need to be considered : whether juxtaposing different approaches in a multidisciplinary fashion , engaging in proactive interdisciplinary integration of them , or generating a new transdisciplinary framework while also includ - ing the Who of which stakeholders from government , industry , and / or communities are involved . An abundance of case studies reveals iterative reflexivity is also a learning opportunity , gaining insight into how well a project is going and any adjustments that are needed . How - ever , the What Now is often short - changed , limiting long - term prospects of any structure and outcomes , let alone radical transformation of the academy . As a result many subsequent 8633 Building capacity for transformative learning : lessons from… 1 3 projects start from scratch and , even if some participants have prior experience in cross - disciplinary and / or cross - sector initiatives , successful collaboration requires participants to invest time and effort into gelling as a group committed to a common purpose influenced by problem choice and context . Case studies also expose differing degrees of change that vary from incremental and ad hoc steps to comprehensive reformulation , though the lat - ter is rare and even then does not eliminate traditional subjects and approaches . Even so , as we have seen , definitions of transdisciplinarity beyond the notion of a singular unity of knowledge led to a plurality of frameworks and participation of stakeholders in research . As a result , the number of sites of learning also increased in number and variety , while pedagogies and activities that emerged from historical sketches of both inter - and trans - disciplinary education elevated the role of active learning while definition o what it means to be educated shifts from solely mastery of a body of content and accepted postulates to emergence in an integrative process of inquiry . Furthermore , as the What and the Why of crossdisciplinarity became aligned with real - world problems , the How of competencies heightened emphasis on teamwork . The What and the Why still differed , though , recalling not only Piaget’s , Lichnerowicz’s , and Jantsch’s conceptions but also subsequent develop - ments that rendered transdisciplinarity a conflicted discourse . Even so , a problem - oriented definition was increasingly routinized in many areas , including sustainability and health . Here too though , despite widespread talk of preparing the next generation of researchers , efforts continue to fall short due to adhocracy of courses that do not alter the standard cur - riculum and , in project - based work , are ephemeral because reliant on soft - money support in short timelines rather than hard - line budgets and longitudinal trajectories . Thus , efforts often remain piece - meal , lacking momentum to effect transformation on a wide scale . 4 . 2 Virtual horizons In her updated account of administering interdisciplinary programs , Holley ( 2017 ) reported virtual technologies are facilitating interactions of students with not only their peers and faculty but external stakeholders as well . DeZure ( 2017 ) also included them in her ros - ter of productive pedagogies , along with technology - enabled methodologies for student research . E - portfolios were the most frequently cited means of documenting and storing student work , in addition to reflection on learning and process . Course assignments also increasingly include creation of websites and online archives , while using blogs , vlogs , and wikis for communication and interaction . And , computational tools are enabling students to access big data and methods for interdisciplinary problem solving . In literature on trans - disciplinary collaboration , new technologies are particularly linked with virtual collabora - tion across institutions and countries . Berente & Howson ( 2019 ) pointed to an array of structures and technological platforms , in the latter case including email , tools for video conferencing , storage for sharing documents and editing them , systems for content man - agement , services for hosting projects , and suites of commercial groupware . However , even the best of federated search engines , RSS feeds , and tools for sharing knowledge and infor - mation do not automate integration and collaboration . Berente & Howison cited a number of problems that curb potential for transformation : including inefficiency , ineffectiveness , poor use of resources , delays in replies , and lack of focus to pertinent communications . The learning curve can also be steep for some . Attention to structure and deliverables , appropri - ate platforms and didactic instruction in how to use them , and well - managed meetings go a long way to lessening problems . Developing a transactive memory system of who - knows - what - and who - is - responsible - for - what is a further means of codifying the Who of skills 8634 J . T . Klein 1 3 and knowledge learned through a process of defining participants’ views and approaches . However , the COVID crisis has ( re ) exposed a gap between Haves and Have - nots . Moreo - ver , Cummings & Kiesler cautioned , technology has not “conquered distance” ( 2005 , p . 704 ) . Institutions have different time zones , missions , and work calendars . In addition , individuals have different capabilities for online work . Berente & Howison recommended project leaders include an opportunity for learning the What and the How of digital tools and platforms . Technology alone , however , cannot transform urban environments . The concept of a smart city , Costa and Oliveira ( 2017 ) reported , is typically associated with sensors , cam - eras , fast Internet connections , and control centers . Yet , they admonished , technology for its own sake must not be the primary purpose . Easing a traffic jam , for example , will not address broader patterns of im / mobility and urban sprawl . A “humane” smart city uses technology as a tool for connecting and engaging both government and citizens , with the goal of rebuilding , recreating , and motivating urban communities . As the concept of smart cities was transposed to emerging countries , the authors added , the field of smart social inclusion arose . It tackles challenges to urban sustainability , including poverty , rapid growth , and geographical expansion . Social sciences play a crucial role in understanding behavior in urban settings . Yet , historical , expressive , cultural , and ethical dimensions of arts and humanities must also be factored into design and use . Furthermore , citizens must be recognized as change agents , not just academic experts who transfer and apply their knowledge in a one - way linear flow to stakeholders . Models and data analytics , Costa & Oliveira added , can also inform the How of adapting to new circumstances . Cars can be pointed to parking places , ambulances rerouted for quick arrival , consumption of energy rationalized , and citizens cautioned about emerging environmental conditions . A participa - tory innovation system , as well , can lead to co - designed user - centered services for civic good . The European Union’s Periphèria project used convergent Internet platforms and innovative services to promote sustainable life - and work - styles within and across emerging networks of peripheral cities . A Smart Neighborhood initiative targeted media - based social interaction . Smart Street developed new mobility behaviors . Smart Square encouraged par - ticipatory civic decisions . Smart Museum and Park focused on natural and cultural her - itage . Smart City Hall delivered mobile e - government services . Smart Campus extended partnership with the Milan Polytechnic in modeling activities . And , the MyNeighbour - hood Project integrated new technologies and methodologies with the aim of creating and strengthening social ties and interactions in urban neighborhoods and communities . The project’s Platform also combined data and functionality of City Transformation Apps with new tools connecting people locally . In addition , generative technologies are one of four major drivers of interdisciplinary research today , identified in a state - of - the - art report on Facilitating Interdisciplinary Research from a task force affiliated with the US - based National Academies of Sciences , Engineering , and Medicine . The other three drivers are the complexity of nature and soci - ety , the need to solve social problems , and a desire to explore basic research problems at the interfaces of disciplines . New affordances of visualizing and mapping relationships , in particular , enable groups to communicate and to negotiate collective pathways , while open - space technology can foster transparent decision - making . The keyword is “generative , ” connoting novelty , power , and capacity for transforming existing disciplines and creating new ones . Examples abound : from magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) and sensor arrays to a virtual observatory and tools that enable collaboration among geographically dispersed individual and groups . The Internet also facilitates connection - making between people and information while , the report added , interaction and collaboration across both time and 8635 Building capacity for transformative learning : lessons from… 1 3 space can enlarge the educational system ( NASEM , 2005 ) . However , to reiterate a caveat reinforced by challenges of coping with COVID , access looms large . When information is held behind paywalls and online learning depends on availability and affordability , the gap between Haves and Have - Nots persists . The parallel in collaborative projects is lack of equal voice and participation in decision making , an obstacle exposed by the one - way linear flow of influence of science to society . Echoing Costa & Oliveira , smart and humane solutions to problems of urban sustainability require socially - robust technology that affords access to digital communication and participation of all stakeholders . Here too , powerful tools and exemplary models are not inherently transformative . New governance models are also needed , in which public authorities listen to and collaborate with citizens in order to make city government more transparent , trusted , participatory , and efficient while empow - ering citizens to co - design and co - create solutions . The popular phrase “thinking outside the box” often implies creating an entirely new box . However , transformation is a multi - layered and complex process that requires systems thinking rather than even the most pow - erful of single strategies . 5 Conclusion Toward An Ecology of Spatializing Practices . Since the early twentieth century interdisciplinary education has aimed to change the What , the Why , and the How of learning in fields and programs centered on complex themes and topics . The ascendancy of transdisciplinarity in closing decades of the cen - tury accelerated calls for more comprehensive change , expanding not only definitions of the What and the Why of boundary crossing but also including transdisciplinary connota - tions of the Where and the Who beyond academic walls . To reiterate , the heterogeneity that emerged over the course of the century means no single format or practice dominates . Some claim heterogeneity has exacerbated the conflicted nature of inter - and trans - discipli - narity , rendering definitions nothing less than a Tower of Babel that obfuscates more than clarifies . Careful reading of literature , however , reveals patterns of consensus anchored by authoritative reports and handbooks . Transformation is not possible , however , if capacity is not sustainable long - term . Achieving it requires rethinking space as an ecology of spatial - izing practice , not simply a physical site or an experimental moment . It recognizes interac - tions of social groups and environments where alternative practices take root and catalyze learning from both academic expertise and the lived experience of grappling with complex problems ( Klein , 2021 ) . An ecological approach to educational reforms , Daniel Stokols ( 2018 ) exhorted , interconnects schools , homes , after - school settings , and online resource . Thus , it is a metasystem that is synergistic , fostering values of sustainability and systems thinking as basic skills . Furthermore , he argued 4 Ts of research in the twenty - first century frame education and training today , documented by the rise of transdisciplinary , transla - tional , team - oriented , and transcultural scholarship and practice . Transdisciplinary orienta - tion is also required in a synergistic composite of values , beliefs , attitudes , skills , knowl - edge , and behaviors that predispose a person to collaboration . Elaborating on the nature of transdisciplinary orientation , Misra et . , ( 2015 ) described values , in particular , as guiding principles that individuals need to work with others and to learn about unfamiliar theories and methods . Attitudes , in particular , include willingness to invest time in learning and to adjust individual conceptual schema to fit demands of teamwork . Behaviors , in turn , include participating constructively in a team . Transdisciplinary orientation further calls 8636 J . T . Klein 1 3 to mind Van Breda , Metelerkamp , & Goh’s concept of methodological agility for transdis - ciplinary research ( https : / / sites . google . com / view / www - ma4tt dr - net ; Van Breda , Meteler - kamp , & Goh , forthcoming ) . Van Breda , Metelerkamp , & Goh defined methodological agility as an ability to switch between and within mono - , multi - , inter - , and trans - disciplinarity , rather than a linear and deterministic progression . When the work of scholars , teachers , students , stakeholders , or partner organizations is embedded in context , switching between methodologies is not impeded by fixed protocols and a hierarchical structure of order . Van Breda , Metelerkamp , & Goh invoked Knorr Cetina’s ( 1999 ) concept of dynamic epistemic objects to highlight emergence as a guiding principle of embedded research . Given the dynamic nature of emergence , methodological agility is an intuition for knowing where and when to switch on the spectrum of crossdisciplinary methodologies , thereby deploying quantitative , quali - tative , and transformative methods appropriate to a given problem . Switching , they added , is not a matter of a Kuhnian paradigm or a Gestalt shift , rather nimbleness in the face of ever - changing conditions and circumstances , comparable to second - and triple - loop learn - ing . Transformation , though , is often shrouded in a utopic rhetoric of revolution . Draw - ing lessons from case studies in multiple types of organizations , Howard Gardner ( 2006 ) concluded that change results most often from a slow and even almost unidentifiable shift of viewpoints , not a single argument or a sudden epiphany . Changes that seem to erupt sud - denly often disguise subtle processes over a longer period of time . Furthermore , it is more difficult to replace a simple way of thinking with a more complex one , and people under - estimate the power of resistance . Changing minds also lies at the heart of Jack Mezirow’s ( 1991 , 1995 , 2006 ) theory of transformational learning . He contended critical reflection can lead to altered assumptions and formal protocols . Argyris and Schön’s theory of learn - ing loops also comes to mind ( based on Klein , 2018 , 2021 ) . Single - loop learning occurs when organizations compare their performance against pre - established rules or standards , detecting and correcting errors against pre - determined criteria for success . In double - loop learning underlying assumptions , norms , objectives , policies , goals and programs are questioned in a form of generative learning that adapts to change and complexity through collaborative action , dialogue , and reflection . Argyris and Schön ( 1996 ) did not mention triple - loop learning explicitly , but in literature on organizational learning the concept con - notes a higher or deeper level when methodologies generate new principles or paradigms as well as reflection on the learning process . Like transformational team learning , it is radi - cal and transgressive in challenging dominant assumptions , habitual thought patterns , and power structures . Textbooks and handbook are guides to theory and practice of both inter - and trans - disci - plinarity . However , several key messages emerge as take - aways from this exploration of the potential of their potential for transformative learning in urban sustainability . First , defini - tion matters , grounded in informed awareness of pertinent literatures and best practices in all four areas of inter - and trans - disciplinarity as well as transformative learning and sus - tainability . Second , creating learning environments conducive to integrative and collabora - tive approaches to complex socio - environmental problems requires crossing boundaries of not only disciplines but also interdisciplinary fields , occupational professions , and sectors of society including government , industry , and communities in the public sphere . Third , innovative pedagogy alone is not enough to foster transformative learning . Both existing and new institutional structures must be scrutinized to ease barriers to crossdisciplinary and cross - sector work , including policies and procedures that favor , not marginalize , alter - native practices . Fourth , the heterogeneity of the core concepts of inter - and trans - disci - plinarity as well as sustainability means different connotations and priorities co - exist and 8637 Building capacity for transformative learning : lessons from… 1 3 even outright conflict . They do not spell chaos or justify cynicism , however . They require weighing the relevance of a rich portfolio of methods and tools that has emerged over the course of decades . Fifth , contextualization looms large : requiring reflection on the What , the Why , the Who , the How , and the Where while mindful of Conditions that shape both possibilities and limits to crossdisciplinary work . Sixth , transformation is not an overnight revolution . Changes occur along a spectrum . Some gain cumulative force over time as alternative goals and approaches are introduced , especially in existing institutions . Oth - ers appear dramatically on a wide scale , especially in new institutions and cross - cutting priorities for both existing and new ones . Even when change emerges over time , though , it must be systematic , not ad hoc or piece - meal . Seventh , and finally , learning requires both individual and social capacity . Individuals need education and training to grapple with complex socio - environmental problems , and teams require readiness to channel individual concepts and methods in a collaborative effort to address them . Funding Not applicable . Declarations Conflicts of interest The author declared no interest . References Apostel , L . , et al . ( Eds . ) . ( 1972 ) . Interdisciplinarity : Problems of teaching and research in universities . Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development . Argyris , C . , & Schön , D . ( 1996 ) . Organizational learning II : Theory , method and practice . Addison - Wesley . Baccini , P . , & Oswald , F . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Designing the urban : linking physiology and morphology . In G . . H . . Hadorn ( Ed . ) , Handbook of transdisciplinary research ( pp . 79 – 88 ) . Springer . Berente , N . , & Howison , J . ( 2019 ) . Strategies for success in virtual collaborations : Structures and norms for meetings , workflow , and technological platforms” . In K . L . Hall , A . Vogel , & R . Croyle ( Eds . ) , Strate - gies for team science success : Handbook of evidence - based principles for cross - disciplinary science and practical lessons learned from health researchers ( pp . 563 – 574 ) . Springer . Boix - Mansilla , V . ( 2017 ) . Interdisciplinary learning : A cognitive - epistemological foundation . In R . Frode - man , J . T . Klein , & R . Pacheco ( Eds . ) , The Oxford handbook of interdisciplinarity ( pp . 261 – 275 ) . Oxford University Press . Brint , S . G . , Turk - Bicakci , L . , Proctor , K . , & Murphy , S . P . ( 2009 ) . Expanding the social frame of knowl - edge : Interdisciplinary , degree - granting fields in American colleges and universities , 1975 – 2000 . Review of Higher Education , 32 ( 2 ) , 155 – 183 . Costa , E . M . , & Oliveira , A . D . ( 2017 ) . Humane smart cities . In R . Frodeman , J . T . Klein , & R . Pacheco ( Eds . ) , The Oxford handbook of interdisciplinarity ( pp . 228 – 240 ) . Oxford University Press . Costanza , R . ( 1990 ) . Escaping the overspecialization trap . In M . E . Clark & S . A . Wawrytko ( Eds . ) , Rethinking the curriculum : Toward an integrated interdisciplinary college education ( pp . 95 – 106 ) . Greenwood . Cummings , J . N . , & Kiesler , S . ( 2005 ) . Collaborative research across disciplinary and organizational bound - aries . Social Studies of Science , 35 ( 5 ) , 703 – 722 . Després , C . , Fortin , A . , Joerin , F . , Vachon , G . , Gatti , E . , & Moretti , G . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Retrofitting postwar suburbs : A collaborative design process . In G . Hadorn ( Ed . ) , Handbook of transdisciplinary research ( pp . 327 – 341 ) . Springer . DeZure , D . ( 2017 ) . Interdisciplinary pedagogies in higher education . In R . Frodeman , J . T . Klein , & R . Pacheco ( Eds . ) , The Oxford handbook of interdisciplinarity ( pp . 555 – 572 ) . Oxford University Press . Gardner , H . ( 2006 ) . Changing minds : The art and science of changing our own and other people’s minds . Harvard Business Review Press . Hirsch Hadorn , G . , et al . ( Eds . ) . ( 2008 ) . Handbook of transdisciplinary research . Springer . 8638 J . T . Klein 1 3 Holley , K . ( 2017 ) . Administering interdisciplinary programs . In R . Frodeman , J . T . Klein , & R . Pacheco ( Eds . ) , The Oxford handbook of interdisciplinarity ( pp . 530 – 543 ) . Oxford University Press . Jantsch , E . , et al . ( 1972 ) . Towards interdisciplinarity and transdisciplinarity in education and innovation . In Apostel ( Ed . ) , Interdisciplinarity : Problems of teaching and research in universities ( pp . 97 – 121 ) . Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development . Klein , J . T . ( 1990 ) . Interdisciplinarity : History , theory , and practice . Wayne State University Press . Klein , J . T . ( 2017 ) . Transdisciplinarity and sustainability : patterns of definition . In D . Fam , J . Palmer , C . Riedy , & C . Mitchell ( Eds . ) , Transdisciplinary research and practice for sustainability outcomes ( pp . 7 – 21 ) . Routledge . Klein , J . T . ( 2018 ) . Learning and transdisciplinary collaboration : A conceptual vocabulary . In D . Fam , L . Neuhauser , & P . Gibbs ( Eds . ) , Transdisciplinary theory , practice and education : The art of collabora - tive research and collective learning ( pp . 11 – 24 ) . Springer . Klein , J . T . ( 2021 ) . Beyond interdisciplinarity : Boundary work , communication , and collaboration . Oxford University Press . Klein , J . T . , & Newell , W . H . ( 1997 ) . Advancing interdisciplinary studies . In J . G . Gaff & J . L . Ratcliff ( Eds . ) , Handbook of the undergraduate curriculum ( pp . 393 – 415 ) . Jossey - Bass and AACU . Knorr Cetina , K . ( 1999 ) . Epistemic culture : How the sciences make knowledge . Harvard University Press . Lichnerowicz , A . , et al . ( 1972 ) . Mathematic and transdisciplinarity . In Apostel ( Ed . ) , Interdisciplinarity : Problems of teaching and research in universities ( pp . 121 – 127 ) . Organization for Economic Coopera - tion and Development . Mezirow , J . ( 1991 ) . Transformative dimensions of adult learning . Jossey - Bass . Mezirow , J . ( 1995 ) . Transformative theory of adult learning . In M . Welton ( Ed . ) , In defense of the lifeworld ( pp . 39 – 70 ) . State University of New York Press . Mezirow , J . D . ( 2006 ) . Learning as transformation : Critical perspectives on a theory in progress . Jossey Bass / Wiley . Misra , S . , Stokols , D . , & Cheng , L . ( 2015 ) . The transdisciplinary orientation scale : Factor structure and relation to the integrative quality and scope of scientific publications . Journal of Translational Medi - cine and Epidemiology , 3 ( 2 ) , 1042 . Mitchell , C . , Cordell , D . , & Fam , D . ( 2015 ) . Beginning at the end : The outcome spaces framework to guide purposive transdisciplinary research . Futures , 65 , 76 – 96 . NASEM [ National Academies of Science , Engineering , and Medicine ] . ( 2005 ) . Facilitating Interdiscipli - nary Research . National Academies Press . Piaget , J . , et al . ( 1972 ) . The epistemology of interdisciplinary relationships . In L . Apostel ( Ed . ) , Interdisci - plinarity : Problems of teaching and research in universities ( pp . 127 – 139 ) . Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development . Schauppenlehner - Kloyber , E . , & Penker , M . ( 2015 ) . Managing group processes in transdisciplinary future studies . Futures , 65 , 57 – 71 . Scholz , R . , & Marks , D . , et al . ( 2001 ) . Learning about transdisciplinarity . In J . T . Klein ( Ed . ) , Transdiscipli - narity , joint problem solving among science , technology and society ( pp . 236 – 252 ) . Birkhauser . Stokols , D . ( 2018 ) . Social ecology in the digital age . Academic Press / Elsevier . Verma , P . , & Raghubanshi , A . S . ( 2018 ) . Urban sustainability indicators : Challenges and opportunities . Ecological Indicators , 93 , 282 – 291 . Van Breda , J . , Goh , A . , & Snowden , D . ( forthcoming ) . Methodological agility for sustainability transitions in the context of the anthropocene . Vienni Baptista , B . , Fletcher , I . , & Pohl , C . ( submitted ) . Unravelling heterogeneity : Knitting together under - standings of interdisciplinarity and transdisciplinarity . Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations .