Review Enhancers : The abundance and function of regulatory sequences beyond promoters Michael Bulger a , ⁎ , Mark Groudine b a Center for Pediatric Biomedical Research , Department of Pediatrics , University of Rochester , Rochester , NY , USA b Division of Basic Sciences , Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center , Seattle , WA , USA ; Department of Radiation Oncology , University of Washington , Seattle , WA , USA a b s t r a c t a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received for publication 16 July 2009 Revised 24 November 2009 Accepted 30 November 2009 Available online 16 December 2009 Keywords : Enhancers Locus control regions Insulators Chromatin Gene Expression Transcription Gene Regulation Nuclear Organization Transcriptional control in mammals and Drosophila is often mediated by regulatory sequences located far from gene promoters . Different classes of such elements – particularly enhancers , but also locus control regions and insulators – have been de ﬁ ned by speci ﬁ c functional assays , although it is not always clear how these assays relate to the function of these elements within their native loci . Recent advances in genomics suggest , however , that such elements are highly abundant within the genome and may represent the primary mechanism by which cell - and developmental - speci ﬁ c gene expression is accomplished . In this review , we discuss the functional parameters of enhancers as de ﬁ ned by speci ﬁ c assays , along with the frequency with which they occur in the genome . In addition , we examine the available evidence for the mechanism by which such elements communicate or interact with the promoters they regulate . © 2010 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Introduction Transcriptional regulation is accomplished via the association of trans - acting factors with regulatory DNA sequences . As might be expected , DNA sequences located close to gene promoters are universally involved in this regulation , and in fact in many organisms , including bacteria and unicellular eukaryotes , the vast majority of regulatory phenomena are limited to the few hundred base pairs upstream of the transcription start site . A wealth of studies of gene regulation in vertebrates and in Drosophila , however , indicate that at least in these organisms additional classes of regulatory elements – enhancers , locus control regions ( LCRs ) and insulators – can be located far from the transcription start site , and that at complex loci multiple elements that are arrayed over large regions can collaborate in regulation of expression of individual genes or gene clusters . The existence of regulatory sequences located far from the promoters they regulate poses a number of questions , most notably how such elements bridge the distance to their cognate promoters to mediate whatever regulatory effects they may have , or alternatively what regulatory functions can be accomplished over such distances . Ongoing interest in these questions has led to the development of novel technologies to probe for interactions between distal sequence elements , which in turn have placed enhancer and LCR function squarely at the nexus of regulation of RNA polymerase II transcription , modulation of chromatin structure and organization of the genome within the nucleus . Activities of distal regulatory elements : enhancers , LCRs and boundary elements Although studies of the characteristics and function of distal regulatory sequences within their endogenous loci are becoming more frequent , most often such elements have been de ﬁ ned in arti ﬁ cial gain - of - function assays , which have revealed distinct classes of regulatory sequences ( Maston et al . , 2006 ) . Enhancers , for example , are de ﬁ ned by their activity in assays involving the transient transfection of reporter genes into cultured cells . Such elements are capable of activating transcription regardless of how far they are located from a promoter ( within the spatial limitations of the plasmid DNA constructs used for the assay ) or their position relative to it – i . e . , upstream or downstream . Another class of regulatory sequences is identi ﬁ ed by the establishment of consistent levels of gene expression upon stable integration into the genome of either cultured cells or transgenic mice . Transgenes in general are subject to position effects , in which expression levels are highly dependent upon the genomic site into which a transgene is inserted . Gene promoters by themselves are capable of driving expression in only a small proportion of integration sites . Some sequence elements , however , are capable of conferring high - level gene expression to linked promoters in a position - Developmental Biology 339 ( 2010 ) 250 – 257 ⁎ Corresponding author . E - mail address : Michael _ Bulger @ urmc . rochester . edu ( M . Bulger ) . 0012 - 1606 / $ – see front matter © 2010 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ydbio . 2009 . 11 . 035 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Developmental Biology journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / developmentalbiology independent fashion . This activity implies the ability to activate transcription at the majority of genomic locations , and is the functional de ﬁ nition of a locus control region ( LCR ) . Sequence elements that exhibit enhancer or LCR activity , as de ﬁ ned by these speci ﬁ c functional assays , have been derived from multiple gene loci and thus appear to represent a general phenom - enon ( Li et al . , 1999 ; Maston et al . , 2006 ) . The distinct functional de ﬁ nitions of enhancers and LCRs , however , raise the question of how these elements differ intrinsically . At least some LCRs appear to subsume the function of enhancers . For example , the LCR within the human β - globin locus harbors at least one element , 5 ′ DNaseI - hypersensitive site 2 ( 5 ′ HS2 ) that acts as an enhancer in transient assays ( Hardison et al . , 1997 ) . The immediate question would appear to be one of quantity vs . quality : does an LCR consist of the same activity as an enhancer , only more powerful , or does it possess a different class of activity ? Evidence exists to support both possibilities . HS2 of the human β - globin LCR can confer position - independent expression to transgenes in mice , but only when 5 ′ HS2 - containing transgenes are integrated with copy numbers greater than 3 – 4 ( Ellis et al . , 1993 ) . One interpretation of this behavior is that a suf ﬁ cient number of HS2 enhancer elements can add up to an LCR , although this has never been investigated systematically . On the other hand , the β - globin LCR also harbors at least two elements – 5 ′ HSs 3 and 4 – that generally exhibit little activity in transient assays , but activate transcription of linked genes when stably integrated in the genome ( Hardison et al . , 1997 ) , and regulatory regions have been derived from other loci that behave similarly . This activity suggests that transient and stable assays of gene expression can reveal different mechanisms of gene activa - tion , and that LCRs can function in ways that are distinct from enhancers . Additional indications of a fundamental difference between LCR and enhancer activity are provided by studies of the immunoglobulin enhancer E μ ( Forrester et al . , 1994 ) , the thymic enhancer of the adenosine deaminase gene ( Aronow et al . , 1995 ) and the human CD2 LCR ( Festenstein et al . 1996 ) . In each case , a core sequence possesses enhancer activity in transient assays but does not function as an LCR in transgenic assays . LCR activity is observed when additional ﬂ anking elements , which possess no measurable activity on their own , are included with the core enhancer . Such activity has been correlated with the propagation of a more accessible chromatin structure from the LCR to more distal sequences . Another class of promoter - distal regulatory element consists of insulators ( Gaszner and Felsenfeld , 2006 ) . The term “ insulator ” in turn encompasses two distinct subclasses of activity . First , “ barrier ” elements are de ﬁ ned by their ability to insulate stably transfected transgenes from position effects . This is super ﬁ cially similar to the activity that de ﬁ nes LCRs , but is different in mechanism : barrier elements are only effective when they ﬂ ank the transgene to either side , while an LCR functions in any orientation with respect to a transgene . The most common interpretation of this behavior is that a barrier serves to block the encroachment of repressive chromatin structure from a given integration site , while an LCR actively functions to establish a chromatin structure that is more conducive to gene expression . The most well - characterized barrier element to date is 5 ′ HS4 of the chicken β - globin locus ; a speci ﬁ c sequence within this element is bound by USF transcription factors and has been shown in multiple studies to insulate transgenes from position effects ( Huang et al . , 2007 ) . The second subclass of insulator consists of “ enhancer - blocking ” elements , which are de ﬁ ned by their ability to block the function of an enhancer on a linked promoter , but only when located between the enhancer and promoter . They do not appear to silence enhancers or promoters ; an enhancer that is blocked from activating a promoter to one side of it by an enhancer - blocking element is still able to activate a promoter located on the other side ( Dorsett , 1999 ) . Prominent examples of such enhancer - blocking elements include ( again ) 5 ′ HS4 of the chicken β - globin locus , speci ﬁ cally a binding site for the transcription factor CTCF ( Bell et al . , 1999 ) . In Drosophila , binding sites for the suppressor of Hairy wing [ su ( Hw ) ] factor can mediate the same effect ( Gdula et al . , 1996 ) . It is not clear that sequences de ﬁ ned as enhancers , LCRs or enhancer - blocking elements in arti ﬁ cial assays necessarily mediate such functions within the loci from which they are derived . Endogenous regulatory elements normally have no need to ensure gene expression from more than one location within the genome , and so it is not obvious how the ability of an LCR to overcome transgene position effects relates to its function at its native location . For example , deletion of the immunoglobulin enhancer E μ conforms to the model that transgenic studies would predict , in that expression from the mutant locus is variegated , involving complete silencing of the locus in the majority of cells ( Ronai et al . , 1999 ) . Deletion of the murine β - globin LCR , however , while leading to a severe reduction in β - globin expression levels in all cells , fails to affect any measurable feature of chromatin structure within the locus . The major function for this element , as revealed by the deletion , appears to be in transcriptional elongation ( Bender et al . , 2000 ; Schubeler et al . , 2001 ; Sawado et al . , 2003 ) . Discrepancies like this could arise from the existence of additional , redundant activities at endogenous loci . Such studies do suggest , however , that the arti ﬁ cial assays used to characterize the function of distal regulatory elements should be interpreted with caution with respect to the role of such sequences within their native loci . Distal regulatory elements in mammalian genomes The development and generalized use of high - throughput and / or genome - wide methodologies for examining transcription factor binding , core histone modi ﬁ cations and RNA polymerase II association has drastically altered the perception of how regulatory sequences are distributed in mammalian genomes . In contrast to the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae , for example , the human genome is only sparsely populated with protein - coding genes , and even when growing awareness of noncoding genes , such as small RNAs , is considered , it is readily apparent that the largest proportion of the genome consists of intergenic or intragenic ( intronic ) sequences for which a speci ﬁ c function is not obvious . Prior studies of selected gene loci have identi ﬁ ed distal regulatory sequences such as enhancers and LCRs within these regions , but the gain - of - function assays used to characterize these elements have only served to delineate one or a few such elements for each locus , leaving the majority of noncoding DNA with no known function . More recently , however , distal regulatory elements have been distinguished from gene promoters by a signature of histone modi ﬁ cations and trans - acting factor binding identi ﬁ ed via genome - wide microarray and high - throughput sequencing ( chIP - seq ) ( The ENCODE Project Consortium , 2007 ; Koch et al . , 2007 ; Heintzman et al . , 2007 ; Heintzman et al . , 2009 ; Visel et al . , 2009 ) . Features of this signature include monomethylation of histone H3 lysine 4 ( H3K4 ) and association of speci ﬁ c factors , such as the histone acetyltransfer - ase and transcriptional coactivator p300 . Levels of H3K4 monomethy - lation in particular peak at enhancers and not at transcription start sites . Conversely , H3K4 trimethylation appears to occur at promoters but not at enhancers . In addition , there is a strong correlation between these regulatory elements and the locations of DNaseI - hypersensitive sites ( DNaseI HSs ) , which are generally thought to mark regions where local chromatin structure is disrupted by transcription factor binding ( Xi et al . , 2007 ) . Both H3K4 monomethylation and p300 binding have proven to be predictive for enhancer activity of genomic elements in functional assays ( The ENCODE Project Consortium , 2007 ; Heintzman 251 M . Bulger , M . Groudine / Developmental Biology 339 ( 2010 ) 250 – 257 et al . , 2007 ; Visel et al . , 2009 ) . This is perhaps not surprising – for example , any sequence that is bound by p300 might be expected to exhibit enhancer activity in a transient transfection assay when linked to a reporter gene , but this doesn ' t necessarily indicate that such a sequence actually functions as an enhancer at its native location . Still , current high - throughput studies are intriguing in several ways . First , they have revealed an unexpected abundance of putative enhancer sequences . A genome - wide study utilizing only two cell lines identi ﬁ ed 55 , 000 sequences exhibiting the “ chromatin signa - ture ” indicative of enhancers ( Heintzman et al . , 2009 ) , which is signi ﬁ cantly larger than the number of genes expressed in these lines . The signature at most of these sequences was speci ﬁ c to one or the other cell type as well , and given the variety of cell types present in mammals , the authors extrapolated this ﬁ gure to estimate that the human genome harbors 10 5 – 10 6 such elements in total . This would represent an average across the genome of one such element every 3000 – 30 , 000 bp , with signi ﬁ cantly higher densities in “ gene - rich ” regions . A pilot survey of 1 % of the human genome by the ENCODE project revealed a similar frequency of occurrence of monomethyl H3K4 not associated with gene promoters ( The ENCODE Project Consortium , 2007 ; Koch et al . , 2007 ) . Second , comparisons of patterns of histone modi ﬁ cation and transcription factor association between putative enhancers and known transcription start sites have suggested that the greatest differences between cell types lie in the distal enhancers , not the promoters ( Heintzman et al . , 2009 ) . Similarly , mapping of DNaseI HSs across six different cell lines showed that the majority , which were common among all of the lines , were associated with promoters or putative insulator elements , while the remaining cell type - speci ﬁ c HSs were highly enriched for enhancer elements ( Xi et al . , 2007 ) . The implication is that development and differentiation of disparate cell types is accomplished for the most part via the differential activities of distal regulatory elements like enhancers . Since the initial discovery of enhancers , it has been known that they are most often the dominant element in conferring tissue speci ﬁ city to a linked gene . A hallmark of most enhancers is their ability to activate transcription from any linked promoter in reporter gene constructs , even if promoter and enhancer originate from gene loci with completely different expression patterns in vivo . Although there are exceptions to the general principle , expression of the reporter gene follows the pattern governed by the enhancer , not the promoter . This ability , in fact , has been used to identify enhancers ( or , more correctly , regions of the genome ) that drive speci ﬁ c expression patterns , via the “ enhancer trap ” – a transgene under the control of a weak promoter will only be expressed if it integrates into a genomic location that is under the in ﬂ uence of an enhancer that can activate the promoter . The importance of enhancers in determining patterns of eukaryotic gene expression is also illustrated by known examples of genes expressed in different tissues or locations in an organism , which in turn are regulated by multiple enhancers , each of which speci ﬁ es part of the expression pattern . On the other hand , the ﬁ nding that differences in histone modi ﬁ cation patterns and transcription factor binding between cell types localizes most often to enhancers and not promoters would seem to con ﬂ ict with the known prevalence of genes with multiple promoters . Genome - wide analyses have shown that more than 50 % of human genes ( Kimura et al . , 2006 ; Carninci et al . , 2006 ) , and ∼ 14 % of genes in Drosophila ( Zhu and Halfon , 2009 ) , are associated with multiple transcription start sites , and the literature is abundant with examples of genes that are expressed in different cell types via different promoters . It would appear , however , that expression from these alternate promoters is under the control of multiple , alternate enhancers , and that in the majority of cases tissue - , developmental - and / or differentiation stage - speci ﬁ c transcription is under the control of distal regulatory elements that are dominant over the promoter ( s ) . Third , genome - wide and otherwise high - throughput studies of putative enhancers have unexpectedly revealed that a substantial proportion of such elements are not evolutionarily constrained ( The ENCODE Project Consortium , 2007 ; Margulies et al . , 2007 ) . In the ENCODE pilot survey , roughly half of the sequences determined to have activity in functional assays did not appear to be subject to evolutionary constraint based on cross - species sequence compari - sons . Previously , sequence conservation in regions of the genome not associated with gene - coding exons has been used to support other lines of evidence for function of distal regulatory elements , and in fact such conservation has been used as a predictive tool to identify potential regulatory regions , a technique termed “ phylogenetic footprinting ” ( Hardison , 2000 ) . The results of the ENCODE analysis indicate either that many distal regulatory elements cannot be identi ﬁ ed on the basis of DNA sequence conservation , or that the conserved sequences within these elements are so small as to escape detection by commonly used computer - based algorithms . A study of the embryonic enhancers of the even - skipped gene in Drosophila as compared to scavenger ﬂ ies ( Sepsidae ) illustrates how this might occur ( Hare et al . , 2008 ) . Although the DNA sequences of the enhancer regions in either species are highly divergent , they function to accomplish embryonic patterns of even - skipped expression that are nearly identical . Conservation of small sequence motifs was also excluded . Thus , highly speci ﬁ c function of a set of distal regulatory elements can be conserved even when DNA sequence is not . Speculation for how this can occur has focused on the possibility of compensatory mutations – that is , pairs of mutations that together are not as deleterious as would be expected for single mutations ( Veitia , 2008 ) . In addition , an enhancer could conceivably recruit the same activating complex , but interact with different components of it . Over time , the entire sequence of an enhancer can be transformed while maintaining function . Some caution in generalization of these studies is warranted , in that thus far they have exclusively utilized transformed cell lines , and so it is not yet clear that primary tissues follow the same pattern . Still , these genome - widestudiesofhistonemodi ﬁ cationpatternsandtranscription factor binding have provided a strong suggestion that in at least some metazoans the genome is rife with promoter - distal sequences that represent the dominant regulatory elements in gene expression . Interactions of distal regulatory elements and nuclear organization Since the discovery of enhancers , one of the most important questions related to their function has been how they regulate promoters located far from them along a linear chromosome . The Fig . 1 . Potential mechanisms underlying distal enhancer - promoter colocalization . ( A ) The “ traditional ” view of enhancer - promoter interactions , in which proteins bound to the enhancer ( ENH ) andotherproteinsboundtothepromoter ( PRO ) directlyinteractwitheachothertofacilitatetranscriptionalactivation , whetherbyrecruitmentofRNApolymerase II ( as shown ) , stimulation of RNA polymerase II elongation ( as demonstrated for the β - globin LCR ) , or another mechanism . Blue circles represent nucleosomes ; based on the best available evidence , we have depicted the majority of intervening sequence between the enhancer and promoter as condensed to the 30 nm ﬁ ber , although higher - order chromatin structure is not well understood and so compaction may be more extensive than this . ( B ) Enhancer - promoter colocalization by association with RNA polymerase II transcription “ factories . ” In this model , factors bound to both enhancer and promoter independently recruit RNA polymerase II ; in a nuclear environment consisting of transcription “ factories , ” however , this amounts to enhancer and promoter colocalizing to the same “ factory . ” The green circles represent as - yet unde ﬁ ned , non - Pol II proteins presumed to be present in transcription factories . ( C ) Enhancer and promoter interactions with speci ﬁ c transcription factories . In this model , different genes associate with different kinds of transcription factories . Such speci ﬁ cassociation ispresumably mediated by somecommon factor orcomplex recruited to both the enhancer and thepromoter ( denoted by violet orgreen circles , respectively ) , and would be expected to underlie speci ﬁ c interchromosomal interactions . 252 M . Bulger , M . Groudine / Developmental Biology 339 ( 2010 ) 250 – 257 majority of speculation on this subject has involved the physical association of an enhancer with a promoter , although several mechanisms have been put forward to explain how such juxtaposi - tions might take place . The development of the Chromosomal Conformation Capture ( 3C ) technique and its variants has provided the means to map interactions between distal sequences within the nucleus , including those that may occur between enhancers and promoters ( Dekker et al . , 2002 ) . In this technique , cells are cross - linked with formaldehyde and subjected to digestion with restriction endonucleases , then incubated with DNA ligase . Genomic restriction fragments that colocalize in the nucleus are then able to ligate with each other , regardless of their positions on the linear genome , and at 253 M . Bulger , M . Groudine / Developmental Biology 339 ( 2010 ) 250 – 257 greater frequencies than sequences that are positioned in different regions of the nucleus . The technique was originally applied to verify the colocalization of telomeres in nuclei of the budding yeast S . cerevisiae ( Dekker et al . , 2002 ) , but was quickly extended to reveal interactions between distal regulatory sequences and promoters in mammalian cells , initially at the β - globin locus ( Tolhuis et al . , 2002 ) , and since then at a large and growing number of gene loci ( Miele and Dekker , 2008 ) . The 3C assay has been used to demonstrate that within the murine β - globin locus , sequences dispersed throughout a region of 100 – 200 kb appear to colocalize within the nucleus in erythroid cells . These include the LCR , the active genes within the cluster , a sequence located ∼ 20 kb downstream of the locus ( 3 ′ HS1 ) , and additional sequences that are located further upstream of the LCR ( − 60 HS ) , to which erythroid - speci ﬁ c HSs have been mapped ( Tolhuis et al . , 2002 ) . This agglomeration of elements is termed the “ active chromatin hub ” ( ACH ) , and the association of the β - globin gene promoters with the ACH has been precisely correlated with their activity . Thus , in erythroid cells that lack transcription factors crucial for β - globin gene expression , such as GATA - 1 and EKLF , the β - globin genes do not appear to colocalize with the LCR or other sequences ( Drissen et al . , 2004 ; Vakoc et al . , 2005 ) . Furthermore , in erythroid progenitors that do not yet express the β - globin genes , a subset of the elements that make up the ACH – 3 ′ HS1 , − 60 HS , and HS5 of the LCR – and which are bound by CTCF still colocalize . The presumed structure that results has been termed a “ pre - ACH ” or simply a “ chromatin hub ” ( CH ) , and it has been speculated that the formation of the ACH occurs on this pre - formed core ( Palstra et al . , 2003 ) . 3C has also been used to elucidate association or colocalization of distal sequences within the Th2 cytokine locus in T - lymphocytes ( Spilianakis and Flavell , 2004 ) . In addition to a complex pattern of colocalization of various sequences within this region , however , selected promoters and other elements appear to colocalize with other elements within the Ifn γ locus , located on another chromo - some ( Spilianakis et al . , 2005 ) . This apparent interchromosomal interaction is particularly interesting since genes within the Th2 cytokine locus and the Ifn γ locus are expressed speci ﬁ cally in lineages ( Th2 and Th1 lymphocytes , respectively ) that are both derived from naïve CD4 + T cells ; the interchromosomal interaction appeared strongest in these cells and was diminished after differentiation into Th2 or Th1 cells . A similar picture has also emerged for the function of Polycomb group ( PcG ) proteins in gene repression ( a comprehensive overview of PcG function is beyond the scope of this article , but for current reviews see Simon and Kingston , 2009 , and Müller and Verrijzer , 2009 ) . 3C - based studies , along with other approaches , have suggested that DNA sequences associated with PcG factors coloca - lize with silenced gene promoters , and that the PcG factors themselves are responsible for promoting long - range intrachromo - somal and interchromosomal interactions to form repressive domains within the nucleus ( Cleard et al . , 2006 ; Lanzuolo et al . , 2007 ; Tiwari et al . , 2008 ) . These studies and a host of others suggest that distal regulatory elements function via colocalization with the promoters they regulate , resulting in the formation of speci ﬁ c three - dimensional conformations within the nucleus that facilitate the molecular steps required for gene activation ( Fig . 1A ) . Thus , enhancer function is linked to larger patterns of nuclear organiza - tion – most notably , the spatial segregation of the genome into compartments that harbor “ open ” and “ closed ” chromatin , respec - tively – that accompany gene expression patterns genome - wide ( Lieberman - Aiden et al . , 2009 ) . Thus far , however , while factor dependence for such associations has often been shown , the molecular interactions responsible for bringing about the observed juxtapositions between enhancers and promoter remain elusive . Factors required for function of enhancer - blocking elements [ CTCF and , in Drosophila , su ( Hw ) ] have been observed to form distinct foci within the nucleus , representing colocalization of multiple CTCF - and su ( Hw ) - bound sequences throughout the genome ( Wallace and Felsenfeld , 2007 ; Gaszner and Felsenfeld , 2006 ) . Evidence for a similar unifying principle for enhancer - promoter colocalization has been provided by studies suggesting that within eukaryotic nuclei , RNA polymerase II also forms distinct foci , implying the presence of so - called “ transcription factories ” ( Iborra et al . , 1996 ) . Notably , in addition to gene promoters , many enhancers are associated with RNA polymerase II , which would suggest that colocalization of enhancers and promoters involves association of both types of element with the same transcription factories ( Fig . 1B ) . A study of the α - globin locus that utilized 3C along with chromatin immunoprecipitation ( ChIP ) to reveal RNA polymerase II binding sites demonstrated a perfect correlation : all sequences found to colocalize by 3C were associated with RNA polymerase II and vice versa ( Vernimmen et al . , 2007 ) . In addition , in studies of the β - globin locus there is an excellent correlation between conditions under which promoter - LCR interac - tions are lost ( for example , in cells lacking GATA - 1 and EKLF ) and the absence of RNA polymerase II at the promoter ( Drissen et al . , 2004 ; Vakoc et al . , 2005 ) . This raises an important question : is colocaliza - tion of enhancers and promoters , as revealed by 3C , an underlying mechanism of enhancer - promoter communication , or is it simply a consequence of the association of RNA polymerase II with both types of regulatory element ? Within the β - globin locus , simultaneous deletion of 3 ′ HS1 and the − 60 HS resulted in no measurable phenotype ( Bender et al . , 2006 ) ; thus , loss of two of the three CTCF - bound elements known to comprise the “ pre - ACH ” had no effect on β - globin gene expression . In support of this , the absence of CTCF in murine erythroid progenitors similarly had no effect on β - globin gene expression or colocalization of other , non - CTCF - bound elements within the locus as determined by 3C ( Splinter et al . , 2006 ) , with the caveat that undifferentiated progenitors do not express high levels of β - globins normally . Thus , while some studies have shown that loss of gene expression correlates with loss of nuclear colocalization as revealed by 3C , other studies have shown that interactions revealed by 3C are not necessarily functional in gene regulation . FISH analysis of erythroid cells has shown that active genes throughout mouse chromosome 7 colocalize within the nucleus , and at surprisingly high frequencies ( Osborne et al . , 2004 ) . For example , the active β - globin gene appears to colocalize with active genes at the other end of chromosome 7 in 40 – 60 % of cells . In fact , combination of 3C with microarray technology – termed “ 4C ” – has shown that in general , active genes appear to colocalize with other active genes on the same chromosome , with some interchro - mosomal interactions as well ( Simonis et al . , 2006 ) . Conversely , inactive genes tend to colocalize with other inactive genes on the same chromosome . Such studies have been interpreted to suggest an organization within the nucleus in which active gene loci form self - organized clusters , within which concentrations of activating factors are thus high enough to reinforce the active state . Transfection - based studies have suggested that different types of genes tend to cluster in the same RNA polymerase “ factories , ” implying that this self - organizing principle extends beyond active / inactive to include speci ﬁ c gene classi ﬁ cations within the nucleus ( Xu and Cook , 2008 ) ( Fig . 1C ) . The question that arises , however , is then to what degree speci ﬁ c enhancer - promoter interactions revealed by 3C actually contribute to gene activation . If the β - globin LCR colocalizes with other active genes on chromosome 7 nearly as frequently as it does with an active β - globin gene , then if this colocalization is important for function , the β - globin LCR should have a regulatory in ﬂ uence on the other genes as well . It is not yet known , however , if deletion of the β - globin LCR affects expression levels of other genes on mouse chromosome 7 . 254 M . Bulger , M . Groudine / Developmental Biology 339 ( 2010 ) 250 – 257 Fig . 2 . Potential roleofintervening DNAbetweenenhancersandpromoters , andfactorsthatassociatewithit , inenhancerfunction . Anenhancer andapromoterwithinagenelocus ( top left ) are both bound bysequence - speci ﬁ cfactors , which inturn serveto recruita factor orcomplex thatthen associateswithchromatin throughout the locus ( bottom left ) . We depictseveralpotentialmechanismsthatmightthenensue : ( 1 ) factorsboundbetweentheenhancerandpromoterservetoorganizetheinterveningchromatininordertobringthe two elements together spatially ; ( 2 ) factors extending from the enhancer to the promoter along the intervening chromatin serve as the primary signal for gene activation , with no necessaryroleforenhancer - promoterjuxtaposition ; ( 3 ) factorsassociatingwiththeinterveningchromatinorganizethelocustobringbothenhancerandpromotertoatranscription factory and accomplish gene activation . Conceivably , enhancer - promoter juxtaposition at transcription factories may be an event secondary to gene activation , as in ( 2 ) . 255 M . Bulger , M . Groudine / Developmental Biology 339 ( 2010 ) 250 – 257 Thus , the functional consequences of nuclear colocalization , or even of transcription factories , are still largely unknown , and most of the available evidence consists of correlations , not demonstrations of function . There is reason for skepticism . For example , the aggregates of the su ( Hw ) protein that provided the initial evidence for the clustering of su ( Hw ) - bound DNA sequences appear to be unrelated to the enhancer - blocking function of these sequences ( Golovnin et al . , 2008 ) . Enhancer - blocking and a potential role for intervening DNA in enhancer function Alternatively , LCR - or enhancer - promoter colocalization revealed by 3C or FISH may not re ﬂ ect the major or only mechanism by which activation occurs . Several observations of enhancer function argue against a simple “ looping ” model for interactions with promoters , starting with the early ﬁ nding that sequences and cognate binding factors that activate promoters over long distances in mammalian cells fail to do so when imported into the yeast S . cerevisiae ( Dorsett , 1999 ) . This has been interpreted as an indication that an activity required for long - range function is missing in yeast . In addition , even in mammals the ability of enhancers to activate transcription appears to be developmentally acquired , coinciding with the onset of transcriptional repression in a 2 - cell embryo in mice ( Majumder and DePamphilis , 1995 ) . The activity of enhancer - blocking elements suggests not only that the mechanism by which enhancers and promoters interact is more complex than colocalization alone , but that the intervening DNA between such elements is also important . This activity has long been recognized as a signi ﬁ cant clue to how enhancer - promoter commu - nication occurs , although its precise meaning has never been clear . Such elements do not appear to inactivate either the promoter or the enhancer , nor do they “ trap ” the enhancer such that it cannot interact with another promoter , or the promoter so that it cannot interact with another enhancer ( Dorsett , 1999 ) . Perhaps the most popular model for the mechanism by which enhancer - blocking elements work is that they divide genomic DNA into “ topologically distinct ” domains across which sequence - speci ﬁ c trans - interactions cannot occur ( Gaszner and Felsenfeld , 2006 ) . It is not obvious , however , how two regions of the genome can be kept “ topologically distinct ” when the presumed mechanism for enhancer function involves direct interactions that can occur across different chromosomes . In addition , at least one process that is known to require direct interaction between DNA sequences that can be located far from each other within the genome – site - speci ﬁ c recombination by Flp recombinase – is not inhibited by interposing an enhancer - blocking element between recombinase sites ( Dunaway et al . , 1997 ) . Thus , although the best evidence suggests a correlation between gene activation and enhancer - promoter colocalization within the nucleus , such colocalization is either established by a process that involves the intervening DNA , or is accompanied by such a process ( Fig . 2 ) . It is then this process that enhancer - blocking elements disrupt , and is in turn not present in S . cerevisiae . Some hints have been presented that suggest a mechanism by which enhancer - promoter interactions are mediated via intervening sequences . First , based on the activity of enhancer - blocking ele - ments , a genetic screen was performed in Drosophila that identi ﬁ ed a protein termed Chip ( with homologues termed Ldb - 1 and - 2 in mammals ) as a crucial cofactor in the activity of multiple enhancer elements ( Morcillo et al . , 1997 ; Dorsett , 1999 ) . Based on the known properties of Chip , it was suggested that this protein was responsible for forming multiple “ mini - loops ” between an enhancer and a promoter that effectively shortened the distance between them and facilitated their interaction . Notably , the other factor that emerged from the same genetic screen in Drosophila was Nipped - B , which is required for the loading of cohesins onto chromosomes during S phase , again implying a function in bridging the gap between enhancer and promoter by effectively shortening the distance between them ( Dorsett , 2009 ) . A study of the β - globin locus in mammals has also shown that the histone methyltransferase MLL2 is associated with chromatin extend - ing from the LCR to the active gene ( Demers et al . , 2007 ) . Loss of the LCR - binding transcription factor NF - E2 resulted in loss of transcrip - tion and also loss of association of MLL2 throughout the locus . Thus , the β - globin LCR , while apparently colocalizing with the active gene promoters , is also required for the association of a histone modifying enzyme throughout the locus , including regions with which it does not appear to colocalize . Notably , genomic mapping of Nipped - B binding across the Drosophila genome similarly revealed large blocks of sequence that were continuously associated with this factor ( Dorsett , 2009 ) . The data again suggest a role for the intervening DNA in enhancer function via the generalized association of cofactors . Summary The ﬁ rst demonstrations of gene activation by sequences located far from promoters are now nearly 30 years old ( Banerji et al . , 1981 ; Moreau et al . , 1981 ) ; the ﬁ rst demonstration of LCR activity in transgenes was made more than 20 years ago ( Grosveld et al . , 1987 ) . In the time since these discoveries , major advances have been made in our understanding of gene regulation and the underlying processes – transcription by RNA polymerase II , modulation of chromatin structure and nuclear organization – accompanied by the develop - ment of new technologies that have suggested an unexpected breadth and complexity to the occurrence and activity of distal regulatory elements , and revealed enhancer - promoter interactions suggestive of the mechanism by which they function . Despite these advances , however , it is clear that answers to the most basic questions of enhancer function are as yet far from complete . Given the demon - strated importance of distal elements in the function of many gene loci , and the general importance implied by the potential for as many as a million enhancers in mammalian genomes , further studies of their function would appear to be a major requirement for a full understanding of gene regulation . References Aronow , B . J . , Ebert , C . A . , Valerius , M . T . , Potter , S . S . , Wiginton , D . A . , Witte , D . P . , Hutton , J . J . , 1995 . Dissecting a locus control region : facilitation of enhancer function by extended enhancer - ﬂ anking sequences . Mol . Cell . Biol . 15 , 1123 – 1135 . Banerji , J . , Rusconi , S . , Schaffner , W . , 1981 . Expression of a beta - globin geneis enhancer by remote SV40 DNA sequences . Cell 27 , 299 – 308 . Bell , A . C . , West , A . G . , Felsenfeld , G . , 1999 . The protein CTCF is required for the enhancer blocking activity of vertebrate insulators . Cell 98 , 387 – 396 . Bender , M . A . , Bulger , M . , Close , J . , Groudine , M . , 2000 . Beta - globin gene switching and DNaseI sensitivity of the endogenous beta - globin locus in mice do not require the locus control region . Mol . Cell 5 , 387 – 393 . Bender , M . A . , Byron , R . , Ragoczy , T . , Telling , A . , Bulger , M . , Groudine , M . , 2006 . Flanking HS - 62 . 5 and 3 ′ HS1 , and regions upstream of the LCR , are not required for beta - globin transcription . Blood 108 , 1395 – 1401 . Carninci , P . , Sandelin , A . , Lenhard , B . , Katayama , S . , Shimokawa , K . , Ponjavic , J . , Semple , C . A . , Taylor , M . S . , Engström , P . G . , Frith , M . C . , Forrest , A . R . , Alkema , W . B . , Tan , S . L . , Plessy , C . , Kodzius , R . , Ravasi , T . , Kasukawa , T . , Fukuda , S . , Kanamori - Katayama , M . , Kitazume , Y . , Kawaji , H . , Kai , C . , Nakamura , M . , Konno , H . , Nakano , K . , Mottagui - Tabar , S . , Arner , P . , Chesi , A . , Gustincich , S . , Persichetti , F . , Suzuki , H . , Grimmond , S . M . , Wells , C . A . , Orlando , V . , Wahlestedt , C . , Liu , E . T . , Cleard , F . , Moshkin , Y . , Karch , F . , Maeda , R . K . , 2006 . Probing long - distance regulatory interactions in the Drosophila melanogaster bithorax complex using Dam identi ﬁ cation . Nat . Genet . 38 , 931 – 935 . Dekker , J . , Rippe , K . , Dekker , M . , Kleckner , N . , 2002 . Capturing chromosome conformation . Science 295 , 1306 – 1311 . Demers , C . , Chaturvedi , C . P . , Ranish , J . A . , Juban , G . , Lai , P . , Morle , F . , Aebersold , R . , Dilworth , F . J . , Groudine , M . , Brand , M . , 2007 . Activator - mediatedrecruitmentofthe MLL2 methyltransferase complex to the beta - globin locus . Mol . Cell 27 , 573 – 584 . Dorsett , D . , 1999 . Distant liaisons : long - range enhancer - promoter interactions in Drosophila . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 9 , 505 – 514 . Dorsett , D . , 2009 . Cohesin , gene expression and development : lessons from Drosophila . Chromosome Res . 17 , 185 – 200 . Drissen , R . , Palstra , R . J . , Gillemans , N . , Splinter , E . , Grosveld , F . , Philipsen , S . , de Laat , W . , 2004 . The active spatial organization of the beta - globin locus requires the transcription factor EKLF . Genes Dev . 18 , 2485 – 2490 . 256 M . Bulger , M . Groudine / Developmental Biology 339 ( 2010 ) 250 – 257 Dunaway , M . , Hwang , J . Y . , Xiong , M . , Yuen , H . L . , 1997 . The activity of the scs and scs ' insulator elements is not dependent on chromosomal context . Mol . Cell . Biol . 17 , 182 – 189 . Ellis , J . , Talbot , D . , Dillon , N . , Grosveld , F . , 1993 . Synthetic human beta - globin 5 ′ HS2 constructs function as locus control regions only in multicopy transgene concatemers . EMBO J . 12 , 127 – 134 . ENCODEProjectConsortium , 2007 . Identi ﬁ cationandanalysisoffunctionalelementsin 1 % of the human genome by the ENCODE pilot project . Nature 447 , 799 – 816 . Festenstein , R . , Tolaini , M . , Corbella , P . , Mamalaki , C . , Parrington , J . , Fox , M . , Miliou , A . , Jones , M . , Kioussis , D . , 1996 . Locus control region function and heterochromatin - induced position effect variegation . Science 271 , 1123 – 1125 . Forrester , W . C . , van Genderen , C . , Jenuwein , T . , Grosschedl , R . , 1994 . Dependence of enhancer - mediated transcription of the immunoglobulin mu gene on nuclear matrix attachment regions . Science 265 , 1221 – 1225 . Gaszner , M . , Felsenfeld , G . , 2006 . Insulators : exploiting transcriptional and epigenetic mechanisms . Nat . Rev . Genet . 7 , 703 – 713 . Gdula , D . A . , Gerasimova , T . I . , Corces , V . G . , 1996 . Genetic and molecular analysis of the gypsy chromatin insulator of Drosophila . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 93 , 9378 – 9383 . Golovnin , A . , Melnikova , L . , Volkov , I . , Kostuchenko , M . , Galkin , A . V . , Georgiev , P . , 2008 . ‘ Insulator bodies ’ are aggregates of proteins but not of insulators . EMBO Rep . 9 , 440 – 445 . Grosveld , F . , van Assendelft , G . B . , Greaves , D . R . , Kollias , G . , 1987 . Position - independent , high - level expression of the human beta - globin gene in transgenic mice . Cell 51 , 975 – 985 . Hardison , R . , 2000 . Conserved noncoding sequences are reliable guides to regulatory elements . Trends Genet . 16 , 369 – 372 . Hardison , R . , Slightom , J . L . , Gumucio , D . L . , Goodman , M . , Stojanovic , N . , Miller , W . , 1997 . Locus control regions of mammalian beta - globin gene clusters : combining phylogenetic analyses and experimental results to gain functional insights . Gene 205 , 73 – 94 . Hare , E . E . , Peterson , B . K . , Iyer , V . N . , Meier , R . , Eisen , M . B . , 2008 . Sepsid even - skipped enhancers are functionally conserved in Drosophila despite lack of sequence conservation . PLoS Genet . 4 , e1000106 . Heintzman , N . D . , Stuart , R . K . , Hon , G . , Fu , Y . , Ching , C . W . , Hawkins , R . D . , Barrera , L . O . , Van Calcar , S . , Qu , C . , Ching , K . A . , Wang , W . , Weng , Z . , Green , R . D . , Crawford , G . E . , Ren , B . , 2007 . Distinct and predictive chromatin signatures of transcriptional promoters and enhancers in the human genome . Nat . Genet . 39 , 311 – 318 . Heintzman , N . D . , Hon , G . C . , Hawkins , R . D . , Kheradpour , P . , Stark , A . , Harp , L . F . , Ye , Z . , Lee , L . K . , Stuart , R . K . , Ching , C . W . , Ching , K . A . , Antosiewicz - Bourget , J . E . , Liu , H . , Zhang , X . , Green , R . D . , Lobanenkov , V . V . , Stewart , R . , Thomson , J . A . , Crawford , G . E . , Kellis , M . , Ren , B . , 2009 . Histone modi ﬁ cations at human enhancers re ﬂ ect global cell - type - speci ﬁ c gene expression . Nature 459 , 108 – 112 . Huang , S . , Li , X . , Yusufzai , T . M . , Qiu , Y . , Felsenfeld , G . , 2007 . USF1 recruits histone modi ﬁ cation complexes and is critical for maintenance of a chromatin barrier . Mol . Cell . Biol . 27 , 7991 – 8002 . Iborra , F . J . , Pombo , A . , Jackson , D . A . , Cook , P . R . , 1996 . Active RNA polymerases are localized within discrete transcription “ factories ” in human nuclei . J . Cell Sci . 109 , 1427 – 1436 . Kimura , K . , Wakamatsu , A . , Suzuki , Y . , Ota , T . , Nishikawa , T . , Yamashita , R . , Yamamoto , J . , Sekine , M . , Tsuritani , K . , Wakaguri , H . , Ishii , S . , Sugiyama , T . , Saito , K . , Isono , Y . , Irie , R . , Kushida , N . , Yoneyama , T . , Otsuka , R . , Kanda , K . , Yokoi , T . , Kondo , H . , Wagatsuma , M . , Murakawa , K . , Ishida , S . , Ishibashi , T . , Takahashi - Fujii , A . , Tanase , T . , Nagai , K . , Kikuchi , H . , Nakai , K . , Isogai , T . , Sugano , S . , 2006 . Diversi ﬁ cation of transcriptional modulation : large - scale identi ﬁ cation and characterization of putative alternative promoters of human genes . Genome Res . 16 , 55 – 65 . Koch , C . M . , Andrews , R . M . , Flicek , P . , Dillon , S . C . , Karaöz , U . , Clelland , G . K . , Wilcox , S . , Beare , D . M . , Fowler , J . C . , Couttet , P . , James , K . D . , Lefebvre , G . C . , Bruce , A . W . , Dovey , O . M . , Ellis , P . D . , Dhami , P . , Langford , C . F . , Weng , Z . , Birney , E . , Carter , N . P . , Vetrie , D . , Dunham , I . , 2007 . The landscape of histone modi ﬁ cations across 1 % of the human genome in ﬁ ve human cell lines . Genome Res . 17 , 691 – 707 . Lanzuolo , C . , Roure , V . , Dekker , J . , Bantignies , F . , Orlando , V . , 2007 . Polycomb response elements mediate the formation of chromosome higher - order structures in the bithorax complex . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 , 1167 – 1174 . Li , Q . , Harju , S . , Peterson , K . R . , 1999 . Locus control regions : coming of age at a decade plus . Trends Genet . 15 , 403 – 408 . Lieberman - Aiden , E . , vanBerkum , N . L . , Williams , L . , Imakaev , M . , Ragoczy , T . , Telling , A . , Amit , I . , Lajoie , B . R . , Sabo , P . J . , Dorschner , M . O . , Sandstrom , R . , Bernstein , B . , Bender , M . A . , Groudine , M . , Gnirke , A . , Stamatoyannopoulos , J . , Mirny , L . A . , Lander , E . S . , Dekker , J . , 2009 . Comprehensivemappingoflong - rangeinteractionsrevealsfolding principles of the human genome . Science 326 , 289 – 293 . Majumder , S . , DePamphilis , M . L . , 1995 . A unique role for enhancers is revealed during early mouse development . BioEssays 17 , 879 – 889 . Margulies , E . H . , Cooper , G . M . , Asimenos , G . , Thomas , D . J . , Dewey , C . N . , Siepel , A . , Birney , E . , Keefe , D . , Schwartz , A . S . , Hou , M . , Taylor , J . , Nikolaev , S . , Montoya - Burgos , J . I . , Löytynoja , A . , Whelan , S . , Pardi , F . , Massingham , T . , Brown , J . B . , Bickel , P . , Holmes , I . , Mullikin , J . C . , Ureta - Vidal , A . , Paten , B . , Stone , E . A . , Rosenbloom , K . R . , Kent , W . J . , Bouffard , G . G . , Guan , X . , Hansen , N . F . , Idol , J . R . , Maduro , V . V . , Maskeri , B . , McDowell , J . C . , Park , M . , Thomas , P . J . , Young , A . C . , Blakesley , R . W . , Muzny , D . M . , Sodergren , E . , Wheeler , D . A . , Worley , K . C . , Jiang , H . , Weinstock , G . M . , Gibbs , R . A . , Graves , T . , Fulton , R . , Mardis , E . R . , Wilson , R . K . , Clamp , M . , Cuff , J . , Gnerre , S . , Jaffe , D . B . , Chang , J . L . , Lindblad - Toh , K . , Lander , E . S . , Hinrichs , A . , Trumbower , H . , Clawson , H . , Zweig , A . , Kuhn , R . M . , Barber , G . , Harte , R . , Karolchik , D . , Field , M . A . , Moore , R . A . , Matthewson , C . A . , Schein , J . E . , Marra , M . A . , Antonarakis , S . E . , Batzoglou , S . , Goldman , N . , Hardison , R . , Haussler , D . , Miller , W . , Pachter , L . , Green , E . D . , Sidow , A . , 2007 . Analyses of deep mammalian sequence alignments and constraint predictions for 1 % of the human genome . Genome Res . 17 , 760 – 764 . Maston , G . A . , Evans , S . K . , Green , M . R . , 2006 . Transcriptional regulatory elements in the human genome . Annu . Rev . Genomics Hum . Genet . 7 , 29 – 59 . Miele , A . , Dekker , J . , 2008 . Long - range chromosomal interactions and gene regulation . Mol . Biosyst . 4 , 1046 – 1057 . Morcillo , P . , Rosen , C . , Baylies , M . K . , Dorsett , D . , 1997 . Chip , a widely expressed chromosomal protein required for segmentation and activity of a remote wing margin enhancer in Drosophila . Genes Dev . 11 , 2729 – 2740 . Moreau , P . , Hen , R . , Wasylyk , B . , Everett , R . , Gaub , M . P . , Chambon , P . , 1981 . The SV40 72 base pair repeat has a striking effect on gene expression both in SV40 and other chimeric recombinants . Nucleic Acids Res . 9 , 6047 – 6068 . Müller , J . , Verrijzer , P . , 2009 . Biochemical mechanisms of gene regulation by polycomb group protein complexes . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 19 , 150 – 158 . Osborne , C . S . , Chakalova , L . , Brown , K . E . , Carter , D . , Horton , A . , Debrand , E . , Goyenechea , B . , Mitchell , J . A . , Lopes , S . , Reik , W . , Fraser , P . , 2004 . Active genes dynamically colocalize to shared sites of ongoing transcription . Nat . Genet . 36 , 1065 – 1071 . Palstra , R . J . , Tolhuis , B . , Splinter , E . , Nijmeijer , R . , Grosveld , F . , de Laat , W . , 2003 . The beta - globin nuclear compartment in development and erythroid differentiation . Nat . Genet . 35 , 190 – 194 . Ronai , D . , Berru , M . , Shulman , M . J . , 1999 . Variegated expression of the endogenous immunoglobulin heavy - chain gene in the absence of the intronic locus control region . Mol . Cell . Biol . 19 , 7031 – 7040 . Sawado , T . , Halow , J . , Bender , M . A . , Groudine , M . , 2003 . The beta - globin locus control region ( LCR ) functions primarily by enhancing the transition from transcription initiation to elongation . Genes Dev . 17 , 1009 – 1018 . Schubeler , D . , Groudine , M . , Bender , M . A . , 2001 . The murine beta - globin locus control regionregulatestherateoftranscriptionbutnotthehyperacetylationofhistonesattheactivegenes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 98 , 11432 – 11437 . Simon , J . A . , Kingston , R . E . , 2009 . Mechanisms of Polycomb gene silencing : knowns and unknowns . Nat . Rev . Mol . Biol . 10 , 697 – 708 . Simonis , M . , Klous , P . , Splinter , E . , Moshkin , Y . , Willemsen , R . , deWit , E . , vanSteensel , B . , de Laat , W . , 2006 . Nuclear organization of active and inactive chromatin domains uncovered by chromosome conformation capture - on - chip ( 4C ) . Nat . Genet . 38 , 1348 – 1354 . Spilianakis , C . G . , Flavell , R . A . , 2004 . Long - range chromosomal interactions in the T helper type 2 cytokine locus . Nat . Immunol . 5 , 1017 – 1027 . Spilianakis , C . G . , Lalioti , M . D . , Town , T . , Lee , G . R . , Flavell , R . A . , 2005 . Interchromosomal associations between alternatively expressed loci . Nature 435 , 637 – 645 . Splinter , E . , Heath , H . , Kooren , J . , Palstra , R . J . , Klous , P . , Grosveld , F . , Galjart , N . , de Laat , W . , 2006 . CTCF mediates long - range chromatin looping and local histone modi ﬁ cation in the beta - globin locus . Genes Dev . 20 , 2349 – 2354 . Tiwari , V . K . , Cope , L . , McGarvey , K . M . , Ohm , J . E . , Baylin , S . B . , 2008 . A novel 6C assay uncoversPolycomb - mediatedhigherorderchromatinconformations . GenomeRes . 18 , 1171 – 1179 . Tolhuis , B . , Palstra , R . J . , Splinter , E . , Grosveld , F . , de Laat , W . , 2002 . Looping and interaction between hypersensitive sites in the active beta - globin locus . Mol . Cell 10 , 1453 – 1465 . Vakoc , C . R . , Letting , D . L . , Gheldof , N . , Sawado , T . , Bender , M . A . , Groudine , M . , Weiss , M . J . , Dekker , J . , Blobel , G . A . , 2005 . Proximity among distant regulatory elements at the beta - globin locus requires GATA - 1 and FOG - 1 . Mol . Cell 17 , 453 – 462 . Veitia , R . A . , 2008 . One thousand and one ways of making functionally similar transcriptional enhancers . BioEssays 30 , 1052 – 1057 . Vernimmen , D . , De Gobbi , M . , Sloane - Stanley , J . A . , Wood , W . G . , Higgs , D . R . , 2007 . Long - range chromosomal interactions regulate the timing of the transition between poised and active gene expression . EMBO J . 26 , 2041 – 2051 . Visel , A . , Blow , M . J . , Li , Z . , Zhang , T . , Akiyama , J . A . , Holt , A . , Plajzer - Frick , I . , Shoukry , M . , Wright , C . , Chen , F . , Afzal , V . , Ren , B . , Rubin , E . M . , Pennacchio , L . A . , 2009 . ChIP - seq accurately predicts tissue - speci ﬁ c activity of enhancers . Nature 457 , 854 – 858 . Wallace , J . A . , Felsenfeld , G . , 2007 . We gather together : insulators and genome organization . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 17 , 400 – 407 . Xi , H . , Shulha , H . P . , Lin , J . M . , Vales , T . R . , Fu , Y . , Bodine , D . M . , McKay , R . D . , Chenoweth , J . G . , Tesar , P . J . , Furey , T . S . , Ren , B . , Weng , Z . , Crawford , G . E . , 2007 . Identi ﬁ cation and characterization of cell type - speci ﬁ c and ubiquitous chromatin regulatory structures in the human genome . PLoS Genet . 3 , e136 . Xu , M . , Cook , P . R . , 2008 . Similar active genes cluster in specialized transcription factories . J . Cell Biol . 181 , 615 – 623 . Zhu , Q . , Halfon , M . S . , 2009 . Complex organizational structure of the genome revealed by genome - wide analysis of single and alternative promoters in Drosophila melanogaster . BMC Genomics 10 , 9 . 257 M . Bulger , M . Groudine / Developmental Biology 339 ( 2010 ) 250 – 257