Wiki as a Platform – Turning Dissemination into Collaboration Craig S . Evans 1 , 2 1 Illinois Informatics Institute , University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign 2 Graduate School of Information and Library Science , University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign Abstract In research projects , data collection and dissemination are considered as two discrete and independent activities . The focus is on the research question , and not on how to best collect , present and subsequently share data . Although most US funding agencies now require that researchers data share , the tools available to operationalize this requirement are lacking . We propose show how the open source MediaWiki system can provides a lightweight , collaborative , and inexpensive tool to support new data sharing practices . This note serves to illustrate how interactive data collection and dissemination supported by a Wiki server can be used by scientists both during the project and for subsequent dissemination . Keywords : data sharing , information reuse , collaborative information systems , scholarly communications Citation : Evans , C . S . ( 2014 ) . Wiki as a Platform - Turning Dissemination into Collaboration . In iConference 2014 Proceedings ( p . 820 – 826 ) . doi : 10 . 9776 / 14404 Copyright : Copyright is held by the author . Acknowledgements : Project completed as part of Preserving Virtual Worlds 2 ( PVW2 ) . PVW2 was made possible through National Leadership Grant # LG - 06 - 10 - 0160 from the Institute of Museum & Library Services . Thanks to Dr’s Jerome McDonough ( PVW2 ) , Michael Twidale ( Academic Advisor ) , and Catherine Blake for academic feedback , and editorial advice . Contact : mailto : csevans2 @ illinois . edu 1 Introduction Research does not get performed in a bubble . At some point , the findings and results of the research need to be published and made accessible . This is a basic tenet of the ‘paradigms’ or ‘normal science’ as defined by Kuhn ( Kuhn , 2012 ) . The traditional mechanism to achieve this goal is a published scientific article . As a distribution mechanism the journal , conference proceeding , and book have been the primary means of distributing knowledge . However , changes in scholarly practices such as FORCE11 1 ( Bourne et al . , 2012 ) which advocates new ways to work on an article , and nanopublishing ( Sofronijević & Pavlović , 2013 ) are changing the way that scientists disseminate information after a project is complete . In this paper we introduce a way to leverage the same platform used during the collaborative research process to concurrently create a collection suitable for external publishing . A common requirement for grant funding agencies is that a “proposal budget may request funds for the costs of documenting , preparing , publishing or otherwise making available to others the findings and products of the work conducted under the grant . ” ( National _ Science _ Foundation , 2013 ) . For many projects this is a straightforward process , and can utilize an institutions online presence such as the IDEALS 2 centralized storage system , publish through a personal , project , or departmental webpage , or disseminate through journals and conference proceedings . However for some projects , a more interactive means for distributing data is required and that often takes the form of a Wiki . While this is appropriate for disseminating results , it doesn’t capture the growing need for interactive collection , analysis , and distribution of information during a project , and after a project it is complete . 1 www . force11 . org - “a community of scholars , librarians , archivists , publishers and research funders that has arisen organically to help facilitate the change toward improved knowledge creation and sharing . Individually and collectively , we aim to bring about a change in modern scholarly communications through the effective use of information technology . ” 2 IDEALS – https : / / ideals . illinois . edu iConference 2014 Craig S . Evans Collaborative research is not new . Harrison and Dourish ( Harrison & Dourish , 1996 ) make a distinction between space ( the physical location where work occurs ) and place ( where work is done ) . Traditionally scientific collaboration required collocation ( space ) , and by using well - defined or ad - hoc tools ( place ) . Twidale and Nichols ( Twidale & Nichols , 1996 ) showed that while collaborative systems exist that allow people to access common information sources , the designers of these systems do everything they can to make it feel like the user is using an individual resource . Scientists do work well together , but as reported by Blake ( Blake & Pratt , 2006a ) the process of collaborating would be enhanced with tools that allowed better sharing of information . Studies in Collaborative Information Seeking ( Karunakaran & Reddy , 2012 ) as well as Blake’s Collaborative Information Synthesis study have shown that there is a focus on sharing of documents and the integration of extracted facts , but that is all . It is proposed that collaboration should extend beyond documents , extracted data , and annotations to data collection and other activities that allow users to work together at different workplaces . In the current research model , funding is predominantly for a fixed period of time , and while data management plans are increasingly asking for how data and research will be distributed and archived post - project , this is not the focus area of a project proposal and not an area where limited resources are typically allocated . Adding complexity is the collaborative nature of projects , involving research from multiple public and private institutions , and the individual involvement of non - affiliated members of the general public . People from outside the Principle Investigators institution may not only be authoring or commenting on research in progress , but might be actively contributing edits , data , or annotations to the research . While ad - hoc tools are often brought together to facilitate collaboration , it is often as an after thought , and will often be a mix of online or cloud based solutions such as a Wiki or Google docs . The Wiki is used to share information in a consumptive manner , while the Google docs are used to collaboratively edit . 1 . 1 Motivating Example The Preserving Virtual Worlds 2 Project 3 ( McDonough et al . , 2010 ) was a funded research initiative with a defined timeline . The outcomes from the project included a survey tool to continue gathering information , as well as an ability to disseminate information . The general structure of the data collection is along the lines of a survey . The obvious choice is to use a survey engine such as Survey Monkey … but who collects the data for analysis in the future ? Ongoing maintenance of a system is not uncommon after a projects funding is complete . So how can this be achieved ? While the PVW2 project motivated this project , the Wiki as a platform concept was a very small part of the research and served the purpose of survey data collection only . While building the system , the author realized the potential for other research projects and has started to explore the use of Wikis as a collaborative dissemination mechanism . 2 Description The use of Wikis in research is commonplace , and allows authors to publish information while allowing users to search and browse information and allows collaborative editing of text documents , as well as a modicum of discussion . However , this is largely a publication model , with little interaction with the data . We needed a solution that was simple , lightweight , had low ongoing maintenance overhead , was secure , and could be sustained without the need for programming resources . To satisfy these goals , along with the need for post project longevity , we turned to open source software that could be customized with minimal effort . 3 PVW2 focuses on determining significant properties for a variety of educational games and game franchises in order to provide a set of best practices for preserving the materials through virtualization technologies and migration , as well as provide an analysis of how the preservation process is documented . 821 iConference 2014 Craig S . Evans The platform we based our solution on was MediaWiki 4 – the same Wiki engine used by Wikipedia . This platform was chosen because it presented a number of immediate benefits . • Lightweight MediaWiki uses a lightweight LAMP ( Linux , Apache , MySQL , PHP ) style application stack . For our purposes , we used Apple’s OS X operating system , with its internal web server ( which is Apache based ) , a MySQL database , and PHP at the database interface language . Internal pages were developed using the standard Wiki markup language and HTML / CSS with JavaScript for the enhanced data entry pages . • Low Maintenance Overhead The MediaWiki server is the basis of Wikipedia , and as such has been demonstrated to scale exceptionally well . As the underlying Wikipedia server , the software is actively supported and regularly patched . This has the advantage of reducing the burden of requiring a software engineer to maintain and upgrade code . Content is displayed using a combination of standard Wiki markup language as well as HTML / CSS and JavaScript via common plugins . • Secure The inherent security model of MediaWiki was another attractive feature in that a dedicated systems administrator was not required for the server , and security was largely self managed by the system . Dedicated logins to internal resources were not required , with nominated users being able to grant / revoke user privileges . To enhance use in an academic setting , the user signup page can be readily customized to include wording for IRB acceptance as well . • Simplicity and familiarity With those major functions addressed , the fourth criterion to be addressed was simplicity . The advantages of this approach were twofold : 1 . The navigation model was familiar to the user community ; 2 . The Wiki markup schema is well established and well documented . Previous solutions were over engineered and added a level of complexity to the task of data collection that were inappropriate for the task and the target audience . • Extendibility While not a standard feature , a readily available plugin for MediaWiki is an ability to use HTML and CSS within the pages . This allowed us to create flexible and dynamic survey forms that would normally require a webserver to host , and access to the file structure to maintain . By embedding HTML into MediaWiki , we are now able to update survey pages without the need to have backend server access . To create an interactive server that was more than a publishing platform we also installed the following extensions : o Cite and SpecialCite – enhanced citation handling o SecureHTML – allows embedded HTML / CSS in wiki page o Vector – Adds the familiar Wikipedia UI o WikiEditor – Enhanced word processor style page editing • Cheap While listed last , with limited resources in a budget , this is a major advantage . A Wiki based system is generally open source 5 . The system will run on low cost servers utilizing a LAMP ( Linux , Apache , MySQL , PHP ) approach that is well understood ( no specialized training for staff to install , maintain , and use ) , has readily available support ( online forums from a very active user community ) , 4 www . mediawiki . org 5 Commercial Wiki systems are available , however a majority of them are open source and free for academic use . 822 iConference 2014 Craig S . Evans and has regular maintenance and upgrade release ( minimizing developer overhead , and increasing security through user contributed patches ) . This adds up to being a small line item in a budget instead of a major undertaking . Figure 1 : Example data collection form using HTML , CSS , and JavaScript Standard Wiki Navigation and Layout . Look and feel of web page controlled by user selected Wiki Template . Allows for use by screen readers with appropriate template . Security Controlled via Wiki Security model . This page shows someone with Admin access , allowing them to make changes to the code on the page is necessary Dynamic content controlled via standard JavaScript and CSS / HTML settings . Text entry blocks only appear as required . Use of Wiki Categories to enable enhanced content settings for security . Completion / suggestion for data entry based on information already in database to minimize data entry errors . HTML based buttons , saves data back to the Wikipedia database , allowing ready integration into existing Wiki pages for reporting . Also allows for error checking , missed fields , and data entry validation 823 iConference 2014 Craig S . Evans 3 Discussion The traditional use of a Wiki is that of a publishing platform that allows the content to be collaboratively edited and comments made , with an audit trail of changes . For many projects this provides an adequate level of control , and provides a means to consolidate changes within a collection of documents . The HTML and CSS plugins for Wiki are intended for enhancing layout using standard web based techniques , but HTML is not purely for display . Adding in these plugins opens up options that are not generally considered for a Wiki based platform . Using forms and server side scripting such as PHP , it is possible to create interactive websites . With an underlying MySQL database , forms can be written to the same database and tables that the Wiki is pulling from to display information . A further advantage is that data from the survey can write to the MediaWiki database , can dynamically pull information from the database ( Wiki pages ) , and can use the MediaWiki interface to display data . By embedding these within a Wiki framework we now have a platform that is suitable for both the publishing and collection of data , and displaying dynamic content . This combination of plugin and wiki server has a number of other advantages that can also suddenly be leveraged . • Dynamic Data Displays The web has become interactive . Data is now dynamically graphed , charted , plotted and manipulated through web based interfaces using a number of techniques such as the Data Driven Documents library ( d3 . org ) . These interfaces can be readily incorporated into a Wiki page . This has the advantage that the data presented in a wiki is no longer static , but is a living entity that can be visualized by the user in ways that were not originally conceived . • External data sources A Wiki is typically limited to the data that is contained within its database . A web based solution does not have those limitations , and can pull data from sources outside the Wiki database . While not searchable as part of the Wiki index , this information could be used to enhance the data within a wiki page to provide context or supplemental data . • Template Based Displays The advantage of this is two fold . The wiki is a primarily a publishing platform . Content is displayed according to the deployment of templates . This template driven approach has a number of advantages . 1 . Mobile Sites : By detecting the browser , different template options can be loaded . This allows for the same content to be displayed in formats that are appropriate to both desktop style clients as well as mobile clients . With the relevant HTML embedded within the template code for a Wiki page , information can be displayed to mobile devices in a form that is more appropriate to that platform , while desktop computers can have a richer presentation . 2 . Accessibility : By deploying a template that adheres to accessibility standards , those with visual or mobility disabilities will be able to access and participate using the same underlying data as others within a project . By allowing a user to choose the appropriate template for their usage needs ( standard , mobile , accessible ) the system can be used by a wider audience . • Data Verification and Quality Control Surprisingly , a standard Wiki installation has little in the way of form controls . By using a security models we can limit who can enter data ( verified project team members ) , who can edit data ( verified project team members ) , who can comment on the data ( users with an account ) , and who can read the data ( anyone ) . Data entered and made visible in this form allows for a peer review and 824 iConference 2014 Craig S . Evans verification , and importantly , because changes are logged , a edit history of changes is also maintained . It should also be noted that beyond peer review , simpler systems such as using Javascript to perform edit checks prior to saving data , or Ajax to look up a field in a database and autocomplete a response ( minimizing transcription errors ) are also available once we incorporate an interactive interface into the Wiki system . 4 Future Work Grudin’s Eight Challenges for Groupware Developers ( Grudin , 1994 ) posited that there was a “disparity in work and benefit … often requir ( ing ) additional work from individuals who do not perceive a direct benefit from the use of the application . ” At the moment the people who are doing the work are the scientists , and the people who get the reward are scientists in other groups . By repurpose existing software in order to support collaboration during the project and subsequent dissemination , those creating the content get the benefits during the project , and the results are already in a form suitable for public dissemination . While the PVW2 project is completed , the Wiki as a Platform concept has been included in a number of upcoming research initiatives . We are hoping that by using the MediaWiki system in combination with the described plugins , we will have a platform that we can further tailor with minimal effort to not only act as an interactive portal for the collection of data , and the presentation and explorations of data , but will also provide a platform to gauge usage patterns , and ascertain which pages are the most important to different types of users . The projects under review will make use of the Data Driven Documents paradigm , creating visualizations that will help scientists to explore the data they are contributing , and will have a template driven interface so that they display appropriately on mobiles devices as well as desktop computers without the need for a dedicated mobile client . 5 Conclusion Collaboration should mean working together . The location is immaterial provided that the tools and resources at hand allow people to contribute to the common project , comment on each others work , and share results with both those in their project as well as disseminate the findings to a wider audience . The use of the Wiki framework presented also has the advantage of allowing scientists multiple views of the same data , and a level of transparency in data entry that could also help to ensure data quality . Streamlining the process and integrating the research and publication will make it easier for scientists to collaborate during a project and disseminate their work after . 6 References Blake , Catherine , & Pratt , Wanda . ( 2006a ) . Collaborative information synthesis I : A model of information behaviors of scientists in medicine and public health . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 57 ( 13 ) , 1740 - 1749 . Blake , Catherine , & Pratt , Wanda . ( 2006b ) . Collaborative information synthesis II : Recommendations for information systems to support synthesis activities . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 57 ( 14 ) , 1888 - 1895 . Bourne , PE , Clark , T , Dale , R , de Waard , A , Herman , I , Hovy , E , & Shotton , D . ( 2012 ) . Improving Future Research Communication and e - Scholarship . Force 11 Manifesto . Grudin , Jonathan . ( 1994 ) . Groupware and social dynamics : eight challenges for developers . Communications of the ACM , 37 ( 1 ) , 92 - 105 . Harrison , Steve , & Dourish , Paul . ( 1996 ) . Re - place - ing space : the roles of place and space in collaborative systems . Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 1996 ACM conference on Computer supported 825 iConference 2014 Craig S . Evans cooperative work , Boston , Massachusetts , United States . http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? doid = 240080 . 240193 Karunakaran , Arvind , & Reddy , Madhu . ( 2012 ) . The role of narratives in collaborative information seeking . Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 17th ACM international conference on Supporting group work , Sanibel Island , Florida , USA . Kuhn , Thomas S . ( 2012 ) . The structure of scientific revolutions : University of Chicago press . McDonough , Jerome , Olendorf , Robert , Kirschenbaum , Matthew , Kraus , Kari M , Reside , Doug , Donahue , Rachel , . . . Rojo , Susan . ( 2010 ) . Preserving virtual worlds final report . National Science Foundation . ( 2013 ) . Proposal and Award Policies and Procedures Guide : Part I - Grant Proposal Guide . ( OMB Control Number : 3145 - 0058 ) . Retrieved from http : / / www . nsf . gov / publications / pub _ summ . jsp ? ods _ key = gpg . Sofronijević , Adam , & Pavlović , Aleksandra . ( 2013 ) . Applicability of the nano - publication concept for fostering Open Access in developing and transition countries . Twidale , Michael , & Nichols , David . ( 1996 ) . Collaborative browsing and visualisation of the search process . Paper presented at the Aslib Proceedings . 7 Table of Figures Figure 1 : Example data collection form using HTML , CSS , and JavaScript . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 823 826