Subreddit Links Drive Community Creation and User Engagement on Reddit Rachel Krohn , 1 Tim Weninger 2 1 Rose - Hulman Institute of Technology , 2 University of Notre Dame krohn @ rose - hulman . edu , tweninger @ nd . edu Abstract On Reddit , individual subreddits are used to organize content and connect users . One mode of interaction is the subreddit link , which occurs when a user makes a direct reference to a subreddit in another community . Based on the ubiquity of these references , we have undertaken a study on subreddit links on Reddit , with the goal of understanding their impact on both the referenced subreddit , and on the subreddit land - scape as a whole . By way of an extensive observational study along with several natural experiments using the entire history of Reddit , we were able to determine that ( 1 ) subreddit links are a signiﬁcant driver of new suberddit creation ; ( 2 ) subreddit links ( 2a ) substantially drive activity in the referenced subred - dit , and ( 2b ) are frequently created in response to high levels of activity in the referenced subreddit ; and ( 3 ) the graph of subreddit links has become less dense and more treelike over time . We conclude with a discussion of how these results con - ﬁrm , add to , and in some cases conﬂict with existing theories on information - seeking behavior and self - organizing behavior in online social systems . Introduction All that is gold does not glitter , Not all those who wander are lost ; ( J . R . R . Tolkien , Fellowship of the Ring ) Users of online social systems tend to group into communi - ties based on common interests , a speciﬁc topic , or a singular purpose . These communities take on unique characteristics based on their form or function . Depending on the platform , these communities can be well - deﬁned or completely infor - mal . For example , Reddit is particularly community - focused : all content is organized into subreddits and each commu - nity is populated by users for the purpose of sharing and discussing relevant content . The same is true in many online social systems like StackExchange , Tumblr , and others . In the present work , we focus on explicit inter - community links , i . e . , direct , clickable , hyperlinks from one community to another . Hyperlinks like these are the deﬁning characteris - tic of the Web . Findings of information navigation ( Farzan and Brusilovsky 2018 ) and human wayﬁnding ( West and Leskovec 2012 ) on the Web are largely based on the construc - tionist interpretation of information behavior theory ( Fisher , Copyright © 2021 , Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial Intelligence ( www . aaai . org ) . All rights reserved . Figure 1 : Example of subreddit links in a Reddit comment thread . Each link points to a subreddit as a whole , and not to a single post or comment within that subreddit . These links are not only used to promote communities , but are also used as social commentary or jokes . In this case , r / simplyprofound did not exist at the time the link was made , prompting the r / subsifellfor reply . However , the subreddit r / simplyprofound was created as a result of this link , leading to the r / notanymore reply . Additionally , r / birthofasub is referenced , since this community chronicles the creation of new subreddits . Edelez , and McKechnie 2005 ) and have given way to well - deﬁned models of human behavior in these linked systems . These theories and models suggest that hyperlinks are a pri - mary driver of user navigation and attention , and are evidence of user interest ( Gao et al . 2021 ) . Hyperlinks are typically assumed to be intentional and reﬂective of some organizational structure – a structure typ - ically decided by the organization and implemented by a Web administrator ( Weninger , Johnston , and Han 2013 ) . But what happens when information structures and communities are deﬁned by the users themselves ? Existing models and theoretical frameworks have surprisingly little to say on the subject . Empirical studies on Wikipedia and Twitter show that users use links ( wikilinks and clickable hashtags resp . ) to self - organize and drive user attention to content ( Bairi , Car - man , and Ramakrishnan 2015 ) . But does the same hold true for social communities ? Do online links drive the formation a r X i v : 2203 . 10155v1 [ c s . S I ] 18 M a r 2022 and growth of online social groups ? Reddit is a natural environment in which to consider these questions because of the well - deﬁned subreddit structure and because inter - community references , illustrated in Fig . 1 , are commonplace on Reddit . We call these inter - community references subreddit links and , unlike links to content or users , these subreddit links reference an entire community – not a single post or comment . Therefore , users who create these subreddit links are consciously deciding to reference the community as a whole , and not one particular discussion or user within the community . Given that all Reddit content is hosted within some community , we can also say that each subreddit link originates in a particular community . In this way , subreddit links may be viewed as directed connections from one community to another . Most subreddit links reference an existing subreddit , en - couraging users to explore or join established communities . In other cases , links are made to subreddits that do not exist ( often as a joke ) , and occasionally these links spur the cre - ation of a new community . As a result subreddit links have the power to alter the community landscape of Reddit . The ability of these links to drive online community development and change has not , until now , been carefully studied . Instead , most work has focused on user - level behavior analysis ( Tan and Lee 2015 ) or on individual communi - ties and hashtag campaigns , e . g . , ( Jackson , Bailey , and Fou - cault Welles 2018 ) . Interaction between community enti - ties is less understood . What role do these inter - community links serve in online communities ? And how do these inter - community links affect the evolution and dynamics of the online social system at large ? Answers to these questions are critical to our understand - ing of social organization in online spaces and can be used to inform design decisions of future online social systems . Only after we understand the dynamics by which communities are created and grow can we begin to deﬁne user roles and other behavioral dynamics ( Yang et al . 2019 ) . Research Questions The overarching goal of the current work is to better under - stand these subreddit links , where they come from , where they lead , and the effect that these links have on the evolution of the community - structure as a whole . Speciﬁcally , we ask : RQ1 Do subreddit links spur the creation of new communi - ties ? RQ2 Does a subreddit link impact the activity level of the referenced community ? RQ3 From the perspective of these subreddit links , how has the landscape of subreddit interactions changed over time ? What does this tell us about the evolution of Reddit ? We show that subreddit links have substantive impact on both activity levels within existing communities , and on com - munity generation . Users have adopted this mechanism of community creation , promotion , and navigation , thereby im - buing subreddit links with the power to inﬂuence the overall social landscape . These community links therefore represent another avenue of innovation on the social Web , one that seeks to better organize the wealth of content by allowing users themselves , instead of “the algorithm” , to drive engage - ment , create communities , and organize content . Social Media Communities Social media communities exist in a variety of forms , and for a variety of purposes . Once established , a community takes on an identity beyond its user base . Unique commu - nity characteristics can impact user behavior both within and outside the community . Some communities favor loy - alty among users , yielding higher user retention ( Hamilton et al . 2017 ) . Similarly , dynamic and distinctive communi - ties are better at retaining users than communities without these features ( Zhang et al . 2017 ) . On Reddit , subreddits fea - turing niche content can even prevent users from migrating to another platform ( Newell et al . 2016 ) . However , not all community features are universally predictive ; rather , they are unique environments , each governed by a distinct set of rules ( Horne , Adali , and Sikdar 2017 ) . Online communities can interact in various interesting ways . In the case of informal communities , topics may shift and overlap as they evolve . In well - deﬁned community spaces , mechanisms exist for inter - community interactions . For example , on Reddit content may be cross - posted to mul - tiple subreddits simultaneously , or links to content in another subreddit may fuel additional discussion . Communities may be highly inﬂuential , or alternatively dependent , on other communities ( Bel ´ ak , Lam , and Hayes 2012 ) . Community loyalty can impact not only user behavior within the com - munity , but also the underlying structure of the community itself ( Hamilton et al . 2017 ) . Conversely , how distinctive or dynamic a community is can determine how users engage with that community ( Zhang et al . 2017 ) . However , not all community interaction is internal . On - line communities must coexist on the same platform as other communities with opposed ideals , which can lead to con - ﬂict between communities . Reddit is an archetype of such a Web site where subreddits share , co - mingle , and are fre - quently in conﬂict with one another . These disagreements can manifest as conﬂicting behavior by member users ( Datta and Adar 2019 ) . Alternatively , users in one subreddit may be mobilized to ‘attack’ another subreddit as a way of ex - pressing negative sentiment , leading to a multi - community conﬂict ( Kumar et al . 2018 ) . Content can also be poached from small communities and re - posted to a larger commu - nity with the goal of amassing Internet karma ( Gilbert 2013 ) . Some communities can even become havens of hate speech , prompting bans before the toxic behavior can spread to other communities ( Chandrasekharan et al . 2017 ) . Within a multi - community ecosystem , patterns of user behavior can predict the types of communities users will choose to engage with . While some users are intrinsically loyal , and are therefore more likely to remain in communities they join initially ( Hamilton et al . 2017 ) , other users may instead wander through communities making them unlikely to stay long - term ( Tan and Lee 2015 ) . Models of informa - tion forging behavior , for example , rely heavily on a certain stochasticity of the users in order to ﬁnd alternate paths to additional information ( Pirolli 2009 ) . Those who wander risk reaching dead - ends but may also be rewarded by the dis - covery of new , interesting content . Exploratory , risk - taking browsing appears to be on the rise on the Web . A recent survey of ( N = 498 ) Web users found that 12 % of Web brows - ing was passive , i . e . , users had no particular goal in mind , compared to just 2 % in 1997 ( Liu 2020 ) . Differences in user information - seeking styles are also predictive : while goal - oriented users engage with a narrower set of communities , wanderers cast a wider net and participate in a greater variety of communities ( Waller and Anderson 2019 ) Evolution of Communities Because community - building is a primary motivation for Reddit users to remain on the platform ( Moore and Chuang 2017 ) , users tend to invest their attention in smaller , more specialized communities instead of larger , more general sub - reddits . To meet this demand , the number of subreddits has expanded to cover increasingly niche topic areas . As a result of this explosion in the number of available communities , the most popular subreddits now account for a smaller percentage of total posts on Reddit ( Singer et al . 2014 ) . Overall , active communities have shifted towards smaller , more intimate groups ( Ford , Krohn , and Weninger 2021 ) . As social media has evolved , so too have the communities within it . One aspect of a community’s unique identity is the way in which it grows and changes over time . The lifecycle of a community may be characterized with different behav - ior patterns as the community evolves ( Mensah , Xiao , and Soundarajan 2020 ) . Within a single community , users may be more susceptible to community - induced linguistic change during certain community life stages ( Danescu - Niculescu - Mizil et al . 2013 ) . A particular focus of community evolution is the creation of these communities – the gathering of like - minded users into a cohesive group . Existing work in this area is limited , and is generally focused on predicting community popularity , and not on the processes and mechanisms driving community birth and growth . This in itself is a challenging problem , as there are many different ways to measure community suc - cess ( Cunha et al . 2019 ) . While many social scientists look to genealogical analysis – based on users’ existing commu - nity ties – to predict future community growth ( Tan 2018 ) , others consider both diffusion and other growth to model community growth and death ( Kairam , Wang , and Leskovec 2012 ) . It is clear that communities play an important role in how people use and interact with social media , but there remain unanswered questions . How do users ﬁnd new communities ? And how are they created in the ﬁrst place ? The prevailing wisdom is that social media users create new communities to ﬁll gaps in existing offerings , but not all communities will succeed in attracting an active user base . When considering newly - formed communities , how are they established and where do the members of the new subreddit come from ? In order for users to self - organize into distinct communities , they must somehow be exposed to new communities as they are created . In this work , we begin to explore the role of subreddit links on Reddit in the community formation and growth process . Subreddit Links On Reddit content is organized into various communities , known as subreddits . Each subreddit hosts various posts , each with associated comments . Within these posts and comments , users may link to content elsewhere on the web , including other Reddit content . One special case of these links is a subreddit link , which occurs when a user links directly to a subreddit , instead of a speciﬁc post , comment , or external website . These subreddit links can be viewed as a promotion or recommendation of the referenced community . The real example in Fig . 1 illustrates several instances of subreddit links , where each can be identiﬁed by the r / preﬁx . In addition to providing recommendation or commentary , subreddit links are also used as commentary or as means for a joke . A series of links may build upon one another as users add to the joke . Users may also link to a single community as a form of meme , using the subreddit name as a response to the parent post or comment . For example , a link to r / mapswithoutnz is a common occurrence , and serves both as commentary on an inaccurate map , and as promotion of that community . These links may be followed by further references to r / mapswithoutjapan , r / mapswithoutcyprus , or r / mapswithoutthecheasapeakebay – even though the last of these is not a real subreddit ( yet ) . These subreddit links are not restricted to subreddits that already exist ; users may also link to a community that does not exist . Often these types of links are used as jokes , and may follow the naming convention of an existing community . This communication method is well - established on Reddit , and users are aware of how these references can create a new subreddit . For example , the community r / birthofasub catalogs new communities that are created following a subreddit link . Because of the frequency of these subreddit links , and the ease by which these links can be identiﬁed , they are a natural ﬁt for a study on direct community interaction . Each subreddit link is a conscious choice by the posting user to reference a particular subreddit as a whole , instead of a speciﬁc post or comment within that community . The unit of information in these subreddit links is therefore the community itself , offering a unique opportunity to assess the impact of these links on community growth and creation . Extracting and Categorizing Links We extract all subreddit links on Reddit from June 2005 to December 2019 . This includes all links occurring in both posts and comments , by any user , on any subreddit . To be a valid subreddit link , the link must a ) reference a subreddit and not a particular post or comment ; b ) point to a valid subreddit name , according to Reddit’s naming requirements ; and c ) be properly formatted including the r / preﬁx . In this way , we capture all direct community references . In total , we identiﬁed 110 , 365 , 594 subreddit links . Figure 2 illustrates the number of subreddit links over time . Although the number of subreddit links per month is only about 1 % of the total comments and posts , their num - ber has grown at about the same rate . We observe that more links occur in comments , rather that in post - text . There are many reasons for this . First , there is a much higher volume of 2005 2010 2015 2020 10 0 10 4 10 8 Date L i n ks P e r M on t h ( l og ) All Comments All Posts Links in Comments Links in Posts Figure 2 : Number of subreddit links appearing in posts and comments per month . Subreddit links are found in about 1 % of all post and comments after 2010 . comments than posts on Reddit . Second , many posts do not contain text , and instead consist only of images . Finally , com - ments tend to be reactive replies to other content , so subreddit links ﬁt more naturally here – for example , replies to threaded content may spur a reference to a related community . We categorize these subreddit links into 3 primary types . Promotional links are those links that reference a different subreddit that already exists ; in this way , the posting user is promoting or recommending the referenced community . Inventive links are those links to a subreddit that does not exist at the time of the link , but may exist at some point in the future . In this case , the posting user is leveraging the subreddit link format to potentially spawn a new community , or as a referential communication method . Finally , self - links are those links from one subreddit to itself . For example , a user may use the link r / AskReddit to refer to the community as a whole within a post in that subreddit . Figure 3 shows the frequency of these link types over time . Promotional links are the most common , followed by self - links , and then inventive links . Because self - links do not reference an external community , and therefore do not drive inter - community interactions , we do not analyze these links further . The large number of subreddit links and the variety of the different types both indicate the acceptance by users of this interaction method . Users have adopted the link format , using it for the intended purpose – referencing an existing community – and co - opting it ironically to link to nonexistent communities sarcastically or as a joke . Inventive Links and Community Creation The large adoption of this style of communication provides a way to determine the answer to RQ1 : Do subreddit links spur the creation of new communities ? In the context of the aforementioned models of information seeking behavior , the thinking goes that a hyperlink provides a mode by which the user can move to a new information - space . If a user clicks on a subreddit - link , it shows some modicum of interest in the linked - subject , perhaps framed by the context of the linking information . Then , if it turns out that the community is absent , i . e . , the link is broken , then the interested user may be motivated to create the community . 10 0 10 3 10 6 L i n ks P e r M on t h ( l og ) Promotional links Self - links Inventive links 2005 2010 2015 2020 10 0 10 2 10 4 Date L i n ks P e r M on t h ( l og ) Failed Inventive Link Successful Inventive Link Figure 3 : ( Top ) Number of subreddit links per month by type . ( Bottom ) Number of failed and successful inventive links per month . Formally , we deﬁne an inventive link as a subreddit link made at time t 0 in community u referencing a community v that does not exist at time t 0 . In this way , we can say that the posting user may be inventing the new subreddit v . Not all inventive links are successful . Most often , the in - vented community v is never created as a subreddit . We classify these inventive links as failed inventive links . On the contrary , successful inventive links are those links that result in the referenced community v being created at some later time t v > t 0 . It is important to note that we do not claim to know if the link is directly or causally responsible for the creation of subreddit . Given the observational nature of the present work , we can only study the correlation between links and subreddit creation . Furthermore , we do not impose any time requirements to inventive links ; there may exist a long delay between the time of the link t 0 and the community’s creation time t v ( assuming community v is created at all ) . Therefore , there is no way to know when an inventive link is ﬁrst made whether it will be successful or not – only when referenced subreddit v is created can the link be classiﬁed as successful . This deﬁnition also means that a single community v may experience many inventive links before its creation . As indicated in Fig . 3 and directly illustrated in Fig . 4 , most inventive links are unsuccessful . Even as the overall number of inventive links has increased over time , the number of links resulting in the creation of a new community has remained relatively stable , especially when compared with the growing number of failed inventive links . As a result , the probability a link will produce a new community has decreased over time . Visibility bias may be the reason that inventive links appearing in post text are more likely to result in the creation of a community , because post - text is always displayed at the top of the Web page . It is important to note our deﬁnition of an inventive link is essentially an attempt at invention . A single attempt lives 2010 2015 2020 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 Date P r ob . I n v en t i v e L i n k i s S u cc e ss f u l Link in Post All Links Link in Comment Figure 4 : Probability that a new subreddit is created immedi - ately after an inventive link has decreased over time . This and future plots begin at 2010 because there are too few subreddit links to reliably calculate probabilities before 2010 . 10 0 10 1 10 2 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 Number of Inventive Attempts ( log ) P r ob . I n v en t i v e L i n k i s S u cc e ss f u l Figure 5 : Probability new subreddit is created given a cer - tain number of inventive links . Error bars represent 95 % conﬁdence from the Binomial test . Repeated links reach a saturation point of 33 % success at about 20 repetitions . permanently – unless the poster deletes their comment – but the effect of a single attempt is short - lived . Posts and com - ments are typically only relevant for a few days after their posting . Subreddit creation statistics bear this out : 8 . 78 % of all subreddits were created within 1 day of an inventive link ; likewise , 10 . 09 % , 10 . 62 % , and 11 . 34 % of all subreddits were created within one , two , and four weeks after an inventive link was posted referencing the not - yet - created new subred - dit . If we remove all time restrictions we ﬁnd that 16 . 60 % of all created subreddits were referenced by a subreddit link at some point before their creation . Taken together , these statistics suggest that users interpret at least some subreddit links as a signal for a new community to be created . Instead of new subreddits being formed out - of - the - blue , many are spurred by these links . Because a measurable portion of new subreddits experienced inventive links before their creation , this organizational innovation is common enough to merit further investigation . It is natural to assume that repeated posts of the same inventive link ought to result in a greater likelihood of a successful invention . We therefore ask : do repeated inventive attempts produce an additive effect ? To address this question , we plotted the probability that a subreddit is created as a function of the number of inventive attempts in Fig . 5 . There is a logarithmic correlation between the number of inventive attempts and the success probability ( Pearson R 2 = 0 . 83 ) ; the probability of a successful invention reaches a saturation point of 33 % at about 20 repetitions . This loga - rithmic trend follows similar results of saturation in language models and other classical asymptotic plots of diminishing returns ( Rowlands , Waddell , and McKenna 2016 ) . Overall we found 4 , 306 , 117 total inventive links . Of those , 715 , 106 ( 13 . 60 % ) were eventually successful and 3 , 591 , 011 were not . Note that the existence of duplicate links is responsible for the difference from the 16 . 60 % - ﬁnding from earlier . Here we count subreddit links , which contain duplicates ; earlier we counted subreddits , which do not . A Natural Experiment for Statistical Testing Our deﬁnition of a successful inventive link provides that any future creation of a subreddit after some past inventive link is seen as a success – this is perhaps too permissive . It may therefore be difﬁcult to say whether or not inventive links are correlated with successful subreddit creation from these descriptive statistics alone . Instead , a proper statistical analysis can be realized through a straightforward adoption of survival analysis . Formally , given an inventive link to subreddit v at time t 0 , we deﬁne survival as a subreddit continuing to not exist as time elapses . We deﬁne a null hypothesis as follows : for any inventive link to subreddit v at time t 0 we randomly iden - tify another subreddit v (cid:48) that was created after t 0 and deﬁne survival as v (cid:48) not existing as time elapses . Simply put , the null model captures the time to creation of a particular sub - reddit without an inventive link , as compared to a subreddit experiencing an inventive link . Survival analysis using the log rank test found that inven - tive links were far more likely to result in the creation of the referenced subreddit within seven days compared to the con - trol ( χ 2 = 242 . 61 p - value < 0 . 001 ) . The resulting Kaplan - Meier curve is illustrated in Fig . 6 . This ﬁgure shows graphically what the statistics report analytically : that an inventive link signiﬁcantly increases the probability that the referenced sub - reddit will be created compared to the control . Although not illustrated , the same holds true if we consider time lim - its of one day ( χ 2 = 971 . 82 p - value < 0 . 001 ) and one month ( χ 2 = 161 . 16 p - value < 0 . 001 ) . In addition to the log rank test , we also performed Cox regression analysis using the amount of activity in the link - ing subreddit during the month of the link , as well as the subreddit identities ( names ) themselves , as covariates . Ulti - mately , the amount of activity in the linking subreddit was not found to be predictive of the creation of a referenced subreddit . However , subreddits r / nﬂ , r / AskReddit , and others were found to have slight predictive power on the eventual creation of a referenced subreddit , but that statistical signiﬁ - cance waned once Bonferroni correction was applied to the p - values . Overall , we show that although inventive links are not a guarantee of future subreddit creation , they are highly and immediately correlated to the birth of new communities on Reddit . As information seeking theory suggests , these sub - reddit links can therefore be seen as a driving force behind 0 84 168 0 0 . 5 1 Hours After Inventive Link E s t . I n v . P r ob . o f S ub r edd i t C r ea t i on Control Inventive Link Figure 6 : Survival analysis Kaplan - Meier curve for inven - tive subreddit links compared to the control . Inventive links signiﬁcantly increase the probability that the referenced sub - reddit will be created compared to the control ( χ 2 = 242 . 61 p - value < 0 . 001 ) . − 168 − 24 0 24 168 3 4 5 6 · 10 − 3 Time relative to link event ( hours ) M ean N o r m a li z ed A c t i v i t y Le v e l Normalized Activity Seasonality Adjusted − 12 0 12 Figure 7 : Subreddit activity levels one week before and after a promotional link in another subreddit ( 12 hours before and after inset ) . ( Aggregating 10 % of promotional links from 6 - 2005 through 12 - 2019 . ) Error bars show 95 % conﬁdence interval . Activity rises and falls over the course of a 24 - hour period , but overall activity is higher following a promotional link event . Removing seasonality from the activity levels makes the rise in activity following a link more apparent . organizational innovation : users leverage these links to better shape Reddit’s structure and content . Subreddit Links Promote Community Activity Having determined that subreddit links are signiﬁcantly cor - related with the creation of new subreddits , our next goal is to answer RQ2 : whether or not subreddit links confer sig - niﬁcant activity upon the referenced subreddit . Are users successfully driving engagement via community promotion ? To answer this question we ﬁrst deﬁne a promotional link as any subreddit link made at time t 0 in community u ref - erencing an existing community v , where u (cid:54) = v . By deﬁni - tion , community v ’s ﬁrst activity occurred at time t v , where t v < t 0 . Therefore , we say that community u is promoting community v via a direct link . To measure the effect of these promotional links on a subreddit’s activity level , we begin by ﬁrst extracting all pro - motional link events . Across all of Reddit from June 2005 to December 2019 , we found 70 , 512 , 949 promotional links . − 168 − 24 0 24 168 4 6 8 · 10 − 3 Time relative to link event ( hours ) M ean N o r m a li z ed A c t i v i t y Le v e l Random Activity Promotional Link Random Time − 12 0 12 Figure 8 : Activity for one week before and after promo - tional link ( 12 hours before and after inset ) . Error bars show 95 % conﬁdence interval . Activity surrounding a link event is higher than baseline activity around a random time , but lower than activity around a contribution within the subreddit . − 168 − 24 0 24 168 0 0 . 5 1 Time relative to link event ( hours ) ρ H 0 = Random Time H 0 = Random Activity − 12 0 12 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 Figure 9 : Mann - Whitney ρ ( rho ) statistic between promo - tional link activity and random controls for one week before and after link ( 12 hours before and after inset ) . Extreme val - ues , near 0 or 1 , represent stronger distribution separation , while ρ = 0 . 5 indicates complete overlap . We ﬁnd that a promotion link is correlated with statistically higher activity in the referenced subreddit compared to a random time , but statistically less activity than a random post in the referenced subreddit . Two sided p < 0 . 001 for all tests , but are not illustrated here for clarity . Next , we computed the activity level of the referenced sub - reddit v surrounding the promotional link . Activity is counted as the number of contributions ( posts and comments ) in the referenced subreddit , relative to the time of the promotional link . This allows for a comparison of pre - link and post - link activity levels . For each promotional link , we normalized the activity lev - els within each hour for the week before and week after the link posting . Each promotional link is considered indepen - dently , even if a subreddit experiences multiple links within a single week . The normalized activity represents the rela - tive portion of activity that occurs in each hour - bin , thereby controlling for subreddit size effects . Mean activity levels per hour and their 95 % conﬁdence internals are illustrated in Fig . 7 . An oscillating activity pat - tern is clearly evident and represents the daily oscillations in activity dominated by the the primarily English - speaking audience of Reddit , i . e . , the Western hemisphere timezones . The overall activity level before and after a promotional link is higher than the background . Furthermore , although it is difﬁcult to see from the illustration , the activity level appears to be slightly higher after the link than before , particularly in the ﬁrst 24 hours . This suggests that promotional links have some effect on subreddit activity levels , but that the effect is not long - lasting or of a high magnitude . Ultimately , these results illustrate what we already know : activity begets activity ( Muchnik , Aral , and Taylor 2013 ; Glenski and Weninger 2017 ) . The question is : how much more activity than baseline does a subreddit link provide ? We answer this question by deﬁning two control models : an upper bound and a lower bound . Because activity within a subreddit is known to spur activity within a subreddit , we devise an upper bound null model by drawing a random contribution ( post or comment ) in subreddit v for each pro - motional link referencing v . As a lower bound null model , we draw one random time in the same month as each subreddit link – but not responsive to any particular subreddit link or other activity time . Simply put , the upper bound null model corresponds to the activity surrounding a random contribu - tion in the subreddit , and the lower bound corresponds to a random time . We illustrate these normalized and adjusted activity levels in Fig . 8 . We ﬁnd that promotional links generate a large increase in activity in the referenced subreddit . Compared to the random activity upper bound , which appears to be mostly - symmetrical about the selected activity , the Promotional Link activity appears statistically elevated before and after the time of promotional link . These ﬁndings match predictions from information forag - ing theory : that a link would drive trafﬁc to the referenced community , just as hyperlinks on the Web drive users to in - teract with content . However , this behavior is different than a direct content link increasing engagement with an article or video online . Because subreddit links reference an entire community , and not a particular post , the mechanism of en - gagement is different . For subreddits to exhibit increased activity following a promotional link , users must not only fol - low the link , but also browse the community before making their own post or comment . This two - step process requires effort beyond following the subreddit link , requiring the user to engage with the community environment ﬁrst . Statistical Testing Unfortunately , the descriptive statistics presented in the above analysis are unable to provide statistical clarity to RQ2 : are promotional links statistically correlated with a change in subreddit activity ? To gain further clarity on this question , we apply the Mann - Whitney U - test to the distribution of activity within each hour and compare the activity of promo - tional links against the upper and lower bounded controls . We plot the Mann - Whitney ρ ( rho ) values for the two tests in Fig . 9 . We observe that the activity surrounding random times is signiﬁcantly lower than promotional links , and that activ - ity surrounding random events is signiﬁcantly higher than promotional links . All associated two - tailed p - values < 0 . 001 . Simply put , promotional links are correlated with an increase of activity in the referenced subreddit , but not as much as a post - itself . Types of Promotional Links These results raise further questions . Primarily we ask : are promotional links driven by activity in the referenced sub - reddit ? Or do promotional links cause an increase in activity following the link ? We are interested in the driving force behind subreddit links because of what it can tell us about how these links are being used . If most promotional links are the result of high activity within the referenced subreddit , this would suggest links are being used to highlight active and thriving com - munities . This can be seen as users adding structural ties between different types of communities and content , thereby contributing to the organization of Reddit . If , however , most links cause an increase in activity , this would suggest a de - sire to introduce new users to a different community . These links again create relationships between communities , but also seek to increase engagement in the referenced commu - nity . These contrasting motivations represent very different use - cases of promotional links . Absent the ability to survey linking users , our goal is to to better understand these moti - vations by examining the frequency and activity patterns of different types of links . For this analysis we focus on the activity immediately surrounding a promotional link . For each promotional link , we sum the activity in the 24 hours preceding the link , and also the activity in the 24 hours following the link . We then compare these two activity totals . Links with more activity before the link are labeled reactive links , and those with more activity after the link are labelled proactive links ; exact ties are rare and are thrown out from this categorization . Proac - tive links are most clearly predicted by information foraging theory , wherein a link is used by an information seeker to explore information . However , we also ﬁnd that many other users leave proverbial breadcrumbs in the form of reactive links to guide others towards interesting activity – a behavior not predicted by the information foraging framework . Across all months of Reddit data , we labeled 4 , 543 , 377 links as reactive links , and 3 , 792 , 075 links as proactive . We expected to ﬁnd far more proactive links , i . e . , links that mo - tivate activity in the referenced subreddit . However , both link types occur frequently , suggesting two link motivations coexist among Reddit users . For both categories of links , we compute the mean , median , Q1 , and Q3 of the normalized subreddit activity level . Results are shown in Fig . 10 . We ﬁnd that the reactive vs . proactive categorization is particularly compelling : there is a large discrepancy in activity between these two types of links . Does the size of the subreddit matter ? For both reactive and proactive links , we examined the distribution of subreddit sizes , for both the linking and referenced subreddits , where subreddit size is deﬁned as the total number of posts and comments per month . Comparing the subreddit size distribu - tion for linking subreddits in the reactive and proactive link groups , we ﬁnd that these two distributions are very similar ( KS - Test D = 0 . 004 , Mann - Whitney ρ = 0 . 4979 ) . The distri - − 100 − 50 0 50 100 0 0 . 5 1 · 10 − 2 Time relative to link event ( hours ) M ean N o r m a li z ed A c t i v i t y Le v e l Reactive Links − 100 − 50 0 50 100 Time relative to link event ( hours ) Proactive Links − 12 0 12 − 12 0 12 Mean Median Q1 Q3 Random Time Random Event Figure 10 : Average normalized activity level surrounding promotional links partitioned into two categories based on pre - link vs post - link activity levels for one week ( 12 hours before and after inset ) . Error bars show 95 % conﬁdence interval . Activity is summed in the 24 hours before and after the promotional link , and each link is categorized based on whether there is more activity before or after the link . In reactive links ( left ) , there is a rise in activity leading up to the promotional link ; in proactive links ( right ) , the rise in activity occurs following the link . In both cases , the period of increased activity surpasses the activity of the random contribution control . butions of referenced subreddit sizes are also very similar ( KS - Test D = 0 . 023 , Mann - Whitney ρ = 0 . 5146 ) . However , we do ﬁnd some difference between the subreddit size dis - tributions for linking and referenced subreddit . For reactive links , we ﬁnd that the linking subreddit tends to be larger than the referenced subreddit ( KS - Test D = 0 . 155 , Mann - Whitney ρ = 0 . 6184 ) . We ﬁnd the same relationship for proactive links ( KS - Test D = 0 . 180 , Mann - Whitney ρ = 0 . 6337 ) . Simply put , subreddit size does not appear to be correlated with a link being reactive or proactive , but linking subreddits tend to be larger than the referenced subreddit . Regardless of the motivations and mechanisms behind these two types of links , it is clear that not all promotional links have the same impact on the referenced subreddit . While some links are the cause of increased activity , others appear to be the effect of previous activity . Though linking subreddits tend to be larger than the referenced subreddit , subreddit size is not correlated with the link type . Both types of promotional links allow users to add structural ties between different com - munities ( we assume , however , with different motivations ) thereby inﬂuencing engagement and content curation beyond simple likes and upvotes . Community Linkage Graph Now that we have established the impact of both inventive and promotional subreddit links on the creation of new com - munities and activity within communities , we turn our at - tention to the overall community landscape on Reddit . Once again , the many subreddit links provide an avenue and per - spective to answer RQ3 : How has the landscape of subreddit interactions changed over time ? More speciﬁcally , we seek to understand the role of subreddit links in modelling Reddit’s structure and evolution and to determine the impact of these organically occurring connections . To assess the changing community landscape on Reddit , we built a subreddit link graph based on direct subreddit links . For each month between 2010 and 2019 , we considered only inventive and promotional link events occurring within that month . Subreddits with at least one link event ( outgoing or incoming ) are added to the month’s graph as nodes . A di - rected edge is added to the graph for each subreddit link , from the linking subreddit to the referenced subreddit . Edges are weighted with the number of links to manage repeated links between the same pair of subreddits . We intentionally chose to build monthly versions of the subreddit graph rather than a single cumulative graph . The monthly subreddit graphs pro - vide temporal snapshots into the dynamics and evolution of the macro - network . A cumulative graph ( combining all pre - vious months together ) would potentially mix relationships that occurred years apart and are no longer relevant . We computed a variety of graph statistics on the monthly subreddit link graphs to evaluate how the connectivity pat - terns of Reddit have evolved . This macro - view provides in - sights into how communities , and the ties between them , have changed over time . The four subplots in Fig . 11 illustrate these dynamics . The subreddit graph consisted of a giant weakly connected component that comprised about 98 % of all nodes ( but var - ied slightly ( ± 1 % ) month to month ) . The diameter plot in Fig . 11 ( left ) shows how the 95 % effective diameter of the giant component has changed overtime . Generally , the di - ameter has increased slightly overall . This is in contrast to the well - established shrinking diameter’s of person - to - person social networks ( Leskovec , Kleinberg , and Faloutsos 2007 ) . These contrasting results are likely due to the creation of new subreddits : as more communities are created and participate in subreddit links , the largest weakly - connected component appears to be growing . We also computed the density and subreddit activity assor - tativity for these monthly graphs , but do not illustrate them 2010 2015 2020 10 15 20 Date 95 % D i a m e t e r 2010 2015 2020 0 . 1 0 . 15 0 . 2 Date A v g . C l u s t . C oe f . 2010 2015 2020 3 . 2 3 . 4 3 . 6 Date A v g . S ho r t e s t P a t h 0 . 1 0 . 15 0 . 2 3 . 2 3 . 4 3 . 6 Avg . Clust . Coef . A v g . S ho r t e s t P a t h Figure 11 : Subreddit link graph statistics over time . ( Left ) 95 % effective diameter of the largest weakly - connected component of the subreddit link graph increases slightly over time as new subreddits are created . Because subreddit links have not kept pace with community creation , the diameter of the graph has grown larger . ( Left Center ) Average clustering coefﬁcient of the largest weakly - connected component increased early in Reddit’s life , but then entered a decreasing trend . This suggests that subreddit links are more likely to extend beyond a subreddit’s immediate neighborhood . ( Right Center ) Average shortest path of the largest weakly - connected component increased over time as the graph grew larger as a result of the creation of new subreddits . ( Right ) Scatter - plot of average clustering coefﬁcient versus average shortest path length . Color indicates the passage of time from blue for 2010 to red for 2019 . Over time , the subreddit link graph has become sparser and more treelike . here . Both density and assortativity of the graphs were re - markably stable . Speciﬁcally , the density of the graph was quite low : ranging from 0 . 1 – 0 . 01 % . Graph assortativity was computed using the total activity ( number of posts and com - ments ) of each subreddit in each month . Assortativity mea - sures the preference for a network’s nodes to connect to other similar nodes ; assortativity near 1 indicates perfect assortativ - ity , i . e . , active nodes link to other active nodes ; values near - 1 indicate a disassortative network , i . e . , active nodes link to in - active nodes . Overall , we found that the activity assortativity was near 0 and relatively stable over all months . Independently , the average clustering coefﬁcient graph ( center left ) and the average shortest path length ( center right ) shows that the subreddit graph tends to cluster together less over time . However , much information can be gleaned by consider considering these two statistics in tandem ( You et al . 2020 ) as shown in Fig . 11 ( right ) . This ﬁgure plots points from blue to red corresponding to 2010 to 2019 ( more red is more recent ) . We interpret the red - shift in this graph to indicate that the subreddit graph is becoming sparser and more treelike over time . This suggests that subreddit links are not keeping pace with the creation of new subreddits , and that community ties do not cluster as strongly they did in the past . Because Reddit is a user - driven social network , all con - tent is created , curated , and organized by the participating users . New subreddits can be created with relatively little effort , leading to subreddits becoming more specialized over time ( Ford , Krohn , and Weninger 2021 ; Singer et al . 2014 ) . This expansion of Reddit mirrors the behavior of individual users , who continually post in new communities as they wan - der for new content ( Tan and Lee 2015 ) – new subreddits are required to feed these wandering users . As the organi - zational structure of Reddit has grown to encompass more different types of content , and Reddit has evolved and shifted focus ( Singer et al . 2014 ) , subreddit links serve as an another way for users to innovate and shape the environment to their liking by inﬂuencing the community landscape directly . Conclusions On Reddit , individual subreddits are used to organize content and connect users . Because these communities exist within the same space , and must therefore compete for attention , content , and users , subreddits often interact with one another . One mode of interaction is the subreddit link , which occurs when a user makes a direct reference to a subreddit in another community . Information foraging theory suggests that these links can be seen as promotion of the referenced community , driving information seekers to that content . But we also ﬁnd that subreddit links have evolved into a mechanism for jokes , memes , or other commentary . Subreddit links can also be seen as a new form of innovation , granting users the power to inﬂuence community engagement and the organization of content . Based on the frequency and ubiquity of these links , we have undertaken a study on subreddit links on Reddit , with the goal of understanding their impact on both the referenced subreddit , and on the subreddit landscape as a whole . Subreddit links may reference communities that do not yet exist . These inventive links can be seen as users pointing out a gap in existing subreddit offerings . In some cases , new subreddits are created as a result of these links , though not all subreddits originate in this way . We ﬁnd that these inven - tive links are signiﬁcant drivers of new subreddits and that inventive links have a major impact the overall community ecosystem of Reddit . In contrast , promotional links reference a subreddit that already exists ; these links can be seen as the posting user promoting or recommending the referenced community in an attempt to inﬂuence engagement . We ﬁnd that promotional links induce a temporary increase in activity levels surround - ing the link , particularly in the ﬁrst few hours after the link . More speciﬁcally , activity levels around a promotional link are higher than baseline subreddit activity levels . Addition - ally , we ﬁnd that some links are reactive – driven by other activity , while others are proactive – driving activity in the referenced subreddit . This suggests that there are different motivations for links depending on the subreddit and situa - tion . Surprisingly , subreddit size does not impact whether a link is reactive or proactive , but linking subreddits do tend to be more active than the referenced subreddit . Finally , we examined the changing community landscape on Reddit via a subreddit link graph , constructed based on subreddit links . We ﬁnd that this graph has become more sparse and less clustered over time . This indicates that as Reddit has grown and new subreddits were created , the num - ber and variety of subreddit links has not kept pace , leading to an effective decrease in the reach of subreddit links . In their totality , these results conﬁrm and expand upon existing theories of information seeking behavior : subreddit links on Reddit not only serve as links to information , but have measurable impact on the creation of new communities and the activity within existing subreddits . By serving as a form of innovation , these links allow users to inﬂuence com - munity organization and engagement . Users have adopted the subreddit link , and leverage it for a variety of purposes , shaping the landscape of Reddit as a result . However , some results also stand in contrast to the well - established social network dynamics that predict shrinking diameters of social networks . Instead , we ﬁnd that the subreddit network appears to be expanding , not shrinking . Future Work We are convinced that subreddit links are a powerful tool for the study of community interaction , but recognize the limitations of the presented work . A similar analysis could be applied to other social media platforms , like Facebook , Twitter , and Instagram , but signiﬁcant modiﬁcation would be required as not all platforms have such well - deﬁned com - munities . There are also other mechanisms of community promotion that could be studied and compared . For example , crossposts on Reddit allow the same content to be shared to many different communities , which can be seen as a less direct method of community promotion . Though we have shown that subreddit links impact the activity levels within the referenced community , further in - vestigation is required to determine the true cause and source of the additional activity . Are new users joining the commu - nity the cause of elevated activity levels ? Were these users previously members of the linking community ? Or is the increased activity in the referenced subreddit driven by exist - ing community members ? Answering these questions would help us more - thoroughly understand the power of community links . We are also interested in the types of users creating these community links . Are linking users active in both the link - ing and referenced community ? Are linking users long - established members of the linking community , or did they join only to recommend to another community ? These ﬁnd - ings could assist creators of new communities in growing their following . Similarly , we are interested in what types of contexts attract subreddit links . Are there particular discus - sion dynamics that are more likely to produce a subreddit link ? Do the links themselves change the pattern of discus - sion ? Understanding the complex interactions between users , communities , and discussions would allow social media de - velopers to better tailor the user experience to individual needs and preferences . Finally , we would like to tease out the factors that make some subreddit links more successful than others . We ﬁnd that repeated links are correlated with a greater likelihood of a subreddit’s creation , but , do repeated links guarantee community growth ? Does the size of the linking subreddit determine link visibility , and therefore impact ? Are links more beneﬁcial when the referenced community is small , or when it is large ? Are upvotes on a link , or comment author popularity , predictive factors ? Are communities created fol - lowing an inventive link more or less likely to succeed ? There are a large variety of factors that remain unexplored in the understanding of how and why subreddit communities grow and evolve , which we plan to explore in future studies . Broader Impacts and Ethical Considerations The results presented in this paper show that subreddit links have a substantive impact on community creation and activity levels within established communities on Reddit . Based on these ﬁndings , we recognize the possible applications , both good and bad . We therefore outline here the potential impacts and strategies to mitigate them . Potential Impacts As with most social media research , the work presented here is subject to unique ethical considerations . The line between positive and negative outcomes is often very thin in this do - main , and the potential uses of subreddit links are no different . Intention and nuance are critical in evaluating the ethics of these community promotions , as the mechanism of use is the same for helpful and harmful instances . Given that we have shown how subreddit links inﬂuence the community landscape on Reddit , one possible negative outcome is the manipulation of these subreddit links by bad actors to push a particular agenda or viewpoint . Community - focused misinformation contributes to siloing and echo cham - bers , fueling conﬂict . Similarly , users could co - opt common links by creating a community whose purpose does not match the subreddit name , potentially exposing other users to harm - ful or malicious content . To mitigate these negative impacts , Reddit and other social media platforms may need to monitor the frequency of subreddit links and the formation of new communities to detect and intervene in cases of misuse . There are also positive outcomes that could result from this work . First , a better understanding of the power of subreddit links could allow for new avenues of content promotion . For example , users can direct other commenters to speciﬁc help - ful subreddits based on the context of the discussion . This is already a common use case of subreddit links , but with con - crete evidence of link impact , organizations could adopt the convention for good , like recommendation of mental health communities . Subreddit links could also be leveraged in the ﬁght against misinformation and disinformation , by directing users to communities with more rigorous moderation and fact - checking . Limitations These ﬁndings are limited to subreddit communities on Red - dit . These ﬁndings are likely to generalize to other social me - dia platforms , but further experiments are required to conﬁrm . Our experiments assume that all subreddit links are deliberate choices made by users , and therefore may incorrectly cap - ture some links that were mistakes or typos . However , even if a subreddit link was made by mistake , any well - formed link will point to a subreddit that may or may not exist . In compiling the link dataset , we considered all well - formed links , without ﬁltering for link score or visibility , community size , or other factors that could impact a link’s effectiveness . Future work investigating these nuances may reveal trends or effect not discovered in this aggregate analysis . Data Collection and Privacy Considerations Because this data contains artifacts of human subjects , we sought human subjects review from the ethical review board at the University of Notre Dame ; an exemption was granted for this study on the basis that all data was public and no treatments were conducted by the research team . Addition - ally , most Reddit users act anonymously , but any personal information was willingly shared by the user . All results presented are in aggregate . We did not seek nor attempt to de - anonymize any data and therefore do not reveal any private or personally identifying information . The dataset used for experiments is available from ﬁles . pushshift . io / reddit . We encourage interested parties to con - tact us for more details on dataset compilation and analysis . All plots include conﬁdence intervals as appropriate . All experiments were conducted on a local high - capacity CPU machine . References Bairi , R . ; Carman , M . ; and Ramakrishnan , G . 2015 . On the evolution of Wikipedia : dynamics of categories and articles . In ICWSM , volume 9 . Bel ´ ak , V . ; Lam , S . ; and Hayes , C . 2012 . Cross - community inﬂuence in discussion fora . In ICWSM , volume 6 . Chandrasekharan , E . ; Pavalanathan , U . ; Srinivasan , A . ; Glynn , A . ; Eisenstein , J . ; and Gilbert , E . 2017 . You can’t stay here : The efﬁcacy of reddit’s 2015 ban examined through hate speech . CSCW 1 : 1 – 22 . Cunha , T . ; Jurgens , D . ; Tan , C . ; and Romero , D . 2019 . Are all successful communities alike ? Characterizing and predicting the success of online communities . In TheWebConference , 318 – 328 . Danescu - Niculescu - Mizil , C . ; West , R . ; Jurafsky , D . ; Leskovec , J . ; and Potts , C . 2013 . No country for old members : User lifecycle and linguistic change in online communities . In TheWebConference , 307 – 318 . ACM . Datta , S . ; and Adar , E . 2019 . Extracting inter - community conﬂicts in reddit . In ICWSM , volume 13 , 146 – 157 . Farzan , R . ; and Brusilovsky , P . 2018 . Social navigation . Social information access 142 – 180 . Fisher , KE . ; Erdelez , S . ; and McKechnie , LEF . 2005 . Theo - ries of information behavior Information Today , Inc . Ford , T . ; Krohn , R . ; and Weninger , T . 2021 . Competition Dynamics in the Meme Ecosystem . https : / / arxiv . org / abs / 2102 . 03952 . Gao , Y . ; Cui , Y . ; Bulut , O . ; Zhai , X . ; and Chen , F . 2021 . Examining adults’ web navigation patterns in multi - layered hypertext environments . Computers in Human Behavior 107142 . Gilbert , E . 2013 . Widespread underprovision on reddit . In CSCW , 803 – 808 . Glenski , M . ; and Weninger , T . 2017 . Rating effects on social news posts and comments . ACM Trans . on Intelligent Systems and Technology 8 ( 6 ) : 78 . Hamilton , W . ; Zhang , J . ; Danescu - Niculescu - Mizil , C . ; Ju - rafsky , D . ; and Leskovec , J . 2017 . Loyalty in online commu - nities . In ICWSM , volume 11 . Horne , B . D . ; Adali , S . ; and Sikdar , S . 2017 . Identifying the social signals that drive online discussions : A case study of reddit communities . In ICCCN , 1 – 9 . IEEE . Jackson , S . J . ; Bailey , M . ; and Foucault Welles , B . 2018 . # GirlsLikeUs : Trans advocacy and community building online . New Media & Society 20 ( 5 ) : 1868 – 1888 . Kairam , S . R . ; Wang , D . J . ; and Leskovec , J . 2012 . The life and death of online groups : Predicting group growth and longevity . In WSDM , 673 – 682 . Kumar , S . ; Hamilton , W . L . ; Leskovec , J . ; and Jurafsky , D . 2018 . Community interaction and conﬂict on the web . In TheWebConference , 933 – 943 . Leskovec , J . ; Kleinberg , J . ; and Faloutsos , C . 2007 . Graph evolution : Densiﬁcation and shrinking diameters . ACM Trans - actions on Knowledge Discovery from Data ( TKDD ) 1 ( 1 ) : 2 – es . Liu , F . 2020 . How Information - Seeking Behavior Has Changed in 22 Years . URL \ url { https : / / www . nngroup . com / articles / information - seeking - behavior - changes / } . [ Online ; posted 20 - January - 2020 ] . Mensah , H . ; Xiao , L . ; and Soundarajan , S . 2020 . Characteriz - ing the Evolution of Communities on Reddit . In International Conference on Social Media and Society , 58 – 64 . Moore , C . ; and Chuang , L . 2017 . Redditors revealed : Moti - vational factors of the Reddit community . In HICSS . Muchnik , L . ; Aral , S . ; and Taylor , S . J . 2013 . Social inﬂuence bias : A randomized experiment . Science 341 ( 6146 ) : 647 – 651 . Newell , E . ; Jurgens , D . ; Saleem , H . ; Vala , H . ; Sassine , J . ; Armstrong , C . ; and Ruths , D . 2016 . User migration in online social networks : A case study on reddit during a period of community unrest . In ICWSM , volume 10 . Pirolli , P . 2009 . An elementary social information foraging model . In CHI , 605 – 614 . Rowlands , T . ; Waddell , N . ; and McKenna , B . 2016 . Are we there yet ? A technique to determine theoretical saturation . Journal of Computer Information Systems 56 ( 1 ) : 40 – 47 . Singer , P . ; Fl¨ock , F . ; Meinhart , C . ; Zeitfogel , E . ; and Strohmaier , M . 2014 . Evolution of reddit : from the front page of the internet to a self - referential community ? In TheWebConference , 517 – 522 . Tan , C . 2018 . Tracing community genealogy : how new com - munities emerge from the old . In ICWSM , volume 12 . Tan , C . ; and Lee , L . 2015 . All who wander : On the preva - lence and characteristics of multi - community engagement . In TheWebConference , 1056 – 1066 . Waller , I . ; and Anderson , A . 2019 . Generalists and specialists : Using community embeddings to quantify activity diversity in online platforms . In TheWebConference , 1954 – 1964 . Weninger , T . ; Johnston , T . J . ; and Han , J . 2013 . The paral - lel path framework for entity discovery on the web . ACM Transactions on the Web ( TWEB ) 7 ( 3 ) : 1 – 29 . West , R . ; and Leskovec , J . 2012 . Human wayﬁnding in information networks . In TheWebConference , 619 – 628 . Yang , D . ; Kraut , R . E . ; Smith , T . ; Mayﬁeld , E . ; and Jurafsky , D . 2019 . Seekers , providers , welcomers , and storytellers : Modeling social roles in online health communities . In CHI , 1 – 14 . You , J . ; Leskovec , J . ; He , K . ; and Xie , S . 2020 . Graph struc - ture of neural networks . In ICML , 10881 – 10891 . PMLR . Zhang , J . ; Hamilton , W . ; Danescu - Niculescu - Mizil , C . ; Juraf - sky , D . ; and Leskovec , J . 2017 . Community identity and user engagement in a multi - community landscape . In ICWSM , volume 11 .