Gomoll , A . S . , Hmelo - Silver , C . E . , Tolar , E . , Šabanović , S . , & Francisco , M . ( 2017 ) . Moving Apart and Coming Together : Discourse , Engagement , and Deep Learning . Educational Technology & Society , 20 ( 4 ) , 219 – 232 . 219 ISSN 1436 - 4522 ( online ) and 1176 - 3647 ( print ) . This article of the Journal of Educational Technology & Society is available under Creative Commons CC - BY - ND - NC 3 . 0 license ( https : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - nd / 3 . 0 / ) . For further queries , please contact Journal Editors at ets - editors @ ifets . info . Moving Apart and Coming Together : Discourse , Engagement , and Deep Learning Andrea S . Gomoll 1 * , Cindy E . Hmelo - Silver 1 , Erin Tolar 1 , Selma Šabanović 2 and Matthew Francisco 2 1 School of Education , Indiana University , Bloomington , IN , USA / / 2 School of Informatics and Computing , Indiana University , Bloomington , IN , USA / / agomoll @ indiana . edu / / chmelosi @ indiana . edu / / etolar @ iu . edu / / selmas @ indiana . edu / / francm @ indiana . edu * Corresponding author ABSTRACT An important part of “doing” science is engaging in collaborative science practices . To better understand how to support these practices , we need to consider how students collaboratively construct and represent shared understanding in complex , problem - oriented , and authentic learning environments . This research presents a case study centered on the work of four students in a human - centered robotics curriculum enactment . We explore how discursive features including embodied gesture and positioning of material artifacts contributed to the problem - solving process and helped students move towards deeper learning — showing how nonverbal and verbal discourses were used to construct agreement and disagreement , parallel interaction , and accountability . Each of these discursive actions informed how the group moved forward or was halted in their complex collaborative work . We found that early stages of constructing a joint problem - solving space ( JPSS ) in this classroom environment required extended engagement , student ownership , and negotiation of shared activity . By exploring how select students worked toward the co - construction of joint problem - solving spaces , we reimagine what deep engagement and learning in STEM learning environments can look like , and we inform better design for the creation of these spaces . Keywords Human - centered robotics , Joint problem solving , Collaborative learning , Discourse analysis Introduction As learners construct knowledge in social and interactive contexts , they negotiate power dynamics and disagreement , establish group norms , and navigate what it means to come to a consensus ( Barron , 2000 ) . In this article , we focus on these complex collaborative learning practices as a central piece of deep STEM engagement and learning . Collaborative learning practices are essential to STEM interest , engagement , and learning . These collaborative practices are also important for students’ ability to see themselves as capable of “doing” science and engineering ( Tan et al . , 2013 ) . Collaboration is essential for STEM careers , which require practitioners to navigate jointly what cannot be solved alone , obtain and evaluate evidence , design solutions , and communicate pertinent information . In the Next Generation Science Standards ( NGSS ) , Engineering Practices 7 and 8 pertain to the ability to obtain and evaluate evidence , construct explanations , and design solutions ( NGSS Lead States , 2013 ) . Engaging students in the work of collaborative learning practices is therefore intertwined with authentic STEM engagement in classroom contexts and beyond . We conjecture that supporting students as they engage in these collaborative practices promotes deep learning . Although there is no single definition that we have found to categorize “deep learning , ” we view it as learning that leads to robust understanding of disciplinary practices , disciplinary concepts , and how these are interconnected ( Sawyer , 2008 ) . To better understand how to support deep collaborative learning , we need to consider how students navigate the challenging task of constructing shared knowledge ( Barron , 2000 ; Roschelle , 1992 ) . The research presented here reveals the process of constructing joint problem - solving spaces ( JPSS ) in the discourse of one small group of middle school students . JPSS are shared “conceptual spaces” where students are able to develop their understanding together ( Teasley & Roschelle , 1993 , p . 69 ) . These spaces , where students negotiate using shared language and activity , can be an important springboard for long - term STEM engagement and deep learning . As students collaboratively construct knowledge , they use verbal and nonverbal discourse to create a shared language for problem solving . This negotiation spurs students to engage deeply with disciplinary content and practices ( Engle & Conant , 2002 ) . The interactional data presented here comes from a larger research project that aims to engage students with engineering design practices through the use of a socially - oriented robotics curriculum . Prior studies of JPSS have taken place predominantly in lab settings or with advanced student populations ( Hmelo , Nagarajan , & Day , 2000 ; Roschelle , 1992 ) . Studying JPSS in a complex classroom setting advances our understanding of how students jointly progress toward deeper learning in naturalistic environments . 220 The human - centered robotics ( HCR ) curriculum described here is an inquiry - based curriculum of robotics experiences centered on a human - centered problem ( “How can we create a robot that serves a need in our local context and connects students with remote peers ? ” ) . We designed and studied an HCR curriculum that helps learners develop technical skills along with an understanding of the relationship between technology , nature , and society . A key goal of this curriculum was to engage non - dominant populations ( e . g . , females and ethnic and racial minority populations ) in STEM via a social robotics experience . Hands - on robotics and participatory design activities are an effective way to engage diverse groups of students in STEM ( DiSalvo et al . , 2008 ) . HCR attends to “societal context” and “human needs” and has led to increased motivation in STEM , particularly for underrepresented female populations ( Pajares , 2005 ) . In this robotics unit , students in Indiana collaboratively personalized and programmed robots to both meet a local need and to communicate telepresently ( i . e . , via remotely controlled robot ) with students from Alaska ( Gomoll , Hmelo - Silver , Šabanović & Francisco , 2016 ) . This connection was framed as an opportunity to interact with students and physical environments they might not be able to visit otherwise . As students worked together to build a telepresence robot , they negotiated how to organize the problem - solving process . This negotiation within a real - world context involves active and creative problem solving , and is thus an ideal context for deep learning ( Wang , Kirschner , & Bridges , 2016 ) . In this study , deep learning occurs as students move beyond the ability to connect basic robotic components to recognizing how they work together as a designed socio - technical system . It also means that students come to appreciate the potential of collaborative roles and iterative design within the robotics project . Thus , our present analysis aims to understand how and where students make these connections , as well as when they fail to do so . Joint problem - solving spaces ( JPSS ) are constructed through interaction as group members set goals , define and redefine problems , and propose actions to solve them ( Barron , 2000 ) . This negotiation is akin to the kind of problem solving process that STEM practitioners and designers navigate ( Silva , 2008 ) . By pinpointing where JPSS are and are not occurring , as well as how the success and failure of JPSS are mapped to discourse , we can better understand how this curriculum supported deep engagement on the way to deep learning . In doing so , we also inform the literature on how to design curricula that support deep STEM learning experiences . This research expands upon earlier work around JPSS as well as research that has been conducted on knowledge convergence — exploring how these collaborative spaces are constructed in the face - to - face learning environment of an HCR experience over an extended period of time , and how they act as a precursor to collaboratively constructed understanding ( Jeong & Chi , 2007 ; Roschelle , 1992 ) . We focus in particular on the nonverbal and embodied contributions and collaborative practices that shaped one small group’s work . This paper addresses three research questions :  How do individual students engage with collaborative work within this curriculum ?  How and where do we see JPSS in the collaborative work of one group in a middle school robotics curriculum ?  What discursive practices support and impede the creation of JPSS in this human - centered robotics context ? In the sections that follow , we provide an overview of joint problem solving and engagement , describe our qualitative analysis methods , and present episodes of small group interaction to reveal the dynamic nature of problem solving in one small group’s experience of our HCR curriculum . Joint problem - solving spaces and discursive practices In early stages of collaboration , learners have different knowledge about the concepts they are working to master , challenging them to construct shared conceptual understanding through creation of a joint problem - solving space . When this joint construction of a space for problem solving is achieved , learners are able to move towards knowledge convergence ( Roschelle , 1992 ) . When knowledge convergence occurs , increasingly similar representations and socially shared meaning are produced by group members ( Jeong & Chi , 2007 ; Weinberger , Stegmann , & Fischer , 2007 ) . Jeong and Chi ( 2007 ) found that collaboration experiences led to knowledge convergence . However , these authors highlighted that examining conversation alone was not enough to paint a full picture of knowledge convergence as a collaborative process . We must also attend to social norms , nuanced contributions , and indicators of divergence . Before knowledge convergence can occur , students must create a JPSS where new understanding can be built . Within a JPSS , students establish common ground and coordinate their interactions to achieve a shared goal ( Barron , 2000 ) . We aim to better understand the work of constructing a JPSS by exploring the interaction of one small group . 221 As students work together to build a telepresence robot , they make decisions about how to organize the problem - solving process . Working cooperatively , students often take up individual roles and piece their work together to create a final product ( Damon & Phelps , 1989 ) . This group structure makes it difficult to construct a shared problem space , as one group member’s ideas may dominate the problem - solving process . Alternatively , groups working collaboratively tackle problems together , offer peer feedback , and build on each other’s ideas ( Jordan & McDaniel , 2014 ) . JPSS , and the interactions that construct them , serve as indicators of effective collaboration . If participants do not develop a shared problem space , they may not converge upon a shared understanding , and thus deep learning for all of the participants is unlikely . As demonstrated in Barron’s work ( 2000 ) , middle school groups engaged in complex problem solving often struggle to agree upon their goals , negotiate joint solutions , and achieve shared understanding . The barriers to engagement in complex problem solving and coordination included focusing on individual outcomes , treating personal workbooks as territory ( i . e . , only recording your own ideas ) , and failing to acknowledge peer contributions . High coordination in Barron’s ( 2000 ) contrasting case study was marked by consistent turn - taking , shared workbook navigation , productive conflicts , and uptake of peer ideas . These activities all constitute discursive practices — doing something to shape an interactional event in situ ( Potter & Wetherell , 1987 ; Potter & Hepburn , 2008 ) . Barron and Roschelle ( 2009 ) argued that instances of disagreement and repair are necessary for the achievement of shared cognition . As groups uncover discrepancies , they must repair them in order to achieve shared understanding . This repair acts as a catalyst for knowledge convergence . As we work to design a curriculum that supports knowledge convergence and deep STEM engagement , it is important to create spaces where discrepancies are expected and encouraged , and where organic JPSS can emerge . Our work unpacks one group’s patterns of interaction — considering how verbal and nonverbal discourses are connected to a group’s engagement and their eventual trajectory toward the construction of a JPSS and shared understanding . JPSS , engagement , and deep learning In past research , behavioral engagement ( e . g . , on - task behavior and participation ) , cognitive engagement ( e . g . , willingness to persevere to solve a problem ) , and emotional engagement ( e . g . , student attitudes and interests ) have been privileged as evidence of students’ interest and learning ( Fredricks , Blumenfeld , & Paris , 2004 ) . These forms of engagement are often studied in isolation , when they should be considered as dimensions of the complex and contextually determined concept of engagement ( Fredricks et al . , 2004 ) . Furthermore , these defined forms of engagement are difficult to measure and interpret in meaningful ways ( Fredricks & McColskey , 2012 ) . Throughout this paper , we consider engagement as context dependent and continually in flux . Across diverse definitions of engagement , there is agreement that it is a multidimensional construct . Engagement is nuanced and involves emotional , behavioral , and cognitive dimensions — including multifaceted forms of participation ( Appleton , Christenson , & Furlong , 2008 ; Fredericks et al . , 2004 ; Sinha et al . , 2015 ) . As such , this research examines how engagement unfolds in an HCR learning environment over time and across groups . Exploring engagement and its connection to the construction of JPSS , we look for evidence of co - construction of understanding as students participate in diverse ways . We attend to the ways that students use verbal and nonverbal discourse to structure their interaction — including the use of gesture and the orientation to physical materials at the group’s table . Such materials can be considered “boundary objects , ” artifacts that make the negotiation of group norms and understanding possible ( Engeström , Engeström , & Kärkkäinen , 1995 ) . Nonverbal discourse and embodied gesture are important aspects of communication and cognition ( Alibali & Nathan , 2012 ) . Human interaction depends on the use of a large toolkit of semiotic resources — from the sequence of talk to the positioning of the body , to aspects of the surrounding environment made relevant through gesture ( e . g . , pointing ; Goodwin , 2000 ) . Researchers have increasingly attended to embodiment ( e . g . , pointing , gaze , posture ) as a significant interactional feature that can be used to perform discursive action such as collaborative knowledge construction and participation ( Nevile , 2015 ) . We conjecture JPSS and the nuanced verbal and nonverbal engagement that occurs within them not only to be an indicator of effective collaboration , but also as a precursor to deep learning . 222 Methods Participants Participants in this study were students in a five - week HCR unit in a seventh and eighth grade Applied Science class in a rural , U . S . public school in Indiana . Of the 30 students in the class , the instructor selected eight as focus group participants . One focus group of four was selected for analysis because of more appropriate and respectful group dynamics that the research team viewed as a condition for examining the deep engagement needed for constructing a JPSS . This group included two female eighth grade students and two male seventh grade students . All students were Caucasian . The rural demographic and female population of this middle school class was categorized as a non - dominant population in STEM ( Avery , 2013 ; Tan et al . , 2013 ) . Instructional context Over the course of the unit , students collaboratively personalized and programmed robots to meet both a need in their local environment and to engage telepresently with students from Alaska ( see Gomoll et al . , 2016 ) . Telepresence connections allowed students to drive a robot remotely . For example , a student in Indiana would drive a robot in Alaska — engaging with remote peers using a video feed and sensors embedded in the telepresence robot’s design . Students worked collaboratively in groups of four with support from a facilitator as they tackled ill - structured problems . Students also identified a need in their classroom that could be solved by a robot , and adapted their robot to solve this problem . This dual focus between solving a local problem and communicating with distant peers helped students consider how robots could both affect their local environment and be used to connect to a remote context . Figure 1 . Overview of HCR unit trajectory Figure 1 shows an overview of the HCR unit . During the unit introduction , students experienced several activities that introduced HCR and basic engineering practices . In groups of four , they moved between tables where different HCR interactive experiences were set ( Figure 1A ) . The design challenge was then presented : Design a robot that serves a local need in your community and allows remote students to explore your space telepresently . Students brainstormed ways that robots could be used to address local needs ( 1B ) . Students then created maps of their classroom as aids for telepresent exploration and to better understand how a robot would move in their local environment ( 1C ) . This was followed by an embodied programming activity where students discovered the need for clear , specific instructions ( 1D ) . Here , they took on the role of the robot and translated 223 directions into basic code . Students then practiced programming and troubleshooting as they drove the iRobot Create ( 1E ) . In the design portion of the unit , students designed prototypes of robots for their schools ( 1F ) . Each group agreed upon a unified design and was challenged to build and program a working human - centered robot , building up from an iRobot Create platform ( 1G ) . Throughout the unit , an engineering design cycle ( see Figure 2 ) was used as a resource to help students to organize and reflect upon their problem - solving process . Students were encouraged to reflect on which part ( s ) of this cycle they were enacting as they designed and built their robots . In final presentations of their robot designs , groups used the engineering design cycle as a framework for explaining their group’s process . Students provided examples of questions asked , information collected , challenges faced in the process of testing solutions , and refinements made based on these challenges . Figure 2 . Engineering design cycle adapted from Resnick ( 2007 ) Data sources and selection Video of the focus group was recorded for every class session , with data from four class periods selected for this analysis . The selected videos involved group reasoning and joint activity directly related to our research question about the nature of collaborative work in this setting . In these clips , the students were engaged in tasks that could not be completed alone , including embodied programming , troubleshooting , and user testing . We were interested in the construction of JPSS in collaborative tasks , and we therefore selected inherently collaborative tasks to provide the best chance of “seeing” a JPSS emerge . The first author developed initial analytic memos for each video . These memos noted the actions performed in small group discourse ( e . g . , disagreement ) and features that related to the group’s problem solving . Seven 2 - to 7 - minute video clips were selected for further exploration . These clips included group problem - solving experiences where a variety of verbal and nonverbal discourse features were highlighted in memos . These moments were flagged as potential JPSS . Analysis We investigated our research questions using tenets of discourse analysis . Discourse analysis considers talk as a social action , and can be used to identify discursive patterns and norms that both shape and are shaped by participants ( Gee & Green , 1998 ; Potter & Wetherell , 1987 ) . We used discourse analysis to consider how this group’s nuanced engagement shaped their collaborative inquiry and knowledge construction . We were interested in ( a ) the role of both nonverbal and verbal discourse in an interaction , and ( b ) how norms and practices such as turn - taking , agreement , disagreement , and decision - making , evolved at individual and group levels ( Edwards & Potter , 1992 ) . 224 The seven case - study clips were transcribed and analyzed in four data sessions . Participants in the data sessions noted interesting features of each interaction and converged around three themes related to the creation of JPSS : discrepancy , accountability and ownership , and parallel play . These themes were adapted into emergent codes and further memos were then applied to transcripts . Early codes were tags that noted features and functions of talk related to collaborative inquiry ( e . g . , disagreement , accountability , facilitation , questioning , blame ) . For each of these early codes , we explored sub codes that spoke to the mechanisms that made these actions possible — thinking about how students and facilitators were actively constructing disagreement , accountability , facilitation , etc . Iterative review across data sessions allowed us to refine our research questions to focus on the nature of engagement in this context — drawing attention to nonverbal discourse in particular . This led to the reformatting of transcripts to privilege nonverbal action . Orienting to embodied interaction , we added layers of codes related to nonverbal features that appeared to be shaping the interaction . These codes fit into three categories ( movement of artifacts , gesture , and gaze ) . Three episodes were selected that best represented each of these categories in action . Choosing such moments in which nonverbal engagement is well represented is particularly important for investigating how nuanced collaboration contributes to knowledge convergence and to deep learning . The findings will present examples of each of these discursive features and the nuanced functions they performed . These episodes speak to the nature of this small group’s collaborative work and the nonverbal actions used to move towards the construction of a JPSS . Findings We present three episodes that highlight discursive themes that emerged in our qualitative analysis : discrepancies , accountability and ownership , and parallel interaction . Each of the episodes highlights a theme that speaks to the construction of a JPSS and illuminates the nonverbal aspects of the small group’s collaborative work . As we trace these discourses , we map them to the group’s activity — working to understand how and when this group achieved a shared problem space . These findings provide a developing framework for discursive features that shape the construction of JPSS in our HCR curriculum . Episode 1 As students called attention to and negotiated discrepancies throughout the HCR unit , a potential space was created for knowledge convergence . In the movement of artifacts across the table and verbal uptake and rejection of group members’ ideas , students performed accountability and ownership . This performance shed light on how the group was negotiating discrepancies , but it also illuminated norms around what it meant to “do STEM” in this space . As students coordinated their activity , the words they used and the movement of materials in the workspace shaped what they achieved . We conjecture that the interaction analyzed in the following two episodes can be labeled a JPSS , though it may not be one that was productive for knowledge convergence . This episode demonstrates that not all convergence is necessarily productive . During the session in which the first episode takes place , students used maps they created of their classroom to consider a route that a robot could take in order to allow remote students to see the most important elements of the room . Each group in the class experimented with a “human robot” to develop specific directions they could translate into coded language to be used on a programming platform developed for this unit ( http : / / robotmoose . com ) . As groups tested their human robot directions ( e . g . , “walk forward 10 steps” ) , they found ways to refine their directions to be increasingly specific for a wide audience ( e . g . , using units like “floor tiles , ” “feet , ” and “degrees” ) . Though the group put forth several ideas for units ( tiles on the floor , the metric unit of a “foot” ) they did not all use the same units in their individual written work . Thus , they were engaged in a parallel interaction where each individual was pursuing his or her own solutions ( Barron , 2000 ) . In this first episode , the discrepancies in the four students’ individual work come to the fore . In the activity that follows ( Figure 3 ) , the group’s productive negotiation of these spaces was impeded . This highlights unsuccessful JPSS as a precursor to this group’s successful construction of a JPSS . The episode began with student Karen’s attempt to check the work that she has been doing independently . Her groupmates ( Chad , Rayna , and Evan ) filled in their own individual robot direction worksheets ( see Appendix A for transcript conventions ) . All student names have been changed . 225 Figure 3 . Episode 1 In this episode , ownership and authority were performed in the positioning of artifacts . As Chad distributed worksheets ( line 2 ) , he foregrounded the separation of solutions — positioning each set of directions as belonging to one individual ( Rayna ) . When Rayna rejected the paper that Chad handed her ( line 3 ) , she rejected personal ownership , as “everybody wrote on it . ” This statement highlighted Rayna’s attention to the group as a community . At this point , Evan was positioned as an authority ( line 1 and 6 ) , likely because he was the student to physically walk the paces while measuring the number of tiles for each move . His peers oriented to him and his work . The movement of artifacts across the table provided a visible representation of their negotiation of authority as they worked to develop a solution . In lines 6 - 8 , the artifact movement across the table served as an emerging boundary object — passed between two participants , but not yet achieving its potential as a conduit for joint problem solving . All students continued to write on their own individual worksheets , deferring to the perceived group authority ( Evan ) as they copied his responses . We view this as a failed JPSS . In the episodes that follow , we explore more successful collaborative problem - solving experiences and what made them possible . Episode 2 Episode 2 demonstrates how the group’s coordination of ownership and display of engagement continued across multiple levels . This extract occurred early in a class period when students were preparing to present their group’s robot design to the whole class . In the days leading up to this , students proposed individual robot designs and agreed upon a shared design for the group . This design was then submitted to be 3D printed as a small prototype by the research team . In these lines of interaction , we see how students negotiated authority in the group and discrepancies about one feature of the 3D - printed design . Throughout this interaction , students engaged in the developing and testing of solutions and improving phases of the design cycle . In this episode , nonverbal transcription sheds light on the role that nonverbal discourses played within the interaction ( see Figure 4 ) . In line 1 , Chad used gesture to reference the group’s design drawing on the table as he asserted that the group’s 3D printed model did not reflect what they represented in their sketch . Here , he called attention to the discrepancy between drawn fingers on their hand - like robot and the 3D printed rendering . This subtle gesture demonstrated Chad’s engagement with the group’s process and shared design history , indicating that he was working within a JPSS organized around that history . The movement functioned to orient the group to what they had already done ( the design drawing ) and where to go next ( articulating their idea to the whole class ) . Rayna took up this orientation and contributed to the group’s coordination in line 2 — articulating what the design was “supposed to be like . ” This statement of “supposed to be” asserted knowledge about the design . However , Rayna’s unfinished sentence and hand gesture complicated this action and created a space for refinement of the collective understanding ( a possible JPSS ) . As she constructed her argument for facilitators positioned at the table , Rayna extended her own hand , using her body as a representation of what the robot hand should look like . She then abandoned this gesture , moving her hand to cover her eye ( line 2 ) . This movement functioned as a cue for others to jump in and participate . Rayna’s embodied gesture and her verbal reasoning both halted in line 2 . The remainder of her sentence waited to be filled . In line 3 , Karen responded to this bid for participation from others by leaning back from the table and fixing her gaze on Rayna . This movement away from the design drawing shifted the responsibility back to Rayna . Rather than referencing the group’s designs or responding verbally , Karen leaned back and thus established herself as a 226 listener . This positioning further established Rayna’s ideas as representative of the collective group . In this moment , the potential JPSS seemed to narrow and disintegrate — centering again on one individual as responsible for problem solving . Here , we see how these students are moving apart and coming together as they use discourse and material objects to negotiate problem solving . Figure 4 . Episode 2 In line 5 , a facilitator mirrored the beginning of Rayna’s gesture . This movement functioned as a piece of the facilitator’s role — ending Rayna’s sentence via embodied movement and guiding the group’s work with a question : “Like this ? ” Lines 6 - 7 include examples of gestures that speak to accountability and ownership in this small group . In line 6 , Chad gestured toward the group’s design drawing as he verbally placed blame for the state of the group’s design ( “you told me to” ) . This gesture drew attention to the shared artifact and evidence at the table — contributing to Chad’s construction of accountability as the group negotiated a discrepancy . Rayna used her own gesture to dismiss in the following line — flipping her wrist outward as she declared : “Okay , I told him to do it like that . ” 227 Facilitator 2 then referenced the drawing as he mediated the group’s interaction . This embodied discourse from an authority figure validated Chad’s move to make the artifact relevant as evidence in the argument . Finally , in line 9 , we see the action of leaning made relevant for the second time in this exchange . Evan , who had not yet spoken , leaned forward in his chair — craning his neck towards the design drawing . This subtle gesture demonstrated his peripheral engagement in a JPSS . Throughout this extract , we see how gesture was used to make shared artifacts relevant in group reasoning and how body positioning ( e . g . , leaning ) can be linked to attention and peripheral participation ( line 9 ) and division of labor ( line 3 ) . We also see how gesture was used as a facilitation strategy — reorienting the group to their shared design . This re - orientation might be leveraged as a way to help groups recognize and reflect upon their JPSS in real time . Throughout this episode , a JPSS was created through nuanced performances of accountability and ownership . These discursive performances served to construct a shared space for problem solving . While we do not see deep learning and knowledge convergence at this stage , this demonstration of a JPSS acts as a precursor . In the episode that follows , we move beyond the construction of accountability and ownership to see how discrepancy was negotiated by this small group and the class as a whole . Episode 3 Throughout the process of creating and coding nonverbal transcripts for the analysis featured here , pointing emerged as a significant feature of group interaction . In preliminary coding , we identified three functions of pointing : accountability ( e . g . , directing another student to respond ) , attribution of blame ( e . g . , pointing that highlights a discrepancy ) , and evidence ( e . g . , pointing to artifacts that support a claim ) . Episode 3 , presented below , gives an example of pointing that provided evidence for deep engagement with design reasoning ( Figure 5 ) . Prior to the beginning of this episode , a classroom facilitator ( Facilitator 2 ) discussed the 3D printing process for a prototype of the robot that the group had drawn . He went on to describe some of the decisions he had to make when he translated the group’s drawing into 3D form . The group noticed aspects they intended did not come through clearly in the 3D model . They used pointing as a means of coordinating discussion around these features , attempting to create a shared understanding of the problem . Figure 5 . Episode 3 228 In lines 1 and 4 of this interaction , pointing directed attention to features of the group’s 3D modeled design . Facilitator 1’s pointing called attention to a specific feature of the group’s 3D printed design model ( line 1 ) . Evan directed his gaze to this feature — orienting to the move made by the facilitator to achieve joint attention ( line 2 ) . Rayna physically handled the 3D model and pointed to the highlighted feature ( line 4 ) . She explained that it was intended as a cup holder . Here , Rayna gave voice to the collective ideas of the group . With this move , she used the physical model at the table and the gesture of pointing to support her explanation . As she gestured and explained , the other three members of the group oriented to her , as demonstrated by their gaze ( line 5 ) . Figure 6 . Episode 3 continued Following this interaction , the physical model of the group’s robot was passed between group members as they further explained their intended design . Here , students participated in a shared activity structure that made use of tools ( the robot model and design drawings at the table ) to communicate their collective robot design goals . This tool use helped the group to address issues that were not immediately visible in their prior drawing , and it also appeared to support students’ developing understanding of the need to iterate using physical prototypes within a design cycle . In this case , the physical robot prototype served as a boundary object for the group . In the following interaction , a later portion of episode 3 , the students addressed discrepancies in their design ideas using pointing and physical artifacts ( see Figure 6 ) . Throughout this connected episode , Chad worked to re - orient his group members to their design drawing and to come to consensus about their robot’s appearance . Again , the group refined their design ideas . As he pointed to the design drawing in line 7 and enacted robot movement , Chad argued for the inclusion of fingers in their final robot design . He also referenced Rayna’s idea — prompting the group to remember their shared decisions . This orientation to a shared design space and history served to construct a JPSS . In line 8 , Karen used her hand to contribute . Here , she used physical gesture to show Chad what she and Rayna were depicting in their design drawing — a flat hand with touching fingers . Chad mirrored this gesture in line 9 . As Chad and Karen mimicked 229 one another , they appeared to be constructing a shared and embodied means of representing their robot design . Chad further supported the construction of this shared understanding by bringing the original design drawing back into the conversation ( line 10 ) . In this interaction , the students experienced real issues in designing robots that will complete specific tasks ( e . g . , grasping ) . This authentic experience helped them to recognize the limits of static images in the iterative brainstorming phase of the design cycle . For the purposes of this analysis , we claim that pointing is a meaningful feature of engagement and a site for co - construction of understanding . We provide one example of how pointing functioned to direct attention and provide evidence in this small group’s work with human - centered robotics . We conjecture that this particular gesture is important for groups’ communication of design and construction ideas , to command joint attention , negotiate discrepancies , and to make connections — thus serving to build toward a JPSS . Discussion In examining these episodes in a middle school HCR context , our analysis oriented to the functions of discrepancy , ownership and accountability , and parallel interaction in one group’s discourse . First , we showed how the performance of ownership and accountability can both support and impede joint problem solving . Across these episodes , we showed how the HCR context provided opportunities to create JPSS ( even when not realized ) . The curriculum provided physical materials and a designed problem that allowed students to negotiate iteratively designed artifacts , the ownership of which could change over time . These curricular aspects , which support the creation of JPSS , can be leveraged further to deepen collaborative engagement with the engineering design cycle and the socio - technical systems that are critical aspects of HCR . Building upon the productive use of physical robot prototypes and shared written artifacts as boundary objects , we might integrate more opportunities for students to physically move ideas across the table . Tools and activities such as collage boards for design ideas and collaborative word documents can promote embodied argumentation and scaffold the creation of a shared space for meaning making . Students might be encouraged to use movement and gesture to explain — modeling ways that embodied and verbal actions can contribute to the construction of shared understanding . Furthermore , video reflection might be used with instructors to scaffold active noticing of embodied engagement . Attending to joint interaction and gesture can serve as an indicator of group engagement . Throughout our analysis , we were particularly interested in how group collaboration and problem - solving occurred . As students engaged with their HCR projects , they moved apart and came together . Students were not always in a JPSS , but over time , the ability to imagine the others ' perspective became richer so that even in parallel work it was possible to attend to the perspective of the group . In the work presented here , we are interested in the social tensions and triumphs of small group work , considering how group dynamics and engagement are constructed and constructive in problem solving as well as how we can design for them . As students moved towards the construction of a JPSS , they came together more than they moved apart . We were able to see this coming together as we tracked verbal and nonverbal collaborative contributions . This analysis sets the stage for future work exploring JPSS , collaboration , and deep learning . Conclusion This research made a case for the importance of nonverbal engagement in collaborative interaction and presented a preliminary framework of four specific features that were significant in one small group’s collaborative interaction in a human - centered robotics curriculum . This framework includes embodied actions of leaning , the movement of artifacts , pointing , and gaze . These embodied elements functioned to position authority and accountability , direct attention , and provide support for verbal reasoning . These embodied actions are highlighted as aspects of deep engagement , and they contribute to existing literature on engagement and what it looks like in collaborative learning environments ( e . g . , Barron , 2000 ; Sinha et al . , 2015 ) . Tracing embodied actions throughout a series of episodes , we’ve demonstrated how they help us to “see” JPSS taking shape . Though these spaces are difficult to pin down and represent , we have highlighted how nonverbal actions taken by group members serve to create a shared mental and physical environment for meaning making . This research has also shown that not all convergence was productive for group work . As students leaned and directed gaze , they communicated their participation and expectations about participatory patterns in group work . As they moved artifacts and pointed , they used material objects as artifacts to think with ( Papert , 1980 ) . These actions played out over time to weave the group’s collaborative fabric as they wrestled with the challenge of engineering design practices . Embodied action supported students’ brainstorming and iterative design . As they 230 displayed and negotiated ownership and accountability in the problem - solving process highlighted here , students engaged with authentic STEM practices — perhaps beginning to see themselves as STEM learners in a new light . An open question remains as to whether engaging in these more robust practices leads learners to appreciate them over time , suggesting that we need to continue to consider the relationship between deep engagement and deep learning . This research demonstrated how collaboration in verbal and non - verbal dimensions was an important part of students’ design process , and thus that embodiment was central to students’ understanding of robotics design . As students engaged in embodied ways , they made connections and developed more robust collaborative learning practices . In this sense , they were engaging deeply . From our sociocultural perspective , this kind of deep engagement and participation is deep learning . Opportunities like these for deep STEM engagement are important for the development of STEM interest and collaborative practices . For non - dominant populations in STEM who often find it difficult to identify themselves in STEM activities and careers , experiences that prompt exploration of diverse embodied and verbal discourses may help to re - define what STEM can and should look like . Acknowledgements This research was funded by the National Science Foundation ITEST grant # 1433414 . We thank Dr . Joshua Danish for comments on an earlier draft and all undergraduate and graduate student researchers who contributed to data collection and analysis sessions . These students include AnnaRose Girvin , Joey Huang , Stella Huang , Charles Mahoney , Miranda Meade , Haley Molchan , and Benjamin Oistad . References Alibali , M . W . , & Nathan , M . J . ( 2012 ) . Embodiment in mathematics teaching and learning : Evidence from learners’ and teachers’ gestures . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 21 ( 2 ) , 247 – 286 . Appleton , J . J . , Christenson , S . L . , & Furlong , M . J . ( 2008 ) . Student engagement with school : Critical conceptual and methodological issues of the construct . Psychology in the Schools , 45 ( 5 ) , 369 - 386 . Avery , L . M . ( 2013 ) . Rural science education : Valuing local knowledge . Theory into Practice , 52 ( 1 ) , 28 - 35 . Barron , B . ( 2000 ) . Achieving coordination in collaborative problem - solving groups . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 9 ( 4 ) , 403 - 436 . Barron , B . , & Roschelle , J . ( 2009 ) . Shared cognition . In E . Anderman , ( Ed . ) , Psychology of classroom learning : An encyclopedia ( pp . 819 - 823 ) . Detroit , MI : Macmillan . Damon , W . , & Phelps , E . ( 1989 ) . Critical distinctions among three approaches to peer education . International Journal of Educational Research , 13 , 9 – 19 . DiSalvo , C . , Nourbakhsh , I . , Holstius , D . , Akin , A . , & Louw , M . ( 2008 ) . The Neighborhood networks project : A Case study of critical engagement and creative expression through participatory design . In Proceedings of the 10th conference on participatory design ( pp . 41 – 50 ) . Indianapolis , IN : Indiana University . Edwards , D . , & Potter , J . ( 1992 ) . Discursive psychology . London , UK : Sage . Engeström , Y . , Engeström , R . , & Kärkkäinen , M . ( 1995 ) . Polycontextuality and boundary crossing : Learning and problem solving in complex work activities . Learning and Instruction , 5 , 319 – 336 . Engle , R . A . , & Conant , F . R . ( 2002 ) . Guiding principles for fostering productive disciplinary engagement : Explaining an emergent argument in a community of learners classroom . Cognition and Instruction , 20 ( 4 ) , 399 – 483 . Fredricks , J . A . , Blumenfeld , P . C . , & Paris , A . H . ( 2004 ) . School engagement : Potential of the concept , state of the evidence . Review of Educational Research , 74 , 59 – 109 . Fredricks , J . A . , & McColskey , W . ( 2012 ) . The Measurement of student engagement : A Comparative analysis of various methods and student self - report instruments . In S . L . Christenson , A . L . Reschly , & C . Wylie , ( Eds . ) , Handbook of research on student engagement ( pp . 763 – 782 ) . New York , NY : Springer . Gee , J . P . , & Green , J . L . ( 1998 ) . Discourse analysis , learning , and social practice : A Methodological study . Review of Research in Education , 23 , 119 – 169 . Goodwin , C . ( 2000 ) . Action and embodiment within situated human interaction . Journal of Pragmatics , 32 , 1489 - 1522 . 231 Gomoll , A . , Hmelo - Silver , C . E . , Šabanović , S . , & Francisco , M . ( 2016 ) . Dragons , ladybugs , and softballs : Girls’ STEM engagement with human - centered robotics . Journal of Science Education and Technology , 25 , 899 - 914 . Hmelo , C . E . , Nagarajan , A . , & Day , R . S . ( 2000 ) . Effects of high and low prior knowledge on construction of a joint problem space . Journal of Experimental Education , 69 , 36 - 56 . Jefferson , G . ( 2004 ) . Glossary of transcript symbols with an introduction . Pragmatics and Beyond New Series , 125 , 13 – 34 . Jeong , H . , & Chi , M . T . ( 2007 ) . Knowledge convergence and collaborative learning . Instructional Science , 35 ( 4 ) , 287 - 315 . Jordan , M . E . , & McDaniel Jr . , R . R . ( 2014 ) . Managing uncertainty during collaborative problem solving in elementary school teams : The Role of peer influence in robotics engineering activity . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 23 ( 4 ) , 490 – 536 . Nevile , M . ( 2015 ) . The Embodied turn in research on language and social interaction . Research on Language and Social Interaction , 48 ( 2 ) , 121 - 151 . NGSS Lead States . ( 2013 ) . Next generation science standards : For states , by states . Washington , DC : The National Academies Press . Pajares , F . ( 2005 ) . Gender differences in mathematics self - efficacy beliefs . In A . M . Gallagher & J . C . Kaufman ( Eds . ) , Gender differences in mathematics : An integrative psychological approach ( pp . 294 – 315 ) . Boston , MA : Cambridge University Press . Papert , S . ( 1980 ) . Mindstorms : Children , computers , and powerful ideas . New York , NY : Basic Books . Potter , J . , & Wetherell , M . ( 1987 ) . Discourse and social psychology : Beyond attitudes and behaviors . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage Publications . Potter , J . , & Hepburn , A . ( 2008 ) . Discursive constructionism . In J . A . Holstein & J . F . Gubrium ( Eds . ) , Handbook of Constructionist Research ( pp . 275 - 293 ) . New York , NY : Guilford Press Resnick , M . ( 2007 ) . All I really need to know ( about creative thinking ) I learned ( by studying how children learn ) in kindergarten . In Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity & Cognition ( pp . 1 – 6 ) . New York , NY : ACM . Roschelle , J . ( 1992 ) . Learning by collaborating : Convergent conceptual change . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 2 ( 3 ) , 235 – 276 . Sawyer , R . K . ( 2008 ) . Optimising learning : Implications of learning sciences research . In Innovating to learn , learning to innovate ( pp . 45 - 65 ) . Paris , France : OECD . Silva , E . ( 2008 ) . Measuring skills for the 21st century . Washington , DC : Education Sector . Sinha , S . , Rogat , T . K . , Adams - Wiggins , K . R . , & Hmelo - Silver , C . E . ( 2015 ) . Collaborative group engagement in a computer - supported inquiry learning environment . International Journal of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning 10 ( 3 ) , 273 – 307 . Tan , E . , Calabrese Barton , A . , Kang , H . , & O’Neill , T . ( 2013 ) . Desiring a career in STEM - related fields : How middle school girls articulate and negotiate identities in practice in science . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 50 ( 10 ) , 1143 – 1179 . Teasley , S . D . , & Roschelle , J . ( 1993 ) . Constructing a joint problem space : The Computer as a tool for sharing knowledge . In S . P . Lajoie , & S . J . Derry ( Eds . ) , Computers as Cognitive Tools ( pp . 229 – 258 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Routledge . Wang , M . , Kirschner , P . A . , & Bridges , S . M . ( 2016 ) . Computer - based learning environments for deep learning in inquiry and problem - solving contexts . In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference of the Learning Sciences ( pp . 1356 - 1360 ) . Singapore : International Society of the Learning Sciences . Weinberger , A . , Stegmann , K . , & Fischer , F . ( 2007 ) . Knowledge convergence in collaborative learning : Concepts and assessment . Learning and Instruction , 17 ( 4 ) , 416 - 426 . 232 Appendix A . Transcript conventions ( adapted from Jefferson , 2004 ) Transcript conventions [ A single left bracket notes the beginning of overlapping talk ] A single right bracket notes the end of overlapping talk = An equal sign notes latching talk ( no gap between turns ) ( 1 ) Numbers in parentheses note pauses . ( 1 ) notes a pause of ~ 1 second ( . ) A period in parentheses notes a small pause between utterances _ _ _ _ Underlined speech notes an emphasis on the underlined word ( s ) Italics Italicized words inside of double parentheses notes nonverbal behavior Student pseudonyms and table positions Front of classroom / bottom of transcript images Rayna Chad Karen Evan