JCB : Article The Rockefeller University Press $ 30 . 00 J . Cell Biol . Vol . 188 No . 6 919 – 933 www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200908078 JCB 919 Correspondence to Sandra L . Schmid : slschmid @ scripps . edu D . Yarar’s present address is Whitehead Institute , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , 9 Cambridge Ctr . , Cambridge , MA 02142 . G . Danuser’s present address is Department of Cell Biology , 240 Longwood Ave . , Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA 02115 . Abbreviations used in this paper : CCP , clathrin - coated pit ; CCS , clathrin - coated structure ; CCV , clathrin - coated vesicle ; CME , clathrin - mediated endocytosis ; EGFP , enhanced GFP ; GCCS , giant CCS ; LCa , light chain a ; LDLR , low density lipoprotein receptor ; tet , tetracycline ; TfnR , transferrin receptor ; TIR - FM , total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy ; wt , wild type . Introduction Clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) requires the coordina - tion of multiple molecular events for the assembly and matura - tion of clathrin - coated pits ( CCPs ) , including incorporation of transmembrane receptors ( hereafter referred to as cargo ) through selective adaptor proteins . Recently , based on lifetime decom - position , we identified three CCP subpopulations , termed early abortive , late abortive , and productive CCPs ( Loerke et al . , 2009 ) . Our data suggested that aberrant structures not suited for completion abort , whereas productive CCPs are stabilized and complete their maturation to form endocytic clathrin - coated vesicles ( CCVs ) . Thus , the overall rate of CME measured bio - chemically depends on four variables : the ( i ) density / number of productive CCPs , ( ii ) efficiency of CCP maturation , ( iii ) rate of CCP maturation , and ( iv ) cargo / CCP , which in turn depends on CCP size and / or the packaging efficiency of cargo molecules . Our data also suggested the existence of an endocytic restriction / checkpoint mechanism that receives input through endocytic accessory proteins , monitoring among other factors coat assem - bly , membrane curvature , and cargo selection ( Loerke et al . , 2009 ; Mettlen et al . , 2009 ) . The incorporation of certain cargo / adaptor protein complexes ( i . e . , transferrin receptor / AP2 ) into CCPs in - creases the efficiency of CCP maturation without affecting CCP density or CCP maturation rate ( Loerke et al . , 2009 ; Mettlen et al . , 2009 ) . Whether other cargo , using other adaptor proteins , have the same effect , is yet unknown . Transferrin ( Tfn ) and low density lipoprotein ( LDL ) recep - tors ( TfnRs and LDLRs , respectively ) are concentrated in CCPs and constitutively endocytosed even in the absence of their nutrient ligands ( Hanover et al . , 1985 ; Brodsky , 1988 ) . The clus - tering of these cargos depends on sorting signals found in their cytoplasmic tail ( Trowbridge et al . , 1993 ; Kirchhausen et al . , 1997 ) . Whereas the YXX  sorting signal in the TfnR ( Jing et al . , 1990 ) is recognized by the tetrameric adaptor protein AP2 , recruit - ment of the LDLR relies on an FXNPXY motif ( Davis et al . , 1986 ) recognized by the adaptors Dab2 and ARH . Interestingly , although LDLR uptake in cultured hepatocytes and lymphocytes is dependent on ARH ( Mishra et al . , 2002b ; Jones et al . , 2003 ) , C lathrin - mediated endocytosis of surface receptors and their bound ligands ( i . e . , cargo ) is highly regulated , including by the cargo itself . One of the possible sources of the observed heterogeneous dy - namics of clathrin - coated pits ( CCPs ) might be the differ - ent cargo content . Consistent with this , we show that CCP size and dynamic behavior varies with low density lipo - protein receptor ( LDLR ) expression levels in a manner de - pendent on the LDLR - specific adaptors , Dab2 and ARH . In Dab2 - mCherry – expressing cells , varying LDLR expression leads to a progressive increase in CCP size and to the appearance of nonterminal endocytic events . In LDLR and ARH - mCherry – expressing cells in addition to an increase in CCP size , turnover of abortive CCPs increases , and the rate of CCP maturation decreases . Altogether , our results underscore the highly dynamic and cargo - responsive nature of CCP assembly and suggest that the observed heterogeneity is , in part , related to compositional differences ( e . g . , cargo and adaptors ) between CCPs . Cargo - and adaptor - specific mechanisms regulate clathrin - mediated endocytosis Marcel Mettlen , 1 Dinah Loerke , 2 Defne Yarar , 1 Gaudenz Danuser , 1 and Sandra L . Schmid 1 1 Department of Cell Biology , The Scripps Research Institute , La Jolla , CA 92037 2 Department of Physics and Astronomy , University of Denver , Denver , CO 80208 © 2010 Mettlen et al . This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike – No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the pub - lication date ( see http : / / www . rupress . org / terms ) . After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License ( Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported license , as described at http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 / ) . T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y JCB • VOLUME 188 • NUMBER 6 • 2010 920 Figure 1 . Dab2 / LDLRs regulate CCP size . BSC1 cells stably expressing LCa - EGFP were transfected with Dab2 - mCherry and infected with adenoviruses coding for a tet - repressible LDLR expression system . Cells were cultured in the presence of decreasing concentrations of tet , fixed / permeabilized , and observed by epifluorescence or electron microscopy . [ tet ] : ( A – D ) 1 , 000 ng / ml , no CD8 / LDLR ; ( E – H ) : 25 ng / ml , low CD8 / LDLR ; arrowheads : normal - sized CCPs ; arrows : enlarged CCPs ( I – L ) : 0 ng / ml , high CD8 / LDLR . Bars , 10 µm . ( D , H , and L ) Encircled areas indicate clathrin lattices at the ventral membrane of BSC - 1 cells . Insets show normal - sized CCPs in each condition . 921 Cargo regulates CCP size and dynamics • Mettlen et al . levels of endogenous LDLRs , Dab2 and ARH ( Keyel et al . , 2006 ; unpublished data ) facilitating analysis of exogenously expressed wild - type and mutant forms of these proteins , and ( iv ) CCP dy - namics in these cells are well characterized ( Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ; Loerke et al . , 2009 ; Mettlen et al . , 2009 ) . We first examined Dab2 , which mediates LDLR uptake independently of AP2 . Relative amounts of Dab2 and CD8 / LDLR control CCP size Stable Dab2 expression strongly inhibits proliferation of cultured cell lines ( He et al . , 2003 ; unpublished data ) ; therefore , we tran - siently transfected BSC1 cells with mCherry - tagged Dab2 ( Dab2 - mCherry ) . Under these conditions , Dab2 - mCherry colocalized with enhanced GFP ( EGFP ) – tagged clathrin light chain a ( LCa - EGFP ; Fig . 1 , A – C ) and EGFP - tagged  2 subunit of AP2 (  2 - EGFP ; Fig . S2 A ) in CCPs at the cell surface . This expected localization of Dab2 - mCherry suggests that the fluorescent tag did not interfere with its function . CCPs in Dab2 - mCherry – expressing cells were comparable in intensity to those in neighboring cells not expressing Dab2 ( Fig . 1 B , inset ) . Negative - stained EM analysis of CCPs on the ex - posed ventral surface of cells ( Fig . 1 D ) revealed small flat and curved lattices , typically < 200 nm in diameter ( Table I ) . These re - sults differ from observations made upon Dab2 overexpression in Cos7 and HeLa cells ( Chetrit et al . , 2009 ) , leading us to hypothe - size that these differences might reflect the low endogenous lev - els of LDLRs ( or other Dab2 - specific cargo ) expressed in BSC1 cells relative to other cell lines ( Keyel et al . , 2006 ) . To test this hypothesis , we generated recombinant adenoviruses encoding a CD8 / LDLR chimera driven by a tetracycline ( tet ) - repressible pro - moter . The CD8 / LDLR chimera comprises the extracellular and transmembrane domains of CD8 and the intracellular LDLR tail bearing a FXNPXY motif ( Motley et al . , 2003 ) . In infected BSC1 cells , the expression levels of this chimera can be tightly controlled by tet ( Fig . S1 , A and B ) and its endocytosis readily measured using commercially available anti - CD8 antibodies as ligand . As predicted , at the low levels of CD8 / LDLR expression induced in the presence of 25 ng / ml tet ( Fig . S1 ) , CCPs increased in intensity ( Fig . 1 , E – G ) , suggesting an increase in CCP size and / or clustering of CCPs . EM analysis of the ventral surface of cells revealed the appearance of larger flat lattices ( Fig . 1 H ) , up to 500 nm in diameter ( Table I ) , and clusters of CCPs ( Fig . 1 , F and H ; see also Fig . 3 Ba ) that were not detected under control conditions . Strikingly , at the high levels of overexpression achieved upon complete removal of tet , Dab2 was strongly recruited to the plasma membrane and induced the formation of giant clathrin - coated structures ( GCCSs ) . These were selectively located on the ventral surface , irregular in shape , and reached several mi - crometers in diameter ( Fig . 1 , I – L , Fig . S2 B , and Video 1 ) . EM revealed these to be flat lattices ( Table I ) and not clusters of CCPs . GCCS formation was dependent on Dab2 expression , as they were not detected in cells overexpressing CD8 / LDLR alone ( Fig . S2 , E and F ; see also Fig . 4 , C and D ) . When TfnRs were overexpressed , even in the presence of Dab2 ( Fig . S2 C ) , we did not detect an effect on CCP size or the appearance of GCCSs by immunofluorescence . Indeed , in our studies , CCPs detected by EM on the dorsal surface of BSC1 cells overexpressing TfnR its uptake in ARH - null fibroblasts is unaffected ( Garcia et al . , 2001 ; Arca et al . , 2002 ) . In these cells , Dab2 mediates LDLR inter - nalization , suggesting that these adaptors are partially redundant ( Maurer and Cooper , 2006 ) . Dab2 and ARH both contain N - terminal PTB domains that bind to FXNPXY sorting signals and phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphospate . Dab2 , but not ARH , contains multiple NPF motifs that mediate binding of Eps15 homology ( EH ) domain – containing proteins ; whereas a PDZ - interacting motif is present in ARH , but not Dab2 . Additional recognition motifs in these adaptors mediate binding to both clathrin and AP2 ( Mishra et al . , 2002a , b ) . Although Dab2 interacts with AP2 selectively through the  - adaptin subunit ( Morris and Cooper , 2001 ) , it appears to sort cargo into CCPs independently of AP2 ( Garuti et al . , 2005 ; Keyel et al . , 2006 ; Maurer and Cooper , 2006 ) . ARH binds selectively to the  - adaptin subunit of AP2 ( Mishra et al . , 2005 ; Edeling et al . , 2006 ; Keyel et al . , 2008 ) and its function is AP2 dependent ( Maurer and Cooper , 2006 ) . Although the general endocytic functions of ARH and Dab2 have been well established , the rela - tionship between these adaptors and AP2 complexes remains un - clear , and there are conflicting reports as to whether LDLR and TfnR are internalized via the same or distinct CCPs ( Keyel et al . , 2006 ; Lakadamyali et al . , 2006 ) . Here , we have used BSC1 cells expressing variable levels of a CD8 / LDLR chimera along with wild - type ( wt ) and mutant forms of its adaptors , Dab2 and ARH . Combining total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy ( TIR - FM ) , electron micros - copy ( EM ) , and biochemical assays , we have studied the effects of this cargo and its adaptors on the size and dynamic behavior of CCPs and the rate and efficiency of CCP maturation . Results To study the effect of LDLR and its specific adaptors on clathrin - mediated endocytosis we used epithelial BSC1 cells because ( i ) they are well suited for TIR - FM due to their morphology and adherence to the substratum , ( ii ) they can be readily infected with adenovirus for regulated protein expression , ( iii ) they contain low Table I . CCP size , as determined by negative - stain EM , varies with cargo , Dab2 , and ARH expression levels Adenovirus construct Tet ( ng / ml ) Adaptor protein expressed CCP size ( µm 2 ± SD ) n Ventral cell surface CD8 / LDLR 1 , 000 Dab2 0 . 013 ± 0 . 03 20 CD8 / LDLR 25 Dab2 0 . 45 ± 0 . 38 a 19 CD8 / LDLR 0 Dab2 3 . 31 ± 2 . 49 b 8 CD8 / LDLR 0 ARH 0 . 89 ± 0 . 54 c 27 Dorsal cell surface TfnR 1 , 000 None 0 . 011 ± 0 . 004 51 TfnR 0 None 0 . 008 ± 0 . 003 d 82 a P < 0 . 001 relative to no CD8 / LDLR expression ( i . e . 1 , 000 ng / ml tet ) . b P < 0 . 001 relative to low levels of CD8 / LDLR expression ( i . e . 25 ng / ml tet ) . c P < 0 . 001 relative to Dab2 expression in the presence of high CD8 / LDLR levels . d P < 0 . 001 relative to endogenous levels of TfnR expression ( i . e . 1 , 000 ng / ml tet ) . JCB • VOLUME 188 • NUMBER 6 • 2010 922 Dab2 exists as two isoforms : Dab2 - p96 and the internal splice variant , Dab2 - p67 ( Xu et al . , 1995 ) . Dab2 - p96 binds to both clathrin and AP2 , and localizes to CCPs , whereas Dab2 - p67 lacks the main AP2 - and clathrin - binding motifs and does not localize to CCPs . To probe the structural requirements for the formation of Dab2 - dependent GCCSs , we expressed mCherry - labeled Dab2 - p67 in BSC1 cells and confirmed that under con - trol conditions ( Fig . 2 B ) and upon overexpression of the TfnR ( Fig . S2 D ) , Dab2 - p67 exhibited a mainly diffuse , probably cytosolic labeling with only minor / no recruitment to CCPs . Un - expectedly , in cells overexpressing CD8 / LDLR , Dab2 - p67 in - duced the formation of GCCSs and colocalized with clathrin heavy chain ( CHC ; Fig . 2 C ) . These observations suggest that in the presence of low levels of cargo , clathrin and / or AP2 binding by Dab2 are required for its recruitment to CCPs . However , at higher cargo concentrations , other binding interactions , perhaps involving the remaining NPF motifs on Dab2 - p67 , are sufficient to stabilize Dab2 at the membrane , leading to the formation of larger CCPs and ultimately GCCSs . alone were smaller than in control cells ( Table I ) . These findings differ from an earlier study in which the assembly of flat clathrin lattices was induced by overexpression of human TfnR in chicken fibroblasts ( Miller et al . , 1991 ) , which may reflect species or cell type differences . Together , these results demonstrate a contin - uum in the size of CCPs dependent on the expression levels of Dab2 and cargo : both Dab2 and CD8 / LDLR overexpression are required for the formation of GCCSs . Increased membrane recruitment of Dab2 is sufficient to induce GCCSs To test whether direct cargo binding by Dab2 is required for formation of GCCSs , we expressed myristoylated Dab2 in BSC1 cells . Even in the absence of exogenously expressed cargo , the strong membrane recruitment of this protein alone was sufficient to induce GCCSs ( Fig . 2 Aa ) , although CD8 / LDLR expression further increased their size ( Fig . 2 Ab ) . Under these conditions , formation of GCCSs was no longer restricted to the ventral plasma membrane ( not depicted ) . Figure 2 . Requirements for Dab2 / LDLR - induced GCCS formation . BSC1 - wt cells were transfected with either myristoylated Dab2 - mCherry ( A ) or Dab2 - p67 - mCherry ( B and C ) and were infected with adenoviruses coding for CD8 / LDLR as indicated . Cells were fixed , permeabilized , immunolabeled in green for clathrin heavy chain ( CHC ; B and C ) , and observed by epifluorescence . Bars , 10 µm . 923 Cargo regulates CCP size and dynamics • Mettlen et al . CCPs . Unlike Dab2 , the combined presence of ARH and CD8 / LDLR did not induce formation of GCCSs . EM analysis showed that the CCPs present in these cells consisted of flat and curved lattices , which remained below the diffraction limit ( up to 500 - nm and 165 - nm diameter , respectively ; Fig . S4 D , Table I ) . When we coexpressed CD8 / LDLR , Dab2 - mCherry , and ARH - EGFP in BSC1 cells , both adaptors were recruited to the plasma mem - brane , where they colocalized ( Fig . 4 E ) . However , in the pres - ence of ARH , Dab2 and CD8 / LDLR overexpression failed to generate GCCSs , although CCSs remained larger ( and / or more clustered ) when compared with control conditions ( compare Fig . 4 E with Fig . 1 , I – K and Fig . 4 , C and D ) . Together , these results indicate that ( i ) Dab2 and ARH bind to the same cargo , ( ii ) both adaptors are recruited into the same CCSs , ( iii ) the size of CCPs can be controlled by the ratio of Dab2 / ARH ; and ( iv ) despite their partial functional redundancies and structural similarities , Dab2 and ARH exhibit fundamentally different , albeit cargo - dependent , interactions with CCPs . We also noted that stable ARH expression altered cell mor - phology such that the cells displayed a very broad and regular lead - ing edge ( Fig . 4 A , Fig . S3 A ) . These shape changes were accompanied by alterations in the actin cytoskeleton ( Fig . S3 , A and B ) , which were reversed upon CD8 / LDLR expression , as ARH redistributed to CCPs ( Fig . S3 C ) . Together , these obser - vations indicate that ARH interacts with and controls actin dy - namics by an as yet unknown mechanism . AP2 binding is required for CCP recruitment of ARH , whereas its nuclear export is passive and AP2 independent We next examined the structural requirements for the cargo - dependent redistribution of ARH from the nucleus . The mutant mCherry - tagged ARH - F259A , which is unable to bind AP2 ( Mishra et al . , 2005 ) , was also localized to the nucleus in stably transformed BSC1 cells not expressing CD8 / LDLR ( Fig . 5 A ) . Upon overexpression of CD8 / LDLR , ARH - F259A exited the nucleus , but was not recruited into CCPs ( Fig . 5 B ) . Thus , although cargo overexpression is sufficient to trigger nuclear exit , AP2 interactions are required to stabilize ARH in CCPs . Con - sistent with this , ARH - containing CCPs almost always colocalized with AP2 ( Fig . 4 D ) , even though we could readily detect clathrin - labeled CCPs that did not contain AP2 ( Fig . S2 E , circles ) . We next tested the role of ARH’s PTB domain in nuclear exit . The PTB domain mutants ARH - S117Y and ARH - F165A show no or reduced affinity for LDLRs , respectively , and fail to rescue LDL - plasma concentrations in ARH  /  mice ( Garuti et al . , 2005 ) . When transiently transfected into BSC1 cells both the ARH - S117Y - mCherry and ARH - F165A - mCherry mutants exhibited attenuated nuclear exit / CCP recruitment upon CD8 / LDLR expres - sion ( unpublished data ) . The double mutant ARH - S117Y ; F165A - mCherry was localized to the nucleus and failed to exit upon CD8 / LDLR expression ( Fig . 5 C ) , indicating a role for PTB binding interactions in the nuclear shuttling of ARH . Proteins or protein complexes with a molecular weight larger than  40 kD are actively transported through nuclear pore complexes by importins . These transporters recognize nuclear localization signals ( NLSs ) found in target proteins Dab2 and CD8 / LDLR expression can induce clathrin - coated structures ( CCSs ) that mimic nonterminal endocytic events To probe the endocytic activity of CCSs in the presence of Dab2 and increasing amounts of CD8 / LDLRs , we next observed BSC1 cells by time - lapse TIR - FM . In the absence of CD8 / LDLR , Dab2 - mCherry and LCa - EGFP displayed typical dynamic be - haviors , assembling as CCPs and departing together as CCVs ( Fig . 3 A , Video 2 ) . However , we were also able to detect a small fraction of “nonterminal” events ( Fig . 3 A , arrowhead at 140 s ) , which were originally defined by Merrifield et al . ( 2005 ) as sites at which multiple rounds of CCV formation were observed to occur from an apparently single CCP . Nonterminal events are frequently observed in HeLa cells ( Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Loerke et al . , 2009 ) , but rarely detected in control BSC1 cells ( Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ; Loerke et al . , 2009 ) . Our ability to detect nonterminal endo - cytic events in BSC1 cells expressing Dab2 suggests the exis - tence of some larger - than - normal CCPs or unresolvable clusters of CCPs , even in the presence of endogenous cargo levels . The larger CCPs present in BSC1 cells expressing Dab2 - mCherry and low levels of CD8 / LDLR ( Fig . 1 , E – H ) were highly dynamic and often appeared as clusters of smaller CCSs . Indeed , clusters of CCPs were frequently observed by EM ( Fig . 3 Ba ) . Multiple rounds of vesicle budding ( Fig . 3 Bb and Video 3 ) could be detected from these CCP clusters , which would appear as nonterminal events for closely adjacent CCPs . With increasing amounts of CD8 / LDLR , the size of these clusters increased ( not depicted ) , and although Dab2 - mCherry was homogeneously dis - tributed throughout these structures , LCa - EGFP and CHC were less uniform ( Fig . 1 J and Fig . 3 C ) . This uneven distribution was even more pronounced for AP2 , which appeared as mobile clus - ters within enlarged CCSs ( Fig . S2 B and Video 4 ) . Finally , GCCSs induced by overexpression of CD8 / LDLR and Dab2 also displayed a dynamic morphology ( Fig . 3 C , splitting and merg - ing events within these structures are indicated by arrows and arrowheads , respectively ; see also Video 5 ) . Dab2 and clathrin exchanged actively in these structures ( Fig . 3 D ) , albeit with dif - ferent kinetics ( Fig . 3 E ; Chetrit et al . , 2009 ) . However , despite this dynamic behavior , CCVs were observed to pinch off from the edges of these GCCSs only on rare occasions , indicating that they are not endocytically active ( Videos 4 and 5 ) . Together , these data further support a continuum of effects of cargo and Dab2 on CCP size and dynamic behavior . CCP localization of ARH is cargo dependent In contrast to Dab2 , exogenous expression of ARH did not inhibit cell proliferation , and thus we could generate BSC1 cells stably expressing mCherry - tagged ARH ( ARH - mCherry ) . To our sur - prise , unlike the identically labeled Dab2 , the vast majority of ARH - mCherry was found in the nucleus of BSC1 cells ( Fig . 3 , A and B ) . Only a weak ARH signal was detectable in CCPs , colocalizing with CHC ( not depicted ) and  - adaptin ( Fig . 4 B , insets upon overexposure ) . Upon CD8 / LDLR expression , ARH exited the nucleus and was recruited to the plasma membrane , where it colocalized with clathrin ( Fig . 4 C ) , and  - adaptin ( Fig . 4 D ) in diffraction - limited JCB • VOLUME 188 • NUMBER 6 • 2010 924 inhibited ARH export ( Fig . S3 Fa ) . However , if we first ex - pressed CD8 / LDLR for 2 – 7 h and then added LmB , ARH redis - tributed from the nucleus to CCPs ( Fig . S3 Fb , c ) . Together , these results show that nuclear exit of ARH is passive and suggest the existence of a second PTB domain binding partner required for nuclear import of ARH . In this scenario , overexpression of ( Stewart , 2007 ) . ARH lacks a recognizable NLS , suggesting that an additional factor might be involved in its nuclear shuttling . To investigate whether nuclear export of ARH was an active process , we treated cells with leptomycin B ( LmB ) , a potent inhibitor of nuclear exit . LmB prevented adenoviral - mediated CD8 / LDLR expression ( Fig . S3 , D and E ) , and hence indirectly Figure 3 . GCCSs are dynamic and , at moderate CD8 / LDLR levels , generate nonterminal endocytic events . BSC1 cells were cultured as described in Fig . 1 and observed by dual - color TIRF - FM ( A , Bb , C ) , electron microscopy ( Ba ) , or spinning disk confocal microscopy ( D ) . ( A ) Montage shows lifetime of a CCP . Arrowhead indicates nonterminal event . ( B ) In the presence of mild CD8 / LDLR expression , CCPs tend to cluster and undergo nonterminal endocytic events . ( C ) GCCSs are dynamic and change morphology . ( D ) A small area in GCCSs has been bleached ( indicated by square ) and FRAP was recorded and quantified . Bars : ( A ) 400 nm ; ( Ba ) 200 nm ; ( Bb ) 600 nm ; ( C and D ) 2 µm . 925 Cargo regulates CCP size and dynamics • Mettlen et al . to modulate LDLR expression ( Eden et al . , 2007 ) . Therefore , although beyond the scope of this study , it will be worthwhile in future studies to explore the mechanisms governing ARH nuclear shuttling and the possible nuclear function of ARH . the CD8 / LDLR chimera might displace this factor and enable recruitment of ARH to the plasma membrane . Other endocytic adaptors , including epsin and  - arrestin ( Pilecka et al . , 2007 ) are known to shuttle to the nucleus , and Dab2 has been shown Figure 4 . ARH localization is cargo dependent . BSC1 cells stably expressing ARH - mCherry were infected with adenoviruses coding for CD8 / LDLR and cultured in the presence ( A and B ) or absence ( C and D ) of tet . Cells were then fixed , permeabilized , immunolabeled as indicated , and observed by epi - fluorescence . Insets show enlarged areas . ( E ) BSC1 cells coexpressing Dab2 - mCherry , ARH - EGFP , and CD8 / LDLR were fixed and visualized by spinning disk confocal microscopy . Bars , 10 µm . JCB • VOLUME 188 • NUMBER 6 • 2010 926 ARH partially rescues saturated CME in an AP2 - dependent manner Previously , it has been reported that constitutive CME is saturable ( Warren et al . , 1997 , 1998 ; Loerke et al . , 2009 ) . We confirmed this property in BSC1 cells by biochemically measuring CD8 / LDLR endocytosis . Although total levels of internalized CD8 / LDLR increase upon overexpression , a significant decrease in efficiency of endocytosis is apparent when cargo uptake is nor - malized to the total number of surface - expressed receptors . With increasing expression levels of CD8 / LDLR , the efficiency of CME decreased ( Fig . 6 A ) . To test whether this saturation re - flected decreased efficiency of adaptor - mediated cargo cluster - ing , we compared CD8 / LDLR uptake in control cells with cells expressing one of various fluorescently tagged clathrin - coat components ( i . e . , LCa - EGFP ,  2 - EGFP , ARH - wt - mCherry , or ARH - F259A - mCherry ) . As expected , neither LCa - EGFP nor  2 - EGFP expression increased uptake efficiency of CD8 / LDLR chimeras ( Fig . 6 , B and C ) . However , the endocytic efficiency of CD8 / LDLR uptake under high ( 0 ng / ml tet ) expression levels was increased in cells expressing an additional pool of ARH ( Fig . 6 , B and C ; open symbols / bars ) . To establish the specific - ity of this effect , we showed that TfnR uptake , which was also saturated upon its overexpression , was not rescued by ARH ( Fig . S1 C ) . The partial rescue of saturated CD8 / LDLR uptake in cells expressing wt ARH - mCherry coincided with an  48 % decrease in the amount of extracellularly exposed CD8 / LDLRs ( unpublished data ) . This was expected because the amount of CD8 / LDLRs at the membrane reflects the balance between endocytosis and recycling ( the latter was unaffected by CD8 / LDLR expression ; unpublished data ) . Although endocytosis of CD8 / LDLRs was more efficient with increased amounts of ARH , the rescue was incomplete , indicating the existence of other rate - limiting components during uptake of high CD8 / LDLR loads . As predicted by our previous findings , the endocytic effi - ciency of CD8 / LDLR uptake in BSC1 cells was directly linked to the capability of ARH to bind AP2 . Analysis of mutant ARH proteins defective in AP2 binding ( Mishra et al . , 2005 ) showed that expression of ARH - 252A255 , which has reduced ability to bind AP2 , only slightly increased the efficiency of CD8 / LDLR uptake , whereas expression of ARH - F259A , which is unable to bind AP2 , had no effect ( Fig . 6 C ) . Finally , depletion of AP2 through siRNA - mediated knockdown of µ2 by 80 % ( unpublished data ) ablated the ability of ARH - mCherry expression to restore the efficiency of CD8 / LDLR endocytosis at high levels of ex - pression ( Fig . 6 C ) . Altogether , these data clearly establish the requirement of AP2 for ARH - mediated LDLR uptake , which mirrors the requirements for ARH targeting to CCPs . Further - more , these results demonstrate that saturated CME can be par - tially accounted for by a limited amount of adaptor proteins . Cargo overexpression prolongs the lifetime of productive CCPs To better understand the role of the LDLR / ARH cargo - adaptor complex in regulating early stages in CME , we recorded time - lapse movies of LCa - EGFP – labeled CCPs in the presence or absence of CD8 / LDLRs and / or ARH by TIR - FM and applied ARH stabilized AP2 at the plasma membrane Consistent with results from others ( Mishra et al . , 2005 ; Keyel et al . , 2006 , 2008 ; Maurer and Cooper , 2006 ) , our data suggest that ARH recruitment to CCPs was dependent on AP2 interaction . Interestingly , we found that ARH expression induced strong mem - brane recruitment of AP2 even in the absence of CD8 / LDLR overexpression ( Fig . 5 D , µ2 signal ) , indicating that a small amount of membranous ARH ( Fig . 4 B , insets ) is sufficient to in - crease CCP recruitment of AP2 . Upon CD8 / LDLR overexpres - sion , the cytosolic pool of µ2 was further depleted ( Fig . 5 D ) and as expected , the ARH - F259A mutant failed to increase AP2 membrane recruitment ( Fig . 5 D ) . All other cell clones showed only slightly reduced or unchanged cytosolic pools of µ2 upon CD8 / LDLR overexpression , and the distribution of CHC between cytosol and the membrane fraction ( i . e . , ratio of 4 : 1 ) was un - affected ( Fig . 5 D ) . Consistent with this , CD8 / LDLR overexpres - sion alone does not significantly alter overall CCP density ( Fig . S4 A ) . Together , these results demonstrate a strong CD8 / LDLR - dependent membrane recruitment of both ARH and AP2 that , because CCP density does not change , results in a cargo - dependent increase of the adaptor protein content per CCP . Figure 5 . Requirements for ARH targeting to CCPs . BSC1 cells stably ex - pressing ARH F259A - mCherry ( A and B ) or ARH S117Y ; F165A - mCherry ( C ) were left untreated ( A ) or infected with adenoviruses coding for CD8 / LDLR ( B and C ) . Cells were then fixed , permeabilized , immunolabeled as indicated , and observed by epifluorescence . Bars , 10 µm . ( D ) Indicated cell lines were cultured as previously described and analyzed by West - ern blot after subcellular fractionation . S : cytosolic fraction ( diluted 4x ) ; P : membrane fraction . Actin served as loading control . The cell fraction - ation experiment has been repeated at least three times and a typical experiment is shown . 927 Cargo regulates CCP size and dynamics • Mettlen et al . by CD8 / LDLR and / or ARH expression ( control : 0 . 088 ± 0 . 026 pits / min / µm 2 ; + CD8 / LDLR : 0 . 089 ± 0 . 028 pits / min / µm 2 ; + CD8 / LDLR + ARH : 0 . 089 ± 0 . 025 pits / min / µm 2 ; Fig . S4 C ) , whereas the initiation density of short - lived structures with lifetimes of 3 – 30 s ( i . e . , abortive CCPs ; Fig . 7 B ) increased ( control : 0 . 29 ± 0 . 071 pits / min / µm 2 ; + CD8 / LDLR : 0 . 41 ± 0 . 093 pits / min / µm 2 ; and + CD8 / LDLR + ARH : 0 . 30 ± 0 . 066 pits / min / µm 2 ) . Together , these data indicate that CD8 / LDLR over - expression stimulates initiation of CCPs , but does not affect the total number of productive CCPs . Thus , the reduced overall CCP maturation efficiency reflects an increased presence of abortive events . Consistent with the decreased efficiencies of CME ob - served biochemically , the average lifetime of productive CCPs , which reflects the rate of maturation , increased significantly from 62 . 8 ± 3 . 1 s to 75 . 5 ± 5 . 0 s upon CD8 / LDLR overexpres - sion ( Fig . 7 B ) . An additional pool of ARH did not alter the life - times of productive CCPs ( 76 . 3 ± 5 . 2 s ) , despite increasing the efficiency of CD8 / LDLR endocytosis ( Fig . 6 B ) . These data suggest that ARH expression enhances CD8 / LDLR uptake by increasing packaging , i . e . , the number of CD8 / LDLRs per CCP and / or the size of CCPs , rather than by enhancing either the efficiency or rate of CCP maturation . In contrast to the effects on productive CCPs , the average lifetime of late abortive struc - tures was decreased from 19 . 1 ± 1 . 7 s under control conditions to 17 . 2 ± 1 . 2 s in the presence of CD8 / LDLRs and further de - creased to 15 . 5 ± 0 . 8 s upon expression of ARH ( Fig . 7 B ) . Thus , CD8 / LDLR overexpression together with its adaptor ARH lead to increased rates of initiation and turnover of abortive species . automated analysis of CCP trajectories as described previously ( Jaqaman et al . , 2008 ; Loerke et al . , 2009 ) . We were unable to follow CD8 / LDLR clustering directly because overexpression of this chimera led to a strong decrease of the signal - to - noise ratio at the plasma membrane ( Fig . S1 B ) , impeding automated tracking of cargo - laden CCPs . As previously shown in control cells ( Mettlen et al . , 2009 ) , productive CCPs , which ultimately lead to vesicle formation , contribute 50 . 7 ± 2 . 0 % ( mean ± jackknifed cell - to - cell error ; Thomson and Chave , 1991 ) to the total number of CCPs found at the plasma membrane ( Fig . 7 A ) , with early and late abortive CCPs representing 30 . 7 ± 1 . 3 % and 17 . 0 ± 1 . 3 % , respectively . The remaining persistent CCPs ( 1 . 7 ± 0 . 4 % ; Fig . S4 B ) failed to turn over for the duration of the 10 - min movies . The calculated mean lifetimes were 5 . 7 ± 0 . 3 s , 19 . 1 ± 1 . 7 s , and 62 . 8 ± 3 . 1 s for early abortive , late abortive , and productive CCPs , respec - tively ( Fig . 7 B ) . Surprisingly , in cells overexpressing CD8 / LDLRs in either the absence or presence of an additional pool of ARH , the rela - tive contribution of productive CCPs decreased to 41 . 3 ± 2 . 1 % and 44 . 5 ± 2 . 2 % , respectively ( Fig . 7 A ) . This decrease in CCP maturation efficiencies was in contrast to our previously re - ported results upon TfnR overexpression ( Loerke et al . , 2009 ) . To test whether this observation was due to an increased abso - lute number of abortive structures , and / or a decreased absolute number of productive CCPs , we measured the initiation den - sity of CCPs ( i . e . , their rate of appearance per unit of cell sur - face ) . The average initiation rate of LCa - EGFP – labeled CCPs with lifetimes of 35 – 135 s ( i . e . , productive CCPs ) was unaffected Figure 6 . ARH partially rescues saturated LDLR uptake . ( A ) BSC1 - wt cells infected with adenovirus coding for CD8 / LDLR were cultured in the presence of the indicated concentrations of tet and the rate of anti - CD8 antibody internalization relative to surface bound ligand was mea - sured at 37°C , as described in Materials and methods . ( B ) Time course of single round internalization of prebound anti - CD8 antibody in BSC1 cells expressing EGFP - CLCa (  ,  ) or mCherry - ARH (  ,  ) . Shown are means ( ±SD ) of at least three independent experiments . ( C ) BSC - wt cells or cells stably expressing LCa - EGFP ,  2 - EGFP , ARH - wt - , ARH - F259A - , or ARH - 252A255 - mCherry were treated ( + µ2 k . d . ) or not with µ2 siRNA to reduce AP2 levels , in - fected with CD8 / LDLR adenovirus , and incubated with or without tet as indicated . The mean efficiency CD8 / LDLR uptake as determined in at least two independent experi - ments is shown . Of note : to follow basal endocytic uptake of CD8 , minimal exogenous expression of CD8 / LDLR was necessary ( i . e . , overnight culture in the presence of 75 ng / ml tet ) . * * * , confidence levels of P < 0 . 001 rela - tive to wt control , 0 tet . JCB • VOLUME 188 • NUMBER 6 • 2010 928 and ARH enhances this effect and increases the packaging effi - ciency of CD8 / LDLR into these enlarged CCPs . In cells expressing CD8 / LDLR , ARH - mCherry displayed nearly identical accumulation kinetics during the first 30 – 40 s at CCPs as compared with LCa - EGFP ( Fig . 8 D , orange lines vs . green lines , respectively ) . However , ARH accumulation seemed to reach its maximum in CCPs with lifetimes > 80 s , whereas clathrin intensities were higher in longer - lived cohorts . Thus , CCPs that take longer to pinch off have a higher ratio of clathrin : ARH than shorter - lived CCPs . In addition , although the relative intensities of these two markers could not be directly compared , an earlier de - crease of the ARH - mCherry signals compared with LCa - EGFP signals ( Fig . 8 D , arrows ) led to a more symmetrical shape of the ARH - mCherry profiles . A similar dissociation / redistribution has been suggested for AP2 ( Rappoport et al . , 2005 ; Saffarian and Kirchhausen , 2008 ) and was further supported by our analysis of CCP cohorts labeled by  2 - EGFP . Like LCa - EGFP and ARH - mCherry , AP2 rapidly accumulated in CCPs ( Fig . 8 E , blue lines ) . However , unlike clathrin , but as for ARH - mCherry , these  2 - EGFP intensities began to decrease before LCa - EGFP . The appar - ently earlier disappearance of adaptors relative to clathrin indicates either their dissociation from CCPs before clathrin and / or a non - uniform redistribution of both ARH and AP2 in the clathrin lattice , resulting in their differential illumination within the TIRF field . CD8 / LDLR overexpression also increased signal intensities of all  2 - EGFP – labeled CCP cohorts ( Fig . 8 , E and F ; red lines and bars , respectively ) and prolonged the growth phase to  50 s . Expression of an additional pool of ARH in the presence of CD8 / LDLR reduced the amount of  2 - EGFP per CCP ( Fig . 8 , E and F ; green lines and bars , respectively ) . Together , these data indicate that despite the dependence of ARH on AP2 , these adaptors nonetheless also compete for incorporation into CCPs These effects suggest that additional factors , required to stabi - lize productive CCPs , become limiting during saturated CME . CD8 / LDLRs increase the amount of coat components per CCP To further test the possibility that CD8 / LDLR overexpression alters the size and / or packaging efficiency of CCPs , we extracted LCa - EGFP intensity profiles of CCP cohorts with a given life - time range . These profiles are a general indicator of CCP growth and an indirect size measurement for structures under the light - diffraction limit ( Saffarian and Kirchhausen , 2008 ) . Under control conditions ( Fig . 8 A , blue lines ) , intensity pro - files of LCa - EGFP – labeled CCPs were asymmetrically shaped , with the exception of the 10 – 20 - s cohort , containing mainly abortive structures . We detected four phases of CCP maturation : ( i ) an initial phase of rapid growth , lasting  30 s , during which CCPs of all lifetime cohorts acquired LCa - EGFP molecules ( triskelia ) with similar kinetics , ( ii ) an intensity plateau , ( iii ) a phase of slow intensity decline , and ( iv ) the rapid disappearance of the fluorescent signal . The maximum fluorescent intensi - ties of LCa - EGFP at the plateau phase increased with lifetimes ( Fig . 8 C , blue bars ) . CD8 / LDLR overexpression strongly in - creased the intensities of all CCP cohorts ( Fig . 8 A , red lines ; Fig . 8 C , red bars ) through an increased growth rate during the now slightly prolonged initial phase . The increase in growth cor - responds to increased lifetimes of productive CCPs observed upon CD8 / LDLR overexpression . Introduction of an additional pool of ARH ( Fig . 8 B , green lines ) further increased the intensi - ties of LCa - EGFP signals , especially of those pits with lifetimes of 40 – 100 s ( Fig . 8 C , green bars ) , consistent with CCP size measured by EM ( Table I , Fig . S4 D ) . Together , these data estab - lish that CD8 / LDLR overexpression increases the size of CCPs , Figure 7 . CD8 / LDLRs prolong the lifetimes of productive CCPs . ( A ) TIR - FM time - lapse movies have been recorded and analyzed as described previously ( Loerke et al . , 2009 ) . ( A ) Relative contributions and ( B ) lifetimes of CCP subpopulations labeled by LCa - EGFP are shown . Error bars represent cell - to - cell variation ; the height of the lifetime bars in B denotes the range around the mean lifetime that contains 50 % of the data . Brackets indicate confidence levels P < 10  8 ( Kolmogorov - Smirnov test ) . The number of CCP trajectories ( n ) and cells ( k ) for each condition are : LCa - EGFP control ( n = 100 , 823 ; k = 65 ) ; LCa - EGFP + CD8 / LDLR ( n = 70 , 955 ; k = 38 ) ; LCa - EGFP + ARH + CD8 / LDLR ( n = 23 , 394 ; k = 17 ) . 929 Cargo regulates CCP size and dynamics • Mettlen et al . Dab2 and ARH are differentially recruited to CCPs , yet compete for occupancy In agreement with previous studies ( Morris and Cooper , 2001 ; Keyel et al . , 2006 ; Maurer and Cooper , 2006 ; Chetrit et al . , 2009 ) , we observed colocalization of exogenously expressed mCherry - labeled Dab2 with clathrin - coat components in control cells . Under the same experimental conditions , ARH displayed a fun - damentally distinct intracellular distribution : it was predomi - nantly nuclear with only a barely detectable recruitment to CCPs . ARH can interact directly with both clathrin ( He et al . , 2002 ) and AP2 complexes ( Mishra et al . , 2005 ) ; hence , the absence of ARH from CCPs under control conditions suggests that ARH recruitment is highly regulated and involves a yet - unidentified factor / mechanism . This hypothesis is strongly supported by the observation that ( i ) ARH translocated from the nucleus into the cytosol upon CD8 / LDLR expression , and ( ii ) this nucleo - cytoplasmic shuttling did not depend on AP2 binding and / or CCP recruitment , but on a functional PTB domain . Dab2 and ARH compete with each other and with AP2 for binding sites within the same CCPs as evidenced by ( i ) the strong colocalization of these various adaptors in CCPs , ( ii ) the com - petition of ARH and Dab2 for cargo binding , thereby disrupting Dab2 scaffolding of GCCSs , and ( iii ) the displacement of AP2 and that the relative amounts of ARH and AP2 define the size ( i . e . , the intensities ) of diffraction - limited CCPs . Discussion We have used a combination of immunofluorescence , biochem - istry , electron microscopy , live - cell imaging by TIR - FM , and automated analysis of CCP trajectories to characterize how cargo - and adaptor - specific mechanisms regulate CME . Previously , we showed that overexpression of TfnR , a constitutively internal - ized , AP2 - dependent cargo , increased the efficiency of CCP maturation by increasing the contribution of productive CCPs at the expense of abortive species without affecting the rate of CCP maturation , i . e . , the lifetimes of productive CCPs ( Loerke et al . , 2009 ) . In contrast , we show here that overexpression of another constitutively internalized cargo , the LDLR , increases the rate of initiation and turnover of abortive CCPs , slows the rate of CCP maturation , and increases the size of CCPs through membrane recruitment of its specific adaptors , Dab2 and ARH . Together , these data strongly suggest that the observed heterogeneity in the dynamic behavior of CCPs ( Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Rappoport et al . , 2005 ; Yarar et al . , 2005 ) could reflect differences in their content of cargo and adaptor molecules . Figure 8 . CD8 / LDLR and adaptors affect CCP size . TIR - FM time - lapse movies have been recorded under various conditions , following the indicated fluores - cently tagged protein . CCP cohorts of given lifetimes have been binned and their intensity profiles ( A , B , D , and E ) determined as a measure for CCP growth . The number of CCP trajectories for each condition , which ranges from 626 to 20 , 000 , is shown in Table S1 . The maximum plateau level of the LCa - EGFP ( C ) or  2 - EGFP ( F ) is plotted against the mean cohort lifetime for the indicated cells . JCB • VOLUME 188 • NUMBER 6 • 2010 930 remains after CCV budding . The number of nonterminal events increased upon mild overexpression of cargo , and clusters of dy - namic CCPs were observed . The presence or absence of a vari - able fraction of nonterminal events in different cell types could be explained by variable amounts of cargo and / or Dab2 at the plasma membrane . This idea is further supported by the observa - tion that nonterminal events are more frequent in HeLa cells ( Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ; Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Loerke et al . , 2009 ) , which express relatively high levels of Dab2 and cargo ( Maurer and Cooper , 2006 ; unpublished data ) . At very high levels of CD8 / LDLR overexpression , Dab2 induced the formation of large , flat , and endocytically inactive clathrin lattices on the ventral cell surface . Similar GCCSs have been observed in other cell types upon Dab - 2 overexpression , associated with integrins , another Dab2 - specific cargo molecule ( Chetrit et al . , 2009 ) . Hence , GCCS formation is likely dependent on levels of expression of Dab2 and endogenous cargo . We speculate that the cargo - dependent recruitment of Dab2 contributes to a more extended adaptor scaffold at the plasma membrane , thereby guiding—presumably through its NPF motifs—recruitment of additional endocytic ac - cessory proteins that affect the extent of clathrin polymerization and the dynamic behavior of CCPs . When CD8 / LDLR and ARH were coexpressed , CCPs also grew in size , as detected by increased clathrin intensities and electron microscopy , yet they remained under the light - diffraction limit . Thus , we observed a cargo and adaptor expression - dependent continuum in regulating the size of CCPs , such that TfnR over - expression < control cells = Dab2 alone < CD8 / LDLR overex - pression alone < low CD8 / LDLR + Dab2 < high CD8 / LDLR + ARH < < high CD8 / LDLR + Dab2 . The fact that both Dab2 and ARH increased the size of CCPs relative to CCPs in which AP2 is the predominant adaptor ( i . e . , under conditions of TfnR over - expression ) might reflect the need to accommodate the very large ligands bound by LDLR and LRP ( Jones et al . , 2003 ) ( i . e . , LDL particles , d  22 nm and  2 - macroglobulin , d  18 . 5 nm ; Krimbou et al . , 1998 ) , respectively . Additional studies are re - quired to determine the molecular mechanisms controlling the extent of clathrin polymerization . Adaptor content and the endocytosis checkpoint We previously identified an endocytic restriction / checkpoint and provided evidence that progression beyond the checkpoint ( i . e . , CCP maturation efficiency ) was enhanced by TfnR overexpression in a manner dependent on AP2 adaptors ( Loerke et al . , 2009 ) . Subsequently , we identified a subset of endocytic accessory fac - tors , including membrane curvature and coat - sensing proteins , whose siRNA knockdown altered the rate and extent of turnover of abortive CCPs ( Mettlen et al . , 2009 ) . These data suggested that factors recruited to AP2 complexes through interactions with their appendage domains might provide input into the endocytic checkpoint . Although much work remains to test this checkpoint hy - pothesis and its implications and mechanisms , the results reported here provide some new insight as to how the checkpoint might respond to cargo content and adaptor assembly . For example , in contrast to the effects of TfnR overexpression , increased by ARH from cargo - laden CCPs . Overexpression of a specific receptor and its adaptors alters the relative adaptor composition of CCPs and hence their dynamic behavior . There has been some controversy as to whether TfnR and LDLR can be co - internalized in a single CCP ( Keyel et al . , 2006 ; Lakadamyali et al . , 2006 ) . Our data are consistent with the ability of CCPs to take up multiple distinct receptors . However , we speculate that cargo - specific mechanisms ( e . g . , ligand - induced receptor clustering ) could , under steady - state conditions , alter the relative proportions of specific receptors and their adaptors to specifically affect the properties of individual CCPs . Such effects have been observed for G protein – coupled signaling receptors ( Puthenveedu and von Zastrow , 2006 ) . ARH is AP2 dependent and limiting during CD8 / LDLR uptake Although biochemical measurements establish that CD8 / LDLR endocytosis is saturable , resulting in a markedly decreased effi - ciency of CME , the effect of CD8 / LDLR overexpression on CCP dynamics was relatively small . This apparent discrepancy reflects the fact that biochemical assays for ligand uptake measure CME indirectly and the efficiency of CME depends on cargo loading / concentration into CCPs . At very high levels of expression , most of the CD8 / LDLRs are diffusely distributed on the plasma membrane and not captured in CCPs . In contrast , the TIRF - based assays measure CCP dynamics and CCV formation directly . That these kinetics were less affected by CD8 / LDLR overexpression argues that reduced CME efficiency under these conditions reflects saturation of adaptor - dependent recruitment of cargo into CCPs . Previous studies have reported a strong inhibition of fluores - cent DiI - LDL internalization after transient expression of ARH - GFP in HeLa cells ( Mishra et al . , 2005 ) . Here , we have taken care to select stable transformants expressing low levels of ARH - mCherry and show biochemically that ARH is able to increase the efficiency of LDLR uptake at saturation . This activity was dependent on its abilities to bind LDLR through its PTB do - main and to interact with AP2 . Increased efficiency of LDLR uptake upon ARH expression was not achieved through an in - creased CCP density , an increased percentage of productive CCPs , or an increased rate of their maturation . Instead , it occurred through an increased efficiency of LDLR sorting / packaging into CCPs . Our live - cell and electron microscopy experiments dem - onstrated that this is accomplished , in part , by a prolonged growth phase and increased size of individual CCPs . CD8 / LDLRs and their adaptors increase the size and dynamic behavior of productive CCPs In contrast to TfnR overexpression , which did not affect AP2 distribution ( Loerke et al . , 2009 ) , overexpression of CD8 / LDLR increased the recruitment of both Dab2 and ARH to the plasma membrane . This recruitment of adaptor proteins had differential effects on CCP size and their dynamic behaviors . In cells expressing Dab2 - mCherry , the size of CCPs in - creased with increasing levels of CD8 / LDLR expression . At endogenous levels of cargo , we observed an increase in the num - ber of nonterminal endocytic events , suggesting that under these conditions , larger CCPs assemble so that a residual clathrin patch 931 Cargo regulates CCP size and dynamics • Mettlen et al . Adenoviral infection , immunofluorescence , and TIR - FM Cells were plated on glass coverslips ( refractive index 1 . 523 ; Corning ) at a density of 8 . 3 × 10 3 cell / cm 2 and co - infected with adenoviruses coding for the CD8 / LDLR chimera and adenoviruses coding for a tet repressible transcription activator . After overnight incubation in the presence ( 1 , 000 ng tet / ml ; control cells ) or absence of tet ( to allow CD8 / LDLR overexpression ) , cells were washed three times in PBS and fixed in a mixture of pre - warmed paraformaldehyde ( 2 % final ; Electron Microscopy Sciences ) and Triton X - 100 ( 0 . 5 % final ) for 2 min , then with paraformaldehyde ( 4 % final ) for an additional 18 min . Reactive aldehydes and nonspecific binding sites were quenched for 30 min with Q - PBS ( PBS supplemented with 0 . 01 % [ wt / vol ] saponin , 2 % [ wt / vol ] BSA , and 0 . 1 % [ wt / vol ] lysine , pH 7 . 4 ) , then incubated at room temperature for 1 h in primary antibodies diluted in Q - PBS : anti –  - adaptin ( clone 100 / 2 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) , anti –  - adaptin ( clone 100 / 1 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) , anti - CD8 ( clone UCHT4 ; Ancell ) , and anti - clathrin heavy chain ( clone X22 ; Hybridoma ) . After extensive washing with Q - PBS , samples were incubated with the appropriate Alexa 488 ( green ) or - 568 ( red ) secondary antibodies ( Invitrogen ) at 5 µg / ml in Q - PBS supple - mented or not with the nuclear stain DAPI ( 2 . 5 µg / ml ) for 1 h in the dark . For F - actin staining , cells were incubated with phalloidin - Alexa 488 ( 0 . 8 units / ml ) . Samples were washed , postfixed with 4 % ( wt / vol ) paraformal - dehyde for 5 min , and washed twice with PBS . Coverslides were then mounted in Fluoromount G ( Electron Microscopy Sciences ) . Epifluores - cence images of fixed cells were acquired on an inverted microscope ( Axiovert 200M ; Carl Zeiss , Inc . ) coupled to a 14 - bit cooled CCD camera ( Cool SNAP HQ2 ; Photometrics ) controlled by MetaMorph software ( Universal Imaging Corp . ) , using a 63x / 1 . 4 NA Plan Apo objective ( Carl Zeiss , Inc . ) . For live - cell TIR - FM imaging , cells were preincubated with imaging medium ( DME , devoid of phenol red and containing 10 mM Hepes and 5 % fetal bovine serum , pH 7 . 4 ) . Coverslips were then mounted on a slide and rapidly transferred to a prewarmed microscope stage as described in Yarar et al . ( 2005 ) . Five or six cells ( i . e . , movies ) were recorded per coverslip in fast ( frame rate 400 ms ) and slow ( frame rate 2 s ) acquisition mode during 10 min , using a 100x 1 . 45 NA objective ( Nikon ) mounted on an inverted microscope ( model TE2000U ; Nikon ) and a 14 - bit mode operated camera ( Orca II - ERG ; Hamamatsu Photonics ) . The theoretical depth of the evanes - cent field ( d ) was < 100 nm and exposure times were 80 – 90 or 180 – 200 ms , depending on the frame rate and the intensity of the signal . FRAP was performed using an inverted microscope ( model TE2000E ; Nikon ) in which the 488 - nm and 568 - nm line of a Kr / Ar laser ( 2 . 5 W ; Spectraphysics ) was introduced fiber - optically into a FRAP illuminator ( Nikon ) and images were collected with a 63x / 1 . 4 NA Plan Apo DIC objective ( Nikon ) on a spinning - disk confocal scanner ( Yokogawa ) using an Orca ER camera ( Hamamatsu Photonics ) ; fluorescence recovery was imaged at 1 - s intervals for 2 min . The intensity of each bleached region was measured using MetaMorph , corrected to the intensity of an unbleached region in the frame to account for any fluctuations in intensity , and then normalized to the average intensity of five frames before the bleach . Automated image and CCP lifetime and intensity profile analysis Fluorescent particle detection and life - time tracking of CCPs in the TIR - FM movies was accomplished using the software package described in Jaqaman et al . ( 2008 ) . The lifetime analysis of CCPs was performed as described in Loerke et al . ( 2009 ) and P values were determined as in Mettlen et al . ( 2009 ) . For the intensity profile analysis , we used the entirety of CCP trajec - tories to calculate averaged intensity time courses for conglomerates of CCPs within a given lifetime range ( i . e . , CCP cohorts ) . The averaging first aligned and averaged the common first time point of the intensity time courses ( i . e . , the point at which the trajectory is first detected ) , yielding the “appearance - aligned” average . The time courses were then aligned to their last time point ( i . e . , the last detected point of the trajectory ) and averaged , yielding the “disappearance - aligned” average . The global average was calcu - lated as the weighted combination of the appearance - and disappearance - aligned averages , weighted toward the appearance - aligned trace at the beginning and weighted toward the disappearance - aligned trace at the end . This procedure reduced noise by averaging , while preserving the fast intensity dynamics at the beginning and end of the trajectory . Finally , the maximum plateau levels of intensity profiles were determined by averaging the five highest intensity values in each trace . Estimation of surface - bound / endocytic uptake of CD8 / LDLR chimeras Cells , plated in 10 - cm dishes and co - infected with adenoviruses , were cultured in the absence ( high CD8 / LDLR overexpression ) or presence of 75 ng / ml tet ( very low CD8 / LDLR expression ) . After overnight incubation , cells were LDLR / ARH levels led to a slight increase in the initiation , turn - over rate , and number of abortive CCPs . Under these conditions , ARH partially displaces AP2 from CCPs , which could account for the destabilization of nascent CCPs . Dab2 , unlike ARH , is recruited to CCPs and can function independently of AP2 . Thus , the Dab2 - dependent formation of nonfunctional , flat GCCSs under conditions of high cargo concentrations could reflect an imbalance of protein – protein interactions , possibly involving the disproportionate recruitment , through the multiple NPF motifs found in Dab2 , of EH domain – containing proteins ( e . g . , Eps15 , Eps15R , and intersectin ) that bind directly or indirectly to clath - rin . This could potentially bypass the requirement for a thresh - old amount of AP2 and its associated partners , and hence disrupt signaling to the endocytic restriction / checkpoint . This hypothe - sis is supported by the observations that in the presence of CD8 / LDLR : ( i ) Dab2 - p67 , which is unable to bind clathrin and AP2 but contains NPF motifs , was able to induce the formation of GCCSs ; ( ii ) ARH , which is lacking NPF motifs , did not induce formation of flat lattices ; ( iii ) a mix of ARH and Dab2 led to the breakdown of GCCSs ; and ( iv ) AP2 complexes are nonuni - formly distributed in GCCSs . Altogether , our results underscore the highly dynamic and cargo - responsive nature of clathrin coats and illustrate the com - plexity of CCP maturation . Together with our previous results ( Loerke et al . , 2009 ) , we establish that even constitutively inter - nalized cargo and their adaptors can regulate multiple aspects of CCP maturation and that variations in adaptor / cargo content can account , in part , for the dynamic heterogeneity of CCPs . Materials and methods Cell lines and cell culture BSC1 cells stably expressing rat brain clathrin light chain a - EGFP ( LCa - EGFP ) or the AP2 rat brain  2 - adaptin fused to EGFP were provided by Dr . T . Kirchhausen ( Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA ) . All cells were grown under 5 % CO 2 at 37°C in DME supplemented with 20 mM Hepes , 10 mg / ml streptomycin , 66 µg / ml penicillin , and 10 % ( vol / vol ) fetal calf serum ( HyClone ) . Cells stably expressing fluorescently tagged proteins were cultured in the continuous presence of 0 . 5 mg / ml geneticin . Preparation of plasmids , viruses , and stable cell lines cDNAs encoding Dab2 and ARH were provided by Linton Traub ( Univer - sity of Pittsburgh , Pittsburgh , PA ) . C - terminally tagged Dab2wt , Dab2 - p67 , ARHwt , ARH - F259A , ARH - 252A255 , and ARH - S117Y ; F165A coupled to mCherry were made by first fusing the corresponding DNA ( amplified by PCR ) to the 3  end of the coding sequence for EGFP ( pEGFP - C1 ; Takara Bio Inc . ) and then replacing EGFP by mCherry . N - terminal myristoylated Dab2 - mCherry was produced by cloning the fluorescently tagged protein into a pC4M - F2E expression plasmid ( ARAID ) . BSC1 monkey kidney cells stably expressing either wild - type or mutant forms of ARH were obtained by transfection of wild - type cells using Lipo - fectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen ) according to the manufacturer’s recommendation and a 3 - wk selection in DME supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum and geneticin ( 1 mg / ml ; Invitrogen ) . siRNA treatment µ2 expression was depleted through siRNA treatment with RNA oligos ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) targeting AAGUGGAUGCCUUUCGGGUCA ( Motley et al . , 2003 ) . Cells were plated on 60 - mM Petri dishes at a density of 8 . 3 × 10 3 cells / cm 2 . After overnight incubation , cells were washed with Opti - MEM ( Invitrogen ) and transfected once with siRNA oligos ( 50 nM final concentration ) using HiPerFect transfection reagent as a delivery agent ( QIAGEN ) , according to the manufacturer’s recommendations . Cells were placed in ordinary culture medium 8 h after transfection and processed for TIR - FM or Western blot analysis the next day . JCB • VOLUME 188 • NUMBER 6 • 2010 932 Video 4 shows that AP2 forms dynamic clusters within enlarged CCSs in BSC1 cells expressing Dab2 and moderate levels of CD8 / LDLR . Video 5 shows the dynamic behavior of GCCSs formed in BSC1 cells expressing Dab2 and high levels of CD8 / LDLR . Online supplemental material is avail - able at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200908078 / DC1 . We thank Vasyl Lukiyanchuk for preparation of cDNA constructs and lenti­ viruses , Malcolm Wood , Director of the TSRI Core EM facility , for EM sample preparation and imaging , Bridget Wilson and Mary Raymond­Stintz ( University of New Mexico ) for advice on EM , and members of the Schmid and Danuser laboratories for helpful discussions . This is TSRI manuscript number 20307 . This research was supported by National Institutes of Health R01 grants ( GM73165 to G . Danuser and S . L . Schmid , and MH61345 to S . L . Schmid ) , by a fellowship from the American Heart Association to M . Mettlen , and from the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society to D . Yarar . Submitted : 17 August 2009 Accepted : 18 February 2010 References Arca , M . , G . Zuliani , K . Wilund , F . Campagna , R . Fellin , S . Bertolini , S . Calandra , G . Ricci , N . Glorioso , M . Maioli , et al . 2002 . Autosomal recessive hypercholesterolaemia in Sardinia , Italy , and mutations in ARH : a clinical and molecular genetic analysis . Lancet . 359 : 841 – 847 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0140 - 6736 ( 02 ) 07955 - 2 Brodsky , F . M . 1988 . Living with clathrin : its role in intracellular membrane traf - fic . Science . 242 : 1396 – 1402 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 2904698 Chetrit , D . , N . Ziv , and M . Ehrlich . 2009 . Dab2 regulates clathrin assembly and cell spreading . Biochem . J . 418 : 701 – 715 . doi : 10 . 1042 / BJ20081288 Davis , C . G . , M . A . Lehrman , D . W . Russell , R . G . Anderson , M . S . Brown , and J . L . Goldstein . 1986 . The J . D . mutation in familial hypercholesterolemia : amino acid substitution in cytoplasmic domain impedes internalization of LDL receptors . Cell . 45 : 15 – 24 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 86 ) 90533 - 7 Edeling , M . A . , S . K . Mishra , P . A . Keyel , A . L . Steinhauser , B . M . Collins , R . Roth , J . E . Heuser , D . J . Owen , and L . M . Traub . 2006 . Molecular switches involving the AP - 2 beta2 appendage regulate endocytic cargo selec - tion and clathrin coat assembly . Dev . Cell . 10 : 329 – 342 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2006 . 01 . 016 Eden , E . R . , X . M . Sun , D . D . Patel , and A . K . Soutar . 2007 . Adaptor protein dis - abled - 2 modulates low density lipoprotein receptor synthesis in fibro - blasts from patients with autosomal recessive hypercholesterolaemia . Hum . Mol . Genet . 16 : 2751 – 2759 . doi : 10 . 1093 / hmg / ddm232 Ehrlich , M . , W . Boll , A . Van Oijen , R . Hariharan , K . Chandran , M . L . Nibert , and T . Kirchhausen . 2004 . Endocytosis by random initiation and stabilization of clathrin - coated pits . Cell . 118 : 591 – 605 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2004 . 08 . 017 Garcia , C . K . , K . Wilund , M . Arca , G . Zuliani , R . Fellin , M . Maioli , S . Calandra , S . Bertolini , F . Cossu , N . Grishin , et al . 2001 . Autosomal recessive hyper - cholesterolemia caused by mutations in a putative LDL receptor adaptor protein . Science . 292 : 1394 – 1398 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1060458 Garuti , R . , C . Jones , W . P . Li , P . Michaely , J . Herz , R . D . Gerard , J . C . Cohen , and H . H . Hobbs . 2005 . The modular adaptor protein autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia ( ARH ) promotes low density lipoprotein receptor clustering into clathrin - coated pits . J . Biol . Chem . 280 : 40996 – 41004 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M509394200 Hanover , J . A . , L . Beguinot , M . C . Willingham , and I . H . Pastan . 1985 . Transit of receptors for epidermal growth factor and transferrin through clathrin - coated pits . Analysis of the kinetics of receptor entry . J . Biol . Chem . 260 : 15938 – 15945 . He , G . , S . Gupta , M . Yi , P . Michaely , H . H . Hobbs , and J . C . Cohen . 2002 . ARH is a modular adaptor protein that interacts with the LDL receptor , clathrin , and AP - 2 . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 44044 – 44049 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M208539200 He , J . , J . Xu , X . X . Xu , and R . A . Hall . 2003 . Cell cycle - dependent phosphorylation of Disabled - 2 by cdc2 . Oncogene . 22 : 4524 – 4530 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . onc . 1206767 Jaqaman , K . , D . Loerke , M . Mettlen , H . Kuwata , S . Grinstein , S . L . Schmid , and G . Danuser . 2008 . Robust single - particle tracking in live - cell time - lapse sequences . Nat . Methods . 5 : 695 – 702 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1237 Jing , S . Q . , T . Spencer , K . Miller , C . Hopkins , and I . S . Trowbridge . 1990 . Role of the human transferrin receptor cytoplasmic domain in endocytosis : localization of a specific signal sequence for internalization . J . Cell Biol . 110 : 283 – 294 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 110 . 2 . 283 Jones , C . , R . E . Hammer , W . P . Li , J . C . Cohen , H . H . Hobbs , and J . Herz . 2003 . Normal sorting but defective endocytosis of the low density lipoprotein receptor in mice with autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 29024 – 29030 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M304855200 washed 3× in PBS , harvested in PBS containing 5 mM EDTA , pelleted in the presence of MgCI 2 ( 1 mM ) , and resuspended in 400 µl ice - cold PBS + + + + ( 1 mM CaCI 2 , 1 mM MgCI 2 , 0 . 2 % BSA [ wt / vol ] , and 5 mM glu - cose ) , and supplemented with biotinylated anti – human CD8 antibodies ( clone UCGT4 , 5 µg / ml final ; Ancell ) for 45 min ( on ice ) to allow binding , followed by three gentle washes in ice - cold PBS + + + + ( resuspension / sedi - mentation ) to remove nonbound antibodies . Aliquots of cells were either kept on ice and lysed as described below ( to determine the amount of sur - face exposed CD8 / LDLR chimera ) or warmed to 37°C for the indicated times to measure endocytic uptake . Endocytosis was stopped by returning cells to ice and noninternalized CD8 / LDLR chimera were masked by suc - cessive treatment with avidin and biocytin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . Finally , cells were lysed in blocking buffer ( 2 % BSA [ wt / vol ] , 1 % Triton X - 100 [ vol / vol ] , 0 . 1 % SDS [ wt / vol ] , 1 mM EDTA , 50 mM NaCl , and 10 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 4 ) . To measure surface - bound and intracellular CD8 / LDLR chimera , known amounts of anti – human CD8 antibodies ( standard curve ) and cell ly - sates were loaded into 96 - well ELISA plates ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) coated with anti – mouse antibodies and incubated overnight at 4°C . After extensive washes with PBS and blocking buffer , plates were incubated with streptavidin / HRP conjugate ( 1 : 5 , 000 ; Roche ) for 1 h . HRP activity was measured by a stopped colorimetric assay using ortho - dianisidine as a substrate . Light ab - sorption at 490 nm was determined with a Bio - Stack microplate reader ( Bio - Tek ) and all values were corrected by light absorbance at 650 nm and normalized by the total cell protein content ( bicinchoninic acid assay ) . Cell fractionation and Western blotting For Western blots , cells grown in 60 - mM dishes were washed twice with PBS and harvested in PBS containing 5 mM EDTA . Protein concentration was determined and low speed cell pellets were gently resuspended in fractionation buffer ( 25 mM sucrose , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 2 mM EGTA , and 25 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 4 ) to equal protein concentration—the lowest protein condi - tion being resuspended in 300 µl . Cells were lysed by three cycles of freezing / thawing in liquid N 2 and equal volumes of whole - cell lysates were centrifuged at 110 , 000 g in a rotor ( model TLA100 . 2 ; Beckman Coulter ) for 30 min . The soluble fraction ( cytosolic fraction “S” ) was col - lected and pellets ( membrane fraction “P” ) were resuspended in 150 µl fractionation buffer and sonicated . The “S” fraction was further diluted 2× and equal volumes were separated by SDS – PAGE , transferred to a nitro - cellulose membrane ( GE Healthcare ) , blocked for 1 h in blocking buffer ( 20 mM Tris - base , 15 mM NaCl , 5 mM EDTA , 0 . 5 % [ vol / vol ] Tween 20 , and 5 % [ wt / vol ] milk powder , pH 7 . 4 ) , incubated overnight with primary antibodies at 4°C : clathrin heavy chain ( TD1 ; Hybridoma ) , µ2 ( AP50 ; BD ) , actin ( clone C4 ; Millipore ) , and CD8 ( clone H - 169 ; Santa Cruz Biotechnol - ogy , Inc . ) , and revealed by HRP - labeled secondary antibodies and en - hanced chemiluminescence . Electron microscopy of ventral membrane surfaces The ventral surfaces of unroofed cells were prepared for visualization by negative stain EM according to published procedures ( Wilson et al . , 2007 ) . In brief , BSC1 - wt ( either transfected with Dab2 - mCherry or infected with CD8 / LDLR expressing adenovirus system or both ) or BSC1 cells stably ex - pressing ARH were seeded und cultured overnight on poly - l - lysine – coated EM grids . Cells were “unroofed” by applying a poly - l - lysine – coated cover - slip , pressure , and then ripping off the EM grids and adherent ventral PM sheets as described previously ( Wilson et al . , 2007 ) . These were rapidly fixed first in 2 % PFA ( 20 min ) , then 2 % glutaraldehyde ( 10 min ) , stained with uranyl acetate , and visualized on an electron microscope ( model CM - 100 ; Philips ) . Online supplemental material Fig . S1 shows that CD8 / LDLR expression is regulated by tet and that TfnR overexpression saturates its endocytosis , which is not affected by ARH . Fig . S2 shows colocalization between Dab2 and AP2 upon overexpression of CD8 / LDLR and TfnR , and that not all CCPs labeled with clathrin contain AP2 . Fig . S3 shows the altered cell morphology and actin organization in ARH - mCherry – expressing cells and that leptomycin B blocks LDLR expres - sion , but not subsequent nuclear exit of ARH . Fig . S4 shows data for CCP densities , initiation densities of productive CCPs , relative contributions of persistent CCPs in BSC1 cells under various conditions , and increased CCP sizes upon coexpression of CD8 / LDLR and ARH . Video 1 shows that GCCSs ( here labeled by LCa - EGFP ) are exclusively found at the ventral plasma membrane . Video 2 shows CCP dynamics in cells expressing mCherry - Dab2 . Video 3 shows multiple CCV internalization events from enlarged CCSs in BSC1 cells expressing Dab2 and moderate levels of CD8 / LDLR . 933 Cargo regulates CCP size and dynamics • Mettlen et al . Wilson , B . S . , J . R . Pfeiffer , M . A . Raymond - Stintz , D . Lidke , N . Andrews , J . Zhang , W . Yin , S . Steinberg , and J . M . Oliver . 2007 . Exploring membrane domains using native membrane sheets and transmission electron microscopy . Methods Mol . Biol . 398 : 245 – 261 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 59745 - 513 - 8 _ 17 Xu , X . X . , W . Yang , S . Jackowski , and C . O . Rock . 1995 . Cloning of a novel phos - phoprotein regulated by colony - stimulating factor 1 shares a domain with the Drosophila disabled gene product . J . Biol . Chem . 270 : 14184 – 14191 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . 270 . 23 . 14184 Yarar , D . , C . M . Waterman - Storer , and S . L . Schmid . 2005 . A dynamic actin cyto - skeleton functions at multiple stages of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell . 16 : 964 – 975 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E04 - 09 - 0774 Keyel , P . A . , S . K . Mishra , R . Roth , J . E . Heuser , S . C . Watkins , and L . M . Traub . 2006 . A single common portal for clathrin - mediated endocytosis of distinct cargo governed by cargo - selective adaptors . Mol . Biol . Cell . 17 : 4300 – 4317 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E06 - 05 - 0421 Keyel , P . A . , J . R . Thieman , R . Roth , E . Erkan , E . T . Everett , S . C . Watkins , J . E . Heuser , and L . M . Traub . 2008 . The AP - 2 adaptor beta2 appendage scaffolds alternate cargo endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell . 19 : 5309 – 5326 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E08 - 07 - 0712 Kirchhausen , T . , J . S . Bonifacino , and H . Riezman . 1997 . Linking cargo to ves - icle formation : receptor tail interactions with coat proteins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 9 : 488 – 495 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0955 - 0674 ( 97 ) 80024 - 5 Krimbou , L . , M . Tremblay , J . Davignon , and J . S . Cohn . 1998 . Association of apolipoprotein E with alpha2 - macroglobulin in human plasma . J . Lipid Res . 39 : 2373 – 2386 . Lakadamyali , M . , M . J . Rust , and X . Zhuang . 2006 . Ligands for clathrin - mediated endocytosis are differentially sorted into distinct populations of early endo - somes . Cell . 124 : 997 – 1009 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2005 . 12 . 038 Loerke , D . , M . Mettlen , D . Yarar , K . Jaqaman , H . Jaqaman , G . Danuser , and S . L . Schmid . 2009 . Cargo and dynamin regulate clathrin - coated pit matura - tion . PLoS Biol . 7 : e57 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 1000057 Maurer , M . E . , and J . A . Cooper . 2006 . The adaptor protein Dab2 sorts LDL receptors into coated pits independently of AP - 2 and ARH . J . Cell Sci . 119 : 4235 – 4246 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 03217 Merrifield , C . J . , D . Perrais , and D . Zenisek . 2005 . Coupling between clathrin - coated - pit invagination , cortactin recruitment , and membrane scission ob - served in live cells . Cell . 121 : 593 – 606 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2005 . 03 . 015 Mettlen , M . , M . Stoeber , D . Loerke , C . N . Antonescu , G . Danuser , and S . L . Schmid . 2009 . Endocytic accessory proteins are functionally distin - guished by their differential effects on the maturation of clathrin - coated pits . Mol . Biol . Cell . 20 : 3251 – 3260 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E09 - 03 - 0256 Miller , K . , M . Shipman , I . S . Trowbridge , and C . R . Hopkins . 1991 . Transferrin receptors promote the formation of clathrin lattices . Cell . 65 : 621 – 632 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 91 ) 90094 - F Mishra , S . K . , P . A . Keyel , M . J . Hawryluk , N . R . Agostinelli , S . C . Watkins , and L . M . Traub . 2002a . Disabled - 2 exhibits the properties of a cargo - selective endo - cytic clathrin adaptor . EMBO J . 21 : 4915 – 4926 . doi : 10 . 1093 / emboj / cdf487 Mishra , S . K . , S . C . Watkins , and L . M . Traub . 2002b . The autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia ( ARH ) protein interfaces directly with the clathrin - coat machinery . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 99 : 16099 – 16104 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 252630799 Mishra , S . K . , P . A . Keyel , M . A . Edeling , A . L . Dupin , D . J . Owen , and L . M . Traub . 2005 . Functional dissection of an AP - 2 beta2 appendage - binding sequence within the autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia protein . J . Biol . Chem . 280 : 19270 – 19280 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M501029200 Morris , S . M . , and J . A . Cooper . 2001 . Disabled - 2 colocalizes with the LDLR in clathrin - coated pits and interacts with AP - 2 . Traffic . 2 : 111 – 123 . doi : 10 . 1034 / j . 1600 - 0854 . 2001 . 020206 . x Motley , A . , N . A . Bright , M . N . Seaman , and M . S . Robinson . 2003 . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis in AP - 2 - depleted cells . J . Cell Biol . 162 : 909 – 918 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200305145 Pilecka , I . , M . Banach - Orlowska , and M . Miaczynska . 2007 . Nuclear func - tions of endocytic proteins . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 86 : 533 – 547 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2007 . 04 . 004 Puthenveedu , M . A . , and M . von Zastrow . 2006 . Cargo regulates clathrin - coated pit dynamics . Cell . 127 : 113 – 124 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2006 . 08 . 035 Rappoport , J . Z . , A . Benmerah , and S . M . Simon . 2005 . Analysis of the AP - 2 adaptor complex and cargo during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Traffic . 6 : 539 – 547 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1600 - 0854 . 2005 . 00280 . x Saffarian , S . , and T . Kirchhausen . 2008 . Differential evanescence nanometry : live - cell fluorescence measurements with 10 - nm axial resolution on the plasma membrane . Biophys . J . 94 : 2333 – 2342 . doi : 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 107 . 117234 Stewart , M . 2007 . Molecular mechanism of the nuclear protein import cycle . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 : 195 – 208 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2114 Thomson , D . J . , and A . D . Chave . 1991 . Jackknife error estimates for spectra , co - herences , and transfer functions . In Advances in Spectrum Analysis and Array Processing . S . Haykin , editor . Prentice Hall , Engelwood Cliffs , NJ . 58 – 113 . Trowbridge , I . S . , J . F . Collawn , and C . R . Hopkins . 1993 . Signal - dependent mem - brane protein trafficking in the endocytic pathway . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 9 : 129 – 161 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . cb . 09 . 110193 . 001021 Warren , R . A . , F . A . Green , and C . A . Enns . 1997 . Saturation of the endocytic pathway for the transferrin receptor does not affect the endocytosis of the epidermal growth factor receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 2116 – 2121 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . 272 . 4 . 2116 Warren , R . A . , F . A . Green , P . E . Stenberg , and C . A . Enns . 1998 . Distinct saturable pathways for the endocytosis of different tyrosine motifs . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 17056 – 17063 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . 273 . 27 . 17056