BI81CH27 - Cooper ARI 9 May 2012 8 : 52 Roles for Actin Assembly in Endocytosis Olivia L . Mooren , Brian J . Galletta , and John A . Cooper Department of Cell Biology and Physiology , Washington University School of Medicine , Saint Louis , Missouri 63110 ; email : jcooper @ wustl . edu Annu . Rev . Biochem . 2012 . 81 : 661 – 86 The Annual Review of Biochemistry is online at biochem . annualreviews . org This article’s doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev - biochem - 060910 - 094416 Copyright c (cid:2) 2012 by Annual Reviews . All rights reserved 0066 - 4154 / 12 / 0707 - 0661 $ 20 . 00 Keywords clathrin , dynamin , membrane , pinocytosis , ﬁlaments , Arp2 / 3 Abstract Endocytosis includes a number of processes by which cells internalize segments of their plasma membrane , enclosing a wide variety of mate - rial from outside the cell . Endocytosis can contribute to uptake of nu - trients , regulation of signaling molecules , control of osmotic pressure , and function of synapses . The actin cytoskeleton plays an essential role in several of these processes . Actin assembly can create protrusions that encompass extracellular materials . Actin can also support the processes of invagination of a membrane segment into the cytoplasm , elonga - tion of the invagination , scission of the new vesicle from the plasma membrane , and movement of the vesicle away from the membrane . We brieﬂy discuss various types of endocytosis , including phagocyto - sis , macropinocytosis , and clathrin - independent endocytosis . We focus mainly on new ﬁndings on the relative importance of actin in clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) in yeast versus mammalian cells . 661 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2012 . 81 : 661 - 686 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D uk e U n i v e r s it y on 07 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BI81CH27 - Cooper ARI 9 May 2012 8 : 52 Clathrin : a protein component that associates with itself to form triskelions , which polymerize into the curved coat that surrounds the endocytic vesicle duringclathrin - mediated endocytosis CME : clathrin - mediated endocytosis Contents 1 . INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 662 1 . 1 . Types of Endocytosis . . . . . . . . . . 662 1 . 2 . Endocytosis in Normal Tissues and Disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 663 2 . THE ACTIN CYTOSKELETON IN CLATHRIN - MEDIATED ENDOCYTOSIS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 663 2 . 1 . The Need for Actin in Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis : Yeast versus Mammalian Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 663 2 . 2 . Actin and Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis in Other Cell Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 666 2 . 3 . Regulation of Actin Dynamics at Sites of Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 667 2 . 4 . Coordination of Membrane Curvature Proteins with Actin . . . 672 2 . 5 . Mechanisms of Membrane Scission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 674 2 . 6 . Mathematical Modeling of Actin Assembly and Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 675 2 . 7 . Models of Force Generation by Actin Assembly During Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis . . 676 3 . CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS . . . . . . . . . 678 1 . INTRODUCTION Endocytosis includes a number of processes by which materials are taken up by cells , and a role for the actin cytoskeleton has been uncovered for a number of these processes . In this arti - cle , we review progress in our understanding of how actin is involved in these various processes of endocytosis . A number of reviews addressing various aspects of this subject have been pub - lished recently . We refer the reader to them and place our focus on the most recent publi - cations . 1 . 1 . Types of Endocytosis Cellular uptake is an important process for function in a wide variety of cell types ( see Section 1 . 2 below ) . Multiple pathways for uptake have been identiﬁed including clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) , cave - olae , phagocytosis , macropinocytosis , circular dorsal rufﬂes , and several clathrin - independent pathways . Doherty & McMahon ( 1 ) wrote a remarkably comprehensive review of the molecular mechanisms involved in various types of endocytosis . On the topic of CME , McMahon & Boucrot ( 2 ) published a compre - hensive review in 2011 . For further information on clathrin - independent endocytosis , we rec - ommend a review by Howes and colleagues ( 3 ) . The endocytic pathways of phagocytosis , macropinocytosis , and circular dorsal rufﬂes clearly require actin ( 4 – 8 ) . The forces that con - tribute to deforming the plasma membrane , to bringing the material into the cytoplasm , and to executing ﬁssion may come from the poly - merization of actin ﬁlaments or from the action of myosin motor proteins on actin ﬁlaments . In these settings , actin polymerization is likely to depend on the concerted action of ﬁlament nu - cleation proteins , such as Arp2 / 3 , formins , and WH2domainproteins . Actin - bindingproteins , such as ADF / coﬁlin , VASP , proﬁlin , α - actinin , and capping protein , are likely to play impor - tant roles ( 9 – 13 ) . In fact , many key elements of the processes remain to be deﬁned , espe - cially with regard to signaling and regulatory controls . Other endocytic pathways , for which the role of actin is less certain and less well - deﬁned , include the CLIC / GEEC pathway , caveolae , transcytosis , and endocytic pathways that involve Arf6 and ﬂotillin ( 1 ) . Several stud - ies of clathrin - independent endocytosis have demonstrated a requirement for actin . A re - cent study of endocytic tubules caused by the Shiga toxin produced by enteropathogenic bac - teria revealed a need for actin in the pro - cess of scission by which tubules form vesicles ( 14 ) . 662 Mooren · Galletta · Cooper A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2012 . 81 : 661 - 686 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D uk e U n i v e r s it y on 07 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BI81CH27 - Cooper ARI 9 May 2012 8 : 52 Arp2 / 3 : a seven - subunit protein complex containing the actin - related proteins Arp2 and Arp3 ; it nucleates actin ﬁlament assembly and creates end - to - side branches Scission : ﬁssion of membrane tubule attaching the incipient endocytic vesicle to the plasma membrane Latrunculin A and B : cell - permeable toxins that bind actin monomers , inhibit actin assembly at low concentrations and short times , and depolymerizeﬁlamentsathighconcentrationsandlongertimes Dynamin : a protein with GTPase activity capable of binding lipid membranes and facilitating ﬁssion BAR domain : Bin - amphiphysin - Rvs protein domain 1 . 2 . Endocytosis in Normal Tissues and Disease In normal cells that either are undergoing development and differentiation or are func - tioning in their differentiated physiologic state , endocytosis can play a variety of important roles . For example , professional phagocytic cells ingest and degrade apoptotic or necrotic cells . Immune cells that process antigens , such as dendritic cells , use macropinocytosis to ingest relatively large volumes of extracellular ﬂuid and thus take up potential antigens for presentation . Binding of ligands to their cellular receptors induces signaling that is propagated into the cell and can result in endocytosis of the ligand . This is necessary for uptake of vital substances , and the subsequent degradation or recycling of those receptors is a critical element of the control of receptor availability on the cell surface . Mutations in components of CME and of other types of endocytosis have been implicated in a wide range of human diseases , including various cancers , neurodegenerative diseases , and metabolic syndromes ( 1 , 2 ) . During infec - tions , a number of microorganisms , including viruses , bacteria , and fungi , enter host cells via a wide variety of endocytic processes , includ - ing CME , phagocytosis , and macropinocytosis ( 4 , 15 – 17 ) . The ability to speciﬁcally interfere with endocytosis of pathogens , including pri - ons , may be important in the future for treat - ment of diseases . 2 . THE ACTIN CYTOSKELETON IN CLATHRIN - MEDIATED ENDOCYTOSIS 2 . 1 . The Need for Actin in Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis : Yeast versus Mammalian Systems CME has been studied most completely in yeasts and cultured mammalian cells . In yeast , it is clear that actin is absolutely required for the successful progression and execution of the process of CME , reviewed in Reference 18 . In mammalian cells , actin is not always necessary for CME to occur , but it does appear to become necessary in certain settings , such as the inges - tion of larger cargoes or endocytosis in loca - tions that are richly dense with actin ﬁlaments . In yeast , actin - rich foci on the plasma mem - brane , termed actin patches , are the locations of CME . The evidence for this conclusion comes from the colocalization of endocytic and actin - binding proteins , as well as from mutations in actin - binding proteins resulting in endocytic defects . Advances in live - cell imaging techniques have been crucial in determining the dynamics and recruitment of endocytic and actin regulating proteins to the sites of CME in yeast ( see the box Advancing Our Understanding of the Endocytic Process ) . Also , targeting actin by treatment of cells with toxins , such as latrunculin , has demonstrated a need for actin ﬁlament assembly in CME ( 19 – 21 ) . The requirement for actin assembly at sites of CME in yeast may be a consequence of the turgor pressure of these cells , which is high relative to that in animal cells ( 22 ) . Contradictory evidence of a requirement for actin in metazoan CME has led to debate re - garding the role of the actin cytoskeleton . As in yeast , there is convincing biochemical evidence for interactions between several endocytic pro - teins and actin - binding proteins . The use of various actin toxins has demonstrated that actin may participate in multiple stages of endocy - tosis , including invagination , elongation of the neck of the endocytic vesicle , ﬁssion , and move - ment away from the plasma membrane ( 23 , 24 ) . However , depending on the cell type used or which surface of the cell was measured , effects were minimal in certain cases ( 25 , 26 ) . A study by De Camilli and colleagues ( 27 ) found similarities between yeast and mammalian CME in the coordination of lipid curvature - inducing proteins with actin . Loss of dynamin 1 and 2 in mouse ﬁbroblasts arrested CME , with long tubules capped by clathrin attached to the plasma membrane . Actin , actin regulators , and curvature - inducing BAR domain proteins were found at the base of the tubule . Latrunculin B treatment led to loss of the actin foci and the tubules , along with www . annualreviews . org • Actin and Endocytosis 663 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2012 . 81 : 661 - 686 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D uk e U n i v e r s it y on 07 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BI81CH27 - Cooper ARI 9 May 2012 8 : 52 ADVANCING OUR UNDERSTANDING OF THE ENDOCYTIC PROCESS Improvements in technology and methodology associated with light and electron microscopy have been crucial for advancing our understanding of molecular mechanisms . The advent of ﬂuorescent proteins , including green ﬂuorescentprotein ( GFP ) anditsrelatives , hasenabledonetofollowtheaccumulationofindividualcomponentsover time , to directly compare the time courses of accumulation of two or more proteins with each other , and to follow the movement of endocytic structures . The development of pHluorin as a GFP derivative with ﬂuorescence sensitivity to pH has been a very useful tool to mark the time of scission of the endocytic vesicle from the plasma membrane . Great improvements in signal - to - noise ratios have been provided by the development of confocal microscopy , both laser scanning and spinning disk , and by the implementation of total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence microscopy . These technological advancements have been essential for improving sensitivity and the visualization of relatively faint ﬂuorescent signals . Super - resolution ﬂuorescence microscopy , such as stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy ( STORM ) or photoactivated localization microscopy ( PALM ) , has also contributed to improved visualization , and further applications of these novel approaches are expected to provide new insights . Advances in electron microscopy , especially improvements in our ability to visualize clathrin assemblies and actin ﬁlaments provided by freeze - etch , platinum replica , and tomographic approaches , have been invaluable . The correlation of ﬂuorescence with high - resolution electron microscopy images has likewise made important contributions . Quantitative measurements of GFP ﬂuorescence can be converted to absolute numbers of molecules by compar - ison with standards in cells . Computer - assisted analysis of movie data can track individual entities , such as endocytic vesicles and clathrin - rich sites , providing data on their ﬂuorescence intensity and position over time . The computer programs allow one to analyze data for hundreds to thousands of such entities . Two key issues related to GFP fusions are the level of expression of the fusion protein and the ability of the fusion to functionally replace the endogenous protein . Ideally , one would like to replace the endogenous protein with a GFP fusion without changing the total expression level of the protein . Gene integration technology , which is well established in yeast and other model organisms and recently available in cultured mammalian cells , allows the fusion protein to be expressed from the appropriate endogenous locus . However , this alone does not guarantee proper protein levels because the presence of the GFP fusion can inﬂuence rates of synthesis , folding , and degradation of either RNA or protein . Inaddition , oneneedstodocumentthattheGFPfusionfunctionsidenticallytotheendogenousprotein , atleastin the processes of interest , namely endocytosis . Experience from model organisms indicates that documenting rescue ofnullmutantphenotypesisanimportantcriterion , butalsothatoneneedstoconsiderthenatureoftheassayandthe genetic background . In particular , in cells carrying one or more mutations of endocytic components , the ability of a given GFP fusion to function may be compromised more than would be appreciated from otherwise wild - type cells . widening of the neck of clathrin pits . The authors concluded that actin is important for progression of CME , owing to a role , in coordination with BAR domain proteins , in narrowing and elongating the neck of clathrin pits . These features were reminiscent of CME in yeast . In addition , dynamin appeared to limit actin polymerization and tubule elongation , which also bears some similarities to CME in yeast ( discussed in more detail below , in Section 2 . 4 on scission ) . Asubsequentstudywithacell - freesystemby the same group also found actin to be required for the formation of plasma membrane tubules ( 28 ) . Cultured ﬁbroblasts on a poly - L - lysine - coated surface were sonicated , leaving plasma membrane sheets . Addition of brain cytosol with ATP and GTP γ S caused the formation of tubules capped by clathrin . Tubules did not form upon treatment with latrunculin B ; however , clathrin pits still accumulated . A need for actin in CME was also found in a study of 664 Mooren · Galletta · Cooper A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2012 . 81 : 661 - 686 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D uk e U n i v e r s it y on 07 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BI81CH27 - Cooper ARI 9 May 2012 8 : 52 Cytochalasin D : a cell - permeable toxin that blocks elongation from barbed ends of actin ﬁlaments F - BAR : a BAR protein domain that is an extensions of the FCH ( Fes / CIP4 homology ) domain CCS : clathrin - coated structure CCP : clathrin - coated pit mammalian cells cultured on poly - L - lysine , which leads to a relatively tight attachment of the cell to the surface ( 24 ) . These observations suggest that actin may be needed in mammalian CME , for invagination or tubulation , only when cells are ﬁrmly attached to the substrate or when the membrane is under tension . Other lines of evidence also indicate that tension may determine the requirement for actin involvement in CME . In yeast , Ayscough and coworkers ( 22 ) demonstrated that the high turgor pressure in the cell creates a need for actin to provide enough force for membrane invagination . In addition , treatment of mam - malian cells with actin ﬁlament disruption tox - ins ( latrunculin B or cytochalasin D ) , which should decrease cortical membrane tension , al - lowed BAR and F - BAR domain proteins to in - duce tubule formation ( 29 ) . Actin involvement in CME of larger clathrin - coated structures ( CCS ) , termed clathrin plaques , has been ob - served on the adherent surface of certain cell types ( 26 ) . In addition , increased adhesion of a cell to a surface inhibited CME and increased the lifetime of clathrin - coated pits ( CCPs ) , as did proximity of a CCP to a cell - surface attach - ment plaque ( 30 ) . In this study , latrunculin B treatment of the cells increased the lifetimes of all CCPs , indicating a general need for actin in CME , and the effect of latrunculin was greater on CCPs in adherent regions , conﬁrming that actin is more important when adhesion is high . Together , these results suggest that adhesion of cells to their substrate requires more force for internalization of CCPs and that this increased force is provided by actin . In striking contrast , in other settings , actin ﬁlamentnetworksappeartoinhibitCME . Actin ﬁlaments are important for generation of cor - tical tension , and high cortical tension appears to decrease the efﬁciency of CME . In a study of cultured cells ( BSC1 ) attached to ﬁbronectin - coated micropatterned substrates , CCP life - times were heterogeneous . Relaxation of the cortical actin network with inhibitors of actin or myosin led to decreased CCP lifetimes and loss of lifetime heterogeneity , i . e . , increased efﬁciency of CME ( 31 ) . Most of the CCPs analyzed were located between , not directly co - incident with , integrin attachment sites . The authors proposed that stress ﬁbers , anchored at sites of integrin attachment , spanned across the cell and increased cortical tension , which impeded the invagination machinery . In these experiments , the levels of latrunculin A were sufﬁciently low that most ﬁlamentous actin was preserved , in contrast to other studies where high levels of latrunculin A caused actin depoly - merization at a gross level . Thus , these results do not negate a possible requirement for actin in CME ; instead , they suggest that increased cortical tension may be a means by which actin can inhibit CME . Different conclusions regarding cortical tension and the role of actin in CME were reached by Kirchhausen and colleagues ( 32 ) in a recent study with cultured polarized Madin - Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) epithelial cells . CME at the apical surface of these polarized cells was known to depend on actin because of a previous study ﬁnding inhibition of CME by cytochalasin D ( 33 ) . In the new study , disruption of the actin network by latrunculin A treatment resulted in decreased CME , with a large number of U - shaped clathrin pits on the apical surface , apparently arrested in the process of invagination . This dependence of CME on actin correlated with the presence of microvilli on the apical surface . Microvillar structure depends on a bundle of actin ﬁlaments as a structural core , so the effect on CME may have resulted from the loss of actin ﬁlaments or microvilli . Previously , membrane tension was found to be higher on the apical surface of po - larized cells , relative to the basal surface , on the basis of membrane - tether pulling experiments ( 34 ) . This increased membrane tension was due primarily to cortical actin , revealed by the observation of less tension when tethers were pulled from membrane blebs . Kirchhausen and colleagues ( 32 ) found that subjecting cells to swelling ( with hypotonic medium ) or to mechanical stretching created a requirement for actin in CME on the basolateral surface of the cells , and , again , arrested clathrin pits were seen . They proposed that increased www . annualreviews . org • Actin and Endocytosis 665 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2012 . 81 : 661 - 686 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D uk e U n i v e r s it y on 07 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BI81CH27 - Cooper ARI 9 May 2012 8 : 52 Jasplakinolide : an actin toxin that is cell permeable and binds to and stabilizes ﬁlaments membrane tension decreased the ability of the clathrin lattice to produce invaginations , creating a need for assistance from the actin cytoskeleton . In this study , latrunculin A and jasplakinolide both caused arrest of CCPs ; this seems puzzling because the former inhibits or reverses actin ﬁlament polymerization , whereas the latter stabilizes actin ﬁlaments . Perhaps in each case , the net effect was to prevent architectural remodeling of the actin ﬁlament network needed for CME . Internalization of large cargo by CME ap - pears to be another setting in which actin be - comes necessary for CME . Vesicular stomatitis virus requires actin to enter the cell via CME ( 35 ) . The large size and shape of the virus would seem to preclude complete encasement of the virus by the relatively smaller clathrin - coated vesicle . However , a shorter form of vesicu - lar stomatitis virus , the defective interfering particle , DI - T , was completely encased into a clathrin - coated vesicle , and the requirement for actin was lost ( 36 ) . This suggests that additional force was needed for internalization of the whole virus and that actin provided that force . Finally , a recent electron microscopy ( EM ) study by Svitkina and coworkers ( 37 ) has demonstrated that many CCSs on the ven - tral surface of unroofed cultured mammalian cells , B16F1s , have networks of short , highly branched actin ﬁlaments associated with them . These actin ﬁlament networks were not always observed by ﬂuorescence microscopy , raising concern that the detection limitations of ﬂu - orescence microscopy might underestimate the number of CCPs that have actin ﬁlaments as - sociated with them . In this study , treatment of cells with actin - disrupting drugs ( latrunculin B or cytochalasin D ) led to dissolution of stress ﬁbers but not complete removal of actin ﬁla - ments associated with CCSs . This observation raises another important experimental caveat . In studies observing no effect on CME upon addition of such drugs , perhaps the loss of actin ﬁlaments at the site of CME is incomplete . To summarize the different experimental ﬁndings , actin appears to be necessary for CME in mammalian cells in certain settings , perhaps because actin provides an increased level of force needed for invagination , scission , or vesi - cle movement . The role of membrane tension , and the contribution of cortical actin to mem - brane tension , is somewhat confusing . In some studies , cortical actin appeared to contribute to increased membrane tension , which impeded the process of CME . In other studies , regions of cells with high membrane tension appeared to require actin for CME to occur . The connec - tion between tension and actin in CME is likely to be a physiologically important one , assum - ing that cells in different tissues modulate their cortical tension in response to their environ - ment . It does seems reasonable to suggest that actin mightbe constitutivelyrecruitedto CCSs , along with other endocytic proteins , because of the abundance of interactions between en - docytic and actin - regulatory proteins . Perhaps the amount of actin polymerization needed in a given case is determined by the amount of force required to counteract membrane or cor - tical tension . The molecular mechanisms of the processes by which the cell senses the tension and regulates the actin assembly should be in - teresting areas for future investigation . 2 . 2 . Actin and Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis in Other Cell Types Although endocytosis in plants has not been investigated extensively , plants appear to use CME as a primary means of internalization ( 38 – 40 ) . Plants have homologs of many of the same endocytic proteins conserved in yeast and mammals , such as AP - 2 , epsin , Arp2 / 3 , and dynamin ( 41 ) ; however , studies of their functional roles have been limited . Several studies have demonstrated a requirement for actin in plant endocytosis by treating cells with actin - depolymerizing drugs ( 42 – 46 ) , reviewed in Reference 47 . One might expect actin to be required for CME in plants , by analogy to yeast , because both types of cells have high turgor pressure . Interestingly , CCPs in yeast and plants are smaller than those in mammalian cells ( 2 ) , which may be consistent with the notion that high turgor pressure 666 Mooren · Galletta · Cooper A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2012 . 81 : 661 - 686 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D uk e U n i v e r s it y on 07 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BI81CH27 - Cooper ARI 9 May 2012 8 : 52 WASp : Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein SCAR / WAVE : WASp family verprolin - homologous protein impedes invagination . Further investigation into the role of actin in plant CME will help test ideas about the role of actin in the face of high membrane or cortical tension . In Dictyostelium cells , actin ﬁlaments are clearly essential for a number of endo - cytic mechanisms , notably phagocytosis and macropinocytosis ( reviewed in Reference 48 ) . Relatively less is known about the role of actin in CME in Dictyostelium . During the course of CME , a brief burst of actin polymerization can be observed prior to the loss of clathrin from the membrane ( 49 , 50 ) , and several actin - binding proteins localize to CCSs , including WASP ( 51 ) , Arp2 / 3 , myosin - IB , and coronin ( 49 ) . Treatment of cells with actin toxins , cy - tochalasin A or latrunculin A , results in an in - creased number of clathrin puncta at the plasma membrane , consistent with a requirement for actin in CME progression ( 50 ) . O’Halloran and coworkers ( 50 ) hypothesized that huntingtin - interacting protein 1 - related ( Hip1r ) protein , a component of CCPs , may coordinate clathrin with actin polymerization because Hip1r in - teracts with both actin and clathrin . Epsin , a PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - binding protein that promotes early invagination and binds clathrin , recruited Hip1r to sites of CME and promoted its phos - phorylation . In cells lacking epsin or Hip1r , clathrin foci persisted at the membrane for longer times than seen in wild - type cells , and actin structures were more diffuse , with a larger and irregular shape and increased lateral motil - ity . In yeast , Hip1r ( Sla2 ) mutants have altered actin dynamics at endocytic patches ( 20 ) , and clathrin light chain , Clc1 , binds to Sla2 and in - hibits the interaction of Sla2 with actin ( 52 ) . In mammalian cells , Hip1R binds cortactin , clathrin , and actin , which may form a cap to negatively regulate actin polymerization ( 53 ) . Therefore , a conserved function of Hip1r may be to regulate actin polymerization at clathrin pits , thereby promoting efﬁcient CME . Drosophila also use CME as a means of cellular uptake . CCSs in Drosophila hemo - cytes appeared at the periphery of ﬁlopodial membranes and moved centripetally along the membrane before scission occurred ( 54 ) . Latrunculin A stopped this lateral movement of CCSs as well as the uptake of maleylated BSA ( mBSA ) , a CME cargo . Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin assembly was implicated by the observations that wasp mutants displayed no centripetal movement of CCSs or uptake of mBSA . In dynamin mutants , shibiri ts2 , elongated tubules formed from the plasma membrane at the restrictive temperature , and the uptake of mBSA was increased because of trapping within the elongated tubules . Latrunculin A treatment prior to the shift to a restrictive temperature decreased the internalization of mBSA , sug - gesting a role for actin in the formation of the elongated tubules , similar to what has been reported in mammalian systems ( 27 , 29 ) . A study in Drosophila S2R + cells suggested that actin is involved in the internalization and motility of CCPs via F - BAR domain pro - tein CIP4 / Toca - 1 ( cdc42 - interacting protein 4 / transducer of cdc42 - dependent actin assem - bly 1 ) regulation of the Arp2 / 3 activators WASp ( Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ) and SCAR / WAVE ( WASp family verprolin - homologous protein ) ( 55 ) . Latrunculin A treat - ment abolished the movement of endocytic vesicles through the cytoplasm following scis - sion . The SH3 domain of CIP4 interacted directly with WASP and indirectly with WAVE via the Abi subunit . Overexpression of CIP4 (cid:2) SH3 - EGFP in cells caused long tubules to form from the plasma membrane , suggest - ing that Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin assembly was needed for scission . The loss of Cip4 in ﬂies caused the formation of multiple wing hairs , as did loss of function of Arp2 / 3 , WAVE , or dy - namin . Thus , dynamin and CIP4 , by regulating actin , may promote endocytic scission and may be important for wing hair development . 2 . 3 . Regulation of Actin Dynamics at Sites of Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis Actin networks that form at sites of endocytosis must be tightly regulated for efﬁcient inter - nalization . Indeed , many of the components involved in the dendritic nucleation model localize to CME sites . These include www . annualreviews . org • Actin and Endocytosis 667 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2012 . 81 : 661 - 686 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D uk e U n i v e r s it y on 07 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BI81CH27 - Cooper ARI 9 May 2012 8 : 52 Nucleation - promoting factor ( NPF ) : a protein that binds to and activates Arp2 / 3 nucleation - promoting factors ( NPFs ) , which increase the ability of Arp2 / 3 to form a branched actin network ; capping protein , which limits the length of ﬁlaments ; and depolymerization factors , such as coﬁlin , which turn over older ﬁlaments for recycling of actin subunits . The majority of the research on the regulation of actin at sites of CME has been in budding and ﬁssion yeast . We discuss that work in the following sections with some comparisons to other systems . 2 . 3 . 1 . Phases of the endocytic process . Modern cell biological techniques have so - lidiﬁed the relationship between actin and endocytosis . Fast time resolution , dual - color imaging , in both yeast and mammalian cells , reveals stereotypical temporal relationships be - tween the accumulation of endocytic proteins and regulators of actin assembly . These movies also reveal distinct phases of movement by the endocytic ensemble . Endocytosis can be viewed as a three - phase process . During phase I , en - docytic coat proteins , including clathrin , Sla1 ( CD2AP / Cin85 ) , Sla2 ( Hip1r ) , and End3 , are recruited , and the endocytic structure remains at the cell cortex undergoing relatively minor movements . Regulators of actin assembly are recruited , and near the end of this stage , actin polymerization begins . During phase II , the proteins make a short movement away from the cortex into the cytoplasm . At the end of this phase , endocytic proteins are lost from the vesicle , presumably coinciding with scission of the vesicle from the plasma membrane . Finally , in phase III , the vesicle and its actin machinery execute faster and longer movements about the cytoplasm . For recent reviews on this topic , see References 18 and 56 – 59 . The polymerization of actin is required for the movements observed during phase I and phase II . When cells are treated with latrun - culin A to inhibit actin polymerization , the endocytic site forms , but it never leaves the cor - tex ( 20 , 21 ) . However , the initial production of membrane curvature may not depend on actin , according to EM studies ( 60 ) . The architecture of the actin ﬁlament network and the protein composition of the endocytic sites strongly suggest that Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin assembly occurs in the manner described by the dendritic nucleation model ( 10 ) . Actin ﬁlaments at sites of endocytosismake end - to - sidebranches char - acteristic of Arp2 / 3 ( 61 ) . Sites of endocytosis contain Arp2 / 3 and other actin - regulatory pro - teins associated with the dendritic nucleation model , including a capping protein and coﬁlin . 2 . 3 . 2 . The nucleator Arp2 / 3 and its regula - tors . To date , the only nucleator of actin ﬁla - ments found at sites of endocytosis is Arp2 / 3 . Conditional mutations affecting Arp2 / 3 result in a signiﬁcant disruption of the normal behav - ior of endocytic sites ( 62 , 63 ) . Other actin nu - cleators in budding yeast include two formin proteins , and conditional loss of their activity does not affect the movement of endocytic sites ( 21 ) . To nucleate new actin ﬁlaments , mam - malianArp2 / 3requiresthebindingofanactiva - tor protein , sometimes called an NPF protein . Binding of an NPF protein to Arp2 / 3 induces a major conformational change in the complex , bringing the actin - like Arp2 and Arp3 subunits into a conﬁguration that mimics the barbed end of an actin ﬁlament ( 64 ) . In yeast , Arp2 / 3 has a signiﬁcant amount of nucleation activity in the absence of an activator , especially when as - sayed with yeast actin ( 65 ) . Therefore , the role of Arp2 / 3 regulatory proteins in yeast may be to localize or ﬁne - tune the activity of Arp2 / 3 . Six proteins are capable of regulating the in vitro activity of Arp2 / 3 in yeast : ﬁve positive regula - tors , WASp / Las17 , two type I myosins ( Myo3 and Myo5 ) , Pan1 , and Abp1 , and one negative regulator , coronin . The best studied of the Arp2 / 3 regula - tors in yeast is the WASp homolog Las17 . WASp / Las17arrivesatsitesofendocytosisdur - ing the nonmotile phase , prior to the arrival of Arp2 / 3 and actin ( 20 ) . Complete loss of Las17 leads to a loss of cortical actin patches ( 66 ) . However , mutations affecting the Arp2 / 3 - binding region of Las17 have far less severe consequences on actin assembly , perturbing the timing and movement of endocytic structures , but not eliminating actin assembly ( 67 , 68 ) . 668 Mooren · Galletta · Cooper A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2012 . 81 : 661 - 686 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D uk e U n i v e r s it y on 07 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BI81CH27 - Cooper ARI 9 May 2012 8 : 52 The differences in phenotype between the las17 deletion and the las17 - Arp2 / 3 - binding mutant may result from functional overlap of Las17 with other Arp2 / 3 regulators , and Las17 may also have a critical role for actin assembly at sites of endocytosis independent of its interac - tion with Arp2 / 3 . Las17 interacts with a number of proteins in addition to Arp2 / 3 , some of which appear to regulate the activity of Las17 . Because full - length Las17 is not strongly autoinhibited ( 65 ) , other proteins may inhibit Las17 . Indeed , sev - eral proteins can negatively regulate Las17 , and many of them are recruited early during the as - sembly of an endocytic site . The ﬁrst protein recruited to endocytic sites identiﬁed to date is Syp1 , a muniscin family protein containing an EFC / F - BAR domain , capable of binding and bending membranes ( 69 – 71 ) . Beyond its abil - ity to bend membranes , Syp1 can negatively regulate the activity of WASp / Las17 . The en - docytic proteins Sla1 and Bbc1 , also recruited early in the endocytic process , cooperate to in - hibit Arp2 / 3 activation by Las17 ( 20 , 72 , 73 ) . An intriguing model is that the early - arriving proteins inhibit actin assembly at sites of endo - cytosis in the earliest stages , and this inhibition is lifted as Syp1 leaves the patch . Alternatively , the negative action of Sla1 / Bbc1 may be relieved by Bzz1 , an endo - cytic protein that interacts with and appears to positively regulate Las17 ( 67 ) . Bzz1 arrives at the patch after Las17 and Syp1 just prior to the start of actin polymerization ( 67 , 74 ) . Bzz1 contains an F - BAR domain , so it may help sense the curvature of the membrane to control the timing and localization of actin polymerization . Arp2 / 3 activators other than Las17 may also be regulated . The two type I myosins in yeast , Myo3 and Myo5 , have acidic / DDW regions that bind Arp2 / 3 . The TH1 domain of Myo5 can interact with its own C - terminal tail , which includes the acidic / DDW Arp2 / 3 - binding region ( 75 ) . This interaction interferes with Myo5 binding to Vrp1 ( verprolin ) , a mammalian WIP homolog , which is critical for the ability of Myo5 to activate actin ﬁlament nucleation by Arp2 / 3 . In addition , inhibition of Myo5 activation of Arp2 / 3 appears to be , at least in part , mediated by calmodulin ( Cmd1 ) . Calcium reduced the association of Cmd1 with Myo5 in vitro and promoted the Myo5 / Vrp1 interaction . The dissociation of Cmd1 from Myo5 by calcium addition on beads could also trigger the polymerization of actin in cell extracts . In cells , mutations that disrupt the in - teraction of Cmd1 and Myo5 led to premature actin assembly at endocytic sites , suggesting a role in regulating the activity of Myo5 toward Arp2 / 3 ( 75 ) . In ﬁssion yeast , Cam2 , a light chain for Myo1 , is important for recruiting the type I myosin to the site of endocytosis ( 76 ) . The motor activity of the type I myosins in yeast is also important for endocytosis . Elim - inating motor activity inhibits ﬂuid - phase en - docytosis and inward movement of endocytic patches ( 67 ) . Motor activity is likely to be regu - lated ; phosphorylation of the TEDS site , which accelerates its ATPase activity , is required for ligand - induced , but not constitutive , endocyto - sis in yeast ( 77 ) . Yeast Pan1 ( mammalian intersectin ) is another Arp2 / 3 activator with an acidic / DDW region , and Pan1 also appears to be under negative regulation . Similar to Las17 , Pan1 is recruited to actin patches before Arp2 / 3 and actin , so its ability to activate Arp2 / 3 may be suppressed at ﬁrst . In fact , Sla2 , an early endocytic protein , can inhibit the ability of Pan1 to activate Arp2 / 3 in vitro ( 78 ) . In vivo a sla2 mutation that impairs the ability of Sla2 to interact with Pan1 displayed endocytic and actin phenotypes that result from excessive activation of Arp2 / 3 by Pan1 . Another protein that plays a critical role in endocytosisinyeast , likelyatthestepofregulat - ing actin assembly , is verprolin , or Vrp1 , anal - ogous to the mammalian WASp - interacting protein ( WIP ) . Vrp1 can interact with Las17 , type I myosins , and actin monomers . Endo - cytic patches form in vrp1 null mutant cells , but endocytosis was blocked ( reviewed in Reference 79 ) . The patches were immotile , but they did assemble F - actin ( 67 , 72 ) . www . annualreviews . org • Actin and Endocytosis 669 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2012 . 81 : 661 - 686 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D uk e U n i v e r s it y on 07 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BI81CH27 - Cooper ARI 9 May 2012 8 : 52 Understanding the molecular mechanism by which Vrp1 contributes to the assembly of a functional actin network at sites of endocytosis has been a challenge . An appealing model for Vrp1 function is to provide actin monomers to Arp2 / 3 or to Arp2 / 3 activators , such Las17 and type I myosins , to nucleate new daugh - ter ﬁlaments . Testing this model has been complicated because Vrp1 interacts genetically and biochemically with Las17 and the type I myosins , which themselvesappear tohave over - lapping functions . However , progress has been made . Unexpectedly , the interaction between Las17 and Vrp1 did not appear to be critical for endocytosis on the basis of ﬂuid - phase end - point assays ( 80 , 81 ) , but more detailed assays may be informative . Other mutations , including ones that disrupt the Las17 / Arp2 / 3 interaction , can affect the dynamics of protein recruitment at sites of endocytosis without affecting uptake of ﬂuid - phase markers . Of course , Las17 and type I myosins may overlap in function for activation of Arp2 / 3 , and the in - teraction between Vrp1 and type I myosins may be sufﬁcient to mask the loss of the Vrp1 / Las17 interaction . Also surprising were observations that mutations affecting actin - binding domains of Vrp1 did not prevent ﬂuid - phase endocy - tosis ( 79 , 82 ) . Again , overlapping function , in this case between the actin - binding domains of Vrp1 or those of Las17 , may mitigate the effects of single mutations . 2 . 3 . 3 . Origin of the ﬁrst mother actin ﬁlament . One interesting question for actin assembly at sites of endocytosis is what triggers the beginning of the process . Arp2 / 3 requires an existing mother ﬁlament on which to create a new branch . What is the origin of that ﬁla - ment ? Evidence has been provided by a recent study of Dip1 , the WASH / DIP ortholog in Schizosaccharomyces pombe ( 83 ) . WASH / DIP proteins regulate Arp2 / 3 and the formin mDia2 in mammalian cells . In dip1 mutants , the timing between the arrival of WASp and the recruitment of Arp2 / 3 was more variable than in wild - type cells . However , once actin polymerization began , the process progressed with normal kinetics . Thus , Dip1 appears to act as a switch to initiate actin polymerization . The interesting observation was that , in wild - type and dip1 mutant cells , the movement of an existing actin patch near to a site of incipient endocytosis appeared to trigger the assembly of actin at that new site . Perhaps , a ﬁlament in the existing actin patch can serve as the ﬁrst mother actin ﬁlament and thereby trigger the switch to turn on actin polymerization . In mammalian cells , the origin of the ﬁrst mother actin ﬁlament is suggested by recent electron micrographs of unroofed cells . The pointed end of an actin ﬁlament associated with a CCS was frequently found to be in contact with the side of an actin ﬁlament extending from the surrounding cortical actin network or a nearby stress ﬁber ( 37 ) . In general , mammalian cells have a high density of actin ﬁlaments , particularly near the cortex , so the ﬁrst mother actin ﬁlament could easily be one that happens to collide with an active Arp2 / 3 molecule at a CCS . In yeast , the actin ﬁlament density in the cytoplasm is substantially less , but small oligomers of actin appear to exist ( 84 ) . Such an oligomer might serve as the ﬁrst mother ﬁlament . 2 . 3 . 4 . Termination of growth . Thedendritic nucleation model predicts that proper termi - nation of the growth of actin ﬁlaments may be important for regulating actin assembly and the movements produced by actin assembly . Cap - ping barbed ends is the proposed means of ter - minating actin assembly of individual ﬁlaments in the branched network . Deletion of the het - erodimeric actin capping protein , Cap1 / Cap2 in yeast , affects all phases of endocytosis , delay - ing the start of movement and affecting both the slow and fast movements away from the membrane . Consistent with a need for a proper balance between ﬁlament growth and capping , overexpression of capping proteins also affected the assembly of the actin network at sites of endocytosis ( 21 ) . Loss of capping proteins had no effect on the movement of presumably endocytic vesicles in the cytoplasm ( 21 ) ; however , the movement appears to depend on 670 Mooren · Galletta · Cooper A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2012 . 81 : 661 - 686 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D uk e U n i v e r s it y on 07 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BI81CH27 - Cooper ARI 9 May 2012 8 : 52 Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin polymerization ( 85 , 86 ) . Thus , this feature of the dendritic nucleation model may not hold in this setting . 2 . 3 . 5 . Actin turnover and disassembly . An emerging aspect of the regulation of the actin ﬁlament network at sites of endocytosis is the role of actin turnover proteins . The dendritic nucleation model predicts that the disassem - bly of actin ﬁlaments is essential for the proper function of an actin network to recycle actin subunits . Coﬁlin , coronin , and Aip1 potently disassemble actin ﬁlaments in vitro , especially in combination ( 87 , 88 ) . In yeast cells , these three proteins are recruited to the endocytic patch at the same time after actin ﬁlament as - sembly is complete , consistent with a role in ﬁlament disassembly ( 89 , 90 ) . In mammalian cells , coﬁlin and coronin are also recruited to endocytic sites after actin assembles ( 91 ) . In terms of function in yeast , coﬁlin is essential for viability , and conditional loss - of - function mutations strongly inhibit movement ofendocyticsites ( 89 , 90 ) . However , thepheno - types of coronin and Aip1 mutants in budding yeast indicate that their contribution to coﬁlin function is relatively minor ( 68 , 90 ) , apparently not consistent with what was expected from biochemical studies . Loss of coronin prolonged the actin assembly time for endocytic patches and increased the movement of endocytic patches late in their life ; however , neither of these effects was nearly as large as those result - ingfromlossofcoﬁlinfunction . Understanding the precise roles of coronin in regulating actin assembly at endocytic sites may be a signiﬁcant challenge . In addition to cooperating with coﬁlin in disassembling actin ﬁlaments in vitro , coronin could bind to actin ﬁlaments and protect them from coﬁlin when the actin was in its ATP - bound state ( 92 ) . Coronin was also able to activate and inhibit nucleation by Arp2 / 3 , depending on their concentrations ( 93 , 94 ) . Point mutations that abolish the interaction of coronin with Arp2 / 3 had subtle affects on the assembly of endocytic sites ( 94 ) . Finally , with regard to Aip1 , loss of function had a very mild phenotype , far less than those resulting from loss of coﬁlin or coronin ( 90 ) . Thus , understanding whether and how this set of three proteins causes ﬁlament disassembly in endocytosis requires further study . 2 . 3 . 6 . Actin cross - linking proteins . Actin cross - linking proteins may also play a role in assembling a productive actin ﬁlament network during CME . In biochemical studies , Arp2 / 3 can connect the side of one ﬁlament with the pointed end of another ﬁlament , and Sac6 , mammalian ﬁmbrin , can bind the sides of two actin ﬁlaments , forming a bundle . In ﬁssion yeast , ﬁmbrin ( Fim1 ) is important for endocytic actin patch function . Fim1 truncation leads to loss of its ability to cross - link actin ﬁlaments ; in cells , this mutation increased the lifetime of actin at the patch and decreased the num - ber of actin patches that move inward . In ﬁm1 null mutants , tropomyosin localizes ectopically to actin patches ; however , this did not oc - cur with the truncated Fim1 unable to cross - link , indicating that Fim1’s bundling activity is important ( 95 , 96 ) . Actin ﬁlament cross - linking is also impor - tant in budding yeast . Fimbrin ( Sac6 ) null mu - tations caused defects in actin organization , cell polarity , and endocytic uptake of α - factor ( 97 , 98 ) . Loss of Sac6 inhibited inward movement of endocytic structures , completely in one study and partially in another ( 72 , 99 ) . The sac6 null mutant phenotype was enhanced by deletion of the gene encoding another actin cross - linking protein , Ssp1 ( 99 ) . The possible role of ectopic tropomyosin , seen in ﬁssion yeast , has yet to be examined in these budding yeast mutants . The amount of ﬁmbrin at sites of endocyto - sis in ﬁssion yeast is much greater than that in budding yeast , so ﬁmbrin’s function may differ in the two organisms ( 100 ; B . J . Galletta & J . A . Cooper , unpublished information ) . The end - to - side branch connections be - tween actin ﬁlaments created by Arp2 / 3 are lost over time , and the rate of their loss is likely to be an important parameter for the func - tion of the ﬁlament network . In vitro loss of these connections was found to be increased by a coﬁlin - like protein , glial maturation www . annualreviews . org • Actin and Endocytosis 671 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2012 . 81 : 661 - 686 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D uk e U n i v e r s it y on 07 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BI81CH27 - Cooper ARI 9 May 2012 8 : 52 N - WASP : neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein N - BAR : BAR domain preceded by an N - terminal amphipathic helix I - BAR : inverse - BAR protein domain factor ( GMF , known as Aim7 in budding yeast ) ( 101 ) . Incells , GMF / Aim7displayedgeneticin - teractions with coﬁlin , so its debranching activ - ity may be functionally relevant . 2 . 3 . 7 . Time proﬁles of recruitment . Ob - servations of the time course of recruitment of proteins to the CCS have produced time proﬁles that allow one to divide the many proteins into groups or modules ( 72 , 91 ) . In yeast , four modules were described : the coat protein module , the actin module , the WASP / Myo module , and the amphiphysin module . A recent comprehensive study in mammalian cells by Merriﬁeld and colleagues ( 91 ) found the same four modules and uncov - ered additional ones . The WASP / Myo module included dynamin and was termed the dynamin module in this study . The coat module was divided into a clathrin submodule and an adaptor / F - BAR submodule , and the actin module was divided into assembly and disas - sembly submodules . New modules included GAK , Rab5 , and FBP17 / CIP4 , making a total of nine groups . The similarities in these results between yeast and mammalian cells argue for common molecular functions . Future studies of mutations in mammalian cells , similar to those in yeast , can test that hypothesis . Quantitative analysis of the time proﬁles for recruitment has led to other novel and im - portant ﬁndings . Working in mammalian cells , Merriﬁeld and coworkers ( 91 ) employed a pH - sensitiveﬂuorescenttransferrinreceptor , which revealed the time of scission , allowing them to align the recruitment time proﬁles of various proteins relative to the time of scission . One unexpected result among the recruitment time proﬁles was that FBP17 , an F - BAR protein , showed biphasic recruitment and peaked after scission . SNX9 ( sorting nexin 9 ) , a BAR pro - tein , also peaked after scission . These recruit - ment proﬁles were not expected because these proteins interact with dynamin and N - WASP , which are recruited earlier , and BAR domain proteins are predicted to precede and promote scission , not follow it , as described in more de - tail in the next sections . Both proteins are func - tionally important in that knockdown of either FBP17 or SNX9 inhibited CME ( 29 , 102 , 103 ) . Another interesting result from Merriﬁeld’s group ( 91 ) was that ∼ 50 % of scission events were categorized as nonterminal , meaning that scission did not result in total clearance of the CCS from the membrane . These nonterminal events may have skewed CCP internalization lifetime measurements in the past based on observing the disappearance of ﬂuorescent puncta . This study also described shorter lifetime events , termed abortive , consistent with previous observations ( 104 ) . However , conclusions from the lifetime results are not without controversy . Studies in mammalian cells have used ﬂuorescent fusion proteins , generally expressed at levels somewhat higher than those of the endogenous proteins . This fact raises concern about the possibility of altering the molecular processes under examination . In a recent study ( 105 ) , the advent of gene - editing techniques in mammalian cells allowed investigators to use ﬂuorescent fusions of endocytic proteins expressed from their endogenous genetic loci . When the levels of the fusion proteins were that of endogenous and likely lower expression than in the past , CCP lifetimes were shorter . Also , almost all clathrin - positive foci led to productive endocytic events because the foci proceeded to a dynamin - positive state ( 105 ) . The sensitivity of the ﬂuorescence microscopy now becomes an important variable , one that may account for the apparent differences among the various studies . Results from ex - periments combining high - sensitivity live - cell ﬂuorescence microscopy with gene - editing methodologies should be very interesting . Observations of recruitment time proﬁles in mammalian cell mutants , analogous to experiments in yeast , will also be exciting . 2 . 4 . Coordination of Membrane Curvature Proteins with Actin The BAR domain superfamily of proteins induces or senses membrane curvature , and its members are involved in CME in yeast and 672 Mooren · Galletta · Cooper A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2012 . 81 : 661 - 686 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D uk e U n i v e r s it y on 07 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BI81CH27 - Cooper ARI 9 May 2012 8 : 52 mammalian cells . The superfamily has three families that modulate curvature in distinct ways : BAR / N - BAR ( N - terminal amphipathic helix preceding the BAR domain ) proteins , F - BAR ( BAR domain is extension of an FCH domain ) proteins , and I - BAR ( inverse BAR ) proteins ( 106 ) . BAR / N - BAR and F - BAR proteins preferentially bind highly curved and relatively ﬂatter membranes , respectively , which may inﬂuence the stage at which they interact with CCSs . A number of F - BAR proteins have been linked to actin - regulatory proteins and found to be involved in CME , including FBP17 , Toca - 1 / CIP4 , syndapin ( Bzz1 in yeast ) , and FCHo1 and - 2 ( Syp1 in yeast ) ( 107 – 109 ) . F - BAR pro - teins are thought to participate in early invagi - nationstepstoformthetubulesofCCPs , inpart because they can bind and deform relatively ﬂat membranes , suchastheplasmamembrane ( 106 , 110 ) . Overexpression of F - BAR proteins in - duces tubule formation in mammalian cells ( 29 , 103 ) . EarlyrecruitmentofSyp1inyeast ( 69 – 71 ) or FCHo1 in mammalian cells to sites of CME ( 37 , 111 ) suggeststhattheseproteinsparticipate in creating the initial membrane curvature and also in recruiting clathrin , thus helping to spec - ify the site of CME ( 111 ) . Additionally , Syp1 negatively regulates WASp / Las17 in yeast ( 71 ) , suggesting that actin polymerization is inhib - ited until an initial level of membrane curva - ture is achieved . Other F - BAR proteins are re - cruited later to sites of CME ( 67 , 91 ) , and they stimulate Arp2 / 3 - dependent actin polymeriza - tion in mammalian cells via N - WASP / WASp ( Las17 in yeast ) or the N - WASP / WIP complex ( Las17 / Vrp1 in yeast ) ( 55 , 67 , 74 , 103 , 109 , 112 – 115 ) . Somewhat surprisingly , the F - BAR proteins CIP4 and FBP17 displayed bipha - sic recruitment to CCPs in mammalian cells ( NIH - 3T3 ) , with accumulation phases before and after scission ( 91 ) , as noted above . There - fore , their functions must differ somewhat from what was predicted . In mammalian cells , BAR / N - BAR proteins ( including amphiphysins , endophilin , Tuba , and SNX9 ) are involved in CME . CME was in - hibited by knockdown of SNX9 ( 102 ) or over - expression of dominant - negative mutant forms of BAR domain proteins , such as amphiphysin ( 116 ) , SNX9 ( 117 ) or Tuba ( 118 ) . BAR / N - BAR proteins prefer to bind to highly curved mem - branes , and they can induce curvature in cells . Overexpression of amphiphysin or endophilin caused long tubules to form from the plasma membrane ( 119 , 120 ) . Therefore , duringCME , BAR / N - BAR proteins are predicted to be re - cruited to invaginated CCPs to promote tubule elongation or stabilization ( 110 , 121 ) . Several cellularexperimentssupportthisprediction ( re - viewedinReferences110and122 ) . However , as noted above , the recruitment of SNX9 to sites of CME peaks after scission ( 91 ) , suggesting a more complex or different mechanism . BAR / N - BAR proteins may also induce actin assembly at sites of CME . In mammalian cells , many BAR / N - BAR proteins are able to bind and activate N - WASP ( Las17 in yeast ) and thereby stimulate Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin poly - merization ( 118 , 123 , 124 ) . Alternatively , the BAR protein PICK1 can bind to and regulate Arp2 / 3 directly ( 125 ) . Together , the number of F - BAR and BAR / N - BAR proteins that sense and / or pro - mote membrane curvature is relatively high in yeastandmammaliancells , asisthenumberthat can interact with actin polymerization machin - ery . Thus , the ﬁeld is faced with the challenging and important tasks of understanding how and when each protein is recruited to a site of CME , how each protein contributes to the regulation of actin assembly , and how the various proteins are coordinated with each other . I - BAR proteins bind to membranes and induce negative curvature , the opposite of what is produced by BAR / N - BAR or F - BAR proteins . Overexpression of I - BAR proteins in mammalian cells promotes ﬁlopodia - like pro - trusions , so the general role for I - BAR proteins may be to cause membrane protrusions , not invaginations . I - BAR proteins may stabilize the neck of an invaginating CCP , where the curvature is negative . I - BAR proteins interact with several actin regulators , including N - WASp ( 126 ) , WAVE2 ( 127 ) , Mena / VASP ( 128 ) , and mDia ( 129 ) . The www . annualreviews . org • Actin and Endocytosis 673 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2012 . 81 : 661 - 686 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D uk e U n i v e r s it y on 07 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BI81CH27 - Cooper ARI 9 May 2012 8 : 52 I - BAR protein missing - in - metastasis ( MIM ) , interacts with the Arp2 / 3 regulator cortactin ( 130 ) , and it contains a WH2 domain , which can bind actin monomers ( 131 , 132 ) . On the basis of recent studies , I - BAR pro - teins do appear to have a role in CME . Mouse embryo ﬁbroblasts isolated from MIM homozygous knockout mice were impaired in their ability to perform receptor - mediated CME and ﬂuid - phase pinocytosis ( 133 ) . The MIM − / − cells had an abnormally high number of platelet - derived growth factor ( PDGF ) re - ceptors remaining on the surface after PDGF stimulation and an increased number of phos - phorylated PDGF receptors , also consistent with decreased CME . In addition , MIM over - expression led to increased receptor - mediated CME , suggesting that MIM promotes CME . However , another found that MIM inhibited endocytosis in mouse embryo ﬁbroblasts and Drosophila border cells ( 134 ) . Here , researchers used siRNA - mediated knockdown of MIM in a cultured cell line , a different approach from the ﬁrststudy . TheyalsofoundthatMIMcompetes with the endophilin / CD2AP complex for cor - tactin binding , which may relate to the endocy - tosis and cell migration phenotypes reported . IBARa , a Dictyostelium homolog of the I - BAR protein IRSp53 , has been implicated in CME because of its localization to clathrin pits ( 135 ) . Also , BAIAP2L2 , a member of the IRSp53 fam - ilyinmammals , waslocalizedtoclathrin - coated plaques in cultured cell lines . 2 . 5 . Mechanisms of Membrane Scission In mammalian cells , dynamin is a critical component for ﬁssion of the CCP from the plasma membrane ( 27 , 136 , 137 ) . Dynamin is a GTPase with ﬁve functional domains : the N - terminal GTPase domain , a middle domain responsible for oligomerization , a PH domain that binds PIP 2 , a GED domain also responsi - ble for oligomerization and for stimulating the GTPase activity of the N - terminal domain , and a PRD domain that interacts with many SH3 domain partners . In cells , the recruitment time proﬁle of dynamin shows relatively late accumulation , just prior to scission ( 91 ) . Many biochemical interactions between dy - namin and actin exist in mammalian cells ei - ther by actin - binding proteins , such as cor - tactin , mAbp1 , syndapin , and myosin1E ( 138 , 139 ) , or by direct binding to actin ( 140 ) . Also , most of the F - BAR or BAR domain proteins in - volved in CME bind both dynamin and either N - WASP or SCAR / WAVE ( 121 ) , further link - ing dynamin to the actin cytoskeleton . Some of dynamin’s interactions , including those with cortactin or SNX9 , can increase the GTPase activity of dynamin in vitro ( 102 , 141 ) , which is important for dynamin’s mechanochemical function . However , how these connections be - tween dynamin and actin contribute to CME is still unclear . Several studies have indicated that actin may contribute to scission . Cells treated with latrun - culin , jasplakinolide , or thymosin β 4 contained stalled endocytic pits , as determined by EM or specialized uptake assays , suggesting that actin promotes constriction of the vesicle neck ( 23 , 24 , 32 , 142 ) . Stalled clathrin pits resulting from actin toxin treatment of MDCK cells did not recruit dynamin ( 32 ) . Perhaps actin contributes to scission by constricting the vesicle neck , pro - viding force to assist dynamin in scission . Actin does play a role in ﬁssion of membrane tubules in one form of clathrin - independent endocytosis ( 14 ) . In cells , actin was important for the ﬁssion of membrane tubules that were induced by Shiga toxin . Actin was also impor - tant for ﬁssion in vitro in a synthetic system of liposomes in which membrane tubules were induced to form by Shiga toxin . Actin and actin - binding proteins were components of the synthetic system , but dynamin was absent , suggesting that actin polymerization at the tubule membrane can be sufﬁcient for ﬁssion . In this study , ﬁssion required the presence of cholesterol in the liposomes , consistent with the notion that boundaries between membrane domains create interfacial force that promotes ﬁssion , discussed below in Section 2 . 6 . In yeast , dynamin also contributes to scis - sion but is less critical . The dynamin homolog 674 Mooren · Galletta · Cooper A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2012 . 81 : 661 - 686 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D uk e U n i v e r s it y on 07 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BI81CH27 - Cooper ARI 9 May 2012 8 : 52 Vps1 was originally found to have a role in CME because there were null mutant pheno - types in receptor internalization and actin or - ganization ( 143 ) . Subsequent studies found that Vps1 localized transiently to sites of endocyto - sis , with a time proﬁle similar to that of the amphiphysin Rvs167 , a likely marker for vesi - cle scission ( 144 ) . Also , vps1 (cid:2) null mutant cells had abnormalities in CME , including the ul - trastructure of the membrane invagination and uptake of the membrane dye FM4 - 64 ( 144 , 145 ) . The vps1 (cid:2) mutanthaddelayedactinpatch movement and decreased recruitment of the amphiphysin Rvs167 ( 144 ) . In sum , Vps1 ap - pears to promote invagination and trigger scis - sion , with a less critical role than what has been observed for dynamin in other cell types . In yeast , BAR domain – containing am - phiphysins , Rvs161 and Rvs167 , also have a role in membrane scission . They are recruited to endocytic patches just before the patch be - gins to move away from the membrane , they moveforashortdistance , andthentheyarelost , consistent with a role in scission ( 72 ) . Rvs167 was observed at the neck of the membrane invagination by immunoelectron microscopy ( 60 ) , conﬁrmed by recent correlated light mi - croscopy / EM ( 146 ) . In vitro puriﬁed Rvs161 and Rvs167 proteins formed a heterodimer , and the heterodimer was able to bind liposomes and induce the formation of tubules ( 147 ) . In rvs161 (cid:2) and rvs167 (cid:2) single and double - null mutant cells , ∼ 20 % – 30 % of endocytic patches began to move away from the plasma mem - brane and then retracted back , consistent with a failure of scission ( 72 , 147 ) . In another study , rvs167 and vps1 single mutants showed 30 % – 40 % of endocytic patches retracting back to the membrane , with a greater percentage in an rvs167 vsp1 double mutant , supporting the no - tion that amphiphysins and dynamin both have roles in scission ( 144 ) . In mammalian cells , BAR domain proteins are important for CME , and they appear to coordinate the action of dynamin for scission . Many BAR domain proteins , including SNX9 , interact directly with dynamin ( 102 , 122 , 148 – 151 ) . SNX9 , endophilin , and amphiphysin are recruited to endocytic sites with temporal proﬁles similar to that of dynamin ( 91 , 102 , 152 ) . BAR domain proteins alone do not seem to cause scission ; the long tubules induced by overexpression of amphiphysin or endophilin are stable and do not undergo ﬁssion ( 119 , 120 ) . In mammalian cells , recent evidence sug - gests a role for phospholipid metabolism in scission . Synaptojanin , aPI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 phosphatase , induced fragmentation of tubules ( created by overexpression of the BAR domain protein en - dophilin ) in conjunction with endophilin and dynamin ( 120 ) . Synaptojanin2 β 1 was recruited to endocytic sites with a timing proﬁle simi - lar to that of dynamin , peaking at scission ( 91 ) . These ﬁndings support the idea that tension at the interface of membrane lipid domains may contribute to scission ( 57 , 153 , 154 ) , which we discuss in more detail below . 2 . 6 . Mathematical Modeling of Actin Assembly and Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis The small size of endocytic sites creates a chal - lenge for the analysis of how actin can provide forces driving membrane deformation . Direct measurementofmanyoftheimportantphysical parameters are correspondingly difﬁcult , espe - cially in living cells . The molecular complexity of the endocytic site also provides a challenge , owing to the large number of protein and lipid moleculesassociatedwiththemembrane , notto mention the polymeric carbohydrates and pro - teins of the cell wall outside the membrane . In this setting , molecular modeling may provide criticalinsightintotheseprocesses . Twogroups havedescribedcomplementarymodelsofendo - cytosis aimed at explaining how the actin ﬁla - ment network assembles and how the forces for bending the membrane and causing ﬁssion are generated . Liu and colleagues ( 57 , 153 , 154 ) developed a model to predict curvature formation and scission on the basis of interfacial forces produced by lipid boundaries in the membrane of the forming vesicle . Mechanochemical feed - back is a key feature of the model . BAR domain www . annualreviews . org • Actin and Endocytosis 675 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2012 . 81 : 661 - 686 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D uk e U n i v e r s it y on 07 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BI81CH27 - Cooper ARI 9 May 2012 8 : 52 proteins sense curvature in the membrane and bind to the membrane , and this promotes further curvature , which positively feeds back to promote more binding of BAR domain pro - teins ( 154 ) . Next , the presence of BAR domain proteins at the neck of the short tubule protects PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 from the action of phosphatases . PIP 2 hydrolysis continues unabated at the tip of the tubule , providing an interfacial force be - tween the two regions of the membrane owing to the difference in their PIP 2 compositions . Positive feedback occurs again at this point ; the interfacial force enhances curvature , and curvature promotes the action of phosphatases . Phosphatase - catalyzed hydrolysis of PIP 2 further increases the difference in PIP 2 com - position between the two membrane regions , whichincreasestheinterfacialforce . Themodel can be applied to CME in both yeast and mam - malian systems . The model also incorporates actin , myosin , and dynamin as components that promote curvature and invagination ( 154 ) . In another study , Pollard and colleagues ( 155 ) developed a detailed biochemical model for the assembly and disassembly of the actin ﬁlament network at sites of endocytosis in ﬁssion yeast , using the dendritic nucleation model . The model incorporated experimental values for kinetic rate constants for many of the chemical reactions , which had been determined from in vitro biochemical experiments . The model was further constrained by values for the numbers of molecules at the endocytic sites , which were obtained from quantitative ﬂuores - cence microscopy ( 100 , 155 ) . When the model was used to ﬁt experimental data for protein dy - namics , some biochemical parameters needed to be changed to provide a good ﬁt , suggesting new experiments to test the model . One pre - diction was that some of the chemical reactions pertaining to actin needed to occur faster than what had been measured for muscle actin . Con - ﬁrming that prediction , actin from S . pombe was recentlyfoundtohaveafasterrateofnucleotide exchange , dimer formation , and phosphate release when compared to muscle actin ( 156 ) . This model provides an important mechanism to begin to understand the temporal relation - ships among the many reactants involved in forming a branched actin ﬁlament network . In the future , extending the model with spatial and mechanical information will be informative . 2 . 7 . Models of Force Generation by Actin Assembly During Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis As we have discussed above , actin assembly is tightly coupled to and necessary for CME in yeast and , in some situations , mammalian cells . How might actin contribute to the force required for efﬁcient CME ? One mechanism includes force productions by myosins , inter - acting by their motor within actin ﬁlaments . Type I myosins localize to sites of CME in yeast and mammals , and they are functionally important for endocytosis ( 18 , 91 , 139 , 157 ) . In cultured mammalian cells , myosin 1E and myosin VI were recruited to sites of CME as part of the dynamin module ( 91 ) . Myosin VI , a minus - end - directed motor myosin , was necessary for CME at the apical brush border of epithelial cells in the intestine and the kidney ( 158 , 159 ) . This region of the plasma membrane includes microvilli and the terminal web , both of which are very dense with actin ﬁlaments . For most of these actin ﬁlaments , their pointed ends are directed away from the membrane , suggesting that myosin VI may walk along these ﬁlaments and pull the CME vesicle away from the membrane . Another possible mechanism involves force produced by Arp2 / 3 - mediated dendritic nu - cleation at membrane surfaces , resulting from membrane - bound NPFs . In one such model , NPFs are located at the base of the clathrin - coated vesicle on the plasma membrane . The actin ﬁlaments created by these NPFs add new actin monomers onto ﬁlament barbed ends that are directed toward the plasma membrane . The growing ﬁlament ends push on the membrane , which does not move , and the actin ﬁlament network ﬂows away from the membrane ( 20 , 160 ) . Attachment of the tip of the invagina - tion to the actin ﬁlament network results in the tip being pulled into the cytoplasm . As 676 Mooren · Galletta · Cooper A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2012 . 81 : 661 - 686 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D uk e U n i v e r s it y on 07 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BI81CH27 - Cooper ARI 9 May 2012 8 : 52 Time a Mammalian cells Arp2 / 3 activators Clathrin / endocytic coat Actin network – + Syp1 Rvs161 / 167 Bzz1 1 – 2 min ~ 10 – 20 s ~ 5 s Time FCHo1 / 2 Amphiphysin FBP17 / TOCA - 1 1 – 2 min ~ 10 – 20 s ~ 5 s Dynamin Vps1 Cofilin / coronin b Yeast Figure 1 Models for actin assembly during endocytosis in mammalian cells ( a ) and budding yeast ( b ) ; these models are based on many of the studies discussed above . Many features are found in common . Clathrin and adaptors are recruited at very early stages and provide initial curvature . Regulators of actin nucleation follow . Actin polymerization proceeds , curvature increases , and the invagination elongates . Amphiphysins and dynamin are recruited , and membrane ﬁssion occurs . Actin disassembly proteins are recruited late . invagination proceeds and scission occurs , actin - binding proteins move away from the membrane ; however , the actin ﬁlament network does not constitute a solid column extending from the membrane to the actin patch . Instead , a clear zone separates the actin patch from the membrane , as found by ﬂuorescence microscopy ( 18 ) . Furthermore , immunoelectron microscopy images of the invagination reveal two pools of actin and myosin - I ( Myo5 ) , one at the base of the invagination and one near the tip ( 60 ) . Thus , the network appears to assemble at or near the vesicle , as well as at the plasma membrane . An alternative actin assembly model in - corporates these features . Membrane - bound NPFsstillnucleateactinﬁlamentassemblywith barbed ends pointed toward the membrane . In this case , NPFs are located on the plasma membrane , and they remain on the invaginat - ing membrane ( 161 ) . In this model , illustrated in Figure 1 , actin ﬁlament assembly pushes on the membrane at the initial curvature site to promote invagination , elongation , and ﬁssion . This model is supported by new results on the architecture of the actin ﬁlament network during CME , revealed by an EM study of CCSs in mammalian cells by Svitkina and colleagues ( 37 ) . Many CCSs were associated at their edges with short actin ﬁlaments in a highly branched network characteristic of Arp2 / 3 - mediated as - sembly . The barbed ends of the actin ﬁlaments were directed toward the CCSs . Shallow CCSs were surrounded by a collar - like network of ﬁlaments , and invaginated and constricted CCSs were associated with elongated patches of actin ﬁlaments . The results support the hypothesis that the polymerization of free www . annualreviews . org • Actin and Endocytosis 677 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2012 . 81 : 661 - 686 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D uk e U n i v e r s it y on 07 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BI81CH27 - Cooper ARI 9 May 2012 8 : 52 barbed ends of actin ﬁlaments may push on the membrane to exert force at the neck of vesicles . This model is consistent with the idea , discussed above , that regulators of actin polymerization can be recruited or activated by BAR domain proteins ( 108 , 121 , 162 ) . Actin ﬁlaments arranged in this fashion would be poised to drive the movement of the vesicle after it separates from the membrane ( 37 ) . 3 . CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS In conclusion , actin is essential for many types of endocytosis , including several that do not in - volve clathrin . For CME , actin is essential in yeast , but in metazoans , it varies in importance , depending on the cell type and experimental design . Comparative molecular studies of CME in metazoans and yeast , including budding and ﬁssion yeast , reveal a striking level of similar - ity despite great phylogenetic distance . Thus , the molecular machinery may be assembled and function in similar ways . In the future , addressing the issue of how and where actin ﬁlaments create force at an endocytic vesicle will be important . In mammalian cells , when actin is important for efﬁcient CME , one would like to deﬁne the molecular mechanisms that sense the need for actin and the signaling pathway that connects the sensor information to the appropriate actin assembly machinery . A related issue is under - standing how CME is regulated by tension in the plasma membrane and in the underlying actin cortex , a topic currently associated with controversy . Actin polymerization , or myosin motors , or perhaps some unknown mechanism may generate the force during invagination of an endocytic vesicle . Regardless of the source of the force , knowledge of the detailed archi - tecture of the actin ﬁlament network over time , with respect to the plasma membrane and the endocytic vesicle , will be critical . Myosins are clearly important for CME , and understanding the molecular nature of their function will be valuable , for myosin - I in yeast and metazoans and for myosin - VI in mammalian cells . Two important issues are ( a ) whether myosins function as motors to move vesicular cargo along actin ﬁlaments and ( b ) the molecular nature of the connection between myosin and cargo . CME has been studied intensively , but only in a limited number of organisms , so it will be interesting to explore the commonality of mechanisms across a broader range of organ - isms . Finally , the types of endocytosis and the underlying molecular mechanisms that occur in cells in the context of tissues and organs will be important areas for future research . SUMMARY POINTS 1 . Actin is essential for clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) in yeast . 2 . Actin can vary from important to dispensable for CME in metazoans , depending on the circumstances . 3 . Actin is essential for many types of endocytosis that do not involve clathrin . 4 . Comparative molecular studies of CME in budding and ﬁssion yeast reveal a striking level of similarity despite great phylogenetic distance . FUTURE ISSUES 1 . How and where do actin ﬁlaments create force ? 2 . What is the detailed architecture of the actin ﬁlament network at sites of endocytosis ? How does that architecture change over time ? 678 Mooren · Galletta · Cooper A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2012 . 81 : 661 - 686 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D uk e U n i v e r s it y on 07 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BI81CH27 - Cooper ARI 9 May 2012 8 : 52 3 . How does myosin function in CME ? In particular , does it function as a motor moving along actin ﬁlaments ? If so , what are the molecular compositions of its cargo ? 4 . How does CME depend on tension in the plasma membrane and in the actin cortex , which is associated with the plasma membrane ? 5 . How common are the molecular mechanisms for CME , including the role of actin , across a broad range of organisms ? 6 . What are the molecular mechanisms that sense the need for actin in a given location for CME ? And how does the sensor signal to the actin assembly machinery ? 7 . What types of endocytosis and molecular mechanisms are found in cells operating in tissues and organs ? DISCLOSURE STATEMENT The authors are not aware of any afﬁliations , memberships , funding , or ﬁnancial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We are grateful to the many colleagues who shared their insight about the ﬁeld or provided us with information about their research prior to publication . We apologize to the many researchers whose work was not discussed owing to space constraints . The writing of this article was supported by the following National Institutes of Health grants : R01 GM 38542 to J . A . C . , F32 GM083538 to O . L . M . , and R01 GM086882 to Anders Carlsson . LITERATURE CITED 1 . Doherty GJ , McMahon HT . 2009 . Mechanisms of endocytosis . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 78 : 857 – 902 2 . McMahonHT , BoucrotE . 2011 . Molecularmechanismandphysiologicalfunctionsofclathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 : 517 – 33 3 . Howes MT , Mayor S , Parton RG . 2010 . Molecules , mechanisms , and cellular roles of clathrin - independent endocytosis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 22 : 519 – 27 4 . Groves E , Dart AE , Covarelli V , Caron E . 2008 . Molecular mechanisms of phagocytic uptake in mam - malian cells . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 65 : 1957 – 76 5 . Orth JD , McNiven MA . 2006 . Get off my back ! Rapid receptor internalization through circular dorsal rufﬂes . Cancer Res . 66 : 11094 – 96 6 . Kerr MC , Teasdale RD . 2009 . Deﬁning macropinocytosis . Trafﬁc 10 : 364 – 71 7 . JaumouilleV , GrinsteinS . 2011 . Receptormobility , thecytoskeleton , andparticlebindingduringphago - cytosis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 23 : 22 – 29 8 . Lim JP , Gleeson PA . 2011 . Macropinocytosis : an endocytic pathway for internalising large gulps . Immunol . Cell Biol . 89 : 836 – 43 9 . Michelot A , Drubin DG . 2011 . Building distinct actin ﬁlament networks in a common cytoplasm . Curr . Biol . 21 : R560 – 69 10 . Pollard TD , Cooper JA . 2009 . Actin , a central player in cell shape and movement . Science 326 : 1208 – 12 11 . Firat - Karalar EN , Welch MD . 2011 . New mechanisms and functions of actin nucleation . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 23 : 4 – 13 12 . Kovar DR , Sirotkin V , Lord M . 2011 . Three’s company : the ﬁssion yeast actin cytoskeleton . Trends Cell Biol . 21 : 177 – 87 www . annualreviews . org • Actin and Endocytosis 679 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2012 . 81 : 661 - 686 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D uk e U n i v e r s it y on 07 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BI81CH27 - Cooper ARI 9 May 2012 8 : 52 13 . ChesaroneMA , DupageAG , GoodeBL . 2010 . Unleashingforminstoremodeltheactinandmicrotubule cytoskeletons . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 : 62 – 74 14 . Romer W , Pontani LL , Sorre B , Rentero C , Berland L , et al . 2010 . Actin dynamics drive membrane reorganization and scission in clathrin - independent endocytosis . Cell 140 : 540 – 53 15 . Dunn JD , Valdivia RH . 2010 . Uncivil engineers : Chlamydia , Salmonella and Shigella alter cytoskeleton architecture to invade epithelial cells . Future Microbiol . 5 : 1219 – 32 16 . TaylorMP , KoyuncuOO , EnquistLW . 2011 . Subversionoftheactincytoskeletonduringviralinfection . Nat . Rev . Microbiol . 9 : 427 – 39 17 . Cossart P , Veiga E . 2008 . Non - classical use of clathrin during bacterial infections . J . Microsc . 231 : 524 – 28 18 . Galletta BJ , Mooren OL , Cooper JA . 2010 . Actin dynamics and endocytosis in yeast and mammals . Curr . Opin . Biotechnol . 21 : 604 – 10 19 . Ayscough KR , Stryker J , Pokala N , Sanders M , Crews P , Drubin DG . 1997 . High rates of actin ﬁlament turnover in budding yeast and roles for actin in establishment and maintenance of cell polarity revealed using the actin inhibitor latrunculin - A . J . Cell Biol . 137 : 399 – 416 20 . Kaksonen M , Sun Y , Drubin DG . 2003 . A pathway for association of receptors , adaptors , and actin during endocytic internalization . Cell 115 : 475 – 87 21 . Kim K , Galletta BJ , Schmidt KO , Chang FS , Blumer KJ , Cooper JA . 2006 . Actin - based motility during endocytosis in budding yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 : 1354 – 63 22 . Aghamohammadzadeh S , Ayscough KR . 2009 . Differential requirements for actin during yeast and mammalian endocytosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 11 : 1039 – 42 23 . Merriﬁeld CJ , Perrais D , Zenisek D . 2005 . Coupling between clathrin - coated - pit invagination , cortactin recruitment , and membrane scission observed in live cells . Cell 121 : 593 – 606 24 . Yarar D , Waterman - Storer CM , Schmid SL . 2005 . A dynamic actin cytoskeleton functions at multiple stages of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 : 964 – 75 25 . Fujimoto LM , Roth R , Heuser JE , Schmid SL . 2000 . Actin assembly plays a variable , but not obligatory role in receptor - mediated endocytosis in mammalian cells . Trafﬁc 1 : 161 – 71 26 . Saffarian S , Cocucci E , Kirchhausen T . 2009 . Distinct dynamics of endocytic clathrin - coated pits and coated plaques . PLoS Biol . 7 : e1000191 27 . Ferguson SM , Raimondi A , Paradise S , Shen H , Mesaki K , et al . 2009 . Coordinated actions of actin and BAR proteins upstream of dynamin at endocytic clathrin - coated pits . Dev . Cell 17 : 811 – 22 28 . WuM , HuangB , GrahamM , RaimondiA , HeuserJE , etal . 2010 . Couplingbetweenclathrin - dependent endocytic budding and F - BAR - dependent tubulation in a cell - free system . Nat . Cell Biol . 12 : 902 – 8 29 . Itoh T , Erdmann KS , Roux A , Habermann B , Werner H , De Camilli P . 2005 . Dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton cooperatively regulate plasma membrane invagination by BAR and F - BAR proteins . Dev . Cell 9 : 791 – 804 30 . Batchelder EM , Yarar D . 2010 . Differential requirements for clathrin - dependent endocytosis at sites of cell - substrate adhesion . Mol . Biol . Cell 21 : 3070 – 79 31 . Liu AP , Loerke D , Schmid SL , Danuser G . 2009 . Global and local regulation of clathrin - coated pit dynamics detected on patterned substrates . Biophys . J . 97 : 1038 – 47 32 . BoulantS , KuralC , ZeehJ - C , UbelmannF , KirchhausenT . 2011 . Actindynamicscounteractmembrane tension during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 : 1124 – 31 33 . Gottlieb TA , Ivanov IE , Adesnik M , Sabatini DD . 1993 . Actin microﬁlaments play a critical role in endocytosis at the apical but not the basolateral surface of polarized epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 120 : 695 – 710 34 . Dai J , Sheetz MP . 1999 . Membrane tether formation from blebbing cells . Biophys . J . 77 : 3363 – 70 35 . Cureton DK , Massol RH , Saffarian S , Kirchhausen TL , Whelan SP . 2009 . Vesicular stomatitis virus enterscellsthroughvesiclesincompletelycoatedwithclathrin thatdependuponactinforinternalization . PLoS Pathog . 5 : e1000394 36 . CuretonDK , MassolRH , WhelanSP , KirchhausenT . 2010 . Thelengthofvesicularstomatitisviruspar - ticles dictates a need for actin assembly during clathrin - dependent endocytosis . PLoS Pathog . 6 : 1001127 37 . Collins A , Warrington A , Taylor KA , Svitkina T . 2011 . Structural organization of the actin cytoskeleton at sites of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Curr . Biol . 21 : 1167 – 75 680 Mooren · Galletta · Cooper A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2012 . 81 : 661 - 686 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D uk e U n i v e r s it y on 07 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BI81CH27 - Cooper ARI 9 May 2012 8 : 52 38 . Dhonukshe P , Aniento F , Hwang I , Robinson DG , Mravec J , et al . 2007 . Clathrin - mediated constitutive endocytosis of PIN auxin efﬂux carriers in Arabidopsis . Curr . Biol . 17 : 520 – 27 39 . Perez - Gomez J , Moore I . 2007 . Plant endocytosis : it is clathrin after all . Curr . Biol . 17 : R217 – 19 40 . Kitakura S , Vanneste S , Robert S , L¨ofke C , Teichmann T , et al . 2011 . Clathrin mediates endocytosis and polar distribution of PIN auxin transporters in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 23 : 1920 – 31 41 . Holstein SE . 2002 . Clathrin and plant endocytosis . Trafﬁc 3 : 614 – 20 42 . Baluska F , Hlavacka A , Samaj J , Palme K , Robinson DG , et al . 2002 . F - actin - dependent endocytosis of cell wall pectins in meristematic root cells . Insights from brefeldin A - induced compartments . Plant Physiol . 130 : 422 – 31 43 . Baluska F , Samaj J , Hlavacka A , Kendrick - Jones J , Volkmann D . 2004 . Actin - dependent ﬂuid - phase endocytosis in inner cortex cells of maize root apices . J . Exp . Bot . 55 : 463 – 73 44 . DhonuksheP , GrigorievI , FischerR , TominagaM , RobinsonDG , etal . 2008 . Auxintransportinhibitors impair vesicle motility and actin cytoskeleton dynamics in diverse eukaryotes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 : 4489 – 94 45 . Lisboa S , Scherer GE , Quader H . 2008 . Localized endocytosis in tobacco pollen tubes : visualisation and dynamics of membrane retrieval by a ﬂuorescent phospholipid . Plant Cell Rep . 27 : 21 – 28 46 . Eggenberger K , Mink C , Wadhwani P , Ulrich AS , Nick P . 2011 . Using the peptide BP100 as a cell - penetrating tool for the chemical engineering of actin ﬁlaments within living plant cells . ChemBioChem 12 : 132 – 37 47 . Samaj J , Baluska F , Voigt B , Schlicht M , Volkmann D , Menzel D . 2004 . Endocytosis , actin cytoskeleton , and signaling . Plant Physiol . 135 : 1150 – 61 48 . Rivero F . 2008 . Endocytosis and the actin cytoskeleton in Dictyostelium discoideum . Int . Rev . Cell Mol . Biol . 267 : 343 – 97 49 . Heinrich D , Youssef S , Schroth - Diez B , Engel U , Aydin D , et al . 2008 . Actin - cytoskeleton dynamics in non - monotonic cell spreading . Cell Adhes . Migr . 2 : 58 – 68 50 . Brady RJ , Damer CK , Heuser JE , O’Halloran TJ . 2010 . Regulation of Hip1r by epsin controls the temporal and spatial coupling of actin ﬁlaments to clathrin - coated pits . J . Cell Sci . 123 : 3652 – 61 51 . Veltman DM , Insall RH . 2010 . WASP family proteins : their evolution and its physiological implications . Mol . Biol . Cell 21 : 2880 – 93 52 . Boettner DR , Friesen H , Andrews B , Lemmon SK . 2011 . Clathrin light chain directs endocytosis by inﬂuencing the binding of the yeast Hip1R homologue , Sla2 , to F - actin . Mol . Biol . Cell 22 : 3699 – 714 53 . Le Clainche C , Pauly BS , Zhang CX , Engqvist - Goldstein AE , Cunningham K , Drubin DG . 2007 . A Hip1R - cortactin complex negatively regulates actin assembly associated with endocytosis . EMBO J . 26 : 1199 – 210 54 . KochubeyO , MajumdarA , KlingaufJ . 2006 . Imagingclathrindynamicsin Drosophila melanogaster hemo - cytes reveals a role for actin in vesicle ﬁssion . Trafﬁc 7 : 1614 – 27 55 . Fricke R , Gohl C , Dharmalingam E , Grevelh¨orster A , Zahedi B , et al . 2009 . Drosophila Cip4 / Toca - 1 integrates membrane trafﬁcking and actin dynamics through WASP and SCAR / WAVE . Curr . Biol . 19 : 1429 – 37 56 . Conibear E . 2010 . Converging views of endocytosis in yeast and mammals . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 22 : 513 – 18 57 . Liu J , Sun Y , Oster GF , Drubin DG . 2010 . Mechanochemical crosstalk during endocytic vesicle forma - tion . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 22 : 36 – 43 58 . Robertson AS , Smythe E , Ayscough KR . 2009 . Functions of actin in endocytosis . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 66 : 2049 – 65 59 . Girao H , Geli MI , Idrissi FZ . 2008 . Actin in the endocytic pathway : from yeast to mammals . FEBS Lett . 582 : 2112 – 19 60 . Idrissi FZ , Gr¨otsch H , Fern´andez - Golbano IM , Presciatto - Baschong C , Riezman H , Geli MI . 2008 . Distinct acto / myosin - I structures associate with endocytic proﬁles at the plasma membrane . J . Cell Biol . 180 : 1219 – 32 61 . YoungME , CooperJA , BridgmanPC . 2004 . Yeastactinpatchesarenetworksofbranchedactinﬁlaments . J . Cell Biol . 166 : 629 – 35 www . annualreviews . org • Actin and Endocytosis 681 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2012 . 81 : 661 - 686 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D uk e U n i v e r s it y on 07 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BI81CH27 - Cooper ARI 9 May 2012 8 : 52 62 . Winter D , Podtelejnikov AV , Mann M , Li R . 1997 . The complex containing actin - related proteins Arp2 and Arp3 is required for the motility and integrity of yeast actin patches . Curr . Biol . 7 : 519 – 29 63 . Martin AC , Xu XP , Rouiller I , Kaksonen M , Sun Y , et al . 2005 . Effects of Arp2 and Arp3 nucleotide - binding pocket mutations on Arp2 / 3 complex function . J . Cell Biol . 168 : 315 – 28 64 . RodalAA , SokolovaO , RobinsDB , DaughertyKM , HippenmeyerS , etal . 2005 . Conformationalchanges in the Arp2 / 3 complex leading to actin nucleation . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 12 : 26 – 31 65 . Wen KK , Rubenstein PA . 2005 . Acceleration of yeast actin polymerization by yeast Arp2 / 3 complex does not require an Arp2 / 3 - activating protein . J . Biol . Chem . 280 : 24168 – 74 66 . Li R . 1997 . Bee1 , a yeast protein with homology to Wiscott - Aldrich syndrome protein , is critical for the assembly of cortical actin cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 136 : 649 – 58 67 . Sun Y , Martin AC , Drubin DG . 2006 . Endocytic internalization in budding yeast requires coordinated actin nucleation and myosin motor activity . Dev . Cell 11 : 33 – 46 68 . Galletta BJ , Chuang DY , Cooper JA . 2008 . Distinct roles for Arp2 / 3 regulators in actin assembly and endocytosis . PLoS Biol . 6 : e1 69 . Reider A , Barker SL , Mishra SK , Im YJ , Maldonado - B´aez L , et al . 2009 . Syp1 is a conserved endocytic adaptor that contains domains involved in cargo selection and membrane tubulation . EMBO J . 28 : 3103 – 16 70 . Stimpson HE , Toret CP , Cheng AT , Pauly BS , Drubin DG . 2009 . Early - arriving Syp1p and Ede1p function in endocytic site placement and formation in budding yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 : 4640 – 51 71 . Boettner DR , D’Agostino JL , Torres OT , Daugherty - Clarke K , Uygur A , et al . 2009 . The F - BAR protein Syp1 negatively regulates WASp - Arp2 / 3 complex activity during endocytic patch formation . Curr . Biol . 19 : 1979 – 87 72 . Kaksonen M , Toret CP , Drubin DG . 2005 . A modular design for the clathrin - and actin - mediated endocytosis machinery . Cell 123 : 305 – 20 73 . Rodal AA , Manning AL , Goode BL , Drubin DG . 2003 . Negative regulation of yeast WASp by two SH3 domain - containing proteins . Curr . Biol . 13 : 1000 – 8 74 . Soulard A , Lechler T , Spiridonov V , Shevchenko A , Shevchenko A , et al . 2002 . Saccharomyces cerevisiae Bzz1pisimplicatedwithtypeImyosinsinactinpatchpolarizationandisabletorecruitactin - polymerizing machinery in vitro . Mol . Cell . Biol . 22 : 7889 – 906 75 . Gr¨otsch H , Giblin JP , Idrissi FZ , Fern´andez - Golbano IM , Collette JR , et al . 2010 . Calmodulin dissoci - ation regulates Myo5 recruitment and function at endocytic sites . EMBO J . 29 : 2899 – 914 76 . Sammons MR , James ML , Clayton JE , Sladewski TE , Sirotkin V , Lord M . 2011 . A calmodulin - related light chain from ﬁssion yeast that functions with myosin - I and PI 4 - kinase . J . Cell Sci . 124 : 2466 – 77 77 . Grosshans BL , Gr¨otsch H , Mukhopadhyay D , Fern´andez IM , Pfannstiel J , et al . 2006 . TEDS site phosphorylation of the yeast myosins I is required for ligand - induced but not for constitutive endocytosis of the G protein – coupled receptor Ste2p . J . Biol . Chem . 281 : 11104 – 14 78 . Toshima J , Toshima JY , Duncan MC , Cope MJ , Sun Y , et al . 2007 . Negative regulation of yeast Eps15 - like Arp2 / 3 complex activator , Pan1p , by the Hip1R - related protein , Sla2p , during endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 : 658 – 68 79 . Munn AL , Thanabalu T . 2009 . Verprolin : a cool set of actin - binding sites and some very HOT prolines . IUBMB Life 61 : 707 – 12 80 . RajmohanR , WongMH , MengL , MunnAL , ThanabaluT . 2009 . Las17p - Vrp1pbutnotLas17p - Arp2 / 3 interaction is important for actin patch polarization in yeast . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1793 : 825 – 35 81 . Wong MH , Meng L , Rajmohan R , Yu S , Thanabalu T . 2010 . Vrp1p - Las17p interaction is critical for actin patch polarization but is not essential for growth or ﬂuid phase endocytosis in S . cerevisiae . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1803 : 1332 – 46 82 . Thanabalu T , Rajmohan R , Meng L , Ren G , Vajjhala PR , Munn AL . 2007 . Verprolin function in endocytosis and actin organization . Roles of the Las17p ( yeast WASP ) - binding domain and a novel C - terminal actin - binding domain . FEBS J . 274 : 4103 – 25 83 . Basu R , Chang F . 2011 . Characterization of Dip1p reveals a switch in Arp2 / 3 - dependent actin assembly for ﬁssion yeast endocytosis . Curr . Biol . 21 : 905 – 16 84 . Okreglak V , Drubin DG . 2010 . Loss of Aip1 reveals a role in maintaining the actin monomer pool and an in vivo oligomer assembly pathway . J . Cell Biol . 188 : 769 – 77 682 Mooren · Galletta · Cooper A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2012 . 81 : 661 - 686 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D uk e U n i v e r s it y on 07 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BI81CH27 - Cooper ARI 9 May 2012 8 : 52 85 . Chang FS , Stefan CJ , Blumer KJ . 2003 . A WASp homolog powers actin polymerization - dependent motility of endosomes in vivo . Curr . Biol . 13 : 455 – 63 86 . Chang FS , Han GS , Carman GM , Blumer KJ . 2005 . A WASp - binding type II phosphatidylinositol 4 - kinase required for actin polymerization - driven endosome motility . J . Cell Biol . 171 : 133 – 42 87 . Brieher WM , Kueh HY , Ballif BA , Mitchison TJ . 2006 . Rapid actin monomer - insensitive depolymer - ization of Listeria actin comet tails by coﬁlin , coronin , and Aip1 . J . Cell Biol . 175 : 315 – 24 88 . Kueh HY , Charras GT , Mitchison TJ , Brieher WM . 2008 . Actin disassembly by coﬁlin , coronin , and Aip1 occurs in bursts and is inhibited by barbed - end cappers . J . Cell Biol . 182 : 341 – 53 89 . Okreglak V , Drubin DG . 2007 . Coﬁlin recruitment and function during actin - mediated endocytosis dictated by actin nucleotide state . J . Cell Biol . 178 : 1251 – 64 90 . Lin MC , Galletta BJ , Sept D , Cooper JA . 2010 . Overlapping and distinct functions for coﬁlin , coronin and Aip1 in actin dynamics in vivo . J . Cell Sci . 123 : 1329 – 42 91 . Taylor MJ , Perrais D , Merriﬁeld CJ . 2011 . A high precision survey of the molecular dynamics of mam - malian clathrin - mediated endocytosis . PLoS Biol . 9 : e1000604 92 . Gandhi M , Achard V , Blanchoin L , Goode BL . 2009 . Coronin switches roles in actin disassembly depending on the nucleotide state of actin . Mol . Cell 34 : 364 – 74 93 . Humphries CL , Balcer HI , D’Agostino JL , Winsor B , Drubin DG , et al . 2002 . Direct regulation of Arp2 / 3 complex activity and function by the actin binding protein coronin . J . Cell Biol . 159 : 993 – 1004 94 . Liu SL , Needham KM , May JR , Nolen BJ . 2011 . Mechanism of a concentration - dependent switch between activation and inhibition of Arp2 / 3 complex by coronin . J . Biol . Chem . 286 : 17039 – 46 95 . Skau CT , Kovar DR . 2010 . Fimbrin and tropomyosin competition regulates endocytosis and cytokinesis kinetics in ﬁssion yeast . Curr . Biol . 20 : 1415 – 22 96 . Skau CT , Courson DS , Bestul AJ , Winkelman JD , Rock RS , et al . 2011 . Actin ﬁlament bundling by ﬁm - brin is important for endocytosis , cytokinesis , and polarization in ﬁssion yeast . J . Biol . Chem . 286 : 26964 – 77 97 . Kubler E , Riezman H . 1993 . Actin and ﬁmbrin are required for the internalization step of endocytosis in yeast . EMBO J . 12 : 2855 – 62 98 . Adams AEM , Botstein D , Drubin DG . 1991 . Requirement of yeast ﬁmbrin for actin organization and morphogenesis in vivo . Nature 354 : 404 – 8 99 . Gheorghe DM , Aghamohammadzadeh S , Smaczynska - de Rooij II , Allwood EG , Winder SJ , Ayscough KR . 2008 . Interactions between the yeast SM22 homologue Scp1 and actin demonstrate the importance of actin bundling in endocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 283 : 15037 – 46 100 . Sirotkin V , Berro J , Macmillan K , Zhao L , Pollard TD . 2010 . Quantitative analysis of the mechanism of endocytic actin patch assembly and disassembly in ﬁssion yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell 21 : 2894 – 904 101 . Gandhi M , Smith BA , Bovellan M , Paavilainen V , Daugherty - Clarke K , et al . 2010 . GMF is a coﬁlin homolog that binds Arp2 / 3 complex to stimulate ﬁlament debranching and inhibit actin nucleation . Curr . Biol . 20 : 861 – 67 102 . Soulet F , Yarar D , Leonard M , Schmid SL . 2005 . SNX9 regulates dynamin assembly and is required for efﬁcient clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 : 2058 – 67 103 . Tsujita K , Suetsugu S , Sasaki N , Furutani M , Oikawa T , Takenawa T . 2006 . Coordination between the actin cytoskeleton and membrane deformation by a novel membrane tubulation domain of PCH proteins is involved in endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 172 : 269 – 79 104 . Loerke D , Mettlen M , Yarar D , Jaqaman K , Jaqaman H , et al . 2009 . Cargo and dynamin regulate clathrin - coated pit maturation . PLoS Biol . 7 : e57 105 . DoyonJB , ZeitlerB , ChengJ , ChengAT , CheroneJM , etal . 2011 . Rapidandefﬁcientclathrin - mediated endocytosis revealed in genome - edited mammalian cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 : 331 – 37 106 . Saarikangas J , Zhao H , Lappalainen P . 2010 . Regulation of the actin cytoskeleton - plasma membrane interplay by phosphoinositides . Physiol . Rev . 90 : 259 – 89 107 . Roberts - Galbraith RH , Gould KL . 2010 . Setting the F - BAR : functions and regulation of the F - BAR protein family . Cell Cycle 9 : 4091 – 97 108 . Suetsugu S . 2010 . The proposed functions of membrane curvatures mediated by the BAR domain su - perfamily proteins . J . Biochem . 148 : 1 – 12 www . annualreviews . org • Actin and Endocytosis 683 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2012 . 81 : 661 - 686 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D uk e U n i v e r s it y on 07 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BI81CH27 - Cooper ARI 9 May 2012 8 : 52 109 . Kessels MM , Qualmann B . 2006 . Syndapin oligomers interconnect the machineries for endocytic vesicle formation and actin polymerization . J . Biol . Chem . 281 : 13285 – 99 110 . Frost A , Unger VM , De Camilli P . 2009 . The BAR domain superfamily : membrane - molding macro - molecules . Cell 137 : 191 – 96 111 . Henne WM , Boucrot E , Meinecke M , Evergren E , Vallis Y , et al . 2010 . FCHo proteins are nucleators of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Science 328 : 1281 – 84 112 . SoulardA , FriantS , FittererC , OrangeC , KanevaG , etal . 2005 . TheWASP / Las17p - interactingprotein Bzz1p functions with Myo5p in an early stage of endocytosis . Protoplasma 226 : 89 – 101 113 . Takano K , Toyooka K , Suetsugu S . 2008 . EFC / F - BAR proteins and the N - WASP - WIP complex induce membrane curvature - dependent actin polymerization . EMBO J . 27 : 2817 – 28 114 . Ho HY , Rohatgi R , Lebensohn AM , Le M , Li J , et al . 2004 . Toca - 1 mediates Cdc42 - dependent actin nucleation by activating the N - WASP - WIP complex . Cell 118 : 203 – 16 115 . Kamioka Y , Fukuhara S , Sawa H , Nagashima K , Masuda M , et al . 2004 . A novel dynamin - associating molecule , formin - binding protein 17 , induces tubular membrane invaginations and participates in en - docytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 279 : 40091 – 99 116 . Slepnev VI , Ochoa GC , Butler MH , De Camilli P . 2000 . Tandem arrangement of the clathrin and AP - 2 binding domains in amphiphysin 1 and disruption of clathrin coat function by amphiphysin fragments comprising these sites . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 17583 – 89 117 . Lundmark R , Carlsson SR . 2003 . Sorting nexin 9 participates in clathrin - mediated endocytosis through interactions with the core components . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 46772 – 81 118 . Salazar MA , Kwiatkowski AV , Pellegrini L , Cestra G , Butler MH , et al . 2003 . Tuba , a novel protein containing Bin / amphiphysin / Rvs and Dbl homology domains , links dynamin to regulation of the actin cytoskeleton . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 49031 – 43 119 . Lee E , Marcucci M , Daniell L , Pypaert M , Weisz OA , et al . 2002 . Amphiphysin 2 ( Bin1 ) and T - tubule biogenesis in muscle . Science 297 : 1193 – 96 120 . Chang - Ileto B , Frere SG , Chan RB , Voronov SV , Roux A , Di Paolo G . 2011 . Synaptojanin 1 - mediated PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 hydrolysis is modulated by membrane curvature and facilitates membrane ﬁssion . Dev . Cell 20 : 206 – 18 121 . Suetsugu S , Toyooka K , Senju Y . 2010 . Subcellular membrane curvature mediated by the BAR domain superfamily proteins . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 21 : 340 – 49 122 . Slepnev VI , De Camilli P . 2000 . Accessory factors in clathrin - dependent synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 1 : 161 – 72 123 . ColwillK , FieldD , MooreL , FriesenJ , AndrewsB . 1999 . InvivoanalysisofthedomainsofyeastRvs167p suggests Rvs167p function is mediated through multiple protein interactions . Genetics 152 : 881 – 93 124 . Yarar D , Waterman - Storer CM , Schmid SL . 2007 . SNX9 couples actin assembly to phosphoinositide signals and is required for membrane remodeling during endocytosis . Dev . Cell 13 : 43 – 56 125 . Rocca DL , Martin S , Jenkins EL , Hanley JG . 2008 . Inhibition of Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin polymerization by PICK1 regulates neuronal morphology and AMPA receptor endocytosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 : 259 – 71 126 . Lim KB , Bu W , Goh WI , Koh E , Ong SH , et al . 2008 . The Cdc42 effector IRSp53 generates ﬁlopodia by coupling membrane protrusion with actin dynamics . J . Biol . Chem . 283 : 20454 – 72 127 . Miki H , Yamaguchi H , Suetsugu S , Takenawa T . 2000 . IRSp53 is an essential intermediate between Rac and WAVE in the regulation of membrane rufﬂing . Nature 408 : 732 – 35 128 . Krugmann S , Jordens I , Gevaert K , Driessens M , Vandekerckhove J , Hall A . 2001 . Cdc42 induces ﬁlopodia by promoting the formation of an IRSp53 : Mena complex . Curr . Biol . 11 : 1645 – 55 129 . Fujiwara T , Mammoto A , Kim Y , Takai Y . 2000 . Rho small G - protein - dependent binding of mDia to an Src homology 3 domain - containing IRSp53 / BAIAP2 . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 271 : 626 – 29 130 . Lin J , Liu J , Wang Y , Zhu J , Zhou K , et al . 2005 . Differential regulation of cortactin and N - WASP - mediated actin polymerization by missing in metastasis ( MIM ) protein . Oncogene 24 : 2059 – 66 131 . Mattila PK , Salminen M , Yamashiro T , Lappalainen P . 2003 . Mouse MIM , a tissue - speciﬁc regulator of cytoskeletal dynamics , interacts with ATP - actin monomers through its C - terminal WH2 domain . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 8452 – 59 132 . Woodings JA , Sharp SJ , Machesky LM . 2003 . MIM - B , a putative metastasis suppressor protein , binds to actin and to protein tyrosine phosphatase delta . Biochem . J . 371 : 463 – 71 684 Mooren · Galletta · Cooper A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2012 . 81 : 661 - 686 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D uk e U n i v e r s it y on 07 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BI81CH27 - Cooper ARI 9 May 2012 8 : 52 133 . Yu D , Zhan XH , Niu S , Mikhailenko I , Strickland DK , et al . 2011 . Murine missing in metastasis ( MIM ) mediates cell polarity and regulates the motility response to growth factors . PLoS ONE 6 : e20845 134 . Quinones GA , Jin J , Oro AE . 2010 . I - BAR protein antagonism of endocytosis mediates directional sensing during guided cell migration . J . Cell Biol . 189 : 353 – 67 135 . VeltmanDM , AucielloG , SpenceHJ , MacheskyLM , RappoportJZ , InsallRH . 2011 . Functionalanalysis of Dictyostelium IBARarevealsaconservedroleoftheI - BARdomaininendocytosis . Biochem . J . 436 : 45 – 52 136 . Mettlen M , Pucadyil T , Ramachandran R , Schmid SL . 2009 . Dissecting dynamin’s role in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 37 : 1022 – 26 137 . Ramachandran R . 2011 . Vesicle scission : dynamin . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 22 : 10 – 17 138 . Schafer DA . 2004 . Regulating actin dynamics at membranes : a focus on dynamin . Trafﬁc 5 : 463 – 69 139 . Krendel M , Osterweil EK , Mooseker MS . 2007 . Myosin 1E interacts with synaptojanin - 1 and dynamin and is involved in endocytosis . FEBS Lett . 581 : 644 – 50 140 . Gu C , Yaddanapudi S , Weins A , Osborn T , Reiser J , et al . 2010 . Direct dynamin - actin interactions regulate the actin cytoskeleton . EMBO J . 29 : 3593 – 606 141 . Mooren OL , Kotova TI , Moore AJ , Schafer DA . 2009 . Dynamin2 GTPase and cortactin remodel actin ﬁlaments . J . Biol . Chem . 284 : 23995 – 4005 142 . Lamaze C , Fujimoto LM , Yin HL , Schmid SL . 1997 . The actin cytoskeleton is required for receptor - mediated endocytosis in mammalian cells . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 20332 – 35 143 . Yu X , Cai M . 2004 . The yeast dynamin - related GTPase Vps1p functions in the organization of the actin cytoskeleton via interaction with Sla1p . J . Cell Sci . 117 : 3839 – 53 144 . Smaczynska - deRooijII , AllwoodEG , AghamohammadzadehS , HettemaEH , GoldbergMW , Ayscough KR . 2010 . A role forthe dynamin - like protein Vps1during endocytosisin yeast . J . Cell Sci . 123 : 3496 – 506 145 . Nannapaneni S , Wang D , Jain S , Schroeder B , Highﬁll C , et al . 2010 . The yeast dynamin - like protein Vps1 : vps1 mutations perturb the internalization and the motility of endocytic vesicles and endosomes via disorganization of the actin cytoskeleton . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 89 : 499 – 508 146 . Kukulski W , Schorb M , Welsch S , Picco A , Kaksonen M , Briggs JA . 2011 . Correlated ﬂuorescence and 3D electron microscopy with high sensitivity and spatial precision . J . Cell Biol . 192 : 111 – 19 147 . Youn JY , Friesen H , Kishimoto T , Henne WM , Kurat CF , et al . 2010 . Dissecting BAR domain function in the yeast amphiphysins Rvs161 and Rvs167 during endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 21 : 3054 – 69 148 . RingstadN , NemotoY , DeCamilliP . 1997 . TheSH3p4 / Sh3p8 / SH3p13proteinfamily : bindingpartners forsynaptojaninanddynaminviaaGrb2 - likeSrchomology3domain . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 : 8569 – 74 149 . Ringstad N , Gad H , Low P , Di Paolo G , Brodin L , et al . 1999 . Endophilin / SH3p4 is required for the transition from early to late stages in clathrin - mediated synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Neuron 24 : 143 – 54 150 . David C , McPherson PS , Mundigl O , de Camilli P . 1996 . A role of amphiphysin in synaptic vesicle endocytosis suggested by its binding to dynamin in nerve terminals . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 93 : 331 – 35 151 . Ramjaun AR , Micheva KD , Bouchelet I , McPherson PS . 1997 . Identiﬁcation and characterization of a nerve terminal - enriched amphiphysin isoform . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 16700 – 6 152 . Perera RM , Zoncu R , Lucast L , De Camilli P , Toomre D . 2006 . Two synaptojanin 1 isoforms are recruited to clathrin - coated pits at different stages . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 : 19332 – 37 153 . Liu J , Kaksonen M , Drubin DG , Oster G . 2006 . Endocytic vesicle scission by lipid phase boundary forces . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 : 10277 – 82 154 . LiuJ , SunY , DrubinDG , OsterGF . 2009 . Themechanochemistryofendocytosis . PLoSBiol . 7 : e1000204 155 . BerroJ , SirotkinV , PollardTD . 2010 . Mathematical modelingofendocyticactinpatchkineticsinﬁssion yeast : disassembly requires release of actin ﬁlament fragments . Mol . Biol . Cell 21 : 2905 – 15 156 . Ti SC , Pollard TD . 2011 . Puriﬁcation of actin from ﬁssion yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe and charac - terization of functional differences from muscle actin . J . Biol . Chem . 286 : 5784 – 92 157 . McConnell RE , Tyska MJ . 2010 . Leveraging the membrane - cytoskeleton interface with myosin - 1 . Trends Cell Biol . 20 : 418 – 26 158 . Collaco A , Jakab R , Hegan P , Mooseker M , Ameen N . 2010 . Alpha - AP - 2 directs myosin VI - dependent endocytosis of cystic ﬁbrosis transmembrane conductance regulator chloride channels in the intestine . J . Biol . Chem . 285 : 17177 – 87 www . annualreviews . org • Actin and Endocytosis 685 A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2012 . 81 : 661 - 686 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D uk e U n i v e r s it y on 07 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BI81CH27 - Cooper ARI 9 May 2012 8 : 52 159 . Gotoh N , Yan Q , Du Z , Biemesderfer D , Kashgarian M , et al . 2010 . Altered renal proximal tubular endocytosis and histology in mice lacking myosin - VI . Cytoskeleton 67 : 178 – 92 160 . Kaksonen M , Toret CP , Drubin DG . 2006 . Harnessing actin dynamics for clathrin - mediated endocy - tosis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 6 : 404 – 14 161 . Merriﬁeld CJ . 2004 . Seeing is believing : imaging actin dynamics at single sites of endocytosis . Trends Cell Biol . 14 : 352 – 58 162 . Suetsugu S . 2009 . The direction of actin polymerization for vesicle ﬁssion suggested from membranes tubulated by the EFC / F - BAR domain protein FBP17 . FEBS Lett . 583 : 3401 – 4 RELATED RESOURCES Cell Migr . Consort . 2011 . Cell Migration Gateway . http : / / www . cellmigration . org / Sci . Signal . 2011 . Database of Cell Signaling . http : / / stke . sciencemag . org / cm / H . T . McMahon home page . 2011 . Researching Endocytic Mechanisms . http : / / www . endocytosis . org / 686 Mooren · Galletta · Cooper A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2012 . 81 : 661 - 686 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D uk e U n i v e r s it y on 07 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BI81 - FrontMatter ARI 9 May 2012 7 : 26 Annual Review of Biochemistry Volume 81 , 2012 Contents Preface Preface and Dedication to Christian R . H . Raetz JoAnne Stubbe (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) xi Prefatories A Mitochondrial Odyssey Walter Neupert (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 1 The Fires of Life Gottfried Schatz (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 34 Chromatin , Epigenetics , and Transcription Theme Introduction to Theme “Chromatin , Epigenetics , and Transcription” Joan W . Conaway (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 61 The COMPASS Family of Histone H3K4 Methylases : Mechanisms of Regulation in Development and Disease Pathogenesis Ali Shilatifard (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 65 Programming of DNA Methylation Patterns Howard Cedar and Yehudit Bergman (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 97 RNA Polymerase II Elongation Control Qiang Zhou , Tiandao Li , and David H . Price (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 119 Genome Regulation by Long Noncoding RNAs John L . Rinn and Howard Y . Chang (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 145 Protein Tagging Theme The Ubiquitin System , an Immense Realm Alexander Varshavsky (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 167 Ubiquitin and Proteasomes in Transcription Fuqiang Geng , Sabine Wenzel , and William P . Tansey (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 177 v A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2012 . 81 : 661 - 686 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D uk e U n i v e r s it y on 07 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BI81 - FrontMatter ARI 9 May 2012 7 : 26 The Ubiquitin Code David Komander and Michael Rape (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 203 Ubiquitin and Membrane Protein Turnover : From Cradle to Grave Jason A . MacGurn , Pi - Chiang Hsu , and Scott D . Emr (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 231 The N - End Rule Pathway Takafumi Tasaki , Shashikanth M . Sriram , Kyong Soo Park , and Yong Tae Kwon (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 261 Ubiquitin - Binding Proteins : Decoders of Ubiquitin - Mediated Cellular Functions Koraljka Husnjak and Ivan Dikic (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 291 Ubiquitin - Like Proteins Annemarthe G . van der Veen and Hidde L . Ploegh (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 323 Recent Advances in Biochemistry Toward the Single - Hour High - Quality Genome Patrik L . Sta˚hl and Joakim Lundeberg (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 359 Mass Spectrometry – Based Proteomics and Network Biology Ariel Bensimon , Albert J . R . Heck , and Ruedi Aebersold (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 379 Membrane Fission : The Biogenesis of Transport Carriers Felix Campelo and Vivek Malhotra (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 407 Emerging Paradigms for Complex Iron - Sulfur Cofactor Assembly and Insertion John W . Peters and Joan B . Broderick (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 429 Structural Perspective of Peptidoglycan Biosynthesis and Assembly Andrew L . Lovering , Susan S . Safadi , and Natalie C . J . Strynadka (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 451 Discovery , Biosynthesis , and Engineering of Lantipeptides Patrick J . Knerr and Wilfred A . van der Donk (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 479 Regulation of Glucose Transporter Translocation in Health and Diabetes Jonathan S . Bogan (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 507 Structure and Regulation of Soluble Guanylate Cyclase Emily R . Derbyshire and Michael A . Marletta (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 533 The MPS1 Family of Protein Kinases Xuedong Liu and Mark Winey (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 561 The Structural Basis for Control of Eukaryotic Protein Kinases Jane A . Endicott , Martin E . M . Noble , and Louise N . Johnson (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 587 vi Contents A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2012 . 81 : 661 - 686 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D uk e U n i v e r s it y on 07 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . BI81 - FrontMatter ARI 9 May 2012 7 : 26 Measurements and Implications of the Membrane Dipole Potential Liguo Wang (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 615 GTPase Networks in Membrane Trafﬁc Emi Mizuno - Yamasaki , Felix Rivera - Molina , and Peter Novick (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 637 Roles for Actin Assembly in Endocytosis Olivia L . Mooren , Brian J . Galletta , and John A . Cooper (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 661 Lipid Droplets and Cellular Lipid Metabolism Tobias C . Walther and Robert V . Farese Jr . (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 687 Adipogenesis : From Stem Cell to Adipocyte Qi Qun Tang and M . Daniel Lane (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 715 Pluripotency and Nuclear Reprogramming Marion Dejosez and Thomas P . Zwaka (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 737 Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress and Type 2 Diabetes Sung Hoon Back and Randal J . Kaufman (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 767 Structure Uniﬁes the Viral Universe Nicola G . A . Abrescia , Dennis H . Bamford , Jonathan M . Grimes , and David I . Stuart (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 795 Indexes Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors , Volumes 77 – 81 (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 823 Cumulative Index of Chapter Titles , Volumes 77 – 81 (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 827 Errata An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Biochemistry articles may be found at http : / / biochem . annualreviews . org / errata . shtml Contents vii A nnu . R e v . B i o c h e m . 2012 . 81 : 661 - 686 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D uk e U n i v e r s it y on 07 / 07 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y .