R E V I E W A R T I C L E Keeping the focus on biophysics and actin filaments in Nagoya : A report of the 2016 “ now in actin ” symposium Ikuko Fujiwara 1 | Akihiro Narita 2 1 Frontier Research Institute for Materials Science , Nagoya Institute of Technology , Gokiso , Showa - ku , Nagoya 466 - 8555 , Japan 2 Structural Biology Research Center and Division of Biological Sciences , Graduate School of Science , Nagoya University , Furo - cho , Nagoya 464 - 8601 , Japan Correspondence Ikuko Fujiwara , Frontier Research Institute for Materials Science , Nagoya Institute of Technology , Gokiso , Showa - ku , Nagoya 466 - 8555 , Japan . Email : fujiwara . ikuko @ nitech . ac . jp Funding information Integrative Graduate Education and Research Program in Green Natural Sciences ( IGER ) program , Nagoya University , Japan . Abstract Regulatory systems in living cells are highly organized , enabling cells to response to various changes in their environments . Actin polymerization and depolymerization are crucial to establish cytoskeletal networks to maintain muscle contraction , cell motility , cell division , adhesion , orga - nism development and more . To share and promote the biophysical understanding of such mechanisms in living creatures , the “ Now in Actin Study : - Motor protein research reaching a new stage - ” symposium was organized at Nagoya University , Japan on 12 and 13 , December 2016 . The organizers invited emeritus professor of Nagoya and Osaka Universities Fumio Oosawa and leading scientists worldwide as keynote speakers , in addition to poster presentations on cell motil - ity studies by many researchers . Studies employing various biophysical , biochemical , cell and molecular biological and mathematical approaches provided the latest understanding of mecha - nisms of cell motility functions driven by actin , microtubules , actin - binding proteins , and other motor proteins . KEYWORDS actin , actin binding proteins , cell cytoskeleton and cellular motilities , meeting summary , Nagoya 1 | INTRODUCTION For over 70 years , countless biophysical research studies have been employed to elucidate life processes from the atomic level to the size of cells and larger using the methods and concepts of physics . Actin - based cellular processes have been a major research target for such approaches . The field has been highly influenced by the approach of Fumio Oosawa and his collaborators whose detailed focus on the investigation of actin biophysics at the bulk , filament and atomistic level continues to inspire the research of a large community ( see accompanying article by Thomas Pollard ) . Polymerization of actin is essential to maintain cellular functions . The self - assembly of actin from monomer to polymer was theoretically demonstrated as a fibrous con - densation ( Oosawa , Asakura , Hotta , & Ooi , 1959 ) . The theory of nucle - ation and elongation of actin polymerization was summarized in Thermodynamics of the Polymerization of Protein ( Oosawa and Asakura , 1975 ) . This theory was experimentally proven by using purified actin , such as monitoring pyrene - labeled actin polymerization ( Kouyama and Mihashi , 1981 ) , and the direct observation of the growth of actin fila - ments by electron microscopy ( Pollard , 1986 ) . Later individual filaments were observed in real time by total internal reflection fluorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy ( Fujiwara , Takahashi , Tadakuma , Funatsu , & Ishiwata , 2002 ; Kuhn and Pollard , 2005 ) . Nowadays , these approaches are com - monly used to assess regulatory mechanisms of actin polymerization with actin binding proteins . Those biochemical and biophysical studies let to a model of actin dynamics in cell protrusions ( Pollard , Blanchoin , & Mullins , 2001 ) . The model has been verified and describes that actin monomers associate to the barbed end of actin filaments that are fac - ing the leading edge of the cell . In addition to the WASP / Scar family of proteins , biophysical actin research has discovered various nucleation promotion factors ( NPFs ) and their regulatory mechanisms that modu - late actin nucleation and polymerization acceleration at the elongating of barbed ends of filaments . More recently formins , Ena / VASP and CARMILs were also found as factors that connect the barbed ends of actin filaments to the leading edges of cells . These factors regulate actin polymerization in a narrow zone beneath the cell membrane to enable cell motility ( Barzik , McClain , Gupton , & Gertler , 2014 ; Fujiwara , Remmert , Piszczek , & Hammer , 2014 ; Hansen and Mullins , 2010 ; Kovar and Pollard , 2004 ] . The coordination of actin assembly , has recently been confirmed by negative EM that all barbed - ends of actin Cytoskeleton . 2017 ; 1 – 15 . wileyonlinelibrary . com / journal / cm V C 2017 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . | 1 Received : 29 May 2017 | Revised : 20 June 2017 | Accepted : 21 June 2017 DOI : 10 . 1002 / cm . 21384 filaments face the cell membrane , and the other end are attached to the side of other actin filaments by the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Narita et al . , 2012 ; Vinzenz et al . , 2012 ) ( Figure 1 ) . Biophysical research studies , following similar methodological approaches ( some by Oosawa ’ s trainees ) , also revealed mechanisms of motor proteins such as : biased Brownian motion of myosin ( Kitamura , Tokunaga , Iwane , & Yanagida , 1999 ) ; bacteria flagella motor and flag - ella formation ( Yonekura , Maki - Yonekura , & Namba , 2003 , 2005 ) ; and F - 1 ATPase rotation ( Noji , Yasuda , Yoshida , & Kinosita , 1997 ) . By com - bining molecular biology and developing detection technologies , bio - physical research approaches are being applied to understand the binding and regulatory mechanisms of proteins , signal transduction and an ever expanding range of cellular functions . This review highlights the research presented in talks at the symposium “ Now in actin study : Motor protein research reaching a new stage ” that took place in Nagoya , Japan , from 12th to 13th of December , 2016 . We had 131 attendees worldwide , 22 oral presentations and 33 poster presenta - tions ( Oosawa , invited overseas speakers and attendees are shown in Figure 6 ) . The symposium stimulated many scientific discussions by world leading scientists . This review article highlights the research pre - sented in many of the oral presentations , grouped into the following topics : ( i ) Actin thermodynamics , ( ii ) Structure of actin , flagellin and bacterial actin homologs , ( iii ) Actin filaments acting as tension sensors and regulatory binding proteins , ( iv ) Microtubules , another essential polymorphic in cells , ( v ) Actin dynamics in cellular motility . This broad subject matter that covered a wide range of points of view provided lively discussions of the novel cellular regulatory roles of actin . 2 | BODY 2 . 1 | Actin thermodynamics Some proteins have an ability to self assemble to form polymers that are involved in cellular functions . Actin is one of these proteins and has been extensively studied for over 70 years , since Straub published his purification protocol in 1942 ( Straub , 1942 ) . In the Now in Actin Study symposium , Fumio Oosawa ( Nagoya University , Japan ) encouraged more research to understand the transi - tion from G - to F - actin and to decipher the thermodynamics of actin polymerization . Nagoya University is recognized worldwide for its past and ongoing contribution to this basic line of actin investigation . Almost nothing was known about actin thermodynamics and kinetics when Oosawa started his work with actin as a physicist who had at that time proposed the well - known Asakura - Oosawa force ( a discovery that , he remembered , took a while to be recognized ) ( Asakura and Oosawa 1954 ; Oosawa and Asakura , 1975 ) . Oosawa reviewed the early evidence for the G - to F - transition above a critical concentration in experiments of actin polymerization at temperatures from 0 to 20 8 C ( Asakura , Kasai & Oosawa , 1960 ) . The temperature dependence of the critical concentration supported Oosawa ’ s seminal theory of actin poly - merization as a condensation phenomenon in which the critical con - centration is inversely proportional to temperature . This measured data led the understanding of the theoretical relation of G - or F - actin over total actin concentrations ( edited by Stracher , 1983 ) ( Figure 2 ) . Another milestone was the visualization of the motion of individual actin fila - ments that demonstrated their physical characteristics as semi - flexible polymers , probably viewed for the first time in Nagoya by Honda , Nagashima , & Asakura in 1986 ( Honda , Nagashima , & Asakura , 1986 ) . Two unforgettable phenomena for Oosawa are how an actin bundle can form a ring by self - annealing its ends ( Higashi - Fujime , 1980 ) and how Heavy mero - myosin ( HMM ) changes the rigidity of actin filaments and causes fragmentation under certain conditions ( Tawada and Oosawa , 1969 ) . To understand the physical basis of the latter phenom - enon , Tawada and Oosawa described the directional and rotational properties of side chains of actin subunits in a filament as essential . Indeed , the side chains in the actin - myosin interface has been visual - ized by recent cryo electron microscopy at 3 . 9 Å resolution ( von der Ecken , Heissler , Pathan - Chhatbar , Manstein , & Raunser , 2016 ) , although higher resolution is required to full understanding of the side chain effects . Oosawa expected that important aspects of the mecha - nisms by which actin regulatory factors change the thermodynamics of actin polymerization are revealed at the structural level . However , while the structure of the actin monomer has been determined and updated many times since first determined by Kabsch et al . in 1990 ( Kabsch , Mannherz , Suck , Pai , & Holmes , 1990 ) ( Figure 3 ) , important FIGURE 1 An electron tomography image of actin cytoskeletons in the region of the lamellipodium network was prepared from Swiss 3T3 cells that were extracted with Triton X - 100 . Cells were fixed in glutaraldehyde and negatively stained with sodium silico - tungstate . Cyan tubes , cyan spheres and yellow isosurfaces repre - sents traces of the actin filaments , barbed ends of the traced actin filaments and Arp2 / 3 complexes , respectively ( see Narita et al . , 2012 ; Vinzenz et al . , 2012 ) . Polarity and orientation of each fila - ment were determined by correlating with the averaged structure of actin filaments in tomograms . The barbed ends of actin filaments face towards the cell membrane and pointed ends of many actin filaments are connected to the branched points with the Arp2 / 3 complex . Scale bar 5 100 nm [ Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary . com ] 2 | FUJIWARA AND NARITA information on the filamentous structure related to actin polymeriza - tion and ATP hydrolysis is still missing . Significant progress was achieved by recent studies . Murakami et al . ( 2010 ) and von der Ecken et al . ( 2015 ) showed step - by - step structural changes of actin subunits as they polymerize . These results revealed that the conformational change is greater at the pointed end than the barbed end . This finding is in good agreement with reports showing that G - actin monomers flat - ten by rotation between two major domains when incorporated into filaments ( Fujii , Iwane , Yanagida , & Namba , 2010 ; Oda , Iwasa , Aihara , Ma (cid:1) eda , & Narita , 2009 ; von der Ecken et al . , 2016 ) . Later , Oosawa commented that he has been interested in intramolecular movements of G - actin such as side chain rotations of amino acids in a range of temperature , while this information cannot be obtained with current technologies . Deciphering local thermal ratchets and fluctuations gen - erated from side chain motions will open a novel and unique window of biophysical research of actin . Oosawa foresees the discovery of “ unexpected ” mechanisms of how living creatures naturally utilize ther - mal energy . Dimitrios Vavylonis ( Lehigh University , USA ) presented theoretical work by his group on two basic aspects of actin polymerization and actin contractile ring formation . First he argued how weak affinity and fast release of phosphate from the pointed end of the actin filament , together with slower association of ATP - actin to ADP - actin at pointed ends ( Fujiwara , Vavylonis , & Pollard , 2007 ) can be the basis for the dif - ference in the critical concentrations between the barbed and pointed ends . This difference enables the acceleration of actin turnover in the presence of depolymerization , severing , and capping , consistently with detailed balance in equilibrium . Prior controversies regarding coupling of profilin to ATP - hydrolysis may be related to the critical concentra - tion of ATP - actin ( ratio of ATP - actin off and on rate constants ) being smaller than the critical concentration of the barbed end , the value of which includes the effects of ATP hydrolysis . Vavylonis also discussed the mechanism of actin ring formation under spherical confinement and crosslinking ( Honda , Takiguchi , Ishikawa , & Hotani , 1999 ; Miyata and Kinosita , 1994 ; Miyazaki , Chiba , Eguchi , Ohki , & Ishiwata , 2015 ; Tsai and Koenderink , 2015 ) . Using Brownian dynamics simulations , he presented phase diagraphs showing actin ring phases between disor - ganized and collapsed phases and described their dependence on fila - ment length , persistence length , and actin concentration . Applying the model for different confining radii provided a decreasing probability of ring formation , similar to recent experimental data ( Miyazaki et al . , 2015 ) . Vavylonis ’ s theoretical approaches revealed properties of the actin cytoskeleton under physiological conditions at the level of actin molecules and actin filaments . Makoto Suzuki ( Tohoku University , Japan ) focused on the physical driving force of actomyosin motility through understanding the hydra - tion state of actin filaments and in particular the importance of hyper - mobile water ( HMW ) . Theoretical research on the state of HMW answered how the interaction energies between water - water and water - ion are distributed spatially around an ion including a charged protein ( Kinoshita and Suzuki , 2009 ; Mogami , Suzuki , & Matubayasi , 2016 ) . By precision microwave Dielectric Relaxation ( DR ) spectros - copy , Suzuki et al . found that water surrounding actin filaments con - sists of restrained water , HMW and bulk water ( Kabir , Yokoyama , Mihashi , Kodama , & Suzuki , 2003 ) . Lately , the existence of HMW FIGURE 2 The specific feature of the polymerization of actin as a condensation phenomenon . ( a ) The experimental relation between the degree of flow birefringence ( D n ) ( dependent on concentration of F - actin ) and the total actin concentration ( C 0 ) at various temperatures . Actin concentration , 3 . 4 mg mL 2 1 ; 0 . 4 mM MgCl 2 ; 7 . 5 mM veronal - HCl buffer of pH 8 . 3 ; 0 . 75 mM ATP . 1 . 20 8 C ; 2 , 6 8 C ; 3 , 0 8 C . ( b ) The theoretical relation between the concentrations of G - or F - actin and the total actin concentration The critical con - centration of actin polymerization is inversely proportional to tem - perature . This experiment supported Oosawa ’ s theory of actin polymerization as a condensation phenomenon . Reprinted with permission from Oosawa , F . Muscle and nonmuscle motility , Vol . 1 , Chapter 3 , edited by Stracher ( 1983 ) FIGURE 3 Atomic structure of G - actin ( DNase I complex ) . The main chains of the structure are well determined , and have not been dramatically changed up to present . Reprinted with permis - sion from Figure 1b of Kabsch et al . , 1990 . Nature 347 : 37 – 44 FUJIWARA AND NARITA | 3 around actin filaments was supported by studies using NMR ( Wazawa et al . , 2011 ) and quasi - elastic neutron scattering ( Matsuo et al . , 2016 ) . While HMW was not detected around isolated myosin S1 ( M ) , DR spectroscopy showed that actin filaments ( A ) bound with myosin S1 ( M ) which nucleotide state is ADP ( A . M . ADP ) had a higher fraction of HMW compared to actin filaments only , reflecting a change in the hydration state of actin filaments by M ( Suzuki et al . , 2004 ) . On the other hand , actin filaments bound to myosin S1 which nucleotide is AMPPNP ( A . M . AMPPNP ) have 65 % less HMW compared to A . M . ADP . These complexes can be regarded as the states before and after the force generation . Moreover , other data from Suzuki ’ s laboratory imply that divalent cations , Mg 2 1 or Ca 2 1 , influence the electrostatic potential field around actin filaments , changing the hydration state as far as 3 or 4 water layers ( Suzuki et al . , 2016 ) . The number of HMW molecule is roughly equivalent with the volume between the electro - static equipotential surface of – kT / 2 e and the first - water - layer surface of actin filaments , where the electric field strength is in the range of 10 7 2 10 8 V m 2 1 and sufficient to produce HMW around actin fila - ments , by solving the Poisson – Boltzmann equation . Suzuki ’ s approach suggests that water molecules significantly affect the cooperativity of protein binding and translocation along cytoskeletal filaments . Suzuki has proposed the driving force hypothesis for actomyosin motility whereby the difference in the radial electric field strength in the range 10 7 2 10 8 V m 2 1 along actin filaments generates the different water field to cause a gradient of hydration free energy of myosin S1 along the actin filament to drive the myosin motion . Consistent with this idea , Suzuki showed an estimation that the driving force can be as high as several pico newtons per myosin head which is the experimen - tally observed force , based on a MD calculation of the hydration free energy of a small organic molecule with / without high electric field . Force generation by myosin is generally believed to be driven by the swinging motion of the myosin lever arm , but most convincing pieces of evidence for the swinging lever arm model were obtained with the slow and processive myosin V . It is possible that fast and nonproces - sive myosins such as myosin II utilize an additional mechanism for force generation , such as that proposed by Suzuki . Ikuko Fujiwara ( Nagoya Institute of Technology , Japan ) explained how Latrunculin - A ( LatA ) promotes actin depolymerization . LatA is a toxin from the red sea sponge Latrunculia magnifica . This reagent has been used widely to destabilize actin filaments in cells . Previous research demonstrated that LatA binds to actin monomers , and actin monomers with bound LatA cannot contribute to actin polymerization ( i . e . , sequestration ) ( Ayscough et al . , 1997 ; Cou (cid:1) e , Brenner , Spector , & Korn , 1987 ) . A crystal structure of actin monomer with bound LatA ( Morton , Ayscough , & McLaughlin , 2000 ) , showed LatA binds near ATP in the central cleft . Fujiwara ’ s question was if the actin monomer seques - tration can explain the rapid destabilization of actin filaments in a cell within a short time frame of 2 – 5 min ( Ayscough et al . , 1997 ) . To answer this question , the depolymerization and polymerization of single actin fil - aments were observed on a TIRF microscopy . Surprisingly , LatA acceler - ated the depolymerization of both ends of filaments that were freshly assembled from ATP - actin monomers , indicating that LatA also binds to actin filaments . At high LatA concentrations the rate of actin depolymer - ization was saturated at the same rate as ADP - actin . A few severing events were observed at very high concentrations of LatA ( Figure 4 arrowhead ) , but no actin filaments vanished rapidly due to random sever - ing . This suggests that LatA mainly affects subunits near the ends of actin filaments . LatA did not change the depolymerization rate of ADP - actin in the absence or presence of millimolar concentrations of phosphate ( P i ) . Fujiwara suggested that LatA may not be able to accelerate the depoly - merization rate above the intrinsic rates of actin depolymerization . Although P i slows the rate of depolymerization of ADP - actin filaments , LatA does not accelerate the release of P i after the polymerization of ATP - actin using 2 - amino - 6 - mercapto - 7 - methyl purine riboside - phosphorylase ( MESG ) assay [ Blanchoin and Pollard , 1999 ; Melki , Fievez , & Carlier , 1996 ] . Fujiwara suggested that binding of LatA may only accel - erate P i release from actin subunits at the ends of filaments . TIRF obser - vations also showed that the bound nucleotide strongly influences LatA binding to actin monomers , with estimated K d s 0 . 1 l M for ATP - actin , 0 . 4 l M for ADP - P i - actin and 4 . 7 l M for ADP - actin monomers . LatA binds with higher affinity to all these states of actin monomers than actin fila - ments and monomers . Fujiwara concluded that LatA rapidly depolymer - izes actin in living cells by sequestering actin monomers and accelerating the actin depolymerization rate to the level of ADP - actin . 2 . 2 | Structure of actin , flagellin , and bacterial actin homologs Structure determination is indispensable for understanding functions of the actin filament . However , crystallization of filamentous complexes still has various difficulties . FIGURE 4 Polymerization of 1 l M Mg - ATP - actin monomer ( 20 % Oregon green labeled ) was followed by depolymerization in the presence of 100 l M Latrunculin - A ( LatA ) , as observed by TIRFM . Actin polymerization was started by mixing TIRF buffer at time 0 ( time in the cor - ner ) . Actin in TIRF buffer was immediately loaded into the observation chamber . Barbed and pointed ends were identified from the elonga - tion speeds of the two ends . In micrographs , the end facing up is barbed ( rapid elongation ) , and the end facing down is pointed end . The moment of solution exchange ( t 5 710 s ) is indicated in the figure . TIRF buffer containing final 100 l M LatA was flushed in the observation chamber and all free actin monomer was simultaneously removed . The yellow arrowhead at 800 s indicates a severing event . Scale bar 5 10 l m [ Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary . com ] 4 | FUJIWARA AND NARITA Keiichi Namba ( Osaka University , Japan ) described structural anal - yses of filamentous complexes , including the history of structural research technologies . From 80s to 90s when cryo - electron micros - copy was yet to be fully developed , X - ray fiber diffraction was the most powerful tool for high - resolution structural analyses . Namba started his carrier by studying muscle fiber X - ray diffraction and moved on to tobacco mosaic virus ( TMV ) . TMV forms well - aligned liquid crys - tals , because of its stiff rod shape . TMV diffracted up to 2 . 9 Å , and an atomic model was successfully reconstructed by fiber diffraction analy - sis ( Namba , Pattanayek , & Stubbs , 1989 ) . It was the first reliable atomic model of a filamentous protein complex . In 2000s , cryo - electron microscopy and computer technology were rapidly improved . Namba ’ s research group tackled high - resolution analysis of filamentous complexes with this advanced cryo - electron microscopy techniques . Yonekura & Maki - Yonekura et al . reported a high - resolution ( 4 – 5 Å ) structure of the bacterial flagellar filament in 2003 ( Yonekura et al . , 2003 ) by helical image reconstruction from EM images collected with an electron microscope with a liquid helium - cooled specimen stage ( JEOL JEM300SFF ) . The resolution of 4 – 5 Å was a landmark , because this had never been achieved by cryo - EM without combining electron diffraction data with two - dimensional crystals . In 2010s , Takashi Fujii , a member of Namba ’ s group , and his colleagues improved the image quality of cryo - electron micrographs by the following three factors : energy filter , controlling ice thickness , and specimen temperature at 50 K , which is intermediate between liquid nitrogen and liquid helium . This intermediate temperature was the breakthrough for the improved image contrast , because the density of ice was significantly higher at the liquid helium temperature . They determined several different struc - tures including actin filament at 6 – 7 Å resolution by using single parti - cle image analysis ( Fujii et al . , 2010 , 2012 ; Gayathri et al . , 2012 ) . Recently , the actomyosin rigor complex structure at 5 . 2 Å ( Fujii and Namba , 2017 ) presented detailed interactions between actin and skele - tal muscle myosin ( Figure 5 ) . The ATP binding pocket of myosin was more open than that of rigor complex of human cytoplasmic myosin previously reported ( von der Ecken et al . , 2016 ) , suggesting the mecha - nism for a much faster rate of ATPase cycle of skeletal muscle myosin and hence , faster sliding speed along actin filament . By comparison with a crystal structure of ADP - BeF3 ( ATP analog ) bound myosin ( M (cid:1) en (cid:1) etrey et al . , 2008 ) , they suggested that myosin cardiomyopathy loop ( C403 - Q417 , CM loop ) will clash with actin when ATP binds to the myosin in the rigor complex , which will cause actomyosin dissocia - tion . The possible weak binding state of myosin to the actin filament was modeled based on the rigor structure and the ATP bound myosin ( Iwaki , Iwane , Shimokawa , Cooke , & Yanagida , 2009 ) . Namba sug - gested a model that explains a preferential binding of myosin to the actin filament dependent on the direction of relative motion and / or force . Robert C . Robinson ( IMCB , A * STAR , Singapore ) focused on actin filament systems in health and disease . ParMs , bacterial actin homo - logs , widely distribute among prokaryotes ( Gunning , Ghoshdastider , Whitaker , Popp , & Robinson , 2015 ) . ParMs provide force to segregate plasmids which often code toxins and drug resistance . The ParM filament is a part of ParMRC system , where parC is a repetitive section of DNA on the plasmid , and ParR is a protein that connects parC to ParM . Thus , when ParM polymerizes it exerts a force through ParR to move the plasmid . Although monomeric ParM structures resemble the actin monomer , the filament structures are largely diverse . E . coli ParM forms an actin - like two - stranded polar filament ( Popp et al . , 2008 ) . But the handedness of the helical twist is opposite to that of the actin fila - ment . Bacillus thuringiensis ParM , from the pBMB67 plasmid , is con - structed as a uniquely anti - parallel double - stranded twisted supercoiled structure ( Jiang et al . , 2016 ) . When this ParM polymerized in the pres - ence of ParR , the filament structure adopted a different conformation , forming a four - stranded microtubule - like nanotube . Another ParM , this time from the Clostridium tetani pE88 plasmid , also formed a four - stranded filament , but with distinct geometry . When viewed from the top , the filament appears as a U - like shape with a trench winding down the length of the filament , an open nanotubule . Given this previously unknown variety in ParM filament architectures , prokaryotic actin - like filaments are likely to have many more geometries that have yet to be discovered . Thus through investigating the variety in prokaryotic fila - ment structures , the general rules for constructing filaments can be understood . On the other , the actin filament is the universal force pro - vider in eukaryotic cells and is extremely well conserved , unlike the prokaryotic ParM filaments , because of its huge number of actin bind - ing proteins ( Xue and Robinson , 2013 ) . From the point of view of dis - ease , actin is an important target for pathogens to regulate the status of host cells . Pathogenic Yersinia has caused numerous pandemics throughout human history , including the Black Death that killed (cid:1) 40 % of Europe ’ s population . YopO is an effector injected by pathogenic Yer - sinia into human macrophages , where it contributes to the disabling of phagocytosis by disruption of the actin cytoskeleton , enabling the sur - vival of pathogen in the host . YopO consists of membrane binding domain , Rho - GTPase - binding domain and a kinase domain . The Rho - GTPase binding domain sequesters Rho - A and Rac , inhibiting their activities , stopping signaling for actin filament assembly . The kinase domain phosphorylates several actin regulators including VASP , formin Dia1 and gelsolin . YopO requires actin - monomer binding for its self - activation . An actin - YopO crystal structure revealed the mechanism of activation and phosphorylation ( Lee , Grimes , & Robinson , 2015 ) . Many actin - binding proteins , including the phosphorylation targets of YopO , bind to a hydrophobic cleft between the actin subdomains 1 and 3 . This cleft is vacant in the actin - YopO complex . Instead , the kinase domain bound to subdomain 4 of the actin monomer . When the pro - tein target to be phosphorylated binds to the actin hydrophobic cleft , the YopO kinase can simultaneously interact with the same actin monomer . In other words , YopO uses actin as bait for capturing target actin - regulating proteins for phosphorylation . Robinson also reported an interesting crystal of PAK4 / Inka ( Baskaran et al . , 2015 ) . PAK4 is a kinase with strong links to cellular transformation and cancer metasta - sis . Inka is a PAK4 inhibitor . Surprisingly , PAK4 and Inka spontaneously cocrystalized within a mammalian cell , with a crystal size of > 50 l m . Robinson ’ s group succeeded in determining the atomic structure of the PAK4 / Inka complex from crystals inside intact cells . Moreover , the FUJIWARA AND NARITA | 5 crystal packing forms a large solvent - filled hexagonal tubule - like pat - tern . When GFP was fused to the N - terminus of PAK4 , the GFP was successfully incorporated into this cavity in the crystal . Similarly , a fluo - rescent sensor protein could be fused to PAK4 in place of the GFP . This crystal proved to act as in vivo sensor , which is easily observed by light microscopy due to the multiple copies within the crystal . Akihiro Narita ( Nagoya University , Japan ) presented development of correlative microscopy based on a tip - scan type atomic force micros - copy . Electron tomography and freeze - etching electron microscopy have revealed molecular structures and arrangements in the cell to some extent . For example , Narita ’ s group analyzed electron tomograms of lamellipodia , through collaboration with Victor Small ’ s group , and determined structure of actin branches in the cell at (cid:1) 3 nm resolution by subtomogram averaging ( Figure 1 ) ( Narita et al . , 2012 ; Vinzenz et al . , 2012 ) . However , only the shape of the molecules can be observed in tomograms or EM images , and identification of molecules in complex cellular structures is often difficult . On the other hand , fluo - rescent labeling has rapidly developed and this approach is suitable for relatively easy identification of molecules in the cell . Many cellular functions and phenomena have been observed by fluorescent FIGURE 5 Conformational changes of rigor myosin head upon ATP binding and its possible consequence to form the weak binding state . ( a , b ) The actomyosin rigor structure ; ( c , d ) myosin structure upon ATP binding with its L50D helix – loop – helix and loop 2 still attached to actin ; and ( e , f ) after rotation of myosin head to avoid the clash of CM loop with actin where L50D helix – loop – helix and loop 2 still attached to actin . The a – c are overviews , and b , d , f are magnified . Note that the N - terminal portion of loop 2 must be flexible enough to allow myosin head rotation while the lysine - rich C - terminal portion stays attached to the N - terminal region of actin to keep electrostatic interactions of the weak binding state . The crystal structure of chicken muscle myosin in the post - rigor state ( PDB : 2MYS ) was used to build the models shown in c – f by including loop 2 in different conformations to accommodate different distances between actin D1 and myosin U50D . Image and figure legend correspond to Figure 6 from Fujii and Namba , 2017 Nat Commun . 8 : 13969 [ Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary . com ] 6 | FUJIWARA AND NARITA microscopy and it would be highly desirable to observe molecular structures at the position where a particular phenomenon is measured by fluorescent microscopy . Atomic force microscopes ( AFM ) based on a tip - scan system , in which the cantilever moves in the x , y , and z direc - tions and the stage does not move , can be easily combined with a light microscope and are suitable for such correlative microscopy . Because the deflection of the small cantilever scanning in the x and y directions is difficult to sense , it had been challenging to apply a small cantilever , thereby limiting the time and spatial resolution of tip - scan AFM . Olym - pus has developed a regulation system to control the cantilever and has thus been able to reduce the size of the cantilever . As a result , time and spatial resolution have been improved . In the AFM image of the actin filament , the molecular interval of the actin subunits ( (cid:1) 5 . 5 nm ) was clearly observed as stripes . In the image of the actin - tropomyosin complex , each tropomyosin molecule on the actin fila - ment was directly observed ( Narita et al . , 2016 ) . Cells were prepared for AFM by an unroofing technique , by which a part of plasma mem - brane was broken by gentle sonication and the intracellular region was exposed by removing soluble components from the cytoplasm ( Usu - kura , Narita , Yagi , Ito , & Usukura , 2016 ) . The actin filaments , microtu - bules , clathrin coats and caveolae were observed on the cytoplasmic surface of cell membranes at nanometer - order resolution . High resolu - tion fluorescent images taken by an oil emersion lens and nanometer - order resolution AFM images were taken recently at the same time and at the same position ( unpublished data ) and this promises to be a powerful tool for cell biology as a new correlative microscopy technique . Shuichi Takeda ( Nagoya University , Japan ) described a new inter - esting actin crystal , which explains ATPase activity in the actin filament . Their work is expected to be submitted for publication soon and , as such , is not elaborated upon here . 2 . 3 | Actin filaments acting as tension sensors and regulator of binding proteins The number of actin filament ends in a cell is well controlled to orchestrate both mechanical and dynamical properties of the actin cytoskeleton . Enrique M . De La Cruz ( Yale University , USA ) presented results from biochemical and biophysical studies focused on defining in chemi - cal and physical terms how the essential regulatory protein cofilin binds and fragments actin filaments . Because filament elongation and disas - sembly occurs at filament ends , the filament severing activity of cofilin accelerates actin assembly dynamics and turnover . Filament severing by cofilin is driven by cofilin binding interactions and thermal energy alone ( i . e . , occurs without the use of external energy such as ATP ) , FIGURE 6 Drs . Oosawa and Pollard in the meeting of “ Now in Actin , ” Nagoya in Japan 2016 ( top left picture ) . Drs . Robinson , Oosawa , Fujiwara , De La Cruz , Pollard and Vavylonis ( from left to right ) at the meeting ( top right picture ) . Attendees for the meeting ( bottom picture ) [ Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary . com ] FUJIWARA AND NARITA | 7 which demands thermodynamic analysis of the binding interaction and linked equilibria . Quantitative binding assays ( De La Cruz , 2005 ) , math - ematical modeling ( McCullough et al . , 2011 ) and direct visualization of fluorescently labeled proteins ( Suarez et al . , 2011 ) indicate that small clusters of vertebrate cofilin are sufficient for severing , in contrast to models in which extensive decoration is needed for severing , and that severing occurs preferentially at boundaries of bare and cofilin - decorated segments . Cofilin binding is entropically - driven and linked to the dissociation of a single filament associated cation ( Cao , Goodarzi , & De La Cruz , 2006 ) , which alters filament structure and renders fila - ments more compliant in bending ( McCullough , Blanchoin , Martiel , & De la Cruz , 2008 ) and twisting ( Prochniewicz , Janson , Thomas , & De la Cruz , 2005 ) . The different structures and mechanical properties of actin and cofilactin segments effectively alters the filament “ phases ” and introduces topological and mechanical gradients at boundaries of bare and decorated segments . These boundaries are kinetically and thermo - dynamically less stable than uniform segments ( i . e . , the discontinuities cost energy , analogous to a phase boundary ) , and fragment more read - ily than interfaces within actin or cofilactin segments ( De La Cruz , 2009 ) . A feature of this severing mechanism is that the changes in fila - ment stiffness associated with cation release contribute to the instabil - ity of boundaries . Site - specific actin mutants support a cation - linked mechanism for vertebrate cofilin and demonstrate that filament sever - ing is the essential function of cofilin in cells ( Kang et al . , 2014 ) . Verte - brate cofilin only weakly severs actin filaments lacking this “ stiffness cation ” unless a stiffness cation - binding site is engineered into the actin molecule . Moreover , vertebrate cofilin rescues the viability of a S . cere - visiae cofilin deletion mutant only when the stiffness cation site is simultaneously introduced into actin , demonstrating that filament severing is the essential function of cofilin in cells . De La Cruz went on to discuss how the nonuniform elasticity of filaments partially deco - rated with cofilin responds to external forces , and how these forces can enhance the severing activity of cofilin . Because partially decorated filaments are comprised of stiff and flexible segments , they respond asymmetrically to external forces such that the softer cofilactin seg - ments deform more readily than stiff bare actin segments ( De La Cruz , Roland , McCullough , Blanchoin , & Martiel , 2010 ; De La Cruz , Martiel , & Blanchoin , 2015 ) . This nonuniform deformation localizes strain at regions of highest curvature , which coincides to regions immediately adjacent to the boundaries between bare and decorated segments . Accordingly , the local elastic strain energy destabilizes the filament ( i . e . , increases its free energy ) and is hypothesized to accelerate fragmentation . Taro Uyeda ( Waseda University , Japan ) presented evidence for the allosteric regulation of actin filament by actin binding proteins in vitro and in vivo . This study is a sequel to a long stretch of studies , pioneered by Oosawa et al . in 1972 ( Oosawa et al . , 1972 ) , who investigated the impact of myosin ( S1 ) binding to actin filaments . With a fluorescence microscope , Uyeda investigated the cooperative binding of myosin on an actin filament in the presence of ATP ( Tokuraku , Kurogi , Toya , & Uyeda , 2009 ) . High - speed AFM scanning visualized that this coopera - tive binding of S1 to actin filaments partially untwists the actin helix , and the helical pitch of actin filaments depends on the nucleotide state of S1 . Actin filaments were partially untwisted in the presence of ATP but not in the presence of ATP g S or ADP , indicating that only cycling myosin heads can affect the twist of filaments . This is consistent with previous structural studies that demonstrated that the helical pitch of the acto - S1 rigor complex is hardly longer than the control . Notably , transient binding of skeletal muscle myosin S1 in the presence of ATP inhibited cofilin binding to actin filaments , which cannot be accounted for by competition for binding sites on actin since most of the actin protomers were unoccupied by S1 at any moment . Uyeda extended his research and suggested that conformational changes in actin filaments induced by actin - binding proteins would play important roles in modulating affinities for various actin binding proteins present in the common cytoplasm . To elucidate the function of conformational fluctu - ations of actin filaments in vivo , the structural change in an actin subu - nit was monitored by FRET by labeling subdomain 2 and 4 of an actin protomer with two fluorophores . Ptk2 cells injected with labeled actin monomers showed that the lamellipodia of a cell has lower FRET effi - ciency than the average , whereas peripheral areas poked by external force had higher FRET efficiency . Consistent with the idea that confor - mational variation of actin molecules in a cell is physiologically relevant , Uyeda presented evidence that the actin binding domain ( ABD ) of fila - min preferentially binds to a subset of actin filaments in a cell , using filamin - ABD fused with photoactivatable fluorescent protein ( Shibata , Nagasaki , Adachi , & Uyeda , 2016 ) . Finally , Uyeda presented effects of point mutations in actin expected to perturb conformational dynamics within or between actin molecules . When tested with in vitro motility assays these mutations inhibit the sliding velocity of actin filaments by myosin II immobilized on glass , but not by immobilized myosin V ( Kubota , Mikhailenko , Okabe , Taguchi , & Ishiwata , 2009 ; Noguchi et al . , 2012 ) . These results indicate that myosin II requires conforma - tional dynamics of actin protomers or the propagation of conforma - tional changes along an actin filament to work as an assembled system , but the processive myosin V motor does not . Uyeda summarized that regulatory mechanisms concerning tensions of actin filament networks and actin - binding proteins in a cell are highly orchestrated through the cooperative binding and structural changes . Masahiro Sokabe ( Nagoya University , Japan ) described how the actin cytoskeleton senses force at the cell and single molecule levels focusing on the involvement of actin - depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) / cofi - lin . Sokabe et al . found that stress fibers were disrupted in endothelial cells cultured on a prestretched elastic PDMS chamber when com - pressed by releasing the stretch force on the chamber ( Hayakawa , Tatsumi , & Sokabe , 2011 ) . This result suggested that lowering the ten - sion in stress fibers caused them to break down , which is not a simple physical process . Thus they suspected involvement of some chemical factors and eventually determined that ADF / cofilin was sufficient to induce tension sensitive stress fiber disruption . Using optical tweezers to control the tension in single actin filaments , they confirmed that cofilin preferentially bound to , and severed , filaments at low tension . Tension over 2 pN inhibited cofilin binding to filaments . Measurements of torsional fluctuations of single actin filaments suggested that less 8 | FUJIWARA AND NARITA tensed actin filaments tend to have a more twisted structure exposing cofilin binding sites . Thus actin filaments can work as a negative ten - sion sensor in cooperation with cofilin ( Hayakawa et al . , 2011 ) . Using super - high - resolution real - time single - molecule imaging , Sokabe and his colleague ( Hayakawa , Sakakibara , Sokabe , & Tatsumi , 2014 ) directly measured the cooperative binding of cofilin to single actin filaments , which had been suggested to enhance cofilin severing activity ( De La Cruz , 2005 ) . The on - rate of the cofilin binding was 0 . 06 l M s 2 1 , while the off rate was 0 . 6 s . During long - term cofilin binding events ( > 0 . 4 s ) , additional cofilin binding occurred preferentially in the vicinity of the initial binding site . The on - rate of these events was 2 . 3 - fold larger than that of noncontiguous binding . The distance dependence of on - rate enhancement decayed exponentially with a space constant of 65 nm ( corresponding to ca . 24 actin protomers ) . By contrast , the cofilin off - rate was not affected by the presence of prebound cofilin . These results indicate that cofilin binding induces distance dependent struc - tural changes ( that might be twisting ) that enhance cofilin binding . The cooperative binding will form a cluster of cofilin molecules , producing a less rigid filament region than nondecorated one . The boundary between the cofilin decorated and non - decorated regions will be a stress concentration point susceptible to mechanical perturbations and may contribute to actin severing by cofilin ( De La Cruz et al . , 2015 ) . Through a series of cofilin studies , Sokabe revealed that tension in the actin cytoskeleton prevents cofilin driven severing to keep its structure and may regulate actin bound signaling molecules ( Hirata et al . , 2014 ) . He concluded that this mechanism can optimize the amount of actin fil - aments in cells through disrupting the filaments not in use , like the dis - use atrophy in skeletal muscles . Shin ’ ichi Ishiwata ( Waseda University , Japan ) explained how force regulates actin filament dynamics ( see Ishiwata et al . , 2017 for the review on the research done by Ishiwata and his colleagues ) . First , Ishi - wata presented experiments showing distortion of the fine structure around Cys 374 of actin protomers in an actin filament induced by applying a stretching force of about 20 piconewtons ( pN ) , which is equivalent to the load applied in muscle fiber ( Shimozawa and Ishiwata , 2009 ) . Second , he described how external force applied to formin superfamily proteins contributes to their regulation of actin polymeriza - tion ( Kubota et al . , unpublished data ) . Ishiwata and his colleagues constructed single molecule manipulation methods , which constitutes double beads trapped with optical tweezers , to apply tension to mam - malian homolog diaphanous 1 ( mDia1 ) bound to a polymerizing barbed - end ( B - end ) of an actin filament . A several pN force modulated both actin association and dissociation rates for the mDia1 - bound actin filament , wherein the force - sensitivity was stronger for ADP - bound than ATP - bound actin monomers . Furthermore , the stretching tension reversibly switched in an all - or - none fashion from a depolymerization phase to a rapid polymerization phase by modulating the biphasic effects of profilin on mDia1 regulation . The estimated force sensitivity of mDia1 was greater - than - expected especially upon profilin assis - tance , suggesting that the formin - profilin system in the cell supports the force - dependent drastic morphological changes in the actin cyto - skeleton by regulating actin polymerization . The effects of stretching force on the polymerization dynamics were explained by a simple model in which the kinetic constants are assumed to be force - dependent . Finally , Ishiwata presented that polymerization of actin fila - ments inside a cell - sized water - in - oil droplet surrounded by a mono - layer phospholipid membrane induces spontaneous formation of a ring - shaped contractile bundle in the presence of myosin molecules and bundling factors ( Miyazaki et al . , 2015 ) . This strongly suggests that the spherical boundary condition and the mechanical constraint pro - mote the formation of contractile ring . Ishiwata suggested that this experiment could be extended to a liposome , which is surrounded by a double - layered phospholipid membrane in an aqueous medium ( Chiba , Miyazaki , & Ishiwata , 2014 ) , i . e . , more realistic as a cell model . David D . Thomas ( University of Minnesota , USA ) introduced the biophysical research in his laboratory for improving therapeutic strat - egies in muscular dystrophy , based on proteins that interact with actin . Dystrophin ( 427 kDa ) and its homolog utrophin ( 395 kDa ) bind to actin filaments and maintain their mechanical stability . Thomas and his research group , led by Yun Lin and Ewa Prochniewicz , have hypothe - sized that the structural dynamics of dystrophin - actin complexes , such as filament twisting , are key for understanding and treating muscular dystrophy . There is an urgent need for this research , because previ - ously designed therapeutic constructs do not provide sufficient improvement for patients . The Thomas group found that the signal decay of time - resolved phosphorescence anisotropy ( TPA ) of phosphorescent - labeled actin filaments could be used to measure the resilience of actin - dystrophin complexes . They found that this measure of resilience correlates well with the functional effectiveness of smaller dystrophin complexes . They found that a “ Mini - Dys ” construct of dys - trophin , with a large internal deletion ( 46 % ) mutant of dystrophin is quite similar to full length dystrophin in its effect on actin resilience . This result may explain why Mini - Dys is effective in rescuing the mus - cular dystrophy phenotype in mice ( Lin et al . , 2012 ) . Thomas proposes that the practical gene therapy needs to understand molecular mecha - nisms of protein – protein interactions . TPA was also used to elucidate how dystrophin and utrophin regulate actin filaments . The result showed that dystrophin and utrophin restricted the rotational dynamics of actin filaments , corresponding to increased resilience , but utrophin was more effective than dystrophin . Actin resilience , measured by TPA , is proportional to the amount of stored elastic energy — highly resilient polymers can recover quickly from deformations . Thomas showed that this resilience of dystrophin or utrophin bound actin filaments is expressed by the relationship between elastic energy and distortion , which is correlated with the rate and amplitude of rotational motions under TPA ( Prochniewicz , Henderson , Ervasti , & Thomas , 2009 ) . The data showed that dystrophin and utrophin decrease rotational correla - tional times , while restricting the angular amplitudes of bending and twisting of actin filaments . Both dystrophin and utrophin decrease the torsional rigidity of actin filaments , but utrophin decreases the torsional rigidity much more effectively than dystrophin . By testing various con - structs , the Thomas research team demonstrated the correlation between actin resilience and the recovery of dystrophic mice . The result indicates that the measurement of resilience by TPA is FUJIWARA AND NARITA | 9 potentially useful for designing new therapies . Most importantly , this research indicates that utrophin constructs are more effective than dystrophin constructs in gene therapy for muscle dystrophy . Thomas pointed out that his research on actin dynamics benefited greatly from his time spent as a visiting Professor in Japan in 1987 , when he worked closely with Toshio Yanagida , Shin ’ ichi Ishiwata , and Kazuhiko Kinosita , all of whom were strongly influenced by Fumio Oosawa . A highlight of that time was his visit to Nagoya , where he discussed his ideas with Professor Oosawa . It was also during that time in Japan that Thomas met Dr . Ewa Prochniewicz , who later became his most important col - laborator in Minnesota . Ewa Prochniewicz ( University of Minnesota , USA ) presented her research on the microsecond structural dynamics of actin filaments , as measured by TPA , to obtain insight into the role of actin dynamics in various cellular processes . Dr . Prochniewicz was trained in Poland by the great muscle biophysicist , Drabikowski , then moved to Japan to work on actin biophysics with Oosawa and Yanagida . From 1993 to her retirement in 2016 , she worked with David Thomas in Minnesota , producing an impressive body of research that has had great impact on the field of actin biophysics . There she found that TPA decays show that torsional motions of actin filaments are restricted in the presence of skeletal muscle myosin II ( Prochniewicz , Guhathakurta , & Thomas , 2013 ) . This torsional motion is altered by various factors , such as mutating actin , myosin isoforms and nucleotide states of myosin . These results suggest that functionally important structural transitions of actin filaments are regulated by actin - binding proteins . These transitions determine roles in actin filament networks . Prochniewicz furthermore found that the dynamics of myosin - bound actin is affected not only by the catalytic domain of myosin but also by isoforms of the essential light chains ( ELC ) of myosin . Only the longer A1 isoform of ELC binds to the C - terminal region of actin and modulates actomyosin function , actin filament flexibility , and movement of the myosin lever arm during the ATPase cycle . Prochniewicz concluded that actin filaments flexibly assume multiple structural states . This is due to the variability of inter - protomer interfaces . Shifting equilibrium states from one to another tells how actin binding proteins generate the regulatory diversities of actin filament networks . Jun Ohnuki from Mitsunori Takano ’ s group ( Waseda University , Japan ) presented the piezoelectric allostery of an actin filament . It has been proposed that an actin filament can sense the tension produced by bound myosin to promote more myosin binding ( Uyeda , Iwadate , Umeki , Nagasaki , & Yumura , 2011 ) . Ohnuki and Takano previously showed that myosin , which also acts as a mechanosensor , exhibits “ pie - zoelectric allostery ” where a locally applied mechanical stimulus indu - ces electrostatic potential change at distant regions via concerted rearrangements of ionic and hydrogen bonds within the molecule ( Ohnuki , Sato , & Takano , 2016 ) . Now they performed all - atom molecu - lar dynamics ( MD ) simulations of an actin filament to investigate the response to an externally applied tension and found that the piezoelec - tric allostery is actually inherent in an actin filament . They argued that the observed piezoelectric allostery of actin is involved in the regula - tion of the interaction with actin binding proteins . 2 . 4 | Microtubules , another essential polymorphic in cells In eukaryotic cells , the microtubule is a major cytoskeletal polymer that plays a crucial role in complex cell functions such as cell polarization , migration and division . The Now in Actin symposium featured exciting investigations on physicochemical properties of microtubules underly - ing the motility of motor proteins such as kinesin and dynein . Etsuko Muto ( Brain Science Institute , RIKEN , Japan ) took a bottom - up approach to explore how the structure and the physico - chemical properties of the microtubule modulate its binding interac - tions with motor proteins such as kinesin . The group first measured the interaction of counterions with microtubules , extended the analysis to the motion of charged nanoparticles on microtubules , and finally stud - ied the motion of single - headed kinesin . For the analysis of the behav - ior of counterions , Itsushi Minoura in Muto ’ s group measured the dielectric properties of microtubules by applying an alternating electric field to a solution of microtubules and observed the electroorientation of microtubules by optical microscopy ( Minoura and Muto , 2006 ) . By modeling a microtubule as a dielectric ellipsoid , the conductivity and dielectric constant of a single microtubule were extracted from the time course of the electroorientation . The result revealed that the num - ber of counterions moving along a MT is a linear function of the charge density of the microtubules , as predicted from polyelectrolyte theory ( Oosawa , 1971 ) . This observation allowed the group to hypothesize that any object with a sufficient number of positive charges would exhibit one - dimensional diffusional motion along a microtubule . Indeed , the positively charged , synthetic nanoparticles made of polyacrylamide gel showed one - dimensional diffusion on microtubules , with the diffu - sion coefficient decreasing and the duration of interaction increasing , both exponentially , with an increasing particle charge ( Minoura , Katayama , Sekimoto , & Muto , 2010 ) . Applying Eyring ’ s transition state theory , they formulated a simple three states model of binding versus diffusive interactions , which provides a theoretical framework that may be extended to analyze biological interactions of motors and microtu - bules . Application of the model to the movement of the single - headed kinesin KIF1A in the weak - binding state enabled Minoura to disentan - gle specific from nonspecific , electrostatic interactions . This analysis showed that during its diffusional motion , KIF1A - ADP is bound station - ary on the microtubule > 99 % of the time , while a diffusing charged nanoparticle is bound on the microtubule only 30 % of the time . The long life of KIF1A ’ s stationary binding indicates a contribution of ster - eospecific binding in the diffusional motion of kinesin motor . The group further investigated how motor proteins switch from nonspecific elec - trostatic interaction to stereospecific strong binding and activate their ATPase activities . Seiichi Uchimura from the Muto group used budding yeast to test the motility of kinesin and dynein on MTs composed of tubulin with various mutations of charged residues . In both cases , the motor stops diffusional motion and switches to stereospecific binding at a position where the electrostatic complementarity of the MT is locally inverted . While the surface of the MT is dominated by negative charges and the interface of motor proteins with the MT is dominated by positive charges , there exist a few exceptional residues with 10 | FUJIWARA AND NARITA opposite charges on both sides . The charged - to - alanine mutations at the rare basic residues on microtubule resulted in a loss of directional movement of dynein ( Uchimura et al . , 2015 ) and impaired motility of kinesin ( Minoura et al . , 2016 ) . In both cases , the ATPase activities were completely abolished . Based on these observations , Muto hypothe - sized that during the diffusional search , the motors might use the rare basic tubulin residues as a landmark to locate the site for stereospecific binding , the validity of which awaits future studies . Yasushi Okada ( QBiC , RIKEN and University of Tokyo , Japan ) explained the regulation of the conformational polymorphism of the microtubule and its physiological role in the regulation of kinesin - based intracellular transport . Using a super resolution live cell imaging tech - nique , Okada demonstrated that kinesin has a higher affinity for stabi - lized microtubules ( MTs ) induced by adding taxol or GTP - tubulins , than unstable MTs induced by GDP - tubulins . This ongoing research will explore a novel control mechanism where the state of MT functions as a spatio - temporal regulator to determine the destination of cargo transported by motor proteins . Another important message from Oka - da ’ s presentation , when combined with other talks on actin filaments in the symposium , was that both of the major eukaryotic cytoskeletal fila - ments are polymorphic , presumably in a cooperative manner , and the polymorphism plays important roles in determining the cellular functions . 2 . 5 | Actin dynamics in cellular motility Thomas D . Pollard ( Yale University , USA ) reviewed how the biophys - ical characterization of actin has advanced since the pioneering studies by Fumio Oosawa and colleagues in the 1960s . He started his own work with experiments on movements in cell extracts without knowing that Hatano and Oosawa had purified actin from Physarum ( 1966 ) and was gratified to discover that the movements of cells depended on thin filaments of actin and thick filaments of myosin ( Pollard and Ito , 1970 ) . Since then , Pollard has characterized the mechanisms that regu - late actin assembly . He explained how Arp2 / 3 complex nucleates branched actin filaments at the leading edge of motile cells ( Mullins , Heuser , & Pollard , 1998 ) and how Arp2 / 3 complex is activated by bind - ing nucleation promoting factors such as WASp and actin filaments ( Ti , Jurgenson , Nolen , & Pollard , 2011 ) . Pollard ’ s lab has investigated the cellular function of the Arp2 / 3 complex by studying clathrin - mediated endocytosis in fission yeast , where actin polymerization promotes membrane invagination analogously to how actin promotes membrane protrusions in motile cells . His group used biochemistry to characterize the proteins and quantitative fluorescence microscopy to count the numbers of molecules at sites of endocytosis . Nucleation promoting factors ( Wsp1 and Myo1p ) and two F - BAR proteins accumulate on coated pits and attract Arp2 / 3 complex , which assembles a total of about 5000 actin molecules into short filaments in each endocytic actin patch , in about 10 s ( Sirotkin , Berro , Macmillan , Zhao , & Pollard , 2010 ) . The whole network then disassembles in about 10 s . Deterministic sim - ulations of a mathematical model of the biochemical reactions repro - duced the time courses of the appearance and disappearance of the main proteins in these actin patches , but required adjustment of the values of rate constants and modifications of the initial assumptions of the assembly mechanism in the model ( Berro and Pollard , 2014 ) . Sub - sequent biochemical and genetics experiments verified these changes in the assumptions and parameters . New super - resolution microscopy observations of live cells with 1 s and 35 nm resolution show how Arp2 / 3 complex promotes vesicle scission by accumulating in two zones along the endocytic membrane and growing two zones of actin filaments . Pollard also discussed the role of actin in cytokinesis by fis - sion yeast . His group measured the numbers of the proteins and deter - mined the timing of events during the assembly , constriction and disassembly of cytokinetic ring ( Wu , Kuhn , Kovar , & Pollard , 2003 ; Wu and Pollard , 2005 ) . Computer simulations of mathematical models reproduce the events observed in live cells from the appearance of pre - cursors called nodes anchored to the plasma membrane to constriction of the contractile ring ( Stachowiak et al . , 2014 ; Vavylonis , Wu , Hao , O ’ Shaughnessy , & Pollard , 2008 ) . Super - resolution microscopy showed that nodes persist in contractile rings and move around the circumfer - ence as the ring constricts ( Laplante , Huang , Tebbs , Bewersdorf , & Pol - lard , 2016 ) . Throughout the process actin filaments assemble , interact with myosin and disassemble . This dynamic process helps to maintain a homogeneously constricting ring as the average actin filament length decreases over time . Naoki Watanabe ( Kyoto University , Japan ) presented his ongoing research by using easy , efficient and electroporation - based Single - Molecule Speckle microscopy ( eSiMS ) to elucidate the force - regulated actin remodeling processes . This microscopy has an advant - age of 100 % labeling efficiency ( Yamashiro et al . , 2014 ) . With this approach , the research group investigated how force derived by myo - sin II affects actin stability in fast - moving keratocytes during the treat - ment with blebbistatin . Watanabe suggests that stabilization of actin filaments by myosin may facilitate efficient force transduction in some types of actin networks . Formin homology proteins processively bind the growing barbed - end of actin filaments . Helical rotation of formins was demonstrated by fluorescence polarization . They stay along the actin long - pitch helix while processively elongating the barbed - end of actin filaments ( Mizuno et al . , 2011 ) . Interestingly , actin filaments poly - merized by mDia1 ( formin homology protein ) were protected from cofilin binding . This was presumably because , in their experimental setup , mDia was anchored on the chamber surface , such that helical rotation of the filament caused by mDia1 would untwist the filament helix . Thus Watanabe concluded that formins may function as anti - mechanostress machineries to maintain the integrity of the actin fila - ment network . Formins nucleate actin filaments rapidly when G - actin is released from the mechanically perturbed actin networks , which also functions to protect cells from mechanical stress ( Higashida et al . , 2013 ) . Takuo Yasunaga ( Kyushu Institute of Technology , Japan ) observed the actin cytoskeleton in filopodia of nerve cells by using cryo - electron tomography . The result showed that actin filaments in vivo are packed as a unit of (cid:1) 30 actin filaments , suggesting that other factors are coor - dinated with fascin to stabilize actin bundles ( Aramaki , Mayanagi , Jin , Aoyama , & Yasunaga , 2016 ) . Yasunaga proposed a new detailed FUJIWARA AND NARITA | 11 architecture of actin bundles including fascin crosslinking at the peri - pheral regions , which gives rigid bundles that retain flexibility and dynamic performance . Kaoru Sugimura ( WPI – iCeMS , Kyoto University , Japan ) presented the regulatory and functional mechanisms of the actin cell cytoskeleton during epithelial development . Epithelial tissues pack cells into a honey - comb pattern to support the tissue structure . Sugimura ’ s group previ - ously reported that axial stretching forces acting on the Drosophila pupal wing help to promote the hexagonal cell packing . They proposed a simple model based on their observation and calculation that stretch - ing forces align the orientation of hexagonal cells . These forces reduce the mismatch in the orientation between small clusters of hexagonal cells and help the small clusters to merge into a large honey comb pat - tern ( Sugimura and Ishihara , 2013 ) . However , the mechanisms by which cells sense the tensile tissue stress and transmit the information to the molecular machinery for cell rearrangement remain unknown . When addressing the question , Sugimura was inspired by recent reports that actin filaments act as tension sensors ( Galkin , Orlova , & Egelman , 2012 ; Hayakawa et al . , 2011 ; Ngo , Kodera , Katayama , Ando , & Uyeda , 2015 ) . Here , Sugimura focused on Actin Interacting Protein 1 ( AIP1 ) and cofilin based on a result of localization - based screening of actin binding proteins , and studied whether and how they are responsi - ble for the process . A working model shows that epithelial cells use actin filaments as mechanosensors for the tensile tissue stress via asso - ciated proteins , AIP1 and cofilin . The mechanosensors transmit the mechanical information to the actin cytoskeleton and cell adhesions , and thereby optimize the shape of cells in a tissue . Further work will answer whether development contexts in other epithelial tissues also adopt the same molecular mechanisms in order to cause changes to optimize the cell shape . 3 | CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES Biophysicists have been motivated to decipher the underlying funda - mental mechanisms of life . This symposium showcased the latest research on the elegant regulatory mechanisms of the cytoskeleton and actin - based cell motility . In particular , it is clear that actin filaments and microtubules are not simply tracks for motor proteins . They work as tension sensors by changing their twist , rigidity , nucleotide condition and surface charge . Revealing how these highly orchestrated systems regulate cell cytoskeleton mechanisms will answer how cells move , organize in a tissue and improve therapeutic treatments for diseases such as muscular dystrophy . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors thank all speakers ( Fumio Oosawa , Dimitrios Vavylonis , Makoto Suzuki , Keiichi Namba , Robert C . Robinson , Shuichi Takeda , Enrique M . De La Cruz , Masahiro Sokabe , Shin ’ ichi Ishiwata , David D . Thomas , Ewa Prochniewicz , Jun Ohnuki in Mitsunori Takano ’ s lab , Etsuko Muto , Yasushi Okada , Thomas D . Pollard , Naoki Wata - nabe , Takuo Yasunaga , Kaoru Sugimura ) who helped edit this review , particularly Taro Uyeda for his extensive and helpful advice . They also thank Michio Homma and Marie Takeda for helping to organize this symposium . This symposium was supported by Integrative Grad - uate Education and Research Program in Green Natural Sciences ( IGER ) program , Nagoya University , Japan . REFERENCES Aramaki , S . , Mayanagi , K . , Jin , M . , Aoyama , K . , & Yasunaga , T . ( 2016 ) . Filopodia formation by crosslinking of F - actin with fascin in two dif - ferent binding manners . Cytoskeleton ( Hoboken ) 73 , 365 – 374 . Asakura , S . & Oosawa , F . ( 1954 ) . On interaction between two bodies immersed in a solution of macromolecules . The Journal of Chemical Physics , 22 , 1255 . Asakura , S . , Kasai , M . & Oosawa , F . ( 1960 ) . The effect of temperature on the equilibrium state of actin solutions . 44 , 35 – 49 . Ayscough , K . R . , Stryker , J . , Pokala , N . , Sanders , M . , Crews , P . , & Drubin , D . G . ( 1997 ) . High rates of actin filament turnover in budding yeast and roles for actin in establishment and maintenance of cell polarity revealed using the actin inhibitor latrunculin - A . Journal of Cellular Biology , 137 , 399 – 416 . Barzik , M . , McClain , L . M . , Gupton , S . L . , & Gertler , F . B . ( 2014 ) . Ena / VASP regulates mDia2 - initiated filopodial length , dynamics , and func - tion . Molecular Biology of the Cell , 25 , 2604 – 2619 . Baskaran , Y . , Ang , K . C . , Anekal , P . V . , Chan , W . L . , Grimes , J . M . , Man - ser , E . , & Robinson , R . C . ( 2015 ) . An in cellulo - derived structure of PAK4 in complex with its inhibitor Inka1 . Nature Communication , 6 , 8681 . Berro , J . & Pollard , T . D . ( 2014 ) . Synergies between Aip1p and capping protein subunits ( Acp1p and Acp2p ) in clathrin - mediated endocytosis and cell polarization in fission yeast . Molecular Biology of the Cell , 25 , 3515 – 3527 . Blanchoin , L . & Pollard , T . D . ( 1999 ) . Mechanism of interaction of Acan - thamoeba actophorin ( ADF / Cofilin ) with actin filaments . Journal of Biological Chemistry , 274 , 15538 – 15546 . Cao , W . , Goodarzi , J . P . , & De La Cruz , E . M . ( 2006 ) . Energetics and kinetics of cooperative cofilin - actin filament interactions . Journal of Molecular Biology , 361 , 257 – 267 . Chiba , M . , Miyazaki , M . , & Ishiwata , S . ( 2014 ) . Quantitative analysis of the lamellarity of giant liposomes prepared by the inverted emulsion method . Biophysical Journal , 107 , 346 – 354 . Cou (cid:1) e , M . , Brenner , S . L . , Spector , I . , & Korn , E . D . ( 1987 ) . Inhibition of actin polymerization by latrunculin A . FEBS Letters , 213 , 316 – 318 . De La Cruz , E . M . ( 2005 ) . Cofilin binding to muscle and non - muscle actin filaments : Isoform - dependent cooperative interactions . Journal of Molecular Biology , 346 , 557 – 564 . De La Cruz , E . M . ( 2009 ) . How cofilin severs an actin filament . Biophysi - cal Reviews , 1 , 51 – 59 . De La Cruz , E . M . , Martiel , J . L . , & Blanchoin , L . ( 2015 ) . Mechanical het - erogeneity favors fragmentation of strained actin filaments . Biophysi - cal Journal , 108 , 2270 – 2281 . De La Cruz , E . M . , Roland , J . , McCullough , B . R . , Blanchoin , L . , & Martiel , J . L . ( 2010 ) . Origin of twist - bend coupling in actin filaments . Biophysi - cal Journal , 99 , 1852 – 1860 . Ebashi , S . , Huxley , H . E . , Martonosi , A . N . , Oosawa , F . & Pepe , F . A . ( 1983 ) . Macromolecular assembly of actin , edited by Alfred Stracher , Muscle and Nonmuscle Motility volume 1 , New York , Academic Press , 151 – 216 . Fujii , T . , Cheung , M . , Blanco , A . , Kato , T . , Blocker , A . J . , & Namba , K . ( 2012 ) . Structure of a type III secretion needle at 7 - Å resolution pro - vides insights into its assembly and signaling mechanisms . Proceedings 12 | FUJIWARA AND NARITA of the National Academy of Science of United States of America , 109 , 4461 – 4466 . Fujii , T . , Iwane , A . H . , Yanagida , T . , & Namba , K . ( 2010 ) . Direct visualiza - tion of secondary structures of F - actin by electron cryomicroscopy . Nature , 467 , 724 – 728 . Fujii , T . & Namba , K . ( 2017 ) . Structure of actomyosin rigour complex at 5 . 2 Å resolution and insights into the ATPase cycle mechanism . Nature Communication , 8 , 13969 . Fujiwara , I . , Remmert , K . , Piszczek , G . , & Hammer , J . A . ( 2014 ) . Capping protein regulatory cycle driven by CARMIL and V - 1 may promote actin network assembly at protruding edges . Proceedings of the National Academy of Science of United States of America , 111 , E1970 – E1979 . Fujiwara , I . , Takahashi , S . , Tadakuma , H . , Funatsu , T . , & Ishiwata , S . ( 2002 ) . Microscopic analysis of polymerization dynamics with individ - ual actin filaments . Nature of Cell Biology , 4 , 666 – 673 . Fujiwara , I . , Vavylonis , D . , & Pollard , T . D . ( 2007 ) . Polymerization kinetics of ADP - and ADP - Pi - actin determined by fluorescence microscopy . Proceedings of the National Academy of Science of United States of America , 104 , 8827 – 8832 . Galkin , V . E . , Orlova , A . , & Egelman , E . H . ( 2012 ) . Actin filaments as ten - sion sensors . Current Biology , 22 , R96 – 101 . Gayathri , P . , Fujii , T . , Møller - Jensen , J . , van den Ent , F . , Namba , K . , & L € owe , J . ( 2012 ) . A bipolar spindle of antiparallel ParM filaments drives bacterial plasmid segregation . Science , 338 , 1334 – 1337 . Gunning , P . W . , Ghoshdastider , U . , Whitaker , S . , Popp , D . , & Robinson , R . C . ( 2015 ) . The evolution of compositionally and functionally dis - tinct actin filaments . Journal of Cell Science , 128 , 2009 – 2019 . Hansen , S . D . & Mullins , R . D . ( 2010 ) . VASP is a processive actin poly - merase that requires monomeric actin for barbed end association . Journal of Cell Biology , 191 , 571 – 584 . Hayakawa , K . , Sakakibara , S . , Sokabe , M . , & Tatsumi , H . ( 2014 ) . Single - molecule imaging and kinetic analysis of cooperative cofilin - actin fila - ment interactions . Proceedings of the National Academy of Science of United States of America , 111 , 9810 – 9815 . Hayakawa , K . , Tatsumi , H . , & Sokabe , M . ( 2011 ) . Actin filaments function as a tension sensor by tension - dependent binding of cofilin to the fil - ament . Journal of Cell Biology , 195 , 721 – 727 . Higashi - Fujime , S . ( 1980 ) . Active movement in vitro of bundle of microfi - laments isolated from Nitella cell . Journal of Cell Biology , 87 , 569 – 578 . Higashida , C . , Kiuchi , T . , Akiba , Y . , Mizuno , H . , Maruoka , M . , Narumiya , S . , . . . Watanabe , N . ( 2013 ) . F - and G - actin homeostasis regulates mechanosensitive actin nucleation by formins . Nature Cell Biology , 15 , 395 – 405 . Hirata , H . , Gupta , M . , Vedula , S . R . K . , Lim , C . T . , Ladoux , B . , & Sokabe , M . ( 2014 ) . Actomyosin bundles serve as a tension sensor and a plat - form for ERK activation . EMBO Reports , 16 , 250 – 257 . Honda , H . , Nagashima , H . , & Asakura , S . ( 1986 ) . Directional movement of F - actin in vitro . Journal of Molecular Biology , 191 , 131 – 133 . Honda , M . , Takiguchi , K . , Ishikawa , S . , & Hotani , H . ( 1999 ) . Morphogene - sis of liposomes encapsulating actin depends on the type of actin - crosslinking . Journal of Molecular Biology , 287 , 293 – 300 . Ishiwata , S . , Miyazaki , M . , Sato , K . , Nakagome , N . , Shintani , S . A . , Kobiru - maki - Shimozawa , F . , . . . Itabashi , T . ( 2017 ) . Dynamic properties of bio - motile systems as a liquid - crystalline structure . Molecular Crystals & Liquid Crystals , 647 , 127 – 150 . Iwaki , M . , Iwane , A . H . , Shimokawa , T . , Cooke , R . , & Yanagida , T . ( 2009 ) . Brownian search - and - catch mechanism for myosin - VI steps . Nature of Chemical Biology , 5 , 403 – 405 . Jiang , S . , Narita , A . , Popp , D . , Ghoshdastider , U . , Lee , L . J . , Srinivasan , R . , . . . Larsson , M . ( 2016 ) . Novel actin filaments from Bacillus thurin - giensis form nanotubules for plasmid DNA segregation . Proceedings of the National Academy of Science of United States of America , 113 , E1200 – E1205 . Kabir , S . R . , Yokoyama , K . , Mihashi , K . , Kodama , T . , & Suzuki , M . ( 2003 ) . Hyper - mobile water is induced around actin filaments . Biophysical Journal , 85 , 3154 – 3161 . Kabsch , W . , Mannherz , H . G . , Suck , D . , Pai , E . F . , & Holmes , K . C . ( 1990 ) . Atomic structure of the actin : DNase I complex . Nature , 347 , 37 – 44 . Kang , H . , Bradley , M . J . , Cao , W . , Zhou , K . , Grintsevich , E . E . , Michelot , A . , . . . De La Cruz , E . M . ( 2014 ) . Site - specific cation release drives actin filament severing by vertebrate cofilin . Proceedings of the National Academy of Science of United States of America , 111 , 17821 – 17826 . Kinoshita , M . & Suzuki , M . ( 2009 ) . A statistical - mechanical analysis on the hypermobile water around a large solute with high surface charge density . Journal of Chemistry & Physics , 130 , 014707 . Kitamura , K . , Tokunaga , M . , Iwane , A . H . , & Yanagida , T . ( 1999 ) . A single myosin head moves along an actin filament with regular steps of 5 . 3 nanometres . Nature , 397 , 129 – 134 . Kouyama , T . & Mihashi , K . ( 1981 ) . Fluorimetry study of N - ( 1 - pyrenyl ) iodoacetamide - labelled F - actin . Local structural change of actin pro - tomer both on polymerization and on binding of heavy meromyosin . European Journal of Biochemistry , 114 , 33 – 38 . Kovar , D . R . & Pollard , T . D . ( 2004 ) . Insertional assembly of actin fila - ment barbed ends in association with formins produces piconewton forces . Proceedings of the National Academy of Science of United States of America , 101 , 14725 – 14730 . Kubota , H . , Mikhailenko , S . V . , Okabe , H . , Taguchi , H . , & Ishiwata , S . ( 2009 ) . D - loop of actin differently regulates the motor function of myosins II and V . Journal of Biological Chemistry , 284 , 35251 – 35258 . Kuhn , J . R . & Pollard , T . D . ( 2005 ) . Real - time measurements of actin fila - ment polymerization by total internal reflection fluorescence micros - copy . Biophysical Journal , 88 , 1387 – 1402 . Laplante , C . , Huang , F . , Tebbs , I . R . , Bewersdorf , J . , & Pollard , T . D . ( 2016 ) . Molecular organization of cytokinesis nodes and contractile rings by super - resolution fluorescence microscopy of live fission yeast . Proceedings of the National Academy of Science of United States of America , 113 , E5876 – E5885 . Lee , W . L . , Grimes , J . M . , & Robinson , R . C . ( 2015 ) . Yersinia effector YopO uses actin as bait to phosphorylate proteins that regulate actin polymerization . Nature Structural & Molecular Biology , 22 , 248 – 255 . Lin , A . Y . , Prochniewicz , E . , Henderson , D . M . , Li , B . , Ervasti , J . M . , & Thomas , D . D . ( 2012 ) . Impacts of dystrophin and utrophin domains on actin structural dynamics : Implications for therapeutic design . Journal of Molecular Biology , 420 , 87 – 98 . Matsuo , T . , Arata , T . , Oda , T . , Nakajima , K . , Ohira - Kawamura , S . , Kikuchi , K . , & Fujiwara , S . ( 2016 ) . Difference in the hydration water mobility around F - actin and myosin subfragment - 1 studied by quasielastic neutron scattering . Biochemical & Biophysical Reports , 6 , 220 – 225 . McCullough , B . R . , Blanchoin , L . , Martiel , J . L . , & De la Cruz , E . M . ( 2008 ) . Cofilin increases the bending flexibility of actin filaments : Implications for severing and cell mechanics . Journal of Molecular Biol - ogy , 381 , 550 – 558 . McCullough , B . R . , Grintsevich , E . E . , Chen , C . K . , Kang , H . , Hutchison , A . L . , Henn , A . , . . . Blanchoin , L . ( 2011 ) . Cofilin - linked changes in actin filament flexibility promote severing . Biophysical Journal , 101 , 151 – 159 . FUJIWARA AND NARITA | 13 Melki , R . , Fievez , S . , & Carlier , M . F . ( 1996 ) . Continuous monitoring of Pi release following nucleotide hydrolysis in actin or tubulin assembly using 2 - amino - 6 - mercapto - 7 - methylpurine ribonucleoside and purine - nucleoside phosphorylase as an enzyme - linked assay . Bio - chemistry , 35 , 12038 – 12045 . M (cid:1) en (cid:1) etrey , J . , Llinas , P . , Cicolari , J . , Squires , G . , Liu , X . , Li , A . , . . . Houdusse , A . ( 2008 ) . The post - rigor structure of myosin VI and implications for the recovery stroke . EMBO Journal , 27 , 244 – 252 . Minoura , I . , Katayama , E . , Sekimoto , K , & Muto , E . ( 2010 ) . One - dimen - sional Brownian motion of charged nanoparticles along microtubules : A model system for weak binding interactions . Biophysical Journal , 98 , 1589 – 1597 . Minoura , I . & Muto , E . ( 2006 ) . Dielectric measurement of individual microtubules using the electroorientation method . Biophysical Journal , 90 , 3739 – 3748 . Minoura , I . , Takazaki , H . , Ayukawa , R . , Saruta , C . , Hachikubo , Y . , Uchi - mura , S . , . . . Muto , E . ( 2016 ) . Reversal of axonal growth defects in an extraocular fibrosis model by engineering the kinesin - microtubule interface . Nature Communication , 7 , 10058 . Miyata , H . & Kinosita , K . Jr . ( 1994 ) . Transformation of actin - encapsulating liposomes induced by cytochalasin D . Biopysical Jour - nal , 67 , 922 – 928 . Miyazaki , M . , Chiba , M . , Eguchi , H . , Ohki , T . , & Ishiwata , S . ( 2015 ) . Cell - sized spherical confinement induces the spontaneous formation of contractile actomyosin rings in vitro . Nature Cell Biology , 17 , 480 – 489 . Mizuno , H . , Higashida , C . , Yuan , Y . , Ishizaki , T . , Narumiya , S . , & Wata - nabe , N . ( 2011 ) . Rotational movement of the formin mDia1 along the double helical strand of an actin filament . Science , 331 , 80 – 83 . Mogami , G . , Suzuki , M . , & Matubayasi , N . ( 2016 ) . Spatial - decomposition analysis of energetics of ionic hydration . Journal of Physical & Chemi - cal Biology , 120 , 1813 – 1821 . Morton , W . M . , Ayscough , K . R . , & McLaughlin , P . J . ( 2000 ) . Latrunculin alters the actin - monomer subunit interface to prevent polymeriza - tion . Nature Cell Biology , 2 , 376 – 378 . Mullins , R . D . , Heuser , J . A . , & Pollard , T . D . ( 1998 ) . The interaction of Arp2 / 3 complex with actin : Nucleation , high affinity pointed end cap - ping , and formation of branching networks of filaments . Proceedings of the National Academy of Science of United States of America , 95 , 6181 – 6186 . Murakami , K . , Yasunaga , T . , Noguchi , T . Q . , Gomibuchi , Y . , Ngo , K . X . , Uyeda , T . Q . , & Wakabayashi , T . ( 2010 ) . Structural basis for actin assembly , activation of ATP hydrolysis , and delayed phosphate release . Cell , 143 , 275 – 287 . Namba , K . , Pattanayek , R . , & Stubbs , G . ( 1989 ) . Visualization of protein - nucleic acid interactions in a virus . Refined structure of intact tobacco mosaic virus at 2 . 9 A resolution by X - ray fiber diffraction . Journal of Molecular Biology , 208 , 307 – 325 . Narita , A . , Mueller , J . , Urban , E . , Vinzenz , M . , Small , J . V . , & Ma (cid:1) eda , Y . ( 2012 ) . Direct determination of actin polarity in the cell . Journal of Molecular Biology , 419 , 359 – 368 . Narita , A . , Usukura , E . , Yagi , A . , Tateyama , K . , Akizuki , S . , Kikumoto , M . , . . . Usukura , J . ( 2016 ) . Direct observation of the actin filament by tip - scan atomic force microscopy . Microscopy ( Oxf ) , 65 , 370 – 377 . Ngo , K . X . , Kodera , N . , Katayama , E . , Ando , T . , & Uyeda , T . Q . ( 2015 ) . Cofilin - induced unidirectional cooperative conformational changes in actin filaments revealed by high - speed atomic force microscopy . eLife , 04806 . Noguchi , T . Q . , Komori , T . , Umeki , N . , Demizu , N . , Ito , K . , Iwane , A . H . , . . . Uyeda , T . Q . ( 2012 ) . G146V mutation at the hinge region of actin reveals a myosin class - specific requirement of actin conformations for motility . Journal of Biological Chemistry , 287 , 24339 – 24345 . Noji , H . , Yasuda , R . , Yoshida , M . , & Kinosita , K . ( 1997 ) . Direct observa - tion of the rotation of F1 - ATPase . Nature , 386 , 299 – 302 . Oda , T . , Iwasa , M . , Aihara , T . , Ma (cid:1) eda , Y . , & Narita , A . ( 2009 ) . The nature of the globular - to fibrous - actin transition . Nature , 457 , 441 – 445 . Ohnuki , J . , Sato , T . , & Takano , M . ( 2016 ) . Piezoelectric allostery of pro - tein . Physical Reviews E , 94 , 012406 . Oosawa , F . ( 1971 ) . Polyelectrolytes . New York : Marcel Dekker . Oosawa , F . ( 1972 ) . Dynamic properties of F - actin and the thin filament . Nihon Seirigaku Zasshi , 34 , 96 – 97 . Oosawa , F . & Asakura , S . ( 1975 ) . Thermodynamics of the polymerization of protein . New York : Academic . Oosawa , F . , Asakura , S . , Hotta , K . , & Ooi , T . ( 1959 ) . G - F transformation of actin as a fibrous condensation . Journal of Polymer Science , 37 , 323 – 326 . Pollard , T . D . ( 1986 ) . Rate constants for the reactions of ATP - and ADP - actin with the ends of actin filaments . Journal of Cell Biology , 103 , 2747 – 2754 . Pollard , T . D . , Blanchoin , L . , & Mullins , R . D . ( 2001 ) . Actin dynamics . Jour - nal of Cell Science , 114 , 3 – 4 . Pollard , T . D . & Ito , S . ( 1970 ) . Cytoplasmic filaments of Amoeba proteus . I . The role of filaments in consistency changes and movement . Jour - nal of Cell Biology , 46 , 267 – 289 . Popp , D . , Narita , A . , Oda , T . , Fujisawa , T . , Matsuo , H . , Nitanai , Y . , . . . Ma (cid:1) eda , Y . ( 2008 ) . Molecular structure of the ParM polymer and the mechanism leading to its nucleotide - driven dynamic instability . EMBO Journal , 27 , 570 – 579 . Prochniewicz , E . , Guhathakurta , P . , & Thomas , D . D . ( 2013 ) . The struc - tural dynamics of actin during active interaction with myosin depends on the isoform of the essential light chain . Biochemistry , 52 , 1622 – 1630 . Prochniewicz , E . , Henderson , D . , Ervasti , J . M . , & Thomas , D . D . ( 2009 ) . Dystrophin and utrophin have distinct effects on the structural dynamics of actin . Proceedings of the National Academy of Science of United States of America , 106 , 7822 – 7827 . Prochniewicz , E . , Janson , N . , Thomas , D . D . , & De la Cruz , E . M . ( 2005 ) . Cofilin increases the torsional flexibility and dynamics of actin fila - ments . Journal of Molecular Biology , 353 , 990 – 1000 . Shibata , K . , Nagasaki , A . , Adachi , H . , & Uyeda , T . Q . ( 2016 ) . Actin binding domain of filamin distinguishes posterior from anterior actin filaments in migrating Dictyostelium cells . Biophysics & Physicobiology , 13 , 321 – 331 . Shimozawa , T . & Ishiwata , S . ( 2009 ) . Mechanical distortion of single actin filaments induced by external force : Detection by fluorescence imag - ing . Biophysical Journal , 96 , 1036 – 1044 . Sirotkin , V . , Berro , J . , Macmillan , K . , Zhao , L . , & Pollard , T . D . ( 2010 ) . Quantitative analysis of the mechanism of endocytic actin patch assembly and disassembly in fission yeast . Molecular Biology of Cell , 21 , 2894 – 2904 . Stachowiak , M . R . , Laplante , C . , Chin , H . F . , Guirao , B . , Karatekin , E . , Pol - lard , T . D . , & O ’ Shaughnessy , B . ( 2014 ) . Mechanism of cytokinetic contractile ring constriction in fission yeast . Developmental Cell , 29 , 547 – 561 . Straub , F . B . ( 1942 ) . In Studies from the Institute of Medical Chemistry Uni - versity Szeged ( ed . Szent - Gy € orgyi , A . ) , S . Karger AG , Basel , Switzer - land , 2 . 3 – 15 . Suarez , C . , Roland , J . , Boujemaa - Paterski , R . , Kang , H . , McCullough , B . R . , Reymann , A . C . , . . . Blanchoin , L . ( 2011 ) . Cofilin tunes the nucleotide 14 | FUJIWARA AND NARITA state of actin filaments and severs at bare and decorated segment boundaries . Current Biology , 21 , 862 – 868 . Sugimura , K . & Ishihara , S . ( 2013 ) . The mechanical anisotropy in a tissue promotes ordering in hexagonal cell packing . Development , 140 , 4091 – 4101 . Suzuki , M . , Imao , A . , Mogami , G . , Chishima , R . , Watanabe , T . , Yamaguchi , T . , . . . Wazawa , T . ( 2016 ) . Strong dependence of hydration state of F - actin on the bound Mg ( 2 1 ) / Ca ( 2 1 ) ions . Journal of Physical Chemistry B , 120 , 6917 – 6928 . Suzuki , M . , Kabir , S . R . , Siddique , M . S . , Nazia , U . S . , Miyazaki , T . , & Kodama , T . ( 2004 ) . Myosin - induced volume increase of the hyper - mobile water surrounding actin filaments . Biochemical & Biophysical Research Communication , 322 , 340 – 346 . Tawada , K . & Oosawa , F . ( 1969 ) . Effect of the H - meromyosin plus ATP system on F - actin . Biochimica Biophysica Acta , 180 , 199 – 201 . Ti , S . C . , Jurgenson , C . T . , Nolen , B . J . , & Pollard , T . D . ( 2011 ) . Structural and biochemical characterization of two binding sites for nucleation - promoting factor WASp - VCA on Arp2 / 3 complex . Proceedings of the National Academy of Science of United States of America , 108 , E463 – E471 . Tokuraku , K . , Kurogi , R . , Toya , R . , & Uyeda , T . Q . ( 2009 ) . Novel mode of cooperative binding between myosin and Mg2 1 - actin filaments in the presence of low concentrations of ATP . Journal of Molecular Biol - ogy , 386 , 149 – 162 . Tsai , F . C . & Koenderink , G . H . ( 2015 ) . Shape control of lipid bilayer membranes by confined actin bundles . Soft Matter , 11 , 8834 – 8847 . Uchimura , S . , Fujii , T . , Takazaki , H . , Ayukawa , R . , Nishikawa , Y . , Minoura , I . , . . . Kon T . ( 2015 ) . A flipped ion pair at the dynein - microtubule interface is critical for dynein motility and ATPase activation . Journal of Cell Biology , 208 , 211 – 222 . Usukura , E . , Narita , A . , Yagi , A . , Ito , S . , & Usukura , J . ( 2016 ) . An unroof - ing method to observe the cytoskeleton directly at molecular resolu - tion using atomic force microscopy . Scientific Reports , 6 , 27472 . Vavylonis , D . , Wu , J . Q . , Hao , S . , O ’ Shaughnessy , B . , & Pollard , T . D . ( 2008 ) . Assembly mechanism of the contractile ring for cytokinesis by fission yeast . Science , 319 , 97 – 100 . Vinzenz , M . , Nemethova , M . , Schur , F . , Mueller , J . , Narita , A . , Urban , E . , . . . Rottner K . ( 2012 ) . Actin branching in the initiation and mainte - nance of lamellipodia . Journal of Cell Science , 125 , 2775 – 2785 . von der Ecken , J . , Heissler , S . M . , Pathan - Chhatbar , S . , Manstein , D . J . , & Raunser , S . ( 2016 ) . Cryo - EM structure of a human cytoplasmic acto - myosin complex at near - atomic resolution . Nature , 534 , 724 – 728 . von der Ecken , J . , M € uller , M . , Lehman , W . , Manstein , D . J . , Penczek , P . A . , & Raunser , S . ( 2015 ) . Structure of the F - actin - tropomyosin com - plex . Nature , 519 , 114 – 117 . Wazawa , T . , Sagawa , T . , Ogawa , T . , Morimoto , N . , Kodama , T . , & Suzuki , M . ( 2011 ) . Hyper - mobility of water around actin filaments revealed using pulse - field gradient spin - echo 1H NMR and fluorescence spec - troscopy . Biochemical & Biophysical Research Communication , 404 , 985 – 990 . Wu , J . Q . , Kuhn , J . R . , Kovar , D . R . , & Pollard , T . D . ( 2003 ) . Spatial and temporal pathway for assembly and constriction of the contractile ring in fission yeast cytokinesis . Developmental Cell , 5 , 723 – 734 . Wu , J . Q . & Pollard , T . D . ( 2005 ) . Counting cytokinesis proteins globally and locally in fission yeast . Science , 310 , 310 – 314 . Uyeda , T . Q . P . , Iwadate , Y . , Umeki , N . , Nagasaki , A . , & Yumura , S . ( 2011 ) . Stretching actin filaments within cells enhances their affinity for the myosin II motor domain . PLoS One , 6 , e26200 . Xue , B . & Robinson , R . C . ( 2013 ) . Guardians of the actin monomer . Euro - pean Journal of Cell Biology , 92 , 316 – 332 . Yamashiro , S . , Mizuno , H . , Smith , M . B . , Ryan , G . L . , Kiuchi , T . , Vavylonis , D . , & Watanabe , N . ( 2014 ) . New single - molecule speckle microscopy reveals modification of the retrograde actin flow by focal adhesions at nanometer scales . Molecular Biology of Cell , 25 , 1010 – 1024 . Yonekura , K . , Maki - Yonekura , S . , & Namba , K . ( 2003 ) . Complete atomic model of the bacterial flagellar filament by electron cryomicroscopy . Nature , 424 , 643 – 650 . Yonekura , K . , Maki - Yonekura , S . , & Namba , K . ( 2005 ) . Building the atomic model for the bacterial flagellar filament by electron cryomi - croscopy and image analysis . Structure , 13 , 407 – 412 . How to cite this article : Fujiwara I , Narita A . Keeping the focus on biophysics and actin filaments in Nagoya : A report of the 2016 “ now in actin ” symposium . Cytoskeleton . 2017 ; 00 : 1 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / cm . 21384 FUJIWARA AND NARITA | 15