Editorials Scoring systems : Is a ﬁx needed ? * S coring systems , starting with the Therapeutic Intervention Scoring System ( TISS ) and Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation ( APACHE ) and later with the Simpliﬁed Acute Physiology Score and Mortality Probability Models , have been used to compare patient out - comes in intensive care units ( ICUs ) all over the world . Newer avatars of now proprietary systems have demanded our attention . The institutions have to invest heavily in terms of money , personnel , and time to implement the systems . That is one of the main reasons that APACHE II , in the public domain since its appearance in 1985 , has remained the most popular system . Dr . Combes and colleagues ( 1 ) , in this issue of Critical Care Medicine , have commented on the same . The systems evaluated in large data - bases have been used for quality assur - ance purposes and for comparing mortal - ity statistics with use of the standardized mortality ratio . Shortcomings of the scoring systems in analyzing data for one or another group of patients have been pointed out . In fact , the original APAPCHE was criticized as soon it ap - peared in print by trauma surgeons as being unrepresentative of surgical pa - tients . Subsequently , it was pointed out that APACHE II underperformed in pa - tients in coronary care units , patients un - dergoing coronary artery bypass surgery , patients with cardiogenic pulmonary edema , patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome , and for patients re - quiring prolonged ICU care . For patients undergoing coronary artery bypass sur - gery , specialized scoring systems have been developed and used with success ( 2 ) . This reviewer with his colleagues had the temerity to even develop a scoring system speciﬁcally for invasively monitored pa - tients , only to be reminded by the distin - guished Joseph Civetta that we did not need “new and improved” scoring sys - tems ( 3 , 4 ) ! He commented , “The unfor - tunate implication that hospitals with high death rates deliver poor quality care has been made in numerous newspaper articles . ” Carson and Bach ( 5 ) compared four scoring systems and concluded that except for APACHE II , all vastly underes - timated mortality in patients transferred for long - term care . Over a 6 - yr period in a French tertiary care hospital , Dr . Combes and colleagues ( 1 ) identiﬁed patients who were trans - ferred from other ICUs . These patients constituted 12 % of their total admissions and accounted for 13 % higher mortality . The transferred patients seemed to con - sume more ICU resources such as me - chanical ventilation days and diagnostic tests . The authors believe that the aca - demic medical centers are likely to be “penalized” for excess mortality . They document that the patients’ transfer from another ICU as the only fact that seemed to account for excess mortality . Inciden - tally , Zimmerman et al . ( 6 ) reported mor - tality in teaching hospitals at 18 . 4 % vs . 15 . 1 % in non – teaching hospitals , ﬁgures that are lower than the current study . In the North American context , the effect of penalization could mean any of the following : 1 ) bad report cards , 2 ) postings on the Internet , 3 ) reduced hos - pital payments , 4 ) reduced physician pay - ments , or 5 ) threatened loss of insurance contracts . Dr . Combes and colleagues ( 1 ) do not clarify whether , in France , academic medical centers compete for patients and money the same way as they do in the United States . I believe it is the mission of the tertiary care centers to care for more seriously ill patients , as such higher mor - tality rates in academic centers are to be expected . The fact that it is not reﬂected in Simpliﬁed Acute Physiology Score II has to do with shortcomings of the mea - suring tool . Dr . Combes and colleagues ( 1 ) recog - nize that the transferred patients had re - ceived needed care in the transferring facility . If vital signs had been stabilized and laboratory abnormalities corrected at the ﬁrst institution , the Simpliﬁed Acute Physiology Score measured in the trans - ferring facility would underestimate se - verity of illness . That would inﬂuence the standardized mortality ratio . APACHE III accounts for patients’ source of admis - sion—the lead time bias . The authors suggest some solutions to the problem . Ignoring these patients or assigning the mortality to the original facility is not a good suggestion . They also doubt if sec - ond - level customization would help . Per - haps all of the systems need to emulate APACHE III for including source of ad - mission . Dr . Combes and colleagues ( 1 ) re - ported ICU mortality and not hospital mortality . The latter is usually 5 – 10 % higher , even in the published French studies ( 7 ) . They also did not record do - not - resuscitate orders at the time of ICU discharge . In general , French intensivists are handicapped by antiquated ideas about euthanasia ( 8 ) . It seems that they would ﬁnally adopt some laws similar to those in North America . Many of our pa - tients who are designated do - not - resusci - tate are transferred out of the ICU for continued palliative care and are expected to die . The authors do recognize these limitations . The question then is , do the trans - ferred patients represent a ﬂaw of the scoring systems ? Are there other limits to data analysis , some recognized and some ill - understood ? The techniques for quan - titative analysis of ICU survival and mor - tality will always have limits . Marginal improvements in 10 – 15 % misclassiﬁca - tion rates seem to require enormous re - sources . I think that as clinicians , it is our duty to recognize these limits . Vinod K . Puri , MD Providence Hospital and Medical Center Southﬁeld , MI REFERENCES 1 . Combes A , Luyt CE , Trouillet JL , et al : Adverse effect on a referral intensive care unit’s per - * See also p . 705 . Key Words : scoring systems ; outcomes ; Simpliﬁed Acute Physiology Score II ; Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation Copyright © 2005 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Lippincott Williams & Wilkins DOI : 10 . 1097 / 01 . CCM . 0000159725 . 75514 . 11 894 Crit Care Med 2005 Vol . 33 , No . 4 formance of accepting patients transferred from another intensive care unit . Crit Care Med 2005 ; 33 : 705 – 710 2 . Higgins TL , Estafanous FG , Loop FD , et al : Stratiﬁcation of morbidity and mortality out - come by preoperative risk factors in coronary artery bypass patients : A clinical severity score . JAMA 1992 ; 267 : 2344 – 2348 3 . Yeung HC , Lu MW , Martinez EG , et al : Critical care scoring system : New concept based on hemo - dynamic data . Crit Care Med 1990 ; 18 : 1347 – 1352 4 . Civetta J : New and “improved scoring” scoring systems . Crit Care Med 1990 ; 18 : 1487 – 1490 5 . Carson SS , Bach PB : Predicting mortality in patients suffering from prolonged critical ill - ness : An assessment of four severity - of - illness measures . Chest 2001 ; 120 : 928 – 933 6 . Zimmerman JE , Shortell SM , Knaus WA , et al : Value and cost of teaching hospitals : A pro - spective , multicenter , inception cohort study . Crit Care Med 1993 ; 21 : 1432 – 1442 7 . Azoulay E , Adrie C , De Lassence A , et al : De - terminants of postintensive care unit mortal - ity : A prospective multicenter study . Crit Care Med 2003 ; 31 : 428 – 432 8 . Lemaire FJ : A law for end of life care in France ? Int Care Med 2004 ; 30 : 2120 Critical illness polyneuropathy and myopathy in acute respiratory distress syndrome : More common than we realize ! * F irst reported in the early 1980s , critical illness polyneuropathy and myopathy ( CIPNM ) is a neuromuscular disorder that has been described in critically ill patients , particularly among those surviving severe sepsis and multiple organ dysfunction syn - drome ( MODS ) ( 1 – 3 ) . This disorder is man - ifested by difﬁculty in weaning from the ventilator , severe weakness of limb mus - cles , and reduced or absent deep tendon reﬂexes . Electrophysiologic testing reveals an axonal polyneuropathy with sensorimo - tor involvement and occasional myopathic altered motor unit potentials ( 4 , 5 ) . Muscle atrophy or necrosis with noticeably absent inﬂammatory changes is evident on muscle biopsy . The majority of CIPNM patients who survive their critical illness demon - strate improvement in neuromuscular function over several weeks to months ( 2 ) . Currently , there is no speciﬁc treatment for CIPNM ; thus , knowledge of risk factors and the implementation of preventive strategies are crucial in the care of high - risk patients . The pathogenesis and pathophysiology of CIPNM are unclear but likely a conse - quence of multiple factors , including al - terations in the microcirculation , activa - tion of proinﬂammatory cytokines , and changes in skeletal muscle membrane ex - citability and intracellular calcium re - lease . Disorders of proteolytic and apo - ptotic pathways may also be contributory ( 2 , 6 – 8 ) . Known risk factors for CIPNM include a high Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation ( APACHE ) III score on admission to the intensive care unit ( ICU ) and the presence of the sys - temic inﬂammatory response syndrome ( 9 ) . Others have reported duration rather than the severity of MODS , the presence of hyperglycemia , administration of cor - ticosteroids , duration of mechanical ven - tilation , and female gender as added in - dependent risk factors ( 4 , 10 ) . On the other hand , the use of aminoglycoside antibiotics , neuromuscular blocking agents , parenteral nutrition , or renal re - placement therapy has not been consis - tently shown to be associated with CIPNM ( 10 , 11 ) . The acute respiratory distress syn - drome ( ARDS ) is a frequent complication of severe sepsis ; thus , CIPNM would be anticipated to occur commonly in pa - tients with ARDS . Herridge et al . ( 12 ) reported a high prevalence of persistent muscle weakness and fatigue in survivors of ARDS 1 yr after ICU discharge . Others have also reported on the signiﬁcant re - duction of physical activity and quality of life in survivors of ARDS compared with critically ill control patients ( 13 , 14 ) . As there was no comparison or control group of non - ARDS survivors in the study by Herridge et al . ( 12 ) , the investigators were unable to fully determine whether the neuromuscular sequelae observed were speciﬁc to ARDS survivors or typical for other severely affected critically ill patients . In this issue of Critical Care Medicine , Dr . Bercker and colleagues ( 15 ) examined the risk factors that may promote the development of CIPNM in patients with ARDS . Additionally , they assessed the di - agnostic utility of early electrophysi - ologic testing . In their retrospective study , they reviewed the charts of 50 con - secutive ARDS patients admitted to an academic referral center in Germany be - tween May 1998 and November 2001 . All patients fulﬁlled the ARDS criteria ( as deﬁned by the American - European Con - sensus Conference ) ( 16 ) and were man - aged with standard therapies , including low tidal volume ventilation . Thirty - eight ( 76 % ) of the 50 patients had severe sepsis and MODS . Of the 50 ARDS patients , 27 ( 60 % ) were found to have CIPNM . Com - pared with patients who did not develop CIPNM , these patients were older ( me - dian age , 44 vs . 24 yrs , p (cid:1) . 010 ) , had higher mean daily peak blood glucose lev - els ( 166 vs . 144 mg / dL , p (cid:2) . 001 ) , spent longer days on mechanical ventilation ( median , 20 vs . 13 days , p (cid:1) . 018 ) , and had an increased ICU length of stay ( me - dian , 38 vs . 26 days , p (cid:1) . 001 ) . There was no signiﬁcant difference between the two groups for the following observations : duration of sepsis ; severity of illness or MODS ; Pa O 2 / F IO 2 ratio on admission ; ad - ministration of corticosteroids , amino - glycoside antibiotics , or neuromuscular blocking agents ; and use of renal replace - ment therapy or parenteral nutrition . Although the study examined only 50 ARDS patients , it sheds light on the inci - dence and risk factors of CIPNM in this patient group . The authors showed that CIPNM is frequent in patients with ARDS and can be associated with prolonged me - chanical ventilation and ICU length of stay . The ﬁnding of hyperglycemia as an independent risk factor for CIPNM in this study is in agreement with prior observa - tions ( 4 , 17 ) . The study ﬁndings provide added justiﬁcation for early electrophysi - ologic testing in critically ill patients to identify those with CIPNM who may be at risk for weaning failure . * See also p . 711 . Key Words : critical illness polyneuropathy ; critical illness myopathy ; acute respiratory distress syndrome ; hyperglycemia ; intensive care Copyright © 2005 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Lippincott Williams & Wilkins DOI : 10 . 1097 / 01 . CCM . 0000160009 . 97759 . BA 895 Crit Care Med 2005 Vol . 33 , No . 4 The conclusions that can drawn from this study are limited by its retrospective design , the relatively small number of patient records reviewed , and the lack of data on muscle strength . In addition , no long - term data regarding the clinical out - come and results of neuropsychological or electrophysiologic studies after dis - charge from the ICU were provided . Fur - thermore , there were several issues that were not fully addressed in the current study : whether preexisting CIPNM was present at the time of ICU admission , whether early diagnosis and appropriate management of CIPNM could have al - tered outcome , and whether the patient’s nutritional status ( given the lack of data on how these patients were fed during their ICU stay ) played a role in the devel - opment of CIPNM . Interestingly , the au - thors point out that there was no signif - icant difference in the frequency of tracheostomy between the ARDS patients with and without CIPNM . It is increasingly clear that critical care practitioners should be aware that CIPNM may occur and can inﬂuence the course and management of disease in critically ill patients , particularly those with ARDS and severe sepsis . Thus , early electrophysiologic testing should be con - sidered in this patient population , espe - cially among the elderly and those with hyperglycemia . Prospective studies are warranted to investigate the incidence and severity of CIPNM in the critically ill and to determine whether tight glycemic control ( with intensive insulin therapy ) can minimize this complication and im - prove patient outcome . Stephen M . Pastores , MD , FCCM Memorial Sloan - Kettering Cancer Center New York , NY REFERENCES 1 . Bolton C , Gilbert J , Hahn A , et al : Polyneu - ropathy in critically ill patients . J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1984 ; 47 : 1223 – 1231 2 . Bolton CF , Gillert J , Hahn AF : Neuromuscu - lar abnormalities in critically ill patients . In - tensive Care Med 1993 ; 19 : 309 – 310 3 . Bolton CF : Sepsis and the systemic inﬂam - matory response syndrome : Neuromuscular manifestations . Crit Care Med 1996 ; 24 : 1408 – 1416 4 . Witt N , Zochodne D , Bolton C , et al : Periph - eral nerve function in sepsis and multiple organ failure . Chest 1991 ; 99 : 176 – 184 5 . Trojaborg W , Weimer LH , Hays AP : Electro - physiologic studies in critical illness associ - ated weakness : myopathy or neuropathy—A reappraisal . Clin Neurophysiol 2001 ; 112 : 1586 – 1593 6 . de Letter MA , van Doorn PA , Savelkoul HF , et al : Critical illness polyneuropathy and myop - athy ( CIPNM ) : Evidence for local immune ac - tivation by cytokine - expression in the muscle tissue . J Neuroimmunol 2000 ; 106 : 206 – 213 7 . Di Giovanni S , Mirabella M , D’Amico A , et al : Apoptotic features accompany acute quadri - plegic myopathy . Neurology 2000 ; 55 : 854 – 858 8 . Friedrich O , Hund E , Weber C , et al : Critical illness myopathy serum fractions affect membrane excitability and intracellular cal - cium release in mammalian skeletal muscle . J Neurol 2004 ; 251 : 53 – 65 9 . de Letter MA , Schmitz PIM , Visser LH , et al : Risk factors for the development of polyneu - ropathy and myopathy in critically ill pa - tients . Crit Care Med 2001 ; 29 : 2281 – 2286 10 . De Jonghe B , Sharshar T , Lefaucheur JP , et al : Paresis acquired in the intensive care unit : A prospective multicenter study . JAMA 2002 ; 288 : 2859 – 2867 11 . Deem S , Lee CM , Curtis JR : Acquired neuro - muscular disorders in the intensive care unit . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003 ; 168 : 735 – 739 12 . Herridge MS , Cheung AM , Tansey CM , et al : One - year outcomes in survivors of the acute respiratory distress syndrome . N Engl J Med 2003 ; 348 : 683 – 693 13 . Davidson TA , Caldwell ES , Curtis JR , et al : Reduced quality of life in survivors of acute respiratory distress syndrome compared with critically ill control patients . JAMA 1999 ; 281 : 354 – 360 14 . Angus DC , Musthafa AA , Clermont G , et al : Quality - adjusted survival in the ﬁrst year af - ter the acute respiratory distress syndrome . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001 ; 163 : 1389 – 1394 15 . Bercker S , Weber - Carstens S , Deja M , et al : Critical illness polyneuropathy and myop - athy in patients with acute respiratory dis - tress syndrome . Crit Care Med 2005 ; 33 : 711 – 715 16 . Bernard GR , Artigas A , Brigham KL , et al : The American - European Consensus Confer - ence on ARDS . Deﬁnitions , mechanisms , rel - evant outcomes , and clinical trial coordina - tion . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1994 ; 149 : 818 – 824 17 . Van den Berghe G , Wouters P , Weekers F , et al : Intensive insulin therapy in critically ill patients . N Engl J Med 2001 ; 345 : 1359 – 1367 Does nitric oxide control the counter - inﬂammatory response in endotoxic shock ? * I n this issue of Critical Care Med - icine , Dr . Miki and colleagues ( 1 ) , from Kansai Medical University in Osaka , Japan , present the results of a study addressing the inﬂuence of nitric oxide ( NO ) , an inﬂammatory factor , on the host response to bacterial endo - toxin . Endotoxin is a component of the cell wall of Gram - negative bacteria and is the primary initiator of the pathophysio - logic consequences of the sepsis - medi - ated shock response . Dr . Miki and col - leagues ( 1 ) use a mouse endotoxin challenge model to test the hypothesis that NO plays a major role in controlling the inﬂammatory response to endotoxin . Previous work in this area suggested that NO inhibition can enhance mortality in animals challenged with endotoxin ( 2 , 3 ) . NO is an intercellular signaling factor that is produced by innate immune cells in response to endotoxin and other in - ﬂammatory stimuli ( 4 ) . Although it is well established that NO is indeed a proinﬂammatory mediator , there is also evidence to suggest that NO has a counter - inﬂammatory activity acting on cells of the adaptive immune system , in particular , T cells ( 5 , 6 ) . These authors show that exposure to endotoxin causes a shift in the T - cell response phenotype to what is referred as a T - helper 2 ( Th2 ) – type response , a counter - inﬂammatory – type adaptive immune response ( 7 ) . How - ever , when mice that lack an enzyme that is required to make NO ( inducible NO * See also p . 716 . Copyright © 2005 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Lippincott Williams & Wilkins DOI : 10 . 1097 / 01 . CCM . 0000159696 . 69557 . 41 896 Crit Care Med 2005 Vol . 33 , No . 4 synthase [ iNOS ] ) were given the same dose of endotoxin , they failed to observe this natural shift toward a Th2 - type adap - tive immune response . Instead , the oppo - site type of adaptive immune response , a T - helper 1 ( Th1 ) – type response was ob - served . Th1 - type immune responses are proinﬂammatory in nature and are asso - ciated with heightened antimicrobial im - munity ( 7 ) . Moreover , they found that iNOS - deﬁcient mice succumb more readily to endotoxin challenge than mice that have the capacity to produce normal levels of NO , suggesting that NO deﬁ - ciency augments the toxicity of endo - toxin . Their data support two general conclusions . First , NO plays a protective role during endotoxemia , and second , the Th2 - type response induced by endotoxin is dependent on NO . However , their ﬁnd - ings also suggest that the Th2 - type re - sponse displayed by the adaptive immune system ( CD4 (cid:3) T cells ) after endotoxemia may be an important protective response during sepsis . Dr . Miki and colleagues ( 1 ) promote the idea that NO plays a role in inducing immune dysfunction after endotoxemia . However , their ﬁndings really suggest that NO protects the host from excessive inﬂammatory reactivity and death . I be - lieve that an increased understanding of mechanistic basis for this observation and how NO is involved in the induction of a protective Th2 - type response will surely advance our understanding of the pathologic consequences of endotoxemia and sepsis . Some possibilities that were not addressed by these authors is the potential role of the NO - producing my - eloid suppressor macrophage subset in controlling inﬂammatory reactivity in their model or the idea that endotoxin might activate CD4 (cid:3) CD25 (cid:3) regulatory T cells that are known to control inﬂam - matory responses through Th2 - type mechanisms ( 8 – 10 ) . Interestingly , CD4 (cid:3) CD25 (cid:3) regulatory T cells expresses receptors , Toll - like receptor 4 , that react speciﬁcally with endotoxin ( 11 ) . Similar conclusions concerning the protective counter - inﬂammatory activity of Th2 - type responses have been made in other inﬂammatory - driven diseases such as trauma , burn injury , colitis , and auto - immune inﬂammatory diseases ( 10 , 12 – 15 ) . Unfortunately , a prolonged and ex - cessive Th2 - type response can also cause generalized immune suppression and the development of opportunistic infections , as has been characterized after severe trauma , burn injury , and sepsis ( 16 , 17 ) . This suggests that maintaining immune homeostasis with respect to the balance between inﬂammatory - and counter - inﬂammatory – type responses plays a ma - jor role in maintaining a healthy immune response . Is NO a major determinant in the balance between Th1 - and Th2 - type immune responses after sepsis or injury ? The results presented in this study , al - though limited to endotoxemia , suggest that it might be one important determi - nant . Other studies also support this pos - sibility , showing that NO deﬁciency re - sults in a bias toward Th1 - type reactivity and reduced Th2 - type responses . In par - ticular , it was shown that iNOS - deﬁcient mice had higher Th1 - type responses to herpes simplex virus – 1 or Leishmania in - fection ( 18 , 19 ) . Enhanced Th1 - type re - activity was also observed in iNOS - deﬁcient mice challenged with the parasite Schistosoma mansoni ( 20 ) . However , in all these studies , it was shown that the biased Th1 - type response did not provide a protective beneﬁt to the host . It was eventually shown that the cytokine , interleukin - 12 , was responsible in part for the skewed Th1 - type response because NO suppresses interleukin - 12 production and cells from iNOS - deﬁcient mice produce higher levels of interleu - kin - 12 ( 21 ) . In summation , it seems that NO can be an important determinant of the bal - ance between Th1 - and Th2 - type immune responses . However , the most important contribution of NO to overall host immu - nity may be to control excessive inﬂam - matory responses through the subse - quent induction of a counter - inﬂammatory protective Th2 - type adaptive immune response . The recent report of higher mortality in patients with septic shock treated with the NO synthase inhibitor drug 546C88 ( 59 % vs . 49 % for placebo ) suggests that NO does indeed play a natural protective role in septic shock ( 22 ) . Future considerations of therapeutic strategies targeting the NO or other immune regulatory networks during sepsis and trauma need to con - sider this balance between Th1 - and Th2 - type control of inﬂammatory responses as an important determinant of patient out - come . James A . Lederer , MS , PhD Department of Surgery Brigham and Women’s Hospital Harvard Medical School Boston , MA REFERENCES 1 . Miki S , Takeyama N , Tanaka T : Immune dys - function in endotoxicosis : Role of nitric ox - ide produced by inducible nitric oxide syn - thase . Crit Care Med 2005 ; 33 : 716 – 720 2 . Billiar TR , Curran RD , Harbrecht BG , et al : Modulation of nitrogen oxide synthesis in vivo : NG - monomethyl - L - arginine inhibits endotoxin - induced nitrate / nitrate biosynthe - sis while promoting hepatic damage . J Leu - koc Biol 1990 ; 48 : 565 – 569 3 . Cobb JP , Natanson C , Hoffman WD , et al : N omega - amino - L - arginine , an inhibitor of ni - tric oxide synthase , raises vascular resistance but increases mortality rates in awake ca - nines challenged with endotoxin . J Exp Med 1992 ; 176 : 1175 – 1182 4 . MacMicking J , Xie QW , Nathan C : Nitric ox - ide and macrophage function . Annu Rev Im - munol 1997 ; 15 : 323 – 350 5 . van der Veen RC , Dietlin TA , Dixon Gray J , et al : Macrophage - derived nitric oxide inhibits the proliferation of activated T helper cells and is induced during antigenic stimulation of rest - ing T cells . Cell Immunol 2000 ; 199 : 43 – 49 6 . van der Veen RC : Nitric oxide and T helper cell immunity . Int Immunopharmacol 2001 ; 1 : 1491 – 1500 7 . Abbas AK , Murphy KM , Sher A : Functional diversity of helper T lymphocytes . Nature 1996 ; 383 : 787 – 793 8 . Garn H , Siese A , Stumpf S , et al : Shift toward an alternatively activated macrophage re - sponse in lungs of NO 2 - exposed rats . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2003 ; 28 ( 3 ) : 386 – 396 9 . Atochina O , Daly - Engel T , Piskorska D , et al : A schistosome - expressed immunomodula - tory glycoconjugate expands peritoneal Gr1 ( (cid:3) ) macrophages that suppress naive CD4 ( (cid:3) ) T cell proliferation via an IFN - gamma and nitric oxide - dependent mecha - nism . J Immunol 2001 ; 167 : 4293 – 4302 10 . Powrie F , Read S , Mottet C , et al : Control of immune pathology by regulatory T cells . No - vartis Found Symp 2003 ; 252 : 92 – 98 ; discus - sion , 98 – 105 , 106 – 114 11 . Caramalho I , Lopes - Carvalho T , Ostler D , et al : Regulatory T cells selectively express toll - like receptors and are activated by lipopoly - saccharide . J Exp Med 2003 ; 197 : 403 – 411 12 . Munford RS , Pugin J : Normal responses to injury prevent systemic inﬂammation and can be immunosuppressive . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001 ; 163 : 316 – 321 13 . Guo Z , Kavanagh E , Zang Y , et al : Burn injury promotes antigen - driven Th2 - type re - sponses in vivo . J Immunol 2003 ; 171 : 3983 – 3990 14 . Zang Y , Dolan SM , Choileain NN , et al : Burn injury initiates a shift in superantigen - induced T cell responses and host survival . J Immunol 2004 ; 172 : 4883 – 4892 15 . Sakaguchi S : Naturally arising CD4 (cid:3) regu - latory T cells for immunologic self - tolerance and negative control of immune responses . Annu Rev Immunol 2004 ; 22 : 531 – 562 16 . Hotchkiss RS , Karl IE : The pathophysiology 897 Crit Care Med 2005 Vol . 33 , No . 4 and treatment of sepsis . N Engl J Med 2003 ; 348 : 138 – 150 17 . Lederer JA , Rodrick ML , Mannick JA : The effects of injury on the adaptive immune response . Shock 1999 ; 11 : 153 – 159 18 . Wei XQ , Charles IG , Smith A , et al : Altered immune responses in mice lacking inducible nitric oxide synthase . Nature 1995 ; 375 : 408 – 411 19 . MacLean A , Wei XQ , Huang FP , et al : Mice lacking inducible nitric - oxide synthase are more susceptible to herpes simplex virus in - fection despite enhanced Th1 cell responses . J Gen Virol 1998 ; 79 ( Pt 4 ) : 825 – 830 20 . James SL , Cheever AW , Caspar P , et al : In - ducible nitric oxide synthase - deﬁcient mice develop enhanced type 1 cytokine - associated cellular and humoral immune responses af - ter vaccination with attenuated Schistosoma mansoni cercariae but display partially re - duced resistance . Infect Immun 1998 ; 66 : 3510 – 3518 21 . Huang FP , Niedbala W , Wei XQ , et al : Nitric oxide regulates Th1 cell development through the inhibition of IL - 12 synthesis by macrophages . Eur J Immunol 1998 ; 28 : 4062 – 4070 22 . Lopez A , Lorente JA , Steingrub J , et al : Mul - tiple - center , randomized , placebo - con - trolled , double - blind study of the nitric oxide synthase inhibitor 546C88 : Effect on survival in patients with septic shock . Crit Care Med 2004 ; 32 : 21 – 30 The quest to improve cardiac arrest survival : Overcoming the hemodynamic effects of ventilation * C ardiovascular disease claims almost 800 , 000 lives annually in the United States . Of these , about one half are due to sud - den cardiac death ( 1 ) . Survival varies largely by community but is uniformly dismal , with only 5 % surviving out - of - hospital cardiopulmonary resuscitation . These rates are disappointing given the widespread international research focus on cardiac resuscitation and the measur - able success achieved over the years with various cardiac drugs , procedures , and devices in the laboratory setting . The question is why many of these interven - tions so often work in large animal stud - ies but only work some of the time in human studies . Translational research may be our best opportunity to address this quandary . An area of escalating scientiﬁc interest and promise is in the idea of enhancing the low - ﬂow state of cardiac resuscitation by manipulating intrathoracic pressures during cardiopulmonary resuscitation ( CPR ) . The stability of the myocardium is dependent on adequate perfusion of the coronary vessels . It has been shown that stroke volume and additionally myocar - dial perfusion are greatly diminished by the high intrathoracic pressures pro - duced with positive pressure ventilation ( 2 – 5 ) . To mitigate this problem , multiple techniques have been considered to re - duce the intrathoracic pressures during CPR : changing the chest compression - ventilation ratios ; decreasing ventilation frequency , amplitude , and duration ; aug - menting the elastic recoil of the chest to enhance the return of blood back into the chest ; and selective blockade of ventila - tion during the decompression phase of CPR . The idea is to reduce intrathoracic pressures , creating a vacuum - like nega - tive pressure state in the chest , to in - crease venous return and ultimately im - prove cardiac output and vital organ perfusion . Coronary perfusion pressure ( CPP ) is largely considered a measure of efﬁcacy of CPR and is the calculated difference between the diastolic aortic pressure and the right atrial pressure . Previous inves - tigators have tried both direct and indi - rect methods in attempts to improve the CPP . Direct aortic arch perfusion may be accomplished by infusing volume through a balloon catheter directed to the thoracic aorta via the femoral artery ( 6 ) . Alternatively , indirect methods such as the active compression - decompression CPR device use the vacuum concept , ac - tively assisting the natural recoil of the chest wall to create a negative pressure state in the thorax to enhance myocardial ﬂow ( 7 , 8 ) . Indirect methods are perhaps more favorable in the prehospital setting as they may be accomplished by nonin - vasive means . The inspiratory impedance threshold device ( ITD ) is a small , inexpensive , air - way adjunct to reduce intrathoracic pres - sures by preventing positive pressure ventilation during the decompression phase of CPR ( 9 ) . The device is a one - way valve that is attached to a face mask or an endotracheal tube and is used with the ventilation bag . It essentially blocks air from entering the lungs during the de - compression phase of CPR . Animal stud - ies clearly show that the impedance threshold device improves circulation during CPR by enhancing negative in - trathoracic pressures ( 10 – 13 ) . A study in this issue of Critical Care Medicine reports on the ﬁrst double - blinded randomized controlled trial de - signed to evaluate clinical outcomes of an ITD ( 14 ) . The Milwaukee study provides further data for the ITD in out - of - hospital cardiac arrest patients , which previously had only been tested clinically in com - bination with active compression - decompression CPR ( 15 – 17 ) . The study compares short - term outcomes ( ICU admission , 24 - hr survival ) of patients treated with standard CPR combined with either ITD or a sham device . No - table is that the trial was terminated early for several technical reasons but not for lack of patient safety or efﬁcacy of the device . Consequently , the study was underpowered to assess even short - term outcomes—thus , any subgroup analysis , a priori or not , must be eval - uated critically in this light . Although no signiﬁcant association was found overall with use of the device , a post hoc analysis identiﬁed a signiﬁcant sur - vival beneﬁt for the ITD patients who had a documented cardiac rhythm of pulseless electrical activity at any time during the cardiac arrest . For patients with pulseless electrical activity , a group that typically has few survivors , 24 - hr survival was double with the use of the ITD vs . sham . The data are prom - ising at best . Given the small sample size and the lack of alpha - adjustment * See also p . 734 . Key Words : cardiopulmonary resuscitation ; cardio - pulmonary resuscitation impedance threshold device Copyright © 2005 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Lippincott Williams & Wilkins DOI : 10 . 1097 / 01 . CCM . 0000159748 . 51702 . 20 898 Crit Care Med 2005 Vol . 33 , No . 4 for multiple testing , it is difﬁcult to eluci - date the clinical importance of this ﬁnding , which perhaps is not the most noteworthy ﬁnding of this investigation . During patient recruitment for this study , investigators made an alarming discovery regarding the way that emer - gency personnel ventilate patients in the ﬁeld . Patients were ventilated at an aver - age rate of 37 breaths / min , which is more than double the American Hospital Asso - ciation recommendation ( 2 , 3 ) . Using a porcine model , investigators showed that this practice of hyperventilation adversely affected stroke volumes and coronary perfusion pressures . To moderate this , all emergency personnel went through a CPR retraining session , and a timing de - vice was used to give rescuers a prompt to ventilate at a proper rate . It is likely that this practice of hyperventilating patients is common among emergency agencies , and thus this ﬁnding has potentially global implications . The concern that we now face is whether many of our prior clinical studies of cardiac drugs and pro - cedures have been hampered by this same mechanism—by which hyperventilation has created a state of such poor coronary perfusion pressures as to prohibit ade - quate circulation of study drugs and sat - isfactory trial of these interventions . Finally , it is important to understand that the authors of this study have estab - lished signiﬁcant ﬁnancial ties with the patent , corporation , and manufacturer of the trial device . Relationships between industry and clinical researchers have been increasingly scrutinized in recent years . The implication is that industry - supported clinical trials may yield biased ﬁndings and violate basic research prin - ciples . We each must consider for our - selves the relative importance of any af - ﬁliations that may present here as an appearance of a conﬂict of interest . Should we be adopting the use of the impedance threshold device based on these preliminary clinical results ? The devices are inexpensive and easy to use . The safety proﬁle appears satisfactory . Animal studies have clearly shown that the ITD successfully reduces intratho - racic pressures and enhances circulation during CPR . Moreover , clinical trials combining ITD with active compression - decompression CPR also show improved coronary perfusion pressures and short - term survival outcomes . The modality ap - pears promising , but further research is necessary before adopting this new de - vice . We do not want this to be another example of “letting the horse out of the barn , ” whereby we change clinical prac - tice at the ﬁrst sight of a potentially promising technology and thus lose any further window of opportunity to subject the intervention to appropriate study to elucidate its true potential . Although an - imal studies are mostly positive , and this article gives us reason to be optimistic , there is currently insufﬁcient evidence to support a change in general clinical prac - tice . Appropriately , authors are currently conducting a further , more deﬁnitive trial to evaluate the effectiveness of this device , incorporating both a larger sam - ple size and a more clinically meaningful primary outcome of survival to hospital discharge . Should we evaluate our systems to de - termine whether our emergency person - nel are following American Hospital As - sociation guidelines for ventilation rates during CPR ? The Milwaukee experience provides compelling evidence to suggest that we should more closely monitor our emergency personnel to ensure that pa - tients are not being hyperventilated dur - ing CPR . Resuscitation researchers are now acutely aware of the detrimental ef - fect of hyperventilation on stroke volume and vital organ perfusion . Is it possible that the simple correction of this proce - dure alone could lead to important sur - vival beneﬁts on a wide - scale basis ? Now is the time for clinical researchers to re - consider all those negative cardiac arrest trials that failed to bear out the same promise purported by their colleagues in the animal laboratory . Valerie J . De Maio , MD , MSc Department of Emergency Medicine University of North Carolina Chapel Hill , NC REFERENCES 1 . Zheng ZJ , Croft JB , Giles WH : State speciﬁc mortality from sudden cardiac death - United States , 1999 . MMWR Morbid Mortal Wkly Rep 2002 ; 51 : 123 – 126 2 . Aufderheide TP , Sigurdsson G , Pirrallo RG , et al : Hyperventilation - induced hypotension during cardiopulmonary resuscitation . Cir - culation 2004 ; 109 : 1960 – 1965 3 . Aufderheide TP , Lurie KG : Death by hyper - ventilation : A common and life - threatening problem during cardiopulmonary resuscita - tion . Crit Care Med 2004 ; 32 ( 9 suppl ) : S345 – S351 4 . Sigurdsson G , Yannopoulos D , McKnite SH , et al : Cardiorespiratory interactions and blood ﬂow generation during cardiac arrest and other states of low blood ﬂow . Curr Opin Crit Care 2003 ; 9 : 183 – 188 5 . Pepe PE , Raedler C , Lurie KG , et al : Emer - gency ventilatory management in hemor - rhagic states : Elemental or detrimental ? J Trauma 2003 ; 54 : 1048 – 1047 6 . Manning JE , Murphy CA Jr , Hertz CM , et al : Selective aortic arch perfusion during car - diac arrest : A new resuscitation technique . Ann Emerg Med 1992 ; 21 : 1058 – 1065 7 . Guly UM , Robertson CE : Active decompres - sion improves the haemodynamic state dur - ing cardiopulmonary resuscitation . Br Heart J 1995 ; 73 : 372 – 376 8 . Malzer R , Zeiner A , Binder M , et al : Hemo - dynamic effects of active compression - decompression after prolonged CPR . Resus - citation 1996 ; 31 : 243 – 253 9 . Lurie KG , Mulligan KA , McKnite S , et al : Optimizing standard cardiopulmonary resus - citation with an inspiratory impedance threshold valve . Chest 1998 ; 113 : 1084 – 1090 10 . Marino BS , Yannopoulos D , Sigurdsson G , et al : Spontaneous breathing through an in - spiratory impedance threshold device aug - ments cardiac index and stroke volume index in a pediatric porcine model of hemorrhagic hypovolemia . Crit Care Med 2004 ; 32 ( 9 Suppl ) : S398 – S405 11 . Yannopoulos D , Sigurdsson G , McKnite S , et al : Reducing ventilation frequency combined with an inspiratory impedance device im - proves CPR efﬁciency in swine model of car - diac arrest . Resuscitation 2004 ; 61 : 75 – 82 12 . Lurie KG , Barnes TA , Zielinski TM , et al : Evaluation of a prototypic inspiratory imped - ance threshold valve designed to enhance the efﬁciency of cardiopulmonary resuscitation . Respir Care 2003 ; 48 : 52 – 57 13 . Lurie K , Zielinski T , McKnite S , et al : Im - proving the efﬁciency of cardiopulmonary re - suscitation with an inspiratory impedance threshold valve . Crit Care Med 2000 ; 28 ( 11 Suppl ) : N207 – N209 14 . AufderheideTP , PirralloRG , ProvoTA , etal : Clin - ical evaluation of an inspiratory impedance threshold device during standard cardiopulmo - naryresuscitationinpatientswithout - of - hospital cardiac arrest . Crit Care Med 2005 ; 33 : 734 – 740 15 . Plaisance P , Lurie KG , Vicaut E , et al : Eval - uation of an impedance threshold device in patients receiving active compression - decompression cardiopulmonary resuscita - tion for out of hospital cardiac arrest . Resus - citation 2004 ; 61 : 265 – 271 16 . Wolcke BB , Mauer DK , Schoefmann MF , et al : Comparison of standard cardiopulmonary resuscitation versus the combination of ac - tive compression - decompression cardiopul - monary resuscitation and an inspiratory im - pedance threshold device for out - of - hospital cardiac arrest . Circulation 2003 ; 108 : 2201 – 2205 17 . Frascone RJ , Bitz D , Lurie K : Combination of active compression decompression cardio - pulmonary resuscitation and the inspiratory impedance threshold device : state of the art . Curr Opin Crit Care 2004 ; 10 : 193 – 201 899 Crit Care Med 2005 Vol . 33 , No . 4 Acute lung injury : New insights from computed tomography * C omputed tomography ( CT ) has become a superb research tool for dissecting pulmonary pathophysiology during me - chanical ventilation in patients with acute lung injury ( ALI ) . Since the ﬁrst descriptions of lung morphometry in acute respiratory distress syndrome ( ARDS ) almost 2 decades ago ( 1 , 2 ) , im - provements in CT technology have both improved scan resolution and reduced scan time . Now multiple - detector , helical scanners can scan the entire thorax in (cid:2) 3 secs at a slice thickness of 1 – 1 . 5 mm . Using differences in Hounsﬁeld density , lung regions that are normally aerated can be distinguished from lung regions that are either derecruited or overdis - tended . The Hounsﬁeld density of each CT voxel , although displayed on a computer screen as a single pixel , is in reality an average density of all of the alveoli within the voxel’s three - dimensional volume . Within each voxel , some alveoli may be derecruited , some may be normally aer - ated , and some may be overdistended . Volume averaging effectively hides from the reader the heterogeneity of aeration that exists within each voxel . The larger the voxel , the less regional heterogeneity is apparent . Density histograms can be used by readers to calculate the percentage of lung tissue that falls within each category of aeration . Decreasing slice thickness re - duces the size of each voxel , which , in turn , reduces the number of alveoli aver - aged in each voxel . The resulting en - hanced spatial resolution permits small regions of hyperinﬂation to be identiﬁed that would have escaped detection if thicker slices had been used . In this issue of Critical Care Medicine , Dr . Vieira and colleagues ( 3 ) report the results of a study that is proof of this principal . They compare the sensitivity of low to high spatial resolution CT sections in the detection lung overinﬂation in 30 pa - tients with ALI / ARDS . In this study ( 3 ) , lung overinﬂation was measured using previously validated proprietary imaging software on thick ( 10 mm ) and thin ( 1 . 5 mm ) CT sections obtained at functional residual capacity at either zero end - expiratory pressure or positive end - expiratory pressure of 10 cm H 2 O . Pa - tients were anesthetized , paralyzed , and ventilated using controlled mechanical ventilation . Overinﬂated lung volume was measured as the end - expiratory vol - ume of lung regions with CT attenuations (cid:2)(cid:4) 900 Hounsﬁeld units , a density pre - viously determined as the lower limit of lung attenuation in volunteers breath - holding at total lung capacity ( 4 ) . The authors demonstrate that thick slice CT signiﬁcantly underestimates regional overinﬂation compared with thin CT sec - tions . Underestimation of overdistension occurred primarily in patients with focal loss of aeration , that is , signiﬁcant radio - graphic inhomogeneity involving primar - ily the lower lobes . Although the applica - tion of positive end - expiratory pressure signiﬁcantly increased overdistension only in patients with focal inﬁltrates , these patients represented 60 % of the population studied . During positive end - expiratory pressure of 10 cm H 2 O , the percentage of lung estimated to be over - inﬂated was negligible when measured using thick CT sections but was as high as 16 % when measured using thin CT sections . When one considers that the CT images were acquired at end - expiration rather than during an inspiratory - hold maneuver , this number is certainly an underestimation of the amount of lung that would be overdistended during rou - tine ventilation . Although the focus on the current study is on new technology , Vieira and colleagues are careful not to let the real signiﬁcance of these observations to es - cape ; they provide strong imaging evi - dence that overinﬂation is indeed heter - ogeneously distributed between adjacent alveoli during mechanical ventilation of patients with acute lung injury . Further - more , they show that regional overdis - tension can occur even when plateau air - way pressures are in the previously considered “safe” range of 25 cm H 2 O . The implications of these data are tre - mendous and again beg the question : “Is there a safe plateau airway pressure ? ” In a preliminary report of a post hoc analysis of data from the ARDSnet tidal volume trial ( 5 ) , Brower and colleagues ( 6 ) investigated the effect of tidal volume reduction in patients who had plateau airway pressures in the previously consid - ered safe range of (cid:1) 32 cm H 2 O . In pa - tients from this trial who had the lowest quartile of plateau airway pressures on study day 1 , those who were randomized to receive a tidal volume 12 mL / kg of predicted body weight had plateau airway pressures (cid:1) 26 cm H 2 O and a mortality rate of 34 % . These numbers are very sim - ilar to those reported in the focal lung injury group of the present study ( 3 ) ( 25 cm H 2 O and 39 % , respectively ) . Patients in the ARDSnet trial randomized to 6 mL / kg of predicted body weight had pla - teau airway pressures (cid:1) 20 cm H 2 O and a mortality rate of only 23 % . Unfortu - nately , we do not have information on the heterogeneity of radiographic inﬁltration in the ARDSnet trial ( 5 ) , but using the data by Dr . Vieira and colleagues ( 3 ) and Brower et al . ( 6 ) in composite might lead one to speculate that there is not a safe plateau airway pressure below which pa - tients are spared ventilator - induced lung injury . Nor , as pointed out in a previous investigation by the authors of the current report ( 7 ) , will reliance on the pressure - volume curve reliably identify overdisten - sion since it occurs simultaneously with recruitment . Only high - resolution CT imaging can reliably detect this type of regional overdistension . In reference to the implications of these data , Dr . Vieira and coauthors ( 3 ) state that this information is of critical importance in the care of patients . How - ever , it seems a bit premature to suggest that clinicians should start rushing every ALI / ARDS patient to the CT scanner . For several reasons , the current information represents an interesting vista along our journey , not our destination , in our un - * See also p . 741 . Key Words : computed tomography ; acute lung in - jury ; acute respiratory distress syndrome Copyright © 2005 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Lippincott Williams & Wilkins DOI : 10 . 1097 / 01 . CCM . 0000159722 . 22115 . 44 900 Crit Care Med 2005 Vol . 33 , No . 4 derstanding of lung pathophysiology dur - ing mechanical ventilation . First , very few centers have the expertise of the authors to perform these difﬁcult stud - ies in an accurate , precise , and safe manner . Second , just like the use of CT for the diagnosis of pulmonary embo - lism ( 8 ) , the current data will need ad - ditional validation by other centers to be generalizable to community medical centers . And ﬁnally , but most impor - tant , the clinical impact of these obser - vations is largely unknown . Although we now clearly understand the clinical relevance of ventilation with high tidal volumes and high plateau air - way pressures , we know nothing about the relevance of radiographic regional hy - perinﬂation during “lung - protective ven - tilation” that is visible only through the eyes of high - resolution CT imaging . De - veloping portable bedside CT density his - tograms that are used to customize both mechanical ventilation and body posi - tioning in a way that optimizes alveolar recruitment while minimizing the risk of ventilator - induced lung injury ( 9 ) will re - main a clinical science challenge for years to come . Ben deBoisblanc , MD , FCCM Section of Pulmonary / Critical Care Medicine Louisiana State University Medical School New Orleans , LA REFERENCES 1 . Gattinoni L , Presenti A , Torresin A , et al : Adult respiratory distress syndrome proﬁles by com - puted tomography . J Thorac Imaging 1986 ; 1 : 25 – 30 2 . Maunder RJ , Shuman WP , McHugh JW , et al : Preservation of normal lung regions in the adult respiratory distress syndrome . Analysis by computed tomography . JAMA 1986 ; 255 : 2463 – 2465 3 . Vieira SRR , Nieszkowska A , Lu Q , et al : Low spatial resolution computed tomography un - derestimates lung overinﬂation resulting from positive pressure ventilation . Crit Care Med 2005 ; 33 : 741 – 749 4 . Vieira SR , Puybasset L , Richecoeur J , et al : A lung computed tomographic assessment of positive end - expiratory pressure - induced lung overdistension . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998 ; 158 : 1571 – 1577 5 . Anonymous : Ventilation with lower tidal vol - umes as compared with traditional tidal vol - umes for acute lung injury and the acute respiratory distress syndrome . The Acute Re - spiratory Distress Syndrome Network . N Engl J Med 2000 ; 342 : 1301 – 1308 6 . Brower RG , et al : Effects of tidal volume re - duction ( VT - R ) in acute lung injury ( ALI ) pa - tients with inspiratory plateau pressures ( Pplat ) (cid:1) 32 CM H2O before VT - R . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003 ; 167 : A616 7 . Rouby JJ , Lu Q , Vieira S : Pressure / volume curves and lung computed tomography in acute respiratory distress syndrome . Eur Re - spir J Suppl 2003 ; 42 8 . Gulsun M , Goodman LR : CT for the diagnosis of venous thromboembolic disease . Curr Opin Pulm Med 2003 ; 9 : 367 – 373 9 . Rouby J - J , Puybasset L , Nieszkowska A : Acute respiratory distress syndrome : Lessons from computed tomography of the whole lung . Crit Care Med 2003 ; 31 ( Suppl ) : S285 – S295 Still a black box : What do we really know about the intensive care unit admission process and its consequences ? * When you choose not to decide you have already made a choice . T he purpose of intensive care medicine is to provide the fa - cilities for diagnosis , monitor - ing , prevention , and treatment of multiple organ failure in severely ill patients . This requires a multidisci - plinary team approach and the highest possible standards of nursing and medical care . Modern intensive care units ( ICUs ) offer a limited amount of highly special - ized medical services that consume a large proportion of hospital budgets for a minority of patients ( 1 ) . One of the most important challenges for the intensivist remains the allocation of scarce public resources to those patients expected to beneﬁt from intensive care therapy . The fact that treatment—of proven value or not—is possible is not in itself justiﬁca - tion for patients’ ICU admission . Inten - sive care therapies and invasive monitor - ing techniques have complications ( 2 , 3 ) , and inappropriate admission of low - risk patients may thus not only waste scarce resources but , more importantly , expose the patient to unnecessary risks . Never - theless , the decision to transfer a patient to the ICU may often be determined by factors other than acute medical needs and potential for beneﬁt , eventually lead - ing to the admission of patients with little or no hope of survival ( 4 ) . In this issue of Critical Care Medicine , Dr . Garrouste - Orgeas and colleagues ( 5 ) for the French ADMISSIONREA Study Group carefully describe factors associ - ated with patients’ admission or refusal in 11 selected French ICUs . Among the pa - tient - related characteristics , dependency and a history of metastatic cancer signif - icantly inﬂuenced ICU admission deci - sions . Logistic regression analysis re - vealed a signiﬁcant association of center , bed availability , and time of day with the likelihood of patient refusal ( 5 ) . In reviewing the literature , surpris - ingly little information with regard to admission policies and practices is avail - able ( 6 – 10 ) , although this may have a major effect on patients’ outcome . This lack of data is most likely due to the challenging nature of such data compila - tion and analysis . Although in 1988 a consensus panel in the United Kingdom stated , “Selection for intensive care should be based on broad concepts of prognosis derived from statistical analysis of comparable cohorts of patients backed up by sound clinical trials” ( 11 ) , the ap - plicable instruments and profound data are hardly available . In the article by Dr . Garrouste - Orgeas and colleagues ( 5 ) , the authors applied— besides demographic data and admission diagnosis—a variety of instruments at - * See also p . 750 . Key Words : intensive care unit ; admission ; triage ; process ; organization ; outcome Copyright © 2005 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Lippincott Williams & Wilkins DOI : 10 . 1097 / 01 . CCM . 0000159723 . 33298 . 07 901 Crit Care Med 2005 Vol . 33 , No . 4 tempting an objective characterization of all patients , thus enabling a meaningful analysis , namely the Mortality Probability Model ( MPM II 0 ) ( 12 ) , the McCabe co - morbidity score ( 13 ) , and the Omega score ( 14 , 15 ) . Nevertheless , none of the available se - verity - of - illness scoring systems ( e . g . , Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation , Simpliﬁed Acute Physiology Score , or MPM ) is capable of predicting individual patients’ outcomes reliably , and too many confounders , such as lead time bias and case mix , may have altered patients’ outcome well beyond the scope of the scoring system ( 16 , 17 ) . Yet , MPM II 0 is still the only objective measure of patients’ severity of illness that has been validated for immediate assessment and can thus be applied before or at the time of ICU admission . However , calibration and discrimination of the MPM II 0 is poor and thus precludes strong inferences ( 18 , 19 ) . Moreover , the accuracy of the MPM II 0 ( as reﬂected by measures of discrimi - nation and calibration ) diminishes when the case mix is varied ( 20 ) . Finally , the authors applied the MPM II 0 to the non - admitted patients as well—a group of non - ICU patients for which the MPM II 0 was neither developed nor validated . A standardized mortality rate as reported by the authors for admitted , refused , and later - admitted patients may thus be grossly misleading ( 21 ) . Considering patient - related factors as the driving force for ICU admission , chronic disease state is—besides pa - tients’ age and the severity of the acute disease—an independent predictor of outcome after intensive care ( 22 ) . Conse - quently , the authors evaluated the pa - tients’ co - morbidities by applying the Mc - Cabe score , a system originally developed in the early 1960s , which has not been validated for the intended use ( 13 ) . Pa - tients not admitted to the ICU were more frequently considered rapidly fatal , with respect to the McCabe classiﬁcation ( i . e . , too sick to beneﬁt ) , and ﬁnally exhibited a higher mortality . However , the categori - zation of patients was done by the same physician who was responsible for the triage , thereby eventually introducing bias . Among the organizational factors , a full ICU was signiﬁcantly associated with refusal of patients , and for various rea - sons , outcome of refused patient was worse ( 5 ) . Although this seems intuitive , it clearly deserves closer examination . In the future , further restriction of re - sources in the healthcare systems world - wide can be expected , leading to an in - crease of bed shortage in the ICU setting . This may well be associated with ration - ing care ( 23 ) and subsequently fewer ICU admissions . The selection process re - ferred to as triage therefore assumes a pivotal role in reliably identifying those patients most likely to beneﬁt from in - tensive care therapy . For all other pa - tients , alternative settings providing sup - portive care need to be deﬁned . However , Wasserfallen et al . ( 24 ) have recently re - ported intentional bed closure on a sur - gical ICU without measurable effects on outcome or activity indicators . By its very nature , the triage process must include all patients already receiv - ing intensive care therapy . Thus , an in - depth analysis with a clear trade - off of risks and beneﬁts of intensive care be - tween all patients in the ICU and the patients on request must be executed . Moreover , the availability of alternative services in the same or other hospitals , such as intermediate care facilities or other ICUs , and the potential risks and consequences of premature discharge from the ICU ( 25 , 26 ) must be acknowl - edged . Nevertheless , commonly consid - ered outcome measures may be mislead - ing because they do not necessarily reﬂect the quality of processes and care in complex systems such as an ICU ( 24 ) . The authors consequently grouped pa - tients referred to other institutions in the category of admitted patients but did not provide the necessary data to decide whether all patients who were treated on the referring ICU did really require inten - sive care therapy . Given the signiﬁcant association of an occupied ICU and ad - mission refusal , a more in - depth analysis and detailed description of the patient cohort already cared for would have been desirable . Instruments such as the Sim - pliﬁed Therapeutic Intervention Scoring System ( TISS - 28 ) may well have served to identify the patients receiving active treatment ( i . e . , truly depending on inten - sive care therapy ) ( 27 , 28 ) . This may have also shed some light on the extreme heterogeneity with regard to refusal rates across the participating ICUs , varying from 7 % to 63 % , which has not been fully explained by the authors . It remains speculative whether speciﬁc ser - vices of these ICUs ( e . g . , case - mix , num - ber of beds , training status of the triaging physician , proportion of active treatment , or any other organizational factor ) were associated with the higher refusal rates . Patient admission and discharge re - mains a black box in intensive care med - icine . We are hardly able to deﬁne objec - tive surrogate variables for decision making , and thus , triage of patients con - tinues to be one of the most complex , accountable , and challenging obligations of the daily ICU routine . Regularly , phy - sicians are forced to decide on acceptance or denial of intensive care services for critically ill patients , with very little in - formation on hand . For the foreseeable future , ICU admis - sion practices will thus continue to be individual processes . Although recom - mendations for triage to the ICU have been issued , these are rarely followed ( 29 ) . Consequently , subjective patient as - sessment facilitated by sound medical ex - pertise , ethical experience , and responsi - bility will remain the backbone of the admission process ( 30 ) . It is hoped that more colleagues , such as the ADMISSIONREA Study Group , try to dissect their individual admission and refusal practices , thereby gaining insight in structural weaknesses and potential ar - eas for process improvement . None of this analysis will be perfect because all will inevitably suffer from a number of methodologic shortcomings , but every attempt will still serve to emphasize the principle needs and may well deﬁne fu - ture targets . Jürgen Graf , MD Medical Clinic I Department of Cardiology and Pulmonology University Hospital Aachen Aachen , Germany Uwe Janssens , MD , FESC Medical Clinic St . Antonius Hospital Eschweiler , Germany REFERENCES 1 . Kuckelt W : Notes in intensive care medicine in Europe : Intensive care medicine in Ger - many . In : Organisation and Management of Intensive Care : A Prospective Study in 12 European Countries . Reis Miranda D , Ryan DW , Schaufeli WB , et al ( Eds ) . Berlin , Springer , 1998 , pp 88 – 90 2 . Abramson NS , Wald KS , Grenvik AN , et al : Adverse occurrences in intensive care units . JAMA 1980 ; 244 : 1582 – 1584 3 . Giraud T , Dhainaut JF , Vaxelaire JF , et al : Iatrogenic complications in adult intensive care units : A prospective two - center study . Crit Care Med 1993 ; 21 : 40 – 51 4 . Vincent JL : Forgoing life support in western European intensive care units : The results of 902 Crit Care Med 2005 Vol . 33 , No . 4 an ethical questionnaire . Crit Care Med 1999 ; 27 : 1626 – 1633 5 . Garrouste - Orgeas M , Montuclard L , Timsit JF , et al : Predictors of intensive care unit refusal in French intensive care units : A mul - tiple - center study . The French ADMISSION - REA Study Group . Crit Care Med 2005 ; 33 : 750 – 755 6 . Simchen E , Sprung CL , Galai N , et al : Sur - vival of critically ill patients hospitalized in and out of intensive care units under paucity of intensive care unit beds . Crit Care Med 2004 ; 32 : 1654 – 1661 7 . Sprung CL , Geber D , Eidelman LA , et al : Evaluation of triage decisions for intensive care admission . Crit Care Med 1999 ; 27 : 1073 – 1079 8 . Metcalfe MA , Sloggett A , McPherson K : Mor - tality among appropriately referred patients refused admission to intensive - care units [ see comments ] . Lancet 1997 ; 350 : 7 – 11 9 . Hanson LC , Danis M , Lazorick S : Emergency triage to intensive care : Can we use progno - sis and patient preferences ? J Am Geriatr Soc 1994 ; 42 : 1277 – 1281 10 . Ron A , Aronne LJ , Kalb PE : The therapeutic efﬁcacy of critical care units : Identifying sub - groups of patients who beneﬁt . Arch Intern Med 1989 ; 149 : 338 – 341 11 . Intensive care in the United Kingdom : Re - port from the King’s Fund Panel . Anaesthe - sia 1989 ; 44 : 428 – 431 12 . Lemeshow S , Teres D , Klar J , et al : Mortality Probability Models ( MPM II ) based on an international cohort of intensive care unit patients . JAMA 1993 ; 270 : 2478 – 2486 13 . McCabe WR , Jackson GG : Gram negative bacteremia : Etiology and ecology . Arch In - tern Med 1962 ; 110 : 847 – 855 14 . Le Gall JR , Loirat P , Mathieu D , et al : The patients in management of intensive care . In : Guidelines for Better Use of Resources . Miranda DR , Williams A , Loirat P ( Eds ) . Dor - drecht , Kluwer , 1990 , pp 11 – 53 15 . Sznajder M , Leleu G , Buonamico G , et al : Esti - mation of direct cost and resource allocation in intensive care : Correlation with Omega system . Intensive Care Med 1998 ; 24 : 582 – 589 16 . Dragsted L , Jörgensen J , Jensen NH , et al : Interhospital comparisons of patient outcome from intensive care : Importance of lead - time bias . Crit Care Med 1989 ; 17 : 418 – 422 17 . Goldhill DR , Withington PS : The effect of casemix adjustment on mortality as pre - dicted by APACHE II . Intensive Care Med 1996 ; 22 : 415 – 419 18 . Arabi Y , Al Shirawi N , Memish Z , et al : As - sessment of six mortality prediction models in patients admitted with severe sepsis and septic shock to the intensive care unit : A prospective cohort study . Crit Care 2003 ; 7 : R116 – R122 19 . Zhu BP , Lemeshow S , Hosmer DW , et al : Fac - tors affecting the performance of the models in the Mortality Probability Model II system and strategies of customization : A simulation study . Crit Care Med 1996 ; 24 : 57 – 63 20 . Murphy - Filkins R , Teres D , Lemeshow S , et al : Effect of changing patient mix on the performance of an intensive care unit sever - ity - of - illness model : How to distinguish a general from a specialty intensive care unit . Crit Care Med 1996 ; 24 : 1968 – 1973 21 . Gunning K , Rowan K : Outcome data and scoring systems . BMJ 1999 ; 319 : 241 – 244 22 . Angus DC , Linde - Zwirble WT , Lidicker J , et al : Epidemiology of severe sepsis in the United States : Analysis of incidence , out - come , and associated costs of care . Crit Care Med 2004 ; 29 : 1303 – 1310 23 . Singer DE , Carr PL , Mulley AG , et al : Ration - ing intensive care – physician responses to a resource shortage . N Engl J Med 1983 ; 309 : 1155 – 1160 24 . Wasserfallen JB , Revelly JP , Moro D , et al : Can the impact of bed closure in intensive care units be reliably monitored ? Intensive Care Med 2004 ; 30 : 1134 – 1139 25 . Rosenberg AL , Watts C : Patients readmit - ted to ICUs * : A systematic review of risk factors and outcomes . Chest 2000 ; 118 : 492 – 502 26 . Goldfrad C , Rowan K : Consequences of dis - charges from intensive care at night . Lancet 2000 ; 355 : 1138 – 1142 27 . Graf J , Graf C , Janssens U : Analysis of re - source use and cost - generating factors in a German medical intensive care unit employ - ing the Therapeutic Intervention Scoring System ( TISS - 28 ) . Intensive Care Med 2002 ; 28 : 324 – 331 28 . Keenan SP , Doig GS , Martin CM , et al : As - sessing the efﬁciency of the admission pro - cess to a critical care unit : Does the literature allow the use of benchmarking ? Intensive Care Med 1997 ; 23 : 574 – 580 29 . Azoulay E , Pochard F , Chevret S , et al : Com - pliance with triage to intensive care recom - mendations . Crit Care Med 2001 ; 29 : 2132 – 2136 30 . Einav S , Soudry E , Levin PD , et al : Intensive care physicians’ attitudes concerning distri - bution of intensive care resources : A compar - ison of Israeli , North American and Euro - pean cohorts . Intensive Care Med 2004 ; 30 : 1140 – 1143 Another excuse bites the dust : Low tidal volume ventilation does not increase sedation use * W hile the ARDS Network’s ﬁrst trial comparing tidal volume ventilations ( 6 mL / kg vs . 12 mL / kg ) in acute lung injury ( ARMA ) was enrolling , I was a pulmonary fellow and helped to managed many of our site’s recruited pa - tients . Each time a new patient entered the study , the care team ( physician , nurses , respiratory therapists ) hoped that the new patient would be randomized by the coordinating center to a 12 mL / kg tidal volume . Like any intensive care team , we might disagree on various aspects of our patients’ care , but we were always unani - mous on this point . We were very conﬁdent in our belief that patients receiving 6 mL / kg tidal volume ventilation developed worse hypoxemia , more hypercarbia , and increased tachypnea and needed lots of se - dation to maintain ventilator synchrony and comfort . When the trial was stopped early in 1999 , we assumed that the trial had ended in futility . As bedside clinicians , many of us were very surprised to learn that the trial proved that low tidal volume ventilation actually decreased mortality rate by 25 % ( 1 ) . Despite ARMA , adoption of 6 mL / kg tidal volume as the standard in patients with acute lung injury / acute respiratory distress syndrome ( ALI / ARDS ) is far from universal ( 2 – 5 ) . A recent study shows that average tidal volumes for ALI / ARDS patients have decreased only modestly since the ﬁndings of the ARMA study , from 11 . 7 mL / kg to 10 . 7 mL / kg ( 4 ) . One may posit various reasons for this slow adoption among physicians , but few are supported by recent evidence . For exam - ple , some practitioners may choose to * See also p . 766 . Key Words : acute lung injury ; acute respiratory distress syndrome ; sedation ; ARDSNet Copyright © 2005 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Lippincott Williams & Wilkins DOI : 10 . 1097 / 01 . CCM . 0000159693 . 52183 . 2E 903 Crit Care Med 2005 Vol . 33 , No . 4 control plateau pressures instead of tidal volumes , despite the clear beneﬁt of us - ing 6 mL / kg tidal volume at every plateau pressure . However , the data gathered by Young et al . ( 4 ) indicate that the plateau pressures have also not changed since ARMA . Perhaps some are concerned about the initial worsening of P O 2 and P CO 2 levels when tidal volumes are low - ered ( 1 ) . This seems unlikely given that ARMA demonstrated that the initial dete - rioration in P O 2 / F IO 2 ratio is short - lived and that by the third day , low tidal vol - ume patients had lower F IO 2 compared with the high tidal volume group . Simi - larly , although low tidal volume ventila - tion causes an increase in P CO 2 initially , there is no difference in pH by day 7 . Based on my own team’s pre - ARMA thinking , I suspect that many physi - cians worry that low tidal volume ven - tilation causes increased ventilator dis - synchrony and increased sedation . In this issue of Critical Care Medicine , Dr . Kahn and colleagues ( 6 ) address the concern about sedation . Retrospectively reviewing the data from 61 ARMA pa - tients enrolled at Harborview Hospital , Seattle , from 1996 to 1999 ( 33 low tidal volume , 28 high tidal volume ) , the in - vestigators found no difference either in the proportion of patients receiving benzodiazepine sedatives or opioid an - algesics or in the dosages of these med - ications . As with any secondary subset analysis from a large trial , the Kahn report may have signiﬁcant inherent ﬂaws due to its retrospective design , small sample size , and focus on a single site where the sedation practices may not be representative of the norm . The study’s small size does not allow it to detect differences (cid:2) 4 mg / hr of mor - phine or lorazepam , a range that could be clinically signiﬁcant . However , as the authors note , the study suggested increased sedative use for the high tidal volume group , making it less likely that the low power of the study caused it to miss an increase in sedation needs in the low tidal group . Despite its ﬂaws , the study by Dr . Kahn and colleagues ( 6 ) is the best ev - idence to date that low tidal volume ventilation does not invariably increase the use of sedation . Other available lit - erature supporting the contention that low tidal volume ventilation does not increase sedation use includes pub - lished data from the San Francisco ARMA site ( 7 ) . Although not yet fully published , other data from the ARMA study also suggest that the Seattle and San Francisco ﬁndings with regard to sedation may well be true for the entire study population . Undoubtedly , the universal adoption of low tidal volume ventilation for acute lung injury patients will continue be slow . However , clinicians should be reas - sured by the growing body of evidence that low tidal volume ventilation does not result in increased sedation of ALI / ARDS patients . Another excuse against lowering ventilation volumes to 6 mL / kg no longer seems credible . Joseph A . Govert , MD Medical Intensive Care Unit Duke University Medical Center Durham , NC REFERENCES 1 . The Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome Net - work : Ventilation with lower tidal volumes as compared with traditional tidal volumes for acute lung injury and the acute respiratory distress syn - drome . N Engl J Med 2000 ; 342 : 1301 – 1308 2 . Brower RG , Thompson BT , Ancukiewicz M : Clinical trial of mechanical ventilation with traditional versus lower tidal volumes in acute lung injury and acute respiratory distress syn - drome : Effects on physicians’ practices . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2004 ; 169 : A256 3 . Weinert CR , Gross CR , Marinelli WA : Impact of randomized trial results on acute lung injury ventilator therapy in teaching hospitals . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003 ; 167 : 1304 – 1309 4 . Young MP , Manning HL , Wilson DL et al : Ventilation of patients with acute lung injury and acute respiratory distress syndrome : Has new evidence changed clinical practice ? Crit Care Med 2004 ; 32 : 1260 – 1265 5 . Kallet RH , Corral W , Silverman HJ , et al : Implementation of a low tidal volume ventila - tion protocol for patients with acute lung in - jury or acute respiratory distress syndrome . Respir Care 2001 ; 46 : 1024 – 1037 6 . Kahn JM , Andersson L , Karir V , et al : Low tidal volume ventilation does not increase sedation use in patients with acute lung injury . Crit Care Med 2005 ; 33 : 766 – 771 7 . Cheng IW , Eisner MD , Thompson BT , et al : Acute effects of tidal volume strategy on hemo - dynamics , ﬂuid balance and sedation in acute lung injury . Crit Care Med 2005 ; 33 : 63 – 70 Phospholipase A 2 and acute lung injury : It’s just not that simple * T he phospholipases A 2 ( PLA 2 ) are enzymes that play a crucial role in a variety of inﬂamma - tory disease processes , includ - ing acute lung injury ( ALI ) and its more severe form , the acute respiratory distress syndrome ( ARDS ) ( 1 – 3 ) . For example , higher concentrations of PLA 2 are found in the bronchoalveolar lavage ﬂuid ( BALF ) in both animals ( 3 – 5 ) and patients with ALI ( 6 , 7 ) and seem to correlate with the sever - ity of lung injury . Intratracheal administra - tion of PLA 2 induces lung injury in animal models ( 8 ) , and inhibition of PLA 2 attenu - ates oleic acid – induced lung injury in rab - bits ( 4 , 5 ) . The contribution of Dr . Nakos and colleagues ( 9 ) in this issue of Critical Care Medicine provides additional evi - dence , albeit indirect , for the role of PLA 2 in ALI and ARDS . PLA 2 are a superfamily of enzymes that hydrolyze phospholipids at the sn - 2 fatty acyl ester bond of membrane phospholip - ids , generating free fatty acids and lyso - phospholipids . PLA 2 thus play a crucial role in the induction of the host inﬂammatory response through the synthesis of lipid me - diators , such as platelet - activating factor , leukotrienes , and prostaglandins such as thromboxane . Platelet - activating factor is a proinﬂammatory phospholipid with vari - ous biological effects , including the induc - tion of leukocyte adhesion , endothelial ac - tivation , and production of cytokines and chemokines . The thromboxanes and leuko - trienes are also potent proinﬂammatory mediators , generated by the cyclooxygen - ase and lipoxygenase pathways , respec - tively . Thromboxane increases capillary * See also p . 772 . Key Words : acute respiratory distress syndrome ; surfactant ; phospholipase A 2 ; platelet - activating – factor acetylhydrolase ; type - II secretory phospholipase A 2 Copyright © 2005 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Lippincott Williams & Wilkins DOI : 10 . 1097 / 01 . CCM . 0000159694 . 64555 . F8 904 Crit Care Med 2005 Vol . 33 , No . 4 permeability , whereas the leukotrienes are potent chemoattractants . Several studies have shown that PLA 2 hydrolyze lung sur - factant , producing potentially cytotoxic by - products such as lyso - phosphatidylcholine and directly causing loss of alveolar stabil - ity and subsequent alveolar collapse through surfactant degradation ( 1 , 2 , 4 , 5 , 10 , 11 ) . PLA 2 seem to up - regulate the ex - pression of chemokines and adhesion mol - ecules in the lung vascular endothelium ( 12 ) . PLA 2 seem to play active roles in or - chestrating the host inﬂammatory re - sponse to lung injury , while at the same time contributing to the diffuse atelectasis and ventilation - perfusion mismatching characteristic of ALI and ARDS . Therefore , given these multiple , overlapping roles in the pathogenesis of ALI and ARDS , the PLA 2 family would appear to be an attrac - tive target for drug discovery . The PLA 2 family is classiﬁed into three main subtypes : secretory PLA 2 ( sPLA 2 ) , of which at least ten subtypes have been identiﬁed to date , cytosolic Ca 2 (cid:3) - depen - dent PLA 2 ( cPLA 2 ) , and intracellular Ca 2 (cid:3) - independent PLA 2 ( 2 ) . Although the majority of studies have focused on sPLA 2 , recent evidence implicates cPLA 2 in the pathogenesis of ALI as well ( 13 , 14 ) . Dr . Nakos and colleagues ( 9 ) extend the current body of knowledge on the role of PLA 2 in ALI and ARDS in this issue of Critical Care Medicine . Consistent with previous studies , these investigators noted that 1 ) the total PLA 2 activity in the BALF , BAL cells , and plasma in critically ill adults with ARDS is signiﬁcantly higher compared with critically ill adults who did not meet criteria for either ALI or ARDS and that 2 ) total PLA 2 activity in BALF correlated inversely with Pa O 2 / F IO 2 ratio and directly with mortality . PLA 2 activity was distributed differentially in BAL subfractions . PLA 2 activity was local - ized to the very small surfactant aggre - gate in patients with ARDS , whereas PLA 2 activity was found predominately in the large surfactant aggregate of control pa - tients . As Dr . Nakos and colleagues ( 9 ) point out , the very small surfactant ag - gregate subfraction represents decom - posed surfactant with poor surface prop - erties , providing additional evidence for the role of PLA 2 in surfactant degradation in ALI and ARDS . Of potentially greater importance , these investigators provide unequivocal evidence for the presence of both sPLA 2 and cPLA 2 in the BALF and plasma of adults with ARDS by using both protein analysis and biochemical charac - terization . Although these data are de - scriptive in nature , the temporal relation - ship between BALF sPLA 2 and BALF cPLA 2 , especially when viewed in the con - text of recent animal data suggesting a cause - and - effect relationship between cPLA 2 and ALI ( 13 , 14 ) , suggests that cPLA 2 may be just as important as sPLA 2 in the development of ALI . Alveolar macrophages , the guardians of the lung , are the primary source of PLA 2 via local production and secretion into the alveolar space ( 1 , 2 ) . Alterna - tively , PLA 2 could enter the alveolar space from the pulmonary circulation due to the increased permeability of the alveo - lar - capillary membrane . The current study supports the former mechanism , as there seems to be no correlation between PLA 2 activity in the BALF and the total BALF protein ( a marker of increased al - veolar - capillary permeability ) or to the total PLA 2 activity in the plasma ( 4 ) . Dr . Nakos and colleagues ( 9 ) provide us with two potential explanations for the failure of a speciﬁc sPLA 2 inhibitor to improve survival in a recent , multiple - center , clinical trial in adults with multi - ple organ failure and ARDS ( 15 ) . First , as these investigators ( 4 ) and others ( 13 , 14 ) have shown , cPLA 2 may prove to be just as important as sPLA 2 in ALI and ARDS . Notably , the available sPLA 2 inhibitors do not affect cPLA 2 activity . Second , the in - travenous administration of PLA 2 inhibi - tors may not be sufﬁcient to inhibit lo - cally produced enzymes such as PLA 2 . Regardless , PLA 2 seem to play instrumen - tal roles in ALI and ARDS and should remain a focus on further investigation , although once again we are offered proof that when it comes to targeting speciﬁc mediators of the inﬂammatory cascade in diseases such as ALI and ARDS , it is just not that simple . Derek S . Wheeler , MD Division of Critical Care Medicine Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center Cincinnati , OH REFERENCES 1 . Touqui L , Arbibe L : A role for phospholipase A 2 in ARDS pathogenesis . Mol Med Today 1999 ; 5 : 244 – 249 2 . Balsinde J , Balboa MA , Insel PA , et al : Regula - tion and inhibition of phospholipase A 2 . Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 1999 ; 39 : 175 – 189 3 . Attalah HL , Wu Y , Alaoui - El - Azher M , et al : Induction of type - IIA secretory phospho - lipase A 2 in animal models of acute lung injury . Eur Respir J 2003 ; 21 : 1040 – 1045 4 . Furue S , Kuwabara K , Mikawa K , et al : Cru - cial role of group II phospholipase A 2 in oleic acid - induced acute lung injury in rabbits . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999 ; 160 : 1292 – 1302 5 . Furue S , Mikawa K , Nishina K , et al : Thera - peutic time - window of a group IIA phospho - lipase A 2 inhibitor in rabbit acute lung in - jury : Correlation with lung surfactant protection . Crit Care Med 2001 ; 29 : 719 – 727 6 . Kim DK , Fukuda T , Thompson BT , et al : Bronchoalveolar lavage ﬂuid phospholipase A 2 activities are increased in human adult respiratory distress syndrome . Am J Physiol 1995 ; 269 : 109 – 118 7 . Nakos G , Kitsiouli E , Tsangas I , et al : Bron - choalveolar lavage ﬂuid characteristics of early intermediate and late phases of ARDS : Alterations in leukocytes , proteins , PAF , and surfactant components . Intensive Care Med 1998 ; 24 : 296 – 303 8 . Durham SK , Selig WM : Phospholipase A 2 – induced pathophysiologic changes in the guinea pig lung . Am J Pathol 1990 ; 136 : 1283 – 1291 9 . Nakos G , Kitsiouli E , Hatzidaki K , et al : Phospholipases A 2 and platelet - activating – factor acetylhydrolase in patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome . Crit Care Med 2005 ; 33 : 772 – 779 10 . Arbibe L , Koumanov K , Vial D , et al : Gener - ation of lyso - phospholipids from surfactant in acute lung injury is mediated by type - II phospholipase A 2 and inhibited by a direct surfactant protein A - phospholipase A 2 pro - tein interaction . J Clin Invest 1998 ; 102 : 1152 – 1160 11 . Chabot S , Koumanov K , Lambeau G , et al : Inhibitory effects of surfactant protein A on surfactant phospholipids hydrolysis by se - creted phospholipases A 2 . J Immunol 2003 ; 171 : 995 – 1000 12 . Beck GC , Yard BA , Shulte J , et al : Secreted phospholipase A 2 induce the expression of chemokines in microvascular endothelium . Biochem Biophys Res Comm 2003 ; 300 : 731 – 737 13 . Nagase T , Uozumi N , Ishii S , et al : Acute lung injury by sepsis and acid aspiration : A key role for cytosolic phospholipase A 2 . Nat Im - munol 2000 ; 1 : 42 – 46 14 . Nagase T , Uozumi N , Aoki - Nagase T , et al : A potent inhibitor of cytosolic phospholipase A 2 , arachidonyl triﬂuoromethyl ketone , at - tenuates LPS - induced lung injury in mice . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2003 ; 284 : L720 – L726 15 . Abraham E , Naum C , Bandi V , et al : Efﬁcacy and safety of LY315920Na / S - 5920 , a selective inhibitor of 14 - kDa group IIA secretory phos - pholipase A 2 , in patients with suspected sep - sis and organ failure . Crit Care Med 2003 ; 31 : 718 – 728 905 Crit Care Med 2005 Vol . 33 , No . 4 Arterial pressure , vasopressors and septic shock : Higher is not necessarily better * R esuscitation of sepsis and hy - potension begins with ﬂuid infusion . However , in patients with septic shock , hypoten - sion persists despite vigorous ﬂuid infu - sion . Although cardiac output increases , the marked underlying vasodilation re - sults in a persistently low blood pressure . Accordingly , vasopressor therapy is re - quired to achieve a level of arterial pres - sure that maintains organ perfusion , while avoiding excessive vasoconstriction that might further impair organ perfu - sion and potentially cardiac performance . To achieve this goal , vasopressor agents are titrated to a minimum level of mean arterial pressure ( MAP ) that is pre - sumed to be adequate for critical organ perfusion . That level has varied from 60 mm Hg , which represents the lower limit of the autoregulatory threshold below which major organ blood ﬂow becomes pressure dependent , to much higher lev - els ( 1 – 3 ) . Indeed , levels of mean arterial pressure of 80 – 90 mm Hg have been used as end points of therapy in a number of studies ( 4 – 6 ) . One rationale for the higher end points of MAP is that sepsis , with its alterations in vascular tone , may produce alterations in normal autoregu - latory function that increase the range of pressure - dependent organ blood ﬂow . In addition , older patients and those with underlying cardiovascular disease might require higher levels of MAP because of shifts in their normal autoregulatory curves of the type seen with chronic hy - pertension . Our group ( 7 ) previously examined the relationship between MAP and organ perfusion in patients with septic shock . In ten patients , with each patient serving as his or her own control , norepinephrine was titrated to a MAP of 65 , 75 , and 85 mm Hg . Hemodynamic variables , indexes of oxygen metabolism , splanchnic perfu - sion , skin perfusion , and urine output were monitored . No signiﬁcant difference was observed in arterial lactate concen - tration , mixed venous oxygen saturation , or any index of organ perfusion between the three different levels of MAP . Cardiac index and systemic vascular resistance in - creased at the higher levels of MAP con - sistent with the higher doses of norepi - nephrine that were used . The report by Dr . Bourgoin and col - leagues ( 8 ) , in this issue of Critical Care Medicine , extends these observations . Twenty - eight patients were prospectively randomized to norepinephrine titrated to a MAP of 65 mm Hg or a MAP of 85 mm Hg . Hemodynamic variables , indexes of oxygen metabolism , and renal function variables were measured . None of their patients received dopamine , in contrast to the study of Ledoux et al . ( 7 ) . No sig - niﬁcant differences in arterial lactate concentration , oxygen consumption , cre - atinine clearance , creatinine concentra - tion , or urine output were observed be - tween the two groups . Cardiac index and systemic vascular resistance increased as the norepinephrine was increased . Although both studies are consistent with each other , they are limited by the small patient numbers . A group of older patients with signiﬁcant underlying hy - pertension and vascular disease might re - spond differently and require a higher perfusion pressure . In addition , the infu - sion periods of both studies are also rel - atively short . However , as reﬂected by other studies examining the effects of dif - ferent vasoactive drugs in septic shock , these periods should have been adequate to observe any effects on regional organ perfusion ( 6 , 9 , 10 ) . It is also possible that there may have a beneﬁt from higher levels of MAP , but this seems unlikely . The lack of change in any variable over a range of 20 mm Hg in MAP suggests that the patients in the studies of Ledoux et al . ( 7 ) and Dr . Bourgoin and colleagues ( 8 ) were within their autoregulatory range . This conclusion is supported by evidence that in patients with septic shock , auto - regulation of cerebral blood ﬂow is main - tained over a similar range of MAP ( 11 ) . These observations contrast with reports in which increases in MAP in septic shock patients from levels of 50 – 55 mm Hg to the range of 70 – 90 mm Hg were associ - ated with signiﬁcant increases in urine output and improvement in renal func - tion ( 5 , 6 ) . Taken together , the data sug - gest that a MAP of 60 – 65 mm Hg may deﬁne the autoregulatory threshold , at least for renal blood ﬂow , in patients with septic shock . Although neither study identiﬁed complications associated with the use of higher doses of norepinephrine that the end point of a MAP of 85 mm Hg re - quired , other patients may respond to similar doses with excessive vasoconstric - tion and tachyarrhythmias . Importantly , both studies involved patients who at baseline had their intravascular volume optimized and hyperdynamic proﬁles . Pa - tients with hypovolemia or signiﬁcant cardiac dysfunction and baseline hypody - namic proﬁles may demonstrate different responses as vasopressors are increased to achieve higher levels of MAP . In this setting , the vasoconstriction associated with increasing MAP may result in a lower cardiac output and decreased renal blood ﬂow ( 12 , 13 ) . In addition , these results may not be applicable to other vasopressor agents that have different he - modynamic proﬁles . As evidenced in the current study , the offsetting (cid:5) - and (cid:6) - ad - renergic activity of norepinephrine usu - ally results in only small increases in heart rate and modest augmentation of cardiac output ( 8 ) . Dopamine is associ - ated with greater increases in heart rate , thereby increasing the possibility of tachyarrhythmias and myocardial isch - emia ( 14 ) . Both neosynephrine and vaso - pressin have minimal intrinsic inotropic activity and have the potential to decrease cardiac output and organ perfusion as the dose is increased ( 15 ) . * See also p . 780 . Key Words : mean arterial pressure ; organ perfu - sion ; septic shock Copyright © 2005 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Lippincott Williams & Wilkins DOI : 10 . 1097 / 01 . CCM . 0000159695 . 20613 . 2C 906 Crit Care Med 2005 Vol . 33 , No . 4 The studies of Ledoux et al . ( 7 ) and Dr . Bourgoin and colleagues ( 8 ) should not be interpreted to indicate that 65 mm Hg should be the end point for vasopressor therapy for all patients with septic shock . These studies do , however , suggest that this is a reasonable starting point . In in - dividual patients , the goal MAP should be modiﬁed higher , or lower , as determined by measures of hemodynamic perfor - mance , tissue perfusion , and organ func - tion . Similarly , in patients in with signif - icant vascular disease , a higher level of MAP may be desired . Manuela Reisbeck , MD Mark E . Astiz , MD , FCCM Saint Vincents Catholic Medical Center of New York New York Medical College REFERENCES 1 . Johnson P : Autoregulation of blood ﬂow . Circ Res 1986 ; 59 : 483 – 495 2 . Mueller H , Ayres S , Giannelli S , et al : Effect of isoproterenol , l - norepinephrine , and in - traaortic counterpulsation on hemodynam - ics and myocardial metabolism in shock fol - lowing acute myocardial infarction . Circ 1972 ; 16 : 335 – 350 3 . Strandgaard S , Sengupta E , MacKenzie E , et al : The lower and upper limits of autoregu - lation of cerebral blood ﬂow . In Cerebral circulation and Metabolism . Langﬁtt T et al ( Eds ) . New York , Springer - Verlag , 1975 , pp 3 – 6 4 . Hayes MA , Timmins AC , Yau E , et al : Eleva - tion of systemic oxygen delivery in the treat - ment of critically ill patients . N Engl J Med 1994 ; 330 : 1717 – 1722 5 . Desjars P , Pinaud M , Bugnon D , et al : Nor - epinephrine therapy has no deleterious renal effects in human septic shock . Crit Care Med 1989 ; 17 : 426 – 429 6 . Martin C , Eon B , Akin P , et al : Renal effects of norepinephrine used to treat septic shock . Crit Care Med 1990 ; 18 : 282 – 285 7 . Ledoux D , Astiz M , Carpati C , et al : Effects of perfusion pressure on tissue perfusion in septic shock . Crit Care Med 2000 ; 28 : 2729 – 2732 8 . Bourgoin A , Leone M , Delmas A , et al : In - creasing mean arterial pressure in patients with septic shock : Effects on oxygen vari - ables and renal function . Crit Care Med 2005 ; 33 : 780 – 786 9 . Marik P , Mohedin M : The contrasting effects of dopamine and norepinephrine on systemic and splanchnic oxygen utilization in hyper - dynamic sepsis . JAMA 1994 ; 272 : 1354 – 1357 10 . Neviere R , Mathieu D , Chagnon JL , et al : The contrasting effects of dobutamine and dopa - mine on gastric mucosal perfusion in septic patients . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1996 ; 154 : 1684 – 1688 11 . Matta B , Stow P : Sepsis - induced vasoparaly - sis does not involve the cerebral vasculature : Indirect evidence from autoregulation and carbon dioxide reactivity studies . Br J Anesth 1996 ; 76 : 790 – 794 12 . Tristani F , Cohn J : Studies in clinical shock and hypotension . VI . Renal hemodynamics before and during treatment . Circulation 1970 ; 52 : 839 – 851 13 . Gunnar R , Cruz A , Boswell J , et al : Myocar - dial infarction with shock . Hemodynamic studies and results of therapy . Circulation 1966 ; 32 : 753 – 762 14 . Mueller H , Evans R , Ayres S : Effect of dopa - mine on hemodynamics and myocardial me - tabolism in shock following myocardial in - farction in man . Circulation 1978 ; 57 : 361 – 365 15 . Landry D , Levin H , Gallant E , et al : Vasopres - sin deﬁciency contributes to vasodilation of septic shock . Circulation 1997 ; 95 : 1122 – 1125 Ventilator - induced lung injury : Do dynamic factors also play a role ? * T he landmark ARDS Network Study ( 1 ) comparing lower and higher tidal volume venti - lation ﬁrmly established the clinical importance of ventilator - induced lung injury ( VILI ) , with the improved outcome attributed to a lower lung strain . Rather than indicating the end of a successful bench - to - bedside program , these data signal the start of an exciting period of laboratory and clinical progress . Although most interest has focused on static variables during ventilation such as end - expiratory pressure , tidal volume , and end - inspiratory volume ( 2 ) , dynamic ventilatory variables such as inspiratory ﬂow rate and ﬂow proﬁle may also cause VILI . Ventilatory strategies aimed to mini - mize VILI need to be understood in the context of normal pulmonary physiology . Increased lung volume is a potent physi - ologic stimulus for the release of surfac - tant from epithelial type II cells ( 3 ) . Sur - factant reduces surface tension at the air - liquid interface , and , as surface tension is the major factor determining lung elas - tance , the healthy lung becomes easier to inﬂate . However , just as an increase in lung volume with deformation of the ep - ithelium is a stimulus to surfactant se - cretion , it may also result in stress failure of the plasma membrane . Using cultured alveolar epithelial type II cells and A549 cells , the amplitude , magnitude , and rate of cell deformation are all independently cytotoxic ( 4 , 5 ) . These factors are also associated with increased vesicular lipid trafﬁcking , with or without repair of the disrupted or wounded plasma membrane ( 6 ) . As cell wounding is a potent factor both altering proinﬂammatory gene ex - pression and release of growth factors , this suggests that excessive strain can lead to important changes at the blood - gas barrier before cell injury becomes ap - parent ( 7 ) . Increased amplitude and magnitude of cell deformation are analogous to static changes in tidal , end - inspiratory , or end - expiratory volume . Similarly , an increase in the rate of deformation is analogous to increased inspiratory ﬂow or respiratory rate as a dynamic mechanism of VILI ; however , isolating the relative impor - tance of these factors can be difﬁcult due to their inherent linkage through inspira - tory time , inspiratory to expiratory ratio , and tidal volume . In this issue of the Critical Care Medicine , Dr . Conrad and coworkers ( 8 ) report that lower respira - tory rate reduces high tidal volume VILI . Lung injury was assessed using a well - described and sensitive method for as - sessing permeability , the capillary ﬁltra - tion coefﬁcient , and experiments were * See also p . 835 . Key Words : ventilator - induced lung injury ; me - chanical ventilation ; inspiratory ﬂow rate ; inspiratory ﬂow proﬁle ; pulmonary physiology Copyright © 2005 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Lippincott Williams & Wilkins DOI : 10 . 1097 / 01 . CCM . 0000159850 . 11273 . A5 907 Crit Care Med 2005 Vol . 33 , No . 4 performed in the isolated perfused rat lung , which allows control of many po - tential confounding factors . As systemic inﬂammatory cells and mediators are ex - cluded from this preparation , injury due to these processes could not be explored . Nevertheless , this is an important contri - bution and adds to the notion that dy - namic factors during tidal ventilation also contribute to lung injury . The clinical signiﬁcance of dynamic factors in VILI is currently uncertain ; however , there is increasing evidence that respiratory rate , inspiratory ﬂow rate , and ﬂow proﬁle can inﬂuence the development of VILI . Although earlier re - ports ( 9 , 10 ) of reduced injury at lower respiratory rates are consistent with the ﬁndings reported by Dr . Conrad and co - workers , in all these studies , a ﬁxed in - spiratory to expiratory ratio meant that the decrease in respiratory rate was ac - companied by decreased inspiratory ﬂow rate . When inspiratory ﬂow rate is inde - pendently varied ( 11 – 13 ) , ﬂow rather than respiratory rate is the dominant fac - tor producing lung injury . This is analo - gous to the strain rate rather than the number of deformations , although this must be a factor , as a single deformation does not appear injurious and Dr . Conrad and coworkers found a highly signiﬁcant correlation between the number of breaths and injury . A series of clinical studies ( 14 – 16 ) reported increased non - linear behavior with increased ﬂow rate , measured as an increase in viscoelastic pressure , in patients with acute respira - tory distress syndrome and as positive end - expiratory pressure was increased to 15 cm H 2 O . As surface tension at the air - liquid interface ( 17 ) and heteroge - neous distribution of ventilation account for most of the viscoelastic pressure , this suggests that the effects of increased ﬂow rate are clinically relevant and result in greater lung strain . A second dynamic source of VILI is the inspiratory ﬂow proﬁle . Some clinicians use pressure - controlled ventilation as it delivers a decelerating ﬂow proﬁle . This leads to a lower end - inspiratory pressure than volume - controlled ventilation deliv - ered at the same tidal volume and posi - tive end - expiratory pressure , due to ear - lier dissipation of resistive pressure ; however , the elastic distending pressure is similar . Under these circumstances , there is no difference in gas exchange , hemodynamic stability , or distribution of ventilation in patients with acute lung injury ( 18 ) . Although there may be a dif - ference in nonlinear behavior favoring pressure - controlled ventilation , due to differences in the buildup of viscoelastic pressure , this is small compared with the increase found with a prolonged inspira - tion and inverse ratio ventilation . Labo - ratory and clinical studies ( 19 ) examining the signiﬁcance of these differences are equivocal due to difﬁculties and differ - ences in study design . However , the re - cent report ( 20 ) of VILI with pressure - regulated volume control ventilation , compared with matched volume control ventilation , can be attributed to the greater peak inspiratory ﬂow rate inher - ent in a decelerating ﬂow proﬁle . As is common with an important con - tribution , the data presented by Dr . Conrad and coworkers raise many fascinating is - sues . We need more carefully designed studies to better understand how dynamic ventilatory factors produce VILI and , in ad - dition to inﬂuencing the prescription of mechanical ventilation , whether there are useful pharmacologic interventions . Con - trol of carbon dioxide tension during lower tidal volume ventilation usually necessi - tates higher respiratory rates , but this could mitigate some of the beneﬁcial ef - fects . If future clinical studies examine these issues they will need even more care - ful design , as differences in ﬂow rate will potentially introduce confounding factors . For example , low inspiratory ﬂow rates might lead to ﬂow starvation , increased pa - tient - ventilator dyssynchrony , and a subse - quent increase in sedation . At higher respi - ratory rates there will be the risk of gas trapping and inadvertent positive end - expiratory pressure , so this may need to be combined with permissive hypercapnea . Despite these caveats , a growing body of elegant basic research suggests that dy - namic factors also cause VILI . As the extent of deformation injury due to rapid strain rates is similar to that with either a large amplitude or magnitude of strain , it’s time to integrate these concepts into mechanical ventilation strategies . Andrew D . Bersten , MBBS , MD Dani - Louise Bryan , PhD Flinders Medical Centre and School of Medicine Flinders University South Australia REFERENCES 1 . The Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome Network : Ventilation with lower tidal vol - umes as compared with traditional tidal vol - umes for acute lung injury and the acute respiratory distress syndrome . N Engl J Med 2000 ; 342 : 1301 – 1308 2 . Dreyfuss D , Saumon G : Ventilator - induced lung injury : Lessons from experimental stud - ies . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998 ; 157 : 294 – 323 3 . Nicholas TE , Barr HA : The release of surfac - tant in the rat lung by brief periods of hy - perventilation . Respir Physiol 1983 ; 52 : 69 – 83 4 . Tschumperlein DJ , Oswari J , Margulies SS : Deformation - induced injury of alveolar epi - thelial cells . Effect of frequency , duration and amplitude . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000 ; 162 : 357 – 362 5 . Vlahakis NE , Schroeder MA , Pagano RE , et al : Deformation - induced lipid trafﬁcking in alveolar epithelial cells . Am J Physiol 2001 ; 280 : L938 – L946 6 . Vlahakis NE , Schroeder MA , Pagano RE , et al : Role of deformation - induced lipid trafﬁck - ing in the prevention of plasma membrane stress failure . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002 ; 166 : 1282 – 1289 7 . McNeil PL : Cell suffering and its prevention in lung . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003 ; 167 : 1046 – 1047 8 . Conrad SA , Zhang S , Arnold TC , et al : Pro - tective effects of low respiratory frequency in experimental ventilator - associated lung in - jury . Crit Care Med 2005 ; 33 : 835 – 840 9 . Hotchkiss JR , Blanch L , Murias G , et al : Effects of decreased respiratory frequency on ventilator - induced lung injury . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000 ; 161 : 463 – 468 10 . Rich PB , Douillet CD , Hurd H , et al : Effect of ventilatory rate on airway cytokine levels and lung injury . J Surg Res 2003 ; 113 : 139 – 145 11 . Rich PB , Reickert CA , Sawada S , et al : Effect of rate and inspiratory ﬂow on ventilator - induced lung injury . J Trauma 2000 ; 49 : 903 – 911 12 . D’Angelo E , Pecchiari M , Saetta M , et al : Dependence of lung injury on inﬂation rate during low - volume ventilation in open - chest rabbits . J Appl Physiol 2004 ; 97 : 260 – 268 13 . Kotani M , Kotani T , Li Z , et al : Reduced inspiratory ﬂow attenuates IL - 8 release and MAPK activation of lung overstretch . Eur Respir J 2004 ; 24 : 238 – 246 14 . D’Angelo E , Calderini E , Torri G , et al : Re - spiratory mechanics in anaesthetized para - lyzed humans : Effects of ﬂow , volume , and time . J Appl Physiol 1989 ; 67 : 2556 – 2564 15 . Eissa NT , Ranieri VM , Corbeil C , et al : Anal - ysis of behavior of the respiratory system in ARDS patients : Effects of ﬂow , volume and time . J Appl Physiol 1991 ; 70 : 2719 – 2729 16 . Eissa NT , Ranieri VM , Corbeil C , et al : Effect of PEEP on the mechanics of the respiratory system in ARDS patients . J Appl Physiol 1992 ; 73 : 1728 – 1735 17 . Bachofen H , Hildebrandt J , Bachofen M : Pressure - volume curves of air - and liquid - ﬁlled excised lungs—Surface tension in situ . J Appl Physiol 1970 ; 29 : 422 – 431 18 . Edibam C , Rutten AJ , Collins DV , et al : Effect of inspiratory ﬂow pattern and inspiratory to 908 Crit Care Med 2005 Vol . 33 , No . 4 expiratory ratio on nonlinear elastic behavior in patients with acute lung injury . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003 ; 167 : 702 – 707 19 . Esteban A , Alia I , Gordo F , et al : Prospective randomized trial comparing pressure - con - trolled and volume - controlled ventilation in ARDS . For the Spanish Lung Failure Collab - orative Group . Chest 2000 ; 117 : 1690 – 1696 20 . Maeda Y , Fujino Y , Uchiyama A , et al : Effects of peak inspiratory ﬂow on development of ventilator - induced lung injury in rabbits . An - esthesiology 2004 ; 101 : 722 – 728 Bubbles in the brain : What to do for arterial gas embolism ? * A rterial gas embolism ( AGE ) oc - curs in two major situations : diving while breathing com - pressed gas ( e . g . , scuba diving ) and direct entry of gas into the circula - tion during medical procedures . In div - ing , the cause is pulmonary overpressur - ization by failing to exhale or regional gas trapping during ascent , leading to alveo - lar rupture and entry of gas into pulmo - nary capillaries . Iatrogenic causes in - clude accidental air injection during cardiopulmonary bypass or angiography . Rarely , AGE can be caused by pulmonary barotrauma during mechanical ventila - tion in children and even less commonly in adults . AGE can also be caused by venous gas embolism entering the arte - rial circulation via a right - to - left shunt such as an atrial septal defect or patent foramen ovale or directly via the pulmo - nary capillary bed . Venous gas embolism commonly occurs in divers ; it can also occur due to accidental intravenous gas injection or passive entry when perform - ing surgery in tissues where venous pres - sure is subatmospheric , for example , dur - ing cesarean section , spine surgery , and cranial surgery in the sitting position . Arterial gas is distributed quantita - tively according to blood ﬂow . Thus , the brain , with close to 20 % of cardiac out - put , receives a major portion . The spinal cord , receiving only 1 – 2 % of cardiac out - put , is almost never involved without ma - jor cerebral injury unless there has been a signiﬁcant load of inert gas due to a compressed gas dive ( 1 ) . One mechanism of injury is direct vas - cular occlusion causing sudden ischemia . However , when only small amounts of arterial gas are embolized , insufﬁcient to cause prolonged occlusion , there is a de - layed reduction in cerebral blood ﬂow , even after the bubbles have dissipated ( 2 ) . Although the cause of this is not fully understood , leukocytes appear to be re - quired for the effect ( 3 ) , possibly due to their adherence to damaged endothelium ( 4 , 5 ) . AGE presents clinically like a stroke , with sudden onset of loss of conscious - ness , acute focal or multifocal neurologic deﬁcit , or sudden death . There may be associated cardiac arrhythmias or evi - dence of myocardial ischemia . When AGE is due to massive or persistent venous gas embolism , there may be pulmonary edema due to capillary endothelial leak . The diagnosis is made presumptively when there is the combination of a char - acteristic presentation and a plausible cause . Few tests are helpful in managing the patient . Imaging ( e . g . , brain com - puted tomography ) reveals intravascular air inconsistently ( 6 ) . Severe AGE can cause elevation of serum creatine phos - phokinase . However , to date speciﬁc markers of AGE - induced central nervous system injury remain to be elucidated . Initial treatment , in addition to usual supportive maneuvers , consists of adminis - tration of high concentrations of oxygen ( 100 % inspired concentration if possible ) . Nitrous oxide will cause intravascular bub - bles to grow ; hence , if it is being used for general anesthesia it should immediately be discontinued in favor of oxygen . Posi - tioning of the patient should be consistent with maintenance of an adequate blood pressure and open airway and prevention of aspiration . Head - down or lateral positions are probably of little use ( 7 , 8 ) . The deﬁnitive treatment is adminis - tration of hyperbaric oxygen ( HBO ) , which acutely reduces bubble volume , fa - cilitates oxygenation of ischemic tissue , and raises the nitrogen partial pressure gradient between bubble and surround - ing tissue , thus facilitating diffusion of nitrogen out of the gas phase into solu - tion . In addition to bubble volume reduc - tion , there are other possible beneﬁcial pharmacologic effects of HBO on cerebral ischemia , such as reduction of cerebral neutrophil sequestration ( 9 , 10 ) , excito - toxicity ( 11 , 12 ) , cyclooxygenase - 2 over - expression ( 13 ) , and apoptosis ( 14 ) . It has been suggested that the appro - priate indication for hyperbaric oxygen treatment is the presence of visible gas by brain computed tomography ( 15 ) . How - ever , a clinical response to HBO often occurs in patients with no visible air on CT ( 6 ) . Moreover , decision making fo - cused solely on removing gas fails to rec - ognize the other actions of HBO . Imaging is useful only if the diagnosis is in doubt , to exclude other possible causes such as hemorrhage . Clinical series suggest that earlier HBO treatment results in better outcome ( 16 ) , although instances of good recovery have been reported even after 24 hrs’ delay or more ( 6 ) . Severe cases can improve initially and then deteriorate ( 17 , 18 ) . Randomized trials of HBO in AGE have not been performed and are unlikely ever to be , due to the sporadic occurrence of the disease and the effectiveness of HBO , strongly supported by clinical ex - perience , meta - analysis ( 19 ) , and animal studies ( 18 , 20 ) . There is evidence that some adjuncts , such as lidocaine and per - ﬂuorocarbon emulsions , may be effective . Since investigations on humans are difﬁcult to do in this uncommon disease , further understanding will have to be based to a large extent on studies in an - imals . In this issue of Critical Care Med - icine , Dr . van Hulst and colleagues ( 21 ) report the latest of a series of experiments performed by their group , targeted at de - ﬁning the mechanisms of injury and ap - propriate care in the ﬁrst few hours fol - lowing AGE . In the present study , the investigators examined the effect of im - mediate and delayed HBO in anesthetized pigs after intracarotid injection of 0 . 5 mL / kg air . Using a schedule of HBO com - monly used for treatment of human AGE ( U . S . Navy Treatment Table 6 ) , two * See also p . 841 . Key Words : arterial gas embolism ; hyperbaric ox - ygenCopyright © 2005 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Lippincott Williams & Wilkins DOI : 10 . 1097 / 01 . CCM . 0000159726 . 47336 . F8 909 Crit Care Med 2005 Vol . 33 , No . 4 groups of animals received HBO , either within the ﬁrst 3 mins after embolization or 1 hr later . During the 1 - hr latent pe - riod , the animals receiving delayed HBO were given 100 % oxygen and were mildly hyperventilated . End points included brain tissue P O 2 , electroencephalograph , brain glucose , glycerol , pyruvate , and lac - tate measured using microdialysis . Brain lactate increased shortly after emboliza - tion , whereas brain tissue glucose de - creased . Similar changes have been ob - served in studies of brain ischemia and traumatic injury . Brain P O 2 , which de - creased after embolization , rose signiﬁ - cantly within a few minutes after starting HBO , both immediate and delayed . Intra - cranial pressure rose in both groups of animals but only to levels 35 – 50 % as high as untreated animals ( 22 ) . What has Dr . van Hulst and col - leagues’ study added to our knowledge ? This is the ﬁrst large animal study to examine the physiologic and metabolic effects of AGE and its treatment . The study has demonstrated the effectiveness of HBO in lowering intracranial pressure and ameliorating abnormalities in cerebral metabolism , even after a 60 - min delay . What remains to be done ? Using this excellent model , fruitful studies could pursue the effects of longer delays to HBO and lower doses of air and the effec - tiveness of adjunctive agents such as li - docaine ( 23 ) , perﬂuorocarbons ( 24 ) , and possibly other agents . Measurement of neurotransmitters could easily be added . The further development of a survival model would allow the implementation of functional and histologic end points . Richard E . Moon , MD Departments of Anesthesiology and Medicine Center for Hyperbaric Medicine and Environmental Physiology Duke University Medical Center Durham , NC REFERENCES 1 . Neuman TS , Bove AA : Combined arterial gas embolism and decompression sickness fol - lowing no - stop dives . Undersea Biomed Res 1990 ; 17 : 429 – 436 2 . Helps SC , Parsons DW , Reilly PL , et al : The effect of gas emboli on rabbit cerebral blood ﬂow . Stroke 1990 ; 21 : 94 – 99 3 . Helps SC , Gorman DF : Air embolism of the brain in rabbits pre - treated with mechloreth - amine . Stroke 1991 ; 22 : 351 – 354 4 . Levin LL , Stewart GJ , Lynch PR , et al : Blood and blood vessel wall changes induced by decompression sickness in dogs . J Appl Physiol 1981 ; 50 : 944 – 949 5 . Nossum V , Koteng S , Brubakk AO : Endothe - lial damage by bubbles in the pulmonary artery of the pig . Undersea Hyperb Med 1999 ; 26 : 1 – 8 6 . Benson J , Adkinson C , Collier R : Hyperbaric oxygen therapy of iatrogenic cerebral arterial gas embolism . Undersea Hyperb Med 2003 ; 30 : 117 – 126 7 . Mehlhorn U , Burke EJ , Butler BD , et al : Body position does not affect the hemodynamic response to venous air embolism in dogs . Anesth Analg 1994 ; 79 : 734 – 739 8 . Rodriguez RA , Cornel G , Weerasena NA , et al : Effect of Trendelenburg head position during cardiac deairing on cerebral microemboli in children : A randomized controlled trial . J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2001 ; 121 : 3 – 9 [ Er - ratum appears in J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2001 ; 121 : 433 ] 9 . Atochin DN , Fisher D , Demchenko IT , et al : Neutrophil sequestration and the effect of hyperbaric oxygen in a rat model of tempo - rary middle cerebral artery occlusion . Under - sea Hyperb Med 2000 ; 27 : 185 – 90 10 . Miljkovic - Lolic M , Silbergleit R , Fiskum G , et al : Neuroprotective effects of hyperbaric ox - ygen treatment in experimental focal cere - bral ischemia are associated with reduced brain leukocyte myeloperoxidase activity . Brain Res 2003 ; 971 : 90 – 94 11 . Badr AE , Yin W , Mychaskiw G , et al : Effect of hyperbaric oxygen on striatal metabolites : A microdialysis study in awake freely moving rats after MCA occlusion . Brain Res 2001 ; 916 : 85 – 90 12 . Yang ZJ , Camporesi C , Yang X , et al : Hyper - baric oxygenation mitigates focal cerebral in - jury and reduces striatal dopamine release in a rat model of transient middle cerebral ar - tery occlusion . Eur J Appl Physiol 2002 ; 87 : 101 – 107 13 . Yin W , Badr AE , Mychaskiw G , et al : Down regulation of COX - 2 is involved in hyperbaric oxygen treatment in a rat transient focal ce - rebral ischemia model . Brain Res 2002 ; 926 : 165 – 171 14 . Yin D , Zhou C , Kusaka I , et al : Inhibition of apoptosis by hyperbaric oxygen in a rat focal cerebral ischemic model . J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2003 ; 23 : 855 – 864 15 . Dexter F , Hindman BJ : Recommendations for hyperbaric oxygen therapy of cerebral air embolism based on a mathematical model of bubble absorption . Anesth Analg 1997 ; 84 : 1203 – 1207 16 . Blanc P , Boussuges A , Henriette K , et al : Iatrogenic cerebral air embolism : Impor - tance of an early hyperbaric oxygenation . In - tensive Care Med 2002 ; 28 : 559 – 563 17 . Pearson RR , Goad RF : Delayed cerebral edema complicating cerebral arterial gas em - bolism : Case histories . Undersea Biomed Res 1982 ; 9 : 283 – 296 18 . Leitch DR , Greenbaum LJ Jr , Hallenbeck JM : Cerebral arterial air embolism : IV . Failure to recover with treatment , and secondary dete - rioration . Undersea Biomed Res 1984 ; 11 : 265 – 274 19 . Dutka AJ : Air or gas embolism . In : Hyper - baric Oxygen Therapy : A Critical Review . Camporesi EM , Barker AC ( Eds ) . Bethesda , MD , Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Soci - ety , 1991 , p 1 – 10 20 . McDermott JJ , Dutka AJ , Koller WA , et al : Effects of an increased PO 2 during recom - pression therapy for the treatment of experimental cerebral arterial gas embo - lism . Undersea Biomed Res 1992 ; 19 : 403 – 413 21 . van Hulst RA , Drenthen J , Haitsma JJ , et al : Effects of hyperbaric treatment in cere - bral air embolism on intracranial pressure , brain oxygenation , and brain glucose me - tabolism in the pig . Crit Care Med 2005 ; 33 : 841 – 846 22 . van Hulst RA , Lameris TW , Hasan D , et al : Effects of cerebral air embolism on brain metabolism in pigs . Acta Neurol Scand 2003 ; 108 : 118 – 124 23 . Mitchell SJ : Lidocaine in the treatment of decompression illness : A review of the liter - ature . Undersea Hyperb Med 2001 ; 28 : 165 – 174 24 . Dromsky DM , Spiess BD , Fahlman A : Treatment of decompression sickness in swine with intravenous perﬂuorocarbon emulsion . Aviat Space Environ Med 2004 ; 75 : 301 – 305 910 Crit Care Med 2005 Vol . 33 , No . 4 One step forward : An advance in understanding of adrenal insufﬁciency in the pediatric critically ill * R elative adrenal insufﬁciency is a murky concept for many an endocrinologist and intensiv - ist . This is especially true in pediatrics , where data often lag those ob - tained in adults . The report published in this issue of Critical Care Medicine by Dr . Pizarro and colleagues ( 1 ) brings to light the largest prospective observational data in the pediatric intensive care unit ( PICU ) and should serve to broaden the discus - sion about adrenal insufﬁciency in the critically ill to include the pediatric pop - ulation . In this study , 57 patients were identi - ﬁed with septic shock after the authors excluded any who had received etomidate or glucocorticoid therapy in the previous week . All patients underwent a 250 - (cid:7) g corticotropin stimulation test and were classiﬁed into four groups based on their baseline cortisol ( (cid:2) or (cid:2) 20 (cid:7) g / dL or 550 nmol / L ) and response to corticotropin ( (cid:1) or (cid:8) 9 (cid:7) g / dL increment or 250 nmol / L ) . Absolute or relative adrenal insufﬁciency was observed in a surprising 44 % of sub - jects , but this may have more to do with the lack of consistent deﬁnition across studies , detailed in Table 2 of the Pizarro study . Why this group chose their cutoff values , however , is not entirely clear . The data were remarkable in their ability to predict catecholamine - resistant shock ( p (cid:2) . 05 ) , although not mortality ( p (cid:1) . 08 ) . Whether adrenal insufﬁciency causes cat - echolamine - resistant shock or merely is a feature of it , like multiple organ failure , is not discernible from the data . Major pre - dictors of mortality were chronic illness and multiple organ failure . The concept of relative adrenal insuf - ﬁciency has gained prominence in the adult critical care world , especially after publication of a prospective , randomized control trial ( n (cid:1) 300 ) demonstrating a reduction in mortality among those with septic shock who failed a 250 - (cid:7) g tetraco - sactrin stimulation test , deﬁned as a stimulated cortisol increment of (cid:1) 9 (cid:7) g / dL ( 2 ) . Although this study did not take into account basal cortisol concen - tration and it included for part of enroll - ment patients pretreated with etomidate , an agent know to cause adrenal suppres - sion ( 3 ) , it has contributed along with other smaller randomized control trials ( 4 – 6 ) to the establishment of treatment guidelines recommending stress dosing ( “low dose” ) of hydrocortisone for pa - tients with septic shock who fail to raise their cortisol by an increment of 9 (cid:7) g / dL in response to corticotropin stimulation ( 7 ) . In the pediatric literature , far fewer studies have been published and none have been able to demonstrate an effect on mortality of response to corticotropin stimulation or hydrocortisone therapy . The current study by Dr . Pizarro and col - leagues , therefore , helps move the ﬁeld forward by conﬁrming an association be - tween adrenal function and catechol - amine - resistant shock and suggesting an association with mortality , to be con - ﬁrmed in an appropriately powered larger study . By excluding etomidate - or ste - roid - treated patients , the authors have avoided common pitfalls in adrenal eval - uations . What remains unaddressed by this and other papers is the correct dose of corticotropin to accurately distinguish those who will beneﬁt from steroid sup - plementation : These investigators chose to use 250 (cid:7) g ; however , it is clear that this is a pharmacologic dose , especially in small children ( median age , 27 months ) . Whether 1 (cid:7) g would produce a more revealing degree of adrenal stimulation in the PICU remains to be seen . And if the 1 - (cid:7) g test did become the standard , it is likely that new cutoff values would need to be set ( 8 ) . The study by Dr . Pizarro and col - leagues ( 1 ) , as well as the other adrenal studies cited here , all share the fact that they measured total cortisol instead of free cortisol . As is true with other hor - mones ( e . g . , thyroid hormone ) , it is the free hormone that is biologically active . Lacking a physiologic measure of circu - lating glucocorticoid action , we are left with the biochemical ability to measure free cortisol and must do so in future studies ( 9 ) . Are we ready to treat based on these data ? Unfortunately , the current body of pediatric literature addressing adrenal in - sufﬁciency does not yet afford us a clear answer . However , as clinicians we must practice based on the best available data . Dr . Pizarro and colleagues ( 1 ) have taken one step forward , and their data obligate us , in the setting of pediatric septic shock , to perform adrenocorticotropic hormone stimulation testing using a 250 - (cid:7) g corticotropin test and consider both the baseline as well as stimulated cortisol . As there is no signiﬁcant associ - ation between outcome measures and treatment in this population , to date , there can be no formal recommendation in pediatrics to give hydrocortisone . However , it would be a reasonable ap - proach to start hydrocortisone at stress doses ( 50 – 100 mg / m 2 / day ) in the pediat - ric patient with catecholamine - requiring septic shock after sending off a 250 - (cid:7) g corticotropin stimulation test . Once re - sulted , steroids could be continued only if the cortisol increment is (cid:1) 9 (cid:7) g / dL and the patient remains critically ill . To carry this out effectively and without delaying therapy , it is important that each PICU stock corticotropin in the PICU local pharmacy . Too often , testing is deferred because of a desire to avoid a therapeutic delay . Further research is needed to clarify the multiple issues relating to the diag - nosis and treatment of adrenal insufﬁ - ciency in children . Without prospective randomized control trials , we can only make vague statements about ideal treat - ment plans . Dr . Pizarro and colleagues ( 1 ) have taken an important step along * See also p . 855 . Key Words : adrenal insufﬁciency ; septic shock ; cortisolCopyright © 2005 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Lippincott Williams & Wilkins DOI : 10 . 1097 / 01 . CCM . 0000159724 . 29534 . CF 911 Crit Care Med 2005 Vol . 33 , No . 4 this road , but we have far to go to com - plete this journey . Michael Agus , MD Pediatric Critical Care and Endocrinology Children’s Hospital Boston Harvard Medical School Boston , MA REFERENCES 1 . Pizarro CF , Troster EJ , Damiani D , et al : Ab - solute and relative adrenal insufﬁciency in children with septic shock . Crit Care Med 2005 ; 33 : 855 – 859 2 . Annane D , Sebille V , Charpentier C , et al : Effect of treatment with low doses of hydro - cortisone and ﬂudrocortisone on mortality in patients with septic shock . JAMA 2002 ; 288 : 862 – 871 3 . Fragen RJ , Shanks CA , Molteni A : Effect on plasma cortisol concentrations of a single in - duction dose of etomidate or thiopentone . Lancet 1983 ; 2 : 625 – 626 4 . Yildiz O , Doganay M , Aygen B , et al : Physio - logical - dose steroid therapy in sepsis . Crit Care ( Lond ) 2002 ; 6 : 251 – 259 5 . Briegel J , Forst H , Haller M , et al : Stress doses of hydrocortisone reverse hyperdynamic sep - tic shock : A prospective , randomized , double - blind , single - center study . Crit Care Med 1999 ; 27 : 723 – 732 6 . Bollaert PE , Charpentier C , Levy B , et al : Re - versal of late septic shock with supraphysi - ologic doses of hydrocortisone . Crit Care Med 1998 ; 26 : 645 – 650 7 . Dellinger RP , Carlet JM , Masur H , et al : Sur - viving Sepsis Campaign guidelines for man - agement of severe sepsis and septic shock . Crit Care Med 2004 ; 32 : 858 – 873 [ erratum appears in Crit Care Med 2004 ; 32 : 1448 ; Note : Correc - tion of dosage error in text ] 8 . Gonzalbez J , Villabona C , Ramon J , et al : Es - tablishment of reference values for standard dose short synacthen test ( 250 microgram ) , low dose short synacthen test ( 1 microgram ) and insulin tolerance test for assessment of the hypothalamo - pituitary - adrenal axis in normal subjects . Clin Endocrinol 2000 ; 53 : 199 – 204 9 . Hamrahian AH , Oseni TS , Arafah BM : Mea - surements of serum free cortisol in critically ill patients . N Engl J Med 2004 ; 350 : 1629 – 1638 Is clinical research and ethics a zero - sum game ? * M any critical care research - ers perceive the current regulatory environment as hostile . And who could blame them for thinking so ? Clinical re - search in which informed consent is not possible came to a halt from 1993 to 1996 . Subsequent U . S . Food and Drug Administration and Health and Human Services regulations permitting a waiver of informed consent imposed numerous , and arguably unnecessary , regulatory hurdles ( 1 , 2 ) . As a result , there was a 15 % per year decline in resuscitation re - search relative to other similar clinical studies ( 3 ) . More recently , ARDSNet clin - ical trials were investigated by the Ofﬁce of Human Research Protections for con - sent and design ﬂaws , resulting in an inordinately long shutdown of the Fluid and Catheter Treatment trial ( 4 ) . Against this history , the tension between the im - perative to conduct critical care research and that to protect research participants seems like a zero - sum game . Efforts to increase research participant protections hinder scientiﬁc progress , and efforts to bolster the pace of medical discovery risk undermining participant protections . Yet , it need not be so . In this issue of Critical Care Medi - cine , Dr . Silverman and colleagues ( 5 ) , on behalf of the ARDSNet Informed Consent Working Group , present “rec - ommendations for informed consent forms for critical care clinical trials” that challenge the zero - sum view of clinical research and ethics . Their pro - posal seeks both to ensure that regula - tory requirements are fulﬁlled and that recognition of the decision - making rights of subjects’ understanding is en - hanced . This is achieved by a number of means . First , model language for con - sent forms for critical care trials is of - fered at a sixth - grade reading level . Sec - ond , consent forms , when possible , are to be made shorter . Third , similarities and differences between treatment in the study and in routine clinical care are to be made explicit , allowing the participants to understand what differ - ence study participation will make to them . Fourth , study procedures admin - istered with therapeutic warrant and those done solely to answer scientiﬁc ends are to be described separately , so participants understand which proce - dures may beneﬁt them and which may only beneﬁt society . Although the ques - tion deserves empirical study , I believe that potential participants ( or their sur - rogates ) are more likely to agree to study participation when they under - stand better to what they are being asked to consent . If this hypothesis proves true , then both participant pro - tection and scientiﬁc progress will have been advanced by these recommenda - tions . The ethical challenges facing critical care research are not limited to problems associated with informed consent forms . As modeled so admirably by Dr . Silver - man and colleagues and a recent initia - tive of the American Thoracic Society ( 5 , 5a ) , these challenges ought to be met head on by critical care researchers who map out solutions that reject the zero - sum approach . Smart solutions to these challenges will be those that enhance both participant protections and progress in clinical research . Three areas merit immediate attention . First , critical care researchers ought to draft , promulgate , and lobby for the adoption of federal regulations to protect incapable adults in research . Current Health and Human Services regulations contain subparts addressing the protec - tion of pregnant women , prisoners , and children . Regulations for the protection of incapable adults in research were ﬁrst proposed in 1978 but have yet to be en - acted ( 6 ) . The absence of federal regula - tion leaves institutional review boards with an obligation to ensure that re - search involving vulnerable populations include “additional safeguards” ( 45 CFR 46 . 111 ) but without guidance as to what these safeguards ought to be when re - * See also p . 867 . Dr . Weijer’s research is supported by a Canadian Institutes of Health Research Investigator Award and Operating Grant ; he was a paid consultant to the Ofﬁce of Human Research Protections with regard to the ARDSNet clinical trials . Copyright © 2005 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Lippincott Williams & Wilkins DOI : 10 . 1097 / 01 . CCM . 0000159692 . 43458 . 51 912 Crit Care Med 2005 Vol . 33 , No . 4 search involves cognitively impaired adults . In the absence of guidance , it is perhaps not surprising that institutional review boards and the Ofﬁce of Human Research Protections ﬁnd critical care studies deserving of special scrutiny . As Karlawish ( 7 ) concludes correctly , “ [ u ] n - til regulations exist for research that in - volves critically ill and other cognitively impaired adults , federal investigations will be inevitable , slowing and even halt - ing the progress of valuable research . ” Thus , the adoption of effective federal regulations tailored to incapable adults offers the possibility of both enhancing subject protection while allowing impor - tant studies to proceed more efﬁciently . Second , critical care researchers ought to identify and promulgate a systematic ap - proach to the ethical analysis of research beneﬁts and harms . Truog ( 8 ) recently en - dorsed an approach to beneﬁt – harm anal - ysis that I have worked on called compo - nent analysis because it “leads to a remarkable and perhaps unexpected con - clusion regarding research in the ICU . ” Critical care research is often thought to pose serious risk to participants , and this perception may hinder clinical research . Component analysis recognizes that clini - cal research often contains a mixture of therapeutic and nontherapeutic interven - tions and that these must be analyzed sep - arately ( 9 ) . Therapeutic procedures , be they study drugs or ventilator settings , must meet the standard of clinical equipoise ; that is , they must be deemed on the basis of available evidence potentially consistent with competent medical care . Nonthera - peutic procedures , such as additional blood tests or data downloaded from monitors , must pose risks judged to be minimized and reasonable in relation to the knowledge to be gained . For the critical care patient , the incremental risk posed by study partic - ipation comes only from nontherapeutic procedures . As nontherapeutic procedures in many critical care studies involve only added blood draws and the like , many stud - ies understood this way pose only minimal risk to participants . Truog ( 8 ) concludes that as a result , “much of the research performed in critical care is clearly less ethically challenging than some of the re - search performed in outpatient settings ! ” Third , critical care researchers ought to address ethical challenges posed by prehos - pital research and develop solutions that enhance patient protections and the con - duct of research . Treatment for critically ill patients often begins before the patient reaches the hospital and is administered by paramedics . Ethical and practical difﬁcul - ties associated with prehospital research have hindered the development of evi - dence - based treatments in this setting ( 10 ) . Time constraints pose a serious challenge to obtaining meaningful consent from ei - ther the patient or a surrogate in prehos - pital research . Paramedics are required as a matter of professional practice to stabilize and transport patients expeditiously . Fur - thermore , there may be a short therapeutic window within which to institute treat - ment in the ﬁeld . Novel concepts may be required to deal with these unique chal - lenges . For instance , the capacity to provide valid informed consent is usually thought of as the possession of the cognitive abili - ties to receive , understand , and rationally manipulate information and , on that basis , to express an informed choice . The role of context in capacity to consent has not been given adequate attention . Might one argue , for instance , when treatment must be ad - ministered immediately , that a patient ( and indeed the patient’s surrogate as well ) who possesses the usual requisite cognitive abil - ities is nonetheless contextually incompe - tent ? If so , the use of a consent waiver might be permitted in such circumstances . Charles Weijer , MD , PhD , FRCPC Dalhousie University Halifax , Nova Scotia , Canada REFERENCES 1 . Biros MH : Research without consent : Cur - rent status 2003 . Ann Emerg Med 2003 ; 42 : 550 – 564 2 . McRae AD , Weijer C : Lessons from everyday lives : A moral justiﬁcation for acute care research . Crit Care Med 2002 ; 30 : 1146 – 1151 3 . Nichol G , Hutszti E , Rokosh J , et al : Impact of informed consent requirements on car - diac arrest research in the United States : Exception from consent or from research ? Resuscitation 2004 ; 62 : 3 – 23 4 . Steinbrook R : How best to ventilate ? Trial design and patient safety in studies of the acute respiratory distress syndrome . N Engl J Med 2003 ; 348 : 1393 – 1401 5 . Silverman HJ , Luce JM , Lanken PN , et al : Recommendations for informed consent forms for critical care clinical trials : For the NHLBI Acute Respiratory Distress Syn - drome Clinical Trials Network ( ARDSNet ) . Crit Care Med 2005 ; 33 : 867 – 882 5a . Luce JM , Cook DJ , Martin TR , et al : Amer - ican Thoracic Society . The ethical conduct of clinical research involving critically ill patients in the United States and Canada : Principles and recommendations . Am J Re - spir Crit Care Med 2004 ; 170 : 1375 – 1384 6 . Department of Health , Education , and Wel - fare : Protection of human subjects : Pro - posed regulations on research involving those institutionalized as mentally disabled . Fed Regist 1978 ; 43 : 53950 – 53956 7 . Karlawish JHT : Research involving cogni - tively impaired adults . N Engl J Med 2003 ; 348 : 1389 – 1392 8 . Truog RD : Will ethical requirements bring critical care research to a halt ? Intensive Care Med [ serial online ] . Accessed Novem - ber 4 , 2004 9 . Weijer C , Miller PB : When are research risks reasonable in relation to anticipated beneﬁts ? Nat Med 2004 ; 10 : 570 – 573 10 . Thompson J : Ethical challenges of informed consent in prehospital research . Can J Emerg Med 2003 ; 5 : 108 – 114 913 Crit Care Med 2005 Vol . 33 , No . 4