Cell Reports Article Cytomegalovirus Restructures Lipid Rafts via a US28 / CDC42 - Mediated Pathway , Enhancing Cholesterol Efﬂux from Host Cells Hann Low , 1 Nigora Mukhamedova , 1 Huanhuan L . Cui , 1 , 2 Brian P . McSharry , 3 Selmir Avdic , 3 Anh Hoang , 1 Michael Ditiatkovski , 1 Yingying Liu , 1 Ying Fu , 1 Peter J . Meikle , 1 Martin Blomberg , 1 Konstantinos A . Polyzos , 2 William E . Miller , 4 Piotr Religa , 2 Michael Bukrinsky , 5 Cecilia Soderberg - Naucler , 2 Barry Slobedman , 3 and Dmitri Sviridov 1 , * 1 Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute , Melbourne , VIC 3004 , Australia 2 Department of Medicine , Karolinska Institute , Stockholm 171 76 , Sweden 3 Discipline of Infectious Diseases and Immunology , University of Sydney , NSW 2006 , Australia 4 Departmentof Molecular Genetics , Biochemistry , andMicrobiology , Universityof CincinnatiCollegeof Medicine , Cincinnati , OH45267 , USA 5 GW School of Medicine and Health Sciences , George Washington University , Washington , DC 20037 , USA * Correspondence : dmitri . sviridov @ bakeridi . edu . au http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2016 . 05 . 070 SUMMARY Cytomegalovirus ( HCMV ) contains cholesterol , but how HCMV interacts with host cholesterol meta - bolism is unknown . We found that , in human ﬁbro - blasts , HCMV infection increased the efﬂux of cellular cholesterol , despite reducing the abundance of ABCA1 . Mechanistically , viral protein US28 was acting through CDC42 , rearranging actin microﬁla - ments , causing association of actin with lipid rafts , and leading to a dramatic change in the abundance and / or structure of lipid rafts . These changes dis - placed ABCA1 from the cell surface but created new binding sites for apolipoprotein A - I , resulting in enhanced cholesterol efﬂux . The changes also reduced the inﬂammatory response in macrophages . HCMV infection modiﬁed the host lipidome proﬁle and expression of several genes and microRNAs involved in cholesterol metabolism . In mice , murine CMV infection elevated plasma triglycerides but did not affect the level and functionality of high - density lipoprotein . Thus , HCMV , through its protein US28 , reorganizes lipid rafts and disturbs cell cholesterol metabolism . INTRODUCTION Cytomegalovirus ( HCMV ) infection is one of the most prevalent viral infections in humans , with up to 75 % of the population carrying the virus . In its latent form , HCMV infection is thought to be largely asymptomatic , with only a few viral transcripts ex - pressed . However , when reactivated , HCMV may cause severe disease in immunocompromised individuals . Acute HCMV infec - tion affects many tissues , including viral effects on the vascular endothelium , leading to vascular dysfunction , bleeding , and thrombosis . Whether latent HCMV infection contributes to any morbidity or not is unclear and , considering the high prevalence of the infection , a causative relationship is difﬁcult to ascertain by traditional epidemiological methods . A number of previous studies have suggested that latent HCMV infection contributes to the risk of atherothrombosis ( Zhu et al . , 1999 ) and cancer ( So¨ - derberg - Naucle´r et al . , 2013 ) . Given that cellular and systemic cholesterol metabolism plays a central role in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis and was implicated in the pathogenesis of several malignancies ( Zhuang et al . , 2005 ) , it is possible that a connection between HCMV infection and associated diseases involves an interaction between HCMV and host cholesterol metabolism . Pathogens of different taxa interact with host cholesterol metabolism ( Sviridov and Bukrinsky , 2014 ) . A common purpose of this interaction is , on the one hand , to facilitate formation of plasma membrane lipid rafts or intracellular raft - like membrane structures , which are used by pathogens as entry gates , assem - bly platforms , and budding sites and require the presence of abundant cholesterol . On the other hand , many pathogens disrupt or modify rafts in order to reduce exposure to the immune system , which interacts with infected cells via rafts ( Triantaﬁlou et al . , 2002 ) . HCMV is an enveloped virus , and its virions contain host - derived cholesterol ( Gudleski - O’Regan et al . , 2012 ) , but very little is known about the interaction of HCMV with host cholesterol metabolism . Infection of endothelial and epithelial cells and macrophages by HCMV requires receptor - mediated endocytosis , a process that is dependent on cholesterol ( Haspot et al . , 2012 ; Ryckman et al . , 2006 ) , and inhibition of cholesterol biosynthesis in human endothelial cells restrained HCMV repli - cation ( Potena et al . , 2004 ) . HCMV infection was associated with increased expression of low - density lipoprotein - related protein ( LRP1 ) ; silencing of LRP1 concomitantly increased cellular cholesterol content and cholesterol content , as well as the yield and infectivity of the virus ( Gudleski - O’Regan et al . , 2012 ) . HCMV - infected cells also have reduced abundance of ABCA1 , a key transporter in the cholesterol efﬂux pathway 186 Cell Reports 16 , 186 – 200 , June 28 , 2016 ª 2016 The Author ( s ) . This is an open access article under the CC BY - NC - ND license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - nd / 4 . 0 / ) . ( Sanchez and Dong , 2010 ) . These examples indicate a possible dependence of HCMV replication on host cholesterol meta - bolism , prompting us to investigate mechanisms of interaction between the two . Here , we established that HCMV , through its protein US28 , modiﬁes host cholesterol metabolism and restruc - tures lipid rafts , enhancing cholesterol efﬂux from host cells . RESULTS HCMV Infection Enhances Cholesterol Efﬂux To investigate the effect of HCMV infection on cholesterol efﬂux , human ﬁbroblasts were infected with HCMV strain Toledo at an MOI of 1 , and their ability to release cholesterol to lipid - free apoli - poprotein A - I ( apoA - I ) was tested at 24 and 48 hr post - infection . The duration of the efﬂux incubation ( 2 hr ) was on a proportional part of the time - dependence curve , and the concentration of apoA - I ( 30 m g / ml ) was close to saturation , ensuring that the con - centration of the acceptor was not rate limiting . Labeling of cells with cholesterol ( i . e . , speciﬁc radioactivity of cholesterol ) was not affected by the infection ( data not shown ) . Figure 1A shows that HCMV infection enhanced the rate of speciﬁc cholesterol efﬂux by 4 - fold and 2 - fold after 24 and 48 hr , respectively . Non - speciﬁc efﬂux ( i . e . , the efﬂux in the absence of an acceptor ) was unaf - fected by the infection ( data not shown ) . Cholesterolefﬂuxtolipid - freeapoA - Iissolelydeterminedbythe activity of the ABCA1 transporter . Therefore , we investigated two other acceptors : isolated high - density lipoprotein ( HDL ) , an acceptor using ABCG1 - and SR - B1 - dependent pathways ; and methyl - b - cyclodextrin ( M b CD ) , a non - speciﬁc acceptor of cholesterol . Both acceptors were used in saturating concentra - tions . Figure 1B shows that , after 48 hr of infection , efﬂux to both apoA - I and HDL was signiﬁcantly enhanced , while the efﬂux to M b CD was unaffected . To further conﬁrm that the effect of HCMVinfectionisanactiveandspeciﬁcprocessandisnotrelated to passive diffusion of cholesterol , we tested the efﬂux of choles - terol from cells ﬁxed with paraformaldehyde prior to the efﬂux in - cubation . While the efﬂux from live cells to apoA - I was enhanced after 48hr of infection , theefﬂux from ﬁxed cells wassimilar forin - fected and uninfected cells ( Figure 1C ; note that the conditions of this experiment were different , resulting in higher levels of efﬂux ) . To rule out the possibility that changes in cholesterol efﬂux were related to changes in cell viability , we tested the effect of HCMV infection on necrosis ( Figure 1D ) and apoptosis ( Figure 1E ) after 24 and 48 hr of infection ; neither was affected by the infection . Finally , toensurethattheeffectswerenotuniquetothelaboratory strain of HCMV , we tested the effects of an additional clinical HCMV strain ( Merlin ) . This HCMV strain also caused elevation of cholesterolefﬂuxtoapoA - I , although theeffectwaslessprofound ( Figure 1F ) . Thus , HCMV infection enhanced speciﬁc cholesterol efﬂux from host cells . Involvement of Host Cholesterol Transporters Increased cholesterol efﬂux to apoA - I is usually a result of increased abundance of total and / or cell - surface ABCA1 . How - ever , when we examined the abundance of ABCA1 in cells in - fected with HCMV , unexpectedly , we found that it was reduced ( Figure 2A ) . The densitometry of bands showed that the ABCA1 / GAPDH ratio was 0 . 7 ± 0 . 08 versus 0 . 4 ± 0 . 07 ( mean ± SD ) for uninfected versus infected cells , respectively ( p < 0 . 003 , n = 4 ) . Furthermore , the abundance of cell - surface ABCA1 was also reduced in infected cells ( Figure 2A ) . The abundance of two other transporters responsible for the efﬂux to HDL , ABCG1 and SR - B1 , was unaffected by the infection ( Figure 2B ) , despite increased efﬂux to HDL in infected cells ( Figure 1B ) . We then stimulated the expression of ABCA1 and ABCG1 by treating cells with the LXR agonist TO901317 . As expected , this treatment increased the rate of cholesterol efﬂux in both infected and unin - fected cells ; however , the efﬂux from HCMV - infected cells was higher at both conditions , and the absolute difference between cholesterol efﬂux from infected and uninfected cells was similar in cells treated or not treated with the LXR agonist ( Figure 2C ) . When ABCA1 abundance was reduced by approximately 80 % after transfecting cells with small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) ABCA1 ( Figure 2D , inset ) , the efﬂux from uninfected cells was signiﬁ - cantly reduced , while the efﬂux from infected cells was un - affected by ABCA1 silencing ( Figure 2D ) . The pathway of ABCA1 - dependent cholesterol efﬂux also involves the efﬂux of phospholipids , either simultaneously or prior to the efﬂux of cholesterol ( Vedhachalam et al . , 2007 ) . When we tested the effect of HCMV infection on phospholipid efﬂux , no changes were found ( Figure 2E ) . Collectively , these ﬁndings suggest that the increase of cholesterol efﬂux after HCMV infection is not mediated by host ABCA1 . Involvement of HCMV Proteins An alternative possibility explaining enhanced cholesterol efﬂux fromcellsinfectedwithHCMVisthatthevirusintroducesanaddi - tional virus - derived efﬂux pathway into the host cell . To test this possibility , we infected cells with HCMV inactivated by UV irradi - ation . UV irradiation does not affect the capacity of the virus to enter target cells but blocks viral gene transcription ( Zhu et al . , 1997 ) . Wefound thatUVinactivation oftheviruscompletely abol - isheditscapacitytostimulatecholesterolefﬂux ( Figure3A ) andto reduce ABCA1 abundance ( Figure 3B , lanes 1 , 2 , and 5 ) . Similar effects on cholesterol efﬂux were demonstrated when the UV - in - activated Merlin HCMV strain was used ( data not shown ) . To further conﬁrm the requirement for active replication , we treated cells with a speciﬁc inhibitor of HCMV DNA polymerase , phos - phonoacetic acid ( PAA ) ( Stinski , 1977 ) . Treatment with PAA had no effect on cholesterol efﬂux from uninfected cells but completely abolished the increase of cholesterol efﬂux seen in infected cells ( Figure 3C ) . HCMV is a complex virus ; its genome contains more than 160 open reading frames ( ORFs ) , and the functions of many of the products of these genes are not known . None of the HCMV pro - teins carries sequences homologous to known sterol - binding or sterol - sensing domains of mammalian proteins . The HCMV pro - tein US28 is a 41 - kDa G - protein - coupled receptor expressed at all stages of the infection and found in perinuclear endosomes and lipid rafts ( Droese et al . , 2004 ) . It was previously implicated as potentially playing a role in the pathogenesis of atheroscle - rosis by altering smooth muscle cell migration ( Streblow et al . , 1999 ) . We tested whether US28 may be also responsible for the viral effects on cholesterol efﬂux . We compared uninfected cells with cells infected with the Toledo strain , a D US28 viral mutant based on the VR1814 strain and the parental VR1814 Cell Reports 16 , 186 – 200 , June 28 , 2016 187 strain ( + US28 ) . While infection with both Toledo and + US28 viruses similarly increased cholesterol efﬂux , the D US28 virus failed to do so ( Figure 3D ) . When the effects on ABCA1 abun - dance were examined , again , the + US28 virus reduced abun - dance of ABCA1 , while the D US28 virus was less effective ( Figure 3B , lanes 1 – 4 ) . In a complementary set of experiments , we transiently overexpressed US28 tagged with turboGFP ( tGFP ) in the host cells in the absence of the virus ( Figure 3E , inset ) . Overexpression of US28 resulted in an increase of the rate of cholesterol efﬂux , similar to the positive control , cells Figure 1 . HCMV Enhances Cholesterol Efﬂux from Human Fibroblasts ( A ) Time dependence of the effect of HCMV infection on cholesterol efﬂux to apoA - I ( 30 m g / ml ) . ( B ) The effect of HCMV infection ( 48 hr ) on cholesterol efﬂux to apoA - I ( 30 m g / ml ) , HDL ( 40 m g / ml ) , and methyl - b - cyclodextrin ( 200 m g / ml ) . ( C ) The effect of ﬁxing cells with paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) on the effect of HCMV infection ( 48 hr ) on cholesterol efﬂux to apoA - I . ( D ) The effect of HCMV infection ( 48 hr ) on cell necrosis . ( E ) The effect of HCMV infection ( 48 hr ) on cell apoptosis . ( F ) The effect of infection with clinical strain of HCMV ( Merlin , 48 hr ) on cholesterol efﬂux to apoA - I . Data indicate means ± SD . * p < 0 . 05 ; * * p < 0 . 01 ( versus uninfected ) . 188 Cell Reports 16 , 186 – 200 , June 28 , 2016 overexpressing ABCA1 ( Figure 3E ) . Furthermore , overexpres - sion of US28 in HCMV ( D US28 ) - infected cells elevated choles - terol efﬂux even above that in cells infected with the parent HCMV ( + US28 ) virus ( Figure 3F ) . When the effect of US28 overex - pression on ABCA1 abundance was examined , the total ABCA1 abundance was unchanged in US28 - transfected cells ( Fig - ure 3G ) . The abundance of cell - surface ABCA1 was , however , lower in US28 versus mock - transfected cells ( 482 versus 662 arbitrary densitometry units [ a . d . u . ] ) , conﬁrming that , in cells transfected with US28 , ABCA1 is located in a compartment not exposed to the cell surface . A discrepancy between the effects of HCMV infection and US28 transfection on the total abundance of ABCA1 is likely a reﬂection of different amounts of US28 intro - duced by viral infection versus transfection or is temporal ; how - ever , we cannot exclude a possibility that US28 requires a co - factor for its effects on ABCA1 . Finally , overexpression of US28 in another cell type , mouse macrophage RAW 264 . 7 cells , also elevated cholesterol efﬂux Figure 2 . Involvement of Host Cholesterol Transporters in the Effects of HCMV on Cholesterol Efﬂux ( A ) The effect of HCMV infection ( 48 hr ) on the abundance of total ( left ) and cell - surface ( right ) ABCA1 . ( B ) The effect of HCMV infection ( 48 hr ) on the abundance of ABCG1 and SR - B1 . ( C ) The effect of activation of expression of ABC transporters with LXR agonist TO901317 on cholesterol efﬂux from HCMV - infected cells ( 48 - hr infection ) to apoA - I . ( D ) The effect of silencing ABCA1 on cholesterol efﬂux from HCMV - infected cells ( 48 - hr infection ) to apoA - I . Inset : abundance of ABCA1 after silencing with siRNA ABCA1 . siRNA s , scrambled siRNA . ( E ) The effect of HCMV infection ( 48 hr ) on phospholipid efﬂux to apoA - I . Data indicate means ± SD . * p < 0 . 05 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 ( versus uninfected ) ; # p < 0 . 05 ( versus untreated ) . Cell Reports 16 , 186 – 200 , June 28 , 2016 189 ( legend on next page ) 190 Cell Reports 16 , 186 – 200 , June 28 , 2016 ( Figure 3H ) . Thus , it appears that HCMV protein US28 is essential and sufﬁcient for the effects of HCMV on cholesterol efﬂux ; it is also essential , but may not be sufﬁcient , for the reduction of ABCA1 abundance in host cells . Mechanism of the Effect of HCMV on Cholesterol Efﬂux To investigate the mechanism of US28 - dependent stimulation of cholesterol efﬂux , we tested the effect of US28 on apoA - I binding to host cells . Infection of cells with + US28 HCMV led to an almost 3 - fold elevation of apoA - I binding to cells , compared to unin - fected cells ( Figure 4A ) . Infection of cells with US28 - deﬁcient HCMV virus led to a reduction of apoA - I binding , compared to cells infected with the + US28 virus ( Figure 4A ) . Next , we tested the effect of overexpression of US28 on apoA - I binding . Trans - fection of cells with US28 more than doubled the binding of apoA - I , compared to mock - transfected cells , exceeding the ef - fect of transfection with ABCA1 ( Figure 4B ) . The effect of US28 on apoA - I binding was further conﬁrmed with two independent methods . First , the amount of apoA - I bound to mock - or US28 - transfected cells was analyzed by western blot . Repre - sentative images of western blots of cell - bound [ Alexa Fluor 647 ] apoA - I are shown in Figure 4C . We found that transfection of US28 increased the apoA - I / GAPDH ratio by 1 . 38 ( ± 0 . 045 ) - fold ( n = 3 ) in US28 - versus mock - transfected cells ( p < 0 . 05 ) . Second , we used live confocal microscopy to analyze the bind - ing of [ Alexa Fluor 647 ] apoA - I to mock - or US28 - transfected cells . Findings are presented in Figure 4D ( note that , for better visualization , colors were changed and tGFP is presented as red , while Alexa Fluor 647 is shown as green ) . The left panel in Figure 4D shows a small amount of apoA - I ( green dots ) bound to mock - transfected cells . The middle panels show apoA - I bound to the surface of the US28 - transfected cell ( red ) but not to the surface of untransfected cell ( seen at bright - ﬁled picture on the right panel ) . Quantitation of the confocal images demon - strated that twice as much apoA - I binds to US28 - transfected versus mock - transfected cells ( Figure 4D , right panel ) . We hypothesized that the mechanism of the effect of US28 on apoA - I binding could be a direct binding of apoA - I to US28 on the cell surface , leading to a translocation of plasma - membrane cholesterol to bound apoA - I . To test this hypothesis , we overex - pressed tGFP - tagged US28 in human ﬁbroblasts , incubated cells with human apoA - I , cross - linked with cell - impermeable cross - linker followed by immunoprecipitation with either anti - apoA - I or anti - tGFP antibody . Immunoprecipitation with both anti - tGFP and anti - apoA - I failed to detect a direct binding be - tween US28 and apoA - I ( Figure 4E ) . At the same time , analysis of complexes immunoprecipitated with anti - apoA - I revealed ample binding of apoA - I to ABCA1 ( Figure 4E , right panel ) . Thus , it appears unlikely that US28 closely associates with or directly binds to apoA - I . An alternative is that HCMV , through US28 , alters the structure of plasma membrane , creating sites where apoA - I can bind and solubilize membrane lipids , a mech - anism recently suggested for the ABCA1 - dependent cholesterol efﬂux ( Vedhachalam et al . , 2007 ) . The binding of apoA - I stimulates transfer of cholesterol to the plasma membrane and increases the abundance of cholesterol on the cell surface ( Sviridov et al . , 2001 ) . Therefore , we tested whether HCMV infection alters the abundance of cholesterol on the surface of plasma membrane ( deﬁned as a proportion of cholesterol susceptible to oxidation by cholesterol oxidase ) . Both HCMV infection and overexpression of US28 signiﬁcantly increased the abundance of cell - surface cholesterol ( Figures 4F and 4G ) . This ﬁnding was further conﬁrmed by analyzing the amount of BODIPY - cholesterol incorporated into cell membranes after pulse labeling of cells by incubating them for 10 min with BODIPY - cholesterol / cyclodextrin complex . The amount of BODIPY - cholesterol extracted from the plasma membranes of US28 - transefcted cells was twice that in the mock - transfected cells ( Figure 4H , left panel ) , while the abun - dance of the membrane marker a Na + / K + ATPase ( ‘‘loading con - trol , ’’ analyzed using western blot in samples from the same experiment ) was slightly less ( Figure 4H , middle panel ) . Enrich - ment of membranes with cholesterol usually leads to increased abundance of lipid rafts ; therefore , we also analyzed the abun - dance in the membrane fraction of the raft marker ﬂotillin . Unex - pectedly , the abundance of ﬂotillin in cells transfected with US28 decreased , compared to that in mock - transfected cells ( Fig - ure 4H , right panel ) , when normalized to loading control ( Fig - ure 4H , middle panel ) . Thus , HCMV and US28 increased the binding of apoA - I and abundance of cholesterol on the cell surface ; both factors may contribute to the increased cholesterol efﬂux . Lipid rafts are an important structural element of plasma mem - brane involved in regulation of cholesterol efﬂux and many other metabolic processes . Therefore , we further investigated the ef - fect of US28 on the abundance of rafts using confocal micro - scopy . Flotillin and ganglioside GM1 ( assessed through binding of cholera toxin subunit B [ CT - B ] ) were used as raft markers , and the experiments were conducted in two modiﬁcations : in cell suspension , where the plasma membrane can be clearly Figure 3 . Involvement of Viral Proteins in the Effects of HCMV on Cholesterol Efﬂux ( A ) The effect of UV irradiation on the ability of HCMV ( 48 - hr infection ) to enhance cholesterol efﬂux to apoA - I . ( B ) The effect of UV irradiation and of deletion of the US28 gene on the ability of HCMV ( 48 - hr infection ) to reduce abundance of ABCA1 . ( C ) The effect of phosphonoacetic acid ( PAA ) on the ability of HCMV ( 48 - hr infection ) to enhance cholesterol efﬂux to apoA - I . ( D ) Cholesterol efﬂux to apoA - I from cells not infected with HCMV or infected with wild - type ( WT ) HCMV , HCMV ( D US28 ) , and parent virus to HCMV D US28 containing US28 ( HCMV ( + US28 ) ) ; all infections were for 48 hr . ( E ) TheeffectoftransientoverexpressionoftGFP - US28orhABCA1oncholesterolefﬂux . Inset : presenceofUS28aftertransfectionwithmock ( left ) ortGFP - US28 ( right ) plasmid . ( F ) Cholesterol efﬂux to apoA - I from cells infected with HCMV ( + US28 ) , HCMV ( D US28 ) , or HCMV D US28 ( 48 - hr infection ) in combination with transfection with US28 . ( G ) The effect of transient overexpression of tGFP - US28 on the abundance of total ( top left ) or cell - surface ( right ) ABCA1 . ( H ) The effect of transient overexpression of tGFP - US28 on cholesterol efﬂux from RAW 264 . 7 cells . Data indicate means ± SD . * p < 0 . 01 ; * * p < 0 . 01 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 . Cell Reports 16 , 186 – 200 , June 28 , 2016 191 Figure 4 . Mechanism of the Effect of HCMV on Cholesterol Efﬂux ( A ) The effect of HCMV ( + US28 ) and HCMV ( D US28 ) ( 48 - hr infection ) on binding of apoA - I to human ﬁbroblasts . ( B ) The effect of overexpression of US28 or ABCA1 on apoA - I binding ( 2 hr ) to human ﬁbroblasts . ( legend continued on next page ) 192 Cell Reports 16 , 186 – 200 , June 28 , 2016 visualized , and in adherent cells , a more natural state for ﬁbro - blasts . In suspended ﬁbroblasts transfected with mock - GFP plasmid , we found a high abundance of ﬂotillin - and GM1 - posi - tive staining on the plasma membrane , consistent with a high abundance of rafts in these cells ( Figure 5A ) . In cells transfected with US28 - tGFP , two types of staining were observed . In some transfected cells , US28 was localized to the nucleus , cytoplasm , and plasma membrane ; in these cells , we observed weaker staining with anti - ﬂotillin antibody but clearly distinguishable staining of the plasma membrane with CT - B ( Figure 5B ) . In other cells , US28 localized to the perinuclear space and nucleus ; in these cells , no ﬂotillin - or GM1 - positive staining was observed on plasma membrane ( Figure 5C ) . Quantitation of ﬂotillin abun - dance derived from confocal microscopy experiments is shown in Figure 5D . Similar observations were made with adherent cells ( Figure S1A ) . Two types of intracellular distribution of US28 were reported previously and are thought to reﬂect temporal regula - tion , with nucleus - localized US28 representing later stages of infection ( Noriega et al . , 2014 ) . We further conﬁrmed these ﬁnd - ings in cells infected with + US28 and D US28 HCMV . While , in uninfected cells , we observed an abundant and even staining of plasma membrane with anti - ﬂotillin antibody and CT - B ( Fig - ure 5E ) , in cells infected with + US28 virus , the abundance of ﬂo - tillin and GM1 was considerably reduced and became uneven ( ‘‘clustered’’ ) ( Figure 5F ) . Abundance and distribution of raft markers in cells infected with D US28 HCMV were similar to those in uninfected cells ( Figure 5G ) , while infection with D US28 virus combined with transfection with US28 - tGFP again led to reduced abundance and clustering of lipid raft markers ( Fig - ure 5H ; cells transfected with US28 - tGFP are identiﬁed by tGFP ﬂuorescence ) . Quantitation of ﬂotillin abundance derived from confocal microscopy experiments is shown in Figure 5I . Similar observations were made with adherent cells ( Figure S1B ) . Thus , HCMV infection and transfection with US28 reduced abun - dance of rafts and / or severely affected their properties , inducing clustering and exclusion of key lipid raft markers . To understand a mechanism responsible for re - organization of lipid rafts by HCMV , we investigated the status of actin cytoskel - eton in infected cells . Actin microﬁlaments are involved in main - taining the structure of rafts , including their clustering ( Chichili and Rodgers , 2007 ) , and are responsible for the alteration of raft structure by the inﬂuenza virus ( Simpson - Holley et al . , 2002 ) . Indeed , actin cytoskeleton was altered in HCMV - infected cells showing considerable rearrangement ; we also observed the co - localization of actin with GM1 in the sites of raft clustering ( Figures 6A and 6B ) . Similar changes in actin cytoskeleton and increased co - localization of actin with GM1 was observed in US28 - transfected cells when compared to mock - transfected cells ( Figures 6C and 6D ; note that the color of GFP was changed to blue to identify transfected cells ) . US28 is known to initiate a signaling cascade , resulting in the activation of CDC42 ( Melnychuk et al . , 2004 ; Vischer et al . , 2014 ) , a small GTPase of the Rho family implicated in the regula - tion of actin polymerization ( Chadda et al . , 2007 ; Vischer et al . , 2014 ) . To test whether this mechanism is involved , we silenced CDC42 in human ﬁbroblasts , using siRNA CDC42 . Silencing of CDC42resultedinapproximately80 % reductionofCDC42abun - dance ( Figure 6E ) . When the binding of [ Alexa Fluor 647 ] apoA - I was tested in cells transfected with scrambled siRNA , as expected , co - transfection with US28 increased apoA - I binding ( Figure 6F , lanes 1 and 2 ) . When cells were transfected with siRNA CDC42 , the increase of apoA - I binding in US28 - transfected cells was completely eliminated ( Figure 6F , lanes 3 and 4 ) . This ﬁnding was conﬁrmed by measuring the effects of US28 on cholesterol efﬂux from cells after CDC42 silencing : silencing of CDC42 completely eliminated the increase of cholesterol efﬂux caused by US28 transfection ( Figure 6G ) . Thus , a mechanism of the effects of HCMV on the structure of lipid rafts is through CDC42 - mediated remodeling of actin cytoskeleton . Effect of US28 on Inﬂammation Changes in lipid rafts may lead to impairment of multiple signaling pathways , including inﬂammatory cytokine production . Therefore , we investigated possible physiological implications of the effects of US28 and tested whether overexpression of US28 affects elements of inﬂammation . Mouse macrophage RAW 264 . 7 cells were transfected either with mock plasmid or with US28 , and cytokine secretion was analyzed . Transfection of cells with US28 signiﬁcantly reduced unstimulated secretion of inter - leukin ( IL ) - 6 , IL - 27 , and interferon ( IFN ) - b ( Figure S2A ) . When cells were stimulated with lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) , secretion of IL - 6 , IL - 27 , and granulocyte / macrophage colony - stimulating factor ( GM - CSF ) was reduced in cells transfected with US28 ( Figure 6H , solid bars ) . To assess the contribution of US28 - medi - ated raft modiﬁcations to cytokine secretion , we compared the effects of transfecting cells with US28 with the effects of M b CD , which modiﬁes rafts by extracting cholesterol and does not interact with known chemokine receptors . Treatment of cells with M b CD reduced the abundance of rafts ( Figure S2B ) and signiﬁcantly reduced LPS - stimulated secretion of IL - 6 and ( C ) Western blot of [ Alexa Fluor 647 ] apoA - I bound to mock - or US28 - transfected cells . MW , molecular weight . ( D ) Live confocal microscopy images of [ Alexa Fluor 647 ] apoA - I bound to mock - or US28 - transfected cells . Note that , for better visualization , colors were changed , and GFP is presented as red , while Alexa Fluor 647 is shown as green . Left panel : ﬂuorescence image of mock - transfected cell . Middle panels : ﬂuorescent ( left middle panel ) and bright - ﬁeld ( right middle panel ) images of US28 - transfected cells . Right panel : quantitation of apoA - I binding to US28 - transfected and mock - transfected cells . Scale bars , 10 m m . ( E ) Cross - linking of apoA - I with tGFP - US28 or ABCA1 in cells overexpressing tGFP - US28 . The table below the panel explains the conditions : top row speciﬁes whether cells were transfected with mock ( M ) or US28 plasmid ; middle row speciﬁes the antibody used for immunoprecipitation ( IP ) ; bottom row speciﬁes the antibody used for visualization of the bands . ( F ) The effect of HCMV infection ( 48 hr ) on the abundance of cell - surface cholesterol . ( G ) The effect of overexpression of US28 on the abundance of cell - surface cholesterol . ( H ) The effect of overexpression of US28 on incorporation of BODIPY - cholesterol into plasma membrane . Left panel : ﬂuorescence of BODIPY - cholesterol bands after separation of membrane lipid extract using TLC ; middle panel : abundance of a Na + / K + ATPase in the same samples analyzed by western blot ; right panel : abundance of ﬂotillin in the same samples analyzed by western blot . Data indicate means ± SD . * p < 0 . 05 ; * * p < 0 . 01 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 . Cell Reports 16 , 186 – 200 , June 28 , 2016 193 Figure 5 . The Effect of HCMV on Lipid Rafts ( A ) The effect of transfection of ﬁbroblasts with mock - GFP on the abundance of ﬂotillin and GM1 . ( B ) The effect of transfection of ﬁbroblasts with US28 - tGFP on the abundance of ﬂotillin and GM1 when US28 is distributed to cytoplasm . ( C ) The effect of transfection of ﬁbroblasts with US28 - tGFP on the abundance of ﬂotillin and GM1 when US28 is distributed to the nucleus . ( D ) Quantitation of ﬂotillin abundance derived from confocal microscopy experiments . CTCF , corrected total cell ﬂuorescence . * * p < 0 . 01 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 ( versus mock - GFP or as shown ) . Cyto . , cytoplasm ; Nucl . , nucleus . ( E ) Abundance and distribution of ﬂotillin and GM1 in uninfected cells . ( F ) The effect of infection of ﬁbroblasts with HCMV ( + US28 ) ( 48 hr ) on the abundance and distribution of ﬂotillin and GM1 . ( legend continued on next page ) 194 Cell Reports 16 , 186 – 200 , June 28 , 2016 GM - CSF , similar to the effects of transfection with US28 ( Fig - ure 6H ) . However , the effect of M b CD on LPS - stimulated secre - tion of IL - 27 was opposite that of US28 , indicating the possible contribution of chemokine scavenging and receptor hijacking , previously attributed to US28 ( Vischer et al . , 2014 ) , to its anti - in - ﬂammatory properties . When conditioned medium from US28 - transfected macrophages ( not stimulated with LPS ) was added to the endothelial cells carrying reporter gene under the control of VCAM - 1 promoter , we observed a 25 % reduction in the stim - ulatory effect on VCAM1 expression , when compared with medium from mock - transfected cells ( Figure 6I ) . Effect of HCMV Infection on Cellular Lipid Metabolism Our ﬁndings imply that HCMV infection replaces the cell - speciﬁc ABCA1 - dependent pathway of cholesterol efﬂux with a virus - speciﬁc US28 - dependent cholesterol efﬂux . To elucidate the net effect of such substitution on lipid content , we performed lipidomic analysis of cells infected with HCMV . The ﬁndings are summarized in Figure 7A , with a full dataset presented in Table S1 . The notable effects of HCMV infection on cellular lipids were small , but statistically signiﬁcant , elevations of the abun - dance of ceramide , dihexosylceramide , and GM3 ganglioside . These lipids play an important role in maintaining the structure and functional properties of lipid rafts ( Quinn , 2014 ) . Total abun - dance of two other important components of rafts , cholesterol and sphingomyelin , were not affected by the infection ; abun - dance of cholesteryl esters was also unaffected . Cholesterol efﬂux is often non - productive : the release of cellular cholesterol to extracellular acceptor may be compen - sated by cholesterol uptake , with no net change in overall cellular cholesterol content . We further investigated this issue and measured two surrogate markers of cellular cholesterol content : rates of cholesterol biosynthesis and esteriﬁcation . The rate of cholesterol biosynthesis in HCMV - infected ( Figure 7B ) or US28 - transfected ( Figure 7C ) cells was slightly reduced , while the rate of cholesterol esteriﬁcation was increased ( Figures 7D and 7E ) compared to that in uninfected cells . These ﬁndings are consistent with an increased , rather than decreased , abun - dance of cholesterol , at least in the regulatory pool in the endo - plasmic reticulum . HCMV infection also caused a modest increase in the incorporation of [ 3 H ] acetate into free fatty acids ( 1 . 26 ± 0 . 04 versus 1 . 09 ± 0 . 08 dpm per milligram or cell protein ; p < 0 . 05 ) and phospholipids ( 2 . 89 ± 0 . 16 versus 2 . 59 ± 0 . 08 dpm per milligram of cell protein ; p < 0 . 05 ) and had no effect on tri - glyceride ( TG ) biosynthesis . When we measured the abundance of total cellular cholesterol and cholesteryl esters in cells trans - fected with US28 , it was similar to that in mock - transfected cells ( Figure 7F ) , analogous to the effect of HCMV infection . Thus , elevation of cholesterol efﬂux by HCMV infection or US28 trans - fection does not appear to be productive and did not lead to reduction of cellular cholesterol content . It might , however , lead to a redistribution of cholesterol between cellular pools . Next , we investigated the effect of HCMV infection on the expression of lipid metabolism - related genes in host cells . We found that the expression of MSR1 , ABCA3 , and ABCG1 was increased , while the expression of ABCA12 was reduced , and the expression of ABCA1 was unaffected ( Figure S3A ) . Interest - ingly , the increase in the expression of ABCG1 , ABCA3 , and MSR1 in the infected cells was not translated into an increased abundance of these proteins ( Figure 2B ; Figure S3B ) . Next , we investigated the effect of HCMV infection on the abundance of ten microRNAs ( miRNAs ) known to target ABCA1 and cholesterol efﬂux in various cells ( for a review , see Canfra´n - Duque et al . , 2014 ) . Abundance of two miRNAs , miR10b and miR106b , was signiﬁcantly elevated in infected cells ( Figure 7G ) , pointing to a possible mechanism of reduction of ABCA1 abundance in cells infected with HCMV . However , the abundance of two other miRNAs known to target ABCA1 , miR145 and miR27a , was reduced by HCMV infection . Other miRNAs were unaffected . It must be noted that the abundance of the affected miRNAs was low , compared to that of the main miRNA regulator of ABCA1 , miR33a ( Figure S3C ) . The abun - dance of miR33a and miR33b was unaffected . Animal Studies Finally , we analyzed the effect of CMV infection on lipid meta - bolism in vivo using a murine model . BALB / c mice were infected intraperitoneally with 1 . 8 3 10 6 plaque - forming units ( PFUs ) of murine CMV ( MCMV ) . It should be noted that MCMV does not express US28 ( Beisser et al . , 2008 ) . At 3 weeks post - infection , uninfected and infected animals were euthanized . Analysis of plasma lipoproteins ( Figures S4A – S4D ) revealed that MCMV infection caused modest elevation of total plasma cholesterol , which was mostly due to the elevation of non - HDL cholesterol . There was a signiﬁcant elevation of plasma TG content ; HDL cholesterol was unaffected . We also analyzed the capacity of mouse plasma to support cholesterol efﬂux from uninfected mouse macrophages ( RAW 264 . 7 ) . No effect was found ( Fig - ure S4E ) . Furthermore , we analyzed the effect of MCMV infection on the expression of genes related to cholesterol metabolism in the liver ( Figure S4F ) . The livers of MCMV - infected animals had elevated expression of Abca3 , similar to the in vitro ﬁndings with HCMV , and also of Hmgcr and Lxra . Next , we analyzed the abundance of Abca1 and Abcg1 in the liver ( Figures S4G and S4H ) . There was a tendency for lower abundance of Abca1 in the liver of the infected animals , but the difference did not reach statistical signiﬁcance . However , there was statis - tically signiﬁcant elevation of the abundance of Abcg1 in the livers of the infected animals . DISCUSSION Very little is known about the role of cholesterol in the life cycle of HCMV ; however , the presence of cholesterol in HCMV virions ( G ) The effect of infection of ﬁbroblasts with HCMV ( D US28 ) ( 48 hr ) on the abundance and distribution of ﬂotillin and GM1 . ( H ) The effect of infection of ﬁbroblasts with HCMV ( D US28 ) ( 48 hr ) and transfection with US28 - tGFP on the abundance and distribution of ﬂotillin and GM1 . ( I ) Quantitationofﬂotillinabundancederivedfromconfocalmicroscopyexperiments . CTCF , correctedtotalcellﬂuorescence . * p < 0 . 05 ; * * p < 0 . 01 ( versus - HCMV or as shown ) . Data indicate means ± SD . Scale bars , 10 m m . See also Figure S1 . Cell Reports 16 , 186 – 200 , June 28 , 2016 195 Figure 6 . Mechanism and Consequences of the Effect of HCMV on Lipid Rafts ( A and B ) The effect of infection of ﬁbroblasts with HCMV on the abundance and co - localization of GM1 and b - actin . Scale bars , 20 m m . ( CandD ) TheeffectoftransfectionofﬁbroblastswithUS28ontheabundanceandco - localizationofGM1and b - actin . NotethatthecoloroftGFPwaschangedto blue to identify transfected cells . Scale bars , 20 m m . ( legend continued on next page ) 196 Cell Reports 16 , 186 – 200 , June 28 , 2016 suggests a possible interaction of the virus with cellular choles - terol metabolism . Given the important role that such interaction plays in the pathogenesis of many viral infections ( Sviridov and Bukrinsky , 2014 ) , we comprehensively investigated the interac - tion between HCMV infection and host cholesterol metabolism in vitro and in vivo . The main ﬁnding of this study is that HCMV restructures lipid rafts in the host cells , causing increased cholesterol efﬂux and , at the same time , reducing abundance of a key transporter in the host cholesterol efﬂux pathway , ABCA1 . The viral protein responsible for this effect is US28 . Mechanistically , the following sequence of events is proposed ( Figure S5 ) : ( 1 ) US28 is acting as chemokine receptor and activates CDC42 ; ( 2 ) activation of CDC42 leads to rearrangement of actin microﬁlaments , including tight association of actin with rafts ; ( 3 ) remodeling of actin affects abundance and / or structure of lipid rafts , causing raft clustering ; ( 4 ) changes in lipid rafts lead to creation of plasma membrane regions that are capable of binding apoA - I and releasing cholesterol ( this also leads to displacement of ABCA1 from the cell surface ) ; ( 5 ) increased binding of apoA - I causes redistribution of intracellular cholesterol to the plasma mem - brane ; ( 6 ) elevated binding of apoA - I and an increased amount of accessible cholesterol enhanced cholesterol efﬂux . Our ﬁnd - ings are consistent with the hypothesis that US28 causes a re - distribution of cholesterol between cellular compartments , reorganizeslipidrafts , andincreasesthenumberofplasmamem - brane structures capable of binding apoA - I and releasing choles - terol . The current understanding of the mechanism of cholesterol efﬂuxisthatABCA1changespropertiesoftheplasmamembrane domains , forming apoA - I binding sites leading to the efﬂux ( Ved - hachalam et al . , 2007 ) . It appears that US28 induces similar changes to the plasma membrane without ABCA1 . US28 is a virus - encoded G - protein - coupled receptor ; it is ex - pressed in both acute and latent infection ( Vischer et al . , 2007 ) and is only found in primate CMVs ( Beisser et al . , 2008 ) . US28 affects multiple signaling pathways ; it is dispensable for viral replication , but it plays a key role in immune evasion as well as in inﬂammatory and proliferative responses of the infected cells ensuring persistence of the infection ( for a review , see Beisser et al . , 2008 ; Vischer et al . , 2007 , 2014 ) . US28 was also implicated in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis , mainly through the ef - fects on inﬂammation and migration of smooth muscle cells and macrophages ( Streblow et al . , 1999 ; Vischer et al . , 2014 ) . Findings of this study may provide a mechanistic explanation for the effects of US28 on inﬂammatory and proliferative signaling pathways originating from lipid rafts . Dysregulation of cellular cholesterol metabolism inﬂicted by US28 may contribute to the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis through changes in abun - dance and / or properties of cholesterol - rich plasma membrane domains , rafts , and caveolae ( Murphy et al . , 2008 ) . Our ﬁndings raise the following question : given that expression of US28 is not essential for HCMV replication ( Vischer et al . , 2007 ) , what advantage is gained by HCMV from enhancing cholesterol efﬂux , apparently with no net effect on cellular cholesterol content ? We propose that this effect is related to the dramatic changes in the abundance and properties of lipid rafts . Lipid rafts are essential for many intracellular pathogens . On the one hand , many viruses use host plasma membrane rafts as an assembly platform , entry gate , or binding sites during cell - to - cell transmission ( Sviridov and Bukrinsky , 2014 ) ; this requires an increased abundance of rafts . It is not currently known how and whether HCMV interacts with rafts at different stages of its life cycle . Juckem et al . ( 2008 ) suggested that cholesterol deple - tion and disruption of lipid rafts result in a block of HCMV infec - tion of ﬁbroblasts . Infection of this cell type takes place by fusion of the virus envelope with the plasma membrane , but whether rafts are also essential for entry into other cell types is unknown . On the other hand , rafts are a structural platform for innate im - mune response ( Fessler and Parks , 2011 ) , and pathogens often target rafts to reduce immune - related signaling originating from rafts and exposure of infection - related factors to the immune system ; this requires a reduced abundance of rafts . To accom - modate these two seemingly contradictory requirements , patho - gens modify rafts . Often , they do so by modifying lipid ﬂuxes ( Sviridov and Bukrinsky , 2014 ) , as even small changes in lipid ﬂux affect raft structural properties , severely impairing signaling from Toll - like receptors ( TLRs ) ( Fessler and Parks , 2011 ) . A frequent form of raft modiﬁcation is clustering , when rafts con - verted into more stable and larger structures ( Sviridov and Buk - rinsky , 2014 ) . We propose that HCMV , through the suggested mechanism , changes structural and functional properties of lipid rafts , enhancing cholesterol efﬂux and impairing innate immune responses . This suggestion is supported by our ﬁnding that transfection of mouse macrophage cells with US28 reduced secretion of several cytokines measured both directly and by a functional assay assessing the effects of secreted cytokines on VCAM1 expression in endothelial cells . It is also consistent with the ability of HCMV to inhibit IFN - a - stimulated responses , which are known to rely on intact rafts ( Miller et al . , 1999 ) . Furthermore , we also found elevated levels of ceramide in HCMV - infected cells ; enrichment of rafts with ceramide is known to be associated with altered transmembrane signaling and for - mation of larger domains ( Cremesti et al . , 2002 ) . However , the suggestion of a physiological role of US28 as a modulator of innate immunity remains speculative and needs to be tested in an animal model—a complex task , given that only primate ( E ) Western blot of CDC42 with and without siRNA silencing . MW , molecular weight . ( F ) Western blot of [ Alexa Fluor 647 ] apoA - I bound to cells transfected with : mock plasmid and siRNA s ( line 1 ) , US28 and siRNA s ( line 2 ) , mock plasmid and siRNA CDC42 ( line 3 ) , or US28 and siRNA CDC42 ( line 4 ) . ( G ) Cholesterol efﬂux to apoA - I ( 30 m g / ml ) from cells transfected with various combinations of mock and US28 plasmids , siRNA s , and siRNA CDC42 . ( H ) The effects of transfection with US28 or treatment with methyl - b - cyclodextrin ( M b CD ) on cytokine secretion from RAW 264 . 7 macrophages after stimulation withLPS . RatiosofLPS - stimulatedchangesinUS28transfectedversusmock - transfectedcells ( ﬁlledbars ) orM b CD - treatedversusuntreatedcells ( dashedbars ) are shown ( means ± SD , n = 4 ) . ( I ) The effect of conditioned medium from RAW 264 . 7 cells transfected with US28 on VCAM1 expression in mouse endothelial cells . Data indicate means ± SD . * p < 0 . 05 ; * * p < 0 . 01 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 ( versus mock - transfected cells ) ; # # # p < 0 . 001 ( versus untreated cells ) . See also Figure S2 . Cell Reports 16 , 186 – 200 , June 28 , 2016 197 Figure 7 . The Effect of HCMV Infection on Host Lipid Metabolism ( A ) The effects of HCMV infection ( 48 hr ) on abundance of cellular lipids ( standardized to PC ) . LPC ( O ) , alkyllysophosphatidylcholine ; PG , phosphatidylglycerol ; LPE , lysophosphatidylethanolamine ; LPI , lysophosphatidylinositol ; LPC , lysophosphatidylcholine ; DHC , dihexosylceramide ; PE ( O ) , alkylphosphatidylethanol - amine ; Cer , ceramide ; THC , trihexosylceramide ; MHC , monohexosylceramide ; PE ( P ) , alkenylphosphatidylethanolamine ; PC ( P ) , alkenylphosphatidylcholine ; PC ( O ) , alkylphosphatidylcholine ; GM3 , G M3 ganglioside ; CE , cholesteryl ester ; SM , sphingomyelin ; PS , phosphatidylserine ; PI , phosphatidylinositol ; PE , phosphatidylethanolamine ; Chol , cholesterol ; PC , phosphatidylcholine . ( legend continued on next page ) 198 Cell Reports 16 , 186 – 200 , June 28 , 2016 CMVs contain US28 . The effects of US28 on host cholesterol metabolism may also be related to a known capacity of HCMV to facilitate co - infection with other viruses , including HIV , which also critically depends on rafts and suppression of ABCA1 for their infectivity ( Cui et al . , 2012 ) . While our ﬁndings are consistent with these hypotheses , critical evidence to support them beyond speculation awaits further experiments . In a mouse model , MCMV infection did not affect liver abun - dance of Abca1 , while slightly increasing plasma TG and non - HDL cholesterol content . Animal models , however , have limita - tions in reproducing properties of HCMV infection . Speciﬁcally , MCMV does not have a gene for US28 , and its chemokine recep - tor functions are fulﬁlled by M33 ( Beisser et al . , 2008 ) ; the two proteins have limited homology ( 64 % ) , and M33 may not share US28 functionality in modifying host cholesterol metabolism . In conclusion , HCMV , through its protein US28 , modiﬁes plasma membrane rafts and enhances cholesterol efﬂux from in - fected cells . Given the role of cholesterol and lipid rafts in cell metabolism and immunity , the ﬁndings of this study may have signiﬁcant implications on understanding of the pathogenesis of HCMV infection and its complications and may also identify therapeutic targets for treating HCMV infection . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Detailed methodology is provided as Supplemental Experimental Procedures . Virus and Cells Thelow - passageToledostrainofHCMVwasusedunlessindicatedotherwise . Whenindicated , HCMVstrainVR1814wasusedasthebasisfordeletionofthe US28 open reading frame . A clinical strain of HCMV ( Merlin ) was used in the experiments described in Figure 1F . Human foreskin ﬁbroblast cells ( HFFs ) were used in the experiment described in this study , unless indicated otherwise . HFFs were infected with HCMV at an MOI of 1 . Unless indicated otherwise , the experiments were con - ducted 48 hr after infection . In the experiments described in Figures 3H , 6H , and S2 , RAW 264 . 7 mouse macrophages were used . Cholesterol and Phospholipid Efﬂux Cholesterol or phospholipids were labeled by incubation with 1 m Ci of [ 3 H ] cholesterol or [ 3 H ] choline , respectively , and cells were equilibrated and incu - bated for 2 hr with either human apoA - I ( 30 m g / ml ) or isolated human HDL ( 40 m g / ml ) or methyl - b - cyclodextrin ( 200 m g / ml ) . Efﬂux was expressed as a percentage of cholesterol moved from cell to medium . Other Techniques Cell - surface ABCA1 was assessed after biotinylation of cell - surface proteins ( Cui et al . , 2012 ) . Toassess apoA - I binding , apoA - Iwas ﬂuorescentlylabeled withAlexa Fluor 647 carboxyl succinimidyl ester . Cells were incubated with 20 m g / ml ﬂuores - cent apoA - I for 2 hr and harvested , and ﬂuorescence was measured . Alterna - tively , live cells were observed with confocal microscopy or lysed with RIPA buffer and processed for LI - COR western blot . Lipid biosynthesis was assessed by the incorporation of [ 3 H ] acetate into cholesterol , free fatty acids , and TGs and phospholipids and by the incorpora - tion of [ 14 C ] oleic acid into cholesteryl esters . Abundance of cell - surface cholesterol on the plasma membrane was as - sessed through susceptibility to cholesterol oxidase , as described previously ( Cui et al . , 2012 ) . Alternatively , cells were labeled with BODIPY - cholesterol / methyl - b - cyclodextrin inclusion complex ( 0 . 17 mg / ml ) at 37 (cid:1) C for 10 min , andmembraneswereisolatedasdescribedpreviously ( Cuietal . , 2012 ) . Lipids were extracted from the membrane pellet , and cholesterol was separated using TLC . The abundance of lipid rafts was assessed using the Vybrant Lipid Rafts Labeling Kit ( Life Technologies ) . Concentrations of cytokines were determined using the LEGENDplex Multi - Analyte Flow Assay Kit ( BioLegend ) . SVEC4 / VCAM - 1 cells were used to assess the effect of secreted cytokines on VCAM - 1 expression ( D’Souza et al . , 2010 ) . MCMV Infection of Mice Animal experiments were carried out in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki ; the experimental protocol was approved by the ethical committee ofWarsawMedicalUniversity ( # 93 / 2013 ) . BALB / cmicewereinfectedintraper - itoneallywith1 . 8 3 10 6 PFU ofMCMV ( Smithstrain ) ; plasma and liver samples were collected 3 weeks post - infection . Statistics All data are shown as means ± SD , unless stated otherwise . Statistical signif - icance ofthedifferences was assessedbyStudent’sttest whendata followed normal distribution or Mann - Whitney U test on ranks . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures , ﬁve ﬁgures , and one table and can be found with this article online at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2016 . 05 . 070 . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS D . S . conceived the idea of the study , planned the experiments , oversaw the study , and wrote the bulk of the paper . H . L . , H . L . C . , N . M . , A . H . , M . D . , Y . F . , Y . L . , and M . Blomberg performed the majority of the experiments . B . P . M . and S . A . generated and supplied HCMV . P . J . M . performed lipidomic analysis . P . R . and K . A . P . performed animal experiments . W . E . M . supplied D US28 HCMV . C . S . - N . , B . S . , M . Bukrinsky , N . M . , H . L . , and H . L . C . participated in designing the study and critically revised the manuscript . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This study was supported by grants from the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia ( GNT1019847 , GNT1036352 ) and the NIH ( # HL093818 ) to D . S . and M . B . and , in part , by the Victorian Government’s OIS Program . We acknowledge the assistance of Monash Micro Imaging at the Alfred Medical Research and Education Precinct . Received : January 7 , 2016 Revised : April 7 , 2016 Accepted : May 17 , 2016 Published : June 16 , 2016 ( B ) The effect of HCMV infection ( 48 hr ) on the incorporation of [ 3 H ] acetate into cholesterol . ( C ) The effect of transfection with US28 on the incorporation of [ 3 H ] acetate into cholesterol . ( D ) The effect of HCMV infection ( 48 hr ) on the incorporation of [ 14 C ] oleic acid into cholesteryl esters . ( E ) The effect of transfection with US28 on the incorporation of [ 14 C ] oleic acid into cholesteryl esters . ( F ) The effect of transfection of cells with US28 on the abundance of total cholesterol and cholesteryl esters . ( G ) The effect of HCMV infection ( 48 hr ) on the abundance of selected miRNAs related to cholesterol metabolism . Data indicate means ± SD . * p < 0 . 05 ; * * p < 0 . 01 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 , versus control ( Student’s t test ) . # p < 0 . 05 ; # # p < 0 . 01 , versus control ( corrected for multiple comparisons using the Benjamini - Hochberg method ) . See also Figure S3 and Table S1 . Cell Reports 16 , 186 – 200 , June 28 , 2016 199 REFERENCES Beisser , P . S . , Lavreysen , H . , Bruggeman , C . A . , and Vink , C . ( 2008 ) . Chemo - kinesandchemokinereceptorsencoded bycytomegalovirus . InHumanCyto - megalovirus ( CurrentTopicsinMicrobiologyandImmunology ) , T . E . Shenkand M . F . Stinski , eds . ( Berlin : Springer - Verlag ) , pp . 221 – 242 . Canfra´n - Duque , A . , Ramı´rez , C . M . , Goedeke , L . , Lin , C . - S . , and Ferna´ndez - Hernando , C . ( 2014 ) . microRNAs and HDL life cycle . Cardiovasc . Res . 103 , 414 – 422 . Chadda , R . , Howes , M . T . , Plowman , S . J . , Hancock , J . F . , Parton , R . G . , and Mayor , S . ( 2007 ) . Cholesterol - sensitive Cdc42 activation regulates actin poly - merization for endocytosis via the GEEC pathway . Trafﬁc 8 , 702 – 717 . Chichili , G . R . , andRodgers , W . ( 2007 ) . Clusteringofmembraneraftproteinsby the actin cytoskeleton . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 36682 – 36691 . Cremesti , A . E . , Goni , F . M . , andKolesnick , R . ( 2002 ) . Roleofsphingomyelinase and ceramide in modulating rafts : do biophysical properties determine bio - logic outcome ? FEBS Lett . 531 , 47 – 53 . Cui , H . L . , Grant , A . , Mukhamedova , N . , Pushkarsky , T . , Jennelle , L . , Dubrov - sky , L . , Gaus , K . , Fitzgerald , M . L . , Sviridov , D . , and Bukrinsky , M . ( 2012 ) . HIV - 1 Nef mobilizes lipid rafts in macrophages through a pathway that com - petes with ABCA1 - dependent cholesterol efﬂux . J . Lipid Res . 53 , 696 – 708 . D’Souza , W . , Stonik , J . A . , Murphy , A . , Demosky , S . J . , Sethi , A . A . , Moore , X . L . , Chin - Dusting , J . , Remaley , A . T . , and Sviridov , D . ( 2010 ) . Structure / function relationships of apolipoprotein a - I mimetic peptides : implications for antia - therogenic activities of high - density lipoprotein . Circ . Res . 107 , 217 – 227 . Droese , J . , Mokros , T . , Hermosilla , R . , Sch € ulein , R . , Lipp , M . , Ho¨pken , U . E . , and Rehm , A . ( 2004 ) . HCMV - encoded chemokine receptor US28 employs multiple routes for internalization . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 322 , 42 – 49 . Fessler , M . B . , and Parks , J . S . ( 2011 ) . Intracellular lipid ﬂux and membrane microdomains as organizing principles in inﬂammatory cell signaling . J . Immunol . 187 , 1529 – 1535 . Gudleski - O’Regan , N . , Greco , T . M . , Cristea , I . M . , and Shenk , T . ( 2012 ) . Increased expression of LDL receptor - related protein 1 during human cyto - megalovirus infection reduces virion cholesterol and infectivity . Cell Host Microbe 12 , 86 – 96 . Haspot , F . , Lavault , A . , Sinzger , C . , Laib Sampaio , K . , Stierhof , Y . D . , Pilet , P . , Bressolette - Bodin , C . , and Halary , F . ( 2012 ) . Human cytomegalovirus entry into dendritic cells occurs via a macropinocytosis - like pathway in a pH - inde - pendent and cholesterol - dependent manner . PLoS ONE 7 , e34795 . Juckem , L . K . , Boehme , K . W . , Feire , A . L . , and Compton , T . ( 2008 ) . Differential initiation of innate immune responses induced by human cytomegalovirus entry into ﬁbroblast cells . J . Immunol . 180 , 4965 – 4977 . Melnychuk , R . M . , Streblow , D . N . , Smith , P . P . , Hirsch , A . J . , Pancheva , D . , and Nelson , J . A . ( 2004 ) . Human cytomegalovirus - encoded G protein - coupled receptor US28 mediates smooth muscle cell migration through Galpha12 . J . Virol . 78 , 8382 – 8391 . Miller , D . M . , Zhang , Y . , Rahill , B . M . , Waldman , W . J . , andSedmak , D . D . ( 1999 ) . Human cytomegalovirus inhibits IFN - alpha - stimulated antiviral and immu - noregulatory responses by blocking multiple levels of IFN - alpha signal trans - duction . J . Immunol . 162 , 6107 – 6113 . Murphy , A . J . , Woollard , K . J . , Hoang , A . , Mukhamedova , N . , Stirzaker , R . A . , McCormick , S . P . A . , Remaley , A . T . , Sviridov , D . , and Chin - Dusting , J . ( 2008 ) . High - densitylipoproteinreducesthehumanmonocyteinﬂammatoryresponse . Arterioscler . Thromb . Vasc . Biol . 28 , 2071 – 2077 . Noriega , V . M . , Gardner , T . J . , Redmann , V . , Bongers , G . , Lira , S . A . , andTortor - ella , D . ( 2014 ) . Human cytomegalovirus US28 facilitates cell - to - cell viral dissemination . Viruses 6 , 1202 – 1218 . Potena , L . , Frascaroli , G . , Grigioni , F . , Lazzarotto , T . , Magnani , G . , Tomasi , L . , Coccolo , F . , Gabrielli , L . , Magelli , C . , Landini , M . P . , and Branzi , A . ( 2004 ) . Hydroxymethyl - glutaryl coenzyme a reductase inhibition limits cytomegalo - virus infection in human endothelial cells . Circulation 109 , 532 – 536 . Quinn , P . J . ( 2014 ) . Sphingolipid symmetry governs membrane lipid raft struc - ture . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1838 , 1922 – 1930 . Ryckman , B . J . , Jarvis , M . A . , Drummond , D . D . , Nelson , J . A . , and Johnson , D . C . ( 2006 ) . Human cytomegalovirus entry into epithelial and endothelial cells depends on genes UL128 to UL150 and occurs by endocytosis and low - pH fusion . J . Virol . 80 , 710 – 722 . Sanchez , V . , and Dong , J . J . ( 2010 ) . Alteration of lipid metabolism in cells infected with human cytomegalovirus . Virology 404 , 71 – 77 . Simpson - Holley , M . , Ellis , D . , Fisher , D . , Elton , D . , McCauley , J . , andDigard , P . ( 2002 ) . A functional link between the actin cytoskeleton and lipid rafts during budding of ﬁlamentous inﬂuenza virions . Virology 301 , 212 – 225 . So¨derberg - Naucle´r , C . , Rahbar , A . , and Stragliotto , G . ( 2013 ) . Survival in patients with glioblastoma receiving valganciclovir . N . Engl . J . Med . 369 , 985 – 986 . Stinski , M . F . ( 1977 ) . Synthesis of proteins and glycoproteins in cells infected with human cytomegalovirus . J . Virol . 23 , 751 – 767 . Streblow , D . N . , Soderberg - Naucler , C . , Vieira , J . , Smith , P . , Wakabayashi , E . , Ruchti , F . , Mattison , K . , Altschuler , Y . , and Nelson , J . A . ( 1999 ) . The human cytomegaloviruschemokinereceptorUS28mediatesvascularsmoothmuscle cell migration . Cell 99 , 511 – 520 . Sviridov , D . , and Bukrinsky , M . ( 2014 ) . Interaction of pathogens with host cholesterol metabolism . Curr . Opin . Lipidol . 25 , 333 – 338 . Sviridov , D . , Fidge , N . , Beaumier - Gallon , G . , and Fielding , C . ( 2001 ) . Apolipo - protein A - I stimulates the transport of intracellular cholesterol to cell - surface cholesterol - rich domains ( caveolae ) . Biochem . J . 358 , 79 – 86 . Triantaﬁlou , M . , Miyake , K . , Golenbock , D . T . , and Triantaﬁlou , K . ( 2002 ) . Medi - ators of innate immune recognition of bacteria concentrate in lipid rafts and facilitate lipopolysaccharide - induced cell activation . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 2603 – 2611 . Vedhachalam , C . , Duong , P . T . , Nickel , M . , Nguyen , D . , Dhanasekaran , P . , Saito , H . , Rothblat , G . H . , Lund - Katz , S . , and Phillips , M . C . ( 2007 ) . Mechanism of ATP - binding cassette transporter A1 - mediated cellular lipid efﬂux to apoli - poproteinA - Iandformationofhighdensitylipoproteinparticles . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 25123 – 25130 . Vischer , H . F . , Hulshof , J . W . , deEsch , I . J . P . , Smit , M . J . , andLeurs , M . J . ( 2007 ) . Virus - encoded G - protein - coupled receptors : constitutively active ( dys ) regula - tors of cell function and their potential as drug target . Ernst Schering Found . Symp . Proc . 2006 , 187 – 210 . Vischer , H . F . , Siderius , M . , Leurs , R . , and Smit , M . J . ( 2014 ) . Herpesvirus - en - coded GPCRs : neglected players in inﬂammatory and proliferative diseases ? Nat . Rev . Drug Discov . 13 , 123 – 139 . Zhu , H . , Cong , J . P . , and Shenk , T . ( 1997 ) . Use ofdifferential display analysisto assess the effect of human cytomegalovirus infection on the accumulation of cellular RNAs : induction of interferon - responsive RNAs . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 13985 – 13990 . Zhu , J . , Quyyumi , A . A . , Norman , J . E . , Csako , G . , and Epstein , S . E . ( 1999 ) . Cytomegalovirus in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis : the role of inﬂamma - tion as reﬂected by elevated C - reactive protein levels . J . Am . Coll . Cardiol . 34 , 1738 – 1743 . Zhuang , L . , Kim , J . , Adam , R . M . , Solomon , K . R . , and Freeman , M . R . ( 2005 ) . Cholesterol targeting alters lipid raft composition and cell survival in prostate cancer cells and xenografts . J . Clin . Invest . 115 , 959 – 968 . 200 Cell Reports 16 , 186 – 200 , June 28 , 2016