Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing cambridge . org / aie Review Article Cite this article : Blandino G , Montagna F , Cantamessa M , Colombo S ( 2023 ) . A comparative review on the role of stimuli in idea generation . Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing 37 , e19 , 1 – 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0890060423000124 Received : 20 October 2022 Revised : 2 April 2023 Accepted : 10 May 2023 Keywords : conceptual design ; idea generation ; review ; stimuli ; source of inspiration Corresponding author : Blandino Graziana ; Email : graziana . blandino @ polito . it © The Author ( s ) , 2023 . Published by Cambridge University Press A comparative review on the role of stimuli in idea generation Graziana Blandino , Francesca Montagna , Marco Cantamessa and Samuele Colombo Department of Management and Production Engineering , Politecnico di Torino , Corso Duca degli Abruzzi , 24 , Torino 10129 , Italy Abstract This paper reports a systematic literature review with the aim of determining the role of stim - uli and other factors , such as timing , the designers ’ background , expertise , and experience , in the idea generation phase of conceptual design related to engineering and industrial design and architecture . “ Stimulus ” is a general expression for a source of information characterized by several features , including the source ( internal or external ) , analogical distance ( near or far ) , and form ( textual , visual , or other ) . Several recent studies have been conducted on this topic involving neurophysiological measurements with significant results . This comprehensive review will help to determine if the neurophysiological results are consistent with those from protocol studies . This allows for determining how the features of stimuli affect – among the related factors – designers ’ performance in idea generation . The literature search was carried out using the Snowball and PRISMA methods . A total of 72 contributions were selected from studies adopting protocol analysis or neurophysiological measurements . This study presents a framework to support the selection of stimuli most likely to maximize performance , based on the designer ’ s background and expertise in the different idea generation metrics . The main findings of the framework suggest that visual stimuli enhance the creative performance of designers , regardless of their background , while textual stimuli foster the variety and quality of ideas , but only in engineering and industrial designers . Comparing the findings , the result - ing framework reveals aspects of stimuli that require further investigation . These can be con - sidered valuable insights for new directions for design research . Introduction The term “ stimuli ” in design research refers to sources of information that support designers in generating ideas during design processes by providing possible sources of inspiration ( Gonçalves et al . , 2014 ) . The combination of multiple pieces of information improves the development of innovative solutions and creative concepts as solutions to design problems ( Borgianni et al . , 2020 ; Kirjavainen and Hölttä - Otto , 2020 ) . This topic has been continuously studied from the design literature and recent contributions are leading to evidence about dif - ferent and under - investigated features of stimuli that – along with other external factors – affect idea generation . More often , these studies refer to idea generation in constrained design problems ( i . e . problem - solving problems where the solution space is defined ) rather than in unstructured design explorations . There , the sources of inspiration are investigated through two alternative approaches , protocol analysis and neurophysiological measurements , which focus on the cognitive aspects of the design process . These methods are applied both in the case of engineering design and industrial design . Protocol analysis 1 is the traditional methodology adopted in the design literature to inves - tigate cognitive activity related to design processes ; it bases its results and observations on the interpretation of verbal reports , sketches , and gestures of designers during experimental activ - ities ( Hay et al . , 2017 ) . Design researchers have recently adopted cognitive neuroscience and physiology approaches , including the investigation of designers ’ biometric signals to investigate neuro - physiological processes , especially in conceptual design ( Gero and Milovanovic , 2020 ) . Although these two methods pursue the same research objectives , they generally focus on different traits of the cognitive processes in design . Unfortunately , the experimental protocols adopted in the literature lack homogeneity . The design tasks used are varied and often differ in the structure of the problems and difficulty levels . Thus , the conclusions reached by experi - mental studies are often difficult to compare and sometimes conflict with each other . 1 Protocol analysis is a method that has been applied for the last 25 years in Engineering and Industrial Design ( Vieira et al . , 2019 ) to investigate the cognitive phenomena of designers during the design process , such as processes related to memory , semantic , visual and associative processes , etc . ( Hay et al . , 2017 ) . Consequently , a systematic review is appropriate to overcome these issues , comparing results obtained from the contributions that adopt protocol analysis and neurophysiological measurements ( subsequently simply named “ protocol studies ” and “ neurophysio - logical studies ” ) . It allows us to investigate the role of stimuli as sources of inspiration for design problem - solving , when designers explore possible alternatives and propose design solutions that sat - isfy the problem constraints ( Kryssanov et al . , 1999 ) . One previous review paper collected inspiration sources ’ findings in the design process ( Vasconcelos and Crilly , 2016 ) ; still , no papers or reviews have compared the evidence obtained by the different investigation methods . Similarly , no paper has yet provided a framework to clar - ify how to select the correct type of stimuli , given factors such as the designer ’ s characteristics and the desired performance . Therefore , the present paper aims to summarize and structure the evidence obtained from protocol and neurophysiological stud - ies about the effect of different types of stimuli on idea generation in structured design problems and their outcomes . In fact , on the one hand , investigating how stimuli are involved in solution gen - eration is fundamental to comprehending ideas and justifying designers ’ performance . On the other hand , the analysis of the outcomes of ideation indicates which are the most appropriate features of stimuli . It also suggests how to properly provide stimuli during the design process , so that designers ’ performance will be directly enhanced . Therefore , comparing results from different sources of inspiration is related to factors that depend on the designer and the design task . Finally , this paper aims to present a structured agenda for future research and to improve designers ’ and design managers ’ idea generation . Two research questions have driven the literature analysis in this contribution by investigating if : (cid:129) the results from neurophysiological studies are consistent with protocol studies about the role of stimuli during the idea gen - eration phase of the design process ; (cid:129) external factors , and specifically individual characteristics of designers , suggest the selection of specific types of stimuli , in order to achieve better performance in idea generation . The methodology adopted consisted of a systematic literature review conducted through Snowballing , combined with PRISMA . The former was based on an initial set of papers searched for relevant contributions by looking at reference lists and citing papers ( as in Wohlin , 2014 ) ; the latter focused on the selection of relevant contributions through a checklist and a flowchart ( as suggested by Moher et al . , 2009 ) . Subsequently , the resulting contributions were fully reviewed and classified based on the stimuli ’ s features and the other factors , distinguish - ing the protocol and the neurophysiological studies . The paper is divided into four sections . The first section describes all stages of the method adopted for the literature search . The second section illustrates the comparison of the results that emerged from the analysis of the papers on the role of stimuli in idea generation for bounded design problems . The third section focuses on the other factors impacting idea genera - tion . Finally , the last section includes the resulting framework and suggests new directions for future work . Methodology for the review The Snowballing methodology ( Wohlin , 2014 ) adopted for ini - tially selecting contributions highlighted the rapid diffusion that occurred since 2016 of the use of methods from neurophysiology in the engineering and industrial design literature . During this first phase of the review , 8 out of 42 of the selected contributions focus on studying conceptual design through the use of biomedi - cal devices . However , only two of these eight contributions of design neurocognition show useful elements in understanding the role of stimuli . Consequently , the work was structured to search the contribu - tions related to idea generation during conceptual design for ( 1 ) the role of stimuli in conceptual design and ( 2 ) if this role was consistent in the neurophysiological studies . For these two strands , two different queries were run . The literature review fol - lowed the PRISMA methodology ( Moher et al . , 2009 ; Torres - Carrion et al . , 2018 ) and was structured in three phases : Identification , screening , and inclusion . The whole selection pro - cess is summarized in Figure 1 . During the identification step , two queries were applied to the Scopus database ; they focused on the whole document and had a common structure for “ Aim ” AND “ Domain ” AND “ Design Phase ” . The first focused on “ Stimuli ” AND “ Stimuli Features ” , while the second focused on “ Biometric Measures ” , including techniques for recording neurophysiological activities , through the use of noninvasive biomedical devices to collect relevant data for the cognition of engineering and industrial design pro - cesses . In this review , the neurophysiological measurements already adopted in the design literature were included in the research query , as shown in strand 2 , Figure 2 . Each query was run iteratively : at each launch , the resulting main keywords were gradually included , improving the precision of the outcomes . In the end , the results were consistent with other reviews ( e . g . the list of included biometrics in the reviews of Borgianni and MacCioni ( 2020 ) and Gero and Milovanovic ( 2020 ) . This process is summarized in Figure 2 , and the selection criteria are listed according to the application order in Table 1 . The identification phase criteria were applied automatically through the Scopus engine . The authors manually checked the papers ’ availability and citation indicator , in the screening phase . They removed duplicates to select the relevant contributions to answer the initial research questions for both the strands identified . Given their objective and relevance , papers were checked based on the exper - imental activities and topics covered . At this phase , only experi - mental papers involving individual design tasks were selected . This is due to the fact that the dynamics of team design activities have been widely investigated through protocol analysis , but no research contribution on team experimental tasks has currently adopted Neurophysiological measurements , making a comparison of findings not possible . Successively , a full - text screening assessed the consistency of selected papers with the analysis of different sources of inspiration for designers during the idea generation activity , distinguishing pro - tocol analysis from neurophysiological measurements approaches . Finally , in the inclusion , the authors selected the crucial con - tributions identified for the two strands , reaching a total of 64 contributions , considered relevant for this research because of their influence in the literature . Results from the review Features of stimuli In the literature , stimuli are defined as possible sources of inspira - tion for designers during the idea - generation process ( Borgianni 2 Graziana Blandino et al . et al . , 2020 ) . They are described in different ways , with terms that are not always consistent . In the present work , we adopted the most used terms , also included in the most relevant contributions ( Goldschmidt and Smolkov , 2006 ; Gonçalves et al . , 2011 ; Goucher - Lambert et al . , 2018 ) . From the final set of papers , 47 out of the 72 contributions dis - cuss the role of stimuli and their features , as in Table 2 . The first feature ( “ source ” , in the first column ) refers to the source of the stimuli , which can be internal or external . Internal stimuli are those obtained from memory retrieval of past experiences , personal memories , and knowledge ( Gonçalves et al . , 2014 ) . These , called self - generated ideas , can be externalized by designers through different modalities of representation as sketches , prototypes , 3D models , and textual descriptions . Figure 1 . Selection process . Figure 2 . Query definition process and final queries . Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing 3 Such stimuli have the potential to inspire designers to generate other new solutions to design problems when no external stimulus is intentionally provided ( Suwa and Tversky , 1997 ) . External stimuli , on the other hand , refer to the external sources of inspiration that can be found through a passive process , in which information comes randomly to the designer , or through an active process , in which information is searched voluntarily by the designer through different sources , such as the internet and books ( Gonçalves et al . , 2011 ) . External stimuli can also be distinguished by analogical distance and the form / modality of representation . When designers consider a stimulus as a good source of inspiration for generating new ideas , they build a series of connec - tions between the stimulus and the problem according to “ analog - ical reasoning ” ( Goucher - Lambert et al . , 2018 ) . The analogical distance is investigated in 20 of the 47 contributions . This analog - ical distance is also called “ proximity to the problem ” ( Vasconcelos and Crilly , 2016 ) and it has been defined as “ a mea - sure of the degree of structural ( relational or functional ) similarity and surface ( attributional ) similarity to the problem ” ( Jia et al . , 2020 ) . Moreover , some authors have distinguished “ near ” analogy Table 1 . Selection criteria and threshold Phase Criteria Threshold or value Identification Publication year < 2022 Subject area Engineering OR CognitiveNeuroscience Document type Article , conference paper , review Publication stage Final Language English Screening Availability Yes Citation indicator [ # of citations / ( 2022 – Publication year ) ] > 1 Duplicate articles Removed Individual Yes Neurophysiology , stimuli Yes Full - text consistency Accepted Table 2 . Stimuli features Stimuli features References Source Internal Modality of representation of self - generated ideas Visual ( Sketch , Prototype , 3D Model ) (cid:129) Bilda et al . ( 2006 ) (cid:129) Sun et al . ( 2013 ) (cid:129) Suwa and Tversky ( 1997 ) (cid:129) Viswanathan and Linsey ( 2013 ) Textual ( Description ) (cid:129) Sun et al . ( 2013 ) External Analogical distance Near (cid:129) Bi et al . ( 2015 ) (cid:129) Cardoso et al . ( 2009 ) (cid:129) Cardoso and Badke - Schaub ( 2011 ) (cid:129) Casakin ( 2010 ) (cid:129) Chan et al . ( 2011 ) (cid:129) Chan et al . ( 2015 ) (cid:129) Cheong and Shu ( 2013 ) (cid:129) Goldschmidt and Sever ( 2011 ) (cid:129) Gonçalves et al . ( 2011 ) (cid:129) Gonçalves et al . ( 2016 ) (cid:129) Goucher - Lambert et al . ( 2018 ) (cid:129) Goucher - Lambert et al . ( 2019 ) (cid:129) Keshwani and Chakrabarti ( 2017 ) (cid:129) Malaga ( 2000 ) (cid:129) Ozkan and Dogan ( 2013 ) (cid:129) Srinivasan et al . ( 2018 ) (cid:129) Tseng et al . ( 2008 ) Far Medium (cid:129) Chai et al . ( 2015 ) (cid:129) Fu et al . ( 2013 ) (cid:129) Gonçalves et al . ( 2014 ) Form / Modality of representation Visual ( Line - Drawing , Picture , Photograph , Prototype , 3D Model , Real Object ) (cid:129) Bilda and Gero ( 2007 ) (cid:129) Cardoso et al . ( 2009 ) (cid:129) Cardoso and Badke - Schaub ( 2011 ) (cid:129) Casakin ( 2010 ) (cid:129) Chai et al . ( 2015 ) (cid:129) Goldschmidt and Smolkov ( 2006 ) (cid:129) Liang et al . ( 2017 ) (cid:129) Perttula and Liikkanen ( 2006 ) (cid:129) Yao et al . ( 2017 ) Textual ( Keyword , Description , Question ) (cid:129) Doboli et al . ( 2014 ) (cid:129) Fink et al . ( 2010 ) (cid:129) Goldschmidt and Sever ( 2011 ) ( Continued ) 4 Graziana Blandino et al . from “ far ” analogy , suggesting the analysis of analogies at inter - mediate distances ( Fu et al . , 2013 ; Gonçalves et al . , 2014 ) . The form , sometimes labeled “ modality of representation ” ( Vasconcelos and Crilly , 2016 ) , looks at the modality with which a stimulus is represented , and it is investigated in 47 of the included contributions . This variable distinguishes between visual and textual stimuli , as in Table 2 , and it can be analyzed conjunctly or independently to the analogical distance . The visual stimuli class includes sketches , photographs , prototypes , 3D mod - els , and real objects ; textual stimuli include keywords , texts , or questions . The literature has also investigated the effects of visual and textual stimuli alone and the effects of combining stimuli of different forms ( Borgianni et al . , 2020 ; Malaga , 2000 ) . Furthermore , we distinguish papers according to the method - ology adopted , between protocol analysis ( 41 out of 47 ) and neu - rophysiological studies ( 6 out of 47 ) , as depicted in Figure 3 . Metrics for performance evaluation and the problem of fixation The investigation of the role of stimuli in idea generation , as a process and its outcomes , requires the introduction of metrics for evaluating the participants ’ performance . Currently , the litera - ture has shown no official standards in the number and type of metrics adopted . This review refers to metrics such as novelty , variety , quality , and quantity , proposed by Shah et al . ( 2003 ) for assessing ideation effectiveness , since they are the most commonly used in the litera - ture . In addition , some of the papers included in the review also evaluate the ideas ’ originality level ( Dean et al . , 2006 ; Vasconcelos and Crilly , 2016 ) . The mentioned metrics are listed and defined in Table 3 . Fixation has been investigated in 10 contributions , this review included . It represents a subconscious phenomenon that occurs especially when the designer has sufficient time to resolve a design problem with a very low degree of uncertainty ( Mohan et al . , 2011 ) . This process narrows the solution space explored by the designer , who remains “ fixed ” to the initial ideas ( Nelius et al . , 2020 ) . Although the fixation is a phenomenon related to the idea genera - tion process , it is often evaluated in combination with other perfor - mance metrics since it has a negative impact on the quality and originality of ideas ( Cardoso et al . , 2009 ) , and on the number , the variety , and the novelty of ideas ( Mohan et al . , 2011 ) . In some cases , fixation is due to the stimuli themselves ( Hay et al . , 2020 ) or to the repeated use of only a small portion of the external stimuli available ( Hwang et al . , 2021 ) . For example , Table 2 . ( Continued . ) Stimuli features References (cid:129) Gonçalves et al . ( 2014 ) (cid:129) Goucher - Lambert et al . ( 2018 ) (cid:129) Goucher - Lambert et al . ( 2019 ) (cid:129) Hernandez et al . ( 2010 ) (cid:129) Liikkanen and Perttula ( 2010 ) (cid:129) Linsey et al . ( 2007 ) (cid:129) Moreno et al . ( 2014 ) (cid:129) Royo et al . ( 2021 ) (cid:129) Tseng et al . ( 2008 ) (cid:129) Viswanathan and Linsey ( 2013 ) Other ( Combination of stimuli , Technical representation , Example of solution , Metaphor , Biology analogy , Patent ) (cid:129) Bi et al . ( 2015 ) (cid:129) Borgianni et al . ( 2020 ) (cid:129) Cascini et al . ( 2020 ) (cid:129) Chan et al . ( 2011 ) (cid:129) Chan et al . ( 2015 ) (cid:129) Cheong and Shu ( 2013 ) (cid:129) Dogan et al . ( 2019 ) (cid:129) Fiorineschi et al . ( 2020 ) (cid:129) Fu et al . ( 2015 ) (cid:129) Gonçalves et al . ( 2016 ) (cid:129) Hadian ( 2015 ) (cid:129) Hay et al . ( 2019 ) (cid:129) Helms et al . ( 2009 ) (cid:129) Leahy et al . ( 2020 ) (cid:129) Malaga ( 2000 ) (cid:129) McKoy et al . ( 2001 ) (cid:129) Ozkan and Dogan ( 2013 ) (cid:129) Sarkar and Chakrabarti ( 2008 ) (cid:129) Srinivasan et al . ( 2018 ) Figure 3 . Methods of investigation . Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing 5 visual stimuli , such as images of everyday life scenes or line draw - ings and photographs , can both guide the designer to inappropri - ately repeat some features of the stimuli in their final ideas ( respectively , Purcell and Gero , 1992 ; Hernandez et al . , 2010 ) . Comparing internal and external stimuli , Leahy et al . ( 2020 ) found that participants were more fixated on their initial ideas when stimulated by an external example of a solution provided during the experiment . Moreover , designers ’ expertise can affect the performance with fixation . Viswanathan and Linsey ( 2013 ) showed that both expert and novice designers exhibited a state of design fixation due to a solution example ; previous experience and knowledge support experts in generating more ideas , but these elements can cause design fixation . New methods have been developed in the literature to help novice designers recognize and avoid the fixation phenomenon . Hwang et al . ( 2021 ) developed a support system that keeps track of designers ’ use of the available external stimuli and guides individuals in redistributing their attention to unused stimuli . Design by analogy can help reduce design fixation by supporting designers in constructing distant analogies from the design prob - lem domain while still relying on prior knowledge , experience , or external stimuli ( Moreno et al . , 2016 ) . Finally , alternative repre - sentations of the design task , such as a brief functional description of the problem , have great benefits for expert engineers in reduc - ing fixation . In contrast , they have a negligible effect on novices ( Viswanathan and Linsey , 2011 ) . The study of stimuli by protocol studies Protocol analysis involves conducting a qualitative interpretation of participants ’ gestures , sketches , videos , and audio recordings to investigate cognitive aspects related to the idea generation activity . Most of the contributions included in this review study the role of stimuli and their features in design by applying this method , as in Table 4 . Internal stimuli The design literature focuses on investigating external sources of inspiration , as in Figure 4a , since only 7 of 47 contributions deal with the role of internal stimuli . (cid:129) Visual . Suwa and Tversky ( 1997 ) found that designers ’ inspec - tion of self - generated sketches suggests new ways to improve their initial ideas . In addition , Goldschmidt and Smolkov ( 2006 ) observed that the sketches , as internal stimuli , are funda - mental to generate creative solutions . Bilda et al . ( 2006 ) com - pared the idea generation process in a “ blindfolded ” and a “ sketching ” condition for experienced architects . They observed that the inability to sketch did not affect the quality of the information in the generated ideas . On the contrary , the overall performance , in making connections between different ideas , was lower in the blindfolded mode . Moreover , physical and 3D samples and mental images can aid designers in refining their initial ideas ( Gonçalves et al . , 2014 , 2016 ) . Viswanathan and Linsey ( 2012 , 2013 ) noted that building physical models helps designers to generate more functional solutions with a higher level of quality than the condition in which they produce only sketches , but it can cause a degree of fixation directly pro - portional to the amount of time taken to build the 3D model . (cid:129) Textual . Among self - generated stimuli , one can also consider the description of own ideas . Doboli et al . ( 2014 ) found that summarizing own ideas through keywords or titles improves the level of innovation of generated solutions . External stimuli The analogical distance . Concerning analogical distance , 19 papers out of 47 investigate the role of near and far analogies , and only 3 contributions have focused on intermediate analogies , as in Figure 4b . (cid:129) Methods for analogical distance evaluation . For the selection of textual stimuli with different levels of distance , Goucher - Lambert Table 3 . Idea generation outcomes metrics and phenomenon bias Phase Metric / phenomenon Definition Idea generation outcomes Novelty It evaluates how much an idea is unexpected compared to all others . This metric may be measured by comparing generated ideas with the ones already known in state of art , those a priori defined as not novel , expected , or usual . Alternatively , it can be evaluated by defining general key attributes and evaluating how each is satisfied by each idea . The higher the number of ideas that satisfy the attribute in the same way , the lower the level of novelty is ( Shah et al . , 2003 ) . Variety It measures how different each other are the ideas generated . The higher the level of variety , the higher the probability of finding the best solutions in different areas of the explored solution space . Variety assessment focuses on the different principles that can be adopted to satisfy the same design problem . The adoption of different principles makes the ideas different from each other ( Shah et al . , 2003 ) . Quality It refers to idea feasibility and how much every idea is able to address design requirements and specifications . QFD , as the reference tool for defining requirements , can also be used to evaluate their fulfillment ( Shah et al . , 2003 ) . Authors also refer to it as “ usefulness ” or “ functionality ” ( Vasconcelos and Crilly , 2016 ) . Quantity It is also defined as the “ number of solutions ” and measures the total number of ideas generated ( Shah et al . , 2003 ) . Originality It measures how rare and surprising the idea is ( Dean et al . , 2006 ) . Vasconcelos and Crilly ( 2016 ) reported that originality , or “ rarity ” , metrics evaluate the uniqueness of the ideas and that this has sometimes been confused or substituted with the novelty metric . Idea generation process Fixation This phenomenon belongs to the broader family of cognitive biases that lead to a personal interpretation of information and produce a distorted image of reality . The main consequence of fixation on designers ’ performance is the inappropriate repetition of elements and features of the stimuli provided in the final ideas generated ( Cardoso and Badke - Schaub , 2011 ) . 6 Graziana Blandino et al . Table 4 . Stimuli features investigated in protocol studies Reference Method Stimuli features Source Analogical distance Form Bilda et al . ( 2006 ) Experiment Internal Sketches Bilda and Gero ( 2007 ) Experiment Internal Sketches Borgianni et al . ( 2020 ) Experiment External Keywords , pictures representing the meaning of textual stimuli , combination of words and pictures Cardoso et al . ( 2009 ) Experiment External Near and far Line - drawings or pictures Cardoso and Badke - Schaub ( 2011 ) Experiment External Near and far Line - drawing or picture of a possible solution Casakin ( 2010 ) Experiment External Near and far Images Cascini et al . ( 2020 ) Experiment External Problem - solution network ( PSN ) and functional decomposition and morphology ( FDM ) , and textual description Chai et al . ( 2015 ) Experiment External Near , far , medium Pictures of sources of example Chan et al . ( 2011 ) Experiment External Near and far Picture and textual descriptions of examples from the U . S . Patents database Chan et al . ( 2015 ) Experiment External Near and far Textual description Cheong and Shu ( 2013 ) Experiment External Near and far Textual descriptions of biological phenomena Doboli et al . ( 2014 ) Experiment External List of devices Dogan et al . ( 2019 ) Experiment External Metaphors Fiorineschi et al . ( 2020 ) Methodological paper External Problem - solution network of available solutions and chart of structural solutions Fu et al . ( 2015 ) Experiment External Near , far , medium Patent descriptions of products Goldschmidt and Smolkov ( 2006 ) Experiment External Pictures and line - drawings Goldschmidt and Sever ( 2011 ) Experiment External Near and far Textual descriptions of ideas Gonçalves et al . ( 2014 ) Experiment External Near , far , medium Textual descriptions Gonçalves et al . ( 2016 ) Interview External Near and far Visual , textual and other Hadian ( 2015 ) Interview External Metaphors Helms et al . ( 2009 ) Biologically inspired design study External Textual and visual biological solutions Hernandez et al . ( 2010 ) Experiment External Sketch of solution examples Leahy et al . ( 2020 ) Experiment Internal External Example concept sketch and description Liikkanen and Perttula ( 2010 ) Experiment External Keyword Linsey et al . ( 2007 ) Experiment External Near and Far Description Malaga ( 2000 ) Experiment External Near and Far Pictures , words , and combination of picture and words McKoy et al . ( 2001 ) Experiment External Textual and visual Moreno et al . ( 2014 ) Experiment External Key problem descriptors Ozkan and Dogan ( 2013 ) Experiment External Near and Far Textual and visual Perttula and Liikkanen ( 2006 ) Experiment External Sketch of examples Purcell and Gero ( 1992 ) Experiment External Near and Far Pictures and descriptions Royo et al . ( 2021 ) Experiment External Questions Sarkar and Chakrabarti ( 2008 ) Experiment External Visual , textual and other Srinivasan et al . ( 2018 ) Experiment External Near and Far Patents Suwa and Tversky ( 1997 ) Experiment Internal Sketches Tseng et al . ( 2008 ) Experiment External Near and Far List of words Viswanathan and Linsey ( 2011 ) Experiment External Sketch of example solution Viswanathan and Linsey ( 2013 ) Experiment Internal 3D and sketches Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing 7 and Cagan ( 2017 ) adopted the crowdsourcing method , asking online workers to summarize in six keywords their solutions to proposed problems . Next , the most frequent keywords were considered near stimuli , and words used only once were called far stimuli . On the other hand , given a list of words extrapolated from the initial solutions to the design problems , Malaga ( 2000 ) let two experts individually evaluate the distance of each word from the problem . Regarding the distance of visual stimuli , Chai et al . ( 2015 ) evaluated the analogical distance of images related to an outdoor furniture design problem . The authors evaluated pictures depicting outdoor furniture as close stimuli , images of mostly abstract furniture as medium - distance stimuli , and images with elements of nature as distant stimuli . (cid:129) Near versus far stimuli . Gonçalves et al . ( 2014 ) classified stimuli into “ close ” , “ distant ” , and “ too distant ” , and noted that the lat - ter resulted in difficult to interpret and exploit for generating new ideas . Conversely , close stimuli limited the exploration of the solution space , leading to frequent repetition of the same ideas . Finally , the authors observed a midpoint of distance , defined “ distant ” stimuli , at which participants demonstrated “ peak inspiration ” . However , most of the papers suggest that near stimuli provide better support . Srinivasan et al . ( 2018 ) demonstrated that near stimuli support the generation of more solutions at a higher level of quality than far stimuli ; Jia et al . ( 2020 ) found that near stimuli result in higher quality , novelty , and variety of ideas generated . Finally , Chan et al . ( 2011 , 2015 ) showed that near stimuli aided participants in gen - erating the most creative ideas . The form / modality of representation . Among the modalities of representation , the “ other form ” , including the combination of visual and textual stimuli , examples of a solution , biology analo - gies , and technical representations , is the most investigated form of stimuli in the Design literature , as in Figure 4c . (cid:129) Visual . Goldschmidt and Smolkov ( 2006 ) stated that visual stimuli support the generation of creative solutions , and even random features of the external environment sometimes inspire participants . The richness of details of visual stimuli , defined by Vasconcelos and Crilly ( 2016 ) as “ Fidelity of the representa - tion ” , can influence the creative performance of designers . Borgianni et al . ( 2020 ) pointed out that low - fidelity stimuli , such as abstract drawings and pictures , result in non - obvious analogies in idea generation , though with no improvement in quality , originality , and quantity metrics . On the other hand , Cardoso et al . ( 2009 ) found that high - fidelity visual stimuli , concrete sketches , and pictures cause the repetition of some fea - tures of stimuli in the final solutions . However , “ raw ” drawings and line - drawing illustrations led to the generation of more novel ideas , while photographs resulted in less original ideas . In addition , Chan et al . ( 2015 ) observed a higher level of novelty with abstract stimuli , but participants rated concrete stimuli as more useful . The effect of pictures on ideas also depends on the designer ’ s familiarity with the portrayed image ( Purcell and Gero , 1992 ) . (cid:129) Textual . Moreno et al . ( 2014 ) observed that keywords , key - problem descriptors , have a negative effect on the number of ideas , probably because of a high cognitive effort for their com - prehension and interpretation . Chan et al . ( 2011 ) observed that textual stimuli decreased the number of ideas generated both when supplied alone and in addition to visual stimuli . Finally , Royo et al . ( 2021 ) observed that questions , as textual stimuli , resulted in the generation of fewer ideas , with higher levels of quality and lower levels of novelty and variety . (cid:129) Combination of stimuli . Gonçalves et al . ( 2016 ) investigated designers ’ preferences in the use of different types of stimuli . All the designers preferred visual stimuli because accessing and storing this type of information requires less effort than the textual one , which also calls for concepts that are more abstract and , therefore , more complex to interpret . Mckoy et al . ( 2001 ) pointed out that visual / graphical sources of inspira - tion are more effective than textual ones since the design is an image - oriented process and visual senses are more involved than the others ( Mougenot et al . , 2008 ) . On the combination of different forms , Malaga ( 2000 ) found that visual combined with textual stimuli resulted in ideas with a higher level of crea - tivity than textual stimuli alone . Moreover , Borgianni et al . ( 2020 ) noted that this combination leads to a higher number of ideas generated . Conversely , switching from a textual stimu - lus to a visual one does not increase the number , quality , and originality of ideas . Finally , Sarkar and Chakrabarti ( 2008 ) sug - gested providing respectively videos , pictures , and textual stim - uli to generate higher - quality ideas . (cid:129) Technical representation . Technical reports , charts , maps , and methods for representing solutions , can aid designers in defin - ing initial ideas and using these as stimuli for improvements , or generate new ones . Fiorineschi et al . ( 2020 ) noted that the problem - solution network ( PSN ) and the chart of structural solution Alternatives could be adopted as frameworks both for generating and sharing ideas to inspire other designers . Finally , Cascini et al . ( 2020 ) found that stimuli coming from a functional structure , a tree graph ( with hierarchical alternation of problems and their solutions ) , or a morphological map ( functions vs . solutions ) , inspire ideas with greater variety . (cid:129) Example of solution . Hernandez et al . ( 2010 ) observed that the visual examples of solutions improve the variety and the novelty Figure 4 . Stimuli features investigated in protocol studies : ( a ) source of stimuli , ( b ) analogical distance , ( c ) form . 8 Graziana Blandino et al . of the ideas , but this effect is not homogeneous on the whole sample of participants . Differently , Koronis et al . ( 2018 ) found that visual examples of solutions in the presentation of the design problem might reduce the novelty of ideas while representing generic requirements might be more effective . Providing textual solutions , Chan et al . ( 2011 ) observed that examples may cause the fixation phenomenon . It is due to the designers ’ tendency to be more adept at reusing parts of the provided solutions to develop new ideas , regardless of the analogical distance . In archi - tectural design , stimuli composed by the explanation of previous design problems and their context through textual descriptions , pictures , and diagrams are defined as “ cases ” and are the most used stimuli for solving design problems ( Akin , 2002 ; Eilouti , 2009 ) . Finally , Stacey and Sketch ( 1997 ) observed that previous designs work as useful stimuli for new ideas and as references during communication among designers . (cid:129) Metaphor . Metaphors are usually words or phrases through which an implicit relationship of similarity between two objects is generated ; they are considered apart from analogies because the latter presents a relation of similarity explicit and evident ( Dogan et al . , 2019 ) . In Architecture , they have wide applica - tions as a potential source of inspiration . Hadian ( 2015 ) inter - viewed professional architects and found that metaphors are the most effective form of stimuli for generating creative solutions to design problems ; while analogies are equally effective , but used more for idea generation . Specifically , Al - Assadi ( 2022 ) states that , among the metaphors , bio - metaphors are a simula - tion of nature that also allows architects to be inspired by stim - uli of the domain of biology for the generation of innovative solutions . (cid:129) Biology analogy . Cheong and Shu ( 2013 ) highlighted the diffi - culty in developing analogies from these kinds of stimuli , so participants often ignore them . Furthermore , Helms et al . ( 2009 ) showed that biology analogies could influence the entire design process , sometimes preventing designers from ade - quately exploring the solution space , thus causing an improper analogical transfer . Keshwani and Chakrabarti ( 2017 ) suggested that providing biology analogies with explanations and textual descriptions of the natural phenomenon increases the “ level of comprehensiveness in explanation of an analogy ” . Therefore , biology stimuli are a more understandable and effective source of inspiration even for designers without a biology background . (cid:129) Patent . Fu et al . ( 2015 ) observed that the patent descriptions of products as stimuli have no impact on the number of ideas gen - erated and that they generally do not cause the negative phe - nomenon of fixation . Srinivasan et al . ( 2018 ) , using patents of many technological classes as stimuli , noted that patents from the same technology class as the design problem lead to higher quality and lower novelty solutions . Conversely , stimuli from different domains support the generation of ideas with a higher level of novelty and a lower level of quality . Table 5 highlights the main findings from the protocol analysis approach . The study of stimuli with neurophysiological measurements The study of biometric measurements during design activities has been developing since 2005 . The currently most implemented Table 5 . Main findings on the role of stimuli from protocol studies Protocol Analyses StimuliFeatures Source Internal (cid:129) Self - generated sketches suggest new ways to correct initial ideas ( Suwa and Tversky , 1997 ) and to generate creative solutions ( Goldschmidt and Smolkov , 2006 ) . They do not affect the quality of experienced architects ’ ideas ( Bilda et al . , 2006 ) . (cid:129) Summarizing ideas through keywords improves the generated solutions ( Doboli et al . , 2014 ) ; (cid:129) Physical models help designers generate ideas with a higher level of quality ( Viswanathan and Linsey , 2012 ) . External Information comes randomly to the designer or through an active process where information is searched voluntarily by the designer through different sources ( Gonçalves et al . , 2011 ) Their effect depends on their features . Analogical distance Near (cid:129) Near stimuli support the generation of more solutions at a higher level of quality than far stimuli ( Srinivasan et al . , 2018 ) ; (cid:129) Near stimuli support the generation of the most creative ideas ( Chan et al . , 2015 ) . Medium At the midpoint distance , participants demonstrated “ peak inspiration ” ( Gonçalves et al . , 2014 ) Far (cid:129) More distant stimuli are difficult to interpret ( Gonçalves et al . , 2014 ) ; (cid:129) They support generating ideas with greater novelty ( Chan et al . , 2011 ) . Form / modality of representation Visual (cid:129) Visual stimuli are positively correlated with the creative solutions generated by participants ( Goldschmidt and Smolkov , 2006 ) ; (cid:129) Visual stimuli can have different levels of the richness of details ( Vasconcelos and Crilly , 2016 ) . Textual (cid:129) Textual stimuli require more effort than visual during for their interpretation ( Gonçalves et al . , 2016 ) ; (cid:129) Textual stimuli have a negative effect on the number of ideas ( Chan et al . , 2011 ) . Other (cid:129) The combination of stimuli enhances the creative potential of designers ( Malaga , 2000 ; Borgianni et al . , 2020 ) ; (cid:129) Technical representations enhance the variety of ideas ( Cascini et al . , 2020 ) ; (cid:129) Biology analogies can influence the design process , sometimes preventing designers from adequately exploring the solution space ( Helms et al . , 2009 ) . Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing 9 devices are electroencephalography ( EEG ) and functional mag - netic resonance imaging ( fMRI ) , while eye - tracking is in the min - ority , as depicted in Figure 5 . Furthermore , no contribution has adopted functional near - infrared spectroscopy ( fNIRS ) or electro - myography ( EMG ) techniques . Gero and Milovanovic ( 2020 ) pre - sent a deeper understanding of these tools and their adoption in design research . There is limited research on neurophysiological aspects of idea generation investigating the role of stimuli . Although the study of these processes at the neurocognitive level is fundamental for dee - pening the understanding of design cognition , only a small min - ority of contributions ( 6 out of 47 ) included in this review have investigated the role of stimuli by analyzing neurophysiological signals , as depicted in Table 6 . Consequently , only certain features of inspirational stimuli have been investigated adopting the neurophysiological approach and the comparison with the proto - col studies results is not always possible . The limited number of articles may be due to neurophysiolog - ical measurements ’ constraints on the definition of protocols and experimental setups . For example , fMRI techniques require the subject to be still and supine for the recording , which particularly limits the movements and gestures of the participants during the experimental activities . In EEG recording , even minor movements , such as breathing or eye - moving , can impair the quality of the recorded signal . Despite their limitations , biometric techniques offer great advantages as their precision and sensitivity allow the collection of objective and realistic data for design cognition . Internal stimuli Most of the neurophysiological contributions included in this review ( four out of six ) have investigated only the role of external sources of inspiration ; one paper has focused on internal sources , and the last contribution has compared internal and external stimuli , as in Figure 6a . Fink et al . ( 2010 ) , by investigating fundamental cognitive pro - cesses in the early stages of design from the neuropsychological perspective , observed that the unfolding of creative processes at the cognitive level involves the deactivation of parieto - temporal regions , which is crucial during the activity of retrieval from memory of internal stimuli occurring in the initial stages of design . The same authors , investigating idea generation tasks , noted that in the experimental condition without stimuli , such activation is greater than in the conditions in which participants exploit their initial ideas ( internal stimuli ) , or ideas generated by other people ( external stimuli ) . The deactivation of parieto - temporal regions and activity in the alpha band results in the Figure 5 . Biometric measures . Table 6 . Stimuli features investigated in neurophysiological studies Reference Method Biometric measures Stimuli features Source Analogical distance Form Bi et al . ( 2015 ) Experiment Eye tracking External List and graph area Fink et al . ( 2010 ) Experiment fMRI External and Internal Words Goucher - Lambert et al . ( 2018 ) Experiment fMRI External Near and Far Keywords Liang et al . ( 2017 ) Experiment EEG External Pictures Sun et al . ( 2013 ) Experiment EEG Internal Sketches and Descriptions Yao et al . ( 2017 ) Experiment EEG External Pictures Figure 6 . Stimuli features investigated in neurophysiological studies : ( a ) source of stimuli , ( b ) analogical distance , ( c ) form . 10 Graziana Blandino et al . inhibition of potential external stimuli . Sun et al . ( 2013 ) proved that describing ideas helps designers identify possible gaps in their solutions . External stimuli Regarding the active research for external stimuli as sources of inspiration , Hay et al . ( 2020 ) observed that understanding and interpreting stimuli or ignoring them involves the performance of numerous cognitive processes that interact with each other , including perception , which consists of the processing of sensory information , semantic processing , and attention . The analogical distance Although analogical distance largely influences the idea genera - tion process , only one of the neurophysiological studies focused on it , as in Figure 6b . (cid:129) The analogical reasoning . Through fMRI , Goucher - Lambert et al . ( 2018 ) observed that the cognitive mechanisms related to the valuable exploitation of stimuli differ based on analogical distance . The authors pointed out that the pre - frontal cortex is the area most involved during the analogical reasoning pro - cesses in the early stages of the design , since it is responsible for retrieving from memory information regarding the analo - gies and assessing the analogical distance . In addition , the authors noted that , in general , stimuli are helpful when they guide internal attention to memory , as shown by near stimuli . (cid:129) Near versus far stimuli . Goucher - Lambert et al . ( 2018 ) , through fMRI , observed that the cognitive processes carried out by designers when they are provided with a near stimulus recog - nized as useful , differ from the case when the designer individu - ally seeks new sources of inspiration as a reaction to stimuli considered to be too distant to be a good source of inspiration . Experimental results have shown that near stimuli in textual form involve a process defined as “ inspired internal search ” , activating the left hemisphere ’ s bilateral temporal and parietal areas , enhancing abstract thinking , and ensuring greater pro - ductiveness in design problem - solving . On the other hand , the condition with a far stimulus activated both the process of inspired internal search and unsuccessful external search since a far stimulus is not always considered a good source of inspira - tion by the designer . The designer , therefore , activates an inspired internal search process if the far stimulus is perceived to be useful . Otherwise , the stimulus is ignored , according to the process of unsuccessful external search . Consequently , a new phase of primary visual elaboration is activated , resulting in an active search for stimuli in the external environment . Finally , the results of this experimental study highlighted that nearer stimuli improved the usefulness and feasibility of new solutions , thus being the type of stimuli with the greatest impact in assisting designers during the generation of new ideas . The form / modality of representation The form / modality of representation is investigated in five out of six neurophysiological contributions , as in Figure 6c . (cid:129) Visual . Through eye - tracking , Bi et al . ( 2015 ) demonstrated that visual stimuli make the human brain more able to identify data relationships and patterns . Liang et al . ( 2017 ) investigated the phenomena of visual attention and visual association in the case of expert participants , because these two phenomena influence designers ’ creativity . Visual attention is the process carried out by the frontoparietal region of the cerebral cortex , through which the selection of received information and input and its reprocessing based on the designer ’ s goals takes place , neglecting all other received information . Visual associa - tion is the phenomenon through which a connection is built between the source and target of the analogy ; it is related to alpha band activation in the central region of the cortex and gamma band activation in different areas of the brain . Yao et al . ( 2017 ) found that this process is strongly related to frontal and pre - frontal brain activity , focusing on visual association through EEG signals . (cid:129) Textual . Employing fMRI , Goucher - Lambert et al . ( 2019 ) found that temporal brain regions are particularly important for the interpretation of this form of stimuli . These regions are involved in the semantic processing activity of texts and the recognition of textual concepts . In the same way , Fink et al . ( 2010 ) noted temporoparietal activation in the right hemisphere in experi - mental conditions involving textual stimuli , while Sun et al . ( 2013 ) observed centrotemporal activity in their experimental contribution . Summarizing again , Table 7 highlights the main findings from neurophysiological measurements . Stimuli features comparison between the two approaches Table 8 presents the main findings from the studies that have adopted protocol analyses and neurophysiological measurements . This table shows the comparison of results for each feature of stimuli . Contributions from the two approaches have often investigated the role of stimuli and cognitive processes using dif - ferent experimental protocols and identifying nonstandard or dif - ferently defined variables . In view of that , we now attempt to assess the consistency of the results of the protocol and neurophysiological studies , based on the features of the stimuli investigated . Other factors influencing idea generation Some other factors were identified during the literature analysis as factors influencing participants ’ performance in experimental studies . External factors in this review include the concept of background , expertise , and personal experience of participants , as well as the time , as in Table 9 . Other factors from protocol studies Knowledge background and expertise , as shown in Figure 7 , are the mainly investigated factors concerning participants , because they can influence designers ’ approach to generating more origi - nal ideas ( Cardoso and Badke - Schaub , 2011 ) . (cid:129) Background . The majority of experiments conducted in the engineering and industrial design domain involve especially architects and engineers as participants , as in Figure 8 . A small proportion of the selected experimental studies also involved participants from other backgrounds , such as Civil Engineering , Mechanical Engineering , Computer Science , Social Science , and Fine Arts disciplines . These disciplines have been included under a single category called “ Other ” in Figure 8 . Investigating the background influence on the design Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing 11 process , Todoroff et al . ( 2021 ) pointed out some differences between engineers and architects . The former intend to achieve a predetermined goal by optimizing activities , while the latter adopt an approach based more on intuition . Goldschmidt and Smolkov ( 2006 ) stated that visual information is used more than textual , which is fairly independent of the background . However , experiments that involved participants from the engi - neering or industrial design domain tended to explore the role of stimuli with different and mixed features ( Goucher - Lambert et al . , 2019 ; Royo et al . , 2021 ) , but these studies seldom control for the background factor . Conversely , experiments involving participants from architecture focused mainly on visual stimuli and on the practice of sketching self - generated ideas ( Purcell and Gero , 1992 ; Suwa and Tversky , 1997 ; Goldschmidt and Smolkov , 2006 ; Ozkan and Dogan , 2013 ) , probably because sketching is the way architects are trained to improve their ideas during their studies ( Bilda et al . , 2006 ) . Focusing on exter - nal stimuli , Akin ( 2002 ) observed that architects exploit design “ cases ” more for comparing and evaluating their own ideas than as a source of inspiration . In fact , information and data from design “ cases ” and examples are often unstructured and impli - cit , and their use as potential sources of inspiration requires a lot of effort . In this regard , Eilouti ( 2009 ) proposed precedent based - design models that recycle the intrinsic knowledge in the previous solution examples representing the information and data in more explicit forms , such as prototypes , to make stimuli more accessible to designers . (cid:129) Expertise is the external factor most investigated by the contri - butions with the protocol analysis approach cited in this review . Casakin ( 2010 ) observed that experts use visual stimuli better than novices , thus obtaining better solutions . In experimental conditions with no explicit instructions to use stimuli , expert architects were more able to spontaneously search for visual sources of inspiration and concrete objects as stimuli in the external environment . Gonçalves et al . ( 2011 ) highlighted some differences between expert and novice designers searching for and managing external stimuli during the initial phase of the design process . Professionals claim to select closely related sources , while novices prefer more distant sources to improve their creative ideas . In the end , Chai et al . ( 2015 ) noted that experts and senior students prioritize the completeness of their solutions , while junior students focus on functionality . (cid:129) Experience . The influence of experience is investigated in only one study with Protocol Analysis . Sun et al . ( 2014 ) investigated the effect of this factor on the creative performance of engineers in solving a design task consisting of a textual delivery and a picture . Experienced participants obtained better solutions than the inexperienced , thanks to their knowledge and strategies to improve new concepts , but invested more mental effort in understanding the requirements of the design problems . Consequently , more work experience and prior knowledge about the task domain and design process imply a better use of design strategy . (cid:129) Time . In this review , only three papers based on protocol anal - ysis studied the idea generation process focusing on the time factor ; other contributions mention the time factor but do not use it as a control variable . Vasconcelos and Crilly ( 2016 ) defined the instant when stimuli are provided to the participant as the “ timing of stimulation ” . Perttula and Liikkanen ( 2006 ) showed that the exposition of participants to examples of existing solutions , before the process of idea generation , caused the exploration of fewer new possible solutions categories than those explored providing the stimulus during the process . Tseng et al . ( 2008 ) observed that providing stimuli after designers have started working on the problem is more effective , but the effect of the timing of stimulation also depends on the analogical dis - tance . Stimuli that are more distant from the task domain have a greater impact on generated ideas if provided after the participant has received the problem . Conversely , stimuli related to the task domain seem to affect the generation of new ideas even if provided before the problem . In the end , Malaga ( 2000 ) observed that the number of par - ticipants ’ ideas depends not only on the form of the stimulus or the distance of the analogy but also on the amount of time available to generate new solutions . Liikkanen and Perttula Table 7 . Main findings on the role of stimuli from neurophysiological studies Neurophysiological measurements Stimulifeatures Source Internal (cid:129) When external sources of inspiration are not provided , the designers retrieve internal stimuli from memory , activating the parieto - temporal cortex brain area ( Fink et al . , 2010 ) (cid:129) A textual description of self - generated ideas helps designers identify possible gaps in their solutions ( Sun et al . , 2013 ) . External Understanding or ignoring external stimuli involves the performance of numerous cognitive processes , such as perception and attention ( Hay et al . , 2020 ) Analogical distance Near Near stimuli activate the “ inspired internal search ” resulting in the improvement of designer productivity with a higher number of ideas generated and a higher level of innovation ( Goucher - Lambert et al . , 2019 ) Medium X Not investigated Far Far stimuli are ignored if they are too difficult to interpret ; otherwise , they follow the same process activated by near stimuli ( Goucher - Lambert et al . , 2019 ) Form / modality of representation Visual Visual attention paid to the visual stimuli positively correlated with performance : the identification of relationships and patterns of data in visual form is easier for the human brain than in textual form ( Liang et al . , 2017 ) Textual The correct interpretation of textual stimuli involves a process of activation of the temporal areas of the cerebral cortex ( Goucher - Lambert et al . , 2019 ) Other X Not investigated 12 Graziana Blandino et al . ( 2010 ) , focusing on the time factor , demonstrated that a short amount of time available could lead designers to generate more ideas with less creativity . Other factors from neurophysiological studies Among the other factors in neurophysiological studies , the exper - tise is the most investigated , followed by background and experi - ence , as in Figure 9 . (cid:129) Background . The experimental results of neurophysiological contributions show that educational background impacts design activities ; in most experimental studies , participants have an engineering background , followed by industrial design and architecture , as in Figure 10 . Vieira et al . ( 2019 ) , comparing EEG signals from experts in mechanical engineering and archi - tecture during the resolution of a textual task combined with visual stimuli , demonstrated that the formers activate regions ( left pre - frontal cortex ) involved in the structured , rule - based design , and in planning aimed at well - defined goals . In contrast , the latter show different activations ( temporal and occipital right cortex ) related to the elaboration process of information and creative insights while generating new ideas . Investigating the dif - ferences between engineering and industrial design students , Colombo et al . ( 2020 ) found that in the latter , the process of inhi - bition of external stimuli is more pronounced than in engineers . From the analysis of selected contributions for this review , there is no evidence of the difference in neurophysiological Table 8 . Comparison of protocol and neurophysiological studies on the role of stimuli Protocol analyses Neurophysiological measurements StimuliFeatures Source Internal (cid:129) Self - generated sketches suggest new ways to correct initial ideas ( Suwa and Tversky , 1997 ) and to generate creative solutions ( Goldschmidt and Smolkov , 2006 ) . They do not affect the quality of experienced architects ’ ideas ( Bilda et al . , 2006 ) . (cid:129) Summarizing ideas through keywords improves the generated ideas ( Doboli et al . , 2014 ) ; (cid:129) Physical models help designers generate ideas with a higher level of quality ( Viswanathan and Linsey , 2012 ) . (cid:129) When external sources of inspiration are not provided , the designers retrieve internal stimuli from memory , activating the parieto - temporal cortex brain area ( Fink et al . , 2010 ) (cid:129) A textual description of self - generated ideas helps designers identify possible gaps in their solutions ( Sun et al . , 2013 ) . External Information comes randomly to the designer or through an active process where information is searched voluntarily by the designer through different sources ( Gonçalves et al . , 2011 ) Their effect depends on their features . Understanding or ignoring external stimuli involves the performance of numerous cognitive processes , such as perception and attention ( Hay et al . , 2020 ) . Analogicaldistance Near (cid:129) Near stimuli support the generation of more solutions at a higher level of quality than far stimuli ( Srinivasan et al . , 2018 ) ; (cid:129) Near stimuli support the generation of the most creative ideas ( Chan et al . , 2015 ) . Near stimuli activate the “ inspired internal search ” , improving designer productivity in terms of a higher number of ideas generated and a higher level of innovation ( Goucher - Lambert et al . , 2019 ) . Medium At the midpoint distance , participants demonstrated “ peak inspiration ” ( Gonçalves et al . , 2014 ) X Not investigated Far (cid:129) More distant stimuli are difficult to interpret ( Gonçalves et al . , 2014 ) ; They support the generation of ideas with a greater level of novelty ( Chan et al . , 2011 ) . Far stimuli are ignored if they are too difficult to interpret ; otherwise , they follow the same process activated by near stimuli ( Goucher - Lambert et al . , 2019 ) . Form / Modality of representation Visual (cid:129) Visual stimuli are positively correlated with the creative solutions generated by participants ( Goldschmidt and Smolkov , 2006 ) ; (cid:129) Visual stimuli can have different levels of the richness of details ( Vasconcelos and Crilly , 2016 ) . Visual attention paid to visual stimuli positively correlated with performance : the identification of relationships and patterns of data in visual form is easier for the human brain than in textual form ( Liang et al . , 2017 ) . Textual (cid:129) Textual stimuli require more effort than visual during for their interpretation ( Gonçalves et al . , 2016 ) ; (cid:129) Textual stimuli have a negative effect on the number of ideas ( Chan et al . , 2011 ) . The correct interpretation of textual stimuli activates the temporal areas of the cerebral cortex ( Goucher - Lambert et al . , 2019 ) . Other (cid:129) The combination of stimuli enhances the creative potential of designers ( Malaga , 2000 ; Borgianni et al . , 2020 ) ; (cid:129) Technical representations enhance the variety of ideas ( Cascini et al . , 2020 ) ; (cid:129) Biology analogies can influence the entire design process , sometimes preventing designers from adequately exploring the solution space ( Helms et al . , 2009 ) . X Not investigated Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing 13 signals due to different features of stimuli and different partici - pants ’ backgrounds . (cid:129) Expertise . As with Protocol Analyses , expertise is the most investigated external factor among neurophysiological studies . Vieira et al . ( 2020 ) found that novice designers generating new ideas for a textual problem with visual stimuli , showed more brain activity than the experts and , as a consequence , dif - ferent levels of cognitive effort . In other experimental condi - tions with visual stimuli , Yao et al . ( 2017 ) observed differences in EEG signals between expert and novice partici - pants . Both hemispheres ’ activation resulted in experts , while novices showed only the activation of the right hemisphere . Moreover , experts appear to be more rational than novices in resolving conflicts between contrasting concepts and focused on the goal of the visual association task . Analyzing the effect of textual stimuli , Sun et al . ( 2013 ) pointed out that novices require more cognitive resources than experts , probably because of their unfamiliarity with the design process . In addition , recorded signals from novice designers ’ posterior and occipital brain regions indicate a low level of creativity among these participants . (cid:129) Experience . The definition of expertise has rarely been distin - guished from the contextual experience in the Design literature , Table 9 . Other factors in the design literature Other Factors References Participant ’ s characteristics Background (cid:129) Goldschmidt and Smolkov ( 2006 ) (cid:129) Goucher - Lambert et al . ( 2019 ) (cid:129) Royo et al . ( 2021 ) (cid:129) Todoroff et al . ( 2021 ) (cid:129) Vieira et al . ( 2019 ) (cid:129) Vieira et al . ( 2020 ) Expertise (cid:129) Casakin ( 2010 ) (cid:129) Chai et al . ( 2015 ) (cid:129) Cross ( 2004 ) (cid:129) Gonçalves et al . ( 2011 ) (cid:129) Goucher - Lambert et al . ( 2019 ) (cid:129) Kavakli and Gero ( 2001 ) (cid:129) Hu et al . ( 2021 ) (cid:129) Majdic et al . ( 2017 ) (cid:129) Nelius et al . ( 2020 ) (cid:129) Ozkan and Dogan ( 2013 ) (cid:129) Sun et al . ( 2013 ) (cid:129) Suwa and Tversky ( 1997 ) (cid:129) Viswanathan and Linsey ( 2013 ) (cid:129) Yao et al . ( 2017 ) Experience (cid:129) Hu and Reid ( 2018 ) (cid:129) Sun et al . ( 2014 ) Time Timing of Stimulation (cid:129) Perttula and Liikkanen ( 2006 ) (cid:129) Tseng et al . ( 2008 ) Time available (cid:129) Liikkanen and Perttula ( 2010 ) Figure 7 . Other factors investigations in protocol studies . Figure 8 . Background in protocol studies . Figure 9 . Other factors investigations in neurophysiological studies . Figure 10 . Background in neurophysiological studies . 14 Graziana Blandino et al . with only one contribution from the Neurophysiological approach . Hu and Reid ( 2018 ) defined contextual experience as the tacit knowledge accumulated in real and concrete per - sonal experience in using a particular product or solving a sit - uation in a given context . This particular distinction is due to the different points of view adopted by Cognitive Neuroscience in Design research . Contextual experience influ - ences the cognitive processes during design , since it can cause changes in the level of distraction and in the use of the working memory that is usually related to creative performances leading to novel ideas . As a consequence , the authors noted that partic - ipants with contextual experience with the proposed design tasks are more focused on solving the problem and aware of their own experiences . Conversely , those without past experi - ences recorded a greater level of distraction . Usually , they try to recover from memories of past experiences and remote ideas that could be adopted for solving the design task . The effect of other factors , such as the timing of stimulation and the time available , have not yet been studied , and this gap in the Design literature might suggest future studies . A comparison between the two approaches on the other factors In the end , Table 10 compares the results between studies that adopted protocol analysis and neurophysiological measurements to investigate each factor . The analysis of the literature has shown that the gender of par - ticipants is a factor scantly explored in experimental studies about stimuli . In the literature , Vieira et al . ( 2021 ) investigated the fre - quency bands and brain areas of activation of males and females during idea generation for problem - solving tasks . The analysis revealed males involve cognitive functions of visual – spatial mem - ory coordination , planning , inductive reasoning , and search for originality . Females activate visuospatial information , visual men - tal imagery , and reasoning cognitive functions . However , this study , although investigating open versus constrained design tasks , did not consider the role of stimuli . About the effect of gen - der in stimuli exploration , only two contributions are present in the literature and they are with protocol analysis . Through a sur - vey , Todoroff et al . ( 2021 ) observed that women outperform men in design thinking ability , but the effects of gender are negligible if compared with the background factor . In addition , Goldschmidt and Sever ( 2011 ) found no significant difference between male and female participants in using textual stimuli to solve a design problem . The limited investigation in the literature of the gender vari - able , specifically in gender effect on the use of inspirational stim - uli , has led to not including it as a criterion of comparison in this review . If this gap represents a limitation for such a review , on the other side , it offers insights for future analyses and contributions to the literature . The resulting framework The literature analysis on the role of stimuli has revealed the lack of shared evidence from experimental studies or conflicting results ; in some cases , this is due to the diversity in the method - ological approaches adopted . Studies from neurophysiology are still in their infancy and not all the studies exhibit the same depth of investigation . In other cases , the experimental variables from protocol and neurophysio - logical studies have the same object of design research but are investigated differently ; consequently , comparing the evidence gained from these two approaches is often not possible . Table 10 . Comparison of protocol and neurophysiological studies on the other factors Protocol analyses Neurophysiological measurements OtherFactors Background (cid:129) Engineers intend to achieve a predetermined goal by optimizing activities , while architects adopt an approach based more on intuition ( Todoroff et al . , 2021 ) (cid:129) Independently of background , visual sources of inspiration are more used than others ( Goldschmidt and Smolkov , 2006 ) (cid:129) During the idea generation phase , engineers activate brain regions involved in the structured and rule - based design , and planning , aiming at well - defined goals . Architects show activations related to the elaboration process of information and creative insights ( Vieira et al . , 2019 ) (cid:129) Industrial designers have a more pronounced process of inhibition of external stimuli than Engineering designers ( Colombo et al . , 2020 ) Expertise (cid:129) Experts prioritise the completeness of their solutions , while novices focus on the functionality ( Chai et al . , 2015 ) (cid:129) Experts make better use of visual stimuli than novice ones , thus obtaining better solutions ( Casakin , 2010 ) (cid:129) Professionals claimed to select more often closely related sources , while novices prefer more distant sources to improve their creative ideas ( Gonçalves et al . , 2011 ) (cid:129) Experts are more rational than novices in resolving conflicts between contrasting concepts and focused on the goal of the visual association task ( Yao et al . , 2017 ) (cid:129) Novices require more cognitive resources than experts in analysing textual stimuli ( Sun et al . , 2013 ) Experience Experienced participants generate better solutions than inexperienced , thanks to their knowledge . The formers invest more mental effort in understanding the requirements of the design problems ( Sun et al . , 2014 ) Participants who have contextual experience with the proposed design tasks are more focused on solving the problem and aware of their own experiences , while participants without past experiences record a greater level of distraction ( Hu and Reid , 2018 ) Time (cid:129) Stimulating designers and providing a stimulus after one has started working on the problem is more effective in inspiring a solution ( Tseng et al . , 2008 ) (cid:129) A short amount of time available leads designers to generate more ideas with a lower level of creativity ( Liikkanen and Perttula , 2010 ) X Not investigated Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing 15 Table 11 . The framework of stimuli selection Metrics Other factors Novelty Originality Variety Quality Quantity Fixation Architecture Novice ↑ a Near analogies ( Ozkan and Dogan , 2013 ) ↑ Pictures ( Purcell and Gero , 1992 ) ↑ Pictures ( Casakin , 2010 ) ↑ Source examples ( Ozkan and Dogan , 2013 ) ↑ Pictures ( Purcell and Gero , 1992 ) Expert ↑ Pictures ( Casakin , 2010 ) ↓ b Far analogies ( Ozkan and Dogan , 2013 ) IndustrialDesign Novice ↑ Pictures & far Analogies ( Yao et al . , 2017 ) ↑ List of questions ( Royo et al . , 2021 ) ↑ Sketches of internal ideas ( Sun et al . , 2013 ) ↑ Keywords & near stimuli ( Goucher - Lambert et al . , 2019 ) ↑ Questions ( Royo et al . , 2021 ) ↑ Descriptions of internal ideas ( Sun et al . , 2013 ) ↑ Initial internal ideas ( Leahy et al . , 2020 ) ↓ Pictures & Far analogies ( Yao et al . , 2017 ) Expert ↑ Pictures & far analogies ( Yao et al . , 2017 ) ↑ Sketches of internal ideas ( Sun et al . , 2013 ) ↓ Pictures & far analogies ( Yao et al . , 2017 ) EngineeringDesign Novice ↑ Pictorial line - drawing of existing design solutions & far analogies ( Cardoso and Badke - Schaub , 2011 ) ↓ Sketch of solution example ( Hernandez et al . , 2010 ) ↓ Sketch of examples & before problem - solving ( Perttula and Liikkanen , 2006 ) ↑ List of words & far stimuli & After problem - solving ( Tseng et al . , 2008 ) ↑ List of words & near stimuli & Before problem - solving ( Tseng et al . , 2008 ) ↓ Pictorial line - drawing or photograph of existing design solutions ( Cardoso et al . , 2009 ) ↑ Sketch of solution example ( Hernandez et al . , 2010 ) ↑ List of words & far stimuli & After problem - solving ( Tseng et al . , 2008 ) ↑ List of words & Near stimuli & before problem - solving ( Tseng et al . , 2008 ) ↓ Pictorial line - drawing or photograph of existing design solutions ( Cardoso et al . , 2009 ) ↓ Sketch of solution example ( Hernandez et al . , 2010 ) ↑ Textual keywords & near stimuli ( Goucher - Lambert et al . , 2019 ) ↑ Pictorial line - drawing or photograph of existing design solutions ( Cardoso et al . , 2009 ) ↑ Sketch of solution example ( Hernandez et al . , 2010 ) ↑ Sketch of examples & after problem - solving ( Perttula and Liikkanen , 2006 ) ↑ List of words & far stimuli & after problem - solving ( Tseng et al . , 2008 ) ↑ List of words & near stimuli & before problem - solving ( Tseng et al . , 2008 ) ↑ Pictorial line - drawing or photograph of existing design solutions ( Cardoso et al . , 2009 ) ↑ Sketch of examples ( Perttula and Liikkanen , 2006 ) Expert ↑ Sketches of internal ideas ( Viswanathan and Linsey , 2013 ) ↑ Sketches of internal ideas ( Viswanathan and Linsey , 2013 ) ↑ Sketch of example solution ( Viswanathan and Linsey , 2011 ) ↑ 3D and physical models of internal ideas ( Viswanathan and Linsey , 2013 ) ↓ List of words & description of the task ( Viswanathan and Linsey , 2011 ) ↑ Example solutions ( Viswanathan and Linsey , 2011 ) a ↑ Stimuli associated with this symbol have a positive effect on the performance metric . b ↓ Stimuli associated with this symbol have a negative effect on the performance metric . 16 G r a z i a n a B l a n d i no e t a l . Moreover , experimental results are difficult to generalize due to the lack of homogeneity of experimental protocols . Design tasks are countless due to the pervasive nature of Design ( Gero , 2011 ) and different authors rarely reuse the same design problems ( Patel et al . , 2019 ) . Moreover , researchers have not yet defined a standard structure for design problems nor a standard indicator for their difficulty nor a standard evaluation approach ( Kumar and Mocko , 2016 ; Sosa , 2019 ) . Also , the research methodology , protocol analysis or neurophysiological measurement influences the design of the experiment and the experimental setup . Therefore , it is not unsurprising to see some contradictions emerge from the different experiments . Finally , the literature analysis highlights the use of different metrics to evaluate idea generation performance . Some contribu - tions evaluate only some performance metrics or metrics specific to the protocol employed , regardless of the level of detail of the solutions provided and the available time for idea generation . Hence , the comparison of the results becomes complicated . Nevertheless , the comparison of the protocol and the neuro - physiological studies has evidenced a fundamental difference . According to the neurophysiological measurements approach , only stimuli that activate the “ inspired internal search ” process are useful to the designer and these are the only ones that support the designer in improving creative performance . On the other hand , the protocol studies affirm that the designers ’ performance is better than when no stimulus is provided , regardless of the form and timing presentation of the stimulus . Moreover , both strands of research have shown the effect of stimuli in design also depends on other factors , such as subjects ’ background , expertise , and experience . These findings , combined with the idea generation evaluation metrics , can therefore be incorporated into an original framework for selecting the most appropriate stimuli . The framework shows how metrics such as novelty , originality , variety , quality , and quantity of ideas gener - ated by designers can be improved by specific types of stimuli , according to their backgrounds , such as Architecture , Industrial Design , or Engineering , and according to their level of expertise , novice or expert . Therefore , the paper attempts to propose a framework that aims to deepen the literature by tidying up and clarifying the research results on the role of stimuli in design . The framework , as in Table 11 , combines evidence from the contributions with protocol analyses and neurophysiological measurements that ana - lyze the features of the stimuli , together with at least one of the other factors . Hence , the background factor on the table ’ s rows distinguishes between Architecture , Industrial Design , and Engineering Design . Two levels of expertise are determined for each background : novice and expert . Due to the low number of contributions focused on the role of experience in design with stimuli , the factor “ experience ” is not included here . The columns contain the most relevant and common perfor - mance metrics highlighted in the literature . In the cells , the results from the literature regarding the most appropriate types of stimuli concerning the background and expertise in the row are entered , considering the effect of these sources of inspiration on the metrics reported in the column . Each result in the cell , with the respective reference , is preceded by an arrow , upwards or downwards , depending on whether the stimulus cited has , on the performance metric considered , a positive or negative effect , respectively . Consequently , the framework provides aid in two different ways . On the one hand , it shows what kind of stimuli can enhance each metric if the background and the level of expertise are defined a priori . For example , selecting “ Industrial Design ” as the background and “ novice ” as the level of expertise , the descrip - tion of initial ideas results in increasing the quantity metric and raising the fixation level . On the other hand , knowing the metric of interest , it is possible to find out the stimuli features that can impact it based on background and expertise . For a practical example , the “ fixation ” column shows that distant analogies are the best solution to prevent this phenomenon in experts from architecture and industrial design . This framework shows how this structured review is not only a useful classification of the literature , summarizing the most signif - icant and recent results but also a guide for professionals who need sources of inspiration in their design activity . Design man - agers may also use this guide not only to define optimal working conditions for designers , by selecting the most appropriate stim - ulus and the best combination of possible sources of inspiration but also to achieve better results in terms of performance metrics . Finally , the framework can be used as a guide by researchers in the design literature as it represents a seminal literature frame - work to place new findings and newly acquired evidence . Therefore , it can be enriched and updated and represent an evol - ving guide for those involved in this field of research . The frame - work also highlights those aspects of the literature that still need to be investigated , thus providing researchers with pointers to new research opportunities . Conclusion This review aims to explore the role of stimuli and other factors during the idea generation phase in design problem - solving , com - paring two main streams of the design literature , the ones that adopt protocol analysis and those supported by neuropsycholog - ical measurement . From the perspective of protocol studies , stimuli always improve the performance of designers . On the other hand , from the perspective of neurophysiological studies , only stimuli that activate the “ inspired internal search ” cognitive process are useful for generating new ideas . In order to answer the research question about the consistency of findings on stimuli features from the protocol and neurophys - iological studies , complementary results have been found . Both protocol and neurophysiological approaches agree that the textual representation of self - generated ideas can concretely act as sources of inspiration . Regarding the external stimuli , protocol studies conclude that distant stimuli are often ignored since they require much effort for interpretation . Neurophysiological studies point out that design cognitive processes change according to analogical distance ; dis - tant stimuli involve the same cognitive process of near stimuli if recognized as a potential source of inspiration ; otherwise , they are ignored and new sources of inspiration are sought in the exter - nal environment . Regarding the form , visual stimuli are preferred to textual ones since , from neurophysiological studies , they improve the designer ’ s ability to recognize data connections . Conversely , text - ual stimuli require much effort , probably because they need spe - cific cognitive processes for comprehension . For a comprehensive analysis of the role of stimuli and to answer the research question about the external factors that influ - ence the idea generation process and outcomes , it has been found that the background of designers affects the individual approach Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing 17 to design activities ; as consequences , engineers and architects acti - vate different cognitive processes while generating ideas . Both protocol and neurophysiological studies agree that engineering designers follow well - structured processes to achieve predeter - mined design goals . In contrast , others adopt approaches based on processing information through intuition and creativity . No detailed results about industrial designers are available from pro - tocol and neurophysiological studies for a consistent comparison . Regarding expertise , both protocol and neurophysiological results agree on the higher ability of experts to be inspired by stimuli with less effort than novices . No specific conclusions are drawn from protocol and neurophysiological studies about how novices and experts handle different types of stimuli . Finally , experienced designers may perform better due to their prior knowledge ; the neurophysiological studies add that they are more focused on the design problem without distractions , in line with protocol studies results pointing out that experienced designers invest more mental effort than inexperienced designers . For some stimuli ’ features , such as the other forms of internal and external stimuli , and other factors , such as time and gender , the comparison has not been possible , due to the absence of find - ings in the literature . The final framework summarizes the literature results based on individual characteristics of the designers , such as background and expertise with performance metrics , also referring to the phe - nomenon of fixation . It finds application as a guideline for designer managers to select stimuli with ad hoc features , improv - ing design performance and concretely supporting designers with a specific background and expertise . As a research tool , the frame - work consists of empty cells to be filled . It highlights the gaps in the literature and suggests new aspects yet to be investigated . In the future , the framework provides a base to be enriched with new evidence . It can also be used to collect new results from the literature . Data availability statement . The contributions that support the findings of this study are available on Scopus and Google Scholar . Funding . This work received no specific grant from any funding agency , commercial or not - for - profit sectors . Competing interests . The author ( s ) declare none . References Akin O ( 2002 ) Case - based instruction strategies in architecture . Design Studies 23 , 407 – 431 . Al - Assadi FI ( 2022 ) Bio - metaphor in Iraqi architecture ( date palm as model ) . Journal of Engineering Research ( Kuwait ) 10 , 15 – 31 . Bi Y , Shergadwala M , Reid T and Panchal JH ( 2015 ) Understanding the uti - lization of information stimuli in design decision making using eye gaze data . Proceedings of the ASME 2015 International Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference . Volume 2A : 41st , Design Automation Conference , Paper No : DETC2015 - 46495 , V02AT03A017 , Boston , MA , USA , August 2 – 5 . Bilda Z and Gero JS ( 2007 ) The impact of working memory limitations on the design process during conceptualization . Design Studies , 28 , 343 – 367 . Bilda Z , Gero JS and Purcell T ( 2006 ) To sketch or not to sketch ? That is the question . Design Studies 27 , 587 – 613 . Borgianni Y and MacCioni L ( 2020 ) Review of the use of neurophysiological and biometric measures in experimental design research . Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing : AIEDAM 34 , 248 – 285 . Borgianni Y , Maccioni L , Fiorineschi L and Rotini F ( 2020 ) Forms of stimuli and their effects on idea generation in terms of creativity metrics and non - obviousness . International Journal of Design Creativity and Innovation 8 , 147 – 164 . Cardoso C and Badke - Schaub P ( 2011 ) The influence of different pictorial representations during idea generation . Journal of Creative Behavior 45 , 130 – 146 . Cardoso C , Badke - Schaub P and Luz A ( 2009 ) . Design fixation on non - verbal stimuli : the influence of simple vs . rich pictorial information on design problem - solving . Proceedings of the ASME 2009 International Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference . Volume 8 : 14th Design for Manufacturing and the Life Cycle Conference ; 6th Symposium on International Design and Design Education ; 21st International Conference on Design Theory and Methodology , Parts A and B , Paper No : DETC2009 - 86826 , San Diego , CA , USA , August 30 – September 2 . Casakin H ( 2010 ) Visual analogy , visual displays , and the nature of design problems : the effect of expertise . Environment and Planning B : Planning and Design 37 , 170 – 188 . Cascini G , Fiorineschi L and Rotini F ( 2020 ) Impact of design representa - tions on creativity of design outcomes . Journal of Integrated Design and Process Science 23 , 31 – 60 . Chai C , Cen F , Ruan W , Yang C and Li H ( 2015 ) Behavioral analysis of ana - logical reasoning in design : differences among designers with different expertise levels . Design Studies 36 , 3 – 30 . Chan J , Fu K , Schunn C , Cagan J , Wood K and Kotovsky K ( 2011 ) On the benefits and pitfalls of analogies for innovative design : ideation performance based on analogical distance , commonness , and modality of examples . Journal of Mechanical Design , Transactions of the ASME 133 , 081004 , 1 – 11 . Chan J , Dow SP and Schunn CD ( 2015 ) Do the best design ideas ( really ) come from conceptually distant sources of inspiration ? Design Studies 36 , 31 – 58 . Cheong H and Shu LH ( 2013 ) Using templates and mapping strategies to sup - port analogical transfer in biomimetic design . Design Studies 34 , 706 – 728 . Colombo S , Mazza A , Montagna F , Ricci R , Dal Monte O and Cantamessa M ( 2020 ) Neurophysiological evidence in idea generation : differences between designers and engineers . Proceedings of the Design Society : DESIGN Conference 1 , 1415 – 1424 . Cross N ( 2004 ) Expertise in design : an overview . Design studies 25 , 427 – 441 . Dean D , Hender J , Rodgers T and Santanen E ( 2006 ) Identifying quality , novel , and creative ideas : constructs and scales for idea evaluation . Journal of the Association for Information Systems 7 , 646 – 699 . Doboli A , Umbarkar A , Subramanian V and Doboli S ( 2014 ) Two experi - mental studies on creative concept combinations in modular design of elec - tronic embedded systems . Design Studies 35 , 80 – 109 . Dogan F , Taneri B and Erbil L ( 2019 ) Use of analogies , metaphors , and similes by students and reviewers at an undergraduate architectural design review . Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing : AIEDAM 33 , 69 – 84 . Eilouti BH ( 2009 ) Design knowledge recycling using precedent - based analysis and synthesis models . Design Studies 30 , 340 – 368 . Fink A , Grabner RH , Gebauer D , Reishofer G , Koschutnig K and Ebner F ( 2010 ) Enhancing creativity by means of cognitive stimulation : evidence from an fMRI study . NeuroImage 52 , 1687 – 1695 . Fiorineschi L , Frillici FS and Rotini F ( 2020 ) Challenging COVID - 19 with creativity : supporting design space exploration for emergency ventilators . Applied Sciences ( Switzerland ) 10 , 4955 , 1 – 23 . Fu K , Chan J , Cagan J , Kotovsky K , Schunn C and Wood K ( 2013 ) The meaning of near and far : the impact of structuring design databases and the effect of distance of analogy on design output . Journal of Mechanical Design , Transactions of the ASME 135 , 021007 , 877 – 888 . Fu K , Murphy J , Yang M , Otto K , Jensen D and Wood K ( 2015 ) Design - by - analogy : experimental evaluation of a functional analogy search methodology for concept generation improvement . Research in Engineering Design 26 , 77 – 95 . Gero JS ( 2011 ) Fixation and commitment while designing and its measure - ment . Journal of Creative Behavior 45 , 108 – 115 . Gero J and Milovanovic J ( 2020 ) A framework for studying design thinking through measuring designers ’ minds , bodies and brains . Design Science 6 , E19 . 18 Graziana Blandino et al . Goldschmidt G and Sever AL ( 2011 ) Inspiring design ideas with texts . Design Studies 32 , 139 – 155 . Goldschmidt G and Smolkov M ( 2006 ) Variances in the impact of visual stimuli on design problem solving performance . Design Studies 27 , 549 – 569 . Gonçalves M , Badke - Schaub P and Cardoso C ( 2011 ) Around you : how designers get inspired . The impact of inspiration in co - evolution of the problem and solution space View project Creative Space View project , International Conference on Engineering Design , ICED11 , 15 – 18 . Gonçalves M , Cardoso C and Badke - Schaub P ( 2014 ) What inspires designers ? Preferences on inspirational approaches during idea generation . Design Studies 35 , 29 – 53 . Gonçalves M , Cardoso C and Badke - Schaub P ( 2016 ) Inspiration choices that matter : the selection of external stimuli during ideation . Design Science 2 , E10 . Goucher - Lambert K and Cagan J ( 2017 ) Using crowdsourcing to provide analogies for designer ideation in a cognitive study . In DS 87 - 8 Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Engineering Design ( ICED 17 ) . Vol 8 : Human Behaviour in Design , Vancouver , Canada , August 21 – 25 . Goucher - Lambert K , Moss J and Cagan J ( 2018 ) Inspired internal search : using neuroimaging to understand design ideation and concept generation with inspirational stimuli . In International Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference , Vol . 51845 . American Society of Mechanical Engineers , Paper No : DETC2018 - 85690 , V007T06A007 , Quebec City , Quebec , Canada , August 26 – 29 . Goucher - Lambert K , Moss J and Cagan J ( 2019 ) A neuroimaging investiga - tion of design ideation with and without inspirational stimuli – understand - ing the meaning of near and far stimuli . Design Studies 60 , 1 – 38 . Hadian A ( 2015 ) Using metaphor and analogy for understanding structural concepts in architectural education ; an Iranian perspective . Open House International 40 , 29 – 36 . Hay L , Duffy AHB , McTeague C , Pidgeon LM , Vuletic T and Grealy M ( 2017 ) A systematic review of protocol studies on conceptual design cogni - tion : design as search and exploration . Design Science 3 , E10 . Hay L , Duffy AH , Gilbert SJ , Lyall L , Campbell G , Coyle D and Grealy MA ( 2019 ) The neural correlates of ideation in product design engineering prac - titioners . Design Science 5 , e29 . Hay L , Cash P and McKilligan S ( 2020 ) The future of design cognition anal - ysis . Design Science 6 , e20 , 1 – 26 . Helms M , Vattam SS and Goel AK ( 2009 ) Biologically inspired design : pro - cess and products . Design Studies 30 , 606 – 622 . Hernandez NV , Shah JJ and Smith SM ( 2010 ) Understanding design ideation mechanisms through multilevel aligned empirical studies . Design Studies 31 , 382 – 410 . Hu M , Shealy T and Milovanovic J ( 2021 ) Cognitive differences among first - year and senior engineering students when generating design solutions with and without additional dimensions of sustainability . Design Science 7 , e1 , 1 – 30 . Hu WL and Reid T ( 2018 ) The effects of designers contextual experience on the ideation process and design outcomes . Journal of Mechanical Design , Transactions of the ASME 140 , 101101 , 1 – 11 . Hwang D , Choi B , Bae S and Park W ( 2021 ) Mitigating design fixation : a visualization tool for enhancing situation awareness . Journal of Mechanical Design , Transactions of the ASME 143143 , 061402 , 1 – 9 . Jia L , Becattini N , Cascini G and Tan R ( 2020 ) Testing ideation performance on a large set of designers : effects of analogical distance . International Journal of Design Creativity and Innovation 8 , 31 – 45 . Kavakli M and Gero JS ( 2002 ) The structure of concurrent cognitive actions : a case study on novice and expert designers . Design Studies 23 , 25 – 40 . Keshwani S and Chakrabarti A ( 2017 ) Influence of analogical domains and comprehensiveness in explanation of analogy on the novelty of designs . Research in Engineering Design 28 , 381 – 410 . Kirjavainen S and Hölttä - Otto K ( 2020 ) Deconstruction of idea generation methods into a framework of creativity mechanisms . ASME Journal of Mechanical Design 2021 , 143 , 031401 , 1 – 15 . Koronis G , Silva A and Kang J ( 2018 ) The impact of design briefs on crea - tivity : a study on measuring student designers outcomes . Proceedings of International Design Conference , DESIGN 5 , 2461 – 2472 . Kryssanov VV , Tamaki H and Ueda K ( 1999 ) Synthesis and emergence in engi - neering design problem solving . Proceedings First International Symposium on Environmentally Conscious Design and Inverse Manufacturing , IEEE , 690 – 695 . Kumar V and Mocko G ( 2016 ) Similarity of engineering design problems to enable reuse in design research experiments . In International Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference , Vol . 50190 . American Society of Mechanical Engineers , Paper No : DETC2016 - 60474 , V007T06A042 , Charlotte , North Carolina , USA , August 21 – 24 . Leahy K , Daly SR , McKilligan S and Seifert CM ( 2020 ) Design fixation from initial examples : provided versus self - generated ideas . Journal of Mechanical Design , Transactions of the ASME 142 , 101402 . Liang C , Lin CT , Yao SN , Chang WS , Liu YC and Chen SA ( 2017 ) Visual attention and association : an electroencephalography study in expert designers . Design Studies 48 , 76 – 95 . Linsey JS , Laux J , Clauss EF , Wood KL and Markman AB ( 2007 ) Effects of analogous product representation on design - by - analogy . In DS 42 : Proceedings of ICED 2007 , the 16th International Conference on Engineering Design , Paris , France , 28 . - 31 . 07 . 2007 , 337 – 338 . Liikkanen LA and Perttula M ( 2010 ) Inspiring design idea generation : insights from a memory - search perspective . Journal of Engineering Design 21 , 545 – 560 . Majdic B , Cowan C , Girdner J , Opoku W , Pierrakos O and Barrella E ( 2017 ) . Monitoring brain waves in an effort to investigate student ' s cognitive load during a variety of problem solving scenarios . In 2017 Systems and Information Engineering Design Symposium ( SIEDS ) , 186 – 191 . Malaga RA ( 2000 ) The effect of stimulus modes and associative distance in individual creativity support systems . Decision Support Systems 29 , 125 – 141 . McKoy FL , Vargas - Hernández N , Summers JD and Shah JJ ( 2001 ) Influence of design representation on effectiveness of idea generation . Proceedings of the ASME 2001 International Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference . Volume 4 : 13th International Conference on Design Theory and Methodology . Pittsburgh , PA , USA . September 9 – 12 , 2001 , 39 – 48 . Mohan M , Chen Y and Shah JJ ( 2011 ) Towards a framework for holistic idea - tion in conceptual design . In International Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference , Vol . 54792 , 661 – 672 . Moher D , Liberati A , Tetzlaff J , Altman DG and Prisma Group . ( 2009 ) Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta - analyses : the PRISMA statement . PLoS Medicine 6 , 336 – 341 . Moreno DP , Hernández AA , Yang MC , Otto KN , Hölttä - Otto K , Linsey JS , Wood KL and Linden A ( 2014 ) Fundamental studies in design - by - analogy : a focus on domain - knowledge experts and applications to transactional design problems . Design Studies 35 , 232 – 272 . Moreno DP , Blessing LT , Yang MC , Hernández AA and Wood KL ( 2016 ) Overcoming design fixation : design by analogy studies and nonintuitive findings . Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing : AIEDAM 30 , 185 – 199 . Mougenot C , Bouchard C , Aoussat A and Westerman S ( 2008 ) Inspiration , images and design : an investigation of designers ’ information gathering strategies . Journal of Design Research 7 , 331 – 351 . Nelius T , Doellken M , Zimmerer C and Matthiesen S ( 2020 ) The impact of confirmation bias on reasoning and visual attention during analysis in engi - neering design : an eye tracking study . Design Studies 71 , 1 – 28 . Ozkan O and Dogan F ( 2013 ) Cognitive strategies of analogical reasoning in design : differences between expert and novice designers . Design Studies 34 , 161 – 192 . Patel A , Elena MV and Summers J ( 2019 ) A systematic approach to evaluating design prompts in supporting experimental design research . Proceedings of the International Conference on Engineering Design , ICED , August , 2755 – 2764 . Perttula MK and Liikkanen LA ( 2006 ) Structural tendencies and exposure effects in design idea generation . In International Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference , Vol . 42584 , 199 – 210 . Purcell AT and Gero JS ( 1992 ) Effects of examples on the results of a design activity . Knowledge - Based Systems 5 , 82 – 91 . Royo M , Mulet E , Chulvi V and Felip F ( 2021 ) Guiding questions for increas - ing the generation of product ideas to meet changing needs ( QuChaNe ) . Research in Engineering Design 32 , 411 – 430 . Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing 19 Sarkar P and Chakrabarti A ( 2008 ) The effect of representation of triggers on design outcomes . Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing : AIEDAM 22 , 101 – 116 . Shah JJ , Vargas - Hernandez N and Smith SM ( 2003 ) Metrics for measuring ideation effectiveness . Design Studies 24 , 111 – 134 . Sosa R ( 2019 ) Metrics to select design tasks in experimental creativity research . Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers , Part C : Journal of Mechanical Engineering Science 233 , 440 – 450 . Srinivasan V , Song B , Luo J , Subburaj K , Elara MR , Blessing L and Wood K ( 2018 ) Does analogical distance affect performance of ideation ? Journal of Mechanical Design , Transactions of the ASME 140 , 1 – 12 . Stacey M and Sketch J ( 1997 ) Managing effective communication in knitwear design . Design Journal 2 , 923 – 928 . Sun L , Xiang W , Chai C , Wang C and Liu Z ( 2013 ) Impact of text on idea generation : an electroencephalography study . International Journal of Technology and Design Education 23 , 1047 – 1062 . Sun G , Yao S and Carretero JA ( 2014 ) Comparing cognitive efficiency of experienced and inexperienced designers in conceptual design processes . Journal of Cognitive Engineering and Decision Making 8 , 330 – 351 . Suwa M and Tversky B ( 1997 ) What do architects and students perceive in their design sketches ? A protocol analysis . Design Studies 18 , 385 – 403 . Todoroff EC , Shealy T , Milovanovic J , Godwin A and Paige F ( 2021 ) Comparing design thinking traits between national samples of civil engineering and architecture students . Journal of Civil Engineering Education 147 , 1 – 12 . Torres - Carrion PV , Gonzalez - Gonzalez CS , Aciar S and Rodriguez - Morales G ( 2018 ) Methodology for systematic literature review applied to engineer - ing and education . IEEE Global Engineering Education Conference , EDUCON , 2018 - April , 1364 – 1373 . Tseng I , Moss J , Cagan J and Kotovsky K ( 2008 ) The role of timing and ana - logical similarity in the stimulation of idea generation in design . Design Studies 29 , 203 – 221 . Vasconcelos LA and Crilly N ( 2016 ) Inspiration and fixation : questions , methods , findings , and challenges . Design Studies 42 , 1 – 32 . Vieira SLdS , Gero JS , Delmoral J , Gattol V , Fernandes C and Fernandes AA ( 2019 ) Comparing the design neurocognition of mechanical engineers and architects : a study of the effect of designer ’ s domain . Proceedings of the International Conference on Engineering Design , ICED , Delft , The Netherlands , 5 - 8 August . Vieira S , Gero J , Gattol V , Delmoral J , Li S , Cascini G and Fernandes A ( 2020 ) The neurophysiological activations of novice and experienced pro - fessionals when designing and problem - solving . Proceedings of the Design Society : DESIGN Conference 1 , 1569 – 1578 . Vieira S , Benedek M , Gero J , Cascini G and Li S ( 2021 ) Brain activity of industrial designers in constrained and open design : the effect of gender on frequency bands . Proceedings of the Design Society 1 , 571 – 580 . Viswanathan V and Linsey J ( 2011 ) Understanding fixation : a study on the role of expertise . In DS 68 - 7 : Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Engineering Design ( ICED 11 ) , Impacting Society through Engineering Design . Vol . 7 : Human Behaviour in Design , Lyngby / Copenhagen , Denmark , August 15 – 19 . Viswanathan VK and Linsey JS ( 2012 ) Physical models and design thinking : a study of functionality , novelty and variety of ideas . Journal of Mechanical Design , Transactions of the ASME 134 , 1 – 15 . Viswanathan VK and Linsey JS ( 2013 ) Design fixation and its mitigation : a study on the role of expertise . Journal of Mechanical Design , Transactions of the ASME 135 , 051008 , 1 – 15 . Wohlin C ( 2014 ) Guidelines for snowballing in systematic literature studies and a replication in software engineering . In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering . Yao SN , Lin CT , King JT , Liu YC and Liang C ( 2017 ) Learning in the visual association of novice and expert designers . Cognitive Systems Research 43 , 76 – 88 . Graziana Blandino is a first - year Ph . D . student at the Department of Management and Production Engineering of Politecnico di Torino . The main objective of her Ph . D . study is to identify the main causes of human stress at the neurophysiological level within manufacturing contexts . She graduated from Politecnico di Torino with a bachelor ’ s degree in Biomedical Engineering and a master ’ s degree in Management Engineering . Her current research activities involve collaboration with a multidisciplinary consortium on a European - funded project aimed at devel - oping a real - time stress monitoring system to be used in real manufacturing applications . She is member of A . I . TE . M . and of Design Society . Francesca Montagna ( PhD ) , is Associate Professor at Politecnico di Torino . Research topics rangefrom Innovation Management , Technology Management and Engineering Design . Lecturing has been carried out at Industrial Engineering and Management programs , Mechanical Engineering , Industrial Design and Data Science ones . She is member of Design Society , serving its advisory board . She usually serves as reviewer on conferences ( e . g . ICED , DESIGN and IFAC - INCOM ) and journals ( e . g . RED , IJATM , JPME ) , collaborates with public or private organizations on research and consultancy projects in the fields of Innovation Management , Product and Service Design , Marketing . She is evaluator of projects at national as international level . Marco Cantamessa is Professor at the Department of Management and Production Engineering of Politecnico di Torino , where he teaches Management of Innovation and Product Development . He has lectured at European universities and business schools and authored papers in the fields of manufacturing systems engineering , management of innovation and engi - neering design . He has covered senior academic positions at Politecnico di Torino and currently serves as Rector ’ s delegate for Strategic Assessment and Planning . He has been founding member of The Design Society , serving on its Boards , and covered a number of board - level positions in public and private institutions . Samuele Colombo is a third - year PhD sudent at the Department of Management and Production Engineering at Politecnico di Torino ( Italy ) . His research focuses on the neurophysiological and psychological aspects of decision - making , especially during conceptual design activities . His background is in engineering and management . Indeed , his research group and his teaching activities focus on innovation management and product development . He has actively collaborated with several university both at national and international level . As international experiences , he has spent visiting periods at University of California , Berkeley ( USA ) and Lulea Technological University ( Sweden ) . He is member of The Design Society . 20 Graziana Blandino et al .