Direct Manipulation : A Step Beyond Programming Languages Ben Shneiderman What makes a “truly pleased user ? ” Well , if you answer “yes” to at least two of these questions , you’re probably a “truly pleased user”… Did you find the system easy to master ? Are your tasks being taken care of competently ? Are you retaining your knowledge of the system ? Do you enjoy using the system and showing off in front of your colleagues ? Would you like to get to know the system better ? Not quite direct manipulation… In 1983 , certain programs - - visual editors ( EMACS , Vi ) , video games ( Pong , Donkey Kong , TRON ) , or computer aided design programs ( with robots ! ) - - came close to Ben Shneiderman’s ideal of Direct Manipulation by possessing these lovely and “delightful” qualities : - visible objects of interest ( e . g . multiple lines of code , a Mario Brother , layered - - or windowed - - data ) ; - rapid , reversible , incremental actions ( no more tyops ! ) ; - command language superceded by direct manipulation of the visible object of interest ; Why You Might Like Direct Manipulation… As Don Hatfield’s crew dropped their WYSWYG and Ted Nelson exclaimed : “The tool itself seems to disappear [ ! ] ” , Ben Shneiderman was listening . By positing the Syntactic / Semantic Model , ShneiderMan suggests that we , humanity , would be best served by a system that visualizes our problems , gives us physical actions in lieu of a complex syntax , and layers information to make knowledge bi ( y ? ) te - sized and easy to digest . Some Concerns… Shneiderman realizes that there might be some issues with direct manipulation . For instance , graphic representation alone doesn’t necessarily guarantee better performance . Indeed , graphic representation , like a syntactic command language , has aspects that need to be learned . Icons can be confusing or unclear . Misunderstood graphic signifiers could lead to false conclusions and user disappointment . Eek ! Also , 10 graphically signified documents are much less appealing than 50 tabularly listed documents . For sure . Where do we stand ? Who is ShneiderMan ? In addition to being adorable and awesome , Ben Shneiderman is a Professor in the Department of Computer Science at the University of Maryland , College Park and a pioneer in the field of Human Computer Interaction . His unflagging interest in Direct Manipulation has resulted in many fruitful ( cha - ching ! ) and interesting endeavors visualizing information over the past few decades .