University of Nebraska - Lincoln DigitalCommons @ University of Nebraska - Lincoln Robert G . Fuller Publications and Presentations Research Papers in Physics and Astronomy 1 - 1 - 1981 How Do College Students Solve Proportion Problems ? Melvin C . Thorton University of Nebraska - Lincoln Robert Fuller rfuller @ neb . rr . com Follow this and additional works at : http : / / digitalcommons . unl . edu / physicsfuller Part of the Physics Commons This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Research Papers in Physics and Astronomy at DigitalCommons @ University of Nebraska - Lincoln . It has been accepted for inclusion in Robert G . Fuller Publications and Presentations by an authorized administrator of DigitalCommons @ University of Nebraska - Lincoln . Thorton , Melvin C . and Fuller , Robert , " How Do College Students Solve Proportion Problems ? " ( 1981 ) . Robert G . Fuller Publications and Presentations . Paper 24 . http : / / digitalcommons . unl . edu / physicsfuller / 24 Published in Journal of Research in Science Teaching 18 : 4 ( 1981 ) , pp . 335 – 340 . Copyright © 1981 by the National As - sociation for Research in Science Teaching ; published by John Wiley & Sons , Inc . Used by permission . http : / / www3 . interscience . wiley . com / cgi - bin / jhome / 31817 How Do College Students Solve Proportion Problems ? Melvin C . Thornton and Robert G . Fuller University of Nebraska , Lincoln , Nebraska Problems which could be solved using proportional reasoning were administered nation - wide by college faculty to their own science classes during a three year period . The rea - soning of more than 8000 students covering three sections of the country was classi ﬁ ed as concrete , transitional , or formal using Piagetian categories . Data from the West close - ly replicated that from the Midwest on similar metric conversion tasks . Student perfor - mance changed noticeably with a different problem format . The percentages of students using a ratio formula , ratio attempt , or intuitive methods of solution held approximate - ly constant over time , task , and section of the country . The data shows the use of additive and conversion methods of solution depends upon the problem presentation . Introduction An almost universal assumption by college science teachers is that their students are capa - ble of using formal or hypothetic - deductive reasoning ( Inhelder and Piaget , 1958 ) . However , in class and on examinations when college students are encouraged to show their methods as well as their answers , many inappropriate reasoning patterns are displayed . During the seventies many researchers ( Grif ﬁ ths , 1976 ; Killian , 1979 ; Kolody , 1975 ; Law - son , Nordland , & Devito , 1975 ; McKinnon & Renner , 1971 ; Renner & Lawson , 1973 ) tested college students in this country and found only 25 to 50 % were consistently using formal rea - soning patterns . Yet proportional reasoning , an important pattern of formal thought ( Lawson , 1978 ; Lawson , Karplus , & Adi , 1978 ; Renner , 1979 ; Walker , Hendrix , & Mertens , 1979 ) is of - ten assumed to be used by nearly all college science students . “College Science Teaching and the Development of Reasoning” was the title of a short course offered on the NSF - AAAS Chautauqua circuit to acquaint more college science teachers with the developmental theory of Piaget . The course , co - directed by Robert G . Fuller and Mel - vin C . Thornton , was given for three academic years beginning in Fall , 1976 . Almost three hun - dred science faculty from over two hundred institutions met for fall and spring sessions to apply some of Piaget’s ideas to their own teaching . As part of an interim project between the two ses - sions these participants gave and evaluated proportion problems answered by a large number of students . This note reports and comments upon the data which were obtained . Before proceeding the reader should consider these questions : What aspects of a problem encourage students to use proportional reasoning ? What kinds of responses to proportionali - ty problems do you expect from college science students ? What responses do you evaluate as showing formal reasoning ? As not showing formal reasoning ? How docs the type of school , subject matter of the course , mathematical prerequisite , or sex of the student relate to the rea - soning used ? 335 336 T HORNTON & F ULLER IN J . R ES . S CI . T EACHING 18 ( 1981 ) The Proportion Problems Different written problems requiring proportional reasoning were used in different years . The Wahoo Puzzle ( Renner & Paske , 1977 , p . 290 ) was given to students in the Midwest in Fall 1976 . The Recipe Puzzle ( Fig . 1 ) was given to students in the West in Fall 1977 . The Shadows Puzzle ( Fig . 2 ) was given to students in the East in Fall 1978 . The student responses were categorized on the reasoning employed , not on a right answer - wrong answer dichotomy . The following ﬁ ve point scale was used . 1 . Intuitive : No response or a guess with little evidence of reasoning . Example : Can’t tell . I’m not good at numbers . 2 . Additive : Adds or subtracts to obtain an answer . Example ( Shadows ) : 8 is to 6 as 18 is to 16 . 3 . Ratio attempt : Attempts a ratio but fails for reasons other than arithmetic : wrong ratio , can’t solve for x , etc . Example ( Recipe ) : May try to ﬁ nd how many times 99 goes into 231 , what remainder will exist , then somehow try to convert the 33 ml remainder into teaspoons . 4 . Ratio formula : Uses proportional reasoning to set up an equation and then solve for un - known . Example ( Shadows ) : 6 / 8 = x / 18 so x = ( 6 / 8 ) 18 or 13 ½ feet . 5 . Conversion : Introduces a new quantity as a conversion factor then multiplies or divides . Example ( Shadows ) : The height is 6 / 8 or 75 % of the shadow so the tree is 0 . 75 x 18 = 13 . 5 feet high . Fig . 1 . The Recipe Puzzle . H OW D O C OLLEGE S TUDENTS S OLVE P ROPORTION P ROBLEMS ? 337 Fig . 2 . The Shadows Puzzle . Note that this ﬁ ve point scale is quite close to those used by Karplus , Adi , and Lawson ( in press ) and Renner and Paske ( 1977 ) . Responses of types 1 and 2 were considered as displays of concrete reasoning . A type 3 response was not clearly indicative of either concrete or for - mal reasoning and was labeled transitional . Responses of types 4 and 5 were assumed to show formal reasoning . The numbering should not be interpreted as meaning a 5 - response is superi - or . to a 4 - response . Both 4 and 5 responses reveal an understanding of the ratio - concept . Renner and Paske suggest a 4 - response shows a more sophisticated level of thought than does a 5 be - cause it makes overt use of proportion . On the other hand a 4 could result from applying a mem - orized algorithm without understanding why and a 5 involves the introduction of a new quanti - ty for the solution . In any case both approaches give the same result but by identi ﬁ ably distinct reasoning . . Table I gives a summary of the classes where the problems were given . Note that most of the classes were in science and the average size was approximately 30 students . Student responses , rounded to the nearest percent , on the three problems are summarized in Table II . 338 T HORNTON & F ULLER IN J . R ES . S CI . T EACHING 18 ( 1981 ) Discussion Since the problems were given in separate parts of the country a year apart and to different students , the closeness of the percentages for the Wahoo and Recipe results is of interest . A dif - ferent proportions problem given by Karplus , Adi and Lawson ( in press ) to 86 freshmen and sophomores in a nonmajors physical science course at the University of California - Berkeley gave similar results : concrete 20 % , transitional 6 % , and formal 74 % . Note that the fraction of responses displaying a good grasp of the ratio concept is fairly constant at about three - fourths . In 1978 the Shadows Puzzle was expected to replicate the earlier data , but it did not . Why should that problem give such different results ? One would think that the students on the East coast are as well prepared as those from the West or Midwest . Looking closely at the methods of solution suggests an alternative explanation . Table III gives the student responses in terms of the ﬁ ve point scale . The difference in the Wahoo - Recipe performance compared with the Shadows is mainly in the additive and conversion methods . There was a substantial drop in the percentage of students using conversion and a corresponding increase in the percentage of students using the additive method . What makes the additive method much more tempting in the Shadows Puzzle ? In re - sponse to this question , the professors who evaluated their students’ answers to these problems suggested several contributing factors : H OW D O C OLLEGE S TUDENTS S OLVE P ROPORTION P ROBLEMS ? 339 ( a ) The printed format of the Wahoo - Recipe Puzzles strongly suggests use of a ratio . The quantities are expressed in numerals , the information is displayed in two boxes which are indicated to be equal . The 21 appears directly over the 99 and a blank represent - ing the unknown is directly over the 231 . The numbers are fairly large so the differenc - es are not immediately obvious . An exact number is expected indicating paper - pencil computation is necessary . Both problems involve changing metric to English measure - ments which may suggest a conversion factor . ( b ) The Shadows Puzzle is more obviously a “word problem . ” The visual clue of simi - lar triangles may be missed by many students . The numerical data is not displayed and each number is written in English , not in numerals . The difference of two feet between the six foot person and eight foot shadow is automatically noticed and tempting to use . The problem asks for a best guess rather than assuming an exact numerical answer . In none of the three puzzles were the students told it was a proportion problem or that ratios were to be used . The clues to the solution were contained in the written presentation of the prob - lem . The data does indicate a distinct difference in the effectiveness of these clues . Does this difference vary with some obvious parameters of the students ? Data on the Recipe and Shadows Puzzles were compared with regard to these variables : kind of science course , level of science course , assumed mathematics prerequisite , type of school , and sex of student . For all variables the signi ﬁ cant change from the Recipe data to the Shadows data was a drop in the percentage using the conversion factor and arise in the percentage using the additive method . For science courses requiring more than college algebra , this change was relatively small . The sex of the student did make a quantitative difference in the change . Males went from 3 % ( additive ) and 24 % ( conversion ) on the Recipe to 13 % ( additive ) and 12 % ( con - version ) on Shadows . For females the data was 5 % ( additive ) and 23 % ( conversion ) on Recipe to 28 % ( additive ) and 8 % ( conversion ) on Shadows . Conclusions and Implications Several conclusions can be drawn . ( 1 ) College students use a variety of problem solving approaches to proportion problems . ( 2 ) College teachers ought not to assume that even obvious ratio problems will provoke all students to use proportional reasoning . ( 3 ) The details of the problem statement in ﬂ uence students’ use of proportional reasoning . ( 4 ) Additive reasoning is used by many students in inappropriate situations . 340 T HORNTON & F ULLER IN J . R ES . S CI . T EACHING 18 ( 1981 ) We have found these data illuminate the dif ﬁ culties many students have with a variety of nu - merical problems in our classes . For example , the additive method of solution for proportion problems often occurs on examinations . If this does indicate a lack of formal reasoning abili - ty then the Piagetian level of the students must be considered in planning courses . Our own ex - periences in college classes using the learning cycle model developed by Robert Karplus ( Kar - plus & Lawson , 1974 ) provide us with some positive feed back . Six Piagetian - based college programs have found some evidence ( ADAPT , 1978 ) to support the claim that consistent use of active methods can improve students’ abilities to evoke satisfactory problem solving schemes . References ADAPT ( Accent on Developing Abstract Processes of Thought ) . Multidisciplinary Piagetian - Based Programs for College Freshmen ( third edition ) Lincoln , NE : Author , 1978 . Grif ﬁ ths , D . Physics Teaching : Does it hinder intellectual development ? American Journal of Physics , 1976 , 44 , 81 – 85 . Inhelder , B . , & Piaget , J . The Growth of Logical Thinking from Childhood to Adolescence . New York : Basic Books , 1958 . Karplus , R . , Adi , H . , & Lawson , A . E . Intellectual Development Beyond Elementary School VIII : Proportional , Probabilistic , and Correlational Reasoning . School Science and Mathe - matics , in press . Karplus , R . & Lawson , C . A . Science Curriculum Improvement Study , Teachers Handbook . Berkeley , CA ; Lawrence Hall of Science , University of California , 1974 . Killian , C . R . Cognitive Development of College Freshmen . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 1979 , 16 , 347 – 350 . Kolody , G . The Cognitive Development of High School and College Science Students . Journal of College Science Teaching , 1975 , 5 , 20 – 22 . Lawson , A . E . The Development and Validation of a Classroom Test of Formal Reasoning . Jour - nal of Research in Science Teaching , 1978 , 15 , 11 – 24 . Lawson , A . E . , Karplus , R . , & Adi , H . The Acquisition of Propositional Logic & Formal Opera - tional Schemata During the Secondary School Years . Journal of Research in Science Teach - ing , 1978 , 15 , 465 – 478 . Lawson , A . E . , Nordland , F . H . , & DeVito , A . Relationship of Formal Reasoning to Achieve - ment , Aptitudes , and Attitudes in Preservice Teachers . Journal of Research in Science Teach - ing , 1975 , 12 , 423 – 431 . McKinnon , J . W . , & Renner , J . W . Are Colleges Concerned with Intellectual Development ? American Journal of Physics , 1971 , 39 , 1047 – 1052 . Renner , J . W . The Relationships Between Intellectual Development and Written Responses to Science Questions . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 1979 , 16 , 279 – 299 . Renner , J . W . , & Lawson , A . E . Promoting Intellectual Development Through Science Teach - ing . The Physics Teacher , 1973 , 11 , 273 . Renner , J . W . , & Paske , W . C . Quantitative Competencies of College Students . Journal of Col - lege Science Teaching , 1977 , 6 , 283 – 292 . Walker , R . A . , Hendrix , J . R . , & Mertens , T . R . Written Piagetian Task Instrument : Its Develop - ment and Use . Science Education , 1979 , 63 , 211 – 220 . Manuscript accepted November 13 , 1980 .