© 2017 . Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd . Kindlin Supports Platelet Integrin αIIbβ3 Activation by Interacting with Paxillin Juan Gao 1 , Ming Huang 1 , Jingjing Lai 1 , Kaijun Mao 1 , Peisen Sun 1 , Zhongyuan Cao 1 , Youpei Hu 1 , Yingying Zhang 1 , Marie L . Schulte 2 , Chaozhi Jin 3 , Jian Wang 3 , Gilbert C . White 2 , 4 , Zhen Xu 1 , 2 , ‡ and Yan - Qing Ma 1 , 2 , 4 , ‡ 1 Collaborative Research Program for Cell Adhesion Molecules , Shanghai University School of Life Sciences , Shanghai , China ; 2 Blood Research Institute , Blood Center of Wisconsin , Wisconsin , WI , USA ; 3 State Key Laboratory of Proteomics , Beijing Proteome Research Center , National Center for Protein Sciences , Beijing , China ; 4 Department of Biochemistry , Medical College of Milwaukee , Wisconsin , WI , USA ‡ Correspondence : Blood Research Institute , Blood Center of Wisconsin , 8727 Watertown Plank Rd , Milwaukee , WI 53226 ; email : yanqing . ma @ bcw . edu or zhen . xu @ bcw . edu Key words : Integrin αIIbβ3 ; kindlin ; paxillin ; talin ; platelets ; thrombosis J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t JCS Advance Online Article . Posted on 27 September 2017 ABSTRACT Kindlins play an important role in supporting integrin activation by cooperating with talin ; however , the mechanistic details remain unclear . Here , we disclosed that kindlins directly interacted with paxillin and this interaction could support integrin αIIbβ3 activation . An exposed loop in the N - terminal F 0 subdomain of kindlins was involved in mediating the interaction . Disruption of kindlin binding to paxillin by structure - based mutations significantly impaired the function of kindlins in supporting integrin αIIbβ3 activation . Both kindlin and talin were required for paxillin to enhance integrin activation . Interestingly , a direct interaction between paxillin and the talin head domain was also detectable . Mechanistically , paxillin , together with kindlin , were able to promote the binding of talin head domain to integrin , suggesting that paxillin may complex with kindlin and talin to strengthen integrin activation . Specifically , we observed that crosstalk between kindlin - 3 and the paxillin family in mouse platelets was involved in supporting integrin αIIbβ3 activation and in vivo platelet thrombus formation . Taken together , our findings uncover a novel mechanism by which kindlin supports integrin αIIbβ3 activation , and this might be beneficial for developing safer anti - thrombotic therapies . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t INTRODUCTION Integrins mediate cell adhesion and migration by interacting with their ligands in the surrounding microenvironment ( Hynes , 2002 ) . For many integrin members , a process of activation is required for them to be able to interact with soluble ligands , via conformational changes from a quiescent / bent state to an active / extended state , i . e . , inside - out signaling ( Dai et al . , 2015 ; Ginsberg et al . , 2005 ) . The activation states of integrins are tightly controlled by intersubunit α / β interactions at both the membrane - proximal cytoplasmic tails ( CTs ) and the transmembrane domains ( Vinogradova et al . , 2002 ; Yang et al . , 2009 ; Zhu et al . , 2009 ) . Integrin conformational changes towards active states can be triggered by the binding of cytoplasmic integrin activators to the integrin β CTs ( Liu et al . , 2000 ; Ma et al . , 2007 ; Moser et al . , 2009b ; Qin et al . , 2004 ) . Among many integrin β CT binding proteins , the talin head domain ( TH ) and the kindlin family members are essentially required to induce integrin activation ( Moser et al . , 2009b ; Tadokoro et al . , 2003 ) . Both TH and kindlins are FERM domain - containing proteins , consisting of typical FERM subdomains ( F 1 , F 2 and F 3 ) and an extra N - terminal F 0 subdomain ( Larjava et al . , 2008 ) . The F 3 subdomains in TH and kindlins are responsible for binding to the integrin β CTs , but their binding sites in the β CTs are distinct , an NPLY / F motif in the middle of β CTs for TH and an NxxY / F motif at the C - termini of β CTs for kindlins ( Harburger et al . , 2009 ; Ma et al . , 2008 ; Moser et al . , 2008 ; Shi et al . , 2007 ; Xu et al . , 2015 ; Xu et al . , 2014 ) . Meanwhile , the F 3 subdomain of TH also recognizes the membrane - proximal residues of the integrin β CTs and is thus capable of unclasping the integrin α / β CT complex and triggering integrin activation ( Wegener et al . , 2007 ) ; in addition , other subdomains in TH are functionally supportive by facilitating membrane attachment ( Goult et al . , 2010 ) . Besides talin , multiple lines of evidence , J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t from model cells to genetically modified mice to human patients , have clearly shown that kindlins are also essentially involved in supporting integrin activation ( Larjava et al . , 2008 ; Plow et al . , 2009 ; Rognoni et al . , 2016 ) . The kindlin family members , including kindlin - 1 , - 2 and - 3 , share a high homology with each other while they display distinct patterns of tissue - specific expression ( Ussar et al . , 2006 ) . Kindlin - 1 is rich in epithelial cells ; a lack of kindlin - 1 in humans causes Kindler syndrome , marked with serious skin fragility ( Jobard et al . , 2003 ; Siegel et al . , 2003 ) . Kindlin - 2 has been found in multiple cell types ; kindlin - 2 - deficient patients have not been identified so far , likely due to a lethal consequence as evidenced in kindlin - 2 knockout mice ( Dowling et al . , 2008 ; Montanez et al . , 2008 ) . Kindlin - 3 is predominantly expressed in hematopoietic cells ; human LAD - III patients with a kindlin - 3 deficiency display severe bleeding disorders and recurrent infections due to dysfunctional integrins in both platelets and leukocytes ( Kuijpers et al . , 2008 ; Malinin et al . , 2009 ; Svensson et al . , 2009 ) . Mice with deficiencies of kindlin - 1 ( Ussar et al . , 2008 ) and kindlin - 3 ( Moser et al . , 2009a ; Moser et al . , 2008 ) phenotypically recapitulate the Kindler syndrome and LAD - III patients , respectively . Despite their functional importance , the kindlin family members themselves are incapable of unclasping the integrin α / β CT complex ( Bledzka et al . , 2012 ) , and consequently insufficient to induce high integrin activation ( Ma et al . , 2008 ; Shi et al . , 2007 ) . Since a significant interaction between kindlins and TH has not been observed ( Bledzka et al . , 2012 ; Yates et al . , 2012a ) , how the kindlin family supports talin - induced integrin activation is mechanistically unclear . Hypothetically , a bridging molecule might exist between kindlin and talin , which could promote integrin activation by facilitating the formation of a multiprotein complex of the key integrin activators . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t In addition to β - integrins , multiple kindlin binding proteins ( KBPs ) have been identified , such as migfilin for kindlin - 1 / 2 ( Brahme et al . , 2013 ; Tu et al . , 2003 ) , Src and F - actin for kindlin - 2 ( Bledzka et al . , 2016 ; Liu et al . , 2015 ; Qu et al . , 2014 ) , and RACK1 for kindlin - 3 ( Feng et al . , 2012 ) . Thus far , it has been shown that these KBPs are only involved in regulating integrin - mediated cell adhesion / spreading ( outside - in signaling ) but not integrin activation ( inside - out signaling ) . ILK has ever been identified as an integrin activator ( Honda et al . , 2009 ) and can also interact with kindlin - 2 ( Fukuda et al . , 2014 ; Huet - Calderwood et al . , 2014 ) ; however , it has no additional effect on integrin activation mediated by TH and kindlin - 2 ( Fukuda et al . , 2014 ) , indicating that ILK may not fit the category of bridging molecules . Interestingly , a recent study has disclosed that ADAP , a hematopoietic - specific adapter protein , can associate with both talin and kindlin - 3 and promote integrin αIIbβ3 activation in platelets ( Kasirer - Friede et al . , 2014 ) , which endorses the proposed bridging molecule model . However , the unexpectedly mild bleeding phenotype observed in ADAP - / - mice suggests that other candidates may also be required in platelets for supporting integrin αIIbβ3 activation ( Kasirer - Friede et al . , 2007 ) . In this study , we identify the paxillin family members as the KBPs and demonstrate that the paxillin family members are able to promote platelet integrin αIIbβ3 activation by cooperating with kindlin and talin , thus highlighting a novel mechanism that can interpret how kindlins support integrin activation . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t RESULTS PXN interacts with kindlin - 1 and enhances integrin αIIbβ3 activation The kindlin family members are FERM domain - containing integrin activators ( Fig . 1A ) . The F 3 subdomain of kindlins directly interacts with the integrin β CT ; the PH domain inserted in the F 2 subdomian can associate with the plasma membrane and facilitate kindlin recruitment to integrin ( Hart et al . , 2013 ; Liu et al . , 2011 ; Liu et al . , 2012 ; Yates et al . , 2012b ) . The N - termini of kindlins , including the F 0 and F 1 subdomains , are also involved in supporting integrin activation ( Bouaouina et al . , 2012 ; Goult et al . , 2009 ; Ma et al . , 2008 ) . Although possible membrane - binding sites have been proposed in the F 0 + F 1 subdomains of kindlins , the exact mechanism by which they support integrin activation remains unclear . To explore the underlying mechanism , the ProQuest TM yeast 2 - hybrid system was employed to screen and identify the binding partners for the F 0 + F 1 subdomains of kindlin - 1 ( K1N ) . After initial screening and subsequent verification , multiple K1N binding proteins were identified ( Fig . 1A ) . Notably , three of them , KRT18 , TRIOBP and paxillin ( PXN ) are cytoskeletal proteins , like talin and kindlin . To determine if they play a role in regulating integrin activation , each of these kindlin - 1 binding molecules was flag - tagged and co - expressed with DsRed - fused TH and EGFP - fused kindlin - 1 in CHO - αIIbβ3 cells , and integrin αIIbβ3 activation was analyzed by FACS . PAC - 1 and 2G12 , two specific antibodies to integrin αIIbβ3 , were respectively used to stain activated and total integrins . The binding of PAC - 1 to activated integrin αIIbβ3 in CHO cells induced by TH and kindlin - 1 is specific ( Fig . S1A ) . To ensure the similar expression of TH and kindlin - 1 in different transfectants , DsRed and EGFP double positive cells were gated ( Fig . 1B ; Fig . S1B ) . In addition , expression of the J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t kindlin - 1 binding proteins was also evaluated by western blotting ( Fig . 1C ) . Interestingly , although PXN , KRT18 and TRIOBP all could be expressed in the transfected cells , we found that only PXN , but not the other two , significantly enhanced integrin αIIbβ3 activation ( Fig . 1D ) . Since EGFP - kindlin - 1 was found to associate with endogenous PXN in CHO - αIIbβ3 cells ( Fig . S2 ) , we further tested if endogenous PXN participates in supporting integrin αIIbβ3 activation . Two different siRNA duplexes against PXN were selected , and each of them could efficiently knock down the expression of PXN ( ~ 70 % vs . control siRNA ) in CHO - αIIbβ3 cells ( Fig . 1E ) . Markedly , knocking down endogenous PXN by specific siRNAs significantly suppressed integrin αIIbβ3 activation induced by TH and kindlin - 1 ( Fig . 1F ) , and overexpressing exogenous PXN could rescue integrin αIIbβ3 activation in these siRNA - treated cells ( not shown ) , indicating that endogenous PXN is involved in supporting integrin activation . Together , these results suggest that PXN can interact with kindlin - 1 and may play an important role in supporting integrin αIIbβ3 activation . As noticed , integrin activation was only partially suppressed by siRNAs against PXN . This might be due to an incomplete knockdown of endogenous PXN ( Fig . 1E ) and / or the presence of another PXN family member Hic - 5 in CHO - αIIbβ3 cells ( Fig . S2 ) . PXN binds to the F 0 subdomain of kindlin - 1 and enhances integrin αIIbβ3 activation To validate the interaction between PXN and kindlin - 1 , another yeast 2 - hybrid system ( Matchmaker Gold ) was employed . As shown in Fig . 2A , both the full - length kindlin - 1 and the K1N ( F0 + F1 ) fragment were verified to interact with PXN . To further narrow down the PXN binding region in K1N , deletion mutants of kindlin - 1 were generated , with a lack of either the F 0 or the F 1 subdomain . Specifically , deletion of the F 0 , but not the F 1 subdomain , disrupted the J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t interaction of kindlin - 1 with PXN ( Fig . 2A ) , suggesting that the F 0 subdomain in kindlin - 1 is involved in mediating the interaction . To confirm this finding , these proteins were purified for performing pull down assays ( Fig . S3A ) . In contrast to GST alone , GST - fused PXN could bind to both K1N and the F 0 subdomain of kindlin - 1 ; however it failed to interact with kindlin - 1 with a deletion of the F0 subdomain ( Fig . 2B ) . In addition , the full - length kindlin - 1 and the F 0 subdomain of kindlin - 1 were able to interact with PXN in the lysates of transfected CHO cells , while kindlin - 1 - ΔF 0 had a significantly compromised interaction with PXN ( Fig . 2C ) . These results demonstrate that PXN interacts with kindlin - 1 via the N - terminal F 0 subdomain . Further , we observed that kindlin - 1 - ΔF 0 had a significantly reduced ability to activate integrin αIIbβ3 ( Fig . 2D ) , which might be due to the disconnection between kindlin - 1 - ΔF 0 and PXN in cells . Consistently , kindlin - 1 - ΔF 0 failed to support PXN to enhance integrin activation ( Fig . 2D ) . Taken together , these results suggest that PXN supports integrin activation by directly interacting with kindlin - 1 via the F 0 subdomain . A conserved loop in the F 0 subdomain of kindlin - 1 is involved in mediating the interaction with PXN and supporting integrin αIIbβ3 activation The F 0 subdomains of kindlins adopt a ubiquitin - like fold ( Goult et al . , 2009 ; Li et al . , 2017 ; Perera et al . , 2011 ) . To identify the PXN binding sites in kindlin - 1 ( Fig . 3A ) , the exposed surface residues in the F 0 subodmain of kindlin - 1 were selected based on solvent accessibility ( > 30 % ) and grouped to 6 clusters ( M1 - M6 ) . Accordingly , six mutants of kindlin - 1 were generated by substitution of the exposed residues ( underlined ) in each of the clusters with alanine ( Fig . 3B ) . Next , we evaluated the interactions of these kindlin - 1 mutants with PXN using the yeast 2 - hybrid system , and found that the M3 and M4 mutants of kindlin - 1 no longer interacted with PXN while J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t the others still could ( Fig . 3C ) , indicating that the exposed residues in the M3 and the M4 regions of kindlin - 1 may constitute the binding sites for PXN . Because the M3 is more conserved across the kindlin family members ( Fig . 3C ) and the M4 is involved in interfacing with the F 1 subdomain in kindlins ( Goult et al . , 2009 ; Li et al . , 2017 ) , we therefore focused on the M3 for subsequent studies . When kindlin - 1 and the M3 mutant were co - expressed with PXN in CHO - αIIbβ3 cells , we found that the M3 mutant of kindlin - 1 exhibited a weaker interaction with PXN compared to wild type counterpart ( ~ 65 % reduction based on the results from three experiments ) , although they could equally interact with the β3 - integrin ( Fig . 3D , E ) . In addition , the interaction of the M3 mutant of kindlin - 1 with the integrin β3 CT was also confirmed in the yeast 2 - hybrid system ( not shown ) . Together , these results indicate that the M3 region in kindlin - 1 is involved in interacting with PXN , but not with integrin . Consistently , the M3 mutant of kindlin - 1 was less effective in supporting integrin activation no matter if PXN was present ( Fig . 3F ) . Further , we found that when the M3 mutant of kindlin - 1 was overexpressed in CHO - αIIbβ3 cells , these cells poorly spread on immobilized fibrinogen while cells with overexpressed wild type kindlin - 1spread well under the same condition ( Fig . 3G ) , indicating that the M3 mutant may act as a dominant negative manner to suppress integrin function . Structurally , the M3 residues in the F 0 subdomain of kindlin - 1 constitute a surface loop ( Fig . 3A ) , which is distal from the known binding sites for other molecules , such as F - actin and phospholipids ( Bledzka et al . , 2016 ; Perera et al . , 2011 ) , implying that the M3 region in kindlin - 1 may provide a unique docking site for PXN . In addition , when we mutated each of the residues in the M3 ( Q 54 DWSD ) of kindlin - 1 , we found that , except for the nonconserved Q 54 , each of the conserved residues ( DWSD ) exhibited significant influence on integrin αIIbβ3 activation ( Fig . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t S4 ) . Taken together , these findings suggest that the M3 loop in the F 0 subdomain of kindlin - 1 is responsible for interacting with PXN and supporting integrin αIIbβ3 activation . Both kindlin - 1 and TH are required for PXN to enhance integrin αIIbβ3 activation Next we evaluated the involvement of TH and kindlin - 1 in PXN’s function to enhance integrin αIIbβ3 activation . As shown in Fig . 4A , PXN alone failed to induce integrin activation . When combined with either TH or kindlin - 1 , it also failed to show further enhancement on integrin activation . The enhancement only occurred when both TH and kindlin - 1 were present , suggesting that PXN may functionally rely on both of them . Considering a previously identified association between PXN and talin ( Salgia et al . , 1995 ) , our finding points out that PXN may possibly complex with both TH and kindlin - 1 in supporting integrin activation , through which the binding of TH to integrin might be stabilized . To explore this idea , we performed pull - down assays using purified proteins and observed that PXN could directly interact with TH ( Fig . 4B ) . We then dissected TH into the N - terminal TH - F 0 F 1 and the C - terminal TH - F 2 F 3 fragments and found that PXN only interacted with TH - F 2 F 3 ( Figure 4B ) but not with TH - F 0 F 1 ( not shown ) . Further , we were able to detect a direct interaction between TH - F 2 and PXN ( Fig . 4B ) . We failed to determine if TH - F 3 alone could interact with PXN due to a high non - specific background ; however , TH - ΔF 2 exhibited the binding ability to PXN ( Fig . 4B ) , suggesting that TH - F 2 F 3 may contain more than one binding sites for PXN . Substantially , TH lacking the F 2 subdomain exhibited a compromised effect on inducing integrin activation , which may be ascribed to its functional disconnection with endogenous PXN in cells . In addition , TH - ΔF 2 no longer cooperated with kindlin - 1 to support integrin activation , even in the presence of PXN ( Fig . 4C ) . Next , we tested if PXN , together with kindlin - 1 , promotes the binding of TH to the integrin β3 CT . As shown in Fig . 4D , E , the binding of TH to the integrin β3 CT was significantly enhanced J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t when both kindlin - 1 and PXN were present ; either kindlin - 1 or PXN alone failed to enhance the binding . However , we failed to detect a significant enhancement of TH - ΔF 2 binding to the integrin β3 CT in the presence of kindlin - 1 and PXN ( Fig . S3B ) . Furthermore , we found that , even in the absence of integrin , PXN could mediate formation of the TH and kindlin - 1 complex ( Fig . S3C ) . Taken together , these results suggest that PXN may enhance the binding of TH to integrin by complexing with kindlin - 1 and TH , thus being able to facilitate TH’s function on supporting integrin activation . PXN and Hic - 5 interact with the kindlin family members and enhance integrin αIIbβ3 activation We next sought to extend our finding to the kindlin family , which includes three members ( kindlin - 1 , - 2 and - 3 ) . As evaluated by the yeast 2 - hybrid system , PXN interacted with all kindlin members , but not with their M3 mutants ( Fig . 5A ) ; in addition , PXN could interact with the N - terminal fragments ( F0 + F1 or F0 ) of kindlins ( not shown ) . In addition , we verified that PXN directly interacted with the N - terminal fragments ( F0 + F1 ) of all kindlins by pull down assays ( Fig . S5 ) . These results suggest that the interaction between PXN and kindlins may be a common mechanism . Previously , it was reported that Hic - 5 , another key member in the PXN family , was able to play a supportive role in integrin αIIbβ3 activation in platelets ( Kim - Kaneyama et al . , 2012 ) . Therefore , we tested if Hic - 5 can also interact with kindlins and TH . As shown in Fig . 5B , the results from pull - down experiments showed that Hic - 5 , similar to PXN , interacted with all three kindlin members and TH . Functional analysis using CHO - αIIbβ3 cells also confirmed that Hic - 5 , like PXN , did enhance integrin αIIbβ3 activation mediated by TH and kindlin - 1 / 2 ( Fig . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 5C ) . These results suggest that a general mechanism between the kindlin family members and PXN / Hic - 5 may exist in supporting integrin activation . As known , kindlin - 3 is primarily expressed in hematopoietic cells and plays an essential role in supporting integrin αIIbβ3 activation in platelets . However , kindlin - 3’s function is difficult to be recapitulated in CHO - αIIbβ3 cells , and instead , kindlin - 1 / 2 have been widely used for exploring mechanistic details in this model system ( Bialkowska et al . , 2015 ; Harburger et al . , 2009 ; Ma et al . , 2008 ; Moser et al . , 2008 ; Xu et al . , 2013 ; Ye et al . , 2013 ) . To determine if PXN / Hic - 5 also support kindlin - 3 mediated integrin αIIbβ3 activation , we next sought to verify the association of kindlin - 3 , PXN / Hic - 5 and talin in platelets . As known , during platelet activation , talin can be cleaved to release the head domain ( TH ) , which is responsible for binding to the integrin β CT and inducing integrin activation ( Calderwood , 2004 ; Campbell and Ginsberg , 2004 ; Yan et al . , 2001 ) . As expected , Hic - 5 , the predominant PXN family member in human platelets ( Rathore et al . , 2007 ) , was detected to associate with integrin αIIbβ3 , together with kindlin - 3 and TH , in activated but not resting human platelets ( Fig . 5D ) , indicating that the activation of integrin αIIbβ3 may correlate with a multiprotein complex formation in platelets . We failed to detect the association of full - length talin with integrin in platelets under either resting or activated conditions ( Fig . 5D ) . In addition , when we used the proximity ligation assay ( PLA ) to evaluate the interaction of kindlin - 3 and Hic - 5 in human platelets spreading on immobilzed fibrinogen , specific PLA signals of kindlin - 3 and Hic - 5 , reflected by the bright fluorescent spots , could be detected ( Fig . 5E ) , demonstrating that there is a close proximity between kindlin - 3 and Hic - 5 . Collectively , the above results suggest that the interactions between kindlins and the PXN family members may be , among other possibilities , a new mechanism to support integrin activation by facilitating the formation of a multiprotein complex . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Disconnection of kindlin - 3 with PXN / Hic - 5 in mouse platelets compromises integrin αIIbβ3 activation and reduces platelet thrombus formation Next , an in vivo kindlin - 3 rescue strategy in mice was employed to functionally evaluate the crosstalk between kindlin - 3 and PXN / Hic - 5 in platelets . Kindlin - 3 - deficient bone marrow cells isolated from kindlin - 3 fl / fl Mx1 - Cre mice were infected with lentiviral particles encoding either EGFP fused wild type kindlin - 3 or the M3 mutant , and transplanted into lethally irradiated wild type C57BL / 6 recipient mice . 6 - 8 weeks after bone marrow transplantation , platelets isolated from the recipients were analyzed by FACS to evaluate the EGFP positive population . As shown in Fig . S6 , platelets expressing either wild type kindlin - 3 or the M3 mutant showed a similarly heterogeneous pattern , and this is probably due to an insufficient lentiviral transduction of the donor bone marrow cells . Nonetheless , functional analyses were able to perform by gating the EGFP - positive platelets . Surface expression levels of integrin αIIbβ3 were comparable between platelets expressing EGFP - fused wild type kindlin - 3 and the M3 mutant ( Fig . 6A ) . Co - IP assays were performed using an anti - GFP antibody to immunoprecipitate EGFP - fused kindlin - 3 . As shown in Fig . 6B , wild type kindlin - 3 and the M3 mutant were able to be precipitated from the respective platelet lysates . While both PXN and Hic - 5 were co - precipitated with wild type kindlin - 3 , their association with the M3 mutant of kindlin - 3 was less detectable . As expected , both wild type kindlin - 3 and the M3 mutant were able to interact with the integrin β3 subunit , validating the specificity of disconnection between the M3 mutant and PXN / Hic - 5 in platelets . In addition , we evaluated the rescue effects of wild type kindlin - 3 and the M3 mutant on integrin αIIbβ3 activation . Platelets isolated from the transplanted mice were stimulated with either PAR4 agonist peptides or CRP and incubated with Alexa - Fluor 647 - conjugated fibrinogen , a ligand of J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t integrin αIIbβ3 , and the binding of fibrinogen to EGFP - positive platelets was analyzed by FACS . As shown in Fig . 6C , D , the binding levels of fibrinogen to wild type kindlin - 3 expressed platelets were significantly higher than platelets expressing the M3 mutant . Importantly , the binding of fibrinogen to the two types of platelets could be reduced to similarly low levels when EDTA was present , showing the specificity of fibrinogen binding to integrin αIIbβ3 . In addition , platelets expressing wild type kindlin - 3 spread well on fibrinogen , whereas platelets expressing the M3 mutant showed relatively less spreading ( Fig . 6E ) , which is consistent with the observations in CHO cells ( Fig . 3G ) . Together , these results indicate that interaction of kindlin - 3 with PXN / Hic - 5 in platelets plays a supportive role in integrin αIIbβ3 activation . Further , platelet thrombus formation in bone marrow transplanted mice was evaluated using fluorescent intravital microscopy . Mouse cremaster arteriolar walls were under laser - induced injury , and platelet accumulation at the wound sites was visualized . As shown in Fig . 6F , G , after vascular injury , platelet thrombus formation quickly occurred in cremaster arterioles in mice expressing EGFP - kindlin - 3 in platelets , and the formed thrombi were evident . However , platelet accumulation was only minimally detected in cremaster arterioles in mice with the expression of the M3 mutant of kindlin - 3 in platelets under the same experimental conditions , indicating a compromised ability for platelet thrombus formation in these mice . Surprisingly , tail bleeding tests showed that the bleeding time had no significant difference between these two types of bone marrow transplanted mice , suggesting that the M3 mutant of kindlin - 3 may have less effect on hemostasis ( Fig . 6H ) . Taken together , the results from these in vivo experiments suggest that crosstalk of kindlin - 3 with PXN / Hic - 5 in mouse platelets may be essentially involved in supporting platelet thrombus formation while having minimal effects on normal hemostasis . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t DISCUSSION The important role of the kindlin family members in supporting integrin activation and functions has been highlighted in human genetic diseases and animal models . However , the mechanistic details remain largely unknown . In this study , by performing biochemical and functional analyses , we disclose a novel mechanism to interpret how kindlins support integrin αIIbβ3 activation . Our main findings are as follows . ( 1 ) Kindlins can interact with PXN / Hic - 5 via their N - terminal F 0 subdomain , where a conserved surface loop is involved in mediating the interaction . ( 2 ) Formation of a multiprotein complex of integrin / kindlin / PXN / talin can occur in supporting integrin activation , which may theoretically facilitate the binding of talin to integrin , thus being able to promote integrin activation . ( 3 ) The binding of paxillin to kindlins may be crucial for supporting both integrin inside - out and outside - in signaling , as evidenced by soluble ligand binding and cell spreading , respectively . ( 4 ) We demonstrate that crosstalk between kindlin - 3 and PXN / Hic - 5 in platelets is required to support integrin αIIbβ3 activation . Importantly , such a mechanism can preferentially promote platelet thrombus formation in mice while having less effect on normal hemostasis , suggesting that it might be useful for developing specific anti - thrombotic strategies . In a recently published paper , a distinguished research group also detected the interaction between PXN and kindlins ( Theodosiou et al . , 2016 ) . The authors found that PXN interacted with the PH domain of kindlin - 2 , which is different from our current finding that the F 0 subdomain in kindlins is responsible for binding to PXN . Actually , using the yeast 2 - hybrid system , we did detect the interaction of PXN with the PH domain fragment of kindlin - 1 ( not shown ) , although we did not detect the binding signal between PXN and kindlin - 1 - ΔF0 ( Fig . 2A ) , J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t suggesting that the PXN binding site in the PH domain of kindlin - 1 may possibly be buried by other subdomains . However , we failed to detect a significant binding signal between PXN and the PH domain fragment of kindlin - 2 , indicating that the binding might be relatively weak . In addition , they focused on β1 - integrins and found that crosstalk between PXN and kindlin - 2 could promote FAK - mediated cell spreading on fibronectin . In our current study , we disclose a novel mechanism by which kindlins can cooperate with PXN to enhance the binding of talin to integrin αIIbβ3 , thus being able to support platelet integrin αIIbβ3 function . Substantially , overexpressing the kindlin M3 mutants with a disabled binding ability to PXN not only suppresses integrin αIIbβ3 activation ( Fig . 3F ) but also dramatically impairs integrin αIIbβ3 mediated cell spreading ( Fig . 3G ) , demonstrating that the crosstalk between kindlins and PXN may be essential for supporting the bidirectional signaling of integrin αIIbβ3 . However , we failed to detect significant influence of PXN on the binding of a β1 - integrin ligand , the fibronectin type - III repeats 9 - 11 , to CHO cells under the same condition ( not shown ) , suggesting that the regulation of PXN on integrin signaling may be integrin and / or cell type specific . As a key scaffold protein , PXN itself has numerous binding partners ( Brown and Turner , 2004 ) . Substantially , many of the paxillin binding partners are functionally associated with integrin signaling , such as ILK , vinculin , FAK , Src , and even integrin subunits themselves , suggesting that PXN may play multiple roles in regulating integrin activation . In addition , PXN may possibly induce integrin clustering by cooperating with kindlin ( Ye et al . , 2013 ) . Interestingly , when comparing the surface distribution of integrin αIIbβ3 on CHO cells in suspension by con - focal microscopy , significant changes were not detected between cells with and without exogenous expression of PXN ( not shown ) . Nonetheless , a possible regulation of PXN on integrin αIIbβ3 micro - clustering could not be excluded . If an avidity modulation does J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t occur here , it may likely rely on an affinity modulation triggered by the talin head , because kindlin and PXN , individually or together , fail to induce integrin activation when the talin head is not present ( Fig . 4A ) . In addition , disruption of the interaction between PXN and kindlin - 3 significantly affect the binding of soluble fibrinogen to activated platelets ( Fig . 6 ) , indicating the involvement of affinity modulation as well . Obviously , more mechanistic details need to be explored in the future . A previous study disclosed that Hic - 5 played a supportive role in integrin αIIbβ3 activation ( Kim - Kaneyama et al . , 2012 ) , which is consistent with our current findings . However , another study claimed that Hic - 5 was dispensable for supporting integrin αIIbβ3 activation in mouse platelets ( Popp et al . , 2015 ) . The discrepancy between these studies is mechanistically unknown . Interestingly , knockdown of paxillin in mouse platelets by lentivirus - based shRNA could even elevate integrin αIIbβ3 activation ( Sakata et al . , 2014 ) . These controversial observations indicate complications for understanding the role of PXN / Hic - 5 in regulating integrin αIIbβ3 activation in platelets . However , it is worth noting that these studies were based on deletion of either PXN or Hic - 5 in platelets . As PXN / Hic - 5 interact with numerous important cytoskeletal / signaling molecules in cells ( Brown and Turner , 2004 ) , arbitrary deletion of PXN / Hic - 5 may lead to significant signaling alternations in platelets . If so , the function of PXN / Hic - 5 in supporting integrin activation might be buried in the integrated effects . In addition , PXN and Hic - 5 may not function equally in supporting integin activation in different cells . For example , we found that knockdown of endogenous Hic - 5 in CHO - αIIbβ3 had a negligible effect on PAC - 1 binding ( not shown ) , showing that the endogenous PXN may play a major role in supporting integrin activation in these cells . In our study , we disconnect the crosstalk between kindlins and PXN / Hic - 3 by introducing structure - based mutations in kindlins , which is more specific ; and our J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t results from in vitro and in vivo analyses demonstrate that such crosstalk does play an important role in supporting integrin αIIbβ3 function . Nevertheless , functional specificity and possible compensation across different PXN family members need to be further explored . In addition , it is possible that more than one KBP in platelets may be involved in the regulation of integrin αIIbβ3 activation . For example , ADAP , a hematopoietic cell specific adaptor protein , was previously reported to be able to associate with talin and kindlin - 3 and promote integrin αIIbβ3 activation ( Kasirer - Friede et al . , 2014 ) . In summary , we disclose that PXN / Hic - 5 , as a family of novel kindlin binding proteins , are involved in supporting integrin αIIbβ3 activation by facilitating the formation of a multiprotein complex of integrin activators , which provides further mechanistic insights into the regulation of integrin αIIbβ3 activation . Further , we provide in vivo evidence to show that such a mechanism may be useful for developing more specific anti - thrombotic therapeutics . Nonetheless , due to the heterogeneity of kindlin - 3’s expression in transplanted mice in this study , further investigation using kindlin - 3 knock - in mice are needed to specify the physiological and pathological significance of the identified mechanism . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t MATERIAL AND METHODS Antibodies Mouse monoclonal antibody ( Cat # F1804 ) and rabbit polyclonal antibody ( Cat # F7425 ) against flag for Co - IP and Western blotting were purchased from Sigma ; Mouse monoclonal antibody against GFP for CO - IP was kindly provided by Dr . Boquan Jin ( The Fourth Military Medical University , Xi’an , China ) ; Rabbit polyclonal antibody ( Cat # A1544 ) against GFP for CO - IP and Western blotting was purchased from Sigma ; Mouse monoclonal antibody ( Cat # 610052 ) against paxillin for Western blotting was purchased from BD ; Mouse monoclonal antibody ( Cat # 611165 ) against Hic - 5 for Western blotting was purchased from BD ; Mouse monoclonal antibody ( Cat # MAB1676 ) and rabbit polyclonal antibody ( Cat # sc - 15336 ) against talin for Western blotting were purchased from EMD Millipore and Santa Cruz Biotechnology , respectively ; Mouse monoclonal antibody PAC - 1 ( Cat # 340535 ) against activated integrin αIIbβ3 was purchased from BD ; Goat polyclonal antibody ( Cat # sc - 6627 ; sc - 6626 ) against integrin β3 for Western blotting was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology ; Mouse monoclonal antibodies ( Cat # sc - 53073 and 631212 ) against 6xHis tag for Western blotting were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology and Clontech , respectively ; Rabbit polyclonal antibodies against kindlin - 3 peptides ( GEVGEPAGTDPGLD ; CERARGEELDEDLFLQ ) were prepared at New England Peptide . cDNA constructs , siRNA duplexes and transfection The paxillin cDNA was kindly provided by Hisataka Sabe ( Hokkaido University ) and was subcloned into p3×flag - CMV - 10 vector ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . Other cDNA constructs , including the J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t KBPs , were obtained from either Addgene or ATCC . Different kindlin mutants were generated using a QuickChange site - directed mutagenesis kit ( Agilent Technologies ) and further verified by gene sequencing . The siRNA duplexes targeting paxillin in CHO cells ( siRNA # 001 : 5’ - AAGAGAAGCCAAAGCGAAAUU - 3’ ( sense ) and 5’ - UUUCGCUUUGGCUUCUCUUUU - 3’ ( antisense ) ; siRNA # 003 : 5’ - GCGCCAUCCUGGAGAACUAUU - 5’ ( sense ) and 5’ - UAGUUCUCCAGGAUGGCGCUU - 3’ ( antisense ) ) were ordered from Dharmacon . Transient transfection of CHO cells stably expressing integrin αIIbβ3 ( CHO - αIIbβ3 ) was performed using either Lipofectamine 2000 or 3000 ( Invitrogen ) . Yeast 2 - hybrid systems The ProQuest TM yeast 2 - hybrid system ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) was employed for initial screening of kindlin binding proteins ( KBPs ) . In brief , yeast MaV203 cells were sequentially transformed with a plasmid of pDBLeu - K1N encoding the N - terminal F 0 + F 1 fragment of kindlin - 1 ( K1N ) and a human liver cDNA library in pPC86 vector . Primary positive clones were screened on selective media from at least 1×10 6 transformants and tested using three reporter assays . The positive clones were further verified by retransformation assays . Finally , the targeted cDNA inserts in positive clones were sequenced and analyzed by BLAST searches . In addition , the Matchmaker TM Gold yeast 2 - hybrid system ( Clontech , Mountain View , CA ) was utilized to validate the interaction of known molecular pairs . Briefly , two known molecules to be tested were respectively fused with either the DNA binding domain or the activation domain of GAL4 in pGBKT7 or pGADT7 vector , and co - expressed in yeast strain Y2Hgold . Their interaction was evaluated by culturing the transformants on selective media by a serial dilution method . The growth of yeast cells on - Leu / - Trp media indicates successful J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t transformation ; the growth of yeast cells on - Leu / - Trp / - His media indicates a positive protein - protein interaction . The interactions were expressed as following : - , no growth with dilutions ; + , growth only with a 10 - 1 dilution ; + + , growth only with 10 - 1 and 10 - 2 dilutions ; + + + , growth with all three serial dilutions . Meanwhile , a known molecular pair ( AS1 / AS2 ) ( Liu et al . , 2009 ) was used as a positive control and the empty vectors were transformed to serve as a negative control . In addition , auto - activation for each of the tested molecules was tested and excluded . Integrin activation assays Integrin αIIbβ3 activation was evaluated in CHO - K1 cells ( ATCC ) by the PAC - 1 binding assay as described previously ( Ma et al . , 2008 ; Ma et al . , 2006 ; Xu et al . , 2013 ) . In details , the talin head was cloned in pDsRed - Monomer - N1 vector ; the kindlin family members were cloned in pEGFP - C2 vector ; and KBPs , including paxillin and Hic - 5 , were cloned in p3xFLAG - CMV - 10 vector . Different combinations of TH - DsRed , EGFP - kindlin and flag - KBP or their empty vectors , as indicated in each of the experiments , were transiently expressed in CHO cells stably expressing integrin αIIbβ3 ( CHO - αIIbβ3 cells ) . 24 hours after the transfection , the transfected cells were harvested and separated into two aliquots . One was used to incubate with PAC - 1 , an antibody specific for activated integrin αIIbβ3 ; the other one was used to incubate with 2G12 , an antibody for staining total integrin αIIbβ3 . After incubation , the cells were further stained with Alexa633 - labeled secondary antibodies . Finally , flow cytometry analysis was performed . The cells positive for both DsRed and EGFP were gated and the binding of PAC - 1 and 2G12 to these cells were analyzed . Dead cells were excluded by DAPI positive staining . Integrin αIIbβ3 activation was expressed by the normalized median fluorescence intensity ( MFI ) of PAC - 1 binding with total integrin αIIbβ3 as measured by 2G12 binding . We defined the integrin αIIbβ3 J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t activation index of the sample transfected only with empty vectors as 1 , and accordingly calculated integrin αIIbβ3 activation for other transfected samples . Pull - down and co - immunoprecipitation ( Co - IP ) assays To evaluate the interactions of PXN / Hic - 5 with kindlin and talin , purified GST and GST - PXN / Hic - 5 proteins were coupled on glutathione - Sepharose beads and used to incubate with his - kindlin or his - TH proteins in PBS buffer containing 10 % glycerol and 1 % BSA for overnight at 4°C . After incubation , the beads were washed and the precipitated proteins on the beads were analyzed by SDS - PAGE followed by Coomassie blue staining or Western blotting . To test if PXN and kindlin can jointly promote the binding of TH to the integrin β CT , glutathione - Sepharose beads coated with GST - β3 CT were used to incubate with flag - TH in the presence of either kindlin or PXN , or both , and the amount of TH bound to the integrin β3 CT was evaluated by Western blotting . For Co - IP assays to test the interaction of PXN and kindlin , flag - PXN and EGFP - kindlin were transiently co - expressed in CHO cells , and the transfected cells were lysed with lysis buffer ( 50mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 4 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 % Triton X - 100 , protease inhibitor cocktail ) for 30 minutes on ice followed by high speed centrifugation ( 12500 rpm , 15 min ) . The supernatant was used to incubate with protein A / G agarose beads coupled with an anti - flag antibody for overnight at 4°C . To evaluate the association of PXN / Hic - 5 and kindlin - 3 or talin in platelets , washed human platelets , untreated or treated with TRAP - 6 ( 7 μM , 15 mins ) under non - stirring conditions , were lysed with the lysis buffer ( same as above ) followed by high speed centrifugation ( 12500 rpm , 15 min ) to remove the insoluble fraction , and the supernatant was used for the Co - IP assays . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Proximity ligation assay ( PLA ) Freshly isolated human platelets were allowed to spread on immobilized fibrinogen for 45 mins in the presence of TRAP - 6 ( 10 μM ) , followed by fixation and permeabilization for PLA . In this assay , spread platelets were incubated with mouse anti - Hic - 5 monoclonal and rabbit anti - kindlin - 3 polyclonal primary antibodies followed by staining with species - specific secondary antibodies , each attached with a unique short DNA strand , called PLUS and MINUS Duolink ® PLA probes ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , respectively . The proximity of these two probes was explored by three steps : 1 ) joining two other DNA oligonucleotides complementary for each of the probes to a circle by enzymatic ligation ; 2 ) replicating the circle DNA strand via rolling circle PCR ; and 3 ) highlighting the amplified DNA circles by complementary probes conjugated with a selected fluorescence reagent . Control mouse IgG and rabbit IgG antibodies were used to show the background . Finally , the signal can be viewed by confocal microscopy . Lentiviral transduction and bone marrow transplantation Kindlin - 3 fl / fl Mx1 - Cre mice were intraperitoneally injected with poly ( I : C ) during their 6 - 8 week old ages to induce Mx1 - cre mediated kindlin - 3 deletion in hematopoietic cells . Deficiency of kindlin - 3 in platelets isolated from poly ( I : C ) - treated mice was verified by Western blotting . Bone marrow cells were collected from these mice for lentiviral transduction to express EGFP - kindlin - 3 or the M3 mutant . Finally , lentiviral - infected bone marrow cells were injected into lethally irradiated wild type C57BL / 6 male recipient mice . The transplanted recipients all survived but the non - transplanted control mice died about two weeks after irradiation , demonstrating that the transplanted bone marrow cells were functionally dominant in recipient mice . Functional analyses for platelets from the transplanted mice were performed at 6 - 8 weeks J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t after the transplantation . Lentiviral particles used here to express EGFP - fused kindlin - 3 or the M3 mutant were prepared in the Viral Laboratory of Blood Center of Wisconsin . Functional analysis of transplanted mouse platelets Platelets were isolated from peripheral blood of bone marrow transplanted mice and washed and diluted in Tyrode’s buffer supplemented with 1 mM Ca 2 + and 1 mM Mg 2 + . To test integrin αIIbβ3 activation , platelets were incubated with Alexa Fluor 647 conjugated fibrinogen for 25 minutes at room temperature in the absence or presence of either PAR4 agonist peptides ( AYPGKF , 150 µM ) or CRP ( 2 μg / ml ) . The expression of integrin αIIbβ3 was evaluated by a PE - conjugated anti - CD41 antibody . After incubation , platelets were fixed with 2 % paraformaldehyde for flow cytometry analysis . Platelet spreading was tested on immobilized fibrinogen . To evaluate the interaction of EGFP - kindlin - 3 and PXN / Hic - 5 in mouse platelets , protein A / G agarose beads pre - coupled with an anti - EGFP antibody were used to incubate with platelet lysates . Co - precipitation of EGFP - kindlin - 3 and PXN / Hic - 5 on the beads was quantified by Western blotting . Intravital imaging of platelet thrombus formation in mouse cremaster arterioles were performed in the Thrombosis Core at Blood Research Institute of Blood Center of Wisconsin . Briefly , mice were anesthetized and the body temperature was maintained at 37 °C using a thermo - regulated heating pad . The cremaster muscle was exposed and superfused with warm saline ( 37 °C ) during the experiment . Arteriolar wall injury was induced with a micropoint laser ablation system ( Intelligent Imaging Innovations ) . Fuorescence images were captured using a high - speed camera ( Orca Flash4 . 0 , Hamamatsu ) . Data was collected for at least two minutes following vessel injury . All the animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Statistics P values were calculated by the 2 - tailed Student t test . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health ( HL131654 ) and the NNSFC ( 31370748 , 31571177 and 31500618 ) . AUTHORSHIP CONTRIBUTIONS J . G . , M . H , J . L . , K . M . , P . S , Z . C . , Y . H . , Y . Z . , M . L . S . , C . J . and Z . X . contributed to acquisition of the data ; J . W . and G . C . W . contributed to interpretation of the data ; Y . Q . M . and Z . X . contributed to design of the experiments , analysis of the data and wrote the manuscript . ABBREVIATIONS PXN , paxillin ; CT , cytoplasmic tail ; TH , talin head domain ; KBP , kindlin binding protein ; EGFP , enhanced green fluorescent protein ; DISCLOSURE OF CONFLICTS OF INTEREST Authors have no competing interests . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t REFERENCES Bialkowska , K . , T . V . Byzova , and E . F . Plow . 2015 . Site - specific phosphorylation of kindlin - 3 protein regulates its capacity to control cellular responses mediated by integrin alphaIIbbeta3 . J Biol . Chem . 290 : 6226 - 6242 . Bledzka , K . , K . Bialkowska , K . Sossey - Alaoui , J . Vaynberg , E . Pluskota , J . Qin , and E . F . Plow . 2016 . Kindlin - 2 directly binds actin and regulates integrin outside - in signaling . J Cell Biol . 213 : 97 - 108 . Bledzka , K . , J . Liu , Z . Xu , H . D . Perera , S . P . Yadav , K . Bialkowska , J . Qin , Y . Q . Ma , and E . F . Plow . 2012 . Spatial coordination of kindlin - 2 with talin head domain in interaction with integrin beta cytoplasmic tails . Journal of Biological Chemistry . 287 : 24585 - 24594 . Bouaouina , M . , B . T . Goult , C . Huet - Calderwood , N . Bate , N . N . Brahme , I . L . Barsukov , D . R . Critchley , and D . A . Calderwood . 2012 . A conserved lipid - binding loop in the kindlin FERM F1 domain is required for kindlin - mediated alphaIIbbeta3 integrin coactivation . Journal of Biological Chemistry . 287 : 6979 - 6990 . Brahme , N . N . , D . S . Harburger , K . Kemp - O ' Brien , R . Stewart , S . Raghavan , M . Parsons , and D . A . Calderwood . 2013 . Kindlin binds migfilin tandem LIM domains and regulates migfilin focal adhesion localization and recruitment dynamics . J Biol . Chem . 288 : 35604 - 35616 . Brown , M . C . , and C . E . Turner . 2004 . Paxillin : adapting to change . Physiol Rev . 84 : 1315 - 1339 . Calderwood , D . A . 2004 . Talin controls integrin activation . Biochemical Society Transactions . 32 : 434 - 437 . Campbell , I . D . , and M . H . Ginsberg . 2004 . The talin - tail interaction places integrin activation on FERM ground . Trends Biochem . Sci . 29 429 - 435 . Dai , A . , F . Ye , D . W . Taylor , G . Hu , M . H . Ginsberg , and K . A . Taylor . 2015 . The structure of a full - length membrane - embedded integrin bound to a physiological ligand . J Biol . Chem . 290 : 27168 - 27175 . Dowling , J . J . , E . Gibbs , M . Russell , D . Goldman , J . Minarcik , J . A . Golden , and E . L . Feldman . 2008 . Kindlin - 2 Is an essential component of intercalated discs and is required for vertebrate cardiac structure and function . Circulation Research . 102 : 423 - 431 . Feng , C . , Y . F . Li , Y . H . Yau , H . S . Lee , X . Y . Tang , Z . H . Xue , Y . C . Zhou , W . M . Lim , T . C . Cornvik , C . Ruedl , S . G . Shochat , and S . M . Tan . 2012 . Kindlin - 3 mediates integrin alphaLbeta2 outside - in signaling , and it interacts with scaffold protein receptor for activated - C kinase 1 ( RACK1 ) . Journal of Biological Chemistry . 287 : 10714 - 10726 . Fukuda , K . , K . Bledzka , J . Yang , H . D . Perera , E . F . Plow , and J . Qin . 2014 . Molecular basis of kindlin - 2 binding to integrin - linked kinase pseudokinase for regulating cell adhesion . J Biol . Chem . 289 : 28363 - 28375 . Ginsberg , M . H . , A . Partridge , and S . J . Shattil . 2005 . Integrin regulation . Current Opinion in Cell Biology . 17 : 509 - 516 . Goult , B . T . , M . Bouaouina , P . R . Elliott , N . Bate , B . Patel , A . R . Gingras , J . G . Grossmann , G . C . Roberts , D . A . Calderwood , D . R . Critchley , and I . L . Barsukov . 2010 . Structure of a double ubiquitin - like domain in the talin head : a role in integrin activation . EMBO Journal . 29 : 1069 - 1080 . Goult , B . T . , M . Bouaouina , D . S . Harburger , N . Bate , B . Patel , N . J . Anthis , I . D . Campbell , D . A . Calderwood , I . L . Barsukov , G . C . Roberts , and D . R . Critchley . 2009 . The structure of the J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t N - terminus of kindlin - 1 : a domain important for alphaiibbeta3 integrin activation . Journal of Molecular Biology . 394 : 944 - 956 . Harburger , D . S . , M . Bouaouina , and D . A . Calderwood . 2009 . Kindlin - 1 and - 2 directly bind the C - terminal region of beta integrin cytoplasmic tails and exert integrin - specific activation effects . Journal of Biological Chemistry . 284 : 11485 - 11497 . Hart , R . , P . Stanley , P . Chakravarty , and N . Hogg . 2013 . The kindlin 3 pleckstrin homology domain has an essential role in lymphocyte function - associated antigen 1 ( LFA - 1 ) integrin - mediated B cell adhesion and migration . J Biol . Chem . 288 : 14852 - 14862 . Honda , S . , H . Shirotani - Ikejima , S . Tadokoro , Y . Maeda , T . Kinoshita , Y . Tomiyama , and T . Miyata . 2009 . Integrin - linked kinase associated with integrin activation . Blood . 113 : 5304 - 5313 . Huet - Calderwood , C . , N . N . Brahme , N . Kumar , A . L . Stiegler , S . Raghavan , T . J . Boggon , and D . A . Calderwood . 2014 . Differences in binding to the ILK complex determines kindlin isoform adhesion localization and integrin activation . J Cell Sci . 127 : 4308 - 4321 . Hynes , R . O . 2002 . Integrins : bidirectional , allosteric signaling machines . Cell . 110 : 673 - 687 . Jobard , F . , B . Bouadjar , F . Caux , S . Hadj - Rabia , C . Has , F . Matsuda , J . Weissenbach , M . Lathrop , J . F . Prud ' homme , and J . Fischer . 2003 . Identification of mutations in a new gene encoding a FERM family protein with a pleckstrin homology domain in Kindler syndrome . Human Molecular Genetics . 12 : 925 - 935 . Kasirer - Friede , A . , J . Kang , B . Kahner , F . Ye , M . H . Ginsberg , and S . J . Shattil . 2014 . ADAP interactions with talin and kindlin promote platelet integrin alphaIIbbeta3 activation and stable fibrinogen binding . Blood . 123 : 3156 - 3165 . Kasirer - Friede , A . , B . Moran , J . Nagrampa - Orje , K . Swanson , Z . M . Ruggeri , B . Schraven , B . G . Neel , G . Koretzky , and S . J . Shattil . 2007 . ADAP is required for normal alphaIIbbeta3 activation by VWF / GP Ib - IX - V and other agonists . Blood . 109 : 1018 - 1025 . Kim - Kaneyama , J . R . , A . Miyauchi , X . F . Lei , S . Arita , T . Mino , N . Takeda , K . Kou , K . Eto , T . Yoshida , T . Miyazaki , S . Shioda , and A . Miyazaki . 2012 . Identification of Hic - 5 as a novel regulatory factor for integrin alphaIIbbeta3 activation and platelet aggregation in mice . J Thromb . Haemost . 10 : 1867 - 1874 . Kim , K . H . , A . Barazia , and J . Cho . 2013 . Real - time imaging of heterotypic platelet - neutrophil interactions on the activated endothelium during vascular inflammation and thrombus Formation in live mice . J Vis . Exp . 74 : e50329 . Kuijpers , T . W . , d . V . van , M . A . Weterman , B . M . de , A . T . Tool , T . K . van den Berg , M . Moser , M . E . Jakobs , K . Seeger , O . Sanal , S . Unal , M . Cetin , D . Roos , A . J . Verhoeven , and F . Baas . 2008 . LAD - 1 / variant syndrome is caused by mutations in FERMT3 . Blood . 113 : 4740 - 4746 . Larjava , H . , E . F . Plow , and C . Wu . 2008 . Kindlins : essential regulators of integrin signalling and cell - matrix adhesion . EMBO Rep . 9 : 1203 - 1208 . Li , H . , Y . Deng , K . Sun , H . Yang , J . Liu , M . Wang , Z . Zhang , J . Lin , C . Wu , Z . Wei , and C . Yu . 2017 . Structural basis of kindlin - mediated integrin recognition and activation . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . Liu , J . , K . Fukuda , Z . Xu , Y . Q . Ma , J . Hirbawi , X . Mao , C . Wu , E . F . Plow , and J . Qin . 2011 . Structural basis of phosphoinositide binding to Kindlin - 2 pleckstrin homology domain in regulating integrin activation . Journal of Biological Chemistry . 286 : 43334 - 43342 . Liu , S . C . , D . A . Calderwood , and M . H . Ginsberg . 2000 . Integrin cytoplasmic domain - binding proteins . Journal of Cell Science . 113 : 3563 - 3571 . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Liu , Y . , Y . Zhu , S . Ye , and R . Zhang . 2012 . Crystal structure of kindlin - 2 PH domain reveals a conformational transition for its membrane anchoring and regulation of integrin activation . Protein Cell . 3 : 434 - 440 . Liu , Z . , D . Lu , X . Wang , J . Wan , C . Liu , and H . Zhang . 2015 . Kindlin - 2 phosphorylation by Src at Y193 enhances Src activity and is involved in Migfilin recruitment to the focal adhesions . Federation of European Biochemical Societies . 589 : 2001 - 2010 . Liu , Z . , Y . Zhu , J . Gao , F . Yu , A . Dong , and W . H . Shen . 2009 . Molecular and reverse genetic characterization of NUCLEOSOME ASSEMBLY PROTEIN1 ( NAP1 ) genes unravels their function in transcription and nucleotide excision repair in Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant J . 59 : 27 - 38 . Ma , Y . Q . , J . Qin , and E . F . Plow . 2007 . Platelet integrin alpha ( IIb ) beta ( 3 ) : activation mechanisms . J . Thromb . Haemost . 5 : 1345 - 1352 . Ma , Y . Q . , J . Qin , C . Wu , and E . F . Plow . 2008 . Kindlin - 2 ( Mig - 2 ) : a co - activator of beta3 integrins . Journal of Cell Biology . 181 : 439 - 446 . Ma , Y . Q . , J . Yang , M . M . Pesho , O . Vinogradova , J . Qin , and E . F . Plow . 2006 . Regulation of Integrin alpha ( IIb ) beta ( 3 ) Activation by Distinct Regions of Its Cytoplasmic Tails . Biochemistry . 45 : 6656 - 6662 . Malinin , N . L . , L . Zhang , J . Choi , A . Ciocea , O . Razorenova , Y . Q . Ma , E . A . Podrez , M . Tosi , D . P . Lennon , A . I . Caplin , S . B . Shurin , E . F . Plow , and T . V . Byzova . 2009 . A point mutation in kindlin - 3 ablates activation of three integrin subfamilies in humans . Nature Medicine . 15 : 313 - 318 . Montanez , E . , S . Ussar , M . Schifferer , M . Bosl , R . Zent , M . Moser , and R . Fassler . 2008 . Kindlin - 2 controls bidirectional signaling of integrins . Genes and Development . 22 : 1325 - 1330 . Moser , M . , M . Bauer , S . Schmid , R . Ruppert , S . Schmidt , M . Sixt , H . V . Wang , M . Sperandio , and R . Fassler . 2009a . Kindlin - 3 is required for beta2 integrin - mediated leukocyte adhesion to endothelial cells . Nat . Med . 15 : 300 - 305 . Moser , M . , K . R . Legate , R . Zent , and R . Fassler . 2009b . The tail of integrins , talin , and kindlins . Science . 324 : 895 - 899 . Moser , M . , B . Nieswandt , S . Ussar , M . Pozgajova , and R . Fassler . 2008 . Kindlin - 3 is essential for integrin activation and platelet aggregation . Nat . Med . 14 : 325 - 330 . Perera , H . D . , Y . Q . Ma , J . Yang , J . Hirbawi , E . F . Plow , and J . Qin . 2011 . Membrane Binding of the N - Terminal Ubiquitin - Like Domain of kindlin - 2 Is Crucial for Its Regulation of Integrin Activation . Structure . 19 : 1664 - 1671 . Plow , E . F . , J . Qin , and T . Byzova . 2009 . Kindling the flame of integrin activation and function with kindlins . Current Opinion in Hematology . 16 : 323 - 328 . Popp , M . , I . Thielmann , B . Nieswandt , and D . Stegner . 2015 . Normal Platelet Integrin Function in Mice Lacking Hydrogen Peroxide - Induced Clone - 5 ( Hic - 5 ) . PLoS . One . 10 : e0133429 . Qin , J . , O . Vinogradova , and E . F . Plow . 2004 . Integrin bidirectional signaling : a molecular view . PLoS . Biol . 2 : e169 . Qu , H . , Y . Tu , J . L . Guan , G . Xiao , and C . Wu . 2014 . Kindlin - 2 tyrosine phosphorylation and interaction with Src serve as a regulatable switch in the integrin outside - in signaling circuit . J Biol . Chem . 289 : 31001 - 31013 . Rathore , V . B . , M . Okada , P . J . Newman , and D . K . Newman . 2007 . Paxillin family members function as Csk - binding proteins that regulate Lyn activity in human and murine platelets . Biochem . J . 403 : 275 - 281 . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Rognoni , E . , R . Ruppert , and R . Fassler . 2016 . The kindlin family : functions , signaling properties and implications for human disease . J Cell Sci . 129 : 17 - 27 . Sakata , A . , T . Ohmori , S . Nishimura , H . Suzuki , S . Madoiwa , J . Mimuro , K . Kario , and Y . Sakata . 2014 . Paxillin is an intrinsic negative regulator of platelet activation in mice . Thromb . J . 12 : 1 . Salgia , R . , B . Brunkhorst , E . Pisick , J . L . Li , S . H . Lo , L . B . Chen , and J . D . Griffin . 1995 . Increased tyrosine phosphorylation of focal adhesion proteins in myeloid cell lines expressing p210BCR / ABL . Oncogene . 11 : 1149 - 1155 . Shi , X . , Y . Q . Ma , Y . Tu , K . Chen , S . Wu , K . Fukuda , J . Qin , E . F . Plow , and C . Wu . 2007 . The MIG - 2 / integrin interaction strengthens cell - matrix adhesion and modulates cell motility . Journal of Biological Chemistry . 282 : 20455 - 20466 . Siegel , D . H . , G . H . Ashton , H . G . Penagos , J . V . Lee , H . S . Feiler , K . C . Wilhelmsen , A . P . South , F . J . Smith , A . R . Prescott , V . Wessagowit , N . Oyama , M . Akiyama , A . D . Al , A . K . Al , G . A . Al , H . K . Al , I . A . Al , R . Al - Suwaid , D . J . Atherton , R . Caputo , J . D . Fine , I . J . Frieden , E . Fuchs , R . M . Haber , T . Harada , Y . Kitajima , S . B . Mallory , H . Ogawa , S . Sahin , H . Shimizu , Y . Suga , G . Tadini , K . Tsuchiya , C . B . Wiebe , F . Wojnarowska , A . B . Zaghloul , T . Hamada , R . Mallipeddi , R . A . Eady , W . H . McLean , J . A . McGrath , and E . H . Epstein . 2003 . Loss of kindlin - 1 , a human homolog of the Caenorhabditis elegans actin - extracellular - matrix linker protein UNC - 112 , causes Kindler syndrome . American Journal of Human Genetics . 73 : 174 - 187 . Svensson , L . , K . Howarth , A . McDowall , I . Patzak , R . Evans , S . Ussar , M . Moser , A . Metin , M . Fried , I . Tomlinson , and N . Hogg . 2009 . Leukocyte adhesion deficiency - III is caused by mutations in KINDLIN3 affecting integrin activation . Nat . Med . 15 : 306 - 312 . Tadokoro , S . , S . J . Shattil , K . Eto , V . Tai , R . C . Liddington , J . M . de Pereda , M . H . Ginsberg , and D . A . Calderwood . 2003 . Talin binding to integrin á tails : a final common step in integrin activation . Science . 302 : 103 - 106 . Theodosiou , M . , M . Widmaier , R . T . Bottcher , E . Rognoni , M . Veelders , M . Bharadwaj , A . Lambacher , K . Austen , D . J . Muller , R . Zent , and R . Fassler . 2016 . Kindlin - 2 cooperates with talin to activate integrins and induces cell spreading by directly binding paxillin . Elife . 5 : e10130 . Tu , Y . , S . Wu , X . Shi , K . Chen , and C . Wu . 2003 . Migfilin and Mig - 2 link focal adhesions to filamin and the actin cytoskeleton and function in cell shape modulation . Cell . 113 : 37 - 47 . Ussar , S . , M . Moser , M . Widmaier , E . Rognoni , C . Harrer , O . Genzel - Boroviczeny , and R . Fassler . 2008 . Loss of Kindlin - 1 causes skin atrophy and lethal neonatal intestinal epithelial dysfunction . PLoS . Genet . 4 : e1000289 . Ussar , S . , H . V . Wang , S . Linder , R . Fassler , and M . Moser . 2006 . The Kindlins : subcellular localization and expression during murine development . Experimental Cell Research . 312 : 3142 - 3151 . Vinogradova , O . , A . Velyvis , A . Velyviene , B . Hu , T . A . Haas , E . F . Plow , and J . Qin . 2002 . A structural mechanism of integrin àIIbá3 " inside - out " activation as regulated by its cytoplasmic face . Cell . 110 : 587 - 597 . Wegener , K . L . , A . W . Partridge , J . Han , A . R . Pickford , R . C . Liddington , M . H . Ginsberg , and I . D . Campbell . 2007 . Structural basis of integrin activation by talin . Cell . 128 : 171 - 182 . Xu , Z . , J . Cai , J . Gao , G . C . White , F . Chen , and Y . Q . Ma . 2015 . Interaction of kindlin - 3 and beta2 - integrins differentially regulates neutrophil recruitment and NET release in mice . Blood . 126 : 373 - 377 . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Xu , Z . , X . Chen , H . Zhi , J . Gao , K . Bialkowska , T . V . Byzova , E . Pluskota , G . C . White , J . Liu , E . F . Plow , and Y . Q . Ma . 2014 . Direct interaction of kindlin - 3 with integrin alphaIIbbeta3 in platelets is required for supporting arterial thrombosis in mice . Arteriosclerosis , Thrombosis , and Vascular Biology . 34 : 1961 - 1967 . Xu , Z . , J . Gao , J . Hong , and Y . Q . Ma . 2013 . Integrity of kindlin - 2 FERM subdomains is required for supporting integrin activation . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 434 : 382 - 387 . Yan , B . , D . A . Calderwood , B . Yaspan , and M . H . Ginsberg . 2001 . Calpain cleavage promotes talin binding to the beta 3 integrin cytoplasmic domain . Journal of Biological Chemistry . 276 : 28164 - 28170 . Yang , J . , Y . Q . Ma , R . C . Page , S . Misra , E . F . Plow , and J . Qin . 2009 . Structure of an integrin alphaIIb beta3 transmembrane - cytoplasmic heterocomplex provides insight into integrin activation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 106 : 17729 - 17734 . Yates , L . A . , A . K . Fuzery , R . Bonet , I . D . Campbell , and R . J . Gilbert . 2012a . Biophysical analysis of Kindlin - 3 reveals an elongated conformation and maps integrin binding to the membrane - distal beta - subunit NPXY motif . Journal of Biological Chemistry . 287 : 37715 - 37731 . Yates , L . A . , C . N . Lumb , N . N . Brahme , R . Zalyte , L . E . Bird , C . L . De , R . J . Owens , D . A . Calderwood , M . S . Sansom , and R . J . Gilbert . 2012b . Structural and functional characterisation of the kindlin - 1 pleckstrin homology domain . Journal of Biological Chemistry . 287 : 43246 - 43261 . Ye , F . , B . G . Petrich , P . Anekal , C . T . Lefort , A . Kasirer - Friede , S . J . Shattil , R . Ruppert , M . Moser , R . Fassler , and M . H . Ginsberg . 2013 . The Mechanism of Kindlin - Mediated Activation of Integrin alphaIIbbeta3 . Current Biology . 23 : 2288 - 2295 . Zhu , J . , B . H . Luo , P . Barth , J . Schonbrun , D . Baker , and T . A . Springer . 2009 . The structure of a receptor with two associating transmembrane domains on the cell surface : integrin alphaIIbbeta3 . Molecular Cell . 34 : 234 - 249 . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Figures Fig . 1 . Paxillin ( PXN ) interacts with the N - terminus of kindlin - 1 and enhances integrin αIIbβ3 activation . ( A ) The subdomains of kindlins and their binding partners . ( B ) PXN , KRT18 and TRIOBP were constructed as flag - tagged molecules and expressed in CHO - αIIbβ3 cells together with DsRed - fused talin head ( TH ) and EGFP - fused kindlin - 1 ( K1 ) by transient transfection . The transfected cells positive for both DsRed and EGFP were gated for further analysis . ( C ) The expression levels of flag - tagged PXN , KRT18 and TRIOBP in the transfected cells were measured by Western blotting ( WB ) . ( D ) Integrin αIIbβ3 activation was expressed by normalized PAC - 1 binding , as defined in methods . ( * * , p < 0 . 01 ) ( E ) CHO - αIIbβ3 cells were transfected with the siRNA duplexes targeting PXN ( siPXN001 and siPXN003 ) or a control J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t siRNA duplex ( siControl ) . Their efficiencies of knocking down endogenous PXN were evaluated by Western blotting . ( F ) Control and specific siRNA duplexes targeting for PXN were co - transfected in CHO - αIIbβ3 cells with TH and K1 , as indicated , and their effects on integrin αIIbβ3 activation were evaluated by the PAC - 1 binding assay ( * * , p < 0 . 01 ) . Results in ( D ) and ( F ) represent the mean ± SD of five experiments . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Fig . 2 . The F 0 subdomain of kindlin - 1 interacts with PXN to enhance integrin αIIbβ3 activation . ( A ) The interaction of PXN with kindlin - 1 ( K1 ) and the indicated mutants were evaluated using the Matchmaker TM Gold yeast two - hybrid system as described in the methods . ( B ) GST and GST - tagged PXN ( GST - PXN ) were coupled to glutathione - Sepharose beads and incubated with the indicated his - tagged kindlin - 1 fragments . The precipitated proteins on the beads were evaluated by either Coomassie blue ( C . blue ) staining or Western blotting ( WB ) . ( C ) EGFP - kindlin - 1 ( EGFP - K1 ) and the indicated mutants were co - expressed with flag - PXN in CHO cells , respectively . The interaction flag - PXN with the kindlin - 1 variants was evaluated by CO - IP followed by Western blotting ( WB ) . ( D ) As indicated , different combinations of TH - DsRed ( TH ) , EGFP - kindlin - 1 ( K1 ) or EGFP - K1ΔF0 ( K1ΔF0 ) , flag - PXN ( PXN ) , or their empty vectors were expressed in CHO - αIIbβ3 cells . The cells positive for both DsRed and EGFP were selected , and integrin αIIbβ3 activation in these cells was evaluated by the PAC - 1 binding assay ( * * , p < 0 . 01 ; ns , non - significant ) . Results represent the mean ± SD of five experiments . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Fig . 3 . Identification of PXN binding sites in the F 0 subdomain of kindlin - 1 . ( A ) Structure of the F 0 subdomain of kindlin - 1 ( PDB accession code 2KMC ) was shown . The exposed surface residues were selected and highlighted ( M1 - M6 ) . ( B ) Amino acid sequences of the F 0 subdomains of kindlins of humans and mice . The exposed residues ( underlined ) were determined by solvent accessibility ( > 30 % , Swiss PDB view ) and mutated to alanine for functional analysis . ( C ) The interactions of kindlin - 1 and the mutants ( M1 - M6 ) with PXN were evaluated using the J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Matchmaker TM Gold yeast two - hybrid system as described in methods . ( D ) EGFP - kindlin - 1 ( EGFP - K1 ) and the M3 mutant ( EGFP - K1M3 ) were expressed with flag - PXN or the flag vector in CHO cells , respectively . Their interactions were evaluated by CO - IP using an anti - flag antibody . The co - precipitated EGFP - kindlin - 1 and the M3 mutant were evaluated by Western blotting ( WB ) . ( E ) EGFP - kindlin - 1 ( EGFP - K1 ) and the M3 mutant ( EGFP - K1M3 ) were expressed in CHO - αIIbβ3 cells . The interaction of β3 - integrin with EGFP - K1 and EGFP - K1M3 was evaluated by CO - IP using an anti - β3 antibody followed by Western blotting ( WB ) . ( F ) Combinations of the indicated molecules were expressed in CHO - αIIbβ3 cells . Integrin αIIbβ3 activation in the positively transfected cells was evaluated by the PAC - 1 binding assay ( * * , p < 0 . 01 ; ns , non - significant ) . Results represent the mean ± SD of five experiments . ( G ) CHO - αIIbβ3 cells expressing either EGFP - K1 or EGFP - K1M3 were allowed to spread on immobilized fibrinogen for 2 hours at 37 °C and the spreading of EGFP - positive cells was evaluated using fluorescence microscope . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Fig . 4 . PXN relies on both kindlin - 1 and talin to enhance integrin activation . ( A ) Different combinations of flag - PXN ( PXN ) , DsRed - fused TH ( TH ) , EGFP - fused kindlin - 1 ( K1 ) , or their vectors were expressed in CHO - αIIbβ3 cells . Integrin αIIbβ3 activation in the positively transfected cells were evaluated by the PAC - 1 binding assay ( * * , p < 0 . 01 ; ns , non - significant ) . ( B ) Pull - down experiments were performed to evaluate the interaction of PXN with the subdomains of TH . The precipitates were determined by Western blotting ( WB ) . Meanwhile , the loaded GST proteins were evaluated by Coomassie blue ( C . blue ) staining . ( C ) DsRed - fused TH ( TH ) or the mutant lacking the F 2 subdomain ( THΔF2 ) was co - expressed in CHO - αIIbβ3 cells with EGFP - fused kindlin - 1 ( K1 ) , with or without flag - PXN ( PXN ) . Integrin αIIbβ3 activation in the positively transfected cells was evaluated by the PAC - 1 binding assay ( * , p < 0 . 05 ; ns , non - significant ) . ( D - E ) GST - β3CT protein was coupled to glutathione - Sepharose beads and used for incubation with purified flag - tagged TH ( flag - TH ) in the presence or absence of purified kindlin - J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 1 ( his - K1 ) and / or PXN . After washing , proteins precipitated with GST - β3CT were evaluated by Western blotting ( WB ) . The loaded GST - β3CT protein on the beads was evaluated by Coomassie blue ( C . blue ) staining . The signals of TH bound to GST - β3CT were quantified using ImageJ software ( * , p < 0 . 05 ) . The results represent four experiments . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Fig . 5 . The PXN family members interact with the kindlin family members and support integrin αIIbβ3 activation . ( A ) The interaction of PXN with different kindlins and their M3 mutants were evaluated using the Matchmaker TM Gold yeast two - hybrid system . ( B ) The interactions of PXN / Hic - 5 with kindlins and TH were evaluated by pull - down assays . The precipitates were analyzed by Western blotting ( WB ) . Meanwhile , the loaded GST proteins on the beads was evaluated by Coomassie blue ( C . blue ) staining . ( C ) As indicated , flag - PXN ( PXN ) or flag - Hic - 5 ( Hic - 5 ) was co - expressed with DsRed - fused TH ( TH ) and EGFP - fused kindlin ( K1 / 2 ) in CHO - αIIbβ3 cells . Integrin αIIbβ3 activation in the positively transfected cells was measured by the PAC - 1 binding assay ( * * , p < 0 . 01 ; * , p < 0 . 05 ) . ( D ) Washed human platelets were activated with TRAP - 6 ( 7 μM , 15 mins ) or kept under resting conditions . Activated platelets ( AP ) and resting platelets ( RP ) were lysed and used to incubate with either control IgG or an antibody J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t against αIIbβ3 , in the presence of protein A / G agarose beads . After incubation for 6 hours at 4°C , the beads were washed and the precipitated proteins on the beads were analyzed by Western blotting ( WB ) . ( F ) Proximity ligation assay ( PLA ) . Washed human platelets were spread on fibrinogen , and PLA was performed and the proximity of Hic - 5 and kindlin - 3 was detected by con - focal microscopy . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Fig . 6 . Disconnection of kindlin - 3 with PXN / Hic - 5 in mouse platelets disadvantages integrin αIIbβ3 activation and platelet thrombus formation . ( A ) Histograms showing the expression of integrin αIIb subunit ( CD41 ) in platelets expressing either EGFP - K3 ( K3 ) or EGFP - K3M3 ( K3M3 ) . Non - stained ( NS ) platelets were used as negative controls . ( B ) Platelets expressing either EGFP - K3 or EGFP - K3M3 were lysed and used for Co - IP using an anti - GFP antibody . The expected precipitates were evaluated by Western blotting ( WB ) . ( C - D ) The binding of fibrinogen to platelets expressing either EGFP - K3 ( K3 ) or EGFP - K3M3 ( K3M3 ) was measured under stimulating conditions with either PAR4 agonist peptide ( C ) or CRP ( D ) in the presence or absence of EDTA ( 5 mM ) . The bound fibrinogen conjugated with Alexa Fluor 647 on platelets J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t was measured by flow cytometry ( * , p < 0 . 05 ; * * , p < 0 . 01 ) . ( E ) Platelets expressing either EGFP - K3 or EGFP - K3M3 were allowed to adhere and spread on immobilized fibrinogen for 45 minutes in the presence of PAR4 agonist peptide before fixation . The adherent platelets positive for EGFP were imaged by fluorescence microscopy and platelet spreading areas were measured ( * , p < 0 . 05 ) . ( F , G ) Intravital microscopy was performed using a method as described in previously ( Kim et al . , 2013 ) in transplanted mice . Platelet thrombus formation at the sites of laser - induced arteriolar wall injury was visualized and quantified . Data were collected from 15 sites in three of each type of mice . ( G ) A small segment of mouse tails ( ~ 5 mm ) was transected , and the bleeding time was monitored for 10 minutes . The time to first cessation in bleeding was recorded for each mouse ( ns , non - significant ) . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 1 SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Fig . S1 : Integrin αIIbβ3 activation in CHO - αIIbβ3 cells . ( A ) PAC - 1 binding to the activated integrin αIIbβ3 induced by the talin head ( TH ) and kindlin - 1 ( K1 ) was inhibited by different inhibitors , including EDTA ( 5 mM ) , RGDW peptide ( 100 µM ) , tirofiban ( 2 µg / ml ) and eptifibatide ( 2 µg / ml ) . ( B ) CHO - αIIbβ3 cells were transfected with different panels of plasmids to express the indicated molecules . The transfected cells were stained with 2G12 for total integrin αIIbβ3 or PAC1 specific for activated integrin αIIbβ3 , followed by corresponding Alexa 633 - labeled secondary antibodies . For flow cytometry analysis , cells positive for both DsRed and EGFP were gated as shown in Fig . 1B , and the histograms of DsRed and EGFP on the gated cells were shown . J . Cell Sci . 130 : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 205641 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n 2 Fig . S2 : Kindlin - 1 interacts with the endogenous PXN in CHO - αIIbβ3 cells . CHO - αIIbβ3 cells were transfected to express either EGFP or EGFP - kindlin - 1 ( K1 ) . The transfected cells were lysed for CO - IP assays using an anti - EGFP antibody . The interaction of EGFP - K1 with endogenous PXN or Hic - 5 was evaluated by Western blotting . J . Cell Sci . 130 : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 205641 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n 3 Fig . S3 : Purified proteins and the formation of talin / PXN / K1 complex . ( A ) Purified proteins used in this study . Proteins were expressed in E . coli and further purified by affinity chromatography . These proteins were subjected to SDS - PAGE followed by Coomassie blue staining . The band of each protein was indicated by an arrow head . ( B ) GST - β3CT protein was coupled to glutathione - Sepharose beads and used for incubation with purified flag - tagged talin head with a deletion of the F2 subdomain ( flag - TH - ΔF2 ) in the presence or absence of purified kindlin - 1 ( his - K1 ) and / or PXN . After washing , proteins precipitated with GST - β3CT were evaluated by Western blotting ( WB ) . The loaded GST - β3CT protein on the beads was evaluated by Coomassie blue ( C . blue ) staining . ( C ) Flag - talin head ( TH ) protein was loaded on protein A / G agarose beads coupled with an anti - flag antibody and split into two aliquots . Equal amount of his - kindlin - 1 ( K1 ) protein was used to incubate with the beads in the presence or absence of PXN protein for overnight at 4 °C . After incubation , the beads were washed and proteins precipitated on the beads were analyzed by Western blotting ( WB ) . J . Cell Sci . 130 : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 205641 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n 4 Fig . S4 : The effect of each individual residue in the M3 region of kindlin - 1 on integrin αIIbβ3 activation . Each of the residues in the M3 region ( QDWSD ) of kindlin - 1 was mutated to alanine and their effects on integrin αIIbβ3 activation were evaluated in CHO - αIIbβ3 cells by the PAC1 binding assay , as described in methods . ( * , p < 0 . 05 ; * * , p < 0 . 01 ) J . Cell Sci . 130 : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 205641 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n 5 Fig . S5 : PXN interacts with the N - terminal F0 + F1 fragments of kindlins . GST alone and GST - tagged PXN were coupled to glutathione - Sepharose beads and used to incubate with his - tagged N - terminal fragments of kindlins that contain the F0 + F1 subdomains ( k1N , K2N and K3N ) . The precipitated proteins on the beads were evaluated by Western blotting . J . Cell Sci . 130 : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 205641 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n 6 Fig . S6 : EGFP - positive platelets isolated from bone marrow transplanted mice . Bone marrow cells isolated from kindlin - 3 - deficient mice were transduced with lentiviral particles expressing either EGFP - kindlin - 3 ( EGFP - K3 ) or the M3 mutant ( EGFP - K3M3 ) , and used to reconstitute lethally irradiated wild type mice . Platelets isolated from wild type ( WT ) or transplanted mice expressing either EGFP - K3 or EGFP - K3M3 were analyzed by FACS . EGFP - positive platelets were gated and used for evaluating integrin αIIbβ3 activation . J . Cell Sci . 130 : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 205641 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n