Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) International Journal of Technology and Design Education ( 2019 ) 29 : 1011 – 1032 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10798 - 018 - 9482 - z 1 3 Learning while designing in a fourth‑grade integrated STEM problem Lyn D . English 1 Accepted : 29 October 2018 / Published online : 1 November 2018 © Springer Nature B . V . 2018 Abstract This article reports on a 4th - grade problem activity implemented as part of a 4 - year lon - gitudinal , design research study across grades 3 – 6 . The activity integrated the four STEM disciplines through a focus on design . Following investigations of their feet measurements and shoes , two classes of 9 - year - olds explored the roles of designers and engineers in shoe manufacture , experimented with materials , and then designed and constructed their own pairs of shoes . A conceptual framework , towards informed design ( adapted from Crismond and Adams in J Eng Educ 101 ( 4 ) : 738 – 797 , 2012 ) , is advanced for exploring students’ learning while designing . Drawing on this framework , consideration is given to students’ use of design strategies , including posing their own problems and design aims , sketching their shoe designs , testing and reflecting on their products , and redesigning and reconstructing . Although more students expressed a desired shoe than a design problem to be solved , they nevertheless were able to develop their own design aims and constraints . Designing a functional and aesthetically pleasing shoe was most common , together with comfort . Material properties typically less accessible to young students ( water repellent , durable , insulated ) were also considered in their designs . Students’ attention to detail in their design sketches ( e . g . , style features , 2 - D and 3 - D perspectives , measurements , mate - rials ) suggested they had progressed beyond beginning designers . Likewise , students’ increased satisfaction with their redesigns , displaying knowledge of material properties , measurement and spatial skills , and design processes indicated progress towards informed design . Keywords Towards informed design · Shoe design · Fourth - grade · STEM integration · Design strategies · Material properties * Lyn D . English l . english @ qut . edu . au 1 Faculty of Education , Queensland University of Technology , Victoria Park Road , Kelvin Grove , Brisbane , QLD 4059 , Australia 1012 L . D . English 1 3 Introduction The integration of the STEM disciplines through design is recognized as an increasingly important area of research ( Crismond and Adams 2012 ; McFadden and Roehrig 2018 ) . Design has received substantial attention in studies of engineering education , especially in the secondary school and college years ( e . g . , Fan and Yu 2017 ; Froyd and Lohmann 2014 ; Mentzer et al . 2015 ) . Although design has been a feature of technology education since the 1990s , its contributions to mathematics and science education have received less attention particularly in the elementary grades ( Fan and Yu 2017 ; Jones et al . 2013 ; Kelley et al . 2010 ) . Furthermore , it has been argued that design is beyond young chil - dren’s capabilities and that teachers lack knowledge and confidence in implementing design - based experiences ( Bagiati and Evangelou 2018 ; McFadden and Roehrig 2018 ) . Coupled with these design issues is the debate on whether the STEM domains should be integrated , with a key concern being adequate content coverage of the respective dis - ciplines ( e . g . , English 2016 ; Guzey et al . 2017 ; Honey et al . 2014 ; Shaughnessy 2013 ) . This article reports on a problem activity that integrated the four STEM disciplines through a focus on design . Drawing on students’ learning across their STEM studies , the “Fancy Feet” activity involved fourth - graders in firstly investigating their feet measure - ments , shoe sizes and properties , then experimenting with materials to identify their properties . They then explored the roles of designers and engineers in shoe manufacture and subsequently designed and constructed their own pair of shoes . This article consid - ers the last component of the activity , namely , students’ shoe design and construction . With a focus on both mathematics and science , together with design processes draw - ing on engineering and technology , the study offers an alternative approach to fostering interdisciplinary learning during integrated STEM experiences . The inclusion of design processes involved students in learning through design involving planning , sketching , and testing proposed shoe structures , chosen material compositions , and additional aes - thetic features . Planning and sketching processes are considered a critical medium of design work , yet are given limited attention in the younger grades . In the first part of this article I consider some of the controversies over STEM inte - gration together with the goals of the reported study . I next present the conceptual framework guiding the study , namely , towards informed design ( adapted from Crismond and Adams 2012 ) , where students learn while designing . Controversies over STEM integration Debates on STEM integration continue , with a number of controversies concerning the nature and extent of integration ( Bybee 2013 ; Daugherty and Carter 2018 ) . With the increasing challenges of multidisciplinary problems in today’s world , it would seem paramount to engage students in integrated STEM experiences from the earliest grades ( Daugherty and Carter 2018 ; English 2016 , 2017 ; Honey et al . 2014 ; Masters 2016 ; Moore and Smith 2014 ; Park et al . 2018 ; Rennie et al . 2018 ) . Ranging from a single discipline perspective , through to multidisciplinary and transdisciplinary approaches ( Vasquez et al . 2013 ) , the notions of STEM and STEM integration remain vague , with common concerns including the loss of disciplinary content coverage especially when multiple disciplines are addressed ( English 2016 , 2017 ; Guzey et al . 2017 ; Honey et al . 2014 ; Shaughnessy 2013 ) . 1013 Learning while designing in a fourth - grade integrated STEM… 1 3 This lack of STEM content emphasis has also been reported in technology education , where students’ application of science and mathematics knowledge to support design processes is limited , with trial - and - error a common experience . Many students thus fail to develop an understanding of how science and mathematics knowledge supports their design processes and subsequent solutions ( Fan and Yu 2017 ; Lewis 1999 ; Mativo and Wicklein 2011 ) . In a similar vein , Shaughnessy ( 2013 ) warned that programs can be referred to as “STEM” but can be merely a STEM veneer , where approaches do not genu - inely integrate the disciplines and hence learning in one area can take precedence over another . Furthermore , as with many problem - solving activities , students can simply work procedurally , often preoccupied with the task context at the expense of the disciplinary content ( Reiser 2004 ; Watkins et al . 2014 ) . Another impediment to successful STEM integration is perceiving it as adding to , rather than enhancing , an existing curriculum where students apply their learning across the dis - ciplines ( Bryan et al . 2015 ) . The importance of STEM integration being “intentional” and “specific” with consideration given to both content and context requires greater recogni - tion . Integrating STEM content per se does not guarantee that students will be aware of the contributions of the respective disciplines in problem solution ( Moore et al . 2014 ) . One approach to meeting this challenge is increasing students’ awareness of their disciplinary learning and how they are applying this in an integrated STEM activity ( Bryan et al . 2015 ; Honey et al . 2014 ; Moore et al . 2014 ; Nathan et al . 2013 ) . In the present study , considera - tion was given to an appealing context , namely shoe design and construction , that would lend itself effectively to STEM integration and that would support students’ content learn - ing as well as their application of , and reflection on , their learning . At the same time , it was important that students learn about design as they worked the problem activities . To this end , an adapted form of Crismond and Adams’ ( 2012 ) Informed Design Teaching and Learning Matrix ( Fig . 1 ) served as the conceptual framework for the study . Dimensions of Informed Design Towards Informed Designers L e a r n i ng W h il e D e s i gn i ng M a k i ng K no w l e dg e - D r i v e n D ec i s i on s U s i ng D e s i gn S t r a t e g i e s E ff e c ti v e l y C onn e c ti ng A nd R e f l ec ti ng O n K no w l e dg e A nd S k ill s A Problem Solving Problem Framing B Idea Scarcity Idea Fluency C Surface Detailed Sketching D Ignore Balancing benefits & Trade - offs E Unfocused Diagnostic Troubleshooting F Haphazard Managed & Iterative Designing G Tacit Reflective Design Thinking Fig . 1 Towards informed design matrix . Adapted from Crismond and Adams ( 2012 ) 1014 L . D . English 1 3 Towards informed design Within the design matrix of Crismond and Adams ( 2012 ) , an “informed designer” is con - sidered to have gained a level of competence that lies beyond that of a novice designer but not that of an expert . In the present study , students’ progress towards informed design was supported with knowledge scaffolding involving structuring the problem activity ( as indicated in the “Methods” section ) and problematizing the disciplinary content ( McKenna 2014 ; Reiser 2004 ) . Four core , interrelated performance dimensions from Crismond and Adam’s ( 2012 ) matrix were applied to the conceptual framework , namely : “learning while designing” , “making knowledge - driven decisions” , “using design strategies effectively” , and “connect - ing and reflecting on knowledge and skills” ( p . 750 ) . As indicated in the matrix of Fig . 1 ( adapted from Crismond and Adams , p . 750 ) , a number of design strategies cut across these dimensions , which , if used effectively , indicate progression towards informed design . Such strategies include framing or scoping a given problem , being fluent in ideas , balanc - ing benefits and trade - offs , and in the present study , posing the problem first instead of immediately attempting a solution . Displaying detailed sketching , engaging in managed and iterative designing , and applying reflective design thinking are also important strate - gies towards becoming an informed designer . For the present study , four main research questions that were derived from the matrix were of interest : Research question 1 What was the nature of students’ posed problems including bal - ancing benefits and trade - offs ? ( problem framing , incorporating ideas involving balancing benefits and trade - offs ) Research question 2 How did students test their aims and rate the outcomes ? What changes occurred in their ratings between the initial designs and redesigns ? ( managed and iterative designing , reflective design thinking ) Research question 3 How did students detail their design sketches ? ( design sketching ) Research question 4 How did students assess their ( a ) initial designs and redesigns and ( b ) use of measurements and materials ? What changes occurred in these assessments ? ( making knowledge - driven decisions ; reflective design thinking ) Drawing on the design matrix , three dimensions of informed design are considered in relation to learning while designing , namely , using design strategies effectively , making knowledge - driven decisions , and connecting and reflecting on the knowledge and skills developed . Learning while designing A significant contribution of design - based problem solving is the rich learning that is afforded . Progression towards informed design involves applying core disciplinary knowl - edge and reflecting on and explicating this learning . In essence , design - based problem solving involves learning from all phases of a problem solution , from initial problem fram - ing through to the final product , as indicated next ( Crismond and Adams 2012 ; Lawson and Dorst 2009 ) . As students progress towards informed design , they become more aware of 1015 Learning while designing in a fourth - grade integrated STEM… 1 3 the STEM knowledge they are applying or need to apply during the design phases , and are better able to make and explain decisions that are knowledge - based rather than haphazard or ill - informed . Students are then in a better position to trouble - shoot and make informed decisions on how to improve on their initial designs and ideas ( Crismond 2013 ; Fan and Yu 2017 ) . Using design strategies effectively Design is regarded as central to both technology and engineering practices ( e . g . , Burghardt and Hacker 2004 ; Fan and Yu 2017 ; Guzey et al . 2017 ; Haupt 2018 ) . Typically , design - based projects involve real - world , hands - on constructions that allow for multiple approaches and solutions . Effective use of design strategies is usually described as compris - ing a number of iterative phases , including ( a ) problem framing or scoping , where problem boundaries , goals , and constraints are identified ; ( b ) generation of ideas for planning and potential construction , in contrast to focusing on the development of just a single idea ; the balancing of benefits and trade - offs in considering design ideas is an important aspect ( Crismond and Adams 2012 ) ; ( c ) designing and constructing , involving design sketching and transforming a design into a product ; ( d ) testing and reflecting on outcomes , where goal attainment and meeting of constraints are checked , ( e ) redesigning and reconstruct - ing , where reflections on the first design help identify improvements , with a subsequent new / revised design created ; and ( f ) reflecting on and communicating the overall processes of designing and constructing . The application of , and reflection on , STEM disciplinary content during the design phases is a critical component ( McKenna 2014 ; Wendell and Lee 2010 ) . The use of design strategies in an integrative STEM activity can assist students in devel - oping new knowledge and capabilities when solving problems ( Fan and Yu 2017 ) . Further - more , such an activity can facilitate an understanding of connections among the STEM disciplines and an ability to bring together these links to generate more effective solutions ( Burghardt and Hacker 2004 ; Bybee 2013 ; Fan and Yu 2017 ) . Unfortunately , as Burghardt and Hacker lamented , design projects can end up focusing on the product rather than on the learner and the important learning that can be fostered . Informed design is thus viewed by Burghardt and Hacker as enabling students to enhance their own knowledge base rather than resort to trial - and - error problem solving that can be devoid of conceptual develop - ment . Although substantial research on design processes has been devoted to older students and adult designers , comparatively little research has focused on the elementary grades ; even the secondary years remain under - researched ( Mentzer et al . 2015 ) . Design sketching As previously highlighted , a core feature of design is sketching ( Dym et al . 2005 ; Kelley and Sung 2017 ; Song and Agogino 2004 ; Welch et al . 2000 ) . Song and Agogino’s ( 2004 ) notion of a design sketch includes varied forms of displayed representations , where the main features of an object or situation are documented to illustrate an envisioned or partly envisioned proposed design form . Design sketches can enhance students’ learning by help - ing them to develop and convey meaning and understanding about a design - based problem ( Song and Agogino 2004 ) , as well as draw on and connect the STEM disciplines in gener - ating and annotating their sketches . Design sketching thus provides a potentially rich tool for learning ( Gustafson et al . 2007 ; Welch et al . 2000 ) . 1016 L . D . English 1 3 Unfortunately , recognition of the important roles of design sketching appears lacking in the elementary grades , possibly because of a common assumption that young children do not possess the necessary skills or are reluctant sketchers ( MacDonald and Gustafson 2004 ; Smith 2001 ; Welch et al . 2000 ) . Furthermore , it has often been claimed that younger students do not use sketching as a means to develop and communicate their design plans ; rather , they go straight to constructing ( e . g . , Crismond and Adams 2012 ; Welch et al . 2000 ) . Crismond and Adams ( 2012 ) further report that novice designers typically tend to focus on superficial features of potential solutions , ignore problem constraints , and devote little time to design sketching . Consequently , several studies have focused on the teach - ing of design sketching , rather than on scaffolding its development ( e . g . , Kelley and Sung 2017 ; Smith 2001 ; Welch et al . 2017 ) . Given its contributions to learning , design sketching with younger students needs further research including their skills in sketching indepen - dently of teacher directions , and how they apply their disciplinary knowledge in planning and designing . Testing and reflecting Beginning designers are considered to display little reflection on their actions and to not articulate the disciplinary knowledge they are using or need to use to advance their inves - tigations ( Crismond and Adams 2012 ) . The iterative nature of engineering design , how - ever , prompts students to reflect on their knowledge application as they revisit a phase in their efforts to optimize goal attainment ( Kangas et al . 2013 ; Wendell et al . 2017 ) . Testing product designs , with subsequent reflection on outcomes and identification of problematic aspects of a design , play a key role in effective strategy use . In fostering growth towards informed design , the present study required students to pose their own problem to solve , together with their aims and the tests they would apply in determining achievement of their aims , rather than being supplied with this information . Such experiences appear lacking in the elementary grades yet have the potential to pro - mote more effective learning both about and from a problem ( cf . , McKenna 2014 ) . Such learning is especially important in integrated STEM activities , where students often do not make the important connections between the disciplines ( Moore et al . 2014 ) . As students test whether their own aims have been achieved and the problem constraints met , they need to review their use of appropriate disciplinary knowledge such as the prop - erties of selected materials ( e . g . , water repellent ) . Testing their product’s effectiveness and feasibility prompts students to reflect on its strengths and weaknesses . Subsequent rede - sign and reconstruction requires identifying , understanding , and applying core concepts and principles of the STEM disciplines ( Lachapelle and Cunningham 2014 ; Lewis 2005 ) . Such actions foster “learning while designing” ( Crismond and Adams 2012 , p . 744 ) . At the same time , this learning can often require some form of scaffolding , such as multi - purpose design portfolios ( Crismond and Adams 2012 ; Crismond 2013 ) , or other supports such as exploring applicable scientific content with students or including questions that prompt reflection on the disciplinary knowledge applied to problem solution ( Capobianco et al . 2017 ; Kelley et al . 2015 ; Lachapelle et al . 2018 ; McFadden and Roehrig 2018 ; Wen - dell and Lee 2010 ) . In sum , within the proposed framework , as students work towards informed design they learn while designing , especially when some form of scaffolding is provided . Using design strategies effectively , including managed and iterative design processes , and detailed sketching to represent and convey ideas , contributes significantly to learning . Testing the 1017 Learning while designing in a fourth - grade integrated STEM… 1 3 products created and reflecting on the STEM disciplinary knowledge applied are also con - sidered key components of learning while designing . Developing these design capabili - ties in the elementary grades is under - researched ( Lippard et al . 2017 ) , due in part to lack of awareness or acknowledgement of the design capabilities of younger students ( English 2018 ) . Methods Research design A longitudinal , design research approach was adopted for the study ( Cobb et al . 2016 ; Kelly 2014 ) , catering for complex classroom situations that contain numerous variables and real - world constraints . Time is a key dimension of a longitudinal design as the desired learning needs to be introduced , built upon , and sustained from 1 year to the next . This research approach was most appropriate for achieving the study aims as it facilitated inter - vention involving the creation and refinement of learning experiences with a focus on developing students’ learning across time . Contributions to both theory and practice are also a key outcome of design research studies . The present students were participants in this longitudinal study ( 3rd to 6th grade , 2014 – 2018 ) involving STEM modelling activities , where the overall study goal was to advance students’ STEM learning through long - term , modelling - with - data experiences . Specifically , the study aimed to identify , track , and assess students’ learning with a focus on design , inquiry processes , informal inferential reasoning , representational skills , and STEM - based conceptual development . Participants Two classes of fourth - grade students ( N = 34 ) in a private , all - girls school in a predomi - nantly middle - class suburb , participated in the problem activities , Fancy Feet . Four of the students in the present study were absent for the first day of the second component , which is the focus of this paper . The mean age of the students during the first component was 9 . 9 years and 10 . 3 years for the second . Thirteen of the 34 students were new to the school in fourth grade and thus did not complete the first year of the study . Overview of activities The Fancy Feet problem activities comprised two components , as described next , and were developed using ideas from the TeachEngineering website ( https : / / www . teach engin eerin g . org / activ ities / view / engin eer _ a _ sneak er ; and https : / / www . teach engin eerin g . org / activ ities / view / cub _ feet _ activ ity1 ) . The activities were developed by the author and a senior research assistant in collaboration with the class teachers . It was important that the activities align with the STEM content being covered in the teachers’ curriculum , which included both linking and consolidating students’ learning across the STEM disciplines and developing this learning further through the application of design processes . The concepts and pro - cesses addressed across the two components included : ( a ) mathematical and statistical pro - cesses ( e . g . , measuring and calculating , optimising product outcome on a given budget , 1018 L . D . English 1 3 collecting and analysing statistical data , and applying the concepts of variation , typical , mode , prediction , and certainty ) ; ( b ) scientific understandings ( e . g . , properties of materials , notions of strength , support , and stability ) ; and ( c ) ideas from design and technology ( e . g . , engineering practices , design processes , and technology in product generation ) . Problem component 1 In the first problem component ( not reported here ) , students posed their own statistical questions to investigate their feet and shoes , and those of their peers ( e . g . , questions per - taining to shoe types , shoe fabrics , shoe sizes , foot lengths etc . ) . They collected , repre - sented , and analyzed their data , and drew conclusions and inferences from their findings . The ideas of variation , typical , mode , prediction , and uncertainty were explored ; such sta - tistical understandings have been emphasized as important in working with design ( Dym et al . 2005 ) . As this first problem component provided foundations for the second , stu - dents’ findings were briefly revisited prior to their shoe design and construction . Problem component 2 In this second problem component , students initially completed a “natural and processed materials” unit from their science curriculum , then explored shoe materials , shoe design - ers and their designs , and shoe manufacturing . Students explored how shoe designers and manufacturers would determine what shoes to make in various sizes for different age groups , the materials that might be used , and the latest and predicted fashion trends . Working in small groups ( usually 3 students per group ) , students engaged in learning while designing as they applied their knowledge from the first component in designing and creating a shoe of their choice . Students ( a ) identified a design need ( problem / challenge ) ; ( b ) identified properties of common materials as a basis for their shoe design and con - struction ; ( c ) applied design processes including generating ideas , planning , and designing desired shoes ( through initial sketching ) ; ( d ) selected appropriate materials from a given supply for creating their shoes ; ( e ) constructed an initial model , taking into account given constraints ; and ( g ) tested , evaluated , and suggested ways to improve their product . Prior to designing and constructing their shoes , students answered a number of pre - pared questions in the student workbooks we had developed . These questions served as a form of scaffolding ( Reiser 2004 ) and were open - ended to enable students to generate their own ideas . The importance of “scaffolding complex learning” involving structuring the problem - solving task and problematizing the disciplinary content has been highlighted by Reiser ( p . 273 ) . The workbook questions included : ( a ) What shoe problem ( or need ) has your group identified ? ( b ) List 3 things ( aims ) that your group would like your shoe design to achieve . ( c ) How will you test how well your design meets each of these aims ? How will you know if it passes the test ? Students subsequently brainstormed design ideas , recording notes and rough sketches in their workbooks . Next , they were reminded of the materials unit they had completed in science , including the properties of various common materials , which they were to apply to their shoe designs . Students were informed that their challenge was to figure out how to 1019 Learning while designing in a fourth - grade integrated STEM… 1 3 create a shoe that they could wear from the materials available and that would achieve their aims . Given time limitations , students were supplied with a pre - cut set of “cardboard soles” from which they were to choose their size . They were also supplied with a wide range of materials together with a table of costs per item ( e . g . , sponge [ $ 1 . 75 ] , fabric [ $ 1 . 25 ] , sandpaper [ $ 2 . 00 ] , ribbon , Velcro dots etc . ) . Students could experiment with the materials before creating their design . Following a class discussion on working within constraints including budgetary ( $ 10 ) and time limitations , students completed a table in which they recorded : ( a ) the properties of the materials , ( b ) their material selections , ( c ) the shoe part where the material / s was to be used , and ( d ) total material cost . Students then created a first design of their shoe , tested their aims , rated the achievement of each aim on a scale of 1 – 5 , and recorded how they planned to improve on their shoe design . On testing their shoe constructions from their first design , the students subsequently redesigned their shoe to better meet their initial aims . The shoe made from the second design was to fit another group member . The testing of the aims was repeated , with students reflecting on and justifying each of their ratings . Students were to subsequently rate their initial designs and redesigns on a scale of 1 – 5 , and to jus - tify their ratings . Students also reflected on and rated their measurement and material use after each design , together with reflections on their overall material use . A class Fancy Feet Shoe Parade concluded the problem . To reflect on the students’ learning from the activity , a class discussion addressed ques - tions of the form : ( a ) How did the aims of the shoe design influence your choice of materi - als ? ( b ) How did experimenting with the materials affect your design decisions and materi - als ? ( c ) How did drawing your design help you think about the parts of the shoe ? ( d ) What problems did you encounter when building your shoe ? ( e ) How did testing and rating your shoe help you to improve your design ? ( f ) Did you think about what you learned in the first problem component ( e . g . , typical shoe size , favourite type of shoe , materials from which favourite shoes are made ) when designing / creating your shoe ? If not , how might these have changed your design ? ( g ) What have you learnt about the engineering process of designing , creating , building , testing , and redesigning to create fancy shoes ? Data collection and analysis Several forms of data collection were undertaken including audio and video recordings of selected groups’ interactions in designing and making their shoes , as well as whole class discussions . The groups selected ( referred to here as focus groups ) comprised ( usually ) three students of mixed achievement levels , selected on the basis of their ability to converse and work together . Data from each student’s workbook were scanned , including their shoe design sketches . All focus group interactions and class discussions were transcribed and were used to provide further evidence of students’ progress towards informed design . Both qualitative and basic quantitative ( frequency distributions ) analyses of the work - book data were undertaken . The analysis commenced with a form of open coding ( Strauss and Corbin 1998 ) after repeatedly studying the students’ workbook responses including design sketches to identify and code evidence of their learning . The senior research assis - tant , who attended all classroom sessions with the author , checked the codes that the author had developed . Coding in which any discrepancies were identified were subsequently refined through further checking and mutual agreement . All results were then summarised ( Creswell 2002 ) , with basic frequency counts undertaken where appropriate . The codes used in the data analysis are reported in the results section with each research question . 1020 L . D . English 1 3 The analyses of the focus group and whole class transcripts adopted the form of itera - tive refinement cycles for in - depth evidence of students’ learning ( Lesh and Lehrer 2000 ) . Through repeated analyses of the transcripts , examples of focus group students applying design strategies , together with their use of disciplinary knowledge , were identified . Iden - tification of students’ design strategies was based on the dimensions displayed in Fig . 1 ( Towards Informed Design Matrix ) , as discussed previously . In addressing each of the research questions , students’ responses to selected workbook questions are analysed , together with supporting extracts from the transcriptions . Consid - eration is given to each research question in turn . Results Research question 1 What was the nature of students’ posed problems including balanc - ing benefits and trade - offs ? ( problem framing , incorporating ideas involving balancing benefits and trade - offs ) Students were invited to pose a shoe problem they wished to address in their design and construction . Forty - two percent of students ( n = 31 ) posed a clear problem to be solved , while 58 % simply presented a statement indicating a desired shoe . Students in the former category posed problems such as , “We have found a problem where soccer boots slip on concrete and scratch the floor . So we are making soccer boots that grip concrete ; ” and “The problem is all the roller shoes I have seen have looked hidious ( hideous ) so I would like very much roller shoes that look nice . ” Students who described a desired shoe gave responses such as , “To keep your feet warm in winter ; ” and “You need a comfy shoe to wear to the shop . ” In analysing the students’ problems , we also considered whether they included ideas pertaining to balancing benefits and trade - offs , that is , their posed problem comprised ele - ments that appeared opposing in nature thus creating a tension to be resolved ( e . g . , expen - sive , stylish brand versus durability / strength ; function versus appearance , such as roller shoes looking “hideous” ; and comfort versus versatility . The majority of students ( 65 % ) , however , did not pose a problem of this form , while 35 % did include this tension , for exam - ple , “People want to wear sneakers and flats at the same time but they can’t” , and “The expensive shoe breaking , our shoe is going to be a boot . Our design needs to be good look - ing , [ but ] doesn’t break and doesn’t get dirty . ” Research question 2 How did students test their aims and rate the outcomes ? What changes occurred in their ratings between the initial designs and redesigns ? ( managed and iterative designing , reflective design thinking ) In analysing the three aims that students identified for their initial design ( and redesign ) , the majority ( 74 % , n = 31 ) identified at least two aims that addressed their posed prob - lem , while 26 % described only one aim that did so . Of interest were students’ approaches to testing their aims , with the majority choosing a combination of methods . All students ( n = 31 ) tested the properties of the materials ( e . g . , waterproof , durable , functionable , providing comfort ) by placing their shoe in a tub of water , jumping or dancing in them , walking to ascertain shoe comfort or whether it served the desired purpose . Seventy - one percent of students combined this testing of materials with other aspects . These included 1021 Learning while designing in a fourth - grade integrated STEM… 1 3 assessing the product form ( e . g . , display features such as ribbons , laces , other adornments ) through surveying their peers for their opinions ( 42 % ) , with one further student opting to simply use her own perceptions . An additional one student tested the materials , surveyed her peers , and used her own viewpoint on the product form . Those who indicated con - ducting a survey of their peers gave responses such as , “Conduct a survey for 10 people with the question on a scale of 1 – 5 , how eye catching you would rate this . ” Seven students incorporated tests for measurements including the shoe’s overall fit and how well the mate - rial was fitting around the foot . In summary , for testing all three aims , the 31 students gave a total of 95 responses ( including an additional two responses that combined two features , namely , insulation and comfort ) . Testing a shoe’s functionality was the focus of 28 % of all responses , aesthetics 24 % , comfort 23 % , water repellent 9 % , insulation and durability each 6 % , and size 2 % . It is perhaps not surprising that the students desired functional and attrac - tive shoes , but the finding that size was rarely a concern is unexpected . As previously mentioned , students were required to rate the outcomes of their testing of each aim , for both the initial design and the redesign , on a scale of 1 ( low ) to 5 ( high ) . Examples of the students’ responses included a rating of 1 for the aim , “The roller shoes will work” with the rating justification , “The balls crushed immeadately ( immediately ) so aim 1 didn’t work at all . ” A rating of 4 was given by a student for the aim to “Make it look like a sheep face , ” with the reason , “Because when I servayed ( surveyed ) 5 people and two people said 5 but one person said 2 , 3 , and 4 . ” Other justifications for aim ratings when peer surveys were conducted included , “We did … the survey to ask people how good it was and … so we rated it , so I thought we would rate it 5 because we did get um about two 4 s and the rest were all 5 s so the majority of them were 5 so that’s why I rate it 5 . ” These responses reflect the students’ experiences in the first component of the activity where they collected data and drew conclusions and inferences . On their redesign , students were to rate each aim again . Table 1 displays the changes in students’ ratings for each aim , between the first design and the redesign . As can be seen in Table 2 , the majority of students displayed either an improvement in their ratings of their aims on their redesigns or no change ; a smaller percentage consid - ered their aims were not as well achieved on their redesigns . Holly , for example , rated the attainment of her third aim ( “To catch the eye and be the center of attention positively” ) as higher for her redesign . To test this aim , she chose to “Conduct a survey for 10 peo - ple with the question on a scale of 1 – 5 how eye - catching would you rate this . ” She rated the achievement of this aim as 3 for her initial design because “The survey showed that it was quite average , ” and as 4 for her redesign because “The survey results showed that it was very eye - catching . ” Charlie rated her second aim ( “Make sure the shoe is comfort - able” ) higher for her initial design ( rating of 4 ) than her redesign ( rating of 3 ) , “Because Table 1 Changes ( % ) in ratings for each aim between initial design and redesign N = 31 N / A not answered / indecipherable response Aim 1 Aim 2 Aim 3 N / A 16 6 3 No change 16 29 19 Decrease 19 29 16 Increase 48 35 61 1022 L . D . English 1 3 the sponge acted like a cushion” on her first design but for her redesign , she indicated that “I could have gone up a size . ” Research question 3 How did students detail their design sketches ? ( design sketching ) In analysing the students’ sketches , we considered three aspects , namely , the perspec - tives displayed , how the sketches were annotated in terms of measurements and materials , and whether style features of the shoe were included ( e . g . , ribbons , straps , color ) . Eighty - one percent of sketches displayed style features for the initial design ( N = 30 ) and 78 % for the redesign ( N = 34 ) , indicating that students were concerned with the visual appearance of their desired shoes . Their use of perspectives and annotations varied between the two designs , as indicated in Table 2 . The codes used for the perspectives and annotations , and the percentage of students whose sketches displayed these are displayed . Well over half the students’ sketches included both measurements and material place - ments on their initial designs but fewer on their redesigns . Nevertheless , students’ focus on materials and their placements was still prevalent in the redesigns , with the inclusion of measurements less so . Likewise , the frequencies of 3 - D perspectives or both 2 - D side and top views were not as high in the students’ redesign sketches , possibly due to time constraints or students’ fatigue . Figure 2 illustrates a redesign sketch that displays both a top view and side view , shoe style features , and both materials and measurements , while Fig . 3 shows a 3 - D redesign sketch where features were added together with explanations . No measurements were included , however . It is worth reporting some of the students’ feedback on their design sketching dur - ing the follow - up class discussions , where they were asked , “… how did drawing your design … taking that time to draw your design , how did that help you think about the different parts of the shoe ? ” Tianna replied , “It helped me by , because at the start I was thinking what on , what on earth am I going to do , and um , if I just started randomly making the shoe it would not work because I would have no idea what I was doing . And the design would help because you would know where to put the parts and um , how it would look and everything . ” Lilliana added , “It was good that you had to draw your design so you actually had a good idea of what it was going to look like . ” In the other class , Hilary explained that she found sketching her shoe assisted her in assessing the feasibility of her ideas : “Say you had this idea and you thought it was amazing , say you … when you draw it out , oh , when you think about it , it seems awesome , you draw it out and you see that it won’t work . ” Table 2 Perspectives and annotations ( % ) displayed on students’ sketches for initial designs and redesigns Codes : Perspectives 1 : 2 - D top view only ; 2 : 2 - D side view only ; 3 : 3 - D or both 2 - D top and side views Annotations 1 : materials and their placement only were annotated ; 2 : measurements only ; 3 : both materials and measurements N ( initial design ) = 30 ; N ( redesign ) = 34 Code Initial design Redesign 1 2 3 1 2 3 Perspectives 19 16 61 28 22 47 Annotations 23 6 68 47 3 44 1023 Learning while designing in a fourth - grade integrated STEM… 1 3 It was also observed in the analysis of the group transcripts how students were cogni - zant of the need to follow their design sketches in creating their shoes . Suzie’s group , for example , was debating the use of padding on their shoe when Maryam commented , “… I know what we can do Suzie , cause in our plan we said we put something there ( under toes ) and there ( under heel ) , said our plan , if you pay attention to our plan Suzie . ” Research question 4 How did students assess their ( a ) initial designs and redesigns and ( b ) use of measurements and materials ? What changes occurred in these assessments ? ( making knowledge - driven decisions , reflective design thinking ) Students’ assessments of their initial designs and redesigns ( on a scale of 1 – 5 ) , including the effectiveness of their material use and shoe measurements , required them to make knowledge - driven decisions as they reflected on the aims of each design . Stu - dents’ assessments for each design appear in Table 3 . Students tended to rate their redesigns more highly than their initial designs , espe - cially with respect to a rating of 5 . In all , 53 % of students ( N = 30 ) increased their assessments between their initial design and their redesign , while 20 % assessed their redesigns as worse than their initial designs , and 27 % kept their assessments the same . Students’ justifications for their design assessment included reference to specific mate - rial properties , and other shoe characteristics including adequate support , fit , comfort , and style / aesthetics . Reference to material properties included Gertrude’s response where she first recalled her three aims as , “Aim 1 , ‘comfiness’ . Aim 2 , to not get blisters Fig . 2 A redesign sketch that displays both a top view and side view , shoe features , and both materials and measurements 1024 L . D . English 1 3 or to not get a red rash or a red mark . Aim 3 , was flexibility . ” She described her material selection and justified this as follows : “Materials used : thick plastic , glue gun , card - board , ribbon and foam sheeting… I chose the plastic because , well Gabrielle chose the plastic , because the cardboard sole is low tensile strength and the plastic will make it stronger because it is medium tensile strength . I chose cardboard because… if you bend it will be flexible and that means you can walk in it . We chose the ribbon for the strap and the other strap because it is high tensile strength which means it won’t just break on me . We chose the foam sheeting because one of our aims was to make it comfy so we put foam sheeting down… We test [ ed ] the shoe by walking around the room and test - ing our aims and making , yep , the aims… I would give my overall design a 3 out of 5 because I only completed 2 of the aims even though one of our aims was not to give it a rub , which it only slightly did but I will still count that . ” Jemma’s assessments took into account support factors and style / aesthetics , where she rated her first design as a 3 because , “It would be better if it had proper support” , and her redesign as 3 . 5 , “Because [ it has ] mismatched sides and it doesn’t look that good at all but it works very well because it has reinforced heels . ” Another student , who made interesting wedge shoes considered a number of factors in assessing her designs . Her initial design was rated more highly than her redesign , with the former receiving a rating of 4 ( “I like the design because it is a wedge and is really comfortable” ) and the latter , a rating of 3 because Fig . 3 A 3 - D redesign sketch displaying both features and explanations Table 3 Students’ design assessments ( % ) N ( initial design ) = 30 ; N ( redesign ) = 34 Ratings 1 2 3 4 5 ( highest ) Initial design 3 10 33 43 10 Redesign 9 9 12 35 35 1025 Learning while designing in a fourth - grade integrated STEM… 1 3 she felt the wedge component could be improved ( “… it wasn’t really , um that really well designed … it was a bit not measured that well , it was a bit too big for your foot and I think we should have put this ( the front strap ) a bit lower and the shoe made more colourful” ) . Students’ reflections on , and assessments of , their measurements and material use revealed further insights into how they applied aspects of disciplinary knowledge in designing and constructing their shoes . Students rated their measurement and material use for both their initial designs and their redesigns . To obtain further data on students’ knowledge and application of the materials unit studied earlier , they were also asked to reflect on and rate their overall use of materials on completion of the activity . Consid - eration is given to this overall material reflection and assessment rather than for their initial designs and redesigns , given that the students provided more detailed responses for the former . Consideration is first given to the measurement component . In analysing students’ measurement assessments on their initial designs and rede - signs , five categories of rating justifications were identified , namely : 1 . An inappropriate or limited response , such as , “We made mistakes ; ” and “We didn’t know the measurements” . 2 . A simple indication that the general fit and / or measurements were accurate , such as , “I rate it 4 because our measurements were pretty accurate . ” 3 . Responses in this category included reference to ( a ) measurement terms such as length and / or width , height , shorter , longer ; ( b ) size indicating an appropriate or inappropriate fit ; and ( c ) specific parts of the shoe where measurement was not correct or not exact . Examples included , “Because we measured Louise with and without the shoe but I think it could be taller ; ” “The plastic took a while to get right and the studs were wonky and all different sizes ; ” “I gave the shoe a 4 because the size looked good and the length was good ; ” “I gave the shoe a 5 because the sole is a smaller size than Felicity’s and it fits Felicity and me . ” 4 . These responses referred to the inaccuracy of measurement using specific quantities , such as , “It was a cm wrong” “It could be higher than 8 cm ; ” and “We wanted it to be a centimetre taller than our first design but it wasn’t quite a centimetre ; ” 5 . Reference was made to costs or budget , such as , “We made the right measurements , except for the costs because we chopped and changed a bit . ” Table 4 displays students’ justifications for their measurement ratings on their initial designs and their redesigns . It is evident that students’ justifications for their measurement were mainly coded as 2 or 3 , with only a small percentage offering just a basic justification referring to the accu - racy of the overall fit or measurements ( code 1 ) . Likewise , reference to specific measure - ment quantities ( code 4 ) was not as prevalent as hoped , indicating a greater focus is needed on this component . On the other hand , 50 % of student responses ( N = 30 ) displayed an increase in measurement ratings between the initial designs and redesigns , indicating that Table 4 Students’ justifications for their measurement ratings ( % ) on their initial designs and redesigns N ( 1st design ) = 33 ( two students’ responses were coded as both 3 and 4 , and one student’s response as both 2 and 5 ) ; N ( 2nd design ) = 35 ( one student’s response was coded as both 2 and 5 ) Code Unanswered 1 2 3 4 5 Initial design 3 6 30 48 9 3 Redesign 0 6 46 37 9 3 1026 L . D . English 1 3 students considered they had made more effective use of measurements on their redesigns . Twenty percent did not change in their measurement ratings and 30 % decreased . Students’ reflections on and justifications for their overall use of materials on the com - pletion of the activity were coded as follows : 1 . Limited response or no response ; 2 . Reference to material properties , such as those pertaining to strength , durability , texture , water resistance , insulation , dirt resistance , and “manmade” ; 3 . Reference to appropriateness or inappropriateness of material for shoe purpose , for example , “hard to walk around in rubber high heels” ; 4 . Consideration of materials with respect to structural factors , such as “stable , ” “protect foot , “gives balance , ” and providing comfort ( e . g . , “We tested its limits and it was not comfortable” ) ; 5 . Materials cited in terms of product features / style , such as use of laces or Velcro , fashion - able / stylish , flat shoes / high heels , inner sole , decorative features including colour , and “sensible shoe” . The frequencies of reference to each code type across all the students’ justifications were determined ( N = 75 occurrences of code types ) . Most code types were evident in combination with others in a given justification , such as , “The fabric was good because it protects your foot . We used the non - slip gripping pad so that you will not slip on tiles . We used fabric also to catch the eye because it can be drawn on . We also used foam sheeting to comfort the foot . ” Students’ reflections on and justifications for their material ratings at the end of the activity again indicated how students applied their knowledge of material properties in their shoe creations . Reference to material properties was the most frequent , representing 44 % of total occurrences of justification types . Material properties were mentioned either solely ( 12 % ) or in combination with the other design factors . Structural components were the next most prevalent ( 27 % of total occurrence of code types ) , cited in combination with other factors including material properties ( code 2 ) , suitability of material for shoe purpose ( code 3 ) , and / or product features ( code 5 ) . Student responses that displayed a combination of multiple code types included , “Cardboard provided a sturdy base , hot glue provided a glue to stick everything , plastic provided a waterproof element , sponge provided a nice soft base and the sand paper ( sandpaper ) provided a sturdy exterior . ” In sum , the various roles of material use in students’ designs were evident in their reflections and justifica - tions , again suggesting that their preparatory experiences with materials and their proper - ties served as a sound foundation for the present activity component . Discussion This article has reported on a fourth - grade STEM problem activity ( Fancy Feet ) that inte - grated the four disciplines through a focus on design . Following students’ investigations of their feet and shoes , together with properties of materials , students explored the roles of designers and engineers in shoe manufacture , and then designed and created their own pair of shoes from a range of materials . Rather than being presented with a predetermined problem , students were to identify their own problems to solve , together with the aims they 1027 Learning while designing in a fourth - grade integrated STEM… 1 3 wished to achieve in their design . The activity drew on students’ disciplinary knowledge pertaining to science ( materials and their properties ) , mathematics ( measurement , statis - tics , spatial skills ) , and design ( engineering and technology ) . In addressing students’ shoe design and construction , a theoretical framework , towards informed design , drawing on Crismond and Adams’ ( 2012 ) teaching and learning matrix , was proposed . An informed designer is considered to have gained a level of competence that lies beyond that of a novice designer but not that of an expert . Within the proposed framework , students learn while designing as they progress towards informed design . Such learning entails problem posing and framing / scoping , generating ideas , designing and con - structing , testing and reflecting , and redesigning and reconstructing . Undertaking detailed sketching to represent and convey ideas is a core component of design learning , as is mak - ing knowledge - driven decisions in acting on design outcomes . In the present study , careful scaffolding that facilitated , but did not direct , students’ learning was built into the activity . Together with supportive teacher and student interactions , learner scaffolding involved con - tent - based questions and design challenges in student workbooks ( cf . Hertel et al . 2017 ) . A primary issue arising from this study is the nature of students’ progress towards informed design . In addressing this issue , consideration is given to each of the four research questions . The first investigated the nature of the problems students posed in designing their shoes . Although more students expressed a desired shoe rather than a problem to be solved , they were nevertheless able to identify the features of the shoe they intended to create thus setting constraints to address , such as the appropriate selection of materials and shoe style . From this perspective , students could be considered as moving towards informed design . On the other hand , their problems rarely incorporated benefits and trade - offs to consider , which is perhaps not surprising as this component had not been emphasized . Some consid - eration of this component was evident , however , in students’ rating of their designs where they acknowledged , for example , that strength and stability outweighed style ( e . g . , “… [ it has ] mismatched sides and it doesn’t look that good at all but it works very well because it has reinforced heels” ) . Given that reasoning about the benefits and trade - offs , especially in planning and making informed design decisions , is a core component of design rea - soning and decision - making ( Crismond and Adams 2012 ; Jonassen et al . 2006 ) , it is an area that needs further attention as elementary students develop towards informed design . Inviting students to pose their own problems , together with the aims they hope to achieve , followed by testing , reflecting on , and justifying their achievements could be a productive approach to fostering this development . In a similar vein , Crismond and Adams ( 2012 ) refer to “explanation - based designing” ( p . 762 ) as an effective means to scaffold students’ thinking about the benefits and trade - offs as they consider different design options . With respect to the second research question , students were required to not only test the achievement of their aims but also rate these outcomes . In this way , students can develop important trouble - shooting strategies as they look critically at their designs ( Crismond and Adams 2012 ) . This critical assessment prompts iterative design as students redesign and reconstruct their products to better meet their aims . The importance of testing the proper - ties of their shoe materials was recognized by all students , reflecting application of their materials science learning ( cf . Wendell and Lee 2010 ) . Combining this testing with other considerations including style and display features , together with surveying peers for their assessments , suggests that students were aware of the need to review multiple STEM com - ponents in identifying ways to improve their designs . Through iterative designing and reconstructing , students were becoming more informed designers as they increased their achievements for at least two of their aims . Students’ completion of the workbook ques - tions , including their design justifications , supports Wendell and Lee’s ( 2010 ) point on the 1028 L . D . English 1 3 important role of workbooks in facilitating students’ science learning through authentic activities involving engineering design . In considering the third research question , namely , how students detailed their design sketches , some scaffolding was provided in their workbooks where they were reminded to include intended materials and measurements . No other scaffolding regarding their sketches was included . The majority of students displayed style features on both designs , together with different perspectives including 3 - D , and 2 - D top and side views , even though they were not instructed to do so . The inclusion of materials and their placement , together with measurements , was seen on their sketches especially for the initial design . Students’ inclusion of measurements decreased on their redesign sketches , which could be due par - tially to time constraints and / or fatigue . On the other hand , other research has shown how students need prompting in displaying actual measurements in their sketches ( e . g . , Kangas et al . 2013 ) . Nevertheless , given that the students were inexperienced in design sketching , their attention to detail especially in their initial design could be regarded as evidence of progress beyond beginning designers , whose sketches can lack specific detail for ideas to come to fruition ( Crismond 2013 ; Crismond and Adams 2012 ) . Furthermore , it is proposed that students’ experiences in the first component of the activity provided the background disciplinary knowledge that enabled students to create sketches that were more than just “attractive drawings” . As Kangas et al . ( 2013 ) reported , dealing with concrete materials and real - world artifacts can prompt rich opportunities for interdisciplinary learning , including “spatial , functional , and aesthetic aspects” ( p . 175 ) . An appreciation of design and the importance of detailed sketching was evident in student transcripts where they indicated how their designs guided their planning and construction , including how their shoe parts fit together and whether a product would likely be feasible . It is conjectured that students’ reflections on their designs , both in the creation of their products and during the design sketching process itself [ “reflecting - in - action” , Baaki et al . ( 2017 , p . 667 ) ] , further contributed to their progress towards informed design . The last research question investigated students’ reflections on , and assessment of , their designs , together with their ratings on their use of measurements and materials . Students displayed increased satisfaction with their redesigns , suggesting that they had targeted the weaknesses of their initial designs in redesigning to better meet their aims . In assess - ing their designs , students needed to make knowledge - driven decisions that involved the properties of materials and their appropriateness for meeting design aims , the accuracy of measurements in facilitating adequate fit , and spatial skills in combining all design com - ponents into a finished product . Although students did not display frequent reference to specific quantities in their measurement assessments on either design , they considered they had made more effective use of measurements on their redesigns . Despite this , the find - ings indicate that greater attention is needed on these measurement aspects to foster further growth towards informed design . In contrast , students’ awareness of the important roles of materials was apparent in their overall reflections , with frequent reference to how material properties and their structural features enhanced their products . Students’ application of disciplinary knowledge of mate - rials and their properties was evident in their reference to shoes that were , for example , stable , durable , waterproof , and stylish . Although studies have explored young students’ thinking about objects and materials ( e . g . , in classification tasks ) , few studies have focused on how students apply this thinking to practical tasks where appropriate materials have to be selected for particular objects and their selection justified ( Wendell and Lee 2010 ) . Furthermore , through their testing of and reflections on their shoe creations , students were able to identify less accessible material properties such as strength and insulation , 1029 Learning while designing in a fourth - grade integrated STEM… 1 3 properties that were challenging to the young students in Wendell and Lee’s ( 2010 ) study . Knowledge of materials science plays a significant role in the work of professional engi - neers and scientists ( Wendell and Lee 2010 ) and likewise , can contribute significantly to young students’ STEM learning in solving design - based problems . More use needs to be made of such problems in the elementary grades where students move beyond just mate - rial classifications . As Wendell and Lee ( 2010 ) emphasized , prompting children to reflect on the scientific knowledge and reasoning behind their design decisions appears critical in materials science learning . Limitations A number of limitations are worth noting . First , given that the students were from a sin - gle - sex , non - state school , the inclusion of a broader cross - section of mixed gender schools would enrich the present findings and enhance their generalizability . Second , more time allocation to students’ redesign and construction , together with increased opportu - nity to share and discuss their design sketches , might have yielded more detailed rede - sign sketches . Third , the conceptual framework requires further refinement through other studies , including its effectiveness for very young learners . It may be that some compo - nents require greater emphasis than others in better capturing the design processes and skills of young children . Finally , as noted by Crismond and Adams ( 2012 ) , there needs to be an increased focus on ways in which the framework can inform teachers’ reflections on , and development of , their pedagogical knowledge and skills in implementing design experiences . Concluding points Applying and generating knowledge is a critical factor in design technology , with design being recognized as increasingly knowledge intensive , complex , intensive , and multidi - mensional ( Alamaki 2017 ) . Design activities have the potential to foster young students’ development of STEM knowledge , but greater attention is needed in enhancing young students’ learning through design . The proposed towards informed design framework has highlighted the important roles of design strategies in promoting such learning . Problem posing and framing , generating ideas and sketching designs , constructing and testing , reflecting on design products , and subsequently redesigning can serve as powerful tools in generating important STEM learning . With students posing their own questions and answering these during the process of iterative design , they are afforded opportunities to generate new knowledge as they answer their questions , indeed , “knowledge resides in the questions that can be asked” ( Dym et al . 2005 , p . 104 ) . Students’ responses in the present activity indicate that such learning can occur in the elementary grades , with careful , but not directive , scaffolding involving structuring the problem activity and problematizing the disciplinary content ( Kangas et al . 2013 ; Reiser 2004 ) . Working in teams in designing , sketching , and constructing can help further promote students’ learning ( Alamaki 2017 ; Dym et al . 2005 ; Gustafson et al . 2007 ) , as illustrated in excerpts from the group inter - actions . McKenna’s ( 2014 ) sentiments are especially pertinent here , namely , as students interact with a problem activity and the associated environment , they learn from and about 1030 L . D . English 1 3 the problem , “while continually reflecting on , and possibly reshaping , prior knowledge and experiences” ( p . 232 ) . Acknowledgements This study was supported by funding from the Australian Research Council ( ARC ; DP150100120 ) . Views expressed in this paper are those of the author and not the ARC . Participation of the students and teachers is gratefully acknowledged . References Alamaki , A . ( 2017 ) . A conceptual model for knowledge dimensions and processes in design and technology projects . International Journal of Technology and Design Education . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s1079 8 - 017 - 9410 - 7 . Baaki , J . , Tracey , M . W . , & Hutchinson , A . ( 2017 ) . Give us something to react to and make it rich : Design - ers reflecting - in - action with external representations . International Journal of Technology and Design Education , 27 , 667 – 682 . Bagiati , A . , & Evangelou , D . ( 2018 ) . Identifying Engineering in a PreK classroom : An observation protocol to support guided project - based instruction . In L . D . English & T . Moore ( Eds . ) , Early engineering learning ( pp . 83 – 111 ) . Berlin : Springer . Bryan , L . A . , Moore , T . J . , Johnson , C . C . , & Roehrig , G . H . ( 2015 ) . Integrated STEM education . In C . C . Johnson , E . E . Peters - Burton , & T . J . Moore ( Eds . ) , STEM road map : A framework for integrated STEM education ( pp . 23 – 37 ) . New York , NY : Routledge . Burghardt , D . , & Hacker , M . ( 2004 ) . Informed design : A contemporary approach to design pedagogy as a core process in technology . The Technology Teacher , 64 ( 1 ) , 6 – 8 . Bybee , R . W . ( 2013 ) . The case for STEM education : Challenges and opportunities . Arlington , VA : NSTA Press . Capobianco , B . M . , DeLisi , J . , & Radloff , J . ( 2017 ) . Characterizing elementary teachers’ enactment of high - leverage practices through engineering design - based science instruction . Science Education , 102 ( 2 ) , 342 – 376 . Cobb , P . , Jackson , K . , & Dunlap , C . ( 2016 ) . Design research : An analysis and critique . In L . D . English & D . Kirshner ( Eds . ) , Handbook of international research in mathematics education ( 3rd ed . , pp . 481 – 503 ) . New York , NY : Routledge . Creswell , J . W . ( 2002 ) . Educational research : Planning , conducting , and evaluating quantitative and quali - tative research . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Merrill . Crismond , D . ( 2013 ) . Troubleshooting : A bridge that connects engineering design and scientific inquiry . Science Scope , 36 , 74 – 79 . Crismond , D . P . , & Adams , R . S . ( 2012 ) . The informed design teaching and learning matrix . Journal of Engineering Education , 101 ( 4 ) , 738 – 797 . Daugherty , M . K . , & Carter , V . ( 2018 ) . The nature of interdisciplinary STEM education . In M . J . de Vries ( Ed . ) , Handbook of technology education ( pp . 159 – 171 ) . Berlin : Springer . Dym , C . L . , Agogino , A . M . , Eris , O . , Frey , D . D . , & Leifer , L . J . ( 2005 ) . Engineering design thinking , teaching , and learning . Journal of Engineering Education , 94 ( 1 ) , 103 – 120 . English , L . D . ( 2016 ) . STEM education K - 12 : Perspectives on integration . International Journal of STEM Education . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s4059 4 - 016 - 0036 - 1 . English , L . D . ( 2017 ) . Advancing elementary and middle school STEM education . International Journal of Science and Mathematics Education , 15 ( 1 ) , 5 – 24 . English , L . D . ( 2018 ) . Engineering education in early childhood : Reflections and future directions . In L . D . English & T . Moore ( Eds . ) , Early engineering learning ( pp . 273 – 284 ) . Berlin : Springer . Fan , S . , & Yu , K . ( 2017 ) . How an integrative STEM curriculum can benefit students in engineering design practices . International Journal of Technology and Design Education , 27 , 107 – 129 . Froyd , J . E . , & Lohmann , J . R . ( 2014 ) . Chronological and ontological development of engineering education as a field of scientific inquiry . In A . Johri & B . M . Olds ( Eds . ) , Cambridge handbook of engineering education research ( pp . 3 – 26 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Gustafson , B . , MacDonald , D . , & Gentilini , S . ( 2007 ) . Using talking and drawing to design : Elementary children collaborating with university industrial design students . Journal of Technology Education , 19 ( 1 ) , 19 – 34 . 1031 Learning while designing in a fourth - grade integrated STEM… 1 3 Guzey , S . S . , Ring - Whalen , E . A . , Harwell , M . , & Peralta , Y . ( 2017 ) . Life STEM : A case study of life sci - ence learning through engineering design . International Journal of Science and Mathematics Educa - tion . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s1076 3 - 017 - 9860 - 0 . Haupt , G . ( 2018 ) . Design in technology education : Current state of affairs . In M . J . de Vries ( Ed . ) , Hand - book of technology education ( pp . 643 – 659 ) . Berlin : Springer . Hertel , J . D . , Cunningham , C . M . , & Kelly , G . J . ( 2017 ) . The roles of engineering notebooks in shaping elementary engineering student discourse and practice . International Journal of Science Education , 39 ( 9 ) , 1194 – 1217 . Honey , M . , Pearson , G . , & Schweingruber , A . ( 2014 ) . STEM integration in K - 12 education : Status , pros - pects , and an agenda for research . Washington : National Academies Press . Jonassen , D . H . , Strobel , J . , & Lee , C . B . ( 2006 ) . Everyday problem solving in engineering : Lessons for engineering educators . Journal of Engineering Education , 95 ( 2 ) , 139 – 151 . Jones , A . , Buntting , C . , & de Vries , M . J . ( 2013 ) . The developing field of technology education : A review to look forward . International Journal of Technology and Design Education , 23 , 191 – 212 . Kangas , K . , Seitamaa - Hakkarainen , P . , & Hakkarainen , K . ( 2013 ) . Design expert’s participation in elemen - tary students’ collaborative design process . International Journal of Technology and Design Educa - tion , 23 ( 2 ) , 161 – 178 . Kelley , T . R . , Brenner , D . C . , & Pieper , J . T . ( 2010 ) . Two approaches to engineering design : Observations in STEm education . Journal of STEM Teacher Education , 47 ( 2 ) , 5 – 40 . Kelley , T . R . , Capobianco , B . M . , & Kaluf , K . J . ( 2015 ) . Concurrent think - aloud protocols to assess elemen - tary design students . International Journal of Technology and Design Education , 25 , 521 – 540 . Kelley , T . R . , & Sung , E . ( 2017 ) . Sketching by design : Teaching sketching to young learners . International Journal of Technology and Design Education , 27 , 363 – 386 . Kelly , E . A . ( 2014 ) . Design - based research in engineering education : Current state and next steps . In A . Johri & B . M . Olds ( Eds . ) , Cambridge handbook of engineering education research ( pp . 497 – 518 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Lachapelle , C . P . , & Cunningham , C . M . ( 2014 ) . Engineering in elementary schools . In S . Purzer , J . Stroble , & M . Cardella ( Eds . ) , Engineering in pre - college settings : Research in synthesizing research , policy , and practices ( pp . 61 – 88 ) . Lafayette , IN : Purdue University Press . Lachapelle , C . P . , Cunningham , C . M . , & Davis , M . E . ( 2018 ) . Middle childhood education : Engineering concepts , practices , and trajectories . In M . J . de Vries ( Ed . ) , Handbook of technology education ( pp . 141 – 157 ) . Berlin : Springer . Lawson , B . , & Dorst , K . ( 2009 ) . Design expertise . Oxford : Architectural Press . Lesh , R . , & Lehrer , R . ( 2000 ) . Iterative refinement cycles for videotape analyses of conceptual change . In R . Lesh & A . Kelly ( Eds . ) , Research design in mathematics and science education ( pp . 665 – 708 ) . Hills - dale , NJ : Erlbaum . Lewis , T . ( 1999 ) . Research in technology education—Some areas of need . Journal of Technology Educa - tion , 10 ( 2 ) , 41 – 56 . Lewis , T . ( 2005 ) . Coming to terms with engineering design as content . Journal of Technology Education , 16 ( 2 ) , 2005 . Lippard , C . N . , Lamm , M . H . , & Riley , K . L . ( 2017 ) . Engineering thinking in prekindergarten children : A systematic literature review . Journal of Engineering Education , 106 ( 3 ) , 454 – 474 . MacDonald , D . , & Gustafson , B . ( 2004 ) . The role of design drawing among children engaged in a parachute building activity . Journal of Technology Education , 16 ( 1 ) , 55 – 71 . Masters , G . ( 2016 ) . Policy insights : Five challenges in Australian school education . Melbourne : Australian Council for Educational Research . Mativo , J . , & Wicklein , R . ( 2011 ) . Learning effects of design strategies on high school students . Journal of STEM Teacher Education , 48 ( 3 ) , 8 . McFadden , J . , & Roehrig , G . ( 2018 ) . Engineering design in the elementary science classroom : Supporting student discourse during an engineering design challenge . International Journal of Technology and Design Education . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s1079 8 - 018 - 9444 - 5 . McKenna , A . F . ( 2014 ) . Adaptive expertise and knowledge fluency in design and innovation . In A . Johri & B . M . Olds ( Eds . ) , Cambridge handbook of engineering education research ( pp . 227 – 242 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Mentzer , N . , Becker , K . , & Sutton , M . ( 2015 ) . Engineering design thinking : High school students’ perfor - mance and knowledge . Journal of Engineering Education , 104 ( 4 ) , 417 – 432 . Moore , T . J . , & Smith , K . A . ( 2014 ) . Advancing the state of the art of STEM integration . Journal of STEM Education , 15 ( 1 ) , 5 – 10 . Moore , T . J . , Stohlmann , M . S . , Wang , H . , Tank , K . M . , Glancy , A . W . , & Roehrig , G . H . ( 2014 ) . Implemen - tation and integration of engineering in K - 12 STEM education . In S . Purzer , J . Strobel , & M . Cardella 1032 L . D . English 1 3 ( Eds . ) , Engineering in pre - college settings : Research into practice ( pp . 35 – 60 ) . West Lafayette , IN : Purdue University Press . Nathan , M . J . , Srisurichan , R . , Walkington , C . , Wolfgram , M . , Williams , C . , & Alibali , M . W . ( 2013 ) . Building cohesion across representations : A mechanism for STEM integration . Journal of Engineering Education , 102 ( 1 ) , 77 – 116 . Park , D . - Y . , Park , M . - H . , & Bates , A . B . ( 2018 ) . Exploring young children’s understanding about the con - cept of volume through engineering design in a STEM activity : A case study . International Journal of Science and Mathematics Education , 16 ( 2 ) , 275 – 294 . Reiser , B . J . ( 2004 ) . Scaffolding complex learning : The mechanisms of structuring and problematizing stu - dent work . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 13 ( 3 ) , 273 – 304 . Rennie , L . , Venville , G . , & Wallace , J . ( 2018 ) . Making STEM curriculum useful , relevant , and motivat - ing for students . In R . Jorgensen & K . Larkin ( Eds . ) , STEM education in the junior secondary ( pp . 91 – 109 ) . Berlin : Springer . Shaughnessy , M . ( 2013 ) . By way of introduction : Mathematics in a STEM context . Mathematics Teaching in the Middle School , 18 ( 6 ) , 324 . Smith , J . ( 2001 ) . The current and future role of modeling in design and technology . Journal of Design and Technology Education , 6 ( 1 ) , 5 – 15 . Song , S . , & Agogino , A . M . ( 2004 ) . Insights on designers’ sketching activities in new product design teams . In Proceedings of the DETC’04 ASME 2004 design engineering technical conference and computers and information in engineering conference ( pp . 1 – 10 ) . Salt Lake City , Utah , September 28 – October 2 . Strauss , A . , & Corbin , J . M . ( 1998 ) . Basics of qualitative research : Techniques and procedures for develop - ing grounded theory ( 2nd ed . ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Vasquez , J . , Sneider , C . , & Comer , M . ( 2013 ) . STEM lesson essentials , grades 3 – 8 : Integrating science , technology , engineering , and mathematics . Portsmouth , NH : Heinemann . Watkins , J . , Spencer , K . , & Hammer , D . ( 2014 ) . Examining young students’ problem scoping in engi - neering design . Journal of Pre - College Engineering Education Research , 4 ( 1 ) , 5 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7771 / 2157 - 9288 . 1082 . Welch , M . , Barlex , D . , & Lim , H . S . ( 2000 ) . Sketching : Friend or foe to the novice designer ? International Journal of Technology and Design Education , 10 , 125 – 148 . Wendell , K . , & Lee , H . ( 2010 ) . Elementary students’ learning of materials science practices through instruc - tion based on engineering design tasks . Journal of Science and Technology Education , 19 , 580 – 601 . Wendell , K . , Wright , C . G . , & Paugh , P . ( 2017 ) . Reflective decision - making in elementary students’ engi - neering design . Journal of Engineering Education , 106 ( 3 ) , 356 – 397 .