Proceedings of the Editors : Linda Andersson Hidir Aras Florina Piroi Allan Hanbury Karlsruhe , Germany September 12th , 2019 1st Workshop on on Patent Text Mining and Semantic Technologies Editors : Linda Andersson , Linda . Andersson @ artiﬁcialresearcher . com Artiﬁcial Researcher IT , GmbH , Vienna , Austria Hidir Aras , Hidir . Aras @ ﬁz - Karlsruhe . de Text and Data Mining ( TDM ) , Leibniz Institute for Information Infrastructure , FIZ Karlsruhe GmbH , Karlsruhe , Germany Florina Piroi , Florina . Piroi @ tuwien . ac . at , Florina . Piroi @ artiﬁcialresearcher . com Institute of Information Systems Engineering , Technische Universit¨at Wien , Vienna , Austria Artiﬁcial Researcher IT GmbH , Vienna , Austria Allan Hanbury , Allan . Hanbury @ tuwien . ac . at Institute of Information Systems Engineering , Technische Universit¨at Wien , Vienna , Austria This document contains the proceedings of the 1st Workshop on on Patent Text Mining and Semantic Technologies ( PatentSemTech 2019 ) helod on September 12 , 2019 in Karlsruhe , Germany . All submissions to this workshop have gone through single - blind reviewing process . The workshop was organized as a one day event and had the endorsement from the European Patent Oﬃce . The workshop was co - located with the SEMANTiCS 2019 conference that took place in September 09 - 12 , 2019 , in Karslruhe , Germany . The editors would like to thank all the scientiﬁc committe members of PatentSemTech2019 . DOI : 10 . 34726 / pst2019 ' 2019 Institute of Information Systems Engineering , Technische Universit¨at Wien , Vienna , Austria . The copyright of each paper within these proceedings is with its authors . All rights reserved . Contents 1 Overview 1 Hidir Aras , Linda Andersson , Florina Piroi 1st Workshop on Patent Text Mining and Semantic Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 2 Papers 9 - 21 Sam Arts , Jianan Hou , Juan Carlos Gomez Text Mining to Measure Novelty and Diﬀusion of Technological Inventions . . . . . . . . . . . 9 Tobias Fink , Linda Andersson , Allan Hanbury Detecting Multi Word Terms in Patents the same way as Named Entities . . . . . . . . . . . 11 Benjamin Meindl , Ingrid Ott , Ulrich Zierahn Binary Patent Classication Methods for Few Annotated Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 Mustafa Sofean Deep Learning based Pipeline with Multichannel Inputs for Patent Classication . . . . . . . . 18 Tatyana Skripnikova , Hidir Aras , Anna Weihaar , Sebastian Blank , Hans - Peter Zorn Semantic Views – Interactive Hierarchical Exploration for Patent Landscaping . . . . . . . . 20 3 Demos 22 - 30 Farag Saad , Hidir Aras , Stefan Helfrich Visual Programming for Patent Mining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 Mustafa Sofean , Ahmad Alrifai Deep Learning Services for Patents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 1st Workshop on Patent Text Mining and Semantic Technologies ( PatentSemTech 2019 ) Hidir Aras 1 FIZ Karlsruhe – Leibniz Institute for Information Infrastructure Linda Andersson , Florina Piroi 2 TU Wien , Institute for Information Systems Engineering Abstract This volume presents the proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Patent Text Mining and Semantic Technolo - gies ( PatentSemTech 2019 ) co - located with the SEMANTiCS 2019 conference , held in Karlsruhe , Germany . It is a ﬁrst in series of workshops that aims to establish a long - term collaboration and a two - way commu - nication channel between the IP industry and academia from relevant ﬁelds to foster the usage of semantic technologies for answering research questions related to patent text mining and patent analytics as well as adopt them in working applications . Keywords : Patent Text Mining , Semantic Technologies , Semantics 2019 , Intellectual Property , Machine Learning 1 . Introduction The PatentSemTech 2019 workshop 3 is a ﬁrst in series of workshops that aims to establish a long - term collaboration and a two - way communication channel between the IP industry and academia from relevant ﬁelds such as natural - language processing ( NLP ) , text and data mining ( TDM ) and semantic technologies ( ST ) in order to explore and transfer new knowledge , methods and technologies for the beneﬁt of industrial applications as well as support research in applied sciences for the IP and neigh - bouring domains . We invited scientiﬁc contributions as well as proof of concepts that show relevant use cases for patent text mining and analytics . Moreover , we in - vited researchers to investigate and promote new means for bootstrapping training data generation , e . g . for labelling domain - speciﬁc data sets from the Intellectual Property ( IP ) domain . The arti - cles included in this volume went through a peer - review process where each submission was reviewed 1 https : / / www . ﬁz - karlsruhe . de 2 https : / / www . ifs . tuwien . ac . at 3 http : / / www . ifs . tuwien . ac . at / patentsemtech / by at least three reviewers out of a mixed pro - gramme committee of academic researchers and ex - perts from the IP domain . Seven papers passed the review process – 3 long , 2 short and 2 demo pa - pers . Three submissions that passed the reviewing process were proposed for publication to the World Patent Information 4 ( WPI ) virtual special issue on ”Patent Text Mining and Semantic Technologies” . For these submissions we only included their ( ex - tended ) abstracts in these proceedings . In its ﬁrst year , the workshop was organized as a one day event . We have invited as a keynote speaker Mr . A . Trippe , managing director of Patinformat - ics LLC . , a long year , internationally recognised IP expert , and an adjunct Professor of IP Man - agement and Markets at Illinois Institute of Tech - nology where he teaches courses on patent analysis and landscapes for strategic decision making . His keynote addressed the importance of patent ana - lytics tools based on semantics and machine learn - ing techniques for the strategic decisions that busi - nesses need to take with respect to their long term 4 https : / / www . journals . elsevier . com / world - patent - information Published in " Proceedings of The 1 st Workshop on Patent Text Mining and Semantic Technologies ( PatentSemTech 2019 ) " , Eds . L . Andersson , H . Aras , F . Piroi , A . Hanbury , PatentSemTech 2019 , 12 September 2019 , Karlsruhe , Germany . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 34726 / pst2019 . 1 | © Authors 2019 . CC BY 4 . 0 License . 1 R & D and economic plans . 2 . Keynote : Improving Patent Analytics Using Semantic Technologies The use of patent analytics has increased ex - ponentially over the past ten years . So much so that even the worlds patent oﬃces have devoted resources and staﬀ to create departments responsi - ble for developing insights into technology areas of importance to that country or region using output generated applying patent analytics . At the same time new tools , methods and systems have begun to emerge that seek to make the analysis of patent data easier to accomplish . Included in these new de - velopments are a signiﬁcant number of approaches that apply machine learning and make use of knowl - edge modeling and semantic analysis in order to deal with existing challenges for text and data ana - lytics . As these changes continue to occur , it would be useful to review a list of the tasks associated with patent analytics and think about the types of tools , systems , or methods that a patent analyst would like to have at their disposal . Starting with a general overview of patent analytics , and with a focus on patent landscape reports , case studies and perspectives will be provided on why this work is so highly valued . The presentation concluded with a prioritized list of suggestions for how patent ana - lytics and patent landscape creation could be aided by the further development and implementation of semantic technologies . 3 . Main Topics and Objectives In the started workshop series we aim to set the basis for researchers and the IP industry to ex - plore next - generation text and data mining meth - ods and semantic technologies for the enrichment and large - scale analysis of huge amounts ( Big Data ) of scientiﬁc - technical information in general and patent data in particular . We want to motivate and enable scientists from academia to make use of and exploit the rich - ness of the scientiﬁc - technical information that is amassed nowhere else but in the patent data , by , for example , interlinking it to other knowledge sources from domain - speciﬁc knowledge graphs ( bio - pharma , chemistry or engineering , etc . ) or the linked open data cloud . Starting with publicly available datasets for patent mining and patent retrieval tasks such as classiﬁcation , passage retrieval , etc . we want to set the focus on developing enhanced methods for analysing patent texts by applying machine learn - ing and making use of implicit and explicit semantic information . Hence , the workshop series aims to motivate re - search and development in related areas in order to • explore IP applications with underlying ad - vanced NLP , TDM and artiﬁcial intelligence methods , e . g . applying Deep Learning ( DL ) for generating patent embeddings , etc . • apply enhanced machine or deep learning tech - nologies for the semantic enrichment and anal - ysis of big data of patent texts , e . g . to con - tribute to use cases such as technology analy - sis , trend analysis , semantic patent landscap - ing , competitor analysis , etc . • show proof of concepts for patent and tech - nology analysis use cases such as patent land - scaping , portfolio analysis , white and hotspot analysis , technology trends analysis , etc . • evaluate new visual user interface concepts for exploring and analysing large datasets of sci - entiﬁc texts There have been several text mining initiatives in terms of establishing tools and benchmark col - lections for widely used data such as news corpora , medical data , etc . However , a set of benchmark collections covering the diversity of the information needs of the IP industry , as for example detailed in [ 30 , 4 ] , is still missing . A long term goal of this series of workshops is therefore to encourage future research collaboration with focus on IP related data – patent documents , non - patent literature , court litigation cases – and combine it with more tradi - tional patent analytic resources , like meta - data , to be used for the above described tasks and use cases . 4 . State of the Art and the Impact of Train - ing and Test Data Patent text mining [ 48 , 24 , 22 , 36 ] includes re - search on the handling and the integration of mul - tiple and diverse information sources , since infor - mation related to IP for science and technology are siloed into various repositories consisting of laws , regulations , patents , court litigation , scientiﬁc pub - lications etc . 2 4 . 1 . Patent Retrieval As a research ﬁeld , Patent Retrieval belongs to domain - speciﬁc information retrieval , hence , rep - resents a sub discipline of information retrieval ( IR ) . The research focus of patent retrieval is to develop techniques and methods that eﬀectively and eﬃciently retrieve relevant patent documents or paragraphs in response to an information need [ 36 , 50 , 51 ] . IR has received a signiﬁcant amount of focus from researchers in diﬀerent computer sci - ence disciplines since many decades . In comparison , patent retrieval is poorly treated by the academic scientiﬁc communities , with periodic surges of such activities whenever patent data became available to researchers . It is only during the last 20 years that the challenges in patent retrieval have been a target for the research community [ 30 ] . On rea - son for this is that , compared to other types of text , the patent genre presents unique features such as lengthy documents ( multi - page ) , multi - modal documents ( e . g . image , text , algorithm and pro - gramming codes ) , multi - language , semi - structured , meta - data rich , stretching over a variety of tech - nologies ( heterogeneous ) . Answers to information needs in IP also vary from a complete multi - page application to a one - page inventor disclosure to just a few keywords [ 22 ] . In a scientiﬁc context patent retrieval was ﬁrst introduced in the NIIs NTCIR - 1 campaigns ( 2002 to 2007 ) [ 15 ] , followed by several initiatives that included patent retrieval as a research topic , e . g . Dutch Belgian Information Retrieval workshop [ 41 ] , ASPIRE [ 17 ] , Patent Information Retrieval ( PaIR ) , TREC - Chem ( TExt REtrieval Conference Chem - ical track ) [ 28 ] , and the Information Retrieval Facility Symposium and Conference ( 2008 - 2014 ) [ 42 , 29 ] . The largest academic research impact , in Europe , has been made by the CLEF - IP track , which was part of the Cross - Language Evaluation Forum ( CLEF ) . The CLEF - IP track was organized from 2009 to 2013 and included a variety of tasks ranging from image classiﬁcation , prior art search , and patent text classiﬁcation . 4 . 2 . Passage Retrieval In 2012 , CLEF - IP introduced the Patent Passage Retrieval task [ 33 ] . Given a patent application and selected claims in the document , the aim was to retrieve relevant documents and also extract those paragraphs ( passages ) from them that are found most relevant . Since CLEF - IP used mainly data released by the European Patent Oﬃce ( EPO ) , the relevance assessments were semi - automatically ex - tracted from EPO search reports . The passage retrieval task is very close in spirit with the work of patent examiners done during an invalidity or validity search : examiners need to identify both the prior art documents , as well as each speciﬁc paragraph within these documents considered to be Prior Art for speciﬁc claims in the patent application [ 18 , 36 ] . Patent Passage Re - trieval could be seen as a cross - over between ad - hoc document retrieval tasks and question answer - ing ( QA ) tasks . Concretely , in order to achieve good performance it is required that query for - mulations include automatic technical term ex - traction , followed by an advanced ad - hoc IR ap - proach . Furthermore , in order to narrow in on each relevant passage information extraction ( IE ) approaches needs to be considered as well . 4 . 3 . Enhanced Semantic Analysis and Patent Min - ing Segmenting the full text of patent documents ( e . g . patent descriptions [ 39 ] text , claims [ 16 ] ) is regarded an important step for the semantic struc - ture analysis of the patent texts . New approaches based on machine learning are increasingly used for a variety of tasks related to patent text mining and large - scale patent analytics [ 38 ] . Important exam - ples are trends analysis [ 47 ] , technology forecast - ing [ 43 ] , various clustering algorithms like reinforce - ment learning [ 10 ] , support vector clustering [ 49 ] , and matrix factorization [ 13 ] . In the last few years researchers started to apply Deep Learning methods to patent text mining tasks such as keyword extraction [ 21 ] , synonym extrac - tion [ 25 ] or patent classiﬁcation [ 12 ] . Tasks such as calculating patent similarity [ 37 ] , patent segmenta - tion [ 11 ] , and patent landscaping [ 3 ] can be consid - ered as important sub - tasks to be considered . In addition , various types of embedding [ 32 ] such as graph embedding [ 46 ] , word embedding have been applied to evaluating patent similarity [ 9 ] or text classiﬁcation tasks [ 44 ] . 4 . 4 . Benchmark Data and Patent Resources for Patent Mining Tasks After the CLEF - IP and the TREC - Chem evalu - ation campaigns , and the test collections resulting out of them , further eﬀorts to establish and up - date benchmark text collections have been made , the latest is the WPI collection [ 26 ] . 3 In the World Patent Information ( WPI ) jour - nal , own data collections are provided in order to support the objectives of the journal , to publish new research and insights covering a broad spec - trum of intellectual property information retrieval and patent analytics related practices and methods . The WPI journal editors together with the team at IFI CLAIMS Patent Services have put together a patent research collection , publicly available and for free , to foster scientiﬁc good practice : comparabil - ity , reproducibility , transparency and repeatability of experiments and results . The WPI collection is for this reason static . It will not be updated with new data . This decision was made in order to make sure that experimental results are traceable and due to improvements of the proposed mining / retrieval methods are due to algorithmic improvements and not due to changes in the dataset . The WPI collection complements existing test collections , which are vertical ( one do - main or one authority over many years ) . Compared to them , the WPI collection is horizontal : it in - cludes all technical domains from the major patent - ing authorities over the relatively short time span of two years . Other , industry driven initiatives to establish re - sources for patent text mining also aim to provide researchers with benchmark data for this area : • In October 2017 , Google launched several patent related data collections and services . Google provides the Google Patents Public Datasets 5 on BigQuery , with a collection of publicly accessible , connected database ta - bles for empirical analysis of the international patent system . The Google Patent Datasets can provide a solution to developing and an - swering search oriented questions . For in - stance , it is possible to formulate questions such as ”what percentage of the patents have more than one inventor ? ” or ”what funding does the government provide to promote in - novation in certain patent areas ? ” • Linked Open EP data 6 uses Uniform Resource Identiﬁers ( URIs ) to identify patent applica - tions , publications and other resources present 5 https : / / cloud . google . com / blog / products / gcp / google - patents - public - datasets - connecting - public - paid - and - private - patent - data 6 https : / / www . epo . org / searching - for - patents / data / linked - open - data . html in patent data . The URIs make it possible to link the data other datasets . The data set cov - ers the most relevant , but not all available bib - liographic data elements for patents and not all data elements from the CPC scheme . It also includes references to the full text publi - cation in PDF , HTML and XML format , which are stored on the European Publication Server . Linked Open EP data creates a public web of interlinked patent data from EPO and other data publishers that can be queried , retrieved and viewed using standardized web technolo - gies like HTTP , URI , RDF and SPARQL . A common problem in machine learning and par - ticularly in the patent domain is the creation of la - belled data ( i . e . training and testing data ) for a variety of search and analysis tasks . As available labelled corpora are either too small or not accessi - ble to the research community , we want to alleviate this situation with a three - year eﬀort . That is , we plan to target the creation of more datasets open to research and addressing diﬀerent patent text min - ing and patent text analysis applications with focus on Information Extraction ( IE ) , classiﬁcation , clus - tering , and to establish further datasets that require only semi - supervised training methods . Currently , the publicly available patent mining datasets involve only a few diﬀerent types of IR applications ( classiﬁcation , passage retrieval and prior art search 7 ) . In order to explore and sup - port other patent text mining and text analysis applications that originate from the diversity of IP experts’ information needs , we aim for the cre - ation of more IE - oriented datasets . The IE - oriented datasets will be designed for domain - speciﬁc termi - nology extraction , for example extraction of partic - ular token types like mathematical formula , chemi - cal compounds , quantity entity , sequences program - ming codes . These datasets will provide to the industry and the research community a variety of benchmark data , a kind of ’PatentPedia’ , which can sup - port diﬀerent types of question answering systems ranging from text - based to knowledge - based ap - proaches . Furthermore , a variety of patent re - trieval and analysis tasks such as technology anal - ysis , trend analysis , semantic patent landscaping , 7 For example see http : / / ifs . tuwien . ac . at / patentsemtech / data - sources . html 4 competitor analysis , etc . could be explored , devel - oped and evaluated . The eﬀort to establish these datasets will be un - dertaken as a community eﬀort with an annotation task . As organisers we intend to provide a small starting set , which is gradually improved and in - creased as the task is launched and running . A similar procedure has been explored in BioNLP and SemEval [ 19 ] successfully . During the ﬁrst workshop we used existing data , which , though small in size , allowed us to apply su - pervised and unsupervised methods to detect tech - nical terms [ 14 ] . For the coming years we plan de - ﬁne tasks that build on previous ones , with the aim of creating speciﬁc patent text sets of data where completing speciﬁc tasks is needed in order to ap - proach the next one . 5 . Impact and Expectations 5 . 1 . Target Audience The workshop is customised for the IP industry experts as well as for academic researchers . To at - tract the IP industry and especially expert users , we have been in contact with members of the CEPIUG ( Confederacy of European Patent Information User Groups ) in order to oﬀer Continuing Professional Development ( CPD ) points . For securing visibility and increase in research submissions and participation from both industry and academia , the authors of a selected set of ac - cepted papers are invited to submit extended ver - sions of their research to the virtual special issue of WPI , “Text Mining and Semantic Technologies in the Intellectual Property Domain” . This year the following papers have been promoted to the virtual special issue : • Deep Learning based Pipeline with Multichan - nel Inputs for Patent Classiﬁcation • Detecting Multi Word Terms in Patents the same way as Named Entities • Semantic Views - Interactive Hierarchical Ex - ploration for Patent Landscaping In the future we aim to span over diﬀerent sci - entiﬁc disciplines such as Economic [ 45 , 23 ] and So - cial Science [ 20 ] , which also have a long tradition of working with patent analytics , in particular on citation networks . Furthermore , we would like to involve , the Triz community Invention Innovation creativity and design , which has run their own con - ference since 2009 . We are working to engage na - tional and international patent oﬃces , such as the EPO , and companies active in the patent indus - try ( e . g . Legit , Patsnap , Landscaping Valuenex , Google Patent , to name a few ) and invite them to the workshop events . Our key speaker in the ﬁrst workshop in the series we invited a representative of the IP industry side . In our second , upcoming event , we plan to invite an academic key speaker , while in the third event we plan for a panel debate with participants from patent oﬃces , industry and academics . Mr . Anthony Trippe , the key speaker of the ﬁrst event , is Managing Director of Patinformatics , LLC . Patinformatics is an advisory ﬁrm specializ - ing in patent analytics and landscaping to support decision making for technology based businesses . In addition to operating Patinformatics , Mr . Trippe is also an Adjunct Professor of IP Management and Markets at Illinois Institute of Technology teach - ing a course on patent analysis , and landscapes for strategic decision making . He has written or con - tributed to IP related articles that have appeared in the Wall Street Journal , Forbes , The Washing - ton Post , and more than a dozen additional sources . Besides that , Mr Trippe has worked for a variety of organizations , in a number of diﬀerent capacities , including : P & G where he was responsible for evan - gelizing the use of patent analytics for business deci - sion , Aurigin Systems where he travelled the world working with companies of all sizes that use patent analytics for competitive advantage . 5 . 2 . How do we want to engage the patent expert to evaluate and assess our tools ? One of the key issues when developing domain - speciﬁc mining tools , especially tools requiring la - belled data and expert assessment , is to engage a suﬃcient number of domain - experts to establish a sizable corpora or benchmark collections . There - fore , for the participating patent experts , upon re - quest , we will issue a certiﬁcate statement which describes and documents the tasks they have been involved in , certiﬁcate signed by the head of the organisation committee . Within the certiﬁcation body of the International Standard Board for Qual - iﬁed Patent Information Professionals , the certi - ﬁed professional needs to engage in Continued Pro - fessional Development ( CPD ) on an annual basis . There are four types of group activities : 5 1 . Presenting at a conference and co - author a pa - per on patent - related topics , 2 . Participating in courses related to patent in - formation or patentable subject matter , 3 . Reading publication on patent information , 4 . Peer reviewing manuscripts or search reports , or attending patent information vendor , webi - nar . Within the PatentSemtTech workshop series there is ample opportunity to obtain credit for each of the group activities . Our workshop allows the IP professionals to participate as a reviewer , a presen - ter , or to learn about new emerging technology as well as design future use cases and contributed to establishing new benchmark collections within the ﬁeld of patent text mining . 6 . Organizing and Programme Committee 6 . 1 . Organizing Committee The organizing committee consists of persons with experience both in academic research and in close collaboration with experts in the IP domain . Two of the committee members have been key per - sons in organizing and running the CLEF - IP and TREC - Chem campaigns . • Dr . Hidir Aras , FIZ Karlsruhe , Germany • Linda Andersson , TU Wien & Artiﬁcial Re - searcher IT , Austria • Dr . Lei Zhang , FIZ Karlsruhe , Germany • Dr . Florina Piroi , TU Wien & Artiﬁcial Re - searcher IT , Austria • Prof . Dr . Allan Hanbury , TU Wien , Austria • Dr . Mihai Lupu , Data Science Studio , Re - search Studios Austria Forschungsgesellschaft , Austria 6 . 2 . Programme Committee We are grateful to the following people for provid - ing high quality reviews and helping the workshop organizers with the submission selection process : • Jian Wang , University of Leiden , Netherlands • Simone Ponzetto , University of Mannheim , Germany • Hans - Peter Zorn , inovex Gmbh , Karlsruhe , Germany • Catherine Faron Zucker , University of Nice , France • Ron Daniel , Elsevier Labs , USA • Natasa Varytimou , Reﬁnitiv , formerly Thom - son Reuters , UK • Paul Groth , University of Amsterdam , Nether - lands • Natterer Michael , Dennemeyer Octimine GmbH , Munich , Germany • Pedro Szekeli , USC Viterbi School of Engineer - ing , USA • Kobkaew Opasjumruskit , German Aerospace Center , Jena , Germany • Shariq Bashir , University of Islamabad , Pak - istan • Michail Salampasis , International Hellenic University , Greece • Siegfried Handschuh , University of St . Gallen , Switzerland • Agata Filipowska , Poznan University of Eco - nomics , Poland • Rene Hackl - Sommer , FIZ Karlsruhe , Germany • Richard Eckart de Castilho , TU Darmstadt , Germany • Joni Sayeler , Uppdragshuset Sverige AB , Swe - den • Mustafa Sofean , FIZ Karlsruhe , Germany • Christoph Hewel , Patent Attorney at Cabinet Beau de Lomnie , France • Sebastian Pado , University of Stuttgart , Ger - many • Parvaz Mahdabi , Swisscom , Switzerland • Gabriela Ferraro , Australian National Univer - sity , Australia • Wlodek Zadrozny , UNC Charlotte , USA • Bharathi Raja Chakravarthi , Insight Centre for Data Analytics , National University of Ire - land , Galway 7 . Conclusions The workshop organized this year addressed re - searchers from academics as well as industrial ex - perts from relevant domains and aimed to establish a two - way communication channel between both . The general feedback was very positive and partici - pants recommended keeping the good mix of scien - tiﬁc and practical presentations and the demos . The participating experts expressed that such an event was missing since a while and eﬀorts towards this direction are welcome by both - IP experts as well as academic researchers who supported the 6 workshop actively by , for example , providing data or participating in paper reviewing as part of the programme committee . The PatentSemTech workshop can be seen as a ﬁrst initiative to establish a patent data min - ing community and will be more than a one - day event per year . Our intention is to make it into an active community with webinars on relevant top - ics , training and assessment activities to promote patent data mining and creating benchmark data to address diﬀerent patent use cases and tasks . We plan to run the workshop for three years , and a selected set of peer - reviewed and accepted sci - entiﬁc papers will be invited to be published in a Virtual Special Issue ( VSI ) of the World Patent In - formation “Text Mining and Semantic Technologies in the Intellectual Property Domain” . Submissions to the VSI is possible also during the years after the workshop has taken place . In addition , it is planned to establish social media channels ( Twit - ter , LinkedIn ) in order to publish news related to the workshop and future activities . We recommend all interested researchers to have a look at our work - shop website , where we will update datasets and re - sources , or announce interesting results and events . References [ 1 ] Assad Abbas , Limin Zhang , Samee U . Khan , A literature review on the state - of - the - art in patent analysis , World Patent Information , Volume 37 , 2014 . [ 2 ] Aras , Hidir , Ren Hackl - Sommer , Michael Schwantner and Mustafa Sofean . Applications and Challenges of Text Mining with Patents . IPaMin @ KONVENS , 2014 . [ 3 ] Aaron Abood and Dave Feltenberger . 2018 . Automated patent landscaping . Artif . Intell . Law 26 , 2 ( June 2018 ) , 103 - 125 . [ 4 ] D . Alberts , C . Barcelon Yang , D . Fobare - DePonio , K . Koubek , S . Robins , M . Rodgers , E . Simmons , D . De - Marco . 2017 . Introduction to Patent Searching : Practical Experience and Requirements for Searching the Patent Spaces . In [ 27 ] . [ 5 ] L . Andersson , M . Lupu , J . Palotti , A . Hanbury , and A . Rauber . When is the time ripe for natural language pro - cessing for passage patent retrieval monitoring of vocab - ulary shifts over time . In Proceedings of the 25th ACM International on Conference on Information and Knowl - edge Management , CIKM 16 , 2016 . [ 6 ] L . Andersson , M . Lupu , Joo R . M . Palotti , F . Piroi , A . Hanbury , and A . Rauber . Insight to hyponymy lexical relation extraction in the patent genre versus other text genres . In Proceedings of the First Inter - national Workshop on Patent Mining and Its Appli - cations ( IPaMin 2014 ) co - located with Konvens 2014 , Hildesheim , Germany , October 6 - 7 , 2014 . , 2014 . [ 7 ] Anick , P . G . , M . Verhagen , and J . Pustejovsky . ”Identi - ﬁcation of Technology Terms in Patents . ” LREC . 2014 . [ 8 ] J . Alex , H . Schtze , and S . Brgmann . ”Unsupervised training set generation for automatic acquisition of tech - nical terminology in patents . ” Proceedings of COLING 2014 , the 25th international conference on computational linguistics : Technical Papers . 2014 . [ 9 ] Aras , H . ; Trker , R . ; Geiss , D . ; Milbradt , M . ; Sack , H . Get Your Hands Dirty : Evaluating Word2Vec Models for Patent Data , In Proc . of the 14th Int . Conf . on Seman - tic Systems ( SEMANTICS 2018 ) , P & D Track , CEUR workshop proceedings vol . 2198 , 2018 . [ 10 ] H . Beltz , A . Fueloep , R . R . Wadhwa , P . Erdi , From ranking and clustering of evolving networks to patent ci - tation analysis , in : Neural Networks 350 ( IJCNN ) , 2017 International Joint Conference on , IEEE . [ 11 ] Carvalho , Danilo & Nguyen , Minh - Le . ( 2017 ) . Eﬃcient Neural - based patent document segmentation with Term Order Probabilities . ESANN 2017 proceedings , Euro - pean Symposium on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks , Compu - tational Intelligence and Machine Learning . Bruges ( Bel - gium ) , 26 - 28 April 2017 . [ 12 ] Don , S & Min , Dugki . ( 2016 ) . Feature Selection for Automatic Categorization of Patent Documents . Indian Journal of Science and Technology . [ 13 ] R . Du , B . Drake , H . Park , Hybrid Clustering based on Content and Connection Structure using Joint Nonneg - ative Matrix Factorization , 2017 , arXiv : 1703 . 09646 . [ 14 ] T . Fink . Improving Multi Word Term Detection in the Patent Domain with Deep Learning . 2018 Master thesis . TU Wien [ 15 ] Fujii , M . Iwayama , and N . Kando . Introduction to the special issue on patent processing . Information Process - ing & Management , 43 ( 5 ) : 1149 – 1153 , 2007 . Patent Pro - cessing . [ 16 ] Hackl - Sommer , Rene ; Schwantner , Michael . Patent Claim Structure Recognition . Archives of Data Science , Series A , 2017 , v . 2 ( 1 ) , 15 [ 17 ] Hanbury , V . Zenz , and H . Berger . 1st international workshop on advances in patent information retrieval ( aspire10 ) . SIGIR Forum , 44 ( 1 ) : 1922 , August 2010 . [ 18 ] D . Hunt , L . Nguyen , and M . Rodgers . Patent Searching : Tools & Techniques . Wiley , 2007 . [ 19 ] N . Ide and J . Pustejovsky , eds . Handbook of Linguistic Annotation . Springer , 2017 . [ 20 ] A . B . Jaﬀe , S . R . Peterson , P . R . Portney and R . N . Stavins . 1995 . Environmental Regulation and the Com - petitiveness of U . S . Manufacturing : What Does the Ev - idence Tell Us ? In Journal of Economic Literature . Vol . ( 33 ) . No ( 1 ) . pages 132 - 163 . American Economic Associ - ation [ 21 ] Hu , Jie , Shaobo Li , Yong Yao , Liya Yu , Guanci Yang and Jianjun Hu . Patent Keyword Extraction Algorithm Based on Distributed Representation for Patent Classi - ﬁcation . Entropy 20 ( 2018 ) : 104 . Sunghae Jun , Sang - Sung Park , and Dong - Sik Jang . 2014 . Document clus - tering method using dimension reduction and support vector clustering to overcome sparseness . Expert Syst . Appl . 41 , 7 ( June 2014 ) , 3204 - 3212 . [ 22 ] J . Jrgens , C . Womser - Hacker , and T . Mandl . Modeling the interactive patent retrieval process : an adaptation of marchioninis information seeking model . In Fifth Infor - mation Interaction in Context Symposium , IIiX 14 , Re - gensburg , Germany , August 26 - 29 , 2014 , pages 247250 , New York , NY , USA , 2014 . [ 23 ] D . Franz , Kogler , G . Heimeriks and L . Leydesdorﬀ . 2018 Patent portfolio analysis of cities : statistics and 7 maps of technological inventiveness , In European Plan - ning Studies , Routledge , Vol . ( 26 ) , No ( 11 ) , pages 2256 - 2278 , Routledge [ 24 ] R . Krestel and P . Smyth . Recommending patents based on latent topics . In Proceedings of the 7th ACM Con - ference on Recommender Systems , RecSys 13 , pages 395398 , New York , NY , USA , 2013 . ACM . [ 25 ] A . Leeuwenberg , M . Vela , J . Dehdari , J . van Genabith . A Minimally Supervised Approach for Synonym Extrac - tion with Word Embeddings . The Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics volume 105 , Pages 111 - 142 , De Gruyter , Berlin , Germany , 4 / 2016 . [ 26 ] M . Lupu , L . Papariello , R . Alentorn , M . Baycroft , J . List , The WPI patent test collection , World Patent Infor - mation , Volume 56 , 2019 , Pages 78 - 85 , ISSN 0172 - 2190 . [ 27 ] Mihai Lupu , Katja Mayer , Noriko Kando , and Anthony J . Trippe . Current Challenges in Patent Information Re - trieval ( 2nd ed . ) . Springer Publishing Company , Incor - porated , 2017 . [ 28 ] M . Lupu , K . Mayer , J . Tait , and A . J . Trippe . Current Challenges in Patent Information Retrieval . Springer Publishing Company , Incorporated , 1st edition , 2011 . [ 29 ] M . Lupu , A . Hanbury , and A . Rauber . 4th interna - tional workshop on patent information retrieval ( pair11 ) . In Proceedings of the 20th ACM Conference on Informa - tion and Knowledge Management , CIKM 2011 , Glasgow , United Kingdom , October 24 - 28 , 2011 , pages 26232624 . [ 30 ] M . Lupu and A . Hanbury ( 2013 ) , ”Patent Retrieval” , Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval : Vol . 7 : No . 1 , pp 1 - 97 . [ 31 ] M . Lupu , J . Huang , and J . Zhu . Evaluation of chemi - cal information retrieval tools . In Current Challenges in Patent Information Retrieval . Springer , 2011 . [ 32 ] Mikolov , T . ; Sutskever , I . ; Chen , K . ; Corrado , G . S . ; Dean , J . Distributed Representations of Words and Phrases and their Compositionality . In Proceedings of the 27th Annual Conference on Neural Information Pro - cessing Systems ( NIPS ) , Lake Tahoe , NV , USA , 2013 . [ 33 ] F . Piroi , M . Lupu , and A . Hanbury . Passage retrieval starting from patent claims . A clef - ip 2013 task overview . In Working Notes for CLEF 2013 Conference , Valencia , Spain , September 23 - 26 , 2013 . [ 34 ] O . Nekhayenko . Eigennamenerkennung fr Technolo - gien . Implementierung und Evaluierung eines Proto - typs fr Patente , 2016 Master Thesis , Stiftung Universitt Hildesheim . [ 35 ] H . Menkge . Computer Aided Patent Processing : Natu - ral Language Processing , Machine Learning , and Infor - mation Retrieval . PhD Thesis Drexel University library 2018 . [ 36 ] W . Shalaby and W . Zadrozny . Patent retrieval : A lit - erature review . CoRR , abs / 1701 . 00324 , 2017 . [ 37 ] P . Sharma , R . Tripathi and R . C . Tripathi , ”Finding similar patents through semantic expansion , ” 2016 Inter - national Conference on Computer Communication and Informatics ( ICCCI ) , Coimbatore , 2016 , pp . 1 - 5 . [ 38 ] Sofean M . , Aras H . , Alrifai A . ( 2018 ) A Workﬂow - Based Large - Scale Patent Mining and Analytics Framework . In - formation and Software Technologies , In : Damaeviius R . , Vasiljevien G . ( eds ) Information and Software Tech - nologies . ICIST 2018 . Communications in Computer and Information Science , vol 920 . Springer , Cham . [ 39 ] Sofean , M . Automatic Segmentation of Big Data of Patent Texts in : Proceedings of the International Con - ference on Big Data Analytics and Knowledge Discovery . DaWaK 2017 . Springer pp 343 - 351 . [ 40 ] S . Taduri , Gloria T . Lau , Kincho H . Law , and Jay P . Kesan . A patent system ontology for facilitating retrieval of patent related information . In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Theory and Practice of Elec - tronic Governance , ICEGOV , 2012 . [ 41 ] J . Tait , M . Lupu , H . Berger , G . Roda , M . Dittenbach , A . Pesenhofer , E . Graf , and van Rijsbergen K . Patent search : An important new test bed for ir . In The Dutch - Belgian Information Retrieval Workshop , 2009 . [ 42 ] J . Tait . Information retrieval facility symposium in Vi - enna . SIGIR Forum , 42 ( 1 ) : 67 , 2008 . [ 43 ] C . V . Trappey , H . Y . Wu , F . Taghaboni - Dutta , and A . J . C . Trappey , Using patent data for technology forecast - ing : China RFID patent analysis , Advanced Engineering Informatics , 2011 . [ 44 ] Trker , R . ; Zhang , L . ; Koutraki , M . ; Sack H . The Less Is More for Text Classiﬁcation” , In Proc . of the 14th Int . Conf . on Semantic Systems ( SEMANTICS 2018 ) P & D Track , CEUR workshop proceedings vol . 2198 . [ 45 ] B . Van Looy , J . Callaert and K . Debackere . 2006 . Pub - lication and patent behavior of academic researchers : Conﬂicting , reinforcing or merely co - existing ? . Research Policy . Vol . ( 35 ) , No ( 4 ) , pages 596 - 608 , [ 46 ] Wu , T . ; Zhang , D . ; Zhang , L . ; Qi , G . Cross - Lingual Taxonomy Alignment with Bilingual Knowledge Graph Embeddings , 7th Joint International Semantic Technol - ogy Conference ( JIST 2017 ) , Cold Coast , QLD , Aus - tralia , November 10 - 12 , 2017 . [ 47 ] J . Yoon and K . Kim , TrendPerceptor . A property func - tion based technology intelligence system for identifying technology trends from patents , Expert Systems with Applications , 2012 . [ 48 ] H . Yu , S . Taduri , J . Kesan , G . Lau , and H . Law Kincho . Retrieving information across multiple , related domains based on user query and feedback : Application to patent laws and regulations . In Proceedings of the 4th Interna - tional Conference on Theory and Practice of Electronic Governance , ICEGOV 10 , pages 143151 , New York , NY , USA , 2010 . [ 49 ] S . Jun , S . - S . Park , D . - S . Jang , Document clustering method using dimension reduction and support vector clustering to overcome sparseness , Expert Systems with Applications , 2014 . [ 50 ] L . Zhang , L . Li , and T . Li . Patent mining : A survey . SIGKDD Explor . Newsl . 16 ( 2 ) : 119 , May 2015 . [ 51 ] L . Zhang . An Integrated Framework for Patent Anal - ysis and Mining . PhD thesis , Florida International Uni - versity , USA , 2016 . 8 Text Mining to Measure Novelty and Diffusion of Technological Inventions Sam Arts * Jianan Hou * * Juan Carlos Gomez * * *  * Department of Management , Strategy and Innovation , Faculty of Economics and Business , KU Leuven , Korte Nieuwstraat 33 , 2000 Antwerp , Belgium ( e - mail : sam . arts @ kuleuven . be ) . * * Department of Management , Strategy and Innovation , Faculty of Economics and Business , KU Leuven , Korte Nieuwstraat 33 , 2000 Antwerp , Belgium ( e - mail : jianan . hou @ kuleuven . be ) . * * * Department of Electronics Engineering , University of Guanajuato Campus Irapuato - Salamanca , Carretera Salamanca - Valle de Santiago , Salamanca , Mexico ( e - mail : jc . gomez @ ugto . mx ) Abstract : Traditional measures of patent novelty and diffusion mostly rely on patent classification or citation information . Given that inventive ideas are embedded in the text of patent documents , our study validates different alternative natural language processing techniques to measure the novelty and diffusion of technological inventions . As a validation test , we collect a set of patents linked to famous awards such as the Nobel prize . Overall , text - based measures outperform other commonly - used novelty and diffusion metrics . Keywords : patent , text , natural language processing , novelty , impact , indicator  1 . INTRODUCTION The increasing number of granted patents echoes the prosperity of innovation activities . Nevertheless , the distribution of patent quality is highly skewed as most inventions are categorized as small incremental advances to existing technologies with little impact on subsequent invention and economic growth ( Nelson and Winter , 1982 ; Henderson and Clark , 1990 ) . To assess the novelty and diffusion of patents , prior studies mainly rely on patent classification or citation information ( e . g . Trajtenberg 1990 ; Fleming , 2001 ; Dahlin and Behrens , 2005 ) . The validity of traditional measures have been questioned by recent studies ( McNamee , 2013 ; Arts et al . , 2018 ; Kuhn and Thompson , 2019 ) , and one of the most obvious limitations is that neither patent classifications nor citations can perfectly mirror the technological content of the patent . In this paper , we focus on the technological content of patents and develop new patent novelty and diffusion measures by means of natural language processing techniques . To do so , we collect US patents granted up to 2018 and identify the first occurrence of a new word or word combination to pinpoint the origin of new technologies . The reuse frequency of new words and word combinations are used as indicators of technology diffusion . To examine the validity of the new measures , we collect a sample of patents awarded by prestigious prizes , such as Nobel Prize and A . M . Turing Award . 2 . IDENTIFYING THE ORIGIN AND DIFFUSION OF NEW TECHNOLOGIES We collect titles , abstracts , and claims of US utility patents granted between 1969 and 2018 from the USPTO , the patent claims research dataset ( Marco et al . , 2016 ) , and PATSTAT . For all patents , we concatenate the titles , abstracts , and claims , lowercase the text , tokenize words , and remove punctuation , words composed of numbers only , one - digit words , words which appear in only one patent , and natural stop words . Then , we stem the remaining keywords and remove duplicate stemmed keywords from the same patent . Finally , the technical content of each patent is summarized by a collection of unique keywords . Based on the processed unique words list , we trace the origin of new technologies by identifying the first patent introducing a given word or word combination . All patents are sorted by filing date , and keywords from patents filed before 1980 are used to compile the baseline dictionary ( Balsmeier et al . , 2018 ) . To assess the diffusion of new technology , we count the number of subsequent US patents reusing the given new word or word combination . Finally , for each patent , we calculate the total number of new words and new word combinations as indicator of novelty and aggregate reuse frequency of all new words and new word combinations as indicators of diffusion . Published in " Proceedings of The 1 st Workshop on Patent Text Mining and Semantic Technologies ( PatentSemTech 2019 ) " , Eds . L . Andersson , H . Aras , F . Piroi , A . Hanbury , PatentSemTech 2019 , 12 September 2019 , Karlsruhe , Germany . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 34726 / pst2019 . 2 | © Authors 2019 . CC BY 4 . 0 License . 9 We calculate several commonly used novelty and diffusion measures and compare their performance with the new text - based measures . First , we calculate new subclass combinations as the number of previously uncombined pairs of patent subclasses and weight it by the total number of subsequent patents reusing the focal new subclass combinations to generate a measure of diffusion ( Fleming et al . , 2007 , Arts & Veugelers , 2014 ) . Similarly , we count the number of previously uncombined pairs of cited patents and count the number of future patents citing the same two patents ( Arts and Fleming , 2018 ) . By examining the technological diversity of cited and citing patents , we calculate originality as one minus the Herfindahl index based on classes of cited patents , and generality as one minus the Herfindahl index based on classes of citing patents ( Trajtenberg et al . , 1997 ) . Finally , we count forward citations as the number of citations received by the focal patent within 10 years ( Trajtenberg , 1990 ) . 3 . VALIDATION To assess the ability of the new text - based measures , we collect a set of patents with arguably high novelty and diffusion from seven prestigious prizes ( Carpenter et al . , 1981 ; Arts et al , 2013 ) , namely Nobel Prize , Lasker Award , A . M . Turing Award , National Inventor Hall of Fame , National Medal of Technology and Innovation , Benjamin Franklin Medal , and Bower Award . Given that most awards ( except National Inventors Hall of Fame ) do not provide the patent numbers of awarded inventions , we manually match each awarded invention to US patents by the name of laureate , technical description of the awarded invention , year of discovery and laureate’s affiliation . For each awarded patent , we select one control patent based on text similarity and approximate filing date ( Arts et al . , 2018 ) . First , we run t tests to compare the means of the different measures for the award and control patents . Award patents score significantly higher on all measures , except for originality and new citation combination . New word combinations show the strongest discriminating power . Subsequently , we run logit regressions to predict the likelihood of being an award patent . New word combinations strongly dominates other measures in distinguishing awarded patents from control patents . 4 . CONCLUSION We develop new text mining techniques to measure the novelty and diffusion of technological inventions in the population of U . S patents . Whereas prior studies predominantly rely on patent classification or citations , we focus on the technical content of patents . By a validation test , we show that text - based measures outperform traditional measures . We will provide open access to all code and data for all US utility patents granted before May 2018 . REFERENCES Arts , S . , Appio , F . P . , & Van Looy , B . ( 2013 ) . Inventions shaping technological trajectories : do existing patent indicators provide a comprehensive picture ? Scientometrics , 97 ( 2 ) , 397 - 419 . Arts , S . , & Veugelers , R . ( 2014 ) . Technology familiarity , recombinant novelty , and breakthrough invention . Industrial and Corporate Change , 24 ( 6 ) , 1215 - 1246 . Arts , S . , Cassiman , B . & Gomez , J . C . , ( 2018 ) . Text matching to measure patent similarity . Strategic Management Journal , 39 ( 1 ) , 62 - 84 . Arts , S . & Fleming , L . ( 2018 ) . Paradise of novelty - or loss of human capital ? Exploring new fields and inventive output , Organization Science , 29 ( 6 ) , 989 - 1236 . Balsmeier , B . , Assaf , M . , Chesebro , T . , Fierro , G . , Johnson , K . , Johnson , S . , Li , G . , Luck , S . , O ' Reagan , D . , Yeh , B . , Zang , G . & Fleming , L . ( 2018 ) . Machine learning and natural language processing on the patent corpus : data , tools , and new measures . Journal of Economics & Management Strategy , 27 ( 3 ) , 535 - 553 . Carpenter , M . P . , Narin , F . & Woolf , P . ( 1982 ) . Citation rates to technologically important patents , World Patent Information , 3 ( 4 ) , 160 - 163 . Dahlin , K . B . , Behrens . D . M . , ( 2005 ) , When is an invention really radical ? defining and measuring technological radicalness , Research Policy , 34 , 717 - 737 . Fleming , L . ( 2001 ) . Recombinant uncertainty in technological search . Management Science , 47 ( 1 ) , 117 - 132 . Fleming , L . , Mingo , S . & Chen , D . ( 2007 ) . Collaborative brokerage , generative creativity , and creative success , Administrative Science Quarterly , 52 ( 3 ) , 443 - 475 . Henderson , R . M . , Clark , K . B . , ( 1990 ) . Architectural innovation : The reconfiguration of existing product technologies and the failure of established firms . Administrative Science Quarterly , 35 ( 1 ) , 9 – 30 . Kuhn , J . M . , Thompson , N . C . , ( 2019 ) , How to measure and draw causal inferences with patent scope . International Journal of the Economics of Business , 26 ( 1 ) , 5 - 38 . Marco , A . C . , Sarnoff , J . D . & deGrazia , C . A . ( 2016 ) . Patent claims and patent scope , USPTO Economic Working Paper No . 2016 - 04 . McNamee , R . C . , ( 2013 ) , Can’t see the forest for the leaves : Similarity and distance measures for hierarchical taxonomies with a patent classification example , Research Policy , 42 ( 4 ) , 855 - 873 . Nelson , R . , Winter , S . , ( 1982 ) , An evolutionary theory of economic change . MA : Harvard University Press . Thompson P & Fox - Kean M . ( 2005 ) . Patent citations and the geography of knowledge spillovers : a reassessment . American Economic Review : 450 - 460 . Trajtenberg , M . ( 1990 ) . A penny for your quotes : Patent citations and the value of innovations . The RAND Journal of Economics , 21 ( 1 ) , 172 - 187 . Trajtenberg , M . , Henderson , R . & Jaffe , A . ( 1997 ) . University versus corporate patents : A window on the Basicness of invention , Economics of Innovation and New Technology , 5 : 1 , 19 - 50 . Uzzi , B . , Mukherjee , S . , Stringer , M . & Jones , B . , ( 2013 ) . Atypical combinations and scientific impact . Science , 342 ( 6157 ) , 468 - 472 . 10 Detecting Multi Word Terms in Patents the same way as Named Entities Tobias Fink a , Linda Andersson b and Allan Hanbury c a TU Wien , tobias . fink @ tuwien . ac . at b TU Wien and Artificial Researcher IT GmbH , linda . andersson @ tuwien . ac . at c TU Wien , allan . hanbury @ tuwien . ac . at Keywords : deep learning , multi word term , patent IR , named entity recognition A B S T R A C T In English patent document information retrieval , Multi Word Terms ( MWTs ) are an important factor in determining how relevant a patent document is for a particular search query . Detecting the correct boundaries for these MWTs is no trivial task and often complicated by the special writing style of the patent domain . In this paper we describe a method for detecting MWTs in patent sentences based on a method for detecting technical named entities using deep learning . On our annotated dataset of 22 patents , our method achieved an average precision of 0 . 75 , an average recall of 0 . 74 and an average F1 score of 0 . 74 . Further , we argue for the use of domain specific word embedding resources and suggest that our model mostly learns whether individual words should be included in MWTs or not . Introduction Domain speciﬁc terminology and technical language of - ten play a key role when determining whether a particular patent document is relevant for a particular search query in Patent Information Retrieval ( IR ) . In English , technical terms of this domain speciﬁc terminology are often composed of multiple words making them Multi Word Terms ( MWTs ) , such as “blood cell count” . The meaning of a MWT can be diﬀerent from the combined meaning of the individual words , which makes it important to detect MWTs as units . When identifying MWTs important words that contribute to the technical nature of the term need to be included and non - technical words need to be excluded . Whether an individual word is an important part of the MWT is not always obvi - ous to the non - expert and might depend on the context of the patent . For example , a “shiny appearance” can be a neces - sary piece of information in the context of baking products but might be a subjective addition by the author in any other context ( see [ 4 ] ) . New MWTs are frequently introduced in the patent domain , be it because of new technology / new concepts that need new MWTs to describe them or be it be - cause of paraphrasing of existing concepts so that the used MWTs refer to a concept more abstractly to widen the scope of a patent claim [ 6 ] . As a result , some MWTs that deﬁne key - concepts of a technology do not occur very frequently in a patent corpus . In this paper we present a method for detecting MWTs in patent sentences inspired by deep learn - ing methods for detecting keyphrase named entities in scien - tiﬁc text ( See [ 1 ] ) . We compare the performance of various model components using a dataset of 22 patents with anno - tated MWTs . Further , we provide a qualitative analysis of the model performance by looking at the non - training data prediction errors . 2 . Multi Word Term Extraction Since technical terms are often Noun Phrases ( NP ) ( [ 5 ] ) , many methods ( such as [ 3 ] ) require Part - of - Speech ( PoS ) tagging to detect MWTs . However , [ 2 ] note that due to the unique writing style in the patent domain the quality of PoS tagging patent text is problematic , which is why we opt to use a method that does not require PoS tagging to work . We conduct our experiments on a small dataset of 22 patent documents randomly selected from the CLEF - IP 2013 Topic patent document set . For this dataset we manually annotate the MWT boundaries ( i . e . the MWT start and end indices ) as they appear in the plain text patent document . Sentences are split into word - token sequences and each word is also split into a sequence of 32 characters . In total , our dataset con - sists of 232 , 065 word tokens , 10 , 337 sentences , and 19 , 465 MWT instances from a dictionary of 5 , 099 MWTs . The av - erage MWT dictionary size per patent is 241 , while the stan - dard deviation of the MWT dictionary size is 335 . Following the method described in [ 1 ] , we create a MWT - model architecture ( Figure 1 ) that is designed to transform an input sentence represented as a sequence of words into a BILOU encoded output sequence of labels representing the MWTs in the sentence . The architecture consists of the fol - lowing components : • Word Embedding Component : consists of a pre - trained word vector which is concatenated to a char - acter representation produced by a small Character - CNN component . We compare domain speciﬁc word embeddings with general purpose word embeddings as well as the impact of character representations . • LSTM Component : consists of two Bi - directional LSTM layers . • Scoring Component : produces a sequence of label score vectors , containing a score for each BILOU la - bel . • CRF Component : takes the sequence of label score vectors and predicts the most likely label sequence . The predicted label sequence is converted to a predic - tion of MWT boundaries , which are then compared to the 9 Published in " Proceedings of The 1 st Workshop on Patent Text Mining and Semantic Technologies ( PatentSemTech 2019 ) " , Eds . L . Andersson , H . Aras , F . Piroi , A . Hanbury , PatentSemTech 2019 , 12 September 2019 , Karlsruhe , Germany . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 34726 / pst2019 . 3 | © Authors 2019 . CC BY 4 . 0 License . An extended version has been submitted to the World Patent Information Journal - Virtual Special Issue : Text Mining and Semantic Technologies in the Intellectual Property domain . 1 1 1 . Detecting Multi Word Terms in Patents the same way as Named Entities Figure 1 : The complete architecture of the MWT model . ground truth MWT boundaries . To prevent model overﬁt - ting we employ early stopping : we keep 10 % of our training set patents as validation set and stop training if the validation set F1 score does not improve for a set number of epochs . To measure the performance when detecting MWTs in patent texts , we calculate the precision , recall and F1 score of the model predictions . A MWT prediction counts as a True Pos - itive only if the start and end boundaries exactly match the ground truth boundaries . Further , we provide a qualitative analysis of the model’s performance , in particular with re - spect to prediction errors and their possible causes . 3 . Results Our experiments show that using word embeddings pre - trained on the patent domain outperforms the use of word embeddings pre - trained on Wikipedia and results in an av - erage precision of 0 . 75 , an average recall of 0 . 74 and an av - erage F1 score of 0 . 74 . In fact , it is necessary to use do - main speciﬁc word embeddings paired with a character rep - resentation produced by the Character - CNN component to perform better than a simple Noun Phrase ﬁlter that just an - notates all Noun Phrases as MWTs . Further , we investigate the errors that are made during pre - diction to get a better idea how the model could be improved . Going through the sentences and the predictions of our best model revealed that the model misses some MWTs by leav - ing out some words that should be attributed a technical na - ture , such as “distributed” . This out - of - vocabulary problem might be the result of a too small training set . Sometimes , the model also adds words to MWTs that should not be included , such as non - technical words containing the sub - strings ’ac - tiv’ and ’ing’ . However , these sub - strings also frequently appear in words that are part of true MWTs , which explains the model’s behaviour . 4 . Conclusion Our experiments suggest that a small dataset of only 22 patents results in an out - of - vocabulary problem and that both a patent speciﬁc word embedding resource as well as char - acter representations of words are needed to perform bet - ter than basic NP - Filtering . The network appears to learn whether or not individual words or character sequences should be attributed a technical nature , adding them to MWTs if they appear in a MWT context during training or leaving them out if they do not . The same word being included in one MWT but excluded from other MWTs was almost never observed . By increasing the dataset size it might be possible to re - duce the out - of - vocabulary problem in future work . Further - more , adding additional components , such as a gazetteer or pre - trained language model component , might also improve model performance . References [ 1 ] Ammar , W . , Peters , M . , Power , R . , Bhagavatula , C . , 2017 . The AI2 systematSemEval - 2017Task10 ( ScienceIE ) : semi - supervisedend - to - end entity and relation extraction . nucleus 2 , e2 . URL : https : / / pdfs . semanticscholar . org / 2264 / e14e35dc5a3db93437bc408a03171af8c59d . pdf . [ 2 ] Andersson , L . , Lupu , M . , Palotti , J . , Hanbury , A . , Rauber , A . , 2016 . When is the Time Ripe for Natural Language Processing for Patent Passage Retrieval ? , in : Proceedings of the 25th ACM International on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management , ACM . pp . 1453 – 1462 . URL : http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 2983858 . [ 3 ] Anick , P . G . , Verhagen , M . , Pustejovsky , J . , 2014 . Identiﬁcation of Technology Terms in Patents . , in : LREC , pp . 2008 – 2014 . URL : http : / / www . lrec - conf . org / proceedings / lrec2014 / pdf / 701 _ Paper . pdf . [ 4 ] van Dulken , S . , 2014 . Do you know English ? The challenge of the English language for patent searchers . World Patent Information 39 , 35 – 40 . [ 5 ] Justeson , J . S . , Katz , S . M . , 1995 . Technical terminology : some lin - guistic properties and an algorithm for identiﬁcation in text . Natural language engineering 1 , 9 – 27 . [ 6 ] Nanba , H . , Kamaya , H . , Takezawa , T . , Okumura , M . , Shinmori , A . , Tanigawa , H . , 2009 . Automatic translation of scholarly terms into patent terms , in : Proceedings of the 2nd international workshop on Patent information retrieval , ACM . pp . 21 – 24 . 12 Binary Patent Classiﬁcation Methods for Few Annotated Samples Benjamin Meindl a , Ingrid Ott b , e , Ulrich Zierahn c , d a University of Lisbon b Karlsruhe Institute of Technology ( KIT ) c ZEW Mannheim d CESifo Network e IfW Kiel Abstract In this paper , we develop binary patent classiﬁcation algorithms for ambiguous concepts and small sample sizes . These are particularly useful for economic questions , which often require binary classiﬁcation for implementing ambiguous and subjective concepts , where human classiﬁcation is time - consuming , so that sample sizes are small . This covers examples such as whether workers are susceptible to automation or not , or whether a device is an automat or not . We compare the performance of naive Bayes , support vector machine , random forest and k - nearest neighbor classiﬁers with a the spaCy convolutional neural network ( CNN ) model , as well as spaCy CNN model pre - trained with patent data . The results show overall highest accuracy for the CNN models , with a signiﬁcantly improved performance through pre - training . Our analysis suggests that the spaCy pre - trained CNN model provides a highly accurate NLP model , feasible for implementation without extensive computation capacity required . Pre - training was particularly beneﬁcial for small sample sizes . Already 100 labeled patents lead to an accuracy of 77 . 2 % . The low sample size required , may encourage researchers in various ﬁelds to use manually labeled patent data , for evaluating their speciﬁc question . Keywords : patent classiﬁcation , small sample size , convolutional neural network , language model pre - training , fast pre - training 1 . Introduction New technologies play a key role for economic de - velopment and wealth [ 1 ] . This covers a large and cur - rently very active debate on the e ﬀ ects of automation technologies on the labor market [ 2 , 3 ] . The economic 5 debate often relies on binary classiﬁcations to analyze the e ﬀ ects of new technologies on the economy . For ex - ample , economists study whether technological change refers to automation or not ( e . g . [ 4 ] ) , whether workers are susceptible or non - susceptible to automation ( e . g . 10 [ 5 , 6 ] ) , how innovation vs . imitation a ﬀ ects the econ - omy ( e . g . [ 7 ] ) , or the role of process vs . product inno - vations for ﬁrms ( e . g . [ 8 ] ) . Patent texts are well rec - ognized indicators to describe the technological state of the art . As such , patents contain relevant information 15 to measure the mentioned concepts , e . g . , by classify - ing patents that refer to automats vs . non - automats [ 4 ] . This is often complex due to the ambiguity of the con - cepts and the similarity of patents that refer to distinct categories . Being able to assign patents to unique cate - 20 gories allows linking them to other economic data . Until now there only exist few and very broad concordances that allow assigning patents either to technologies [ 9 ] or to industries [ 10 ] . But these classiﬁcations are rather broad . 25 In this paper , we compare binary patent classiﬁers , which may be used for analyzing technological change . The main challenge not only lies in the complexity and ambiguity of the concepts , but also in the sample size . Sample sizes are often small , because human coders of - 30 ten require signiﬁcant time for classifying such cases . These algorithms may be applied to other cases with complex and ambiguous binary classes and few train - ing data . The rest of this paper is organized as follows : Sec - 35 tion 2 provides a description of the underlying patent data and Section 3 our machine learning algorithms . We present and discuss our results in Sections 4 . Section 5 concludes . 13 Published in " Proceedings of The 1 st Workshop on Patent Text Mining and Semantic Technologies ( PatentSemTech 2019 ) " , Eds . L . Andersson , H . Aras , F . Piroi , A . Hanbury , PatentSemTech 2019 , 12 September 2019 , Karlsruhe , Germany . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 34726 / pst2019 . 4 | © Authors 2019 . CC BY 4 . 0 License . 2 . Patent Data 40 We aim at developing a classiﬁer which is able to han - dle cases with high ambiguity / large overlap . Addition - ally , it should provide su ﬃ cient precision even with low numbers of examples , as hand - classiﬁcation is costly when human coders have to read large parts of a patent 45 to classify it . In order to develop algorithms which are suited for such cases , we focus on data which contains a binary outcome variable with ambiguous classes . In particular , we rely on patent data , which is particularly suited to study technological change . Moreover , we 50 focus on two selected cooperative patent classiﬁcation ( CPC ) classes as our outcome variable to analyze a bi - nary outcome . We focus on two CPC classes which are potentially hard to di ﬀ erentiate for an algorithm in or - der to train algorithms which are suited for ambiguous 55 cases . We motivate the choice of our patent sample by the recent interest in robot technologies and the widespread interest this technology ﬁeld receives in current public and economic debate ( e . g . , [ 11 , 12 , 13 ] ) . The United 60 States patent classiﬁcation ( USPC ) class 901 - robot - has been mapped to the CPC with the most recent up - date being from 2012 1 . Most statistically relevant CPC classes related to the USPC class 901 are G 05D , A 61B , G 05B , B 25J , B 23K , B 06B , and G 01N . 65 Most similar from a technological perspective are CPC classes G 05B and G 05D . 2 We thus restrict our sample to the two sub - classes G 05D and G 05B and use these two classes as a natural delineation to train bi - nary classiﬁers . G 05D refers to systems for controlling 70 or regulating non - electric variables , e . g . , for welding , pressure control , and so on . G 05B relates to control and regulating systems which are “clearly more gener - ally applicable” . The fact that G 05B refers to systems which are more generally applicable , whereas G 05D 75 refers to those that control or regulate only non - electric variables , creates a certain ambiguity . Such an abiguity is often present in the economic examples noted above : Without a su ﬃ cient training it is often hard to assess for a human , whether a patent is su ﬃ ciently generally ap - 80 plicable to be classiﬁed as G 05B instead of G 05D . This challenge is similar to the economic samples described in the introduction , such as [ 4 ] who deﬁne an automat as a device that carries out a process independently . Their classiﬁcation task ( i . e . , automats vs . non - automats ) in - 85 volves ambiguity , as devices typically require at least 1 USPC has been deprecated in favor of CPC . 2 compare https : / / www . uspto . gov / web / patents / classiﬁcation / cpc / pdf / us901tocpc . pdf . some kind of human involvement , so that the interpre - tation of independence remains a subjective assessment of the human coders . Another objective of the algorithm is to achieve high 90 accuracy with low sample data , as hand - classiﬁcation is costly when human coders have to read large parts of a patent to classify a patent . [ 4 ] , for example , build their analysis of patents describing “automats” on 560 hand classiﬁed patents . We will compare our algorithms for 95 di ﬀ erent sample sizes , to evaluate requirements on sam - ple sizes for potential annotation tasks . We start with the smallest sample size of 100 patents only , which may be mainly relevant for early validation of the feasibility of an idea , and as an input for active learning , which is an 100 early training of the model to select further patents for more e ﬃ cient classiﬁcation . Next , we include datasets with 250 and 500 patents . We expect 500 patents to be a potential minimum sample size for analysis , e . g . , sim - ilar to [ 4 ] . Finally we build larger datasets of 1 , 500 and 105 5 , 000 patents , to evaluate the beneﬁt of higher invest - ment of resources for annotation . We draw our sample data from the USPTO - 2m patent abstract dataset [ 14 ] , which is commonly used for patent classiﬁcation benchmarking . For each dataset , we draw 110 50 % each G 05D and G 05B examples , whereas patents with both labels are considered as G 05D . For evalua - tion , we use 250 randomly drawn patents of each cate - gory . 3 . Patent Classiﬁcation Algorithms 115 In our analysis , we compare di ﬀ erent approaches for patent classiﬁcation . [ 4 ] use a multinominal naive Bayes ( MNB ) algorithm to identify patents describing an “automat . ” Based on 560 manual annotations , they achieve a correct prediction of 80 % of patents . One 120 valuable feature of MNB is the ability to interpret re - sults . [ 4 ] , for example , extract tokens typical for “au - tomats . ” Support vector machines ( SVM ) may outper - form Naive Bayes [ 15 , 16 ] or other approaches such as k - nearest neighbor [ 17 ] for text classiﬁcation , and also 125 allow for feature extraction . [ 18 ] performed best at the ALTA 2018 patent classiﬁcation task , using a method based on SVMs . Further approaches for patent classiﬁcation are based on neural network ( NN ) models [ 19 ] . [ 20 , 14 ] describe 130 the potentially high precision of NNs for patent classi - ﬁcation and [ 21 ] ﬁnd that they may outperform SVM , particularly for shorter texts . Some recent advances in the ﬁeld of natural language processing rely on pre - training and ﬁne - tuning NN models ( e . g . , BERT [ 22 ] , 135 ULMFiT [ 23 ] ) . [ 24 ] outperformed previous approaches 14 of patent classiﬁcation using patent data to pre - train a BERT convolutional neural network ( CNN ) model . Pre - training models such as BERT require extensive computational resources . Therefore , [ 25 , 26 ] describe 140 alternative models , achieving a signiﬁcant reduction in computational resource requirements with nearly sim - ilar performance . A similar model , called Language Modelling with Approximate Outputs ( LMAO ) is im - plemented in the spaCy library 3 . 145 For our analysis , we want to a compare binary classi - ﬁcation performance of a pre - trained CNN with alterna - tive approaches . Naive Bayes has been used as a base - line for similar e ﬀ orts [ 27 ] . We use a Bernoulli naive Bayes ( BernoulliNB ) classiﬁer as a baseline for our 150 work , which accounts particularly for the binary deci - sion . Further , we evaluate an SVM based model , which has been successfully used for various patent classiﬁca - tion tasks . Also , we implement a random forest classi - ﬁer ( RandomForest ) and a k - nearest neighbor classiﬁer 155 ( k - NN ) for comparison . BernoulliNB , SVM , RandomForest , and K - NN clas - siﬁers are implemented using Scikit - learn . Therefore , we lemmatize words ( using NLTK 4 ) , remove stop - words , and extract the most relevant words per doc - 160 ument through term frequency - inverse document fre - quency scores ( TF - IDF ) , using unigrams as well as bi - grams . [ 28 ] ﬁnds that TF - IDF analysis using bigrams ( instead of unigrams only ) may lead to higher accuracy , as it accounts for complex multi - word expressions . We 165 use the Scikit - learn model selection , GridSearchCV , for optimization of model parameters . We implement a CNN based classiﬁer using spaCy , which is a library aiming at providing a combination of high accuracy and speed . This is especially relevant 170 for patent classiﬁcation , as it enables research on large patent data sets with reasonable resources . Further , it allows resource e ﬃ cient LMAO pre - training for patent speciﬁc context . Our analysis includes two spaCy based approaches . 175 First , we use the default large English language model . Second , we use the same model pre - trained with patent data ( we refer to it as spaCy pre ) . To assure high contex - tual relevance of pre - training , we use the 25 , 212 patents in the class G 05 from the USPTO - 2m dataset . The al - 180 gorithm ran 200 passes over the dataset until the loss function did not further decrease . In addition , we run the same models with the software prodigy 5 . Prodigy 3 https : / / spacy . io / 4 https : / / www . nltk . org 5 https : / / prodi . gy builds on spaCy and allows for straightforward imple - mentation of natural language processing analysis and 185 annotation . It provides a simple API requiring only ba - sic knowledge in programming . We want to evaluate whether using the tools compromises performance com - pared to a manual implementation of spaCy . 4 . Results and Discussion 190 A comparison of the di ﬀ erent algorithms shows that the pre - trained CNN model outperforms remaining models ( see table 1 ) for each sample size . The regular spaCy model performs second best for all sample sizes . From the remaining models , the BernoulliNB classiﬁer 195 performed best for all sample sizes but the largest one . The performance of the SVC model ﬂuctuated strongly for di ﬀ erent sample sizes , and did even decrease , e . g . , comparing the 1 , 500 dataset with the 250 dataset . Ran - domForest and k - NN were within lowest performing 200 classiﬁers for all sample sizes , however , they reach a reasonable accuracy for the largest dataset . We thus ﬁnd that the pre - trained CNN model performs best as a bi - nary patent classiﬁer for hard - to - classify concepts . The results further show a signiﬁcant increase in per - 205 formance through pre - training with patent data . The beneﬁts are strongest for small sample sizes , where 100 annotations led to accuracy scores of 77 . 2 % , com - pared to a score of 72 . 5 % for the CNN without pre - training . This score suggests , that pre - trained neu - 210 ral network may be well suitable for active learning , which aims at increasing the e ﬃ ciency of annotations through active learning [ 29 ] . The performance advan - tage of pre - training , however , decreases with sample size and almost disappears for the largest data set . Ac - 215 cordingly , we ﬁnd that pre - training is particularly use - ful for small data sets , but provides negligible perfor - mance advantages with large data sets of around 5 , 000 or more annotated samples . Future research may evalu - ate , whether more expensive pre - training methods pro - 220 vide even stronger models . Our best - performing CNN achieves an accuracy of 0 . 832 and 0 . 866 with sample sizes of 500 and 1500 patents . These accuracy scores may be appropriate for a number of further analyses and may encourage future 225 researchers to use labeled patent data for their analyses . Moreover , the spaCy LMAO pre - training does not re - quire extensive computation capacity . Therefore , the described methods may be suitable for a broad range of researchers , providing high accuracy and enabling e ﬃ - 230 cient implementation . In addition to the results shown in the table , we ran the spaCy models through the Prodigy software . The 15 Model Sample size 100 250 500 1 , 500 5 , 000 BernoulliNB 0 . 706 0 . 776 0 . 798 0 . 808 0 . 842 SVC 0 . 612 0 . 536 0 . 794 0 . 774 0 . 858 RandomForest 0 . 590 0 . 668 0 . 752 0 . 770 0 . 836 K - NN 0 . 598 0 . 704 0 . 716 0 . 772 0 . 838 spaCy 0 . 726 0 . 786 0 . 806 0 . 858 0 . 872 spaCy pre 0 . 772 0 . 800 0 . 832 0 . 866 0 . 874 Table 1 : Comparison of patent classiﬁcation performance . The models implemented are Bernoulli naive Bayes ( BernoulliNB ) , support vector machine ( SVC ) , random forest , k - nearest neighbour , spaCy large English model , and a spaCy model pre - trained with patent data . The models have been tested with di ﬀ erent sample sizes , of 100 , 250 , 500 , 1 , 500 , and 5 , 000 patents in categories G 05D , and G 05B . Scores relate to recognition of G 05D . results were similar to both spaCy models and are thus not listed in Table 1 . This implies that relying on a sim - 235 ple API that requires only basic knowledge in program - ming comes at little performance costs , rendering the methods proposed in this paper potentially accessible to researchers from disciplines with typically less training in programming , such as e . g . economists . 240 5 . Conclusions Patent classiﬁcation , in general , is an active research ﬁeld . Besides pre - classiﬁcation of patent applications , which is highly relevant for patent o ﬃ ces [ 17 ] , also other ﬁelds may beneﬁt from advances in this area . Par - 245 ticularly economists may beneﬁt from improved meth - ods of patent analyses . [ 30 ] , for example , describe the lack of high - quality data and empirically informed mod - els as a key challenge for a better understanding of au - tomation technologies . Patent data may be a rich source 250 of data to address this challenge . Our work contributes to patent as well as NLP re - search by evaluating a powerful pre - trained CNN based approach for binary patent classiﬁcation . The proposed method o ﬀ ers a fast , high accuracy tool enabling a broad 255 range of researchers conducting patent classiﬁcation or other text classiﬁcation tasks . We ﬁnd that pre - training signiﬁcantly raises performance particularly in small samples of annotated data , while the performance sur - plus declines for larger samples . 260 We further ﬁnd that the methods provide a high accu - racy , do not require high computational resources , and that relying on Prodigy as a simple API does not result in noticeable performance losses . This implies that the methods proposed here are both useful and potentially 265 accessible to researchers from other disciplines . Competing Interests We declare that we have no signiﬁcant competing ﬁ - nancial , professional , or personal interests that might have inﬂuenced the performance or presentation of the 270 work described in this manuscript . References [ 1 ] D . Acemoglu , Introduction to Modern Economic Growth , Princeton University Press , 2009 . [ 2 ] J . Mokyr , C . Vickers , N . L . Ziebarth , The history of technologi - 275 cal anxiety and the future of economic growth : Is this time dif - ferent ? , Journal of Economic Perspectives 29 ( 3 ) ( 2015 ) 31 – 50 . [ 3 ] D . Autor , Why are there still so many jobs ? the history and fu - ture of workplace automation , Journal of Economic Perspectives 29 ( 3 ) ( 2015 ) 3 – 30 . 280 [ 4 ] K . Mann , L . P ¨ uttmann , Benign e ﬀ ects of automation : New evi - dence from patent texts ( 2018 ) . [ 5 ] C . B . Frey , M . A . Osborne , The future of employment : How susceptible are jobs to computerization ? , Technological Fore - casting and Social Change 114 ( 2017 ) 254 – 280 . 285 [ 6 ] M . Arntz , T . Gregory , U . Zierahn , Revisiting the risk of automa - tion , Economics Letters 159 ( 2017 ) 157 – 160 . [ 7 ] P . S . Segerstrom , Innovation , imitation , and economic growth , Journal of Political Economy 99 ( 4 ) ( 1991 ) 807 – 827 . [ 8 ] A . Bartel , C . Ichniowski , K . Shaw , How does information tech - 290 nology a ﬀ ect productivity ? Plant - level comparisons of product innovation , process improvement , and worker skills , Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 ( 4 ) ( 2007 ) 1721 – 1758 . [ 9 ] U . Schmoch , Concept of technology classiﬁcation for country comparisons , Final report to the World Intellectual Property Or - 295 ganisation ( WIPO ) , Fraunhofer Institute for Systems and Inno - vation Research ( ISI ) ( 2008 ) . [ 10 ] eurostat , Patent statistics : Concordance ipc v8 - nace rev . 2 , Tech . rep . , Eurostat ( 2014 ) . URL https : / / circabc . europa . eu / sd / a / 300 d1475596 - 1568 - 408a - 9191 - 426629047e31 / 2014 - 10 - 16 - Final % 20IPC _ NACE2 _ 2014 . pdf [ 11 ] D . Acemoglu , P . Restrepo , Robots and jobs : Evidence from US labor markets , NBER Working Paper 23285 ( 2017 ) . [ 12 ] W . Dauth , S . Findeisen , J . S¨udekum , N . W¨ossner , German 305 robots - the impact of industrial robots on workers , IAB Work - ing Paper 30 / 2017 . [ 13 ] G . Graetz , G . Michaels , Robots at work , Review of Economics and Statistics 100 ( 5 ) ( 2018 ) 753 – 768 . 16 [ 14 ] S . Li , J . Hu , Y . Cui , J . Hu , DeepPatent : patent classiﬁ - 310 cation with convolutional neural networks and word embed - ding , Scientometrics 117 ( 2 ) ( 2018 ) 721 – 744 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s11192 - 018 - 2905 - 5 . [ 15 ] T . Joachims , Text Categorization with Support Vector Machines : Learning with Many Relevant Features , European conference 315 on machine learning ( 1998 ) 137 – 142 . [ 16 ] C . J . Fall , A . T¨orcsv´ari , K . Benzineb , G . Karetka , Automated Categorization in the International Patent Classiﬁcation , Acm Sigir Forum 37 ( 1 ) ( 2003 ) 10 – 25 . [ 17 ] M . Krier , F . Zacc , Automatic categorisation applications at the 320 European patent o ﬃ ce , World Patent Information 24 ( 2002 ) 187 – 196 . [ 18 ] F . Benites , S . Malmasi , M . Zampieri , Classifying Patent Ap - plications with Ensemble Methods , Proceedings ofAustralasian Language Technology Association Workshop ( 2018 ) 89 – 92 . 325 [ 19 ] A . Abbas , L . Zhang , S . U . Khan , A literature review on the state - of - the - art in patent analysis , World Patent Information 37 ( 2014 ) 3 – 13 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . wpi . 2013 . 12 . 006 . [ 20 ] M . F . Grawe , C . A . Martins , A . G . Bonfante , Automated Patent Classiﬁcation Using Word Embedding , 16th IEEE International 330 Conference on Machine Learning and Applications ( 2017 ) 408 – 411 doi : 10 . 1109 / ICMLA . 2017 . 0 - 127 . [ 21 ] W . Zaghloul , S . M . Lee , S . Trimi , Text classiﬁcation : neu - ral networks vs support vector machines , Industrial Manage - ment & Data Systems 109 ( 5 ) ( 2009 ) 708 – 717 . doi : 10 . 1108 / 335 02635570910957669 . [ 22 ] J . Devlin , M . Chang , K . Lee , K . Toutanova , Bert : Pre - training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding , Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics : Hu - 340 man Language Technologies , Volume 1 ( Long and Short Papers ) ( 2019 ) 4171 – 4186 . URL https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / N19 - 1423 [ 23 ] J . Howard , S . Ruder , Universal Language Model Fine - tuning for Text Classiﬁcation , Proceedings ofthe 56th Annual Meet - 345 ing ofthe Association for Computational Linguistics ( Volume 1 : Long Papers ) ( 2018 ) 328 – 339 . [ 24 ] J . Lee , J . Hsiang , PatentBERT : Patent classiﬁcation with ﬁne - tuning a pre - trained BERT model ( 2019 ) . arXiv : 1906 . 02124 . URL http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 1906 . 02124v2 350 [ 25 ] L . H . Li , P . H . Chen , C . - J . Hsieh , K . - W . Chang , E ﬃ cient con - textual representation learning without softmax layer ( 2019 ) . arXiv : 1902 . 11269 . [ 26 ] S . Kumar , Y . Tsvetkov , Von mises - ﬁsher loss for training se - quence to sequence models with continuous outputs ( 2018 ) . 355 arXiv : 1812 . 04616v3 . [ 27 ] D . Moll´a , D . Seneviratne , Overview of the 2018 ALTA shared task : Classifying patent applications , in : Proceedings of the Australasian Language Technology Association Workshop 2018 , Dunedin , New Zealand , 2018 , pp . 84 – 88 . 360 URL https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / U18 - 1011 [ 28 ] E . D’hondt , S . Verberne , C . Koster , L . Boves , Text Representa - tions for Patent Classiﬁcation , Computational Linguistics 39 ( 3 ) ( 2013 ) 755 – 775 . doi : 10 . 1162 / COLI . [ 29 ] S . Tong , D . Koller , Support Vector Machine Active Learning 365 with Applications to Text Classiﬁcation , Journal of Machine Learning Research ( 2001 ) 45 – 66 . [ 30 ] M . R . Frank , D . Autor , J . E . Bessen , E . Brynjolfsson , M . Ce - brian , D . J . Deming , M . Feldman , M . Groh , J . Lobo , E . Moroa , D . Wang , H . Youn , I . Rahwan , Toward understanding the im - 370 pact of artiﬁcial intelligence on labor , PNAS 116 ( 14 ) ( 2019 ) 6531 – 6539 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1900949116 . 17 Deep Learning based Pipeline with Multichannel Inputs for Patent Classiﬁcation Mustafa Sofean FIZ Karlsruhe , Hermann - von - Helmholtz - Platz 1 . 76344 Eggenstein - Leopoldshafen Mustafa . Sofean @ ﬁz - karlsruhe . de Abstract Patent document classiﬁcation as groundwork has been a challenging task with no satisfactory performance for decades . In this work , we introduce a deep learning pipeline for automatic patent classiﬁcation with multichannel inputs based on LSTM and word vector embeddings . Sophisticated text mining methods are used to extract the most important segments from patent texts , and a domain - speciﬁc pre - trained word embeddings model for the patent domain is developed ; it was trained on a very large dataset of more than ﬁve million patents . A deep neural network model is trained with multichannel inputs namely embeddings of diﬀerent segments of patent texts , and sparse linear input of diﬀerent metadata . A series of patent classiﬁcation experiments are conducted on diﬀerent patent datasets , and the experimental results indicate that using the segments of patent texts as well as the metadata as multichannel inputs for a deep neural network model , achieves better performance than one input channel . Keywords : Patent Analysis , Neural Network , Deep Learning , Patent Classiﬁcation 1 . Methods Patent classiﬁcation is a kind of knowledge man - agement where documents are assigned into prede - ﬁned categories . Due to the extremely complicated patent language and hierarchical patent classiﬁca - tion scheme , many previous studies focused only on whole texts of patent or some general sections such as title , abstract , detailed description and claims [ 2 ] [ 1 ] . They did not consider the most important sections like background , technical ﬁeld , summary , and independent claims that need speciﬁc text min - ing tools to extract . 1 . 1 . Semantic Structure of patent and Embeddings Eﬃcient text mining services are used for se - mantic structuring of the patent texts [ 3 ] . The ﬁrst service is used to structure the description part of patent text into structured segments such as the technical ﬁeld , background , summary , and the embodiments [ 5 ] . The second service is able to automatically identify the complete claim hi - erarchy within patent texts [ 4 ] . In addition , a domain - speciﬁc word and phrase embeddings model is developed for the patent domain . The model is trained on more than ﬁve million patent docu - ments and can be used for word / phrase similarity or patent analysis such as classiﬁcation tasks . 1 . 2 . Deep Learning based Pipeline Architecture Firstly , we extract the most important segments of patent texts which are title , abstract , technical ﬁeld , background , summary , and the independent claim . For texts of each segment , a tokenization process is used for breaking the text into individ - ual words , and the sequence length of each seg - ment is set according to the maximum length of each . The deep learning architecture has two com - ponents : deep , and wide . It feed - forward neural networks with embeddings of each segment , and uses them as deep layers for deep neural network model , and the patent metadata on the other hand is used as a wide part for the model . Speciﬁcally , the architecture is described as follows : for the wide components of the model , we used one - hot representation for patent metadata features ( such as inventors , citations , and assignees ) , these one - hot vectors are fed into separate sub - networks , and Published in " Proceedings of The 1 st Workshop on Patent Text Mining and Semantic Technologies ( PatentSemTech 2019 ) " , Eds . L . Andersson , H . Aras , F . Piroi , A . Hanbury , PatentSemTech 2019 , 12 September 2019 , Karlsruhe , Germany . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 34726 / pst2019 . 5 | © Authors 2019 . CC BY 4 . 0 License . An extended version has been submitted to the World Patent Information Journal - Virtual Special Issue : Text Mining and Semantic Technologies in the Intellectual Property domain . 18 Table 1 : Evaluation Results . ( TI : title , AB : abstract , TECHF : Technical Fields , BACK : Background , SUMM : Summary , IND CLAM : Independent Claim , INVs : Inventors , and PAs : Patent Assignees ) Input Accuracy Precision Recall F1 - score All texts of segments as one channel 67 % 84 % 61 % 71 % TI , AB , TECHF , BACK , SUMM , and IND CLAM as mul - tichannels 74 % 92 % 63 % 75 % TI and TECHF as multichannel inputs 66 % 83 % 59 % 69 % TI and TECHF , INVs , and PAs as multichannel inputs 68 % 85 % 61 % 71 % at the end they are represented as deep networks . For the deep components of the model , deep lay - ers are created for the most important patent text segments . These are sequential input to a Long Short - Term Memory ( LSTM ) network that takes the embeddings as inputs that are obtained by us - ing a pre - trained word embeddings model to encode each segment texts into vectors , and then we feed them into LSTM layers . To avoid network overﬁt - ting and help network stability , additional layers are added for each input channel , dropout layer is used to drop out 30 % of input in order to prevent neural networks from overﬁtting , and Batch normalization layer is used to normalize the input layer by adjust - ing and scaling the activations . The exponential linear unit ( ELU ) is used as activation function . Finally , we concatenated nine components which are text - based LSTM layers ( title LSTM , abstract LSTM , technical ﬁeld LSTM , background LSTM , summary LSTM , and independent claim LSTM ) , and metadata - based LSTM layers ( inventors , as - signees , and citations ) into a ﬁnal set of deep lay - ers with dropout , batch normalization , and softmax activation function for multi - class and sigmoid for multi - label classiﬁcation task . 1 . 3 . Experimental Results The dataset in this work is extracted from databases of the European Patent Oﬃce ( EPO ) and the World Intellectual Property Organization ( WIPO ) . All extracted patents contain the title , ab - stract , detailed description , claims , and at least one IPC label . The total number of extracted records in the dataset is about 1 , 915 , 308 patents ﬁled be - tween 1978 and 2016 . The segmentation tools [ 3 ] [ 4 ] were used to extract the most important sec - tions ( technical ﬁeld , background , summary of in - vention and independent claim from patent texts . All patent documents are classiﬁed into related sub - class level of IPC , and we used four evaluation mea - sures namely accuracy , precision , recall , and F1 . A series of patent classiﬁcation experiments are con - ducted on the dataset , and we also studied how the full text , diﬀerent parts of a patent information , and their combination aﬀect the classiﬁcation per - formance . The evaluation results are shown in the table 1 . The best performance we obtained is 74 % , 92 % , 63 % , and 75 % for accuracy , precision , recall , and F1 , respectively . The result in this work in - dicates that using the segments of patent text as multichannel inputs improved the performance of patent classiﬁcation in terms of all evaluation cri - teria . 2 . Conclusion In this work , we introduced a deep learning based pipeline for large - scale patent classiﬁcation . Diﬀer - ent parts of patent information are used as mul - tichannel inputs for a Long Short - Term Memory ( LSTM ) that takes the both vectors ( embeddings and one - hot ) in order to learn a patent classiﬁ - cation model . The experimental results indicated that using the segments of patent texts as well as the metadata as multichannel inputs for a deep neu - ral network model , achieve a good performance . 3 . References [ 1 ] Assad Abbas , Limin Zhang , S . U . K . , 2015 . A literature review on the state - of - the - art in patent analysis . World Patent Information 37 , 3 – 13 . [ 2 ] Juan Carlos Gomez , M . F . M . , 2014 . A survey of auto - mated hierarchical classiﬁcation of patents . Springer In - ternational Publishing . [ 3 ] Mustafa Sofean , Hidir Aras , A . A . , 2018 . A workﬂow - based large - scale patent mining and analytics framework . Proceedings of 24th International Conference on Infor - mation and Software Technologies ( ICIST ) ; . [ 4 ] Rene Hackl - Sommer , M . S . , 2015 . Patent claim structure recognition . Archives of Data Science . [ 5 ] Sofean , M . , 2017 . Automatic segmentation of big data of patent texts . International Conference on Big Data Analytics and Knowledge Discovery . DaWaK , 343 – 351 . 19 Semantic Views – Interactive Hierarchical Exploration for Patent Landscaping Tatyana Skripnikova 1 KIT - Karlsruhe Institute of Technology Hidir Aras 2 FIZ Karlsruhe - Leibniz Institute for Information Infrastructure Anna Weißhaar , Sebastian Blank , Hans - Peter Zorn 3 inovex GmbH Abstract In this paper , we investigate whether a semantic representation of patent documents provides added value for a multi - dimensional visual exploration of a patent landscape compared to traditional approaches . Word embeddings from a pre - trained model created from patent text are used to calculate pairwise similarities for representing each document in the semantic space . Then , a hierarchical clustering method is applied to create several semantic aggregation levels for a collection of patent documents . For visual exploration , we have seamlessly integrated multiple interaction metaphors that combine semantics and additional metadata for improving hierarchical exploration of large document collections . Keywords : Patent landscaping , word embeddings , hierarchical clustering , text analysis , semantic exploration , multi - dimensional exploration , visual user interface . 1 . Introduction The number of written works describing scien - tiﬁc progress is steadily increasing , which necessi - tates the development of supportive tools for their eﬃcient analysis . Developing a visualization ap - proach to facilitate the examination proves to be a challenging task . This is due to the complexity 1 https : / / www . kit . edu 2 https : / / www . ﬁz - karlsruhe . de 3 https : / / www . inovex . de Published in ”Proceedings of The 1st Workshop on Patent Text Mining and Semantic Technologies ( PatentSemTech 2019 ) ” , Eds . L . Andersson , H . Aras , F . Piroi , A . Hanbury , PatentSemTech 2019 , 12 September 2019 , Karlsruhe , Ger - many . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 34726 / pst2019 . 6 — Authors 2019 . CC BY 4 . 0 License . An extended version has been submitted to the World Patent Information Journal - Virtual Special Issue : Text Mining and Semantic Technologies in the Intellectual Property do - main . of these documents , which are not only character - ized by their textual content , but also by a number of metadata attributes of various kinds , including information about relationships between them . Patent landscaping [ 1 ] is an example of a task in which complex document explorations take place . With the help of patent landscaping , companies acquire competitive advantages and steer their re - search and development eﬀorts . However , with hun - dreds to thousands of patent documents that have to be considered per patent landscaping report , hu - man perception must be aided in the task of ﬁnding patterns in data to prevent cognitive overload . We propose an approach that allows for a multi - dimensional visual exploration [ 2 ] based on both se - mantics and metadata from the patent documents . Semantic embeddings [ 3 ] are widely used in natu - ral language processing to capture relationships be - tween text documents . Nonetheless , when trying to visualize those relationships , we face the prob - lem that positions and distances in the embedding 2 0 space are not easily explainable and can hardly be understood by themselves . As for creating a patent landscape the question what is ”in / out” of a fo - cused topical region is crucial , we utilize semantic similarity of documents for creating a patent land - scape [ 4 ] followed by clustering [ 5 ] the documents at 3 aggregation levels employing hierarchical ag - glomerative clustering . 2 . Semantic Exploration of a Patent Land - scape In order to semantically explore patent docu - ments , two challenges exist which must be reﬂected in our approach : 1 . visually presenting high - dimensional semantic representations of documents in a way that is intuitively understood , and 2 . supporting semantic interactions , which means that the display adapts to the intentions of the user with regard to information density and level of detail [ 6 ] . The user interface and the interaction metaphors it oﬀers are designed to handle these challenges by utilizing a number of coordinated views which re - spond to the changes in each other’s states . The scatter plot is the main area of the visualization representing the semantic space . At the same time , the histogram and sunburst views display meta - data attributes from the dataset in an aggregated form . They enable ﬁltering and highlighting of the data across all views via brushing and linking , which means that ”the change to the representation in one view aﬀects the representation in the other views as well” [ 7 ] . The interactions connecting the views fall into one of three groups : selection , highlighting and re - setting the current selection . The implementation is consistent across all views : 1 ) clicking means se - lecting an object / group , 2 ) hovering with the mouse causes a highlighting of an object / group which is a preview of the selection , 3 ) clicking on the back - ground of a view resets the selection . 3 . Evaluation In order to evaluate the question of how semantic information in combination with rich metadata can be used to enhance the visual exploration of large document collections , we conducted a summative study in form of a think - aloud - experiment with sev - eral patent experts . The subjects of the study are employees of FIZ Karlsruhe and have acquired sig - niﬁcant experience over the years with patent mat - ters in general and with patent research and patent landscaping in particular . This makes them appro - priate candidates to study the complex cognitive processes that happen during the exploration . We evaluated the visualization approach by means of tasks the users had to perform and by means of questionnaires for capturing user feed - back . The usability study indicates that visualization metaphors and interaction techniques were appro - priately chosen . 4 . Conclusion We set out to present a novel approach for the hi - erarchical exploration of large document collections combining semantics and additional metadata . Our research shows that the chosen interaction tech - niques are consistent and intuitive . The proposed visualization approach provides added value for patent landscaping , and can also be applied to other document exploration tasks . References [ 1 ] K . W . Boyack , B . N . Wylie , G . S . Davidson , Domain visualization using vxinsight for science and technology management , Journal of the American Society for Infor - mation Science and Technology 53 ( 9 ) ( 2002 ) 764 – 774 . doi : 10 . 1002 / asi . 10066 . [ 2 ] K . Wittenburg , G . Pekhteryev , Multi - Dimensional Com - parative Visualization for Patent Landscaping , in : IEEE VIS Workshop 2015 BusinessVis15 . [ 3 ] M . E . Peters , M . Neumann , M . Iyyer , M . Gardner , C . Clark , K . Lee , L . Zettlemoyer , Deep contextualized word representations arXiv : 1802 . 05365 . URL http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 1802 . 05365 [ 4 ] A . Abood , D . Feltenberger , Automated patent landscap - ing , Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Law 26 ( 2 ) ( 2018 ) 103 – 125 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10506 - 018 - 9222 - 4 . [ 5 ] A . Skupin , A Cartographic Approach to Visualizing Con - ference Abstracts , IEEE Computer Graphics and Appli - cations 22 ( 1 ) ( 2002 ) 50 – 58 . doi : 10 . 1109 / 38 . 974518 . [ 6 ] D . Modjeska , Navigation in Electronic Worlds : Research Review for Depth Oral Exam ( May ) ( 1997 ) 1 – 56 . [ 7 ] Marti A . Hearst , Modern Information Retrieval , Addison - Wesley - Longman Publishing co . , 1999 . doi : 10 . 7748 / ns . 4 . 42 . 26 . s69 . 2 1 Visual Programming for Patent Mining Farag Saad , Hidir Aras 1 FIZ Karlsruhe Leibniz Institute for Information Infrastructure Stefan Helfrich 2 KNIME GmbH Abstract In this paper we describe how to employ and extend the KNIME Analytics Platform with a Hadoop backend in order to realize scalable text mining workﬂows for annotating and linking large - scale patent data . Keywords : Patent Mining , KNIME Analytics Platform , Workﬂows , Visual Programming , Hadoop , Scalability 1 . Introduction The aim of scientiﬁc workﬂow systems is to allow users to systematically describe scientiﬁc processes or methods , e . g . for data analysis . For example , scientists from the life sciences need support how 5 to perform annotation tasks on large amounts of chemical texts . Still today , programming or script - ing skills are not necessarily part of a life scientists tool built to accomplish their analysis tasks . Hence , a platform which allows to remedy this by means of 10 visual programming ( instead of requiring a speciﬁc programming language ) is needed . The KNIME Analytics Platform [ 1 ] is an easy to use and comprehensive open source data in - tegration , analysis , and exploration platform , de - 15 signed to handle large amounts of heterogeneous data . It implements intuitive usage concepts and allows users to perform programming tasks in a vi - sual manner : the data ﬂow and processing steps in a workﬂow are modelled by inserting and connecting 20 modules ( so called “nodes” ) as shown in Figure 1 . Furthermore , KNIME allows for easy conﬁguration and execution of nodes in its graphical user inter - face . It provides over 2 , 000 native nodes that are 1 https : / / www . ﬁz - karlsruhe . de 2 https : / / www . knime . com continually developed and maintained by KNIME 25 AG . These core nodes cover generic functionality that is independent of the underlying data . The most prominent examples are statistical evaluation , data mining and machine learning , as well as ( cus - tomizable ) interactive visualizations . Many more 30 of these nodes are provided through open source integrations , e . g . Apache Spark or Apache Hadoop for big data processing , H2O for high performance machine learning , Python and R for scripting and plotting , and extensions including image process - 35 ing , cheminformatics , or bioinformatics . The KNIME Text Processing Extension , in par - ticular , was designed and developed to read and process textual data , and transform it into nu - merical data ( document and term vectors ) to , for 40 example , apply data - agnostic nodes from KNIME Analytics Platform . The extension enables read - ing , processing , mining and visualization of textual data in a convenient way . Processing may involve , among others , recognition and tagging of named 45 entities , ﬁltering ( e . g . named entity ﬁlters ) , and stemming . Frequencies of words can be computed , keywords can be extracted , and documents can be visualized ( e . g . tag clouds ) , among other things . Despite the fact that KNIME provides a diverse 50 set of built - in nodes , there is a high demand to ex - tend the platform’s functionalities in order to ful - ﬁll speciﬁc requirements . This is taken into ac - count and the platform allows to develop and inte - 2 2 Published in " Proceedings of The 1 st Workshop on Patent Text Mining and Semantic Technologies ( PatentSemTech 2019 ) " , Eds . L . Andersson , H . Aras , F . Piroi , A . Hanbury , PatentSemTech 2019 , 12 September 2019 , Karlsruhe , Germany . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 34726 / pst2019 . 7 | © Authors 2019 . CC BY 4 . 0 License . Reading Textual Data Enrichment no missings only documents Read Tripadvisor data create documents Assign POS tags Row Filter Column Filter Table Reader Strings To Document POS Tagger Reading Textual Data Enrichment no missings only documents Read Tripadvisor data create documents Assign POS tags Row Filter Column Filter Table Reader Strings To Document POS Tagger Figure 1 : Simple workﬂow for POS Tagging implemented with KNIME Analytics Platform . grate custom nodes for implementing more complex 55 scientiﬁc workﬂows , complementing KNIME’s core functionality . In this paper , we take advantage of this exten - sibility feature by developing new nodes for build - ing scalable patent text mining workﬂows with the 60 KNIME Analytics Platform . To be able to build such workﬂows one has to • implement custom nodes to be used for visual programming in order to execute annotation tasks and interact with the results , and 65 • integrate a scalable service processing backend , e . g . based on Hadoop / MR2 . A proof of concept implementation for annotat - ing and linking chemical entities shows that our ap - proach allows for creating eﬃcient , scalable , and 70 easy to use patent mining workﬂows by means of visual programming . 2 . A Patent Text Mining Use Case In the following , we describe a use case from patent text mining [ 2 ] for annotating and linking of 75 chemical entities in patent texts . As a prerequisite to realize a dedicated scalable annotation workﬂow , several custom KNIME nodes for essential tasks have been developed and integrated . 2 . 1 . Scalable Annotation Workﬂows 80 In recent years , a strong increase in publica - tions ( patents and scientiﬁc articles ) related to the life sciences has been observed . The extrac - tion of meaningful information e . g . named enti - ties from these publications is no longer achievable 85 within a reasonable time without big data process - ing . Therefore , a sophisticated distributed system such as Hadoop can be employed in order to per - form extraction , transformation and loading tasks ( ETL ) eﬃciently . However , the integration of such 90 a scalable system into customized workﬂows e . g . as KNIME workﬂows , is often a challenging task . In order to allow for scalable processing with a cus - tomized workﬂow , three processes need to be ini - tiated . First , the subset of the input data has 95 to be selected and necessary information sent to a KNIME node which is responsible for distributed processing . Secondly , a KNIME node which allows for distributed data processing has to be executed . And thirdly , the annotated data then needs to be 100 retrieved , post - processed and visualized for user in - teraction . In the following , we describe our approach for performing scalable annotation tasks in technical detail , with a robust annotation and visualization 105 service integrated into the KNIME analytics plat - form . In order to enable scalable processing and mining in KNIME workﬂows , four custom nodes have been developed and integrated seamlessly . A scalable annotation workﬂow comprises steps 110 for preparing the execution of an annotation task , e . g . setting conﬁguration parameters , creating database tables , deployment to a multi - node clus - ter , and , ﬁnally , its distributed execution . Figure 2 shows the PhoenixUnzipData custom node which 115 is used to select the ids of a subset of patent docu - ments for annotation and its conﬁguration e . g . en - tering the SQL statement using the Table Creator node and handing over as parameter . The obtained id list serve as input for the 120 Phoenix OP custom node , which is shown in Fig - ure 2 . Herewith , a database table for storing the id list is created and all ids inserted . Besides that , it is needed to specify the table name for storing the annotations , which is again done via a Table 125 Creator node . At the same time the table name serves as an input parameter for the GenericSer - viceRunner node for the distributed processing in the Hadoop cluster . This custom KNIME node uses 2 3 Figure 2 : Scalable Chemical Annotation Workﬂow . Figure 3 : Visualization Workﬂow for Chemical Annotations . the Hadoop / YARN REST API in order to com - 130 municate with the cluster to execute a dedicated Hadoop / MR2 job . Before a scalable annotation service can be exe - cuted for large - scale data , the java library ( jar ) of the service must be deployed to the Hadoop clus - 135 ter manually and stored in the distributed ﬁle sys - tem HDFS . Alternatively , the HDFSUpload node from the KNIME Big Data Extensions could also be used . In our use case a service for annotating and link - 140 ing chemical entities employing the OSCAR4 chem - ical tagger [ 3 ] and the EntityLinker service ( see Section 2 . 2 ) was developed and used for the work - ﬂow . Once the annotation service and the needed resources are available on the cluster , it can be 145 horizontally scaled and executed via the Generic - ServiceExecutor Hadoop / MR2 job . This is possi - ble , because the service implements a standard java interface , which is seamlessly integrated into the Hadoop service executor job . The results of the an - 150 notation service , i . e . chemical entities and links to external resources such as to ChEMBL , DrugBank , etc . for each processed patent in the selected set are stored to the Phoenix database and can be accessed for later processing or visualization . 155 2 . 2 . Linking Chemical Entities via Chemical Struc - ture Identiﬁers The mapping between annotated chemical en - tities and external resources is performed by the EntityLinker using the UniChem [ 4 ] web 160 services . UniChem eﬃciently produces cross - references between chemical structure identiﬁers ( e . g . InCHI Key ) from diﬀerent databases and includes the entities’ identiﬁers of 28 databases such as ChEMBL , DrugBank , IBM Patent System , 165 ChEBI , SureChEMBL , PharmGKB , NIH Clinical Collection , etc . In our use case , the output of the GenericServiceExecutor job ( stored in a previ - ously created Phoenix table ) includes the annota - tions along with the external resource links and the 170 status ( successful , error ) for each patent document . https : / / www . ebi . ac . uk / unichem / info / webservices 24 Figure 4 : D3 Tree Diagram Visualizations 2 . 3 . Visualization of Results In the last part of the scalable annotation work - ﬂow shown in Figure 3 ) , the PhoenixUnzipData custom node is used to select and visualize a 175 subset of the annotated documents . The Os - car4D3VizJsonFormatter custom node is used to convert the resulting annotations to the format of the D3 . js visualization library . In the exam - ple shown in Figure 3 , the annotations of a patent 180 document are visualized as a ”D3 Tree Diagram” . KNIME’s Generic JavaScript View node is used for implementing and running the D3 Tree Diagram code . The resulting tree diagram visualization gives the 185 user excellent view and shows the annotated docu - ment with its chemical entities linked to their corre - sponding external knowledge resources . Using the tree diagram visualized annotation , the user can easily by mouse click navigate between entities and 190 their external knowledge resources . For example , as Figure 4 shows by clicking on the annotated en - tity EDTA , the workﬂow will react by displaying a list of the linked external resources e . g . PubChem . For example , when the user clicks on PubChem , 195 the workﬂow will react and display detailed infor - mation about the annotated entity EDTA from the PubChem database e . g . PubChem id , InChi Key , Drug information , Molecular formula etc . 3 . Conclusion 200 The KNIME Analytics Platform with its exten - sions for e . g . text processing allows for building patent mining workﬂows in a visual fashion . The ﬂexibility and openness of the platform makes it a perfect candidate for rapid development and de - 205 ployment of large - scale analysis and mining work - ﬂows without vendor lock in . We have shown an example that employs custom KNIME nodes and a scalable service infrastructure based on Hadoop in order to enrich and link chem - 210 ical entities in patent text to external knowledge sources . Furthermore , we have shown how the user can interact with the visualized result by navigat - ing between linked external resources and exploring new information related to the annotated chemical 215 entities such as InChi Key , SMILES , molecular for - mula , molecular weight etc . References [ 1 ] M . R . Berthold , N . Cebron , F . Dill , T . R . Gabriel , T . K¨otter , T . Meinl , P . Ohl , C . Sieb , K . Thiel , 220 B . Wiswedel , KNIME : The Konstanz Information Miner , in : Studies in Classiﬁcation , Data Analysis , and Knowl - edge Organization ( GfKL 2007 ) , Springer , 2007 . [ 2 ] M . Sofean , H . Aras , A . Alrifai , A workﬂow - based large - scale patent mining and analytics framework , in : 225 R . Damaˇseviˇcius , G . Vasiljevien˙e ( Eds . ) , Information and Software Technologies , Springer International Pub - lishing , Cham , 2018 , pp . 210 – 223 . [ 3 ] D . M . Jessop , S . E . Adams , E . L . Willighagen , L . Haw - izy , P . Murray - Rust , Oscar4 : a ﬂexible architecture for 230 chemical text - mining , Journal of Cheminformatics 3 ( 1 ) ( 2011 ) 41 . [ 4 ] J . Chambers , M . Davies , A . Gaulton , A . Hersey , S . Velankar , R . Petryszak , J . Hastings , L . Bellis , S . McGlinchey , J . Overington , Unichem : A uniﬁed chem - 235 ical structure cross - referencing and identiﬁer tracking system , Journal of cheminformatics 5 ( 2013 ) 3 . 25 Deep Learning Services for Patents Mustafa Sofean and Ahmad Alrifai FIZ Karlsruhe , Hermann - von - Helmholtz - Platz 1 . 76344 Eggenstein - Leopoldshafen Abstract Most of word embedding techniques provide only one vector representation for each word in a text corpus , de - spite the fact that a single word could have multiple meanings . In this paper , we developed a domain - speciﬁc word and phrase embedding model for the patent domain . It treats patent phrases as single information units . Natural language processing techniques are used to extract the meaningful terms from ﬁve million patent documents , and a word embedding algorithm is used for generating semantic representation of those terms . This model can be used for a wide rage of tasks like search query expansion , patent semantic similarity search , enrichment and for supporting other patent text mining tasks like patent technology categorization , and knowledge discovery . 1 . Introduction Word embedding techniques have been widely adapted in modern Natural Language Processing ( NLP ) applications , where words are represented as numerical vectors that capture the semantic and 5 syntactic characteristics of each word in the cor - pus . Relations with other words as well could be exploited from word embedding models . [ 1 ] . Vari - ous previous works involved word embedding tech - niques on patent domain [ 2 ] [ 3 ] . While the model 10 encodes each word with all of its potential meanings into a single vector , it is unable to model polyse - mous words which have multiple meanings [ 4 ] . For instance , the meaning of the word ”oil” varies with context ( e . g ; organic , or mineral ) . The idea behind 15 our phrase embedding is that we want to have dif - ferent vectors for the diﬀerent senses . The straight - forward solution is just to have two inputs for ”oil” , for example , ”oil o” and ”oil m” . Therefore we ap - plied sophisticated NLP tasks to extract the most 20 important patent terms ( words and phrases ) , and then each phrase is merged into a single token , so that it will be represented by a single vector . The remaining of this paper is organized as follows . Sec - tion 2 provides our methods for creating the phrase 25 embedding model . Section 3 describes some patent applications that use the phrases embedding model such as word / phrase similarity , patent semantic similarity search , and enrichment tool for patent technology categorization . Finally , Section 4 gives 30 the conclusion and outlines the future research . 2 . Construction of Word / Phrase Embedding Model Word embedding is a technique used to represent words as dense vectors in a vector space . When 35 pre - trained on a large number of tokens , relations of these vectors could make a machine learning sys - tem understand the word context and semantics . The key idea is that , because words / phrases with similar meanings often appear in similar contexts , 40 the corresponding embeddings will also be similar . We go beyond a single word embedding to do a better task of modelling complicated concepts . For instance , there is no individual usage of the term ”oil” when it refers to the concept ”vehicle oil” , or 45 ”vegetable oil” , because they have diﬀerent mean - ings . Therefore , we create our embedding model not only on single words , but also with phrases . First of all , natural language processing techniques are used to extract the meaningful terms ( words or 50 phrases ) from patent texts . We then applied the skip - gram of Word2vec algorithm to produce the embedding model . 2 6 Published in " Proceedings of The 1 st Workshop on Patent Text Mining and Semantic Technologies ( PatentSemTech 2019 ) " , Eds . L . Andersson , H . Aras , F . Piroi , A . Hanbury , PatentSemTech 2019 , 12 September 2019 , Karlsruhe , Germany . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 34726 / pst2019 . 8 | © Authors 2019 . CC BY 4 . 0 License . Figure 1 : ”solar energy collector” space Figure 2 : ”cancer treatment” space 2 . 1 . Dataset In this work , we collected and processed ap - 55 proximately ﬁve million patents published between 1978 and 2016 . These patent documents were ex - tracted from databases of the European Patent Of - ﬁce ( EPO ) and the World Intellectual Property Or - ganization ( WIPO ) by using our paten search en - 60 gine system called STN 2 . From each patent docu - ment , we extract the title and abstract that provide the accurate description of the invention . 2 . 2 . Natural Language Processing ( NLP ) Many diﬀerent Natural Language Processing 65 tasks are performed on the provided texts to au - tomatically extract the most signiﬁcant words and phrases from the collection of patent documents . These NLP tasks include Sentence Detection for transforming the row texts of titles and abstracts 70 into sentences , tokenization for dividing the texts into tokens , part - of - speech tagging and Shallow Syntactic Parsing ( or Chunking ) for splitting long sentences into smaller chunks . These NLP tasks are applied to transform the collection of title and 75 abstracts into a collection of more than 13 mil - lion sentences , including approximately one billion 2 https : / / www . stn . org words . Moreover , for each phrase in each sen - tence , we applied additional NLP tasks : Stop - word Removal , Lemmatization , Pruning ( ignoring 80 terms that have very low or very high frequency ) , and We keep some special characters like ” - ” that is frequently used ( e . g ; anti - cancer and multiple - processor ) . Additionally , a custom n - gram model is used for the long noun phrases . Additional rule - 85 based methods are applied for ﬁltering out unde - sired words and phrases on the one hand , and for enhancing other phrases on the other hand . For terms that contain more than one word , we linked them via underscores and treated them as sin - 90 gle tokens , e . g . , ”digital rights management” and ”quantum cryptography” , so that they are repre - sented as single vectors . We implemented our NLP pipeline by using spaCy 3 which is a Python - based library that provides a variety of practical tools for 95 text processing in multiple languages . It is powerful and advanced library used as standard for practical NLP due to its speed , robustness and near state - of - the - art performance . 2 . 3 . Train The Model 100 After applying our NLP tasks to extract the most signiﬁcant terms ( words and phrases ) from the col - lection of patent documents , we need to create 3 https : / / spacy . io / 2 7 Figure 3 : Patent Semantic Similarity Search vector representations for those terms in an un - supervised manner using a word embedding algo - 105 rithm . After applying a series of testing exper - iments , we decided to used the Word2vec imple - mentation in Gensim 4 with few modiﬁcations . We experimentally found that skip - gram with negative sampling loss ( n = 15 ) performed best . We used 110 100 - dimensional embeddings , a learning rate equals to 0 . 01 , epochs = 30 , window is set to 10 , and a min - imum word / phrase count is set to 5 . The details of this model are available on Github 5 . 3 . Applications 115 3 . 1 . Word / Phrase Semantic Relatedness Generally speaking , semantic relations also en - able query expansion to make phrase - related searches more intelligent . Given the fact that word embedding based query expansion methods per - 120 form better than co - occurrence based statistics , we can utilize the phrase embedding to expand the query with terms that are semantically related to the query as a whole or to its terms . In addition , this model can be used to ﬁnd certain word / phrase 125 synonyms . Figure 1 and ﬁgure 2 show a dimen - sional projection of the word embedding space for two phrases ”solar energy collector” and “cancer 4 https : / / radimrehurek . com / gensim / 5 https : / / github . com / sofean - mso / PatentPhraseEmbedding treatment” , respectively . Additional , our phrase embedding model can capture the relationships be - 130 tween terms and their acronyms , for instance the two technical terms ”Digital Rights Management” and ”Support Vector Machine” are similar to DRM and SVM respectively . 3 . 2 . Patent Semantic Similarity Search 135 . We exploited the pre - trained model in order to al - low matching queries to patent documents based on meaning rather than keywords . It understands that two terms ”car” and ”vehicle” have similar mean - 140 ings ( synonymy ) . Instead of building a query with keywords , the user can also describe his / her inven - tion with a few sentences , considering any part of patent texts such as abstract , technical ﬁeld , sum - mary , or independent claims , in order to get the 145 similar inventions . Figure 3 illustrates the workﬂow of the proposed service : for each document in the dataset , we ap - ply the same pre - processing steps that were applied for training the word embedding model in order to 150 get the important terms ( words and phrases ) . Each term in the document is encoded into a vector based on the pre - trained word2vec model . Then , the to - ken vectors are averaged to represent the document into a single vector since each phrase is treated as a 155 single token and hence represented by a single vec - tor . Similarly , we used the same scenario to get the embedding vector of the query . Cosine distance is used to calculate the similarity between the query vector and each document’s vector in the dataset , so 160 that the most similar documents will be returned . 3 . 3 . Patent Technology Categorization Various methods that involve machine learn - ing and text mining have been proposed in order to extract values from patent information [ 5 ] [ 6 ] . 165 Patent classiﬁcation is a kind of knowledge man - agement where documents are assigned into pre - deﬁned categories . Examples of patent classiﬁca - tion systems are the International Patent Classi - ﬁcation ( IPC ) and the Cooperative Patent Clas - 170 siﬁcation ( CPC ) , which have hierarchical schemes and used by patent information professionals to assign classes to each patent document . In an - other work [ 7 ] , our word / phrase embedding model has been used as transfer learning for patent classi - 175 ﬁcation task 6 . Particularly , instead of representing 6 https : / / github . com / sofean - mso / DeepL4Patent 28 Table 1 : The top 20 most similar terms to the three patent terms : ”quantum computing” , ”brain tumor” , and ”autonomous driving” quantum computing brain tumor autonomous driving quantum computing device quantum computer qubit device superconducting ﬂux quantum logic quantum device superconducting phase - charge qubit hybrid qubit quantum circuit quantum information processing ising model quantum bits superconducting processor quantum processor quantum gates quanton quantum systems qubit state superconducting integrated circuits quantum interference brain tumor therapy brain tumor marker metastatic brain brain tumor cells metastatic brain lesions human gbm brain tumor recurrence brain tumors ewing sarcoma primary tumour brain tumor treatment high - grade gliomas malignant melanoma brain tumor tissue breast tumor brain cancer tumor response breast cancer metastatic brain tumor malignant brain autonomous driving mode autonomous driving apparatus autonomous driving control automated driving autonomous driving vehicle lane keeping road curvature manual driving mode park assist target lane autonomous driving state driving assistance driving environment driver assistance system driver interaction park assist system travel segment autonomous driving assistance vehicle surroundings monitoring automatic travel each document with a sparse vector , each word in the document can be encoded into n - dimensional vector which called embedding . For example , for a document with two terms “solar collector” , and 180 “solar cell” , a pre - trained word / phrase embedding model can be used to get embedding of each term and add them together then the document is rep - resented as a single point . Another patent mining task is an automatic cate - 185 gorization of topic - related patents according to spe - ciﬁc categories such as technology , eﬀect , applica - tion , use , etc [ 8 ] [ 9 ] . This task requires high qual - ity training dataset that involves patent experts for manually processing unstructured patent docu - 190 ments . Therefore , phrase embedding model can be used as a tool to help patent experts and data scien - tists to create a knowledge base for the categoriza - tion task since each category can be described by a group of similar / related terms . Table 1 presents the 195 result of retrieving the top 20 most similar terms to the three patent terms : ”quantum computing” , ”brain tumor” , and ”autonomous driving” . 4 . Conclusion In this paper , we developed a domain - speciﬁc 200 word and phrase embedding model for the patent domain . The key idea is getting similar embed - dings for words and phrases that appear within sim - ilar contexts in patent documents . This model can serve many real patent applications such as search 205 query expansion , patent semantic similarity search , enrichment and supporting other text mining tasks like technology categorization . One of our future research directions is going towards developing a knowledge graph for patent terms by using unsu - 210 pervised methods such as word / phrase embedding . References [ 1 ] Tomas Mikolov , Ilya Sutskever , Kai Chen , Greg Cor - rado , Jeﬀrey Dean , Distributed representations of words and phrases and their compositionality , Proceedings of 215 the 26th International Conference on Neural Informa - tion Processing Systems ( 2013 ) [ 2 ] Julian Risch , and Ralf Krestel , Domain - speciﬁc word embeddings for patent classiﬁcation , Data Technologies and Applications , ( 2019 ) 220 [ 3 ] Aaron Abood and Dave Feltenberger , Automated patent landscaping , Artif Intell law ( 2018 ) [ 4 ] Andrew Trask , Phil Michalak , and John Liu : SENSE2VEC - A fast and accurate method for word sense disambiguation in neural word embeddings . Dig - 225 ital Reasoning Systems , Inc . 2015 [ 5 ] Assad Abbas , Limin Zhang , and Samee U . Khan . A lit - erature review on the state - of - the - art in patent analysis , World Patent . Information . 2015 29 [ 6 ] Mustafa Sofean , Hidir Aras , and Ahmad Alrifai . A 230 Workﬂow - based Large - Scale Patent Mining and An - alytics Framework . Proceedings of 24th International Conference on Information and Software Technolo - gies . ( ICIST ) ; Vilnius , Litauen . ( 2018 ) [ 7 ] Mustafa Sofean . Deep Learning based Pipeline with 235 Multichannel Inputs for Patent Classiﬁcation . in Pro - ceedings of of PatentSemTech , 1st Workshop on Patent Text Mining and Semantic Technologies ( 2019 ) [ 8 ] Anthony Trippe . Guidelines for Preparing Patent Land - scape Reports . Patinformatics , LLC , With contribu - 240 tions from WIPO Secretariat . ( 2015 ) [ 9 ] World Intellectual Property Report . https : / / www . wipo . int / patentscope / en / programs / patent landscapes / plrdb search . jsp ? territory code = IN ( last access October 2019 ) 30