State of the Art Cellular Stress Failure in Ventilator - injured Lungs Nicholas E . Vlahakis and Rolf D . Hubmayr Thoracic Diseases Research Unit , Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine , Department of Medicine ; and Department of Physiology and Biomedical Engineering , Mayo Clinic College of Medicine , Rochester , Minnesota The clinical and experimental literature has unequivocally estab - lished that mechanical ventilation with large tidal volumes is injuri - ous to the lung . However , uncertainty about the micromechanics of injured lungs and the numerous degrees of freedom in ventilator settings leave many unanswered questions about the biophysical determinantsoflunginjury . Inthisreviewwefocusonexperimental evidence for lung cells as injury targets and the relevance of these studies for human ventilator - associated lung injury . In vitro , the stress - induced mechanical interactions between matrix and adher - ent cells are important for cellular remodeling as a means for pre - venting compromise of cell structure and ultimately cell injury or death . In vivo , these same principles apply . Large tidal volume me - chanical ventilation results in physical breaks in alveolar epithelial and endothelial plasma membrane integrity and subsequent trig - gering of proinflammatory signaling cascades resulting in the cyto - kine milieu and pathologic and physiologic findings of ventilator - associated lung injury . Importantly , though , alveolar cells possess cellular repair and remodeling mechanisms that in addition to pro - tecting the stressed cell provide potential molecular targets for the prevention and treatment of ventilator - associated lung injury in the future . Keywords : alveolar epithelium ; cell injury ; cell mechanics ; cell repair ; mechanical ventilation , plasma membrane tension CONTENTS IntroductionPulmonaryMicromechanicsAlveolarMicromechanics of the Normal Lung Alveolar Micromechanics in Injury States The Blood – Gas Barrier of Ventilator - injured Lungs MorphologyCellularStress Failure in Injured Lungs Cell Responses and Consequences of Deforming Stress Microrheology of Living Cells Cellular Remodeling : Prevention of Plasma Membrane Wounding Plasma Membrane Wounding Plasma Membrane Repair Effects of Deforming Stress on Gene Expression and Cell Survival Conclusions ( Received in original form August 11 , 2004 ; accepted in final form January 21 , 2005 ) Supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health HL - 63178 , American Lung Association , the Brewer Foundation and the Mayo Foundation Correspondence and requests for reprints should be addressed to Nicholas E . Vlahakis , M . D . , MayoClinic ( Stabile8 ) , 200FirstStreetSW , Rochester , MN55905 . E - mail : vlahakis . nicholas @ mayo . edu Am J Respir Crit Care Med Vol 171 . pp 1328 – 1342 , 2005 Originally Published in Press as DOI : 10 . 1164 / rccm . 200408 - 1036SO on February 1 , 2005 Internet address : www . atsjournals . org INTRODUCTION In the United States over 100 , 000 individuals each year develop Acute Lung Injury ( ALI ) and Acute Respiratory Distress Syn - drome ( ARDS ) , the more severe form of ALI ( 1 ) . Current estimates of attributable mortality for ALI / ARDS range be - tween 17 , 000 and 43 , 000 persons per year . Numerous studies suggest that ALI mortality has improved during the past two decades , but remains high , ranging between 25 and 50 % in the most current series ( 2 – 6 ) . While mechanical ventilation is inte - gral to the management of patients with injured lungs , a recent ARDS network trial has made it clear that the choice of ventila - tor settings accounts for as many as one - third of all deaths attrib - uted to ALI ( 7 ) . This , and a preceding smaller trial ( 8 ) , represent the successful bench - to - bedside culmination of decades of re - search that had suggested artiﬁcial ventilation can either cause de novo lung injury or aggravate preexisting lung injury ( re - viewed in Reference 9 ) . The breadth and depth of knowledge regarding mechanical ventilation , ventilator - induced lung injury ( VILI ) , barotrauma , “so - called” biotrauma , and mechanotransduction is far too great to do it justice in a single review . The reader is referred to several outstanding reviews on the pathophysiology and clinical manifestations of VILI ( 9 , 10 ) , on the molecular biology of pulmonary mechanotransduction ( 11 – 18 ) , and on the effects of deforming stress on surfactant biology ( 19 – 22 ) . In this review we will therefore focus primarily on the structural failure of cells and tissues , a relatively novel and underappreciated area of lung biology , as it is causally related to many of the disease manifestations in ventilator - injured lungs . Widespread endothe - lial and epithelial cell disruption and plasma membrane blebbing are indeed hallmarks of the entity and account at least in part for the increased microvascular permeability that is readily ob - served in experimental models of VILI ( 23 – 28 ) . PULMONARY MICROMECHANICS A review of the cellular pathology of ventilator - injured lungs would be incomplete without some discussion of the current understanding of pulmonary micromechanics in health and dis - ease . It is important to note that there remain major gaps in knowledge because the available imaging tools lack sufﬁcient temporal and / or spatial resolution to quantify stresses and strains on the scale of interest . Nonetheless , an appreciation of the governing principles provides the foundation for the design of physiologically relevant in vitro and in vivo studies , the physio - logicbasis forunderstandingexperimentalresults , andultimately a basis for their logical application to modes of clinical practice . Throughout this review we will use terms such as stress , strain , elastic modulus , or stiffness , and have listed their deﬁnitions in Table 1 . Alveolar Micromechanics of the Normal Lung For more than 50 years it has been appreciated that the topo - graphical distributions of lung parenchymal stress and strain are State of the Art 1329 TABLE 1 . DEFINITION OF PHYSICAL TERMS Parameter Definition Comment Strain Dimensionless parameter describing Strain can be thought of as an extension ratio , e . g . , the fractional deformation length change of a spring under a stress . Ideally , the reference state is the unstressed state of the spring / material . The lung in situ is always prestressed , i . e . , transpulmonary pressure is not zero . Therefore , unless stated otherwise we reference lung strain to the lung dimension ( volume ) at end expiration ( e . g . , lung strain is tidal volume divided by the volume at end - expiration ) Stress Force per unit area Note that pressure and stress have identical units and definitions Stiffness Quantity that relates stress and Engineersmayrefertostiffnessaselasticmodulusorshearmodulus . strain according to Hook’s law It has the units of stress Yield Stress The maximal pressure which a Yield Stress is typically 10 (cid:1) 2 to 10 (cid:1) 3 times the shear modulus substance is capable of supporting without fracturing Plastic Deformation A deformation of a body caused by Thinkmashedpotato ! Allbiologicmaterialsincludingcellsundergo an applied stress which remains plastic deformations , i . e . , they do not behave like ideal springs after the stress is removed nonuniform , and the biophysical determinants of this nonunifor - mity are generally understood ( 29 – 32 ) . Accordingly , the lungs and the boundary structures to which they must conform ( rib - cage , diaphragm abdomen , heart , and mediastinum ) are consid - ered gravitationally deformed elastic solids . The shape matching of lung and boundary structures imposes a nonuniform stress and strain ﬁeld . At least in quadrupeds , the weight of the lung is only a minor determinant of nonuniform transpulmonary pres - sures and alveolar volumes ( 30 ) . The gravitational deformations of heart and diaphragm / abdomen turn out to be much more important determinants of regional volume and ventilation than the actions of gravity on the lungs themselves ( 33 , 34 ) . Further - more , with increasing precision of methods for measuring re - gional lung function it is now apparent that there is considerable small - scale heterogeneity in lung parenchymal strain that cannot be explained by any gravitational mechanism ( 35 , 36 ) . Measurements of lung strain in recumbent dogs suggested that the linear dimensions of the lung increase by as much as 40 % during an inﬂation from functional residual capacity ( FRC ) to total lung capacity ( TLC ) ( 37 ) . However , this value is a gross overestimate of the elastic deformation experienced by individ - ual cells and tissue matrix . The lung parenchyma is a connective tissue network that is distorted by surface tension ( 38 ) . Embed - ded in this network are airways and blood vessels , which resist deformation to a greater extent than the surrounding paren - chyma . This difference in mechanical properties is an important source of interdependence and explains why in cases of baro - trauma extraalveolar air generally tracks along bronchovascular bundles or why edema ﬂuid accumulates in perivascular cuffs ( 39 ) . Models of parenchymal micromechanics that are based on morphometric analyses of perfusion - ﬁxed tissue specimens consider the helical network of elastin and collagen ﬁbers that form the alveolar ducts as the primary stress - bearing structures ( 40 – 45 ) . The alveolar walls in turn are largely supported by surface tension , and are thought to simply unfold as lung volume increases ( 46 ) . This explains why macroscopic strains computed from lung regions that are more than 1 cm 3 may grossly overesti - mate the stretch experienced by lung cells during breathing . Aware of this limitation , Tschumperlin and Margulies traced the lengths of alveolar basement membranes in electron microscopic images of alveolar walls and estimated their area change with transpulmonary pressure and volume ( 47 ) . Accordingly , the basement membrane area increased by approximately 35 % dur - ing an inspiratory capacity maneuver , which corresponds to a linear strain and hence cell stretch estimate of about 15 % ( 47 ) . These observations were in keeping with earlier work suggesting that in the normal tidal breathing range alveolar septae simply unfold as opposed to being stretched ( 38 ) . Because most ﬁxatives affect tissue hydration and surface tension and thereby distort lung architecture relative to its in vivo state , the current models of alveolar micromechanics await morphometric conﬁrmation on living , unﬁxed specimens ( 48 ) . Microscopic imaging of canine subpleural alveoli through a pleural window suggested that alve - olar volume changes little during normal breathing ( 49 ) and that the acinus expands nonuniformly ( 43 ) . Because the mechanics of subpleural alveoli may be dominated by their coupling to a relatively inelastic pleural membrane , which in these experi - ments had to be immobilized to generate a focused image , the amplitude of alveolar volume change during quiet breathing is likely to remain a topic of active investigation . Alveolar Micromechanics in Injury States There is a relative paucity of detailed morphometric data on injured lungs , and their interpretation is controversial ( 50 – 55 ) . The long - held view that the heavy injured lung collapses under its own weight has been challenged ( 56 – 58 ) . The challenge rests on the assertion that ﬂuid accumulates in small airways and distal airspaces , which prevents as opposed to promotes the collapse of dependent lung tissue . The effects on gas exchange , i . e . , shunt and low V˙ / Q˙ , are similar , regardless of whether one views the dependent lung as airless and collapsed ( tissue dimensions are decreased ) or occluded by liquid plugs and expanded by edema ( tissue dimensions are normal or increased ) . However , the stresses to which airway and alveolar lining cells are exposed during breath - ing could be quite different . Injured lungs possess two attributes that explain why they are at increased risk for additional deformation injury . The ﬁrst attribute is that the number of alveoli capable of expanding during inspiration is decreased . The injured lung contains nor - mally aerated , poorly aerated , and nonaerated respiratory units ( 59 ) . A smaller number of less injured units are preferentially recruited ( referred to by Gattinoni as “baby lung” [ 60 ] ) , and thus receive a large proportion of the delivered tidal volume . This explains the increased risk of injury from regional overex - pansion . The second attribute is that the local impedance to lung expansion is heterogeneous and a result of the distribution of liquid and surface tension in distal airspaces . This heterogeneity in lung impedances results in shear stress being generated be - tween neighboring , interdependent units that operate at differ - ent volumes , as was ﬁrst detailed by Mead and colleagues ( 61 ) . They pointed out that forces carried by elements of a uniformly 1330 AMERICAN JOURNAL OF RESPIRATORY AND CRITICAL CARE MEDICINE VOL 171 2005 expanded network structure must be uniformly distributed , but that departures from uniformity do generate large stress concen - trations . One of the reasons for such stress concentrations , they argued , was that a change in dimension of one element ( e . g . , a collapsed alveolus ) mandates thatinsertion forces ofneighboring elements ( the surrounding parenchyma ) act over a smaller area . Consequently , local stress , deﬁned as force per unit area , has to increase . Even though Mead’s numeric analyses focused on the reduction in alveolar surface area as principle source of hetero - geneous stress and ignored strain gradients in the surrounding parenchyma , the resulting insights have proven fundamental to understanding the mechanics of injured lungs . In addition to stress concentrations resulting from interde - pendence , there is also injury to small airways and alveolar ducts caused by their repeated opening and closure and by energy dissipation during liquid bridge fracture or stress that is imposed on lining cells by the movement of air – liquid interfaces with respiration ( 62 – 64 ) . Modeling approaches to bubble and liquid ﬂow in tubes , while constrained by simplifying assumptions ( e . g . , rigid tube of uniform diameter , smooth surface ) , are beginning to shed some light on more quantitative aspects of this problem ( 65 , 66 ) . The relative contribution of these distinct injury mecha - nisms in different syndromes and disease models is simply not known . Inferences from animal experiments with short - term physiologic endpoints are at best hypothesis generating , but have yet to demonstrate the circumstance under which any one of these injury mechanisms prevails . THE BLOOD – GAS BARRIER OF VENTILATOR - INJURED LUNGS The ﬁrst experimental study of VILI appeared in 1964 and dem - onstrated that mechanical ventilation with high volumes and pressures altered the surface properties of canine lung extracts ( 67 ) . In 1974 Webb and Tierney reported that mechanical venti - lation with large tidal volumes caused hemorrhagic pulmonary edema in rats ( 68 ) . The ﬁndings established that deforming stresses associated with mechanical ventilation could alter lung barrier function and moreover impair the integrity of the blood – gas barrier . The clinical relevance of these ﬁndings was not appreciated until Egan , and later Parker and coworkers , began to explore the effects of lung volume and mechanical ventilation on pulmonary vascular barrier properties ( 69 – 73 ) . The critical care community took note of this work only after Dreyfuss and colleagues conﬁrmed Webb and Tierney’s observations and demonstrated that tidal volume was a more appropriate determi - nant of deforming and potentially injurious stress than was peak airway pressure ( reviewed in References 9 and 24 ) . Morphology Dreyfuss and colleagues were the ﬁrst to characterize in detail the morphology of the blood – gas barrier of ventilator - injured rat lungs ( 24 ) , extending earlier observations by John and col - leagues in mechanically ventilated rabbit lungs ( 27 ) . Electron micrographs of rat lungs taken after 5 minutes of injurious venti - lation showed interstitial edema and endothelial lesions consisting of plasma - membrane blebs and loss of cell contact with the base - ment membrane . More prolonged exposure to injurious stress produced alveolar epithelial pathology ranging in spectrum from inter - and intracellular gap formations ( Figure 1A ) with denuded basement membranes to extensive cell destruction ( 9 , 24 , 27 ) . These changes in cellular ultrastructure may be viewed as evi - dence for deformation related cell remodeling and / or yielding of the cells’ stress - bearing elements . Interestingly , type II alveolar epithelial cells appeared relatively spared , suggesting that they had experienced a smaller deformation on account of their loca - tion in alveolar corners . In a series of studies motivated by interest in high - altitude physiology , the group of West ( reviewed in Reference 74 ) stud - ied the consequences of capillary pressure on the blood – gas barrier ( Figure 1B ) . The blood – gas barrier of rabbit lungs ex - posed to high capillary pressures revealed not only transcellular epithelial gaps and endothelial lesions , but also basement mem - brane breaks ( 75 , 76 ) . However , frank cell necrosis and large alveolar wounds were not observed . On the basis of these ﬁnd - ings West’s group suggested that under certain conditions capil - lary pressures could exceed the structural limit of the basement membrane , which is the primary stress - bearing element of the blood – gas barrier . For the most part it is composed of a network of type IV collagen ﬁbers , which can withstand considerable tensile stress ( 74 ) . Physiologic andpathologic conditions in which pulmonary capillary stress failure has been observed or strongly suspected include high - altitude pulmonary edema ( 77 ) , conges - tive heart failure , mitral stenosis , and Goodpasture’s Syndrome , which is characterized by an immune mediated weakening of the collagen IV lattice ( 78 ) , as well as high intensity exercise in race horses ( 75 ) and elite athletes ( 79 ) . West’s group also emphasized important mechanical interactions between lung volume , capillary pressure , and the probability of capillary stress failure , which is in keeping with experimental observations on isolated perfused and mechanically ventilated rabbit lungs and a case report of a patient with ARDS ( 75 , 80 ) . Although structural failure of capillary basement membranes has not to date been demonstrated in ventilator - injured lungs , the presence of pulmonary hemorrhage in rat and canine VILI models , which is readily apparent to the naked eye , would be hard to explain by any other mechanism ( 24 , 68 , 81 ) . At the same time , not all hydrostatic pulmonary edema results in capil - lary stress failure ( 53 , 54 ) . That is because the transmural pres - sures at which intraalveolar capillaries experience yield stress is quite high and was estimated by West and colleagues to approxi - mate 40 mm Hg ( 75 ) . Capillary pressures associated with ultra - stuctural changes in adherent endothelial and epithelial cells tend to be considerably lower ( 54 ) . Majno and coworkers recognized as early as 1969 that vascu - lar permeability was at least in part controlled by contractile endothelial cell proteins ( 82 ) . Majno and colleagues postulated that inﬂammatory mediators caused active endothelial contrac - tion with formation of intercellular gaps and subsequent extrava - sation of plasma . Since then , a great deal has been learned about the endothelial regulation of pulmonary vascular barrier properties and about the role of adhesion receptors and cytoskel - etal proteins in this process ( reviewed in References 83 – 87 ) . Moreover , a body of work including the pioneering studies by Neal and Michel on frog mesenteric vessels ( Figure 1C ) has established that certain endothelial agonists and high vascular pressures cause gaps not only between adjacent endothelial cells but also within or through individual endothelial cells ( 88 – 94 ) . These gaps close rapidly upon removal of the deforming stress , restoring normal vascular permeability . These observations are in keeping with the observed plasticity of the blood – gas barrier in transient pulmonary venous hypertension ( 93 ) and intermittent hyperinﬂation ( 94 ) . Cellular Stress Failure in Injured Lungs To test if plasma membrane injury and repair are phenomena in ventilator - injured lungs , Gajic and coworkers perfused ex vivo mechanically ventilated rat lungs with solutions containing the membrane - impermeant label propidium iodide ( PI ) ( 95 ) . When PI enters a cell through a plasma membrane defect , it inter - chelates with DNA and emits red ﬂuorescence upon excitation State of the Art 1331 Figure 1 . Examples of vascular le - sions resulting from deforming stress . ( A ) Imagesoftheblood – gas barrier ( i . e . , intraalveolar capillar - ies ) of rats exposed to injurious mechanical ventilation . Note en - dothelial ( A1 ) and epithelial ( A2 ) blebbingandgapsthataremarkedby arrows . AS (cid:2) alveolar space ; IE (cid:2) interstitial edema ; PN (cid:2) poly - morphonuclear neutrophil . ( Re - produced with permission from Dreyfuss D , et al . Principles and Practices of Mechanical Ventilation . New York : McGraw - Hill , 1994 . pp . 793 – 811 . ) ( B ) Images of the blood – gas barrier of rabbits with hydro - staticpulmonaryedema . Notebleb - bing and vesicle formation ( B1and B2 , thin arrows and asterisks ) as well as the large alveolar fenestration with denuded / exposed basement membrane ( B3 , wide arrow ) . AE (cid:2) alveolar edema ; BM (cid:2) basement membrane ; End (cid:2) endothelium . ( B1 and B2 reproduced with per - mission from Reference 54 ; B3 re - produced with permission from Reference 25 . ) ( C ) Images of two adherent endothelial cells ( red and yellow ) fromafrogmesentericcap - illary thatis exposed tohigh vascu - lar pressures . Upperpanel (cid:2) en - face view ; lower panel (cid:2) cross - section . Note the intracellular gap forma - tion ( G1 ) and the preserved inter - cellular tight junction . ( Reproduced withpermissionfromReference89 . ) ( D ) Scanning electron - micrograph of an intraalveolar pulmonary cap - illary from a mechanically venti - latedpatientwithacuterespiratorydistresssyndrome ( D1 ) . Note that the capillary / basement membrane fracture ( D2 is magnified view ) . ( ReproducedwithpermissionfromReference80 . ) with blue light . PI - positive cells can therefore be identiﬁed in optical sections of subpleural airspaces obtained with laser con - focal microscopy ( Figure 2 ) . In aseries ofvalidation experiments , Gajic and colleagues showed that the number of subpleural cells with membrane defects increases with increasing tidal volumes and duration of stress exposure , and that cell injury correlates reasonably well with other physiologic and histologic injury mark - ers . More importantly , by comparing preparations that had been labeled during ventilation at injurious settings with those labeled after removal ofthe injurious stress , Gajic andassociates inferred that over 60 % of injured cells repair plasma membrane defects . In aggregate experimental studies conﬁrm that injurious me - chanical ventilation produces stress failure of capillary basement membranes as well as of adherent cells . It is not clear if epithelial and endothelial cells are the only lung cells predisposed to stress failure , what role the subcortical cytoskeleton plays in strain - related plasma membrane breaks , or if stress failure of the base - ment membrane invariably leads to stress failure of cells . It is also not clear if intercellular and / or intracellular gap formation in adherent cells is an active remodeling response to adapt to large substratum strains . In frog mesenteric microvessel experi - ments relevant tolung deformation , the pressure atwhich plasma extravasatesthrough intracellulargaps wasshown tobe tempera - ture - sensitive ( 96 ) . Because low temperature had no measurable effect on the vessels’ compliance , the investigators attributed gap formation to inhibition of active deformation - induced cell remodeling as opposed to structural failure consequent to a basement membrane break ( i . e . , the capillary is more leaky but not more fragile ) . Alternatively , recent experiments using rat pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells suggest that vessel leakiness resulting from mechanical cell wounding may be a result of weakened cell – cell adhesion resulting from decreases in the expression of the cell juctional protein , (cid:3) - catenin ( 97 ) . CELL RESPONSES AND CONSEQUENCES OF DEFORMING STRESS The response of cells to deforming forces is a result of the cell’s ability to “sense” and transduce these stimuli . Experiments 1332 AMERICAN JOURNAL OF RESPIRATORY AND CRITICAL CARE MEDICINE VOL 171 2005 Figure 2 . Light microscopic ( up - per panel ) and live tissue images ( lower panel ) of isolated perfused rat lungs after mechanical ventila - tion at noninjurious ( tidal volume 6 ml / kg ) or injurious ( tidal volume 40 ml / kg ) settings . The perfusate contained propidium iodide , a membrane - impermeant molecule , which on entering the cell emits a red fluorescence when it is inter - chelated with RNA or DNA . Note the increased cellularity , the peri - vascular hemorrhage , and the damage to small airway lining cells in the histologic section of the in - jured lung . Note the prominent red nuclei of transiently or perma - nently wounded subpleural cells in the live tissue images obtained with laser confocal microscopy . ( ReproducedwithpermissionfromReference95 . ) studying the molecular mechanisms of mechanotransduction have implicated numerous candidates . However , the nature of their interrelatedness , cooperativity , and cell and tissue speciﬁc - ity remain areas of continued rigorous investigation . The reader is referred to a number of excellent reviews addressing cellular mechanotransduction ( 98 – 100 ) . In this section we will discuss the general principles of cellular microrheology as a platform for highlighting the cellular consequences and adaptive and re - parative responses to cell deformation that mimics the injurious effect of mechanical ventilation in vivo . Microrheology of Living Cells The principle stress - bearing elements of the lung , which account for its tendency to recoil , are elastin and collagen ﬁber networks and surface tension . Indeed , the lung can be viewed as a tissue network that is distorted by surface tension ( 46 ) . While the resistance of cells to deformation contributes little to overall lung stiffness , lung cells must nevertheless adapt to deformations of the scaffolding to which they adhere . Cells interact with their surroundingsthroughadhesionreceptors suchasintegrins , which provide dynamic bidirectional links between the cytoskeleton and the extracellular matrix ( 101 – 103 ) . An increase in basement membrane surface area that accompanies a large tidal breath thus imposes a shape change on adherent alveolar epithelial and microvascular endothelial cells . Both epithelial and endothelial cells are subjected to deforming stress during breathing as a result of the interdependent effects of lung volume , transpulmo - nary pressure , surface tension , and vascular pressure on the blood – gas barrier ( 75 ) . The resulting cellular shape change man - dates that cell surface to volume ratio increase , and this is gener - ally accompanied by a reorganization of the cell’s stress - bearing elements ( i . e . , the cytoskeleton ) . The cytoskeleton is an interconnected network of biopoly - mers that exert centripetal forces on the surrounding matrix ( 104 , 105 ) . It is covered by the plasma membrane , a lipid bilayer , the molecular constituents of which are organized in speciﬁc outer and inner leaﬂet domains ( 106 ) . Compared with cytoskele - tal proteins , the plasma membrane carries little stress under physiologic conditions ( 107 ) . Nevertheless , it may experience lytic tensions when a large shape change is externally imposed . This can be readily documented in epithelial monolayers that are grown on malleable membranes and subjected to large defor - mations ( 108 – 112 ) . Interestingly , plasma membrane defects re - sulting from large substratum strains tend to be transient and rapidly repaired ( 112 ) . The mechanical properties of solid materials can be described State of the Art 1333 Figure 3 . Cartoon of putative cel - lular mechanosensing structures ( A ) andtheirresponsetodeforming stress ( B ) . ( A ) Deformation ( strain ) of the matrix ( basement mem - brane ) generates a force , which is transmitted via adhesion receptors ( e . g . , integrins ) tothecell . Todate , over 50 different focal adhesion proteins have been identified that link adhesion receptors to the ten - sion bearing elements of the cyto - skeleton ( CSK ) . They are thought to be a major locus of mechanosens - ing , i . e . , theyrespondtoforcesthat are either generated by the cells ( viamolecularmotors ) andarecar - riedviatheCSKorwhichareexter - nally imposed ( e . g . , in the lung during breathing ) and transmitted to the CSK . Moreover , tension - bearing elements of the CSK can connect directly to protein chan - nels ( shown in blue ) , thereby me - chanically gating ion flux through them . ( B ) An externally imposed shape change is associated with the unfolding of excess plasma membrane . As lateral tension of the unfolded plasma membrane increases channel proteins ( e . g . , mechanosensitive cation chan - nels ) , that are suspended by hy - drophobicmatchinginthelipidbi - layer , undergo a conformational change and ion flux ( e . g . , Ca 2 (cid:4) ) increases . The increase in plasma membrane tension triggers a vig - orouslipid ( andprotein ) trafficking response ( brown and yellow vesi - cles ) that results in a net growth of plasma membrane surface area . by elastic constants that characterize the material’s resistance to changes in volume and shape ( 31 ) . Within this framework , yield - stress and lytic stress are quantities denoting the material’s susceptibility to plastic deformation and structural failure . Mate - rial properties have been estimated for cell constituents such as cytoskeletal proteins , cytoskeletal networks , lipid bilayers , and plasma membranes , as well as whole cells including alveolar and bronchial epithelial cells ( 113 , 114 ) . In the context of a discussion on cell injury two characteristics of biomaterials deserve com - ment : ( 1 ) the distinct rheologic properties of network structures ( 115 – 117 ) and ( 2 ) the importance of active remodeling in de - termining cell plasticity ( 118 – 120 ) . Because cells and speciﬁcally their cytoskeleton are network structures , the mechanical properties of individual stress - bearing elements ( e . g . , single actin ﬁbers ) are only secondary determi - nants of a cell’s deformation resistance . Cells are prestressed networks of tension - bearing microﬁlaments that are coupled to compression - resistant microtubules and extracellular matrix molecules ( 117 ) . As such , their resistance to deformation is criti - cally dependent on the interconnectedness of the network struc - ture and on the rate at which molecular contacts between stress - bearing elements can be broken , degraded , and reformed . Living cells display a great deal of plasticity , that is , the network of stress - bearing elements remodels readily when it is subjected to a deforming stress ( 121 – 123 ) Deformation induced remodeling involves active , energy - dependent processes that may well pro - vide a safeguard against the development of structural failure ( 112 , 124 , 125 ) . Cellular Remodeling : Prevention of Plasma Membrane Wounding Matrix - and cytoskeleton - dependent mechano - sensing and remod - eling . Proteins that link the extracellular matrix with stress bear - ing cytoskeletal biopolymers play a pivotal role in mechanosen - sing and transduction ( 101 , 126 – 129 ) . They are assembled in so - called focal adhesion sites , plaques , or complexes and can be thought of as mini - strain gauges that monitor local force ( Fig - ure 3 ) . Focal adhesions are highly plastic structures and remodel in a force - dependent manner . This allows adherent cells to probe the regional impedance of the surrounding scaffolding and in turn provides cues for directional control of locomotion and cell shape ( 101 , 105 ) . The most extensively studied adhesion receptors involved in mechanotransduction are the integrins . After ligand - induced activation , integrins transduce matrix - dependent intra - cellular biochemical signals ( 130 ) through structural associations with adaptor proteins , which include GTPases ( 131 ) , receptor 1334 AMERICAN JOURNAL OF RESPIRATORY AND CRITICAL CARE MEDICINE VOL 171 2005 and nonreceptor tyrosine kinases ( 132 – 136 ) , and phosphoinosi - tides ( 137 , 138 ) . Other adhesion molecules such as cadherins are also increasingly recognized as playing important roles in mechanotransduction ( 133 ) and as molecular targets of deforma - tion induced impairments of epithelial and endothelial barrier function ( 97 , 139 , 140 ) . Through numerous distinct but interrelated biochemical sig - nals , matrix molecules undoubtedly play a major role in lung remodeling induced by stress ( 141 – 143 ) . For example , bronchial epithelial cells exposed to a compressive stress in vitro elicit a proﬁbrotic response in unstressed ﬁbroblasts ( 144 ) . Compressive stress was shown to shrink the lateral intercellular space sur - rounding epithelial cells , and thereby triggered signaling via au - tocrine binding of epidermal growth factor family ligands to the epidermal growth factor receptor ( 145 ) . Remodeling responses are also initiated through paracrine signaling involving ﬁbronec - tin , collagen , and matrix metalloproteinases ( MMP ) . In a rat model of VILI , expression of the extracellular matrix metallo - proteinase inducer ( EMMPRIN ) , gelatinase A and B , MT1 - MP were induced in lung endothelium ( 146 , 147 ) . In the rabbit , mechanical ventilation with high positive end - expiratory pres - sure ( PEEP ) was associated with increased mRNA expression of extracellular matrix proteins such as (cid:5) 2 ( IV ) procollagen and ﬁbronectin ( 141 ) . These effects were measured in the absence of alveolar cell breaks , as quantiﬁed by electron microscopy , and were accompanied by an increase in mRNA of the mitogenic growth factors TGF - (cid:3) 1 and basic ﬁbroblast growth factor . The authors attributed the ﬁndings to wall stress – induced vascular remodeling . It is not our intent to provide a comprehensive review or even a complete list of the large number of publications dealing withinjuredlungs andmatrixandadhesion molecules . Wesimply underscore that these molecules are integral to cell and tissue remodeling regardless of whether their expression is triggered by the structural failure of a stress - bearing element or initiated by some other mechanotransduction event . Regulation of cell surface area and plasma membrane tension . The hypothesis that deformation induced remodeling is vital in the prevention of cellular stress failure applies not only to remodeling responses involving matrix and cytoskeletal proteins , but also to vesicular lipid trafﬁcking to and from the plasma membrane ( Figure 3 ) . This lipid trafﬁcking serves as a means of regulating cell surface area and plasma membrane tension and ultimately helps to prevent plasma membrane stress failure ( 112 , 124 , 125 , 148 ) . To the extent to which plasma membrane stress failure is one of the triggers of proinﬂammatory signaling and / or cell death in ventilator - injured lungs , it becomes impor - tant to understand how cells regulate plasma membrane surface area and tension . In a thought - provoking essay , Morris discusses the evolution - ary question of how apparent regulatory feedback loops for cell volume and surface area came into being ( 149 ) . She concludes that size regulation in the earliest protocells would have been governed by liposome physics and develops the argument that monitoring and regulationof lipid bilayer tensionultimately deter - mines a cell - size set point . According to that theory , changes in bilayer tension could have altered membrane conductivity for osmolytes and consequently effected a cell volume change . Mod - ern cellshave evolvedmore elaborate controlmechanisms linked to protein - regulated expenditures of energy and ﬂuxes of materi - als . Cells sense a multitude of ﬂux rates such as the rates of endocytosis , exocytosis , protein channel or pump activities , and the polymerization rates of cytoskeletal networks . Volume , sur - face area , and shape are simply consequences of the weighted distributions of the respective rate constants , but are not the sensed quantities themselves . Plasma membrane tension is cen - tral to many of these control loops . As detailed below , changes in plasma membrane tension not only effect membrane ion and water conductivities but also the rates of membrane addition ( exocytosis ) and retrieval ( endocytosis ) ( 150 ) . For example , in - creases in plasma membrane tension , in response to a hypoosmolar challenge , produce a net increase in plasma membrane , whereas a fall in tension results in membrane retrieval ( 151 , 152 ) . Deformation - induced lipid trafﬁcking . Changes in the dimen - sion of the connective tissue matrix during breathing impose a shape change in adherent cells which ought to intermittently raise plasma membrane tension . Therefore , Vlahakis and col - leagues reasoned that to prevent lytic membrane tensions , alveo - lar epithelial cells would demonstrate a net exocytic lipid traf - ﬁcking response during stretch in culture ( 125 ) . Not only did they demonstrate active lipid vesicle trafﬁcking to the plasma membrane that was temperature - and energy - dependent , but also that the response could be inhibited by both cytoskeleton active agents and by cholesterol depletion of the plasma mem - brane ( 112 ) . Recent observations have conﬁrmed the importance of deformation - induce lipid trafﬁcking over plasma membrane unfolding in the surface area regulation of tonically stretched alveolar epithelial cells ( 148 ) . It must be emphasized that the mechanisms underlying this trafﬁcking response cannot be equated with those governing deformation - induced surfactant secretion by type II alveolar epithelial cells ( 153 , 154 ) . Deforming stresses can also trigger endocytic responses , as was demonstrated in umbrella cells of pressurized porcine blad - ders and in radially strained alveolar epithelial cells ( 155 , 156 ) . That stretch would trigger endocytosis of surface membrane lipids might seem counterintuitive when considered in the con - text of plasma membrane tension regulation . However , the ex - perimental evidence is undeniable and suggests that exocytic and endocytic trafﬁcking responses are intrinsically linked ( 157 ) . While exocytosis and endocytosis may be temporarily dissoci - ated , their relativerates probably do vary withplasma membrane tension . Furthermore , preliminary evidence from alveolar epi - thelial cell lines suggests that stretch - induced internalization of lipids proceeds via distinct molecular pathways ( 156 ) . Several observations on normal and injured lungs raise inter - est in the molecule and pathway speciﬁcity of deformation trig - gered vesicular trafﬁcking . When lungs suffer relatively mild forms of interstitial pulmonary edema , the lipid microdomains of lung cell surfacemembranesundergo asubstantialreorganization ( 158 , 159 ) . The functional consequence of membrane remodeling , which is almost certainly accompanied by changes in surface protein ex - pression , remains to be explored . In vitro , such changes are associ - ated with changes in cell phenotype and by inference , changes in the cells’ susceptibility to mechanical injury ( 109 , 160 , 161 ) . For example , membrane remodeling by loading alveolar epithe - lial cell membranes with lipids such as cholesterol results in the formation of specialized microdomains ( see below ) , which in turn accelerates transdifferentiation from the Type II to Type I phenotype , whichpossessdifferentmechanicalproperties ( 162 , 163 ) . This may also be relevant insofar as the alveolar exudate of injured lungs contains cell debris and is cholesterol rich ( 164 ) . As the progenitor of the type I cell , during alveolar wound healing , type II cells must divide and differentiate in a cholesterol - rich environment . If and how excess cholesterol effects the differenti - ation of ATIIs to the ATI phenotype in vivo , and the conse - quences of this differentiation on deformation - induced lipid traf - ﬁcking and mechanotransduction , are not known . The plasma membrane of eukaryotic cells is enriched in cho - lesterol and phosphatidylcholine and also contains high levels of sphingolipids ( 165 , 166 ) . Lipids and proteins of the plasma membrane are hydrophobically matched to maintain a low mem - brane - energy state . Changes in protein and lipid composition State of the Art 1335 Figure 4 . Schematic of the cellular response to membrane stress fail - ure . Calciumentersthecellthrough a plasma membrane defect . Sus - tained large elevations in intracellu - lar Ca 2 (cid:4) produce necrosis . Smaller transients in intracellular Ca 2 (cid:4) ini - tiate cell repair responses . Cells re - pair membrane defects but several mechanisms ( right - hand side ) . Mechanism 1 involves lateral flow plasma membrane lipids driven the free energy ( analogous to sur - face tension ) at the wound edge . This mechanisms is thought to play a role in the healing of small defects . Mechanism 2 is the fusion ofearlyendosomeswiththeplasmamembrane . Mechanism 3 involves thecoalescenceofvesicularorgan - elles ( usually lysosomes ) , which form a patch and plugs the wound by Ca 2 (cid:4) - induced , site - directed ex - ocytosis . Wounding and repair triggeralsothetranslocationofnu - clear transcription factors like NF (cid:6) - B , leading to the induction of early stress response genes and thereby initiate proinflammatory signaling cascades . alter the membrane energy state and thereby inﬂuence cell func - tion ( 167 ) . Sphingolipids play important roles in a wide variety of cell functions , including mechanotransduction ( 157 ) . Their concentration in cell membranes is tightly regulated in close association with cholesterol , with which they form membrane microdomains ( 168 , 169 ) . In endothelial cells , ﬁbroblasts , and some epithelial cells , sphingolipids , cholesterol , and GPI - anchored proteins appear to have a preferential association with 50 - to 100 - nm pits called caveolae as deﬁned by the marker protein caveolin ( 170 ) . These structures play an important role in non – clathrin - dependent endocytosis and in contrast to surfactant se - creting type II cells can be readily identiﬁed in type I alveolar epithelium ( 171 – 174 ) . To the extent to which caveolae are plasma membrane invaginations that may unfold when laterally stressed , they might not only be important for the mechanotransduction of deformation - induced lipid trafﬁcking , but also central for the maintenance of sublytic membrane tension . Plasma Membrane Wounding Plasma membrane wounding is a common event in exercising muscles and it plays a central role in the pathogenesis of progres - sive muscle failure in some forms of muscular dystrophy ( 175 , 176 ) . Cell wounding is the reason why patients with increased myocardial stress often have elevated serum levels of “cardiac enzymes , ” and it probably occurs in the lining cells of the gastro - intestinal tract on a regular basis ( 177 , 178 ) . Increasingly , it is being recognized that excessive mechanical forces in the lung result in tissue damage that is characterized by lung cell injury and plasma membrane wounding ( 24 , 95 ) . Normally , theplasma membranecarriestensilestress thatisat least one order of magnitude lower than that born by ﬁlamentous actin ( 104 , 150 , 179 , 180 ) . The tension at which the plasma mem - brane fractures is estimated to range between 1 and 25 mN / m , corresponding to membrane strains of only 1 to 3 % ( 181 , 182 ) . Lytic tensions vary with the composition and organization of the lipid bilayer as well as with the timeframe for breakage ( 180 , 183 ) . At least in model membranes , lytic tensions are loading rate – dependent , implying a kinetic process that begins with nu - cleation of a molecular - scale defect , which either resolves spon - taneously or grows to become an unsustainable hole . Several studies have examined the molecular as well as bio - physical determinants of plasma membrane stress failure in cul - tured alveolar epithelial cells ( 108 – 112 ) . Results of these studies may be summarized as follows : The probability of stress failure varies with strain amplitude and strain rate . For example , mini - mal wounding occurs in A549 cells , a human adenocarcinoma cell line , when strain rates are kept at or below 3 % / second at a normally injurious strain amplitude ( 112 ) . The susceptibility for deformation - related stress failure varies considerably between cells and cell culture systems , as does the probability of subse - quent membrane repair . Interventions that effect cytoskeletal assembly or vesicular trafﬁcking increase the susceptibility of cells to wounding presumably by impairing their ability to re - model stress - bearing structures ( 112 ) . Plasma Membrane Repair The ability to restore membrane integrity after cell wounding is essential for cell survival and virtually all cells possess the means to do so ( Figures 3 and 4 ) . Until recently the prevailing view held that injured plasma membranes repaired primarily by “self - sealing” whereby hydrophobic interactions between phos - pholipids and water would drive lipid ﬂow toward the free edges of a defect ( 184 , 185 ) . Indeed , this mechanism is readily observed in model membranes and red blood cells ( 186 ) . However , by 1336 AMERICAN JOURNAL OF RESPIRATORY AND CRITICAL CARE MEDICINE VOL 171 2005 itself it is insufﬁcient for repair of large wounds and does not account for resealing in nucleated cells ( 186 ) . In 1994 , Steinhardt and coworkers described wounding re - sponses in sea urchin eggs and provided the ﬁrst clues that repair was governed by Ca 2 (cid:4) - dependent membrane trafﬁcking and fu - sion events ( 187 ) . During the subsequent decade several groups of investigators have extended these observations to mammalian cells and have added considerable detail to our understanding of the responsible molecular mechanisms ( reviewed in Reference 175 ) . Small disruptions on the order of 1 (cid:7) m evoke a calcium - dependent exocytosis of vesicles near the wound site , lower plasma membrane tension , and thereby facilitate wound closure ( 188 ) . The generation and trafﬁcking of vesicles involves non - muscle myosin and is sensitive to disruptions of the actin cyto - skeleton ( 189 , 190 ) . A rise in cytosolic Ca 2 (cid:4) consequent to the loss of plasma membrane integrity also promotes the coalescence of vesicular endomembranes ( 190 – 194 ) . These are transported as a “patch” to the site of larger defects and fuse there with the plasma membrane . Lysosomes appear to be a ubiquitous source of endomembrane patches in wounded cells and the release of lysosomal contents after membrane injury may well be a primi - tive defense mechanism against invading pathogens ( 195 – 200 ) . Additional novel classes of vesicular organelles have been impli - cated in cell repair , but their speciﬁc roles and functions remain to be deﬁned ( 201 , 202 ) . Cells also possess adaptive mechanisms to protect their plasma membranes against repeated mechanical insults . In 3T3 ﬁbro - blasts , repeated membrane wounding results in long - term poten - tiation of Ca 2 (cid:4) - regulated vesicular exocytosis in turn generating faster membrane resealing rates ( 189 , 195 , 203 ) . This adaptive response requires cAMP - dependent protein kinase A over the short term ( minutes ) and cAMP response element - binding pro - tein over the long term ( days ) . Vesicular fusion reactions are catalyzed by diverse proteins , which mediate the initial recogni - tion of the membranes that are destined for fusion ( 196 ) . They pull the membranes close to each other to destabilize the lipid / water interface and to initiate mixing of the lipids . For example , synaptotagmins function as Ca 2 (cid:4) sensors in membrane fusion and play a prominent role in lysosomal exocytosis ( 204 – 206 ) . Synaptotagmin VII – deﬁcient mice show defects in cell resealing and develop a form of autoimmune myositis ( 207 ) . This suggests that defective membrane repair and the consequent release of intracellular contents overwhelms immune tolerance to self anti - gens . Although lung morphology and function of synaptotagmin VII – deﬁcient mice have not been characterized to date , it is of note that another syndrome with impaired lysosomal exocytosis , the Hermansky - Pudlak syndrome , is associated with lung pathol - ogy ( 208 ) . EFFECTS OF DEFORMING STRESS ON GENE EXPRESSION AND CELL SURVIVAL Since the landmark paper by Tremblay and colleagues , which demonstrated a relationship between ventilator settings and in - ﬂammatory signaling , the immune and inﬂammatory responses of lungs to mechanical stress have been extensively studied ( 209 ; reviewed in References 13 and 15 ) . Notwithstanding some de - bate about model , cell , and timing speciﬁc differences in the expression of inﬂammatory mediators , in aggregate the evidence leaves little doubt that inﬂammation is integral to the pathobiol - ogy of the syndrome ( 210 – 213 ) . The concomitant impairment in lung barrier function contributes to the loss of compartmental - ization and may account for many of the systemic manifestations of ventilator - associated lung injury ( 214 – 220 ) . The inﬂammatory effect of mechanical deformation on uninjured lungs ( “one hit” ) compared with preinjured lungs ( “two hits” ) remains an area of important and continued investigation ( 221 ) . The signal transduction pathways that link deformation to some gene response are being characterized in ever - increasing detail ( 14 , 18 , 222 ) . Nevertheless , theimportance ofplasma mem - brane wounding in initiating a widespread proinﬂammatory gene response in ventilator - injured lungs is difﬁcult to discern ( 213 , 223 ) . It is clear that not all molecular responses to mechanical ventilation are associated with lung edema or micron - scale plasma membrane lesions ( 224 ) . Indeed , observations on macrophages and epithelial cells in culture suggest that deforming stress can trigger the release of proinﬂammatory cytokines in the absence of gross cell injury ( 211 , 212 , 225 ) . At the time these observations ﬁrst appeared , there was some debate if and how an alveolar macrophage might be deformed during mechanical ventilation , and if macrophages or epithelial cells were the predominant source of inﬂammatory mediators in ventilator - injured lungs . In the interim , the role of epithelial cells as active participants in pulmonary immune responses has been largely acknowledged ( 226 ) . However , there are virtually no data on epithelial cell strain in situ , let alone data on how an epithelial deformation is transmitted to an adherent macrophage . Be this as it may , many whole animal models of VILI in which inﬂammatory mech - anisms have been characterized have employed ventilation strat - egies known to produce cell and plasma membrane stress failure ( 24 , 68 , 95 ) . When plasma membrane lesions are produced in cell culture , they invariably cause the translocation of nuclear factor - (cid:6) B followed by the induction of early stress response genes ( Figure 4 ) ( 227 ) . It is reasonable to think that similar events occur in intact mechanically ventilated lungs . Moreover , the resulting induction of CXC chemokines could be ampliﬁed and transmitted to uninjured cells by cell contact – as well as non – cell contact – dependent pathways ( 213 , 228 – 231 ) . In that sce - nario , plasma membrane wounding becomes the critical mechano - sensing event that initiates and propagates the inﬂammatory response in the whole organ . Understanding the gene proﬁle of cells that wound , compared with those that are able to prevent or repair wounding , may provide potential protein candidates for further study and chemotherapeutic targeting . Cell wounding not only results in gene expression , but can ultimately lead to cell death via cell necrosis or apoptosis . Apo - ptosis or programmed cell death is an integral mechanism of inﬂammation , tissue remodeling , and repair . Not surprisingly , therefore , the role of apoptotic mechanisms in lung injury have generated considerable interest , and several reports that injured lungs contain apoptotic cells have appeared ( 232 – 234 ) . While type II cell hyperplasia and cell necrosis dominate the acute phase of VILI , tissue specimens from patients with resolving ARDS have revealed type II cell apoptosis ( 235 ) . The paucity of apoptotic cells in acutely injured lungs of hyperventilated animals contrasts with the abundance of apoptotic cells in the kidney and GI tract ( 220 ) . Although it is established that de - forming stress can trigger apoptotic responses in lung and muscle cells , it is not known if plasma membrane injury or nuclear deformation are contributing or even necessary priming events ( 236 – 242 ) . In addition , the signals that lead a cell to necrosis or apoptosis remain to be elucidated . In the preceding paragraphs , we have highlighted just a few examples of the effects of deforming forces on important cellular responses such as gene expression and resultant protein produc - tion , cell proliferation , and survival . Several important issues remain to be explained . First , what is the downstream effect of mechanical forces resulting in cell wounding compared with wounding and subsequent repair ? What are the determining structural , physiologic , and biological characteristics of cells that fall into each category ? Finally , what if any difference is there State of the Art 1337 in this cellular response between the cells of the lung ( epithelium versus endothelium versus [ lipo - ] ﬁbroblast ) ? CONCLUSIONS Motivated by our interest in ventilator - induced and ventilator - associated acute lung injury , we have reviewed the determinants and consequences of the mechanical failure of lung structures . We have focused on tissue elements that are not ordinarily consid - ered important for stress bearing , namely cells and their plasma membranes . Nevertheless , they are susceptible to deformation injury and serve both as sensors and effectors of the innate immune responses that are triggered by physical stress . We have deliberately sought to assimilate observations from nonpulmo - nary ﬁelds to broaden our and the reader’s perspective on a problem that should be of interest to practicing intensivists and pulmonary scientists alike . Central to our review is the premise that many manifestations of VILI , be they edema , inﬂammation , or tissue remodeling and ﬁbrosis , can be traced to stress failure of cell membranes . Although injury is not the only trigger of deformation - related cell signaling , one must never forget that it is cells and not alveoli , airways , blood vessels , or connective tissue that sense and transduce local stress . Two interventions , which have re - ceived close attention in the critical care literature , namely low tidal volume and high PEEP , clearly reduce cellular stress failure in experimental lung injury models ( 95 , 62 ) . Therefore , one may consider gas exchange , lung aeration , or respiratory mechanics to be surrogates for the real therapeutic objective , namely to prevent cellular stress failure and to enhance airway and alveolar wound healing by physical means . Because wound healing re - quires cell migration , proliferation , and epithelial transdifferenti - ation , it is important to understand if and how the aeration of a previously ﬂooded or “closed” airspace inﬂuences these critical cell biologic functions . Speciﬁcally , there remain fundamental questions about mechanisms through which interfacial forces , cell strain , and gas tension interact to effect epithelial wound repair . Intensivists , who interpret gas exchange and mechanics in a cell biological context , may develop a different perspective on rationale and efﬁcacy of certain treatment approaches . For ex - ample , some believe that bilevel pressure ventilation obviates the need for limiting tidal volume in mechanically ventilated patients with injured lungs ( 243 ) . This opinion is largely grounded in the observation that preserving diaphragm activity prevents the atel - ectasis of diaphragm apposed dependent lung . In other words , the loss of regional aeration is equated with injury . However , the prognostic relevance of the surrogate endpoint , atelectasis , remains unclear . Cells are injured because the matrix to which they adhere undergoes large deformations or because their api - cal membranes are “abraded” by the cyclic movement of air – liquid interfaces and foam across them ( 64 , 112 ) . None of the observed effects of bilevel pressure ventilation on regional lung aeration directly address these cell injury mechanisms . More - over , the sometimes overlooked work by Mascheroni and col - leagues argues that hyperventilation - induced lung injury need not be restricted to positive pressure breathing ( 244 ) . This is because large oscillations in alveolar volume and surface area , be they generated by machines or the respiratory muscles , over time impair the physicochemical properties of surfactant ( 245 – 247 ) . The point of this example is not to refute claims of efﬁcacy of bilevel pressure ventilation , but only to raise caution against the ready acceptance of a surrogate physiologic endpoint as proof of beneﬁt . The focus on cellular stress failure as central to VILI also suggests new treatment targets . These include molecules in - volved in the regulation of deformation - induced cytoskeletal remodeling , lipid trafﬁcking , and membrane repair . Much pre - clinical work will need to be done before related approaches can be tested at the bedside . On the other hand , some “old drugs” that are currently in use for different indications may already point in this direction . For example , it has been known for some time that (cid:3) - adrenergic receptor agonists preserve bar - rier properties of ventilator - injured lungs ( 248 ) . Among the many putative mechanisms of beneﬁt is a cyclic adenosine mono - phosphate ( cAMP ) - mediated effect on the endothelial cell cyto - skeleton . To think that a change in the resistance of endothelial cells to deforming stress could alter their susceptibility for stress failure would take but a small leap of faith and is an intriguing and testable hypothesis . The current approach to mechanical ventilation is built on the foundations of classic cardiopulmonary physiology and respiratory system mechanics . In dealing with VILI , the critical care community has in the past decade discov - ered an important connection between mechanics and innate immunity . The term “biotrauma” coined by Arthur Slutsky em - braces and underscores this connection ( 249 ) . Has the time come to add plasma membrane and cytoskeletal biology to the topics an intensivist should know something about ? We hope that this review convinces the reader that the answer is “yes . ” Conflict of Interest Statement : N . E . V . does not have a financial relationship with a commercial entity that has an interest in the subject of this manuscript ; R . D . H . does nothave a financial relationshipwith a commercialentity that hasan interest in the subject of this manuscript . References 1 . Rubenfeld GD . Epidemiology of acute lung injury . Crit Care Med 2003 ; 31 : S276 – S284 . 2 . MossM , ManninoDM . Raceandgenderdifferencesinacuterespiratory distress syndromedeaths inthe United States : An analysisof multiple cause mortality data ( 1979 – 1996 ) . Crit Care Med 2002 ; 30 : 1679 – 1685 . 3 . Bersten AD , Edibam C , Hunt T , Moran J . Incidence and mortality of acute lung injury and the acute respiratory distress syndrome in three Australian States . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002 ; 165 : 443 – 448 . 4 . Milberg JA , Davis DR , Steinberg KP , Hudson LD . Improved survival of patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome ( ARDS ) : 1983 – 1993 . JAMA 1995 ; 273 : 306 – 309 . 5 . Luhr OR , Antonsen K , Karlsson M , Aardal S , Thorsteinsson A , Frosell CG , Bonde J . Incidence and mortality after acute respiratory failure and acute respiratory distress syndrome in Sweden , Denmark , and Iceland . TheARF Study Group . AmJ Respir Crit CareMed 1999 ; 159 : 1849 – 1861 . 6 . Abel SJ , Finney SJ , Brett SJ , Keogh BF , Morgan CJ , Evans TW . Re - duced mortality in association with the acute respiratory distress syndrome ( ARDS ) . Thorax 1998 ; 53 : 292 – 294 . 7 . The Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome Network . Ventilation with lower tidal volumes as compared with traditional tidal volumes for acute lung injury and the acute respiratory distress syndrome . N Engl J Med 2000 ; 342 : 1301 – 1308 . 8 . Amato MBP , Barbas CSV , Medeiros DM , Magaldi RB , Schettino GDP , Lorenzi G , Kairalla RA , Deheinzelin D , Munoz C , Oliveira R , et al . Effect of a protective - ventilation strategy on mortality in the acute respiratory distress syndrome . N Engl J Med 1998 ; 338 : 347 – 354 . 9 . Dreyfuss D , Saumon G . Ventilator - induced lung injury : lessons from experimental studies . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998 ; 157 : 294 – 323 . 10 . Whitehead T , Slutsky AS . The pulmonary physician in critical care : 7 . Ventilator - induced lung injury . Thorax 2002 ; 7 : 635 – 642 . 11 . Uhlig S . Mechanotransduction in the lung : ventilation - induced lung injury and mechanotransduction : stretching it too far ? Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2002 ; 282 : L892 – L896 . 12 . Frank JA , Matthay MA . Science review : mechanisms of ventilator - induced injury . Crit Care 2003 ; 7 : 233 – 241 . 13 . Pugin J . Molecular mechanisms of lung cell activation induced by cyclic stretch . Crit Care Med 2003 ; 31 : S200 – S206 . 14 . LiuM , TanswellAK , Post M . Mechanicalforce - induced signaltransduc - tion in lung cells . Am J Physiol 1999 ; 277 : L667 – L683 . 15 . Dos Santos CC , Slutsky AS . Invited review : mechanisms of ventilator - induced lung injury : a perspective . J Appl Physiol 2000 ; 89 : 1645 – 1655 . 16 . Wirtz HR , Dobbs LG . The effects of mechanical forces on lung func - tions . Respir Physiol 2000 ; 119 : 1 – 17 . 1338 AMERICAN JOURNAL OF RESPIRATORY AND CRITICAL CARE MEDICINE VOL 171 2005 17 . Vlahakis NE , Hubmayr RD . Response of alveolar cells to mechanical stress . Curr Opin Crit Care 2003 ; 9 : 2 – 8 . 18 . Shyy JY , Chien S . Role of integrins in endothelial mechanosensing of shear stress . Circ Res 2002 ; 91 : 769 – 775 . 19 . Edwards YS . Stretch stimulation : its effects on alveolar type II cell function in the lung . Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol 2001 ; 129 : 245 – 260 . 20 . Savov J , Silbajoris R , Young SL . Mechanical ventilation of rat lung : effect on surfactant forms . Am J Physiol 1999 ; 277 : L320 – L326 . 21 . Malloy JL , Veldhuizen RA , Lewis JF . Effects of ventilation on the surfactant system in sepsis - induced lung injury . J Appl Physiol 2000 ; 88 : 401 – 408 . 22 . Torday JS , Rehan VK . Stretch - stimulated surfactant synthesis is coordi - nated by the paracrine actions of PTHrP and leptin . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2002 ; 283 : L130 – L135 . 23 . American Thoracic Society / European Respiratory Society . Interna - tional consensus conferences in intensive care medicine : ventilator - associated lung injury in ARDS . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999 ; 160 : 2118 – 2124 . 24 . Dreyfuss D , Basset G , Soler P , Saumon G . Intermittent positive - pres - sure hyperventilation with high inﬂation pressures produces pulmo - nary microvascular injury in rats . Am Rev Respir Dis 1985 ; 132 : 880 – 884 . 25 . Fu Z , Costello ML , Tsukimoto K , Prediletto R , Elliott AR , Mathieu - Costello O , West JB . High lung volumes increases stress failure in pulmonary capllaries . J Appl Physiol 1992 ; 73 : 123 – 133 . 26 . Costello ML , Mathieu - Costello O , West JB . Stress failure of alveolar epithelial cells studied by scanning electron microscopy . Am Rev Respir Dis 1992 ; 145 : 1446 – 1455 . 27 . John E , McDevitt M , Wilborn W , Cassady G . Ultrastructure of the lung after ventilation . Br J Exp Pathol 1982 ; 63 : 401 – 407 . 28 . Parker JC , Townsley MI . Evaluation of lung injury in rats and mice . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2004 ; 286 : L231 – L246 . 29 . Agostoni E . Mechanics of the pleural space . In : Geiger SR , editor . Handbookofphysiology . Section3 : Therespiratorysystem . Bethesda , MD : American Physiological Society ; 1986 . pp . 531 – 559 . 30 . D’Angelo E , Michelini S , Agostoni E . Partition of factor contributing to the vertical gradient of transpulmonary pressure . Respir Physiol 1971 ; 12 : 90 – 101 . 31 . Wilson TA . Solid mechanics . In : Fishman AP , editor . Handbook of Physiology . Section 3 : Respiratory System , Volume III : Mechanics of Breathing , Part I . Baltimore , MD : Williams and Wilkins Co . ; 1986 . pp . 35 – 40 . 32 . Rodarte JR , Fung YC . Distribution of stresses within the lung . In : Fishman AP , editor . Handbook of Physiology . Section 3 : Respiratory System . Volume III : Mechanics of Breathing , Part I . Baltimore , MD : Williams and Wilkins Co . ; 1986 . pp . 233 – 246 . 33 . Bar - YishayE , HyattRE , RodarteJR . Effectofheartweightondistribu - tion of lung surface pressures in vertical dogs . J Appl Physiol 1986 ; 61 : 712 – 718 . 34 . Agostoni E , D’Angelo E , Bonanni MV . The effect of the abdomen on the vertical gradient of pleural surface pressure . Respir Physiol 1970 ; 8 : 332 – 346 . 35 . Chang H , Lai - Fook SJ , Domino KB , Schimmel C , Hildebrandt J , Rob - ertson HT , Glenny RW , Hlastala MP . Spatial distribution of ventila - tion and perfusion in anesthetized dogs in lateral postures . J Appl Physiol 2002 ; 92 : 745 – 762 . 36 . Hubmayr RD , Rodarte JR , Walters BJ , Tonelli FM . Regional ventila - tionduringspontaneousbreathingandmechanicalventilationindogs . J Appl Physiol 1987 ; 63 : 2467 – 2475 . 37 . Rodarte JR , Hubmayr RD , Stamenovic D , Walters BJ . Regional lung strainin dogsduring deﬂationfrom totallung capacity . J ApplPhysiol 1985 ; 58 : 164 – 172 . 38 . Bachofen H , Schurch S . Alveolar surface forces and lung architecture . Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol 2001 ; 129 : 183 – 193 . 39 . Lai - Fook SJ , Kallok MJ . Bronchial - arterial interdependence in isolated dog lung . J Appl Physiol 1982 ; 52 : 1000 – 1007 . 40 . Bachofen H , Schurch S , Urbinelli M , Weibel ER . Relations among alveolar surface tension , surface area , volume , and recoil pressure . J Appl Physiol 1987 ; 62 : 1878 – 1887 . 41 . Mercer RR , Laco JM , Crapo JD . Three - dimensional reconstruction of alveoli in the rat lung for pressure - volume relationships . J Appl Phys - iol 1987 ; 62 : 1480 – 1487 . 42 . Mercer RR , Crapo JD . Spatial distribution of collagen and elastin ﬁbers in the lungs . J Appl Physiol 1990 ; 69 : 756 – 765 . 43 . Gil J , Bachofen H , Gehr P , Weibel ER . Alveolar volume - surface area relation in air - and saline - ﬁlled lungs ﬁxed by vascular perfusion . J Appl Physiol 1979 ; 47 : 990 – 1001 . 44 . Oldmixon EH , Hoppin FG Jr . Distribution of elastin and collagen in canine lung alveolar parenchyma . J Appl Physiol 1989 ; 67 : 1941 – 1949 . 45 . Oldmixon EH , Hoppin FG Jr . Alveolar septal folding and lung inﬂation history . J Appl Physiol 1991 ; 71 : 2369 – 2379 . 46 . Wilson TA , Bachofen H . A model for mechanical structure of the alveolar duct . J Appl Physiol 1982 ; 52 : 1064 – 1070 . 47 . TschumperlinDJ , MarguliesSS . Alveolarepithelialsurfacearea - volume relationship in isolated rat lungs . J Appl Physiol 1999 ; 86 : 2026 – 2033 . 48 . Bachofen H , Gerber U , Schurch S . Effects of ﬁxatives on function of pulmonary surfactant . J Appl Physiol 2002 ; 93 : 911 – 916 . 49 . Carney DE , Bredenberg CE , Schiller HJ , Picone AL , McCann UG , Gatto LA , Bailey G , Fillinger M , Nieman GF . The mechanism of lung volume change during mechanical ventilation . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999 ; 160 : 1697 – 1702 . 50 . Halter JM , Steinberg JM , Schiller HJ , DaSilva M , Gatto LA , Lanclas S , Nieman GF . Positive end - expiratory pressure after a recruitment maneuver prevents both alveolar collapse and recruitment / derecruit - ment . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003 ; 167 : 1620 – 1626 . 51 . Schiller HJ , McCann UG II , Carney DE , Gatto LA , Steinberg JM , Nieman GF . Altered alveolar mechanics in the acutely injured lung . Crit Care Med 2001 ; 29 : 1049 – 1055 . 52 . Steinberg J , Schiller HJ , Halter JM , Gatto LA , Dasilva M , Amato M . MCCann UG , Nieman GF . Tidal volume increases do not affect alveolar mechanics in normal lung but cause alveolar overdistension and exacerbate alveolar instability after surfactant deactivation . Crit Care Med 2002 ; 30 : 2675 – 2683 . 53 . Bachofen H , Schu¨rch S , Michel RP , Weibel ER . Experimental hydro - static pulmonary edema in rabbit lungs : Morphology . Am Rev Respir Dis 1993 ; 147 : 989 – 996 . 54 . Bachofen H , Schu¨rch S , Weibel ER . Experimental hydrostatic pulmo - nary edema in rabbit lungs : barrier lesions . Am Rev Respir Dis 1993 ; 147 : 997 – 1004 . 55 . Fehrenbach A , Fehrenbach H , Wittwer T , Ochs M , Wahlers T , Richter J . Evaluation of pulmonary edema : stereological versus gravimetrical analysis . Eur Surg Res 2001 ; 33 : 270 – 278 . 56 . Hubmayr RD . Perspective on lung injury and recruitment : a skeptical look at the opening and collapse story . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002 ; 165 : 1647 – 1653 . 57 . Wilson TA , Anaﬁ RC , Hubmayr RD . Mechanics of edematous lungs . J Appl Physiol 2001 ; 90 : 2088 – 2093 . 58 . Martynowicz MA , Minor TA , Walters BJ , Hubmayr RD . Regional expansion of oleic acid - injured lungs . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999 ; 160 : 250 – 258 . 59 . Maunder RJ , Shuman WP , McHugh JW , Marglin SI , Butler J . Preserva - tion of normal lung regions in the adult respiratory distress syndrome : analysis by computed tomography . JAMA 1986 ; 255 : 2463 – 2465 . 60 . Gattinoni L , Pesenti A , Avalli L , Rossi F , Bombino M . Pressure - volume curve of total respiratory system in acute respiratory failure : com - puted tomographic scan study . Am Rev Respir Dis 1987 ; 136 : 730 – 736 . 61 . Mead J , Takishima T , Leith D . Stress distribution in lungs : a model of pulmonary elasticity . J Appl Physiol 1970 ; 28 : 596 – 608 . 62 . Muscedere JG , Mullen JB , Gan K , Slutsky AS . Tidal ventilation at low airway pressures can augment lung injury . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1994 ; 149 : 1327 – 1334 . 63 . Goldstein I , Bughalo MT , Marquette CH , Lenaour G , Lu Q , Rouby JJ . Mechanical ventilation - induced air - space enlargement during ex - perimental pneumonia in piglets . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001 ; 163 : 958 – 964 . 64 . Bilek AM , Dee KC , Gaver DP III . Mechanisms of surface - tension - induced epithelial cell damage in a model of pulmonary airway re - opening . J Appl Physiol 2003 ; 94 : 770 – 783 . 65 . Gaver DP III , Kute SM . A theoretical model study of the inﬂuence of ﬂuid stresses on a cell adhering to a microchannel wall . Biophys J 1998 ; 75 : 721 – 733 . 66 . Cassidy KJ , Gavriely N , Grotberg JB . Liquid plug ﬂow in straight and bifurcating tubes . J Biomech Eng 2001 ; 123 : 580 – 589 . 67 . Greenﬁeld LJ , Ebert PA , Benson DW . Effect of positive pressure venti - lation on surface tension of lung extract . Anesthesiology 1964 ; 25 : 312 – 316 . 68 . Webb HH , Tierney DF . Experimental pulmonary edema due to inter - mittent positive pressure ventilation with high inﬂation pressures : protection by positive end - expiratory pressure . Am Rev Respir Dis 1974 ; 110 : 556 – 565 . 69 . Egan EA . Lung inﬂation , lung solute permeability and alveolar edema . J Appl Physiol 1982 ; 53 : 121 – 125 . State of the Art 1339 70 . Parker JC , Townsley MI , Rippe B , Taylor AE , Thigpen J . Increased microvascular permeability in dog lungs due to high peak airway pres - sures . J Appl Physiol 1984 ; 57 : 1809 – 1816 . 71 . Parker JC , Breen EC , West JB . High vascular and airway pressures increase interstitial protein mRNA expression in isolated rat lungs . J Appl Physiol 1997 ; 83 : 1697 – 1705 . 72 . Parker JC , Ivey CL , Tucker A . Phosphotyrosine phosphatase and tyro - sine kinase inhibition modulate airway pressure - induced lung injury . J Appl Physiol 1998 ; 85 : 1753 – 1761 . 73 . Parker JC , Ivey CL , Tucker JA . Gadolinium prevents high airway pres - sure - inducedpermeabilityincreasesinisolatedratlungs . JApplPhys - iol 1998 ; 84 : 1113 – 1118 . 74 . West JB . Thoughts on the pulmonary blood - gas barrier . EB2003 Com - roe Lecture . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2003 ; 285 : L501 – L513 . 75 . West JB , Tsukimoto K , Mathieu - Costello O , Prediletto R . Stress failure in pulmonary capillaries . J Appl Physiol 1991 ; 70 : 1731 – 1742 . 76 . Tsukimoto K , Mathieu - Costello O , Prediletto R , Elliott AR , West JB . Ultrastructuralappearancesofpulmonarycapillariesathightransmu - ral pressures . J Appl Physiol 1991 ; 71 : 573 – 582 . 77 . Swenson ER , Maggiorini M , Mongovin S , Gibbs JS , Greve I , Mairbaurl H , Bartsch P . Pathogenesis of high altitude pulmonary edema : in - ﬂammation is not an etiologic factor . JAMA 2002 ; 287 : 2228 – 2235 . 78 . Wieslander J , Heinegard D . The involvement of type IV collagen in Goodpasture’s Syndrome . Ann N Y Acad Sci 1985 ; 460 : 363 – 374 . 79 . Hopkins SR , Schoene RB , Martin TR , Henderson WR , Spragg RG , West JB . Intense exercise impairs the integrity of the pulmonary blood gas barrier in elite athletes . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1997 ; 155 : 1090 – 1094 . 80 . HotchkissJR , SimonsonDA , MarekDJ , MariniJJ , DriesDJ . Pulmonary microvascular fracture in a patient with acute respiratory distress syndrome . Crit Care Med 2002 ; 30 : 2368 – 2370 . 81 . Broccard A , Shapiro RS , Schmitz LL , Adams AB , Nahum A , Marini JJ . Prone positioning attenuates and redistributes ventilator - induced lung injury in dogs . Crit Care Med 2000 ; 28 : 295 – 303 . 82 . Majno G , Shea SM , Leventhal M . Endothelial contraction induced by histamine - type mediators : an electron microscopic study . J Cell Biol 1969 ; 42 : 647 – 672 . 83 . Dudek SM , Garcia JG . Cytoskeletal regulation of pulmonary vascular permeability . J Appl Physiol 2001 ; 91 : 1487 – 1500 . 84 . Bogatcheva NV , Dudek SM , Garcia JG , Verin AD . Mitogen - activated protein kinases in endothelial pathophysiology . J Investig Med 2003 ; 51 : 341 – 352 . 85 . Bogatcheva N , Garcia JG , Verin AD . Role of tyrosine kinase signaling in endothelial cell barrier regulation . Vascul Pharmacol 2002 ; 39 : 201 – 212 . 86 . Hammersen F , Hammersen E . The ultrastructure of endothelial gap formation and leukocyte emigration . In : Messmer K , Hammersen F , editors . Microcirculation and inﬂammation : vessel wall , inﬂammatory cells , mediator interation . Proceedings of the 6th Bodensee Sympo - sium on Microcirculation 1986 Jun 22 – 25 ; Heidelberg , Germany . Ba - sel : Karger , 1987 . p . 1 – 34 . 87 . Bhattacharya S , Sen N , Yiming MT , Patel R , Parthasarathi K , Quadri S , IssekutzAC , Bhattacharya J . High tidal volumeventilation induces proinﬂammatory signaling in rat lung endothelium . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2003 ; 28 : 218 – 224 . 88 . Neal CR , Michel CC . Transcellular openings through microvascular walls in acutely inﬂamed frog mesentery . Exp Physiol 1992 ; 77 : 917 – 920 . 89 . Neal CR , Michel CC . Transcellular gaps in microvascular walls of frog and rat when permeability is increased by perfusion with the iono - phore A23187 . J Physiol 1995 ; 488 : 427 – 437 . 90 . Neal CR , Michel CC . Openings in frog microvascular endothelium in - duced by high intravascular pressures . J Physiol 1996 ; 492 : 39 – 52 . 91 . Feng D , Nagy NA , Hipp J , Pyne K , Dvorak HF , Dvorak AM . Reinter - pretation of endothelial cell gaps induced by vasoactive mediators in guinea - pig , mouse and rat : many are transcellular pores . J Physiol 1997 ; 504 : 747 – 761 . 92 . NealCR , MichelCC . Transcellularopeningsthroughfrogmicrovascular endothelium . Exp Physiol 1997 ; 82 : 419 – 422 . 93 . Elliott AR , Fu Z , Tsukimoto K , Prediletto R , Mathieu - Costello O , West JB . Short - term reversibility of ultrastructural changes in pulmonary capillaries caused by stress failure . J Appl Physiol 1992 ; 73 : 1150 – 1158 . 94 . Dreyfuss D , Soler P , Saumon G . Spontaneous resolution of pulmonary edema caused by short periods of cyclic overinﬂation . J Appl Physiol 1992 ; 72 : 2081 – 2089 . 95 . GajicO , LeeJ , DoerrCH , BerriosJC , MyersJL , HubmayrRD . Ventila - tor - induced cell wounding and repair in the intact lung . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003 ; 167 : 1057 – 1063 . 96 . Neal CR , Michel CC . Effects of temperature on the wall strength and compliance of frog mesenteric microvessels . J Physiol 2000 ; 526 : 613 – 622 . 97 . Parker JC , Miller GT , Tarpey SB , Anghelescu M , Penton AM , Adkison JB . Cell wounding modulates junctional proteins in rat pulmonary artery and microvascular endothelial cells [ abstract ] . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2004 ; 169 : A158 . 98 . Chen CS , Tan J , Tien J . Mechanotransduction at cell - matrix and cell - cell contacts . Annu Rev Biomed Eng 2004 ; 6 : 275 – 302 . 99 . Huang H , Kamm RD , Lee RT . Cell mechanics and mechanotransduc - tion : pathways , probes , and physiology . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2004 ; 287 : C1 – 11 . 100 . Janmey PA , Weitz DA . Dealing with mechanics : mechanisms of force transduction in cells . Trends Biochem Sci 2004 ; 29 : 364 – 370 . 101 . Geiger B , Bershadsky A , Pankov R , Yamada KM . Transmembrane crosstalk between extracellular matrix - cytoskeleton crosstalk . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2001 ; 2 : 793 – 805 . 102 . Hynes RO . Integrins : bidirectional , allosteric signaling machines . Cell 2002 ; 110 : 673 – 687 . 103 . Ingber DE . Opposing views on tensegrity as a structural framework for understanding cell mechanics . J Appl Physiol 2000 ; 89 : 1663 – 1670 . 104 . Wang N , Naruse K , Stamenovic D , Fredberg JJ , Mijailovich SM , Tolic - Norrelykke IM , Polte T , Mannix R , Ingber DE . Mechanical behavior in living cells consistent with the tensegrity model . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001 ; 98 : 7765 – 7770 . 105 . Schwarz US , Balaban NQ , Riveline D , Addadi L , Bershadsky A , Safran SA , Geiger B . Measurement of cellular forces at focal adhesions using elastic micro - patterned substrates . Mater Sci Eng C - Biomimetic Supramol Syst 2003 ; 23 : 387 – 394 . 106 . PartonRG , HancockJF . Lipidraftsandplasmamembranemicroorgani - zation : insights from Ras . Trends Cell Biol 2004 ; 14 : 141 – 147 . 107 . Stamenovic D , Wang N . Invited review : engineering approaches to cytoskeletal mechanics . J Appl Physiol 2000 ; 89 : 2085 – 2090 . 108 . Oswari J , Matthay MA , Margulies SS . Keratinocyte growth factor re - ducesalveolarepithelialsusceptibilitytoinvitromechanicaldeforma - tion . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2001 ; 281 : L1068 – L1077 . 109 . Tschumperlin DJ , Margulies SS . Equibiaxial deformation - induced in - jury of alveolar epithelial cells in vitro . Am J Physiol 1998 ; 275 : L1173 – L1183 . 110 . Stroetz RW , Vlahakis NE , Walters BJ , Schroeder MA , Hubmayr RD . Validation of a new live cell strain system : characterization of plasma membrane stress failure . J Appl Physiol 2001 ; 90 : 2361 – 2370 . 111 . Tschumperlin DJ , Oswari J , Margulies AS . Deformation - induced injury of alveolar epithelial cells . Effect of frequency , duration , and ampli - tude . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000 ; 162 : 357 – 362 . 112 . Vlahakis NE , Schroeder MA , Pagano RE , Hubmayr RD . Role of defor - mation - induced lipid trafﬁcking in the prevention of plasma mem - brane stress failure . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002 ; 166 : 1282 – 1289 . 113 . Berrios JC , Schroeder MA , Hubmayr RD . Mechanical properties of alveolar epithelial cells in culture . J Appl Physiol 2001 ; 91 : 65 – 73 . 114 . Doornaert B , Leblond V , Planus E , Galiacy S , Laurent VM , Gras G , Isabey D , Lafuma C . Time course of actin cytoskeleton stiffness and matrixadhesionmoleculesin humanbronchialepithelialcellcultures . Exp Cell Res 2003 ; 287 : 199 – 208 . 115 . Coughlin MF , Stamenovic D . A prestressed cable network model of the adherent cell cytoskeleton . Biophys J 2003 ; 84 : 1328 – 1336 . 116 . Fabry B , Maksym GN , Butler JP , Glogauer M , Navajas D , Fredberg JJ . Scaling the microrheology of living cells . Phys Rev Lett 2001 ; 87 : 148102 . 117 . IngberDE , TensegrityI . Cellstructureandhierarchicalsystemsbiology . J Cell Sci 2003 ; 116 : 1157 – 1173 . 118 . Gunst SJ , Tang DD , Saez AO . Cytoskeletal remodeling of the airway smooth muscle cell : a mechanism for adaptation to mechanical forces in the lung . Respir Physiol Neurobiol 2003 ; 137 : 151 – 168 . 119 . Stossel TP , Hartwig JH . Filling gaps in signaling to actin cytoskeletal remodeling . Dev Cell 2003 ; 4 : 444 – 445 . 120 . Shyy JY , Chien S . Role of integrins in endothelial mechanosensing of shear stress . Circ Res 2002 ; 91 : 769 – 775 . 121 . Yoshigi M , Clark EB , Yost HJ . Quantiﬁcation of stretch - induced cy - toskeletal remodeling in vascular endothelial cells by image pro - cessing . Cytometry 2003 ; 55A : 109 – 118 . 122 . Wang N , Ingber DE . Control of cytoskeletal mechanics by extracellular matrix , cell shape , and mechanical tension . Biophys J 1994 ; 66 : 2181 – 2189 . 1340 AMERICAN JOURNAL OF RESPIRATORY AND CRITICAL CARE MEDICINE VOL 171 2005 123 . Heidemann SR , Wirtz D . Towards a regional approach to cell mechan - ics . Trends Cell Biol 2004 ; 14 : 160 – 166 . 124 . Ko KS , McCulloch CA . Partners in protection : interdependence of cytoskeleton and plasma membrane in adaptions to applied forces . J Membr Biol 2000 ; 174 : 85 – 95 . 125 . Vlahakis NE , Schroeder MA , Pagano RE , Hubmayr RD . Deformation - induced lipid trafﬁcking in alveolar epithelial cells . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2001 ; 280 : L938 – L946 . 126 . Bischofs IB , Schwarz US . Cell organization in soft media due to active mechanosensing . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003 ; 100 : 9274 – 9279 . 127 . Bershadsky AD , Balaban NQ , Geiger B . Adhesion - dependent cell mechanosensitivity . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2003 ; 19 : 677 – 695 . 128 . Shafrir Y , Forgacs G . Mechanotransduction through the cytoskeleton . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2002 ; 282 : C479 – C486 . 129 . JanmeyPA . Thecytoskeletonandcellsignaling : componentlocalization and mechanical coupling . Physiol Rev 1998 ; 78 : 763 – 781 . 130 . Jalali S , del Pozo MA , Chen K , Miao H , Li Y , Schwartz MA , Shyy JY , Chien S . Integrin - mediated mechanotransduction requires its dy - namic interaction with speciﬁc extracellular matrix ( ECM ) ligands . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001 ; 98 : 1042 – 1046 . 131 . Li S , Chen BP , Azuma N , Hu YL , Wu SZ , Sumpio BE , Shyy JY , Chien S . Distinct roles for the small GTPases Cdc42 and Rho in endothelial responses to shear stress . J Clin Invest 1999 ; 103 : 1141 – 1150 . 132 . Schmidt C , Pommerenke H , Durr F , Nebe B , Rychly J . Mechanical stressing of integrin receptors induces enhanced tyrosine phosphory - lation of cytoskeletally anchored proteins . J Biol Chem 1998 ; 273 : 5081 – 5085 . 133 . Juliano RL . Signal transduction by cell adhesion receptors and the cytoskeleton : functionsofintegrins , cadherins , selectins , andimmuno - globulin - superfamily members . Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 2002 ; 42 : 283 – 323 . 134 . Li S , Kim M , Hu YL , Jalali S , Schlaepfer DD , Hunter T , Chien S , Shyy JY . Fluid shear stress activation of focal adhesion kinase : linking to mitogen - activated protein kinases . J Biol Chem 1997 ; 272 : 30455 – 30462 . 135 . ChenKD , LiYS , KimM , LiS , YuanS , ChienS , ShyyJY . Mechanotrans - duction in response to shear stress . Roles of receptor tyrosine kinases , integrins , and Shc . J Biol Chem 1999 ; 274 : 18393 – 18400 . 136 . Wang Y , Miao H , Li S , Chen KD , Li YS , Yuan S , Shyy JY , Chien S . Interplay between integrins and FLK - 1 in shear stress - induced signaling . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2002 ; 283 : C1540 – C1547 . 137 . Takenawa T , Itoh T . Phosphoinositides , key molecules for regulation of actin cytoskeletal organization and membrane trafﬁc from the plasma membrane . Biochim Biophys Acta 2001 ; 1533 : 190 – 206 . 138 . Go YM , Park H , Maland MC , Darley - Usmar VM , Stoyanov B , Wetzker R , Jo H . Phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase gamma mediates shear stress - dependent activation of JNK in endothelial cells . Am J Physiol 1998 ; 275 : H1898 – H1904 . 139 . Cavanaugh KJ Jr , Oswari J , Margulies SS . Role of stretch on tight junction structure in alveolar epithelial cells . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2001 ; 25 : 584 – 591 . 140 . Cavanaugh KJ Jr , Margulies SS . Measurement of stretch - induced loss of alveolar epithelial barrier integrity with a novel in vitro method . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2002 ; 283 : C1801 – C1808 . 141 . Berg JT , Fu Z , Breen EC , Tran HC , Mathieu - Costello O , West JB . High lung inﬂation increases mRNA levels of ECM components and growth factors in lung parenchyma . J Appl Physiol 1997 ; 83 : 120 – 128 . 142 . Sheppard D . Functions of pulmonary epithelial integrins : from develop - ment to disease . Physiol Rev 2003 ; 83 : 673 – 686 . 143 . Steinberg J , Halter J , Schiller HJ , Dasilva M , Landas S , Gatto LA , Maisi P , Sorsa T , Rajamaki M , Lee HM , et al . Metalloproteinase inhibition reduces lung injury and improves survival after cecal liga - tion and puncture in rats . J Surg Res 2003 ; 111 : 185 – 195 . 144 . Swartz MA , Tschumperlin DJ , Kamm RD , Drazen JM . Mechanical stress is communicated between different cell types to elicit matrix remodeling . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001 ; 98 : 6180 – 6185 . 145 . Tschumperlin DJ , Dai G , Maly IV , Kikuchi T , Laiho LH , McVittie AK , Haley KJ , Lilly CM , So PT , Lauffenburger DA , et al . Mechanotrans - duction through growth - factor shedding into the extracellular space . Nature 2004 ; 429 : 83 – 86 . 146 . Foda HD , Rollo EE , Drews M , Conner C , Appelt K , Shalinsky DR , Zucker S . Ventilator - induced lung injury upregulates and activates gelatinases and EMMPRIN : attenuation by the synthetic matrix met - alloproteinase inhibitor , Prinomastat ( AG3340 ) . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2001 ; 25 : 717 – 724 . 147 . Haseneen NA , Vaday GG , Zucker S , Foda HD . Mechanical stretch induces MMP - 2 release and activation in lung endothelium : role of EMMPRIN . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2003 ; 284 : L541 – L547 . 148 . Fisher JL , Levitan I , Margulies SS . Plasma membrane surface increases with tonic stretch of alveolar epithelial cells . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2004 ; 31 : 200 – 208 . 149 . Morris CE . How did cells get their size ? Anat Rec 2002 ; 268 : 239 – 251 . 150 . Sheetz MP . Cell control by membrane - cytoskeleton adhesion . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2001 ; 2 : 392 – 396 . 151 . Morris CE , Homann U . Cell surface area regulation and membrane tension . J Membr Biol 2001 ; 179 : 79 – 102 . 152 . Raucher D , Sheetz MP . Characteristics of a membrane reservoir buffer - ing membrane tension . Biophys J 1999 ; 77 : 1992 – 2002 . 153 . Wirtz HR , Dobbs LG . Calcium mobilization and exocytosis after one mechanical stretch of lung epithelial cells . Science 1990 ; 250 : 1266 – 1269 . 154 . Frick M , Bertocchi C , Jennings P , Haller T , Mair N , Singer W , Pfaller W , Ritsch - Marte M , Dietl P . Ca2 (cid:4) entry is essential for cell strain - induced lamellar body fusion in isolated rat type II pneumocytes . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2004 ; 286 : L210 – L220 . 155 . Truschel ST , Wang E , Ruiz WG , Leung SM , Rojas R , Lavelle J , Zeidel M , Stoffer D , Apodaca G . Stretch - regulated exocytosis / endocytosis in bladder umbrella cells . Mol Biol Cell 2002 ; 13 : 830 – 846 . 156 . Berrios JC , Hubmayr RD . Deforming stress triggers endocytosis in alveolar epithelial cells [ abstract ] . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003 ; 167 : A57 . 157 . Volonte D , Galbiati F , Pestell RG , Lisanti MP . Cellular stress induces the tyrosine phosphorylation of caveolin - 1 ( Tyr ( 14 ) ) via activation ofp38mitogen - activatedproteinkinaseandc - Srckinase : evidencefor caveolae , the actin cytoskeleton , and focal adhesions as mechanical sensors of osmotic stress . J Biol Chem 2001 ; 276 : 8094 – 8103 . 158 . Palestini P , Calvi C , Conforti E , Daffara R , Botto L , Miserocchi G . Compositional changes in lipid microdomains of air - blood barrier plasma membranes in pulmonary interstitial edema . J Appl Physiol 2003 ; 95 : 1446 – 1452 . 159 . DaffaraR , BottoL , BerettaE , ConfortiE , FainiA , PalestiniP , Miseroc - chi G . Endothelial cells as early sensors of pulmonary interstitial edema . J Appl Physiol 2004 ; 97 : 1575 – 1583 . 160 . Gutierrez JA , Ertsey R , Scavo LM , Collins E , Dobbs LG . Mechanical distention modulates alveolar epithelialcell phenotypic expression by transcriptionalregulation . AmJRespirCellMolBiol 1999 ; 21 : 223 – 229 . 161 . Gutierrez JA , Suzara VV , Dobbs LG . Continuous mechanical contrac - tion modulates expression of alveolar epithelial cell phenotype . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2003 ; 29 : 81 – 87 . 162 . Kolleck I , Guthmann F , Ladhoff AM , Tandon NN , Schlame M , Rustow B . Cellular cholesterol stimulates acute uptake of palmitate by redis - tribution of fatty acid translocase in type II pneumocytes . Biochemis - try 2002 ; 41 : 6369 – 6375 . 163 . Kolleck I , Wissel H , Guthmann F , Schlame M , Sinha P , Rustow B . HDL - holoparticle uptake by alveolar type II cells : effect of vitamin E status . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2002 ; 27 : 57 – 63 . 164 . Swendsen CL , Skita V , Thrall RS . Alterations in surfactant neutral lipid composition during the development of bleomycin - induced pulmo - nary ﬁbrosis . Biochim Biophys Acta 1996 ; 1301 : 90 – 96 . 165 . Brown DA , London E . Structure and function of sphingolipid - and cholesterol - rich membrane rafts . J Biol Chem 2000 ; 275 : 17221 – 17224 . 166 . Pagano RE , Watanabe R , Wheatley C , Dominguez M . Applications of BODIPY - sphingolipid analogs to study lipid trafﬁc and metabolism in cells . Methods Enzymol 2000 ; 312 : 523 – 534 . 167 . Mitra K , Ubarretxena - Belandia I , Taguchi T , Warren G , Engelman DM . Modulation of the bilayer thickness of exocytic pathway mem - branes bymembrane proteins ratherthan cholesterol . ProcNatl Acad Sci USA 2004 ; 101 : 4083 – 4088 . 168 . Simons K , Toomre D . Lipid rafts and signal transduction . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2000 ; 1 : 31 – 39 . 169 . van Meer G , Holthuis JCM . Sphingolipid transport in eukaryotic cells . Biochim Biophys Acta 2000 ; 1486 : 145 – 170 . 170 . Razani B , Woodman SE , Lisanti MP . Caveolae : from cell biology to animal physiology . Pharmacol Rev 2002 ; 54 : 431 – 467 . 171 . Ludger J , Lamaze C . Clathrin - dependent or not : is it still the question ? Trafﬁc 2002 ; 3 : 443 – 445 . 172 . Gil J . Number and distribution of plasmalemmal vesicles in the lung . Fed Proc 1983 ; 42 : 2414 – 2418 . 173 . Kasper M , Reimann T , Hempel U , Wenzel KW , Bierhaus A , Schuh D , Dimmer V , Haroske G , Muller M . Loss of caveolin expression in type I pneumocytes as an indicator of subcellular alterations during lung ﬁbrogenesis . Histochem Cell Biol 1998 ; 109 : 41 – 48 . 174 . Newman GR , Campbell L , von Ruhland C , Jasani B , Gumbleton M . State of the Art 1341 Caveolin and its cellular and subcellular immunolocalisation in lung alveolar epithelium : implications for alveolar epithelial type I cell function . Cell Tissue Res 1999 ; 295 : 111 – 120 . 175 . McNeil PL , Steinhardt RA . Plasma membrane disruption : repair , pre - vention , adaptation . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2003 ; 19 : 697 – 731 . 176 . BansalD , MiyakeK , VogelSS , GrohS , ChenCC , WilliamsonR , McNeil PL , Campbell KP . Defective membrane repair in dysferlin - deﬁcient muscular dystrophy . Nature 2003 ; 423 : 168 – 172 . 177 . Fischer TA , McNeil PL , Khakee R , Finn P , Kelly RA , Pfeffer MA , Pfeffer JM . Cardiac myocyte membrane wounding in the abruptly pressure - overloaded rat heart under high wall stress . Hypertension 1997 ; 30 : 1041 – 1046 . 178 . McNeil PL , Ito S . Gastrointestinal cell plasma membrane wounding and resealing in vivo . Gastroenterology 1989 ; 96 : 1238 – 1248 . 179 . Olbrich K , Rawicz W , Needham D , Evans E . Water permeability and mechanicalstrength ofpolyunsaturated lipidbilayers . Biophys J 2000 ; 79 : 321 – 327 . 180 . Waugh RE . Effects of abnormal cytoskeletal structure on erythrocyte membrane mechanical properties . Cell Motil 1983 ; 3 : 609 – 622 . 181 . Evans E , Needham D . Physical properties of surfactant bilayer mem - branes composed of lipids , cholesterol and polypeptides : thermal transitions , elasticity , cohesion , andcolloidalinteraction . JPhysChem 1987 ; 91 : 4219 – 4228 . 182 . Bloom M , Evans E , Mouritsen OG . Physical properties of the ﬂuid bilayer component of cell membranes . Q Rev Biophys 1991 ; 24 : 293 – 397 . 183 . Evans E , Heinrich V , Ludwig F , Rawicz W . Dynamic tension spectros - copy and strength of biomembranes . Biophys J 2003 ; 85 : 2342 – 2350 . 184 . Benz R , Zimmermann U . The resealing process of lipid bilayers after reversibleelectricalbreakdown . BiochimBiophysActa 1981 ; 640 : 169 – 178 . 185 . Lipowsky R . The conformation of membranes . Nature 1991 ; 349 : 475 – 481 . 186 . McNeil PL , Miyake K , Vogel SS . The endomembrane requirement for cell surface repair . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003 ; 100 : 4592 – 4597 . 187 . Steinhardt RA , Bi G , Alderton JM . Cell membrane resealing by a vesicular mechanism similar to neurotransmitter release . Science 1994 ; 263 : 390 – 393 . 188 . Togo T , Krasieva TB , Steinhardt RA . A decrease in membrane tension precedes successful cell - membrane repair . Mol Biol Cell 2000 ; 11 : 4339 – 4346 . 189 . Togo T , Alderton JM , Bi GQ , Steinhardt RA . The mechanism of facili - tated cell membrane resealing . J Cell Sci 1999 ; 112 : 719 – 731 . 190 . Togo T , Steinhardt RA . Nonmuscle myosin IIA and IIB have distinct functions in the exocytosis - dependent process of cell membrane re - pair . Mol Biol Cell 2004 ; 15 : 688 – 695 . 191 . TerasakiM , MiyakeK , McNeilPL . Largeplasmamembranedisruptions arerapidly resealedby Ca2 (cid:4) - dependentvesicle - vesicle fusionevents . J Cell Biol 1997 ; 139 : 63 – 74 . 192 . McNeil PL , Vogel SS , Miyake K , Terasaki M . Patching plasma mem - brane disruptions with cytoplasmic membrane . J Cell Sci 2000 ; 113 : 1891 – 1902 . 193 . Bi GQ , Alderton JM , Steinhardt RA . Calcium - regulated exocytosis is required for cell membrane resealing . J Cell Biol 1995 ; 131 : 1747 – 1758 . 194 . Bi GQ , Morris RL , Liao G , Alderton JM , Scholey JM , Steinhardt RA . Kinesin - and myosin - driven steps of vesicle recruitment for Ca2 (cid:4) - regulated exocytosis . J Cell Biol 1997 ; 138 : 999 – 1008 . 195 . ReddyA , CalerEV , AndrewsNW . Plasmamembranerepairismediated by Ca ( 2 (cid:4) ) - regulated exocytosis of lysosomes . Cell 2001 ; 106 : 157 – 169 . 196 . Jahn R , Lang T , Sudhof TC . Membrane fusion . Cell 2003 ; 112 : 519 – 533 . 197 . McNeil PL . Repairing a torn cell surface : make way , lysosomes to the rescue . J Cell Sci 2002 ; 115 : 873 – 879 . 198 . Andrews NW . Regulated secretion of conventional lysosomes . Trends Cell Biol 2000 ; 10 : 316 – 321 . 199 . Rodriguez A , Webster P , Ortego J , Andrews NW . Lysosomes behave as Ca2 (cid:4) - regulated exocytic vesicles in ﬁbroblasts and epithelial cells . J Cell Biol 1997 ; 137 : 93 – 104 . 200 . Rodriguez A , Martinez I , Chung A , Berlot CH , Andrews NW . cAMP regulates Ca2 (cid:4) - dependent exocytosis of lysosomes and lysosome - mediatedcellinvasionbytrypanosomes . JBiolChem 1999 ; 274 : 16754 – 16759 . 201 . Jedd G , Chua NH . A new self - assembled peroxisomal vesicle required for efﬁcient resealing of the plasma membrane . Nat Cell Biol 2000 ; 2 : 226 – 231 . 202 . Borgonovo B , Cocucci E , Racchetti G , Podini P , Bachi A , Meldolesi J . Regulated exocytosis : a novel , widely expressed system . Nat Cell Biol 2002 ; 4 : 955 – 962 . 203 . Togo T , Alderton JM , Steinhardt RA . Long - term potentiation of exo - cytosis and cell membrane repair in ﬁbroblasts . Mol Biol Cell 2003 ; 14 : 93 – 106 . 204 . Rao SK , Huynh C , Proux - Gillardeaux V , Galli T , Andrews NW . Identi - ﬁcation of SNAREs involved in synaptotagmin VII - regulated lyso - somal exocytosis . J Biol Chem 2004 ; 279 : 20471 – 20479 . 205 . Ninomiya Y , Kishimoto T , Miyashita Y , Kasai H . Ca2 (cid:4) - dependent exocytotic pathways in Chinese hamster ovary ﬁbroblasts revealed by a caged - Ca2 (cid:4) compound . J Biol Chem 1996 ; 271 : 17751 – 17754 . 206 . Detrait ER , Yoo S , Eddleman CS , Fukuda M , Bittner GD , Fishman HM . Plasmalemmal repair of severed neurites of PC12 cells requires Ca ( 2 (cid:4) ) and synaptotagmin . J Neurosci Res 2000 ; 62 : 566 – 573 . 207 . Chakrabarti S , Kobayashi KS , Flavell RA , Marks CB , Miyake K , Liston DR , Fowler KT , Gorelick FS , Andrews NW . Impaired membrane resealing and autoimmune myositis in synaptotagmin VII - deﬁcient mice . J Cell Biol 2003 ; 162 : 543 – 549 . 208 . Lyerla TA , Rusiniak ME , Borchers M , Jahreis G , Tan J , Ohtake P , Novak EK , Swank RT . Aberrant lung structure , composition , and function in a murine model of Hermansky - Pudlak syndrome . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2003 ; 285 : L643 – L653 . 209 . Tremblay L , Valenza F , Ribeiro SP , Li J , Slutsky AS . Injurious ventila - tory strategies increase cytokines and c - fos m - RNA expression in an isolated rat lung model . J Clin Invest 1997 ; 99 : 944 – 952 . 210 . Dreyfuss D , Ricard JD , Saumon G . On the physiologic and clinical relevance of lung - borne cytokines during ventilator - induced lung in - jury . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003 ; 167 : 1467 – 1471 . 211 . PuginJ , DunnI , JollietP , TassauxD , MagnenatJL , NicodLP , Chevrolet JC . Activation of human macrophages by mechanical ventilation in vitro . Am J Physiol 1998 ; 275 : L1040 – L1050 . 212 . Vlahakis NE , Schroeder MA , Limper AH , Hubmayr RD . Stretch in - duces cytokine release by alveolar epithelial cells in vitro . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 1999 ; 277 : L167 – L173 . 213 . Belperio JA , Keane MP , Burdick MD , Londhe V , Xue YY , Li K , PhillipsRJ , Strieter RM . CriticalroleforCXCR2 andCXCR2ligands duringthepathogenesisofventilator - inducedlunginjury . JClinInvest 2002 ; 110 : 1703 – 1716 . 214 . Slutsky AS , Tremblay LN . Multiple system organ failure : is mechanical ventilation a contributing factor ? Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998 ; 157 : 1721 – 1725 . 215 . Murphy DB , Cregg N , Tremblay L , Engelberts D , Laffey JG , Slutsky AS , RomaschinA , KavanaghBP . Adverseventilatory strategycauses pulmonary - to - systemic translocation of endotoxin . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000 ; 162 : 27 – 33 . 216 . Chiumello D , Pristine G , Slutsky AS . Mechanical ventilation affects local and systemic cytokines in an animal model of acute respiratory distress syndrome . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999 ; 160 : 109 – 116 . 217 . Nahum A , Hoyt J , Schmitz L , Moody J , Shapiro R , Marini JJ . Effect of mechanical ventilation strategy on dissemination of intratracheally instilled Escherichia coli in dogs . Crit Care Med 1997 ; 25 : 1733 – 1743 . 218 . Verbrugge SJ , Sorm V , van’t Veen A , Mouton JW , Gommers D , Lach - mann B . Lung overinﬂation without positive end - expiratory pressure promotes bacteremia after experimental Klebsiella pneumoniae inoc - ulation . Intensive Care Med 1998 ; 24 : 172 – 177 . 219 . Haitsma JJ , Uhlig S , Goggel R , Verbrugge SJ , Lachmann U , Lachmann B . Ventilator - inducedlunginjuryleadstolossofalveolarandsystemic compartmentalization of tumor necrosis factor - alpha . Intensive Care Med 2000 ; 26 : 1515 – 1522 . 220 . Imai Y , Parodo J , Kajikawa O , de Perrot M , Fischer S , Edwards V , Cutz E , Liu MY , Keshavjee S , Martin TR , et al . Injurious mechanical ventilation andend - organ epithelial cell apoptosisand organ dysfunc - tion in an experimental model of acute respiratory distress syndrome . JAMA 2003 ; 289 : 2104 – 2112 . 221 . Bouadma L , Schortgen F , Ricard JD , Martet G , Dreyfuss D , Saumon G . Ventilation strategy affects cytokine release after mesenteric isch - emia - reperfusion in rats . Crit Care Med 2004 ; 32 : 1563 – 1569 . 222 . Correa - Meyer E , Pesce L , Guerrero C , Sznajder JI . Cyclic stretch acti - vates ERK1 / 2 via G proteins and EGFR in alveolar epithelial cells . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2002 ; 282 : L883 – L891 . 223 . Copland IB , Kavanagh BP , Engelberts D , McKerlie C , Belik J , Post M . Early changes in lung gene expression due to high tidal volume . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003 ; 168 : 1051 – 1059 . 224 . Bhattacharya S , Sen N , Yiming MT , Patel R , Parthasarathi K , Quadri S , IssekutzAC , Bhattacharya J . High tidal volumeventilation induces proinﬂammatory signaling in rat lung endothelium . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003 ; 28 : 218 – 224 . 225 . Li LF , Ouyang B , Choukroun G , Matyal R , Mascarenhas M , Jafari B , Bonventre JV . Force T , Quinn DA . Stretch - induced IL - 8 depends 1342 AMERICAN JOURNAL OF RESPIRATORY AND CRITICAL CARE MEDICINE VOL 171 2005 on c - Jun NH2 - terminal and nuclear factor - kappaB - inducing kinases . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2003 ; 285 : L464 – L475 . 226 . Matthay MA , Zimmerman GA , Esmon C , Bhattacharya J , Coller B , Doerschuk CM , Floros J , Gimbrone MA Jr , Hoffman E , Hubmayr RD , et al . Future research directions in acute lung injury : summary of a National Heart , Lung , and Blood Institute working group . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003 ; 167 : 1027 – 1035 . 227 . Grembowicz KP , Sprague D , McNeil PL . Temporary disruption of the plasma membrane is required for c - fos expression in response to mechanical stress . Mol Biol Cell 1999 ; 10 : 1247 – 1257 . 228 . Ichimura H , Parthasarathi K , Quadri S , Issekutz AC , Bhattacharya J . Mechano - oxidative coupling by mitochondria induces proinﬂamma - tory responses in lung venular capillaries . J Clin Invest 2003 ; 111 : 691 – 699 . 229 . Wang PM , Fujita E , Bhattacharya J . Vascular regulation of type II cell exocytosis . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2002 ; 282 : L912 – L916 . 230 . Kuebler WM , Ying X , Bhattacharya J . Pressure - induced endothelial Ca ( 2 (cid:4) ) oscillations in lung capillaries . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2002 ; 282 : L917 – L923 . 231 . Boitano S , Safdar Z , Welsh DG , Bhattacharya J , Koval M . Cell - cell interactions in regulating lung function . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2004 ; 287 : L455 – L459 . 232 . Martin TR , Nakamura M , Matute - Bello G . The role of apoptosis in acute lung injury . Crit Care Med 2003 ; 31 : S184 – S188 . 233 . Del Riccio V , van Tuyl M , Post M . Apoptosis in lung development and neonatal lung injury . Pediatr Res 2004 ; 55 : 183 – 189 . 234 . Nanjundan M , Possmayer F . Pulmonary phosphatidic acid phosphatase and lipid phosphate phosphohydrolase . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2003 ; 284 : L1 – L23 . 235 . Bardales RH , Xie SS , Schaefer RF , Hsu SM . Apoptosis is a major pathway responsible for the resolution of type II pneumocytes in acute lung injury . Am J Pathol 1996 ; 149 : 845 – 852 . 236 . Maniotis AJ , Chen CS , Ingber DE . Demonstration of mechanical con - nections between integrins , cytoskeletal ﬁlaments , and nucleoplasm that stabilize nuclear structure . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997 ; 94 : 849 – 854 . 237 . Sotoudeh M , Li YS , Yajima N , Chang CC , Tsou TC , Wang Y , Usami S , Ratcliffe A , Chien S , Shyy JY . Induction of apoptosis in vascular smooth muscle cells by mechanical stretch . Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2002 ; 282 : H1709 – H1716 . 238 . Persoon - Rothert M , van der Wees KG , van der Laarse A . Mechanical overload - induced apoptosis : a study in cultured neonatal ventricular myocytes and ﬁbroblasts . Mol Cell Biochem 2002 ; 241 : 115 – 124 . 239 . GalvinDJ , WatsonRW , GillespieJI , BradyH , FitzpatrickJM . Mechani - cal stretch regulates cell survival in human bladder smooth muscle cells in vitro . Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 2002 ; 283 : F1192 – F1199 . 240 . Edwards YS , Sutherland LM , Power JH , Nicholas TE , Murray AW . Cyclic stretch induces both apoptosis and secretion in rat alveolar type II cells . FEBS Lett 1999 ; 448 : 127 – 130 . 241 . Edwards YS , Sutherland LM , Murray AW . NO protects alveolar type II cells from stretch - induced apoptosis . A novel role for macrophages in the lung . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2000 ; 279 : L1236 – L1242 . 242 . Upadhyay D , Correa - Meyer E , Sznajder JI , Kamp DW . FGF - 10 pre - vents mechanical stretch - induced alveolar epithelial cell DNA dam - age via MAPK activation . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2003 ; 284 : L350 – L359 . 243 . Putensen C , Hering R , Wrigge H . Controlled versus assisted mechanical ventilation . Curr Opin Crit Care 2002 ; 8 : 51 – 57 . 244 . MascheroniD , KolobowT , FumagalliR , MorettiMP , ChenV , Buckhold D . Acute respiratory failure following pharmacologically induced hy - perventilation : an experimental animal study . Intensive Care Med 1988 ; 15 : 8 – 14 . 245 . Veldhuizen RA , Welk B , Harbottle R , Hearn S , Nag K , Petersen N , Possmayer F . Mechanical ventilation of isolated rat lungs changes the structure and biophysical properties of surfactant . J Appl Physiol 2002 ; 92 : 1169 – 1175 . 246 . Veldhuizen RA , Yao LJ , Lewis JF . An examination of the different variables affectingsurfactant aggregate conversionin vitro . Exp Lung Res 1999 ; 25 : 127 – 141 . 247 . Ito Y , Veldhuizen RA , Yao LJ , McCaig LA , Bartlett AJ , Lewis JF . Ventilation strategies affect surfactant aggregate conversion in acute lung injury . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1997 ; 155 : 493 – 499 . 248 . Parker JC , Ivey CL . Isoproterenol attenuates high vascular pressure - induced permeability increases in isolated rat lungs . J Appl Physiol 1997 ; 83 : 1962 – 1967 . 249 . Tremblay LN , Slutsky AS . Ventilator - induced injury : from barotrauma to biotrauma . Proc Assoc Am Physicians 1998 ; 110 : 482 – 488 .