Expert Recommender : Designing for a Network Organization Tim Reichling 1 , Michael Veith 1 & Volker Wulf 1 , 2 1 Institute for Information Systems and New Media University of Siegen , Siegen , Germany ( E - mail : tim . reichling @ uni - siegen . de ; michael . veith @ uni - siegen . de ; volker . wulf @ uni - siegen . de ) ; 2 Fraunhofer Institute for Applied Information Technology ( FhG - FIT ) , Sankt Agustin , Germany ( E - mail : volker . wulf @ ﬁ t . fraunhofer . de ) Abstract . Recent knowledge management initiatives focus on expertise sharing within formal organizational units and informal communities of practice . Expert recommender systems seem to be a promising tool in support of these initiatives . This paper presents experiences in designing an expert recommender system for a knowledge - intensive organization , namely the National Industry Association ( NIA ) . Field study results provide a set of speci ﬁ c design requirements . Based on these requirements , we have designed an expert recommender system which is integrated into the speci ﬁ c software infrastructure of the organizational setting . The organizational setting is , as we will show , speci ﬁ c for historical , political , and economic reasons . These particularities in ﬂ uence the employees ’ organizational and ( inter - ) personal needs within this setting . The paper connects empirical ﬁ ndings of a long - term case study with design experiences of an expertise recommender system . Key words : expertise sharing , expert recommender system , case study 1 . Introduction Approaches to knowledge management ( KM ) have attracted both practitioners and scholars in the ﬁ eld of organizations and IT . The basic assumption underlying this trend is that knowledge creation and distribution will become core processes in a complex , fast - changing world . However , the focus of research in knowledge management has shifted . Ackerman et al . ( 2003a ) have proposed the concept of ‘ expertise sharing ’ as a step beyond traditional KM approaches which mainly focus on the externalization of codi ﬁ ed knowledge . To label these developmental stages , Huysman and de Wit ( 2004 ) recognize two distinct waves of knowledge management . The ‘ ﬁ rst wave ’ of knowledge management concentrated on the analysis , modeling , storing , and retrieval of codi ﬁ ed knowledge . These initiatives focused either on the knowledge of individuals or on knowledge management from a managerial perspective . IT tools were mainly designed to support acquisition and retrieval of codi ﬁ ed knowledge in order to improve knowledge bases , i . e . also the externalization of knowledge itself . By contrast , the ‘ second wave ’ of knowledge management focuses on the tacit and emergent aspects of knowledge ( on those forms which cannot be easily externalized ) , and on knowledge sharing within communities . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( 2007 ) 16 : 431 – 465 © Springer 2007 DOI 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 007 - 9055 - 2 In a socio - technical understanding of KM , the importance of IT tools is contested ( e . g . Cohen and Prusak 2001 ) . The primary function of these tools is not to represent codi ﬁ ed knowledge but to support processes of informal interaction within communities ( e . g . communication tools , such as email or instant messaging , and tools which help to ﬁ nd partners for communication ) . Compared to ﬁ rst generation knowledge management tools , little research on expertise sharing and expert recommendation has been conducted so far . Only few case studies distill technical requirements from real world settings ( e . g . McDonald 2000 ) or evaluate the impact of these technologies on organizational performance . Given our understanding of codi ﬁ ed knowledge as just one relevant dimension of knowledge , it still needs to be investigated how knowledge sharing as a part of mundane work practices can be supported by appropriately designed technologies . There are several challenges in investigating the ﬁ t of KM technologies designed for such purpose ( Ackerman et al . 2003a ; Huysman and Wulf 2004 ; Lindgren et al . 2004 ) . Employees often have different skills , goals , or cultural backgrounds which can lead to failures of IT systems ( Pipek and Wulf 2003 ; Normark and Randall 2005 ) . Even the successful application of new technologies can have unexpected individual or organizational outcomes that are contrary to the initial goals as Orlikowski ( 1996 ) and Pipek and Wulf ( 1999 ) describe . Research in this area needs to explore speci ﬁ c organizational settings , identify requirements , introduce dedicated KM systems , and observe actors appropriating the system . The connection between a speci ﬁ c ﬁ eld of application and its design outcomes is another point of interest . The research area of KM is not yet mature enough to come up with general concepts . Instead KM can be seen as a kind of mosaic that still needs to be further completed before one may hope to be able to identify ‘ general patterns ’ in applying KM strategies . In this paper , we present yet another mosaic stone — experiences when designing an expertise recommender system for the speci ﬁ c needs of a major European national industry association ( NIA 1 ) . The design is based on a long - term ﬁ eld study . We outline basic requirements for KM derived from the ﬁ eld study and present a system which deals with the particularities of the identi ﬁ ed problems . We conclude by discussing our design experiences . 2 . Technical support for second generation knowledge management There are several computer applications that have the potential to play a role within initiatives of second generation knowledge management . Most of these applications are designed to overcome spatial or temporal boundaries by making users aware of each other or of artifacts others have created . Among the systems that bridge spatial and temporal boundaries , topic - and member - centered communication spaces are common examples . While member - centered communication spaces , such as the 1 “ NIA ” is actually not the real name but a pseudonym . 432 Tim Reichling et al . Babble or Loops system presented by Ackerman and Halverson ( 2004 ) , foster social ties in existing communities , topic - centered communication spaces , such as news groups , allow members ( or guests ) to exchange ideas and ﬁ nd solutions to given problems 2 . An important motivational factor to participate in topic - centered communication spaces seems to be the gain of personal reputation . Beyond pure communication , applications may foster knowledge exchange by offering virtual spaces which allow creating , developing , and storing topic - centered materials . These repositories of materials are typically augmented with communication and annotation functionality ( cf . Shum 1997 ; Stahl and Herrmann 1999 ; Pipek and Won 2000 , 2002 ) . Editing tools support the development of materials and may have additional functionality to distill content out of communication spaces ( Ackerman et al . 2003a , b ) . The Answer Garden ( cf . Ackerman and Malone 1990 ; Ackerman 1998 ) is one of the most in ﬂ uential approaches in integrating shared repositories within communication spaces . It was mainly built to encourage learning within organizations . While the general functionality of these systems may be similar , their concrete implementation is speci ﬁ c with regard to the topic under discussion and the application domain ( e . g . Chapman 2004 ) . The systems discussed so far offer places in virtual space where human actors can direct themselves to and exchange knowledge through intended but informal communication . By contrast , awareness features capture selected activities of individual actors and make them visible to their cooperation partners . Won and Pipek ( 2003 ) suggest the application of speci ﬁ c awareness services in order to make knowledge creation perceivable for others within an organization . Furthermore , they propose to collect users ’ data on these computer supported activities , which are regarded as indications for their personal expertise . After different steps of aggregation , their expertise awareness mechanism supports ﬁ nding human participants who possess a required skill pro ﬁ le which is dynamically updated . We will now have a closer look at a case study of another class of applications in the ﬁ eld of second generation knowledge management : expert recommenda - tion systems . In this class of applications , the system suggests knowledgeable actors . Contrary to ﬁ rst generation KM tools , these applications do not focus on externalizing and representing knowledge but on calculating the participants ’ level of expertise . These applications therefore require personal data of all users and domain - speci ﬁ c algorithms that can match actors appropriately . Considering the latest approaches of KM applications , ﬁ ve sources of personal data have been applied to generate user pro ﬁ les : 1 . Content of textual documents : Documents that were written , read or reviewed by a user appear to be an indicative source of data for users ’ expertise . Docu - ments can include work reports , www - pages as well as emails or newsgroups 2 Member - centered communication spaces may include some topic - centred functionality . However , their design assumes a rather stable group of users basically known to each other . 433 Expert Recommender : Designing for a Network Organization postings . Systems such as Who Knows ( Streeter and Lochbaum 1988 ) , Yenta ( Foner 1997 ) , Lotus Discovery Server ( Pohs et al . 2001 ) , MII Expert Finder and XperNet ( Maybury et al . 2002 ) , HALe ( McArthur and Bruza 2003 ) , or the ExpertFinding Framework ( Reichling et al . 2005 ) automatically extract personal data about human interests or knowledge from text - based documents . 2 . Yellow pages ( YP ) / directories : Documents created with the speci ﬁ c intent to portray a human actor ’ s interests and expertise can be a highly relevant source . In an e - learning platform , Becks et al . ( 2004 ) ground their matching algorithm partly upon a self - classi ﬁ cation of the learners concerning their educational and professional background . 3 . Inscriptions into software artifacts : Software – like many other artifacts – can contain inscriptions which allow referring to the expertise of its creator . Concepts of a programming language applied when realizing an application can indicate a programmer ’ s skill level ( Vivacque and Lieberman 2000 ) . Comments within the documentation of the source code can indicate who was responsible for the speci ﬁ c module ( McDonald 2000 ) . 4 . Data on Interaction history : Structured data about a user ’ s history in interacting with speci ﬁ c applications can be an indicator for his interests or expertise . Vignollet et al . ( 2005 ) proposes to make use of similarities in browsing histories for expert recommendation . In a similar way , Becks et al . ( 2004 ) presented an approach which is integrated into an e - learning platform . Interacting with certain learning modules out of a well structured hierarchy of learning materials is interpreted as an indication of interest in that domain . 5 . Social network analysis : Analyzing the user ’ s social environment is another method of user assessment . The basic idea is that users who have collaborated in the past are likely to successfully collaborate in the future . Referral Web tries to support scienti ﬁ c communities based on an analysis of co - authorship in publications ( Kautz et al . 1997a , b ) . McArthur and Bruza ( 2003 ) as well as Tyler et al . ( 2003 ) analyze email traf ﬁ c to learn about social networks within organizations . The latter approach focuses on discovering Communities of Practice ( CoPs ) that coexist with the formal organizational structure . McDonald ( 2003 ) suggests integrating data of organizational structure and social networks into the algorithms for ranking potential experts . Interestingly , almost all approaches on expert recommender systems are technology - driven – which means that the authors do not refer to any empirical study that grounds their design to real world practice . The major exception is McDonald ’ s ( 2000 ) work . He analyzed in depth the related needs of a smaller sized medical software company . His tool ’ s functionality is therefore , very speci ﬁ c for this software company . However , he also abstracts some of his experiences into a software architecture for expert recommender systems ( ER Arch ) . Groth and Bowers ( 2001 ) have challenged some assumptions underlying this architecture by means of a second case study conducted within a Swedish 434 Tim Reichling et al . consultancy . Consultants showed patterns of behavior when searching expertise , which were not considered in ER Arch , e . g . choosing accessibility and availability for prioritizing which expert to contact . ER Arch suggests prioritizing experts solely according to data concerning expertise and personal / organizational relations between the information seeker and potential experts . Due to the lack of empirical grounding , the discourse on expert recommender systems has not yet developed a suf ﬁ cient understanding on the requirements in real world settings . It is also unclear which type of user pro ﬁ les and matching algorithms will lead to acceptable matching results . Most of the expert recommenders stand alone in the sense that they collect the required user data from just one application . A more practice - oriented perspective could investigate how to integrate expert recom - mender systems into a given software infrastructure on speci ﬁ c ﬁ elds of application . In the following sections , we will present NIA as a case to explore the potentials of expert recommendation systems . Our research with NIA is still ongoing . We discuss ﬁ ndings from the ﬁ rst two stages of our longitudinal study . Up to this point , we have completed the design of the system based on a comprehensive ﬁ eld study and have implemented a ﬁ rst version of an expertise recommender system . Hence , the software design is based on results of an empirical study which put light on the requirements of different subjects within the underlying heterogeneous organization . 3 . Setting With almost 3 , 000 member companies from a large variety of different branches , NIA is one of the biggest confederations of industries in Europe . The association is divided horizontally into 37 sections , each dedicated to companies from a certain industry sector 3 ( e . g . ‘ agricultural technology ’ , ‘ lifts and escalators ’ or ‘ pumps and systems ’ but all related to machine and plant construction ) and vertically into general departments ( e . g . ‘ business administration ’ , ‘ law ’ or ‘ taxes ’ ) . In addition , NIA consists of several spin offs and other speci ﬁ c organizational units such as forums , projects and regional of ﬁ ces . At the NIA headquarters , about 450 employees work in one of the organizations ’ sections or departments . Member companies pay for their membership according to their size . These fees are received directly by the corres - ponding sections . The sections pay a certain percentage of their fees for organizational overhead to ﬁ nance the vertical departments ( among other parts of the organization ) . The payments of member companies are the main source of income for NIA . Member companies in turn are welcome to request NIA ’ s services , when needed . NIA de ﬁ nes its core competencies as : & Networking ( introducing member companies to each other for business transactions ) & Technical or professional support 3 In the following we will use the term “ sector ” in the sense of branch of industry , whereas “ section ” will refer to NIA ’ s sectoral departments . 435 Expert Recommender : Designing for a Network Organization & Representation ( lobbying at governmental ( or other important ) institutions – This kind of service is offered by NIA exclusively 4 ) Knowledge management initiatives are regarded as a means to deal with a slight decline in membership registrations . While membership in an industrial association was given to companies in technical sectors during the past decades , companies today are expected to justify their expenses by claiming a ‘ return on investment ’ . This can be dif ﬁ cult to calculate for the membership in an organization ‘ dealing ’ with support , network and representation . So one of the projects goals is to better de ﬁ ne and present its services to the members and to make NIA and its members ‘ move closer to each other ’ . This should be done by improving the mutual awareness of one another ; i . e . the awareness of NIA ’ s services on the members ’ side and the awareness of the members ’ needs on NIA ’ s side . An illustrative example should sharpen the project ’ s vision . In short : When developing a new agricultural tractor , one member company got into trouble as they realized ( after the design phase was over ) that their machine did not conform to certain regulations related to its physical dimensions . This was a very costly error that could have been avoided by turning to NIA where this information was available . In turn , NIA was not aware of the company ’ s intention of developing this kind of agricultural machine and thus was unable to inform the company . KM strategies are now expected to connect both NIA and its members more ef ﬁ ciently to each other in order to avoid situations like the one described . It is especially the communicative level of knowledge sharing between member companies and NIA that needs to be improved or at least supported . However , there are also serious intra - organizational challenges in communi - cation . As mentioned above , NIA consists of 37 sections which serve 37 sectors of national machine and plant construction industries . Earlier , many of these sections were autonomous associations and in the 1990s these former rivals were merging into a single organization . There is still a considerable level of rivalry remaining since many member companies are hardly associable with just one section of NIA 5 . Still , quite a number of sections consider members which they had enlisted long before the creation of NIA as their exclusive customers . The members ’ obvious advantage of being served by just a single section becomes a problem when de ﬁ cits in communication within NIA lead to suboptimal services . So , in our ﬁ eld of application it seems that two distinguishable challenges in knowledge management and especially in communication behaviour exist . On the one hand , NIA has considerable problems in providing qualitative and quick help for their member companies . On the other hand , there are also KM problems 5 As an example , some agricultural companies need support from the ‘ agricultural technology ’ and from the ‘ pumps and system ’ section since many agricultural machines and tractors are additionally equipped with systems and machines that are developed by member companies of other sections . 4 During the past 10 years additional organizations appeared which offer networking and knowledge services to – mainly small and medium sized - companies . NIA , however , is the only of ﬁ cially recognized industry representation in these branches . Thus , it can provide exclusive links to political committees and policy - makers . 436 Tim Reichling et al . among NIA sections which seem to be the main reason for the communication problem between the member companies and NIA . 4 . Research methods The methodological approach taken in the ﬁ eld follows the theoretical framework of Integrated Organization and Technology Development ( OTD ) . Wulf and Rohde ( 1995 ) and Rohde ( 2006 ) describe OTD as an evolutionary concept which tries to take technological , organizational , and human factors into consideration . As commonly known , the introduction and establishment of novel technology in ﬂ uences not only work processes but also organizational structures and human habits . Keeping that in mind , human and organizational needs have to be taken into account when new software solutions are supposed to support work practices . One particular characteristic of the NIA project is to implement technical opportunities for additional collaborative work processes . NIA existing work processes often seemed to fail when employees looked for expertise beyond their own section , e . g . when answering a request of a member company . With regard to this general problem statement , our empirical study tried to deal with three speci ﬁ c questions . First , what are the relevant work processes within NIA ? Second , why do they often seem to fail ? And third , which alternatives could be envisioned and which type of technical support would be required ? Through our ﬁ eld study we tried to understand the formal organization , the employees ’ interpretation of it , and the informal patterns employees apply in order to deal with these types of problems . With regard to the empirical case study , we applied the OTD framework by employing the ethnomethodological concept of ‘ studies of work ’ to focus on personal and interpersonal issues ( cf . Flick 2002 : 39ff ; Bergmann 2003 : 129ff ; Harper et al . 2000 ) . Beyond workplace observations , investigations into the technical infrastructure , and workshops on speci ﬁ c topics , our research included three cycles of 16 semi - structured interviews conducted with 14 different employees and two managers of NIA . The majority of the employees worked in the agricultural section ; the others worked in several vertical units such as the staff - , IT departments or standardization committees . The two managers headed the agricultural section and the IT department , respectively . In addition to the interviews , we conducted continuous ﬁ eld observations which we documented in written form . Central to our observations were KM related work practices and the use of corresponding software applications . We also looked at the employees ’ ( electronic ) documents when conducting inter - views and observations . We observed mainly employees who took part in the interviews . Most of the ‘ formal ’ observations took place in conjunction with the interviews or were carried out after the interviews were conducted . Since a researcher was present in the ﬁ eld at least twice a month for almost three years , observations happened additionally in an informal way . These sources provided further empirical material for analysis . 437 Expert Recommender : Designing for a Network Organization For each interview cycle , we created a particular interview guideline . This allowed us to modify the guidelines evolutionarily as we assimilated the experiences gained before . The guidelines included issues such as ‘ everyday life on the job ’ , ‘ working history within NIA ’ ( both were main topics in cycle 1 which included six interviews ) , ‘ communication and cooperation with others ’ , and ‘ knowledge management and expertise sharing ’ ( treated already in cycle 1 but became the main focus in cycle 2 which included seven additional interviews ) . In cycle 3 , technical and socio - technical issues , such as problem solving and dealing with IT , were brought up in three more interviews . The interviews lasted between 60 and 120 min . We set up the interviews in a relatively open and talkative manner since guided questions were accompanied by narrative elements . By doing so , we had the opportunity to re ﬂ ect upon the interviews with regard to the organizational and cultural environment . We recognize and situate our ﬁ ndings in an interpersonal , organizational context ( cf . Randall and Bentley 1994 ) . Therefore , we tried to steer the interviews as little as possible , i . e . we followed an open - ended protocol . In order to guarantee solid and valid results , we used a tape recorder to avoid note taking during the interviews which would have in ﬂ uenced the ﬂ uency of the conversations negatively . To facilitate data reduction and to spend time ef ﬁ ciently , we decided to split the analysis phase into ﬁ ve speci ﬁ c steps ( cf . Schmidt 2003 ) : 1 . Based on the written materials , we constructed ‘ ex - post ’ categories for analysis . This categorization was mainly in line with the three aspects of OTD : technology , organization , and human factors , however , the speci ﬁ c subcategories resulted mainly from the interviews . 2 . We put together the analytical categories to create a coding guideline which helped us to cluster the data in terms of meaningful units . Each unit focused on a speci ﬁ c problem . 3 . We coded the material in order to make critical data anonymous and to generalize the data into meaningful patterns . 4 . We constructed nodes of correlating units which provided a quantitative overview of the material . This also gave us a clue which questions and problems might be most prominent and urgent , and had to be reconsidered in later steps of the project . 5 . Finally , we thought about possible hypotheses which had been derived from the previous steps of analysis . Based on those , we modi ﬁ ed the guideline for the next interview cycle . We employed the ﬁ ve steps mentioned above for each interview cycle . By doing so , we believe to have satis ﬁ ed two important requirements : ( 1 ) participation of NIA ’ s employees and ( 2 ) consideration for processes and practises . Following the OTD approach , we also looked at the empirical ﬁ ndings from a design perspective . A part of the interviews was dedicated to ‘ brainstorming and discussing KM solutions ’ . In the beginning , we had only a very coarse vision of 438 Tim Reichling et al . which KM strategy could be applied within NIA . In later interview sessions , we focussed on KM concepts which potentially offered a solution to problems already been identi ﬁ ed . As a result of the empirical analysis , we came up with a set of speci ﬁ c design requirements for NIA . To evaluate their validity , we created mock - ups and early prototypes and discussed them with employees of NIA 6 . 5 . Empirical ﬁ ndings After analyzing the interviews certain issues appeared to be central in terms of KM . These issues can be roughly assigned to the domains of work processes , organizational transparency and knowledge management . Here , we will focus mainly on those issues which have technical implications for the design of the expert recommender system . More detailed insights of the study are provided by Reichling and Veith ( 2005 ) . In the following section , we will have a closer look at the results which form a starting point for deriving design requirements . 5 . 1 . Working for member companies The work of NIAs ’ employees ( especially those of the agricultural sector ) is dominated by a high and varying workload as targeted events ( e . g . internal work groups , standards committee meetings , exhibitions , trade fairs ) structure their work activities seasonally . The services directly delivered to member companies such as technical support and representation , strongly depend on the members ’ requests and can hardly be anticipated in advance . Handling customers ’ requests for help is an important task in the agricultural section . Responses in the interviews indicate that handling inquiries can often be reduced to ‘ ﬁ nding the right expert ’ . In a ﬁ rst instance , employees try to ﬁ nd experts within their section . In particular cases , even contacts to member companies or ministries are utilized to answer certain questions . A few requests demand further inquiries or are delegated to other work units within the association . A common way to deal with costumer requests – as indicated in the interviews – is to prioritize them according to their ‘ importance ’ for NIA . 7 Especially newcomers ﬁ nd it hard to deal with this dynamic organization of knowledge work . Moreover , new employees are often overwhelmed by NIA ’ s institutional complexity . In this domain experienced employees have an advantage over novices because they are already experienced in dealing with this structural labyrinth . Some of the interviewees claimed that the internal complexity is a result of NIA being created out of the merger of several independent associations . 7 This importance is de ﬁ ned by two major criteria : First , the actual size of a member company , as the membership subscription is based on size , and second , by micro - political considerations regarding the engagement of a member company within NIA ’ s policies . 6 About 20 users participated in evaluating the expertise recommender . We conducted another 21 more interviews and workplace observations with users ( some of them twice at different stages ) during the evaluation period . These participants overlapped partly with those of the early empirical study . 439 Expert Recommender : Designing for a Network Organization Particularly in situations of urgent requests from member companies , knowledge about who has expertise in a certain ﬁ eld is crucially important . Participants described their expectations this way : If we had a rough idea of what everyone is doing [ within NIA ] – which of course is unmanageable for 450 people – then for us this would be a giant step forward . The goal is to create transparency . Responsibilities must be clearly de ﬁ ned and assigned unambiguously . Due to the complex organizational structure and the missing transparency , it is not surprising that requests from member companies were redirected without being answered appropriately . Situations occur , as interviewees reported , where requests were handed over from one colleague to the next without being ﬁ nally answered . It was considered to be dif ﬁ cult to identify actors possessing speci ﬁ c competencies , responsibilities or skills within the organization . Building and maintaining social networks is a task of central importance for NIA ’ s employees . It was reported to take years to have established appropriate networks externally within the industrial sector and towards ministries as well as internally within the different sections of NIA . Moreover , once established social networks cannot be simply transferred among NIA ’ s employees . 5 . 2 . Tools for expertise sharing For internal networking purposes NIA provides two tools which allow employees to seek for experts and maintain social networks : First , a printed catalogue lists internal experts for speci ﬁ c topics . In response to the question whether this booklet eases the search for experts within NIA 8 appropriately , some interviewees stated that it is often pure chance to ﬁ nd an expert using the booklet . The information was often outdated or imprecise . Similar problems were identi ﬁ ed when discussing the second tool , the central Address Information Management System ( AIM ) . The AIM system suffered from being designed in order to meet diverse requirements de ﬁ ned by different organizational units . For instance , as one participant stated , she would like AIM to be capable for seeking persons within the organization carrying certain competencies or responsibilities . However , AIM ’ s functionality did not allow this type of inquiries . To compensate for the problems of AIM and the paper catalogue , we found an interesting approach . One employee described his way to manage external requests by means of a personal archive of contacts . He had built up this archive continuously over time by adding contacts and skills every time a human actor proved to be ‘ useful ’ . His archive allows seeking for skills and experts , but it was not commonly shared since the employee considers it to be his private property . 8 These experts may work in certain horizontal sections ( e . g . the agricultural section ) or in vertical sections ( e . g . the IT or standardization department ) . 440 Tim Reichling et al . When discussing technical functionalities to overcome the given problems , the most illustrative suggestion was described as “ Google for NIA ” , an extended yellow pages system ( YP ) that supports ﬁ nding people based on an extended set of personal attributes , such as activities , interests , experiences , or responsibilities . One of the participants explained his vision in the following way : It would be heaven , just to enter a keyword and then to get exactly those ten experts [ that I am seeking for ] . Yet another interviewee had a vision : . . . that it becomes transparent , who ’ s responsible for what , would be surely helpful . And this might be some kind of compliment for certain people ; they can see themselves in a leading position within the organization ( . . . ) . This can even be motivating . In the latter quotation , another issue is addressed , namely the interviewee gives a subtle reason for employees to take part in the system : People might feel some kind of ‘ glory ’ when being assigned as an expert for a certain topic area . Such a feeling , as some interviewees stated , may improve the employees ’ motivation to keep their pro ﬁ les up to date and to share their knowledge with others . As we see in the following subsection the willingness to share expertise must not be assumed to be naturally given at NIA . A controversial question with regards to YP systems in general is how to create and update the user pro ﬁ les ( cf . Ehrlich 2003 ; Pipek et al . 2003 ) . Since most of the interviewees typically worked under time pressure and high work load , it seems to be unlikely that they would update their pro ﬁ les periodically . On the other hand it became clear from the interviews that a YP system would not be used in case the stored user pro ﬁ les appeared to be outdated or simply erroneous . An alternative suggestion was made by one of the interviewees outlining the idea of a ‘ virtual notice board ’ . In her assessment NIAwas too complex to be effectively covered by a YP system . Her idea was to simply change from a ‘ pull ’ to a ‘ push ’ concept . By having such a virtual notice board , the system would no longer be required to seek people – but have the users themselves responding to the requests they feel quali ﬁ ed for . Even though the ‘ virtual notice board ’ approach has obvious advantages over the Google idea , it is expected to lead to problems when urgent requests were to be handled . As another participant stated , it was impossible for him to wait for ‘ someone who is willing to accept a request ’ . 5 . 3 . Obstacles to expertise sharing When discussing KM strategies during the interview sessions , we primarily focussed on the management of human resources rather than of content . The concepts of a YP system ( Google for NIA ) require the employees to actively take part in , i . e . share their knowledge / expertise which they must be willing and ready to do . Several interviewees found it perfectly natural to share their expertise with 441 Expert Recommender : Designing for a Network Organization others and expected others to follow suit . Others however , expressed good reasons not to do so . Additionally , some participants stated that the ‘ potential of knowledge sharing ’ was highly overestimated . As one participant assumed , KM was primarily required by the younger employees with limited experiences . These are the ones who could bene ﬁ t most from ‘ sharing ’ expertise . In contrast , some of the more experienced employees seemed to be more short - spoken with regard to expertise sharing . An interviewee stated that expertise sharing would endanger his status by ‘ making his unique knowledge accessible for others ’ . So he suggested that it could be a good idea to create incentives for sharing knowledge in the sense of monetary rewards . According to his assessment : [ . . . ] everything inside my head is mine . And I must keep it to myself [ . . . ] to increase or to keep up my market value . Besides this obvious reason not to share his knowledge , other impeding factors of organizational or cultural nature were brought up by the same participant . As he stated , it was a typical behaviour of some of his colleagues to ‘ strut in borrowed plumes ’ . They would solve certain problems with the help of colleagues within NIA , and thereafter , declare it to be their own work . Therefore , colleagues with lower quali ﬁ cation appeared as ‘ experts ’ who would be requested exclusively in future . Such behaviour would reduce the colleagues ’ willingness to share their knowledge . In his eyes the only way to make colleagues share their knowledge would be to pay them money ( see above ) . Asked whether standardizations or guidelines ( mandating colleagues to share expertise as part of their work ) were capable of increasing the colleagues ’ willingness to share knowledge , he spontaneously responded that ‘ guidelines are to be avoided ’ . Assuming that a YP system such as ‘ Google for NIA ’ would be introduced , employees are expected to spend time on helping each other . Taking the workers ’ heavy workload into account , cooperation among colleagues could be fostered by creating a balance sheet to bill internal services . Some of the interviewees argued that such a balance sheet would make it easier for them to legitimate the amount of time spent on helping or cooperating with colleagues . Otherwise these efforts were assumed to be ‘ lost time ’ not resulting in any returns . 6 . Requirements for technical support Based on the ﬁ ndings from the analysis phase , we discuss requirements for a KM tool . We will ﬁ rst summarize the requirements and then link them to appropriate system features . The subsequent section will describe the actual implementation of the expert recommender system for NIA which was designed to meet these requirements . 6 . 1 . Basic requirements The empirical ﬁ ndings can be summarized as follows : NIA is a large organization with a decentralized internal structure consisting of 37 sections and several 442 Tim Reichling et al . general departments . The boundaries among the sections are strongly developed . This is an effect of the organization ’ s history since the sections were formerly independent associations . The mode of dividing the member fees within the organization further strengthens the independence of the different sections . Especially the section heads act in a highly self - determined manner . The decentralized organizational structure fosters the dedication of NIA towards the individual branches . However , the strict borders between the sections lead to losses in potential synergies . Due to 37 sections and several other departments , the formal organizational structure within NIA is very heteroge - neous and the relevant social networks – formal as well as informal – are very complex . Several interviewees stated that increasing mutual awareness about skills , expertise , experiences , and knowledge among the employees would be a ‘ giant step forward ’ 9 . Based on such an awareness , occasional sharing of expertise may happen which many ( but not all ) of the interviewees assumed to be highly promising . Our study shows that this awareness information is not yet available within the existing organizational or IT infrastructure . It is neither provided by the AIM database nor by the employees ’ catalogue . Employees requested an ef ﬁ cient and reliable search function ( that is what the Google metaphor was used for ) for appropriate experts in a given domain . However , we cannot assume that a suf ﬁ cient amount of employees are willing to continuously or periodically update their pro ﬁ le data which ‘ traditional ’ Yellow Pages systems would require . Hence information about the employees ’ expertise needs to be extracted from well chosen , indicative sources of existing data . 6 . 2 . Indicators for expertise When considering expert recommender technology , we had to ﬁ nd appropriate indicators for human actors ’ expertise . With regard to the indicators found in the literature , our ﬁ eld of application offered the following opportunities : 1 . Content of textual documents : Textual documents were a major means to report inside the sections and towards member companies . So most of the employees created considerable amounts of textual documents as part of their daily work practice . For instance , project documentation , protocols , corre - spondence or articles for the organization ’ s website could be widely found . Almost all textual documents were given in PDF or MS Of ﬁ ce ﬁ le formats such as Word , PowerPoint or Excel . The textual documents were typically organized in a directory system hosted on the department ’ s ﬁ le server . Documents stored 9 It becomes obvious from the empirical ﬁ ndings that not only high level expert knowledge is requested . Even lower degrees and different aspects of ‘ expertise ’ ( namely interests , experiences , activities or abilities ) belong to the requested properties ( cf . Hinds and Pfeffer 2003 or Ackerman et al . 2003b ; Pipek and Wulf 2003 ) . 443 Expert Recommender : Designing for a Network Organization on local hard drives , though a rare phenomenon , do still exist . Email was an important means of communication inside as well as outside NIA . Lotus Notes was commonly used as an email client and time scheduler . 2 . Yellow pages : Except for the limited information AIM provided , NIA did not run any personal pro ﬁ le system . Personal pro ﬁ les were updated , e . g . in case an employee moved to another of ﬁ ce . However , employees found it hard to use AIM ef ﬁ ciently for matching people . AIM is – as its name indicates – a data base to administrate address information . It did neither function as a YP - system nor an expertise recommender system . 3 . Social network analysis : The organizational structure given by the sections plays a major role for expertise sharing inside NIA . However , the sections seem to be small enough that expert recommendation is not needed inside . Social network analysis might play an important role in sharing knowledge beyond the individual sections . For privacy reasons , we did not access email information ( see below ) . Beyond email , there was not any other comprehen - sive base for social network analysis available . Taking the given sources for data on the human actors ’ expertise into account , we decided to base a ﬁ rst version of the expert recommender system on textual documents . We assumed that a collection of textual documents would be a rather good indication of an employee ’ s interests and expertise . Based on a choice of the employees ’ text documents a keyword vector was derived using methods of automatic text analysis ( see below ) . We also assumed that the given folder structure would make it easy for the employees to quickly and reliably select relevant and indicative documents from their working environment . Since NIA did not have its own YP system , we decided to integrate a YP component into the expert recommender application . Employees could use it to create a personal expertise pro ﬁ le based on their self - assessments . We extracted the personal data as another indicator of an employee ’ s expertise . Moreover , we presented this information when visualizing the list of experts found by the system . Beyond ‘ ordinary ’ contact information , the YP component allows users to enter information describing their educational background , professional experiences , interests , and organizational involvement – properties which are relevant for expertise matching , as well . Hence the users ’ expertise pro ﬁ le consists of two components : A YP component containing self - assessments that can be directly edited by the users and the keyword vector which is created automatically from a personal selection of the employees ’ text documents . Both pro ﬁ le components are distinct with respect to their content and the level of accessibility by the ( other ) users . So , these two components are likely to complement each other . The keyword vector which is supposed to contain several thousands of keywords adds to the self - assessments provided by the YP component . Its creation requires much less effort since the employees just need to specify the folders from which the textual documents should be extracted . 444 Tim Reichling et al . 6 . 3 . Privacy issues Further requirements emerged from the legal situation in the German context . According to German law , the storage and exploitation of personal data which can be used to monitor employees ’ behaviour and performance is a matter of workers ’ co - determination . Therefore , we designed a system architecture which allows the users to determine which of their documents or document folders should be taken as an indicator of their expertise ( instead of an automatic selection of an employee ’ s entire hard disk or the “ My Documents ” folder ) . 10 When documents or folders were selected to be an indicator of expertise , the system ’ s client just extracts the keyword vector but does not upload the whole documents to the server . The system also provides a function to let the user manually delete speci ﬁ c items from the keyword vector in case of a misleading or privacy - threatening extraction . Hence , none of the user ’ s documents is uploaded to the server or could be inspected by other members anyway . As a result , our system – unlike the original Google – does not actually support detecting documents , which makes the usage of the Google metaphor appear somewhat misleading at this point ( an example of the systems output is given in the subsequent section ) . Finally , the keyword pro ﬁ le is uploaded at the explicit request of a user ( when s / he has pressed the upload button ) . For privacy reasons , we decided not to include email folders or time schedulers as indicators for expertise . While emails and scheduling information may be highly promising indicators for a person ’ s interests and expertise , we assumed that their integration would be perceived as a violation of the actors ’ privacy . The question of how to preserve privacy without violating legal constraints or employees ’ attitudes needs to be further investigated within NIA after the systems roll - out . With regard to the YP component , similar methods of privacy protection are included : For each item that can be entered , its visibility can be set up to be : ‘ not visible for others ’ , ‘ internally visible ’ , or ‘ externally visible ’ . The last option is relevant in case member companies are connected to the system . This feature is described in more detail in the subsequent section . 6 . 4 . Feedback component In order to guarantee reliable and trustworthy recommendations , the tool should provide some kind of ‘ social control ’ in order to prevent negative or opportunistic behaviour . For instance , users may handle other users ’ requests for help carelessly or let themselves inappropriately appear as experts in certain domains – as reported by employees during the analysis phase . The latter might be done by entering wrong or misleading personal information to the system or release misleading text 10 We believed that such a design approach would also improve the quality of the keyword vector since we included only relevant documents for matching . 445 Expert Recommender : Designing for a Network Organization documents . In order to achieve some kind of social control , we include a feedback mechanism that allows users to evaluate the support they received from an expert . Different ‘ methods ’ of providing feedback can be implemented : Scores ( i . e . from 1 to 5 ) , tendencies ( i . e . ‘ + ’ , ‘ − ’ or ‘ neutral ’ ) or comments ( i . e . free - style text of de ﬁ ned maximum length ) are popular elements of user feedback in groupware systems . Another design issue concerning feedback mechanisms is the ‘ degrees of freedom ’ : Will users be able to provide negative feedback as well as positive ? Or will ‘ negative feedback be indicated by lacking feedback or the lowest number of positive scores ? And will other users have access to the feedback details ( i . e . the comments ) ? In case they have : Will they be provided with the overall number of feedback statements , such as the feedback ratio ( positive feedback divided by the overall amount of feedback ) ? Another problem may come up by different ‘ feedback cultures ’ . While some people are used to give honest and straightforward responses , others may use a euphemism to describe poor cooperation . Others in turn may intentionally return undeserved bad feedback in order to keep up their own ‘ market value ’ compared to others ( see section above ) . In order to avoid this kind of behavior and eventual resulting con ﬂ icts , our feedback system does not permit negative scores . In detail , after a request is answered the requestor is given the opportunity to score by assigning between one to ﬁ ve points ( where one means ‘ thanks for trying ’ and ﬁ ve means ‘ great assistance ’ ) to each actor who was involved in answering . Assigning scores , however , is not mandatory . When feedback information is presented , the members ’ overall number of received feedback statements ( and thus , the feedback ratio ) is also displayed . We believe that only the combination of both values provides an impression of the actors ’ actual performance . 6 . 5 . Bringing it all together Table 1 gives an overview of the central requirements mainly taken from our empirically derived scenario and describes the resulting recommender function - alities . The application can be described as a text based recommender system for expertise inside NIA ( and its member companies ) . Each user can provide personal information about himself , including typical yellow page information , such as contact information , a photo , and work - related information . We assume that most of the basic functionalities , i . e . text - based indication of expertise , would be relevant for the second application scenario , as well . However , the privacy - related functionality and the feedback mechanisms will probably need design adaptations with regard to the inter - organizational setting . The architecture of the system is designed in an extendible manner to allow more sophisticated recommendation strategies which include additional indicators of expertise . It allows integrating modules which connect a variety of different applications to access further types of personal data . For instance , in future system versions email content , interaction histories , internet bookmarks or newsgroup 446 Tim Reichling et al . postings may provide additional insights into the employees ’ expertise or interest . Appropriate modules capable of accessing these data sources can extend the system ’ s ability to create indicative user pro ﬁ les . In order to enable interoperability with and integration into NIAs IT infrastructure , we included a Web Service interface into the system , allowing clients access to the system via standardized interaction technologies and protocols like HTTP , XML , SOAP and WSDL ( Alonso et al . 2003 ) . This technology allows for embedding expert recommender functionality into other applications such as AIM or NIA ’ s intranet website . When analysing the KM needs within NIA , many interviewees pointed to the fact that they did not want to get yet another additional application . They felt already overwhelmed by the number of applications they were using . Web Service technology thus enables ( limited ) access to the system without installing the ExpertFinding ’ s client application . 11 11 The Web Service interface allows only for expertise recommendations . Since local creation of the users ’ keyword pro ﬁ lesis a central partofour approachand a WebServicewould requireuploadingentire ﬁ les , the client systemstill needs to be installed locally in order to generate and eventually edit keyword pro ﬁ les before uploading them . Table 1 . Requirements and potential according KM technology . Issues and Requirements Technical Functionalities Creating organizational transparency and gathering expertise related information Identifying competencies , abilities and responsibilities Search for experts based on textual documents and YP data Reflecting the potentially rapid developments in expertise , skills , and interests Preventing users from time consuming profile updates Semi - automatic generation of user - profiles Encouraging users’ motivation and reliability Feedback mechanisms Handling sensible , expertise - indicating data in a trustworthy manner Local creation and editing of expertise profiles ; upload on users explicit request Ease of use and learning Pure expertise recommender engine , no undesired extra functionality Extendibility in terms of expertise - indicators and matching functionality Server and client rely on an open , modular architecture , allowing for extensions and adjustments Interoperability with the existing IT infrastructure Web Service interface for connecting other systems and databases 447 Expert Recommender : Designing for a Network Organization 7 . Expert recommender for NIA We will now have a closer look at the implementation of the expert recommender system for NIA . It is a speci ﬁ c instance of a more widely applicable software framework which we call the ExpertFinding framework ( EFF ; cf . Becks et al . 2004 ; Reichling et al . 2005 ) . We will ﬁ rst outline the system ’ s basic attributes . Afterwards we will describe the most important and distinctive features in more detail . Finally , the application on the client side is presented . 7 . 1 . ExpertFinding framework EFF is implemented in Java using the Java 1 . 5 language speci ﬁ cation . We rely on a client - server architecture ( rather than on peer - to - peer architecture ) since user pro ﬁ les need to be stored on a central server instance in order to guarantee for continuous and quick access to expertise pro ﬁ les even when clients are of ﬂ ine . Hence , the server - side application manages storage , update and eventual deletion or renaming of user pro ﬁ les . Furthermore , requests for expertise are handled by the server . In turn the client - side application offers a user interface for editing the personal data , generating a keyword pro ﬁ le from text documents , generating requests for expertise , accordingly displaying the results ( which may be seen as the realization of the Google metaphor ) and managing emerging requests for help which are facilitated by the system . Both , server and client side applications allow for extensions ( plug - ins ) in order to enrich the systems functionalities . This way further data sources serving as indicators for expertise may be included . The creation of keyword pro ﬁ les from text documents is done by using statistical methods of keyword analysis ( Heyer et al . 2002 ) . Since the text documents generally are present in some proprietary ﬁ le format , plain text needs to be extracted from the ﬁ les in a ﬁ rst step . Namely we are able to extract plain text from MS Word documents , MS PowerPoint presentations , PDF and HTML ﬁ les . For this purpose we rely on open source projects capable of reading these ﬁ le formats ( Apache POI 2005 ; PDFBox 2005 ) . So , we cover the most common text ﬁ le formats used also as standard formats within NIA . 12 The steps to extract keywords and create keyword pro ﬁ les are explained in more detail in ( Reichling et al . 2005 ) . In short : plain text is extracted from documents of diverse ﬁ le formats . Afterward stop words ( terms such as ‘ the ’ , ‘ a ’ , ‘ me ’ or ‘ with ’ ) are ﬁ ltered using stop word listings . The remaining terms are regarded as meaningful terms – i . e . keywords . Together with their frequency within all the recognized documents these keywords are stored within a large keyword vector – the ‘ keyword pro ﬁ le ’ . It has to be pointed out that the documents that users release 12 MS Excel ﬁ les are widely used as well at NIA . However , Excel ﬁ les are not yet supported since we assumed these ﬁ les to include numbers rather than meaningful keywords . Our latest investigations show that this is actually not true for NIA since some Excel sheets appeared to include meaningful keywords . Hence , support for Excel ﬁ les will be included in the next version of the system . 448 Tim Reichling et al . for their keyword pro ﬁ le are not shared with other users . Only the keyword vector is used to match human actors . The use of personal data is highly restricted by the users ’ privacy concerns . Careless handling with these data would threaten the users ’ acceptance of the system . In order to avoid this , none of the users ’ personal data is released without the users ’ explicit agreement . By default personal data ( after uploading to the server ) still remains invisible to other users unless they are explicitly released by the owner of these data . None of the text documents used for automatically generating the user ’ s keyword pro ﬁ le is uploaded to the server or can be inspected by other users . Instead , the keyword pro ﬁ le is generated locally and then sent to the server on the users ’ demand . 7 . 2 . Software architecture Figure 1 presents the software architecture of the expert recommender . It shows nine system components , realized as plug - ins . Furthermore interactions among modules are depicted as dotted lines . Such interaction occurs when matching components access corresponding storage components for user data or when the feedback collection component ‘ feeds ’ the feedback storage component . As described above , a Web Service interface acts as a standardized interface for interaction with the ‘ world outside ’ . The users are represented by three types of pro ﬁ les . They are stored in different modules ( storage modules ) . We will refer to single components of the user pro ﬁ le as ‘ pro ﬁ le components , whereas the collection of each user ’ s pro ﬁ le components is referred to as the ‘ user pro ﬁ le ’ . The ﬁ rst pro ﬁ le component consists of the yellow page information that users provide about themselves . This component is strongly motivated by our empirical ﬁ ndings ( see above ) . It includes contact information ( name , telephone number , email , etc . ) , information about their role within the organization ( position , tasks , job description ) and information about skills , experiences and expertises ( apprenticeship , study , publications , presentations , etc . ) . We assume this information to be rather static since it ’ s only infrequently changed . The second pro ﬁ le component is given by the keywords derived from the users ’ text documents which are created , manipulated , or read in the context of the actors ’ actual work . The extraction is carried out semi - automatically as described above . The third pro ﬁ le component is created from feedback events that occur during continued usage of the system ( see above ) . For each user the overall score is stored in the feedback component . The average value of scores gained by others is likely to re ﬂ ect properties like the participants ’ ‘ willingness to help ’ or their ‘ engagement in users ’ requests ’ . This component is not a part of the ﬁ rst rolled out version of the implementation of the EFF . It is a plug - in which will be further developed in a second cycle . In order to match the user pro ﬁ les against requests and in order to give recommendations , we draw from a set of ﬁ ve matching algorithms ( ‘ matching modules ’ ) , rather than from just one . We do so in order to deal with possible 449 Expert Recommender : Designing for a Network Organization failures of single matching modules ( that may occur as a result of missing , obsolete or insuf ﬁ cient pro ﬁ le data ) . We further believe that over time certain matching components will prove to be useful while others may emerge as rather useless . So , eventual adjustments of the systems con ﬁ guration over time ( e . g . removal of useless components ) are part of our concept . The overall matching result is given by the average value of theses ﬁ ve modules ( we will later see that users can adjust the weight of each module according to their individual needs ) . In Figure 1 these ﬁ ve different matching modules are depicted as light grey boxes , each implementing one single matching strategy . Five strategies might be a surprising number since only three different types of pro ﬁ le data sets are stored . However , by no means is it given that only one matching strategy can be applied to a speci ﬁ c pro ﬁ le component . In this case , three different matching strategies can apply to the keyword pro ﬁ le : simple keyword matching , TF / IDF keyword matching and LSI matching on keywords . The simple matching on personal data and the feedback matching apply to the remaining two pro ﬁ le components ( personal data and feedback pro ﬁ les ) . 7 . 2 . 1 Matching keyword pro ﬁ les The simple keyword matching compares a given request in a fairly simple way : It detects exact or partial matches between the keywords in the request and those in WebService Database Connection Simple Keyword Matching Keywordprofiles Matchingmodules Storagemodules Personaldata TF / IDF Keyword Matching LSI Matching on Keywords Simple Matching on personal data Feedbackprofiles Feedback Matching Feedback Collection Datacollector module Figure 1 The ExpertFinding framework . 450 Tim Reichling et al . each user pro ﬁ le . For all exact matches , the matching result is increased by the weight of the matching term within the user pro ﬁ le . 13 TF / IDF keyword matching works in a very similar way : However , it differs since the matching result is increased by the weight of a keyword divided by the overall number of user pro ﬁ les containing this keyword . 14 A more sophisticated method of comparing user pro ﬁ les is implemented in the LSI algorithm ( Deerwester et al . 1990 ) . LSI ( latent semantic indexing ) applies to a set of documents that reveal hidden ( latent ) similarities between documents . 15 . In the case of a ‘ proper ’ set of documents ( some of the keywords should occur in more than one document ) , similarities are discovered even if there are not any exact matches of terms to be detected . Again , in our case it is the user ’ s pro ﬁ le rather than the documents that is being considered . 7 . 2 . 2 Matching personal data and user feedback Another matching strategy fairly similar to the simple keyword matching is the simple matching on personal data . Again , exact or partial matches between a given request and the user pro ﬁ le are detected . In case of the matching on personal data , the users ’ personal data are used instead of keyword pro ﬁ les . The matching result is computed in the same way as with the simple keyword matching method . Finally , feedback matching is applied to the feedback pro ﬁ les . The matching result is computed independently to the actual request since no matching needs to be performed . It computes an average value describing the users ’ engagement in answering requests ( see above ) based on all received feedback items . For privacy reasons no detailed information about these data is presented . The feedback is included as part of the result list that is displayed on demand . The results are colour - coded : green indicates a positive feedback whereas white indicates negative or missing feedback . Since feedback needs to be gathered , a feedback collection module is part of the software architecture and depicted in the upper left part of Figure 1 . This component gathers user feedback after a cooperation among users was initiated and communi - cation took place . Collected feedback is stored in a pro ﬁ le ( feedback pro ﬁ le ) . 7 . 3 . User interface Now we describe the client - side component ( user client ) of the system . The design rationale was to provide a gentle slope of increased complexity to 15 Presenting this method in detail would exceed the scope of this paper . Therefore , we refer to Berry et al . ( 1995 ) for a detailed description . 13 Partial matches ( truncations ) are considered as matches of ‘ lower quality ’ . Accordingly , in cases of partial matches a smaller value is added to the matching result , due to the number of matching letters . 14 TF / IDF stands for term frequency inversed document frequency . Compared to simple term frequency , this method provides a better understanding of the keyword ’ s importance in the context of the other user pro ﬁ les ( cf . Salton and McGill 1983 ) . 451 Expert Recommender : Designing for a Network Organization allow users to manage the system and its inherent ﬂ exibility ( cf . McLean et al . 1990 ) . On the lowest level of complexity , the client provides ‘ precon ﬁ - gured parameters ’ for non - experienced users to apply the ﬁ ve different matching strategies . However , users can adjust these parameters to ﬁ t their individual needs . Some users may want a con ﬁ guration of the matching modules , which takes the personal pro ﬁ les to be the most important data to base the matching on . Others might be interested in the users ’ willingness to help rather than their pure quali ﬁ cation . The ﬂ exibility in the weighting mechanism is an attempt to deal with partly controversial empirical ﬁ ndings in which participants ’ motivated technical strategies strongly grounded in their actual work contexts . These contexts again , partly differ tremendously due to NIA ’ s organizational structure . 7 . 3 . 1 Searching for experts Figure 2 shows the system ’ s search interface . In Figure 2a , users can select which type of search is required . The options for search include keyword - based search , document driven search , and the search for similar users . To set parameters for individual search strategies , a fourth button needs to be pressed . The keyword - based inquiry can be seen as ‘ straight forward ’ search functionality . It approximates most closely to the aspired Google for NIA idea , which is motivated by the empirical ﬁ ndings . However , the two other search functions need further explanation : First , the document driven search allows users to select one or more text ﬁ les from their ﬁ le system . When starting the search , a vector of weighted keywords is derived from these documents in the same way as it is done when creating keyword pro ﬁ les . In this case , the inquiry is conducted by matching the resulting keyword vector with the user pro ﬁ les stored in the system . The inquiry for similar users compares the requestor ’ s own pro ﬁ le with those of other users . The goal of this type of search is to ﬁ nd user pro ﬁ les that are similar to the requestor ’ s pro ﬁ le . Since the user pro ﬁ les consist of keywords ( in cases of the keyword pro ﬁ le and the personal data ) , similarities between user pro ﬁ les are detected in the same way as it is done with keyword - based requests . These search methods are meant to offer additional access to the expertise indicators . While they were not explicitly required by the NIA interviewees , we assumed that speci ﬁ cally employees in member companies would bene ﬁ t from these additional search options . In Figure 2b a list of experts for an exemplary search inquiry for the terms ‘ market ’ , ‘ agriculture ’ , and ‘ china ’ is shown . From this list , users can directly create requests to experts or add the contact data to their personal address book . The result list shows the expert ’ s name and a photo as long as the data are released to be displayed . By doing so , we dealt with legal concerns as well as 452 Tim Reichling et al . Figure 2 a Interface to select the preferred type of search . b Interface presenting the list of experts . 453 Expert Recommender : Designing for a Network Organization with NIA - speci ﬁ c privacy issues ( see above ) . The overall matching result ( de ﬁ ned as the average of the results returned by all the involved matching modules ) is indicated by the vertical bar chart ( Figure 2b ) . Finally , the right part of each row shows details of the matching results in natural language , explaining why the results are as they are and which are the actual matching terms . Since three matching modules ( the simple keyword matching , the LSI matching and the simple matching on personal data ) were involved in answering this search inquiry , three comments are displayed , each describing the result of one matching module ( depicted in the box in the lower right of Figure 2b , where details are show in increased size and translated to English ) . 16 When creating a request to an identi ﬁ ed expert via the expert recommender a blank email - like window appears . The urgency of the request ( maximum number of days to work on it ) can be adjusted using a slider element . When moving the slider to the left , the urgency increases which is indicated by the background colour that synchronously turns orange ( signalling urgency ) . The receiver ( s ) of that request will see an indication of an incoming request which provides with the following options : They can accept the request , delegate the request to someone else ( contained in the personal address book ) , decline the request for reasons of lacking time , or decline the request for missing expertise to handle it . In each case , an automatic noti ﬁ cation message is sent to the requestor providing the expert ’ s decision . In case of accepting the request , users can specify the expected time it takes them to respond using another slider element . For two reasons we did not draw on existing email infrastructure for messaging . First , traditional email does not provide the speech - act type of functionality described above ( cf . Winograd 1987 / 1988 ) . Second , though most users are willing to show their name and photo , for privacy reasons users may not wish their email address to become visible to others . This may speci ﬁ cally be the case when the system reaches out into member organizations . However , the next version of the system will include email noti ﬁ cation in order to keep the users aware of incoming requests even if the user client is not running . Another motivation to implement a messaging system internally is the documentation of feedback . It would be much harder to capture feedback from a traditional email system . 7 . 3 . 2 Creating the user pro ﬁ le We now turn from searching to pro ﬁ ling which is a central element in our approach : In Figures 3 and 4 screenshots show the user interfaces for creating , checking , and manipulating keyword pro ﬁ les ( Figure 3 ) and personal data 16 The current implementation offers information on the quality of the automatically generated recommenda - tions . However , in case member companies deploy the system to a large extend , we may need to reconsider the display of too many details at this point . For example , NIA may not like to let its member companies know that the best match with regard to a ‘ hot topic ’ has a score of only 26 % . 454 Tim Reichling et al . ( Figure 4 ) . Figure 3a shows a list of folders taken from the ﬁ le system . These folders are selected by a user to indicate his expertise and interests . Figure 3a also indicates an ongoing ‘ document scan ’ which can be observed by the user : The frame in the upper right corner shows the progress on document scanning . The lower right frame shows a list of documents that have not yet been scanned . In Figure 3b a keyword pro ﬁ le is shown after accomplishing the document scan . Experience shows that even a small amount of documents generally results in a large set of keywords . In the left two columns the keywords and corresponding frequencies are displayed . The right column shows the number of documents in which the term has been found . The latter value is provided as additional information for the user . It is not relevant for the matching algorithm and is not transmitted to the server when uploading the keyword pro ﬁ le . Since not all of these terms truly re ﬂ ect the users ’ current expertise or interests , they have the opportunity to edit their keyword pro ﬁ les . Namely they can delete those keywords which could be misleading . The corresponding user interface is depicted in Figure 3c . However , editing the keyword vector is meant to be an exceptional intervention . Figure 3 Screenshots of a the selected folders , b the generated keyword pro ﬁ le and c the interface for editing the keyword pro ﬁ le . 455 Expert Recommender : Designing for a Network Organization In Figure 4 the user interface for editing the personal data is displayed . Those data are divided into contact information ( Figure 4a ) , organizational involvement ( Figure 4b ) and quali ﬁ cation information ( Figure 4c ) . The information gathered in Figure 4a is also represented within AIM . This is not the case for the information displayed in Figure 4b and Figure 4c . To protect the users ’ privacy , the visibility can be con ﬁ gured individually for each item by using the combo box elements next to the entry ﬁ elds . Visibility can be con ﬁ gured to either ‘ not visible ’ , ‘ internally visible ’ or ‘ externally visible ’ . It should be pointed out that the information entered in these ﬁ elds is used to match expertise , regardless of the item ’ s visibility setting . Visibility restrictions only affect the information that is displayed to other users ( for instance in the result lists ) . The information about organizational involvement ( Figure 4b ) includes information about the recent position , a description of the actual tasks , and the number of years spent in the organization . The value of these data may vary according to the level of abstraction that is used . More concrete information about the users ’ actual expertise is gathered in Figure 4c , where typical indicators of expertise are inquired . These include education , apprenticeship , university Figure 4 User interface for editing the personal pro ﬁ le : a contact information , b organizational involvement and c quali ﬁ cation information . 456 Tim Reichling et al . degrees , language skills , international experience , authored publications , given talks , project experiences , and specialized knowledge . The structure of the Yellow Page form was partly derived from the interviewees and was further motivated by AIM which provides basic information about employees ’ contact data . 17 8 . Conclusion Second wave KM initiatives require speci ﬁ c technological support . Expert recommender systems are one of the promising technological options offered in that ﬁ eld . Due to the nature of knowledge and its intertwinedness with work practises , research in the ﬁ eld of expertise recommender systems needs empirical case studies to ground and evaluate the design space . In this paper , we have explored the design space with regards to the speci ﬁ c needs of NIA – a highly decentralized organization which is very complex and heterogeneous in its structure . We have conducted an investigation into the knowledge - related work practises of NIA . Contrary to earlier ﬁ eld studies ( e . g . Pipek and Wulf 2003 ) , NIA had considerable problems in locating appropriate human experts beyond the boundaries of speci ﬁ c sections . Work activities and the related division of labour remained hidden within the individual sections . This pattern seems to result from the organization ’ s history and its internal reward system . These structural patterns seemed to have shaped a culture of competition among the different sections . The size of the organization and its regional distribution only add to the problems . However , at least on the operative level , the inef ﬁ ciency of the current mode of expertise sharing is strongly felt . During the empirical case study , it became clear that the services provided to member companies and employees ’ job satisfaction would bene ﬁ t from better means of expertise sharing . New employees and actors from member companies can be expected to bene ﬁ t the most from better organizational transparency within NIA . However , we also experienced consid - erable reservations from the side of other users . Some of the experienced employees and section heads felt threatened by the potentials of a wider culture of expertise sharing . Such a multi perspective study allows us to better understand potentials and obstacles to the appropriation of expert recommender systems . Moreover , it helps us to conceptualize an appropriate strategy for the roll - out of expert recommender systems . Based on the results of the empirical study , we designed an expert recommender system . Compared to most other implementations of expert recommendation systems ( e . g . Maybury et al . 2002 ; Streeter and Lochbaum 1988 ; Foner 1997 ) , we have implemented an application which is speci ﬁ c for an organizational setting . While we were able to draw on a software framework that provided modules for 17 NIA ’ s employees are used to work with these sets of data and do not want to maintain additional information . 457 Expert Recommender : Designing for a Network Organization different matching strategies and their parameterization ( cf . Becks et al . 2004 ; Reichling et al . 2005 ) , many design decisions were grounded in the speci ﬁ c requirements of NIA . Expert recommenders often rely on structured data such as source code or histories of interaction ( Vivacque and Lieberman 2000 ; McDonald 2000 ; Becks et al . 2004 ) . Structured data typically allow extracting and interpreting expertise related information in a more straight forward way than plain text . However , this kind of data was not easily available inside NIA and its member companies or problematic for privacy reasons . Since dealing with textual documents was an important aspect of the work practices , we took these documents as an indicator of expertise and complemented them with Yellow Page information . Our approach is conceptually close to the ‘ Who Knows ’ application ( Streeter and Lochbaum 1988 ) since it builds on a similar strategy to generate expertise pro ﬁ les from textual documents . However , our system architecture allows dealing with different sources of expertise indicators in a speci ﬁ c manner . Moreover , our architecture and implementation consider privacy issues explicitly . The Lotus Discovery Server ( LDS ) collects a wide variety of textual documents automatically , analysis and clusters them . Human actors are associated with certain document clusters . Search queries display documents as well as related human actors . Users can decide whether to be associated with a certain document cluster ( Pohs et al . 2001 ; Schirmer 2003 ) . While LDS combines search for documents and experts , our approach focuses solely on ﬁ nding expertise . Therefore , indicative documents are selected manually by the users and text analysis happens in a decentralized manner . Such an approach is more selective with regard to indicative documents and sensitive towards privacy concerns . Enterprise content manage - ment systems ( ECM ) contain typically some sort of expert recommender functionality , as well . However , this functionality is not designed for the particularities of a speci ﬁ c organizational setting and does not offer suf ﬁ cient ﬂ exibility . So , matching results are probably suboptimal and privacy concerns are not dealt with in accordance to the legal and cultural particularities . Alternatively , one could think of applying ( commercial or non - commercial ) pull technologies in order to locate and engage experts . For instance , Usenet technology or Virtual Notice Boards meet some of the requirements . Once a participant engages in answering a request , it is a clear indicator of his readiness to share expertise in this domain . However , the empirical pre - study made clear that actors often cannot wait for ‘ someone who is willing to accept a request ’ . We assume that ( speci ﬁ cally in non - cooperative environments ) a ‘ push ’ mechanism of directly asking a potential expert would have a positive impact on the way requests are received : Dedicated requests which are exclusively directed towards a potential expert may be – due to their stronger social and communicative character – much harder to decline than a requests launched in a pull - medium . We are not aware of any existing technology covering the functionality that NIA ( and its member companies ) require . While our approach is mainly based on 458 Tim Reichling et al . textual documents , the quality of recommendation could be improved by taking parts of an employee ’ s communication , such as email messages or phone calls , additionally into account . Further indicators , such as Usenet postings , Internet bookmarks or browser histories , could be considered , as well . For three reasons we decided to base our matching algorithms mainly on textual documents . First , there are still considerable technical and algorithmic problems with regards to voice recognition , which prevent the integration of spoken language . Textual documents are easily accessible and there exists an elaborated set of matching algorithms . Second , privacy issues kept us from utilizing email messages or browser histories . The integration of employees ’ content of communication or detailed activity protocols seemed to be more delicate than dedicated textual documents . Third , we could not rely on a signi ﬁ cant number of users applying other text - based communication channels which could become additional indicators of expertise . For instance , Usenet or similar technologies are not widely used at NIA . Another important issue when designing expert recommender systems is to ﬁ nd a balance between the control a user needs to have over his pro ﬁ le and the effort which is involved in keeping it updated . We believe that the solution developed for NIA , which draws on textual documents stored in the users ’ ﬁ le system , is a promising approach to deal with this design issue . Therefore , changes in a user ’ s document base can be tracked and used to update his pro ﬁ le . This approach can be applied to other document collections which are organized by means of a container structure , as well . From a privacy perspective , a high level of control on a user ’ s pro ﬁ les is essential for any expertise recommender system . The German legal setting , with its high demands on privacy , has a great in ﬂ uence on our design considerations . However , the importance of controllability has also been emphasised outside the German setting , as well ( e . g . Belotti and Sellen 1993 ) . Indeed at this point , design requirements for appropriate expert matching and the requirements for the protection of the users ’ privacy seem to point in the same direction . A third lesson we learned involves integrating expert recommender systems into the given IT infrastructure . McDonald ( 2000 ) and Becks et al . ( 2004 ) already pointed out the fact that important aspects of the users ’ pro ﬁ le data need to be taken out of existing IT systems . Our study con ﬁ rms this ﬁ nding . However , in our case the data source was less obvious and the quality of data probably less precise for matching than in the case of the work of McDonald ( 2000 ) . Our case study shows that ‘ ﬁ tting into the given infrastructure ’ can have a broader meaning . On the one hand , NIA employees requested an integration of the expert ﬁ nder functionality into the user interface of already given applications , e . g . their intranet portal . Since the use of expert recommender systems will be deeply embedded in a range of different work practises , this fact has to be re ﬂ ected by the interface design . The software architecture of expert recommenders should allow the integration into a range of different applications with little efforts . 459 Expert Recommender : Designing for a Network Organization Finally , the extent of the functionality of an expert recommender system needs to be designed in relation to the already existing software functionality . In NIA , a Yellow Page system was missing . To gain additional pro ﬁ le data and to offer potentially relevant functionality to the organization , we decided to integrate a Yellow Page component into our application . So our design case indicates that ﬁ t with an existing IT infrastructure is a more complex construct than just allowing importing external data . There are also lessons to be learnt with regard to the design of the software architecture of an expert recommender system . To integrate expert recommender technologies into given IT infrastructures , a ﬂ exible software architecture and standardized software interfaces are essential . Flexibility allows to access additional sources of expertise indicators and to extend the functionality , e . g . by adding feedback mechanisms or a Yellow Page component . Standardized software interfaces allow for integration of the application into the user interfaces of another application . While the need for ﬂ exibility with regard to expertise indicators has already been discussed in the literature ( McDonald 2000 ; Becks et al . 2004 ) , our study provides a broader set of architectural requirements . Some of them are also the result of privacy concerns which have not yet been widely explored with regard to expertise recommender systems . Groth and Bowers ( 2001 ) challenge expert recommender systems which base their algorithms mainly on indicators of expertise or interest . They found situational factors such as accessibility and availability of human actors more relevant when employees asked for help . To add to this discussion , our empirical study revealed the importance of social and organizational factors when employees select potential experts . These factors include the level of competition across sectors , the level of competition among NIA peers , and the importance of a member company . Groth and Bowers ( 2001 ) concluded that the situatedness of human strategies in ﬁ nding expertise prevented algorithms for expertise location from being effective in case they were solely based on indicators of expertise or interest . Based on our material , one could argue that matching algorithms which do not take social and organizational factors into account would hardly be effective . However , our interpretation of the empirical ﬁ ndings is rather different . NIA ( and the network of its member companies ) is an organizational setting in which potential experts are often unknown to the internal and external actors in need of support . So the current version of the recommender system offers information which has not yet been made available to the human actors . The system architecture allows taking further types of data into account when recommenda - tions are computing , e . g . data dealing with situational , social , or organizational factors . However , our design experience indicates that these data may be hardly available and highly sensitive . Data such as the actual workload of an expert is currently not available within NIA ’ s software infrastructure . Other types of data may even be too sensitive that employees would not state them openly or make 460 Tim Reichling et al . them available to a computer system . This refers in our case to data such as the level of competition between sections or peers . However , the lacking availability of these types of data may not be a too serious threat to the usefulness of expert recommender systems . These applications need to be seen as tools supplementing rather than replacing human activities in expert ﬁ nding ( see Pipek and Wulf 2003 ) . When selecting an actor out of the list of potential experts , the users can ‘ manually ’ bring into play all those factors which have not been considered within the algorithms . The results of matching algorithms which take too many different factors into account may be dif ﬁ cult to interpret by users . Therefore , a design approach grounding its recommendations in data sources which are semantically homogeneous , i . e . indicators of expertise and interests , has its merits . Further information helpful to choose among potential experts could be displayed as additional items in the output window which listed the matching results ( see Figure 2b ) . Our study indicates that it is still a challenge to ﬁ nd homogeneous data sources and to con ﬁ gurate the matching algorithms appropriately for speci ﬁ c organizational settings . While the design of the expert recommender is grounded in the empirical case , further studies on the system ’ s appropriation by NIA ’ s employees are needed . NIA ’ s organizational structures and culture does not guarantee the experts ’ willingness to cooperate or to use the system at all ( see ‘ Obstacles to expertise sharing ’ ) . So the question is whether the recommender is doomed to fail if certain high - level experts will not take part . It is not clear whether those actors will become users of the system as long as they are not intrinsically motivated to contribute to expert sharing in the organizational network . Obviously , the introduction of the expert recommender system should be best accompanied by measures of organizational and personal development ( e . g . Wulf and Rohde 1995 ) . For instance , a modi ﬁ cation of NIA ’ s internal reward system , which would take efforts spent on expertise sharing more into account , would be very bene ﬁ cial for the appropriation of the expert recommender system and , most likely , for NIA ’ s overall organizational performance . Such a reward system could be partly based on data derived from the feedback component of the expert recommender system . However , NIA ’ s decentralized nature seems to make changes in the overall organizational structure more dif ﬁ cult than the introduction of a technical system . Orlikowski ( 1996 ) as well as Pipek and Wulf ( 1999 ) show empirically that the appropriation of groupware may change organizational practises and processes even beyond the originally intended level . So , it will be an interesting issue to investigate to which extent the introduction of the expert recommender system will have an impact on the pattern of expertise sharing . While expert recommender technologies have been discussed for quite some time , the focus was so far rather on conceptual and algorithmic issues ( Maybury et al . 2002 ; Streeter and Lochbaum 1988 ; Foner 1997 ) . We presented a case 461 Expert Recommender : Designing for a Network Organization where we evaluated its ﬁ t into a complex organizational setting . Based on this ﬁ nding , we designed and implemented a speci ﬁ c functionality and came up with new requirements for the software architecture of expert recommender systems . We believe that further studies of this type are needed to better understand the design space for expert recommender systems and make this promising technology useful in real world settings . Acknowledgments The research has been funded by the German Federal Ministry for Economics and Technology . During the time of writing , Volker Wulf was supported by a Fulbright Scholarship . We would like to thank April Bowen , Andrea Bernards , and Aditya Johri for proof reading the manuscript . References Ackerman , M . S . ( 1998 ) : Augmenting Organizational Memory : A Field Study of Answer Garden . ACM Transactions on Information Systems ( TOIS ) , vol . 16 , no . 3 , pp . 203 – 224 . Ackerman , M . S . and C . Halverson ( 2004 ) : Sharing Expertise : The Next Step for Knowledge Management . In M . H . Huysman and V . Wulf ( eds ) : Social Capital and Information Technology . , Cambridge : MIT Press , pp . 273 – 299 . Ackerman , M . S . and T . W . Malone ( 1990 ) : Answer Garden : A tool for growing Organizational Memory Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Of ﬁ ce Information Systems , pp . 31 – 39 . Ackerman , M . S . , V . Pipek and V . Wulf ( eds ) ( 2003a ) : Beyond Knowledge Management : Sharing Expertise . MIT Press : Cambridge , MA . Ackerman , M . S . , A . Swenson , S . Cotterill and C . DeMaagd ( 2003b ) : I - DIAG : From Community Discussion to Knowledge Distillation . In M . Huysman , E . Wenger and V . Wulf ( eds ) : Communities and Technologies , Dordrecht : Kluwer , pp . 307 – 326 . Alonso , G . , F . Casati , H . Kuno and V . Machiraju ( 2003 ) : Web Services – Concepts , Architectures and Applications . Springer : Berlin . Apache POI ( 2005 ) : http : / / jakarta . apache . org / poi / , seen Nov . 2005 . Becks , A . , T . Reichling and V . Wulf ( 2004 ) : Expertise Finding : Approaches to Foster Social Capital . In M . Huysman and V . Wulf ( eds . ) : Social Capital and Information Technology , Cambridge : MIT Press , pp . 333 – 354 . Belotti , V . and A . Sellen ( 1993 ) : Design for Privacy in Ubiquitous Computing Environments . In G . de Michelis , C . Simone and K . Schmidt ( eds ) : Proceedings of the Third Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work – ECSCW ‘ 93 . , Dordrecht , The Netherlands : Kluwer , pp . 77 – 92 . Bergmann , J . R . ( 2003 ) : Ethnomethodologie . In U . Flick , E . von Kardorff and I . Steinke ( eds ) : Qualitative Forschung : Ein Handbuch , Hamburg : Rowohlt Taschenbuch Verlag , pp . 118 – 135 . Berry , M . W . , S . T . Dumais and G . W . O ’ Brien ( 1995 ) : Using Linear Algebra for Intelligent Information Retrieval . SIAM Review , vol . 37 , no . 4 , pp . 573 – 595 . Chapman , R . ( 2004 ) : Pearls of Wisdom : Social Capital Building in Informal Learning Environments . In M . H . Huysman and V . Wulf ( eds ) : Social Capital and Information Technology , Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , pp . 310 – 333 . 462 Tim Reichling et al . Cohen , D . and L . Prusak ( 2001 ) : In Good Company : How Social Capital makes Organizations Work . Harvard Business School Press : Boston . Deerwester , S . , S . Dumais , G . Furnas , T . Landauer and R . Harshman ( 1990 ) : Indexing by Latent Semantic Analysis . Journal of the American Society of Information Science , vol . 41 , no . 6 , pp . 391 – 407 . Ehrlich , K . ( 2003 ) : Locating Expertise : Design Issues for an Expertise Locator System . In M . Ackerman , V . Pipek and V . Wulf ( eds ) : Sharing Expertise – Beyond Knowledge Management , Cambridge : MIT Press , pp . 137 – 158 . Flick , U . ( 2002 ) : Qualitative Sozialforschung : Eine Einführung . Rowohlt Taschenbuch Verlag : Hamburg . Foner , L . N . ( 1997 ) : Yenta : A Multi - Agent , Referral - Based Matchmaking System . In Proceedings of the ﬁ rst international conference on Autonomous agents , New York , ACM Press , pp . 301 – 307 . Groth , K . and J . Bowers ( 2001 ) : On Finding things out : Situated organizational knowledge in CSCW . In Proceedings of the 7th ECSCW , Dordrecht , Kluwer , pp . 279 – 298 . Harper , R . , D . Randall and M . Rounce ﬁ eld ( 2000 ) : Organizational change and Retail Finance : An Ethnographic Approach . Routledge : London . Heyer , G . , U . Quasthoff and C . Wolff ( 2002 ) : Möglichkeiten und Verfahren zur automatischen Gewinnung von Fachbegriffen aus Texten . http : / / wortschatz . informatik . uni - leipzig . de / asv / publikationen / HeyFachbegriffe100902 . pdf , seen 20 Nov . 2004 . Hinds , P . J . and J . Pfeffer ( 2003 ) : Why Organizations Don ’ t “ Know What They Know ” . In M . Ackerman , V . Pipek and V . Wulf ( eds ) : Sharing Expertise – Beyond Knowledge Management , Cambridge : MIT Press , pp . 3 – 26 . Huysman , M . and D . de Wit ( 2004 ) : Practise of Managing Knowledge Sharing : Towards a Second Wave of Knowledge Management . In : Knowledge and Process Management , vol . 11 , no . 2 , pp . 81 – 92 . Huysman , M . and V . Wulf ( 2004 ) : Social Capital and Information Technology . MIT Press : Cambridge , MA . Kautz , H . A . , B . Selman and M . Shak ( 1997a ) : Referral Web : Combining Social Networks and Collaborative ﬁ ltering . In Communication of the ACM , vol . 40 no . 3 , pp . 63 – 65 . Kautz , H . A . , B . Selman and M . Shak ( 1997b ) The Hidden Web . AI Magazine , vol . 18 , no . 2 , pp . 27 – 36 . Lindgren , R . , O . Henfriedsson and U . Schultze ( 2004 ) : Design Principles for Competence Manage - ment Systems : A Synthesis of an Action Research Study . In : MIS Quaterly , vol . 28 , pp . 427 – 435 . Maybury , M . , R . D ’ Amore and D . House ( 2002 ) : Automated Discovery and Mapping of Expertise . In M . Ackerman , V . Pipek and V . Wulf ( eds ) : Expertise Sharing : Beyond Knowledge Management , Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , pp . 359 – 382 . McArthur , R . and P . Bruza ( 2003 ) : Discovery of Implicit And Explicit Connections Between People Using Email Utterance . In : ECSCW 2003 – Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , Helsinki , Finland , pp . 21 – 40 . McDonald , D . W . ( 2000 ) : Supporting Nuance in Groupware Design : Moving from Naturalistic Expertise Location to Expertise Recommendation , PhD thesis , University of California , Irvine . McDonald , D . W . ( 2003 ) : Recommending Collaboration with Social Networks : A Comparative Evaluation . In : Proceedings of the 2003 ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computer Systems , Ft . Lauderdale , pp . 593 – 600 . McLean , A . , K . Carter , L . Lövstrand and T . Moran ( 1990 ) : User - Tailorable Systems : Pressing the Issue with Buttons . In Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Human Interaction ( CHI ’ 90 ) , April 1 – 5 , 1990 , Seattle , Washington , New York : ACM - Press , pp . 175 – 182 . Normark and Randall ( 2005 ) : Local Expertise at an Emergency Call Centre . In Proceedings of the Ninth European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , Dordrecht , The Netherlands , Springer , pp . 347 – 366 . Orlikowski , W . J . ( 1996 ) : Evolving with Notes : Organizational Change Around Groupware Technology . In C . Ciborra ( ed ) : Groupware and Teamwork , Chichester : Wiley , pp . 23 – 60 . 463 Expert Recommender : Designing for a Network Organization PDFBox ( 2005 ) : http : / / www . pdfbox . org / , seen Dec . 2005 . Pipek , V . and M . Won ( 2000 ) : Wissenslandschaften und Kommunikation , Position Paper for the Workshop on ‘ Communication and Cooperation in Knowledge Communities ’ German Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( DCSCW ) , München . Pipek , V . and M . Won ( 2002 ) : Communication - oriented Computer Support for Knowledge Management . Informatik / Informatique – Magazine of the Swiss Informatics Societies ( 1 ) , pp . 39 – 43 . Pipek , V . and V . Wulf ( 1999 ) : A Groupware ’ s Life . In Proceedings of the Sixth European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , ECSCW ’ 99 , The Netherlands : Kluwer , pp . 199 – 218 . Pipek , V . and V . Wulf ( 2003 ) : Pruning the Answer Garden : Knowledge Sharing in Maintenance Engineering . In Proceedings of the Eighth European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( ECSCW 2003 ) , Helsinki , Finland , 14 – 18 September , The Netherlands : Kluwer , pp . 1 – 20 . Pipek , V . , J . Hinrichs and V . Wulf ( 2003 ) : Sharing Expertise : Challenges for Technical Support . In M . Ackerman , V . Pipek and V . Wulf ( eds ) : Sharing Expertise – Beyond Knowledge Management , Cambridge : MIT Press , pp . 111 – 136 . Pohs , W . , G . Pinder , C . Dougherty and M . White ( 2001 ) : The Lotus Knowledge Discovery System : Tools and Experiences . In : IBM Systems Journal , vol . 40 , no . 4 , pp . 956 – 966 . Randall , D . and R . Bentley ( 1994 ) : Tutorial on ‘ Ethnography and collaborative systems development II : practical application in a commercial context ’ , CSCW ’ 94 , Chapel Hill : North Carolina , Sept . 1994 . Reichling , T . and M . Veith ( 2005 ) : Expertise Sharing in a Heterogeneous Organizational Environment . In Proceedings of the Ninth European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , Dordrecht , Netherlands : Springer , pp . 325 – 345 . Reichling , T . , K . Schubert and V . Wulf ( 2005 ) : Matching Human Actors Based on Their Texts : Design and Evaluation of an Instance of the ExpertFinding Framework . In Proceedings of GROUP 2005 , New York : ACM Press . Rohde , M . ( 2006 ) : Integrated Organization and Technology Development ( OTD ) – A Process Model for Action Research , PhD thesis , Department of Communication , Journalism and Computer Science , Roskilde University , Roskilde . Salton , G . and M . J . McGill ( 1983 ) : Introduction to Modern Information Retrieval . McGraw - Hill : New York . Schirmer , A . L . ( 2003 ) : Privacy and Knowledge Management : Challenges in the Design of the Lotus Discovery Server . In : IBM Systems Journal , vol . 42 , no . 3 , pp . 519 – 531 . Schmidt , C . ( 2003 ) : Analyse von Leitfadeninterviews . In U . Flick , E . von Kardorff and I . Steinke ( eds ) : Qualitative Forschung : Ein Handbuch , Hamburg : Rowohlt Taschenbuch Verlag , pp . 447 – 456 . Shum , SB ( 1997 ) : Negotiating the Construction and Reconstruction of Organisational Memories Journal of Universal Computer Science ( Special Issue on IT for Knowledge Management ) , vol . 3 , no . 8 , pp . 899 – 928 . Stahl , G . and T . Herrmann ( 1999 ) : Intertwining Perspectives and Negotiation , In Int . Conference on Supporting Group Work ( GROUP ’ 99 ) , New York : ACM Press , pp . 316 – 325 . Streeter , L . A . and K . E . Lochbaum ( 1988 ) : Who Knows : A System Based on Automatic Representation of Semantic Structure , in RIAO ’ 88 , Cambridge , MA , pp . 380 – 388 . Tyler , J . R . , D . M . Wilkinson and B . A . Huberman ( 2003 ) : Email as Spectroscopy : Automated Discovery of Community Structure Within Organizations . In M . Huysman , E . Wenger and V . Wulf ( eds ) : Communities and Technologies 2003 , Dordrecht : Kluwer , pp . 81 – 96 . Vignollet , L . , M . Plu , J . C . Marty and L . Agosto ( 2005 ) : Regulation Mechanisms in an Open Social Media Using a Contact Recommender System , In Proceedings of Communities and Technologies ( C & T 2005 ) , Dordrecht : Springer , pp . 419 – 436 . 464 Tim Reichling et al . Vivacque , A . and H . Lieberman ( 2000 ) : Agents to Assist in Finding Help , In Proceedings in the Conference on Human Computer Interaction ( CHI 2000 ) , New York , ACM Press , pp . 65 – 72 . Winograd , T . ( 1987 – 1988 ) : A Language / Action Perspective on the Design of Cooperative Work . In Human – Computer Interaction , vol . 3 , no . 1 , pp . 3 – 30 . Won , M . and V . Pipek ( 2003 ) : Sharing Knowledge on Knowledge – The eXact Peripheral Expertise Awareness System . Journal of Universal Computer Science , vol . 9 / 12 , pp . 1388 – 1397 . Wulf , V . and M . Rohde ( 1995 ) : Towards an Integrated Organization and Technology Development . In Proceedings of the Conference on Designing Interactive Systems : Processes , Practices , Methods , and Techniques , New York : ACM Press , pp . 55 – 64 . 465 Expert Recommender : Designing for a Network Organization