How Cognitive Neuroscience Informs a Subjectivist - Evolutionary Explanation of Business Ethics Marc Orlitzky 1 Received : 2 July 2014 / Accepted : 16 March 2016 / Published online : 30 March 2016 (cid:2) Springer Science + Business Media Dordrecht 2016 Abstract Most theory in business ethics is still steeped in rationalist and moral - realist assumptions . However , some seminal neuroscientiﬁc studies point to the primacy of moral emotions and intuition in shaping moral judgment . In line with previous interpretations , I suggest that a dual - system explanation of emotional - intuitive automaticity ( reﬂexion ) and deliberative reasoning ( reﬂection ) is the most appro - priate view . However , my interpretation of the evidence also contradicts Greene’s conclusion that nonconsequentialist decision making is primarily sentimentalist or affective at its core , while utilitarianism is largely rational - deliberative . Instead , I propose that current research on the human brain , in conjunction with converging experimental evidence , hints at moral subjectivism and its evolutionary basis as the most persuasive explanation of morality . These anti - realist con - jectures have far - reaching implications for a wide range of topics in business ethics , as illustrated with the speciﬁc case of corporate social responsibility as a potentially tribal conception of the good . Keywords Anti - realism (cid:2) Intuition (cid:2) Moral emotions (cid:2) Moral realism (cid:2) Rationalism (cid:2) Subjectivism Neuroscientiﬁc research is fundamentally changing the understanding of moral judgment ( Damasio 2003 ; Greene and Haidt 2002 ; Haidt 2008 ; Salvador and Folger 2009 ) . Ethical decision making has traditionally been regarded as deeply steeped in reason ( e . g . , De George 2010 ; Kohlberg 1981 ; Rachels and Rachels 2010 ; Rest et al . 1999 ) . Conventional theorizing in business ethics , as in moral philosophy more generally , has largely been rationalist , based on the assumption that ‘‘reasoning is the most important and reliable way to obtain moral knowledge’’ ( Haidt 2012 , p . 7 ) . Increasingly , however , the aggregate neuroscientiﬁc evidence is pointing to emotion and intu - ition as major inﬂuences on moral judgments . These new insights have far - reaching implications for business ethics because ‘‘it is a mistake [ … ] to focus on the lone individual reacting to a moral judgment [ situation ] and to conclude that reasoning is where the action is’’ ( Haidt 2013 , p . 288 ) . The aim of the naturalist explanation of morality in this paper is to highlight how neuroscientiﬁc ﬁndings cast doubt on the primacy of reason and deontological assumptions in ethical judgments . From my integrative summary of prior work and evidence , I develop a novel set of propositions , suggesting a new , tribal conceptualization of topics in business ethics . This suggestion is consistent with Greene’s ( 2013 ) perspective that any given society consists of distinct moral collectives embracing worldviews that are not only in disagreement , but largely incommensurate . This perspective is probably best captured as moral tribalism ( Greene 2013 ) . Moral tribes , forming their moral - cognitive schemas in advance of individual experience ( Haidt 2012 ) , are charac - terized by their internal cohesiveness and external ( ideo - logical etc . ) competitiveness with other tribes . Although the propositions herein are mere conjectures and not to be misunderstood as hypotheses that present testable relationships between variables , this paper makes several contributions to the literature . First , in contrast to business ethicists’ traditional assumptions of moral realism , I highlight the plausibility of moral subjectivism and , thus , anti - realism . Moral realism is the view that moral claims refer to facts and have objective truth content , whereas anti - realism endorses the mind - dependence of all moral & Marc Orlitzky Marc . Orlitzky @ unisa . edu . au 1 The University of South Australia , Business School , GPO Box 2471 , Adelaide , SA 5001 , Australia 123 J Bus Ethics ( 2017 ) 144 : 717 – 732 DOI 10 . 1007 / s10551 - 016 - 3132 - 8 judgments ( Joyce 2009 ; Robinson 2002 ) . 1 Moral subjec - tivism ( sometimes known as moral non - objectivism ) is the anti - realist claim that individuals invent ethical values , and that moral judgments are typically and ultimately based on individuals’ feelings , emotions , or sentiments ( Hume 1960 ; Mackie 1977 ) . Second , I show how neuroscientiﬁc ﬁndings can only be meaningfully explained as part of a broader evolutionary story , which reinforces our suspicions about the limited usefulness of reason in ethical decision making . This second contribution will qualify and extend the moral sub - jectivist position . Finally , the evolutionary account offered in this paper forms the basis of the contingent applicability of intuitive reﬂexion and deliberative reﬂection , thus recon - ciling some of the current contradictory ﬁndings with respect to these two cognitive 2 mechanisms . The Central Role of Deontology in Business Ethics Deontology , with its characteristic focus on reason as the ultimate arbiter in determining moral obligations and duty , can be considered the major nonconsequentialist theory in business ethics . In fact , one of the founders of business ethics , Norman Bowie , has developed a rigorous and comprehensive theory of Kantian capitalism ( Bowie 1999 ) . So enormous has been the inﬂuence of Bowie’s Kantianism on business ethics that it resulted in a Festschrift illumi - nating its strengths and weaknesses ( Arnold and Harris 2012 ; see also Bowie 2012 , p . 175 ) . In what could be considered his seminal work , Bowie ( 1999 ) derives several implications from neo - Kantian principles and his deonto - logical view of business organizations as moral commu - nities . Beneﬁcence and respect for others occupy a central role in Bowie’s deontological theory of business , which can also be invoked as moral justiﬁcation of corporate social responsibility ( Smith 2012 ) . Furthermore , Bowie ( 1999 , p . 120 ) mentions that rationalist Kantian ethics may help increase business proﬁts . 3 Deontology is ﬁrmly rationalist , thus privileging reason ( ing ) over sense experi - ence ( Casullo 2003 ; Cottingham 1984 ) . One of the key frameworks in business ethics is stake - holder theory ( Agle et al . 2008 ; Donaldson and Preston 1995 ) , which can be shown to be immersed in Kantian deontological principles as well ( Gibson 2000 ) . Because stakeholders are to be viewed , in accordance with Kantian ethics , as ends in themselves they must be given a voice in determining the future direction of companies , according to stakeholder theory ( Evan and Freeman 1993 ) . 4 Managers owe a wide range of responsibilities to a multitude of stakeholder groups , such as customers , employees , or communities . From a more critical perspective , too many companies treat their stakeholders as mere means to the ﬁrm’s own ends , an ethical stance that ought to be rejected , according to Freeman , other stakeholder theorists , and Bowie . As a ﬁnal example of the inﬂuence of deontology , a duty - aligned perspective can be contrasted with an eco - nomic - utilitarian perspective in analyzing relationships in business and society more broadly ( Swanson 1995 , pp . 44 – 45 ) . In its emphasis on ethical duty - bound moti - vation rather than the assessment of consequences , such a contextualized narrative of deontology embraces the moral personhood of others , which has helped Business and Society scholars theorize rules , principles , and constructive descriptions of value systems that enhance ethical out - comes in business and corporate social performance ( Swanson 1995 ) . Highlighting normative - theoretical omissions from previous models of corporate social per - formance , Swanson ( 1995 , 1999 ) explicates the normative foundations of this research stream , which has been at the core of research in Business and Society and business ethics . Many more examples could be cited in support of the centrality of the rationalist framework of deontology in business ethics ( e . g . , Freeman and Gilbert 1988 ; Smith and Dubbink 2011 ) , but space constraints preclude this dis - cussion here . Rather , the next section will focus on the questions raised by neuroscience about deontological and , more broadly , nonconsequentialist moral reasoning . It should be noted that , in this paper , I will not reiterate or describe in any depth several other concerns that have emerged about deontology ( e . g . , Duska 2012 ; Locke 2006 ; MacIntyre 1984 ; Werhane 2012 ) . Instead , my focus will be on what I consider the most interesting implications of research on the human brain for theories of business ethics and ethical decision making in general . 1 Note that this paper does not endorse an alternative , nihilistic meaning of ‘‘anti - realism , ’’ which denies the existence of all moral properties ( Joyce 2009 ) . 2 Throughout the paper , emotions , affects , and intuitions are assumed to be cognitions , too ( Haidt 2001 ) . 3 Stressing this positive impact of deontological decision making on business performance implies that deontology does not ignore the consequences of decisions . Kant did argue , though , that ‘‘nothing in the world [ … ] can possibly be conceived which can be called good without qualiﬁcation except a good will’’ ( Kant 1785 / 1959 , p . 9 ) . Good will arises from acting out of moral obligation or duty , which in turn is determined by Reason . According to deontology , moral worth is independent of the consequences of an action . 4 It should be noted that Freeman and his colleagues also grounded stakeholder theory in feminist ethics , libertarianism , and pragmatism ( Freeman 1994 , 2012 ; Freeman and Phillips 2002 ; Wicks et al . 1994 ) . Later , Freeman ( 2008 , p . 163 ) suggested that no ‘‘normative foundational justiﬁcation’’ would actually be needed for stakeholder theory after all . 718 M . Orlitzky 123 Neuroscientiﬁc Findings About Moral Cognition According to a provocative interpretation of the aggregate evidence ( Greene 2008b ) , neuroscientiﬁc data point to the conclusion that , whereas utilitarian judgments seem to involve higher - order reasoning and cognition , deontologi - cal judgments are more automatic decision processes typ - ically driven by affects and emotions ; if there is moral reasoning involved in deontological judgments , it is typi - cally only a post hoc cognitive activity—in other words , a rationalization . Without aiming to present a comprehensive overview of the literature ( Greene 2008b can be consulted for this purpose ) , the next section brieﬂy explains how such a controversial conclusion could possibly be reached . Studies of Brain Damage The seminal studies in neuroscience involved studies of the impact of brain damage on reasoning in general , and moral reasoning more speciﬁcally . This research program started with the famous case of Phineas Gage ( 1823 – 1860 ) , who , after a steel rod had severely damaged a brain area known as the ventromedial prefrontal cortex ( vmPFC ) , started to act erratically ( Damasio 1994 ) . Speciﬁcally , after the accident , Gage was still able to reason ethically in the abstract , but became unable to follow some basic social rules in everyday life . According to Damasio’s ( 1994 ) inﬂuential explanation , brain injuries can damage brain areas that generate the feelings that must be activated to act ethically . Modern neuroscientiﬁc studies , better able to pinpoint concrete areas of brain damage , showed more speciﬁcally that particular localized brain lesions increase the proba - bility of one type of decision making that is concerned with consequences , that is , utilitarian decision making ( Thomas et al . 2011 ; Young and Koenigs 2007 ) . One seminal study , for example , indicated that six patients with vmPFC brain damage showed a clear preference for consequentialist reasoning and solutions when faced with a particular variant of the widely used trolley dilemma ( Koenigs et al . 2007 ) . The brain - damaged individuals were no longer able to process social emotions or show empathy in their responses to a moral dilemma ( Moll et al . 2008a ) . In contrast , brain regions involved in language processing and memory as well as general cognitive processing ( including deliberative - principled moral reasoning as measured by the Kohlberg instrument ) remained unaffected ( Anderson et al . 1999 ; Moll et al . 2008a ) . Two other experimental studies conducted with patients with brain damage ( Ciaramelli et al . 2007 ; Mendez et al . 2005 ) —either because of dementia or lesions—provided strong evidence for a causal relationship between emotional processing and nonconse - quentialist decision making ( Greene et al . 2008 ) . Another study provided more direct evidence that vmPFC patients were more inclined than control subjects to endorse per - sonal moral violations that generated negative affective reactions ( Moretto et al . 2009 ) . These researchers also found that vmPFC patients exhibited fewer incidents of skin conductance responses , indicative of somatic affective states , and a higher likelihood of utilitarian reasoning . Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Studies Since the early 1990s , functional magnetic resonance imaging ( fMRI ) has become the mainstay of modern neu - roscience ( Salvador and Folger 2009 ) . These fMRI studies involve scans , in 2 - to 6 - s intervals , of blood ﬂow patterns in the brain while study participants are conscious and solving various decision - making tasks . The inference of brain activity from computer - intensive statistical data processing allows neuroscientists to draw conclusions about the anat - omy of moral judgments ( Moll et al . 2008a ) , although they are not as deﬁnitive as experimental designs with abnormal patients and normal controls with respect to the attribution of causality to emotions—that is , whether emotions play a role as either a necessary prerequisite ( cause ) or an epiphenomenon of moral judgment ( Young and Koenigs 2007 ) . Yet , for localizing focal neural processing , fMRI studies are undoubtedly superior to the aforementioned studies with brain - damaged patients . In aggregate , fMRI studies seem to point to the activa - tion of the amygdala and vmPFC—in particular the left vmPFC—in processing information about moral dilemmas that encompass physical harm or violence ( Greene 2009a ; Heekeren et al . 2005 ; Luo et al . 2006 ) . These two brain areas are likely to control socially inappropriate behavior and rapidly assess reward or punishment values ( Greene and Haidt 2002 ) . Of course , these are not the only regions activated in moral judgment tasks ; other brain regions involved in moral cognition include such areas as the medial frontal gyrus , posterior cingulate , superior temporal sulcus , temporal pole , and parietal lobe , among others ( Greene and Haidt 2002 ; Huebner et al . 2009 ) . Utilitarian reasoning has been found to correlate with increased activity ( i . e . , increased blood ﬂow ) in the dorsolateral frontal cortex ( Greene et al . 2004 ) , a part of the brain that has been found to serve a cognitive control function ( E . K . Miller and Cohen 2001 ) . Clearly , a wide range of areas in the brain is involved in moral judgment ( Bucciarelli and Daniele 2015 ) . Converging Experimental and Other Evidence Some convergent experimental evidence provides support for the previous conclusions based on research of brain damage and fMRI studies . An important experiment , with How Cognitive Neuroscience Informs a Subjectivist - Evolutionary Explanation of Business . . . 719 123 response times as the key outcome variable , was conducted by Greene et al . ( 2008 ) , showing that cognitive load only interfered with utilitarian judgments , but not nonutilitarian judgments . Those experimental observations underscore the importance of controlled cognitive processes ( only ) in consequentialist decisions . It is worth noting at this point that a seminal study of responsetimes ( Greeneetal . 2001 ) , usuallyseenassupporting this dual - system theory distinguishing between the neural bases of consequentialist versus nonconsequentialist moral judgments , in fact cannot be cited as support for it because the ﬁndings were driven by idiosyncracies in the questionnaire items used and a few inaccuracies in the data analysis ( McGuireetal . 2009 ) . Speciﬁcally , assoonaspoorlyendorsed items were removed from the analysis , the interactions between dilemma type and response times disappeared . Greene ( 2009b ) by and large agrees with this critique and emphasizes the importance of not conﬂating the distinction between personal / impersonal moral dilemma types with the distinction between consequentialist / nonconsequentialist decisions . Nonetheless , we can safely conclude from this seminal study that individuals , by and large , seem to follow their moral emotions when trying to decide what is right and wrong in situations that involve personal contact ( Greene 2013 ; Rossano 2003 ) , a point to which I will return later . In his response to the reanalysis by McGuire et al . ( 2009 ) , Greene ( 2009b ) also notes that other investiga - tions of individual differences in cognitive style or abil - ities do provide some support for the previous conclusions by Greene and other moral psychologists regarding a dual - system theory of moral cognition , which typically contrasts emotions and reason ( Cushman 2013 ; Kahne - man 2011 ) . For example , study participants high in need for cognition ( Bartels 2008 ) , inclined toward cognitive reﬂection ( Hardman 2008 ) , and larger working memory capacity ( Moore et al . 2008 ) were more likely to make decisions consistent with utilitarianism . Though only correlative , this evidence lends indirect support for the differential activation of brain regions and networks in consequentialist versus deontological judgments . A Preliminary Summary : Moral Judgments as Combinations of Reason and Emotion Overall , a complex picture emerges from the neuroscien - tiﬁc evidence associated with either consequentialist or nonconsequentialist moral judgment . Theoretically , at least four combinations are possible ( Miller 2009 , p . 2 ) . First , both consequentialist and nonconsequentialist judgments may be grounded primarily in reason , a type of rational decision - making in which facts and values are carefully weighed and decided based on rationally derivable gener - alizable rules or principles . This is the rationalist orthodoxy currently seen in most research on the importance of individual reﬂection in ethical decision making ( see Haidt 2013 ) , and especially in business ethics ( e . g . , Jones 1991 ; Trevin˜o 1986 ) . Some cognitive scientists ( e . g . , Bucciarelli and Daniele 2015 ; Bucciarelli et al . 2008 ; Johnson - Laird 1983 , 2006 ) do afﬁrm the centrality of reason in moral judgments—though without differentiating between utili - tarian and deontological reasoning . Another possibility is the suggestion that both conse - quentialist and nonconsequentialist theories are ultimately and primarily undergirded by emotional , or affective , processes . Hume was probably the ﬁrst to embrace this notion in his statement that moral knowledge emerges from an ‘‘immediate feeling and ﬁner internal sense’’ rather than a ‘‘chain of argument and induction’’ ( Hume 1960 , p . 2 ) or in his widely cited pronouncement that ‘‘reason is , and ought only to be the slave of the passions and can never pretend to any other ofﬁce than to serve and obey them’’ ( Hume 1969 , p . 462 ) . Smith’s ( 1759 / 1790 ) Theory of Moral Sentiments is another example of such a sentimen - talist foundation of morality . Modern representatives of this perspective include Haidt and Bjorklund ( 2008 ) , for example ( Miller 2009 ) . The next two viewpoints suggest that one of the ethics frameworks is primarily emotional , while the other is pri - marily rational . More speciﬁcally , a third option regards consequentialism as ﬁrmly grounded in emotions , whereas deontology is ﬁrmly grounded in reason . Immanuel Kant’s ( 1785 / 1959 ) ethics can largely be seen as a refutation of what Kant regarded as Hume’s ﬂawed sentimentalist theory ( a precursor to utilitarianism ) —Kant attempted to construct his deontological framework on Reason alone . At this point , it ought to be noted that it is unclear to what extent reason is really at the core of Kantian deontology or , in fact , merely a post hoc rationalization ( Greene 2008b ; Locke 2006 ) . However , many deontological theories of business ethics currently strike a distinctly rationalist - deontological tone ( see my review in the Introduction ) . Some moral psychologists , such as Greene ( 2008b ) , argue the preponderance of the current empirical evidence points to the fourth perspective as the most plausible view . Consequentialist thinking is mainly underpinned by rational - deliberative processes , whereas nonconsequen - tialist judgments are largely based on emotional - affective mechanisms . Greene’s ( 2009a ) dual - system theory can be considered an instance of such a perspective . It posits that utilitarian judgments are driven by controlled cognitive processes , while deontological judgments are driven by intuition and emotions . Notably , though , some research ( e . g . , Huebner et al . 2009 ; Kahane and Shackel 2008 ; Moll and de Oliveira - Souza 2007 ) points out that the evidence is not deﬁnitive in favor of Greene’s theoretical conclusions . Yet , in a replication study of Kahane et al . ’s ( 2012 ) 720 M . Orlitzky 123 contradictory ﬁndings , Paxton et al . ( 2014 ) reafﬁrm Greene’s original dual - system theory and , in fact , ﬁnd evidence in support of its generalizability . Overall , these debates between empirical researchers indicate that the evidence is far from conclusive . Two recent meta - analyses suggested that all moral judgments tend to be rational and emotional—and not necessarily dominated by either one or the other cognitive mechanism . Bzdok et al . ( 2012 ) showed that moral rea - soning involves perceiving the world from another indi - vidual’s point of view ( probably a relatively high - level ‘‘theory of mind’’ cognition ) and affective empathizing with others’ feelings . Similarly , Sevinc and Spreng’s ( 2014 ) meta - analysis points to the integration of cognitive - deliberative and intuitive - affective brain mechanisms in all moral decision making . Associatively linked representa - tions within domain - general brain networks are necessary for reaching effective moral judgments . Because neither integrative review distinguished between consequentialist and nonconsequentialist judgments , neither can be counted as support for any one of the four previous perspectives . Hence , from the totality of the cumulative evidence , a ﬁfth perspective emerges , proposing that each ethics framework is both rational and emotional , without the current evidence allowing for any more speciﬁc charac - terization of which cognitive content—emotion or rea - son—predominates in either one . Speciﬁcally , some fMRI studies show that reason and emotion can play a role in deontological responses ( Borg et al . 2006 ; Manfrinati et al . 2013 ) . At the same time , it is possible—and perhaps even probable—that passionate emotions may drive utilitarian judgments as much as they drive deontological intuitions ( Baron 2011 ; Huebner et al . 2009 ) . For example , manipu - lations of emotional context have been shown to affect moral judgments , including utilitarian ones ( Valdesolo and DeSteno 2006 ) . Arguably , Reynolds ( 2006 ) neurocognitive model of the ethical decision - making process most closely aligns with this ﬁfth perspective . Reynolds argues that two distinct cycles of ethical decision making can be activated : either ( a ) a reﬂexive cycle that tries to match new obser - vations to previously formulated prototypes in an auto - matic way or ( b ) a higher - order conscious reasoning process , which through active judgment deliberately and volitionally arrives at ethical intentions and behaviors . Because of the functional differences of these two systems of information processing , we would expect , according to Reynolds , differential activations of brain regions , depending on the route of decision making followed . The reﬂective ( higher - order reasoning ) route is proposed to serve as a regulatory mechanism of reﬂexive judgments , in which moral rules are , consistent with some of Greene’s and Haidt’s works , merely rationalizations of automatic , subconscious judgment processes . However , Reynolds ( 2006 , p . 740 ) also emphasizes that deliberative processes allow for rule - based analysis and judgments—they are not solely tied to consequentialist calculations , which is a point of difference between Reynolds’s and Greene’s dual - sys - tem theories . Table 1 provides an overview of these ﬁve distinct viewpoints as well as the main exponents of each perspective . The Legitimacy of Bridging the Descriptive - Normative Divide Yet , as one may legitimately wonder at this point , why or how can empirical ﬁndings in neuroscience be considered important for normative theories of ethics ? Does not the postulation of any connection between descriptive research on one hand and ethical norms of ‘‘ought’’ on the other constitute an inappropriate overreach in bridging the fact / value dichotomy ( Hume 1969 ) and thus an instance of the naturalistic fallacy ( Moore 1978 ) ? Most directly , our knowledge about cognitive capabili - ties can be considered a constraint on what humans can Table 1 Neural - cognitive bases of two moral frameworks ( theoretically plausible combinations ) Consequentialism ( e . g . , utilitarianism ) is … Nonconsequentialism ( e . g . , deontology ) is … Exponents View1 mainly rational While mainly rational as well Most current studies in business ethics ( e . g . , Kohlberg 1981 ) ; also Bucciarelli and Daniele ( 2015 ) View2 mainly emotional While mainly emotional as well Hume ( 1960 , 1969 ) , Smith ( 1759 / 1790 ) , Haidt ( 2001 ) , Haidt and Bjorklund ( 2008 ) View3 mainly emotional While mainly rational Kant ( 1785 / 1959 ) View4 mainly rational While mainly emotional Greene ( 2008b , 2009a ) View5 both rational and emotional While both rational and emotional as well Meta - analytic evidence in cognitive neuroscience ( e . g . , Bzdok et al . 2012 ; Sevinc and Spreng 2014 ) ; Reynolds ( 2006 ) How Cognitive Neuroscience Informs a Subjectivist - Evolutionary Explanation of Business . . . 721 123 possibly accomplish in moral judgments . In other words , if the empirical evidence indicated that humans were inca - pable of a certain kind of information processing ( as far as moral norms are concerned ) , it would a priori be mistaken to suggest that they ought to make decisions that way . Since ought implies can ( Stern 2004 ) , ethicists cannot , and should not , ignore moral psychologists’ studies of neuro - logical processes because ﬁndings generated by neuro - science may point to the moral agent’s cognitive constraints and limitations . Ethicists need to become aware of the neural processes activated in moral decision making , especially because emotions may be far more important drivers of ethical judgments than has been assumed so far ( Haidt 2008 ; Huebner et al . 2009 ) . More broadly , the research program of connecting moral theory to neurobiology is looking for consilience between neuroscientiﬁc evidence and the moral psychology implied by speciﬁc frameworks of ethics ( Casebeer 2003 ; Wilson 1998 ) . Invariably , each normative theory must be based on certain epistemological assumptions about humans’ moral psychology in general ( Hauser 2006 ) . This suggests that the two realms of Is and Ought cannot be cleanly separated in practice , although this distinction remains crucial in ethical theory ( Greene 2003 ) . A deeper understanding of neural processes may shed light on the genealogy of moral codes as complex biological and cultural adaptations to evolutionary demands ( Bloom 2012 ; Joyce 2007 ; Krebs 2008 ) . Finally , a pragmatist philosophical approach suggests that facts and values cannot be separated in any meaningful way ( Rorty 1991 ) . The fact / value dichotomy may itself be a fal - lacy , a cognitive mirage , according to pragmatism ( Freeman 2012 ) . From such a pragmatist perspective , ‘‘values’’ ( or what we designate as values ) not only inﬂuence our per - ceptions of ( what we take as ) ‘‘reality , ’’ but also , conversely , our empirical ﬁndings may legitimately inform our values . In short , any insistence that the realm of empirical ﬁndings has no bearing on values or normative theories would be inconsistent with the pragmatist view of the entanglement of facts and values . Of course , oneneed not adopt a pragmatist’s conviction of the enmeshment of facts and values to argue for the importance of these neuroscientiﬁc ﬁndings for business ethics . Especially my ﬁrst point in this section on the ‘so what ? ’ of the accumulated neuroscientiﬁc and other empir - ical evidence remains valid irrespective of one’s philo - sophical and epistemological commitments . Neuroscience is still in its infancy—especially its appli - cation to management ( Becker et al . 2011 ; Cropanzano and Becker 2013 ) and business ethics ( Salvador and Folger 2009 ) . For this reason , I introduce the implications of my interpretation of the neuroscientiﬁc evidence as a set of propositions , which serve as rhetorical signposts , or place markers , and , thus , guide the reader through my argument . Propositions Three Cheers for Moral Subjectivism Most disquieting to many contemporary ethics scholars may be the implication of the accumulated neuroscientiﬁc ( and other converging ) evidence for a renaissance of moral subjectivism—at least one speciﬁc type of subjectivism . Subjectivism stands in stark contrast to moral realism , which presumes that there are objective moral facts inde - pendent of those constructions of ethics and morality in individual human minds ( Railton 1986 ; Shafer - Landau 2003 ) . Even philosophers that believe in a realist account of ethics ( e . g . , Rachels and Rachels 2010 ) admit that moral facts and norms are not facts in the same objective way as lions , egrets , and roses are—they cannot be investigated or ascertained empirically . Instead , to determine the objec - tivity of moral facts , moral realists typically have a lot of conﬁdence in the force of reason ; for example , ‘‘a moral judgment is true if it is backed by better reasons than the alternatives’’ ( Rachels and Rachels 2010 , p . 41 ) . Expressed differently , moral realists assume that the realm of morally right / morally wrong transcends human constructions of those properties—these properties can , somehow , be clas - siﬁed as objectively true . Thus , ethical transcendentalism may , in fact , be the most appropriate term for such a set of beliefs in moral facts that exist independent of cognitive - cultural constructions ( Wilson 1998 ) . However , the current neuroscientiﬁc evidence that points to emotion , affect , and intuition as an important internal , subjective driver of ethical judgments arguably lends more credence to an anti - realist stance on ethics than moral real - ism , which is , in so many ways , undergirded by rationalist philosophy ( Rachels and Rachels 2010 ) . Such decentering of Reason ( see also Feyerabend 1987 ) in determining moral facts often triggers an inordinate amount of ‘‘knee - jerk opposition to subjectivism’’ ( Joyce 2009 ) . Anti - realism holds that moral ‘‘facts’’ are constituted by our mental activity , similar to Hamlet’s conclusion that ‘‘there is noth - ing either good or bad , but thinking makes it so . ’’ At the same time , subjectivism , afﬁrming the mind dependence of all moral judgments , rejects the strong version of anti - realism , which denies the existence of moral truths altogether . In a way , subjectivism suggests that moral judgments may be akin to aesthetic judgments ( of beauty ) or judgments of taste ( Greene 2003 ; Haidt 2001 ) . For each of these two cognitive realms , there are no anchors in objective reality , but most assuredly individuals subjectively assess what is considered beautiful or tasty to them . Judgments of beauty or taste can certainly be considered subjectively true , which disarms the critique of subjectivism that moral subjectivism does not allow for any type of judgment . If moral judgments share 722 M . Orlitzky 123 these commonalities with judgments of beauty or taste , then any ethical framework that is , for example , grounded in subjective , intuitive , and typically subconscious feelings of moral approval or disapproval ( which are often philosophi - cally dressed up as invariable , objective moral truths ) would have to become more subjective than is typically acknowl - edged by some ethicists ( see also Joyce 2008 ; Katz 2008 ) . According to Greene ( 2003 , 2008b , 2013 ) , the cumula - tive neuroscientiﬁc evidence raises fundamental questions about the normative theory of deontology . According to his interpretation of the data , it would be an odd coincidence if the cognitive outcome of human evolution were at the same time the ‘‘correct moral theory’’ ( Greene 2008a , p . 118 ) . To reiterate a previous important point , Greene believes that deontological judgments are most plausibly explained with reference to moral emotions . This conclusion is based on his careful interpretation of the neuroscientiﬁc ( and other supporting ) evidence that rule - , duty - , and rights - based judgments are often merely the post hoc rationalizations of reﬂexive judgments , which in turn are based on moral emotions , sentiments , or intuitions ( Greene 2008b ; Haidt 2001 ) . In addition , Greene believes there is nothing related to cognitive mechanisms—the outcome of human evolu - tion—that would permit substitution of normatively correct response for evolved automatic response . Greene ( 2008a , b ) , aware of the often biasing inﬂuence of subjective emotions and intuition , rejects deontology in favor of the deliberative cost - beneﬁt calculus inherent in utilitarianism . Ethicists in agreement with Greene may argue for increasing reliance on consequentialist reasoning rather than nonconsequentialist post hoc rationalization of our moral intuitions . Thus , any business ethics theory grounded in deontological reasoning is suspect , according to this interpretation . However , a different interpretation may be equally—or even more—plausible . Greene ( now ) seems to assume that there is a realm of human constructions of right / wrong ( adaptive mechanisms brought about by biological and cultural evolution ) and a separate realm of moral facts . The latter , objective realm of moral facts can be judged as correct or false , presumably by using human reason ( rather than intuition 5 ) . Greene’s references to a ‘‘correct moral theory’’ ( Greene 2008a , p . 117 ) or to ‘‘true principles of justice’’ ( Greene 2013 , p . 274 ) indicate his fundamental premise of a realm of ethical theory that is objectively true / real . Notably , at one point , Greene endorsed the view that objective moral truth does not exist ( Greene 2002 , 2003 ) . However , his views seemed to have changed now , in that he acknowledges the ‘‘possibility of objective improve - ment’’ ( Greene 2013 , p . 373 ) . This acknowledgment makes Greene a moral realist rather than anti - realist because , in order to judge whether something is an ethical improve - ment , we must invoke some objective standard to evaluate how accurately our judgments mirror some external ‘‘true’’ reality ( see also Rorty 1979 ) . Yet , an anti - realist ( with respect to moral judgments ) makes no such assumption— neither about moral Truth nor objective improvement in morality . The only explanation of , and justiﬁcation for , ethical conclusions can be found inside humans’ minds ; ethical explanations and justiﬁcations are purely mental constructions ( thus , subjectivism is sometimes replaced by the term constructivism ) . In other words , moral judgments are strictly mind - dependent ( Joyce 2009 ) . There is no external , ‘‘objective’’ reference point or anchor from which the realm of human constructions may deviate ( Mackie 1977 ) . There is no external reference point that can be invoked ( by Greene or anyone else ) to judge an ethical norm , value , or framework to be ‘‘objectively’’ correct or false—or at least an objective improvement of moral judgment . There are no ‘‘true principles’’ of any kind ; human constructions ( of right and wrong ) are all there is ( see also Mackie 1977 ; Rorty 1979 ) . 6 In his emphatic embrace of utilitarianism , 7 Greene ( 2008a , b ) reveals himself to be a moral realist , although he previously explicitly questioned such an epistemological stance ( Greene 2003 ) . In other words , I regard Greene’s ( 2003 ) initial interpretation as more plausible than his more recent suggestions of ‘‘true principles of justice’’ ( Greene 2013 , p . 274 ) and his insistence on utilitarianism as the only legitimate common currency and on ‘‘the abstract princi - ples behind nature’s machines’’ ( Greene 2013 , p . 352 ) . According to subjectivism , however , moral agents are unable to assume a ( higher - level ) viewpoint that somehow transcends the realm of whatever is observed . Therefore , any comparison between neural processes and some other ‘‘objectively’’ true realm of right and wrong must , by necessity , go beyond the empirical evidence because it sneaks in assumptions about moral facts and , more broadly , 5 Especially in Moral Tribes , Greene ( 2013 ) casts great doubt on intuition ( e . g . , on pp . 63 , 127 , 131 , or 352 ) . This distinction between reason and intuition follows Greene’s characterization ; other cogni - tive scientists view reason and intuition differently ( e . g . , Bucciarelli et al . 2008 , p . 123 ) , as was noted by an observant reviewer of this paper . 6 It must be emphasized here that the anti - realism embraced in this paper is strictly limited to moral claims of right / wrong and morally good / bad . The argument in this paper is not as comprehensive as the ( pragmatist ) anti - foundationalism and ‘‘anti - realism’’ ( of sorts ) con - tained in Rorty ( 1979 ) . Therefore , I want to leave it an open question here whether anti - realism also extends to facts in the physical , natural , and social sciences . For the record , I believe anti - realism is a far less plausible epistemological assumption in those areas of inquiry . 7 For example , ‘‘you can have your metaethical contractualism and constructivism as long as you are open to the possibility that the right ground - level theory is utilitarian and decidedly undeontological . As long as starving children get helped and people get shoved in front of speeding trolleys , that’s all I care about’’ ( Greene 2008a , p . 117 ) . How Cognitive Neuroscience Informs a Subjectivist - Evolutionary Explanation of Business . . . 723 123 moral realism . These ( tacit ) assumptions may certainly be justiﬁable ( see , e . g . , Moore 1978 ; Nozick 1981 , pp . 399 – 570 ; Robinson 2002 ) ; however , researchers that use neuroscientiﬁc evidence to support their view must explain when or how they enter the philosophical realms of ontology and epistemology . This rhetorical obligation exists because moral realism goes beyond—and as an ontological assumption it must go beyond—the neurosci - entiﬁc evidence and cannot be assumed to be true a priori . In my ( admittedly empiricist - naturalist ) explanation of moral judgment , I do not , for present purposes , want to invent or invoke another , separate realm of objectively true values and ethics and thus propose the following : Proposition 1 Moral judgments of right and wrong are merely individuals’ subjective ( cognitive ) constructions and thus strictly dependent on processes in the human brain . The Evolution of Moral Emotions The argument so far does not imply these subjective con - structions of right and wrong are arbitrary . Evolutionary accounts of ethics are based on the notion that moral norms and intuitions , like many other aspects of culture , are grounded in a domain - speciﬁc psychological mechanism that may solve ( or may once have solved ) certain adaptive problems ( Barkow et al . 1992 ; Cosmides and Tooby 2000 , 2013 ; Krebs 2008 ) . Another way of expressing this con - clusion is that ethics is functional ( Nozick 2001 ) . Moral emotions , such as shame , guilt , empathy , or solidarity , for example , may be extremely reliable , fast , and efﬁcient guides to resolving fundamental social dilemmas , that is , adaptive problems emerging from conﬂicting interests among group members ( Krebs 2008 ) . In addition to moral altruistic behaviors as facilitators of group survival ( Dar - win 1871 ) , the ( condemnatory ) moral impulse to punish misbehavior could be regarded as a coordination mecha - nism ( DeScioli and Kurzban 2013 ; Nozick 2001 ) . In gen - eral , moral emotions serve functions similar to those of other emotions : they focus individuals’ attention , motivate action , and produce physiological changes to deal with whatever triggered them ( Frank 1988 ) . If reﬂexive ethical judgments ( possibly underpinned by pangs of conscience ) are fairly complex cognitive mecha - nisms for solving adaptive problems , then the emotions that evoke pleasure from certain prosocial behaviors ( or pain from moral misbehaviors ) may be considered useful in a broader sense . For example , the moral emotion of guilt may motivate us to try to make interpersonal reparations ; gratitude may impel us to return a favor ( McCullough et al . 2001 ; Tangney et al . 2007 ) . Or empathy may impel altru - istic helping behaviors ( Hoffman 1981 ) . Important future research includes the creation of a persuasive taxonomy of distinct moral emotions ( Moll et al . 2008b ) , 8 which mili - tates against a uniﬁed theory of ethical decision making ( Parkinson et al . 2011 ; Sinnott - Armstrong and Wheatley 2014 ) . Following this evolutionary logic , nonconsequentialism may ultimately be redeemed as a legitimate framework with important adaptive functions in various social con - texts ( see also Timmons 2008 ) . Moral intuitions , emotions , and sentiments , unconnected to conscious reﬂection about the consequences of our decisions , may censure unethical behavior that would otherwise emanate from more delib - erative decision making ( Zhong 2011 ) . In other words , moral emotions may represent ( largely subconscious ) evolved knowledge about solving social or interpersonal problems and constraining self - interest . Nevertheless , it must also be emphasized that this type of evolved and frequently subconscious nonconsequentialism grounded in emotions , feelings , and intuition could hardly be consid - ered deontology proper anymore , given the deontologist’s characteristic emphasis on deliberative reason . An evolu - tionary account of emotion - based nonconsequentialism would not pass Kant’s own test of reason as the sole arbiter of inherent rightness of action . A shift away from reason and conscious deliberation—toward emotions , feelings , and affects—as facilitators of moral judgment is a theo - retical move that would vehemently be denied by Kant ( 1785 / 1959 ) , Korsgaard ( 1996 ) , and many other deontol - ogists . Thus , Timmons’ ( 2008 ) or any other scholar’s hope to resurrect deontology in the guise of sentimentalist non - consequentialism seems to be deeply problematic from a theoretical perspective ( Greene 2008a ) . The claim that the affective - reﬂexive processes that create human morality have the same evolutionary basis as all other neural processes is on theoretically ﬁrmer ground than the assumption that objective moral facts exist—in - dependent of our human minds and brains . There is ample evidence that human brains , including our emotional repertoires , have been molded by environmental challenges and constraints ( Barkow et al . 1992 ; Cosmides and Tooby 2013 ; Hauser 2006 ; Hinde 2002 ; Krebs 2008 ; Lawrence and Nohria 2002 ; Nicholson 1998 ; Nozick 2001 ; Shermer 2004 ) , but cannot be reviewed in any detail here . It should simply be noted that , unlike moral realism ( i . e . , moral transcendentalism , as noted before ) , any biological - evolu - tionary account of the origin of cognitive processes is not epistemologically disconnected from the neuroscientiﬁc evidence . Rather , our understanding of human neural 8 Moll et al . ( 2008b ) suggested guilt , pity , embarrassment , shame , pride , awe , contempt , indignation , moral disgust , and gratitude as excellent candidates in their taxonomy of moral emotions . However , this taxonomy was critiqued for not being sufﬁciently grounded in normative ethical theory ( Casebeer 2008 ) . 724 M . Orlitzky 123 processes would be theoretically incomplete and concep - tually impoverished without an evolutionary account ( Buss 2015 ; Dugatkin 2006 ; Gazzaniga et al . 2014 ; Rossano 2003 ) , especially when subconscious processes , such as amygdala responses , are examined ( Postle 2015 , p . 489 ) . Proposition 2 Moral emotions make ethical decision making more automatic and intuitive than deliberative reasoning would and , thus , help individuals solve inter - personal problems in various social situations quickly and efﬁciently . This evolutionary - functionalist argument could certainly be critiqued as an inappropriate type of naturalism ( Farber 1994 ) . At this point , though , it ought to be emphasized that in this paper I am not using evolutionary dynamics to justify moral principles . Rather , I am merely pointing to evolution as a force that may explain our moral intuitions and values , which , according to moral subjectivism , are never objectively true anyway . So , in the same way reli - gious individuals can validly claim that their religious devotion reﬂects a subjective truth , a person committed to certain ethical judgments may legitimately regard certain moral precepts as subjectively true ( Kierkegaard 1944 ) . However , according to subjectivism , one may not gener - alize one’s own subjective truth and impose it on others . In moral subjectivism , recommending , or even worse impos - ing , a subjective truth ( about right / wrong actions ) to , or on , others would be as absurd as if someone who ﬁnds pizza or mushrooms distasteful proffered this judgment as some objective truth ( about the desirability of society without pizzas and without mushroom dishes ) . Deriving an Ought from ( evolutionary ) accounts of Is would only be deduc - tively questionable if that Ought was justiﬁed by evolu - tionary facts and recommended as some objective normative truth or demand ( Rottschaefer 1997 ) . One may even go as far as to conclude that the naturalistic fallacy is no fallacy , if ethicists do not presume an independent realm of moral facts . The Reason of Cultural Evolution Of course , biological evolution is not the only force that may have shaped moral values , codes , or norms—they may also be inﬂuenced to a large extent by social learning , conveyed through moral rules passed on from one gener - ation to the next ( Hinde 2002 ; Krebs 2008 ) . That is , our moral emotions and judgments are also culturally evolved mechanisms and , thus , underpinned by good cultural rea - sons of which individuals may be unaware while making any particular decision ( Hayek 1988 ) . Moral norms and customs—including disgust - based morality ( Blair et al . 2006 ; Borg et al . 2008 ; Schnall et al . 2008 ) —may have sociocultural reasons that are inaccessible to any individual mind ( Hayek 2011 ) . That is , moral traditions may encode ethical patterns of behavior , whose underlying reasons the moral agent may be unable to grasp ( Hayek 1958 ) . Hayek’s conception of moral traditions is deeply suspicious of the effectiveness of submitting moral judgment to reasoning and deliberative choice , anticipating Zhong’s ( 2011 ) ﬁnd - ings , which illustrate how deliberation may decrease the quality of ethical decisions . Cultures may , over time , also put moral norms to the test and contextualize , relativize , or update them ( Haidt 2001 ) . In this sense , the outcome of culturally evolved norms can be located somewhere between moral instinct and reason ( Hayek 1988 ; Krebs 2008 ) . One of the ways in which cultures may test the appropriateness of moral norms and intuition—and infuse them with reason , at least initially— is by connecting them to quantiﬁable outcomes via means - ends causal chains . That is , intuitions that once served functional purposes in evolutionary history may be ques - tioned by cultural developments . Reasoned public debates may , over time , persuade individuals to reevaluate sub - jective moral ‘‘truths’’ ( Haidt 2001 , 2003 ) . For example , for many centuries many cultures considered homosexual relations to be sinful , irresponsible , immoral , or abnormal ( Hauser 2006 ) . Over time , though , attitudes in many Western cultures have now considerably shifted toward more positive views on gay rights and marriage ( Adam - czyk and Cheng 2014 ; Twenge et al . 2015 ) . When moral intuitions , which often lead to outgroup biases ( Greene 2013 ; Haidt 2012 ) , are questioned they become less dog - matic and assume a more relativistic connotation . This trend is often associated with cultural - cognitive shifts toward a more consistent application of principles of lib - erty as noninterference ( Wright et al . 2014 ) . Many moral philosophers are concerned about the ﬂeeting and erratic nature of moral emotions . In line with these misgivings , Greene ( 2008b ) regards moral intuitions and emotions as poor decision tools judging rightness and wrongness , largely because he is troubled by tribal knee - jerk moral judgments that have no basis in a utilitarian calculus . In Greene’s view , it is far better to follow the moral prescripts of ( deliberative ) utilitarianism , which permits many harmless actions forbidden by ( often disgust - based ) moral emotions ( Greene 2013 ) . Although cultural and biological evolutionary forces are difﬁcult to disen - tangle ( Barkow et al . 1992 ) , humanity may need culture to transcend the impulses that are driven by moral intuition . However , what impulses are really counter - productive is a far more difﬁcult question to answer from a subjectivist perspective than a moral realist’s typical reference to rea - son as the ultimate arbiter . For instance , subjectivism does not allow for judgments of moral progress . My guess is that this understandable desire to stipulate and ﬁnd moral pro - gress may have spurred Greene’s adjustment in How Cognitive Neuroscience Informs a Subjectivist - Evolutionary Explanation of Business . . . 725 123 epistemological assumptions between 2002 and 2013 . In general , cultural evolution seems to lead to a normative relativization that tends to reduce outgroup biases . Proposition 3 Cultural evolution defuses and relativizes judgments based on moral emotions and intuitions , which often lead to moral tribalism . The Importance of Decision Context Understanding the biological and cultural evolution of moral emotions ( including their functions and anatomy ) may provide useful insights into the ways moral intuition and moral deliberation can most effectively be harnessed in speciﬁc decision - making contexts . In the following section , I want to suggest that the effectiveness of moral intuition versus deliberative ( e . g . , cost – beneﬁt ) reasoning depends on the correspondence of the decision context with the environments of evolutionary adaptedness that shaped those information - processing brain regions in the ﬁrst place . The more the decision context resembles the envi - ronment by which it was shaped , molded , and / or selected , the more effective is that particular pattern of information processing for moral judgments . By proposing such a correspondence principle of context with information pro - cessing , the following contradictory ﬁndings may be rec - onciled : some studies ( e . g . , Zhong 2011 ) highlight the relevance of emotions over reason in ethical decisions , whereas others ( e . g . , Gunia et al . 2012 ) stress the impor - tance of reason ( ing ) —both social ( conversation ) and indi - vidual ( contemplation ) —over moral intuitions . The next proposition suggests that the effectiveness of each mech - anism ( fast emotions vs . more careful deliberation ) depends on the decision - making context . Moral emotions are primarily efﬁcient behavioral reg - ulators of social interactions within given tribes ( Dugatkin 2006 ; Greene 2013 ) . Intuitively , we may feel , for example , indebted to a family member , friend , acquaintance , or even stranger ( with whom we interact recurrently ) to reciprocate favors or abstain from deception . Such moral intuitions , shaped by evolution , may have instilled a particular kind of self - referential altruism ( or ‘‘enlightened self - interest’’ ) that has become second nature ( Axelrod 1984 ) . Similarly , assisting others , which often involves short - term costs or sacriﬁces to the individual , may enhance that individual’s prospect of longer - term survival . In micro decision con - texts , in which the actions or outcomes are personally observable , our moral intuitions , typically accompanied by conscious or subconscious emotions , are often the most useful guides in ethical decision making . However , in modern societies , many ethical decisions have impersonal attributes . That is , organizational actors as moral agents are often unfamiliar with the individual stakeholders affected by their decisions . In these ( for lack of a better term , ‘‘macro’’ ) decision contexts , deliberation and reasoning may be better guides to our judgments than our moral intuitions . Of course , many individuals may still be guided by basic , emotion - based impulses toward certain judgments or , indeed , action tendencies ( Haidt 2001 ) . However , in impersonal contexts , the reliability of our emotions must be questioned because their evolutionary functionality was not shaped by these macro dynamics of broader collectives—what Greene ( 2013 ) calls Us versus Them decisions . Greene considers deliberative principles— in his view , best captured by utilitarianism—generally superior to moral intuitions . However , some studies con - tradict this general verdict ( e . g . , Wang et al . 2014 ; Zhong 2011 ) . In highly complex situations , too much reasoning can be as counterproductive as in simple , personal decision contexts ( Moore and Tenbrunsel 2014 ) . Therefore , future research could investigate the following proposition : Proposition 4 The effectiveness of each cognitive mech - anism depends on its complementarity with the decision context : ( a ) moral emotions and intuitions are reliable mechanisms for personal micro decision contexts , whereas ( b ) deliberation and reasoning are more reliable guides for impersonal macro contexts . Moral Tribalism in Business Ethics As argued in the previous propositions , the premise that an objective realm of the ( morally ) good or right exists cannot validly be derived from any neuroscientiﬁc evidence ; such a claim is , and must remain , metaphysical . Any persuasive defense of objective moral facts requires ontological and epistemological justiﬁcations that go above and beyond the empirical evidence about information processing in human brains . By itself , the neuroscientiﬁc and some comple - mentary experimental evidence can only point to the sub - jectivity of human cognition . Yet , many research communities within business ethics currently assume that moral propriety can be captured as an objective fact . For example , for several decades researchers have tried to theorize and measure companies’ so - called ‘‘social responsibilities’’ and obligations ( Carroll 1999 , 2008 ) . Many researchers assume that corporate social responsibility ( CSR ) refers to some objective reality , such as societal goodness ( Aguilera et al . 2007 ) or improvement toward some given social good ( McWilliams and Siegel 2001 ) , although the normative foundation of this argument is rarely made explicit . Moral subjectivism unmasks this widely held assumption of organizations possessing veri - ﬁable ‘‘responsible’’ or ‘‘irresponsible’’ features ( inherently normative properties ) as epistemologically naı¨ve . The 726 M . Orlitzky 123 claim that we can use reason to determine those corporate actions that improve society ( in any objective sense ) may be nothing more than an intersubjective commitment to and consensus by an intellectual elite about ‘‘social goodness’’ ( e . g . , about the importance of social justice ) . Other ulti - mately subjective conceptualizations by other moral tribes are certainly possible—for example , conceptions of responsibility centered more on conservative , traditionalist , or libertarian principles and values rather than the secular - liberal ones that are , at present , widely endorsed by the CSR research community ( Orlitzky 2015 ) . If at the root of ethical decision making is , by necessity , subjective judg - ment induced by our moral emotions and intuitions , then the community of ethics researchers must be careful that scholars’ espoused conceptualizations ( of certain self - evi - dent moral ‘‘truths’’ about societal improvement ) are not merely post hoc rationalizations of their own impulses and intuitions ( see also Duarte et al . 2015 ; Hayek 1948 ; Nozick 1997 ; Schumpeter 1947 ) . One piece of evidence pointing toward widespread post hoc rationalization is the hypoth - esis conﬁrmation bias that has been uncovered in the research area of CSR : each research community seems to ‘‘ﬁnd’’ evidence in support of the institutional logic , or ideology , that drove that investigation in the ﬁrst place ( Orlitzky 2011 , 2013 ) . In line with this observation , sub - jectivism , when more broadly conceived than merely moral , would suggest that observers’ acts of invention may be descriptive not only of norms and values , but also cer - tain ‘‘facts’’ ( see also Mackie 1977 ; Rorty 1991 ) . Proposition 5 The ideas contained in business ethicists’ theories of ‘‘social responsibility’’ ( or other concepts with normative connotations ) are intersubjective , tribal rationalizations of the moral intuitions that are enmeshed with business ethicists’ ideological predispositions . To what extent intertribal differences in the conception of the Right and the Good can be resolved is a matter of epistemology . Greene’s ( 2008b , p . 38 ) admittedly tentative ‘‘philosophical psychoanalysis’’ is optimistic about the ability to settle quarrels about the Right and the Good via utilitarian reasoning , which provides a common linguistic arsenal for different moral tribes ( Greene 2013 ) . However , the neuroscientiﬁc evidence suggests that humans are prewired to conceive and assess the moral world in speciﬁc ways , which are not necessarily based on reason . For example , it is simply incorrect to assume that ( seemingly irrational ) repugnance , which often features in conserva - tives’ moral judgments prominently ( Haidt 2001 , 2012 ) , should always be rejected as emotive bias , which has no value or place in decision making ( Cardon and Blumen - thal - Barby 2011 ) . If there are no objective standards for assessing the correctness of individuals’ moral judgments , the world becomes both a nicer and a nastier place . It becomes nicer because a genuine subjectivist cannot legitimately gener - alize from one’s own view to those of others . The increase in libertarian tolerance may , to a large extent , have resulted from the decreasing inﬂuence of objective , absolute rules and standards that are characteristic of many religious and totalitarian frameworks . At the same time , though , our world also becomes nastier because many subjective moral views are incommensurate . Deontologists simply will not accept Greene’s ( 2013 ) premise about utilitarianism as a viable common currency or metaethics ( see also Conning 2015 ) . In practice , the ( largely subconscious ) motivations and intuitions behind speciﬁc ethical judgments and actions will often continue to diverge between different individuals or , more importantly , different moral tribes ( Haidt 2012 ) . This means rational debate may not necessarily resolve many ethical disagreements . Furthermore , in the eternal struggle for the survival of ideas or memes , subjectivism may eventually be subverted by its own anti - realism and , thus , epistemological humility . 9 To be sure , Greene is a persuasive advocate for clearer thinking about the consequences of any given action . More speciﬁcally , this may result , for example , in business ethics scholars’ greater awareness of the unintended conse - quences of CSR ( Orlitzky 2013 ) or its ideologically biased interpretation ( Orlitzky 2015 ) . Yet , in practice , utilitarian deliberation is not always going to be a viable solution , for the reasons already cited above . Furthermore , utilitarianism cannot be assumed to be superior to alternative systems of ethics for two main reasons . First , it seems rather odd to regard a framework as superior to others when neurological pathologies , such as brain damage ( see prior literature review ) or alexithymia ( Patil and Silani 2014 ) , increase the likelihood of utilitarian reasoning . That is , many charac - teristics of healthy brains ( such as empathy ) , shaped by evolution , may exist for good reasons , of which human ( utilitarian ) reason may at present be unaware or disdainful ( see also Hayek 2011 ) . So , what is a valid implication when studies show neurological damage is associated with the lack of empathy , while also increasing the likelihood of consequentialist reasoning ? To regard this evidence as support for the superiority of utilitarianism in healthy brains seems a bit problematic . Second , the assumption that consequentialist decision making is somehow free of heuristics and biases is rather myopic . For example , cost - beneﬁt analyses may also fall prey to such errors as conﬁrmation bias , loss aversion , or 9 Moral subjectivism may not survive if pitted against moral realism because moral realists , convinced that they found and know the objective truth , will show great missionary zeal to impose that Truth on others . In that sense , belief in Truth—moral or otherwise—is much closer to religious fundamentalism than the view endorsed in this paper ( see also Feyerabend 1975 , 1987 ) . How Cognitive Neuroscience Informs a Subjectivist - Evolutionary Explanation of Business . . . 727 123 status - quo bias ( Kahneman 2003 ) , especially if the moral agent is using a utilitarian calculus to bolster their argu - ment ex post ( Haidt 2001 ; Lerner and Tetlock 1999 ) . One cannot safely conclude that only intuitive decision making is affected by cognitive bias , heuristics , and errors , while more deliberative utilitarian thinking is not . This caveat is consistent with the type of subjectivism proposed in this paper and also with some evidence in psychology ( e . g . , Kerr et al . 1996 ; Peters et al . 2007 ; Schulz - Hardt et al . 2000 ) . In short , deliberative cognitive efforts may some - times reduce errors and biases , but they certainly do not guarantee their elimination . Conclusion In this paper , I used seminal neuroscientiﬁc research to explain the genealogy and anatomy of individuals’ moral thinking—rather than justify a particular ethics framework ( such as utilitarianism ) . In line with Greene’s arguments , I showed how some ﬁndings in cognitive neuroscience cast doubt on deontologists’ emphasis on Reason . As part of this argument , I ﬁrst pointed out the illegitimate centrality of Reason - based deontology in theories of business ethics . Then , summarizing seminal ﬁndings generated by cogni - tive neuroscience ( as well as complementary studies ) of moral judgments , I reached the conclusion that both con - sequentialist and nonconsequentialist judgments are infused with emotions / intuitions and deliberation / contem - plation . By understanding the subjective and evolutionary programming of humans’ brains , we may be able to reach conclusions about the suitability of each cognitive mech - anism for a given situation and , more generally , become less absolutist in judgments about conventions such as ‘‘social responsibility , ’’ ‘‘justice , ’’ ‘‘rights , ’’ and other core concepts in business ethics . Abandoning a dogmatic form of Reason ( see also Feyerabend 1975 , 1987 ) as the foun - dation of moral realism may help diminish the ideological character of social science research ( because subjectivism cannot logically be made an objective , prescriptive norm ) and , thus , make the Business Ethics research community more receptive to alternative viewpoints . As shown in the Introduction , many business ethicists have so far relied on the ideas of German philosopher Immanuel Kant in major ways ( Locke 2006 ) . However , this paper argued that , in aggregate , the neuroscientiﬁc evi - dence points to constructivism , a viewpoint held by another German philosopher—Friedrich Nietzsche . Endorsing a naturalist fusion of moral psychology and moral philoso - phy ( Schacht 1994 ; Solomon and Higgins 1999 ) , Nietzsche may hold more clues than Kant to the understanding of human morality ( Solomon 2003 ) . In the absence of a close ( moral - psychological ) examination of the origins and motivations behind speciﬁc ethical concepts and judg - ments , any framework in business ethics must remain incomplete . Acknowledgments With this paper , I owe a special debt of grati - tude to the exceptionally constructive comments of the Guest Editors and the reviewers . All remaining errors , oversights , heuristics , and oversimpliﬁcations are mine . References Adamczyk , A . , & Cheng , Y . - H . A . ( 2014 ) . Explaining attitudes about homosexuality in Confucian and non - Confucian nations : Is there a ‘cultural’ inﬂuence ? Social Science Research , 51 , 276 – 289 . Agle , B . R . , Donaldson , T . , Freeman , R . E . , Jensen , M . C . , Mitchell , R . K . , & Wood , D . J . ( 2008 ) . Dialogue : Toward superior stakeholder theory . Business Ethics Quarterly , 18 , 153 – 190 . Aguilera , R . V . , Rupp , D . E . , Williams , C . A . , & Ganapathi , J . ( 2007 ) . Putting the S back in corporate social responsibility : A multilevel theory of social change in organizations . Academy of Management Review , 32 ( 3 ) , 836 – 863 . Anderson , S . W . , Bechara , A . , Damasio , H . , Tranel , D . , & Damasio , A . R . ( 1999 ) . Impairment of social and moral behavior related to early damage in human prefrontal cortex . Nature Neuroscience , 2 , 1032 – 1037 . Arnold , D . G . , & Harris , J . D . ( Eds . ) . ( 2012 ) . Kantian business ethics : Critical perspectives . Cheltenham , UK : Edward Elgar . Axelrod , R . ( 1984 ) . The evolution of cooperation . New York : Basic Books . Barkow , J . H . , Cosmides , L . , & Tooby , J . ( Eds . ) . ( 1992 ) . The adapted mind : Evolutionary psychology and the generation of culture . New York : Oxford University Press . Baron , J . ( 2011 ) . Utilitarian emotions : Suggestions from introspec - tion . Emotion Review , 3 ( 3 ) , 286 – 287 . Bartels , D . ( 2008 ) . Principled moral sentiment and the ﬂexibility of moral judgment and decision making . Cognition , 108 , 381 – 417 . Becker , W . J . , Cropanzano , R . , & Sanfey , A . G . ( 2011 ) . Organiza - tional neuroscience : Taking organizational theory inside the neural black box . Journal of Management , 37 ( 4 ) , 933 – 961 . Blair , J . , Marsh , A . A . , Finger , E . , Blair , K . S . , & Luo , J . ( 2006 ) . Neuro - cognitive systems involved in morality . Philosophical Explorations , 9 ( 1 ) , 13 – 27 . Bloom , P . ( 2012 ) . Religion , morality , evolution . Annual Review of Psychology , 63 , 179 – 199 . Borg , J . S . , Hynes , C . , van Horn , J . , Grafton , S . , & Sinnott - Armstrong , W . ( 2006 ) . Consequences , action , and intention as factors in moral judgments : An fMRI investigation . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 18 ( 5 ) , 803 – 817 . Borg , J . S . , Lieberman , D . , & Kiehl , K . A . ( 2008 ) . Infection , incest , and iniquity : Investigating the neural correlates of disgust and morality . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 20 ( 9 ) , 1529 – 1546 . Bowie , N . E . ( 1999 ) . Business ethics : A Kantian perspective . Malden , MA : Basil Blackwell Publishers . Bowie , N . E . ( 2012 ) . A reply to my critics . In D . G . Arnold & J . D . Harris ( Eds . ) , Kantian business ethics : Critical perspectives ( pp . 175 – 189 ) . Cheltenham , UK : Edward Elgar . Bucciarelli , M . , & Daniele , M . ( 2015 ) . Reasoning in moral conﬂicts . Thinking & Reasoning , 21 ( 3 ) , 265 – 294 . Bucciarelli , M . , Khemlani , S . , & Johnson - Laird , P . N . ( 2008 ) . The psychology of moral reasoning . Judgment and Decision Making , 3 ( 2 ) , 121 – 139 . Buss , D . M . ( 2015 ) . Evolutionary psychology : The new science of the mind ( 5th ed . ) . Boston , MA : Allyn & Bacon . 728 M . Orlitzky 123 Bzdok , D . , Schilbach , L . , Vogeley , K . , Schneider , K . , Laird , A . R . , Langner , R . , & Eickhoff , S . B . ( 2012 ) . Parsing the neural correlates of moral cognition : ALE meta - analysis on morality , theory of mind , and empathy . Brain Structure and Function , 217 ( 4 ) , 783 – 796 . Cardon , A . , & Blumenthal - Barby , J . S . ( 2011 ) . Should repugnance give us pause ? On the neuroscience of daily moral reasoning . AJOB Neuroscience , 2 ( 2 ) , 47 – 48 . Carroll , A . B . ( 1999 ) . Corporate social responsibility : Evolution of a deﬁnitional construct . Business and Society , 38 ( 3 ) , 268 – 295 . Carroll , A . B . ( 2008 ) . A history of corporate social responsibility : Concepts and practices . In A . Crane , A . McWilliams , D . Matten , J . Moon , & D . S . Siegel ( Eds . ) , The Oxford handbook of corporate social responsibility ( pp . 19 – 46 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Casebeer , W . D . ( 2003 ) . Moral cognition and its neural constituents . Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 4 ( 10 ) , 840 – 847 . Casebeer , W . D . ( 2008 ) . Processes and moral emotions . In W . Sinnott - Armstrong ( Ed . ) , Moral psychology : The neuroscience of morality ( Vol . 3 , pp . 19 – 24 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Casullo , A . ( 2003 ) . A priori knowledge and justiﬁcation . New York : Oxford University Press . Ciaramelli , E . , Muccioli , M . , Ladavas , E . , & di Pellegrino , G . ( 2007 ) . Selective deﬁcit in personal moral judgment following damage to ventromedial prefrontal cortex . Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience , 2 ( 2 ) , 84 – 92 . Conning , A . S . ( 2015 ) . Moral tribes : Emotion , reason , and the gap between us and them [ book review ] . Journal of Moral Educa - tion , 44 ( 1 ) , 119 – 121 . Cosmides , L . , & Tooby , J . ( 2000 ) . Evolutionary psychology and the emotions . In M . Lewis & J . M . Havilland - Jones ( Eds . ) , Handbook of emotions ( 2nd ed . , pp . 91 – 115 ) . New York : Guilford . Cosmides , L . , & Tooby , J . ( 2013 ) . Evolutionary psychology : New perspectives on cognition and motivation . Annual Review of Psychology , 64 , 201 – 229 . Cottingham , J . ( 1984 ) . Rationalism . London : Paladin Books . Cropanzano , R . , & Becker , W . J . ( 2013 ) . The promise and peril of organizational neuroscience : Today and tomorrow . Journal of Management Inquiry , 22 ( 3 ) , 306 – 310 . Cushman , F . ( 2013 ) . Action , outcome , and value a dual - system framework for morality . Personality and Social Psychology Review , 17 ( 3 ) , 273 – 292 . Damasio , A . R . ( 1994 ) . Descartes’ error : Emotion , reason , and the human brain . New York : Putnam . Damasio , A . R . ( 2003 ) . Looking for Spinoza : Joy , sorrow , and the feeling brain . Orlando , FL : Harcourt . Darwin , C . ( 1871 ) . The descent of man , and selection in relation to sex . London : Murray . De George , R . T . ( 2010 ) . Business ethics ( 7th ed . ) . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Prentice Hall . DeScioli , P . , & Kurzban , R . ( 2013 ) . A solution to the mysteries of morality . Psychological Bulletin , 139 ( 2 ) , 477 – 496 . Donaldson , T . , & Preston , L . E . ( 1995 ) . The stakeholder theory of the corporation : Concepts , evidence , and implications . Academy of Management Review , 20 , 65 – 91 . Duarte , J . L . , Crawford , J . T . , Stern , C . , Haidt , J . , Jussim , L . , & Tetlock , P . E . ( 2015 ) . Political diversity will improve social psychological science . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 38 , e130 . Dugatkin , L . A . ( 2006 ) . The altruism equation : Seven scientists search for the origins of goodness . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Duska , R . ( 2012 ) . Revisiting the egoism question in business . In D . G . Arnold & J . D . Harris ( Eds . ) , Kantian business ethics : Critical perspectives ( pp . 18 – 34 ) . Cheltenham , UK : Edward Elgar . Evan , W . M . , & Freeman , R . E . ( 1993 ) . A stakeholder theory of the modern corporation : Kantian capitalism . In T . L . Beauchamp & N . E . Bowie ( Eds . ) , Ethical theory and business ( 4th ed . , pp . 75 – 93 ) . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . Farber , P . L . ( 1994 ) . The temptations of evolutionary ethics . Berkeley , CA : University of California Press . Feyerabend , P . K . ( 1975 ) . Against method : Outline of an anarchistic theory of knowledge . London : New Left Books . Feyerabend , P . K . ( 1987 ) . Farewell to reason . London : Verso . Frank , R . H . ( 1988 ) . Passions within reason : The strategic role of the emotions . New York : W . W . Norton . Freeman , R . E . ( 1994 ) . The politics of stakeholder theory : Some future directions . Business Ethics Quarterly , 4 ( 4 ) , 409 – 421 . Freeman , R . E . ( 2008 ) . Ending the so - called ‘‘Friedman - Freeman’’ debate . Business Ethics Quarterly , 18 ( 2 ) , 153 – 190 . Freeman , R . E . ( 2012 ) . Bowie’s ethics : A pragmatist perspective . In D . G . Arnold & J . D . Harris ( Eds . ) , Kantian business ethics : Critical perspectives ( pp . 35 – 47 ) . Cheltenham , UK : Edward Elgar . Freeman , R . E . , & Gilbert , D . ( 1988 ) . Corporate strategy and the search for ethics . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . Freeman , R . E . , & Phillips , R . A . ( 2002 ) . Stakeholder theory : A libertarian defense . Business Ethics Quarterly , 12 ( 4 ) , 331 – 349 . Gazzaniga , M . S . , Ivry , R . B . , & Mangun , G . R . ( 2014 ) . Cognitive neuroscience : The biology of the mind ( 4th ed . ) . New York : W . W . Norton & Company . Gibson , K . ( 2000 ) . The moral basis of stakeholder theory . Journal of Business Ethics , 26 , 245 – 257 . Greene , J . D . ( 2002 ) . The terrible , horrible , no good , very bad truth about morality and what to do about it . ( Doctoral thesis ) , Princeton University . Greene , J . D . ( 2003 ) . From neural ‘is’ to moral’ought’ : What are the moral implications of neuroscientiﬁc moral psychology ? Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 4 ( 10 ) , 846 – 850 . Greene , J . D . ( 2008a ) . Reply to Mikhail and Timmons . In W . Sinnott - Armstrong ( Ed . ) , Moral psychology : The neuroscience of morality ( Vol . 3 , pp . 105 – 117 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Greene , J . D . ( 2008b ) . The secret joke of Kant’s soul . In W . Sinnott - Armstrong ( Ed . ) , Moral psychology : The neuroscience of morality : Emotion , brain disorders , and development ( Vol . 3 , pp . 35 – 80 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Greene , J . D . ( 2009a ) . The cognitive neuroscience of moral judgment . The Cognitive Neurosciences , 4 , 987 – 999 . Greene , J . D . ( 2009b ) . Dual - process morality and the personal / impersonal distinction : A reply to McGuire , Langdon , Coltheart , and Mackenzie . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 45 , 581 – 584 . Greene , J . D . ( 2013 ) . Moral tribes : Emotion , reason , and the gap between us and them . New York : Penguin . Greene , J . D . , & Haidt , J . ( 2002 ) . How ( and where ) does moral judgment work ? Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 6 ( 12 ) , 517 – 523 . Greene , J . D . , Morelli , S . A . , Lowenberg , K . , Nystrom , L . E . , & Cohen , J . D . ( 2008 ) . Cognitive load slectively interferes with utilitarian moral judgment . Cognition , 107 , 1144 – 1154 . Greene , J . D . , Nystrom , L . E . , Engell , A . D . , Darley , J . M . , & Cohen , J . D . ( 2004 ) . The neural bases of cognitive conﬂict and control in moral judgment . Neuron , 44 ( 2 ) , 389 – 400 . Greene , J . D . , Sommerville , B . R . , Nystrom , L . E . , Darley , J . M . , & Cohen , J . D . ( 2001 ) . An fMRI investigation of emotional engagement in moral judgment . Science , 293 , 2105 – 2108 . Gunia , B . C . , Wang , L . , Huang , L . , Wang , J . , & Murnighan , J . K . ( 2012 ) . Contemplation and conversation : Subtle inﬂuences on moral decision making . Academy of Management Journal , 55 ( 1 ) , 13 – 33 . Haidt , J . ( 2001 ) . The emotional dog and its rational tail : A social intuitionist approach to moral judgment . Psychological Review , 108 ( 4 ) , 814 – 834 . Haidt , J . ( 2003 ) . The emotional dog does learn new tricks : A reply to PizarroandBloom ( 2003 ) . PsychologicalReview , 110 ( 1 ) , 197 – 198 . How Cognitive Neuroscience Informs a Subjectivist - Evolutionary Explanation of Business . . . 729 123 Haidt , J . ( 2008 ) . Morality . Perspectives on Psychological Science , 3 ( 1 ) , 65 – 72 . Haidt , J . ( 2012 ) . The righteous mind : Why good people are divided by politics and religion . New York : Pantheon . Haidt , J . ( 2013 ) . Moral psychology for the twenty - ﬁrst century . Journal of Moral Education , 42 ( 3 ) , 281 – 297 . Haidt , J . , & Bjorklund , F . ( 2008 ) . Social intuitionists answer six questions about morality . In W . Sinnott - Armstrong ( Ed . ) , Moral psychology : The cognitive science of morality ( Vol . 2 , pp . 181 – 217 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Hardman , D . ( 2008 ) . Moral dilemmas : Who makes utilitarian choices . Unpublished manuscript . Hauser , M . ( 2006 ) . Moral minds : How nature designed our universal sense of right and wrong . New York : HarperCollins . Hayek , F . A . ( 1948 ) . The intellectuals and socialism . University of Chicago Law Review , 16 , 417 – 433 . Hayek , F . A . ( 1958 ) . Freedom , reason , and tradition . Ethics , 68 ( 4 ) , 229 – 245 . Hayek , F . A . ( 1988 ) . The fatal conceit : The errors of socialism . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Hayek , F . A . ( 2011 ) . The constitution of liberty : The deﬁnitive edition . In R . Hamowy ( Ed . ) , The collected works of F . A . Hayek . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Heekeren , H . , Wartenburger , I . , Schmidt , H . , Prehn , K . , Schwin - towski , H . - P . , & Villringer , A . ( 2005 ) . Inﬂuence of bodily harm on neural correlates of semantic and moral decision - making . NeuroImage , 24 , 887 – 897 . Hinde , R . A . ( 2002 ) . Why good is good : The sources of morality . London , UK : Routledge . Hoffman , M . L . ( 1981 ) . Is altruism part of human nature ? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 40 ( 1 ) , 121 – 137 . Huebner , B . , Dwyer , S . , & Hauser , M . ( 2009 ) . The role of emotion in moral psychology . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 13 ( 1 ) , 1 – 6 . Hume , D . ( 1960 ) . An inquiry concerning the principles of morals . La Salle , IL : Open Court . Hume , D . ( 1969 ) . A treatise of human nature . London : Penguin . Johnson - Laird , P . N . ( 1983 ) . Mental models : Towards a cognitive science of language and consciousness . Cambrdige , UK : Cam - bridge University Press . Johnson - Laird , P . N . ( 2006 ) . How we reason . Oxford , UK : Oxford University Press . Jones , T . M . ( 1991 ) . Ethical decision making by individuals in organizations : An issue - contingent model . Academy of Manage - ment Review , 16 , 366 – 395 . Joyce , R . ( 2007 ) . The evolution ofmorality . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Joyce , R . ( 2008 ) . Response to Nichols and Katz . In W . Sinnott - Armstrong ( Ed . ) , Moral psychology : The enuroscience of morality ( Vol . 3 , pp . 419 – 426 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Joyce , R . ( 2009 ) . Moral anti - realism . In E . N . Zalta ( Ed . ) , The Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy . http : / / plato . stanford . edu / archives / sum2009 / entries / moral - anti - realism / . Kahane , G . , & Shackel , N . ( 2008 ) . Do abnormal responses show utilitarian bias ? Nature , 452 , E5 . Kahane , G . , Wiech , K . , Shackel , N . , Farias , M . , Savulescu , J . , & Tracey , I . ( 2012 ) . The neural basis of intuitive and counterin - tuitive moral judgment . Social Cognitive and Affective Neuro - science , 7 ( 4 ) , 393 – 402 . Kahneman , D . ( 2003 ) . Maps of bounded rationality : Psychology for behavioral economics . American Economic Review , 93 ( 5 ) , 1449 – 1475 . Kahneman , D . ( 2011 ) . Thinking , fast and slow . New York : Farrar , Straus and Giroux . Kant , I . ( 1785 / 1959 ) . Foundations of the metaphysics of morals . Indianapolis , IN : Bobbs - Merrill . Katz , L . D . ( 2008 ) . Hedonic reasons as ultimately justifying and the relevance of neuroscience . In W . Sinnott - Armstrong ( Ed . ) , Moral psychology : The neuroscience of morality ( Vol . 3 , pp . 409 – 418 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Kerr , N . L . , MacCoun , R . J . , & Kramer , G . P . ( 1996 ) . Bias in judgment : Comparing individuals and groups . Psychological Review , 103 ( 4 ) , 687 – 719 . Kierkegaard , S . ( 1944 ) . Concluding unscientiﬁc postscript . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Koenigs , M . , Young , L . , Adolphs , R . , Tranel , D . , Cushman , F . , Hauser , M . , & Damasio , A . R . ( 2007 ) . Damage to the prefromntal cortex increases utilitarian moral judgments . Nature , 446 ( 138 ) , 908 – 911 . Kohlberg , L . ( 1981 ) . Essays in moral development : The philosophy of moral development ( Vol . I ) . New York : Harper & Row . Korsgaard , C . M . ( 1996 ) . Creating the kingdom of ends . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Krebs , D . L . ( 2008 ) . Morality : An evolutionary account . Perspectives on Psychological Science , 3 ( 3 ) , 149 – 172 . Lawrence , P . R . , & Nohria , N . ( 2002 ) . Driven : How human nature shapes our choices . New York : Wiley . Lerner , J . S . , & Tetlock , P . E . ( 1999 ) . Accounting for the effects of accountability . Psychological Bulletin , 125 ( 2 ) , 255 – 275 . Locke , E . A . ( 2006 ) . Business ethics : A way out of the morass . Academy of Management Learning & Education , 5 ( 3 ) , 324 – 332 . Luo , Q . , Nakic , M . , Wheatley , T . , Richell , R . , Martin , A . , & Blair , R . J . ( 2006 ) . The neural basis of implicit moral attitude—An IAT study using event - related fMRI . NeuroImage , 30 , 1449 – 1457 . MacIntyre , A . ( 1984 ) . After virtue : A study in moral theory ( 2nd ed . ) . Notre Dame , IN : University of Notre Dame Press . Mackie , J . L . ( 1977 ) . Ethics : Inventing right and wrong . Middlesex , UK : Penguin . Manfrinati , A . , Lotto , L . , Sarlo , M . , Palomba , D . , & Rumiati , R . ( 2013 ) . Moral dilemmas and moral principles : When emotion and cognition unite . Cognition and Emotion , 27 ( 7 ) , 1276 – 1291 . McCullough , M . E . , Kilpatrick , S . D . , Emmons , R . A . , & Larson , D . B . ( 2001 ) . Is gratitude a moral affect ? Psychological Bulletin , 127 ( 2 ) , 249 – 266 . McGuire , J . , Langdon , R . , Coltheart , M . , & Mackenzie , C . ( 2009 ) . A reanalysis of the personal / impersonal distinction in moral psychology research . Journal of Experimental Social Psychol - ogy , 45 , 577 – 580 . McWilliams , A . , & Siegel , D . ( 2001 ) . Corporate social responsibility : A theory of the ﬁrm perspective . Academy of Management Review , 26 ( 1 ) , 117 – 127 . Mendez , M . F . , Anderson , E . , & Shapira , J . S . ( 2005 ) . An investigation of moral judgment in frontotemporal dementia . Cognitive and Behavioral Neurology , 18 ( 4 ) , 193 – 197 . Miller , C . ( 2009 ) . Moral psychology , vol . 3 : The neuroscience of morality : Emotion , brain disorders , and development . Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews , 7 , 1 – 12 . Miller , E . K . , & Cohen , J . D . ( 2001 ) . An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex function . Annual Review of Neuroscience , 24 , 167 – 202 . Moll , J . , & de Oliveira - Souza , R . ( 2007 ) . Moral judgments , emotions and the utilitarian brain . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 11 ( 8 ) , 319 – 321 . Moll , J . , de Oliveira - Souza , R . , & Zahn , R . ( 2008a ) . The neural basis of moral cognition : Sentiments , concepts , and values . Annals of New York Academy of Sciences , 1124 , 161 – 180 . Moll , J . , de Oliveira - Souza , R . , Zahn , R . , & Grafmann , J . ( 2008b ) . The cognitive neuroscience of moral emotions . In W . Sinnott - Armstrong ( Ed . ) , Moral psychology : The neuroscience of morality ( Vol . 3 , pp . 1 – 18 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Moore , G . E . ( 1978 ) . Principia ethica . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Moore , A . B . , Clark , B . A . , & Kane , M . J . ( 2008 ) . Who shalt not kill ? Individual differences in working memory capacity , executive 730 M . Orlitzky 123 control , and moral judgment . Psychological Science , 19 ( 6 ) , 549 – 557 . Moore , C . , & Tenbrunsel , A . E . ( 2014 ) . ‘‘Just think about it’’ ? Cognitive complexity and moral choice . Organizational Behav - ior and Human Decision Processes , 123 ( 2 ) , 138 – 149 . Moretto , G . , Ladavas , E . , Mattioli , F . , & Di Pellegrino , G . ( 2009 ) . A psychophysiological investigation of moral judgment after ventromedial prefrontal damage . Journal of Cognitive Neuro - science , 22 ( 8 ) , 1888 – 1899 . Nicholson , N . ( 1998 ) . How hardwired is human behavior ? Harvard Business Review , 76 ( 4 ) , 134 – 147 . Nozick , R . ( 1981 ) . Philosophical explanations . Oxford , UK : Claren - don Press . Nozick , R . ( 1997 ) . Socratic Puzzles . Cambridge : Harvard University Press . Nozick , R . ( 2001 ) . Invariances : The structure of the objective world . Cambridge , MA : Belknap Press . Orlitzky , M . ( 2011 ) . Institutional logics in the study of organizations : The social construction of the relationship between corporate social and ﬁnancial performance . Business Ethics Quarterly , 21 ( 3 ) , 409 – 444 . Orlitzky , M . ( 2013 ) . Corporate social responsibility , noise , and stock market volatility . Academy of Management Perspectives , 27 ( 3 ) , 238 – 254 . Orlitzky , M . ( 2015 ) . The politics of corporate social responsibility or : Why Milton Friedman was right all along . Annals in Social Responsibility , 1 ( 1 ) , 5 – 29 . Parkinson , C . , Sinnott - Armstrong , W . , Koralus , P . , Mendelovici , A . , McGeer , V . , & Wheatley , T . ( 2011 ) . Is morality uniﬁed ? Evidence that distinct neural systems underlie moral judgments of harm , dishonesty , and disgust . Journal of Cognitive Neuro - science , 23 ( 10 ) , 3162 – 3180 . Patil , I . , & Silani , G . ( 2014 ) . Reduced empathic concern leads to utilitarian moral judgments in trait alexithymia . Frontiers in psychology , 5 , 1 – 12 . Paxton , J . M . , Bruni , T . , & Greene , J . D . ( 2014 ) . Are ‘counter - intuitive’deontological judgments really counter - intuitive ? An empirical reply to Kahane et al . 2012 . Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience , 9 ( 9 ) , 1368 – 1371 . Peters , E . , Hess , T . M . , Va¨stfja¨ll , D . , & Auman , C . ( 2007 ) . Adult age differencesindualinformationprocesses : Implicationsfortherole of affective and deliberative processes in older adults’ decision making . Perspectives on Psychological Science , 2 ( 1 ) , 1 – 23 . Postle , B . R . ( 2015 ) . Essentials of cognitive neuroscience . Chichester , UK : Wiley . Rachels , J . , & Rachels , S . ( 2010 ) . The elements of moral philosophy ( 6th ed . ) . New York : McGraw Hill . Railton , P . ( 1986 ) . Moral realism . The Philosophical Review , 95 ( 2 ) , 163 – 207 . Rest , J . , Narvaez , D . , Bebeau , M . J . , & Thoma , S . J . ( 1999 ) . Postconventional moral thinking : A neo - Kohlbergian approach . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Reynolds , S . J . ( 2006 ) . A neurocognitive model of the ethical decision - making process : Implications for study and practice . Journal of Applied Psychology , 91 ( 4 ) , 737 – 748 . Robinson , D . N . ( 2002 ) . Praise and blame : Moral realism and its applications . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Rorty , R . ( 1979 ) . Philosophy and the mirror of nature . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Rorty , R . ( 1991 ) . Objectivity , relativism , and truth : Philosophical papers ( Vol . I ) . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Rossano , M . J . ( 2003 ) . Evolutionary psychology : The science of human behavior and evolution . New York : Wiley . Rottschaefer , W . A . ( 1997 ) . Evolutionary ethics : An irresistible temptation : Some reﬂections on Paul Farber’s . The Temptation of Evolutionary Ethics Biology and Philosophy , 12 , 369 – 384 . Salvador , R . , & Folger , R . G . ( 2009 ) . Business ethics and the brain . Business Ethics Quarterly , 19 ( 1 ) , 1 – 31 . Schacht , R . ( Ed . ) . ( 1994 ) . Nietzsche , genealogy , morality : Essays on Nietzsche’s Genealogy of Morals . Berkeley , CA : University of California Press . Schnall , S . , Haidt , J . , Clore , G . L . , & Jordan , A . H . ( 2008 ) . Disgust as embodied moral judgment . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 34 , 1096 – 1109 . Schulz - Hardt , S . , Frey , D . , Lu¨thgens , C . , & Moscovici , S . ( 2000 ) . Biased information search in group decision making . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 78 ( 4 ) , 655 . Schumpeter , J . ( 1947 ) . Capitalism , socialism , and democracy ( 2nd ed . ) . New York : Harper . Sevinc , G . , & Spreng , R . N . ( 2014 ) . Contextual and perceptual brain processes underlyingmoralcognition : A quantitativemeta - analysis of moral reasoning and moral emotions . PLoS One , 9 ( 2 ) , e87427 . Shafer - Landau , R . ( 2003 ) . Moral realism : A defence . Oxford , UK : Clarendon Press . Shermer , M . ( 2004 ) . The science of good and evil . New York : Henry Holt and Company . Sinnott - Armstrong , W . , & Wheatley , T . ( 2014 ) . Are moral judgments uniﬁed ? Philosophical Psychology , 27 ( 4 ) , 451 – 474 . Smith , A . ( 1759 / 1790 ) . The theory of moral sentiments . Indianapolis , IN : Liberty Classics . Smith , J . D . ( 2012 ) . Corporate duties of virtue : Making ( Kantian ) sense of corporate social responsibility . In D . G . Arnold & J . D . Harris ( Eds . ) , Kantian business ethics : Critical perspectives ( pp . 58 – 75 ) . Cheltenham , UK : Edward Elgar . Smith , J . D . , & Dubbink , W . ( 2011 ) . Understanding the role of moral principles in business ethics : A Kantian perspective . Business Ethics Quarterly , 21 ( 2 ) , 205 – 231 . Solomon , R . C . ( 2003 ) . Victims of circumstances ? A defense of virtue ethics in business . Business Ethics Quarterly , 13 ( 1 ) , 43 – 62 . Solomon , R . C . , & Higgins , K . ( 1999 ) . What Nietzsche really said . New York : Random House . Stern , R . ( 2004 ) . Does ‘ought’ imply ‘can’ ? And did Kant think it does ? Utilitas , 16 ( 1 ) , 42 – 61 . Swanson , D . L . ( 1995 ) . Addressing a theoretical problem by reorienting the corporate social performance model . Academy of Management Review , 20 ( 1 ) , 43 – 64 . Swanson , D . L . ( 1999 ) . Toward an integrative theory of business and society : A research strategy for corporate social performance . Academy of Management Review , 24 ( 3 ) , 506 – 521 . Tangney , J . P . , Stuewig , J . , & Mashek , D . J . ( 2007 ) . Moral emotions and moral behavior . Annual Review of Psychology , 58 , 345 – 372 . Thomas , B . C . , Croft , K . E . , & Tranel , D . ( 2011 ) . Harming kin to save strangers : Further evidence for abnormally utilitarian moral judgments after ventromedial prefrontal damage . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 23 ( 9 ) , 2166 – 2176 . Timmons , M . ( 2008 ) . Toward a sentimentalist deontology . In W . Sinnott - Armstrong ( Ed . ) , Moral psychology : The neuroscience of morality ( Vol . 3 , pp . 93 – 104 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Trevin˜o , L . K . ( 1986 ) . Ethical decision making in organizations : A person - situation interactionist model . Academy of Management Review , 11 , 601 – 617 . Twenge , J . M . , Sherman , R . A . , & Wells , B . E . ( 2015 ) . Changes in American adults’ sexual behavior and attitudes , 1972 – 2012 . Archives of Sexual Behavior , 44 , 2273 – 2285 . Valdesolo , P . , & DeSteno , D . ( 2006 ) . Manipulations of emotional context shape moral judgment . Psychological Science , 17 ( 6 ) , 476 – 477 . Wang , L . , Zhong , C . - B . , & Murnighan , J . K . ( 2014 ) . The social and ethical consequences of a calculative mindset . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 125 ( 1 ) , 39 – 49 . Werhane , P . H . ( 2012 ) . Norman Bowie’s kingdom of worldly satisﬁcers . In D . G . Arnold & J . D . Harris ( Eds . ) , Kantian How Cognitive Neuroscience Informs a Subjectivist - Evolutionary Explanation of Business . . . 731 123 Business ethics : Critical perspectives ( pp . 48 – 57 ) . Cheltenham , UK : Edward Elgar . Wicks , A . C . , Gilbert , D . R , Jr , & Freeman , R . E . ( 1994 ) . A feminist reinterpretation of the stakeholder concept . Business Ethics Quarterly , 4 ( 4 ) , 475 – 497 . Wilson , E . O . ( 1998 ) . Consilience : The unity of knowledge . London : Abacus . Wright , P . J . , Tokunaga , R . S . , & Bae , S . ( 2014 ) . Pornography consumption and US adults’ attitudes toward gay individuals’ civil liberties , moral judgments of homosexuality , and support for same - sex marriage : Mediating and moderating factors . Communication Monographs , 81 ( 1 ) , 79 – 107 . Young , L . , & Koenigs , M . ( 2007 ) . Investigating emotion in moral cognition : A review of evidence from functional neuroimaging and neuropsychology . British Medical Bulletin , 84 , 69 – 79 . Zhong , C . - B . ( 2011 ) . The ethical dangers of deliberative decision making . Administrative Science Quarterly , 56 ( 1 ) , 1 – 25 . 732 M . Orlitzky 123