Collective Sensemaking in Online Health Forums Lena Mamykina , Drashko Nakikj , Noemie Elhadad Columbia University , Department of Biomedical Informatics 622 W . 168th Street , New York , NY 10032 { om2196 , dn2311 , ne60 } @ cumc . columbia . edu ABSTRACT Online health communities collect vast amounts of information and opinions in regards to health and wellness management . However , these opinions are usually stored within lengthy and loosely structured discussion threads ; synthesizing information in these threads can be challenging . In this mixed - methods study , grounded in the theoretical perspective of collective sensemaking , we examined patterns of communication within an online diabetes community TuDiabetes . The results of the study suggest that members of TuDiabetes often construct shared meaning through deep discussions , back and forth negotiation of perspectives , and resolution of conflicts in opinions . However , unlike participants of other sensemaking communities , members of TuDiabetes often value multiplicity of opinions rather than consensus . We use study results to draw implications for the design of computing platforms for facilitating collective sensemaking that promote construction of shared knowledge yet embrace diversity of opinions . Author Keywords : Online health communities , collective sensemaking , diabetes ACM Classification Keywords : H5 . 3 . Group and Organization Interfaces : Web - based Interaction INTRODUCTION With the growing prevalence of chronic diseases and disorders such as cancer , diabetes and autism , more individuals are turning to peers and often seek support and advice online [ 4 ] . According to the 2009 Pew Report , close to one third of all Americans had accessed social media for questions related to health [ 9 ] . Yet despite the high popularity of online health forums , the progress in platforms that support them has been slow . The vast majority of these forums continue to rely on traditional discussion boards , in which users propose new topics for discussion and invite others to respond . The resulting discussion threads can include hundreds of individual contributions , many of them stating diverse opinions , with different degrees of relevance to the original post . Synthesizing and comprehending this information can be challenging , particularly for newcomers , and lead to information overload and disengagement [ 20 ] . Over the years , there emerged several novel types of platforms that facilitate knowledge construction and sharing within communities of peers . For example , in Wikipedia , individuals engage in collaborative writing of articles on topics of mutual interest [ 21 ] . This often involves coordination , negotiation , and resolution of differences in opinions [ 22 ] . In Question and Answer sites ( Q & A ) such as Stack Overflow , individuals ask questions on topics of interest , receive answers from others , and identify the best answers through voting [ 23 ] . Both of these approaches have been shown successful in inspiring collective construction of knowledge and shared understanding . However , there remains a question as to whether these novel platforms can help to facilitate information sharing and learning within online health communities . In order to examine how individuals in online health communities share information and learn from each other , we conducted a study of TuDiabetes , an online forum for individuals with diabetes ( both Type 1 and Type 2 ) . It was created in 2008 and has over 30 , 000 members . TuDiabetes’ computing platform includes such features as public profiles , public and private forums that preserve discussion threads , live chat , and blogs , among others . We approached our study from the theoretical perspective of sensemaking and , in particular , collective sensemaking [ 43 ] . Sensemaking is chiefly concerned with how individuals make sense of dynamic social environments and situations [ 40 ] , [ 41 ] . Collective sensemaking shifts focus from an individual to communities of peers and examines how members of these communities create shared knowledge structures and build meaning together [ 43 ] . Previously , Swartz used a similar collective intelligence perspective to examine transformation of facts on Wikipedia [ 38 ] . Building upon this work , we set out to examine whether and how individuals in TuDiabetes construct shared knowledge structures , and how their style of engagement compares to the one found within Wikipedia and Stack Overflow . Our mixed - methods approach included qualitative interviews with members of the community , quantitative analysis of patterns of interactions within TuDiabetes forums , qualitative analysis of 30 of the Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . CHI 2015 , April 18 - 23 2015 , Seoul , Republic of Korea Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 3145 - 6 / 15 / 04… $ 15 . 00 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702566 Understanding Health through Online Behavior CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 3217 most popular discussion threads , and deep discourse analysis of 2 of these threads . The study revealed that similarly to authors in Wikipedia , and participants of Stack Overflow , members of TuDiabetes often engage in deep discussions on topics of mutual interest , examine different opinions , and seek to resolve conflicting perspectives , thus exhibiting all defining properties of collective sensemaking . The study also suggested that the three attributes of collective sensemaking in online forums include : 1 ) lateral engagement between participants , 2 ) reflection on previously stated perspectives , and 3 ) transformation of ideas throughout the posts in the thread . Further , the study suggested that certain properties of individuals’ posts , for example reference to a contentious topic or generalized presentation of a personal problem , are likely to lead to inspired discussions and can serve as triggers for collective sensemaking . However , and somewhat in contrast with Wikipedia authors and participants of Stack Overflow who usually seek consensus , members of TuDiabetes often value multiplicity and diversity of perspectives , rather than agreement among contributors . The study also showed that the organization of posts in threads often obscures traces of collective sensemaking from members not actively participating in these discussions . A common reading strategy reported by study participants—random sampling of posts throughout a thread—breaks rich structures of shared meaning and can leave individuals with a fragmented perspective on a topic . To address these limitations , we propose that new platforms for collective sensemaking can help individuals to engage in more explicit construction of shared artifacts , help individuals to express how their contributions relate to previous perspectives , and generate visual summaries of collective sensemaking using a combination of computational text analysis and information visualization . BACKGROUND Sensemaking and Collective Sensemaking Sensemaking is an approach to conceptualizing and investigating how individuals make sense of complex , dynamic , often social environments and situations [ 40 ] , [ 41 ] . Over the years , researchers explored sensemaking in many different contexts [ 28 ] from education [ 37 ] , [ 6 ] , to organizational science [ 40 ] . In HCI , sensemaking is often viewed as individuals’ interaction with vast amounts of information in the context of professional analytics and Web 2 . 0 technologies [ 34 ] , [ 10 ] . Collective and collaborative sensemaking shift focus onto groups of individuals making meaning together . In collaborative sensemaking groups actively work on pursuing common goals ( e . g . [ 31 ] ) . In collective sensemaking , individuals use each other to collectively make sense of new information , rather than work towards a common goal ( e . g . , [ 5 ] ) . A related body of work on collective intelligence often focuses on its products and associated extrinsic benefits [ 25 ] . There exist several theoretical accounts of collective sensemaking . Wenger argues that collective sensemaking involves two interrelated processes : participation and reification [ 43 ] . Participation refers to the social experience of membership in social communities and active involvement in social enterprise . Reification refers to the " process of giving form to our experience by producing objects that congeal our experience into " thingness " ( p . 58 ) . This perspective is consistent with the views espoused by the proponents of Distributed Cognition ( DC ) that is concerned with propagation of representational states across a series of representational media [ 14 ] , [ 19 ] . Computing Platforms for Collective Sensemaking and Collective Intelligence To date researchers in HCI and related fields developed a host of approaches to promoting individual as well as collective sensemaking . Tools for individual sensemaking focus on ways to represent information [ 32 ] , [ 11 ] and organize search results [ 1 ] . Entity Workspace supports sensemaking by allowing users to explore a large collection of documents , highlight important terms , annotate content , and organize information [ 3 ] . In recent years Wikipedia presented a fertile ground for investigation of collective sensemaking and intelligence [ 25 ] , [ 7 ] , with different studies focusing on coordination of work [ 21 ] , styles of leadership [ 45 ] , and issues related to content ownership [ 12 ] . A recent analysis by Swarts suggested that collective intelligence in Wikipedia is accomplished through the “back and forth writing , editing , and revising , through periods of negotiation and article stability . ” [ 38 ] Consistently with this account , in our study we specifically focused on the evidence of “back and forth” engagement between members of TuDiabetes . A somewhat alternative approach to supporting collective sensemaking is offered by social Question and Answer sites ( Q & A ) . In Q & A sites large distributed groups of individuals ask questions and provide answers on topics of mutual interest and negotiate shared meaning through voting , comments and discussions [ 13 ] , [ 16 ] , [ 27 ] , [ 24 ] , [ 17 ] , [ 23 ] . Tools that explicitly target collaborative sensemaking often focus on collaborative information seeking on the Web . For example CoSense system [ 30 ] specifically targets individuals engaged in active teamwork , rather than members of loosely organized communities . Finally , tools for distributed sensemkaing [ 8 ] help individuals to benefit from the sensemaking activities of others ; however in distributed sensemaking these individuals neither collaborate nor coordinate their sensemaking activities . Information sharing within online health forums Previous studies of online health forums mostly focused on information seeking [ 26 ] , [ 35 ] , emotional support [ 42 ] and seeking and coordinating help [ 36 ] , rather than on Understanding Health through Online Behavior CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 3218 transformation of ideas , negotiation of meaning , and resolution of conflicts . A recent study by Huh and Ackerman of another diabetes forum , dLife . com , specifically examined individuals’ interactions around seeking and receiving help [ 18 ] . These researchers suggested that individuals operationalize their experiences using their personal illness trajectories . In addition , they argued that individuals develop common understanding in regards to diabetes self - management through alignment of personal histories and opinions . Zhou et al provided a detailed account of unique issues faced by the members of a Chinese online diabetes community , Sweet Home , for example the need to negotiate two different approaches to medicine , Western and traditional Chinese , and the struggle to meet social expectations [ 44 ] . The study presented here builds upon these works and suggests a number of contentious issues negotiated by the international membership of TuDiabetes . Moreover , it carefully examines the process through which this negotiation is accomplished : what factors serve as triggers , the steps involved in the process , and the different contributions members make to advance the overall discussion . METHODS This study used a mixed - methods approach . First , we conducted qualitative open - ended interviews with administrators and active user of TuDiabetes ( n = 9 ) . The interviews focused on individuals’ experiences with the community , their ways to characterize discussions that resulted in new knowledge and insights , issues of trust , and the impact of the platform on users’ engagement , among others . Second , we used quantitative methods to examine a set of 20 , 000 discussion threads ( out of 22 , 180 available ) . In addition , we conducted thematic analysis of 30 of the most popular threads with the specific focus on patterns of participants’ engagement . We used our working definition of collective sensemaking as back and forth negotiation of meaning to rate the most popular threads on their degree of collective sensemaking ( high , medium , low ) . We then specifically examined what attributes differed between threads exhibiting different degrees of collective sensemaking . Finally , we conducted detailed discourse analysis of two threads from the most popular list ( “How Soon on Insulin ? ” and “At the End of the Rope” ) and inductively coded each post based on its contribution to the discussion . To preserve participants’ identity , in the rest of the paper , we use P1 - P9 to refer to participants of the interviews , and M1 - M9 to refer to members who contributed to the discussion threads we analyzed . GENERAL PATTERNS OF ENGAGEMENT The analysis of the discussions showed patterns consistent with much of the previous research on online communities . Most of the variables we examined followed a similarly skewed distribution , with the bulk of the data gathering within a small range of dominant values and a long tail . For example , most of the discussions included only a few members ( between 1 and 10 , including the initiator of the thread ) ; only a small percentage of the discussions had more then 30 participants . Similarly , most of the discussions had between 0 and 30 replies , however , several reached over 1K replies . Most users posted only once , fewer contributed between 2 and 6 posts , and only a few posted on a regular basis ; their contributions could amount to tens of thousands of posts during their membership with the community . Similarly , when examining posts per user within discussions , most users contributed to a given discussion only once . However , a fair number contributed between 2 and 8 posts , and a few individuals contributed more than 8 posts to a given discussion . Most of the discussions Figure 1 : a ) number of users in a discussion ; b ) number of replies in a discussion ; c ) average number of replies per user ; d ) posts per user per discussion ; e ) discussion longevity ; f ) time to first response Understanding Health through Online Behavior CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 3219 did not stay active beyond the first day ; a fair number stayed active for about a week , and the oldest still active discussion was initiated almost 6 years ago . TuDiabetes is a very active forum – almost 90 % of the initial posts received their first reply within the first day . ANALYZING POPULAR DISCUSSIONS Qualitative analysis of 30 of the most popular discussion threads on TuDiabetes revealed several distinct categories : Opinion / experience polls ( n = 13 ) started with posts that sought opinions or experiences of others on a topic of interest . Statement of strong opinion threads ( n = 2 ) were initiated with posts that stated a strong opinion in regards to a certain issue . Ice - breakers included simple games usually not related to diabetes ( n = 7 ) . Bonding threads ( n = 3 ) , asked individuals to share their experiences related to diabetes in general , rather than to any aspect of it in particular . A nnouncements of new events from TuDiabetes leadership ( n = 2 ) usually led to a roll call with members responding and committing to participating . Personal issue threads ( n = 3 ) were initiated by individuals seeking advice in regards to a specific personal issue . These popular threads varied greatly in their longevity ( from 3 days to over 6 years ) , the number of posts ( from 64 to 24 , 193 ) , and in the reply rate , from 1 post every 5 days to 91 posts per day ( on average ) . We found an interesting metric to be a ratio of views to replies , which indicated both the level of interest in the topic among members of the community , and the effort required for participation in the discussion . For example , many ice - breakers had low view / reply ratio , suggesting that most members who viewed this thread posted their own reply . In contrast , opinion polls , particularly on controversial topics had a very high view / reply ratio with many people viewing the thread , but only few replying to it . In regards to collective sensemaking , we classified 8 of the threads as “High CS” , 7 threads as “Medium CS” and 13 threads as “Low CS” . Most of the community building threads ( ice - breakers and bonding ) were classified as having a low degree of collective sensemaking ; opinion / experience poll threads were almost evenly split between “High CS” and “Medium CS” , as were personal issue threads . COLLECTIVE SENSEMAKING ON TUDIABETES The makings of a great discussion The first question we sought to address in this study was what members of TuDiabetes considered to be a great discussion . Previous research in online health communities suggested that individuals come to these forums seeking either information or emotional support and companionship [ 26 ] . Similarly to that classification , our interviewees differed in what they valued in a discussion . Some stressed the emotional support members received from others . P1 : To me [ the great discussions ] are the ones where people really come out to support one another , you know . If somebody posts that they’re having a really hard time and they get an outpouring of love and support from lots of different community members . Others valued diversity and multiplicity of perspectives , which exposed them to different experiences and opinions . M7 : I know an awful lot about my insulin but I don ' t know anything about your insulin or your insulin and so that is interesting to me . Yet others valued conversations where individuals engaged in deep discussion with each other , examined different perspectives , and sought consensus on an issue of common interest . Consistently with the literature on collective sensemaking discussed above , we used this last perspective as a working definition of collective sensemaking in online health communities . Of note , the interviews suggested that both diversity and consensus ( or at least attempts to arrive at one ) were important , but in different contexts . For example , in discussions regarding values and personal experiences , unlikely to find a resolution , multiplicity of opinions was highly desirable . In contrast , in discussions about more objective topics , such as new scientific discoveries related to diabetes , deeper engagement between participants was perceived as more valuable than many superficially expressed perspectives . P2 : If it ' s the type wars [ discussion about differences between type 1 and type 2 diabetes ] then the fact that 10 people have posted 70 times means nothing to me . If it ' s a type wars and there have been 70 people who have posted 70 times that ' s very important to me . On the other hand , if it has been a scientific news that might be out there and 10 people have posted 70 times that might be very interesting to me , but if it ' s a scientific issue and 70 people have posted 70 times that probably means nothing to me , because they are not really drilling on that particular subject ; but in the former case , 10 people posted 70 times on a scientific issue , means that they are probably drilling on the subject and I am probably going to learn something . Attributes of collective sensemaking Given our working definition of collective sensemaking , our first question was what attributes of a discussion thread indicate presence of collective sensemaking . Our analysis suggested that the discussion threads classified as exhibiting high collective sensemaking had the following properties : 1 ) lateral engagement between participants , 2 ) reflection on previously stated perspectives , and 3 ) transformation of ideas throughout the posts in the thread . Lateral engagement between participants . One of the most obvious indicators of collective sensemaking was the depth of the replies in the thread . Multiple levels of replies usually indicated that participants not only expressed their own individual perspectives but also engaged in the back and forth negotiation of meaning . For example , in many of the opinion / experience polls , individuals often interrogated each other’s perspectives , weighting evidence or sharing relevant experiences . In contrast , many ice - breakers Understanding Health through Online Behavior CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 3220 included only first - level replies , and showed no engagement between participants . Importantly , however , level of depth was not always a sufficient indicator of collective sensemaking . When most of the back and forth discussions occurred between the person who initiated the discussion and those who responded , individuals’ ideas and recommendations rarely developed beyond their original form . In contrast , when different respondents engaged with each other , their exchanges often focused on clarifying , enriching , and otherwise developing their initial ideas . Reaction to previous perspectives . Many posts in threads with a high degree of collective sensemaking began with reflection on previously stated perspectives . For example , below are two replies in the “How Soon to Insulin ? ” thread , one that reinforces a previously proposed solution , and another that contradicts it : M1 : I agree with what everyone else has said ; you need to be antibody tested to see if you are T1 . M2 : I second everything that has been said here . . . except the criticism of Humulin . These simple references placed new posts in the context of other contributions and helped to move the discussion forward . In contrast , in “At the End of the Rope…” most of the new posts lacked such reference and seemed independent from each other , often leading to high redundancy in the thread . Any similarity in opinions and recommendations could only be recognized through critical reading and comparison . Transformation of ideas . Perhaps most importantly , many posts within high collective senesmaking threads not only reflected on the previously proposed perspectives , but also developed those ideas beyond their original form . Consider the following sub - discussion from the thread “How Soon to Insulin ! ” that focused on comparative advantages and disadvantages of a particular type of insulin , Humulin . This sub - thread began when the initiator of the original post mentioned that she was prescribed Humulin taken at bedtime . This choice , however , was quickly called into question : M3 : I wonder at her decision to put you on Humulin rather than using one of the newer insulins . Many subsequent posts took a similarly skeptical view of Humulin ; however , instead of simply restating their disagreement with the endocrinologist’s choice , each of them contributed a new perspective on Humulin’s specific limitations , for example its unpredictability and its ability to lead to hypoglycemia ( low blood glucose levels ) . Yet , another replies highlighted its positive aspects , for example its ability to “handle” high - protein meals : M2 : It may not be the flashiest and newest thing around , but it definitely has its valid uses . I haven ' t found anything else that handles high - protein meals anywhere near as well . In our analysis we found that all three of these characteristics are necessary to recognize collective sensemaking ; absence of either one of them puts collective sensemaking into question . For example , lack of lateral exchange between participants in a thread de - emphasizes the possibility of any shared understanding among participants . Absence of reflection on the previously stated perspectives obscures connection between posts , turning a thread into a list of unconnected opinions and recommendations . And finally , if there is no transformation of ideas , and each new posts simply agrees or disagrees with previously expressed perspectives , the thread becomes an elaborate way of community voting more typical for Q & A sites , or a debate between individuals holding opposing positions , rather than richer forms of collective sensemaking . Types of contributions to collective sensemaking The next question in this study was regarding different types of contributions to collective senesmaking . A detailed discourse analysis of two discussion threads suggested a number of conversational moves —different types of contributions each individual post made to the overall discussion ( Table 1 ) . Importantly , individual posts were rarely limited to a single move and often included multiple moves simultaneously . Many discussion threads began with a post that asked a question . These types of posts , however , could appear anywhere in the conversation , when members sought new information or clarification of previous positions . Often , questions were replied to with posts that stated different perspectives on the topic of interest . Notably , these could take a form of an opinion ( for example , “it’s never too early to start on insulin” ) or a recommendation ( for example , “I think you should ask your endo for insulin right away” ) . At times , however , instead of directly answering the question , answers attempted to reframe the problem in somewhat different terms . For example , instead of answering whether early introduction of insulin is appropriate , this type of post could suggest correctness of diagnosis as a more important question . Other posts suggested a new topic for discussion that was related to the original question , yet took the discussion in a different direction . For example , in a thread about early introduction of insulin , one of the replies mentioned low carb diet as a way to stabilize BG levels in addition to medication . Other posts suggested resources , such as useful websites or books , often without stating their authors’ opinion on the topic of interest . While the five categories above focus on the nature of the individual posts , the next five categories focus more on the relationships between posts . The first category includes moves that express direct agreement or disagreement with previously stated perspectives . These moves can often be complemented by presenting an argument or evidence for a previously stated perspective ; however , often we found that individuals continued presenting new arguments long after the perspective was stated . When differences in opinions created conflicts , individuals often attempted to Understanding Health through Online Behavior CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 3221 Conversational move Example 1 . Asking a question Anyone else in a similar situation or have any advice ? 2 . Statement of a perspective I think it is perfectly fine to move to insulin . 3 . Reframing the problem I strongly encourage you to ask for a full panel of antibody testing and a c - peptide test to determine if you are Type 1 4 . Introducing new topic Btw , even with insulin I still have to eat a low carb diet to keep my bg as stable as possible , you may end up having to do that anyway . 5 . Suggesting resources Gary Scheiner ' s " Think Like a Pancreas " and John Walsh ' s " Using Insulin " are good resources . 6 . Agreement / disagreement with previously stated position I agree with what everyone else has said , you need to be antibody tested to see if you are T1 7 . Presenting argument for / against previously stated position There was a study I saw a note about in a Diabetes Forecast " sidebar " that showed that T2 put straight onto insulin had better control or something to that effect 8 . Further developing previously stated position Humulin R may have a role as a supporting player or even as a primary insulin if cost is the issue but it is being prescribed for use before bed rather than before meals 9 . Personal reconciliation Dear , im sorry if i offended you 10 . Synthesis of previously stated perspectives You have gotten some excellent advice here at TuD , and I am glad you have an appointment with your endo . It is important to get testing to see if you have Type 1 diabetes , but the most important thing is getting excellent treatment and care . Table 1 : Types of contributions to a discussion ; 6 - 10 specifically indicate contributions to collective senesemaking reconcile differences , make amends , or to phrase their opinions in milder terms . In some cases , individuals , often community moderators , attempted to synthesize and summarize previously stated perspectives . What triggers collective sensemaking Our next question focused on the conditions under which collective sensemaking occurred , and on different factors that appeared to contribute to it . The study suggested four main factors that appeared to be associated with collective sensemaking : 1 ) reference to a contentious topic ; 2 ) contentious or strongly expressed opinion ; 2 ) statement of a personal question in generic terms ; and 3 ) involvement of core members of the community . Contentious topic . There are a number of contentious topics that almost inevitably provoke engaged discussion within the community . The appropriateness of low carbohydrate diet for diabetes self - management , the nature and significance of differences between T1 and T2 and which of these conditions is “worse” , and advantages and shortcomings of early introduction of insulin therapy – these questions are continuously debated within TuDiabetes and healthcare community at large . Some participants became wary of these ongoing debates that often involve emotional reaction from members , but rarely get resolved or lead to any consensus . M2 : There are certain topics that apparently must be debated and redebated endlessly . Every few months this discussion starts up again . Everyone restates their positions , nobody changes their mind , and everyone jockeys to have the last word . Broken records . Makes me tired . However , new members of the community often felt that these debates were enormously educational , exposed them to many diverse opinions , and often inspired them to try new approaches in their own self - management . M6 : I know it ' s been discussed and debated in the past , but just reading through these 8 pages over lunch , I ' ve gleaned a lot of new information that is great ! Contentious posts . In addition to contentious topics , posts that expressed strong opinions even on mundane topics tended to generate a lot of discussion : P1 : I think for a lot of people , you know , you see a thread and you chime in with what you want to say about it and then you’re kind of done with it unless you’re mad , and then you say what you want to say and then you wait 15 minutes and go see if anybody replied so that you can reply again . However , in both of these cases , intensive back - and - forth engagement between participants did not always lead to collective sensemaking , for example if their posts did not include transformation of ideas . Generalizing personal problems . Third , we found that the framing of the question in the post initiating the discussion had a significant impact on the patterns of engagement between participants . This became particularly apparent in threads in which the initiating post presented a personal challenge and asked for advice . For example , initial posts in both “At the End of the Rope…” and “How Soon to Insulin” asked for advice on a specific personal challenge . However , in “At the End of the Rope…” , the initial post presented the problem in a rather idiosyncratic way , which made it difficult to construct a more general question of interest to others . In contrast , the initial post in the “How Soon to Insulin” thread formulated a more general question : whether it is appropriate to introduce insulin as the first treatment option . This generalization inspired others to not only respond to the original question , but also engage in negotiation of a more generalizable answer . Involvement of core members . Finally , we found that while the topic and the framing of a question had a significant impact on the patterns of engagement among participants , ultimately it often came down to who posted the question , and who was involved in the discussion . As many other online communities , TuDiabetes has a core group of members who actively contribute to blogs and forums and who often recognize each other’s names . These individuals Understanding Health through Online Behavior CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 3222 are usually highly opinionated and outspoken ; their voices were persistent in all of the threads included in our analysis . Moreover , they have a level of comfort and familiarity with each other that often leads to a deeper engagement . P2 : If a person is plugged into a site , that is they are common posters in that area , they are far more likely to get more and more comments back . The more plugged in you are , the more regulars will comment back to you . Dimensions of Collective Sensemaking Together with persistent patterns , there were also considerable differences between threads with a high degree of collective sensemaking . We discuss these differences along two different but related dimensions : whether these threads included exchange of information or personal experiences , and whether they sought consensus or diversity in opinions . Information - driven threads often evolved around general concepts of high interest to the community , for example , the appropriateness of severe reduction of carbohydrates for individuals with diabetes . In these threads , most of the back and forth negotiation of perspectives focused on presenting and critiquing new arguments and evidence supporting either of the contrasting positions : M7 : Here are some studies to look at : 1 ) Link between obesity and inflammation . 2 ) Link between chemicals secreted by fat tissue and insulin resistance . 3 ) Another study along the same lines as the one above , but regarding different inflammatory chemicals . M8 : The first link has a lot of “could” in it… In contrast to this , most of the posts in experience - driven threads included descriptions of individuals’ personal experiences related to the topic of interest . For example , in a different thread with the focus on low carbohydrate diet , the participants mostly shared their personal stories , and what worked and did not work for them . In these situations , the participants use similar back and forth mechanisms to relate to each other’s experiences and point similarities and possible explanations . M9 : I like to be in the upper 80s because after 8 : 30 , I start to climb to 120ish until 11 : 00 when it magically goes down and stays down if I eat right . If I start out in the 80s it doesn ' t climb as high . So I have dawn phenomenon but it doesn ' t kick in until after 8 : 30 ? M10 : M8 , same thing happens to me . If I don ' t eat & inject right away , up , up & away . Not a morning person either . Perhaps as a result , these two threads exhibited different attitudes towards consensus . In the first one , individuals holding different perspectives presented new information and evidence , trying to convince other members to agree with their point of view . In contrast , in the second thread , a consensus , even temporary , was neither sought , nor deemed necessary . Instead of trying to convince each other , participants of this thread shared different perspectives and experiences , together creating a rich and multifaceted picture of this complex issue . Impact of the platform TuDiabetes is built using a commercially available platform for discussion forums that has a number of distinct features that appeared to have an impact on collective senesmaking within the community . Most importantly , it supports sub - threading of discussions : individuals can reply to the initial post , thus appending their contribution to the bottom of the main thread , and also to different posts within the thread , thus creating sub - discussions . This allows individuals to explore issues of mutual interest in greater depth , and enables that back and forth that we perceived as indicative of collective senesmaking . However , the platform also has a few limitations that often lead to confusion . First , as is common for most discussion threads , because all of the posts in a thread are made in a textual form with no meta - data ( users can tag discussion threads but not individual posts ) , users must read the entire thread to understand how each individual post contributes to the discussion . For any thread with a large number of posts this may present a challenge . Because the initial post in a discussion thread is immediately followed by a “Reply” button with an open text field , users often felt compelled to compose their own reply before reading the existing discussion . However , after perusing the discussion later on , many users restated their perspective as a response to a particular post . This often resulted in redundant posts that made the thread longer , but contributed little to collective sensemaking . Those who read other posts and wished to reply to the main thread , had to return back to the initial post ; adding reply to the last post in a thread created a sub - discussion . As a result , many users did both : added their reply to the bottom of the thread ( thus creating or extending a sub - discussion ) , and then repeated it again in the main thread . In addition , the platform imposes a limit of 9 replies within a sub - discussion and removes the option to continue the sub - thread beyond that . As a result , additional replies were sometimes added not to the last post in the sub - thread , but to the previous posts , essentially putting replies out of order . In regards to thread presentation , all the posts in a thread are displayed in chronological order , but within their original sub - discussion structure . As a result , when reading through the thread , individuals could read posts added to sub - discussions several years later before seeing posts added to the main thread much earlier . These limitations , combined with a rather ineffective search function , made it difficult to peruse discussion threads with over 20 or 30 posts , which was noted in many of our interviews . Those who actively participated in a discussion could follow its structure by seeing it unfold in real time . However , synthesizing the main topics and opinions in a discussion they were not a part of was both labor - intensive and time - consuming . Understanding Health through Online Behavior CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 3223 M8 : Well , the challenge is the amount of words you have to read in order to find the consensus . … so if I go on and I want to know if there is a discussion that is going on , it ' s easy for me to follow it , hour by hour , minute by minute but if I want to look at it even one month later , it ' s very very difficult to figure it out because you have to read it all . The participants mentioned several different strategies to exploring threads they did not participate in . Some started reading from the beginning of the thread ( in chronological order ) and read until they “got bored” or reached a point of saturation . Others read in the reverse chronological order , starting with the most recent posts and going backwards . Yet the most common strategy appeared to be random sampling . In this strategy , the participants skimmed through the thread , reading a few messages from the beginning of the thread , a few from the middle , and a few more from the end . Many participants who reported relying on this strategy felt that it gives them an idea of how the thread evolved over time . However , this common strategy made it difficult to benefit from the rich back and forth of collective sensemaking , and could result in a fragmented or skewed perspective on the opinions in the community . DISCUSSION Collective sensemaking with different platforms The underlying question for this work was what technological platforms are best suited for facilitating individuals’ interactions in online health forums . First , the study suggested that traditional discussion boards are ill - suited to supporting collective sensemaking . The rich back and forth negotiation among members is often buried in the volume of posts in the threads , and is usually only apparent to those who participated in the discussion . The random sampling method for reviewing long discussion threads , common among members of the community , breaks internal structures of meaning and can lead to a distorted or incomplete perspective on the topic of the discussion . Given the limitation of the discussion boards , one might wonder whether such platforms as Wikipedia , or Stack Overflow present a more suitable alternative to the traditional discussion boards . The results presented here suggest that there are indeed many similarities between the types of engagement we observed on TuDiabetes , and others observed within Wikipedia [ 38 ] and Stack Overflow [ 23 ] . Similarly to members of these communities , members of TuDiabetes often engaged in deep discussions , back and forth negotiation of meaning , and resolution of conflicts in opinions . In addition , individuals together created shared artifacts , as their negotiated opinions left permanent traces in the discussion threads . In a way , these traces fulfill Wenger’s requirement for reification through construction of shared artifacts [ 43 ] . However , together with these similarities , there are also deep epistemological differences between Wikipedia , Stack Overflow , and TuDiabetes . Wikipedia’s style of engagement implies that knowledge is socially constructed through active collaboration between individuals . Somewhat in contrast to this , the design of Stack Overflow implies that knowledge is a property of an individual , and the role of the community is to recognize the “best answer” , rather than collectively construct it . Further , both Wikipedia and Stack Overflow value consensus and lead their users towards agreement through collaborative writing and editing or through voting . At the end , there is only one Wikipedia article on any given topic , and one most popular answer on Stack Overflow , however unstable it might be . Similarly to Wikipedia , the style of engagement in TuDiabetes implies that knowledge is distributed among many individuals , and is often brought into existence through active back and forth negotiation of different perspectives . However , members of TuDiabetes value both diversity of opinions and agreement among members . Often the main benefit of the forum is in exposing individuals to the richness and multiplicity of different perspectives , which help them to construct their own personal views . Implications for computing systems As a result of our analysis , we propose that tools for facilitating collective sensemaking in online health communities could take several different forms . First , they can help individuals to engage in a more explicit collective production of shared artifacts in a way that encourages negotiation , yet does not require consensus . In recent years , shared content collections , such as Pinterest [ 46 ] gained substantial popularity . In a similar way , members of TuDiabetes could create collages of content related to topics of mutual interest that reflect their perspectives and views . Such collectively constructed collages could serve as shared artifacts and further reinforce reification . Second , computing tools can help individuals to be more explicit about how their posts contribute to the overall discussion thread . For example , using the taxonomy of contribution types presented in this paper , members can be more explicit on whether they present a new perspective , agree or disagree with others , provide evidence or recommend new resources by assigning it an appropriate tag . Moreover , these tools could also facilitate polling opinions of others through voting , making distribution of opinions more apparent . Finally , there is a significant and growing body of work on using computational approaches , such as natural language processing ( NLP ) , data mining , and machine learning , to computationally analyze text within discussion threads . In computational linguistics , new methods focus on the design of novel statistical models for tasks such as event detection [ 2 ] , sentiment analysis [ 29 ] , and modeling of the topics of discussions [ 33 ] as well as predicting the structure of discourse [ 39 ] . Taking these trends further , Hoque et al used a combination of NLP and data visualization techniques to visualize salient properties of discussion threads , such as topics discussed and sentiment towards these topics [ 15 ] . The framework suggested in this paper can provide foundation for new approaches to facilitating collective sensemaking using Understanding Health through Online Behavior CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 3224 computational text analysis and interactive visualizations . Specifically , the three main attributes of collective sensemaking proposed here—lateral engagement between participants , reflection on previous perspectives , and transformation of ideas—can suggest new directions for computational analysis of text . Some of these methods already exist ( e . g . detection of agreement and of topic transformation ) ; others still need to be developed . These methods can then be used to inform visualizations of discussion threads that draw individuals’ attention to areas of debate , or to areas where discussion pivots and may warrant further examination . CONCLUSION In this study we used a mixed - methods approach to investigating how members of an online diabetes community , TuDiabetes , share information and learn from each other . The study showed that members of TuDiabetes often engage in deep discussions , back and forth negotiation of meaning , and resolution of conflicts in opinions . In addition , individuals together create shared artifacts , as their expressed perspectives leave permanent traces in the discussion threads . However , unlike participants of other popular sensemaking communities , members of TuDiabetes often value multiplicity and diversity of opinions rather than consensus . We identified a number of design directions for computing platforms that facilitate collective sensemaking and construction of meaning , yet embrace diversity of perspectives . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This work was funded in part by the National Science Foundation grant # 1422381 . We are grateful to Emily Coles and all members of TuDiabetes community who took part in this study . REFERENCES 1 . Baldonado , M . Q . W . and Winograd , T . SenseMaker : an information - exploration interface supporting the contextual evolution of a user’s interests . Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , ACM ( 1997 ) , 11 – 18 . 2 . Benson , E . , Haghighi , A . , and Barzilay , R . Event discovery in social media feeds . Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics : Human Language Technologies - Volume 1 , Association for Computational Linguistics ( 2011 ) , 389 – 398 . 3 . Billman , D . and Bier , E . A . Medical sensemaking with entity workspace . ACM ( 2007 ) , 229 – 232 . 4 . Chen , A . T . Exploring online support spaces : using cluster analysis to examine breast cancer , diabetes and fibromyalgia support groups . Patient education and counseling 87 , 2 ( 2012 ) , 250 – 257 . 5 . Coburn , C . E . Collective Sensemaking about Reading : How Teachers Mediate Reading Policy in Their Professional Communities . Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 23 , 2 ( 2001 ) , 145 – 170 . 6 . Duffy , M . Sensemaking : A Collaborative Inquiry Approach to ‘Doing’ Learning . The Qualitative Report , ( 1995 ) . 7 . Ferron , M . and Massa , P . Collective memory building in Wikipedia : the case of North African uprisings . Proceedings of the 7th International Symposium on Wikis and Open Collaboration , ACM ( 2011 ) , 114 – 123 . 8 . Fisher , K . , Counts , S . , and Kittur , A . Distributed sensemaking : improving sensemaking by leveraging the efforts of previous users . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM ( 2012 ) , 247 – 256 . 9 . Fox , S . The Social Life of Health Information . Pew Research Center , 2011 . 10 . Furnas , G . W . and Russell , D . M . Making sense of sensemaking . CHI ’05 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems , ACM ( 2005 ) , 2115 – 2116 . 11 . Gotz , D . The ScratchPad : sensemaking support for the web . Proceedings of the 16th international conference on World Wide Web , ACM ( 2007 ) , 1329 – 1330 . 12 . Halfaker , A . , Kittur , A . , Kraut , R . , and Riedl , J . A jury of your peers : quality , experience and ownership in Wikipedia . Proceedings of the 5th International Symposium on Wikis and Open Collaboration , ACM ( 2009 ) , 15 : 1 – 15 : 10 . 13 . Harper , F . M . , Moy , D . , and Konstan , J . A . Facts or friends ? : distinguishing informational and conversational questions in social Q & A sites . ACM ( 2009 ) , 759 – 768 . 14 . Hollan , J . , Hutchins , E . , and Kirsh , D . Distributed cognition : toward a new foundation for human - computer interaction research . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 7 , 2 ( 2000 ) , 174 – 196 . 15 . Hoque , E . and Carenini , G . ConVis : A Visual Text Analytic System for Exploring Blog Conversations . Computer Graphics Forum 33 , 3 ( 2014 ) , 221 – 230 . 16 . Hsieh , G . and Counts , S . mimir : a market - based real - time question and answer service . ACM ( 2009 ) , 769 – 778 . 17 . Hsieh , G . , Kraut , R . E . , and Hudson , S . E . Why pay ? : exploring how financial incentives are used for question & answer . ACM ( 2010 ) , 305 – 314 . 18 . Huh , J . and Ackerman , M . S . Collaborative help in chronic disease management : supporting individualized problems . Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , ACM ( 2012 ) , 853 – 862 . 19 . Hutchins , E . Cognition in the Wild . A Bradford Book , 1996 . 20 . Jones , Q . , Ravid , G . , and Rafaeli , S . Information Overload and the Message Dynamics of Online Interaction Spaces : A Theoretical Model and Empirical Exploration . Information Systems Research 15 , 2 ( 2004 ) , 194 – 210 . Understanding Health through Online Behavior CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 3225 21 . Kittur , A . and Kraut , R . E . Harnessing the wisdom of crowds in wikipedia : quality through coordination . Proceedings of the 2008 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work , ACM ( 2008 ) , 37 – 46 . 22 . Kittur , A . , Suh , B . , Pendleton , B . A . , and Chi , E . H . He says , she says : conflict and coordination in Wikipedia . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM ( 2007 ) , 453 – 462 . 23 . Mamykina , L . , Hartman , B . , and Hripcsak , G . Drawing design lessons from the fastest Q & A site in the West . ( 2011 ) . 24 . Mendes Rodrigues , E . and Milic - Frayling , N . Socializing or knowledge sharing ? : characterizing social intent in community question answering . ACM ( 2009 ) , 1127 – 1136 . 25 . Nagar , Y . What do you think ? : the structuring of an online community as a collective - sensemaking process . Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , ACM ( 2012 ) , 393 – 402 . 26 . Nambisan , P . Information seeking and social support in online health communities : impact on patients’ perceived empathy . Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 18 , 3 ( 2011 ) , 298 – 304 . 27 . Nam , K . K . , Ackerman , M . S . , and Adamic , L . A . Questions in , knowledge in ? : a study of naver’s question answering community . ACM ( 2009 ) , 779 – 788 . 28 . Naumer , C . M . , Fisher , K . E . , and Dervin , B . Sense - Making : A Methodological Perspective , a position paper for CHI 2008 workshop on Sensemaking . ( 2008 ) . 29 . Pang , B . and Lee , L . Opinion Mining and Sentiment Analysis . Found . Trends Inf . Retr . 2 , 1 - 2 ( 2008 ) , 1 – 135 . 30 . Paul , S . A . and Morris , M . R . CoSense : enhancing sensemaking for collaborative web search . Proceedings of the 27th international conference on Human factors in computing systems , ACM ( 2009 ) , 1771 – 1780 . 31 . Paul , S . A . and Reddy , M . C . Understanding together : sensemaking in collaborative information seeking . Proceedings of the 2010 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work , ACM ( 2010 ) , 321 – 330 . 32 . Qu , Y . A sensemaking - supporting information gathering system . CHI ’03 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems , ACM ( 2003 ) , 906 – 907 . 33 . Ritter , A . , Cherry , C . , and Dolan , B . Unsupervised modeling of Twitter conversations . Human Language Technologies : The 2010 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics , Association for Computational Linguistics ( 2010 ) , 172 – 180 . 34 . Russell , D . M . , Furnas , G . , Stefik , M . , Card , S . K . , and Pirolli , P . Sensemaking . CHI ’08 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems , ACM ( 2008 ) , 3981 – 3984 . 35 . schraefel , m . c . , White , R . W . , André , P . , and Tan , D . Investigating web search strategies and forum use to support diet and weight loss . Proceedings of the 27th international conference extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems , ACM ( 2009 ) , 3829 – 3834 . 36 . Skeels , M . M . , Unruh , K . T . , Powell , C . , and Pratt , W . Catalyzing social support for breast cancer patients . Proceedings of the 28th international conference on Human factors in computing systems , ACM ( 2010 ) , 173 – 182 . 37 . Stahl , G . Group Cognition : Computer Support for Building Collaborative Knowledge . MIT Press , 2006 . 38 . Swarts , J . The collaborative construction of “fact” on Wikipedia . Proceedings of the 27th ACM international conference on Design of communication , ACM ( 2009 ) , 281 – 288 . 39 . Wang , L . , Lui , M . , Kim , S . N . , Nivre , J . , and Baldwin , T . Predicting thread discourse structure over technical web forums . Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , Association for Computational Linguistics ( 2011 ) , 13 – 25 . 40 . Weick , K . E . Sensemaking in Organizations . Sage Publications , Inc , 1995 . 41 . Weick , K . E . , Sutcliffe , K . M . , and Obstfeld , D . Organizing and the Process of Sensemaking . Organization Science 16 , 4 ( 2005 ) , 409 – 421 . 42 . Welbourne , J . L . , Blanchard , A . L . , and Boughton , M . D . Supportive communication , sense of virtual community and health outcomes in online infertility groups . Proceedings of the fourth international conference on Communities and technologies , ACM ( 2009 ) , 31 – 40 . 43 . Wenger , E . Communities of Practice : Learning , Meaning and Identity . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , 1998 . 44 . Zhou , X . , Sun , S . , and Yang , J . Sweet Home : Understanding Diabetes Management via a Chinese Online Community . Proceedings of the 32Nd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM ( 2014 ) , 3997 – 4006 . 45 . Zhu , H . , Kraut , R . E . , Wang , Y . - C . , and Kittur , A . Identifying shared leadership in Wikipedia . Proceedings of the 2011 conference on Human factors in computing systems , ACM ( 2011 ) , 3431 – 3434 . 46 . Pinterest . Pinterest . http : / / www . pinterest . com . Understanding Health through Online Behavior CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 3226