Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) The Australian Educational Researcher ( 2022 ) 49 : 193 – 209 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s13384 - 020 - 00426 - 4 1 3 Locating the place of ‘design’ across the Australian Curriculum : a detailed analysis of three learning areas Genevieve Mosely 1 · Jess Harris 1 · Kath Grushka 1 Received : 11 June 2019 / Accepted : 17 December 2020 / Published online : 21 January 2021 © The Australian Association for Research in Education , Inc . 2021 Abstract Recent understandings of ‘design’ and , in particular design education have become entrenched within schools and higher education as approaches to provide students with opportunities to develop creativity and imagination , and the skills needed for a globalized future . Drawing from Australian curriculum documents , this paper presents a content analysis that locates representations of design and establishes whether current representations support the building of twenty - first century capabil - ities . The development of curriculum is positioned within the paper as an ideologi - cal act that establishes normative discourses of design and compares them with ‘the other’ . Our findings demonstrate that design is represented in multiple ways across the Australian Curriculum and that teachers are presented with a specific discourse of design in curriculum documents from different key learning areas . We argue that a dominant re - constructed representation of design within curriculum has the poten - tial to standardize currently discipline specific understandings of design with impli - cations for the enacted curriculum in the classroom and the key discipline design capabilities acquired by students . Keywords Australian Curriculum · Design education · Design thinking · Twenty - first century skills · Content analysis * Genevieve Mosely genevieve . mosely @ uon . edu . au Jess Harris jess . harris @ newcastle . edu . au Kath Grushka kath . grushka @ newcastle . edu . au 1 School of Education , The University of Newcastle , University Drive , Callaghan , NSW 2308 , Australia 194 G . Mosely et al . 1 3 Introduction A dominant educational discourse in Australia positions twenty - first century skills or general capabilities as essential for preparing young people to succeed in an uncertain future in a rapidly changing world ( Gonski et al . 2018 ; Lucas and Smith 2018 ) . Technological advancements , like automation and artificial intelli - gence , alongside global cultural flows of change affect the nature of work ( Appa - durai 1990 ) . The skills required by young people are similarly shifting and there is pressure on schools and universities to prepare them to work in new employ - ment contexts . In light of the changing nature of the international workforce , Australian education policy has emphasized Science , Technology , Engineer - ing and Mathematics ( STEM ) as core components to enable a cross - disciplinary approach to learning ( Department of Education , Skills and Employment 2020 ; Education Council 2015 ) . Building on principles of a traditional curriculum hier - archy ( Bleazby 2015 ) , STEM has been adopted as a key focus for developing twenty - first century skills , including “problem solving , critical analysis and crea - tive thinking” ( Education Council 2015 , p . 7 ) , which are viewed as necessary for success in the emergent global workforce . However , while STEM skills are promoted as crucial to help fuel Australia’s economy , it is argued that innovation and innovative capability require a broader skill mix ( ACOLA 2016 ; Howard 2016 ; Taylor 2016 ) . As Bell ( 2017 ) states in her Boyer Lecture , “our privileging of STEM at the expense of other disciplines is short sighted at best , and detrimental at worst” . Bell’s comments contribute to the widespread acknowledgement of the need to integrate other approaches , such as design , to build an innovative skillset and develop a more holistic way to address innovation challenges ( Design Council 2018 ; Wright and Wrigley 2019 ) . The expansion of design in 1969 by Herbert Simon moving it beyond tech - nical , aesthetically pleasing forms , to defining it as a “comprehensive approach to the entire field of human experience” ( Katz 2015 , p . 190 ) , has seen it grow particularly over the last two decades . Design is now located within educational discourse as both a verb and a noun and the design approach has been adopted across many different contexts to promote innovation ( Manzini 2015 ) . The wid - ened application of design , as verb as well as a noun has resulted in what Heskett ( 2001 , p . 18 ) refers to as “different patterns of usage” around the word ‘design’ . As such , this paper seeks to provide valuable insight that is grounded in a post - structuralist perspective to inquire where and how design is represented within the Australian Curriculum . This paper considers how curriculum authors ( re ) con - struct knowledge , concepts and language , which are “critical to unpacking pre - suppositions which underlie representations” ( Maxwell , Lowe and Salter 2018 , p . 164 ) . Building on Heskett’s ( 2001 ) observation of exploring patterns of usage , we examined discursive patterns involving representations of design in the Austral - ian Curriculum , which led to a specific focus on three learning areas , namely The Arts , Framework for Aboriginal Languages and Torres Strait Islander Languages and Technologies . The aim of this analysis is to unpack the ideological perspec - tives embedded within these curriculum documents . 195 1 3 Locating the place of ‘design’ across the Australian Curriculum : … Each curriculum document has a futures - orientation that is focused on building the twenty - first century skills of Australian students for improved global economic competition ( ACARA 2012 ) . As Ditchburn ( 2012 , p . 258 ) suggests “constructions of knowledge , pedagogy and power” in the Australian Curriculum are intended to ensure that “Australia has a clear economic edge to address perceived global impera - tives” . One ideological agenda underpinning the curriculum focuses on the potential capability of STEM to increase national productivity , create jobs and enhance the competitiveness of Australia’s future ( Department of Education , Skills and Employ - ment 2020 ) . This paper adopts the perspective that curriculum documents are devel - oped to support teachers to understand and enact particular approaches for building the knowledge and skills of young people ( Bleazby 2015 ) , as such the ways in which concepts of design are represented across the curriculum can shape and reshape how teachers engage with design in the classroom and how students perceive the value of design approaches within the disciplines . The changing position of design education Over the past two decades , design has evolved from being recognized as a trade - based practice to being treated as a verb as well as a noun ; a process as well as a product ( Heskett 2001 ; Norman 2016 ) . A fundamental element of the design pro - cess is its relationship to problem - solving and building problem - solving capabilities . These capabilities have contributed to its increased notoriety as a new paradigm and practical approach to dealing with problems across diverse fields , such as business , management , education and IT ( Dorst 2011 ) . The problems that organizations and the workforce are facing today are increasingly complex , networked and ‘wicked’ ( Buchanan 1992 ) . As a result , there is a need for the emergent workforce to develop the knowledge and skills to find novel ways of thinking about and addressing these problems ( Dorst 2015 ) . Design processes and design thinking are recognized as sup - porting solution - focused approaches ( Cross , Christiaans and Dorst 1994 ) that enable people to look at problems differently and solve them in new and innovative ways ( Dorst 2006 ) . As Razzouk and Shute ( 2012 , p . 343 ) indicate “helping students to think like designers may better prepare them to deal with difficult situations and to solve complex problems in school , their careers , and in life in general” . Design education is increasingly viewed as central to building students’ creative problem - solving skills in response to the advancing changes and complex challenges facing society ( Goldman and Kabayadondo 2017 ; Wright and Wrigley 2019 ) . As a result , design education has been integrated into higher education curriculum ( both undergraduate and postgraduate ) globally ( Wrigley and Straker 2017 ) . Multiple understandings and definitions of design have been proposed within the research , highlighting the different meanings associated with the term design across different contexts ( Heskett 2001 ; Love 2002 ) . Design is embedded within a range of different disciplines , including architecture , industrial design , fashion design , graphic design and , more recently , service design and user experience design ( Sand - ers and Stappers 2008 ) . Carvalho , Dong and Maton ( 2009 , p . 499 ) suggest different disciplines practice design differently , not only due to “the variety of knowledge that 196 G . Mosely et al . 1 3 is required to perform the associated tasks but because of the way that knowledge is valued in the respective discipline” . This builds on the work of Heskett ( 2001 ) , proposing that analyses of how different groups , including professionals within each design discipline , use the term can reveal differences in the understandings of design . This analysis of representations of design and design - associated concepts within and across the Australian Curriculum is the first of its type . Content analysis pro - cesses have been used to identify the top three curriculum areas in which design is represented . A critical discourse analysis ( Fairclough 2012 ) approach was then used to examine the development and presentation of dominant design discourses within and across these curriculum documents . This approach enabled us to uncover which representations of design knowledge are given prominence in the curriculum and also to interrogate why this knowledge is privileged . Finally , our analysis raised questions of how privileging particular discourses of design within school curricu - lum documents can shape the understanding of school systems , system leaders and teachers when this curriculum is enacted . Development of the Australian Curriculum and the privileging of knowledge Australia’s education system has undergone unprecedented change over the past decade , particularly through the development and implementation of a national curriculum ( see Savage 2016 ; Reid 2018 ) . Traditionally , constitutional responsibil - ity for F - 10 schooling and curriculum in Australia has rested with state and terri - tory governments . However , as Connors and Morrows ( 2015 , p . 17 ) state , federal involvement “has become the driving policy force in schools funding , and its poli - cies have transformed the face of Australian schooling” . In 2007 , Labour’s Kevin Rudd and Julia Gillard launched the Education Revolution , a policy plan to place education at the centre of the national political agenda , and to develop a framework for a consistent curriculum across Australian states and territories ( Rudd and Gil - lard 2008 ) . Guided by the Melbourne Declaration of Educational Goals for Young Australians ( MCEETYA 2008 , p . 13 – 14 ) , the development of each curriculum doc - ument required educators and policy - makers to consider the educational goals for young Australians , key research , learning needs in the twenty - first century and lead - ing national and international curriculum ( ACARA 2012 ) . Curriculum documents represent a society’s traditions , history , political values as well as a “reflection of accumulated knowledge” from educational research ( Atweh and Goos 2011 , p . 362 ) . An official curriculum is explained by Apple ( 2004 ) and Cohen , Manion and Morrison ( 2013 ) as a selection of what is deemed standard and valid knowledge , the knowledge and skills that are officially prescribed as being nec - essary for society to develop . The selection of what knowledge is ‘valid’ is a highly political and contentious issue and the curriculum is an “ideologically contestable terrain” ( Cohen et al . 2013 , p . 36 ) . When examining school curriculum , Apple ( 2004 , p . 15 ) raises the questions : “‘Whose culture ? ’ , ‘What social group’s knowl - edge ? ’ , and ‘In whose interest is certain knowledge ( facts , skills , and propensities 197 1 3 Locating the place of ‘design’ across the Australian Curriculum : … and dispositions ) taught in cultural institutions like schools ? ’” . The rationale for the knowledge represented in the Australian Curriculum is stated in Version 4 of The Shape of the Australian Curriculum ( ACARA 2012 , p . 7 ) ; Young people will need a wide and adaptive set of knowledge , understanding and skills to meet the changing expectations of society and to contribute to the creation of a more productive , sustainable and just society . In order to achieve these goals , each curriculum document is structured in three - dimensions which includes the Key Learning Area’s ( KLA ) knowledge and skills , three cross - curriculum priorities and seven general capabilities . The general capa - bilities within the Australian Curriculum include : literacy , numeracy , information and communication technology , critical and creative thinking , personal and social capability , ethical understanding and intercultural understanding . When coupled with specific curriculum content , cross - curriculum learning areas and general capa - bilities , this three - tiered design appears to be focused on the type of Australian the curriculum wants young people to become ( Peacock , Lingard and Sellar 2015 ) . Curriculum construction is presently embedded within national political and eco - nomic agendas for increasing international competitiveness and is integral to the issue of addressing Australia’s falling rankings in global education performance on standardized tests ( Education Council 2015 ; Lingard 2018 ; Rudd and Gillard 2008 ) . With the intention of improving Australia’s ranking on global education league tables ( Steiner - Khamsi 2003 ) , the current curriculum focuses strongly on literacy , numeracy and STEM to build fundamental education building blocks and address areas covered by international standardized testing ( Education Council 2015 ) . This focus sits alongside the agenda to provide students with interdisciplinary twenty - first century capabilities , including innovation to prepare them to meet the needs of the future ( ACOLA 2016 ; Department of Education , Skills and Employment 2020 ; MCEETYA 2008 ) . Contexts and divergent understandings of design Due to the breadth of design knowledge that has been applied beyond traditional fields , there has been recognition within education of the importance of exposing all students to design processes and methods to develop capabilities required for the twenty - first century ( Wright and Wrigley 2019 ) . School education now acknowl - edges design processes can be taught to develop the necessary skills to identify a problem or need , consider options and constraints within that problem space , and how to plan , prototype , test and iterate solutions to those problems ( Goldman and Kabayadondo 2017 ; Honey and Kanter 2013 ) . In addition , schools can use design processes to build the capacity of students to become critical and imaginative think - ers who have complex problem - solving skills and can adapt and readily respond to change ( Griffin and Care 2015 ) . Using design as an avenue to integrate STEM through problem - based learning can bring “a creative , value - driven edge” to the disciplines ( Keane and Keane 2016 ) . Design and design thinking is recognized as a central process within engineering 198 G . Mosely et al . 1 3 ( Goldman and Kabayadondo 2017 ) and is seen as “a powerful vehicle to teaching science , technology , engineering and maths ( STEM ) content in an integrated and inspiring way” ( Honey and Kanter 2013 , p . 3 ) . Further to this , from their review of the literature , Li et al . ( 2019 ) argue there are mutual benefits integrating design into STEM education , students can develop design and design thinking within STEM contexts and integrated STEM education can develop students design practice for different disciplinary contexts . Incorporating design and ‘Art’ into STEM , to make ‘STEAM’ expands “the scope of STEM education” ( Taylor 2016 , p . 92 ) to build creativity , collaboration and widen student engagement within the STEM disciplines ( Bequette and Bequette 2012 ) . The ACARA ‘Shape’ and ‘Draft’ curriculum documents highlight initial con - ceptualisations of ‘design’ and the relationship between the Technologies and The Arts curriculum areas . Fleer ( 2018 , p . 71 ) acknowledges design is a feature of both the Technologies and The Arts but “further clarification about what is unique about design in technologies is also needed” . These documents were seen as ‘complement - ing’ each other “particularly in the application of the elements and principles of design in Visual Arts and in the use of digital technologies in Media Arts” ( ACARA 2013 , p . 20 ) . Developing an understanding of design from multiple perspectives in education “should allow students to reconfigure existing traditions and practices which take account of and build upon” different design discipline’s knowledge base ( Carvalho et al . 2009 , p . 501 ) . Despite this symbiotic conception of design in the Technologies and Arts curriculum areas , the Australian Curriculum development process was fraught with tension ( Banks and Williams 2013 ; Ewing 2020 ) . As such , stakeholder consultation , writing teams and government review together have cre - ated multiple representations of design across the finished curriculum documents . Within different contexts , design has different meanings . The rationale for inves - tigating representations of design within the Australian curriculum documents is to uncover which of its multiple definitions and representations are being used and favoured , and if those in the majority align with dominant education and economic productivity discourse . Furthermore , this critical analysis will identify the dominant representation ( s ) of design within and across three curriculum areas and consider how specific ideologies create a ‘regime of truth’ ( Foucault 1972 , 1980 ) that shares official knowledge ( s ) of design with teachers and students through curriculum documents . Analysing design across and within the Australian Curriculum The purpose of this paper is to present a detailed analysis of key Australian Cur - riculum documents to uncover where and how representations of design are used , through a focus on how language and discourse of concepts involving design are constructed and viewed . The approach used combines critical discourse analysis and content analysis with a theoretical underpinning that situates language ( text ) in its social context ( Cohen et al . 2013 ) . Working within a Foucauldian tradition , Fair - clough ( 1992 , p . 213 ) states , “how texts are produced and interpreted , and therefore how genres and discourses are drawn upon and combined , depends upon the nature 199 1 3 Locating the place of ‘design’ across the Australian Curriculum : … of the social context” . In education , critical theory seeks to explore and examine the social construction of knowledge and curricula , who defines what knowledge is worthwhile , the ideological interests it serves and the power relations associated with it ( Cohen et al . 2013 , p . 32 ) . Discourse both transmits and produces power , but it also undermines and exposes it ( Foucault 1990 ) . In a similar way , silences “can enact power , but can also loosen the hold of power and provide obscure areas of tolerance for resistance” ( Powers 2007 , p . 30 ) . Inclusions and exclusions within the Australian curriculum are able to be investigated through Foucault’s concept of discourse to analyse the representation of design within the curriculum and uncover the ideologies and assumptions related to concepts of design that are embedded in these documents . Content analysis Content analysis is commonly used to investigate education policy and curriculum as it is an exploratory process that allows for large amounts of information to be summarized and inferences to be drawn from texts ( see Gardner 2017 ) . Word fre - quency analysis is a common technique for data reduction ( Cohen et al . 2013 ; Krip - pendorff 2013 ) , however it does not reveal much about the associations between concepts ( Weber 1990 ) . Uncovering these relationships requires a systematic inves - tigation of the data , beyond a word frequency analysis . A coding process assists with classifying and interpreting the data to examine the context of words associated with the key word under investigation within texts ( Krippendorff 2013 ) . Content analy - sis provides a systematic approach for reviewing where design is represented across the curriculum and to enable interpretations and inferences to be drawn from that review ( Bowen 2009 ) . As such , this study examined the content within the text and analysed it within the context of categories surrounding the term ‘design’ to recog - nize the meaning and intent of the document . For the inquiry , the most recent versions ( Version 8 . 3 ) of Australian Curriculum documents were searched for and downloaded from the official Australian Curric - ulum website . The initial analysis was based on three steps : firstly , each text was explored through a general overview to develop an understanding of the content , secondly a word frequency search was conducted using NVivo to determine the presence of the term ‘design’ and thirdly , each use of the term ‘design’ was exam - ined in context . Content analysis approaches were applied using a ‘constant compar - ative method’ ( Glaser 1965 ) to examine all eight Australian KLA curriculum docu - ments to identify the presence and use of design within the text . A word frequency examination of the word ‘design’ formed the basis for looking across the curriculum documents and identified the three key curriculum documents that most frequently engage with design , in order to then examine these documents further through cod - ing and consideration of key discourses . Results of the word frequency search are highlighted in Table 1 below . The word frequency analysis identified three key Australian Curriculum docu - ments with the most frequent citations of design : Technologies , Framework for 200 G . Mosely et al . 1 3 Aboriginal Languages and Torres Strait Islander Languages and The Arts . The second phase of the analysis proceeded with an examination of how design is represented within the context of the surrounding text in the three key documents . The representation of design in these three documents is explored further in the following section . Table 1 Design word frequency results across the Australian Curriculum The bold values are the top three learning areas that represent design across the Australian Curriculum . These three learning areas are analysed in detail in the next three sections Learning area Subject Key Word Search : ‘Design’ English English 22 Mathematics Mathematics 5 Science Science 11 Humanities and Social Sciences History GeographyEconomics and Business Civics and Citizenship 28 The Arts DanceDramaMedia Arts MusicVisual Arts 84 Technologies Design and Technologies Digital Technologies 336 Health and Physical Education Health and Physical Education 20 Languages Arabic 6 Auslan 47 Chinese 10 Framework for Aboriginal Languages and Torres Strait Islander Languages 96 Classical Languages 0 French 20 German 8 Hindi 24 Indonesian 1 Italian 6 Japanese 15 Korean 6 Modern Greek 10 Spanish 11 Turkish 23 Vietnamese 5 201 1 3 Locating the place of ‘design’ across the Australian Curriculum : … The Arts The Arts curriculum combines Dance , Drama , Media Arts , Music and Visual Arts , with each discipline individually representing design , with the exceptions of Dance and Music . Within this curriculum document , design is defined as facilitating “the creative and practical realisation of ideas” ( Australian Curriculum 2016c , p . 9 ) . The discourse embedded within the document develops a link between design and the practical creation and representation of ideas and concepts , which can be drawn on to envisage , create and resolve artworks . Design in The Arts involves the implementation of certain elements , principles and devices and building an understanding of how they are used to create and con - vey meaning and value . Within the Arts curriculum , design is most prominently represented within Visual Arts . Design is defined in relation to the aesthetic ele - ments and principles as processes and is closely linked to the discipline of being a vocational visual designer . The design processes tolerate the space for novel indi - vidual artistic expression . The Visual Arts subject area states that students “learn in , through and about visual arts practices , including the fields of art , craft and design” ( Australian Curriculum 2016c , p . 9 ) . This representation of design is the first in the Australian Curriculum to investigate design education as a discipline and define how it is used : Within all arts subjects , design facilitates the creative and practical realisation of ideas . Design thinking is a fundamental strategy in the experimentation , refinement and resolution of an artwork and takes into account logical , criti - cal and aesthetic considerations . Many different words describe design within the arts , such as choreographing , narrating , devising , constructing , composing and sculpting . Design connects the different art forms so that they inform each other , providing possibilities for students to create innovative and hybrid forms of art ( Australian Curriculum 2016c , p . 9 ) . Multiple representations of design are evident within the discourse embedded within the above extract , including the definition of “design thinking” as a “fundamen - tal strategy” in developing an artwork . However , design thinking is not cited as a complete term again , nor explored specifically beyond the above extract within the curriculum . As a process , the curriculum does not clearly articulate how students engage in design thinking within The Arts . The concepts of ‘connecting different art forms’ and ‘providing possibilities for students to create innovative and hybrid forms of art’ tacitly indicates that design is embedded across and can create links between multiple traditions . These traditions , however , are not specifically articulated . The dominant discourse of design process within the Visual Arts curriculum links it to ‘visual conventions’ in the development of tangible , creative output . In this way , design is presented as both a process and a product , without clear articulation of the relationship between the two . The curriculum states that the “craft and handmade sit alongside the manufactured design objects as part of historical , national and cultural identities” ( Australian Curriculum 2016c , p . 15 ) . Of the 84 references to ‘design’ within the Arts curriculum , minimal references differ from the dominant focus on visual conventions , visual thinking and practice to raise an alternative discourse that 202 G . Mosely et al . 1 3 specifically describes ‘design problems’ and associates design with ‘problem - solv - ing’ . One reference in Visual Arts refers to “designing a mural for a local space” for “problem - solving and predicting outcomes with increasing confidence” and to “develop planning skills for art - making” ( Australian Curriculum 2016c , p . 189 ) . A second reference in the Media Arts curriculum relates to “designing a navigational plan for a game” ( Australia Curriculum 2016c , p . 113 ) and a third in Visual Arts , where students explore “digital and virtual technologies” to resolve “design and planning problems” through the use of “innovative thinking” to develop techniques and processes to represent ideas ( Australian Curriculum 2016c , p . 196 ) . Within The Arts ‘design as problem solving’ has a strong association with ‘technologies’ and ‘innovation’ reinforcing a dominant alignment for the practical use of design , beyond the aesthetic , as a process that is used to develop a ‘useful’ and ‘practical’ outcome with technology . Framework of Aboriginal Languages and Torres Strait Islander languages Within the Framework for Aboriginal Languages and Torres Strait Islander Lan - guages curriculum , design is referred to multiple times as ‘visual design’ . As such , this curriculum document foregrounds representations of design as a visual artis - tic practice , which holds significant cultural value and meaning . The Framework for Aboriginal Languages and Torres Strait Islander Languages curriculum docu - ments primarily refer to design in relation to the visual design of art forms “such as body markings , designs , paintings , funeral poles , songs and dances” ( Australian Curriculum 2016a , p . 238 ) . The dominant discourse of design within this curricu - lum document links visual design features and artistic practice with culture , cultural expression and spirituality . In this way , the discourse of design constructed in the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Languages curriculum document bears a close resemblance to the design discourse that is prominent in The Arts document . Visual design as part of artistic expression is a key part of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander language and knowledge ( Australian Curriculum 2016a , p . 55 ) . They learn about their own songs , stories , dances and designs and their own place in the kinship system . ( p . 62 ) They engage with visual texts such as designs on body , bark and sand , and etchings and carvings on wood and rock . ( p . 63 ) understanding that there are different ways of telling a story , such as Elders yarning , through song , dance and music and associated visual design and spec - tacle , and through painting ( body , bark , rock , sand ) ( p . 75 ) ( Australian Curriculum 2016a , p . 62 , 63 & 75 ) As seen in the above extracts , the discourse of design in this Languages curricu - lum document represents design as a product of narrative and cultural norms that students can “learn about” , “engage with” and “understand” . The representation of design in this curriculum both complements the depiction of design in The Arts and explicitly associates design as an artefact that can engage students in visual texts and 203 1 3 Locating the place of ‘design’ across the Australian Curriculum : … narratives to better understand the history , norms and processes of Australian Abo - riginal and Torres Strait Islander cultures . Technologies The Technologies has the most prominent representation of design in the curriculum and is comprised of two distinct but related subjects , Design and Technologies and Digital Technologies . Design is represented across both subjects , as a process , with strong links to process thinking in connection to Technologies’ STEM background and understanding . Within this curriculum , design is defined in relation to five key terms : design brief , design process , design thinking , design solution and design - ing . As such , the discourse constructed within this curriculum document privileges design as a process , rather than its links to culturally aesthetic ‘visual conventions’ or product prioritized in The Arts and The Framework for Aboriginal Languages and Torres Strait Islander Languages curriculum documents . The Design and Technolo - gies curriculum states that a key purpose is to enable “students to become creative and responsive designers” ( Australian Curriculum 2016b , p . 52 ) . The curriculum is constructed to teach students to learn through using design thinking to generate and produce user - friendly solutions . However , ‘design thinking’ as a complete term has minimal reference within the curriculum . Design is strongly represented within Technologies as a process that relates to problem - solving . Students “apply design and systems thinking and design processes to investigate ideas” and create designed solutions for preferred and sustainable futures ( Australian Curriculum 2016b , p . 52 ) . A detailed analysis of the Technologies curriculum uncovered a variety of defini - tions of design and associated related concepts that work to construct a context spe - cific discourse of design . Designing is defined within the text as “a process that typi - cally involves investigating and defining ; generating ; producing and implementing ; evaluating ; and collaborating and managing to create a designed solution” ( Austral - ian Curriculum 2016b , p . 21 ) . This discourse links concepts of design with ‘pro - cesses and production skills’ , based on aspects of design thinking , design processes and production processes . The “processes and production skills strand focuses on creating designed solutions by : investigating and defining , generating and design - ing , producing and implementing , evaluating , and collaborating and managing” ( Australian Curriculum 2016b , p . 56 ) . By incorporating ‘designing’ as a step within ‘processes and production skills’ for designed solutions , the document presents a circular logic . It suggests teachers and students must already have an understand - ing of , and ability to engage ‘designing’ processes in order to develop a “designed solution” ( Australian Curriculum 2016b , p . 19 ) . Further to this , the ‘design process’ is defined as having the exact same steps as the ‘processes and production skills’ strand ( Australian Curriculum 2016b , p . 19 ) . These convoluted definitions without a discreet discipline focus make no distinction between each process ( Mosely , Harris & Grushka 2020 ) . In addition to the convoluted definitions of the design process , design disciplines are discursively constructed in this curriculum document as ‘technologies speciali - zations’ which are “areas of specialisation that typically involve extensive use of 204 G . Mosely et al . 1 3 technologies” ( Australian Curriculum 2016b , p . 46 ) . Examples of technologies spe - cializations in text are , “architecture , electronics , graphics technologies and fash - ion” ( Australian Curriculum 2016b , pp . 46 & 55 ) . The more commonly used term , graphic design , has been replaced with ‘graphic technologies’ in this document , which indicates a shift in focus from design to the use of new technologies while engaging in design processes . In Digital Technologies , user interface ( how users interact with computer hardware or software ) and user experience ( the quality of the user experience with a product or system ) are incorporated in digital solutions . This discourse silences traditional concepts of design as product through references to technologies , relegating ‘design’ to a process that leads to the use or development of new technologies or ‘solutions’ . Discussion This paper explores how design knowledge is represented , emphasized and ulti - mately valued within the Australian Curriculum . The analysis revealed how each of the three learning areas analysed presents its own understanding and specific repre - sentation of design and these representations align with specific curriculum agendas . This finding reinforces Fleer’s ( 2018 , p . 71 ) assertion that design is a key conceptual distinction in Technologies , and a soft recognition that “is also a feature of the arts” . The Technologies curriculum documents present a dominant discourse of design as a process that can be applied to solve problems and create innovative solutions . The design processes reflected in this discourse link it closely to the development of the twenty - first century skills to enable students to prosper in the future workforce and integrates design within STEM disciplines . Unlike the discourse of design as ‘product’ , constructed in The Arts and Framework for Aboriginal Languages and Torres Strait Islander Languages , the discourse of design as process in the Technolo - gies curriculum relates to the broader discourse of cultivating skills that will support economic development and students’ engagement in the workforce . The discourse of design in The Arts and Framework for Aboriginal Languages and Torres Strait Islander Languages curriculum area , however , silences this notion of design as a process by the substitution of alternate words such as practice , generating ideas and iterating concepts . In these two curriculum documents , design is primarily repre - sented as a visual product that draws on specific cultural and historical traditions . As such , the dominant discourse of design here has a very weak association to build - ing workforce capacity or indeed to design processes . The rationale for investigat - ing representations of design within the Australian curriculum documents was to uncover which of its multiple definitions and representations are being used and favoured , and if those in the majority align with dominant education and economic productivity discourse . As a result , design processes are ‘othered’ in The Arts and The Aboriginal Languages and Torres Strait Islander Languages curriculum . The dominant association of design as an artefact over process , establishes a weak recog - nition of design as a way to engage the twenty - first century workforce through arts and culture centred education . The Technologies curriculum establishes a markedly different discourse of design as a process that can be used in and for technological 205 1 3 Locating the place of ‘design’ across the Australian Curriculum : … advancement . While the role of design thinking and ‘designing’ is clear in various aspects of the Technologies curriculum , the circular logic represented in the defini - tions of design processes assumes a prior knowledge of what it means to engage in design . The concept of technologies as outcomes and design process as a form of knowl - edge are privileged within the Technologies curriculum . Apple’s ( 2004 ) key ques - tion about the selection of curriculum knowledge and whose culture benefits from this selection is significant when we ask : Where is the predominant representation of design identified within the Australian Curriculum ? The predominant discourse of design is located in the Technologies curriculum with a strong focus on process and production . Such a position privileges particular understandings and defini - tions of design , and does not acknowledge design as being its own way of knowing particularly evident by its representation of ‘technologies specializations’ as design disciplines ( Mosely , Harris and Grushka 2020 ) . The privileged forms of design knowledge appear to be linked to STEM , through its strong relationship with ‘tech - nologies’ and the current argument that these disciplines within education are best suited to develop skills for innovation ( Education Council , 2015 ) . However , the rep - resentation of design within STEM in the curriculum does not clearly demonstrate how design can build innovative capabilities and complex problem solving skills within students nor integrate STEM disciplines through a problem - based approach . Leading to the question : whose cultural curriculum antecedents get left behind when this particular representation of design is emphasized ? With design so marginalized in The Arts KLA in the Australian Curriculum and its foregrounding in the Frame - work for Aboriginal Languages and Torres Strait Islander Languages curriculum it is clear that there are different emphases being played out in the way design is repre - sented across the Australian Curriculum . Conclusion and implications The analysis presented in this paper has highlighted the problematic nature of how design is represented across the curriculum and how its dominant representation paradoxically undermines some of the key skills that design can promote ( Bleazby 2015 ) . The dominant discourse within the Australian Curriculum , especially Tech - nologies , is a simplified , convoluted ‘design process’ with alignment to twenty - first century skills and innovative capabilities , including STEM . This representation of design aligns to the current innovation discourse in education policy , compared to design being represented in the curriculum for the knowledge that is inherent to design and designers , as well as the acknowledgement that different design disci - plines have different design knowledge which can also develop innovative capabili - ties . As Carvalho et al . ( 2009 , p . 499 ) suggest , design knowledge is structured in dis - ciplines based on the knowledge they value . The two dominant discourses of design in the curriculum do little to complement and build on each other and as a result , the design knowledge present in Framework for Aboriginal Languages and Torres Strait Islander Languages and The Arts is ‘othered’ . 206 G . Mosely et al . 1 3 Due to this ‘othering’ and a distinct representation of design within Technolo - gies , the very skills and capabilities that design has the potential to build are ironi - cally lost by its convoluted representation within the Technologies curriculum . As such , currently the curriculum establishes a privileged representation of design over others , which forms its own particular normative discourse of design within the cur - riculum . The representation of design as a distinct discipline and way of knowing is not explicit within The Arts curriculum . It raises the question whether the STEM focus within education policy has resulted in reduced attention to how The Arts and Languages KLAs can contribute to the development of twenty - first century skills . Clarifying design and design processes within the Technologies curriculum and acknowledging that broader representations of design beyond a product in the other KLAs will enable design to contribute to building twenty - first century and innova - tive skills in students to help them solve complex problems and respond to change in an increasingly complex world . We have a responsibility to ensure that the repre - sentation of design in curriculum enables those skills to be built from each kind of design disciplinary knowledge including The Arts and the Framework for Aborigi - nal Languages and Torres Strait Islander Languages , not only those that align to the dominant discourses of education policy . References ACARA . ( 2012 ) . Australian Curriculum assessment and reporting authority . The Shape of the Australian Curriculum : Version 4 . 0 . http : / / docs . acara . edu . au / resou rces / The _ Shape _ of _ the _ Austr alian _ Curri culum _ v4 . pdf ACARA . ( 2013 ) . Australian Curriculum assessment and reporting authority . Draft Australian Curricu - lum : Technologies . https : / / www . acara . edu . au / curri culum / learn ing - areas - subjects / technologies . ACOLA . ( 2016 ) . Australian Council for Learned Academies . Skills and capabilities for Australian enter - prise innovation ( report 10 ) . https : / / acola . org / skill s - capab iliti es - enter prise - innov ation - saf10 / Appadurai , A . ( 1990 ) . Disjuncture and difference in the global cultural economy . Theory , Culture & Soci - ety , 7 ( 2 – 3 ) , 295 – 310 . Apple , M . W . ( 2004 ) . Ideology and curriculum ( 3rd ed . ) . London : Routledge . Australian Curriculum . ( 2016a ) . Australian Curriculum : Languages – framework for aboriginal lan - guages and Torres Strait Islander languages . https : / / www . austr alian curri culum . edu . au / f - 10 - curri culum / langu ages / frame work - for - abori ginal - langu ages - and - torre s - strai t - islan der - langu ages / Australian Curriculum . ( 2016b ) . Australian Curriculum : Technologies . https : / / www . austr alian curri culum . edu . au / f - 10 - curri culum / techn ologi es / Australian Curriculum . ( 2016c ) . Australian Curriculum : The Arts . https : / / www . austr alian curri culum . edu . au / f - 10 - curri culum / the - arts / Atweh , B . , & Goos , M . ( 2011 ) . The Australian mathematics Curriculum : A move forward or back to the future ? Australian Journal of Education , 55 ( 3 ) , 214 – 228 . Banks , F . , & Williams , P . J . ( 2013 ) . International perspectives on technology education . In G . Owen - Jackson ( Ed . ) , Debates in design and technology education ( pp . 31 – 48 ) . New York : Routledge . Bell , G . ( 2017 , October 21 ) . Fast , smart and connected : How to build our digital future [ speech ] . Boyer Lecture presented at ABC Studios , Ultimo NSW . https : / / www . abc . net . au / radio natio nal / progr ams / boyer lectu res / serie s / 2017 - boyer - lectures / 8869370 . Bequette , J . W . , & Bequette , M . B . ( 2012 ) . A place for art and design education in the STEM conversa - tion . Art Education , 65 ( 2 ) , 40 – 47 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00043 125 . 2012 . 11519 167 . Bleazby , J . ( 2015 ) . Who some school subjects have a higher status than others : The epistemology of the traditional curriculum hierarchy . Oxford Review of Education , 41 ( 5 ) , 671 – 689 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 03054 985 . 2015 . 10909 66 . 207 1 3 Locating the place of ‘design’ across the Australian Curriculum : … Bowen , G . ( 2009 ) . Document analysis as a qualitative research method . Qualitative Research Journal , 9 ( 2 ) , 27 – 40 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3316 / QRJ09 02027 . Buchanan , R . ( 1992 ) . Wicked problems in design thinking . Design Issues , 8 ( 2 ) , 5 – 21 . Carvalho , L . , Dong , A . , & Maton , K . ( 2009 ) . Legitimating design : A sociology of knowledge account of the field . Design Studies , 30 ( 5 ) , 483 – 502 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . destu d . 2008 . 11 . 005 . Cohen , L . , Manion , L . , & Morrison , K . ( 2013 ) . Research methods in education ( 7th ed . ) . New York : Routledge . Connors , L . , & McMorrow , J . ( 2015 ) . Imperatives in schools funding : Equity , sustainability and achieve - ment . Victoria : ACER Press https : / / resea rch . acer . edu . au / aer / 14 / . Cross , N . , Christiaans , H . , & Dorst , K . ( 1994 ) . Design expertise amongst student designers . International Journal of Art and Design Education , 13 ( 1 ) , 39 – 56 . Department of Education , Skills and Employment . ( 2020 ) . Why is STEM important ? STEM skills are crucial for Australia’s changing future . https : / / www . dese . gov . au / austr alian - curri culum / natio nal - stem - educa tion - resou rces - toolk it / intro ducto ry - mater ial / why - stem - impor tant Design Council . ( 2018 ) . Designing a future economy : Developing design skills for productivity and inno - vation . https : / / www . desig ncoun cil . org . uk / resou rces / repor t / desig ning - future - economy - report . Ditchburn , G . ( 2012 ) . The Australian Curriculum : Finding the hidden narrative . Critical Studies in Edu - cation , 53 ( 3 ) , 347 – 360 . Dorst , K . ( 2006 ) . Design problems and design paradoxes . Design Issues , 22 ( 3 ) , 4 – 17 . Dorst , K . ( 2011 ) . The core of ‘design thinking’ and its application . Design Studies , 32 ( 6 ) , 521 – 532 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . destu d . 2011 . 07 . 006 . Dorst , K . ( 2015 ) . Frame innovation : Create new thinking by design . Massachusetts : The MIT Press . Education Council . ( 2015 ) . National STEM school education strategy : A comprehensive plan for science , technology , engineering and mathematics education in Australia . http : / / www . educa tionc ounci l . edu . au / EC - Repor ts - and - Publi catio ns . aspx Ewing , R . ( 2020 ) . The Australian Curriculum : The arts . A critical opportunity . Curriculum Perspectives , 40 , 75 – 81 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s4129 7 - 019 - 00098 - w . Foucault , M . ( 1972 ) . The archaeology of knowledge . London : Tavistock Publications . Foucault , M . ( 1980 ) . Power / knowledge : selected interviews and other writings , 1972 – 1977 . New York : Vintage Books . Foucault , M . ( 1990 ) . The history of sexuality : An introduction . London : Penguin Books . Fairclough , N . ( 1992 ) . Discourse and text : Linguistic and intertextual analysis within discourse analysis . Discourse & Society , 3 ( 2 ) , 193 – 217 . Fairclough , N . ( 2012 ) . Critical discourse analysis . In J . P . Gee & M . Handford ( Eds . ) , The Routledge handbook of discourse ( pp . 9 – 20 ) . New York : Routledge . Fleer , M . ( 2018 ) . The contexts , concepts and conditions for the development of the learning areas of tech - nologies : Productive contradictions or a curriculum fossil ? In A . Reid & D . Price ( Eds . ) , The Aus - tralian Curriculum : Promises , problems and possibilities ( pp . 65 – 77 ) . Deakin West , ACT : ACSA . Gardner , P . ( 2017 ) . Worlds apart : A comparative analysis of discourses of English in the curricula of England and Australia . English in Education , 51 ( 2 ) , 170 – 187 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / eie . 12138 . Goldman , S . , & Kabayadondo , Z . ( 2017 ) . Taking design thinking to school : How the technology of design can transform teachers , learners and classrooms . In S . Goldman & Z , Kabayadondo ( Eds . ) , Taking design thinking to school : How the technology of design can transform teachers , learners and classrooms ( pp . 3 – 19 ) . New York : Routledge . Glaser , B . G . ( 1965 ) . The constant comparative method of qualitative analysis . Social Problems , 12 ( 4 ) , 436 – 445 . Gonski , D . , Arcus , T . , Boston , K . , Gould , V . , Johnson , W . , O’Brien , Perry , L . , & Roberts , M . ( 2018 ) . Through growth to achievement : Report of the review to achieve educational excellence in Austral - ian schools . Commonwealth of Australia . https : / / www . dese . gov . au / uncat egori sed / resou rces / throu gh - growt h - achie vemen t - repor t - revie w - achie ve - educa tiona l - excel lence - austr alian - schoo ls Griffin , P . , & Care , E . ( 2015 ) . The ATC21S method . In P . Griffen & E . Care ( Eds . ) , Assessment and Teaching of 21 st Century Skills : Methods and approach ( pp . 3 – 33 ) . Dordrecht : Springer . Heskett , J . ( 2001 ) . Past , present , and future in design for industry . Design Issues , 17 ( 1 ) , 18 – 26 . Honey , M . , & Kanter , D . E . ( 2013 ) . Introduction . In M . Honey & D . E . Kanter ( Eds . ) , Design , make , play : Growing the next generation of STEM innovators ( pp . 1 – 6 ) . New York : Routledge . Howard , J . H . ( 2016 ) . Securing Australia’s future - capabilities for Australian enterprise innova - tion : The role of government industry and education and research institutions in developing 208 G . Mosely et al . 1 3 innovation capabilities . Australian Council of Learned Academies [ ACOLA ] SAF 10 . https : / / www . acola . org . au / PDF / SAF10 / Howar d . pdf . Katz , B . M . ( 2015 ) . Make it new : The history of Silicon Valley design . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Keane , L . , & Keane , M . ( 2016 ) . STEAM by design . Design and Technology Education : An Interna - tional Journal , 21 ( 1 ) , 61 – 82 https : / / ojs . lboro . ac . uk / DATE / artic le / view / 2085 . Krippendorff , K . ( 2013 ) . Content analysis : A guide to its methodology ( 3rd ed . ) . Thousand Oaks : SAGE Publications . Li , Y . , Schoenfeld , A . H . , diSessa , A . A . , Graesser , A . C . , Benson , L . C . , English , L . D . , & Duschl , R . A . ( 2019 ) . Design ad design thinking in STEM education . Journal for STEM Education Research , 2 , 93 – 104 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s4197 9 - 019 - 00020 - z . Lingard , B . ( 2018 ) . The Australian curriculum : A critical interrogation of why , what and where to ? Curriculum Perspectives , 38 ( 1 ) , 55 – 65 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s4129 7 - 017 - 0033 - 7 . Love , T . ( 2002 ) . Constructing a coherent cross - disciplinary body of theory about designing and designs : Some philosophical issues . Design Studies , 23 ( 3 ) , 345 – 361 . Lucas , B . , & Smith , C . ( 2018 ) . The capable country : Cultivating capabilities in Australian education . http : / / www . mitch ellin stitu te . org . au / repor ts / the - capab le - count ry / Manzini , E . ( 2015 ) . Design , when everybody designs : An introduction to design for social innovation . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Maxwell , J . , Lowe , K . , & Salter , P . ( 2018 ) . The re - creation and resolution of the ‘problem’ of Indig - enous education and the Aboriginal and Torres Strait islander cross - curriculum priority . The Australian Educational Researcher , 45 ( 2 ) , 161 – 177 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s1338 4 - 017 - 0254 - 7 . MCEETYA . ( 2008 ) . Ministerial council on education , employment , training and youth affairs . National declaration on educational goals for young Australians . http : / / www . curri culum . edu . au / verve / _ resou rces / Natio nal _ Decla ratio n _ on _ the _ Educa tiona l _ Goals _ for _ Young _ Austr alian s . pdf Mosely , G . , Harris , J . , & Grushka , K . ( 2020 ) . Design education in schools : An investigation of the Australian . Curriculum : Technologies . International Journal of Technology and Design Educa - tion . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s1079 8 - 020 - 09572 - 3 . Norman , D . ( 2016 ) . When you come to a fork in the road , take it : The future of design . She ji : The Journal of Design , Economics and Innovation , 2 ( 4 ) , 343 – 348 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . sheji . 2017 . 07 . 003 . Peacock , D . , Lingard , R . , & Sellar , S . ( 2015 ) . Texturing space - times in the Australian curriculum : Cross - curriculum priorities . Curriculum Inquiry , 45 ( 4 ) , 367 – 388 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 03626 784 . 2015 . 10643 05 . Powers , P . ( 2007 ) . The philosophical foundations of Foucaultian discourse analysis . Critical Approaches to Discourse Analysis across Disciplines , 1 ( 2 ) , 18 – 34 . Razzouck , R . , & Shute , V . ( 2012 ) . What is design thinking and why is it important ? Review of Educa - tional Research , 82 ( 3 ) , 330 – 348 . Reid , A . ( 2018 ) . The journey towards the first Australian Curriculum . In A . Reid & D . Price ( Eds . ) , The Australian Curriculum : Promises , problems and possibilities ( pp . 3 – 18 ) . Deakin West , ACT : ACSA . Rudd , K . , & Gillard , J . ( 2008 ) . Quality education : The case for an education revolution in our schools . Canberra : Commonwealth of Australia Retrieved from http : / / apo . org . au / syste m / files / 9133 / apo - nid91 33 - 41591 . pdf . Sanders , E . B . - N . , & Stappers , P . J . ( 2008 ) . Co - creation and the new landscapes of design . Co - Design , 4 ( 1 ) , 5 – 18 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710 88070 18750 68 . Savage , G . C . ( 2016 ) . Who’s steering the ship ? National curriculum reform and the re - shaping of Aus - tralian federalism . Journal of Education Policy , 31 ( 6 ) , 833 – 850 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 02680 939 . 2016 . 12024 52 . Steiner - Khamsi , G . ( 2003 ) . The politics of league tables . JSSE - Journal of social science education . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4119 / jsse - 301 . Taylor , P . C . ( 2016 ) . Why is a STEAM curriculum perspective crucial to the 21 st century ? In ACER Research Conference 2016 ( pp . 89 – 93 ) . https : / / resea rch . acer . edu . au / resea rch _ confe rence / RC201 6 / 9augu st / 6 / Wrigley , C . , & Straker , K . ( 2017 ) . Design thinking pedagogy : The educational design ladder . Innova - tions in Education and Teaching International , 54 ( 4 ) , 374 – 385 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14703 297 . 2015 . 11082 14 . 209 1 3 Locating the place of ‘design’ across the Australian Curriculum : … Wright , N . , & Wrigley , C . ( 2019 ) . Broadening design - led education horizons : Conceptual insights and future research directions . International Journal of Technology and Design Education , 29 , 1 – 23 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s1079 8 - 017 - 9429 - 9 . Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . Genevieve Mosely’s research focuses on design education as well as the application of design thinking in diverse , interdisciplinary contexts to help capture value through better understanding users and their needs . She has practical experience working with industry partnerships , including the Royal Australian Air Force and TAFE NSW , utilizing design innovation methods to help gain and sustain competitive advantage . Jess Harris’s research spans a range of areas , highlighting her interest in the fields of school change , educational leadership and communication . Jess has substantial expertise in qualitative research methods , with a focus on analysing the everyday practices of teachers , students and school leaders to develop local solutions to issues in their school community . Jess is passionate about the practices used by school lead - ers , teachers , students and community members to improve schooling for all students both in Australia and internationally . Kath Grushka’s research crosses art curriculum , art / science , arts - education , e - learning , Arts Health , vis - ual learning and the Creative Industries . She has national and international research grant experience . Her research draws on empirical and philosophical fields in narrative , arts - based methods and the performa - tive work of image in representing the contemporary subject . She publishes nationally and internationally and works with a range of editorial teams . Kathryn is a practicing artist with a national reputation . See more details at : https : / / www . newca stle . edu . au / profi le / kath - grush ka