Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID - 19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID - 19 . The COVID - 19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect , the company ' s public news and information website . Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID - 19 - related research that is available on the COVID - 19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories , such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re - use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source . These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID - 19 resource centre remains active . were diagnosed with COVID - 19 pneumonia and required oxy - gen therapy and antibiotics . Many ( 67 % ) also received antivi - rals . Regarding delivery , all nine were live births delivered via cesarean section with 1 - min Apgar scores of 8 - 9 and 5 - min Ap - gar scores of 9 - 10 . Four of the 9 were delivered prematurely at 36 weeks ( 44 % ) for a variety of reasons including premature rupture of membranes , pre - eclampsia , or pneumonia . None of the ﬂuid samples at birth were positive for COVID - 19 . Addi - tionally , all of the mothers and babies were discharged from the hospital . Limitations discussed include the retrospective nature of data abstraction and small sample size . Additionally all patients enrolled were in the third trimester . The authors concluded that pregnant patients with COVID - 19 present with similar symp - toms as nonpregnant patients . Also , based on this limited sam - ple , the mothers had a low risk of complications and all of the infants tested negative for COVID - 19 after birth , suggesting that vertical transmission is unlikely . [ Carly Eastin , MD Travis Eastin , MD , MS University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences , Little Rock , AR ] Comment : There are still many uncertainties about the dis - ease course of COVID - 19 in pregnant patients . This review is reassuring , however this is a very small sample size so caution should be used in applying these results to our day to day pa - tients , especially those at earlier gestational ages . More studies should be conducted on pregnant patients with COVID - 19 in all trimesters to have a more accurate picture of how this virus af - fects pregnancy - related outcomes . , CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF CORONAVIRUS DISEASE 2019 IN CHINA . Guan W , Ni Z , Hu Y , et al . N Engl J Med . 2020 Feb 28 [ Online ahead of print ] DOI : 10 . 1056 / NEJ - Moa2002032 . The novel coronavirus ( SARS - CoV - 2 , causing COVID - 19 ) was originally isolated in Wuhan , China . This virus spread quickly throughout many countries in Asia and now Europe , Australia , North America , leading the World Health Organiza - tion to declare COVID - 19 a pandemic . Given the rapid spread of cases , the authors sought to provide analysis of patients with COVID - 19 , their clinical characteristics , and severity of disease . This was a retrospective review of Chinese medical records for laboratory - conﬁrmed COVID - 19 reported to the National Health Commission between December 11 , 2019 to January 29 , 2020 . Electronic medical records were used to record various clinical data including exposure risk , signs and symp - toms , laboratory ﬁndings , and radiologic ﬁndings . Several re - searchers performed chart abstraction and disagreements were made by a third reviewer . If radiologic ﬁndings were included , these were reviewed by respiratory medicine attending physi - cians who interpreted the ﬁndings . Incubation periods of less than 1 day were excluded . Fever was deﬁned as an axillary tem - perature of 37 . 5 degrees Celsius or higher . Patients were catego - rized into severe or nonsevere based on the American Thoracic Society guidelines for community acquired pneumonia . The pri - mary composite endpoint was admission to the intensive care unit ( ICU ) , use of mechanical ventilation , or death . Secondary outcomes included death rates from symptom onset until each component of the composite end - point . There were 7736 patients admitted at 552 sites during the study period and data were obtained on 1099 patients ( 14 . 2 % ) . The majority were nonsevere disease ( 926 , 84 . 3 % ) . The median age was 47 years ( IQR 35 - 58 ) , 41 . 9 % were female , and most were nonsmokers ( 85 . 4 % ) . Any comorbidity was re - corded in 23 . 7 % of patients , with hypertension being the most common ( 15 . 0 % ) . The majority of patients ( 72 . 3 % ) had recent contact with a Wuhan resident , although 25 . 9 % had no reported exposure . The median incubation period was 4 . 0 days ( IQR 2 . 0 - 7 . 0 ) . Regarding symptoms , only 43 . 8 % of patients had fever on presentation but 88 . 7 % developed fever during hospitalization . Besides fever , the most common symptoms overall were cough ( 67 . 8 % ) , fatigue ( 38 . 1 % ) , sputum production ( 33 . 7 % ) , and shortness of breath ( 18 . 7 % ) . Chest radiograph ﬁndings were available for 274 patients , with the majority being abnormal ( 59 . 1 % ) . Findings included bilateral patchy shadowing ( 36 . 5 % ) , local patchy shadowing ( 28 . 1 % ) , ground - glass opacity ( 20 . 1 % ) , and interstitial abnormality ( 4 . 4 % ) . Chest CT results were available on 975 patients . The majority ( 86 . 2 % ) were abnormal and consisted of ground - glass opacity ( 56 . 4 % ) , bilat - eral patchy shadowing ( 51 . 8 % ) , local patchy shadowing ( 41 . 9 % ) , and interstitial abnormalities ( 14 . 7 % ) . Laboratory testing was available on most , depending on the test , and showed a median white blood cell count of 4700 / mm3 ( IQR 3500 - 6000 ) , elevated C - reactive protein ( > 10mg / L in 60 . 7 % ) , and normal procalcitonin ( < 0 . 5ng / mL in 94 . 5 % ) . Other notable laboratory abnormalities included elevated D - dimer ( > 0 . 5mg / L in 46 . 4 % ) and elevated LDH ( > 250U / L in 41 % ) . The most com - mon complications were pneumonia ( 91 . 1 % ) followed by acute respiratory distress syndrome ( 3 . 4 % ) and most common treat - ments were intravenous antibiotics ( 58 . 0 % ) , oxygen therapy ( 41 . 3 % ) , and oseltamivir ( 35 . 8 % ) . Systemic glucocorticoids and immune globulin were less common therapies , and mechan - ical ventilation was needed in only 6 . 1 % . At the conclusion of the study , 15 ( 1 . 4 % ) of patients had died and 55 ( 5 . 0 % ) had been discharged fro the hospital . The majority of the remaining patients were still hospitalized . Regarding the composite endpoint , there were 67 patients ( 6 . 1 % ) with ICU admission , mechanical ventilation , or death , leading to a cumulative risk of 3 . 6 % . This percentage increased if you were designated as se - vere disease ; in this case 24 . 9 % had the composite outcome , leading to a cumulative risk of 20 . 6 % . The authors concluded that presenting symptoms and workup can be variable , with many patients being afebrile and having normal radiologic studies . Several limitations were noted including missing data for many on incubation periods . Additionally the majority of the patients were still hospitalized at the end of the study and therefore outcomes could not be pro - vided for those patients . [ Carly Eastin , MD Travis Eastin , MD , MS University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences , Little Rock , AR ] The Journal of Emergency Medicine 711 Comment : While this study provides helpful clinical infor - mation to assist emergency physicians in identifying potential COVID - 19 patients , we must understand the limitations . Most signiﬁcantly , this was only a very small portion of the overall sample size of conﬁrmed COVID - 19 patients . Additionally , be cautious in directly applying these results to patients in the United States as populations may differ . , DRIVE - THROUGH SCREENING CENTER FOR COVID - 19 : A SAFE AND EFFICIENT SCREENING SYSTEM AGAINST MASSIVE COMMUNITY OUTBREAK . Kwon KT , Ko JH , Shin H , et al . J Korean Med Sci . Published online March 16 , 2020 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3346 / jkms . 2020 . 35 . e123 . The current Coronavirus Disease 2019 ( COVID - 19 ) pandemic has necessitated the testing of signiﬁcant numbers of patients . Modeled after those used during a previous bioter - rorism disaster and inﬂuenza pandemic , the authors present a descriptive report of their drive - through screening center and processes . The authors recommend use of a large parking lot geograph - ically removed from large population centers . Additionally , they recommend either a tent or temporary building to be used for work space and shelter from weather . They utilized a four - step process : Entrance / Registration / Examination / Specimen collection / Instructions / Exit . Patients do not leave their cars during this process . To minimize contact and preserve personal protective equipment ( PPE ) , communication is performed either by mobile phone or electronic medical re - cord whenever possible . Temperature is obtained with a contact - less thermometer . If the physician strongly suspects COVID - 19 during the examination step , the patient is transported to a desig - nated hospital after specimen collection . Test specimens were collected with the car window opened the minimum amount necessary and car ventilation mode on internal circulation . Pa - tients are provided with information about obtaining test results , home quarantine , and anticipatory guidance . Healthcare workers ( HCWs ) who had direct contact with pa - tients wore the following PPE : N95 respirator , eye shield / face shield / goggles , hooded coverall / gown , and inner and outer gloves . To decrease viral spread and minimize the possibility of specimen contamination , HCWs wore two gowns and two pairs of gloves for patients who required testing ; the external gloves / gown were removed and hands disinfected after each pa - tient contact . The authors reported that this process took approx - imately ten minutes per test , allowing them to screen 100 people per day with a staff of 4 - 8 HCWs . This is estimated to be 1 / 3 the amount of time that a typical screening process would take . The authors recommended rotating staff every 1 - 2 hours if possible , and to ensure that no HCW wore an N95 respirator for longer than four consecutive hours . They also noted the need to be cognizant of relevant environmental issues , such as hot / cold weather , etc . , and to adapt the working environment accordingly . Lastly , there must be adequate communication with the public regarding the limitations of the screening center to minimize the number of people who may attempt to use this resource inappropriately . They recommend considering a similar process for other uses such as medication distribution or vaccine administration . [ Travis Eastin , MD , MS Carly Eastin , MD University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences , Little Rock , AR ] Comment : While not a typical research manuscript we would select for Abstracts , this article describes a non - novel approach to a novel viral pandemic . The drive - through screening process has a number of advantages as outlined above , especially as centers begin seeing higher numbers of potential COVID - 19 patients . It is important to consider and plan for the unintended consequences of such a program , including how HCWs will handle unexpectedly ill patients and patients arriving by alternative transportation ( bike , walking , public transportation ) . Healthcare leaders considering a drive - through screening option should also consider the heightened emotions and fear that are present during epidemic / pandemic conditions and plan for security accordingly . , EPIDEMIOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF 2143 PEDIATRIC PATIENTS WITH 2019 CORONAVIRUS DISEASE IN CHINA . Dong Y , Mo X , Hu Y , et al . Pediatrics . 2020 ; doi : 10 . 1542 / peds . 2020 - 0702 . Novel coronavirus ( SARS - CoV - 2 , which causes COVID - 19 ) is a pandemic with many countries employing massive public health responses . Little is known about the severity of illness in the pediatric population . This study sought to identify demo - graphic information and severity of disease in pediatric patients with COVID - 19 . This was a retrospective study conducted on patients less than 18 years who were suspected or conﬁrmed to have COVID - 19 and were reported to the Chinese Centers for Dis - ease Control ( China CDC ) . Children were considered high risk and suspected if they had positive exposure to an endemic area or a conﬁrmed case of COVID - 19 . High suspicion also included those with fever , respiratory symptoms , digestive symptoms , or fatigue , normal or low white blood cell count and increased C - reactive protein , or abnormal chest radiog - raphy , or those at lower risk for whom inﬂuenza or other respi - ratory illnesses were ruled out . Conﬁrmed cases were deﬁned as having a nasopharyngeal swab or blood sample positivevia PCR or a genetic sampling of respiratory secretions or blood consis - tent with SARS - CoV - 2 . Once identiﬁed , patients were catego - rized by severity of disease using clinical features as well as laboratory and radiographic ﬁndings . Severity categories included asymptomatic ( no symptoms but positive test ) , mild ( mild respiratory symptoms and normal lung exam ) , moderate ( pneumonia , fever , and cough but without hypoxemia or respi - ratory distress ) , severe ( above symptoms as well as oxygen satu - ration less than 92 % and respiratory distress ) , or critical disease ( acute respiratory failure , acute respiratory distress syndrome , shock , or other life - threatening organ dysfunction ) . There were 2143 patients included who were suspected ( 65 . 9 % ) or conﬁrmed ( 34 . 1 % ) to have COVID - 19 . Median age was 7 years ( IQR 2 - 13 ) and the majority ( 56 . 6 % ) were male . The median time from onset of symptoms to presentation 712 Abstracts