ANRV331 - PS59 - 23 ARI 5 November 2007 11 : 20 Grounded Cognition Lawrence W . Barsalou Department of Psychology , Emory University , Atlanta , Georgia 30322 ; email : barsalou @ emory . edu Annu . Rev . Psychol . 2008 . 59 : 617 – 45 First published online as a Review in Advance on August 15 , 2007 The Annual Review of Psychology is online at http : / / psych . annualreviews . org This article’s doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . psych . 59 . 103006 . 093639 Copyright c (cid:2) 2008 by Annual Reviews . All rights reserved 0066 - 4308 / 08 / 0203 - 0617 $ 20 . 00 Key Words cognitive architecture , imagery , representation , simulation , situated action Abstract Grounded cognition rejects traditional views that cognition is com - putation on amodal symbols in a modular system , independent of the brain’s modal systems for perception , action , and introspec - tion . Instead , grounded cognition proposes that modal simulations , bodily states , and situated action underlie cognition . Accumulating behavioral and neural evidence supporting this view is reviewed from research on perception , memory , knowledge , language , thought , so - cialcognition , anddevelopment . Theoriesofgroundedcognitionare also reviewed , as are origins of the area and common misperceptions of it . Theoretical , empirical , and methodological issues are raised whose future treatment is likely to affect the growth and impact of grounded cognition . 617 AR Further Click here for quick links to Annual Reviews content online , including : • Other articles in this volume • Top cited articles • Top downloaded articles • AR’s comprehensive search A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 23 ARI 5 November 2007 11 : 20 Contents WHAT IS GROUNDED COGNITION ? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 618 Origins of Grounded Cognition . . . 619 Common Misperceptions of Grounded Cognition . . . . . . . . 620 THEORIES OF GROUNDED COGNITION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 620 Cognitive Linguistics Theories . . . . 621 Theories of Situated Action . . . . . . . 621 Cognitive Simulation Theories . . . . 622 Social Simulation Theories . . . . . . . 623 EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE . . . . . . . . . . 623 Perception and Action . . . . . . . . . . . . 624 Memory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 625 Knowledge and Conceptual Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 626 Language Comprehension . . . . . . . . 628 Thought . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 629 Social Cognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 630 Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 631 THEORETICAL AND EMPIRICAL ISSUES . . . . . . . . . . . . 631 Does the Brain Contain Amodal Symbols ? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 631 Does Simulation Implement Classic Symbolic Operations ? . . 632 Are Simulations and Embodiments Causal or Epiphenomenal ? . . . . . 632 What Roles Do Statistical Representations Play ? . . . . . . . . . 632 How Is Language Grounded ? . . . . . 633 Does the Brain Contain a Single Representational System ? . . . . . . 633 How Does the Brain Represent Abstract Concepts ? . . . . . . . . . . . . 634 Do Mirror Neuron Systems Pervade Social Cognition ? . . . . . 634 METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES . . . . 634 Computational and Formal Theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 634 Integrating Disciplines and Levels of Explanation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 635 Grounding Classic Research Paradigms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 635 WHAT IS GROUNDED COGNITION ? Standard theories of cognition assume that knowledge resides in a semantic memory sys - tem separate from the brain’s modal sys - tems for perception ( e . g . , vision , audition ) , action ( e . g . , movement , proprioception ) , and introspection ( e . g . , mental states , affect ) . Ac - cording to standard theories , representa - tions in modal systems are transduced into amodal symbols that represent knowledge about experience in semantic memory . Once this knowledge exists , it supports the spec - trum of cognitive processes from perception to thought . Conceptions of grounded cognition take many different forms ( Gibbs 2006 , Wilson 2002 ) . In general , however , they reject the standard view that amodal symbols represent knowledge in semantic memory . From the perspective of grounded cognition , it is un - likely that the brain contains amodal symbols ; if it does , they work together with modal rep - resentations to create cognition . Some accounts of grounded cognition fo - cus on roles of the body in cognition , based on widespread ﬁndings that bodily states can cause cognitive states and be effects of them ( e . g . , Barsalou et al . 2003 , Lakoff & Johnson 1980 , Smith 2005b ) . Most ac - counts of grounded cognition , however , fo - cus on the roles of simulation in cognition ( e . g . , Barsalou 1999 , Decety & Gr ` ezes 2006 , Goldman 2006 ) . Simulation is the reenact - ment of perceptual , motor , and introspective states acquired during experience with the world , body , and mind . As an experience oc - curs ( e . g . , easing into a chair ) , the brain cap - tures states across the modalities and inte - grates them with a multimodal representation stored in memory ( e . g . , how a chair looks and feels , the action of sitting , introspections of comfort and relaxation ) . Later , when knowl - edge is needed to represent a category ( e . g . , chair ) , multimodal representations captured during experiences with its instances are reac - tivated to simulate how the brain represented 618 Barsalou A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 23 ARI 5 November 2007 11 : 20 perception , action , and introspection associ - ated with it . According to this account , a diverse col - lection of simulation mechanisms , sharing a common representational system , supports the spectrum of cognitive activities . The pres - ence of simulation mechanisms across diverse cognitive processes suggests that simulation provides a core form of computation in the brain . Mental imagery constitutes the best known case of these simulation mechanisms ( e . g . , Kosslyn 1980 , 1994 ) . Whereas mental imagery typically results from deliberate at - tempts to construct conscious representations inworkingmemory , otherformsofsimulation often appear to become active automatically and unconsciously outside working memory . Still other accounts of grounded cogni - tion focus on situated action , social inter - action , and the environment ( e . g . , Barsalou 2003 , Barsalou et al . 2007a , Glenberg 1997 , W . Prinz 1997 , Rizzolatti & Craighero 2004 , Robbins & Aydede 2007 , E . Smith & Semin 2004 , Yeh & Barsalou 2006 ) . From this per - spective , the cognitive system evolved to support action in speciﬁc situations , including socialinteraction . Theseaccountsstressinter - actions between perception , action , the body , the environment , and other agents , typically during goal achievement . It is important to note that the phrase “embodied cognition” is often used when referring to this collection of literatures . Problematically , however , “embodied cogni - tion” produces the mistaken assumption that all researchers in this community believe that bodily states are necessary for cognition and that these researchers focus exclusively on bodily states in their investigations . Clearly , however , cognition often proceeds indepen - dently of the body , and many researchers addressotherformsofgrounding . “Grounded cognition” reﬂects the assumption that cog - nition is typically grounded in multiple ways , including simulations , situated action , and , on occasion , bodily states . Perhaps grounding will one day become such a widely accepted assumption that “grounded” falls away , leaving “cognition” and thereby solving this problem . Origins of Grounded Cognition Perhaps surprisingly , grounded cognition has been the dominant view of cognition for most of recorded history . Nearly all prescien - tiﬁc views of the human mind going to back to ancient philosophers ( e . g . , Epicurus 341 – 270 B . C . E . / 1987 ) assumed that modal repre - sentations and imagery represent knowledge ( Barsalou 1999 , J . Prinz 2002 ) , analogous to current simulation views . Even nativists , such as Kant ( 1787 / 1965 ) and Reid ( 1785 / 1969 ) , frequently discussed modal images in knowl - edge ( among other constructs ) . In the early twentieth century , behavior - istsattackedlatenineteenth - centurystudiesof introspection , banishing imagery from much of psychology for not being sufﬁciently sci - entiﬁc , along with other cognitive constructs ( Watson 1913 ) . When cognitive constructs reemerged during the Cognitive Revolution of the mid - twentieth century , imagery was not among them , probably for two reasons . First , the new cognitivists remembered Watson’s at - tacksonimageryandwantedtoavoidthesame criticisms . Second , they were enthralled with new forms of representation inspired by ma - jor developments in logic , linguistics , statis - tics , and computer science . As a result , the - ories of knowledge adopted a wide variety of amodal representations , including feature lists , semantic networks , and frames ( Barsalou & Hale 1993 ) . When early ﬁndings for mental imagery were reported in the 1960s ( for reviews , see Paivio 1971 , Shepard & Cooper 1982 ) , the new cognitivists dismissed and discredited them ( e . g . , Pylyshyn 1973 ) . Nevertheless , the behavioral and neural evidence for imagery eventually became so overwhelming that im - agery is now accepted as a basic cognitive mechanism ( Kosslyn et al . 2006 ) . Most recently , research in grounded cog - nition has challenged theories that origi - nated during the Cognitive Revolution on www . annualreviews . org • Grounded Cognition 619 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 23 ARI 5 November 2007 11 : 20 numerous grounds ( e . g . , Barsalou 1999 , Glenberg 1997 , Harnad 1990 , Lakoff 1987 , Searle 1980 ) . First , little empirical evidence supports the presence of amodal symbols in cognition . Instead , amodal symbols were adopted largely because they provided ele - gant and powerful formalisms for represent - ing knowledge , because they captured impor - tant intuitions about the symbolic character of cognition , and because they could be imple - mented in artiﬁcial intelligence . Second , tra - ditional theories have been challenged on the grounds that they fail to explain how cogni - tion interfaces with perception and action ( the grounding problem ) . Third , traditional theo - ries increasingly face a lack of understanding about where the brain stores amodal symbols and about how amodal symbols could be con - sistent with neural principles of computation . In place of traditional theories , researchers in grounded cognition have turned away from amodal symbols , focusing instead on simu - lation , situated action , and bodily states . In many respects , these researchers have re - discovered the classic philosophical assump - tion that modal representations are central to knowledge , reinventingthisassumptioninthe modern contexts of psychology , cognitive sci - ence , and neuroscience . As a result , grounded theories focus increasingly on neural repre - sentations in the modalities , and less on con - scious imagery . Common Misperceptions of Grounded Cognition Because modern grounded approaches are so new , we are far from having a uniﬁed view . Furthermore , the diverse approaches that ex - ist are not speciﬁed computationally or for - mally . For these reasons , vagueness exists and misperceptions follow . Grounded theories are often viewed as completely empiricist and therefore inconsis - tent with nativism . As noted above , however , classic nativists assumed that imagery played central roles in knowledge . Indeed , there are no a priori reasons why simulation cannot have a strong genetic basis . Genetic contribu - tionsalmostcertainlyshapethemodalsystems and memory systems that capture and im - plement simulations . Some simulations could have a genetic basis . Grounded theories are often viewed as recording systems that only capture images ( e . g . , cameras ) and are unable to interpret these images conceptually ( e . g . , Haugland 1991 , Pylyshyn 1973 ) . As described below , however , grounded theories are capable of implementing the classic symbolic functions that underlie conceptual interpretation ( e . g . , Barsalou 1999 , 2005a ) . Grounded theories are often viewed as only using sensory - motor representations of the external world to represent knowledge . As a result , it is argued that grounded the - ories cannot represent abstract concepts not grounded externally . Importantly , however , embodiment researchers since the classic empiricists have argued that internal states such as meta - cognition and affect constitute sources of knowledge no less important than external experience . Recent embodiment the - orists propose that knowledge acquired from introspection is central to the representa - tion of abstract concepts ( e . g . , Barsalou 1999 , Barsalou & Wiemer - Hastings 2005 ) . Finally , grounded theories are often viewed as necessarily depending on bodily states or full - blown simulations that recreate experience . Researchers in grounded cogni - tion make neither assumption . Bodily states are not necessary for cognitive activity , al - though they can be closely related to it . Al - though simulation is a central construct , these researchers agree that simulations rarely , if ever , recreate full experiences . Instead , sim - ulations are typically partial recreations of ex - perience that can contain bias and error ( e . g . , Barsalou 1999 ) . THEORIES OF GROUNDED COGNITION All grounded theories represent negative re - actionstostandardtheoriesofcognitionbased 620 Barsalou A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 23 ARI 5 November 2007 11 : 20 on amodal symbols . Additionally , grounded theories contain insights about mechanisms central to cognition that standard theories have largely ignored , such as simulation , situ - ated action , and bodily states . Although most theories have been descriptive , they have nev - ertheless generated testable hypotheses ad - dressed in empirical research . Clearly an im - portant goal for future theory is to implement and formalize these theories . Cognitive Linguistics Theories Some of the ﬁrst theories to champion grounded cognition in modern times arose in cognitive linguistics . These theories were negative reactions to amodal theories of syn - tax originating in the Cognitive Revolution ( e . g . , Chomsky 1957 ) , and positive champions for the roles of bodies , situations , and simula - tions in language . Lakoff & Johnson ( 1980 , 1999 ) pro - posed that abstract concepts are grounded metaphorically in embodied and situated knowledge ( also see Gibbs 1994 ) . Speciﬁcally , these researchers argued that people possess extensive knowledge about their bodies ( e . g . , eating ) and situations ( e . g . , verticality ) , and that abstract concepts draw on this knowl - edge metaphorically . For example , love can be understood as eating ( “being consumed by a lover” ) , and affective experience can be understood as verticality ( “happy is up , sad is down” ) . Extensive linguistic evidence across languages shows that people talk ubiq - uitously about abstract concepts using con - crete metaphors . Such metaphors also arise extensively in literature ( e . g . , Turner 1996 ) . A key issue is whether these metaphors sim - ply reﬂect linguistic convention or whether they actually represent how people think ( e . g . , Murphy 1997 ) . Increasing evidence suggests that these metaphors play central roles in thought ( e . g . , Boroditsky & Ramscar 2002 , Gibbs 2006 ) . Othertheoriesincognitivelinguisticshave grounded the syntax and semantics of natural languageincomponentsofexperience , suchas paths , spatial relations , processes , and forces ( e . g . , Lakoff 1987 ; Langacker 1987 , 1991 ; Talmy 1983 , 1988 ) . Cognitive linguists have also grounded reasoning in experience ( e . g . , Fauconnier 1985 ) . Other cognitive linguists have developed grammars that use frames and constructionstocapturethestructureofsitua - tions ( e . g . , Fillmore 1985 , A . Goldberg 1995 ) . All these theories provide rich sources of hy - potheses for scientiﬁc research ( e . g . , Coulson 2001 , Kaschak & Glenberg 2000 , Kemmerer 2006 , Mandler 1992 , Tomasello 2003 ) . Theories of Situated Action These theories reﬂect another reaction to standard theories of cognition , again rejecting the idea that cognition revolves around com - putation on amodal symbols . Positively , many of these theories focus on the central roles of perception and action in cognition . Following Gibson ( 1979 ) , theories of sit - uated action propose that the environment plays central roles in shaping cognitive mech - anisms . Additionally , these theories focus on the close coupling of perception and action during goal achievement ( e . g . , Clark 1997 , W . Prinz 1997 , Thelen & L . Smith 1994 , Steels & Brooks1995 ) , andincreasinglyonso - cial interaction ( e . g . , Breazeal 2002 ) . Many of these theories have originated in robotics . As a result , they are implemented computation - ally in robots operating in the physical world with other agents . Robotics provides a pow - erful test bed for developing and evaluating grounded theories of cognition that attempt to explain uniﬁed agents , not just component processes ( Barsalou et al . 2007a ) . Rather than adopting computational ar - chitectures that manipulate amodal symbols , theories of situated action often adopt dy - namic systems as their architecture . From this perspective , ﬁxed representations do not exist in the brain . Instead , multiple systems imple - mentperception , action , andcognition , where each system is capable of residing in one of inﬁnitely many continuous states . Over learn - ing , states of these systems become coupled to www . annualreviews . org • Grounded Cognition 621 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 23 ARI 5 November 2007 11 : 20 reﬂect patterns of interaction with each other and with the environment effective in achiev - ing goals ( attractors ) . Such theories have been applied to perception and action ( e . g . , Van Orden et al . 2005 ) , development ( e . g . , Thelen et al . 2001 ) , and cognition ( e . g . , Spivey 2007 ) . Cognitive Simulation Theories Perceptual symbol systems . The attacks on standard theories from cognitive linguis - tics , situated action , dynamic systems , and elsewhere might suggest that standard theo - ries have nothing to offer . To the contrary , Barsalou’s ( 1999 ) theory of Perceptual Sym - bol Systems ( PSS ) argued that traditional approaches are correct in postulating the im - portance of symbolic operations for inter - preting experience ( Fodor & Pylyshyn 1988 , Pylyshyn 1973 ) . Although grounded theo - ries are viewed widely as recording systems ( Haugeland 1991 ) , PSS demonstrated that grounded theories can implement symbolic functions naturally ( also see Barsalou 2005a , 2007 ) . Through the construct of simulators— corresponding roughly to concepts and types in standard theories—PSS implements the standard symbolic functions of type - token binding , inference , productivity , recursion , and propositions . This approach retains the symbolic functionality of traditional theories butimplementsitdifferently , usingsimulation and dynamic systems . Thus , PSS is a synthetic approach that integrates traditional theories with grounded theories . PSS further assumes that a single , mul - timodal representation system in the brain supports diverse forms of simulation across different cognitive processes , including high - level perception , implicit memory , working memory , long - term memory , and conceptual knowledge . According to PSS , differences be - tween these cognitive processes reﬂect differ - ences in the mechanisms that capture mul - timodal states and simulate them later . In high - level perception and implicit memory , association areas in a modality capture rep - resentations ( e . g . , in vision ) and later trigger simulations that produce perceptual comple - tion , repetition priming , etc . Working mem - ory utilizes the same representation system but controls it differently during simulation , using frontal mechanisms to keep a modal representation active temporarily . Long - term memory again utilizes the same representa - tion system to simulate episodic events but controls it via medial temporal systems and different frontal areas . Finally , conceptual knowledgeusesthesamerepresentationalsys - tem to simulate knowledge but controls it via association areas in the temporal , parietal , and frontal lobes . According to PSS , simulation is a unifying computational principle across di - verse processes in the brain , taking different forms for each . The convergence zone archi - tecture proposed by Damasio ( 1989 ) and ex - tended by Simmons & Barsalou ( 2003 ) offers one way to implement a single representa - tion system controlled by multiple simulation mechanisms . Barsalou ( 2003 ) integrated PSS with sit - uated cognition , proposing that simulations typicallycontextualizethecategoriesthatthey represent in background situations , which in - clude objects , agents , actions , events , and mental states ( also see Yeh & Barsalou 2006 ) . Barsalou et al . ( 2003 ) similarly proposed that situated simulations explain embodiment effects in social psychology through a pattern - completion inference mechanism . In humans , the simulation system cen - tral to PSS is closely integrated with the lin - guistic system . Paivio ( 1971 , 1986 ) developed an account of how language and simulation interact—Dual Code Theory—and amassed considerableevidenceforit . Glaser ( 1992 ) and Barsalou and colleagues ( 2007b ) offered revi - sions of this theory that place deep conceptual processing in the simulation system , not in thelinguisticsystem . Barsalou ( 2005b ) further proposed that nonhumans have roughly the same simulation system as humans but lack a linguistic system to control it . Barsalou ( 2007 ) proposed that humans’ powerful symbolic ca - pabilities emerge from interactions between language and simulation . 622 Barsalou A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 23 ARI 5 November 2007 11 : 20 Memory theories . Glenberg ( 1997 ) argued that traditional accounts of memory focus too much on the passive storage of information and too little on the importance of situated action . Glenberg proposed that memory pri - marily serves to control situated action , and that the patterns stored in memory reﬂect the nature of bodily actions and their ability to mesh with situations during goal pursuit . Drawing on Gibson ( 1979 ) , Glenberg sug - gested that the perception of relevant objects triggers affordances for action stored in mem - ory . Conversely , reasoning about future ac - tionsreliesonrememberingaffordanceswhile suppressing perception of the environment ( Glenberg et al . 1998 ) . Rubin ( 2006 ) argued that traditional ac - counts of memory are limited by only attempting to explain simple laboratory paradigms . When richer forms of memory are considered , such as autobiographical mem - ory and oral history , more complex theories are required . Rubin proposed Basic Systems Theory as an account of complex memory phenomena . Similar to PSS and its situated extensions , Basic Systems Theory proposes that a complex memory contains many mul - timodal components from vision , audition , action , space , affect , language , etc . , and that retrieving a memory involves simulating its multimodal components together . Conway ( 1990 , 2002 ) similarly stressed the central - ity of multimodal representations in autobi - ographical memory . Social Simulation Theories Simulation plays increasingly important roles in theories of social cognition ( Goldman 2006 ) . Of particular interest is explaining how werepresentthementalstatesofotherpeople . Simulationtheoriesproposethatwerepresent other people’s minds using simulations of our own minds . To feel someone else’s pain , we simulate our own pain . Mirror neuron circuits typically underlie social simulation theories . In primates , a sub - set of the neural circuit used to manipulate objects becomes active when perceiving an - other agent perform an action to achieve a goal ( Rizzolatti & Craighero 2004 ) . To rec - ognize and understand another agent’s action , primatessimulatetheperceivedactionintheir own motor system . Notably , mirror neurons within these circuits respond strongest to the goal of the action , not to the action itself . Thus , mirror circuits help perceivers infer an actor’s intention , not simply recognize the ac - tion performed . More generally , social neuroscientists pro - pose that mirror circuits provide a general mechanism for understanding diverse men - tal states in others ( e . g . , Decety & Gr ` ezes 2006 , Gallese et al . 2004 , 2007 ) . To under - stand how someone else feels when disgusted , we simulate how we feel when disgusted . From this perspective , simulation provides a general mechanism for establishing empathy . Simulation theorists further propose that sim - ulation supports other important social pro - cesses , such as imitation and social coordina - tion . Some simulation theorists propose that mirror circuits contributed to the evolution of human language ( Arbib 2005 , Rizzolatti & Arbib 1998 ) . EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE Surprisingly little research has attempted to test the widely accepted assumption that amodal symbols represent knowledge . In - deed , hardly any research before the past ten years attempted to assess directly the for - mat in which knowledge is represented ( e . g . , amodal symbols , simulation ) . Furthermore , relatively little research assessed other as - pects of the grounded view , such as the roles of situations and bodily states in cognition . During the past ten years , however , many researchers have designed experiments to as - sess grounded theories explicitly . The results of these experiments increasingly suggest that simulations , situations , and bodily states play central roles in cognition . Because of space limitations , many important ﬁndings are not cited . www . annualreviews . org • Grounded Cognition 623 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 23 ARI 5 November 2007 11 : 20 Perception and Action Perceptual inference . The simulation pro - cesscentraltoaccountsofgroundedcognition plays ubiquitous roles in perception . During perception , states of perceptual systems be - come stored in memory ( e . g . , for vision and audition ) . Similar stimuli perceived later trig - ger these memories , simulating the percep - tual states they contain . As these simulations become active , they produce perceptual in - ferences that go beyond perceived stimuli in useful ways . Goldstone ( 1995 ) taught people simple as - sociations between a shape ( e . g . , square ) and a color ( e . g . , dark red ) . Later , when a colored shape was ﬂashed ( e . g . , a red square ) , and par - ticipants had to reproduce its color , they dis - tortedthecolortowardstheprototypicalcolor associatedwiththeshapeseenearlier . Perceiv - ing the object’s shape activated a simulation of its prototypical color , which then distorted perception of the current color . Hansen et al . ( 2006 ) similarly showed that simulations of an object’s natural color ( e . g . , yellow for ba - nana ) distortachromaticperceptionoftheob - ject ( e . g . , a gray banana ) toward the opponent color ( e . g . , a bluish banana ) . During the perception of motion , visual simulations similarly arise that go beyond the physical motion present . In motion con - tinuation , viewers simulate the visual trajec - tory of an object beyond its actual trajectory , falsely remembering anticipated motion ( e . g . , Freyd 1987 ) . Knowledge about whether an object moves quickly or slowly affects the per - ceived speed of these simulated trajectories ( e . g . , Reed & Vinson 1996 ) . During appar - ent motion , simulations of possible human ac - tionsimilarlyshapeperceptionofinterpolated motion ( e . g . , Shiffrar & Freyd 1990 , 1993 ) . Stevens et al . ( 2000 ) showed that simulations in the motor system underlie these inferences . Analogous simulations produce somatosen - sory anticipations of an object tracing a trajec - tory over the body ( Blankenburg et al . 2006 ) . Lexical knowledge produces simulations that contribute to speech perception . In the phoneme restoration effect , listeners use au - ditory knowledge about a word to simulate a missingphoneme ( e . g . , Warren1970 ) . Samuel ( 1997 ) showed that these simulations utilize early auditory systems . Perception - action coordination . As peo - ple perceive visual objects , simulations of po - tential actions become active in preparation for situated action . Tucker & Ellis ( 1998 ) showedthattheperceivedhandleofacupacti - vates a grasping simulation that inadvertently affects motor responses on an unrelated task . Tucker & Ellis ( 2001 ) showed that viewing an object grasped with a precision or power grip ( e . g . , a grape versus a hammer ) produces a simulation of the appropriate action . Symes et al . ( 2007 ) showed that these simulations aresensitivetowhetheranobject’sorientation makes it easily graspable . Glover et al . ( 2004 ) showed that the size of an object affects these simulations . Bub et al . ( 2007 ) showed that a perceived object ( or object name ) automat - ically triggers simulations of both grasping and functional actions . Tucker & Ellis ( 2004 ) alsoshowedthatthesesimulationsoccurwhen the name of an object is read ( e . g . , “grape” ) . Helbig et al . ( 2006 ) showed that action sim - ulations speed visual recognition of objects on which these actions are performed . Us - ing fMRI , Chao & Martin ( 2000 ) showed that perceived objects activate the brain’s grasping circuit ( see Lewis 2006 for a review ) . Researchers increasingly extend these original ﬁndings in creative ways . In Bosbach et al . ( 2005 ) , accurately judging the weight of an object lifted by another agent requires simulating the lifting action in one’s own mo - tor and somatosensory systems . In Repp & Knoblich ( 2004 ) , a pianist’s ability to iden - tify auditory recordings of his or her own playing depends on simulating the motor ac - tions underlying it . In Pulverm¨uller et al . ( 2006 ) , hearing a word activates the articu - latory actions associated with producing it . In Profﬁtt ( 2006 ) , simulations of perceived effort affectvisualperception ( butnotaction - guided 624 Barsalou A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 23 ARI 5 November 2007 11 : 20 movement ) . Being tired from a run makes a hill look steeper . Carrying a heavy pack makes a path look longer . Motor simulations are also central to basic motor control . As a simple action is per - formed , the motor system constructs a feed - forward simulation of the action to guide and correct it ( e . g . , Grush 2004 , Wolpert etal . 1999 ) . Thesemotorsimulationsalsoplay roles in generating visual inferences about the anticipated actions of perceived agents ( Wilson & Knoblich 2005 ) . Perception of space . Rather than being isotropic , the perception of space is shaped by the body , the body’s relation to the envi - ronment , and the body’s potential for action ( Franklin & Tversky 1990 ) . Locating objects along the vertical axis of the body is easiest be - cause of the body’s perceived asymmetry with respect to the ground . Locating objects along the front - back axis is next easiest because of the potential for action to the front . Locating objects along the left - right axis is most dif - ﬁcult because environmental and bodily cues are lacking . Longo & Laurenco ( 2007 ) found that people’s perception of near space extends further outward as their arm length increases , suggesting that individual differences in bod - ies produce individual differences in space perception . Memory Implicit memory . Implicit memory appears closely related to perceptual inference . In both , perceptual memories become active and affect perception . As described above , simula - tions during perceptual inference create per - ceptionsthatgobeyondstimulusinformation . In implicit memory , simulations increase per - ceptualﬂuencyandthelikelihoodthatpercep - tions are categorized correctly ( i . e . , repetition priming ) . If , for example , a perceived face ac - tivates an implicit memory , the face may be perceived more quickly and accurately . Several general ﬁndings support the con - clusion that implicit memory results from the simulation of perceptual memories ( Roediger & McDermott 1993 , Schacter et al . 2004 ) . First , perceptualprocessingistypicallyimpor - tant for establishing robust implicit learning , suggesting that perceptual memories are re - sponsible ( e . g . , Jacoby 1983 ) . Second , repe - tition priming is strongest when the modali - ties of the memory and the perceived stimulus match , for example , when an auditory mem - ory exists to help process an auditory stim - ulus ( e . g . , Kirsner et al . 1989 ) . Third , repe - tition priming is strongest when perceptual details of the memory and perceived stim - ulus match , such as orientation , size , font , etc . ( e . g . , Jacoby & Hayman 1987 , Jolicoeur 1985 ) . Fourth , imagining a stimulus produces repetition priming similar to actually perceiv - ing it , suggesting that shared perceptual rep - resentations underlie both ( e . g . , Roediger & Blaxton 1987 , Schacter & Graf 1989 ) . For all these reasons , the simulation of perceptual states appears central to implicit memory . Explicit memory . Similar to implicit mem - ory , conscious memory of previous episodes relies heavily on modal representations . Ex - tensive reviews of supporting ﬁndings can be found in Paivio ( 1971 , 1986 ) , Conway ( 1990 , 2002 ) , and Rubin ( 2006 ) , who build theories ofexplicitmemoryfromthisevidence . Ingen - eral , these theories assume that multimodal simulations of previous episodes are central to episodic recollection . Simulation also appears central to constructing future events based on memories of past events ( Schacter & Addis 2007 ) . Although particularly strong evidence for multimodal simulation comes from research on autobiographical memory , even simple laboratory experiments demonstrate simula - tion . Consider experiments that manipulate whether words are studied visually or au - ditorally ( e . g . , Wheeler et al . 2000 ) . When retrieval of these words is tested later in a scanner , visual areas become active following visual study , whereas auditory areas become active following auditory study . Thus , the retrieval of a word simulates the modal www . annualreviews . org • Grounded Cognition 625 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 23 ARI 5 November 2007 11 : 20 operations performed at encoding . Buckner & Wheeler ( 2001 ) review many such ﬁndings . Within a single modality , the distributed brain states associated with studying different kinds of stimuli are simulated later at retrieval . Polyn et al . ( 2005 ) found that the distributed neural pattern associated with studying faces later reappeared when remembering them , as did the patterns for studying locations or ob - jects . Kent & Lamberts ( 2006 ) similarly found that the speed of processing different per - ceptual dimensions at encoding was linearly related to the speed of processing them at retrieval . Simulation also provides a natural expla - nation of various memory effects . Because a stimulus leaves memories in the modal areas that encoded it , greater activation in modal areas occurs when remembering something that actually occurred than when falsely re - membering something that did not ( Slotnick & Schacter 2004 ) . Remembering a stimu - lus speciﬁcally produces greater activation in modal areas than remembering it generally ( Garoff et al . 2005 ) . Simulating a scene at en - coding that extends the boundary of a studied picture produces reconstructive error later at retrieval ( e . g . , Intraub et al . 1998 ) . Reinstat - ing actions at retrieval performed earlier dur - ing encoding facilitates memory ( Ross et al . 2007 ) . Working memory . Neuroscience research with nonhumans established the distributed neural circuits that store an absent stimulus in working memory ( e . g . , Levy & Goldman - Rakic 2000 ) . To maintain a working memory , neuronsinthefrontallobesmaintainasimula - tionoftheabsentstimulusinthemodalsystem that processed it originally . More speciﬁ - cally , different regions of frontal cortex main - tain working memories for different types of modal content . For example , some re - gions maintain working memories of objects , whereas others maintain working memories of spatial locations . Even more speciﬁcally , different populations of frontal neurons are highly selective for the speciﬁc features they maintain ( Pasternak & Greenlee 2005 ) . For example , different frontal populations main - tain working memories for motion in differ - ent directions , for textures of different spatial frequency , etc . Research on imagery has further estab - lished the central role of modal simulation in working memory . Considerable behav - ioral evidence indicates that visual imagery in working memory simulates visual processing ( e . g . , Finke 1989 , Kosslyn 1980 , Shepard & Cooper 1982 ) . Neural evidence strongly cor - roborates this conclusion ( e . g . , Kosslyn et al . 2000 ) . Analogously , motor imagery simulates motor processing ( e . g . , Gr ` ezes & Decety 2001 , Jeannerod 1995 ) , and auditory imagery simulates auditory processing ( e . g . , Halpern et al . 2004 ) . When action is relevant to visual imagery , the motor system becomes engaged , consis - tent with theories of situated action . For ex - ample , when visual rotation of a body part is imagined , bodily constraints shape the rota - tional trajectory ( e . g . , Parsons 1987a , b ) . Sim - ilarly , mental rotation of visual objects is ac - companied by motor simulations of making them turn ( e . g . , Richter et al . 2000 ) . Knowledge and Conceptual Processing Although simulation in working memory has been accepted for many years , simulation as the basis of knowledge representation is still considered a radical proposal . Neverthe - less , considerable evidence now demonstrates the presence of simulation during conceptual processing . Behavioral evidence . Researchershaveused the property veriﬁcation task to assess whether conceptual processing utilizes simu - lation . On each trial , the word for a category is presented ( e . g . , HORSE ) followed by a word for a property that is either true or false of the category ( e . g . , mane versus horns ) . According to standard theories , participants assess rela - tions between amodal symbols for concepts 626 Barsalou A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 23 ARI 5 November 2007 11 : 20 and properties to verify properties . Accord - ing to grounded views , participants simulate the concept and the property and then assess whether the simulated property can be found in the simulated concept . Consistent with the simulation view , Solomon & Barsalou ( 2004 ) found that per - ceptual variables such as size best predicted veriﬁcation times and errors . As properties became larger , verifying them became more difﬁcult , consistent with the ﬁnding that veri - fying properties perceptually becomes more difﬁcult as properties become larger ( cf . Morrison & Tversky 1997 ) . Solomon & Barsalou ( 2001 ) similarly found that prop - erty representations contain detailed percep - tual information , difﬁcult to verbalize , sug - gesting that participants simulated properties to verify them . Borghi et al . ( 2004 ) found that the positions of properties in space are simu - lated during their veriﬁcation . If participants simulate properties to verify them , then having to switch from one modal - ity to another while simulating properties shouldincuraswitchingcost , analogoustothe cost of switching attention from one modality to another in perception ( e . g . , Spence et al . 2000 ) . Pecher at al . ( 2003 , 2004 ) found sup - portforthishypothesis , asdidMarques ( 2006 ) and Vermeulen et al . ( 2007 ) . Lesion evidence . Neuropsychologists have reported that lesions in a particular modal - ity increase the likelihood of losing cate - gories that rely on it for processing a cate - gory ( e . g . , Cree & McRae 2003 , Damasio & Damasio 1994 , Gainotti 2006 , Gainotti et al . 1995 , Humphreys & Forde 2001 , Simmons & Barsalou 2003 , Warrington & McCarthy 1987 , Warrington & Shallice 1984 ) . For ex - ample , damage to visual areas increases the likelihood of losing animals because visual processing is often the dominant modal - ity for interacting with this category . Con - versely , damage to motor areas increases the likelihood of losing the tools category , be - cause motor processing is often the dominant modality . Similarly , damage to color process - ing areas can produce deﬁcits in color knowl - edge ( e . g . , Miceli et al . 2001 ) , and damage to spatial processing areas can produce deﬁcits in location knowledge ( e . g . , Levine et al . 1985 ) . Additional research demonstrates that other mechanisms beside modal representa - tions contribute to category - speciﬁc deﬁcits ( e . g . , Caramazza & Shelton 1998 , Cree & McRae 2003 , Simmons & Barsalou 2003 , Tyler et al . 2000 ) . Neuroimaging evidence . Neuroimaging research further conﬁrms that simulation plays a central role in conceptual processing ( Martin 2001 , 2007 ) . When conceptual knowledge about objects is represented , brain areas that represent their properties during perception and action become active . In particular , brain areas that represent the shape and color of objects ( fusiform gyrus ) , the motion they exhibit ( middle and superior temporal lobe ) , and the actions that agents perform on them ( premotor and parietal areas ) become active to represent these prop - erties conceptually . When people perform the property veriﬁcation task described above , modal areas for the properties tested become active , including brain areas for shape , color , size , sound , taste , action , and touch ( e . g . , R . Goldberg et al . 2006 , Kan et al . 2003 , Kellenbach et al . 2001 , Simmons et al . 2007 ) . Further evidence comes from different proﬁles of multimodal activation for different categories . When people process animals conceptually , visual areas are especially active ; when people process artifacts , motor areas become active ( e . g . , Kiefer 2005 ; Martin 2001 , 2007 ; Thompson - Schill 2003 ) . Simi - larly , when people process foods conceptually , gustatory areas become active ( e . g . , Simmons et al . 2005 ) . When people process things that smell , olfactory areas become active ( e . g . , Gonzalez et al . 2006 ) . Additionally , the prop - erty areas just noted are often segregated by category ( Martin 2007 ) . Within the motion processing system , for example , distinct areas represent motion conceptually for animals versus artifacts . www . annualreviews . org • Grounded Cognition 627 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 23 ARI 5 November 2007 11 : 20 Language Comprehension Situation models . Although the presence of modal representations in such a high - level cognitive task as comprehension might seem implausible , supporting evidence has existed for decades . Early work on comprehension inferences strongly suggested the presence of spatial representations ( e . g . , Bransford & Johnson 1973 ) . Bower & Morrow ( 1990 ) foundthatpeoplerepresenttextmeaningwith situation models that have spatial properties ( also see Glenberg et al . 1987 , Rinck & Bower 2004 ) . Other research has shown that read - ers take spatial perspectives on scenes de - scribed in texts ( e . g . , Black et al . 1979 , Spivey et al . 2000 ) . Intraub & Hoffman ( 1992 ) found that readers confused pictures with texts , sug - gesting that readers simulated text meaning . Gernsbacher et al . ( 1990 ) found that individ - ual abilities for comprehending events visu - ally versus verbally were highly correlated , suggesting that modal representations under - lie both . Potter et al . ( 1986 ) showed that re - placing words with pictures did not disrupt sentence processing , suggesting that the pic - tures were integrated effortlessly into modal representations of sentence meaning ( also see Glaser 1992 ) . Perceptual simulation . More recently , re - searchers have addressed the role of per - ceptual simulation in representing texts . In much research reviewed by Zwaan & Madden ( 2005 ) , participants read a sentence and then processed a picture that either matched or mismatched something implied but not stated literally . For example , participants read “The ranger saw the eagle in the sky” and then named a subsequent picture of an eagle ei - ther with its wings outstretched or folded . If readers constructed simulations to rep - resent sentences , these simulations should have contained implicit perceptual informa - tion such as object shape . Consistent with this prediction , participants were faster to name the eagle with outstretched wings . Many ex - periments have demonstrated these match - ing effects , consistent with the simulation view . In another line of research , participants maintained irrelevant information in work - ing memory while processing sentences about scenes ( Fincher - Kiefer 2001 , Fincher - Kiefer & D’Agostino 2004 ) . Drawing predictive spa - tial inferences about the described scenes was worse when working memory contained interfering visual information than when it contained noninterfering verbal information , suggesting that readers represented the texts with simulations . Motor simulation . Many researchers have demonstrated the presence of motor simula - tions in comprehension . Across several lines of research , Pulverm¨uller ( 2005 ) found that when participants simply read the word for an action , the motor system becomes active to represent its meaning . More speciﬁcally , verbs for head , arm , and leg actions pro - duce head , arm , and leg simulations in the respective areas of the motor system . These simulations become active quickly , within a few hundred milliseconds , as illustrated by magnetoencepholography ( MEG ) . These simulations also play causal roles in lexical processing , given that transcranial magnetic stimulation ( TMS ) over the relevant motor areas affects behavioral performance ( e . g . , Buccino et al . 2005 , Pulverm¨uller et al . 2005 ) . Myung et al . ( 2006 ) similarly showed that motor simulations triggered by words produce priming across lexical decision trials . Many other researchers have assessed whether physical actions affect comprehen - sion . Klatzky et al . ( 1989 ) showed that prim - ing a motor action affected the time to judge the sensibility of a simple phrase describing an action . Similarly , comprehension is facil - itated when the action to make a response is consistent with text meaning ( Glenberg & Kaschak 2003 ) and also when the action to control text presentation is consistent ( Zwaan & Taylor 2006 ) . When reading about a sport , suchashockey , expertsproducemotorsimula - tions absent in novices ( Holt & Beilock 2006 ) . 628 Barsalou A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 23 ARI 5 November 2007 11 : 20 Other research shows that participants simulate motion through space as they read texts . Richardsonetal . ( 2003 ) foundthatread - ers simulate horizontal and vertical paths im - pliedbybothconcreteandabstractverbs ( e . g . , pushversuslift , argueversusrespect ) . Matlock ( 2004 ) found that implied ﬁctive motion ( e . g . , the road runs through the valley ) produces corresponding simulations of motion through space . Richardson & Matlock ( 2007 ) found that these simulations produce related eye movements . Meier & Robinson ( 2004 ) found that reading positively valenced words ori - ents attention up , whereas reading nega - tively valenced words orients attention down . Schubert ( 2005 ) similarly found that reading words associated with high versus low power orients attention up versus down , respectively . Meier & Robinson ( 2006 ) found that depres - sion increases downward orientation . Affective simulation . Researchers have also shown that people simulate affective states during comprehension . When people read taboo words and reprimands , affective reac - tions , as measured by skin conductance , are strongerwhenreadinaﬁrstlanguagethanina secondlanguageacquiredatalaterage ( Harris et al . 2003 ) . Because greater affect is associ - ated with these expressions at younger ages , native language speakers continue to simulate these affective responses when reading them as adults . A reader’s affective state interacts with the affective content of a text . In Havas et al . ( 2007 ) , participants’ faces were conﬁgured discretely into states associated with partic - ular emotions prior to judging the sensi - bility of sentences that contained emotional content . When facial emotion matched sen - tence emotion , comprehension was better than when they mismatched . Embodied states ofthefacetriggeredemotionalstates , whichin turninteractedwithsentencecomprehension . Barrett ( 2006 ) suggests that affective simula - tion underlies the conceptualization of emo - tion that occurs in comprehension and other processes . Gesture . Another important form of em - bodiment in language is the gesture that spontaneously accompanies speech ( McNeill 2005 ) . Producing gestures helps speakers re - trieve words whose meanings are related to the gestures ( e . g . , Krauss 1998 ) . Speakers also produce gestures to help listeners compre - hend what they say ( e . g . , Alibali et al . 2001 , Kelly 2001 , Valenzeno et al . 2003 ) . In child development , gesture can convey an emerg - ing conceptualization that cannot yet be artic - ulated in speech ( e . g . , Goldin - Meadow 2003 ) . Kelly et al . ( 2002 ) integrate gesture with grounded theories of language . Thought Physical reasoning . Much work shows that simulations play central roles in reasoning about physical situations ( Hegarty 2004 ) . When people view a static conﬁguration of gears , for example , they use simulation to in - fer the direction in which a particular gear will turn . People similarly use simulation to draw inferences about how a conﬁguration of pul - leys will work or when water will spill from a tipped glass . Numerous sources of evidence support the use of simulation in these tasks . The time to draw an inference is often correlated with the duration of a physical event , such as how long a gear takes to turn ( e . g . , Schwartz & Black 1996 ) . Drawing inferences often produces as - sociated gestures ( e . g . , Hegarty et al . 2005 ) . Carrying out associated actions can improve inference ( e . g . , Schwartz 1999 ) . When work - ing memory is ﬁlled with visuospatial infor - mation , inferencessuffercomparedwithwhen working memory is ﬁlled with verbal infor - mation ( e . g . , Sims & Hegarty 1997 ) . Individ - ual differences in spatial ability correlate with the ability to draw inferences ( e . g . , Hegarty & Steinhoff 1997 ) . Hegarty ( 2004 ) concludes that spatial simulation , not visual imagery , plays the central role in reasoning about phys - ical situations . Furthermore , the simulations that underlie this reasoning appear piecemeal and sketchy , not holistic and detailed . www . annualreviews . org • Grounded Cognition 629 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 23 ARI 5 November 2007 11 : 20 Abstract reasoning . Abstract forms of rea - soning have not received as much atten - tion as physical reasoning . Although Johnson - Laird’s ( 1983 ) mental model theory could be made compatible with grounded views , the mental models in his theory typically con - tain amodal symbols , not simulations . Much circumstantial evidence , however , suggests that simulation plays central roles in ab - stract reasoning . For example , philosophers of science observe frequently that scientiﬁc and mathematical discoveries typically arise from simulation ( e . g . , Barwise & Etchemendy 1991 , Hadamard 1949 , Nersessian 1999 ) . Widespread content effects in reasoning sim - ilarly implicate simulations and situations in abstract reasoning ( e . g . , Cheng & Holyoak 1985 ) . Further evidence that abstract reasoning is grounded comes from research inspired by metaphor theory . When people reason about the abstract concept of time , they use space metaphorically to draw inferences ( e . g . , Boroditsky 2000 , Boroditsky & Ramscar 2002 ) . For example , when people hear , “Next Wednesday’s meeting has been moved for - ward two days , ” their inference about whether the new meeting day is Monday or Friday de - pends on their current spatial trajectory . Sim - ilarly , how people conceptualize time reﬂects whether their language describes space hori - zontally or vertically ( Boroditsky 2001 ) . Social Cognition Embodiment effects . Social psychologists have reported embodiment effects for decades ( Barsalou et al . 2003 , Niedenthal et al . 2005 ) . Bodily states can be effects of social cognition . For example , activating the elderly stereotype causes people to walk slowly and to perform lexical decision slowly ( e . g . , Dijksterhuis & Bargh 2001 ) . Similarly , seeing an in - group member engages the smiling musculature ( e . g . , Vanman et al . 1997 ) . Bodily states are not simply effects of so - cial cognition ; they also cause it . When a facial expression or posture is adopted , it elicits as - sociated mental states . For example , engaging the smiling musculature produces positive af - fect ( e . g . , Strack et al . 1988 ) , whereas slump - ing produces negative affect ( e . g . , Stepper & Strack 1993 ) . Actions produce similar out - comes . Nodding one’s head produces posi - tive affect ( e . g . , Wells & Petty 1980 ) , whereas pushingawaywiththearmsproducesnegative affect ( e . g . , Cacioppo et al . 1993 ) . Barsalou et al . ( 2003 ) proposed that these embodiment effects reﬂect a pattern - completion inference mechanism that sup - ports situated action . According to this view , representations of familiar situations that contain embodiments become established in memory ( e . g . , receiving a gift , feeling posi - tive affect , and smiling ) . When part of this situation occurs ( e . g . , receiving a gift ) , it activates the remainder of the situational pattern , producing associated embodiments ( e . g . , smiling ) . Similarly , if smiling is en - gaged , it activates representations of situa - tions that contain it , producing associated pattern components ( e . g . , positive affect , gen - erosity ) . E . Smith & Semin ( 2004 ) review much further evidence that situated action or - ganizes social cognition . Barsalou et al . ( 2005 ) examine embodiment in religious cognition . Social mirroring . Accumulating evidence implicates simulation in many social processes ( Decety & Gr ` ezes 2006 , Gallese et al . 2004 , Goldman 2006 , Iacoboni 2007 , Rizzolatti & Craighero 2004 ) . In general , mirror circuits appear to underlie these simulations , estab - lishing empathy between perceivers and per - ceived actors . Using mirror circuits , per - ceivers infer the goals of others ( e . g . , Kohler etal . 2002 ) andinfertheiraffectivestates , such as pain and disgust ( e . g . , Jackson et al . 2005 , Wicker et al . 2003 ) . Mirror circuits underlie a variety of other social activities , including im - itation ( e . g . , Iacoboni et al . 1999 ) and social coordination ( e . g . , Sebanz et al . 2006 ) . In general , a mirror circuit does not pro - vide a complete account of a social activity but contributes to a larger system . For example , additional brain areas beyond mirror circuits 630 Barsalou A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 23 ARI 5 November 2007 11 : 20 prevent perceivers from confusing someone else’s mental state with their own ( Decety & Gr ` ezes 2006 ) . In imitation , simulating how the imitation of an action will look and feel is also important ( Iacoboni et al . 1999 ) . Joint attention and timing are also central in social coordination ( Sebanz et al . 2006 ) . Individual differences in simulation ability produce individual differences in social cog - nition . For example , individual differences in the ability to simulate other people’s mental states , such as pain , correlate with rated em - pathy ( e . g . , Jackson et al . 2005 ) . Individual differences in expertise , such as ballet , corre - late with the ability to mirror relevant action ( Calvo - Merino et al . 2005 ) . Development Newborninfantsimitatethefacialexpressions and bodily movements of adults , simulating the actions that they see physically ( Meltzoff & Moore 1983 ) . As infants grow older , they understand the perceived actions of others in terms of what they have come to understand about their own actions and intentions ( Meltzoff 2007 ) . Once infants experience the occluding effects of a blindfold , for example , they understand that an adult wearing a blindfold cannot see . Thus , mirroring plays a central role in development , as infants use simulations of their own experience to understand the goals and actions of others . Researchers increasingly demonstrate that development depends critically on bodily states ( e . g . , L . Smith 2005b ) and situated ac - tion ( e . g . , L . Smith & Gasser2005 ) . Forexam - ple , L . Smith et al . ( 1999 ) showed that the de - velopment of object permanence is not simply a cognitive achievement ( as long believed ) but also a grounded one . Speciﬁcally , motor per - severation plays a major role in tasks that mea - sure object permanence . Longo & Bertenthal ( 2006 ) similarly showed that motor simula - tions contribute to perseveration . Other developmental tasks also exhibit strong dependence on action . For example , the motor actions performed while learn - ing a category inﬂuence the visual features abstracted into its representation ( L . Smith 2005a ) . Similarly , the actions performed on objects during play later cause children to place the objects in spatial clusters that reﬂect shared categories ( Namy et al . 1997 ) . In gen - eral , extensive amounts of learning occur be - tween perception , action , and cognition as de - velopment progresses ( e . g . , Greco et al . 1990 , Rochat & Striano 1999 ) . THEORETICAL AND EMPIRICAL ISSUES Grounded cognition in its modern form is sufﬁciently new and controversial that many issues surround it . A sample of these issues follows . Does the Brain Contain Amodal Symbols ? Researchers who once denied that the modal - ities had anything to do with cognition now acknowledge their potential relevance . The empirical evidence that the modalities have something to do with cognition has become compelling . Nevertheless , most researchers in cognitive psychology and cognitive science are not ready to completely abandon tradi - tional theories . One widely held view is that simulations in the modalities play peripheral roles in cognition , while classic operations on amodal symbols still play the central roles . It will be important for future research to assess this mixed view . Can empirical evidence be found for the amodal symbols still believed by many to lie at the heart of cognition ? As mentioned above , surprisingly few attempts have been made to establish empirical sup - port for amodal symbols . If amodal symbols are to remain central in cognitive theories , empirical support is necessary . It will not be enough to rely on the fact that theories built from amodal symbols can mimic cognitive abilities . It will also be important to demon - strate that computation on amodal sym - bols constitutes the underlying mechanism . www . annualreviews . org • Grounded Cognition 631 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 23 ARI 5 November 2007 11 : 20 Furthermore , modal symbols must be local - ized in the brain , and neural principles for processing them explained . Does Simulation Implement Classic Symbolic Operations ? Conversely , can simulation mechanisms be shown to be more than merely peripheral to cognition ? Can simulation implement the core cognitive functions that many researchers still believe require amodal symbols ? As described above , grounded theories , such as PSS and cognitive linguistics grammars , have illustrated how simulation mechanisms can implement , in principle , core cognitive functions , including type - token binding , inference , productivity , recursion , and propositions . The existence of these operations in the cognitive system is not in question . How the brain actually implements them is . Amodal formalisms for symbolic op - erations may provide a theoretical shorthand for expressing what the brain computes , but simulation , or something else , may be the mechanism that actually implements these operations . Clearly , computational implementations are required to demonstrate convincingly that simulation can implement symbolic opera - tions . Empirical evidence will be required to support these accounts . If future research suc - ceeds in these projects , the viability of amodal symbols as plausible cognitive constructs may increasingly come into question . Are Simulations and Embodiments Causal or Epiphenomenal ? Proponentsofamodalviewsoftensuggestthat amodalsymbolsplaythecentralcausalrolesin cognitive computation , with simulations and embodiments simply being epiphenomenal . Establishing whether simulations and embod - imentsplaycausalrolesisindeedanimportant issue . Considerable evidence exists already , however , that they do . For example , TMS over motor areas affects linguistic process - ing ( e . g . , Buccino et al . 2005 , Pulverm¨uller et al . 2005 ) . If simulations in motor areas are epiphenomenal , then modulating brain activ - ity in these areas should have no effect on the causal sequence of processes underlying language , but it does . Similarly , experimen - tally manipulated bodily states , assigned ran - domly to participants , produce extensive ef - fects throughout social cognition ( Barsalou et al . 2003 ) , situated action ( e . g . , Tucker & Ellis 1998 , 2001 , 2004 ) , and linguistic pro - cessing ( e . g . , Glenberg & Kaschak 2003 ) . If these bodily states are epiphenomenal , they shouldhavenoeffectonthecausalsequenceof processesunderlyingbehavioralperformance , but again they do . Conversely , it is essential for proponents of amodal views to demonstrate that amodal symbols play causal roles in cognition ( as - suming that evidence for their existence in the brain can be found ) . Consider neuroimag - ing studies that ﬁnd activations in modal ar - easduringconceptualprocessing ( e . g . , Martin 2007 ) . If these activations are epiphenome - nal , then it is essential to identify alterna - tive amodal brain areas that play the causal role in producing conceptual performance . Interestingly , many of these studies fail to ﬁnd signiﬁcant activations outside modal ar - eas , suggesting that amodal processes do not contribute to conceptual processing , and that the active modal areas observed play the causal roles , given that they are the only areas active . Assessing the causal roles of simulations and embodiments clearly requires much fur - ther research . Nevertheless , signiﬁcant ev - idence exists already that they are not epiphenomenal . What Roles Do Statistical Representations Play ? Research inspired by neural networks and Bayesian statistics has clearly shown that the brain is exquisitely sensitive to the statistical structure of experience . Interestingly , these two approaches often ( but not always ) assume 632 Barsalou A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 23 ARI 5 November 2007 11 : 20 that statistical processing occurs in a modular system separate from the brain’s modal sys - tems , much like traditional symbolic theo - ries . In other words , these approaches have remained relatively ungrounded . By no means is this necessary . To the contrary , statistical processing is central to grounded cognition , as illustrated by dynamic systems approaches . Similarly , theories such as PSS assume that neural networks underlie the convergence zone architecture that im - plements simulation . Furthermore , Bayesian statistics can be viewed as statistical accounts of the multimodal information stored in the dynamic systems that generate simulations and guide situated action . Depending on the particular distribution of multimodal content captured for a category , the Bayesian statis - tics describing it will vary , as will the simula - tions and situated actions generated from it . Bayesian theories provide a powerful tool for describing the content and behavior of these systems . How Is Language Grounded ? Language provides an excellent domain in which to combine symbolic operations , sta - tistical processing , and grounding . Symbolic operationsareclearlycentraltolinguisticpro - cessing . Thematic roles of verbs are bound to values ( e . g . , binding the instrument role for “eat” to spoon ) . Open - class words for nouns , modiﬁers , andverbs , andadverbscom - bine productively to form novel phrasal and sentential structures ( e . g . , combining differ - ent color modiﬁers with different object head nouns to form noun phrases such as red hair , blond hair , and red wine ) . Phrasal structures embed recursively ( e . g . , “The dog the cat chased howled” ) . Propositions extracted from linguistic utterances represent meaning be - yond surface structure [ e . g . , extracting chase ( cat , dog ) from either “The cat chased the dog” or the “The dog was chased by the cat” ] . Statistical processing is also central to lan - guage use . Much research shows that statisti - cal distributions of word senses contribute to ambiguity resolution during syntactic analy - sis ( e . g . , Trueswell 1996 ) . Similarly , statistical distributions of argument structures and their instantiations contribute to sentence process - ing ( e . g . , McRae et al . 2005 ) . Finally , grounding is also central to com - prehension , as we saw earlier . As people com - prehend a text , they construct simulations to represent its perceptual , motor , and affective content . Simulations appear central to the representation of meaning . Thus , language use is a domain where the study of symbolic operations , statistical processing , and grounding can be integrated . Numerous issues challenge the integration of these perspectives . Do amodal symbols or simulation mechanisms implement the symbolic operations that underlie linguistic processing ? As sentences are processed incrementally , are simulations constructed incrementally to reﬂect the semantic con - tribution of each incoming word ? Does the compositional structure of syntax correspond to the compositional structure of simulations ? Do language statistics affect the speciﬁc sim - ulations constructed during comprehension ? Docognitivelinguisticsgrammarsofferuseful frameworks for integrating symbolic opera - tions , statistical processing , and grounding ? Does the Brain Contain a Single Representational System ? As described above , some simulation theories propose that a single multimodal represen - tation system underlies diverse cognitive processes , including top - down perception , implicit memory , working memory , explicit memory , and conceptual knowledge . Ac - cording to this view , simulation is a unifying computational principle throughout the brain , with different control systems oper - ating on a shared representational system to produce different forms of simulation in different processes . Is this proposal correct ? If so , what is the nature of the shared representational system ? Within a given modality , is the www . annualreviews . org • Grounded Cognition 633 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 23 ARI 5 November 2007 11 : 20 representational system organized hierarchi - cally , as appears to be the case in the visual and motorsystems ? Ifso , dosomeprocessesaccess these hierarchical representations at higher or lower levels than others ? For example , explicit memory , conceptual processing , and language might tend to access high - level representa - tions , whereas top - down perception , implicit memory , and working memory might tend to access lower - level representations . Another central issue concerns the different control mechanisms for different processes . Where are they located in the brain , and why do they reside in these particular locations ? How do differences between them implement differ - ent processes ? How Does the Brain Represent Abstract Concepts ? Abstract concepts pose a classic challenge for grounded cognition . How can theories that focus on modal simulations explain concepts that do not appear modal ? This concern of - tenreﬂectsthemisperceptiondescribedabove that conceptual content in grounded theories can only come from perception of the external world . Becausepeopleperceiveinternalstates , however , conceptual content can come from internal sources as well . Preliminary evidence suggests that introspective information is in - deed central to the representation of abstract concepts ( e . g . , Barsalou & Wiemer - Hastings 2005 , Wiemer - Hastings et al . 2001 ) . Such ﬁndings suggest that we need to learn much more about how people perceive and concep - tualize internal states . Notably , people simu - late internal states similar to how they sim - ulate external states ( e . g . , Havas et al . 2007 , Niedenthal et al . 2005 ) . Thus , simulations of internal states could provide much of the con - ceptual content central to abstract concepts ( Barsalou 1999 ) . Abstract concepts also appear to depend heavily on situations and situated action ( Schwanenﬂugel 1991 ) . Processing an ab - stract concept by itself is difﬁcult but becomes mucheasierwhenabackgroundsituationcon - textualizes it . Barsalou & Wiemer - Hastings ( 2005 ) report evidence for extensive situa - tional content in abstract concepts . Because the scientiﬁc study of concepts has primarily focused so far on concrete concepts , we actually know remarkably little about ab - stract concepts , even from the perspective of traditional cognitive theories . Nevertheless , abstract concepts appear to play central roles throughout human cognition , especially in meta - cognition , social interaction , education , industry , and social institutions . Regardless of whether simulations of introspections and sit - uationsunderlietherepresentationofabstract concepts , muchmoreeffortshouldbedevoted to understanding them . Do Mirror Neuron Systems Pervade Social Cognition ? Much excitement surrounds the discovery of mirror neuron systems . As described above , social simulation theories propose that these systems underlie many important so - cial phenomena . One central issue is assess - ing whether mirror systems do indeed play all these roles , and perhaps others . If so , then why do humans exhibit such different so - cial abilities than nonhuman primates who also have mirror systems ? What other sys - tems contribute to these differences ? Also , to what extent do compromised mirror systems underlie psychopathologies associated with a lack of intersubjectivity , such as autism and schizophrenia ( e . g . , Gallese 2003 ) ? METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES Besides addressing theoretical and empirical issues , grounded cognition must address vari - ous methodological issues . Future growth and impact of this area is likely to depend on ad - dressing these issues successfully . Computational and Formal Theories Grounded cognition suffers from an obvi - ous lack of well - speciﬁed theories . Often 634 Barsalou A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 23 ARI 5 November 2007 11 : 20 experiments simply attempt to demonstrate the presence of modal processing in higher cognition . Given the widespread skepticism about grounded cognition ten years ago , demonstration experiments made sense . Now that modal processing in higher cognition is becoming well documented , it is time to de - velop computational accounts of grounded theories , along with experiments that test them . Transitioning from demonstration ex - periments to analytic experiments is a nat - ural trajectory in science , and it will un - doubtedly occur in grounded cognition . This trajectory is also likely to include increasing attempts to build computational implemen - tations , followed by formal accounts of the principles underlying them . For examples of initial attempts to implement grounded the - ories , see Cangelosi et al . ( 2000 ) , Cangelosi & Riga ( 2006 ) , Garagnani et al . ( 2007 ) , Wennekers et al . ( 2006 ) , and Goldreich ( 2007 ) . Integrating Disciplines and Levels of Explanation One strength of grounded cognition is its nat - ural ﬁt with the brain . Because grounded cog - nition rests on the modalities , knowledge of how the brain implements the modalities in - forms grounded cognition . Furthermore , as - sessing neural activity in the modalities pro - vides a natural way to test predictions of grounded theories . Clearly , however , much greater integration of cognitive and neural mechanisms must occur than the relatively simple mappings established so far . Neverthe - less , the grounded approach appears to have unusual potential for integrating cognition with the brain . Grounded cognition has signiﬁcant poten - tial to integrate other research areas as well . For example , a core principle of grounded cognition is that cognition shares mechanisms with perception , action , and introspection . Increasingly speciﬁed accounts of how cog - nition , perception , action , and introspection interactduringsituatedactionarelikelytofol - low from future research . Similarly , grounded cognition has also shown potential to in - tegrate cognitive , social , and developmental processes . Research in all three ﬁelds has increasingly incorporated simulation , situa - tions , and bodily states as important con - structs . Thus , further integration of these areas seems like another natural outcome of research in grounded cognition . As described above , robotics offers considerable potential for accomplishing this integration ( Barsalou et al . 2007a ) . Grounding Classic Research Paradigms It is unlikely that grounded cognition will be fully accepted until classic research paradigms can be understood within its framework . In cognitive psychology , for example , how would a classic paradigm such as recognition mem - ory be understood as grounded ? Similarly , how might the construct of a production in a production system be understood ? One possibility is that many empirical re - sults and their interpretations would remain roughly the same within the framework of groundcognition . Analogoustohowsymbolic operations can be retained in grounded views but be realized differently , well - established empirical results and explanations may often retain much of their original form . One fo - cus of change is likely to be at the represen - tational level . In recognition memory , for ex - ample , rather than assuming that a vector of amodalsymbolsrepresentsalearningepisode , its representational elements could instead be mapped into a multimodal state . At higher theoretical levels , much of the original theory might remain . Similarly , in production sys - tems , rather than viewing the condition and action sides of a production as amodal sym - bols , the condition could be represented as the state of a perceptual modality , and the ac - tion could be represented as a state of the motor system . From the grounded perspec - tive , a production is simply an association be - tween a perception and an action . Above the www . annualreviews . org • Grounded Cognition 635 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 23 ARI 5 November 2007 11 : 20 representational level , the remaining struc - ture of a production system might again re - main largely intact . Clearly , the reinvention of classic paradigms requires careful theoretical and empirical assessment . Until grounding is integrated with classic paradigms , however , it is unlikely that it will be accepted fully . Thus , another major goal for the grounded cognition community is to illustrate how classic paradigms can be made compatible with grounding , and perhaps how grounding can take understandings of these paradigms to new levels . ACKNOWLEDGMENT This work was supported by National Science Foundation Grant BCS - 0212134 and by DARPA contract BICA FA8650 - 05 - C - 7256 to Lawrence Barsalou . LITERATURE CITED Alibali MW , Heath DC , Myers HJ . 2001 . Effects of visibility between speaker and listener on gesture production : Some gestures are meant to be seen . J . Mem . Lang . 44 : 169 – 88 Arbib MA . 2005 . From monkey - like action recognition to human language : an evolutionary framework for neurolinguistics . Behav . Brain Sci . 28 : 105 – 67 Barrett LF . 2006 . Solving the emotion paradox : categorization and the experience of emotion . Pers . Soc . Psychol . Rev . 10 : 20 – 46 Barsalou LW . 1999 . Perceptual symbol systems . Behav . Brain Sci . 22 : 577 – 660 Barsalou LW . 2003 . Situated simulation in the human conceptual system . Lang . Cogn . Process . 18 : 513 – 62 Barsalou LW . 2005a . Abstraction as dynamic interpretation in perceptual symbol systems . In Building Object Categories , Carnegie Sympos . Ser . , ed . L Gershkoff - Stowe , D Rakison , pp . 389 – 431 . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum Barsalou LW . 2005b . Continuity of the conceptual system across species . Trends Cogn . Sci . 9 : 309 – 11 Barsalou LW . 2007 . Grounding symbolic operations in the brain’s modal systems . In Em - bodied Grounding : Social , Cognitive , Affective , and Neuroscientiﬁc approaches , ed . GR Semin , ER Smith . New York : Cambridge Univ . Press . In press Barsalou LW , Barbey AK , Simmons WK , Santos A . 2005 . Embodiment in religious knowledge . J . Cogn . Cult . 5 : 14 – 57 Barsalou LW , Breazeal C , Smith LB . 2007a . Cognition as coordinated noncognition . Cogn . Process . 8 : 79 – 91 Barsalou LW , Hale CR . 1993 . Components of conceptual representation : from feature lists to recursive frames . In Categories and Concepts : Theoretical Views and Inductive Data Analysis , ed . I Van Mechelen , J Hampton , R Michalski , P Theuns , pp . 97 – 144 . San Diego , CA : Academic BarsalouLW , NiedenthalPM , BarbeyA , RuppertJ . 2003 . Socialembodiment . In ThePsychology of Learning and Motivation , Vol . 43 , ed . B Ross , pp . 43 – 92 . San Diego , CA : Academic Barsalou LW , Santos A , Simmon WK , Wilson CD . 2007b . Language and simulation in con - ceptual processing . In Symbols , Embodiment , and Meaning , ed . M De Vega AM , Glenberg AC , Graesser A . Oxford : Oxford Univ . Press . In press Barsalou LW , Wiemer - Hastings K . 2005 . Situating abstract concepts . In Grounding Cognition : The Role of Perception and Action in Memory , Language , and Thought , ed . D Pecher , R Zwaan , pp . 129 – 63 . New York : Cambridge Univ . Press 636 Barsalou A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 23 ARI 5 November 2007 11 : 20 Barwise J , Etchemendy J . 1991 . Visual information and valid reasoning . In Visualization in Mathematics , ed . W Zimmerman , S Cunningham , pp . 9 – 24 . Washington , DC : Math . Assoc . Am . Black JB , Turner TJ , Bower GH . 1979 . Point of view in narrative comprehension , memory , and production . J . Verbal Learn . Verbal Behav . 18 : 187 – 98 Blankenburg F , Ruff CC , Deichmann R , Rees G , Driver J . 2006 . The cutaneous rabbit illusion affects human primary sensory cortex somatotopically . PLoS Biol . 4 : 459 – 66 Borghi AM , Glenberg A , Kaschak M . 2004 . Putting words in perspective . Mem . Cogn . 32 : 863 – 73 Boroditsky L . 2000 . Metaphoric structuring : understanding time through spatial metaphors . Cognition 75 : 1 – 28 Boroditsky L . 2001 . Does language shape thought ? English and Mandarin speakers’ concep - tions of time . Cogn . Psychol . 43 : 1 – 22 Boroditsky L , Ramscar M . 2002 . The roles of body and mind in abstract thought . Psychol . Sci . 13 : 185 – 88 Bosbach S , Cole J , Prinz W , Knoblich G . 2005 . Inferring another’s expectation from action : the role of peripheral sensation . Nat . Neurosci . 8 : 1295 – 97 Bower GH , Morrow DG . 1990 . Mental models in narrative comprehension . Science 247 : 44 – 48 Bransford JD , Johnson MK . 1973 . Considerations of some problems of comprehension . In Visual Information Processing , ed . WG Chase , pp . 383 – 438 . New York : Academic Breazeal C . 2002 . Designing Sociable Robots . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press Bub DN , Masson MEJ , Cree GS . 2007 . Evocation of functional and volumetric gestural knowl - edge by objects and words . Cognition . In press Buccino G , Riggio L , Melli G , Binkofski F , Gallese V , Rizzolatti G . 2005 . Listening to action - related sentences modulates the activity of the motor system : a combined TMS and be - havioral study . Cogn . Brain Res . 24 : 355 – 63 Buckner RL , Wheeler ME . 2001 . The cognitive neuroscience of remembering . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 2 : 624 – 34 Cacioppo JT , Priester JR , Bernston GG . 1993 . Rudimentary determination of attitudes : II . Arm ﬂexion and extension have differential effects on attitudes . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 65 : 5 – 17 Calvo - Merino B , Glaser DE , Gr ` ezes J , Passingham RE , Haggard P . 2005 . Action observation and acquired motor skills : an fMRI study with expert dancers . Cereb . Cortex 8 : 1243 – 49 Cangelosi A , Greco A , Harnad S . 2000 . From robotic toil to symbolic theft : grounding transfer from entry - level to higher - level categories . Connect . Sci . 12 : 143 – 62 Cangelosi A , Riga T . 2006 . An embodied model for sensorimotor grounding and grounding transfer : experiments with epigenetic robots . Cogn . Sci . 30 : 673 – 89 Caramazza A , Shelton JR . 1998 . Domain - speciﬁc knowledge systems in the brain : the animate - inanimate distinction . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 10 : 1 – 34 Chao LL , Martin A . 2000 . Representation of manipulable man - made objects in the dorsal stream . Neuroimage 12 : 478 – 84 Cheng PW , Holyoak KJ . 1985 . Pragmatic reasoning schemas . Cogn . Psychol . 17 : 391 – 416 Chomsky N . 1957 . Syntactic Structures . The Hague : Mouton Clark A . 1997 . Being There : Putting Brain , Body , and World Together Again . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press Conway MA . 1990 . Autobiographical Memory : An Introduction . Buckingham , UK : Buckingham Univ . Press www . annualreviews . org • Grounded Cognition 637 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 23 ARI 5 November 2007 11 : 20 Conway MA . 2002 . Sensory - perceptual episodic memory and its context : autobiographical memory . In Episodic Memory : New Directions in Research , ed . A Baddeley , JP Aggleton , MA Conway , pp . 53 – 70 . Oxford : Oxford Univ . Press Coulson S . 2001 . Semantic Leaps : Frame Shifting and Conceptual Blending in Meaning Construction . New York : Cambridge Univ . Press Cree GS , McRae K . 2003 . Analyzing the factors underlying the structure and computation of the meaning of chipmunk , cherry , chisel , cheese , and cello ( and many other such concrete nouns ) . J . Exp . Psychol . : Gen . 132 : 163 – 201 Damasio AR . 1989 . Time - locked multiregional retroactivation : a systems - level proposal for the neural substrates of recall and recognition . Cognition 33 : 25 – 62 Damasio AR , Damasio H . 1994 . Cortical systems for retrieval of concrete knowledge : the convergence zone framework . In Large - Scale Neuronal Theories of the Brain , ed . C Koch , JL Davis , pp . 61 – 74 . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press Decety J , Gr ` ezes J . 2006 . The power of simulation : imagining one’s own and other’s behavior . Brain Res . 1079 : 4 – 14 Dijksterhuis A , Bargh JA . 2001 . The perception - behavior expressway : automatic effects of social perception on social behavior . In Advances in Experimental Social Psychology , Vol . 23 , ed . MP Zanna , pp . 1 – 40 . San Diego , CA : Academic Epicurus ( 341 – 270 B . C . E . ) . 1987 . Sensation , imagination , and memory . In The Hellenistic Philosophers , Vol . 1 , ed . AA Long , DN Sedley , pp . 72 – 78 . New York : Cambridge Univ . Press Fauconnier G . 1985 . Mental Spaces . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press Fillmore CJ . 1985 . Frames and the semantics of understanding . Quad . di Semantica 6 : 222 – 55 Fincher - Kiefer R . 2001 . Perceptual components of situation models . Mem . Cogn . 29 : 336 – 43 Fincher - Kiefer R , D’Agostino PR . 2004 . The role of visuospatial resources in generating pre - dictive and bridging inferences . Discourse Process . 37 : 205 – 24 Finke RA . 1989 . Principles of Mental Imagery . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press Fodor JA , Pylyshyn ZW . 1988 . Connectionism and cognitive architecture : a critical analysis . Cognition 28 : 3 – 71 Franklin N , Tversky B . 1990 . Searching imagined environments . J . Exp . Psychol . : Gen . 119 : 63 – 76 Freyd JJ . 1987 . Dynamic mental representations . Psychol . Rev . 94 : 427 – 38 Gainotti G . 2006 . Anatomical functional and cognitive determinants of semantic memory disorders . Neurosci . Biobehav . Rev . 30 : 577 – 94 GainottiG , SilveriMC , DanieleA , GiustolisiL . 1995 . Neuroanatomicalcorrelatesofcategory - speciﬁc semantic disorders : a critical survey . Memory 3 : 247 – 64 Gallese V . 2003 . The roots of empathy : the shared manifold hypothesis and the neural basis of intersubjectivity . Psychopathology 36 : 171 – 80 Gallese V , Keysers C , Rizzolatti G . 2004 . A unifying view of the basis of social cognition . Trends Cogn . Sci . 8 : 396 – 403 Garagnani M , Wennekers T , Pulverm¨uller F . 2007 . A neural model of the language cortex . Neurocomputing 70 : 1914 – 19 Garoff RJ , Slotnick SD , Schacter DL . 2005 . The neural origins of speciﬁc and general memory : the role of the fusiform cortex . Neuropsychologia 43 : 847 – 59 Gernsbacher MA , Varner KR , Faust ME . 1990 . Investigating differences in general compre - hension skill . J . Exp . Psychol . : Learn . Mem . Cogn . 16 : 430 – 45 Gibbs RW Jr . 1994 . The Poetics of Mind : Figurative Thought , Language , and Understanding . New York : Cambridge Univ . Press 638 Barsalou A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 23 ARI 5 November 2007 11 : 20 Gibbs RW Jr . 2006 . Embodiment and Cognitive Science . New York : Cambridge Univ . Press Gibson JJ . 1979 . The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception . New York : Houghton Mifﬂin Glaser WR . 1992 . Picture naming . Cognition 42 : 61 – 105 Glenberg AM . 1997 . What memory is for . Behav . Brain Sci . 20 : 1 – 55 Glenberg AM , Kaschak MP . 2003 . The body’s contribution to language . In The Psychology of Learning and Motivation , Vol . 43 , ed . B Ross , pp . 93 – 126 . New York : Academic Glenberg AM , Meyer M , Lindem K . 1987 . Mental models contribute to foregrounding during text comprehension . J . Mem . Lang . 26 : 69 – 83 Glenberg AM , Schroeder JL , Robertson DA . 1998 . Averting the gaze disengages the environ - ment and facilitates remembering . Mem . Cogn . 26 : 651 – 58 Glover S , Rosenbaum DA , Graham J , Dixon P . 2004 . Grasping the meaning of words . Exp . Brain Res . 154 : 103 – 8 Goldberg A . 1995 . Constructions . A Construction Grammar Approach to Argument Structure . Chicago : Univ . Chicago Press Goldberg RF , Perfetti CF , Schneider W . 2006 . Perceptual knowledge retrieval activates sen - sory brain regions . J . Neurosci . 26 : 4917 – 21 Goldin - Meadow S . 2003 . Hearing Gesture : How Our Hands Help Us Think . Cambridge , MA : Harvard Univ . Press Goldman A . 2006 . Simulating Minds : The Philosophy , Psychology , and Neuroscience of Mindreading . Oxford : Oxford Univ . Press Goldreich D . 2007 . A Bayesian perceptual model replicates the cutaneous rabbit and other tactile spatiotemporal illusions . PLoS ONE 2 : e333 Goldstone RL . 1995 . Effects of categorization on color perception . Psychol . Sci . 5 : 298 – 304 Gonzalez J , Barros - Loscertales A , Pulverm¨uller F , Meseguer V , Sanju´an A , et al . 2006 . Reading cinnamon activates olfactory brain regions . Neuroimage 32 : 906 – 12 Greco C , Hayne H , Rovee - Collier C . 1990 . Roles of function , reminding , and variability in categorization by 3 - month - old infants . J . Exp . Psychol . : Learn . Mem . Cogn . 16 : 617 – 33 Gr ` ezes J , Decety J . 2001 . Functional anatomy of execution , mental simulation , observation , and verb generation of actions : a meta - analysis . Hum . Brain Mapp . 12 : 1 – 19 Grush R . 2004 . The emulation theory of representation : motor control , imagery , and percep - tion . Behav . Brain Sci . 27 : 377 – 442 Hadamard J . 1949 . The Psychology of Invention in the Mathematical Field . New York : Dover Halpern AR , Zatorre RJ , Bouffard M , Johnson JA . 2004 . Behavioral and neural correlates of perceived and imagined timbre . Neuropsychologia 42 : 1281 – 92 Hansen T , Olkkonen M , Walter S , Gegenfurtner KR . 2006 . Memory modulates color appear - ance . Nat . Neurosci . 9 : 1367 – 68 Harnad S . 1990 . The symbol grounding problem . Physica D 42 : 335 – 46 Harris CL , Aycicegi A , Berko Gleason J . 2003 . Taboo words and reprimands elicit greater autonomic reactivity in a ﬁrst than in a second language . Appl . Linguistics 24 : 561 – 79 Haugeland J . 1991 . Representational genera . In Philosophy and Connectionist Theory , ed . W Ramsey , SP Stitch , DE Rumelhart , pp . 61 – 89 . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum Havas DA , Glenberg AM , Rinck M . 2007 . Emotion simulation during language comprehen - sion . Psychon . Bull . Rev . In press Hegarty M . 2004 . Mechanical reasoning as mental simulation . Trends Cogn . Sci . 8 : 280 – 85 Hegarty M , Mayer S , Kriz S , Keehner M . 2005 . The role of gestures in mental animation . Spat . Cogn . Comput . 5 : 333 – 56 Hegarty M , Steinhoff K . 1997 . Use of diagrams as external memory in a mechanical reasoning task . Learn . Individ . Differ . 9 : 19 – 42 www . annualreviews . org • Grounded Cognition 639 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 23 ARI 5 November 2007 11 : 20 Helbig HB , Graf M , Kiefer M . 2006 . The role of action representations in visual object recog - nition . Exp . Brain Res . 174 : 221 – 28 Holt LE , Beilock SL . 2006 . Expertise and its embodiment : examining the impact of sen - sorimotor skill expertise on the representation of action - related text . Psychon . Bull . Rev . 13 : 694 – 701 Humphreys GW , Forde EME . 2001 . Hierarchies , similarity , and interactivity in object recog - nition : “category - speciﬁc” neuropsychological deﬁcits . Behav . Brain Sci . 24 : 453 – 509 Iacoboni M . 2007 . Understanding others : imitation , language , empathy . In Perspectives on Im - itation : From Cognitive Neuroscience to Social Science , ed . S Hurley , N Chater . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . In press Iacoboni M , Woods RP , Brass M , Bekkering H , Mazziotta JC , Rizzolatti G . 1999 . Cortical mechanisms of human imitation . Science 286 : 2526 – 28 Intraub H , Gottesman CV , Bills AJ . 1998 . Effects of perceiving and imagining scenes on memory for pictures . J . Exp . Psychol . : Learn . Mem . Cogn . 24 : 186 – 201 Intraub H , Hoffman JE . 1992 . Reading and visual memory : remembering scenes that were never seen . Am . J . Psychol . 105 : 101 – 14 Jackson PL , Meltzoff AN , Decety J . 2005 . How do we perceive the pain of others : a window into the neural processes involved in empathy . NeuroImage 24 : 771 – 79 Jacoby L . 1983 . Remembering the data : analyzing interactive processes in reading . J . Verbal Learn . Verbal Behav . 22 : 485 – 508 Jacoby LL , Hayman CAG . 1987 . Speciﬁc visual transfer in word identiﬁcation . J . Exp . Psychol . : Learn . Mem . Cogn . 13 : 456 – 63 Jeannerod M . 1995 . Mental imagery in the motor context . Neuropsychologia 33 : 1419 – 32 Johnson - Laird PN . 1983 . Mental Models . Cambridge , MA : Harvard Univ . Press Jolicoeur P . 1985 . The time to name disoriented natural objects . Mem . Cogn . 13 : 289 – 303 Kan IP , Barsalou LW , Solomon KO , Minor JK , Thompson - Schill SL . 2003 . Role of mental imagery in a property veriﬁcation task : fMRI evidence for perceptual representations of conceptual knowledge . Cogn . Neuropsychol . 20 : 525 – 40 Kant E . 1787 / 1965 . The Critique of Pure Reason . Transl . NK Smith . New York : St . Martin’s Press Kaschak MP . Glenberg AM . 2000 . Constructing meaning : the role of affordances and gram - matical constructions in sentence comprehension . J . Mem . Lang . 43 : 508 – 29 Kellenbach ML , Brett M , Patterson K . 2001 . Large , colorful , or noisy ? Attribute - and modal activations during retrieval of perceptual attribute knowledge . Cogn . Affect . Behav . Neurosci . 1 : 207 – 21 Kelly SD . 2001 . Broadening the units of analysis in communication : speech and nonverbal behaviours in pragmatic comprehension . J . Child Lang . 28 : 325 – 49 Kelly SD , Iverson J , Terranova J , Niego J , Hopkins M , Goldsmith L . 2002 . Putting language back in the body : speech and gesture on three timeframes . Dev . Neuropsychol . 22 : 323 – 49 Kemmerer D . 2006 . The semantics of space : integrating linguistic typology and cognitive neuroscience . Neuropsychologia 44 : 1607 – 21 Kent C , Lamberts K . 2006 . Modeling the time course of feature perception and feature infor - mation retrieval . J . Mem . Lang . 55 : 553 – 71 Kiefer M . 2005 . Repetition priming modulates category - related effects on event - related poten - tials : further evidence for multiple cortical semantic systems . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 17 : 199 – 211 Kirsner K , Dunn JC , Standen P . 1989 . Domain - speciﬁc resources in word recognition . In Implicit Memory : Theoretical Views , ed . S Lewandowsky , JC Dunn , K Kirsner , pp . 99 – 122 . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum 640 Barsalou A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 23 ARI 5 November 2007 11 : 20 KlatzkyRL , PelligrinoJW , McCloskeyBP , DohertyS . 1989 . Theroleofmotorrepresentations in semantic sensibility judgments . J . Mem . Lang . 28 : 56 – 77 Kohler E , Keysers Cl , Umilt´a MA , Fogassi L , Gallese V , Rizzolatti G . 2002 . Hearing sounds , understanding actions : action representation in mirror neurons . Science 297 : 846 – 48 Kosslyn SM . 1980 . Image and Mind . Cambridge , MA : Harvard Univ . Press Kosslyn SM . 1994 . Image and Brain . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press Kosslyn SM , Ganis G , Thompson WL . 2000 . Neural foundations of imagery . Nat . Rev . Neu - rosci . 2 : 635 – 42 Kosslyn SM , Thompson WL , Ganis G . 2006 . The Case for Mental Imagery . Oxford : Oxford Univ . Press Krauss RM . 1998 . Why do we gesture when we speak ? Curr . Dir . Psychol . Sci . 7 : 54 – 59 Lakoff G . 1987 . Women , Fire , and Dangerous Things : What Categories Reveal About the Mind . Chicago : Univ . Chicago Press Lakoff G , Johnson M . 1980 . Metaphors We Live By . Chicago : Univ . Chicago Press Lakoff G , Johnson M . 1999 . Philosophy in the Flesh : The Embodied Mind and Its Challenge to Western Thought . New York : Basic Books Langacker RW . 1987 . Foundations of Cognitive Grammar : Vol . 1 . Theoretical Prerequisites . Stanford , CA : Stanford Univ . Press LangackerRW . 1991 . FoundationsofCognitiveGrammar , Vol . II : DescriptiveApplication . Stanford , CA : Stanford Univ . Press Lewis JW . 2006 . Cortical networks related to human use of tools . Neuroscientist 12 : 211 – 31 Levine DN , Warach J , Farah MJ . 1985 . Two visual systems in mental imagery : dissociation of “what” and “where” in imagery disorders due to bilateral posterior cerebral lesions . Neurology 35 : 1010 – 18 Levy R , Goldman - Rakic PS . 2000 . Segregation of working memory functions within the dor - solateral prefrontal cortex . Exp . Brain Res . 133 : 23 – 32 Longo MR , Bertenthal BI . 2006 . Common coding of observation and execution of action in 9 - month - old infants . Infancy 10 : 43 – 59 Longo MR , Laurenco SF . 2007 . Space perception and body morphology : extent of near space scales with arm length . Exp . Brain Res . 177 : 285 – 90 Mandler M . 1992 . How to build a baby : II . Conceptual primitives . Psychol . Rev . 99 : 587 – 604 Marques JF . 2006 . Specialization and semantic organization : evidence for multiple semantics linked to sensory modalities . Mem . Cogn . 34 : 60 – 67 Martin A . 2001 . Functional neuroimaging of semantic memory . In Handbook of Functional Neuroimaging of Cognition , ed . R Cabeza , A Kingstone , pp . 153 – 86 . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press MartinA . 2007 . Therepresentationofobjectconceptsinthebrain . Annu . Rev . Psychol . 58 : 25 – 45 Matlock T . 2004 . Fictive motion as cognitive simulation . Mem . Cogn . 32 : 1389 – 400 McNeill D . 2005 . Gesture and Thought . Chicago : Univ . Chicago Press McRae K , Hare M , Elman JL , Ferretti TR . 2005 . A basis for generating expectancies for verbs from nouns . Mem . Cogn . 33 : 1174 – 84 Meier BP , Robinson MD . 2004 . Why the sunny side is up : associations between affect and vertical position . Psychol . Sci . 15 : 243 – 47 MeierBP , RobinsonMD . 2006 . Does“feelingdown”meanseeingdown ? Depressivesymptoms and vertical selective attention . J . Res . Personal . 40 : 451 – 61 Meltzoff AN . 2007 . “Like me” : a foundation for social cognition . Dev . Sci . 10 : 126 – 34 Meltzoff AN , Moore MK . 1983 . Newborn infants imitate adult facial gestures . Child Dev . 54 : 702 – 9 www . annualreviews . org • Grounded Cognition 641 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 23 ARI 5 November 2007 11 : 20 Miceli G , Fouch E , Capasso R , Shelton JR , Tomaiuolo F , Caramazza A . 2001 . The dissociation of color from form and function knowledge . Nat . Neurosci . 4 : 662 – 67 Morrison JB , Tversky B . 1997 . Body schemas . In Proceedings of the Cognitive Science Society , ed . MG Shafto , P Langley , pp . 525 – 29 . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum Murphy GL . 1997 . Reasons to doubt the present evidence for metaphoric representation . Cognition 62 : 99 – 108 Myung J , Blumstein SE , Sedivy JC . 2006 . Playing on the typewriter , typing on the piano : manipulation knowledge of objects . Cognition 98 : 223 – 43 Namy LL , Smith LB , Gershkoff - Stowe L . 1997 . Young children discovery of spatial classiﬁ - cation . Cogn . Dev . 12 : 163 – 84 Nersessian NJ . 1999 . Model - based reasoning in conceptual change . In Model - Based Reasoning in Scientiﬁc Discovery , ed . L Magnani , NJ Nersessian , P Thagard , pp . 5 – 22 . New York : Kluwer Acad . / Plenum Niedenthal PM , Barsalou LW , Winkielman P , Krauth - Gruber S , Ric F . 2005 . Embodiment in attitudes , social perception , and emotion . Pers . Soc . Psychol . Rev . 9 : 184 – 211 Paivio A . 1971 . Imagery and Verbal Processes . New York : Holt , Rinehart & Winston Paivio A . 1986 . Mental Representations : A Dual Coding Approach . New York : Oxford Univ . Press Parsons LM . 1987a . Imagined spatial transformations of one’s body . J . Exp . Psychol . : Gen . 116 : 172 – 91 Parsons LM . 1987b . Imagined spatial transformations of one’s hands and feet . Cogn . Psychol . 19 : 178 – 241 Pasternak T , Greenlee MW . 2005 . Working memory in primate sensory systems . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 6 : 97 – 107 Pecher D , Zeelenberg R , Barsalou LW . 2003 . Verifying properties from different modalities for concepts produces switching costs . Psychol . Sci . 14 : 119 – 24 Pecher D , Zeelenberg R , Barsalou LW . 2004 . Sensorimotor simulations underlie conceptual representations : modality - speciﬁc effects of prior activation . Psychon . Bull . Rev . 11 : 164 – 67 Polyn SM , Natu VS , Cohen JD , Norman KA . 2005 . Category - speciﬁc cortical activity precedes retrieval memory search . Science 310 : 1963 – 66 Potter MC , Kroll JF , Yachzel B , Carpenter E , Sherman J . 1986 . Pictures in sentences : under - standing without words . J . Exp . Psychol . : Gen . 115 : 281 – 94 Prinz J . 2002 . Furnishing the Mind : Concepts and Their Perceptual Basis . Cambridge , MA : MIT Prinz W . 1997 . Perception and action planning . Eur . J . Cogn . Psychol . 9 : 129 – 54 Profﬁtt DR . 2006 . Embodied perception and the economy of action . Perspect . Psychol . Sci . 1 : 110 – 22 Pulverm¨uller F . 2005 . Brain mechanisms linking language and action . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 6 : 576 – 82 Pulverm¨uller F , Hauk O , Nikulin VV , Ilmoniemi RJ . 2005 . Functional links between motor and language systems . Eur . J . Neurosci . 21 : 793 – 97 Pulverm¨uller F , Huss H , Kherif F , Martin FMP , Hauk O , Shtyrov Y . 2006 . Motor cortex maps articulatory features of speech sounds . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 : 7865 – 70 Pylyshyn ZW . 1973 . What the mind’s eye tells the mind’s brain : a critique of mental imagery . Psychol . Bull . 80 : 1 – 24 Reed CL , Vinson NG . 1996 . Conceptual effects on representational momentum . J . Exp . Psy - chol . : Hum . Percept . Perform . 22 : 839 – 50 Reid T . 1785 / 1969 . Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press Repp BH , Knoblich G . 2004 . Perceiving action identity : how pianists recognize their own performances . Psychol . Sci . 15 : 604 – 9 642 Barsalou A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 23 ARI 5 November 2007 11 : 20 Richardson DC , Matlock T . 2007 . The integration of ﬁgurative language and static depictions : an eye movement study of ﬁctive motion . Cognition 102 : 129 – 38 Richardson DC , Spivey MJ , Barsalou LW , McRae K . 2003 . Spatial representations activated during real - time comprehension of verbs . Cogn . Sci . 27 : 767 – 80 Richter W , Somorjai R , Summers R , Jarmasz M , Menon RS , et al . 2000 . Motor area activ - ity during mental rotation studied by time - resolved single - trial fMRI . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 12 : 310 – 20 Rinck M , Bower GH . 2004 . Goal - based accessibility of entities within situation models . In The Psychology of Learning and Motivation : Advances in Research and Theory , Vol . 44 , ed . BH Ross , pp . 1 – 33 . New York : Elsevier Sci . Rizzolatti G , Arbib MA . 1998 . Language within our grasp . Trends Neurosci . 21 : 188 – 94 Rizzolatti G , Craighero L . 2004 . The mirror - neuron system . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 27 : 169 – 92 Robbins P , Aydede M , eds . 2007 . Cambridge Handbook of Situated Cognition . New York : Cambridge Univ . Press Rochat P , Striano T . 1999 . Emerging self - exploration by 2 - month - old infants . Dev . Sci . 2 : 206 – 18 Roediger HL , Blaxton TA . 1987 . Effects of varying modality , surface features , and retention interval on priming in word fragment completion . Mem . Cogn . 15 : 379 – 88 Roediger HL , McDermott KB . 1993 . Implicit memory in normal human subjects . In Handbook of Neuropsychology , Vol . 8 , ed . F Boller , J Grafman , pp . 63 – 131 . Amsterdam : Elsevier Ross BH , Wang RF , Kramer AF , Simons DJ , Crowell JA . 2007 . Action information from classiﬁcation learning . Psychon . Bull . Rev . In press Rubin DC . 2006 . The basic - systems model of episodic memory . Perspect . Psychol . Sci . 1 : 277 – 311 Samuel AG . 1997 . Lexical activation produces potent phonemic percepts . Cogn . Psychol . 32 : 97 – 127 Schacter DL , Addis DR . 2007 . The cognitive neuroscience of constructive memory : remem - bering the past and imagining the future . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B Biol . Sci . 362 : 773 – 86 Schacter DL , Dobbins IG , Schnyer DM . 2004 . Speciﬁcity of priming : a cognitive neuroscience perspective . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 5 : 853 – 62 Schacter DL , Graf P . 1989 . Modality speciﬁcity of implicit memory for new associations . J . Exp . Psychol . : Learn . Mem . Cogn . 15 : 3 – 12 Schubert T . 2005 . Your Highness : vertical positions as perceptual symbols of power . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 89 : 1 – 21 Schwanenﬂugel PJ . 1991 . Why are abstract concepts hard to understand ? In The Psychology of Word Meaning , ed . PJ Schwanenﬂugel , pp . 223 – 50 . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum Schwartz DL . 1999 . Physical imagery : kinematic vs dynamic models . Cogn . Psychol . 38 : 433 – 64 Schwartz DL , Black JB . 1996 . Analog imagery in mental model reasoning : depictive models . Cogn . Psychol . 30 : 154 – 219 Searle JR . 1980 . Minds , brains , and programs . Behav . Brain Sci . 3 : 417 – 24 Sebanz N , Bekkering H , Knoblich G . 2006 . Joint action : bodies and minds moving together . Trends Cogn . Sci . 10 : 70 – 76 ShepardRN , CooperLA . 1982 . MentalImagesandTheirTransformations . NewYork : Cambridge Univ . Press Shiffrar M , Freyd JJ . 1990 . Apparent motion of the human body . Psychol . Sci . 4 : 257 – 64 Shiffrar M , Freyd JJ . 1993 . Timing and apparent motion path choice with human body pho - tographs . Psychol . Sci . 6 : 379 – 84 Simmons WK , Barsalou LW . 2003 . The similarity - in - topography principle : reconciling the - ories of conceptual deﬁcits . Cogn . Neuropsychol . 20 : 451 – 86 www . annualreviews . org • Grounded Cognition 643 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 23 ARI 5 November 2007 11 : 20 Simmons WK , Martin A , Barsalou LW . 2005 . Pictures of appetizing foods activate gustatory cortices for taste and reward . Cereb . Cortex 15 : 1602 – 8 Simmons WK , Ramjee V , Beauchamp MS , McRae K , Martin A , Barsalou LW . 2007 . Common neural substrates for perceiving and knowing about color and action . Neuropsychologia 45 : 2802 – 10 Sims VK , Hegarty M . 1997 . Mental animation in the visual - spatial sketchpad : evidence from dual - task studies . Mem . Cogn . 25 : 321 – 32 Slotnick SD , Schacter DL . 2004 . A sensory signature that distinguishes true from false mem - ories . Nat . Neurosci . 7 : 664 – 72 Smith ER , Semin GR . 2004 . Socially situated cognition : cognition in its social context . Adv . Exp . Soc . Psychol . 36 : 53 – 117 Smith LB . 2005a . Action alters shape categories . Cogn . Sci . 29 : 665 – 79 Smith LB . 2005b . Cognition as a dynamic system : principles from embodiment . Dev . Rev . 25 : 278 – 98 Smith LB , Gasser M . 2005 . The development of embodied cognition : six lessons from babies . Artif . Life 11 : 13 – 30 Smith LB , Thelen E , Titzer R , McLin D . 1999 . Knowing in the context of acting : the task dynamics of the A - not - B Error . Psychol . Rev . 106 : 235 – 60 Solomon KO , Barsalou LW . 2001 . Representing properties locally . Cogn . Psychol . 43 : 129 – 69 Solomon KO , Barsalou LW . 2004 . Perceptual simulation in property veriﬁcation . Mem . Cogn . 32 : 244 – 59 Spence C , Nicholls MER , Driver J . 2000 . The cost of expecting events in the wrong sensory modality . Percept . Psychophys . 63 : 330 – 36 Spivey M . 2007 . The Continuity of Mind . New York : Oxford Univ . Press Spivey M , Tyler M , Richardson D , Young E . 2000 . Eye movements during comprehension of spoken scene descriptions . Proc . 22nd Annu . Conf . Cogn . Sci . Soc . , pp . 487 – 92 . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum Steels L , Brooks R . 1995 . The Artiﬁcial Life Route to Artiﬁcial Intelligence : Building Embodied Situated Agents . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum Stepper S , Strack F . 1993 . Proprioceptive determinants of emotional and nonemotional feel - ings . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 64 : 211 – 20 Stevens JA , Fonlupt P , Shiffrar M , Decety J . 2000 . New aspects of motion perception : selective neural encoding of apparent human movements . NeuroReport 11 : 109 – 15 Strack F , Martin LL , Stepper S . 1988 . Inhibiting and facilitating conditions of the human smile : a nonobtrusive test of the facial feedback hypothesis . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 54 : 768 – 77 Symes E , Ellis R , Tucker M . 2007 . Visual object affordances : object orientation . Acta Psychol . 124 : 238 – 55 Talmy L . 1983 . How language structures space . In Spatial Orientation : Theory , Research , and Application , ed . H Pick , L Acredelo , pp . 225 – 82 . New York : Plenum Talmy L . 1988 . Force dynamics in language and cognition . Cogn . Sci . 12 : 49 – 100 Thelen E , Schoner G , Scheier C , Smith LB . 2001 . The dynamics of embodiment : a ﬁeld theory of infant perseverative reaching . Behav . Brain Sci . 24 : 1 – 86 Thelen E , Smith LB . 1994 . A Dynamic Systems Approach to the Development of Cognition and Action . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press Thompson - Schill SL . 2003 . Neuroimaging studies of semantic memory : inferring “how” from “where . ” Neuropsychologia 41 : 280 – 92 Tomasello M . 2003 . Constructing a Language : A Usage - Based Theory of Language Acquisition . Cambridge , MA : Harvard Univ . Press 644 Barsalou A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV331 - PS59 - 23 ARI 5 November 2007 11 : 20 Trueswell JC . 1996 . The role of lexical frequency in syntactic ambiguity resolution . J . Mem . Lang . 35 : 566 – 85 Tucker M , Ellis R . 1998 . On the relations between seen objects and components of potential actions . J . Exp . Psychol . : Hum . Percept . Perform . 24 : 830 – 46 Tucker M , Ellis R . 2001 . The potentiation of grasp types during visual object categorization . Visual Cogn . 8 : 769 – 800 Tucker M , Ellis R . 2004 . Action priming by brieﬂy presented objects . Acta Psychol . 116 : 185 – 203 Turner M . 1996 . The Literary Mind . New York : Oxford Univ . Press TylerLK , MossHE , Durrant - PeatﬁeldMR , LevyJP . 2000 . Conceptualstructureandthestruc - tureofconcepts : adistributedaccountofcategory - speciﬁcdeﬁcits . BrainLang . 75 : 195 – 231 Valenzeno L , Alibali MW , Klatzky RL . 2003 . Teachers’ gestures facilitate students’ learning : a lesson in symmetry . Contemp . Educ . Psychol . 28 : 187 – 204 Van Orden GC , Holden JG , Turvey MT . 2005 . Human cognition and 1 / f scaling . J . Exp . Psychol . : Gen . 134 : 117 – 23 Vanman EJ , Paul BY , Ito TA , Miller N . 1997 . The modern face of prejudice and structural features that moderate the effect of cooperation on affect . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 73 : 941 – 59 Vermeulen N , Niedenthal PM , Luminet O . 2007 . Switching between sensory and affective systems incurs processing costs . Cogn . Sci . In press Warren RM . 1970 . Perceptual restoration of missing speech sounds . Science 167 : 392 – 93 Warrington EK , McCarthy RA . 1987 . Categories of knowledge : further fractionations and an attempted integration . Brain 110 : 1273 – 96 Warrington EK , Shallice T . 1984 . Category speciﬁc semantic impairments . Brain 107 : 829 – 54 Watson JB . 1913 . Psychology as the behaviorist sees it . Psychol . Rev . 20 : 158 – 77 Wells GL , Petty RE . 1980 . The effects of overt head movements on persuasion : compatibility and incompatibility of responses . Basic Appl . Soc . Psychol . 1 : 219 – 30 Wennekers T , Garagnani M , Pulverm¨uller F . 2006 . Language models based on Hebbian cell assemblies . J . Physiol . Paris 100 : 16 – 30 Wheeler ME , Petersen SE , Buckner RL . 2000 . Memory’s echo : vivid remembering reactivates sensory - speciﬁc cortex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 97 : 11125 – 29 Wicker B , et al . 2003 . Both of us disgusted in my insula : the common neural basis of seeing and feeling disgust . Neuron 40 : 655 – 64 Wiemer - Hastings K , Krug J , Xu X . 2001 . Imagery , context availability , contextual constraint , andabstractness . Proc . 23rdAnnu . Conf . Cogn . Sci . Soc . , pp . 1134 – 39 . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum Wilson M . 2002 . Six views of embodied cognition . Psychon . Bull . Rev . 9 : 625 – 36 Wilson M , Knoblich G . 2005 . The case for motor involvement in perceiving conspeciﬁcs . Psychol . Bull . 131 : 460 – 73 Wolpert DM , Ghahramani Z , Jordan MI . 1999 . An internal model for sensorimotor integra - tion . Science 269 : 1880 – 82 Yeh W , Barsalou LW . 2006 . The situated nature of concepts . Am . J . Psychol . 119 : 349 – 84 Zwaan RA , Madden CJ . 2005 . Embodied sentence comprehension . In Grounding Cognition : The Role of Perception and Action in Memory , Language , and Thought , ed . D Pecher , R Zwaan , pp . 224 – 45 . New York : Cambridge Univ . Press Zwaan RA , Taylor LJ . 2006 . Seeing , acting , understanding : motor resonance in language com - prehension . J . Exp . Psychol . : Gen . 135 : 1 – 11 www . annualreviews . org • Grounded Cognition 645 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR331 - FM ARI 15 November 2007 15 : 19 Annual Review of Psychology Volume 59 , 2008 Contents Prefatory The Evolution of a Cognitive Psychologist : A Journey from Simple Behaviors to Complex Mental Acts Gordon H . Bower (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 1 Pharmacology and Behavior Addiction and the Brain Antireward System George F . Koob and Michel Le Moal (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 29 Consummatory Behavior The Brain , Appetite , and Obesity Hans - Rudolf Berthoud and Christopher Morrison (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 55 Sex Neuroendocrine Regulation of Feminine Sexual Behavior : Lessons from Rodent Models and Thoughts About Humans Jeffrey D . Blaustein (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 93 Audition and Its Biological Bases The Biological Basis of Audition Gregg H . Recanzone and Mitchell L . Sutter (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 119 Color Perception Color in Complex Scenes Steven K . Shevell and Frederick A . A . Kingdom (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 143 Scene Perception , Event Perception , or Object Recognition Visual Perception and the Statistical Properties of Natural Scenes Wilson S . Geisler (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 167 v A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR331 - FM ARI 15 November 2007 15 : 19 Cognitive Processes The Mind and Brain of Short - Term Memory John Jonides , Richard L . Lewis , Derek Evan Nee , Cindy A . Lustig , Marc G . Berman , and Katherine Sledge Moore (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 193 Memory Relativity of Remembering : Why the Laws of Memory Vanished Henry L . Roediger , III (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 225 Reasoning and Problem Solving Dual - Processing Accounts of Reasoning , Judgment , and Social Cognition Jonathan St . B . T . Evans (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 255 Comparative Psychology , Ethology , and Evolution Putting the Altruism Back into Altruism : The Evolution of Empathy Frans B . M . de Waal (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 279 Anxiety Disorders Social Bonds and Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Anthony Charuvastra and Maryl ` ene Cloitre (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 301 Inference , Person Perception , Attribution Spontaneous Inferences , Implicit Impressions , and Implicit Theories James S . Uleman , S . Adil Saribay , and Celia M . Gonzalez (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 329 Social Development , Social Personality , Social Motivation , Social Emotion Motives of the Human Animal : Comprehending , Managing , and Sharing Inner States E . Tory Higgins and Thane S . Pittman (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 361 Cognition in Organizations Cognition in Organizations Gerard P . Hodgkinson and Mark P . Healey (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 387 Selection and Placement Personnel Selection Paul R . Sackett and Filip Lievens (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 419 vi Contents A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR331 - FM ARI 15 November 2007 15 : 19 Education of Special Populations The Education of Dyslexic Children from Childhood to Young Adulthood Sally E . Shaywitz , Robin Morris , and Bennett A . Shaywitz (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 451 Health Promotion and Disease Prevention Health Psychology : The Search for Pathways Between Behavior and Health Howard Leventhal , John Weinman , Elaine A . Leventhal , and L . Alison Phillips (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 477 Emotion Human Abilities : Emotional Intelligence John D . Mayer , Richard D . Roberts , and Sigal G . Barsade (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 507 Data Analysis Sample Size Planning for Statistical Power and Accuracy in Parameter Estimation Scott E . Maxwell , Ken Kelley , and Joseph R . Rausch (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 537 Timely Topics A Comprehensive Review of the Placebo Effect : Recent Advances and Current Thought Donald D . Price , Damien G . Finniss , and Fabrizio Benedetti (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 565 Children’s Social Competence in Cultural Context Xinyin Chen and Doran C . French (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 591 Grounded Cognition Lawrence W . Barsalou (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 617 Neuroeconomics George Loewenstein , Scott Rick , and Jonathan D . Cohen (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 647 Indexes Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors , Volumes 49 – 59 (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 673 Cumulative Index of Chapter Titles , Volumes 49 – 59 (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 678 Errata An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Psychology articles may be found at http : / / psych . annualreviews . org / errata . shtml Contents vii A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2008 . 59 : 617 - 645 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f C a li f o r n i a - D a v i s on 12 / 06 / 11 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y .