Strategic Management Journal Strat . Mgmt . J . , 22 : 521 – 543 ( 2001 ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / smj . 176 ENTREPRENEURSHIP IN THE LARGE CORPORATION : A LONGITUDINAL STUDY OF HOW ESTABLISHED FIRMS CREATE BREAKTHROUGH INVENTIONS GAUTAM AHUJA * and CURBA MORRIS LAMPERT College of Business Administration , University of Texas at Austin , Austin , Texas , U . S . A . We present a model that explains how established ﬁrms create breakthrough inventions . We identify three organizational pathologies that inhibit breakthrough inventions : the familiarity trap – favoring the familiar ; the maturity trap – favoring the mature ; and the propinquity trap – favoring search for solutions near to existing solutions . We argue that by experimenting with novel ( i . e . , technologies in which the ﬁrm lacks prior experience ) , emerging ( technologies that are recent or newly developed in the industry ) , and pioneering ( technologies that do not build on any existing technologies ) technologies ﬁrms can overcome these traps and create breakthrough inventions . Empirical evidence from the chemicals industry supports our model . Copyright (cid:211) 2001 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . INTRODUCTION Radical or ‘breakthrough’ inventions lie at the core of entrepreneurial activity and wealth cre - ation ( Kirchhoff , 1991 ; Schumpeter , 1975 ) . Such inventions serve as the basis of new technological trajectories and paradigms and are an important part of the process of creative destruction in which extant techniques and approaches are replaced by new technologies and products . Most academic studies , as well as reports in the popular press , have focused on the role of new ﬁrms in the creation of such breakthroughs ( Methe et al . , 1997 ) . This focus is understandable since several studies show that breakthrough inventions are often likely to originate with entrants rather than incumbents ( Cooper and Schendel , 1976 ; Foster , 1986 ) . However , recent research suggests that established ﬁrms may actually be contributing to Key words : radical innovation ; corporate entrepreneurship ; organizational learning * Correspondence to : Gautam Ahuja , Management Department , College of Business Administration , 4 . 202 , The University of Texas at Austin , Austin , TX 78712 , U . S . A . Copyright (cid:211) 2001 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . breakthrough inventions to a far greater extent than is generally recognized , and , in some indus - tries , may even dominate this process ( Methe et al . , 1997 ) . Thus , contrary to common perceptions , it appears that at least some large ﬁrms are able to establish routines that enable them to generate signiﬁcant technological breakthroughs , and rein - vent themselves and retain technological leader - ship in their industry . In this study we examine the issue of how established ﬁrms create such breakthrough inventions . Understanding how large , established ﬁrms cre - ate breakthrough inventions has rich theoretical and practical implications from the perspectives of entrepreneurship , technology strategy and organi - zational learning . As Venkataraman ( 1997 ) notes , ‘Entrepreneurship as a scholarly ﬁeld seeks to understand how opportunities to bring into exis - tence “future” goods and services are discovered , created and exploited , by whom and with what consequence . ’ Further , he elaborates , true entrepreneurship entails the creation of both private wealth and social beneﬁt ( Schumpeter , 1975 ; Ven - kataraman , 1997 ) . Breakthrough inventions of the kind that are studied here possess all three of these 522 G . Ahuja and C . M . Lampert concomitants . Almost by deﬁnition breakthrough inventions serve as the basis of ‘future’ technol - ogies , products and services . Further , research ﬁnds that breakthrough inventions are related to the creation of private wealth and the generation of streams of Schumpeterian rents for their inventors ( Harhoff et al . , 1999 ) , while also enhancing social welfare ( Trajtenberg , 1990a , 1990b ) . Examining the nexus between such break - through inventions and large established corpo - rations also provides insights into the processes of corporate entrepreneurship . Although the stereotype of the solitary inventor toiling in a garage adds a memorably heroic dimension to the breakthrough invention story , the fact remains that a very large proportion of R & D resources continue to be expended by established , publicly held corporations . Identifying strategies that can help such corporations to improve their record of breakthrough inventions can potentially create signiﬁcant private and social value . Further , beyond simply wealth creation , for established corporations technological breakthroughs can serve as internally generated opportunities for corporate reinvention , business growth , and new business development ( Burgelman , 1983 ) . Research suggests that the routines of the large established ﬁrm that ensure reliable throughput and output also entail formalization and bureau - cratization , and sometimes even obsolescence and death , as the organization’s ﬁt with a changing environment deteriorates ( Hannan and Freeman , 1989 ; Sorensen and Stuart , 2000 ) . Studying entre - preneurial behavior in large corporations can present important insights for corporate rejuven - ation ( Covin and Miles , 1999 ) . Exploring the determinants of breakthrough inventions is also of importance from the perspec - tive of technology strategy and organizational learning . Breakthrough inventions represent rare , valuable , and potentially inimitable sources of competitive advantage ( Barney , 1991 ) . Under - standing how large corporations create techno - logical breakthroughs and sustain their preemi - nence in an industry is of fundamental concern to strategy theorists trying to explain durable or sustained superior performance . Relatedly , organi - zational learning theorists have argued that learn - ing creates its own traps : as organizations develop capabilities that improve immediate performance they often simultaneously reduce competence with respect to new paradigms that may hold the Copyright (cid:211) 2001 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 22 : 521 – 543 ( 2001 ) key to future performance ( Levinthal and March , 1993 ) . Identifying the kinds of corporate activities that help ﬁrms escape such learning traps is then of signiﬁcant importance . In the sections that follow we integrate the entrepreneurship and organizational learning literatures to develop a theoretical model that explains how established ﬁrms create fundamental technological breakthroughs . Our model has the following key features . First , from the entrepre - neurial literature we draw on the notion that diversity and experimentation within the large corporation are central to successful entrepre - neurial activity ( Burgelman , 1983 ; Lant and Mezias , 1990 ; McGrath and MacMillan , 2000 ; Mezias and Glynn , 1993 ) . Second , from the organizational learning literature we draw on the idea that the dynamics of established organi - zations make the provision of such diversity dif - ﬁcult , leading organizations into learning traps that favor specialization and inhibit experimen - tation ( Levinthal and March , 1993 ; March , 1991 ) . Thus , we argue that the essential constraints to the ability of large ﬁrms to create breakthrough inventions stem in large part from practices that are both necessary and efﬁcient for them . Third , we suggest that in the context of breakthrough inventions such learning traps are manifested in three types of organizational pathologies : a ten - dency to favor the familiar over the unfamiliar ; a tendency to prefer the mature over the nascent ; and a tendency to search for solutions that are near to existing solutions rather than search for completely de novo solutions . We call these three pathologies the familiarity trap , the maturity trap , and the propinquity trap , respectively , and argue that each of these is grounded in signiﬁcant immediate beneﬁts for ﬁrms , but eventually con - strains their ability to create breakthrough inven - tions that hold the key to future performance . Finally , by expanding and elaborating the notion of learning traps in this fashion , we identify speciﬁc strategies that organizations can use to counter these pathologies . Speciﬁcally , we sug - gest that by experimenting with novel , emerging , and pioneering technologies ﬁrms can overcome the liabilities of these traps and successfully cre - ate breakthrough inventions . 1 1 Learning traps ( Levinthal and March , 1993 ) are closely related to another , more familiar construct : competency traps ( Levitt and March , 1988 : 322 ) . Competency traps are deﬁned Entrepreneurship in the Large Corporation 523 Novel technologies are technologies that are new or unfamiliar to the ﬁrm ( i . e . , they are technologies in which the ﬁrm lacks prior experience ) , even though they possibly have existed in the industry before . Emerging technol - ogies are leading - edge technologies that are recent or new to the entire industry ( as distinct from older , mature technologies ) . Pioneering technol - ogies are technologies that have no technological antecedents ( i . e . , they represent technologies that do not build on any existing technologies ) . We test our arguments with longitudinal data on the invention output of the leading ﬁrms in the chemical industry to demonstrate that these strate - gies are predictive of a ﬁrm’s record of break - through invention . 2 THEORY AND HYPOTHESES The distinction between invention and innovation is an important one . Invention refers to the devel - opment of a new idea or an act of creation ; innovation refers to the commercializing of the invention ( Hitt , Hoskisson , and Nixon , 1993 : 162 ; Schumpeter , 1934 ) . In this study , for clarity and focus we restrict our attention to the creation of the actual inventions rather than their subsequent commercialization . Breakthrough inventions can to occur ‘when favorable performance with an inferior pro - cedure leads an organization to accumulate more experience with it , thus keeping experience with a superior procedure inadequate to make it rewarding to use’ ( Levitt and March , 1988 : 322 ) . Learning traps , on the other hand , embody the conﬂict between routines that enable the organization to per - form well in the short run but may position the organization unfavorably for the future . Thus , while competency traps entail choices between two procedures or routines targeted towards the same outcome , the learning traps we discuss here are about the implications of the same routines for two different outcomes such as reliable and predictable outputs that are necessary for immediate or short - run performance , and breakthrough inventions that may form the basis of superior performance in the future . 2 A relevant issue is whether these three strategies represent actions to overcome learning traps , or a more complex global ‘ability to learn . ’ From our perspective a ﬁrm’s ability to learn is a broad construct that is likely to subsume many forms of learning ( see , for instance , Huber , 1991 ; Lei , Hitt , and Bettis , 1996 ) . In this study we focus on the ﬁrm’s ability to overcome three speciﬁc forms of weaknesses or traps . Although the over - coming of these traps is probably just one facet of a ﬁrm’s overall ability to learn , we believe that this speciﬁc characterization is useful in identifying speciﬁc countering strategies . The iden - tiﬁcation of these countering strategies would not be possible or at least not as easy if we focused on the broader , but less tangible , construct of a global ability to learn . Copyright (cid:211) 2001 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 22 : 521 – 543 ( 2001 ) provide a unique competitive advantage and attendant rents to the inventing organization ( Achilladelis , Schwarzkopf , and Cines , 1990 ; Har - hoff et al . , 1999 ) . Further , the capacity to create breakthrough or radical inventions can itself be regarded as a form of meta - learning or dynamic core competence ( Lei et al . , 1996 ; Prahalad and Hamel , 1990 ) reﬂecting a ﬁrm’s unique and specialized problem - solving capabilities . Thus , from both practical and theoretical perspectives , understanding the determinants of breakthrough inventions at the ﬁrm level is important . Radical or breakthrough inventions can be deﬁned along different dimensions . At a very basic level a distinction can be made between inventions that are radical from a technological perspective vs . inven - tions that are radical from a user or market perspec - tive . In this research we focus on the technological importance of an invention in classifying it as breakthrough or radical ( Trajtenberg , 1990a , 1990b ; Podolny and Stuart , 1995 ; Rosenkopf and Nerkar , 2001 ) , and accordingly deﬁne breakthrough inven - tions as those foundational inventions that serve as the basis for many subsequent technological developments ( Trajtenberg , 1990a , 1990b ) . The technological importance of inventions can vary signiﬁcantly . While some inventions open new paths of technological progress and spawn many sub - sequent inventions , others are technological dead ends ( Dosi , 1988 ; Fleming , 1999 ; Podolny and Stuart , 1995 ; Sahal , 1985 ) . Inventions that serve as the source of many subsequent inventions can be regarded as breakthrough or radical because they have demonstrated their utility on the path of tech - nological progress ( Achilladelis et al . , 1990 ; Flem - ing , 1999 ) . Past research suggests that such inven - tions that open the door to many subsequent inventions have considerable technological and eco - nomic value ( Trajtenberg , 1990a ; Rosenkopf and Nerkar , 2001 ) . Although technologically important inventions can also be radical inventions from the perspective of a user , neither our theory nor our data permit us to extend our arguments to a user - based concept of radicality . Accordingly , we limit the domain of our theory and empirical claims to inventions that are technologically important . Prior research on corporate entrepreneurship and breakthrough inventions Recent research has compellingly argued that corporate entrepreneurship adds value not only 524 G . Ahuja and C . M . Lampert by utilizing resources in new ways but also , perhaps more importantly , by creating new resources ( Zahra , Jennings , and Kuratko , 1999 ; Floyd and Wooldridge , 1999 ; Greene , Brush , and Hart , 1999 ) . Prominent among these created resources are knowledge and the various knowl - edge outcomes of the corporate entrepreneurship process ( Zahra et al . , 1999 ; Hitt et al . , 1999 ) . Consistent with this theme several recent studies have looked at knowledge - related outcomes of corporate entrepreneurship . However , the focus of many of these studies is on innovation , in the form of new product development , rather than invention , the act of creating a technological breakthrough . For instance , Hitt et al . ( 1999 ) have examined the role of cross - functional teams in the design and development of new products , ﬁnding that elements of team context such as top management team support and organizational politics have a more signiﬁcant inﬂuence on team success than internal team characteristics . Simi - larly , Koberg , Uhlenbruck , and Sarason ( 1996 ) examine the moderating effect of the life cycle stage of a venture on the organizational and environmental determinants of product inno - vation . Relatively little research has examined inventions as the outcome variable of the entre - preneurial process . Yet , technologically radical inventions can be regarded as opportunities or options that are subsequently exploited through new ventures or commercialization within the existing businesses . Thus , research on the deter - minants of breakthrough inventions complements the above studies that focus on the exploitation of opportunities , by trying to establish an under - standing of the creation of opportunities . Indeed , to the extent that without inventions there are no innovations , improving our understanding of the strategies that lead to breakthrough inventions is critical . Large - sample studies of breakthrough inven - tions are relatively rare even in the technology area . In common with the literature on corporate entrepreneurship , studies that have examined the issue of radical technological breakthroughs have more often focused on the commercialization of inventions or the introduction of new products rather than on the actual inventions themselves ( Anderson and Tushman , 1990 ; Mitchell , 1989 ; Tushman and Anderson , 1986 ) . For instance , a common objective across many of these studies has been the identiﬁcation of the relative impor - Copyright (cid:211) 2001 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 22 : 521 – 543 ( 2001 ) tance and likelihood of incumbents and entrants as sources of successful innovations ( Cooper and Schendel , 1976 ; Foster , 1986 ; Henderson , 1993 ; Methe et al . , 1997 ; Tushman and Anderson , 1986 ; Utterback , 1994 ) . The few studies examining the corporate creation of breakthrough inventions have focused on the impact of such inventions rather than their creation ( for instance , Achillad - elis et al . , 1990 ; Trajtenberg , 1990b ) . Similarly , in - depth case studies of breakthrough inventions ( Foster , 1986 ; Kusunoki , 1997 ; Nayak and Ketter - ingham , 1986 ) or of corporate practices fostering such inventions ( Brown , 1991 ) have provided wonderfully rich and insightful characterizations of the invention process ; however , the task of synthesizing these individual ﬁndings into a for - mal model of breakthrough invention in large corporations remains . In this research we attempt to address this gap . Established ﬁrms and breakthrough inventions The failure of large ﬁrms to create breakthrough inventions can be understood through either their lack of motivation ( the economic perspective ) or their lack of ability ( the organizational perspective ) ( Henderson , 1993 ) . In this study we control for economic motivations such as the profitability of ﬁrms in our empirical work but focus our theory development largely on the organizational question of why large ﬁrms may fail to create breakthrough inventions . We use the most inﬂuential patents ( deﬁned in greater detail later ) in the chemicals industry over an 8 - year period as our indicators of breakthrough invention and develop a framework to explain the strategies that led to the creation of such inventions . We focus especially on why the very nature of being an established ﬁrm creates ten - sions with regard to the generation of break - through inventions . Our model of breakthrough inventions in estab - lished ﬁrms begins with three basic premises drawn from the organizational learning literature . First , we presume that organizational behavior is based on routines ( Nelson and Winter , 1982 ; Levitt and March , 1988 ) . Second , we presume that routines are oriented to targeted outcomes ( Levitt and March , 1988 ; Simon , 1955 ) . Each organization is subject to a set of external and internal objectives , and routines are oriented to Entrepreneurship in the Large Corporation 525 the accomplishment of these objectives . Third , we assume that in successful or established organizations , i . e . , those organizations that survive and mature in the organizational ecology , organi - zational routines and actions are path - dependent and therefore based on interpretations and out - comes of past actions ( Lei et al . , 1996 ; Levitt and March , 1988 ) . Routines that are associated with success in a situation are replicated and perpetuated , while those associated with failure are discarded or modiﬁed . Over time this process of winnowing of unproductive routines and repli - cation of successful ones , combined with the second premise identiﬁed above , ensures that in established organizations routines are specialized towards very speciﬁc outcomes . A ﬁrm’s survival and success are eventually based on its ability to meet at least three sets of objectives . First , it must satisfy some market demands or needs . Without an external demand for its outputs , the ﬁrm must eventually die . Second , in a competitive environment , to succeed a ﬁrm must attempt to develop a competitive advantage over other ﬁrms seeking to offer prod - ucts to the same markets . Third , a ﬁrm needs to establish an internally consistent set of throughput processes that ensure that the above output and competitive advantage demands are met . Estab - lished ﬁrms , or ﬁrms that emerge as leaders or survivors in an industry , are those that have met these three objectives in at least a minimal fashion . Although a ﬁrm must meet several require - ments to satisfy market demands , its ability to provide reliable high - quality outputs in an efﬁcient and predictable fashion is likely to be key to its success and survival ( Hannan and Freeman , 1989 ) . Similarly , from the perspective of obtaining a competitive advantage , a ﬁrm needs to develop a distinctive competence , a unique capability housed in the organization that differentiates it from its competitors ( Hitt and Ireland , 1985 ) . Finally , from the perspective of internal consistency it is important that a ﬁrm’s structure and systems conform to its strategy ( Burgelman , 1985 ; Dess , Lumpkin , and McGee , 1999 ) . The greater the effectiveness with which a ﬁrm can accomplish these three objectives , the higher the likelihood of its survival , at least in the context of a stable environment . By developing and reﬁning a competence , by providing reliable outputs , and by operating a set Copyright (cid:211) 2001 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 22 : 521 – 543 ( 2001 ) of internal controls and processes that ensure the ﬁrst two outcomes , a ﬁrm can enjoy the beneﬁts of external and internal consistency . Interestingly , these very attributes can also serve to limit the ﬁrm’s effectiveness at breakthrough invention . In a set of processes that we describe in greater detail slightly later , we note that each of these performance - enhancing attributes that enable a corporation to survive and establish itself also potentially entail a signiﬁcant dark side . The impetus to provide reliable and predictable so - lutions focuses a ﬁrm’s attention on mature technologies ( Christensen and Rosenbloom , 1995 ; Sorensen and Stuart , 2000 ) . The impetus to develop a competitive advantage favors the reten - tion of routines that lead to distinctive com - petence and specialization , rather than experimen - tation ( Levinthal and March , 1993 ) . Finally , the necessity of establishing control to accomplish the ﬁrst two objectives leads to bureaucratic pro - cedures and structures that favor searching proxi - mate domains of technology , rather than its unknown nether regions that may hold eventually more effective , but ex ante more uncertain and unknown , solutions . As we argue below , this focus on the familiar , the mature , and the proxi - mate may serve to limit the likelihood of creating a truly breakthrough invention . The above , prognosis however , presumes the dominance of single - loop learning among organi - zations ( Argyris , 1983 ) . The retention of routines that enhance reliability , specialization , and control may enable an organization to prosper in a steady state . However , the reality of business indicates that signiﬁcant innovation is likely to be an important dimension of ﬁrm performance for many ﬁrms . In such situations , the possibility of double - loop learning suggests a second dynamic that may be operative on at least some ﬁrms ( Lei et al . , 1996 ) . Recognizing that the above - described routines lead to signiﬁcant deﬁciencies in their capabilities to create breakthrough inven - tions , some ﬁrms may consider a second loop of activity that enables them to counter this dysfunc - tional outcome of the primary loop . Accordingly , instead of seeking to develop just a primary set of competencies at producing output , ﬁrms may target the development of more dynamic capabili - ties ( Lei et al . , 1996 ; Deeds , DeCarolis , and Coombs , 1999 ) . Prominent among such capabili - ties is the development of heuristics and insights to deﬁne and solve complex technological prob - 526 G . Ahuja and C . M . Lampert lems , problems of the kind that can lead to technological breakthroughs ( Lei et al . , 1996 ) . The integration of these second - order capabilities of problem deﬁnition and solution , with the pri - mary capabilities at output generation described earlier , can serve as a form of meta - learning for these ﬁrms and provide a basis for even more signiﬁcant and durable competitive advantages ( Lei et al . , 1996 ; Prahalad and Bettis , 1986 ) . This incentive , of developing a highly tenable competitive position , can serve as a basis for the reevaluation of the ﬁrm’s existing routines and help the ﬁrm to identify strategies to counter these deﬁciencies . In the sections that follow we investigate in some detail both these deﬁciencies and the strategies ﬁrms may follow to over - come them . The familiarity trap and novel technologies Received research suggests that increasing returns to experience , or mutual positive feedback between experience and competence , make the reﬁnement of familiar technologies preferable to the exploration of new ones ( Levinthal and March , 1993 ; March , 1991 ) . Experience with a technology leads to enhanced absorptive capacity and increased competence with the technology ( Cohen and Levinthal , 1990 ) . Greater competence with a technology fosters increased usage , and hence increases experience with the technology ( Cohen and Levinthal , 1990 ) . This cycle of experience and competence is rewarding in terms of enabling the organization to build a specialized competence . However , the increased ease of learning and problem solving in speciﬁc direc - tions made possible by enhanced absorptive capacity and competence in those areas makes the adoption of alternate directions of develop - ment less attractive and potentially less rewarding . Since developing deeper expertise with familiar knowledge bases yields more immediate and likely returns , it is preferred to investing in unfa - miliar technologies ( Cohen and Levinthal , 1990 ; Levinthal and March , 1993 ) . Unfortunately , this path dependence increases the risks of the organi - zation falling into a familiarity trap . As experience and competence in a speciﬁc set of technologies accumulate , knowledge architec - tures reify ( Henderson and Clark , 1990 ) . Cogni - tive maps become increasingly rigid and existing , dominant , paradigmatic solutions are applied to Copyright (cid:211) 2001 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 22 : 521 – 543 ( 2001 ) all problems ( Leonard - Barton , 1992 ; March , 1991 ) . The reduction in experimentation and the invocation of a dominant and familiar paradigm to address all problems reduces the probability that a distinct , radically different approach to solving a given problem will emerge ( Fiol and Lyles , 1985 ; Lei et al . , 1996 ) . However , a given set of routines and competencies can address only so many problems in an effective fashion . The likelihood that the optimal , or even a highly effective , solution to a problem will be discovered diminishes as the range of problems addressed with a given set of competencies is increased . Concurrently , the likelihood that some principles will be inappropriately applied rises as a con - strained set of competencies is applied to more and varied technological problems . Without exposure to novel technologies and the novel modes of reasoning and variation in cause – effect understandings that are associated with such exposure , breakthrough solutions become increas - ingly unlikely . Thus , although the ﬁrm uses fa - miliar , well - understood technologies with great competence , the absence of novelty and exper - imentation that are likely to help the ﬁrm craft breakthrough solutions to upcoming problems limits the ﬁrm’s capacity for breakthrough inven - tion . Exploring novel technologies , i . e . , technologies that are new to the organization , even though they may have been in existence earlier , are an important mechanism by which ﬁrms can avoid familiarity traps . Exploring realms of knowledge that an organization has hitherto not explored provides the organization with multiple beneﬁts from the perspective of generating new , break - through solutions . First , it provides the organi - zation with the beneﬁt of heterogeneity in its problem - solving arsenal ( Amabile , 1988 ) . Novel technologies may differ in their modes of reason - ing and problem formulation and solution . Exposure to these different approaches adds to the repertoire that the organization can bring to bear on any new problem that it faces . Newly learnt or observed perspectives may reﬂect better , more effective solutions to a given problem . Second , as new technologies are observed and studied , the stability of existing cognitive struc - tures and cause – effect relationships is challenged ( Lei et al . , 1996 ) . New world - views have to be developed that account for both the known as well as the unfamiliar , and this process can lead Entrepreneurship in the Large Corporation 527 to additional insights and profundity . Metaphor - ically speaking , the irritant of new , imperfectly understood streams of knowledge can foster the pearls of insight that encompass both old and new knowledge . The enhanced repertoire and deeper understanding that are the consequence of explo - ration of new technologies can provide the basis for breakthrough inventions . Even though exposure to new technologies is likely to be beneﬁcial up to a point , excessive exploration of new technologies must eventually be harmful ( Levinthal and March , 1993 ) . In mod - erate quantities , the novelties that new technol - ogies draw attention to spark renewed exami - nation of causes and effects , improve understanding and insight , and lead to break - through inventions . In excess , the same novelties can become a source of confusion and infor - mation overload . As organizations are reduced to ‘frenzies of experimentation’ performance suffers ( Levinthal and March , 1993 ) . Further , expending resources on multiple new technologies si - multaneously may eventually imply diseconomies of scale within the individual technologies . These arguments suggest that : Hypothesis 1 : A ﬁrm’s creation of break - through inventions is related to its exploration of novel technologies in a curvilinear ( inverted - U shaped ) manner . The maturity trap and emerging technologies Closely related but conceptually distinguishable from the tendency to favor familiar technologies is the tendency to favor mature technologies . Mature technologies are technologies that have been in existence for some time and are relatively well known and understood in the industry . In contrast , emerging technologies are technologies that are new in chronological terms . They rep - resent the leading edge of technology and have only recently been developed . Mature technologies are closely tied to the advantages and characteristics of the established ﬁrm . First , mature technologies are usually well understood and offer greater reliability relative to more recently developed and less tested approaches . For the established ﬁrm , providing reliable performance to its constituencies is a critical element of its competitive repertoire ( Hannan and Freeman , 1989 ) . Second , mature Copyright (cid:211) 2001 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 22 : 521 – 543 ( 2001 ) technologies are likely to have highly developed value networks and organizational and extra - organizational assets that are co - specialized with these technologies ( Christensen and Rosenbloom , 1995 ) . These co - specialized assets and networks make subsequent innovations on these existing technologies easier , but may impede experimen - tation with nascent technologies that require dif - ferent sets of assets , inputs , and complements . Third , mature technologies being well known in the industry offer the beneﬁts of legitimacy ; even if new technologies hold the promise of superior performance , convincing customers to trust unproven technologies may be difﬁcult and expensive . For all these reasons , the established ﬁrm may prefer to exercise its innovative efforts in well - developed , mature technologies while choosing to forgo more current alternatives . This failure to explore emerging technologies may , however , lead the ﬁrm into a maturity trap . The organization’s assets and commitments favor the further development of mature technologies ; how - ever , lack of exposure to immature technologies may reduce the likelihood of creating a break - through invention . Experimenting with nascent or emerging technologies can be a mechanism by which ﬁrms can increase their likelihood of creating a break - through invention and circumvent the maturity trap . Emerging technologies are likely to differ from mature technologies in terms of the nature of technical problems they pose as well as the possi - bilities of technical solutions that they present . On both these accounts they offer a greater potential for breakthrough invention . We examine these two mechanisms in some detail below . Research suggests that the character of inven - tion and innovation changes across the life cycle of a technology ( Abernathy and Utterback , 1978 ; Tushman and Anderson , 1986 ) . In its earliest period a technology poses many signiﬁcant prob - lems as its basic concepts are reduced to practice . Although these problems raise the uncertainties associated with a technology , they also represent signiﬁcant opportunity for early entrants into this technology . Solution of the fundamental problems of a technology can often be of a path - breaking character ( Dosi , 1988 ) . In contrast , as a tech - nology matures , fewer major problems remain to be solved . Thus , the opportunity to make fundamental breakthroughs is higher in emerg - ing technologies . 528 G . Ahuja and C . M . Lampert The theory of recombinant invention provides a second argument for the increased likelihood of breakthrough invention with an emerging tech - nology ( Fleming , 1999 ; Utterback , 1994 ) . Accord - ing to this theory inventions are very commonly the result of combining or recombining existing elements of knowledge into new syntheses ( Henderson and Clark , 1990 ; Kogut and Zander , 1992 ; Tushman and Rosenkopf , 1992 ; Fleming 1999 ) . Every new technology that is invented adds a new set of knowledge elements to the existing universe of knowledge elements . These new knowledge elements can themselves be recombined in various ways and thus serve as the basis for further inventions ( Fleming , 1999 ) . The recombination potential of any set of knowledge elements is , however , ﬁnite in that there are only so many ways that existing elements of knowledge can be fruitfully recom - bined . As technologies mature , the likelihood that high - utility combinations of the technology’s elements have not yet been tried or exploited already must eventually decline . Conversely , emerging technologies , technologies whose con - stituent elements are relatively new , offer signiﬁ - cantly higher potential for breakthrough recombi - nations . Since the elements in these technologies have been in existence for a relatively short period , experimenting with such technologies can enrich the set of underexploited technological factors or primitives available to the organization and increase the potential for breakthrough inven - tions . Thus , from both the perspective of unsolved problems as well as the prospect of recombinatory solutions , emerging technologies present a higher likelihood of breakthrough invention . Eventually , the logic of diminishing returns must apply to the exploration of emerging technologies too . Working on emerging technol - ogies is likely to demand more focus , attention , and resources . These technologies are likely to be relatively poorly understood given their recency . Further , even the infrastructure for research in these technologies may be underdeveloped rela - tive to that of more mature technologies . Research inputs and materials that are routinely available for older technologies may need to be developed afresh for these technologies . Further , the path - ways to successful innovation are more uncertain in such technologies ( Sahal , 1985 ) . Experimenting with many emerging technologies at the same time may fragment the organization’s efforts and Copyright (cid:211) 2001 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 22 : 521 – 543 ( 2001 ) resources and may well undermine its efforts to recharge its invention potential . As with novel technologies , the pursuit of emerging technologies is likely to be most rewarding when conducted in moderation . Without access to new and under - exploited technological elements , the organi - zation’s ability to create breakthrough recombi - nations may be affected . With excessive exploration of emerging technologies the organi - zation’s focus and resources may be challenged . Accordingly , we propose : Hypothesis 2 : A ﬁrm’s creation of break - through inventions is related to its exploration of emerging technologies in a curvilinear ( inverted - U shaped ) manner . The propinquity trap and pioneering technologies A third dynamic that is likely to characterize the problem - solving behavior of established organi - zations is their propensity to search for solutions in the neighborhood of existing solutions ( Helfat , 1994 ; Martin and Mitchell , 1998 ; Nelson and Winter , 1982 ; Stuart and Podolny , 1996 ) . Attempting to solve technological problems is an enterprise fraught with uncertainty . In ambiguous and uncertain environments , reliance upon histori - cal experience is often the norm ( March , 1988 ) . Previously used solutions provide a base of fa - miliarity from which the problem solver can move forward . Further , using elements or approaches that are known to have succeeded in past searches provides some assurance to the problem solver that the endeavor will not be a complete failure ( Fleming , 1999 ) . Thus , from a corporate inno - vation champion’s perspective an effort that builds on technological antecedents is less risky than one that attempts a de novo solution to a problem ( Hoskisson , Hitt , and Hill , 1993 ; Hoskis - son , Hitt , and Ireland , 1994 ) . Similarly , adaptation of existing solutions to new problems conserves cognitive effort and resources , both scarce inputs . The impulse to build on existing foundations is therefore likely to be strong in the context of inventions in general . In the context of an estab - lished organization this impulse is likely to be heightened by the organization’s need to ensure organizational order ( Burgelman , 1983 ; Mezias and Glynn , 1993 ) . In large corporations , organi - zational size and complexity demand that a struc - Entrepreneurship in the Large Corporation 529 tured approach be used to regulate organizational activity ( Burgelman , 1983 ) . Resource allocation must follow established norms , controls , and pro - cedures ( Hitt et al . , 1996 ) . Projects that build on clearly speciﬁed antecedents are likely to be more easily justiﬁable before a rule - bound decision - maker than projects that rely on completely new principles . Although risk aversion , organizational routines , and bureaucratic convenience all mandate a pri - ority for projects that look for new solutions near old solutions , these factors also predispose the organization towards falling into the propinquity or nearness trap . If the organization searches extensively and almost universally for new so - lutions in the neighborhood of old solutions , then large areas in the solution domain remain unex - plored . Yet , the history of science suggests that many remarkable inventions eventually emerge from precisely these hitherto unexplored domains ( Utterback , 1994 ) . Actors from unrelated contexts , unfettered by the need to build on existing prec - edents , introduce new solutions or deﬁne prob - lems in new ways that facilitate completely unprecedented and discontinuous solutions ( Foster , 1986 ; Brown , 1991 ) . Experimentation with pioneering technologies may provide one mechanism for incumbents to circumvent the dangers of the propinquity trap and preempt such attackers ( Brown , 1991 ) . Pio - neering technologies build on no existing technol - ogies . Instead of trying to modify an available solution , pioneering technologies focus on com - pletely de novo solutions . Indeed , the directive to researchers from a pioneering technology perspec - tive is often to ignore all available solutions , focus instead on basic problems and their root causes , and step into the complete unknown in search of a fundamental solution . Such a path is very aptly captured in the following missive from the Director of the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center ( PARC ) to an incoming employee ( Brown , 1991 ) : Our approach to research is ‘radical’ in the sense conveyed by the word’s original Greek meaning : ‘to the root’ . At PARC we attempt to pose and answer basic questions that can lead to fundamen - tal breakthroughs … If you come to work here there will be no plotted path . The problems you work on will be the ones that you help to invent . When you embark on a project , you will have to be prepared to go in directions you couldn’t have predicted at the outset … That’s why fol - Copyright (cid:211) 2001 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 22 : 521 – 543 ( 2001 ) lowing your instinct is so important . Only by having deep intuitions , being able to trust them and knowing how to run with them will you be able to keep your bearings and guide yourself through uncharted territory . The ability to do research that gets to the root is what separates merely good researchers from world class ones . The former are reacting to a predictable future ; the latter are enacting a qualitatively new one . In more abstract form , the role of pioneering strategies in fostering radical inventions can be understood in terms of the research on technologi - cal progress and technological trajectories . Researchers have often described technological progress as a series of continuous improvements in ﬁtness ( a composite of all relevant performance attributes of a technology ) along a technology trajectory , with occasional discontinuities that emerge because of jumps to a different tech - nology trajectory ( Dosi , 1988 ; Foster , 1986 ; Sahal , 1985 ) . If we consider the ﬁtness of a technology as a function deﬁned on a technologi - cal space , then technology trajectories can be represented as the mapping of elements of the technology space onto several distinct , continuous functions . The individual distinct functions rep - resent different trajectories , and thus have discon - tinuous or very different ranges of ﬁtness values , but within a trajectory there is continuity as ﬁtness values of a given technology are closely related to ﬁtness values of proximate technol - ogies . In such a situation , solutions that build on existing solutions are likely to map onto the same technological trajectory and consequently yield very similar ﬁtness values to the ones already obtained by other solutions . A pioneering tech - nology is an attempt to jump to a distinct tra - jectory in the hope that the range of ﬁtness values embodied in the new trajectory is radically higher . Such an attempt is , of course , risky . There is no guarantee that the new trajectory will yield a higher range of ﬁtness values , and indeed may yield extremely low ranges of ﬁtness . However , increasing the number of experiments with such pioneering technologies should eventually yield at least some breakthrough inventions . Other things being equal , the larger the number of such pio - neering attempts the greater the likelihood that at least some of them are successful . The implications of increased experimentation with pioneering technologies for breakthrough inventions are not as clear as those of experi - menting excessively with novel and emerging 530 G . Ahuja and C . M . Lampert technologies . Both novel and emerging technol - ogies directly challenge the cognitive capabilities and research resources of the organization . For instance , we noted earlier that excessive explo - ration of novel or emerging technologies can lead to information overload and diseconomies of scale , and a consequent reduction in breakthrough inventions as the organization tries to develop and integrate too many unfamiliar or nascent and underdeveloped streams of knowledge . With respect to pioneering technologies this effect is not as clearly speciﬁed . On the one hand pio - neering technologies may imply an even greater cognitive task as the organization grapples with deep and fundamental problems . On the other hand pioneering technologies may result from simply ignoring conventional wisdom or from using broad - based creativity from people not directly involved in the ﬁeld . For instance , Exxon’s ‘Wish’ program entailed the involvement of a large set of interested people who were not directly involved in the subject ﬁeld to come up with radical inventions ( Berkowitz , 1996 ) . Since such pioneering efforts may involve only an unconventional approach to a problem , rather than complicated integration of disparate or novel knowledge bases , their costs may be reﬂected not in terms of cognitive overload but rather simply in greater ﬁnancial outlays or organizational expenditures . Thus , their negative consequences may show up in ﬁnancial ﬁgures rather than through a decline in the number of breakthrough inventions . A priori , this suggests two possible outcomes , the ﬁrst consistent with a cognitive overload interpretation , while the second would suggest that the negative consequences of exces - sive experimentation with pioneering technologies may be reﬂected on dimensions other than the output of breakthrough inventions : Hypothesis 3a : A ﬁrm’s creation of break - through inventions is related to its exploration of pioneering technologies in a curvilinear ( inverted - U shaped ) manner . Hypothesis 3b : A ﬁrm’s creation of break - through inventions is positively related to its exploration of pioneering technologies . It would be useful at this stage to clarify the differences between the three traps / strategies identiﬁed above . Although a ﬁrm can si - Copyright (cid:211) 2001 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 22 : 521 – 543 ( 2001 ) multaneously fall into all three traps there are nevertheless important conceptual distinctions between them . The familiarity trap arises on account of lack of variety in the ﬁrm’s conceptual repertoire . The remedy is to introduce variety in the form of unfamiliar or novel technologies . In contrast , the maturity trap arises as a consequence of the opportunity ( or the lack of it ) in the technology itself – the inventive potential of the technologies being used by the ﬁrm has been diminished over time . The remedy is to be active in more leading - edge or emerging technologies . Finally , the propinquity trap arises as a function of the search approach adopted—whether the ﬁrm attempts de novo solutions or uses existing so - lutions as a starting point for deﬁning and addressing technical problems . It is thus a con - dition relating to the originality of the solution approach used . The remedy is to move away from existing solutions and explore the possibilities of a radically different solution . This original approach could be applied to emerging or mature technologies , or familiar or novel ones . Table 1 provides a set of illustrative cases of ﬁrms that fall into each of these traps . Although the table highlights the cases of three pure types , in reality ﬁrms are likely to fall along a con - tinuum on each of these dimensions . Further , while there can be overlaps between novel , emerging , and pioneering technologies ( for instance , an emerging technology can also be novel to the ﬁrm ) , the constructs do not perfectly subsume each other . They work through distinct mechanisms and the occurrence of one does not necessarily imply the occurrence of the others . RESEARCH DESIGN Sample and data selection Since longitudinal data on all inventions in an industry are not generally available , in prior stud - ies scholars have been forced to examine only the cases of inventions that proved to be radical . The methodology of this research attempts to overcome this problem of sampling on the depen - dent variable and its attendant threats to internal and external validity ( Berk , 1983 ) . Speciﬁcally , we study a sample of ﬁrms irrespective of whether or not they have created breakthrough inventions . By obtaining measures of the strate - gies followed by them and incorporating a history Entrepreneurship in the Large Corporation 531 Table 1 . The three traps Firm description Familiarity Maturity trap Propinquity trap trap Firm works in a single technology , not exploring any Yes No No others . However , in that single technology it usually works on the leading edge and often uses a very original approach in terms of addressing the problems in that technology . Firm explores several technologies but usually works on No Yes No mature technologies . Within these mature technologies it sometimes adopts a very original approach to addressing the problems in that technology . Firm explores several technologies but usually works on No No Yes leading - edge technologies . Within these leading - edge technologies it usually adopts an unoriginal approach , preferring to work on problems and solutions that have well established precedents . of all their inventions , breakthrough or otherwise , we are able to present a relatively unbiased pic - ture of the association between ﬁrm strategies and breakthrough inventions . We tested the hypotheses on a longitudinal data set on the patenting activities of the global chemicals industry over the period 1980 – 95 . We used patent citation counts to identify break - through inventions . Several studies have shown that patent citation counts are important indicators of the technical importance of an innovation ( Albert et al . , 1991 ; Narin , Noma , and Perry , 1987 ) . Further , highly cited patents represent criti - cal or path - breaking inventions ( Trajtenberg , 1990a , 1990b ) . We selected the chemicals indus - try as the setting for this research because patents are widely regarded as a meaningful indicator of invention in this industry ( Levin et al . , 1987 ; Arundel and Kabla , 1998 ) . The data collection consisted of two phases . In the ﬁrst phase we identiﬁed the most highly cited patents in the chemicals industry for each year between 1980 and 1989 . For each successful chemical patent application between these years , we computed the number of citations received by the patent . Thereafter , for every year we sorted the patents applied for in that year on the basis of their citation weights and identiﬁed the top 1 percent of patents for that year as breakthrough inventions . This procedure ensures that each pa - tent is compared in its importance only to other patents of the same year . Since the duration for Copyright (cid:211) 2001 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 22 : 521 – 543 ( 2001 ) which a patent is at risk of being cited varies for patents of different vintages , it is important to compare patents only with their own cohort . A similar procedure has been used in past research ( Trajtenberg , 1990a , 1990b ) . A beneﬁt of this approach is that breakthrough inventions are iden - tiﬁed from a universe of all inventions . Hence , sampling on the dependent variable is avoided . In the second phase of the data collection our task was to identify and obtain data on the established ﬁrms in the industry . To accomplish this we consulted the leading trade journals ( Chemical Week and C & E News ) that provide annual listings of the largest chemicals ﬁrms . In the lists published by these journals , subsidiaries were often listed separately from parent ﬁrms . From an original sample of approximately 120 ﬁrms , after including subsidiaries with parent ﬁrms , a sample of 107 ﬁrms remained . For 10 of these ﬁrms either patent data or covariate data could not be reliably obtained and they were dropped from the analysis . For the remaining ﬁrms in the sample we obtained yearly patenting histories identifying each patent that they had created over the study period . We then used the list of breakthrough inventions in the chemicals industry to identify the breakthrough inventions created by these ﬁrms . Note that with this approach , since the sampling on ﬁrms is inde - pendent of whether or not they created break - through inventions , there are many ﬁrms in the sample that do not create any breakthrough inven - 532 G . Ahuja and C . M . Lampert tions in a given year . This approach now enables us to have a panel data set with each ﬁrm’s complete history of breakthrough inventions across the study period . Patents applied for in later years have a smaller window for getting cited . Although our procedure for counting citations only compares patents with other patents applied for in the same year , and thus keeps the ‘at risk of being cited’ period consistent for all compared patents , and we use year dummy variables as suggested in the litera - ture ( Trajtenberg , 1990a , 1990b ) , there is still the concern that the citation patterns for the most recent patents might not be representative of their ﬁnal worth given the shorter period they were available for being cited . Accordingly , we omitted all observations for years after 1989 . Construction of some of the independent variables entailed lags too , and the ﬁnal panel used for regression analysis covers 8 years . The panel is unbalanced as some of the ﬁrms were acquired by other ﬁrms or restructured in a fashion that made comparison difﬁcult beyond a particular year . Even though the sample was focused on the largest ﬁrms in the chemicals industry the inclusion of 97 ﬁrms provides signiﬁcant depth to the sample and ensures that there is considerable variety on all key variables . For instance , the number of employees for ﬁrms in the sample varies from a minimum of 1100 to a maximum of more than 181 , 000 . Financial ﬁgures and personnel data on these ﬁrms were obtained from Compustat , Worldscope , Japan Company Handbooks , Daiwa Institute Research Guides , and trade publications and company annual reports . For all ﬁrms , ﬁnan - cial data were converted to constant ( 1985 ) U . S . dollars to ensure standardization within the sam - ple . A full list of the sample ﬁrms is available from the authors . We used U . S . patent data for all ﬁrms , includ - ing the foreign ﬁrms in the sample . This was necessary to maintain consistency , reliability , and comparability , as patenting systems across nations differ in their application of standards , system of granting patents , and value of protection granted . The United States represents one of the largest markets for chemicals , and ﬁrms desirous of com - mercializing their inventions typically patent in the United States . Prior research using patent data on international samples ( e . g . , Stuart and Podolny , 1996 ; Patel and Pavitt , 1997 ) , including studies of the global chemicals industry ( Achilladelis et Copyright (cid:211) 2001 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 22 : 521 – 543 ( 2001 ) al . , 1990 ) , have followed a similar strategy of using U . S . patent data for international ﬁrms . Variable deﬁnitions Dependent variable Breakthrough inventions . This was computed as the number of breakthrough patents in the chemi - cal industry in any year that were created by the focal ﬁrm . As noted earlier , for every year we sorted the patents applied for in that year on the basis of their citation weights and identiﬁed the top 1 percent of patents for that year as break - through patents . Note that the dependent variable is computed based on citations in patents that are issued after the breakthrough invention . These patents are therefore different from the patents on which the independent variables are based . The independent variables , described below , are based on the focal ﬁrm’s patenting history in the period before the breakthrough invention . Thus , even though both the dependent and some of the independent variables are based on patent data , the actual patents on which they are based are dif - ferent . Our choice of identifying the top 1 percent of patents ( based on the number of citations received by the patents ) as breakthrough inventions was based on the following rationale . Prior research suggests that ( a ) the most heavily cited patents are the most valuable ( Trajtenberg , 1990b ) , and ( b ) the value distribution of patents is very highly skewed , a few patents are very valuable , while most patents have relatively low values ( Griliches , 1990 ; Harhoff et al . , 1999 ) . Studies using citations suggest that the distribution of citations to a patent drops off pretty sharply , but does not provide an indication of an exact cut - off point that can be used to classify truly breakthrough inventions ( Trajtenberg , 1990b ) . Therefore , we examined the actual pattern of citations received by the top 1 percent , top 2 percent , and top 5 percent of patents . These indicated a fairly sharp drop - off in average number of citations received between these three categories of patents . For instance , of all chemicals patents applied for in 1981 , the top 1 percent received 37 citations on average , the top 2 percent received 30 citations on average , while the top 5 percent received 22 citations on average . Since our interest is in identifying truly path - breaking inventions we Entrepreneurship in the Large Corporation 533 decided to use the top 1 percent as our indicators of breakthrough inventions . However , for sensi - tivity we also repeated the analyses using the top 2 percent ( as we report in the Results section , the ﬁndings are substantively the same with either measure ) . Independent variables Novel technologies . For this variable we needed to develop a measure that taps into the degree to which a ﬁrm experiments with technologies that it has not used previously . We computed this variable using the technology classiﬁcation pro - vided by the U . S . patent system . The U . S . patent system classiﬁes the technology domain into 400 broad classes and several hundred thousand sub - classes nested within the classes . Based on a ﬁrm’s prior patenting history we computed this variable as the number of new technology classes that were entered by a ﬁrm in the previous 3 years . A ﬁrm was considered to have entered a new technology class when it ﬁrst applies for a patent in a class in which it had not patented in the previous 4 years . The presumption is that if a ﬁrm has not patented in a technology in the previous 4 years , then that technology represents an unfamiliar technology for the ﬁrm . For robust - ness , we also computed this measure using a 5 - year interval instead of a 4 - year interval . Since technical knowledge tends to depreciate or obso - lesce over time , not participating in a technology for an extended period of time is likely to sig - niﬁcantly reduce a ﬁrm’s stock of viable knowl - edge in that technology . Prior research in tech - nology - intensive industries has used a 4 - to 5 - year window as the appropriate time frame for assessing the validity of a knowledge base in a given technology ( Stuart and Podolny , 1996 ; Ahuja , 2000 ) . The choice of a 4 - to 5 - year period for knowledge relevance is also consistent with studies of R & D depreciation ( Griliches , 1984 ) . Emerging technologies . For this variable we needed a measure that would capture the degree to which a ﬁrm experiments with leading - edge or nascent technologies . We based this measure on the average age of the patents cited by a ﬁrm . Every patent is required by law to disclose all prior art , the previous patents that served as the foundation for the current patent . If a ﬁrm is working primarily on old technologies then the Copyright (cid:211) 2001 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 22 : 521 – 543 ( 2001 ) average age of the patents it cites is likely to be high . On the other hand , if a ﬁrm cites very recent patents then it can be said to be working on very current technologies . We computed the variable as the number of a ﬁrm’s patents that cite technology that is on average less than 3 years old . As an alternate measure ( for robustness ) , we also computed this variable as the number of a ﬁrm’s patents that cite tech - nology that is on average less than 2 years old . The choice of a 2 - to 3 - year time period to signify an emerging technology was related to the currency of knowledge issue raised in the context of the previous variable . Since prior research has used a 4 - to 5 - year period as one representing the most viable life of a technology , the earlier part of this period would be appropri - ate for measuring emerging technologies . Hence , we use 2 - and 3 - year cut - offs . Pioneering technologies . For this variable we needed a measure that would capture the degree to which a ﬁrm experiments with technologies that build on no prior technologies . We computed this variable as the number of a ﬁrm’s patents that cite no other patents . As noted earlier , patents must indicate their prior technological lineage by citing all patents that they build on ( Podolny and Stuart , 1995 ; Stuart and Podolny , 1996 ; Jaffe , Trajtenberg , and Henderson , 1993 ; Trajtenberg , Henderson , and Jaffe , 1992 ) . Patents that cite no other patents indicate that they have no discern - ible technological antecedents . Past research has used the relative lack of prior art citations in a patent as an indicator of the originality and crea - tivity of that patent ( Trajtenberg et al . , 1992 ) . Accordingly , we suggest that the creation of many such patents by a ﬁrm reﬂects its willingness to adopt a pioneering or unprecedented approach in its innovation strategy . Thus , ﬁrms that create many patents that cite no other patents are ﬁrms that can be regarded as willing to explore tech - nology spaces that have not been explored before . Control variables . Prior research suggests that the incentives of a ﬁrm to introduce breakthrough inventions may vary with its profitability ( Henderson , 1993 ) . Accordingly , we included the variable Net Income as a control variable . We also included several other control variables including R & D expenditures ( R & D ) , ﬁrm size as measured by natural log of number of employees 534 G . Ahuja and C . M . Lampert ( Logemployees ) , and ﬁrm diversiﬁcation ( Diversiﬁcation / Entropy ) as calculated using the entropy measure ( Palepu , 1985 ) . In all models we included the unobserved heterogeneity control variable Prior Breakthrough Inventions ( the sum of breakthrough inventions created by a ﬁrm in the 3 years prior to the ﬁrm’s entry into the sample ) and dummy variables for ﬁrm nationality ( U . S . and Japanese – European being the base category ) and calendar year . Finally , it is possible that the frequency of patenting or citations or breakthrough inventions varies across the United States Patent Ofﬁce ( USPTO ) technology classes ( Trajtenberg et al . , 1992 ) . To account for the possibility of technology class effects we created a set of 80 dummy variables to reﬂect the 81 classes that cover the chemicals sector . The most commonly occurring class ( Class 428 ) was treated as the omitted category . For each observation these dummy variables reﬂect a ﬁrm’s partici - pation or nonparticipation in that particular tech - nology class in that year . Model speciﬁcation and econometric issues The dependent variable of the study , Break - through Inventions , is a count variable and takes only nonnegative integer values . A Poisson regression approach is appropriate for such data ( Hausman , Hall , and Griliches , 1984 ; Henderson and Cockburn , 1996 ) . Accordingly , we speciﬁed the following Poisson regression model : P it = e X it - 1 g + A it - 1 b ( 1 ) where P it is the number of breakthrough inven - tions obtained by ﬁrm i in year t , X it - 1 is a vector of control variables affecting P it , and A it - 1 is a vector of variables representing the hypothe - sized effects . The above speciﬁcation does not account for unobserved heterogeneity , the possibility that observationally equivalent ﬁrms may differ on unmeasured characteristics . For instance , ﬁrms may enter the sample with inherently different breakthrough invention - generating capabilities ( Ahuja and Katila , 2001 ) . To address this possi - bility we used the Presample Panel Poisson approach ( Blundell , Grifﬁth , and Van Reenen , 1995 ) and included the Presample variable described earlier , Prior Breakthrough Inventions , as a measure of the unobserved differences Copyright (cid:211) 2001 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 22 : 521 – 543 ( 2001 ) between the sample ﬁrms in their ability to create breakthrough inventions . The presample approach presumes that the inﬂuences valid in the presample period continue to be valid in the study period . To ensure that our results were robust to this assumption we did two things . First , as an alternate measure we used lagged values of the dependent variable as an alternate measure of unobserved heterogeneity . Second , in addition to using conventional Poisson estimation of the Presample Panel Poisson model ( Blundell et al . , 1995 ) we also estimated the models using the GEE ( General Estimating Equation ) approach for modeling longitudinal Poisson data ( Liang and Zeger , 1986 ) . Since unobserved heterogeneity that is affecting the dependent variable should be reﬂected in corre - lation between the residuals of the same ﬁrm , using an approach that models serial correlation into the estimation procedure accounts for any remaining correlation . Finally , we report all results with ‘robust’ or empirical standard errors ( SAS , 1997 ) . In case of model misspeciﬁcation or overdispersion , the model - based standard errors for a Poisson regression can be incorrect . Using robust standard errors guards against this possibility . RESULTS Table 2 provides descriptive statistics and corre - lations for all variables . Table 3 presents the results of the hypothesis testing . We originally attempted to run the GEE regressions with the full set of 80 USPTO class dummies . However , the full models with 80 class dummies and 21 other covariates proved to be nonestimable using GEE methodology . Accordingly , we ﬁrst esti - mated a series of regular Presample Poisson mod - els with all 80 dummies . From these estimations we identiﬁed all USPTO classes that indicated a signiﬁcant class effect . To be conservative we included all classes that were signiﬁcant even at p < 0 . 10 . Then , we estimated the GEE models with this smaller subset of 38 class dummies , treating the remaining classes as a single class . The results of these estimations are reported in the GEE Models 1 – 8 in Table 3 . Model 1 in Table 3 presents the results for the control variables . Model 2 adds the variables for the three hypothesized effects , with no squared terms . Model 3 adds all three squared terms for E n t r e p r e n e u rs h i p i n t h e L a r g e C o r po r a ti on 535 Table 2 . Descriptive statistics and zero - order correlations Variable Mean S . D . Min . Max . 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 1 Breakthrough 0 . 42 1 . 11 0 9 1 . 00 Inventions 2 Novel Technologies it - 1 6 . 89 3 . 59 0 27 0 . 03 1 . 00 3 Emerging 7 . 39 11 . 64 0 79 0 . 54 0 . 05 1 . 00 Technologies it - 1 4 Pioneering 1 . 64 3 . 44 0 24 0 . 39 0 . 02 0 . 82 1 . 00 Technologies it - 1 5 R & D it - 1 86 . 53 166 . 36 0 . 10 1081 . 2 0 . 60 0 . 04 0 . 82 0 . 72 1 . 00 6 Firm Size 2 . 40 1 . 22 0 . 09 5 . 20 0 . 44 0 . 12 0 . 60 0 . 53 0 . 66 1 . 00 ( LogEmployees ) it - 1 7 Net Income it - 1 120 . 12 254 . 39 - 647 2312 . 4 0 . 64 0 . 10 0 . 58 0 . 48 0 . 81 0 . 59 1 . 00 8 Diversiﬁcation - 1 . 30 0 . 34 0 . 20 2 . 19 0 . 23 0 . 05 0 . 40 0 . 40 0 . 41 0 . 46 0 . 30 1 . 00 Entropy it - 1 9 Prior Breakthrough 1 . 32 2 . 54 0 16 0 . 53 0 . 02 0 . 64 0 . 49 0 . 62 0 . 53 0 . 53 0 . 24 1 . 00 Inventions it - 1 10 U . S . A . 0 . 26 0 . 44 0 1 0 . 26 0 . 04 0 . 06 - 0 . 04 0 . 12 0 . 26 0 . 24 - 0 . 12 0 . 24 1 . 00 11 Japan 0 . 43 0 . 50 0 1 - 0 . 19 - 0 . 03 - 0 . 20 - 0 . 19 - 0 . 32 - 0 . 68 - 0 . 32 - 0 . 14 - 0 . 21 - 0 . 52 1 . 00 12 Year 1982 0 . 13 0 . 33 0 1 0 . 01 - 0 . 06 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 02 - 0 . 05 0 . 00 - 0 . 12 0 . 02 0 . 00 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 00 1 . 00 13 Year 1983 0 . 13 0 . 33 0 1 - 0 . 02 - 0 . 02 - 0 . 04 - 0 . 02 - 0 . 04 0 . 00 - 0 . 07 0 . 01 0 . 00 0 . 00 - 0 . 00 - 0 . 14 1 . 00 14 Year 1984 0 . 13 0 . 33 0 1 0 . 01 - 0 . 03 - 0 . 03 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 04 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 00 0 . 01 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 15 - 0 . 15 1 . 00 15 Year 1985 0 . 13 0 . 34 0 1 - 0 . 02 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 02 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 02 0 . 01 - 0 . 08 - 0 . 00 - 0 . 00 0 . 00 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 15 - 0 . 15 - 0 . 15 1 . 00 16 Year 1986 0 . 13 0 . 33 0 1 0 . 00 0 . 01 - 0 . 02 0 . 02 0 . 03 0 . 00 0 . 01 0 . 00 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 00 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 15 - 0 . 15 - 0 . 15 - 0 . 15 1 . 00 17 Year 1987 0 . 12 0 . 33 0 1 - 0 . 01 0 . 08 0 . 03 0 . 00 0 . 07 - 0 . 01 0 . 10 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 00 - 0 . 00 0 . 00 - 0 . 14 - 0 . 14 - 0 . 14 - 0 . 14 - 0 . 14 1 . 00 18 Year 1988 0 . 12 0 . 33 0 1 0 . 04 0 . 10 0 . 06 0 . 07 0 . 10 - 0 . 01 0 . 18 - 0 . 02 0 . 00 - 0 . 00 0 . 00 - 0 . 14 - 0 . 14 - 0 . 14 - 0 . 14 - 0 . 14 - 0 . 14 1 . 00 N = 721 observations All correlations with magnitude > | 0 . 07 | are signiﬁcant at the 0 . 05 level C opy r i gh t (cid:211) 2001 J ohn W il e y & S on s , L t d . S t r a t . M g m t . J . , 22 : 521 – 543 ( 2001 ) 536 G . A hu j a and C . M . L a m p e r t Table 3 . GEE / Poisson regressions of the impact of novel technologies , emerging technologies and pioneering technologies on breakthrough inventions Variable Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 Model 6 Model 7 Model 8 Model 9 Model 10 GEE GEE GEE GEE GEE GEE GEE GEE ( 2 % ) Poisson Poisson ( 2 % ) Constant - 4 . 7787 ⁄⁄⁄ - 4 . 8255 ⁄⁄⁄ - 5 . 1820 ⁄⁄⁄ 4 . 7206 ⁄⁄⁄ - 5 . 2875 ⁄⁄⁄ - 5 . 1613 ⁄⁄⁄ - 5 . 0607 ⁄⁄⁄ - 3 . 3905 ⁄⁄⁄ - 5 . 7640 ⁄⁄⁄ - 3 . 7188 ⁄⁄⁄ [ 0 . 6869 ] [ 0 . 7129 ] [ 0 . 7109 ] [ 0 . 7133 ] [ 0 . 7092 ] [ 0 . 7110 ] [ 0 . 7159 ] ( 0 . 5247 ] [ 0 . 6299 ] [ 0 . 4808 ] Novel Technologies it - 1 0 . 0059 0 . 2074 ⁄⁄⁄ 0 . 0147 0 . 1993 ⁄⁄⁄ 0 . 2057 ⁄⁄⁄ 0 . 2053 ⁄⁄⁄ 0 . 1603 ⁄⁄⁄ 0 . 1974 ⁄⁄ 0 . 1642 ⁄⁄ [ 0 . 0216 ] [ 0 . 0618 ] [ 0 . 0208 ] [ 0 . 0633 ] [ 0 . 0609 ] [ 0 . 0620 ] [ 0 . 0417 ] [ 0 . 0694 ] [ 0 . 0535 ] Novel Technologies Squared it - 1 - 0 . 0105 ⁄⁄⁄ - 0 . 0104 ⁄⁄⁄ - 0 . 0105 ⁄⁄⁄ - 0 . 0103 ⁄⁄⁄ - 0 . 0074 ⁄⁄⁄ - 0 . 0104 ⁄⁄ - 0 . 0075 ⁄⁄ [ 0 . 0032 ] [ 0 . 0033 ] [ 0 . 0032 ] [ 0 . 0032 ] [ 0 . 0020 ] [ 0 . 0038 ] [ 0 . 0028 ] Emerging Technologies it - 1 0 . 0078 0 . 0440 ⁄ 0 . 0399 + 0 . 0106 0 . 0465 ⁄ 0 . 0447 ⁄ 0 . 0582 ⁄⁄⁄ 0 . 0358 + 0 . 0456 ⁄ [ 0 . 0086 ] [ 0 . 0240 ] [ 0 . 0247 ] [ 0 . 0084 ] [ 0 . 0238 ] [ 0 . 0241 ] [ 0 . 0168 ] [ 0 . 0232 ] [ 0 . 0184 ] Emerging Technologies Squared it - 1 - 0 . 0005 ⁄ - 0 . 0004 + - 0 . 0005 ⁄ - 0 . 0005 ⁄ - 0 . 0006 ⁄⁄ - 0 . 0004 + - 0 . 0005 ⁄ [ 0 . 0003 ] [ 0 . 0003 ] [ 0 . 0003 ] [ 0 . 0003 ] [ 0 . 0002 ] [ 0 . 0003 ] [ 0 . 0002 ] Pioneering Technologies it - 1 0 . 0279 ⁄ 0 . 0659 ⁄ 0 . 0586 ⁄ 0 . 0811 ⁄ 0 . 0425 ⁄⁄ 0 . 0399 ⁄⁄ 0 . 0403 ⁄⁄ 0 . 0430 ⁄ 0 . 0423 ⁄ [ 0 . 0151 ] [ 0 . 0327 ] [ 0 . 0333 ] [ 0 . 0353 ] [ 0 . 0144 ] [ 0 . 0139 ] [ 0 . 0141 ] [ 0 . 0222 ] [ 0 . 0180 ] Pioneering Technologies Squared it - 1 - 0 . 0012 - 0 . 0012 - 0 . 0024 + [ 0 . 0016 ] [ 0 . 0015 ] [ 0 . 0017 ] R & D it - 1 - 0 . 0000 - 0 . 0005 - 0 . 0003 - 0 . 0003 - 0 . 0004 - 0 . 0003 - 0 . 0005 - 0 . 0004 0 . 0000 - 0 . 0002 [ 0 . 0006 ] [ 0 . 0007 ] [ 0 . 0007 ] [ 0 . 0007 ] [ 0 . 0007 ] [ 0 . 0007 ] [ 0 . 0007 ] [ 0 . 0004 ] [ 0 . 0008 ] [ 0 . 0007 ] Firm Size ( LogEmployees ) it - 1 0 . 3145 ⁄ 0 . 2717 + 0 . 1583 0 . 2190 0 . 2173 0 . 1521 0 . 1081 0 . 1768 + 0 . 2200 + 0 . 1573 [ 0 . 1410 ] [ 0 . 1395 ] [ 0 . 1372 ] [ 0 . 1453 ] [ 0 . 1342 ] [ 0 . 1377 ] [ 0 . 1432 ] [ 0 . 0990 ] [ 0 . 1467 ] [ 0 . 1179 ] Net Income it - 1 0 . 0010 ⁄⁄ 0 . 0012 ⁄⁄ 0 . 0012 ⁄⁄ 0 . 0011 ⁄⁄ 0 . 0012 ⁄⁄⁄ 0 . 0012 ⁄⁄⁄ 0 . 0012 ⁄⁄⁄ 0 . 0007 ⁄⁄⁄ 0 . 0013 ⁄⁄⁄ 0 . 0008 ⁄⁄⁄ [ 0 . 0003 ] [ 0 . 0004 ] [ 0 . 0004 ] [ 0 . 0004 ] [ 0 . 0004 ] [ 0 . 0003 ] [ 0 . 0003 ] [ 0 . 0002 ] [ 0 . 0003 ] [ 0 . 0002 ] Diversiﬁcation - Entropy it - 1 - 0 . 0776 - 0 . 0945 - 0 . 1134 - 0 . 0911 - 0 . 1230 - 0 . 1136 - 0 . 0330 - 0 . 4857 ⁄ - 0 . 0153 - 0 . 4419 ⁄ [ 0 . 3180 ] [ 0 . 3114 ] [ 0 . 3042 ] [ 0 . 3155 ] [ 0 . 3007 ] [ 0 . 3049 ] [ 0 . 3056 ] [ 0 . 2309 ] [ 0 . 2759 ] [ 0 . 2054 ] Prior Breakthrough Inventions it - 1 - 0 . 0259 - 0 . 0286 0 . 0313 - 0 . 0293 - 0 . 0291 - 0 . 0319 0 . 0086 - 0 . 0362 - 0 . 0013 [ 0 . 0224 ] [ 0 . 0213 ] [ 0 . 0206 ] [ 0 . 0207 ] [ 0 . 0205 ] [ 0 . 0206 ] [ 0 . 0106 ] [ 0 . 0345 ] [ 0 . 0167 ] C opy r i gh t (cid:211) 2001 J ohn W il e y & S on s , L t d . S t r a t . M g m t . J . , 22 : 521 – 543 ( 2001 ) E n t r e p r e n e u rs h i p i n t h e L a r g e C o r po r a ti on 537 Table 3 . Continued Variable Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 Model 6 Model 7 Model 8 Model 9 Model 10 GEE GEE GEE GEE GEE GEE GEE GEE ( 2 % ) Poisson Poisson ( 2 % ) Lagged Breakthrough Inventions 0 . 0335 [ 0 . 0332 ] U . S . A . 1 . 1246 ⁄⁄⁄ 1 . 2424 ⁄⁄⁄ 1 . 2515 ⁄⁄⁄ 1 . 2773 ⁄⁄⁄ 1 . 2182 ⁄⁄⁄ 1 . 2450 ⁄⁄⁄ 1 . 1409 ⁄⁄⁄ 1 . 0461 ⁄⁄⁄ 1 . 5072 ⁄⁄⁄ 1 . 1267 ⁄⁄⁄ [ 0 . 2172 ] [ 0 . 2200 ] [ 0 . 2041 ] [ 0 . 2050 ] [ 0 . 2084 ] [ 0 . 2067 ] [ 0 . 1979 ] [ 0 . 1723 ] [ 0 . 2593 ] [ 0 . 1982 ] Japan 1 . 1954 ⁄⁄ 1 . 2207 ⁄⁄ 0 . 9629 ⁄⁄ 1 . 1386 ⁄⁄ 1 . 0429 ⁄⁄ 0 . 9547 ⁄⁄ 0 . 8076 ⁄ 0 . 8276 ⁄⁄⁄ 1 . 3003 ⁄⁄⁄ 0 . 9166 ⁄⁄⁄ [ 0 . 3793 ] [ 0 . 3888 ] [ 0 . 3590 ] [ 0 . 3805 ] [ 0 . 3649 ] [ 0 . 3627 ] [ 0 . 3534 ] [ 0 . 2370 ] [ 0 . 3575 ] [ 0 . 2774 ] Year 1982 0 . 3778 0 . 4729 + 0 . 4616 + 0 . 4567 0 . 4867 + 0 . 4580 + 0 . 4727 0 . 0954 0 . 4087 + 0 . 1328 [ 0 . 2564 ] [ 0 . 2797 ] [ 0 . 2801 ] [ 0 . 2808 ] [ 0 . 2818 ] [ 0 . 2780 ] [ 0 . 2940 ] [ 0 . 1587 ] [ 0 . 2405 ] [ 0 . 2014 ] Year 1983 - 0 . 0014 0 . 0635 - 0 . 0033 0 . 0081 0 . 0209 0 . 0085 - 0 . 0122 - 0 . 0339 0 . 1127 0 . 0640 [ 0 . 2742 ] [ 0 . 3029 ] [ 0 . 3007 ] [ 0 . 3025 ] [ 0 . 3049 ] [ 0 . 2982 ] [ 0 . 3134 ] [ 0 . 1871 ] [ 0 . 2724 ] [ 0 . 2188 ] Year 1984 0 . 3036 0 . 3602 0 . 3071 ⁄ 0 . 3459 0 . 2935 0 . 3175 0 . 3221 0 . 3174 + 0 . 3255 0 . 4223 ⁄ [ 0 . 2785 ] [ 0 . 2951 ] [ 0 . 2790 ] [ 0 . 2923 ] [ 0 . 2812 ] [ 0 . 2801 ] [ 0 . 2781 ] [ 0 . 1691 ] [ 0 . 2399 ] [ 0 . 1926 ] Year 1985 0 . 0589 0 . 1380 0 . 1093 0 . 1354 0 . 1023 0 . 1138 0 . 1330 0 . 0336 - 0 . 0590 - 0 . 0777 [ 0 . 2963 ] [ 0 . 3236 ] [ 0 . 3142 ] [ 0 . 3225 ] [ 0 . 3162 ] [ 0 . 3134 ] [ 0 . 3257 ] [ 0 . 1901 ] [ 0 . 2549 ] [ 0 . 2071 ] Year 1986 - 0 . 2935 - 0 . 2289 - 0 . 3095 - 0 . 2549 - 0 . 3158 - 0 . 2950 - 0 . 2288 - 0 . 0635 - 0 . 2646 - 0 . 0581 [ 0 . 2842 ] [ 0 . 2988 ] [ 0 . 2878 ] [ 0 . 3009 ] [ 0 . 2906 ] [ 0 . 2857 ] [ 0 . 2915 ] [ 0 . 1867 ] [ 0 . 2664 ] [ 0 . 2098 ] Year 1987 - 0 . 5115 - 0 . 4397 - 0 . 5562 + - 0 . 4568 - 0 . 5636 + - 0 . 5449 - 0 . 5197 - 0 . 1925 - 0 . 4703 + - 0 . 0800 [ 0 . 3270 ] [ 0 . 3394 ] [ 0 . 3330 ] [ 0 . 3430 ] [ 0 . 3300 ] [ 0 . 3330 ] [ 0 . 3637 ] [ 0 . 1896 ] [ 0 . 2818 ] [ 0 . 2154 ] Year 1988 - 0 . 5332 - 0 . 4968 - 0 . 6499 - 0 . 4935 - 0 . 6607 ⁄ - 0 . 6451 ⁄ - 0 . 5687 + - 0 . 3316 - 0 . 7269 ⁄ - 0 . 3818 + [ 0 . 3296 ] [ 0 . 3400 ] [ 0 . 3262 ⁄ ] [ 0 . 3426 ] [ 0 . 3269 ] [ 0 . 3260 ] [ 0 . 3280 ] [ 0 . 2094 ] [ 0 . 2941 ] [ 0 . 2302 ] USPTO technology class dummies 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 38 80 80 dummies dummies dummies dummies dummies dummies dummies dummies dummies dummies Scale 0 . 7492 0 . 7476 0 . 7379 0 . 7461 0 . 7395 0 . 7375 0 . 7383 0 . 9161 0 . 7366 0 . 9187 N 721 721 721 721 721 721 721 721 721 721 Deviance 374 . 98 371 . 72 360 . 42 369 . 04 362 . 56 360 . 62 361 . 36 556 . 39 336 . 94 524 . 16 + p < 0 . 10 ; ⁄ p < 0 . 05 ; ⁄⁄ p < 0 . 01 ; ⁄⁄⁄ p < 0 . 001 Note : Single - tailed t - tests have been used for all hypothesized variables ; two - tailed t - tests have been used for all control variables . C opy r i gh t (cid:211) 2001 J ohn W il e y & S on s , L t d . S t r a t . M g m t . J . , 22 : 521 – 543 ( 2001 ) 538 G . Ahuja and C . M . Lampert the three hypothesized effects to account for the possibility of curvilinearity . Model 3 indicates that the coefﬁcients for Novel Technologies , Novel Technologies Squared , Emerging Technol - ogies and Emerging Technologies Squared , and Pioneering Technologies are statistically signiﬁ - cant with the predicted sign . However , the coef - ﬁcient for Pioneering Technologies Squared , while negative , is not statistically signiﬁcant . We also ran a series of models ( Models 4 , 5 , and 6 ) omitting the squared terms for each of the three hypothesized effects , one at a time . The deviance statistics , which indicate overall model ﬁt , con - ﬁrm the same results as they indicate that omit - ting the square term for either Novel or Emerging Technologies leads to a worsening of model ﬁt ( although for Emerging Technologies the worsen - ing was only marginally statistically signiﬁcant , p < 0 . 10 ) , but omitting the Pioneering Technologies Squared term does not worsen the model ﬁt . Thus , Model 6 that omits the Pioneering Technol - ogies Squared term is the best - ﬁtting speciﬁcation . Model 6 indicates some support for all three hypotheses . In Hypothesis 1 we had predicted that experimenting with Novel Technologies should increase the likelihood of breakthrough inventions up to a point and then lead to a diminution ( an inverted U ) . The coefﬁcient of Novel Technol - ogies is positive and statistically signiﬁcant , while the coefﬁcient of its squared term is negative and statistically signiﬁcant , indicating support for the prediction . In Hypothesis 2 we had predicted that experimenting with Emerging Technologies should increase the likelihood of breakthrough inventions up to a point and then lead to a diminution ( an inverted U ) . The coefﬁcient of Emerging Technologies is positive and sta - tistically signiﬁcant , while the coefﬁcient of its squared term is negative and statistically signiﬁ - cant , again indicating support for Hypothesis 2 . The estimated coefﬁcients for these variables indi - cate that the turning point of the curve lies well within the observed range of data for both these variables ( for Novel Technologies the point of inﬂection is at 0 . 2057 / ( 2 ⁄ 0 . 0105 ) = 10 , where the observed range is 0 – 27 , and for Emerging Technologies it occurs at 0 . 0465 / ( 2 ⁄ 0 . 0005 ) = 46 . 5 , where the observed range is 0 – 79 ) , thus further conﬁrming the downward component of the curve . In the case of Hypothesis 3 we had developed two competing predictions . Hypothesis 3a predicted an inverted U relationship between Copyright (cid:211) 2001 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 22 : 521 – 543 ( 2001 ) Pioneering Technologies and Breakthrough Inven - tions , while Hypothesis 3b predicted a positive effect of Pioneering Technologies on Break - through Inventions . The coefﬁcient of the Pio - neering Technologies variable was positive and statistically signiﬁcant , but the coefﬁcient for its squared term was not statistically signiﬁcant , and indeed was dropped from the ﬁnal model . Thus , the results do not support Hypothesis 3a , but do support the competing hypothesis , Hypothesis 3b . It appears that Pioneering Technologies have a positive impact on breakthrough inventions but the diminishing returns to experimentation evident with the strategies of Novel and Emerging Tech - nologies are not statistically visible with Pio - neering Technologies . We explore this issue in the Discussion section . Since the Emerging and Pioneering Technol - ogies variables were highly correlated ( 0 . 82 ) a danger of multicollinearity arises . In general , the symptoms of multicollinearity include ( a ) very large standard errors for the affected variables and therefore even true effects show up as nonsig - niﬁcant or ( b ) extreme sensitivity of results such that coefﬁcients ﬂip signs after even minor changes in the speciﬁcation or sample size and omitting even a few observations affects the results materially ( Greene , 1997 ) . In the context of the reported results , neither of these symptoms was observed . Indeed , the results are very robust and stable across many changes in speciﬁcation , sample , dependent variables , independent vari - ables , and estimation method . We reran the analy - ses with a one - period lagged value of the depen - dent variable Breakthrough Inventions as a regressor in place of the presample variable Prior Breakthrough Inventions ( Model 7 ) . We also rees - timated the models after deﬁning our dependent variable Breakthrough Inventions as including all patents in the top 2 percent of cited patents ( rather than top 1 % ) ( Model 8 ) . Finally , we esti - mated the models using regular Poisson maximum likelihood estimation instead of the GEE approach and included all 80 class dummies , for both the top 1 percent and the top 2 percent deﬁnitions of the dependent variable ( Models 9 and 10 respectively ) . The results are again consistent with the overall pattern though the Emerging Technol - ogies coefﬁcients in Model 9 are only marginally statistically signiﬁcant ( p < 0 . 07 and p < 0 . 06 , for the variable and its squared term , respectively ) . Among other sensitivity tests , not Entrepreneurship in the Large Corporation 539 presented here but for which results are available directly from the authors , we used alternate deﬁ - nitions of Novel Technologies ( we recomputed the variable after deﬁning novel technologies as technologies in which the ﬁrm had not patented in , in the previous 5 years instead of 4 ) and Emerging Technologies ( we recomputed the vari - able as the number of patents citing technology less than 2 years old instead of 3 years old ) . Finally , as another alternate estimation approach we aggregated all 34 patent classes that were involved in less than 10 percent of the obser - vations into a single class and estimated a GEE model using the resulting 46 class dummies . The results were robust to these and many other speci - ﬁcations of these models . DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS Researchers have suggested that the pursuit of corporate entrepreneurship requires established companies to strike a delicate balance between engaging in activities that use what they already know , while at the same time challenging them - selves to embark upon new activities and oppor - tunities to rejuvenate themselves ( Floyd and Wooldridge , 1999 ; Hannan and Freeman , 1989 ; Huff , Huff , and Thomas , 1992 ) . Leonard - Barton has aptly termed this conﬂict as a ‘capability – rigidity paradox , where existing capabilities pro - vide the basis for a ﬁrm’s current competitive position , [ but ] without renewal , these same capa - bilities become rigidities constraining the ﬁrm’s future ability to compete’ ( Leonard - Barton , 1992 ) . Interest in resolving this apparent paradox has led researchers to examine the processes by which corporations have attempted to ‘redeﬁne , renew and remake themselves’ ( Covin and Slevin , 1991 ; Guth and Ginsberg , 1990 ; Zahra , Jennings , and Kuratko , 1999 ) . In this study we explored this capability – rigidity paradox in the context of one mechanism through which established ﬁrms can initiate the process of renewal : breakthrough inventions . After identifying three organizational pathologies that could hinder the creation of breakthrough inventions in established corpo - rations we suggested three strategies that could help ﬁrms to counter these problems . Our empiri - cal results provided support for our arguments that experimenting with novel , emerging , and pio - neering technologies may be ways for organi - Copyright (cid:211) 2001 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 22 : 521 – 543 ( 2001 ) zations to overcome the traps of familiarity , maturity , and propinquity . Speciﬁcally , we found that exploration of novel and emerging technol - ogies is curvilinearly associated with subsequent breakthrough inventions , ﬁrst increasing and then decreasing a ﬁrm’s likelihood of creating a break - through invention . However , the downward slop - ing part of the curve was not identiﬁable in the case of pioneering technologies . Two possibilities could be consistent with this nonﬁnding . First , as we argued in the hypothesis development for Hypothesis 3b , it could be that Pioneering Technologies differ in their cognitive demands and likelihood of information overload from both Novel Technologies and Emerging Technologies . Entry into Novel and Emerging Technologies entails study of new areas from the ﬁrm’s perspective and the absorption of a body of knowledge already in existence or being created . Pioneering Technologies on the other hand can often imply an attempt to move away from exist - ing bodies of knowledge and give rein to creative solutions . Thus , it is not so much the possibility of information overload that is problematic but simply that the attempted solution may yield no results . In such a circumstance , although excess - ive experimentation with pioneering technologies will have signiﬁcant costs , these costs may not be eventually reﬂected in a decline in breakthrough invention ; instead they would appear as larger resource outlays or monetary costs . Another explanation for this ﬁnding could be that not enough ﬁrms reached the level of experimentation on this variable that was sufﬁciently high for the negative effects of resource fragmentation to become statistically signiﬁcant . These two expla - nations are not mutually exclusive ; however , future research may help to further clarify this matter . We now brieﬂy touch upon the impli - cations of our study for theory , research , and practice . Implications for theory , research , and practice Theoretically , the arguments and conclusions of this study make contributions to the literature on entrepreneurship , strategy , and organizational learning . From the perspective of organizational learning this study’s identiﬁcation of three traps that hinder breakthrough invention in the large corporation is important in and of itself ; however , 540 G . Ahuja and C . M . Lampert it is also important in terms of drawing attention to the fact that the constraints to breakthrough invention in the established ﬁrm do not necessar - ily stem from some dysfunctional traits of the organization , but emerge as a very natural conse - quence of some fairly functional traits . As our model argues , emphasizing the familiar and mature , and building on existing developments , are all efﬁcient responses from the standpoint of the large ﬁrm . They may , however , not be effec - tive when the outcome variable of interest is breakthrough invention . Characterizing the prob - lem in this fashion is useful when compared with a potential alternative characterization : that large corporations fail at breakthrough inventions because they are inept or incompetent . There is no antidote to incompetence . However , the dynamics we identify can be productively arrested as our identiﬁcation of three countering strate - gies demonstrates . In drawing the relationship between rational strategies and unintended negative consequences we follow the lead of organizational theorists that have argued for more reﬁned analyses of organizational processes accounting for both ﬁrst - order and second - order effects ( March , 1991 ; Levinthal and March , 1993 ) . However , we also take their work a few steps further . Prior theoriz - ing suggests that ﬁrms often get caught in learn - ing traps ( Levinthal and March , 1993 ) . Here we build on the learning trap arguments in three ways . First , we suggest that in the context of breakthrough inventions learning traps are mani - fested in three types of organizational pathologies : traps of familiarity , traps of maturity , and traps of propinquity . Factoring learning traps in this fashion permits us to identify speciﬁc strategies that organizations can use to counter these patho - logies . Second , we extend the learning trap argu - ments by including the possibility of second - order or double - loop learning ( Argyris , 1983 ; Huber , 1991 ) . Double - loop learning requires the reexam - ination and change of the governing values of the organization from the perspective of long - range outcomes ( Argyris , 1983 ; Huber , 1991 ) . If ﬁrms regard breakthrough inventions as important to their future , organizational routines that fail to produce such inventions are likely to be the subject of reappraisal and reformulation ( Huber , 1991 ) . Thus , by incorporating the possibility that ﬁrms will counteract such pathologies we deepen and condition the learning trap arguments from a Copyright (cid:211) 2001 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 22 : 521 – 543 ( 2001 ) conceptual standpoint . Finally , we provide empiri - cal evidence in support of our arguments and thus contribute to ﬁlling what has been identiﬁed as a signiﬁcant gap in the organizational learning literature – the absence of systematic large - sample empirical studies to supplement the rich but potentially idiosyncratic case studies ( Huber , 1991 ) . This study found that ﬁrms varied in their use of entrepreneurial strategies and that using these entrepreneurial strategies led to superior invention performance . However , the variation in ﬁrms’ strategies on the three exploration variables and the identiﬁcation of a statistically discernible impact of these variations on the ﬁrm’s output of breakthrough inventions raises a natural ques - tion : why do ﬁrms vary in their adoption of entrepreneurial strategies ? Why do some ﬁrms pursue novel , emerging , and pioneering technol - ogies more than others ? Although this variation across the entrepreneurial behavior of ﬁrms has been noted earlier ( Lant and Mezias , 1990 ; Mezias and Glynn , 1993 ) , less research explains why this variation occurs . We believe that our work , when contrasted with prior contributions in the entrepreneurship literature , draws attention to one possible expla - nation of this variation that could be addressed in future research : the existence of a ‘virtuous circle of corporate entrepreneurship . ’ The virtuous circle argument would suggest that although many ﬁrms would like to pursue such strategies they are unable to do so . This inability stems from their exclusion from a virtuous cycle in which ( a ) the pursuit of novel , emerging , and pioneering technologies leads to breakthrough inventions , ( b ) breakthrough inventions when they occur , create wealth and surplus resources , and ( c ) these sur - plus resources fund the next cycle of entrepre - neurial experimentation , which in turn leads to more breakthrough inventions . Although the full investigation of this virtuous circle goes beyond the scope of this study , prior research and the theory developed in this study provide at least some evidence in support of this explanation . This study’s results provide direct support for the ﬁrst leg of this cycle . However , the study also provides some indi - cations in support of the second leg . For instance , the descriptions of the three forms of exploration identiﬁed here suggest that the pursuit of novel , emerging , and pioneering technologies is likely Entrepreneurship in the Large Corporation 541 to require considerable slack resources . To go off in search of the unknown ( a . k . a . pioneering ) or experiment with novel technologies is likely to demand extensive resources . Without slack , these strategies may be attractive but beyond reach . Indeed , both prior theory ( Burgelman , 1983 ) and anecdotal evidence suggest that cash - rich corpo - rations can far more easily afford certain kinds of speculative and experimental ventures ( Styros , 1997 ) . Similarly , in support of the third leg of the cycle , prior research on the wealth - creating impact of breakthrough inventions suggests that technologically important inventions can generate very signiﬁcant returns ( Hall , Jaffe , and Trajten - berg , 1998 ; Harhoff et al . , 1999 ) . For instance , Harhoff et al . ( 1999 ) ﬁnd that the most valuable patents in their sample are worth tens of millions of dollars . In general , specifying the theoretical models underlying the second and third legs of this cycle may be a fruitful task for further research on corporate entrepreneurship and wealth creation . The paper also makes a contribution towards managerial practice . From a practitioner stand - point , explaining the determinants of break - through inventions is of signiﬁcant importance given the economic stakes associated with them . Additionally , the concepts of the three traps and counteracting strategies have practical utility . Prior research has identiﬁed three basic strategies for entrepreneurship in large ﬁrms ( Lant and Mezias , 1990 ) : ﬁxed ( nonentrepreneurial ) , imitat - ive ( searching domains new to the ﬁrm ) , and adaptive ( searching domains new to the population ) . Through this study we provide mana - gerially actionable variants of the imitative ( novel ) and adaptive ( emerging ) strategies in the context of technology and identify an additional new strategy ( pioneering ) that large corporations can use to reinvent themselves . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We would like to especially thank the Guest Editors and two anonymous reviewers of this journal whose insightful feedback immeasurably improved this study . We gratefully acknowledge the ﬁnancial support of the University of Texas at Austin and the Center for International Business Education and Research at the University of Michigan . Copyright (cid:211) 2001 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 22 : 521 – 543 ( 2001 ) REFERENCES Abernathy WJ , Utterback J . 1978 . Patterns of industrial innovation . Technology Review June / July : 39 – 48 . Achilladelis B , Schwarzkopf A , Cines M . 1990 . The dynamics of technological innovation : the case of the chemical industry . Research Policy 19 ( 1 ) : 1 – 34 . Ahuja G . 2000 . The duality of collaboration : induce - ments and opportunities in the formation of interﬁrm linkages . Strategic Management Journal 21 ( 3 ) : 317 – 343 . Ahuja G , Katila . 2001 . Technological acquisitions and the innovation performance of acquiring ﬁrms : a longitudinal study . Strategic Management Journal 22 ( 3 ) : 197 – 220 . Albert MB , Avery D , Narin F , McAllister P . 1991 . Direct validation of citation counts as indicators of industrially important patents . Research Policy 20 ( 3 ) : 251 – 259 . Amabile . T . 1988 . A model of creativity and innovation in organizations . In Research in Organizational Behavior , Vol . 10 , Staw BM , Cummings LL ( eds ) . JAI Press : Greenwich , CT ; 123 – 167 . Anderson P , Tushman M . 1990 . Technological disconti - nuities and dominant designs : a cyclical model of technological change . Administrative Science Quar - terly 35 : 604 – 633 . Argyris C . 1983 . Action science and intervention . Jour - nal of Applied Behavioral Science 19 : 115 – 140 . Arundel A , Kabla I . 1998 . What percentage of inno - vations are patented ? Empirical estimates for Euro - pean ﬁrms . Research Policy 27 : 127 – 141 . Barney J . 1991 . Firm resources and sustained competi - tive advantage . Journal of Management 17 ( 1 ) : 99 – 120 . Berk R . 1983 . An introduction to sample selection bias in sociological data . American Sociological Review 48 ( 3 ) : 386 – 398 . Berkowitz L . 1996 . ‘Wish program’ for major inno - vations . Research – Technology Management 39 ( 3 ) : 11 – 13 . Blundell R , Grifﬁth R , Van Reenen J . 1995 . Dynamic count data models of technological innovation . Eco - nomic Journal 105 ( 429 ) : 333 – 344 . Brown J . 1991 . Research that reinvents the corporation . Harvard Business Review 69 ( 1 ) : 102 – 111 . Burgelman R . 1983 . A process model of internal corpo - rate venturing in the diversiﬁed major ﬁrm . Adminis - trative Science Quarterly 28 : 223 – 244 . Burgelman R . 1985 . Managing the new venture division : research ﬁndings and implications for stra - tegic management . Strategic Management Journal 6 ( 1 ) : 39 – 54 . Christensen CM , Rosenbloom R . 1995 . Explaining the attacker’s advantage : technological paradigms , organizational dynamics , and the value network . Research Policy 24 ( 2 ) : 233 – 257 . Cohen W , Levinthal D . 1990 . Absorptive capacity : a new perspective on learning and innovation . Admin - istrative Science Quarterly 35 : 128 – 152 . Cooper A , Schendel D . 1976 . Strategic responses to technological threats . Business Horizons 19 ( 1 ) : 61 – 69 . 542 G . Ahuja and C . M . Lampert Covin J , Miles M . 1999 . Corporate entrepreneurship and the pursuit of competitive advantage . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 23 ( 3 ) : 47 – 63 . Covin JG , Slevin DP . 1991 . A conceptual model of entrepreneurship as ﬁrm behavior . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 16 ( 1 ) : 7 – 25 . Deeds D , DeCarolis D , Coombs J . 1999 . Dynamic capabilities and new product development in high technology ventures : an empirical analysis of new biotechnology ﬁrms . Journal of Business Venturing 15 ( 2 ) : 211 – 229 . Dess GG , Lumpkin GT , McGee JE . 1999 . Linking corporate entrepreneurship to strategy , structure , and process : suggested research directions . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 23 ( 3 ) : 85 – 102 . Dosi G . 1988 . Sources , procedures , and microeconomic effects of innovation . Journal of Economic Litera - ture 26 ( 3 ) : 1120 – 1171 . Fiol CM , Lyles M . 1985 . Organizational learning . Acad - emy of Management Review 10 : 803 – 813 . Fleming L . 1999 . Explaining the source and tempo of invention : recombinant learning and exhaustion in technological evolution . A paper presented at the Academy of Management Meetings , San Diego , CA . Floyd SW , Wooldridge B . 1999 . Knowledge creation and social networks in corporate entrepreneurship : the renewal of organizational capability . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 23 ( 3 ) : 123 – 143 . Foster R . 1986 . Innovation : The Attackers Advantage , Summit Books : New York . Greene P , Brush C , Hart M . 1999 . The corporate venture champion : a resource - based approach to role and process . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 23 ( 3 ) : 103 – 122 . Greene W . 1997 . Econometric Analysis . 3rd edn . Pren - tice - Hall : Englewood Cliffs , NJ . Griliches Z . 1984 . Patents and Productivity . NBER : Chicago , IL . Griliches Z . 1990 . Patent statistics as economic indi - cators : a survey . Journal of Economic Literature 28 ( 4 ) : 1661 – 1707 . Guth W , Ginsberg A . 1990 . Guest editors’ introduction : corporate entrepreneurship . Strategic Management Journal , Summer Special Issue 11 : 5 – 15 . Hall BH , Jaffe A , Trajtenberg M . 1998 . Market Value and Patent Citations : A First Look . Paper presented at the Conference of Intangibles and Capital Mar - kets , New York University . Hannan M , Freeman J . 1989 . Organizational Ecology . Harvard University Press : Cambridge , MA . Harhoff D , Narin F , Scherer M , Vopel K . 1999 . Citation frequency and the value of patented inventions . Review of Economics and Statistics 81 ( 3 ) : 511 – 515 . Hausman J , Hall B , Griliches Z . 1984 . Econometric models for count data with an application to the patents – R & D relationship . Econometrica 52 : 909 – 938 . Helfat CE . 1994 . Evolutionary trajectories in petroleum ﬁrm R & D . Management Science 40 : 1720 – 1747 . Henderson R . 1993 . Underinvestment and incompetence as responses to radical innovation : evidence from the photolithographic alignment equipment industry . RAND Journal of Economics 24 ( 2 ) : 248 – 270 . Copyright (cid:211) 2001 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 22 : 521 – 543 ( 2001 ) Henderson RM , Clark KB . 1990 . Architectural inno - vation : the reconﬁguration of existing product technologies and the failure of established ﬁrms . Administrative Science Quarterly 35 ( 1 ) : 9 – 30 . Henderson R , Cockburn I . 1996 . Scale , scope , and spillovers : the determinants of research productivity in drug discovery . Rand Journal of Economics 27 ( 1 ) : 32 – 59 . Hitt M , Ireland R . 1985 . Corporate distinctive com - petence , strategy , industry and performance . Stra - tegic Management Journal 6 ( 3 ) : 273 – 293 . Hitt M , Nixon R , Hoskisson R , Kochhar R . 1999 . Corporate entrepreneurship and cross - functional fer - tilization : activation , process and disintegration of a new product design team . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice Spring : 145 – 167 . Hitt M , Hoskisson R , Johnson R , Moesel D . 1996 . The market for corporate control and ﬁrm innovation . Academy of Management Journal 39 ( 5 ) : 1084 – 1119 . Hitt MA , Hoskisson RE , Nixon RD . 1993 . A mid - range theory of interfunctional integration , its ante - cedents and outcomes . Journal of Engineering and Technology Management 10 ( 1 , 2 ) : 161 – 185 . Hoskisson RA , Hitt MA , Ireland D . 1994 . The effects of acquisitions and restructuring ( strategic refocusing ) strategies on innovation . In The Manage - ment of Corporate Acquisitions : International Per - spectives , Von Krogh G , Sinatra A , Singh H ( eds ) . Macmillan : Houndmills ; 144 – 169 . Hoskisson R , Hitt M , Hill CWL . 1993 . Managerial incentives and investment in R & D in large multi - product ﬁrms . Organization Science 4 ( 2 ) : 325 – 341 . Huber G . 1991 . Organizational learning : the contribu - ting processes and a review of the literatures . Organization Science 2 ( 1 ) : 88 – 117 . Huff JO , Huff AS , Thomas H . 1992 . Strategic renewal and the interaction of cumulative stress and inertia . Strategic Management Journal , Summer Special Issue 13 : 55 – 75 . Jaffe AB , Trajtenberg M , Henderson R . 1993 . Geo - graphic localization of knowledge spillovers as evi - denced by patent citations . Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 ( 3 ) : 577 – 598 . Kirchhoff B . 1991 . Entrepreneurship’s contribution to economics . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 16 ( 2 ) : 93 – 112 . Koberg CS , Uhlenbruck N , Sarason Y . 1996 . Facilita - tors of organizational innovation : the role of life - cycle stage . Journal of Business Venturing 11 ( 2 ) : 133 – 149 . Kogut B , Zander U . 1992 . Knowledge of the ﬁrm , combinative capabilities , and the replication of tech - nology . Organization Science 3 ( 3 ) : 383 – 397 . Kusunoki K . 1997 . Incapability of technological capa - bility : a case study on product innovation in the Japanese facsimile machine industry . Journal of Product Innovation Management 14 ( 5 ) : 368 – 382 . Lant T , Mezias S . 1990 . Managing discontinuous change : a simulation study of organizational learning and entrepreneurship . Strategic Management Jour - nal , Summer Special Issue 11 : 147 – 179 . Lei D , Hitt MA , Bettis R . 1996 . Dynamic core com - petences through meta - learning and strategic context . Entrepreneurship in the Large Corporation 543 Journal of Management 22 ( 4 ) : 549 – 569 . Leonard - Barton D . 1992 . Core capabilities and core rigidities : a paradox in managing new product devel - opment . Strategic Management Journal , Summer Special Issue 13 : 111 – 125 . Levin RC , Klevorick AK , Nelson RR , Winter S . 1987 . Appropriating the returns from industrial research and development : comments and discussion . Brook - ings Papers on Economic Activity 3 : 783 – 831 . Levinthal DA , March JG . 1993 . The myopia of learn - ing . Strategic Management Journal , Winter Special Issue 14 : 95 – 112 . Levitt B , March JG . 1988 . Organizational learning . Annual Review of Sociology 14 : 319 – 340 . Liang K - Y , Zeger S . 1986 . Longitudinal data analysis using generalized linear models . Biometrika 73 ( 1 ) : 13 – 22 . March J . 1988 . Variable risk preferences and adaptive aspirations . Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 9 ( 1 ) : 5 – 24 . March J . 1991 . Exploration and exploitation in organi - zational learning . Organization Science 2 ( 1 ) : 71 – 87 . Martin X , Mitchell W . 1998 . The inﬂuence of local search and performance heuristics on new design introduction in a new product market . Research Policy 26 ( 7 , 8 ) : 753 – 771 . McGrath R , MacMillan I . 2000 . The Entrepreneurial Mindset . Harvard Business School Press : Boston , MA . Methe D , Swaminathan A , Mitchell W , Toyama R . 1997 . The underemphasized role of diversifying entrants and industry incumbents as the sources of major innovations , In Strategic Discovery : Compet - ing in New Arenas , Thomas H , O’Neal D ( eds ) . Wiley : New York ; 99 – 116 . Mezias SJ , Glynn M . 1993 . The three faces of corporate renewal : institution , revolution , and evolution . Stra - tegic Management Journal 14 ( 2 ) : 77 – 101 . Mitchell W . 1989 . Whether and when ? Probability and timing of incumbents’ entry into emerging industrial subﬁelds . Administrative Science Quarterly 34 ( 2 ) : 208 – 230 . Narin F , Noma E , Perry R . 1987 . Patents as indicators of corporate technological strength . Research Policy 16 ( 2 – 4 ) : 143 – 155 . Nayak PR , Ketteringham JM . 1986 . Breakthroughs ! Rawson Associates : New York . Nelson R , Winter S . 1982 . An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change . Harvard University Press : Cam - bridge , MA . Palepu K . 1985 . Diversiﬁcation strategy , profit perfor - mance and the entropy measure . Strategic Manage - ment Journal 6 ( 2 ) : 239 – 255 . Patel P , Pavitt K . 1997 . The technological competencies of the world’s largest ﬁrms : complex and path - dependent , but not much variety . Research Policy 26 : 141 – 156 . Podolny JM , Stuart TE . 1995 . A role - based ecology of technological change . American Journal of Sociology Copyright (cid:211) 2001 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Strat . Mgmt . J . , 22 : 521 – 543 ( 2001 ) 100 ( 5 ) : 1224 – 1260 . Prahalad CK , Bettis RA . 1986 . The dominant logic : a new linkage between diversity and performance . Strategic Management Journal 7 ( 6 ) : 485 – 501 . Prahalad CK , Hamel G . 1990 . The core competence of the corporation . Harvard Business Review 68 ( 3 ) : 79 – 91 . Rosenkopf L , Nerkar A . 2001 . Beyond local search : boundary spanning , exploration and impact in the optical disk industry . Strategic Management Journal 22 ( 4 ) : 287 – 306 . Sahal D . 1985 . Technological guideposts and innovation avenues . Research Policy 14 ( 2 ) : 61 – 82 . SAS . 1997 . SAS / STAT Software : Changes and Enhancements through Release 6 . 12 . SAS Institute : Cary , NC . Schumpeter J . 1934 . The Theory of Economic Develop - ment . Harvard University Press : Cambridge , MA . Schumpeter JA . 1975 . Capitalism , Socialism and Democracy . Harper & Row : New York . ( Originally published in 1942 by Harper and Brothers . ) . Simon H . 1955 . A behavioral model of rational choice . Quarterly Journal of Economics 69 : 99 – 118 . Sorensen J , Stuart T . 2000 . Aging , obsolescence and organizational innovation . Administrative Science Quarterly 45 ( 1 ) : 81 – 112 . Stuart T , Podolny J . 1996 . Local search and the evolu - tion of technological capabilities . Strategic Manage - ment Journal , Summer Special Issue 17 : 21 – 38 . Styros RE . 1997 . Mr . Gates builds his brains trust . Fortune 136 ( 11 ) : 84 – 87 . Trajtenberg M . 1990a . Economic Analysis of Product Innovation : The Case of CT Scanners . Harvard Uni - versity Press : Cambridge , MA . Trajtenberg M . 1990b . A penny for your quotes : patent citations and the value of information . RAND Jour - nal of Economics 21 : 325 – 342 . Trajtenberg M , Henderson R , Jaffe A . 1992 . Ivory tower versus corporate lab : an empirical study of basic research and appropriability . NBER working paper . Tushman M , Rosenkopf L . 1992 . Organizational deter - minants of technological change : toward a sociology of technological evolution . In Research in Organiza - tional Behavior , Vol . 14 , Staw BM , Cummings LL ( eds ) . JAI Press : Greenwich , CT ; 311 – 347 . Tushman ML , Anderson P . 1986 . Technological dis - continuities and organizational environments . Admin - istrative Science Quarterly 31 ( 3 ) : 439 – 465 . Utterback JM . 1994 . Mastering the Dynamics of Inno - vation . Harvard Business School Press : Boston , MA . Venkataraman S . 1997 . The distinctive domain of entrepreneurship research . In Advances in Entrepreneurship , Firm Emergence and Growth , Katz J ( ed ) . JAI Press : Greenwich , CT ; 119 – 138 . Zahra S , Jennings DF , Kuratko A . 1999 . Guest edi - torial : entrepreneurship and the acquisition of dynamic organizational capabilities . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 23 ( 3 ) : 5 – 10 .