Filamin A Is Essential for Active Cell Stiffening but not Passive Stiffening under External Force K . E . Kasza , † F . Nakamura , § S . Hu , { P . Kollmannsberger , k N . Bonakdar , k B . Fabry , k T . P . Stossel , § N . Wang , { * * and D . A . Weitz †‡ * † School of Engineering and Applied Sciences , and ‡ Department of Physics , Harvard University , Cambridge , Massachusetts ; § Translational Medicine Division , Brigham and Women’s Hospital , Department of Medicine , Harvard Medical School , and { Department of Environmental Health , Harvard School of Public Health , Boston , Massachusetts ; k Center for Medical Physics and Technology , Department of Physics , University of Erlangen - Nuremberg , Erlangen , Germany ; and * * Department of Mechanical Science and Engineering , University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign , Urbana , Illinois ABSTRACT The material properties of a cell determine how mechanical forces are transmitted through and sensed by that cell . Some types of cells stiffen passively under large external forces , but they can also alter their own stiffness in response to the local mechanical environment or biochemical cues . Here we show that the actin - binding protein ﬁlamin A is essential for the active stiffening of cells plated on collagen - coated substrates . This appears to be due to a diminished capability to build up large internal contractile stresses in the absence of ﬁlamin A . To show this , we compare the material properties and contractility of two human melanoma cell lines that differ in ﬁlamin A expression . The ﬁlamin A - deﬁcient M2 cells are softer than the ﬁlamin A - replete A7 cells , and exert much smaller contractile stresses on the substratum , even though the M2 cells have similar levels of phosphor - ylated myosin II light chain and only somewhat diminished adhesion strength . In contrast to A7 cells , the stiffness and contractility of M2 cells are insensitive to either myosin - inhibiting drugs or the stiffness of the substratum . Surprisingly , however , ﬁlamin A is not required for passive stiffening under large external forces . INTRODUCTION A cell is a material that has both elastic and viscous proper - ties ( 1 – 4 ) that determine its ability to maintain a stable shape , deform , or remodel . A cell’s material properties also govern the way in which mechanical signals , which are critical to cell function and survival , propagate through and are sensed by the cell ( 5 – 7 ) . The material properties of a cell are quite unusual in comparison with those of more common mate - rials . For instance , the stiffness of a cell is highly nonlinear and increases dramatically when large external forces are applied ( 8 , 9 ) . Unlike a traditional inert material , a cell can actively generate internal contractile tension to pull on its substratum or on neighboring cells ( 10 , 11 ) . This active control of internal tension allows the cell to tune its own stiff - ness ( 8 , 12 ) . This unusual elasticity is thought to be largely determined by the actin cytoskeleton , a biopolymer network composed of ﬁlamentous actin ( F - actin ) and associated regu - latory , motor , and cross - linking proteins . These binding proteins organize F - actin into the networks and bundles that ultimately determine the material properties of the cyto - skeleton . Due to the complexity of cells , determining the precise physical and molecular mechanisms underlying cell elasticity has proven difﬁcult . Nonetheless , a more quantita - tive model of cell material properties is a necessary step toward gaining a more complete understanding of cell mechanics and mechanotransduction . Experimental and theoretical investigations of reconsti - tuted cytoskeletal networks in vitro , where the molecular components can be precisely controlled , have been particu - larly useful in elucidating the physical mechanisms under - lying the material properties of biopolymer networks that are similar to those found in cells ( 13 , 14 ) . For example , the origins of linear and nonlinear elasticity in very simple cross - linked actin networks have been shown to be entropic in nature and arise from single - ﬁlament properties , and are very well described by theoretical models ( 15 ) . The physical origins of elasticity in more complicated systems , which better mimic the networks within cells , are currently being investigated ( 16 , 17 ) . In these cases , even though a fully quan - titative theoretical model is still lacking , the in vitro systems can nonetheless provide signiﬁcant insight into design princi - ples that may be at work in the cell . In one remarkable example , it was found that the unusual elasticity of cells can be reconstituted in a minimal in vitro cytoskeleton formed with puriﬁed F - actin , processive assemblies of myosin II , and the actin cross - linking protein ﬁlamin A ( G . H . Koender - ink , unpublished ) . As in cells , the stiffness of these gels increases with either internal tension generated by myosin ( G . H . Koenderink , unpublished ) or stress applied externally ( 16 ) . Without cross - linking of F - actin by ﬁlamin A and strong adhesion of the gel at the boundaries , the stresses generated by myosin will quickly relax as actin ﬁlaments rearrange or as the gel pulls away from the boundaries . In this in vitro system , it is the buildup of large internal tension that is necessary for stiffening of the biopolymer network . Within the cell , ﬁlamin A cross - links F - actin into orthog - onal networks in the cortex ( 18 ) . It also binds some integrins , Submitted October 19 , 2008 , and accepted for publication February 18 , 2009 . * Correspondence : weitz @ seas . harvard . edu Editor : Reinhard Lipowsky . (cid:2) 2009 by the Biophysical Society 0006 - 3495 / 09 / 05 / 4326 / 10 $ 2 . 00 doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2009 . 02 . 035 4326 Biophysical Journal Volume 96 May 2009 4326 – 4335 providing a link between the actin cytoskeleton and the cell membrane ( 19 , 20 ) . Thus , ﬁlamin A is a good candidate for involvement in the processes by which internal and external mechanical stress affect cell stiffness . Indeed , ﬁlamin A is involved in a number of mechanical cell processes , including cell motility , membrane stability , and mechanoprotection ( 21 – 23 ) . However , ﬁlamin’s contribution to the material properties of the cell remains unclear . There are differing reports regarding the contribution of ﬁlamin A to the stiff - ness of cells , with some ﬁnding that ﬁlamin A increases cell stiffness by 200 – 400 % ( 21 , 24 ) and others ﬁnding an increase of < 30 % ( 25 ) . Thus far , ﬁlamin’s contribution to the stiffening of cells under internal and external stress has not been systematically investigated . A better understanding of the role of ﬁlamin A in cell mechanics and of the extent to which an analogy can be made between the material proper - ties of cells and in vitro biopolymer systems , where the phys - ical mechanisms underlying the relationship between stress and stiffness are more easily unraveled , will be an important step toward achieving a more quantitative model of cell mechanics and mechanotransduction . In this article , we investigate the role of ﬁlamin A in deter - mining cell material properties , with a focus on its involve - ment in the processes by which mechanical stress , both internal and external , affect cell stiffness . We ﬁnd that loss of ﬁlamin A is associated with a strong decrease in internal contractile tension and , as a result , leads to softer cells that do not appear to actively tune their own stiffness . Surpris - ingly , ﬁlamin A is not required for the stiffening of cells under large external stresses , perhaps because of redundancy between different cytoskeletal networks . Our results are consistent with the picture that , as in the in vitro actin - ﬁla - min - myosin system , ﬁlamin A is essential for the buildup of internal tension within the actin cytoskeleton that leads to stiffening , although the cellular mechanisms underlying this tension buildup are more complex . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell culture M2 human melanoma cells , which do not express ﬁlamin A , and A7 cells derived from M2 cells but stably expressing roughly wild - type levels of ﬁlamin A after transfection of ﬁlamin A cDNA ( 21 ) show no difference in the amounts of a - actinin ( 21 ) or the ARP2 / 3 complex ( 18 ) , but we cannot entirely exclude the possibility of differences in other actin - binding proteins . In this study , cells are cultured at 37 (cid:2) C and 5 % CO 2 in minimum essential medium ( Mediatech , Manassas , VA ) supplemented with 8 % newborn calf serum ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) and 2 % fetal calf serum ( Invitrogen ) . Cells are plated on substrates and allowed to grow for 24 h before measurements , unless otherwise noted . For all measurements , cells are subconﬂuent . To assess the contribution of myosin II generated contractile stresses to cell material properties , blebbistatin ( Toronto Research Chemicals , North York , Canada ) , a speciﬁc inhibitor of myosin II activity that keeps myosin II in a weakly bound state to F - actin ( 26 ) is dissolved in DMSO and added to media at a 50 m M ﬁnal concentration . The Rho - associated kinase inhibitor Y - 27632 ( BIOMOL , Plymouth Meeting , PA ) is dissolved in water and added to the media at a ﬁnal concentration of 10 m M . Preparation of substrates Polyacrylamide gel substrates are prepared according to the procedure described by Pelham and Wang ( 27 ) on 35 mm glass - bottomed culture dishes ( MatTek , Ashland , MA ) . Brieﬂy , the glass is aminosilanized to allow for polyacrylamide attachment . Gel stiffness is varied over 2 orders of magnitude by controlling the concentration of the cross - link bis - acrylamide ( Bio - Rad , Hercules , CA ) from 0 . 04 % to 0 . 2 % at acrylamide ( Bio - Rad ) concentrations of 3 % , 5 % , and 7 . 5 % . For traction measurements , a small volume of 200 nm red latex particles ( Invitrogen ) is added to the solution to act as a marker of gel deformation . The solution is polymerized on the aminosilanized coverslip by the addition of ammonium persulfate and n , n , n 0 , n 0 - tetramethylethylenediamine ( TEMED ) . The polymerizing gel is covered with a second unmodiﬁed coverslip and inverted to create a ﬂat gel surface toward which the tracer particles settle . After polymerization is complete , the top coverslip is removed and collagen I ( Vitrogen ; Cohesion Tech , Palo Alto , CA ) at 0 . 1 mg / mL in solution is chemically cross - linked to the gel surface using sulfo - SANPAH ( Pierce Biotechnology , Rockford , IL ) . Collagen attachment and uniformity is conﬁrmed using ﬂuorescent collagen - ﬂuorescein ( Elastin Products , Owensville , MO ) . Comparison with known amounts of ﬂuorescent collagen dried on aminosilanized coverslips allows calibration of the collagen surface density to be ~ 250 – 650 ng / cm 2 for the gels used in this study ( 28 ) . Gel thickness is 70 – 100 m m as determined by microscopy . The elastic shear modulus G 0 of macroscopic samples of the polyacrylamide gels is characterized in a rheometer ( AR - G2 ; TA Instru - ments , New Castle , DE ) . G 0 is related to the Young’s modulus E , reported in this work , by the Poisson ratio , which is taken to be 0 . 48 . Recent work shows that polyacrylamide bulk moduli measured in this way are consistent with atomic force microscopy indentation measurements of polyacrylamide gel substrates ( 28 ) . Confocal microscopy of live and ﬁxed cells Cells for confocal imaging are plated on glass coverslips or polyacrylamide gel substrates and allowed to grow for 2 – 24 h . The cells are rinsed with PBS , ﬁxed in 4 % formaldehyde ( Polysciences , Warrington , PA ) in PBS for 20 min , permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton - X - 100 in PBS for 5 min , blocked with 1 % BSA in PBS , incubated with 1 m g / mL Alexa - 488 phalloidin ( Invi - trogen ) and 1 % BSA in PBS for 20 min , mounted according to the manufac - turer’s instructions ( SlowFade AntiFade Kit ; Invitrogen ) , and sealed . Live cells are ﬂuorescently labeled ( CellTracker Green CMFDA ; Invitrogen ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions . The cells are imaged and sectioned at 100 nm intervals using excitation from the 488 nm line of an argon laser and either a 63 (cid:3) , 1 . 2 NA water immersion objective or a 100 (cid:3) , 1 . 4 NA oil immersion objective on a laser scanning confocal micro - scope ( Leica TCS SP5 , Wetzlar , Germany ) . Traction force microscopy Cell contractility is measured using the traction force microscopy ( TFM ) technique according to previously described methods ( 11 , 29 , 30 ) . Cells are plated sparsely and grown on collagen - coated polyacrylamide substrates . The dish is mounted on a heated microscope stage to maintain 37 (cid:2) C . A phase contrast image is taken to record cell shape , and a ﬂuorescence image of the particles embedded in the gel just below the cell’s basal surface is taken to record gel deformation . After the cell is detached from the gel using trypsin - EDTA , a second ﬂuorescence image of the particles in the unstressed gel is taken . Images are recorded on a CCD camera ( Andor iXon , Belfast , Northern Ireland ) with an image size of 512 (cid:3) 512 pixels and a pixel size of 450 nm . Displacement ﬁelds due to cell tractions are determined using an image correlation method ( 30 ) , and tractions are determined by means of the Fourier transform traction cytometry technique ( 29 ) using a software package kindly provided by Iva Tolic - Norrelykke . For each traction ﬁeld , the prestress and net contractile moments are calculated as described previ - ously ( 29 ) , and both measures of cell contractility display the same qualita - tive trends . Ten to 30 cells of each type are averaged for each condition . We Biophysical Journal 96 ( 10 ) 4326 – 4335 Filamin and Cell Mechanics 4327 conﬁrm that addition of trypsin - EDTA does not induce a background expan - sion or contraction of the gel . Magnetic twisting cytometry Cell material properties are probed by magnetic twisting cytometry ( MTC ) ( 2 ) . Cells are plated sparsely on collagen - coated polyacrylamide gels or glass coverslips and allowed to grow for 24 h , unless otherwise noted . For blebbistatin measurements , cells are treated with the drug for 20 min before measurement . Then 4 . 5 - m m ferromagnetic beads coated with RGD ( Arg - Gly - Asp ) peptide , which binds speciﬁcally to integrins on the cell surface , are incubated with the cells for 15 min . The integrin - bound bead is partially engulfed by the cell , and actin is recruited locally , allowing direct coupling to the actin cytoskeleton . Unbound beads are gently washed away , leaving one or two beads per cell . The dish is mounted on a heated microscope stage to maintain 37 (cid:2) C . Beads in the dish are magnetized by a strong , horizontal magnetic ﬁeld and then twisted by an oscillatory vertical magnetic ﬁeld at frequencies of u ¼ 0 . 6 – 2000 rad / s and amplitudes of 25 – 50 Gauss , corre - sponding to torques per unit bead volume of T ¼ 13 – 27 Pa . Beads are imaged by bright - ﬁeld microscopy using a 10 (cid:3) objective . The motions of hundreds of beads in a ﬁeld of view are recorded with a CCD camera ( Hamamatsu C4742 - 95 - 12ERG ) mounted on an inverted microscope ( Leica DM IRE2 ) , and the beads’ positions are determined in real time with better than 10 nm accuracy by means of an intensity - weighted center - of - mass algo - rithm . Beads that are clustered or not attached to a cell are not included in analysis . Typically , the amplitude of bead displacement , d , is ~ 100 nm , which is small enough for d to be linearly related to T . For each bead , we calculate d and the phase lag , d , of the lateral displace - ment . From T , d , and a geometrical factor , a , we determine the magnitude of the complex modulus , j G * j ¼ a T / d ( 2 , 31 ) , which characterizes overall cell stiffness . j G * j is log - normally distributed in the population , so we report the geometric mean and standard deviation ( SD ) for hundreds of cells under each condition . d characterizes how solid - like or ﬂuid - like the material is ( d ¼ 0 for an elastic solid , and d ¼ p / 2 for a ﬂuid ) , and is normally distrib - uted in the cell population . The elastic modulus is given by G 0 ¼ j G * j cos ( d ) , the viscous modulus by G 00 ¼ j G * j sin ( d ) , and the ratio of elastic to viscous contributions by G 00 / G 0 ¼ tan ( d ) . Unless otherwise noted , the material prop - erties are reported at u ¼ 5 rad / s . To report the viscoelastic moduli , it is necessary to measure the bead - cell contact area and determine a for the M2 and A7 cells . The geometry is char - acterized with confocal ﬂuorescence microscopy of either labeled live cells or ﬁxed and stained cells . For both cell types , beads are embedded ~ 50 % in the cell ( data not shown ) , so that the same value of a is used . We cannot account for possible effects arising from differences in bead - cell or integ - rin - cytoskeletal adhesion , but these MTC results are consistent with inde - pendent measurements of the same cell lines by atomic force microscopy indentation , for which adhesion contributes quite differently ( 32 ) . Because bead twisting induces nonuniform stresses and strains in the cell , a model is used to estimate a for the measured geometry ( 31 ) . Typical stresses are of order 10 Pa , and cell stiffnesses are of order 100 Pa . These measurements reﬂect properties at the length scale of the bead , which is much larger than cytoskeletal structures but still smaller than the whole cell . Magnetic tweezers Magnetic tweezers are employed to measure the nonlinear mechanical response of single cells ( 33 ) grown on 35 mm plastic culture dishes ( Nunc , Roskilde , Denmark ) . Superparamagnetic 4 . 5 m m beads ( Dynabeads M - 450 ; Invitrogen ) coated with human ﬁbronectin ( Roche , Basel , Switzerland ) are added to the cells ( 2 (cid:3) 10 5 beads / dish ) and allowed to bind for 30 min . Unbound beads are washed away and the dish is placed on a heated microscope stage . Only cells with a single bead attached are selected . The tip of the magnetic tweezer is placed 20 – 30 m m from the bead and a stepwise increasing force of 0 . 5 – 10 nN is applied . Bright - ﬁeld images of the cell , the bead , and the needle tip are taken by a CCD camera ( ORCA ER Hamamatsu ) at a rate of 40 frames per second at 40 (cid:3) magniﬁ - cation . Bead positions are tracked in real time using an intensity - weighted center - of - mass algorithm . The bead displacement in response to a stair - case - like force is equivalent to a superposition of creep measurements . By applying the ﬁt procedure described by Mierke et al . ( 33 ) , we obtain a value for differential creep compliance or inverse stiffness for every force level and every bead . This stiffness has units of force per displacement and can be related to the modulus by a geometrical factor , which we have not deter - mined . Cell stiffnesses are of order 1 nN / m m , and from an assumed geometry we estimate that typical stresses rise from 30 to 600 Pa and moduli increase from ~ 100 to 1000 Pa . To obtain the average response of a cell line , the geometric mean of the log - normally distributed differential stiffness values for every force , averaged over all beads that remain attached to the cell throughout the measurement , is computed . Cell adhesion The spinning disk method as described by Boettiger ( 34 ) is modiﬁed to run in a commercial stress - controlled rheometer ( AR - G2 ; TA Instruments ) . Cells are grown sparsely on 22 mm circular glass coverslips that are coated with a solution of 10 m g / mL collagen I and blocked with BSA ( 34 ) . The coverslips are inverted and mounted to the rheometer top plate with vacuum grease . With care taken to avoid any drying , this plate is then gently lowered into a 5 % solution of dextran ( Sigma - Aldrich ) in PBS ( 34 ) , which is con - tained in a large petri dish attached to the rheometer bottom plate . The cover - slip is 3 cm from the bottom of the petri dish and 4 cm from the sides . The rheometer top plate is spun at 175 rad / s for 4 min . In this geometry , ﬂuid shear stresses on the apical surfaces of cells increase linearly with distance from the center of the coverslip , r . The coverslip is removed , the cells ﬁxed , and the F - actin stained with ﬂuorescent phalloidin ( Invitrogen ) . The whole area of the coverslip is imaged with a ﬂuorescence stereomicroscope . Rela - tive cell density as a function of r is assessed by means of a radial average of ﬂuorescence intensity . Data are ﬁt by a sigmoidal curve , and the relative adhesion strength of the cells is determined by comparing the radii at which cell density is decreased by half . Shear stresses as a function of r may be calculated as described previously ( 34 ) ; here , they are ~ 10 – 50 Pa . Western blots Cells are grown on collagen I - coated substrates , rinsed with PBS , lysed and solubilized in SDS sample buffer , and then heated to 95 (cid:2) C for 5 min . The proteins are separated on a NuPAGE Novex 4 – 12 % Bis - Tris Gel ( Invitro - gen ) , followed by Western blotting using an anti - phospho - myosin light chain ( pSer 19 ) antibody produced in rabbit ( Sigma - Aldrich ) and a mono - clonal anti - myosin light chain antibody produced in mouse ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Loss of ﬁlamin A leads to softer and more ﬂuid - like cells To investigate the contribution of ﬁlamin A to the viscoelastic material properties of cells , we compare two human mela - noma cell lines that differ in their expression of ﬁlamin A . The M2 cells are ﬁlamin A deﬁcient , and the A7 cells are derived from the M2 cells but stably express roughly physio - logical levels of ﬁlamin A ( 21 ) . The M2 and A7 cells have been used extensively as a comparison for cells with and without ﬁlamin A protein . Observations in ﬁlamin A - deﬁcient humans ( 35 ) , knockout mice ( 36 ) , and knockdown nonmalig - nant cells ( 37 ) provide results consistent with ﬁndings in the M2 and A7 cell lines . Lack of ﬁlamin A in the M2 cells impairs stability of cell surfaces and translational locomotion , Biophysical Journal 96 ( 10 ) 4326 – 4335 4328 Kasza et al . which are restored in the A7 cells ( 21 ) . These defects have been suggested , but thus far not conﬁrmed , to result from altered cell mechanics in the absence of ﬁlamin A . Here , we measure the deformation of individual A7 and M2 cells in response to forces applied through a magnetic bead bound to integrins on the cell surface , a technique called MTC ( 2 ) . To report the mechanical response in terms of the viscoelastic moduli , G 0 and G 00 , we also measure the bead - cell contact geometry by confocal ﬂuorescence micros - copy ( see Materials and Methods section ) . This allows us to account for possible differences between bead embedding in the M2 and A7 cells . To account for possible variations due to cell shape and cytoskeletal organization , we make measurements at two time points : ﬁrst when they just attach to the substrate and are still round , and 1 day later when they have spread signiﬁcantly on the substrate . When plated on rigid , uncoated glass substrates and measured at 2 h post plating , the A7 and M2 cells are both round in shape , with typical heights of 10 – 15 m m and few actin bundles visible when stained with ﬂuorescent phalloi - din ( Fig . 1 B ) . Both the A7 and M2 cells are soft , solid - like materials with an elastic modulus , G 0 ( u ) z 100 Pa , that dominates the viscous modulus , G 00 ( u ) , over a broad frequency range . The A7 cells are more solid - like and ~ 2 times stiffer than the M2 cells ( Fig . 1 C ) . Later , at 24 h , the A7 cells spread out strongly with a typical height of ~ 5 m m , a more organized actin cytoskel - eton , and visible stress ﬁbers when stained with ﬂuorescent phalloidin ( Fig . 1 B ) . The M2 cells spread less strongly and are still somewhat round in shape , with a typical height of ~ 8 m m and a less well organized actin cytoskeleton ( Fig . 1 B ) . Both cell lines are still soft , solid - like materials over a broad frequency range ( Fig . 1 A ) , but now each cell line is stiffer and more solid - like than it was at the earlier time point , consistent with a correlation between spreading and stiffness observed in ﬁbroblasts ( 38 ) . The A7 cells are two times stiffer than the M2 cells with j G * j ¼ 350 (cid:4) 30 Pa and j G * j ¼ 170 (cid:4) 20 Pa , respectively , and signiﬁcantly more solid - like with G 00 / G 0 ¼ 0 . 28 (cid:4) 0 . 01 and G 00 / G 0 ¼ 0 . 36 (cid:4) 0 . 02 , respectively ( Fig . 1 C ) . The fact that the M2 cells are softer and more ﬂuid - like than the A7 cells at both time points suggests that differences in cell shape alone do not account for the observed differences in material properties . These results establish that ﬁlamin A does contribute to stiffer and more solid - like cells . Loss of ﬁlamin A decreases contractile stresses generated by cells In some types of cells , increased stiffness is associated with increased internal contractile tension ( 12 ) . Cell contractility arises from internal myosin - generated cytoskeletal tension and is necessary for adherent cells to probe their local mechanical environment in important biological processes such as differentiation , migration , and wound healing , or in disease states such as cancer ( 7 , 39 – 41 ) . To investigate possible mechanisms by which ﬁlamin A deﬁciency leads to decreased cell stiffness , we measure the contractility of the A7 and M2 cells . We plate cells on deformable polyacrylamide gels that are coated with collagen I . The gels are of physiological stiff - ness , having a Young’s modulus of E ¼ 1 . 3 kPa . Contractile forces generated by the cells are transmitted to the under - lying substrate and can be measured using TFM ( 11 , 30 , 42 ) . The A7 cells are strongly contractile and signif - icantly deform the substrate , as shown in Fig . 2 C . The M2 cells are much less contractile and only modestly deform the substrate , as shown in Fig . 2 B . The net contractile moment , M , is a measure of the total strength of the cell contraction against the substrate . The A7 cells have a mean contractile moment of M ¼ 4 . 5 pNm ( Fig . 1 A ) . This corre - sponds to a typical prestress supported by the cytoskeleton of ~ 600 Pa . The contractile moment for the M2 cells is nearly 10 times less , corresponding to a prestress of ~ 100 Pa . These data show that M2 cells are indeed less contractile than the A7 cells on collagen I - coated substrates . We hypothesize that the decreased cytoskeletal tension accounts for the decreased stiffness of the M2 cells . FIGURE 1 Viscoelastic material properties of M2 and A7 melanoma cells cultured on rigid glass substrates . ( A ) Elastic , G 0 ( u ) ( closed ) , and viscous , G 00 ( u ) ( open ) , moduli for A7 ( squares ) and M2 ( circles ) cells cultured for 24 h , as measured by MTC . ( B ) Confocal images of actin cytoskel - eton at the basal surface of cells ﬁxed at various times after plating . Bar ¼ 10 m m . ( C ) Cell stiffness ( geometric mean (cid:4) SE ) measured at u ¼ 5 rad / s as a function of time after plating ; similar time evolution observed for all u ( top ) . Ratio of viscous to elastic moduli ( mean (cid:4) SE ) of cells as a function of time after plating ( bottom ) . Error bars , if not visible , are smaller than the points in this plot . Biophysical Journal 96 ( 10 ) 4326 – 4335 Filamin and Cell Mechanics 4329 Loss of ﬁlamin A impairs cell response to substrate stiffness In some cells , contractility increases with substrate rigidity , allowing the cell to tune its own stiffness to roughly match that of the substrate , up to some saturation value ( 43 ) . To further investigate the role of ﬁlamin A in the connection between cell stiffness and internal cytoskeletal tension , we plate the M2 and A7 cells on polyacrylamide gels with a range of physiological stiffness values . On the softest substrates , with E ¼ 0 . 1 kPa , both A7 and M2 cells are weakly spread and round ( Fig . 3 , D and G ) . They have few if any actin bundles that are visible when F - actin is stained with ﬂuorescent phalloidin ( data not shown ) . As the substrate stiffness increases above this , the A7 cells begin to spread and polarize ( Fig . 3 , G – I ) . They develop contractile stress ﬁbers that are visible when stained with ﬂuorescent phalloidin , similar to those shown in the bottom right corner of Fig . 1 B . The M2 cells show a weaker spreading response as substrate stiffness increases ( Fig . 3 , D – F ) , and never form organized stress ﬁbers ( data not shown ) . To quantify spreading , the mean projected cell area is plotted as a function of substrate stiffness in Fig . 3 C . As the substrate stiffness is increased from soft 0 . 1 kPa to stiff 24 kPa substrates , the mean A7 cell area increases more strongly than the M2 cell area . These ﬁndings are consistent with recent reports that ﬁla - min A plays a key role in early cell spreading events . It is recruited to the cortex during early spreading , and loss of ﬁlamin A reduces the number of cell extensions ( 37 , 44 ) . Although ﬁlamin A’s role in spreading is not well under - stood , it is known that , in addition to cross - linking F - actin , ﬁlamin A binds a number of important signaling and adhe - sion molecules , including Rho GTPases , Rho GTPase FIGURE 2 Contractile stresses ex - erted by M2 and A7 cells on collagen I - coated E ¼ 1 . 3 kPa polyacrylamide substrates . ( A ) Meancontractilemoment M . Examplesofcontractiledeformations induced in the substrate by typical M2 ( B ) and A7 ( C ) cells . Image size , 100 m m . FIGURE 3 Contractility , stiffness , and spreading of M2 and A7 cells grown on collagen I - coated polyacrylamide substrates of increasing stiffness . ( A ) Cell contractile moment ( mean (cid:4) SE ) . ( B ) Cell stiffness ( geometric mean (cid:4) SE ) . ( C ) Projected cell area ( mean (cid:4) SE ) . ( D – I ) Examples of cells grown on E ¼ 0 . 1 , 1 . 3 , and 24 kPa substrates . Biophysical Journal 96 ( 10 ) 4326 – 4335 4330 Kasza et al . regulators , and b integrins ( 45 , 46 ) , making ﬁlamin A an attractive candidate for involvement in cytoskeletal remodel - ing and cell spreading . On the softest substrates , the M2 cells are very weakly contractile , with a contractile moment of ~ 0 . 1 pNm , as shown in Fig . 3 A . The A7 cells are somewhat more contrac - tile , with M ¼ 0 . 5 pNm . As the substrate stiffness is increased , the A7 cells show a strong , signiﬁcant increase in contractility , reaching a maximum of M ¼ 5 pNm . The contractile behavior of the A7 cells is consistent with previous studies that revealed a strong correlation between cell contractility and substrate stiffness ( 27 , 40 , 47 ) . In contrast , the M2 cells are weakly contractile , with contractile moments that are never more than 0 . 5 pNm and are nearly independent of substrate stiffness . We are not aware of direct interactions between ﬁlamin A and myosin II that would directly alter contractility ; however , motors and cross - linking proteins may inﬂuence each other by more indirect mechanisms , as suggested previously ( 48 ) . For example , tension exerted on the actin ﬁlament by the motor could affect binding of other proteins , or organiza - tion of the F - actin network microstructure by one protein could accommodate ( or not ) binding of the other protein . To conﬁrm that cell stiffness is indeed correlated with internal contractile tension , we use MTC to probe the mate - rial properties of cells grown on the same substrates . On the softest substrates , the A7 and M2 cells have similar stiffness values of ~ 250 Pa ( Fig . 3 B ) . As substrate stiffness is increased to 4 kPa , the A7 cells stiffen signiﬁcantly to nearly j G * j ¼ 400 Pa ; the M2 cell stiffness does not show any response to substrate stiffness . To summarize , on the softest gels , A7 and M2 cells are soft and only very weakly contractile . As substrate stiffness is increased , the A7 cells respond with increased contractility and an associated increase in stiffness , consistent with previous ﬁndings that cell stiffness increases linearly with contractility ( 12 ) . In contrast , the M2 cells show smaller changes in contractility and do not stiffen as the substrate stiffness is varied over many orders of magnitude . The lack of substrate rigidity response in M2 cells on collagen - coated substrates suggests that ﬁlamin A is essential for the active processes underlying this response . We hypothesize that , as in the reconstituted actin - ﬁlamin - myosin networks , ﬁlamin A is required for the buildup of internal myosin - generated tension in the actin cytoskeleton . However , within the cell , ﬁlamin A may mediate contractile tension buildup and stiffening directly through cross - linking ( as in the recon - stituted networks ) or by promoting cell adhesion and spreading via integrin binding ( Fig . 4 A ) . The stiffness of A7 cells , but not of M2 cells , is strongly decreased by blebbistatin To test the hypothesis that ﬁlamin A is required for the buildup of internal myosin - generated tension in the cytoskel - eton , we ﬁrst conﬁrm the role of myosin - generated cytoskel - etal tension in tuning cell stiffness . We measure the material properties of cells that have been treated with blebbistatin , an inhibitor of myosin II ATPase activity ( 26 ) . Treatment with 50 m M blebbistatin for 20 min slightly increases the ﬂuid - like nature of both cell lines ( Fig . 4 B , bottom ) . The A7 cells treated with blebbistatin have a signiﬁcant decrease in stiff - ness of 64 % compared to control cells ( Fig . 4 B , top ) . This behavior is consistent with the picture that cells tune their own stiffness with acto - myosin - generated tension , which has been observed in other cells ( 8 , 12 ) . In marked contrast , blebbistatin - treated M2 cells show a much smaller decrease in stiffness of only 14 % compared to control cells . Since the M2 cells are at a low level of internal stress to begin with , myosin inhibition can only modestly decrease their stiffness , consistent with a lower stiffness compared to A7 cells in the absence of blebbistatin ( Fig . 1 ) . This suggests that the stiffness of the M2 cells may be dominated by the linear elastic properties of the intracellular biopolymer network , rather than being actively tuned by acto - myosin - generated tension . FIGURE 4 ( A ) Schematic showing various roles for ﬁlamin A in cell mechanics . Filamin A cross - links actin ﬁlaments into orthogonal networks , which support contractile stresses generated by myosin II , and also binds some integrins , linking the actin cytoskeleton to the cell membrane . ( B ) Effect of myosin II inhibition on material properties of A7 and M2 cells . Cell stiffness ( geometric mean (cid:4) SE ) and the ratio of viscous to elastic moduli ( mean (cid:4) SE ) for control cells and cells treated with 50 m M blebbis - tatin for 20 min . * indicates that p < 0 . 05 . Biophysical Journal 96 ( 10 ) 4326 – 4335 Filamin and Cell Mechanics 4331 M2 and A7 cells have similar levels of phosphorylated myosin II light chain To discount the possibility that the M2 cells have a lower level of active myosin II , which could account for their decreased contractility and stiffness , we measure the levels of phosphorylated myosin II light chain ( pMLC ) and myosin II light chain ( MLC ) in the A7 and M2 cells by Western blot - ting . We ﬁnd similar levels of pMLC between the M2 and A7 cells , as shown in Fig . 5 A . The pMLC levels can be decreased in a dose - dependent fashion by treatment with the Rho - associated kinase inhibitor Y - 27632 ( Fig . 5 A ) . The contractility of the A7 cells is strongly decreased by treatment with 10 m M Y - 27632 , whereas the contractility of the M2 cells is not measurably affected ( Fig . 5 B ) . This is consistent with the very low level of M2 contractility to begin with . These data demonstrate that even though the M2 and A7 cells have similar levels of pMLC , the tensions that build up in the two cells are drastically different . This supports the hypothesis that the defect in the ﬁlamin A - deﬁ - cient M2 cells is in the buildup of internal tension , not in the potential for production of that tension by myosin II . Role of ﬁlamin A in adhesion In addition to being an efﬁcient cross - linker of F - actin , ﬁla - min A also binds the cytoplasmic tail of b 1 integrin , a receptor for collagen I , linking the actin cytoskeleton and cell membrane . Thus , loss of ﬁlamin A could potentially impact the ability of cells to adhere strongly to collagen - coated substrates . If adhesion is prevented in the M2 cells , this might account for the low tension and stiffness , in a manner analogous to poor boundary adhesion in the in vitro actin - ﬁlamin - myosin system . To dissect the possible mechanisms by which ﬁlamin A could promote the buildup of internal cytoskeletal tension within the cell , we measure the adhesion of the M2 and A7 cells to collagen I - coated glass . Cells are plated sparsely on round coated coverslips and grown for 24 h before exposure to ﬂuid shear stresses imposed by the spinning disk method ( 34 ) . Shear stresses on the apical surface of cells increase linearly with distance , r , from the center of the coverslip . After exposure to ﬂuid shear stresses , the fraction of A7 cells still bound to the substrate decreases with r , reaching half of its r ¼ 0 value at r ¼ 3 . 1 mm ( Fig . 6 ) . The density of bound M2 cells falls off more quickly , reaching half its r ¼ 0 value at r ¼ 1 . 8 mm . Thus , the mean adhesion strength of the M2 cells is ~ 58 % that of the A7 cells ( Fig . 6 , inset ) . The difference in adhesion strength between the cells corre - sponds well to the difference in projected area between them . FIGURE 5 ( A ) Western blots showing similar levels of pMLC and MLC in M2 ( lanes 1 – 3 ) and A7 ( lanes 4 – 6 ) cells plated on collagen I . pMLC levels are decreased in a dose - dependent manner by treatment with 0 m M ( lanes 1 and 4 ) , 10 m M ( lanes 2 and 5 ) , or 50 m M ( lanes 3 and 6 ) of the Rho - associated kinase inhibitor Y - 27632 . ( B ) Contractile moment , M , of a single M2 ( circles ) or A7 ( squares ) cell after addition of 10 m M Y - 27632 to the media at t ¼ 0 . ( Inset ) Contractile moment ( mean (cid:4) SE ) for cells before ( white ) and after ( black ) 20 min of treatment with either 10 m M Y - 27632 or control media . FIGURE 6 Adhesion strength of M2 ( circles ) and A7 ( squares ) cells to collagen I - coated substrates , measured by the spinning disk method ( 34 ) . After cells are exposed to ﬂuid shear stress , adherent fraction is measured as a function of distance r from the center of the coverslip . Shear stresses on apical surface of cells increase linearly with r . ( Inset ) Relative adhesion strength determined from radius at which 50 % of cells have detached . Biophysical Journal 96 ( 10 ) 4326 – 4335 4332 Kasza et al . Additionally , the rounder and taller M2 cells may experience greater stresses than the A7 cells at equivalent radii , simply due to shape . Our results , then , may reﬂect a difference in adhesion or in cell shape . Although loss of ﬁlamin A in the M2 cells diminishes the strength of adhesion to collagen I substrates , it does not wholly prevent it . Indeed , adhesion strength is not dimin - ished by the absence of ﬁlamin A as strongly as the contrac - tile stresses exerted by the cell on the substrate . Taken together , these data suggest that although decreased adhesion strength may contribute in part to the inability of M2 cells to build up large internal cytoskeletal tensions , it alone does not account for the effect . In fact , decreased cytoskeletal tension could lead to the decreased adhesion and spreading of the M2 cells . The binding of ﬁlamin A to b 1 integrin may also affect the active cell spreading and cytoskeletal reorganization responses downstream of integrin engagement and activa - tion , which will affect the buildup of internal tension and stiffening . We do not directly investigate this mechanism by which ﬁlamin A might be essential to the cell stiffening response , but it is currently being explored by other investi - gators ( 32 ) . Role of ﬁlamin A in cells subjected to large external stresses To test whether ﬁlamin A is required for stiffening of cells exposed to large external stresses , we use magnetic tweezers to pull with 0 . 5 – 10 nN forces on ﬁbronectin - coated beads that are attached to individual M2 or A7 cells ( 33 ) , and observe the resulting cell deformation . From these experi - ments , we measure the cell’s nonlinear elasticity . More than 95 % of beads stay bound to the A7 cells , up to the maximum 10 nN loading force , as shown in the inset to Fig . 7 A . In contrast , beads are disrupted from M2 cells at forces of < 1 nN , and > 25 % of beads are disrupted at 10 nN . This increase in bead binding strength to the A7 cells is consistent with two possible roles for ﬁlamin A : increased bead - cell adhesion , or increased stress supported by the cortical actin network before rupture . At the lowest 0 . 5 – 1 nN forces , the A7 cells are 2 – 3 times stiffer than the M2 cells ( Fig . 7 A ) . This stiffness is essen - tially the ratio of the force to the displacement and depends on the bead - cell geometry . We can estimate the typical defor - mation or strain , g , as the bead displacement d divided by the bead radius R , and the typical stress , s , as the applied force divided by the bead cross - sectional area . For the smallest 0 . 5 nN load , s ~ 30 Pa , yielding estimated moduli of 300 Pa and 150 Pa for the A7 and M2 cells , respectively ( Fig . 7 A ) , in agreement with the moduli determined by MTC ( Fig . 1 ) . Although the A7 cells start out stiffer than the M2 cells , both stiffen strongly as increasing loads are applied ( Fig . 7 A ) . Between 0 . 5 and 10 nN , the stiffness of both cell types increases by 3 – 4 nN / m m , a threefold increase for the A7 cells and a fourfold increase for the M2 cells . There is no signiﬁcant difference in the form of the nonlinearity between the two cell types . Thus , we ﬁnd that ﬁlamin A is , in fact , not required for the passive stiffening of cells under large external stress . For the maximum 10 nN load , we estimate s ~ 600 Pa and g ~ 0 . 7 – 1 . In vitro experiments suggest that F - actin cross - linked by ﬁlamin A would support and signiﬁcantly stiffen under these strains ( 16 ) , whereas F - actin cross - linked by more rigid proteins would rupture ( 15 ) . In addition , reconsti - tuted gels of the intermediate ﬁlament vimentin , a biopolymer that is expressed in the M2 and A7 cells , also can support and stiffen under these large deformations ( 49 ) . It would be an interesting design feature if the cell used two complementary cytoskeletal networks for tuning cell stiffness : 1 ) , the actin network for active tuning of cell stiffness in response to stimuli ; and 2 ) , the intermediate ﬁlament network for a passive , but very fast , stiffening response to potentially damaging large external forces . Indeed , when we treat M2 and A7 cells with 5 m M cytochalasin - D , a drug that disrupts the actin cytoskeleton , the cells are softened signiﬁcantly but the nonlinear stiffening is not abolished , as shown in Fig . 7 B . In fact , the overall magnitude and shape of the nonlinear stiffening response in both cell types are unchanged by cyto - chalasin - D . To elucidate the physical and molecular origins of nonlinear stiffening under external stress , the contribution of other actin cross - linking proteins , including other ﬁlamin FIGURE 7 Stiffening of A7 and M2 cells subjected to large nanonewton - scale external forces , applied by magnetic tweezers through a ﬁbronectin - coated magnetic bead . ( A ) Cell stiffness and estimated modulus ( geometric mean (cid:4) SE ) as a function of force for A7 ( squares , n ¼ 30 ) and M2 ( circles , n ¼ 19 ) cells . ( Inset ) Percentage of beads disrupted from cells as a function of force . ( B ) Cell stiffness as a function of force for A7 ( n ¼ 9 ) and M2 ( n ¼ 7 ) cells treated with 5 m M cytochalasin - D for 15 min . Biophysical Journal 96 ( 10 ) 4326 – 4335 Filamin and Cell Mechanics 4333 isoforms , and the intermediate ﬁlament network should be investigated in future work . CONCLUSIONS We have demonstrated that ﬁlamin A plays a key role in the ability of subconﬂuent cells grown on collagen - coated substrates to actively tune their own stiffness . The ﬁlamin A - deﬁcient M2 cells are soft and exert extremely low levels of contractile stresses against the substratum , regardless of mechanical environment . These properties are nearly unchanged by inhibition of myosin II with drugs . In contrast , the ﬁlamin A - replete A7 cells are stiffer and more contractile , and can actively tune their properties in response to changes in substrate rigidity . The stiffness and contractility of the A7 cells are signiﬁcantly diminished by myosin II inhibitors . These results are consistent with the hypothesis that ﬁla - min A is required for buildup of the large internal cytoskel - etal tensions that stiffen the cell . This hypothesis was motivated by an in vitro reconstituted cytoskeletal system in which cross - linking of F - actin by ﬁlamin A is necessary for forces , generated by assemblies of myosin II , to build up and stiffen the network instead of relaxing away . It seems that in the cell , ﬁlamin A is also required for the buildup of myosin - generated tension , but the mechanism is very likely more complex . In addition to cross - linking F - actin in the cortex , ﬁlamin A also binds integrins , which affect cell contractility , spreading , and adhesion . Indeed , loss of ﬁlamin A diminishes all of these . This key role for ﬁlamin A will have implications for different models of cell material prop - erties and mechanotransduction . Surprisingly , we ﬁnd that ﬁlamin A is not required for the passive stiffening of cells deformed by large external forces . It could be that the loss of ﬁlamin’s F - actin cross - linking can be compensated for by other actin cross - linkers . It is also possible that the actin cytoskeleton is not responsible for the mechanical response to large external forces in vivo . Intermediate ﬁlament networks have long been thought to be responsible for the stability of cells because they can support large strains before breaking . Indeed , reconstituted vimentin networks also can support large deformations and stiffen signiﬁcantly with externally applied stress ( 49 ) . It would be an interesting design feature for the cell to employ two different cytoskeletal systems for two different types of stiffening responses . The stiffness of the actin cytoskeleton can be actively tuned by myosin - generated stresses in response to mechanical and chemical cues . The intermediate ﬁlaments , which can withstand large strains but lack motor proteins to internally prestress them , stiffen passively to stabilize the cell in response to large external forces . This hypothesis could be tested in vivo by investigating the contribution of the different cytoskeletal systems to the nonlinear elasticity of cells , or in vitro by investigating the nonlinear elasticity of composite networks of actin - ﬁlamin - myosin and intermediate ﬁlaments . We thank M . L . Gardel and P . A . Janmey for many helpful discussions . This work was supported by the National Science Foundation ( DMR - 0602684 and CTS - 0505929 ) and the Harvard Materials Research Science and Engineering Center ( DMR - 0820484 ) . D . A . W . , F . N . , and T . P . S . were supported by the HUSEC Seed Fund for Interdisciplinary Science . T . P . S . and N . W . were supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health ( HL - 19429 and GM07274 , respectively ) . K . E . K . was supported by a National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate Fellowship and a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship . REFERENCES 1 . Bausch , A . R . , F . Ziemann , A . A . Boulbitch , K . Jacobson , and E . Sack - mann . 1998 . Local measurements of viscoelastic parameters of adherent cell surfaces by magnetic bead microrheometry . Biophys . J . 75 : 2038 – 2049 . 2 . Fabry , B . , G . N . Maksym , J . P . Butler , M . Glogauer , D . Navajas , et al . 2001 . Scaling the microrheology of living cells . Phys . Rev . Lett . 87 : 148102 . 3 . Hoffman , B . D . , G . Massiera , K . M . Van Citters , and J . C . Crocker . 2006 . The consensus mechanics of cultured mammalian cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 103 : 10259 – 10264 . 4 . Radmacher , M . , M . Fritz , C . M . Kacher , J . P . Cleveland , and P . K . Hansma . 1996 . Measuring the viscoelastic properties of human platelets with the atomic force microscope . Biophys . J . 70 : 556 – 567 . 5 . Na , S . , O . Collin , F . Chowdhury , B . Tay , M . Ouyang , et al . 2008 . Rapid signal transduction in living cells is a unique feature of mechanotrans - duction . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 105 : 6626 – 6631 . 6 . Sawada , Y . , M . Tamada , B . J . Dubin - Thaler , O . Cherniavskaya , R . Sa - kai , et al . 2006 . Force sensing by mechanical extension of the Src family kinase substrate p130Cas . Cell . 127 : 1015 – 1026 . 7 . Discher , D . E . , P . Janmey , and Y . L . Wang . 2005 . Tissue cells feel and respond to the stiffness of their substrate . Science . 310 : 1139 – 1143 . 8 . Fernandez , P . , P . A . Pullarkat , and A . Ott . 2006 . A master relation deﬁnes the nonlinear viscoelasticity of single ﬁbroblasts . Biophys . J . 90 : 3796 – 3805 . 9 . Wang , N . , J . P . Butler , and D . E . Ingber . 1993 . Mechanotransduction across the cell surface and through the cytoskeleton . Science . 260 : 1124 – 1127 . 10 . Harris , A . K . , P . Wild , and D . Stopak . 1980 . Silicone rubber substrata : a new wrinkle in the study of cell locomotion . Science . 208 : 177 – 179 . 11 . Pelham , Jr . , R . J . , and Y . Wang . 1999 . High resolution detection of mechanical forces exerted by locomoting ﬁbroblasts on the substrate . Mol . Biol . Cell . 10 : 935 – 945 . 12 . Wang , N . , I . M . Tolic - Norrelykke , J . Chen , S . M . Mijailovich , J . P . Butler , et al . 2002 . Cell prestress . I . Stiffness and prestress are closely associated in adherent contractile cells . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 282 : C606 – C616 . 13 . Bausch , A . R . , and K . Kroy . 2006 . A bottom - up approach to cell mechanics . Nat . Phys . 2 : 231 – 238 . 14 . Mohrdieck , C . , F . Dalmas , E . Arzt , R . Tharmann , M . M . Claessens , et al . 2007 . Biomimetic models of the actin cytoskeleton . Small . 3 : 1015 – 1022 . 15 . Gardel , M . L . , J . H . Shin , F . C . MacKintosh , L . Mahadevan , P . Matsu - daira , et al . 2004 . Elastic behavior of cross - linked and bundled actin networks . Science . 304 : 1301 – 1305 . 16 . Gardel , M . L . , F . Nakamura , J . H . Hartwig , J . C . Crocker , T . P . Stossel , et al . 2006 . Prestressed F - actin networks cross - linked by hinged ﬁlamins replicate mechanical properties of cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 103 : 1762 – 1767 . 17 . Wagner , B . , R . Tharmann , I . Haase , M . Fischer , and A . R . Bausch . 2006 . Cytoskeletal polymer networks : the molecular structure of cross - linkers determines macroscopic properties . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 103 : 13974 – 13978 . Biophysical Journal 96 ( 10 ) 4326 – 4335 4334 Kasza et al . 18 . Flanagan , L . A . , J . Chou , H . Falet , R . Neujahr , J . H . Hartwig , et al . 2001 . Filamin A , the Arp2 / 3 complex , and the morphology and function of cortical actin ﬁlaments in human melanoma cells . J . Cell Biol . 155 : 511 – 517 . 19 . Kiema , T . , Y . Lad , P . Jiang , C . L . Oxley , M . Baldassarre , et al . 2006 . The molecular basis of ﬁlamin binding to integrins and competition with talin . Mol . Cell . 21 : 337 – 347 . 20 . Calderwood , D . A . , A . Huttenlocher , W . B . Kiosses , D . M . Rose , D . G . Woodside , et al . 2001 . Increased ﬁlamin binding to beta - integrin cyto - plasmic domains inhibits cell migration . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 : 1060 – 1068 . 21 . Cunningham , C . C . , J . B . Gorlin , D . J . Kwiatkowski , J . H . Hartwig , P . A . Janmey , et al . 1992 . Actin - binding protein requirement for cortical stability and efﬁcient locomotion . Science . 255 : 325 – 327 . 22 . Glogauer , M . , P . Arora , D . Chou , P . A . Janmey , G . P . Downey , et al . 1998 . The role of actin - binding protein 280 in integrin - dependent mechanoprotection . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 1689 – 1698 . 23 . Kainulainen , T . , A . Pender , M . D’Addario , Y . Feng , P . Lekic , et al . 2002 . Cell death and mechanoprotection by ﬁlamin A in connective tissues after challenge by applied tensile forces . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 21998 – 22009 . 24 . Tandon , R . , I . Levental , C . Huang , F . J . Byﬁeld , J . Ziembicki , et al . 2007 . HIV infection changes glomerular podocyte cytoskeletal compo - sition and results in distinct cellular mechanical properties . Am . J . Phys - iol . Renal Physiol . 292 : F701 – F710 . 25 . Coughlin , M . F . , M . Puig - de - Morales , P . Bursac , M . Mellema , E . Millet , et al . 2006 . Filamin - A and rheological properties of cultured melanoma cells . Biophys . J . 90 : 2199 – 2205 . 26 . Straight , A . F . , A . Cheung , J . Limouze , I . Chen , N . J . Westwood , et al . 2003 . Dissecting temporal and spatial control of cytokinesis with a myosin II Inhibitor . Science . 299 : 1743 – 1747 . 27 . Pelham , Jr . , R . J . , and Y . Wang . 1997 . Cell locomotion and focal adhe - sions are regulated by substrate ﬂexibility . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 94 : 13661 – 13665 . 28 . Engler , A . , L . Bacakova , C . Newman , A . Hategan , M . Grifﬁn , et al . 2004 . Substrate compliance versus ligand density in cell on gel responses . Biophys . J . 86 : 617 – 628 . 29 . Butler , J . P . , I . M . Tolic - Norrelykke , B . Fabry , and J . J . Fredberg . 2002 . Traction ﬁelds , moments , and strain energy that cells exert on their surroundings . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 282 : C595 – C605 . 30 . Tolic - Norrelykke , I . M . , J . P . Butler , J . Chen , and N . Wang . 2002 . Spatial and temporal traction response in human airway smooth muscle cells . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 283 : C1254 – C1266 . 31 . Mijailovich , S . M . , M . Kojic , M . Zivkovic , B . Fabry , and J . J . Fredberg . 2002 . A ﬁnite element model of cell deformation during magnetic bead twisting . J . Appl . Physiol . 93 : 1429 – 1436 . 32 . Byﬁeld , F . J . , Q . Wen , I . Levental , K . Nordstrom , P . E . Arratia , et al . 2009 . Absence of ﬁlamin A prevents cells from responding to stiffness gradients on gels coated with collagen but not ﬁbronectin . Biophys . J . In press . 33 . Mierke , C . T . , P . Kollmannsberger , D . P . Zitterbart , J . Smith , B . Fabry , et al . 2008 . Mechano - coupling and regulation of contractility by the vin - culin tail domain . Biophys . J . 94 : 661 – 670 . 34 . Boettiger , D . 2007 . Quantitative measurements of integrin - mediated adhesion to extracellular matrix . Methods Enzymol . 426 : 1 – 25 . 35 . Fox , J . W . , and C . A . Walsh . 1999 . Periventricular heterotopia and the genetics of neuronal migration in the cerebral cortex . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 65 : 19 – 24 . 36 . Feng , Y . , M . H . Chen , I . P . Moskowitz , A . M . Mendonza , L . Vidali , et al . 2006 . Filamin A ( FLNA ) is required for cell - cell contact in vascular development and cardiac morphogenesis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 103 : 19836 – 19841 . 37 . Kim , H . , A . Sengupta , M . Glogauer , and C . A . McCulloch . 2008 . Fila - min A regulates cell spreading and survival via b 1 integrins . Exp . Cell Res . 314 : 834 – 846 . 38 . Thoumine , O . , O . Cardoso , and J . J . Meister . 1999 . Changes in the mechanical properties of ﬁbroblasts during spreading : a micromanipula - tion study . Eur . Biophys . J . 28 : 222 – 234 . 39 . Cai , S . , L . Pestic - Dragovich , M . E . O’Donnell , N . Wang , D . Ingber , et al . 1998 . Regulation of cytoskeletal mechanics and cell growth by myosin light chain phosphorylation . Am . J . Physiol . 275 : C1349 – C1356 . 40 . Engler , A . J . , S . Sen , H . L . Sweeney , and D . E . Discher . 2006 . Matrix elasticity directs stem cell lineage speciﬁcation . Cell . 126 : 677 – 689 . 41 . Paszek , M . J . , N . Zahir , K . R . Johnson , J . N . Lakins , G . I . Rozenberg , et al . 2005 . Tensional homeostasis and the malignant phenotype . Cancer Cell . 8 : 241 – 254 . 42 . Dembo , M . , and Y . L . Wang . 1999 . Stresses at the cell - to - substrate interface during locomotion of ﬁbroblasts . Biophys . J . 76 : 2307 – 2316 . 43 . Solon , J . , I . Levental , K . Sengupta , P . C . Georges , and P . A . Janmey . 2007 . Fibroblast adaptation and stiffness matching to soft elastic substrates . Biophys . J . 93 : 4453 – 4461 . 44 . Mammoto , A . , S . Huang , and D . E . Ingber . 2007 . Filamin links cell shape and cytoskeletal structure to Rho regulation by controlling accu - mulation of p190RhoGAP in lipid rafts . J . Cell Sci . 120 : 456 – 467 . 45 . Stossel , T . P . , J . Condeelis , L . Cooley , J . H . Hartwig , A . Noegel , et al . 2001 . Filamins as integrators of cell mechanics and signalling . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 : 138 – 145 . 46 . Stossel , T . P . , and J . H . Hartwig . 2003 . Filling gaps in signaling to actin cytoskeletal remodeling . Dev . Cell . 4 : 444 – 445 . 47 . Polte , T . R . , G . S . Eichler , N . Wang , and D . E . Ingber . 2004 . Extracel - lular matrix controls myosin light chain phosphorylation and cell contractility through modulation of cell shape and cytoskeletal prestress . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 286 : C518 – C528 . 48 . Reichl , E . M . , Y . Ren , M . K . Morphew , M . Delannoy , J . C . Efﬂer , et al . 2008 . Interactions between myosin and actin crosslinkers control cyto - kinesis contractility dynamics and mechanics . Curr . Biol . 18 : 471 – 480 . 49 . Janmey , P . A . , U . Euteneuer , P . Traub , and M . Schliwa . 1991 . Visco - elastic properties of vimentin compared with other ﬁlamentous biopolymer networks . J . Cell Biol . 113 : 155 – 160 . Biophysical Journal 96 ( 10 ) 4326 – 4335 Filamin and Cell Mechanics 4335