Antagonism between Ena / VASP Proteins and Actin Filament Capping Regulates Fibroblast Motility Citation Bear , James E . , Tatyana M . Svitkina , Matthias Krause , Dorothy A . Schafer , Joseph J . Loureiro , Geraldine A . Strasser , Ivan V . Maly , et al . “Antagonism between Ena / VASP Proteins and Actin Filament Capping Regulates Fibroblast Motility . ” Cell 109 , no . 4 ( May 2002 ) : 509 - 521 . Copyright © 2002 Cell Press As Published http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 02 ) 00731 - 6 Publisher Elsevier Version Final published version Accessed Sun Apr 07 10 : 54 : 14 EDT 2019 Citable Link http : / / hdl . handle . net / 1721 . 1 / 83477 Terms of Use Article is made available in accordance with the publisher ' s policy and may be subject to US copyright law . Please refer to the publisher ' s site for terms of use . Detailed Terms The MIT Faculty has made this article openly available . Please share how this access benefits you . Your story matters . Cell , Vol . 109 , 509 – 521 , May 17 , 2002 , Copyright  2002 by Cell Press Antagonism between Ena / VASP Proteins and Actin Filament Capping Regulates Fibroblast Motility main . The EVH1 domain binds to proteins containing the consensus sequence D / E FPPPPXD / E ( abbreviated as “FPPPP” ) that recruit Ena / VASP proteins to focal complexes and adhesions ( Niebuhr et al . , 1997 ) but not to the leading edge ( Bear et al . , 2000 ) . The EVH2 domain James E . Bear , 1 , 5 Tatyana M . Svitkina , 2 , 5 Matthias Krause , 1 Dorothy A . Schafer , 3 Joseph J . Loureiro , 1 Geraldine A . Strasser , 1 Ivan V . Maly , 2 Oleg Y . Chaga , 2 John A . Cooper , 3 Gary G . Borisy , 2 and Frank B . Gertler 1 , 4 1 Massachusetts Institute of Technology has regions implicated in G and F actin binding and Department of Biology contains a predicted coiled - coil region that mediates Cambridge , Massachusetts 02139 oligomerization ( Bachmannet al . , 1999 ; Carlet al . , 1999 ) . 2 Northwestern University School of Medicine Under certainconditions in vitro , Ena / VASPproteins can Department of Cell and Molecular Biology nucleate actin polymerization ( Huttelmaier et al . , 1999 ; Chicago , Illinois 60611 Lambrechts et al . , 2000 ) ; however , clustering of endoge - 3 Washington University School of Medicine nous Ena / VASP proteins within intact living cells fails to Department of Cell Biology nucleate or recruit new filaments at those sites ( Bear et St . Louis , Missouri 63110 al . , 2000 ; Lasa et al . , 1997 ; Pistor et al . , 1994 ; Skoble et al . , 2001 ) . Regardless of the mechanism , Ena / VASP proteins are Summary implicatedinanumberofactin - basedcellularprocesses including axon guidance , platelet shape change , and Cell motility requires lamellipodial protrusion , a pro - Jurkat T cell polarization ( reviewed in Bear et al . , 2001 ) . cess driven by actin polymerization . Ena / VASP proteins In fibroblasts , Ena / VASP proteins are most highly con - accumulate in protruding lamellipodia and promote centrated in focal adhesions , the leading edge of lamelli - the rapid actin - driven motility of the pathogen Listeria . podia , and at the tips of filopodia ( Gertler et al . , 1996 ; In contrast , Ena / VASP negatively regulate cell translo - Reinhard et al . , 1992 ) . Lamellipodial protrusion rate has cation . To resolve this paradox , we analyzed the func - been directly correlated with the accumulation of Ena / tion of Ena / VASP during lamellipodial protrusion . Ena / VASP proteins at leading edges , suggesting that Ena / VASP - deficient lamellipodia protruded slower but more VASPproteinspromoteleadingedgeprotrusion ( Rottner persistently , consistent with their increased cell trans - et al . , 1999 ) . In addition , Ena / VASP proteins are required location rates . Actin networks in Ena / VASP - deficient for full motility of the actin - dependent intracellular lamellipodia contained shorter , more highly branched pathogen Listeria monocytogenes ( reviewed in Cam - filaments compared to controls . Lamellipodia with ex - eron et al . , 2000 ) . cess Ena / VASP contained longer , less branched fila - Paradoxically , fibroblastslackingallendogenousEna / ments . In vitro , Ena / VASP promoted actin filament VASP proteins ( MV D7 cells ) translocated faster than de - elongation by interacting with barbed ends , shielding rivative cells that reexpress Mena ( Bear et al . , 2000 ) . To them from capping protein . We conclude that Ena / confirm this observation in another cell type , the spe - VASP regulates cell motility by controlling the geome - cific , high - affinity interaction between the EVH1 do - try of actin filament networks within lamellipodia . mains and the FPPPP ligand was used to sequester Ena / VASP proteins within Rat2 cells ( Bear et al . , 2000 ) . Introduction Cells in which all Ena / VASP proteins were sequestered on the mitochondrial surface ( “FPPPP - Mito cells” ) Extension of lamellipodia during cell movement de - moved faster than control cells . When the relocalization pends upon forces produced by actin assembly ( Borisy strategy was modified to recruit Ena / VASP proteins to and Svitkina , 2000 ; Pantaloni et al . , 2001 ; Pollard et al . , the membrane ( “FPPPP - CAAX cells” ) , we observed a 2000 ) . Actin filaments are organized in a dendritic network reductionintranslocationspeed . Together , theseresults within protruding lamellipodia , with their barbed , rapidly indicate that Ena / VASP proteins reduce fibroblast trans - growing ends oriented toward the membrane ( Small et location rates when localized to the plasma membrane . al . , 1978 ) . Free barbed ends are created by de novo nu - How can these apparently paradoxical observations cleation or by severing of existing filaments and elonga - about Ena / VASP proteins be reconciled ? Since net cell tion until capped by capping proteins . translocation is an integration of cell behavior over many The Ena / VASP protein family has been implicated in cycles of lamellipodial protrusion and withdrawal , we lamellipodial dynamics and cell motility ( Bear et al . , analyzed the protrusive component of cell motility and 2000 ; Rottner et al . , 1999 ) . This family consists of the determined the supramolecular consequences of ma - vertebrate proteins Mena , EVL , and VASP and Drosoph - nipulating Ena / VASP function in lamellipodia . We pres - ila Ena ( Gertler et al . , 1996 ) . All share a conserved do - ent data indicating that Ena / VASP proteins regulate ac - main structure that includes the N - terminal EVH1 ( Ena / tin network geometry and thereby control protrusive VASP homology ) domain and the C - terminal EVH2 do - behavior . At a molecular level , Ena / VASP proteins inter - act directly with the barbed ends of actin filaments at the leading edge , shielding them from the activity of 4 Correspondence : fgertler @ mit . edu 5 These authors contributed equally to this work . capping protein while supporting filament elongation . Cell510 Figure 1 . Kymograph Analysis of Rat2 , FPPPP - Mito , and FPPPP - CAAX Cells ( A – F ) Individual frames ( A , C , and E ) and ky - mographs ( B , D , and F ) from time - lapse mov - ies of FPPPP - Mito ( A and B ) , Rat2 ( C and D ) , and FPPPP - CAAX ( E and F ) cells . Kymo - graphs show lamellipodial activity along the lines in respective phase contrast images . Ascending and descending contours of the edge indicate protrusion and withdrawal events , respectively , steeper angles of the slopes corresponding to higher rates . Dark shades duringwithdrawal events correspond to ruffles . Dashed lines on kymographs indi - cate positions of shown frames in the time - lapse sequences . Scale bar for ( A ) , ( C ) , and ( E ) and scale vectors for ( B ) , ( D ) , and ( F ) are shown in top images . ( G ) Box and whisker plots for velocity and persistence of individual events of protrusion for FPPPP - Mito , Rat2 , and FPPPP - CAAX cells . Dot indicates mean , middle line of box indicates median , top of box indicates 75 th quartile , bottom ofboxindicates 25 th quartile , and whiskers indicate extent of 10 th and 90 th percentiles , respectively . Data for FPPPP - Mito comes from 814 events of protrusion in 42 cells ; for Rat2 , from 1 , 399 events of protrusion in 67 cells ; and for FPPPP - CAAX , from 1 , 010 events of protrusion in 29 cells . ANOVA p (cid:1) 0 . 0001 for both velocity and per - sistence . Nonoverlapping 95 % confidence intervals indicated by asterisks . change reported previously ( Bear et al . , 2000 ) . Kymo - Results graphs of FPPPP - CAAX cells appeared as “shark teeth” ( Figures 1E and 1F ) , reflecting short protrusions quickly Ena / VASP Proteins Regulate Lamellipodial replaced by withdrawals , usually as ruffles that appear Dynamics and Actin Network Architecture as dark shades on the kymographs . Analysis of the Weanalyzedtheroleof Ena / VASPproteinsduringlamel - FPPPP - CAAX cells revealed a statistically significant lipodialprotrusionkineticallyandstructurally . Forkinetic increase in protrusion velocity with respect to control analysis , we employed kymography ( Hinz et al . , 1999 ) . A cells ( Figures 1G and 4E ) . kymograph is a montage created by extracting intensity To observe nascent lamellipodia , we examined cells values along a defined line region in each image of a recovering from ATP depletion ( Svitkina et al . , 1986 ) . In time - lapse series and pasting them side - by - side to gen - the absence of glucose , sodium azide causes a rapid erate a composite image of object movement over time . depletion of cellular ATP . Without ATP , actin assembly is In our analysis , we used a 1 - pixel - wide line drawn in the impaired , presumably due to a lack of ATP bound actin direction of cell protrusion . The resulting kymographs monomers . Upon washout of sodium azide , actin as - reveal the dynamics of membrane activity at a single sembly is restored , and a large , synchronous burst of point along the cell perimeter . Analysis of such kymo - membrane protrusion occurs . In time - lapse movies of graphs permits quantification of membrane extension FPPPP - Mito and FPPPP - CAAX cells , we observed strik - rates and determination of the average time the mem - ing differences during ATP recovery ( Figure 2 ; see Sup - brane is engaged in individual protrusions . plemental Movies at http : / / www . cell . com / cgi / content / Kymographs of normal fibroblasts such as Rat2 cells full / 109 / 4 / 509 / DC1 ) . In FPPPP - Mito cells , new lamelli - appeared as a series of “shark fin” - like structures re - podia were smooth and almost entirely free of phase - flecting cycles of protrusion and withdrawal ( Figures 1C dark ruffles ( arrow , Figure 2 ) . In contrast , FPPPP - CAAX and 1D ) . In contrast , kymographs of FPPPP - Mito cells cells formed protrusions irregular in shape that con - appeared as “dunes , ” reflecting protrusions that extend tained large numbers of ruffles ( asterisk , Figure 2 ) . With slowly over time and rarely withdraw ( Figures 1A and this treatment , Rat2 control cells showed an intermedi - 1B ) . Lamellipodia of FPPPP - Mito cells protruded at a ate phenotype with some areas of flat lamellipodia and lower velocity , but persisted significantly longer than some ruffles ( data not shown ) . Similar results were ob - controls ( Figure 1G ) . Over time , this behavior results in served with high concentrations of cytochalasin D ap - more net membrane extension in FPPPP - Mito cells than in control cells , consistent with the increased cell shape plied via micropipette to block actin assembly followed Ena / VASP Proteins in Lamellipodia 511 ure 4C ) . FPPPP - Mito cells had a diagonal network of short filaments immediately next to the leading edge , but deeper within lamellipodia ( (cid:2) 0 . 3 – 0 . 5 (cid:3) m ) , filaments were predominantly oriented perpendicular to the lead - ing edge ( Figure 4C ) . To confirm that differences in actin architecture observed in Rat2 cells with altered distribu - tion of Ena / VASP proteins are not cell type specific , we examined the actin network of MV D7 cells ( lacking all Ena / VASP proteins ) and compared them to a rescued derivative . For both nascent and mature lamellipodia , similar differences were seen in these two lines ( see Supplemental Figures S1 and S2 at http : / / www . cell . com / cgi / content / full / 109 / 4 / 509 / DC1 ) . In addition , Rat2 cells overexpressing Mena showed similar phenotypes to FPPPP - CAAX cells . To quantify changes in structural features of the actin network in the different cell types , we measured filament length , branching frequency , and orientation at the lead - ingedge . Todeterminelength andbranching , weutilized cells recovering from ATP depletion , since under these conditions cells have synchronized , uniformly protrud - ing lamellipodia that permit better visualization of actin filaments . Confirming the visual impression , FPPPP - Mito cells had shorter filaments that branched more frequently than controls ( Figures 3B and 3C ) . Con - versely , FPPPP - CAAX cells had longer filaments that branched less frequently ( Figures 3B and 3C ) . In mature lamellipodia , the high filament density made it impossi - Figure 2 . Time - Lapse Analysis of Nascent Lamellipodia ble to directly measure individual filament length and FPPPP - Mito and FPPPP - CAAX cells were filmed during ATP recov - branching frequency . Therefore , for these lamellipodia , ery . Panels show individual frames from time - lapse movies ( see we evaluated changes in filament orientation . Changes Supplemental Movies at http : / / www . cell . com / cgi / content / full / 109 / in filament orientation arise , at least in part , as a conse - 4 / 509 / DC1 ) . Labels indicate time after NaN 3 washout / restoration of nutrient media . Insets show 1 . 5 (cid:4) magnified regions from boxed quence of changes in filament length and branching . areas . Black arrow in 5 min inset indicates new lamellipodial protru - To quantify filament orientation , we applied the Radon sion ; white asterisk indicates area of ruffling . transformation method , recently used to evaluate the lamellipodia of cells engaged in normal translocation ( Maly and Borisy , 2001 ) . This method uses a computer by washout ( data not shown ) , suggesting that this effect algorithm to extract the angles at which actin filaments is not specific for sodium azide treatment . within lamellipodia approach the plasma membrane We reasoned that Ena / VASP - dependent changes in ( “angle of incidence” ) . A value of 0 (cid:5) indicates that the lamellipodial behavior result from altered organization filament runs in the direction of protrusion . Quantifica - of the underlyingactin network . We examinedthe supra - tion by this approach confirmed that FPPPP - CAAX cells molecular organization of the actin filament network in had significantly more filaments with greater angles of nascent and mature lamellipodia by platinum replica elec - incidence than control cells , while FPPPP - Mito cells had tron microscopy . Striking differences were observed 1 more filaments with smaller angles of incidence than min after recovery from ATP depletion . Compared to control cells ( Figure 4D ; see Supplemental Figure S3 at control cells , FPPPP - Mito cells appeared to have http : / / www . cell . com / cgi / content / full / 109 / 4 / 509 / DC1 ) . shorter and more highly branched filaments ( Figure 3A ) . In contrast , FPPPP - CAAX cells displayed strikingly longer and more sparsely branched actin filaments ( Fig - Cell Translocation Rates and Lamellipodial Dynamics Are Linked to Actin Network Architecture ure3A ) . Additionaldifferencesinactinnetworkorganiza - tion were observed 3 min after recovery ( Figure 3A ) . At Our results show that Ena / VASP deficiency leads to shorter actin filaments , more persistent lamellipodial this time point , actin filaments in control cells appeared longer and were organized in a normal diagonal array , protrusion , and faster net cell translocation ( Bear et al . , 2000 ) . If the major function of Ena / VASP proteins is to whereas the filaments in FPPPP - Mito cells appeared short and highly branched ( Figure 3A ) . In contrast , the control filament length , then treatments that reduce fila - ment length should increase cell speeds . We used cyto - longer filaments in FPPPP - CAAX cells appeared to be - come oriented predominantly parallel to the plasma chalasin D ( CD ) , a fungal metabolite that binds to barbed ends of actin filaments with high affinity ( 2 nM ) ( Cooper , membrane ( Figure 3A ) . Mature lamellipodia of cells engaged in normal trans - 1987 ) , for this purpose . To disrupt the actin cytoskeleton in living cells , CD is often used at concentrations in the location displayed similar changes in filament organiza - tion . Compared to the diagonal network of actin fila - range of 1 – 10 (cid:3) M . At these concentrations , low - affinity interactions with actin monomers and dimers become ments in control cells , FPPPP - CAAX cells had filaments running predominantly parallel to the leading edge ( Fig - a confounding factor in interpreting the specificity of Cell512 Figure 3 . Actin Network Supramolecular Organization upon ATP Recovery ( A ) Platinum replica electron microscopy of lamellipodia of FPPPP - Mito , Rat2 , and FPPPP - CAAX cells 1 min or 3 min after recovery from ATP depletion . The scale bar equals 100 nm . ( B ) Length quantitation . For FPPPP - Mito cells , n (cid:6) 178 filaments from 25 cells ; for Rat2 cells , n (cid:6) 156 filaments from 16 cells ; for FPPPP - CAAX , n (cid:6) 141 filaments from 14 cells . ( C ) Branching frequency . For FPPPP - Mito , n (cid:6) 26 images from 15 cells ; for Rat2 cells , n (cid:6) 37 images from 13 cells ; for FPPPP - CAAX , n (cid:6) 40 images from 12 cells . For both ( B ) and ( C ) , ANOVA p (cid:1) 0 . 0001 , nonoverlapping 95 % confidence intervals are marked with an asterisk . the effect . However , at lower doses , CD impairs actin some barbed end elongation is essential for cell translo - cation , but that partially limiting this process causes assembly by specifically reducing the rate of actin mono - mer addition onto barbed ends . cells to move faster . We next examined the effect of CD treatment on the FPPPP - CAAX and FPPPP - Mito cells . We examined the effects of a range of low CD concen - trations on the translocation rate of control Rat2 cells . Treatment with 25 nM CD increased the speed of FPPPP - CAAX cells to approximately that of control cells A biphasic response pattern in cell translocation rate was observed in Rat2 cells ( Figure 4A ) . At 5 nM , cell ( Figure 4B ) . This same dose , however , caused FPPPP - Mito cells to slow down ( Figure 4B ) . speed was not increased significantly . At 25 nM , how - ever , cell speed increased significantly . At 50 nM , cell In addition to the effects on translocation rate , low - dose CD treatment reversed the effects of Ena / VASP speeds were similar to the untreated controls , while 500 nM CD reduced cell speeds . These results indicate that function on actin filament orientation . FPPPP - CAAX Ena / VASP Proteins in Lamellipodia 513 cells treated with 25 nM CD exhibited a reduction of N - WASP signal at the leading edge ( Figures 5A – 5D ) . However , at CD concentrations as low as 25 nM , the filaments oriented parallel to the edge and contained EGFP - Mena signal at the leading edge was reduced an increased abundance of filaments oriented diago - relative to N - WASP and F actin ( data not shown ) . Be - nally with respect to the edge ( Figures 4C and 4D ; see tween 100 and 150 nM CD , EGFP - Mena was displaced Supplemental Figure S3 at http : / / www . cell . com / cgi / completely from the leading edge but not from focal content / full / 109 / 4 / 509 / DC1 ) . The diagonally oriented fil - adhesions ( Figures 6E – 6H ) . At these low concentrations aments appeared shorter . CD - treated FPPPP - CAAX ofCD , theactincytoskeletonshowedlittlevisibledisrup - cells had a distribution of angles of incidence indistin - tion as assessed by phalloidin staining . Endogenous guishable from untreated Rat2 cells . CD at 25 nM in - Mena and VASP showed a similar selective displace - duced a similar shift of Rat2 angles of incidence toward ment from the leading edge with CD treatment ( data not that of untreated FPPPP - Mito cells . No effect of CD on shown ) . As a specificity control in these experiments , incident angle was observed in FPPPP - Mito cells . we used latrunculin B ( LatB ) . Unlike CD , LatB interacts Analysis of lamellipodial dynamics by kymography re - with actin monomers and prevents their incorporation vealed that treatment with 25 nM CD induced concomi - into filaments without occluding the free barbed ends . tant decreases in protrusion velocity ( Figure 4E ) and A range of LatB concentrations was tested ( 10 – 400 nM ) . increases in the persistence of protrusions ( Figure 4F ) At all concentrations of LatB in which N - WASP was in all of the cell types . The greatest effects of CD were detected at the leading edge ( (cid:1) 250 nM ) , EGFP - Mena observed in the FPPPP - CAAX cells , perhaps because was still highly colocalized with N - WASP ( Figures 5I – 5L theabnormalfilamentelongationinthesecellswasmore and data not shown ) . Therefore , displacement of Ena / sensitive to CD than filaments of Rat2 cells or FPPPP - VASP proteins from the leading edge by CD is unlikely to Mitocells . Interestingly , FPPPP - Mitolamellipodiaexhib - result from a general disruption of actin polymerization . ited a slight decrease in protrusion velocity and increase Endogenous Mena was also highly concentrated at the in persistence despite having overall net decrease in tips of filopodia in NG108 neuroblastoma growth cones translocation speed in 25 nM CD . ( Figures 5M – 5O ) . Upon treatment with 100 nM CD , filo - To verify that the low dose of CD used in these experi - podia were still present , but the tip localization of Mena ments reduced filament lengths in vivo , we quantified was lost ( Figures 5P – 5R ) . LatB treatment had little or no filaments at the leading edge in cells recovering from effect on this localization ( data not shown ) . Therefore , ATP depletion in the presence or absence of 25 nM CD the localization of Ena / VASP proteins to fibroblast lead - ( Figure 4G ) . A striking reduction in filament length was ing edges and growth cone filopodial tips requires free observed in the CD - treated FPPPP - CAAX cells , while a barbed ends of actin filaments . smaller but statistically significant decrease was ob - served in CD - treated Rat2 cells . No effect on length was The EVH2 Domain , through Its F Actin Binding observed in the FPPPP - Mito cells , perhaps because Motif , Is Required for Leading Edge Targeting they already have abnormally short filaments . CD treat - The EVH1 domain is sufficient to target EGFP weakly to ment had no effect on the frequency of branching in any the leading edge , along with focal adhesions ( Bear et of the cell types ( data not shown ) . Taken together , these al . , 2000 ) . To determine if the EVH1 domain could medi - data indicate that treatment with 25 nM CD decreases ate the free barbed end - based anchoring of full - length filament length in lamellipodia and shifts the transloca - Ena / VASP proteins , we treated cells expressing EGFP - tion rates , orientation of actin filaments , and lamellipod - EVH1 with doses of CD up to 400 nM and found that , ial dynamics of FPPPP - CAAX cells toward those of un - unlike intact Ena / VASP proteins , the weak leading edge treated Rat2 cells , and the properties of Rat2 cells signal of EGFP - EVH1 was insensitive to CD treatment toward those of untreated FPPPP - Mito cells . ( data not shown ) , indicating that other regions of Ena / VASP proteins are necessary for efficient leading edge targeting of the intact molecules . Free Barbed Ends of Actin Filaments Are Required Ena / VASP proteins can bind directly to F actin in vitro to Target Ena / VASP Proteins to the Leading through an 18 - residue motif in the EVH2 domain ( Bach - Edge and Filopodial Tips mann et al . , 1999 ) . We generated an EGFP - tagged form Ena / VASP proteins are targeted to the leading edge and of Menalacking this motif ( Mena (cid:7) FAB ) . Since Ena / VASP the tips of filopodia by an unknown mechanism . Since proteins oligomerize through a coiled - coil motif within both locations contain high concentrations of free the EVH2 domain , we expressed Mena (cid:7) FAB in MV D7 barbed ends of actin filaments , we asked whether the cells ( lacking all Ena / VASP proteins ) to eliminate the barbed ends themselves might be required to recruit possibility that this construct would be targeted indi - Ena / VASP proteins to these places . In cells , CD effec - rectly through oligomerization with endogenous Ena / tively masks free barbed ends . We used a range of VASP proteins . Mena (cid:7) FAB was properly targeted to fo - CD concentrations from 10 nM to 200 nM to determine cal adhesions but was very weak to undetectable at whether inhibiting barbed end elongation would affect the leading edge ( Figure 6 ) , indicating that the F actin EGFP - Mena localization . These experiments required a binding motif of Ena / VASP proteins is necessary for CD - insensitive marker for the leading edge . We found leading edge targeting of the full - length proteins . that an antibody to N - WASP stains the leading edge Since the FAB motif within the EVH2 domain was robustly and that this distribution was unaffected by any necessary for leading edge targeting , we wondered if concentration of CD used in this experiment . In control the isolated EVH2 domain wouldbe sufficient to mediate targeting to the leading edge . When expressed in MV D7 cells , there was extensive overlap of EGFP - Mena and Cell514 Figure 4 . Low Dose of Cytochalasin D Counteracts Ena / VASP Activity in Cell Motility ( A ) Dose - response curve for cytochalasin D on Rat2 whole - cell speed . ( B ) Effect of 25 nM CD on FPPPP - Mito , Rat2 , and FPPPP - CAAX whole - cell speed . Data come from two independent experiments . ANOVA p (cid:1) 0 . 0001 for both experiments . Nonoverlapping 95 % confidence intervals are marked by asterisks . Asterisks in ( A ) reflect differences from untreated control . Asterisks in ( B ) reflect differences from untreated cognate cell lines . ( C ) Platinum replica electron microscopy of control or 25 nM CD - treated cells . Ena / VASP Proteins in Lamellipodia 515 Figure 5 . Effect of Cytochalasin D on Ena / VASP Localization at the Leading Edge in Fibroblasts and Filopodial Tips in Growth Cones ( A – L ) Immunofluorescence of Rat2 fibroblasts expressing low levels of EGFP - Mena . Control treatment ( A – D ) ; 150 nM cytochalasin D , 30 min ( E – H ) ; 100 nM latrunculin B , 30 min ( I – L ) . F actin ( A , E , and I ) , EGFP - Mena ( B , F , and J ) , N - WASP ( C , G , and K ) ; merge , EGFP - Mena in green , N - WASP in red ( D , H , and L ) . ( M – R ) Immunofluorescence of NG108 growth cones . Control treatment ( M – O ) ; 100 nM CD , 1 min ( P – R ) . F actin ( M and P ) , Mena ( N and Q ) ; merge , EGFP - Mena in green , F actin in red ( O and R ) . cells , EGFP - EVH2 strongly labeled a broad F actin - rich sions ( Figure 6 ) . Since this distribution is perfectly coin - cident with endogenous VASP ( data not shown ) , EVH2 region throughout lamellipodia but did not decorate fo - cal adhesions or concentrate specifically at the leading targeting in this cell type was likely due to oligomeriza - tion with correctly localized endogenous Ena / VASP pro - edges as does full - length EGFP - Mena ( Figure 6 ; see Supplemental Figures S4 and S5 at http : / / www . cell . com / teins . Together , these data indicate that the EVH2 do - main is sufficient to target lamellipodia , but that other cgi / content / full / 109 / 4 / 509 / DC1 ) . The broad region of la - mellipodia decorated by EGFP - EVH2 was similar to that featuressuchastheEVH1domainarerequiredtospecif - ically target the leading edge . seen with Cortactin staining ( see Supplemental Figure S4 ) . The localization of EGFP - EVH2 was sensitive to the same doses of CD that displace intact Ena / VASP VASP - Coated Beads Capture Uncapped But Not Capped Actin Filaments In Vitro proteins from the leading edge and filopodial tips ( data not shown ) . When expressed in Rat2 cells , EGFP - EVH2 To test whether Ena / VASP proteins bind directly to barbedends , weutilizedaninvitroactinfilamentcapture targeted robustly to the leading edge and focal adhe - ( D ) Incidence angles of filaments at the leading edge ( degrees ) as determined by Radon transformation analysis of 18 – 21 images per treatment . Table contains the mean of the absolute value of the positive and negative modal angles ( 0 (cid:5) is the direction of protrusion ; SD , standard deviations ) . Asterisks show differences from Rat2 controls ( Mann - Witney statistical test ; 0 . 05 cut - off ; see Supplemental Figure S3 for more comparisons ) . ( E ) Velocity and ( F ) persistence of protrusion . ANOVA p (cid:1) 0 . 0001 for both ; nonoverlapping 95 % confidence intervals within treatment groups marked by asterisks . Data derived from between 137 and 579 individual events of protrusion per treatment group . ( G ) Length of filaments during ATP recovery with or without 25 nM CD . Data come from 164 – 318 filaments measured per treatment group . ANOVA p (cid:1) 0 . 0001 ; nonoverlapping 95 % confidence intervals within treatment groups marked by asterisks . Cell516 Figure 6 . Structural Requirements for Leading Edge Targeting of Ena / VASP Proteins Immunofluorescence of MV D7 or Rat2 fibroblasts expressing full - length EGFP - Mena ( wt Mena ) , EGFP - Mena (cid:7) FAB , or EGFP - EVH2 . Merge , GFP in green and N - WASP in red . assay . Protein - coated beads were mixed with actin fila - FPPPP / VASP beads was detectable ( Figure 7G ) . Once bound to VASP beads , however , uncapped filaments ments containing fluorescently - labeled actin monomers ( 4 (cid:3) M ) . To prevent dilution - induced depolymerization could not be competed off with soluble capping protein ( data notshown ) . To ensurethat capping didnot depoly - during washing , actin filaments were stabilized with phalloidin . Similar results were obtained without phalloi - merize or otherwise affect the phalloidin - stabilized fila - ments , we used poly - L - lysine - coated beads as a posi - din stabilization , but these experiments were difficult to document due to high background of fluorescence from tive control . The highly charged surface of these beads captures fluorescent actin filaments nonspecifically unattached filaments and unpolymerized monomers ( data not shown ) . Washed bead / filament complexes ( Brown and Spudich , 1979 ) . Filament capture was unaf - fected by preincubating the filaments with 100 nM cap - were examined by fluorescence microscopy . Beads were coated with a fusion protein containing ping protein ( Figures 7E and 7F ) , indicating that capped filaments were stable under our experimental condi - the FPPPP repeats from ActA . When mixed with fluores - cent actin filaments , these FPPPP - alone beads failed to tions . From these data we conclude that Ena / VASP pro - teins likely bind actin filaments directly at or near their capture filaments ( Figure 7A ) . In contrast , FPPPP beads coated with purified , recombinant VASP ( bound to the barbed ends . beads via FPPPP - EVH1 interactions ) recruited a high density of actin filaments under the same conditions Functional Antagonism between Ena / VASP and Capping Proteins In Vitro ( Figure 7B ) . To determine whether the interaction be - tween VASP and actin required free barbed ends , actin We speculated that Ena / VASP proteins promote fila - ment elongation by interacting with free barbed ends of filaments were preincubated with either 100 nM or 10 nM purified capping protein ( CapZ ) . Virtually no capture actin filaments , thereby protecting them from capping protein . To test this hypothesis , we examined the effects of capped filaments by FPPPP / VASP beads was ob - served ( Figures 7C and 7D ) . Furthermore , in the absence of purified VASP on the ability of capping protein to inhibit actin polymerization at barbed ends . Spectrin - F of F actin , no binding of free CapZ ( 100 nM ) to the Ena / VASP Proteins in Lamellipodia 517 actin seeds were used to nucleate polymerization so that filament elongation occurred from barbed ends . We utilized physiological salt concentrations in the assay ( 100 mM KCl ) because these conditions prevent the VASP - dependentnucleation thatcanbeobserved inlow salt ( Huttelmaier et al . , 1999 ) . Using these conditions , no effects on elongation kinetics or actin filament nucle - ation were observed when VASP was added alone ( data notshown ) . Cappingprotein ( CapZ , 5 nM ) stronglyinhib - ited elongation ( Line labeled “0” in Figure 7H ) . VASP antagonized the inhibitory effect of capping protein in a dose - dependent manner ( Figure 7H ) . Therefore , Ena / VASP proteins protect actin filaments from the capping activity of capping protein , resulting in increased fila - ment elongation . Discussion The Molecular Function ( s ) of Ena / VASP Proteins We propose that Ena / VASP proteins interact with actin filaments at or near their barbed ends and prevent or delay binding of capping protein to filaments while per - mitting continued elongation . Ena / VASP proteins asso - ciate with free barbed ends of actin filaments in vitro and , based on CD displacement , free barbed ends are required for leading edge localization of Ena / VASP pro - teins in vivo . The Ena / VASP - dependent changes in actin filament length in lamellipodia are consistent with VASP’s antagonism of capping protein seen by in vitro polymerization assays . In cells , our results suggest that CD treatment largely counteracts the effects of Ena / VASP proteins on cell motility , lamellipodial dynamics , and the architecture of the actin network . Given the known effects of CD on barbed end elongation and our reported effects on filament length in vivo , these obser - vations are consistent with the proposed model for Ena / VASP proteins as “anticapping” proteins . While Ena / VASP proteins may represent the first known proteins withthisactivity , theremaybeother proteinswithsimilar functions just as there are multiple types of filament - capping proteins . The inhibition of capping need not be particularly long lasting to produce the observed effects in cells . A transient inhibition of capping would still pro - Figure 7 . Actin Filament Capture by VASP - Coated Beads and Ef - fects of VASP on Capping Protein during Actin Polymerization duce the long filaments observed in the lamellipodia of the FPPPP - CAAX cells . Since the dissociation rate of ( A – F ) In vitro actin filament capture . Paramagnetic beads coated with GST - FPPPP alone do not capture fluorescent actin filaments capping protein from filaments is slow ( t 1 / 2 (cid:6) 28 min ) , ( A ) . GST - FPPPP beads bound to VASP capture actin filaments ro - capping is essentially a terminal event ( Schafer et al . , bustly ( B ) . Filaments preincubated with ( C ) 100 nM or ( D ) 10 nM 1996 ) . Ena / VASP proteins may simply slow the associa - capping protein are not captured by GST - FPPPP / VASP beads . tion of capping protein with barbed ends . Beads coated with poly - L - lysine capture filaments regardless of Our results indicated that Ena / VASP proteins reduced capping protein preincubation ( [ E ] no capping ; [ F ] 100 nM capping protein ) . Representativebeadsareshown ; threeindependentexper - actin filament branching in vivo . Two recent studies us - iments gave identical results . ing in vitro Arp2 / 3 - induced visual branching assays ar - ( G ) Pull - down experiment testing for VASP / capping protein interac - rived at different conclusions about the effect of VASP tion : lane 1 , starting mixture ; lane 2 , supernatant ; lane 3 , washed on actin filament branching . One study reported no ef - beads . fect of VASP on branching ( Boujemaa - Paterski et al . , ( H ) VASP inhibits capping by capping protein . Polymerization of 2 2001 ) , while another reported a VASP - dependent inhibi - (cid:3) M actin ( 5 % pyrene - labeled ) in the absence ( open circles ) and presence ( filled diamonds ) of 5 nM capping protein was monitored tion of branching ( Skoble et al . , 2001 ) . Regardless of as the change in pyrene - actin fluorescence versus time . Reactions how Ena / VASP proteins affect branching , our results withcappingproteinalsocontainedvaryingconcentrationsofVASP from experiments with CD treatment suggest that as indicated to the right of each trace . Actin polymerization was changes in filament length alone are sufficient to reverse initiated by addition of 0 . 14 nM spectrin - F actin seeds to the re - Ena / VASP’s effect on cell translocation , lamellipodial action . dynamics , and filament orientation . Cell518 Localization of Ena / VASP Proteins Relationship between Lamellipodial Architecture and Protrusive Behavior to the Leading Edge In the absence of Ena / VASP proteins , lamellipodia pro - Localization of Ena / VASP proteins to the leading edge truded more slowly but persisted significantly longer involves a combination of both the EVH1 and EVH2 do - than in control cells . In contrast , in cells containing an mains . While the EVH1 domain alone was sufficient to excess of Ena / VASP proteins at the leading edge , lamel - target GFP to the leading edge , this targeting was not lipodial protrusions were faster than in control cells but as robust as the full - length protein and was insensitive appeared to be transient and rapidly converted into ruf - to CD treatment ( data not shown ) . The EVH1 domain fles . The differences in protrusive behavior correlated interacts directly with FPPPP - containing proteins . In the with changes in lamellipodial architecture . Within lamel - presenceof saturatingamountsofa cytoplasmicFPPPP lipodia , Ena / VASP proteins increased filament lengths , construct , Ena / VASP proteins were fully displaced from decreased branching density , and increased angles of focaladhesions , butleadingedgetargetingwasindistin - incidence . Our results indicate that changes in network guishable from controls ( Bear et al . , 2000 ) . Importantly , geometry alone were sufficient to account for the effect cells expressing the cytoplasmic FPPPP construct ex - of Ena / VASP proteins on lamellipodial dynamics . How hibited normal translocation speeds , confirming that the might network geometry be related to protrusive behav - remaining leading edge pool of Ena / VASP proteins was ior ? Mogilner and Oster proposed an “elastic Brownian functional , and excluded a role for the focal adhesion ratchet” model for lamellipodial protrusion that consid - pool of Ena / VASP proteins in this type of motility assay . ers the length and flexibility of actin filaments ( Mogilner The EVH2 domain also plays a critical role in leading and Oster , 1996 ) . Transient bending of filaments away edge targeting . Deletion of the F actin binding motif from the membrane in the course of thermal fluctuations greatly reduced leading edge targeting but did not affect permits monomer incorporation at the barbed end , and focal adhesion targeting . The EVH2 domain alone local - the subsequent restoring force of the bent filament ized to the F actin - rich network within lamellipodia . Un - drives membrane protrusion . This model predicts that like full - length Ena / VASP proteins , the EVH2 domain maximum protrusiveforce is generated byfilaments that did not become enriched at the leading edge and was have an optimal length of their terminal segment and undetectable in focal adhesions in Ena / VASP - deficient approach the membrane at an optimal angle . Short fila - cells . We propose that leading edge targeting of full - ments are relatively stiff and less able to bend away length Ena / VASP proteins requires both the EVH1 and from the membrane to elongate with new subunits . Long EVH2 domains . The EVH1 domain may act to limit tar - filaments can readily bend and elongate but are not stiff geting of the EVH2 domain to the very leading edge of enough to push effectively against the membrane . They the lamellipodium . It is important to point out that differ - will consequently tend to grow and align parallel to the ent results were observed when the isolated EVH2 do - edge . Our observations are consistent with these pre - main was expressed in cells containing endogenous dictions . Lamellipodia of Ena / VASP - deficient cells con - Ena / VASP proteins , likely due to oligomerization with tain short , branched ( and therefore stiff ) filaments and endogenous proteins ( Bachmann et al . , 1999 ; Huttel - protrude slowly . Although Mogilner and Oster did not maier et al . , 1999 ; Nakagawa et al . , 2001 ) . explicitly treat withdrawal phases , one may predict that Our results suggest that EVH2 - dependent recruitment protrusions containing short stiff filaments would tend of Ena / VASP proteins to the leading edge requires free to be persistent , as we observe . Forces including mem - barbed ends of actin filaments . Low to moderate doses brane tension oppose protrusion ( Raucher and Sheetz , of CD ( 100 – 150 nM ) , which are expected to cap barbed 2000 ) . Lamellipodia containing long spaghetti - like fila - ends , displaced all Ena / VASP proteins from the leading ments ( resulting from an excess of Ena / VASP activity ) edges and filopodial tips . This proposed mechanism may be ineffective in resisting such opposing forces , as could explain why Ena / VASP are concentrated at the evidenced by their tendency to ruffle rapidly . lamellipodial leading edge in relative proportion to the velocity of protrusion ( Rottner et al . , 1999 ) . Protruding Relationship between Lamellipodial Protrusion lamellipodia contain high densities of elongating fila - and Cell Translocation ments . As protrusion velocity and free barbed end den - How can changes in local protrusive behavior affect sity increase , greater levels of Ena / VASP proteins would global cell motility ? Net cell translocation results from be recruited , thereby changing the architecture of the the coordinated activity of four major processes : exten - actinnetworkbyincreasingfilamentlengthanddecreas - sion of actin - rich protrusions , such as lamellipodia , sta - ing branching . This would in turn reduce the persistence bilization of these protrusions by adhesion to the sub - of the protrusion , providing an adaptive , self - limiting stratum , translocation of the cell body by contractile mechanism . Such a mechanism would explain how Ena / forces , and detachment at the rear ( Lauffenburger and VASP proteins could be positive regulators of motility Horwitz , 1996 ) . There is no simple relationship between at the local scale ( lamellipodia ) but negative regulators the magnitude of any of these parameters and net cell at the global scale ( whole cells ) . One consequence of speed . Rather , the optimal combination of these activi - decreasing the persistence of protrusion in rapidly ex - ties plus cell polarization results in productive locomo - tending lamellipodiawould beto decreasenet celltrans - tion . It is important to distinguish between individual location rates and perhaps increase ruffling . Such be - events of protrusion and withdrawal and net cell translo - havior might be important for cells to explore their cation . An individual cycle of protrusion and withdrawal is rapid and brief . In control cells , the leading edge environment and sense guidance cues . Ena / VASP Proteins in Lamellipodia 519 advances in the protrusive phase at a rate of approxi - cells and form protrusions all around the cell perimeter mately 5 (cid:3) m / min and the whole cycle is completed ( unpublished observations ) . Future studies will be di - within 1 min . In contrast , net cell translocation rates are rected at understanding these processes and determin - measured over several hours with typical values of 0 . 5 ing how they are integrated with lamellipodial dynamics (cid:3) m / min ( 30 (cid:3) m / hr ) . Thus , net cell translocation reflects during whole - cell translocation . an integration of cell behavior over many cycles of pro - trusion and withdrawal . Biophysical models such as the Experimental Procedures one of Mogilner and Oster refer specifically to individual protrusive phases , not to net cell translocation . Never - Molecular Cloning and Retroviral Transduction Subcloning and PCR were performed using standard methods . theless , it is relevant to discuss the extent to which net EGFP - Mena (cid:7) FAB is identical to the previously described EGFP - translocation reflects individual protrusive behavior . Mena construct except it lacks residues 410 – 428 ( Bear et al . , 2000 ) . We presented evidence showing a correlation be - EGFP - EVH2 is a fusion between EGFP and residues 345 – 541 of tween changes in lamellipodial dynamics and regulation Mena . EGFP - EVH2 (cid:7) FAB is identical to EGFP - EVH2 except it lacks of net cell translocation by Ena / VASP proteins . Our data residues 410 – 428 . Retroviral packaging , transduction , and FACS demonstrate that high instantaneous lamellipodia pro - sorting were performed as described ( Bear et al . , 2000 ) . trusion rate per se is not sufficient for fast net locomo - tion . Our results suggest that whole - cell translocation Cell Culture and Actin - Blocking Drug Treatments rates are correlated more directly with the persistence Rat2 , MV D7 , and derivative cells were cultured as described ( Bear of individual protrusions than with their instantaneous et al . , 2000 ) . NG108 cells were grown in MEM , 10 % fetal calf serum , velocity . This observation is consistent with work from 1X HAT supplement ( GIBCO - BRL ) . Differentiation was induced by platingcellsonpoly - L - lysine / Laminin - coatedcoverslipswithoutse - Hinz and colleagues showing that EGF - stimulated in - rumandwith0 . 1XHATsupplement ( Smalheiser , 1991 ) . Cytochalasin creases in keratinocyte locomotion involved changes in D and latrunculin B ( Sigma - Aldrich ) were dissolved in DMSO for lamellipodia frequency , persistence , and withdrawal but stock solutions of 3 . 94 mM and 5 mM , respectively , and stored that lamellipodial protrusion velocity remained un - at (cid:8) 20 (cid:5) C . Drugs were diluted in growth or microscopy media and changed ( Hinz et al . , 1999 ) . applied as described in the figure legends . Another factor relevant to lamellipodial dynamics is adhesion to the substratum . We considered whether Kymography and Cell Tracking Ena / VASP proteins’ effects on persistence of lamelli - For kymography , phase - contrast time - lapse sequences were ob - podial protrusion might be mediated by adhesion , since tainedonaNikonEclipseTE200usinga40 (cid:4) objective . Movieswere VASP has been proposed to play a role in regulating 10 – 15 min long with frames taken every 3 s . Kymographs were integrin function ( Reinhard et al . , 2001 ) . We previously produced and analyzed using Metamorph software . Kymographs showed , however , that in fibroblasts complete depletion weregeneratedalong1 - pixel - widelineregionsorientedinthedirec - tionofindividualprotrusions . Forquantitativeanalysis , straightlines of Ena / VASP proteins from focal complexes and focal weredrawnonkymographsfromthebeginningtotheendofindivid - adhesions had no effect on net cell translocation , pro - ual protrusion events , neglecting fluctuations (cid:1) 0 . 5 (cid:3) m ( 2 pixels ) in vided that the leading edge pool was intact ( Bear et al . , magnitude . Slopes of these lines were used to calculate the veloci - 2000 ) . Furthermore , the process of membrane protru - ties , and projections of these lines along the x axis ( time ) were used sion itself does not require adhesion ( Bailly et al . , 1998 ) . to calculate the persistence of protrusions essentially as described Therefore , it appears unlikely that the effects we have ( Hinzet al . , 1999 ) . Cell trackingmovieswere madeusinga 4 (cid:4) phase observed on lamellipodial behavior and cell transloca - contrast objective with a frame every 5 min over 2 hr . A minimum of 20 cells from two independent experiments per treatment were tion are a direct result of Ena / VASP proteins modulating analyzed . Datacollectionandanalysiswereperformedasdescribed adhesion receptors . Ena / VASP proteins may indirectly ( Bear et al . , 2000 ) . affect adhesion through actin architecture - based changes in lamellipodial behavior . Slow , large , and flat lamellipodia in FPPPP - Mito cells may be more likely to ATP Depletion / Recovery Assay The ATP depletion / recovery assay was performed as described form adhesions with the substratum before the next ( Svitkina et al . , 1986 ) . Cells were adapted to microscopy media for withdrawal , whereas small and short lamellipodia of 24 hr and plated on fibronectin - coated (cid:7) T dishes ( Bioptechs ) as FPPPP - CAAX cells with their tendency to form ruffles described ( Bear et al . , 2000 ) . Movies were made using a 40 (cid:4) phase are less likely to attach efficiently . contrastobjectivewithaframeevery3s . Forthetime - lapsevideomi - In addition to lamellipodial protrusion , other actin - croscopy experiment , cells were cultured under the standard mi - dependent processes such as cell body translocation croscopy conditions described above . To initiate ATP depletion , and cell polarity impact whole - cell translocation rates . media was replaced with PBS supplemented with 0 . 1 g / l CaCl 2 , 0 . 1 g / lMgCl 2 , and20 mMNaN 3 . Cellswere incubatedfor 1hr . The NaN 3 - Cell body translocation likely depends upon an actin - containing buffer was then replaced with fresh microscopy media myosin - based contraction event . Since the efficiency of to allow ATP recovery . To analyze recovery in the presence of CD , this contraction depends on the structure of the actin 25 nM CD was added to the azide - containing solution for the last network , it may also be subject to regulation by Ena / 30 min of starvation and to the washout media . VASP proteins . This may explain why CD reduces the whole - cell motility rate of FPPPP - Mito cells while not Platinum Replica Electron Microscopy dramatically altering the filament orientation or lamelli - For platinum replica electron microscopy , cells on glass coverslips podial dynamics . In addition to effects on cell body were extracted for 3 – 5 min with 1 % Triton X - 100 in PEM buffer ( 100 translocation , actinplaysaroleinestablishingandmain - mM PIPES - KOH [ pH 6 . 9 ] , 1 mM MgCl 2 , and 1 mM EGTA ) containing taining cell polarity . Although we did not investigate cell 2 (cid:3) M phalloidin , washed with PEM , fixed with 2 % glutaraldehyde polarity in detail , we noticed that cells with an excess in 0 . 1 M Na - cacodilate ( pH 7 . 3 ) , and processed for electron micros - copy as described ( Svitkina and Borisy , 1998 ) . of Ena / VASP proteins are less polarized than control Cell520 Quantitation of Filament Length , Branching , Samples of the starting mixture , supernatant , and washed beads were mixed with 5X sample buffer and boiled for 5 min , and equiva - and Incident Angle Platinum replica electron micrographs from ATP recovery experi - lent amounts were run on a 10 % SDS - PAGE gel . The gel was trans - ferred and processed for Western blotting using standard condi - ment were coded by number and quantitated blindly . Filament lengths were quantified in a 330 nm high by 660 nm wide image at tions . VASP was detected with rabbit polyclonal antibody ( 2010 ; 1 : 5000 dilution ) , and capping protein (cid:9) 2 subunit was detected by a the leading edge of a lamellipodia by an observer blind to the real identityofthecellusingIPLabssoftware ( Scanalytics ) . Thefollowing mouse monoclonal antibody ( 3F2 . 3 ; 1 : 100 dilution ) . criteria were applied to filament length measurements : ( 1 ) the fila - ment had to have a clearly discernable end oriented approximately Spectrin - F Actin Seeded Actin Polymerization Assay towardtheleadingedge ; ( 2 ) thefilamentwastracedfromthebarbed Spectrin - F actin seeds were prepared from human erythrocytes as end until it emerged from a mother filament or was lost in the net - described ( DiNubile et al . , 1995 ) . Actin was purified from chicken work ; and ( 3 ) filaments that extended beyond the field of view were pectoral muscle as described ( Spudich and Watt , 1971 ) . Pyrene excluded . Branchingfrequencywasquantifiedbycountingthenum - actin was prepared and used as described ( Cooper et al . , 1983 ) . ber of stereotypical 70 (cid:5) Y - branches in a 330 nm by 330 nm image Actinpolymerizationfromspectrin - Factinseedswasassayedusing at the leading edge . To correct for differences in filament density , afinalactinconcentrationof2 (cid:3) Mcontaining0 . 1 (cid:3) Mpyrene - labeled the number of branches per image was divided by the total length actin as a tracer for polymerization . Actin assembly was nucleated of all visible filaments in the image to derive a normalized branches / from spectrin - F actin seeds ( 0 . 14 nM ) in the presence or absence (cid:3) m measurement . To determine the incident angle of F actin , plati - of 5 nM capping protein and varying amounts of VASP in MKEI num replica electron micrographs of cells undergoing normal trans - buffer ( 20 mM imidazole [ pH 7 . 0 ] , 100 mM KCl , 2 mM MgCl 2 , and 1 location were processed by Radon transformation as described mM EGTA ) . Fluorescence of pyrene - actin ( excitation at 365 nm and ( Maly and Borisy , 2001 ) , and the modal incidence angles were ex - emission at 386 nm ) was monitored over 300 – 600 s at 25 (cid:5) C . The tracted from the transformations of individual images . delay between the mixing of reactants and the commencement of fluorescence measurements was less than 10 s . Immunofluorescence Microscopy Acknowledgments Immunofluorescence microscopy was performed as described ( Bear et al . , 2000 ) . The N - WASP staining was done with an affinity - We thank Gretchen Baltus , Amber Murray , and Christy Canida for purified rabbit polyclonal antibody used at a dilution of 1 : 1000 . This excellent technical support and Douglas Rubinson for help with antibodywas akindgift fromR . RohatgiandM . Kirschner . Cortactin statistical analysis . We thank R . Rohatgi and M . Kirschner for the staining was done with a mouse monoclonal antibody ( 4F11 , 1 : 100 kind gift of the N - WASP antibody . We thank Sally Zigmond , Doug dilution ; Upstate Biotechnology ) . Lauffenburger , and Velia Fowler for helpful suggestions and com - ments . Work from D . A . S . and J . A . C . was supported by National Preparation of Purified VASP and Capping Protein Institutes of Health grant GM38542 to J . A . C . Work from T . M . S . , VASPwaspurified usingthebaculovirussystem asdescribed ( Lam - I . V . M . , O . Y . C . , and G . G . B . was supported by NIH grant GM62431 to brechts et al . , 2000 ) . VASP was stored at 4 (cid:5) C and always used G . G . B . J . J . L . is supported by the Anna Fuller Molecular Oncology within one month of purification . Mouse capping protein ( (cid:10) 1 (cid:9) 2 ) was Fund . J . E . B . issupportedbyaSpecialFellowawardfromtheLeuke - expressed , purified , and stored as in Palmgren et al . ( 2001 ) . mia and Lymphoma Society ( 3476 - 02 ) . This work was supported by NIHGlueGrantonCellMigrationIU54GM63126 ( G . G . B . andF . B . G . ) , Actin Filament Capture Assay by NIH grant GM58801 , by funds from Merck & Co . , and by the WM Paramagneticpolystyrenebeads ( M - 280tosylactivatedDynabeads , Keck Distinguished Young Scholar Award to F . B . G . Dynal Biotech ) were coated to saturation with GST - FPPPP fusion protein or poly - L - lysine ( Sigma - Aldrich ) according to the manufac - Received : August 3 , 2001 turer’s instructions . The GST - FPPPP fusion protein , which consists Revised : April 3 , 2002 of GST fused to residues 272 – 361 from ActA , was expressed using pGEX - 2TKandpurifiedfromDH5 (cid:10) E . coli accordingtothemanufac - References turer’s protocol ( Amersham Pharmacia ) . We mixed 100 (cid:3) l of a 50 % slurry of GST - FPPPP beads with purified VASP ( 25 (cid:3) g ) in PBS , Bachmann , C . , Fischer , L . , Walter , U . , and Reinhard , M . ( 1999 ) . The incubated for 30 min , and then washed three times with F buffer ( 5 EVH2 domain of the vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein medi - mM Tris - HCl [ pH 8 ] , 50 mM KCl , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 2 mM EGTA , 1 % ates tetramerization , F - actin binding , and actin bundle formation . sucrose ) . Fluorescent actin filaments were polymerized from 4 (cid:3) M J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 23549 – 23557 . of either Alexa 488 - labeled monomers ( Molecular Probes ) or a 1 : 4 Bailly , M . , Yan , L . , Whitesides , G . M . , Condeelis , J . S . , and Segall , mixture of labeled : unlabeled monomers ( Cytoskeleton ) in G buffer J . E . ( 1998 ) . Regulation of protrusion shape and adhesion to the ( 5 mM Tris - HCl [ pH 8 ] , 0 . 2 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM DTT , 0 . 2 mM ATP , substratumduringchemotacticresponsesofmammaliancarcinoma 10 % sucrose ) by adding 1 / 10 volume 10X KME ( 500 mM KCl , 10 cells . Exp . Cell Res . 241 , 285 – 299 . mM MgCl 2 , 10 mM EGTA , 20 mM Tris - HCl [ pH 8 ] ) . Identical results were observed with either preparation . Filaments were stabilized Bear , J . E . , Loureiro , J . J . , Libova , I . , Fassler , R . , Wehland , J . , and with 10 (cid:3) M phalloidin ( Molecular Probes ) . After phalloidin stabiliza - Gertler , F . B . ( 2000 ) . NegativeregulationoffibroblastmotilitybyEna / tion , filaments were incubated for 10 min with or without purified VASP proteins . Cell 101 , 717 – 728 . capping protein ( 10 or 100 nM ) . To test for filament capture , beads Bear , J . E . , Krause , M . , and Gertler , F . B . ( 2001 ) . Regulating cellular wereaddedtofilamentsandincubatedfor10min . Thebead / filament actin assembly . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 13 , 158 – 166 . mixture was transferred to a microscope slide resting on a magnet Borisy , G . G . , and Svitkina , T . M . ( 2000 ) . Actin machinery : pushing using a wide - bore tip to avoid filament shearing . The beads were the envelope . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 , 104 – 112 . held in place for two washes with 100 volumes of F buffer . Washed Boujemaa - Paterski , R . , Gouin , E . , Hansen , G . , Samarin , S . , LeClainche , bead / filament complexes were mounted by adding 25 (cid:3) l of 37 (cid:5) C C . , Didry , D . , Dehoux , P . , Cossart , P . , Kocks , C . , Carlier , M . F . , and low - melting point agarose ( 0 . 5 % in F buffer ) and then positioning a Pantaloni , D . ( 2001 ) . Listeria protein ActA mimics WASp family pro - coverslip over the beads . The agarose was allowed to harden at 4 (cid:5) C teins : itactivatesfilamentbarbedendbranchingbyArp2 / 3complex . for 30 min . Samples were documented by fluorescence microscopy Biochemistry 40 , 11390 – 11404 . using a Deltavision microscope system . Brown , S . S . , and Spudich , J . A . ( 1979 ) . Nucleation of polar actin filament assembly by a positively charged surface . J . Cell Biol . 80 , VASP / CapZ Pull - Down Experiment 499 – 504 . GST - FPPPP / VASP beads were prepared as described above and mixed with 100 nM capping protein for 30 min in the presence of 4 Cameron , L . A . , Giardini , P . A . , Soo , F . S . , and Theriot , J . A . ( 2000 ) . Secrets of actin - based motility revealed by a bacterial pathogen . (cid:3) M BSA . Beads were separated from supernatant using a magnetic capture stand ( Dynal Biotech ) and then washed twice with F buffer . Nat Rev Mol . Cell . Biol . 1 , 110 – 119 . Ena / VASP Proteins in Lamellipodia 521 Carl , U . D . , Pollmann , M . , Orr , E . , Gertler , F . B . , Chakraborty , T . , and ity : stop and go with Ena / VASP proteins . Trends Biochem . Sci . 26 , 243 – 249 . Wehland , J . ( 1999 ) . Aromatic and basic residues within the EVH1 domain of VASP specify its interaction with proline - rich ligands . Rottner , K . , Behrendt , B . , Small , J . V . , and Wehland , J . ( 1999 ) . VASP Curr . Biol . 9 , 715 – 718 . dynamics during lamellipodia protrusion . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 321 – 322 . Cooper , J . A . ( 1987 ) . Effects of cytochalasin and phalloidin on actin . Schafer , D . A . , Jennings , P . B . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 1996 ) . Dynamics of J . Cell Biol . 105 , 1473 – 1478 . cappingproteinandactinassemblyinvitro : uncappingbarbedends by polyphosphoinositides . J . Cell Biol . 135 , 169 – 179 . Cooper , J . A . , Walker , S . B . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1983 ) . Pyrene actin : documentation of the validity of a sensitive assay for actin polymer - Skoble , J . , Auerbuch , V . , Goley , E . D . , Welch , M . D . , and Portnoy , ization . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 4 , 253 – 262 . D . A . ( 2001 ) . Pivotal role of VASP in Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin nucleation , actin branch - formation , and Listeria monocytogenes DiNubile , M . J . , Cassimeris , L . , Joyce , M . , and Zigmond , S . H . ( 1995 ) . motility . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 89 – 100 . Actin filament barbed - end capping activity in neutrophil lysates : the role of capping protein - beta 2 . Mol . Biol . Cell 6 , 1659 – 1671 . Smalheiser , N . R . ( 1991 ) . Role of laminin in stimulating rapid - onset neurites in NG108 – 15 cells : relative contribution of attachment and Gertler , F . B . , Niebuhr , K . , Reinhard , M . , Wehland , J . , and Soriano , motility responses . Brain Res . Dev . Brain Res . 62 , 81 – 89 . P . ( 1996 ) . Mena , a relativeof VASPand Drosophila Enabled , isimpli - cated in the control of microfilament dynamics . Cell 87 , 227 – 239 . Small , J . V . , Isenberg , G . , and Celis , J . E . ( 1978 ) . Polarity of actin at the leading edge of cultured cells . Nature 272 , 638 – 639 . Hinz , B . , Alt , W . , Johnen , C . , Herzog , V . , and Kaiser , H . W . ( 1999 ) . Spudich , J . A . , and Watt , S . ( 1971 ) . The regulation of rabbit skeletal Quantifying lamella dynamics of cultured cells by SACED , a new muscle contraction . I . Biochemical studies of the interaction of the computer - assisted motion analysis . Exp . Cell Res . 251 , 234 – 243 . tropomyosin - troponin complex with actin and the proteolytic frag - Huttelmaier , S . , Harbeck , B . , Steffens , O . , Messerschmidt , T . , Illen - ments of myosin . J . Biol . Chem . 246 , 4866 – 4871 . berger , S . , and Jockusch , B . M . ( 1999 ) . Characterization of the actin Svitkina , T . M . , andBorisy , G . G . ( 1998 ) . Correlativelight and electron binding properties of the vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein microscopy ofthe cytoskeleton of culturedcells . Methods Enzymol . VASP . FEBS Lett . 451 , 68 – 74 . 298 , 570 – 592 . Lambrechts , A . , Kwiatkowski , A . V . , Lanier , L . M . , Bear , J . E . , Vande - Svitkina , T . M . , Neyfakh , A . A . , Jr . , and Bershadsky , A . D . ( 1986 ) . Actin kerckhove , J . , Ampe , C . , and Gertler , F . B . ( 2000 ) . cAMP - dependent cytoskeleton of spread fibroblasts appears to assemble at the cell protein kinase phosphorylation of EVL , a Mena / VASP relative , regu - edges . J . Cell Sci . 82 , 235 – 248 . lates its interaction with actin and SH3 domains . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 36143 – 36151 . Lasa , I . , Gouin , E . , Goethals , M . , Vancompernolle , K . , David , V . , Vandekerckhove , J . , and Cossart , P . ( 1997 ) . Identification of two regions inthe N - terminaldomain ofActA involvedin theactin comet tail formation by Listeria monocytogenes . EMBO J . 16 , 1531 – 1540 . Lauffenburger , D . A . , andHorwitz , A . F . ( 1996 ) . Cellmigration : aphysi - cally integrated molecular process . Cell 84 , 359 – 369 . Maly , I . V . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2001 ) . Self - organization of a propulsive actin network as an evolutionary process . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 11324 – 11329 . Mogilner , A . , and Oster , G . ( 1996 ) . Cell motility driven by actin poly - merization . Biophys . J . 71 , 3030 – 3045 . Nakagawa , H . , Miki , H . , Ito , M . , Ohashi , K . , Takenawa , T . , and Miya - moto , S . ( 2001 ) . N - WASP , WAVE and Mena play different roles in the organization of actin cytoskeleton in lamellipodia . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 1555 – 1565 . Niebuhr , K . , Ebel , F . , Frank , R . , Reinhard , M . , Domann , E . , Carl , U . D . , Walter , U . , Gertler , F . B . , Wehland , J . , and Chakraborty , T . ( 1997 ) . A novel proline - rich motif present in ActA of Listeria monocytogenes andcytoskeletalproteinsistheligandfortheEVH1domain , aprotein module present in the Ena / VASP family . EMBO J . 16 , 5433 – 5444 . Palmgren , S . , Ojala , P . J . , Wear , M . A . , Cooper , J . A . , andLappalainen , P . ( 2001 ) . InteractionswithPIP2 , ADP - actinmonomers , andcapping protein regulate the activity and localization of yeast twinfilin . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 251 – 260 . Pantaloni , D . , Le Clainche , C . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 2001 ) . Mechanism of actin - based motility . Science 292 , 1502 – 1506 . Pistor , S . , Chakraborty , T . , Niebuhr , K . , Domann , E . , and Wehland , J . ( 1994 ) . The ActA protein of Listeria monocytogenes acts as a nucleator inducing reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton . EMBO J . 13 , 758 – 763 . Pollard , T . D . , Blanchoin , L . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2000 ) . Molecular mechanismscontrollingactinfilamentdynamicsinnonmusclecells . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 29 , 545 – 576 . Raucher , D . , andSheetz , M . P . ( 2000 ) . Cellspreadingandlamellipod - ial extension rate is regulated by membrane tension . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 127 – 136 . Reinhard , M . , Halbrugge , M . , Scheer , U . , Wiegand , C . , Jockusch , B . M . , and Walter , U . ( 1992 ) . The 46 / 50 kDa phosphoprotein VASP purified from human platelets is a novel protein associated with actin filaments and focal contacts . EMBO J . 11 , 2063 – 2070 . Reinhard , M . , Jarchau , T . , and Walter , U . ( 2001 ) . Actin - based motil -