C OMPUTATIONAL S TORYTELLING AND E MOTIONS : A S URVEY A P REPRINT Yusuke Mori 1 Hiroaki Yamane 2 , 1 Yusuke Mukuta 1 , 2 Tatsuya Harada 1 , 2 1 The University of Tokyo , 2 RIKEN { mori , yamane , mukuta , harada } @ mi . t . u - tokyo . ac . jp May 24 , 2022 A BSTRACT Storytelling has always been vital for human nature . From ancient times , humans have used stories for several objectives including entertainment , advertisement , and education . Various analyses have been conducted by researchers and creators to determine the way of producing good stories . The deep relationship between stories and emotions is a prime example . With the advancement in deep learning technology , computers are expected to understand and generate stories . This survey paper is intended to summarize and further contribute to the development of research being conducted on the relationship between stories and emotions . We believe creativity research is not to replace humans with computers , but to ﬁnd a way of collaboration between humans and computers to enhance the creativity . With the intention of creating a new intersection between computational storytelling research and human creative writing , we introduced creative techniques used by professional storytellers . Keywords Storytelling · Story Completion · Story Understanding · Creative Support · Natural Language Processing 1 Introduction What makes a story a story ? In this survey , we focus on “emotion” as an important keyword to get to the root of human creativity and to imitate and support it through computers . The relationship between stories and emotions has been an essential part of research in the ﬁeld of humanities , representing the cognitive and affective science of literature [ Hogan , 2006 , Pandit and Hogan , 2006 , Johnson - Laird and Oatley , 2008 , Hogan , 2010 , 2019 ] . For creators , the practical knowledge of creative techniques stresses on the importance of being conscious of readers’ emotions in order to satisfy them . These ﬁndings have been introduced in computational linguistics ( CL ) , Natural Language Processing ( NLP ) , and Digital Humanities ( DH ) . For example , in their book “The Emotion Thesaurus : A Writer’s Guide to Character Expression , ” Ackerman and Puglisi [ 2012 ] insisted that a key component of every character is emotion . Referring to this , Kim and Klinger [ 2019a ] analyzed how emotions are expressed non - verbally in a corpus of fan ﬁction short stories . Lugmayr et al . [ 2017 ] insisted that a fundamental aspect of storytelling is the emotion , that allows the story to evoke cognitive aspects in its audience . With regard to serious storytelling , they referred to Denning’s book [ Denning , 2005 ] , which stated that having no emotional elements in presentations and applications can cause a failure in project funding . Therefore , numerous efforts have been made to disclose the mystery of the relationship between emotions and stories [ Anderson and McMaster , 1982 , Strapparava and Mihalcea , 2008 , Abdul - Mageed and Ungar , 2017 , Kim and Klinger , 2018 , 2019b , Zad and Finlayson , 2020 ] . Mohammad [ 2012a ] showed that sentiment analysis could be used along with effective visualizations to quantify and track emotions in mails and books . Referring to the talk by Kurt Vonnegut [ Vonnegut , 1995 ] , a famous American writer , attempts were made to classify stories by drawing their “emotional arcs” [ Reagan et al . , 2016 , Chu and Roy , 2017 , Somasundaran et al . , 2020 , Del Vecchio et al . , 2020 ] . In Figure 1 , we show an example of emotional arc . Characters and their relationship are considered as essential for literary analysis [ Bamman et al . , 2014 , Vala et al . , 2015 , Iyyer et al . , 2016 , Chaturvedi et al . , 2017a ] . In our previous work [ Mori et al . , 2019a ] , we investigated whether the emotional ﬂow of a story is useful in predicting the reader’s interest . Moreover , there are some works that have tried to a r X i v : 2205 . 10967v1 [ c s . C L ] 23 M a y 2022 Computational Storytelling and Emotions : A Survey A P REPRINT Figure 1 : A representative emotional arc , called “Man In Hole . ” It starts a little above average . Somebody gets into trouble and gets out of it . This is a reproduction of a diagram drawn by Vonnegut [ 1995 ] . control story generation by considering emotions [ Chandu et al . , 2019 , Luo et al . , 2019 , Brahman and Chaturvedi , 2020 , Dathathri et al . , 2020 , Xu et al . , 2020 ] . There are various terms which are interchangeably used with “emotion , ” such as sentiment , feeling , and affect . Furthermore , the ﬁeld of NLP uses “sentiment analysis” and “emotion analysis” differently . Referring to [ Mayer et al . , 2008 , Liu , 2015 ] , Kim and Klinger [ 2019c ] deﬁned emotion and sentiment as follows : • Emotion : an integrated feeling state involving physiological changes , motor - preparedness , cognition about action , and inner experiences that emerges from an appraisal of the self or situation . • Sentiment : positive or negative feeling underlying an opinion . This deﬁnition is followed in this survey , but for simplicity , and unless otherwise noted , the two terms are used interchangeably as follows ; “sentiment” refers to the positive - negative emotion axis ( i . e . , 1 - dimensional expression ) , while “emotion” refers to the more diverse range of emotions . In this paper , we discuss the results of our survey , conducted to verify the relationship between stories and emotions . Here , we introduce some remarkable recent survey papers on related topics . Alhussain and Azmi [ 2021 ] surveyed on automatic story generation , especially focusing on non - interactive textual stories . They introduced three groups of such models : the structural models , planning - based models , and machine learning models . In their survey , they introduced MEXICA [ Pérez y Pérez and Sharples , 2001 ] , MINSTREL [ Turner , 1993 , 1994 ] , and the analysis of emotional ﬂow [ Mori et al . , 2019a ] as the stream of understanding and generating stories that incorporate emotions . Bae et al . [ 2021 ] conducted a preliminary survey on story interestingness , setting “how to measure story interestingness” as the research question . They insisted that there are two factors involved : the cognitive factor and the emotional factor . Li et al . [ 2022 ] focused on the paradigm of pretrained language models ( PLMs ) and its application in text generation . They discussed the key factors for getting a desirable output . Our survey is novel because in terms of creative writing support we include the ﬁndings of professional creative writers . Furthermore , computational story understanding and generation is an interdisciplinary ﬁeld between humanities and the information sciences . Although this research is mainly based in the ﬁeld of information science , it has a viewpoint associated with applications in humanities and practical knowledge to this ﬁeld . Recent ﬁndings in neuroscience that examine the relationship between emotion and story is also presented . Although emotions are handled in various ways in story comprehension and generation , a more appropriate way to handle emotions in light of the latest ﬁndings is also presented in this study . 2 Computational Storytelling and Emotions : A Survey A P REPRINT Figure 2 : Schematic diagram of story generation through human - computer interaction . Figure 2 shows a schematic example of human - computer interactive story generation . In this system , the computer edits the text written by the human and then the human re - edits it to create the ﬁnal version . To achieve this , computers are required to have various abilities such as understanding context , generating appropriate sentences , and explaining why the editing is done . Now , our research question is ; how can computers understand human creativity and enhance it with machine learning technologies ? The main contributions of our survey are as follows : • We conducted our survey on the various elements of a story with particular attention to emotion . With the intention of creating a new intersection between computational storytelling research and human creative writing , we introduced creative techniques used by professional storytellers and examined how emotions are treated in these techniques . • For a computer to support human creativity , it is necessary to solve the integrated task of understanding the story that a human is trying to write and supplementing it with appropriate story generation . This survey was conducted with the intention to accelerate the study on supporting creative writing based on research on story understanding and generation . Note that our main focus is to understand human creativity with computers and to enhance it with machine learning technologies . We believe creativity research is not about replacing humans with computers but about ﬁnding a way in which humans and computers can collaborate to enhance creativity . We hope this survey on stories and emotions will serve as a material to proceed such research . 2 Structure of this Paper As a guide to look through our survey , we brieﬂy describe the signiﬁcance of each section . In Section 3 we introduce how professional storytellers consider the importance of emotions . For concrete examples , we cite some screenwriting techniques and show the relationship between story structure and emotions . 3 Computational Storytelling and Emotions : A Survey A P REPRINT Section 4 introduces the research on the relationship between stories and emotions since the 1980s , mainly focusing on three popular views of emotions in computational analysis . In Section 5 , we outline recent rapid developments in language models . We present research on story generation ; and also discuss text generation . This is to characterize story generation research , which can serve as a reference for future application in other domains to stories . In Section 6 , we introduce the tasks and methods useful in creative support . From the viewpoint of human story writing assistance , we believe in the possibility of a story completion approach . Furthermore , we widen our survey to affective neuroscience in Section 7 . We focus on emotions through the viewpoint of recent advances in affective neuroscience , to introduce an alternative perspective to the three popular views of emotions . In this paper , we focus on emotion as an important element in a story ; however , emotion alone does not make a story . Thus , in Section 8 , we address other elements in a story and discuss their integration with research on emotion and their future direction . Finally , we conclude our survey in Section 9 . 3 Emotion in Screenwriting Theories In research on the creation / co - creation of stories , the ﬁndings of those who actually create stories are helpful . A representative example is “emotional arcs . ” This term is well - known to have been introduced by the American writer , Vonnegut [ 1995 ] . Based on the idea , Reagan et al . [ 2016 ] studied how stories could be clustered . In this section , we survey some practical creative writing techniques which we believe , will be helpful in conducting research on creative assistance . Theories about creating stories emphasize the importance of being conscious of readers’ emotions in order to satisfy them . In particular , theories of screenplay writing are often considered to be practical , even by novelists [ Brody , 2018 ] . This can be attributed to the fact that ﬁlms require more people and money than novels , and have a restriction on how long a movie can run . Thus , there is a stronger need and merit to theorize how to “construct a structure of stories that sells well” than novels . Our target is a novel , a story written in a text . We are aware that creating a novel is not the same as creating a ﬁlm script . However , ﬁlm screenplay writing has indeed been introduced into the practice of novelists and has proven useful in these different media . As a speciﬁc example , “SAVE THE CAT ! ” [ Snyder , 2005 ] , a technique originally proposed for screenplay writing , has been systematically applied to novel writing [ Brody , 2018 ] . 1 One of the most famous screenplay structures is the “three - act structure” proposed by Field [ 2006 ] . The ﬁrst act sets up the situation , the second depicts the conﬂicts of the characters , and the third depicts the resolution . The entire screenplay is estimated to be 120 pages distributed as 30 , 60 , and 30 pages . The second act is particularly long ; therefore , it is divided into the ﬁrst and second halves with a central point . Figure 3 shows the overview of the three - act structure . According to Gulino [ 2004 , 2019 ] , “eight sequences” were proposed by Frank Daniel . While teaching screenwriting to students based on the three - act structure , he advised the students who were worried that each act was too long for the screenplay , to divide it into eight sequences of 15 pages each . Figure 3shows the overview of this approach . This approach divides a story into eight equal lengths . Gulino [ 2004 ] explained that another reason for the number of sequences being eight was the physical limitation . When movies were shown on ﬁlms , a 120 - minute movie was divided into eight reels ( rolls of ﬁlm ) due to capacity constraints . At 18 frames per second , the reels could contain between 10 and 15 minutes . The audience had to wait during the change of reel from the ﬁnished one to the next one by the projectionist . Filmmakers had to deal with this interval . Each reel needed its role in the movie , therefore , a 120 - minute movie came to have eight meaningful units . Conversely , it can be said that physical constraint was one of the causes that shaped the composition of the ﬁlm . Another well - known theory about story structure is “Blake Snyder Beat Sheet” ( BS2 ) , introduced by “SAVE THE CAT ! ” by Snyder [ 2005 ] . While the author appreciated that Field’s book is helpful for screenwriters , he proposed a new structure with points in between , as the space between acts is too vast for a three - act structure . This is the division of a story into 15 “beats , ” and is widely used . The overview of the BS2 is shown in Table 1 . 1 Tetsuro Shimauchi , who translated [ Iglesias , 2005 ] and [ Brody , 2018 ] to Japanese , noted in his afterword as the translator in [ Brody , 2018 ] that the response from those who write novels has been more noticeable than those who write screenplays , even though [ Iglesias , 2005 ] is a book on screenwriting . 4 Computational Storytelling and Emotions : A Survey A P REPRINT Three - Act Structure Mid Point ACT 1 ACT 2 ACT 3 Beginning Confrontation Resolution 30 pages 60 pages 30 pages Eight Sequences Sequence A B C D E F G H Example : “Toy Story” ( 1995 ) The analysis was conducted by ( Gulino , 2004 ) . The Unwanted Present Falling With Style Buzz Takes A Hit Falling Without Style Double Prizes at Pizza Planet The Big One “The Toys Are Alive ! ” A Finale That Soars Figure 3 : The overview of the Three - Act Structure and Eight Sequences . As an example of the latter , we used the analysis of “Toy Story” ( 1995 ) conducted by Gulino [ 2004 ] . Table 1 : The overview of the Blake Snyder Beat Sheet . Beat Pages 1 Opening Image 1 2 Theme Stated 5 3 Set - up 1 - 10 4 Catalyst 12 5 Debate 12 - 25 6 Break into Two 25 7 Sub Plot 30 8 Fun and Games 30 - 55 9 Midpoint 55 10 Bad Guys Close In 55 - 75 11 All Is Lost 75 12 Dark Night of the Soul 75 - 85 13 Break into Three 85 14 Finale 85 - 110 15 Final Image 110 Iglesias [ 2005 ] insisted the importance to distinguish between two types of emotions – character emotions and reader emotions . He gave the example of a comedy , where characters are stressed , but the viewers laugh at them . In a thriller , the characters may be calm and unaware , while the viewers may be on the edge of their seats because of a threat that the character is not aware of . He warned that screenwriters , who have a general inkling that emotions are important in a screenplay , put too much attention on the emotions of their characters . He wrote , “Whether your character cries or not is not as important as whether the reader cries . ” 5 Computational Storytelling and Emotions : A Survey A P REPRINT Table 2 : The three popular viewpoints of emotions used in emotion analysis of text . Theory Type Features Theory of basic emotions by Ekman [ 1993 ] Categorical Emotions are universal and innate because they are perceived through facial expressions in the same way regardless of what culture one belongs to . There are six emotions : anger , disgust , fear , happiness , sadness , and surprise . Wheel of emotions by Plutchik [ 1980 ] Categorical A hybrid model that arranges emotions into concentric circles with the inner being the basic and the outer being more complex emotions . Circumplex model of affect by Russell [ 1980 ] Dimensions Emotions are represented as vectors in a two - dimensional space and can be explained by a combination of two independent axes , Valence and Arousal . Valence means pleasantness – unpleasantness and Arousal means calmness – excitement . They are called “core affect” . As an extension , a third axis called Dominance can be added for a three - dimensional representation [ Russell and Mehra - bian , 1977 ] . Dominance means perceived control ranging from submissive to dominant . 4 Story Understanding and Emotions In this section , we introduce the development of research in the ﬁeld of story understanding , particularly in terms of understanding emotions . We also introduce datasets that handle the relationship between text and emotion and how they have been constructed with different intentions . 4 . 1 Understanding Emotion in Stories and Narratives A story consists of three elements – character , event , and setting ( i . e . , location and temporal setting ) [ Park et al . , 2020 ] . At the intersection of NLP and literary analysis , various studies have been conducted on these factors . Some analyze stories from the importance of characters and their relationships [ Bamman et al . , 2013 , 2014 , Massey et al . , 2015 , Vala et al . , 2015 , Chaturvedi et al . , 2016 , Srivastava et al . , 2016 ] . To better comprehend stories , some studies considered stories to be collections of events . Using ﬁlm scripts as a departure point for more general narrative research , Murtagh et al . [ 2009 ] analyzed their style and structure . They quantiﬁed various central perspectives , which have been discussed in McKee’s book , “Story” [ McKee , 1997 ] . Referring to The Narrative Cloze Test [ Chambers and Jurafsky , 2008 ] as a typical example of story understanding task considering events , Mostafazadeh et al . [ 2016 ] proposed the Story Cloze Test ( SCT ) as a more difﬁcult task . SCT presents four sentences and the last sentence is excluded from a story composed of ﬁve sentences . The system must select an appropriate sentence from two choices that complement the missing last sentence . In addition to the task , the authors released a large - scale story corpus named ROCStories , which is a collection of non - ﬁctional daily - life stories written by hundreds of workers of Amazon Mechanical Turk . The ﬁve - sentence stories contained varied common - sense knowledge . Park et al . [ 2020 ] analyzed emotions in a story text using an emotion embedding model . In recent years , emotion estimation has been actively studied [ Park et al . , 2019 , Demszky et al . , 2020 ] using unsupervised pre - trained large neural models such as BERT [ Devlin et al . , 2019 ] . The number of characters in a story is not always one ( protagonist ) and research has been done in relation to this . Winston [ 2011 ] arranged for the simultaneous reading of stories by two separate personas , Dr . Jekyll and Mr . Hyde . Presenting NovelPerspective , a tool to subset digital literature based on the point of view ( POV ) , White et al . [ 2018 ] showed many novels have multiple characters , each with their own storyline . We can refer to them and say that various perspectives should be considered when we consider emotions . The importance of emotions in storytelling has long been pointed out and efforts to verify it using computers can be traced back to the 1980s . The pioneering work was done by Anderson and McMaster [ 1982 ] . 2 Based on the 1 , 000 most frequently used English words for which Heise [ 1965 ] had presented semantic differential factor scores , they reported 2 Alternatively , when Lehnert [ 1981 ] proposed Plot Units , he mentioned the events as positive or negative ; “Events that please” and “Events that displease” , so this may be called the ﬁrst step . 6 Computational Storytelling and Emotions : A Survey A P REPRINT the development of a computer program to assist the analysis and modeling of emotional tone in text by identifying those words in a passage of discourse . Emotion analysis in text is closely related to lexicons annotated with emotions , and in these annotations and analyses , psychological ﬁndings have been referred . Kim and Klinger [ 2019c ] stated that there are three theories of emotions popular in computational analysis of emotions : Ekman’s theory of basic emotions [ Ekman , 1993 ] , Plutchik’s wheel of emotion [ Plutchik , 1980 ] , and Russell’s circumplex model [ Russell , 1980 ] . 3 These three views can be divided into categorical and dimensional emotions [ Buechel and Hahn , 2017a , Hakak et al . , 2017 ] : Categorical emotions are represented by Ekman’s basic emotions and Plutchik’s wheel of emotions . Dimensional emotions are represented by Russell’s circumplex model . Categorical emotion theories divide emotions into discrete emotion labels . However , the dimensional emotion theory represents the emotion classes in a dimensional form . We summarize the three theories of emotions in Table 2 . Research on emotion and text strives to better understand human - written texts [ Strapparava and Mihalcea , 2008 , Abdul - Mageed and Ungar , 2017 ] . In the domain of story or narrative , Alm et al . [ 2005 ] provided children’s novels with positive / negative sentiment evaluations and a more complex set of eight classes of emotions based on Ekman’s basic emotions [ Ekman , 1993 ] . To predict emotions using machine learning , they classiﬁed the eight emotions again into three emotional valences : positive , negative , and neutral . Chaturvedi et al . [ 2017b ] proved that by considering emotional movement in a story , models could improve their performance on SCT . Studies have previously investigated the relationship between emotions and stories’ interestingness . As aforementioned in Section 3 , Reagan et al . [ 2016 ] showed that stories collected from Project Gutenberg 4 could be classiﬁed into six styles by considering their emotional arcs ( i . e . , the trajectory of average happiness in a story ) . It has been pointed out that the emotions of a story need to be considered from different perspectives [ Bailey , 1999 , Winston , 2011 , Mori et al . , 2019a ] . Emotions differ depending on the position of the characters , though the emotions of the reader and the characters may not necessarily coincide . For example , the protagonist and the antagonist may have conﬂicting emotions . When the protagonist is in a pinch and depressed , the reader may be excited in anticipation of a subsequent counterattack . In addition , Winston [ 2011 ] , who posited the Strong Story Hypothesis , examined that the interpretation of the story changes depending on the perspective of each reader . Besides through the Strong Story Hypothesis , he also posited the Directed Perception Hypothesis : the mechanisms that enable humans to direct the resources of their perceptual systems to answer questions about real and imagined events account for much of common sense knowledge . Based on these hypotheses , he and his students—the Genesis Group—proposed Genesis , a story understanding system . They used Shakespeare’s “Macbeth” as an example and showed that the Genesis could read patterns such as “vengeance . ” They arranged for the simultaneous reading of stories by two separate personas , which they jocularly named Dr . Jekyll and Mr . Hyde . This showed that the meaning of events in the story changes depending on the perspective . Finally , he insisted that the two hypotheses are inseparable and gathered them in another hypothesis , the Inner Language Hypothesis : human intelligence is enabled by a symbolic inner language faculty whose mechanisms support both story understanding and the querying of perceptual systems . We [ Mori et al . , 2019a ] considered not only positivity and negativity but also more complicated emotions , using two annotation axes—valence and arousal—based on Russell’s circumplex model [ Russell , 1980 ] . Extending the emotional arc , which deals with only one dimension ( positive - negative ) , we proposed an emotional ﬂow that expresses the emotions of a story in two dimensions ( valence and arousal ) , and discussed the inﬂuence of arousal on the interest of the story . The relationship between emotions and stories is important , not only for those two but also for variable aspects . In the context of the story ending generation , we conducted a human evaluation and analyzed the reasons due to which evaluators consider a story good or not [ Mori et al . , 2019b ] . The analysis indicated that human evaluators were conscious of emotions , morals , and common sense when evaluating story endings . Even human - written endings were judged as not appropriate by human evaluators when they were against morals . Hogan [ 2020 ] discussed the strong relationship between ethics and “emotion and narrative” from the perspective of cognitive and affective science of literature . For reference , we would like to touch on research considering reader’s emotions in other text domain like news articles [ Lin et al . , 2007 , Lin et al . , 2008 , Chang et al . , 2015 ] , microblogs [ Tang and Chen , 2012 ] . Lin et al . [ 2007 ] studied the classiﬁcation of news articles into emotions they invoke in their readers . Tang and Chen [ Tang and Chen , 3 Russell noted in his paper that : “While this article was under editorial review , Plutchik ( 1980 ) published a speciﬁc circumplex model of affect and reported previously unpublished data from H . R . Conte’s ( 1975 ) doctoral dissertation supporting the model . Their model is similar , but not identical , to the one proposed here . ” It is so impressive that the theories representing categorical emotions and those representing dimensional emotions were proposed at about the same time . 4 https : / / www . gutenberg . org 7 Computational Storytelling and Emotions : A Survey A P REPRINT 2012 ] focused on a microblog conversation and insisted that the writer of the microblog and the reader who replies to it can both express their emotions . They named the process of changing from writer - emotion to reader - emotion as “a writer - reader emotion transition” , and examined the mined sentiment words . Based on recognizing , reader - emotion is different and maybe more complex than writer - emotion [ Lin et al . , 2008 , Tang and Chen , 2012 ] . Chang et al . [ 2015 ] worked on reader - emotion estimation and on writing assistance using template considering reader - emotion in the news article domain . The research of other domains also inﬂuences our research on stories and we hope this study inﬂuences them in the future . 4 . 2 Datasets of Text and Emotion Many datasets have been proposed to deal with the relationship between text and emotion [ De Bruyne et al . , 2020 ] . There are lexicons that give emotional values to words and others that annotate emotions at the sentence level . As noted in the previous subsection , models of emotion are commonly subdivided into categorical and dimensional ones . Datasets of text with emotion annotation are generally based on these emotional theories . Both the categorical and dimensional text - emotion datasets along with lexicons with emotions are presented below . • Categorical text - emotion datasets : ( children stories ) [ Alm et al . , 2005 ] , DENS [ Liu et al . , 2019 ] , GoEmo - tions [ Demszky et al . , 2020 ] • Dimensional text - emotion datasets : ( Facebook posts ) [ Preo¸tiuc - Pietro et al . , 2016 ] , EmoBank [ Buechel and Hahn , 2017a , b ] , Shared - Character Stories 5 [ Mori et al . , 2019a ] • Lexicons : the General Inquirer [ Stone and Hunt , 1963 ] , LIWC [ Pennebaker et al . , 2001 , Tausczik and Pennebaker , 2010 , Pennebaker et al . ] , ANEW [ Bradley and Lang , 1999 ] , SentiWordNet [ Esuli and Sebastiani , Baccianella et al . , 2010 ] , SenticNet [ Cambria et al . , 2010 , 2020 ] , NRC Hashtag Emotion Lexicon [ Mohammad , 2012b , Mohammad and Kiritchenko , 2015 ] , NRC Valence , Arousal , Dominance Lexicon [ Mohammad , 2018a ] , NRC Affect Intensity Lexicon [ Mohammad , 2018b ] For the three categories in the list above , we will mainly focus here on the ﬁrst two , which are text datasets . Alm et al . [ 2005 ] provided children’s novels with positive and negative sentiment evaluations and a more complex set of eight classes of emotions based on Ekman’s basic emotions [ Ekman , 1993 ] . The goal of their annotation project was set to approximately 185 children’s stories , including Grimms’ , H . C . Andersen’s , and B . Potter’s stories . 6 Liu et al . [ 2019 ] introduced the Dataset for Emotions of Narrative Sequences ( DENS ) for multi - class emotion analysis from long - form narratives in English . DENS was collected from both classic literature available on Project Gutenberg and modern online narratives available on Wattpad , annotated using Amazon Mechanical Turk . The dataset was annotated based on a modiﬁed Plutchik’s wheel of emotions [ Plutchik , 1980 ] . They conducted an initial survey based on 100 stories with a signiﬁcant fraction sampled from the romance genre . They asked readers to identify the major emotion exhibited in each story , from a choice of the original eight primary emotions : joy , sadness , anger , fear , anticipation , surprise , trust , and disgust . They found that readers have signiﬁcant difﬁculty in identifying trust as an emotion associated with romantic stories . They modiﬁed the annotation scheme by removing Trust and adding Love . They also added the Neutral category to denote passages that do not exhibit any emotional content . The ﬁnal annotation categories for DENS were : joy , sadness , anger , fear , anticipation , surprise , love , disgust , and neutral . Demszky et al . [ 2020 ] proposed GoEmotions , the manually annotated dataset of 58 , 000 English Reddit comments , labeled for 27 emotion categories or neutral , with comments extracted from popular English subreddits . 7 Buechel and Hahn [ 2017a ] explained that dimensional models consider affective states to be best described relative to a small number of independent emotional dimensions ( often two or three ) : Valence ( the degree of pleasantness or unpleasantness of an emotion ) , Arousal ( the degree of calmness or excitement ) , and Dominance ( the degree of perceived control ranging from submissive to dominant ) . 8 Based on this idea , EmoBank is proposed as a text corpus , manually annotated with emotion according to the psychological VAD scheme [ Buechel and Hahn , 2017a , b ] . 9 They claimed that the VAD model has a major advantage as the dimensions are designed as independent , so results remain comparable dimension - wise even in the absence of others ( e . g . , Dominance ) . Based on the ﬁndings of Katz et al . [ 2007 ] that annotations are done in vastly different ways depending on the viewpoint of the annotator , they did a 5 Note that it is part of this dataset that is annotated with emotions . 6 In their paper , they used a preliminary annotated and tie - broken dataset of 1 , 580 sentences , or 22 of Grimms’ tales . 7 https : / / github . com / google - research / google - research / tree / master / goemotions 8 They noted that the Dominance dimension is sometimes omitted ( as we did in [ Mori et al . , 2019a ] ) . 9 https : / / github . com / JULIELab / EmoBank 8 Computational Storytelling and Emotions : A Survey A P REPRINT pilot study [ Buechel and Hahn , 2017b ] on two samples ( movie reviews and a genre - balanced corpus ) to compare the inter - annotator agreement ( IAA ) resulting from different annotation perspectives—the writer’s and the reader’s perspective—in different domains . They had crowd workers annotate each of the 10 , 548 sentences from seven domains : news headlines , blogs , essays , ﬁction , letters , newspapers , and travel guides . They used the modiﬁed 5 - point self - assessment manikin ( SAM ) scales for valence , arousal , and dominance . The original SAM was a 9 - point scale [ Bradley and Lang , 1994 ] , but they changed the number to reduce the cognitive load during decision - making for crowd workers . From a psychological view , they ﬁltered out highly improbable ratings , which were considered as fraudulent responses . Finally , they got a total of 10 , 062 sentences bearing VAD values for both perspectives . We proposed Shared - Character Stories dataset ( 759 stories ) and annotations for its subset ( 100 stories and 623 annotations ) [ Mori et al . , 2019a ] . 10 The annotation was based on the psychological Valence - Arousal ( VA ) model and considered emotional changes in context . We also used SAM , but with the original 9 - point scale . Our annotation procedure included emotions and other aspects— Storyness : 11 Does the text seem to be a story ? Fluency : Does the story read smoothly and ﬂuently ? Consistency : Is the story coherent from sentence to sentence ? Clarity : Is the content of the stories easy to understand ? Meaning : Does the story have a meaning / message ? We also asked crowd workers to tell us how interesting a story is and write a review . This made it possible to analyze the relationship between emotions and interestingness ( and other aspects ) . It is costly and time - consuming to manually annotate various information in texts . Annotating emotions is difﬁcult because “emotions” vary from reader to reader ( whether it is the reader’s own emotions or the understanding of the characters’ emotions ) , making it difﬁcult to determine what is “correct emotion . ” Here we show the examples by Katz et al . [ 2007 ] : while the headline “Hundreds killed in earthquake” would be universally accepted as negative , the headline “Italy defeats France in World Cup Final , ” can be seen as positive , negative , or even neutral depending on the viewpoint of the reader . They insisted that these types of problems made it very difﬁcult for their annotators to provide consistent labels . Therefore , datasets of text and emotion are much smaller than tasks such as translation and summarization . Regarding the relationships between categorical and dimensional emotions , Mohammad [ 2018b ] stated that joy words have lower arousal scores on an average than sad words , which further have lower average arousal scores than anger and fear . Anger and fear have a very similar proﬁle of average VAD scores . Although the traditional basic emotions are an important way of thinking about emotions , the latest affective neuroscience ﬁndings deny that everyone has the same emotions regardless of culture or language . This will be discussed in detail in the Section 7 . We believe that dimensional emotions can be used to handle a wider variety of emotions and we also emphasize the importance of “who is feeling . ” In particular , in the case of stories , the reader’s emotions are important . 5 Recent Progress in Computational Storytelling Although there are still issues to be considered such as coherence in long text generation , a transformer - based approach has shown to be able to generate sentences that look as if they were written by humans [ Otter et al . , 2020 ] . For example , Bena and Kalita [ 2019 ] conﬁrmed that GPT - 2 can generate high - quality poetry and stimulate the reader’s emotions . The importance of emotions in stories is not underestimated and story generation with sentiment control ( posi - tive / negative ) has been exceptionally well studied [ Luo et al . , 2019 , Dathathri et al . , 2020 , Xu et al . , 2020 ] . However , unlike the ﬁeld of dialogue generation , where many studies tackled various emotion control [ Ghosh et al . , 2017 , Zhou et al . , 2018 , Ma et al . , 2020 , Peng et al . , 2020 , Song et al . , 2019 ] , story generation with more variety of emotions was not addressed , up until quite recently . The control of emotions in story generation has focused on how to control positive - negative emotions . Moreover , categorical or dimensional emotions have not been well considered until recently , as per the best of our knowledge . Brahman and Chaturvedi [ 2020 ] did the ﬁrst work on emotion - aware storytelling , which considers the emotional arc of the protagonist . In this section , we introduce the brief history of story generation . Then , we introduce controllable story generation , which is essential for emotion - aware control of storytelling in Subsection . Finally , we discuss the works that tackled the task of evaluating story - like texts . 10 https : / / github . com / mil - tokyo / SharedCharacterStories 11 We deﬁned this as “Storyness” , as stated in [ Mori et al . , 2019a ] , but later an anonymous reviewer of our other paper pointed out that “Storylike - ness” would be more appropriate . We have retained the term “Storyness” because it is used in the published paper and we want to avoid confusion , but we thank the anonymous reviewer for the suggestion . 9 Computational Storytelling and Emotions : A Survey A P REPRINT 5 . 1 Research on Story Generation As we have discussed in the previous section , there is a signiﬁcant relationship between story understanding ( literary analysis ) and emotions . Then , what about story generation ? Klein’s “automatic novel writer” [ Klein et al . , 1973 ] , Meehan’s “TALE - SPIN” [ Meehan , 1976 , 1977 ] Lebowitz’s “Universe” [ Lebowitz , 1984 , 1985 ] , and Turner’s MINSTREL [ Turner , 1993 , 1994 ] are often referred to as early efforts of automatic storytelling . From the perspective of computational creativity , Gervás [ 2009 ] stated that most systems were concerned with telling stories recognized as typical of the particular genre . He insisted the need to adopt evaluation practices introducing some measurement of novelty and quality . McIntyre and Lapata [ 2009 ] published the pioneering work of the data - driven approach on story generation . Until then , story generation systems had relied on a large repository of background knowledge containing detailed information about the story plot and its characters . The information was usually handcrafted , but in their paper , McIntyre & Lapata introduced a data - driven approach . Hermann et al . [ 2015 ] stated two approaches to solving automatic story generation : the symbolic and the neural ( network ) approaches . The above studies can be classiﬁed into these two and it seems that the former approach was taken at ﬁrst . However , the latter became stronger due to the progress of deep learning . Applying machine learning to human story writing assistance is an approach where interesting works were published in recent years [ Roemmele , 2016 , Peng et al . , 2018 , Yao et al . , 2019 , Goldfarb - Tarrant et al . , 2019 ] . Referring to recurrent neural networks ( RNN ) as a promising machine learning framework for language generation tasks , Roemmele [ 2016 ] envisions the task of narrative auto - completion applied to helping an author write a story . Peng et al . [ 2018 ] proposed an analyze - to - generate framework for controllable story generation . They apply two types of generation control : 1 ) ending valence control ( happy or sad ending ) , 2 ) storyline keywords . Hou et al . [ 2019 ] categorized probabilistic story generation models into three categories : Theme - Oriented Models , Storyline - Oriented Models , and Human - Machine Interaction - Oriented Models . These models are different with respect to the user constraint , that is , the context given by a user to guide the generation probability of words . Theme - Oriented Models have static user constraint and no human - computer interaction exists . The representative examples of this category were proposed by Fan et al . [ 2018 ] , Xu et al . [ 2018 ] , Yao et al . [ 2019 ] . Storyline - Oriented Models have static user constraint . The constraint contains complete story plots , such as a set of pictures or an abstract description , or a speciﬁc story that needs an ending . Wang et al . [ 2018 ] , Zhao et al . [ 2018 ] , Wang and Wan [ 2019 ] proposed representative models . Human - Machine Interaction - Oriented Models have dynamic user constraints ; the constraints vary through human - computer interaction . The models proposed by Clark et al . [ 2018a ] , Goldfarb - Tarrant et al . [ 2019 ] were considered representatives . Xu et al . [ 2018 ] focused on the problem of narrative story generation . As a special kind of story generation [ Li et al . , 2013 ] , their problem requires systems to generate a narrative story based on a short description of a scene or an event . They insisted that they eliminate external materials and consider the complete story generation task as McIntyre and Lapata [ 2009 ] . Hierarchical approaches , which divide story generation into some steps have been widely studied [ Fan et al . , 2019 , Yao et al . , 2019 , Goldfarb - Tarrant et al . , 2019 , 2020 ] . Fan et al . [ 2019 ] improved the performance of story generation by separating action and entity generation . Considering “Bilbo Baggins” as an example , they insisted on the difﬁculty of handling characters . They had rare names and were called in different ways : “he” and “hobbit” may refer to the same entity . Yao et al . [ 2019 ] proposed a two - step pipeline for open - domain story generation : 1 ) story planning , which generates a storyline , represented by an ordered list of words , and 2 ) surface realization , which composes a story based on the storyline . They proposed a hierarchical generation framework named plan - and - write that combines storyline planning and surface realization to generate stories from titles . Based on [ Yao et al . , 2019 , Holtzman et al . , 2018 ] , Goldfarb - Tarrant et al . [ 2019 ] presented a neural narrative generation system named Plan - and - Revise in which humans and computers collaborate to generate stories . In terms of the relationship with emotions , we should note that Bailey [ 1999 ] discussed story generation by considering reader emotion . The paper insisted that the reader’s expectations and questions are important for stories . The proposed cycle of story - generation consisted of four steps : 1 ) A search - space of possible next segments was generated from the reader’s knowledge - base . 2 ) The effects of each of these possible next segments , in conjunction with the assertions in the story - so - far , on the patterns of expectations and questions derived by the reader , were analyzed . 3 ) The segment which produced patterns of expectations and questions which best ﬁt the patterns preferred by the abstract narration heuristics was chosen . 4 ) The chosen segment was asserted as the next segment of the story . The reader’s expectations and questions were updated to take account of the new segment . This paper proposed such a cycle ; however the search - space becomes too large , which is a drawback . Time has passed since the cycle was proposed . We believe that it 10 Computational Storytelling and Emotions : A Survey A P REPRINT could be used more effectively . First , we believe that improvements in the performance of computational resources and the development of search methods have made it possible to search a large space more efﬁciently . It is also expected that the development of natural language generation methods improves the quality of the candidates generated and improves the segments of a story as a result of the search . 5 . 2 Controllable Story Generation with Transformers The Transformer [ Vaswani et al . , 2017 ] is the basis of today’s signiﬁcant improvement in NLP , and story generation is no exception . Here we give an overview of the Transformer and focus on efforts to control generation , which is essential in story generation . With the advent of the sequence - to - sequence model ( Seq2seq ) , neural networks have become common as a method for generating natural sentences . Seq2seq was ﬁrst proposed for machine translation [ Sutskever et al . , 2014 ] ; however , it has been widely applied to other tasks in NLP [ Vinyals and Le , 2015 ] . There is a variant of Seq2seq , which uses convolutional neural networks ( CNN ) instead of RNNs [ Gehring et al . , 2017 ] . Then , by replacing the RNNs ( or CNNs ) in Seq2seq with self - attention , Transformer gets several advantages [ ten , Last updated 2020 - 10 - 14 UTC . ] : 1 ) Layer outputs can be calculated in parallel , instead of a series like RNN . 2 ) Distant items can affect each other’s output without passing through many RNN - steps , or convolution layers . 3 ) It can learn long - range dependencies . Unsupervised pre - trained large neural models , such as BERT and GPT - 2 [ Radford et al . , 2019 ] , were proposed using the Transformer architecture , and soon became the mainstream in NLP . These pre - trained models were divided into two : the Transformer Encoder ( bi - directional architecture ) and the Transformer Decoder ( left - to - right architecture ) . In sequence generation , models using left - to - right architecture [ Radford et al . , 2019 , Yang et al . , 2019 ] are more suitable . However , instead of using only one of the Transformer architectures , attempts to create Seq2seq ( Encoder - Decoder ) models using unsupervised pre - trained large neural models for initializing each of the encoders and the decoders are becoming the new mainstream [ Lewis et al . , 2020 , Rothe et al . , 2020 ] . Lewis et al . [ 2020 ] proposed BART , which uses BERT as the encoder and GPT - 2 as the decoder , and it showed high performance in tasks such as summarization . Rothe et al . [ 2020 ] proposed to use pre - trained checkpoints of BERT , GPT - 2 , and RoBERTa for initializing a large Transformer - based Seq2seq model . Raffel et al . [ 2020 ] proposed T5 , which uses task - speciﬁc preﬁxes and can solve many text - to - text tasks in one model . There are also some papers that proposed new variations of Seq2Seq models based on the Transformer [ Qi et al . , 2020 , Roller et al . , 2020 , Zhang et al . , 2020a ] . There are also works for controlling text generation in unsupervised pre - trained large neural models . CTRL [ Keskar et al . , 2019 ] is a pioneering work to control particular aspects of text generation with large - scale language models . Based on the large - scale language model MEGATRON [ Shoeybi et al . , 2020 ] and knowledge - enhanced story generation [ Guan et al . , 2020 ] , MEGATRON - CNTRL [ Xu et al . , 2020 ] was proposed . Rashkin et al . [ 2020 ] proposed the task of outline - conditioned story generation . The input only provides a rough sketch of the plot , so models need to generate a story by interweaving the key points provided in the outline . Inspired by Plug & Play Generative Networks ( PPGN ) [ Nguyen et al . , 2017 ] in computer vision , Dathathri et al . [ 2020 ] proposed Plug - and - Play Language Model ( PPLM ) , an alternative approach for controlled text generation . Their approach uses the attachment models for pre - trained GPT - 2 to control the word probability distribution during the word - by - word generation process . Optimization is performed ex post facto in the activation space , therefore no re - training or ﬁne - tuning of the core language model is needed . Following this trend , methods have been presented to control the output by adding modules for output control without modifying the core model : DELOREAN ( DEcoding for nonmonotonic LOgical REAsoNing ) [ Qin et al . , 2020 ] , Side - tuning [ Zhang et al . , 2020b ] , Auxiliary tuning [ Zeldes et al . , 2020 ] , and GeDi [ Krause et al . , 2021 ] . Qin et al . [ 2020 ] solved two tasks by their proposed DELOREAN : “Abductive Reasoning” and “Counterfactual Reasoning . ” Such controllable story generation is important in terms of taking emotions into account . Story generation with sentiment control ( positive / negative ) has been exceptionally well studied [ Luo et al . , 2019 , Dathathri et al . , 2020 , Xu et al . , 2020 ] . Although ﬁne - grained emotion control of story ending generation was tackled by Luo et al . [ 2019 ] , the control of emotions in story generation has been limited to positive - negative emotions . Categorical or dimensional emotions have not been well considered in this area until recently . Brahman and Chaturvedi [ 2020 ] did the pioneering work on emotion - aware storytelling , which considers the emotional arc of the protagonist . Their study was the ﬁrst to model the emotional trajectory of the protagonist in neural storytelling . There are signiﬁcant differences in their study and ours , with respect to task setting and the approach taken . We believe that the future direction should consider the reader’s emotion . The ultimate goal of story generation is to generate a story that satisﬁes readers as readers’ emotions are of utmost importance as suggested by Mori et al . [ 2019a ] . 11 Computational Storytelling and Emotions : A Survey A P REPRINT As discussed in Subsection 4 . 1 , the application of transformers in story understanding and generation has attracted attention in recent years . Transformer architecture’s impact is not only for story generation itself , but also for the evaluation of generated stories . In the next subsection , we will discuss the recent trend of evaluation metrics . 5 . 3 How to Evaluate Story - like Text Evaluation of the generated stories ( texts ) is also a major topic in story ( text ) generation . Human evaluation is considered to be the gold standard ; however , to evaluate all the texts generated by various models that contain various parameters is impossible . Human evaluation is costly , time - consuming , and dependent on individual abilities . Regarding Amazon Mechanical Turk , which is a crowdsourcing platform , Ippolito et al . [ 2019 ] pointed out that the evaluation by average workers is unreliable in the task of story inﬁlling . They reported that their inserted honeypot question showed that performance on the question was close to random guessing . It was also stated by August et al . [ 2020 ] that human evaluation schemes tend to ignore the difference of perspectives , authors , and readers . Therefore , automatic metrics to evaluate the day - by - day progress of natural language generation is strongly needed . However , traditional metrics have a poor correlation with human evaluation , so proper evaluation of NLG is difﬁcult [ Liu et al . , 2016 , Novikova et al . , 2017 , Chaganty et al . , 2018 , Gatt and Krahmer , 2018 , Hashimoto et al . , 2019 ] . In their survey of deep learning applied story generation , Hou et al . [ 2019 ] insisted that the inconsistency of datasets and the lack of effective automated evaluation metrics make it difﬁcult to strictly compare the advantages and disadvantages of each model . Establishing automatic evaluation for various story generation tasks is so difﬁcult that some papers have referred to this as “future work” [ Chandu et al . , 2019 , Mori et al . , 2019b ] . In the ﬁeld of creative assistance , it would be desirable to have humans participate in interactive evaluation owing to the nature of the task . However , it is impossible in terms of cost and time to have humans evaluate every candidate sentence that is generated . It is important to have an index of “good stories” to narrow down the number to a quantity that can be evaluated by humans . 6 Toward Creative Support Cavazza et al . [ 2009 ] stressed the importance of emotions in an interactive storytelling system . At the time they published the paper , natural language processing was a bottleneck hampering the scalability of interactive storytelling systems . Therfore , they introduced their interaction technique based solely on emotional speech recognition . They have concentrated on a small set of ﬁve categories ( each corresponding to combinations of valence / arousal ) : Negative Active , Negative Passive , Neutral , Positive Active , and Positive Passive . Referring to [ Cavazza et al . , 2009 ] , Chandu et al . [ 2019 ] adapted a personality trait that became crucial to capture and maintain the audience’s interest . They stressed that associating the narrative to a personality instigates a sense of empathy and relatedness . As there were no story datasets in which personality traits were annotated , they used Image Chat , a crowdsourced dataset of human - human conversations about an image with a given personality [ Shuster et al . , 2020 ] . 12 An automatic evaluation of whether a story that reﬂects personality can be generated was left as future work . They also left human evaluation as an issue for the future . From the viewpoint of human story writing assistance , we believe in the possibility of a story completion approach , wherein machines get an input of an unﬁnished story and return it in a completed form . Inspired by SCT , story ending generation ( SEG ) was designed as a subtask of story generation [ Zhao et al . , 2018 ] . Given an incomplete story , where the last sentence is excluded from the original ﬁve - sentence story , the objective of the task is to automatically generate the last sentence of this given incomplete story . Furthermore , based on SEG , Wang and Wan [ 2019 ] proposed a story completion task and investigated the problem of generating the missing story plot at any position in an incomplete story . If a middle sentence is missing , the task becomes more difﬁcult , as the system must capture the context both before and after the missing sentence . In addition to this , research on text inﬁlling has been actively conducted in recent years [ Ippolito et al . , 2019 , Donahue et al . , 2020 , Huang et al . , 2020 , Wang et al . , 2020 ] , especially about stories . Ippolito et al . [ 2019 ] worked on the method to complement the gap between pre and post contexts , which they call story inﬁlling . To understand and generate narrative / story , Wang et al . [ 2020 ] tackled controlled narrative / story generation where the model is guided to generate coherent narratives with user - speciﬁed target endings by interpolation . 13 12 Note : [ Chandu et al . , 2019 ] cited the preprint of [ Shuster et al . , 2020 ] on arXiv , 2018 . 13 Note that the term “story completion” is also used in the area of Psychology [ Clarke et al . , 2019 ] . In this paper , we use the term as its deﬁnition in NLP , NLG . 12 Computational Storytelling and Emotions : A Survey A P REPRINT Roemmele [ 2021 ] focused on an “inspiration through observation” paradigm for human interaction with generated text . Emphasizing “storiability” as a desirable feature of the result , Roemmele [ 2021 ] tackled story inﬁlling task and concluded that automated models can intervene in the writing process without necessarily replacing human effort . We should cite Abductive Reasoning as a task that is close to Story Completion . Bhagavatula et al . [ 2020 ] recently introduced Abductive Reasoning to the area of NLP [ Qin et al . , 2020 ] and explained , “Abductive Reasoning has long been considered to be at the core of understanding narratives [ Hobbs et al . , 1993 ] , reading between the lines [ Norvig , 1987 , Charniak and Shimony , 1990 ] , reasoning about everyday situations [ Peirce et al . , 1937 , Andersen , 1973 ] , and counterfactual reasoning [ Pearl , 2002 , Pearl and Mackenzie , 2018 ] . Despite the broad recognition of its importance , the study of abductive reasoning in narrative text has very rarely appeared in the NLP literature . ” Then , they presented the ﬁrst study that investigates the viability of language - based abductive reasoning . Abductive Reasoning is a task that focuses more on causality and common sense . Although it does not necessarily result in a story by itself , the methods and ﬁndings in this task can be fed back to Story Completion . Below are some recent papers that deal with tasks that are close to ( or almost equal to ) story generation . Zhu et al . [ 2020 ] proposed an attention - based model called ScriptWriter . It is also in the context of story generation but is closer to dialogue generation with narrative consideration . Chakrabarty et al . [ 2020 ] focused on ﬁgurative language such as a simile to give readers new insights and inspirations . In the paper , they tackled the problem of simile generation . Kar et al . [ 2020 ] tackled story characterization from movie plot synopses and multi - view multi - labeled reviews . This study suggested the importance of considering that the different recipients of the story have their perspectives . To develop Human - AI co - creation in the domain of story writing , we should not narrow our perspective to just NLP . Such a system has been studied in the collaborative area of NLP and Human Computer Interaction ( HCI ) . Calderwood et al . [ 2020 ] explored how professional ﬁction writers use generative language models during their writing process . Osone et al . [ 2021 ] proposed “Buncho , ” an AI supported story co - creation system in Japanese . With their system , users can generate titles and synopses from keywords . Yuan et al . [ 2022 ] sought to learn how people might use large neural language models , such as GPT - 3 for creative writing . They proposed Wordcraft , a text editor which makes use of prompting techniques and UX patterns for the collaboration between users and large language models . We believe that the practical application of systems that are useful to creators will require the collective knowledge of various research areas , as well as knowledge outside of research ( knowledge of practitioners ) . 7 Emotions in Cutting - edge Neuroscience As discussed in Subection 4 . 1 , there are three popular views of emotions in computational analysis [ Kim and Klinger , 2019c ] : Ekman’s theory of basic emotions , Plutchik’s wheel of emotion , and Russell’s circumplex model . However , from the viewpoint of affective neuroscience , there is still an ongoing debate about how emotions should be deﬁned [ Sander , 2013 ] . We should mention here that cutting - edge neuroscientiﬁc ﬁndings provide us with a new perspective on emotions . We begin this section by reviewing the classical theories . Darwin , famous for proposing the theory of evolution , is exclusively known for “The Origin of Species” [ Darwin , 1859 ] . He wrote several other books applying the theory . In “The Origin of Man and the Selection of his Sex” [ Darwin , 1871 ] and “On the Facial Expressions of Man and Animals” [ Darwin , 1872 ] , Darwin stated that the criterion for an accurate assessment of emotion is the facial expression . During the 1960s , Tomkins and McCarter [ 1964 ] attempted to verify what they deﬁned as basic emotions by linking them to facial expressions . Their experiment , called the basic emotion method , was designed to measure an ability called emotion recognition . Subjects were shown photographs of faces and asked to judge what emotions were indicated by the facial expressions . Ekman’s basic emotions are well known for their use in basic emotion experiments , with subjects from the Fore tribe in Papua New Guinea . It was concluded that emotions are universal and innate because they are perceived through facial expressions in the same way , regardless of what culture one belongs to . The results of this study still form the basis of much of the current research , as shown in Subsection 4 . 1 and 4 . 2 . The theory of basic emotions , established as described above , occupies an important position in affective computing of the text domain , as described in Subsection 4 . 1 . However , in recent years , ﬁndings in cutting - edge neuroscience have cast doubt on the universality and innate nature of emotional cognition [ Barrett , 2017 , 2020 ] . Referring to Russell [ 1994 ] , Barrett [ 2017 ] pointed out that Ekman’s theory , that is , emotions are universally recognized from facial expressions , has been questioned from a scientiﬁc point of view for more than 20 years . Barrett [ 2016 ] insisted that the last two decades of neuroscience research have brought us to the brink of a paradigm shift in understanding the workings of the brain and setting the stage to revolutionize our understanding of emotions . Based on the brain’s structure and function , Barrett proposed the “theory of constructed emotion , ” which states that emotions should be modeled holistically as whole brain - body phenomena in context . The author developed an “emotional granularity” framework to understand and investigate individual differences in the valence – arousal circumplex model [ Diab et al . , 2011 ] . The framework 13 Computational Storytelling and Emotions : A Survey A P REPRINT refers to individual differences in distinguishing between emotional states and how valence and arousal are incorporated into representations of emotion . Cowen and Keltner [ 2017 ] introduced a conceptual framework to analyze reported emotional states elicited by 2 , 185 short videos . Across self - reporting methods , they found that videos reliably elicited 27 distinct varieties of reported emotional experience . Further analyses revealed that categorical labels such as “amusement” better capture reports of subjective experience than dimensional emotions . Although there is a limitation in that this is a self - report , the ﬁndings may be helpful for the future treatment of emotion in computational linguistics . In the area of adaptive control , which studies how the brain coordinates cognitive , emotional , and physiological processes to identify problems in the environment and optimize goal - directed behavior , Clayson and Larson [ 2019 ] conducted an event - related brain potential ( ERP ) study on performance monitoring and found the importance of considering arousal and valence in studies of affective context and cognitive control . In addition , a problem called priming has been pointed out . Priming is the problem when an experiment is conducted using the basic emotion method , and the subject is given a small number of choices , which becomes a cheat sheet for the subject [ Gendron et al . , 2012 , Yik et al . , 2013 , Nelson and Russell , 2016 ] . As the number of choices is not large , after a few trials , the subject learns to choose the “correct emotion” for the facial expression that is subsequently presented . This problem should be considered when annotating datasets in CL and NLP . When annotating text for emotions , if there are not enough options , the same phenomenon of learning the “correct emotion” for face images is likely to occur . Moreover , human evaluation is often taken as a gold standard in evaluating natural language generation models , but further study is needed to ﬁnd the more appropriate way to instruct the annotators . 8 Other Aspects of Stories and Suggestions for Future Directions in this Area In this paper , we focused on emotions , though we understand that emotions are not the only important aspects of stories . There are many other aspects to be considered : event , common sense , entity , and so on . These aspects have deep relationships with emotions , so we will tackle combining the approaches for these aspects with our emotional storytelling system as future work . Events have been well - studied for story understanding and generation [ Chambers and Jurafsky , 2008 , Martin et al . , 2018 , Sims et al . , 2019 , Tambwekar et al . , 2019 ] , and the relationship between events and emotions have also been paid attention [ Rashkin et al . , 2018a ] . Studies on common sense in stories / narratives have a strong relationship with those of events [ Mostafazadeh et al . , 2016 , 2017 ] , and the focus has been broadened to motivations and emotions [ Rashkin et al . , 2018b , Mostafazadeh et al . , 2020 ] . Centering Theory [ Grosz et al . , 1995 ] is the base idea of considering entity in text generation . Barzilay and Lapata [ 2008 ] showed the importance of an entity for managing local - coherence . Clark et al . [ 2018b ] proposed a neural model for text generation that incorporates context via entities . To support tasks in natural language processing and the computational humanities , Bamman et al . [ 2019 ] , Sims et al . [ 2019 ] , Bamman et al . [ 2020 ] proposed LitBank , 14 an annotated dataset of 100 different English literary texts annotated for entity categories ( person , location , geo - political entity , facility , organization , and vehicle ) . In future , it is conceivable to integrate various elements related to story generation , such as characters , emotions , and events , by Narratology . Narratology , founded on Propp’s folktale theory [ Propp , 1968 ] as an origin [ Imabuchi and Ogata , 2012 ] , has been already shown as worth considering for story generation [ Peinado and Gervás , 2005 , Gervás et al . , 2006 , Imabuchi and Ogata , 2012 ] . Moreover , in recent years , Ogata and Akimoto [ 2019 ] introduced a new concept post - narratorogy , deﬁned as “computational and cognitive approaches to narratology” which is closely related to story generation system . How to handle “emotions” remains a big problem in computational linguistics . Which should we use , categorical emotions or dimensional emotions ? If categorical , how many categories are suitable ? Brahman and Chaturvedi [ 2020 ] used ﬁve ( 4 + 1 ) basic emotions of NRC AIL lexicon . They collected open - ended emotion - phrases from COMET [ Bosselut et al . , 2019 ] , and mapped these phrases to one of the ﬁve basic emotions : anger , fear , joy , sadness , and neutral . They also tried to directly use more than 500 unique emotional reactions from COMET , but failed because of the few training examples . If so , is “5” the best number ? We think this is debatable . Controlling emotions using VAD is more complicated than using the four emotions ; however , we believe it will be meaningful because of the potential for more delicate emotional control . The relationship between the two modes of expression is still an important subject of research . In his presentation slide in LREC 2018 , Mohammad noted that the NRC AIL lexicon ( i . e . , lexicon of four basic emotions ) is useful for studying the relationships between affect dimensions , especially when used in combination with the NRC VAD Lexicon . 14 https : / / github . com / dbamman / litbank 14 Computational Storytelling and Emotions : A Survey A P REPRINT As introduced in Section 7 , “emotion” is an important subject of research in ﬁeld of neuroscience , especially in relation to the brain [ Cowen and Keltner , 2017 ] . How to incorporate cutting - edge knowledge in these ﬁelds into the treatment of language will also be important . Although there are debates as to whether categorical or dimensional representations are better , it can be said that Arousal in dimensional emotion has an important meaning for human cognition and affection . Arousal expresses the rise and fall of emotions . A high Arousal level indicates that humans are excited by strong emotions , whereas Low Arousal means that the emotional stimulus is low and ineffective . These factors are closely related to humans’ raw emotions and feelings of liveliness . We [ Mori et al . , 2019a ] hypothesized that human satisfaction with stories could be affected not only by pleasant and unpleasant feelings but also by high and low arousal , and conﬁrmed it with dataset construction , experiment , and analysis . 9 Conclusion Creativity is vital for humans , and writing and reading stories are essential aspects of creativity . Understanding how humans write and read stories has a tight relationship with understanding humans itself . In this paper , we conducted extensive survey on stories and emotions . The novelty of this survey is that it included perspectives such as applications to creative writing support , professional techniques in storytelling , and ﬁndings in neuroscience . Our research question was : how computers can understand human creativity and enhance it with machine learning technologies ? We believe creativity research is not to replace humans with computers , but to ﬁnd a way of collaboration between humans and computers to enhance the creativity . We believe that this paper will lead to further development on story writing with the support of information science and technology and contribute to researchers and story writers . 10 Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Ryohei Shimizu for helpful discussions . This work was partially supported by JST AIP Acceleration Research JPMJCR20U3 , Moonshot R & D Grant Number JPMJPS2011 , JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP19H01115 , and JP20H05556 and Basic Research Grant ( Super AI ) of Institute for AI and Beyond of the University of Tokyo . References P . C . Hogan , “Narrative universals , heroic tragi - comedy , and shakespeare’s political ambivalence , ” College Literature , vol . 33 , no . 1 , pp . 34 – 66 , 2006 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 25115327 L . Pandit and P . C . Hogan , “Introduction : morsels and modules : on embodying cognition in shakespeare’s plays ( 1 ) , ” College Literature , vol . 33 , pp . 1 + , 2020 / 10 / 19 / 2006 , 1 , Article . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / link . gale . com / apps / doc / A142620223 / ITOF ? u = unitokyo & sid = ITOF & xid = d8ead2c9 R . N . Johnson - Laird and K . Oatley , Emotions , music , and literature . , ser . Handbook of emotions , 3rd ed . New York , NY , US : The Guilford Press , 2008 , pp . 102 – 113 . P . C . Hogan , “A passion for plot : Prolegomena to affective narratology , ” symplok¯e , vol . 18 , no . 1 - 2 , pp . 65 – 81 , 2010 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 10 . 5250 / symploke . 18 . 1 - 2 . 0065 —— , “Description , explanation , and the meanings of " narrative " , ” Evolutionary Studies in Imaginative Culture , vol . 3 , pp . 45 + , 2020 / 10 / 19 / 2019 , 1 , 45 , Critical essay . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / link . gale . com / apps / doc / A595569753 / AONE ? u = unitokyo & sid = AONE & xid = 0e1a136b A . Ackerman and B . Puglisi , The Emotion Thesaurus : A Writer’s Guide to Character Expression . JADD Publishing , 2012 . E . Kim and R . Klinger , “An analysis of emotion communication channels in fan - ﬁction : Towards emotional storytelling , ” in Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Storytelling . Florence , Italy : Association for Computational Linguistics , Aug . 2019 , pp . 56 – 64 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / W19 - 3406 A . Lugmayr , E . Sutinen , J . Suhonen , C . Islas Sedano , H . Hlavacs , and C . Suero Montero , “Serious storytelling - a ﬁrst deﬁnition and review , ” Multimedia Tools and Applications , vol . 76 , pp . 15 707 – 15 733 , 07 2017 . S . Denning , The Leader’s Guide to Storytelling : Mastering the Art and Discipline of Business Narrative , ser . J - B US non - Franchise Leadership . John Wiley & Sons , 2005 . 15 Computational Storytelling and Emotions : A Survey A P REPRINT C . W . Anderson and G . E . McMaster , “Computer assisted modeling of affective tone in written documents , ” Computers and the Humanities , vol . 16 , no . 1 , pp . 1 – 9 , Sep 1982 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF02259727 C . Strapparava and R . Mihalcea , “Learning to identify emotions in text , ” in Proceedings of ACMSAC 2008 . New York , NY , USA : ACM , 2008 , pp . 1556 – 1560 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 1363686 . 1364052 M . Abdul - Mageed and L . Ungar , “Emonet : Fine - grained emotion detection with gated recurrent neural networks , ” in Proceedings of ACL 2017 . Vancouver , Canada : Association for Computational Linguistics , July 2017 , pp . 718 – 728 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / aclweb . org / anthology / P17 - 1067 E . Kim and R . Klinger , “Who feels what and why ? annotation of a literature corpus with semantic roles of emotions , ” in Proceedings of COLING 2018 . Santa Fe , New Mexico , USA : Association for Computational Linguistics , Aug . 2018 , pp . 1345 – 1359 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / C18 - 1114 —— , “Frowning Frodo , wincing Leia , and a seriously great friendship : Learning to classify emotional relationships of ﬁctional characters , ” in Proceedings of NAACL - HLT 2019 . Minneapolis , Minnesota : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jun . 2019 , pp . 647 – 653 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / N19 - 1067 S . Zad and M . Finlayson , “Systematic evaluation of a framework for unsupervised emotion recognition for narrative text , ” in Proceedings of the First Joint Workshop on Narrative Understanding , Storylines , and Events . Online : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jul . 2020 , pp . 26 – 37 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / 2020 . nuse - 1 . 4 K . Vonnegut , “Kurt vonnegut on the shapes of stories , ” https : / / www . youtube . com / watch ? v = oP3c1h8v2ZQ , 1995 , video . Accessed : October 17 , 2020 . S . M . Mohammad , “From once upon a time to happily ever after : Tracking emotions in mail and books , ” Decision Support Systems , vol . 53 , no . 4 , pp . 730 – 741 , 2012 , 1 ) Computational Approaches to Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis 2 ) Service Science in Information Systems Research : Special Issue on PACIS 2010 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / S0167923612001418 A . J . Reagan , L . Mitchell , D . Kiley , C . M . Danforth , and P . S . Dodds , “The emotional arcs of stories are dominated by six basic shapes , ” EPJ Data Science , vol . 5 , no . 1 , p . 31 , Nov 2016 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1140 / epjds / s13688 - 016 - 0093 - 1 E . Chu and D . Roy , “Audio - visual sentiment analysis for learning emotional arcs in movies , ” in Proceedings of ICDM 2017 , 2017 , pp . 829 – 834 . S . Somasundaran , X . Chen , and M . Flor , “Emotion arcs of student narratives , ” in Proceedings of the First Joint Workshop on Narrative Understanding , Storylines , and Events . Online : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jul . 2020 , pp . 97 – 107 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / 2020 . nuse - 1 . 12 M . Del Vecchio , A . Kharlamov , G . Parry , and G . Pogrebna , “Improving productivity in hollywood with data science : Using emotional arcs of movies to drive product and service innovation in entertainment industries , ” Journal of the Operational Research Society , vol . 72 , pp . 1 – 28 , 03 2020 . D . Bamman , T . Underwood , and N . A . Smith , “A bayesian mixed effects model of literary character , ” in Proceedings of ACL 2014 . Baltimore , Maryland : Association for Computational Linguistics , June 2014 , pp . 370 – 379 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / P / P14 / P14 - 1035 H . Vala , D . Jurgens , A . Piper , and D . Ruths , “Mr . bennet , his coachman , and the archbishop walk into a bar but only one of them gets recognized : On the difﬁculty of detecting characters in literary texts , ” in Proceedings of EMNLP 2015 . Lisbon , Portugal : Association for Computational Linguistics , Sep . 2015 , pp . 769 – 774 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / D15 - 1088 M . Iyyer , A . Guha , S . Chaturvedi , J . Boyd - Graber , and H . Daumé III , “Feuding families and former friends : Unsupervised learning for dynamic ﬁctional relationships , ” in Proceedings of NAACL - HLT 2016 . San Diego , California : Association for Computational Linguistics , June 2016 , pp . 1534 – 1544 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / N16 - 1180 S . Chaturvedi , M . Iyyer , and H . D . III , “Unsupervised learning of evolving relationships between literary characters , ” 2017 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / aaai . org / ocs / index . php / AAAI / AAAI17 / paper / view / 14564 Y . Mori , H . Yamane , Y . Ushiku , and T . Harada , “How narratives move your mind : A corpus of shared - character stories for connecting emotional ﬂow and interestingness , ” Information Processing & Management , vol . 56 , no . 5 , pp . 1865 – 1879 , 2019 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / S0306457318305879 K . Chandu , S . Prabhumoye , R . Salakhutdinov , and A . W . Black , ““my way of telling a story” : Persona based grounded story generation , ” in Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Storytelling . Florence , Italy : Association for Computational Linguistics , Aug . 2019 , pp . 11 – 21 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / W19 - 3402 16 Computational Storytelling and Emotions : A Survey A P REPRINT F . Luo , D . Dai , P . Yang , T . Liu , B . Chang , Z . Sui , and X . Sun , “Learning to control the ﬁne - grained sentiment for story ending generation , ” in Proceedings of ACL 2019 . Florence , Italy : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jul . 2019 , pp . 6020 – 6026 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / P19 - 1603 F . Brahman and S . Chaturvedi , “Modeling protagonist emotions for emotion - aware storytelling , ” in Proceedings of EMNLP 2020 . Punta Cana , Dominican Republic : Association for Computational Linguistics , November 2020 . S . Dathathri , A . Madotto , J . Lan , J . Hung , E . Frank , P . Molino , J . Yosinski , and R . Liu , “Plug and play language models : A simple approach to controlled text generation , ” in Proceedings of ICLR , 2020 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / openreview . net / forum ? id = H1edEyBKDS P . Xu , M . Patwary , M . Shoeybi , R . Puri , P . Fung , A . Anandkumar , and B . Catanzaro , “Megatron - cntrl : Controllable story generation with external knowledge using large - scale language models , ” in Proceedings of EMNLP 2020 . Punta Cana , Dominican Republic : Association for Computational Linguistics , November 2020 . J . D . Mayer , R . D . Roberts , and S . G . Barsade , “Human abilities : Emotional intelligence , ” Annual Review of Psychology , vol . 59 , no . 1 , pp . 507 – 536 , 2008 , pMID : 17937602 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev . psych . 59 . 103006 . 093646 B . Liu , Sentiment Analysis : Mining Opinions , Sentiments , and Emotions . Cambridge University Press , 2015 . E . Kim and R . Klinger , “A survey on sentiment and emotion analysis for computational literary studies , ” Zeitschrift für digitale Geisteswissenschaften , 2019 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / zfdg . de / 2019 _ 008 _ v1 A . I . Alhussain and A . M . Azmi , “Automatic story generation : A survey of approaches , ” ACM Comput . Surv . , vol . 54 , no . 5 , May 2021 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3453156 R . Pérez y Pérez and M . Sharples , “Mexica : A computer model of a cognitive account of creative writing , ” J . Exp . Theor . Artif . Intell . , vol . 13 , pp . 119 – 139 , 04 2001 . S . R . Turner , “Minstrel : A computer model of creativity and storytelling , ” Ph . D . dissertation , USA , 1993 , uMI Order no . GAX93 - 19933 . S . Turner , The Creative Process : A Computer Model of Storytelling and Creativity . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . , 1994 . B . - C . Bae , S . Jang , Y . Kim , and S . Park , “A preliminary survey on story interestingness : Focusing on cognitive and emotional interest , ” in Interactive Storytelling , A . Mitchell and M . Vosmeer , Eds . Cham : Springer International Publishing , 2021 , pp . 447 – 453 . J . Li , T . Tang , W . X . Zhao , J . Nie , and J . Wen , “A survey of pretrained language models based text generation , ” CoRR , vol . abs / 2201 . 05273 , 2022 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / arxiv . org / abs / 2201 . 05273 P . Gulino , Screenwriting : The Sequence Approach , ser . Screenwriting : The Sequence Approach . Bloomsbury Academic , 2004 . J . Brody , Save the Cat ! Writes a Novel : The Last Book On Novel Writing You’ll Ever Need . Clarkson Potter / Ten Speed , 2018 . B . Snyder , SAVE THE CAT ! The Last Book on Screenwriting You’ll Ever Need . Michael Wiese Productions , 2005 . K . Iglesias , Writing for Emotional Impact . WingSpan Press , 2005 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / ci . nii . ac . jp / ncid / BB15467795 S . Field , The Screenwriter’s Workbook , Revised Edition . Delta Trade Paperbacks , 2006 . P . J . Gulino , “8 sequence approach to writing a screenplay - paul joseph gulino , ” https : / / youtu . be / bLMpNwOIfSY , 2019 , video . Accessed : March 23 , 2021 . P . Ekman , “Facial expression and emotion , ” American Psychologist , vol . 48 ( 4 ) , pp . 384 – 392 , 1993 . R . Plutchik , Emotion , a Psychoevolutionary Synthesis . Harper & Row , 1980 . J . A . Russell , “A circumplex model of affect , ” Journal of personality and social psychology , vol . 39 , pp . 1161 – 1178 , 1980 . J . A . Russell and A . Mehrabian , “Evidence for a three - factor theory of emotions , ” Journal of Research in Personality , vol . 11 , no . 3 , pp . 273 – 294 , 1977 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / 009265667790037X S . Park , B . Bae , and Y . Cheong , “Emotion recognition from text stories using an emotion embedding model , ” in Proceedings of BigComp 2020 , 2020 , pp . 579 – 583 . 17 Computational Storytelling and Emotions : A Survey A P REPRINT D . Bamman , B . O’Connor , and N . A . Smith , “Learning latent personas of ﬁlm characters , ” in Proceedings of ACL 2013 . Soﬁa , Bulgaria : Association for Computational Linguistics , August 2013 , pp . 352 – 361 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / P13 - 1035 P . Massey , P . Xia , D . Bamman , and N . A . Smith , “Annotating character relationships in literary texts , ” CoRR , vol . abs / 1512 . 00728 , 2015 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 1512 . 00728 S . Chaturvedi , S . Srivastava , H . D . III , and C . Dyer , “Modeling evolving relationships between characters in literary novels , ” 2016 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aaai . org / ocs / index . php / AAAI / AAAI16 / paper / view / 12408 S . Srivastava , S . Chaturvedi , and T . Mitchell , “Inferring interpersonal relations in narrative summaries , ” 2016 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aaai . org / ocs / index . php / AAAI / AAAI16 / paper / view / 12173 F . Murtagh , A . Ganz , and S . McKie , “The structure of narrative : The case of ﬁlm scripts , ” Pattern Recognition , vol . 42 , no . 2 , pp . 302 – 312 , 2009 , learning Semantics from Multimedia Content . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / S0031320308002100 R . McKee , Story : Substance , Structure , Style and the Principles of Screenwriting . Itbooks , 1997 . N . Chambers and D . Jurafsky , “Unsupervised learning of narrative event chains , ” in Proceedings of ACL - HLT 2008 . Columbus , Ohio : Association for Computational Linguistics , June 2008 , pp . 789 – 797 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / P / P08 / P08 - 1090 N . Mostafazadeh , N . Chambers , X . He , D . Parikh , D . Batra , L . Vanderwende , P . Kohli , and J . Allen , “A corpus and cloze evaluation for deeper understanding of commonsense stories , ” in Proceedings of NAACL - HLT 2016 . San Diego , California : Association for Computational Linguistics , June 2016 , pp . 839 – 849 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / N16 - 1098 S . Park , J . Kim , J . Jeon , H . Park , and A . Oh , “Toward dimensional emotion detection from categorical emotion annotations . ” CoRR , vol . abs / 1911 . 02499 , 2019 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 1911 . 02499 D . Demszky , D . Movshovitz - Attias , J . Ko , A . Cowen , G . Nemade , and S . Ravi , “GoEmotions : A dataset of ﬁne - grained emotions , ” in Proceedings of ACL 2020 . Online : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jul . 2020 , pp . 4040 – 4054 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / 2020 . acl - main . 372 J . Devlin , M . - W . Chang , K . Lee , and K . Toutanova , “BERT : Pre - training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding , ” in Proceedings of NAACL - HLT 2019 . Minneapolis , Minnesota : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jun . 2019 , pp . 4171 – 4186 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / N19 - 1423 P . Winston , “The strong story hypothesis and the directed perception hypothesis , ” 2011 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aaai . org / ocs / index . php / FSS / FSS11 / paper / view / 4125 L . White , R . Togneri , W . Liu , and M . Bennamoun , “NovelPerspective : Identifying point of view characters , ” in Proceedings of ACL 2018 , System Demonstrations . Melbourne , Australia : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jul . 2018 , pp . 7 – 12 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / P18 - 4002 W . G . Lehnert , “Plot units and narrative summarization , ” Cognitive Science , vol . 5 , no . 4 , pp . 293 – 331 , 1981 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / S036402138180016X D . R . Heise , “Semantic differential proﬁles for 1 , 000 most frequent english words . ” Psychological Monographs : General and Applied , vol . 79 , no . 8 , pp . 1 – 31 , 1965 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / search . ebscohost . com / login . aspx ? direct = true & db = pdh & AN = 2011 - 19203 - 001 & lang = ja & site = ehost - live S . Buechel and U . Hahn , “EmoBank : Studying the impact of annotation perspective and representation format on dimensional emotion analysis , ” in Proceedings of EACL 2017 . Valencia , Spain : Association for Computational Linguistics , Apr . 2017 , pp . 578 – 585 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / E17 - 2092 N . M . Hakak , M . Mohd , M . Kirmani , and M . Mohd , “Emotion analysis : A survey , ” in 2017 International Conference on Computer , Communications and Electronics ( Comptelix ) , 2017 , pp . 397 – 402 . C . O . Alm , D . Roth , and R . Sproat , “Emotions from text : Machine learning for text - based emotion prediction , ” in Proceedings of EMNLP - HLT 2005 , 2005 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / H05 - 1073 S . Chaturvedi , H . Peng , and D . Roth , “Story comprehension for predicting what happens next , ” in Proceedings of EMNLP 2017 . Copenhagen , Denmark : Association for Computational Linguistics , September 2017 , pp . 1603 – 1614 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / D17 - 1168 P . Bailey , “Searching for storiness : Story - generation from a reader’s perspective , ” 1999 . Y . Mori , H . Yamane , Y . Mukuta , and T . Harada , “Toward a better story end : Collecting human evaluation with reasons , ” in Proceedings of INLG 2019 . Tokyo , Japan : Association for Computational Linguistics , Oct . – Nov . 2019 , pp . 383 – 390 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / W19 - 8646 18 Computational Storytelling and Emotions : A Survey A P REPRINT P . C . Hogan , “Narrative Universals , Emotion , and Ethics , ” Poetics Today , vol . 41 , no . 2 , pp . 187 – 204 , 06 2020 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1215 / 03335372 - 8172514 K . H . - Y . Lin , C . Yang , and H . - H . Chen , “What emotions do news articles trigger in their readers ? ” in Proceedings of SIGIR . New York , NY , USA : Association for Computing Machinery , 2007 , p . 733 – 734 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1277741 . 1277882 K . H . Lin , C . Yang , and H . Chen , “Emotion classiﬁcation of online news articles from the reader’s perspective , ” in 2008 IEEE / WIC / ACM International Conference on Web Intelligence and Intelligent Agent Technology , vol . 1 , 2008 , pp . 220 – 226 . Y . - C . Chang , C . - C . Chen , Y . - L . Hsieh , C . C . Chen , and W . - L . Hsu , “Linguistic template extraction for recognizing reader - emotion and emotional resonance writing assistance , ” in Proceedings of ACL - IJCNLP 2015 . Beijing , China : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jul . 2015 , pp . 775 – 780 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / P15 - 2127 Y . - j . Tang and H . - H . Chen , “Mining sentiment words from microblogs for predicting writer - reader emotion transition , ” in Proceedings of LREC 2012 . Istanbul , Turkey : European Language Resources Association ( ELRA ) , May 2012 , pp . 1226 – 1229 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . lrec - conf . org / proceedings / lrec2012 / pdf / 117 _ Paper . pdf L . De Bruyne , O . De Clercq , and V . Hoste , “An emotional mess ! deciding on a framework for building a Dutch emotion - annotated corpus , ” in Proceedings of LREC 2020 . Marseille , France : European Language Resources Association , May 2020 , pp . 1643 – 1651 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / 2020 . lrec - 1 . 204 C . Liu , M . Osama , and A . De Andrade , “DENS : A dataset for multi - class emotion analysis , ” in Proceedings of EMNLP - IJCNLP 2019 . Hong Kong , China : Association for Computational Linguistics , Nov . 2019 , pp . 6293 – 6298 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / D19 - 1656 D . Preo¸tiuc - Pietro , H . A . Schwartz , G . Park , J . Eichstaedt , M . Kern , L . Ungar , and E . Shulman , “Modelling valence and arousal in Facebook posts , ” in Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity , Sentiment and Social Media Analysis . San Diego , California : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jun . 2016 , pp . 9 – 15 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / W16 - 0404 S . Buechel and U . Hahn , “Readers vs . writers vs . texts : Coping with different perspectives of text understanding in emotion annotation , ” 01 2017 . P . J . Stone and E . B . Hunt , “A computer approach to content analysis : Studies using the general inquirer system , ” in Proceedings of the May 21 - 23 , 1963 , Spring Joint Computer Conference . New York , NY , USA : Association for Computing Machinery , 1963 , p . 241 – 256 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1461551 . 1461583 J . W . Pennebaker , R . J . Booth , and M . E . Francis , “Linguistic inquiry and word count : Liwc 2001 , ” 2001 . Y . R . Tausczik and J . W . Pennebaker , “The psychological meaning of words : Liwc and computerized text analysis methods , ” Journal of Language and Social Psychology , vol . 29 , no . 1 , pp . 24 – 54 , 2010 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0261927X09351676 J . W . Pennebaker , R . J . Booth , R . L . Boyd , and M . E . Francis , “Linguistic inquiry and word count : Liwc2015 . ” M . M . Bradley and P . J . Lang , “Affective norms for english words ( anew ) : Instruction manual and affective ratings , ” Technical report C - 1 , the center for research in psychophysiology … , Tech . Rep . , 1999 . A . Esuli and F . Sebastiani , “Sentiwordnet : A publicly available lexical resource for opinion mining . ” Citeseer . S . Baccianella , A . Esuli , and F . Sebastiani , “Sentiwordnet 3 . 0 : an enhanced lexical resource for sentiment analysis and opinion mining . ” in Lrec , vol . 10 , no . 2010 , 2010 , pp . 2200 – 2204 . E . Cambria , R . Speer , C . Havasi , and A . Hussain , “Senticnet : A publicly available semantic resource for opinion mining , ” in AAAI Fall Symposium : Commonsense Knowledge , 2010 . E . Cambria , Y . Li , F . Z . Xing , S . Poria , and K . Kwok , “Senticnet 6 : Ensemble application of symbolic and subsymbolic ai for sentiment analysis , ” in Proceedings of CIKM . New York , NY , USA : Association for Computing Machinery , 2020 , p . 105 – 114 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3340531 . 3412003 S . Mohammad , “ # emotional tweets , ” in * SEM 2012 : The First Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics – Volume 1 : Proceedings of the main conference and the shared task , and Volume 2 : Proceedings of the Sixth International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation ( SemEval 2012 ) . Montréal , Canada : Association for Computational Linguistics , 7 - 8 June 2012 , pp . 246 – 255 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / S12 - 1033 S . M . Mohammad and S . Kiritchenko , “Using hashtags to capture ﬁne emotion categories from tweets , ” Computational Intelligence , vol . 31 , no . 2 , pp . 301 – 326 , 2015 . 19 Computational Storytelling and Emotions : A Survey A P REPRINT S . Mohammad , “Obtaining reliable human ratings of valence , arousal , and dominance for 20 , 000 English words , ” in Proceedings of ACL 2018 . Melbourne , Australia : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jul . 2018 , pp . 174 – 184 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / P18 - 1017 S . M . Mohammad , “Word affect intensities , ” in Proceedings of LREC 2018 , Miyazaki , Japan , 2018 . P . Katz , M . Singleton , and R . Wicentowski , “SWAT - MP : the SemEval - 2007 systems for task 5 and task 14 , ” in Proceedings of SemEval 2007 . Prague , Czech Republic : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jun . 2007 , pp . 308 – 313 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / S07 - 1067 M . M . Bradley and P . J . Lang , “Measuring emotion : The self - assessment manikin and the semantic differential , ” Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry , vol . 25 , no . 1 , pp . 49 – 59 , 1994 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / 0005791694900639 D . W . Otter , J . R . Medina , and J . K . Kalita , “A survey of the usages of deep learning for natural language processing , ” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems , pp . 1 – 21 , 2020 . B . Bena and J . Kalita , “Introducing aspects of creativity in automatic poetry generation , ” in Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Natural Language Processing . International Institute of Information Technology , Hyderabad , India : NLP Association of India , Dec . 2019 , pp . 26 – 35 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / aclanthology . org / 2019 . icon - 1 . 4 S . Ghosh , M . Chollet , E . Laksana , L . - P . Morency , and S . Scherer , “Affect - LM : A neural language model for customizable affective text generation , ” in Proceedings of ACL 2017 . Vancouver , Canada : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jul . 2017 , pp . 634 – 642 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / P17 - 1059 H . Zhou , M . Huang , T . Zhang , X . Zhu , and B . Liu , “Emotional chatting machine : Emotional conversation generation with internal and external memory , ” 2018 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / aaai . org / ocs / index . php / AAAI / AAAI18 / paper / view / 16455 Y . Ma , K . L . Nguyen , F . Z . Xing , and E . Cambria , “A survey on empathetic dialogue systems , ” Information Fusion , vol . 64 , pp . 50 – 70 , 2020 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / S1566253520303092 D . Peng , M . Zhou , C . Liu , and J . Ai , “Human – machine dialogue modelling with the fusion of word - and sentence - level emotions , ” Knowledge - Based Systems , vol . 192 , p . 105319 , 2020 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / S0950705119305970 Z . Song , X . Zheng , L . Liu , M . Xu , and X . Huang , “Generating responses with a speciﬁc emotion in dialog , ” in Proceedings of ACL 2019 . Florence , Italy : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jul . 2019 , pp . 3685 – 3695 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / P19 - 1359 S . Klein , J . F . Aeschlimann , D . F . Balsiger , S . L . Converse , C . Court , M . Foster , R . Lao , J . Oakley , and J . Smith , “Automatic novel writing : A status report , ” 1973 . J . R . Meehan , “The metanovel : writing stories by computer . ” YALE UNIV NEW HAVEN CONN DEPT OF COM - PUTER SCIENCE , Tech . Rep . , 1976 . —— , “Tale - spin , an interactive program that writes stories , ” in Proceedings of IJCAI . San Francisco , CA , USA : Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc . , 1977 , p . 91 – 98 . M . Lebowitz , “Creating characters in a story - telling universe , ” Poetics , vol . 13 , no . 3 , pp . 171 – 194 , 1984 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / 0304422X84900019 —— , “Story - telling as planning and learning , ” Poetics , vol . 14 , no . 6 , pp . 483 – 502 , 1985 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / 0304422X85900154 P . Gervás , “Computational approaches to storytelling and creativity , ” AI Magazine , vol . 30 , pp . 49 – 62 , 09 2009 . N . McIntyre and M . Lapata , “Learning to tell tales : A data - driven approach to story generation , ” in Proceedings of ACL - AFNLP 2009 . Suntec , Singapore : Association for Computational Linguistics , Aug . 2009 , pp . 217 – 225 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / P09 - 1025 K . M . Hermann , T . Koˇciský , E . Grefenstette , L . Espeholt , W . Kay , M . Suleyman , and P . Blunsom , “Teaching machines to read and comprehend , ” in Proceedings of NIPS . Cambridge , MA , USA : MIT Press , 2015 , pp . 1693 – 1701 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 2969239 . 2969428 M . Roemmele , “Writing Stories with Help from Recurrent Neural Networks , ” in Proceedings of AAAI . Phoenix , AZ : AAAI Press , Feb . 2016 , pp . 4311 – 4312 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . aaai . org / ocs / index . php / AAAI / AAAI16 / paper / view / 11966 N . Peng , M . Ghazvininejad , J . May , and K . Knight , “Towards controllable story generation , ” in Proceedings of the First Workshop on Storytelling . New Orleans , Louisiana : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jun . 2018 , pp . 43 – 49 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / W18 - 1505 20 Computational Storytelling and Emotions : A Survey A P REPRINT L . Yao , N . Peng , W . Ralph , K . Knight , D . Zhao , and R . Yan , “Plan - and - Write : Towards better automatic storytelling , ” in Proceedings of AAAI . Honolulu , Hawaii : AAAI Press , January – February 2019 , pp . 7378 – 7385 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1609 / aaai . v33i01 . 33017378 S . Goldfarb - Tarrant , H . Feng , and N . Peng , “Plan , Write , and Revise : an interactive system for open - domain story generation , ” in Proceedings of NAACL - HLT 2019 ( Demonstrations ) . Minneapolis , Minnesota : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jun . 2019 , pp . 89 – 97 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / N19 - 4016 C . Hou , C . Zhou , K . Zhou , J . Sun , and S . Xuanyuan , “A survey of deep learning applied to story generation , ” in Smart Computing and Communication , M . Qiu , Ed . Cham : Springer International Publishing , 2019 , pp . 1 – 10 . A . Fan , M . Lewis , and Y . Dauphin , “Hierarchical neural story generation , ” in Proceedings of ACL 2018 . Melbourne , Australia : Association for Computational Linguistics , July 2018 , pp . 889 – 898 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / P18 - 1082 J . Xu , X . Ren , Y . Zhang , Q . Zeng , X . Cai , and X . Sun , “A skeleton - based model for promoting coherence among sentences in narrative story generation , ” in Proceedings of EMNLP 2018 . Brussels , Belgium : Association for Computational Linguistics , Oct . - Nov . 2018 , pp . 4306 – 4315 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / D18 - 1462 X . Wang , W . Chen , Y . - F . Wang , and W . Y . Wang , “No metrics are perfect : Adversarial reward learning for visual storytelling , ” in Proceedings of ACL 2018 , 2018 , pp . 899 – 909 . Y . Zhao , L . Liu , C . Liu , R . Yang , and D . Yu , “From plots to endings : A reinforced pointer generator for story ending generation , ” in Proceedings of Natural Language Processing and Chinese Computing , vol . abs / 1901 . 03459 , 2018 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 1901 . 03459 T . Wang and X . Wan , “T - CVAE : Transformer - based conditioned variational autoencoder for story completion , ” in Proceedings of IJCAI . International Joint Conferences on Artiﬁcial Intelligence Organization , July 2019 , pp . 5233 – 5239 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 24963 / ijcai . 2019 / 727 E . Clark , A . S . Ross , C . Tan , Y . Ji , and N . A . Smith , “Creative writing with a machine in the loop : Case studies on slogans and stories , ” in Proceedings of IUI . New York , NY , USA : Association for Computing Machinery , 2018 , p . 329 – 340 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3172944 . 3172983 B . Li , S . Lee - Urban , G . Johnston , and M . Riedl , “Story generation with crowdsourced plot graphs , ” 2013 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aaai . org / ocs / index . php / AAAI / AAAI13 / paper / view / 6399 A . Fan , M . Lewis , and Y . Dauphin , “Strategies for structuring story generation , ” in Proceedings of ACL 2019 . Florence , Italy : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jul . 2019 , pp . 2650 – 2660 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / P19 - 1254 S . Goldfarb - Tarrant , T . Chakrabarty , R . Weischedel , and N . Peng , “Content planning for neural story generation with aristotelian rescoring , ” in Proceedings of EMNLP 2020 , 2020 . A . Holtzman , J . Buys , M . Forbes , A . Bosselut , D . Golub , and Y . Choi , “Learning to write with cooperative discriminators , ” in Proceedings of ACL 2018 . Melbourne , Australia : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jul . 2018 , pp . 1638 – 1649 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / P18 - 1152 A . Vaswani , N . Shazeer , N . Parmar , J . Uszkoreit , L . Jones , A . N . Gomez , L . u . Kaiser , and I . Polosukhin , “Attention is all you need , ” in Proceedings of NIPS , I . Guyon , U . V . Luxburg , S . Bengio , H . Wallach , R . Fergus , S . Vishwanathan , and R . Garnett , Eds . Curran Associates , Inc . , 2017 , pp . 5998 – 6008 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / papers . nips . cc / paper / 7181 - attention - is - all - you - need . pdf I . Sutskever , O . Vinyals , and Q . V . Le , “Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks , ” in Proceedings of NIPS . Cambridge , MA , USA : MIT Press , 2014 , pp . 3104 – 3112 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 2969033 . 2969173 O . Vinyals and Q . V . Le , “A neural conversational model , ” in Proceedings of the 31st ICML Deep Learning Workshop , 2015 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / arxiv . org / pdf / 1506 . 05869v3 . pdf J . Gehring , M . Auli , D . Grangier , D . Yarats , and Y . N . Dauphin , “Convolutional sequence to sequence learning , ” ser . Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , D . Precup and Y . W . Teh , Eds . , vol . 70 . International Convention Centre , Sydney , Australia : PMLR , 06 – 11 Aug 2017 , pp . 1243 – 1252 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / proceedings . mlr . press / v70 / gehring17a . html “Transformer model for language understanding , ” https : / / www . tensorﬂow . org / tutorials / text / transformer , Last updated 2020 - 10 - 14 UTC . , accessed : October 19 , 2020 . A . Radford , J . Wu , R . Child , D . Luan , D . Amodei , and I . Sutskever , “Language models are unsupervised multitask learners , ” 2019 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / d4mucfpksywv . cloudfront . net / better - language - models / language - model . pdf 21 Computational Storytelling and Emotions : A Survey A P REPRINT Z . Yang , Z . Dai , Y . Yang , J . Carbonell , R . R . Salakhutdinov , and Q . V . Le , “XLNet : Generalized autoregressive pretraining for language understanding , ” in Proceedings of NeurIPS , H . Wallach , H . Larochelle , A . Beygelzimer , F . d ' Alché - Buc , E . Fox , and R . Garnett , Eds . Curran Associates , Inc . , 2019 , pp . 5753 – 5763 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / papers . nips . cc / paper / 8812 - xlnet - generalized - autoregressive - pretraining - for - language - understanding . pdf M . Lewis , Y . Liu , N . Goyal , M . Ghazvininejad , A . Mohamed , O . Levy , V . Stoyanov , and L . Zettlemoyer , “BART : Denoising sequence - to - sequence pre - training for natural language generation , translation , and comprehension , ” in Proceedings of ACL 2020 . Online : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jul . 2020 , pp . 7871 – 7880 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / 2020 . acl - main . 703 S . Rothe , S . Narayan , and A . Severyn , “Leveraging pre - trained checkpoints for sequence generation tasks , ” TACL , vol . 8 , pp . 264 – 280 , 2020 . C . Raffel , N . Shazeer , A . Roberts , K . Lee , S . Narang , M . Matena , Y . Zhou , W . Li , and P . J . Liu , “Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a uniﬁed text - to - text transformer , ” Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol . 21 , no . 140 , pp . 1 – 67 , 2020 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / jmlr . org / papers / v21 / 20 - 074 . html W . Qi , Y . Yan , Y . Gong , D . Liu , N . Duan , J . Chen , R . Zhang , and M . Zhou , “Prophetnet : Predicting future n - gram for sequence - to - sequence pre - training , ” in Proceedings of EMNLP 2020 . Punta Cana , Dominican Republic : Association for Computational Linguistics , November 2020 . S . Roller , E . Dinan , N . Goyal , D . Ju , M . Williamson , Y . Liu , J . Xu , M . Ott , K . Shuster , E . M . Smith , Y . - L . Boureau , and J . Weston , “Recipes for building an open - domain chatbot , ” 2020 . J . Zhang , Y . Zhao , M . Saleh , and P . J . Liu , “Pegasus : Pre - training with extracted gap - sentences for abstractive summarization , ” 2020 . N . S . Keskar , B . McCann , L . R . Varshney , C . Xiong , and R . Socher , “Ctrl : A conditional transformer language model for controllable generation , ” arXiv preprint arXiv : 1909 . 05858 , 2019 . M . Shoeybi , M . Patwary , R . Puri , P . LeGresley , J . Casper , and B . Catanzaro , “Megatron - lm : Training multi - billion parameter language models using model parallelism , ” 2020 . J . Guan , F . Huang , Z . Zhao , X . Zhu , and M . Huang , “A knowledge - enhanced pretraining model for commonsense story generation , ” TACL , vol . 8 , pp . 93 – 108 , 2020 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1162 / tacl _ a _ 00302 H . Rashkin , A . Celikyilmaz , Y . Choi , and J . Gao , “Plotmachines : Outline - conditioned generation with dynamic plot state tracking , ” 2020 . A . Nguyen , J . Clune , Y . Bengio , A . Dosovitskiy , and J . Yosinski , “Plug & play generative networks : Conditional iterative generation of images in latent space , ” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . IEEE , 2017 . L . Qin , V . Shwartz , P . West , C . Bhagavatula , J . D . Hwang , R . Le Bras , A . Bosselut , and Y . Choi , “Back to the future : Unsupervised backprop - based decoding for counterfactual and abductive commonsense reasoning , ” in Proceedings of EMNLP 2020 . Online : Association for Computational Linguistics , Nov . 2020 , pp . 794 – 805 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / 2020 . emnlp - main . 58 J . O . Zhang , A . Sax , A . Zamir , L . Guibas , and J . Malik , “Side - tuning : A baseline for network adaptation via additive side networks , ” in Proceedings of ECCV , A . Vedaldi , H . Bischof , T . Brox , and J . - M . Frahm , Eds . Cham : Springer International Publishing , 2020 , pp . 698 – 714 . Y . Zeldes , D . Padnos , O . Sharir , and B . Peleg , “Technical report : Auxiliary tuning and its application to conditional text generation , ” 2020 . B . Krause , A . D . Gotmare , B . McCann , N . S . Keskar , S . Joty , richard socher , and N . Rajani , “Gedi : Generative discriminator guided sequence generation , ” 2021 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / openreview . net / forum ? id = TJSOfuZEd1B D . Ippolito , D . Grangier , C . Callison - Burch , and D . Eck , “Unsupervised hierarchical story inﬁlling , ” in Proceedings of the First Workshop on Narrative Understanding . Minneapolis , Minnesota : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jun . 2019 , pp . 37 – 43 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / W19 - 2405 T . August , M . Sap , E . Clark , K . Reinecke , and N . A . Smith , “Exploring the effect of author and reader identity in online story writing : the STORIESINTHEWILD corpus . ” in Proceedings of the First Joint Workshop on Narrative Understanding , Storylines , and Events . Online : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jul . 2020 , pp . 46 – 54 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / 2020 . nuse - 1 . 6 C . - W . Liu , R . Lowe , I . Serban , M . Noseworthy , L . Charlin , and J . Pineau , “How not to evaluate your dialogue system : An empirical study of unsupervised evaluation metrics for dialogue response generation , ” in Proceedings of EMNLP 2016 . Austin , Texas : Association for Computational Linguistics , November 2016 , pp . 2122 – 2132 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / aclweb . org / anthology / D16 - 1230 22 Computational Storytelling and Emotions : A Survey A P REPRINT J . Novikova , O . Dušek , A . Cercas Curry , and V . Rieser , “Why we need new evaluation metrics for NLG , ” in Proceedings of EMNLP 2017 . Copenhagen , Denmark : Association for Computational Linguistics , Sep . 2017 , pp . 2241 – 2252 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / D17 - 1238 A . Chaganty , S . Mussmann , and P . Liang , “The price of debiasing automatic metrics in natural language evalaution , ” in Proceedings of ACL 2018 . Melbourne , Australia : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jul . 2018 , pp . 643 – 653 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / P18 - 1060 A . Gatt and E . Krahmer , “Survey of the state of the art in natural language generation : Core tasks , applications and evaluation , ” Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research , vol . 61 , no . 1 , pp . 65 – 170 , 2018 . T . Hashimoto , H . Zhang , and P . Liang , “Unifying human and statistical evaluation for natural language generation , ” in Proceedings of NAACL - HLT 2019 . Minneapolis , Minnesota : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jun . 2019 , pp . 1689 – 1701 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / N19 - 1169 M . Cavazza , D . Pizzi , F . Charles , T . Vogt , and E . André , “Emotional input for character - based interactive storytelling , ” in Proceedings of AAMAS . Richland , SC : International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems , 2009 , p . 313 – 320 . K . Shuster , S . Humeau , A . Bordes , and J . Weston , “Image - chat : Engaging grounded conversations , ” in Proceedings of ACL 2020 . Online : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jul . 2020 , pp . 2414 – 2429 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / 2020 . acl - main . 219 C . Donahue , M . Lee , and P . Liang , “Enabling language models to ﬁll in the blanks , ” in Proceedings of ACL 2020 . Online : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jul . 2020 , pp . 2492 – 2501 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / 2020 . acl - main . 225 Y . Huang , Y . Zhang , O . Elachqar , and Y . Cheng , “INSET : Sentence inﬁlling with INter - SEntential transformer , ” in Proceedings of ACL 2020 . Online : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jul . 2020 , pp . 2502 – 2515 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / 2020 . acl - main . 226 S . Wang , G . Durrett , and K . Erk , “Narrative interpolation for generating and understanding stories , ” 2020 . V . Clarke , V . Braun , H . Frith , and N . Moller , “Editorial introduction to the special issue : Using story completion methods in qualitative research , ” Qualitative Research in Psychology , vol . 16 , no . 1 , pp . 1 – 20 , 2019 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14780887 . 2018 . 1536378 M . Roemmele , “Inspiration through observation : Demonstrating the inﬂuence of automatically generated text on creative writing , ” in Proceedings of ICCC 2021 . Association for Computational Creativity ( ACC ) , September 2021 . C . Bhagavatula , R . L . Bras , C . Malaviya , K . Sakaguchi , A . Holtzman , H . Rashkin , D . Downey , W . tau Yih , and Y . Choi , “Abductive commonsense reasoning , ” in Proceedings of ICLR , 2020 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / openreview . net / forum ? id = Byg1v1HKDB J . R . Hobbs , M . E . Stickel , D . E . Appelt , and P . Martin , “Interpretation as abduction , ” Artiﬁcial Intelligence , vol . 63 , no . 1 , pp . 69 – 142 , 1993 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / 0004370293900154 P . Norvig , “Inference in text understanding , ” in Proceedings of AAAI . AAAI Press , 1987 , p . 561 – 565 . E . Charniak and S . E . Shimony , “Probabilistic semantics for cost based abduction , ” in Proceedings of AAAI . AAAI Press , 1990 , p . 106 – 111 . C . S . Peirce , C . Hartshorne , and P . Weiss , Collected Papers of C . S . Peirce . Vol . V . Pragmatism and Pragmaticism . University of Chicago Press , 1937 , vol . 4 , no . 1 . H . Andersen , “Abductive and deductive change , ” Language , vol . 49 , no . 4 , pp . 765 – 793 , 1973 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 412063 J . Pearl , “Reasoning with cause and effect , ” AI Magazine , vol . 23 , no . 1 , p . 95 , Mar . 2002 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / ojs . aaai . org / index . php / aimagazine / article / view / 1612 J . Pearl and D . Mackenzie , The Book of Why : The New Science of Cause and Effect , 1st ed . USA : Basic Books , Inc . , 2018 . Y . Zhu , R . Song , Z . Dou , J . - Y . NIE , and J . Zhou , “ScriptWriter : Narrative - guided script generation , ” in Proceedings of ACL 2020 . Online : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jul . 2020 , pp . 8647 – 8657 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / 2020 . acl - main . 765 T . Chakrabarty , S . Muresan , and N . Peng , “Generating similes effortlessly like a pro : A style transfer approach for simile generation , ” in Proceedings of EMNLP 2020 , 2020 . 23 Computational Storytelling and Emotions : A Survey A P REPRINT S . Kar , G . Aguilar , M . Lapata , and T . Solorio , “Multi - view story characterization from movie plot synopses and reviews , ” in Proceedings of EMNLP 2020 . Punta Cana , Dominican Republic : Association for Computational Linguistics , November 2020 . A . Calderwood , V . Qiu , K . Gero , and L . B . Chilton , “How novelists use generative language models : An exploratory user study , ” in HAI - GEN + user2agent @ IUI , 2020 . H . Osone , J . - L . Lu , and Y . Ochiai , BunCho : AI Supported Story Co - Creation via Unsupervised Multitask Learning to Increase Writers ’ Creativity in Japanese . New York , NY , USA : Association for Computing Machinery , 2021 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411763 . 3450391 A . Yuan , A . Coenen , E . Reif , and D . Ippolito , “Wordcraft : Story writing with large language models , ” in Proceedings of IUI . New York , NY , USA : Association for Computing Machinery , 2022 , p . 841 – 852 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3490099 . 3511105 D . Sander , “Models of emotion : the affective neuroscience approach , ” The Cambridge Handbook of Human Affective Neuroscience , pp . 5 – 53 , 01 2013 . C . Darwin , On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection . London : Murray , 1859 , or the Preservation of Favored Races in the Struggle for Life . —— , The descent of man and selection in relation to sex . London : John Murray , Albemarle Street , 1871 . —— , The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals , 1872 , the original was published 1898 by Appleton , New York . Reprinted 1965 by the University of Chicago Press , Chicago and London , . S . S . Tomkins and R . McCarter , “What and where are the primary affects ? some evidence for a theory , ” Perceptual and Motor Skills , vol . 18 , no . 1 , pp . 119 – 158 , 1964 , pMID : 14116322 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2466 / pms . 1964 . 18 . 1 . 119 L . F . Barrett , How emotions are made : The secret life of the brain . Boston , MA : Houghton Mifﬂin Harcourt , 2017 . L . Barrett , “Hypotheses about emotional development in the theory of constructed emotion : A response to developmental perspectives on how emotions are made , ” Human Development , vol . 64 , pp . 1 – 3 , 09 2020 . J . A . Russell , “Is there universal recognition of emotion from facial expression ? a review of the cross - cultural studies . ” Psychological bulletin , vol . 115 1 , pp . 102 – 41 , 1994 . L . F . Barrett , “The theory of constructed emotion : an active inference account of interoception and categorization , ” Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience , vol . 12 , no . 1 , pp . 1 – 23 , 10 2016 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / scan / nsw154 D . L . Diab , L . Yerian , P . Schauer , S . R . Kashyap , R . Lopez , L . Hazen , and A . E . Feldstein , “Emotional Granularity and Borderline Personality Disorder Michael , ” Journal of Abnormal Psychology , vol . 120 , no . 2 , pp . 414 – 426 , 2011 . A . S . Cowen and D . Keltner , “Self - report captures 27 distinct categories of emotion bridged by continuous gradients , ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 2017 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . pnas . org / content / early / 2017 / 08 / 30 / 1702247114 P . E . Clayson and M . J . Larson , “The impact of recent and concurrent affective context on cognitive control : An erp study of performance monitoring , ” International Journal of Psychophysiology , vol . 143 , pp . 44 – 56 , 2019 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / S0167876019301795 M . Gendron , K . A . Lindquist , L . Barsalou , and L . F . Barrett , “Emotion words shape emotion percepts , ” Emotion ( Washington , D . C . ) , vol . 12 , no . 2 , pp . 314 – 325 , Apr 2012 , 22309717 [ pmid ] . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / pubmed . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / 22309717 M . Yik , S . C . Widen , and J . A . Russell , “The within - subjects design in the study of facial expressions , ” Cognition and Emotion , vol . 27 , no . 6 , pp . 1062 – 1072 , 2013 , pMID : 23390928 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 02699931 . 2013 . 763769 N . L . Nelson and J . A . Russell , “A facial expression of pax : Assessing children ’ s “ recognition ” of emotion from faces , ” Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , vol . 141 , pp . 49 – 64 , 2016 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / S0022096515001836 L . Martin , P . Ammanabrolu , X . Wang , W . Hancock , S . Singh , B . Harrison , and M . Riedl , “Event representations for automated story generation with deep neural nets , ” 2018 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / aaai . org / ocs / index . php / AAAI / AAAI18 / paper / view / 17046 M . Sims , J . H . Park , and D . Bamman , “Literary event detection , ” in Proceedings of ACL 2019 . Florence , Italy : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jul . 2019 , pp . 3623 – 3634 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / P19 - 1353 24 Computational Storytelling and Emotions : A Survey A P REPRINT P . Tambwekar , M . Dhuliawala , L . J . Martin , A . Mehta , B . Harrison , and M . O . Riedl , “Controllable neural story plot generation via reward shaping , ” in Proceedings of IJCAI . International Joint Conferences on Artiﬁcial Intelligence Organization , 7 2019 , pp . 5982 – 5988 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 24963 / ijcai . 2019 / 829 H . Rashkin , M . Sap , E . Allaway , N . A . Smith , and Y . Choi , “Event2Mind : Commonsense inference on events , intents , and reactions , ” in Proceedings of ACL 2018 . Melbourne , Australia : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jul . 2018 , pp . 463 – 473 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / P18 - 1043 N . Mostafazadeh , M . Roth , A . Louis , N . Chambers , and J . Allen , “Lsdsem 2017 shared task : The story cloze test , ” in Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Linking Models of Lexical , Sentential and Discourse - level Semantics . Valencia , Spain : Association for Computational Linguistics , April 2017 , pp . 46 – 51 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / aclweb . org / anthology / W17 - 0906 H . Rashkin , A . Bosselut , M . Sap , K . Knight , and Y . Choi , “Modeling naive psychology of characters in simple commonsense stories , ” in Proceedings of ACL 2018 . Melbourne , Australia : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jul . 2018 , pp . 2289 – 2299 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / P18 - 1213 N . Mostafazadeh , A . Kalyanpur , L . Moon , D . Buchanan , L . Berkowitz , O . Biran , and J . Chu - Carroll , “GLUCOSE : Generalized and contextualized story explanations , ” in Proceedings of EMNLP 2020 . Punta Cana , Dominican Republic : Association for Computational Linguistics , November 2020 . B . J . Grosz , A . K . Joshi , and S . Weinstein , “Centering : A framework for modeling the local coherence of discourse , ” Computational Linguistics , vol . 21 , no . 2 , pp . 203 – 225 , 1995 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / J95 - 2003 R . Barzilay and M . Lapata , “Modeling local coherence : An entity - based approach , ” Computational Linguistics , vol . 34 , no . 1 , pp . 1 – 34 , 2008 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1162 / coli . 2008 . 34 . 1 . 1 E . Clark , Y . Ji , and N . A . Smith , “Neural text generation in stories using entity representations as context , ” in Proceedings of NAACL - HLT 2018 . New Orleans , Louisiana : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jun . 2018 , pp . 2250 – 2260 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / N18 - 1204 D . Bamman , S . Popat , and S . Shen , “An annotated dataset of literary entities , ” in Proceedings of NAACL - HLT 2019 ) . Minneapolis , Minnesota : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jun . 2019 , pp . 2138 – 2144 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / N19 - 1220 D . Bamman , O . Lewke , and A . Mansoor , “An annotated dataset of coreference in English literature , ” in Proceedings of LREC 2020 . Marseille , France : European Language Resources Association , May 2020 , pp . 44 – 54 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / 2020 . lrec - 1 . 6 V . I . Propp , Morphology of the Folktale ( Translated by L . Scott ) . University of Texas Press , 1968 . S . Imabuchi and T . Ogata , “Story generation system based on propp theory as a mechanism in narrative generation system , ” in 2012 IEEE Fourth International Conference On Digital Game And Intelligent Toy Enhanced Learning , 2012 , pp . 165 – 167 . F . Peinado and P . Gervás , “Creativity issues in plot generation , ” in Workshop on Computational Creativity , Working Notes , 19th International Joint Conference on AI , 2005 , pp . 45 – 52 . P . Gervás , B . Lönneker - Rodman , J . Meister , and F . Peinado , “Narrative models : Narratology meets artiﬁcial intelligence , ” 2006 . S . Imabuchi and T . Ogata , “A story generation system based on propp theory : As a mechanism in an integrated narrative generation system , ” in Advances in Natural Language Processing , H . Isahara and K . Kanzaki , Eds . Berlin , Heidelberg : Springer Berlin Heidelberg , 2012 , pp . 312 – 321 . T . Ogata and T . Akimoto , Post - narratology through computational and cognitive approaches , ser . Advances in linguistics and communication studies ( ALCS ) book series . Information Science Reference , 2019 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / ci . nii . ac . jp / ncid / BB29667475 A . Bosselut , H . Rashkin , M . Sap , C . Malaviya , A . Celikyilmaz , and Y . Choi , “COMET : Commonsense transformers for automatic knowledge graph construction , ” in Proceedings of ACL 2019 . Florence , Italy : Association for Computational Linguistics , Jul . 2019 , pp . 4762 – 4779 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . aclweb . org / anthology / P19 - 1470 S . Mohammad , “Word affect intensities , ” https : / / www . saifmohammad . com / WebDocs / LREC2018 - word - emo - talk . pdf , accessed : October 23 , 2020 . 25