cells Review Receptor Tyrosine Kinase Ubiquitination and De - Ubiquitination in Signal Transduction and Receptor Trafﬁcking William R . Critchley 1 , Caroline Pellet - Many 2 , Benjamin Ringham - Terry 2 , Michael A . Harrison 3 ID , Ian C . Zachary 2 and Sreenivasan Ponnambalam 1 , * 1 Endothelial Cell Biology Unit , School of Molecular & Cellular Biology , University of Leeds , Leeds LS2 9JT , UK ; w . r . critchley @ leeds . ac . uk 2 Centre for Cardiovascular Biology & Medicine , Rayne Building , University College London , London WC1E 6PT , UK ; c . pellet - many @ ucl . ac . uk ( C . P . - M . ) ; benjamin . ringham - terry @ ucl . ac . uk ( B . R . - T . ) ; i . zachary @ ucl . ac . uk ( I . C . Z . ) 3 School of Biomedical Sciences , University of Leeds , Leeds LS2 9JT , UK ; m . a . harrison @ leeds . ac . uk * Correspondence : s . ponnambalam @ leeds . ac . uk ; Tel . : + 44 - 113 - 343 - 3007 Received : 13 February 2018 ; Accepted : 13 March 2018 ; Published : 15 March 2018 Abstract : Receptor tyrosine kinases ( RTKs ) are membrane - based sensors that enable rapid communication between cells and their environment . Evidence is now emerging that interdependent regulatory mechanisms , such as membrane trafﬁcking , ubiquitination , proteolysis and gene expression , have substantial effects on RTK signal transduction and cellular responses . Different RTKs exhibit both basal and ligand - stimulated ubiquitination , linked to trafﬁcking through different intracellular compartments including the secretory pathway , plasma membrane , endosomes and lysosomes . The ubiquitin ligase superfamily comprising the E1 , E2 and E3 enzymes are increasingly implicated in this post - translational modiﬁcation by adding mono - and polyubiquitin tags to RTKs . Conversely , removal of these ubiquitin tags by proteases called de - ubiquitinases ( DUBs ) enables RTK recycling for another round of ligand sensing and signal transduction . The endocytosis of basal and activated RTKs from the plasma membrane is closely linked to controlled proteolysis after trafﬁcking and delivery to late endosomes and lysosomes . Proteolytic RTK fragments can also have the capacity to move to compartments such as the nucleus and regulate gene expression . Such mechanistic diversity now provides new opportunities for modulating RTK - regulated cellular responses in health and disease states . Keywords : receptor tyrosine kinases ; ubiquitin ; ubiquitin ligases ; de - ubiquitinases ; signal transduction ; trafficking ; proteolysis 1 . Introduction Receptor tyrosine kinases ( RTKs ) represent a family of integral membrane proteins exempliﬁed in humans by 58 proteins divided into 20 subfamilies . These include the epidermal growth factor receptor ( ErbB ) , vascular endothelial growth factor receptor ( VEGFR ) , platelet - derived growth factor receptor ( PDGFR ) and insulin - like receptor ( IR ) families [ 1 – 3 ] ( Figure 1 ) . All RTKs exhibit similar domain organisation with an extracellular ligand - binding domain , a single transmembrane region with α - helical propensity followed by a cytoplasmic domain with tyrosine kinase activity . The unique ligand - binding properties of different RTKs are determined by features in the extracellular domain such as ﬁbronectin III - like repeats [ 4 , 5 ] , cysteine - rich motifs [ 6 , 7 ] , immunoglobulin - like domains [ 8 ] , leucine - rich and glycine - rich repeats / motifs [ 9 , 10 ] ( Figure 1 ) . Interestingly , two branches of the RTK superfamily contain long ~ 60 – 100 residue inserts within the TK domain , with potentially signiﬁcant Cells 2018 , 7 , 22 ; doi : 10 . 3390 / cells7030022 www . mdpi . com / journal / cells Cells 2018 , 7 , 22 2 of 24 regulatory roles . Deletion of the kinase insert from VEGFR2 increases tyrosine kinase activity in the activation loop , but also induces a loss of Y1175 phosphorylation and diminished signaling through phospholipase C γ 1 ( PLC γ 1 ) [ 11 ] . Cells 2018 , 6 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 22 regulatory roles . Deletion of the kinase insert from VEGFR2 increases tyrosine kinase activity in the activation loop , but also induces a loss of Y1175 phosphorylation and diminished signaling through phospholipase C γ 1 ( PLC γ 1 ) [ 11 ] . Figure 1 . Overview of the domain architecture of the 20 human RTK families . Each RTK contains five fundamental structures : an extracellular ligand - binding domain , a short helical transmembrane region , a juxtamembrane region , cytoplasmic domain with tyrosine kinase activity and a flexible C - terminal tail region . The extracellular ligand - binding domain displays significant variability between families , with notable additions of motifs rich in glycine , cysteine or leucine and immunoglobulin - like domains amongst others . The insulin receptor family differs from the rest due to its pre - assembled multimeric complex . Ligand engagement with the RTK extracellular domain induces conformational changes resulting in RTK activation and downstream signal transduction . For RTKs such as the ErbB , VEGFR or PDGFR families , RTK binding to ligand promotes homo - or heterodimer formation ( within each family ) . In other cases , such as IR , a pre - assembled complex is activated by ligand binding ( Figure 1 ) . Interestingly , substantial variability can be observed in the extent of monomeric and pre - formed dimeric RTKs within the same RTK family [ 12 ] . One consistent aspect of ligand binding to RTK is transmission of conformational changes through each RTK , resulting in conformational changes in the TK domain [ 12 ] . Such changes in TK disposition invariably lead to phosphorylation of neighbouring proteins including other RTKs , signaling adaptors , enzymes and kinases [ 13 ] . Activation of the TK domain causes hydrolysis of bound ATP , resulting in the transfer of the γ phosphate group onto the hydroxyl group of a nearby tyrosine side chain . Tyrosine autophosphorylation of the RTK is an early and rate - determining step in controlling the flow of information into different signaling circuits , which in turn modulate cellular responses . Importantly , such modifications are also reversible via the action of protein tyrosine phosphatases ( PTPs ) , which enhances flexibility in controlling signaling output and cell function . 2 . Signal Transduction The details of RTK - mediated signal transduction are covered only briefly here , to set the subsequent discussion in context . In - depth analysis of the mechanisms of RTK - mediated signal transduction is featured in this thematic issue , and reviews elsewhere [ 3 , 14 – 16 ] . Briefly , RTKs can undergo activation by both membrane - bound and soluble ligands . RTK activation by ligand induces Figure 1 . Overview of the domain architecture of the 20 human RTK families . Each RTK contains ﬁve fundamental structures : an extracellular ligand - binding domain , a short helical transmembrane region , a juxtamembrane region , cytoplasmic domain with tyrosine kinase activity and a ﬂexible C - terminal tail region . The extracellular ligand - binding domain displays signiﬁcant variability between families , with notable additions of motifs rich in glycine , cysteine or leucine and immunoglobulin - like domains amongst others . The insulin receptor family differs from the rest due to its pre - assembled multimeric complex . Ligand engagement with the RTK extracellular domain induces conformational changes resulting in RTK activation and downstream signal transduction . For RTKs such as the ErbB , VEGFR or PDGFR families , RTK binding to ligand promotes homo - or heterodimer formation ( within each family ) . In other cases , such as IR , a pre - assembled complex is activated by ligand binding ( Figure 1 ) . Interestingly , substantial variability can be observed in the extent of monomeric and pre - formed dimeric RTKs within the same RTK family [ 12 ] . One consistent aspect of ligand binding to RTK is transmission of conformational changes through each RTK , resulting in conformational changes in the TK domain [ 12 ] . Such changes in TK disposition invariably lead to phosphorylation of neighbouring proteins including other RTKs , signaling adaptors , enzymes and kinases [ 13 ] . Activation of the TK domain causes hydrolysis of bound ATP , resulting in the transfer of the γ phosphate group onto the hydroxyl group of a nearby tyrosine side chain . Tyrosine autophosphorylation of the RTK is an early and rate - determining step in controlling the ﬂow of information into different signaling circuits , which in turn modulate cellular responses . Importantly , such modiﬁcations are also reversible via the action of protein tyrosine phosphatases ( PTPs ) , which enhances ﬂexibility in controlling signaling output and cell function . 2 . Signal Transduction The details of RTK - mediated signal transduction are covered only briefly here , to set the subsequent discussion in context . In - depth analysis of the mechanisms of RTK - mediated signal transduction is featured in this thematic issue , and reviews elsewhere [ 3 , 14 – 16 ] . Briefly , RTKs can undergo activation by Cells 2018 , 7 , 22 3 of 24 both membrane - bound and soluble ligands . RTK activation by ligand induces tyrosine phosphorylation at multiple sites within the cytoplasmic domain , which triggers recruitment of specific adaptors and enzymes to the cytosolic face of the plasma membrane . In the case of EGFR , activation results in the recruitment of Grb2 adaptor which binds to specific phosphotyrosine epitopes , further resulting in binding to the son - of - sevenless ( Sos ) guanine exchange factor ( Figure 2 ) [ 17 ] . Recruitment of Sos to this locality , enables interaction with plasma membrane - localized Ras , a proto - oncoprotein and GTP - hydrolyzing enzyme ( GTPase ) . Sos stimulates Ras - GDP to exchange the bound nucleotide and move into the Ras - GTP state , thus triggering a set of subsequent downstream reactions which is the canonical mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) pathway ( Figure 2 ) . Other downstream targets of activated EGFR include PLC γ 1 , which is again recruited by binding to specific phosphotyrosine epitopes , followed by hydrolysis of plasma membrane - localized phospholipid , phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PIP 2 ) . This hydrolysis generates membrane - bound diacylglycerol and soluble inositol - 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ( IP 3 ) , rapidly diffusible second messengers with potent effects on cell function ( Figure 2 ) . Similar pathways can be activated by the different members of the RTK superfamily ; however , the location , intensity and duration of such signaling events exhibit unique patterns depending on ligand , RTK and cell - type . In this manner , the complexity of signaling mechanisms has evolved to exquisitely control cell , tissue and animal function . Cells 2018 , 6 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 22 tyrosine phosphorylation at multiple sites within the cytoplasmic domain , which triggers recruitment of specific adaptors and enzymes to the cytosolic face of the plasma membrane . In the case of EGFR ( ErbB1 ) , activation results in the recruitment of Grb2 adaptor which binds to specific phosphotyrosine epitopes , further resulting in binding to the son - of - sevenless ( Sos ) guanine exchange factor ( Figure 2 ) [ 17 ] . Recruitment of Sos to this locality , enables interaction with plasma membrane - localized Ras , a proto - oncoprotein and GTP - hydrolyzing enzyme ( GTPase ) . Sos stimulates Ras - GDP to exchange the bound nucleotide and move into the Ras - GTP state , thus triggering a set of subsequent downstream reactions which is the canonical mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) pathway ( Figure 2 ) . Other downstream targets of activated EGFR include PLC γ 1 , which is again recruited by binding to specific phosphotyrosine epitopes , followed by hydrolysis of plasma membrane - localized phospholipid , phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PIP 2 ) . This hydrolysis generates membrane - bound diacylglycerol and soluble inositol - 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ( IP 3 ) , rapidly diffusible second messengers with potent effects on cell function ( Figure 2 ) . Similar pathways can be activated by the different members of the RTK superfamily ; however , the location , intensity and duration of such signaling events exhibit unique patterns depending on ligand , RTK and cell - type . In this manner , the complexity of signaling mechanisms has evolved to exquisitely control cell , tissue and animal function . Figure 2 . SignalingEpithelial growth factor receptor signal transduction . Stimulation of EGFR with the EGF ligand initiates a series of signaling cascades that significantly alter cellular function . EGFR activation triggers the recruitment of Grb2 and son - of - sevenless to the plasma membrane , promoting Ras - GDP to Ras - GTP transition and activation of the MAPK pathway . Separately , EGFR activation stimulates PLC γ 1 activity and PIP 2 hydrolysis to release diacylglycerol and IP 3 . EGF also mediates downstream signaling through the PI3K / Akt and JAK / STAT pathways to induce cellular changes . 3 . Plasma Membrane Endocytosis An increasingly important concept in RTK functionality is membrane trafficking . The amount of plasma membrane RTK ( and thus free RTK available for exogenous ligand sensing ) is substantially influenced by the rate of newly synthesized RTK arriving from the secretory pathway , balanced by the rate of internalization ( endocytosis ) at the plasma membrane . Typically , a newly synthesized RTK polypeptide is made as a Type I integral membrane protein which undergoes translocation into the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) , signal peptide cleavage , usually followed by initial stages of N - and O - linked glycosylation [ 18 ] . Interestingly , a recent study suggests that activation of EGFR causes increased gene expression of components of the COPII machinery that mediates ER - to - Golgi Figure 2 . SignalingEpithelial growth factor receptor signal transduction . Stimulation of EGFR with the EGF ligand initiates a series of signaling cascades that signiﬁcantly alter cellular function . EGFR activation triggers the recruitment of Grb2 and son - of - sevenless to the plasma membrane , promoting Ras - GDP to Ras - GTP transition and activation of the MAPK pathway . Separately , EGFR activation stimulates PLC γ 1 activity and PIP 2 hydrolysis to release diacylglycerol and IP 3 . EGF also mediates downstream signaling through the PI3K / Akt and JAK / STAT pathways to induce cellular changes . 3 . Plasma Membrane Endocytosis An increasingly important concept in RTK functionality is membrane trafﬁcking . The amount of plasma membrane RTK ( and thus free RTK available for exogenous ligand sensing ) is substantially inﬂuenced by the rate of newly synthesized RTK arriving from the secretory pathway , balanced by the rate of internalization ( endocytosis ) at the plasma membrane . Typically , a newly synthesized RTK polypeptide is made as a Type I integral membrane protein which undergoes translocation into the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) , signal peptide cleavage , usually followed by initial stages of N - and O - linked glycosylation [ 18 ] . Interestingly , a recent study suggests that activation of Cells 2018 , 7 , 22 4 of 24 EGFR causes increased gene expression of components of the COPII machinery that mediates ER - to - Golgi trafﬁcking [ 19 ] , suggesting that modulating RTK secretion could have major impacts on animal physiology . Subsequent exit from the ER and delivery to the Golgi complex is marked by extensive glycosylation within the different Golgi subcompartments ( cis , medial , trans ) . Exit from the most distal Golgi subcompartment trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) via the constitutive secretory pathway results in delivery to the plasma membrane . Notably , some RTKs display steady - state or distinct patterns of Golgi localization , but the mechanisms underlying such distribution are unclear . For example , c - Met and EGFR are both routed through the Golgi complex to the basolateral plasma membrane in polarized epithelial cells [ 20 , 21 ] . VEGFR1 is reported to be largely present within a Golgi - like subcompartment in endothelial cells but translocates to the cell surface via a cytosolic calcium ion - dependent membrane trafﬁcking route [ 22 ] . VEGFR2 shows signiﬁcant steady - state Golgi localization in a SNARE - and microtubule - dependent manner with functional consequences for signal transduction and new blood vessel sprouting i . e . , angiogenesis [ 23 – 25 ] . Both tropomysin receptor kinase A ( TrkA ) and EGFR trafﬁcking through the Golgi complex is SNARE - dependent with functional consequences for signal transduction and functionality [ 26 , 27 ] . Interestingly , one study reports that diffusible reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) can promote ligand - independent phosphorylation of VEGFR2 within the Golgi complex , resulting in proteolysis and loss of transport to the cell surface [ 28 ] . A recent study also suggests that ubiquitination programs the marked loss of maturation of newly synthesized VEGFR2 , associated with a reduction in cell surface expression , loss of signaling and diminished levels of angiogenesis [ 29 ] . Complex mechanisms exist to direct both basal ( non - activated , resting , steady - state ) and activated RTK into transport pathways that deliver these membrane - bound enzymes to the endosome - lysosome network . Endocytosis of RTKs is well - documented , with clathrin - dependent endocytosis ( CDE ) of both basal and activated RTKs ( Figure 3 ) . STAT3 signaling downstream of PDGFR β is reliant upon its internalization , which can be mediated by CDE [ 30 ] . Regulation of EGFR [ 31 – 33 ] and VEGFR2 [ 34 – 37 ] internalization by CDE impacts on the intensity and duration of downstream signaling . Furthermore , EGF stimulation of EGFR induces PLC γ 1 and calcium - dependent signaling responsible for the selective internalization of the receptor by CDE [ 38 ] . The vascular regulator Tie2 is linked to internalization via CDE on endothelial cells [ 39 ] . There is also evidence that EGFR activation leads to phosphorylation of components of the CDE machinery , thus modulating the rate of internalization [ 40 , 41 ] . Signaling adaptors such as Grb2 , which are recruited to EGFR , further modulate CDE [ 42 ] . Recent evidence suggests that the adaptor intersectin - s is an important factor in CDE - dependent internalization of EGFR and downstream signaling , and represents a key regulator of recycling [ 43 ] . Plasma membrane microdomains containing either lipid rafts or CDE machinery can specifically recruit EGFR [ 44 , 45 ] . It has also been postulated that EGFR undergoes differential post - translational modifications and proteolytic fates depending on its association with CDE or lipid rafts [ 46 ] . One likelihood is that CDE modulates RTK - linked early trafficking events and signal transduction but does not regulate proteolysis in later compartments such as late endosomes and lysosomes [ 32 ] . However , clathrin - independent endocytosis ( CIE ) has also been documented for RTKs such as EGFR , PDGFR β and VEGFR2 , with roles for lipid rafts , caveolae and macropinocytosis postulated to direct the internalization and delivery to endosomes [ 30 , 47 , 48 ] . EGFR association with caveolae and lipid rafts is dependent on a cysteine - rich region of the extracellular domain close to the transmembrane region [ 49 ] , suggesting involvement of accessory membrane proteins or co - receptors . VEGFR2 association with CIE - dependent pathways such as lipid rafts and caveolae [ 50 ] is balanced by internalization via CDE [ 22 , 34 ] . Another RTK called ROR is implicated in functioning as a scaffold to bind cavin - 1 and caveolin - 1 , structural components of caveolae [ 51 ] . RTK ligands , such as insulin , EGF , and VEGF - A , stimulate c - Src recruitment , activation and tyrosine phosphorylation of caveolin - 1 [ 52 – 54 ] . An emerging theme from multiple studies is that RTK recruitment to different microdomains is dynamic , and potentially activation - dependent . RTK association with either CDE or CIE leads to modulation Cells 2018 , 7 , 22 5 of 24 of internalization , trafficking and proteolysis , which has major consequences for downstream signal transduction events . It is likely that RTK activation could promote recruitment of downstream effectors ( e . g . , c - Src ) or directly stimulate phosphorylation of structural components of CDE and / or CIE pathways that promote or inhibit inclusion into microdomains . Such microdomain clusters could mediate stable plasma membrane association or specify internalization and delivery to endosomes . Cells 2018 , 6 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 22 promote recruitment of downstream effectors ( e . g . , c - Src ) or directly stimulate phosphorylation of structural components of CDE and / or CIE pathways that promote or inhibit inclusion into microdomains . Such microdomain clusters could mediate stable plasma membrane association or specify internalization and delivery to endosomes . Figure 3 . Ubiquitin - mediated internalization of the RTK . RTKs are internalized via both clathrin - dependent ( CDE ) and clathrin - independent ( CIE ) pathways following ubiquitination . Essential endocytic components including epsin and eps15 are recruited to the ubiquitinated RTK . Epsin contains two ubiquitin - binding motifs allowing its recognition of the internalization signal , enabling uptake via both CDE and CIE . Both pathways converge in endosomes following the shedding of clathrin from the vesicular surface . Once within the endocytic vesicle , the RTK is delivered by fusion with the Rab5a - expressing early endosome . At this point , RTK fate is decided by either direction to Rab4a - expressing endosomes for recycling or to multivesicular bodies for lysosomal degradation . Increasingly , it has been postulated that many activated RTKs including EGFR and VEGFR2 trigger important signaling events in endosomes , including the canonical mitogen activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) and phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) signaling pathways [ 31 , 55 , 56 ] . Enhanced EGFR signaling is observed when trafficking from early to late endosomes is slowed , indicating the importance of the endosomal compartment as a signaling station [ 57 ] . Another RTK , c - Met , upon activation , requires endocytosis and delivery to endosomes to signal through the STAT3 pathway [ 58 ] . The capacity of an activated RTK to signal from a variety of endosomal compartments appears likely . Indeed , c - Met al . so displays differential signaling patterns depending upon its localization within peripheral or perinuclear endosomes [ 59 ] . Activated PDGFR can signal to the PI3K and PLC γ 1 pathways from endosomes , leading to physiological responses [ 60 ] . Notably , blocking VEGFR2 endocytosis at the cell surface diminishes signal transduction due to reduced endosome occupancy [ 35 ] . The extended residency of VEGFR2 within sorting endosomes is associated with a loss of signaling , demonstrating the complexity in endosomal regulation of signal transduction downstream of the RTK [ 61 ] . Further RTK trafficking to multivescular bodies and lysosomes is dependent on ubiquitin chain recognition closely linked to proteolysis and signal cessation . 4 . Ubiquitin Modification and Ubiquitin Ligases An important aspect of biochemical regulation of eukaryote function is the use of small , ubiquitin - related protein tags to target proteins for destruction to enable down - regulation and recycling of protein - based components . We now know that such ubiquitin - like tags can cause three different outcomes : target proteins for proteolysis , target proteins to specific locations within a cell and / or modulate biochemical or enzymatic activity . In the case of RTKs , there are increasing Figure 3 . Ubiquitin - mediated internalization of the RTK . RTKs are internalized via both clathrin - dependent ( CDE ) and clathrin - independent ( CIE ) pathways following ubiquitination . Essential endocytic components including epsin and eps15 are recruited to the ubiquitinated RTK . Epsin contains two ubiquitin - binding motifs allowing its recognition of the internalization signal , enabling uptake via both CDE and CIE . Both pathways converge in endosomes following the shedding of clathrin ( orange circles ) from the vesicular surface . Once within the endocytic vesicle , the RTK is delivered by fusion with the Rab5a - expressing early endosome . At this point , RTK fate is decided by either direction to Rab4a - expressing endosomes for recycling or to multivesicular bodies for lysosomal degradation . Increasingly , it has been postulated that many activated RTKs including EGFR and VEGFR2 trigger important signaling events in endosomes , including the canonical mitogen activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) and phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) signaling pathways [ 31 , 55 , 56 ] . Enhanced EGFR signaling is observed when trafficking from early to late endosomes is slowed , indicating the importance of the endosomal compartment as a signaling station [ 57 ] . Another RTK , c - Met , upon activation , requires endocytosis and delivery to endosomes to signal through the STAT3 pathway [ 58 ] . The capacity of an activated RTK to signal from a variety of endosomal compartments appears likely . Indeed , c - Met al . so displays differential signaling patterns depending upon its localization within peripheral or perinuclear endosomes [ 59 ] . Activated PDGFR can signal to the PI3K and PLC γ 1 pathways from endosomes , leading to physiological responses [ 60 ] . Notably , blocking VEGFR2 endocytosis at the cell surface diminishes signal transduction due to reduced endosome occupancy [ 35 ] . The extended residency of VEGFR2 within sorting endosomes is associated with a loss of signaling , demonstrating the complexity in endosomal regulation of signal transduction downstream of the RTK [ 61 ] . Further RTK trafficking to multivescular bodies and lysosomes is dependent on ubiquitin chain recognition closely linked to proteolysis and signal cessation . 4 . Ubiquitin Modiﬁcation and Ubiquitin Ligases An important aspect of biochemical regulation of eukaryote function is the use of small , ubiquitin - related protein tags to target proteins for destruction to enable down - regulation and recycling Cells 2018 , 7 , 22 6 of 24 of protein - based components . We now know that such ubiquitin - like tags can cause three different outcomes : target proteins for proteolysis , target proteins to speciﬁc locations within a cell and / or modulate biochemical or enzymatic activity . In the case of RTKs , there are increasing examples of RTK modiﬁcation by the attachment of monomer or polymeric forms of ubiquitin to lysine residues at one or more sites within their cytoplasmic domains [ 62 – 64 ] . Recently , it has been noted that basal ( non - activated ) VEGFR2 undergoes ubiquitination , which consequently has substantial effects of ligand - stimulated signal transduction and cellular responses [ 65 ] . The attachment of ubiquitin to RTKs such as the ErbB and VEGFRs [ 65 – 67 ] appears to mediate inclusion into CDE and efﬁcient delivery through the endosome - lysosome system for proteolysis . In this way , RTK degradation enables cessation of signal transduction . Ubiquitin is a highly conserved 76 amino acid polypeptide encoded by 4 human genes , i . e . , UBB , UBC , UBA52 and RPS27A [ 68 , 69 ] . UBB and UBC represent polymeric concatemers with three and nine consecutive repeats respectively . UBA52 and RPS27A encode for monoubiquitin fused to the ribosomal proteins L40 and S27A . Both ubiquitin forms are processed to release free ubiquitin monomers to maintain an intracellular ‘free’ ubiquitin pool . This steady - state ubiquitin pool is utilized by 3 enzyme families , termed E1 , E2 and E3 ubiquitin ligases . The E1 ( ubiquitin activating enzymes ) , E2 ( ubiquitin conjugating enzymes ) and E3 ( ubiquitin ligases ) , work in concert to orchestrate addition of ubiquitin to the ε - amino side chain on specific lysine residues within a protein substrate or target . The E1 family has 10 members , with only 2 that are specific to ubiquitin chain addition . These 2 enzymes , UBA1 [ 70 ] and UBA6 [ 71 ] , are structurally similar and are able to initiate the first step of the ubiquitination cascade ( Figure 4 ) . The remaining 8 E1 family members are UBA2 [ 72 ] , UBA3 [ 73 ] , UBA4 / MOCS3 [ 74 ] , UBA5 [ 75 ] , UBA7 [ 76 ] , NAE1 [ 77 ] , SAE1 [ 72 ] and ATG7 [ 78 ] , which are responsible for activation of ubiquitin - like tags for addition to target substrates . These protein tags include small ubiquitin - related modifier ( SUMO ) , neural precursor cell expressed , developmentally downregulated 8 ( NEDD8 ) , and ubiquitin - fold modifier ( Ufm ) . Although sumoylation , neddylation and ufmylation use different biochemical pathways from ubiquitination , the essential features of the cellular machinery involved is mechanistically similar , and thus require interactions with downstream E2 and E3 enzymes . Cells 2018 , 7 , 22 7 of 24 Cells 2018 , 6 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 22 examples of RTK modification by the attachment of monomer or polymeric forms of ubiquitin to lysine residues at one or more sites within their cytoplasmic domains [ 62 – 64 ] . Recently , it has been noted that basal ( non - activated ) VEGFR2 undergoes ubiquitination , which consequently has substantial effects of ligand - stimulated signal transduction and cellular responses [ 65 ] . The attachment of ubiquitin to RTKs such as the ErbB and VEGFRs [ 65 – 67 ] appears to mediate inclusion into CDE and efficient delivery through the endosome - lysosome system for proteolysis . In this way , RTK degradation enables cessation of signal transduction . Ubiquitin is a highly conserved 76 amino acid polypeptide encoded by 4 human genes , i . e . , UBB , UBC , UBA52 and RPS27A [ 68 , 69 ] . UBB and UBC represent polymeric concatemers with three and nine consecutive repeats respectively . UBA52 and RPS27A encode for monoubiquitin fused to the ribosomal proteins L40 and S27A . Both ubiquitin forms are processed to release free ubiquitin monomers to maintain an intracellular ‘free’ ubiquitin pool . This steady - state ubiquitin pool is utilized by 3 enzyme families , termed E1 , E2 and E3 ubiquitin ligases . The E1 ( ubiquitin activating enzymes ) , E2 ( ubiquitin conjugating enzymes ) and E3 ( ubiquitin ligases ) , work in concert to orchestrate addition of ubiquitin to the ε - amino side chain on specific lysine residues within a protein substrate or target . The E1 family has 10 members , with only 2 that are specific to ubiquitin chain addition . These 2 enzymes , UBA1 [ 70 ] and UBA6 [ 71 ] , are structurally similar and are able to initiate the first step of the ubiquitination cascade ( Figure 4 ) . The remaining 8 E1 family members are UBA2 [ 72 ] , UBA3 [ 73 ] , UBA4 / MOCS3 [ 74 ] , UBA5 [ 75 ] , UBA7 [ 76 ] , NAE1 [ 77 ] , SAE1 [ 72 ] and ATG7 [ 78 ] , which are responsible for activation of ubiquitin - like tags for addition to target substrates . These protein tags include small ubiquitin - related modifier ( SUMO ) , neural precursor cell expressed , developmentally downregulated 8 ( NEDD8 ) , and ubiquitin - fold modifier ( Ufm ) . Although sumoylation , neddylation and ufmylation use different biochemical pathways from ubiquitination , the essential features of the cellular machinery involved is mechanistically similar , and thus require interactions with downstream E2 and E3 enzymes . Figure 4 . Ubiquitin activation and conjugating by E1 and E2 enzymes . The E1 enzyme binds to either ubiquitin or ubiquitin - like modifier and Mg - ATP , resulting in ATP hydrolysis . This allows the adenylation of the ubiquitin / ubiquitin - like modifier and release of pyrophosphate . This is followed by the formation of a thioester bond between a cysteine residue within the E1 and the C - terminal glycine of the ubiquitin molecule accompanied by release of AMP . The E1 subsequently undergoes a second round of ubiquitin loading at the adenylation site prior to interaction with the E2 . The transfer of the ubiquitin from E1 to a cysteine residue on the E2 occurs via transthioesterification , allowing the release of the E1 . Figure 4 . Ubiquitin activation and conjugating by E1 and E2 enzymes . The E1 enzyme binds to either ubiquitin or ubiquitin - like modifier and Mg - ATP , resulting in ATP hydrolysis . This allows the adenylation of the ubiquitin / ubiquitin - like modifier and release of pyrophosphate . This is followed by the formation of a thioester bond between a cysteine residue within the E1 and the C - terminal glycine of the ubiquitin molecule accompanied by release of AMP . The E1 subsequently undergoes a second round of ubiquitin loading at the adenylation site prior to interaction with the E2 . The transfer of the ubiquitin from E1 to a cysteine residue on the E2 occurs via transthioesterification , allowing the release of the E1 . E1s bind their cognate ubiquitin or ubiquitin - like modiﬁer and Mg - ATP linked to subsequent ATP hydrolysis to AMP and pyrophosphate , enabling thioester bond formation between a critical cysteine side chain and the carboxyl - terminal glycine in ubiquitin ( Figure 4 ) . This E1 - Ub subsequently undergoes a second round of ubiquitin linkage and the dual - loaded E1 - Ub species is now competent for interaction with E2 enzymes ( Figure 4 ) . Recent evidence demonstrates that UBA5 differs from the other E1 enzymes in its requirement for trans - binding of the UFM1 to the UBA5 homodimer [ 79 ] . UFM1 binding stabilises the UBA5 homodimer , enhancing ATP binding [ 80 ] . Recruitment of an appropriate E2 to E1 - Ub is a critical event in the progression of the ubiquitination cycle , and handover of these ‘charged’ ubiquitin substrate onto E2 enzymes ( Figure 4 ) . This E2 ubiquitin ligase family encoded by ~ 45 genes is deﬁned by a conserved ~ 150 residue ubiquitin - conjugating ( UBC ) domain , exempliﬁed by a cysteine residue needed for the transfer of the charged ubiquitin ( from E1 ) via a thioester bond with E2 , and a histidine - proline - asparagine ( HPN ) triad that regulates E2 activity . The histidine residue represents a critical structural element , providing functional stability within the E2 enzyme [ 81 ] . The asparagine residue within the HPN triad catalyses the formation of an isopeptide bond between the ‘charged’ ubiquitin and the target substrate . This occurs by stabilization of the oxyanion intermediate which regulates interaction of the E2 - ubiquitin thioester with target lysine side chain on the target substrate [ 81 , 82 ] . However , this step also requires E2 interaction with a corresponding or speciﬁc E3 ubiquitin ligase . The E3 protein can function as an adaptor but can also possess catalytic properties . Such features enable the target substrate to achieve close molecular proximity to the charged E2 - Ub species . Although the E2 family already provides diversity , the E3 family is even more diverse with > 700 E3s encoded within the human genome ; the exact number of E3 family members uncertain at present . Substrate speciﬁcity is dependent on the E2 : E3 complex , with a single E2 able to interact with multiple E3s . E3 family members can be subdivided into three groups , including the homologous to the E6AP carboxyl terminus ( HECT ) , really interesting new gene ( RING ) and RING between RING ( RBR ) groups [ 83 ] ( Figure 5A ) . The HECT group , which was the ﬁrst E3 class to be described , Cells 2018 , 7 , 22 8 of 24 has 28 members [ 84 , 85 ] . The HECTs include a C - terminal domain containing a catalytic cysteine residue and an N - terminal domain with an E2 binding motif [ 86 ] ( Figure 5A ) . RING E3s comprise the largest group , with at least 600 members , including the structurally similar U - box proteins [ 87 ] , and contain conserved cysteine and histidine residues in the core that bind zinc ions . The RBR group members have two RING domains separated by an in - between RING domain [ 83 ] . Mechanistically , HECT enzymes form an intermediate thioester bond with the carboxyl - terminus glycine residue of the charged ubiquitin ( attached to E2 ) prior to transfer to the target substrate [ 88 ] ( Figure 5B ) . In contrast , RING members appear to facilitate direct transfer of the charged ubiquitin from E2 to the lysine side chain on the target substrate [ 89 ] . The formation of the E2 - Ub : E3 RING complex could facilitate a change in the ‘closed’ conformation in the E2 - Ub intermediate , thereby priming the thioester linkage for nucleophilic attack on the closely aligned lysine ( s ) within the target substrate [ 90 ] ( Figure 5B ) . RBRs display hybrid features of both RING and HECT groups . Typically , an RBR has E2 binding capacity through the N - terminal RING1 domain and a catalytic cysteine residue within the C - terminal RING2 domain allows transfer of charged ubiquitin from the E2 intermediate to the RBR , before being conjugated to a speciﬁc lysine side chain on the target substrate ( Figure 5B ) . Cells 2018 , 7 , 22 9 of 24 Cells 2018 , 6 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 22 Figure 5 . HECT , RING and RING between RING E3 families differ in their mechanism of ubiquitin transfer to substrates . ( A ) The major E3 families HECT , RING and RING between RING display distinct structures that determine their mode of ubiquitin transfer . HECT E3s have a hinge loop connecting their N - lobe , which contains the E2 binding site , with their C - lobe containing the cysteine residue critical for ubiquitin linkage . RING E3s typically display conserved cysteine and histidine residues within their core structure that stabilise the presence of central zinc ions . The loop structures surrounding the zinc ions represent the conserved E2 binding site . RING between RING E3s are complex multidomain proteins containing two RING domains separated by an ‘in - between RING’ domain . The N - terminal RING contains the E2 binding site and the C - terminal RING contains the catalytic cysteine residue . ( B ) The mechanism of ubiquitin transfer differs between the E3 families . HECT E3s bind to the substrate and ubiquitin - charged E2 , which induces a change in the orientation of the hinge loop to move the C - lobe and catalytic cysteine into closer proximity to the ubiquitin . Ubiquitin is then transferred from the E2 to the C - lobe cysteine , enabling a return to the original lobe orientation and transfer of the ubiquitin from the HECT E3 to a lysine residue on the substrate . RING E3s differ significantly from this as their role is more of a scaffold or adaptor that binds both E2 and substrate . This brings both ubiquitin and substrate into close proximity and enables the direct transfer of ubiquitin from the E2 to a lysine residue on the substrate . Mechanistically , the RBR E3 acts in a more similar manner to their HECT counterparts . The RBR binds the E2 - ubiquitin to its N - terminal RING and binds the substrate with its C - terminal RING . An intermediate thioester bond is formed between the ubiquitin and the C - terminal RING . The ubiquitin molecule is subsequently transferred to a lysine residue on the target substrate that is bound by the C - terminal E3 RING . Figure 5 . HECT , RING and RING between RING E3 families differ in their mechanism of ubiquitin transfer to substrates . ( A ) The major E3 families HECT , RING and RING between RING display distinct structures that determine their mode of ubiquitin transfer . HECT E3s have a hinge loop connecting their N - lobe , which contains the E2 binding site , with their C - lobe containing the cysteine residue critical for ubiquitin linkage . RING E3s typically display conserved cysteine and histidine residues within their core structure that stabilise the presence of central zinc ions . The loop structures surrounding the zinc ions represent the conserved E2 binding site . RING between RING E3s are complex multidomain proteins containing two RING domains separated by an ‘in - between RING’ domain . The N - terminal RING contains the E2 binding site and the C - terminal RING contains the catalytic cysteine residue . ( B ) The mechanism of ubiquitin transfer differs between the E3 families . HECT E3s bind to the substrate and ubiquitin - charged E2 , which induces a change in the orientation of the hinge loop to move the C - lobe and catalytic cysteine into closer proximity to the ubiquitin . Ubiquitin is then transferred from the E2 to the C - lobe cysteine , enabling a return to the original lobe orientation and transfer of the ubiquitin from the HECT E3 to a lysine residue on the substrate . RING E3s differ signiﬁcantly from this as their role is more of a scaffold or adaptor that binds both E2 and substrate . This brings both ubiquitin and substrate into close proximity and enables the direct transfer of ubiquitin from the E2 to a lysine residue on the substrate . Mechanistically , the RBR E3 acts in a more similar manner to their HECT counterparts . The RBR binds the E2 - ubiquitin to its N - terminal RING and binds the substrate with its C - terminal RING . An intermediate thioester bond is formed between the ubiquitin and the C - terminal RING . The ubiquitin molecule is subsequently transferred to a lysine residue on the target substrate that is bound by the C - terminal E3 RING . Cells 2018 , 7 , 22 10 of 24 Multiple types of ubiquitination chains attached to target substrates are dependent on the 7 lysine residues ( K6 , K11 , K27 , K29 , K33 , K48 , K63 ) and free primary amino terminus in the N - terminal methionine ( M1 ) within the ubiquitin polypeptide [ 91 ] . The nature of polyubiquitin chains is highly variable , with the potential for several branches of ubiquitin chains to form at different lysine residues on the same substrate - bound ubiquitin , and the possibility of mixed - chain species with other ubiquitin - like proteins also being found within the same chain alongside ubiquitin [ 92 ] . This corresponds to a signiﬁcant number of potential effects on cellular function , although limited data is available for atypical chain linkages . One such function of ubiquitination that has been explored in some depth is in the DNA damage response pathway [ 93 – 98 ] . K6 and K33 polyubiquitin chains in particular have been linked with the DNA damage response [ 99 ] , alongside K27 chain modiﬁcation of chromatin [ 100 ] , although further research is necessary to conﬁrm these roles . Branched K11 polyubiquitin chains demonstrate more efﬁcient trafﬁcking of the tagged substrate to the proteasome than other types of ubiquitin linkage , suggesting a major role in protein degradation [ 101 ] . K29 chains may play an inhibitory role in signaling through the Wnt / β - catenin pathway [ 102 ] . K48 chains are the most commonly observed linkage type and provide a strong signal for protein degradation [ 103 ] . K63 chains are also associated with protein degradation [ 104 ] , as well as cell signaling pathways [ 105 ] . Mixed K48 - K63 branched species may also play a major role in NF - κ B signaling [ 106 ] , but also direct tagged proteins for degradation [ 107 ] . M1 linear ubiquitin chains are strongly associated with innate immune signaling [ 108 ] and have a well - documented role in TNF receptor function [ 109 ] . 5 . Plasma Membrane RTK Ubiquitination and Sorting Integral membrane proteins such as RTKs appear to undergo both monoubiquitination , multi - monoubiquitination and polyubiquitination ( also at single and multiple sites ) on the protein backbone via attachment to lysine side chains . The overall effects on the RTK may differ substantially depending upon the exact location of the sites of attachment , number of ubiquitin linkages , and exact nature of ubiquitin chains . Ubiquitination of cell surface receptors is generally thought to target these proteins for destruction in the late endosome and lysosome ; however , the exact mechanism ( s ) remain elusive . Currently , the view is ubiquitinated RTKs exhibit increased proteolysis , resulting in cessation of signaling compared to non - ubiquitinated RTKs [ 110 ] . RTK ubiquitination is thought to promote endocytosis via CDE and / or CIE [ 111 , 112 ] . Modifying RTK by attachment of different ubiquitin tags is a complex strategy to control receptor availability at the plasma membrane and dictate trafﬁcking before recycling or proteolysis . It is well - established that for RTKs such as EGFR , ErbB2 , MuSK [ 113 ] , TrkA [ 114 ] and VEGFR2 [ 6 , 34 ] , ligand activation precedes ubiquitination and is linked to increased degradation in the endosome - lysosome network . Activation of TrkA by nerve growth factor occurs in response to ligand stimulation and can be mediated by both multimonoubiquitination [ 114 ] and polyubiquitination [ 115 , 116 ] . VEGFR2 ubiquitination is associated with downregulated cell surface expression and blockade of receptor ubiquitination signiﬁcantly impairs endocytosis resulting in increased cell surface levels [ 29 ] . Similarly , monoubiquitination of activated PDGFR or EGFR is sufﬁcient to stimulate endocytosis , reduce cell surface levels and availability for exogenous ligand binding [ 117 ] . Activated EGFR displaying K63 - linked polyubiquitin chains are subjected to increased proteolysis [ 118 ] . Many studies suggest that RTK ubiquitination can be a signal to promote endocytosis resulting in down - regulation of cell surface levels , and this is irrespective of the type of ubiquitin chain attachment . Transport from the cell surface necessitates the involvement of a group of proteins known as the endosomal sorting complexes required for transport ( ESCRT ) . ESCRT recognition of the type of ubiquitin attachment conjugated to RTKs is dependent on endocytic machinery such as the proteins epsin and Eps15 , both of which contain ubiquitin - interacting motifs ( UIMs ) [ 119 – 121 ] . ESCRTs play key roles in the recognition and trafﬁcking of ubiquitinated EGFR . However , ESCRT - 0 and ESCRT - II complexes are dispensable for EGFR recycling back to the plasma membrane from endosomes [ 122 ] . The G α s protein has recently been demonstrated to bind to the ubiquitinated Hrs component of Cells 2018 , 7 , 22 11 of 24 ESCRT - 0 , and depletion of G α s delays EGFR degradation by impeding trafﬁcking into lysosomes [ 123 ] . ESCRT - III proteins also have a demonstrable role in regulating EGFR trafﬁcking , as evidenced in recent studies with depletion of ESCRT - III regulatory proteins CC2D1A / CC2D1B , which curtailed EGFR signaling and accelerated EGFR degradation [ 124 ] . Studies assessing the internalisation of c - Met and EGFR have both demonstrated requirement for a complex comprising the proto - oncoprotein and E3 ligase ( Cbl ) , CIN85 and endophilin [ 125 , 126 ] . This early endocytosis - associated complex acts to encapsulate the receptor into early invaginations at the plasma membrane and promote inclusion into endocytic vesicles . Such vesicles then fuse with early endosomes , a key compartment for RTK signal transduction and sorting . Inhibition of Cbl association with CIN85 by the GTP - binding protein SEPT9 impairs EGFR ubiquitination and degradation [ 127 ] . 6 . RTK Ubiquitination , Recycling and Proteolysis Plasma membrane RTK down - regulation as a consequence of ubiquitination was conventionally viewed to program cessation of signal transduction after reaching multivescular bodies ( MVBs ) or late endosomes , followed by degradation in lysosomes . This would provide a means for RTK signal attenuation or cessation . Whilst sorting of EGFR into MVBs before proceeding to lysosomes for proteolysis is well - established [ 128 , 129 ] , other studies also suggest that EGFR , TrkA and VEGFR2 undergo proteolysis by a proteasome - regulated pathway [ 9 , 116 , 130 ] . RTKs can be recycled from endosome - to - plasma membrane to maintain sensitivity to exogenous ligand , although it is unclear whether signaling continues during recycling [ 131 – 137 ] . Mutation of speciﬁc lysines within the FGFR1 cytoplasmic domain suggest that the efﬁciency of recycling is increased and targeting for degradation is diminished , facilitating increased signal transduction [ 138 ] . The EGFR model continues to provide new insights and its ability to bind different ligands such as EGF and transforming growth factor - α indicate programming for different signaling and proteolysis outcomes . EGFR : EGF activation stimulates degradation whereas EGFR : TGF - α stimulates recycling to the cell surface [ 139 ] . One possibility is that within the lower pH in endosomes , EGF - EGFR remains stably bound but TGF - α rapidly dissociates , allowing efﬁcient EGFR recycling from endosome - to - plasma membrane . Other EGFR ligands suggest the capacity to program differential post - translational modiﬁcations which affect EGFR fate through trafﬁcking , recycling or proteolysis [ 140 – 142 ] . The family of E1 , E2 and E3 ubiquitin ligases is thus critical in determining how RTK fate and signal transduction properties are regulated in this context . Although RTK ubiquitination is an increasingly important aspect of cellular regulation , there is a dearth of information on E1 , E2 and E3 enzymes in this process . Of note , a recent study identiﬁed the E1 family member , UBA1 , in regulating the ubiquitination of basal ( non - activated ) VEGFR2 but surprisingly , not for ligand - activated VEGFR2 [ 65 ] . This study puts forward the idea that at least 2 different mechanisms of ubiquitination exist , one to modify basal RTKs , and another pathway which targets activated RTKs [ 65 ] . It is likely that other RTKs may also exhibit such regulation . The roles for the other 9 E1 family members in RTK regulation remain to be described . There is also increasing evidence for SUMOylation of RTKs , linked to nuclear translocation of proteolytic fragment ( s ) of the processed RTK e . g . , insulin - like growth factor 1 receptor ( IGF - 1R ) [ 143 ] and ErbB4 [ 144 ] , suggesting roles for E1 members which regulate SUMOylation . The identiﬁcation and mechanistic role of E2 ubiquitin ligases in RTK modiﬁcation remain to be elucidated . Studies on IGF - 1R SUMOylation and nuclear translocation found that such effects were regulated by the E2 family member and SUMO - conjugating enzyme UBE2I [ 145 ] . 7 . RTK Targeting by E3 Ubiquitin Ligases The best - studied aspect of RTK ubiquitination is interaction with E3 ubiquitin ligases that affect signal transduction , trafﬁcking and proteolysis . Many RTKs , including EGFR , PDGFRs , TrkA , Ret , EphRs , FGFRs and VEGFRs , are targeted for ubiquitination by the E3 enzyme Cbl , a proto - oncoprotein that modulates signal transduction , membrane trafﬁcking and proteolysis [ 146 – 158 ] . Cbl also Cells 2018 , 7 , 22 12 of 24 regulates movement of EGFR out of the early endosomes and facilitates ubiquitination , leading to its proteolysis [ 147 ] . Cbl deﬁciency or disruption of its ability to bind target substrates causes increased PDGFR α and FGFR2 cell surface levels concomitant with reduced ubiquitination [ 149 ] . Both c - Cbl and related Cbl - b can also modulate PDGFR β status with subsequent effects on endocytosis and signal transduction [ 150 ] . Other E3 enzymes have been implicated in EGFR modiﬁcation , including UBE4B [ 159 ] and Cullin - 3 / speckle - type POZ protein - like , SPOPL [ 160 ] . Whereas UBE4B is recruited to endosomes and may directly regulate EGFR ubiquitination , Cullin - 3 / SPOPL targets Eps substrate 15 ( Eps15 ) on endosomes [ 160 ] , which regulates EGFR recycling [ 131 ] . MuSK ubiquitination has been reported to be effected by the E3 ligase PDZ domain - containing ring ﬁnger 3 , although its role in the endocytosis of other RTKs has not been established [ 113 ] . Intriguingly , a recent report suggests that the E3 family member , RNF121 , binds to newly synthesized VEGFR2 and impairs its maturation and transport to the plasma membrane [ 29 ] . Insulin receptor ( IR ) cell surface expression is regulated by ubiquitination associated with the E3 ligase TRIM72 , which targets both the receptor and its associated scaffold protein insulin receptor substrate 1 ( IRS1 ) for degradation [ 161 ] . More recently , the E3 ligase MARCH1 was also shown to diminish IR surface expression through the induction of ubiquitin - mediated degradation [ 162 ] . In a similar manner to the effect of UBA1 on basal but not ligand - activated VEGFR2 , MARCH1 impacts upon only basal IR surface expression . This may represent a method of ﬁne - tuning the level of receptor available for engagement by ligand . IGF - 1R modiﬁcation is linked to a number of E3 enzymes including c - Cbl [ 163 ] , Nedd4 [ 164 ] and Mdm2 [ 165 ] . Interestingly , ubiquitination of IGF - 1R by Mdm2 occurs under low IGF - 1 conditions but switches to dependence on c - Cbl at high IGF - 1 levels . Both c - Cbl and Mdm2 catalyze IGF - 1R ubiquitination at different sites ; furthermore , Mdm2 speciﬁes IGF - 1R modiﬁcation by attachment of K63 - linked polyubiquitin chains , whereas c - Cbl mediates K48 - linked polyubiquitin chain attachment [ 163 ] . Such biochemical modiﬁcations are reﬂected in differential endocytic routing of IGF - 1R with Mdm2 regulation associated with CDE , whereas Cbl is associated with CIE . Importantly , Mdm2 regulation of IGF - 1R is associated with proteasome - mediated degradation [ 165 ] , which further supports a role for K63 - linked polyubiquitin chains in delivering substrates to the 26S proteasome [ 118 ] . IGF - 1R modiﬁcation by another E3 enzyme , Nedd4 , in association with Grb10 leads to endocytosis , lysosomal degradation and eventual down - regulation of signal transduction events [ 166 ] . Here , the Nedd4 / Grb10 complex is associated with multi - monoubiquitination of IGF - 1R . There is also some evidence that Nedd4 , Grb10 and ESCRT - 0 have complex regulatory roles in VEGFR2 modiﬁcation , trafﬁcking and proteolysis [ 167 , 168 ] . 8 . RTK De - Ubiquitination De - ubiquitinases ( DUBs ) represent a class of proteases that cleave ubiquitin or ubiquitin - like modiﬁers from attachment to substrate proteins . The DUB superfamily comprises ~ 120 genes that can be further classiﬁed into seven groups , based on the primary sequence of the catalytic domain . The largest DUB group comprises the ubiquitin - speciﬁc processing proteases ( USPs ) , and is made up of 56 members . These proteins contain a conserved core USP domain , a Cys - X - X - Cys zinc - binding motif and the catalytic cysteine residue , which classiﬁes this as a cysteine protease [ 169 ] . Other DUB cysteine proteases include the ovarian tumour ( OTU ) group , which contains 16 active gene products [ 170 ] and the inactive FAM105a member . The group of ubiquitin C - terminal hydrolase ( UCH ) cysteine proteases comprises four members with little sequence conservation and catalytic domains ranging from 223 to 729 amino acids . The group of Machado - Josephin domain ( MJD ) DUBs has 4 members that contain a conserved catalytic Josephin domain [ 171 ] . A more recently identiﬁed and unique DUB group is the motif interacting with novel ubiquitin - containing novel deubiquitinase family ( MINDY ) with at least four members [ 172 ] . Structural studies show that MINDY enzymes have conserved cysteine and proximal histidine residues that enable nucleophilic attack on the ubiquitin and ubiquitin - like substrates , although the third member of the canonical catalytic triad remains to be identiﬁed [ 172 ] . The DUB group of the monocyte Cells 2018 , 7 , 22 13 of 24 chemotactic protein - inducible proteins ( MCPIPs ) has at least four members [ 173 ] linked to immune regulation . These zinc - ﬁnger containing enzymes reduce cellular ubiquitination but are inhibited by the cysteine protease inhibitor N - ethylmaleiimide [ 174 ] . The group of Jab1 / Pab1 / MPN domain - associated metalloisopeptidase ( JAMM ) DUBs has at least 12 members , which are zinc metalloproteases , and thus distinct from the DUB cysteine proteases . There is also a group of SUMO - speciﬁc proteases with at least 8 members , including ubiquitin - speciﬁc protease - like 1 ( USPL1 ) , SUMO / sentrin speciﬁc proteases ( SENP ) or desumoylating isopeptidases ( DESI ) . The removal of ubiquitin and ubiquitin - like modiﬁcations on target substrates by DUBs enables re - use of cellular factors , obviating the need for new protein synthesis . Control of DUB activity is thus an essential feature of cellular regulation , enabling the re - activation or re - use of proteins . De novo synthesis of ubiquitin produces either polymeric forms or monoubiquitin precursors fused to ribosomal proteins , rather than free ubiquitin . Both precursor forms require processing by DUBs to release single ubiquitin units within the cell [ 175 ] . Recent evidence suggests that monoubiquitin release from its precursors is mediated predominantly by ﬁve main DUBs : ubiquitin thioesterase otulin , UCHL3 , USP5 , USP7 and USP9X [ 176 ] , although each has multiple substrates that can be targeted for deubiquitination to maintain the free ubiquitin pool . Removal of ubiquitin from a target protein from substrates such as ubiquitinated RTKs allows a new level of regulation of signal transduction that further impacts on cellular responses associated with RTK function . DUBs have speciﬁcity for polyubiquitin chain cleavage [ 177 – 179 ] . Both recycling and degradation pathways are regulated by ubiquitination [ 128 ] , with polyubiquitin chain addition to target substrates strongly linked to proteolysis [ 180 ] . DUB activity thus controls RTK expression and provides a mechanism by which the activated and ubiquitinated RTK can be redirected away from the degradation pathway towards a return to the plasma membrane . As DUB activity can signiﬁcantly affect cellular processes that could lead to a variety of pathologies , these enzymes have received attention as therapeutic targets [ 181 ] . A reverse genetics screen of human DUBs involved in EGFR regulation has identiﬁed an important role for USP18 [ 182 ] . Loss of USP18 inhibits cell proliferation and increases apoptosis [ 183 ] . However , USP18 regulates EGFR mRNA translation of the EGFR rather than trafﬁcking and proteolysis [ 183 ] . The JAMM member , AMSH , is implicated in regulating EGFR de - ubiquitination on endosomes [ 184 ] ; furthermore , AMSH interacts with components of the ESCRT - III complex [ 185 ] . A more recent siRNA screen has identiﬁed a number of DUBs that signiﬁcantly modulate EGFR levels and degradation kinetics [ 186 ] . USP9X was a key factor identiﬁed from this screen , although it does not directly target EGFR itself , but instead cleaves ubiquitin from endocytic accessory proteins including Eps15 . Deubiquitination of TrkB by the DUB UCHL1 has been reported , which maintains expression of the receptor on the cell surface [ 187 ] . Loss of UCHL1 diminished TrkB expression at the plasma membrane and programmed its trafﬁcking to the degradation pathway , leading to abrogated RTK signaling . Another DUB enzyme , USP8 , functions similarly to target Eps15 [ 188 ] . Transgenic mice with conditional USP8 inactivation develop fatal liver failure associated with the marked downregulation of several RTKs including EGFR , c - Met and ErbB3 [ 189 ] . USP8 has been demonstrated to be important in the regulation of c - Met levels indirectly through regulation of leucine - rich repeats and immunoglobulin - like domains 1 protein , LRIG1 [ 190 ] . Ubiquitinated LRIG1 recruits c - Met to lysosomes for degradation ; reduction in LRIG1 ubiquitination by USP8 depletion or inactivation thus enables c - Met levels and functionality to be maintained . USP8 can form complexes with the ESCRT - 0 subunit STAM on endosomes , stimulating de - ubiquitination of EGFR on endosomes , and promoting EGFR endosome - to - plasma membrane recycling [ 191 ] . Impairment of USP8 activity has signiﬁcant implications , with USP8 mutations that increase catalytic activity promoting de - ubiquitination of EGFR and increased sensitivity to EGF and development of Cushing’s disease [ 192 ] . A recent study has implicated USP8 requirement in VEGFR2 de - ubiquitination and recycling [ 193 ] . Although other DUBs are likely to have important roles in RTK de - ubiquitination , the majority of recent studies have identiﬁed USP8 as a major therapeutic target in many disease states [ 194 , 195 ] . Cells 2018 , 7 , 22 14 of 24 9 . Conclusions The RTKs represent a diverse group of families that propagate signals derived from binding their cognate ligands via transduction along a milieu of intracellular signaling pathways . These circuits enable the sensing of changes in the extracellular environment ( e . g . , growth factor levels ) and the translating of such information into appropriate cellular responses . RTKs share common regulatory mechanisms that control cellular sensitivity to diverse soluble and membrane - bound ligands . Whilst ubiquitination has a well - documented role in RTK endocytosis , and thus inﬂuences cell surface RTK levels , a deeper understanding of the underlying machinery that controls RTK post - translational modiﬁcation and distribution is needed . Indeed , it is evident that RTK ubiquitination does not simply act as a simple signal for lysosomal degradation , but modulates the balance between the rate of RTK synthesis , recycling and degradation in different intracellular compartments . Moreover , attachment of different ubiquitin tags to a speciﬁc RTK opens up the possibility of modulating different signal transduction pathways which are inﬂuenced by RTK residence within a speciﬁc location . Ubiquitin - modifying enzymes comprising E1 , E2 , E3 and DUB families may be further positioned at these different locations to inﬂuence RTK modiﬁcation , turnover and distribution . Such effects would invariably impact on the steady - state or basal RTK levels at the plasma membrane , thus dictating RTK availability for sensing exogenous circulating ligand ( s ) . Such ubiquitin - modifying enzymes are increasingly important therapeutic targets for targeting RTK function in diverse disease states including cancer , heart disease and diabetes . Acknowledgments : We thank the Endothelial Cell Biology Unit members for their help and advice . This work was supported by British Heart Foundation project grant PG / 16 / 86 / 32474 to S . P . , I . C . Z . and M . A . H . Author Contributions : W . R . C . and S . P . planned the manuscript ; W . R . C . wrote the ﬁrst draft of the manuscript ; S . P . , C . P . - M . , B . R . - T . , M . A . H . and I . C . Z . edited and commented on the manuscript . Conﬂicts of Interest : The authors declare no conﬂict of interest . References 1 . Robinson , D . R . ; Wu , Y . M . ; Lin , S . F . The protein tyrosine kinase family of the human genome . Oncogene 2000 , 19 , 5548 – 5557 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 2 . Blume - Jensen , P . ; Hunter , T . Oncogenic kinase signaling . Nature 2001 , 411 , 355 – 365 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 3 . Lemmon , M . A . ; Schlessinger , J . Cell signaling by receptor tyrosine kinases . Cell 2010 , 141 , 1117 – 1134 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 4 . Marino - Buslje , C . ; Mizuguchi , K . ; Siddle , K . ; Blundell , T . L . A third ﬁbronectin type iii domain in the extracellular region of the insulin receptor family . FEBS Lett . 1998 , 441 , 331 – 336 . [ CrossRef ] 5 . Tuzi , N . L . ; Gullick , W . J . Eph , the largest known family of putative growth factor receptors . Br . J . Cancer 1994 , 69 , 417 – 421 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 6 . Garrett , T . P . ; McKern , N . M . ; Lou , M . ; Frenkel , M . J . ; Bentley , J . D . ; Lovrecz , G . O . ; Elleman , T . C . ; Cosgrove , L . J . ; Ward , C . W . Crystal structure of the ﬁrst three domains of the type - 1 insulin - like growth factor receptor . Nature 1998 , 394 , 395 – 399 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 7 . Ward , C . W . ; Hoyne , P . A . ; Flegg , R . H . Insulin and epidermal growth factor receptors contain the cysteine repeat motif found in the tumor necrosis factor receptor . Proteins 1995 , 22 , 141 – 153 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 8 . Grassot , J . ; Gouy , M . ; Perriere , G . ; Mouchiroud , G . Origin and molecular evolution of receptor tyrosine kinases with immunoglobulin - like domains . Mol . Biol . Evol . 2006 , 23 , 1232 – 1241 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 9 . Windisch , J . M . ; Auer , B . ; Marksteiner , R . ; Lang , M . E . ; Schneider , R . Speciﬁc neurotrophin binding to leucine - rich motif peptides of trka and trkb . FEBS Lett . 1995 , 374 , 125 – 129 . [ CrossRef ] 10 . Reshetnyak , A . V . ; Murray , P . B . ; Shi , X . ; Mo , E . S . ; Mohanty , J . ; Tome , F . ; Bai , H . ; Gunel , M . ; Lax , I . ; Schlessinger , J . Augmentor alpha and beta ( fam150 ) are ligands of the receptor tyrosine kinases alk and ltk : Hierarchy and speciﬁcity of ligand - receptor interactions . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2015 , 112 , 15862 – 15867 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Cells 2018 , 7 , 22 15 of 24 11 . Manni , S . ; Kisko , K . ; Schleier , T . ; Missimer , J . ; Ballmer - Hofer , K . Functional and structural characterization of the kinase insert and the carboxy terminal domain in vegf receptor 2 activation . FASEB J . 2014 , 28 , 4914 – 4923 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 12 . Sarabipour , S . ; Hristova , K . Mechanism of fgf receptor dimerization and activation . Nat . Commun . 2016 , 7 , 10262 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 13 . Jahangiri , A . ; Nguyen , A . ; Chandra , A . ; Sidorov , M . K . ; Yagnik , G . ; Rick , J . ; Han , S . W . ; Chen , W . ; Flanigan , P . M . ; Schneidman - Duhovny , D . ; et al . Cross - activating c - met / beta1 integrin complex drives metastasis and invasive resistance in cancer . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2017 , 114 , E8685 – E8694 . [ PubMed ] 14 . Weiss , F . U . ; Daub , H . ; Ullrich , A . Novel mechanisms of rtk signal generation . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 1997 , 7 , 80 – 86 . [ CrossRef ] 15 . Hubbard , S . R . ; Miller , W . T . Receptor tyrosine kinases : Mechanisms of activation and signaling . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 2007 , 19 , 117 – 123 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 16 . Volinsky , N . ; Kholodenko , B . N . Complexity of receptor tyrosine kinase signal processing . Cold Spring Harbor Perspect . Biol . 2013 , 5 , a009043 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 17 . Hsieh , M . Y . ; Yang , S . ; Raymond - Stinz , M . A . ; Edwards , J . S . ; Wilson , B . S . Spatio - temporal modeling of signaling protein recruitment to egfr . BMC Syst . Biol . 2010 , 4 , 57 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 18 . Ott , C . M . ; Lingappa , V . R . Integral membrane protein biosynthesis : Why topology is hard to predict . J . Cell Sci . 2002 , 115 , 2003 – 2009 . [ PubMed ] 19 . Scharaw , S . ; Iskar , M . ; Ori , A . ; Boncompain , G . ; Laketa , V . ; Poser , I . ; Lundberg , E . ; Perez , F . ; Beck , M . ; Bork , P . ; et al . The endosomal transcriptional regulator rnf11 integrates degradation and transport of egfr . J . Cell Biol . 2016 , 215 , 543 – 558 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 20 . Crepaldi , T . ; Pollack , A . L . ; Prat , M . ; Zborek , A . ; Mostov , K . ; Comoglio , P . M . Targeting of the sf / hgf receptor to the basolateral domain of polarized epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 1994 , 125 , 313 – 320 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 21 . Hobert , M . E . ; Kil , S . J . ; Medof , M . E . ; Carlin , C . R . The cytoplasmic juxtamembrane domain of the epidermal growth factor receptor contains a novel autonomous basolateral sorting determinant . J . Biol . Chem . 1997 , 272 , 32901 – 32909 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 22 . Mittar , S . ; Ulyatt , C . ; Howell , G . J . ; Bruns , A . F . ; Zachary , I . ; Walker , J . H . ; Ponnambalam , S . Vegfr1 receptor tyrosine kinase localization to the golgi apparatus is calcium - dependent . Exp . Cell Res . 2009 , 315 , 877 – 889 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 23 . Manickam , V . ; Tiwari , A . ; Jung , J . J . ; Bhattacharya , R . ; Goel , A . ; Mukhopadhyay , D . ; Choudhury , A . Regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 trafﬁcking and angiogenesis by golgi localized t - snare syntaxin 6 . Blood 2011 , 117 , 1425 – 1435 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 24 . Tiwari , A . ; Jung , J . J . ; Inamdar , S . M . ; Nihalani , D . ; Choudhury , A . The myosin motor myo1c is required for vegfr2 delivery to the cell surface and for angiogenic signaling . Am . J . Physiol . Heart Circ . Physiol . 2013 , 304 , H687 – H696 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 25 . Yamada , K . H . ; Nakajima , Y . ; Geyer , M . ; Wary , K . K . ; Ushio - Fukai , M . ; Komarova , Y . ; Malik , A . B . Kif13b regulates angiogenesis through golgi to plasma membrane trafﬁcking of vegfr2 . J . Cell Sci . 2014 , 127 , 4518 – 4530 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 26 . Chen , B . ; Zhao , L . ; Li , X . ; Ji , Y . S . ; Li , N . ; Xu , X . F . ; Chen , Z . Y . Syntaxin 8 modulates the post - synthetic trafﬁcking of the trka receptor and inﬂammatory pain transmission . J . Biol . Chem . 2014 , 289 , 19556 – 19569 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 27 . Du , Y . ; Shen , J . ; Hsu , J . L . ; Han , Z . ; Hsu , M . C . ; Yang , C . C . ; Kuo , H . P . ; Wang , Y . N . ; Yamaguchi , H . ; Miller , S . A . ; et al . Syntaxin 6 - mediated golgi translocation plays an important role in nuclear functions of egfr through microtubule - dependent trafﬁcking . Oncogene 2014 , 33 , 756 – 770 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 28 . Warren , C . M . ; Ziyad , S . ; Briot , A . ; Der , A . ; Iruela - Arispe , M . L . A ligand - independent vegfr2 signaling pathway limits angiogenic responses in diabetes . Sci . Signal . 2014 , 7 , ra1 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 29 . Maghsoudlou , A . ; Meyer , R . D . ; Rezazadeh , K . ; Arafa , E . ; Pudney , J . ; Hartsough , E . ; Rahimi , N . Rnf121 inhibits angiogenic growth factor signaling by restricting cell surface expression of vegfr - 2 . Trafﬁc 2016 , 17 , 289 – 300 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 30 . Jastrzebski , K . ; Zdzalik - Bielecka , D . ; Maminska , A . ; Kalaidzidis , Y . ; Hellberg , C . ; Miaczynska , M . Multiple routes of endocytic internalization of pdgfrbeta contribute to pdgf - induced stat3 signaling . J . Cell Sci . 2017 , 130 , 577 – 589 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Cells 2018 , 7 , 22 16 of 24 31 . Vieira , A . V . ; Lamaze , C . ; Schmid , S . L . Control of egf receptor signaling by clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Science 1996 , 274 , 2086 – 2089 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 32 . Sigismund , S . ; Argenzio , E . ; Tosoni , D . ; Cavallaro , E . ; Polo , S . ; Di Fiore , P . P . Clathrin - mediated internalization is essential for sustained egfr signaling but dispensable for degradation . Dev . Cell 2008 , 15 , 209 – 219 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 33 . Tanaka , T . ; Zhou , Y . ; Ozawa , T . ; Okizono , R . ; Banba , A . ; Yamamura , T . ; Oga , E . ; Muraguchi , A . ; Sakurai , H . Ligand - activated epidermal growth factor receptor ( egfr ) signaling governs endocytic trafﬁcking of unliganded receptor monomers by non - canonical phosphorylation . J . Biol . Chem . 2018 , 293 , 2288 – 2301 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 34 . Ewan , L . C . ; Jopling , H . M . ; Jia , H . ; Mittar , S . ; Bagherzadeh , A . ; Howell , G . J . ; Walker , J . H . ; Zachary , I . C . ; Ponnambalam , S . Intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity is required for vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 ubiquitination , sorting and degradation in endothelial cells . Trafﬁc 2006 , 7 , 1270 – 1282 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 35 . Lampugnani , M . G . ; Orsenigo , F . ; Gagliani , M . C . ; Tacchetti , C . ; Dejana , E . Vascular endothelial cadherin controls vegfr - 2 internalization and signaling from intracellular compartments . J . Cell Biol . 2006 , 174 , 593 – 604 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 36 . Bruns , A . F . ; Herbert , S . P . ; Odell , A . F . ; Jopling , H . M . ; Hooper , N . M . ; Zachary , I . C . ; Walker , J . H . ; Ponnambalam , S . Ligand - stimulated vegfr2 signaling is regulated by co - ordinated trafﬁcking and proteolysis . Trafﬁc 2010 , 11 , 161 – 174 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 37 . Fearnley , G . W . ; Smith , G . A . ; Abdul - Zani , I . ; Yuldasheva , N . ; Mughal , N . A . ; Homer - Vanniasinkam , S . ; Kearney , M . T . ; Zachary , I . C . ; Tomlinson , D . C . ; Harrison , M . A . ; et al . Vegf - a isoforms program differential vegfr2 signal transduction , trafﬁcking and proteolysis . Biol . Open 2016 , 5 , 571 – 583 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 38 . Delos Santos , R . C . ; Bautista , S . ; Lucarelli , S . ; Bone , L . N . ; Dayam , R . M . ; Abousawan , J . ; Botelho , R . J . ; Antonescu , C . N . Selective regulation of clathrin - mediated epidermal growth factor receptor signaling and endocytosis by phospholipase c and calcium . Mol . Biol . Cell 2017 , 28 , 2802 – 2818 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 39 . Bogdanovic , E . ; Coombs , N . ; Dumont , D . J . Oligomerized tie2 localizes to clathrin - coated pits in response to angiopoietin - 1 . Histochem . Cell Biol . 2009 , 132 , 225 – 237 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 40 . Wilde , A . ; Beattie , E . C . ; Lem , L . ; Riethof , D . A . ; Liu , S . H . ; Mobley , W . C . ; Soriano , P . ; Brodsky , F . M . Egf receptor signaling stimulates src kinase phosphorylation of clathrin , inﬂuencing clathrin redistribution and egf uptake . Cell 1999 , 96 , 677 – 687 . [ CrossRef ] 41 . Goh , L . K . ; Huang , F . ; Kim , W . ; Gygi , S . ; Sorkin , A . Multiple mechanisms collectively regulate clathrin - mediated endocytosis of the epidermal growth factor receptor . J . Cell Biol . 2010 , 189 , 871 – 883 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 42 . Jiang , X . ; Huang , F . ; Marusyk , A . ; Sorkin , A . Grb2 regulates internalization of egf receptors through clathrin - coated pits . Mol . Biol . Cell 2003 , 14 , 858 – 870 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 43 . Ioannou , M . S . ; Kulasekaran , G . ; Fotouhi , M . ; Morein , J . J . ; Han , C . ; Tse , S . ; Nossova , N . ; Han , T . ; Mannard , E . ; McPherson , P . S . Intersectin - s interaction with dennd2b facilitates recycling of epidermal growth factor receptor . EMBO Rep . 2017 , 18 , 2119 – 2130 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 44 . Puri , C . ; Tosoni , D . ; Comai , R . ; Rabellino , A . ; Segat , D . ; Caneva , F . ; Luzzi , P . ; Di Fiore , P . P . ; Tacchetti , C . Relationships between egfr signaling - competent and endocytosis - competent membrane microdomains . Mol . Biol . Cell 2005 , 16 , 2704 – 2718 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 45 . Rappoport , J . Z . ; Simon , S . M . Endocytic trafﬁcking of activated egfr is ap - 2 dependent and occurs through preformed clathrin spots . J . Cell Sci . 2009 , 122 , 1301 – 1305 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 46 . Sigismund , S . ; Woelk , T . ; Puri , C . ; Maspero , E . ; Tacchetti , C . ; Transidico , P . ; Di Fiore , P . P . ; Polo , S . Clathrin - independent endocytosis of ubiquitinated cargos . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2005 , 102 , 2760 – 2765 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 47 . Caldieri , G . ; Barbieri , E . ; Nappo , G . ; Raimondi , A . ; Bonora , M . ; Conte , A . ; Verhoef , L . ; Confalonieri , S . ; Malabarba , M . G . ; Bianchi , F . ; et al . Reticulon 3 - dependent er - pm contact sites control egfr nonclathrin endocytosis . Science 2017 , 356 , 617 – 624 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 48 . Basagiannis , D . ; Zografou , S . ; Murphy , C . ; Fotsis , T . ; Morbidelli , L . ; Ziche , M . ; Bleck , C . ; Mercer , J . ; Christoforidis , S . Vegf induces signaling and angiogenesis by directing vegfr2 internalisation through macropinocytosis . J . Cell Sci . 2016 , 129 , 4091 – 4104 . [ PubMed ] Cells 2018 , 7 , 22 17 of 24 49 . Yamabhai , M . ; Anderson , R . G . Second cysteine - rich region of epidermal growth factor receptor contains targeting information for caveolae / rafts . J . Biol . Chem . 2002 , 277 , 24843 – 24846 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 50 . Ikeda , S . ; Ushio - Fukai , M . ; Zuo , L . ; Tojo , T . ; Dikalov , S . ; Patrushev , N . A . ; Alexander , R . W . Novel role of arf6 in vascular endothelial growth factor - induced signaling and angiogenesis . Circ . Res . 2005 , 96 , 467 – 475 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 51 . Yamaguchi , T . ; Lu , C . ; Ida , L . ; Yanagisawa , K . ; Usukura , J . ; Cheng , J . ; Hotta , N . ; Shimada , Y . ; Isomura , H . ; Suzuki , M . ; et al . Ror1 sustains caveolae and survival signaling as a scaffold of cavin - 1 and caveolin - 1 . Nat . Commun . 2016 , 7 , 10060 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 52 . Mastick , C . C . ; Brady , M . J . ; Saltiel , A . R . Insulin stimulates the tyrosine phosphorylation of caveolin . J . Cell Biol . 1995 , 129 , 1523 – 1531 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 53 . Labrecque , L . ; Royal , I . ; Surprenant , D . S . ; Patterson , C . ; Gingras , D . ; Beliveau , R . Regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor - 2 activity by caveolin - 1 and plasma membrane cholesterol . Mol . Biol . Cell 2003 , 14 , 334 – 347 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 54 . Orlichenko , L . ; Huang , B . ; Krueger , E . ; McNiven , M . A . Epithelial growth factor - induced phosphorylation of caveolin 1 at tyrosine 14 stimulates caveolae formation in epithelial cells . J . Biol . Chem . 2006 , 281 , 4570 – 4579 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 55 . Verma , N . ; Keinan , O . ; Selitrennik , M . ; Karn , T . ; Filipits , M . ; Lev , S . Pyk2 sustains endosomal - derived receptor signaling and enhances epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition . Nat . Commun . 2015 , 6 , 6064 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 56 . Taub , N . ; Teis , D . ; Ebner , H . L . ; Hess , M . W . ; Huber , L . A . Late endosomal trafﬁc of the epidermal growth factor receptor ensures spatial and temporal ﬁdelity of mitogen - activated protein kinase signaling . Mol . Biol . Cell 2007 , 18 , 4698 – 4710 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 57 . Laviolette , L . A . ; Mermoud , J . ; Calvo , I . A . ; Olson , N . ; Boukhali , M . ; Steinlein , O . K . ; Roider , E . ; Sattler , E . C . ; Huang , D . ; Teh , B . T . ; et al . Negative regulation of egfr signaling by the human folliculin tumour suppressor protein . Nat . Commun . 2017 , 8 , 15866 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 58 . Kermorgant , S . ; Parker , P . J . Receptor trafﬁcking controls weak signal delivery : A strategy used by c - met for stat3 nuclear accumulation . J . Cell Biol . 2008 , 182 , 855 – 863 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 59 . Menard , L . ; Parker , P . J . ; Kermorgant , S . Receptor tyrosine kinase c - met controls the cytoskeleton from different endosomes via different pathways . Nat . Commun . 2014 , 5 , 3907 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 60 . Wang , Y . ; Pennock , S . D . ; Chen , X . ; Kazlauskas , A . ; Wang , Z . Platelet - derived growth factor receptor - mediated signal transduction from endosomes . J . Biol . Chem . 2004 , 279 , 8038 – 8046 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 61 . Koﬂer , N . ; Corti , F . ; Rivera - Molina , F . ; Deng , Y . ; Toomre , D . ; Simons , M . The rab - effector protein rabep2 regulates endosomal trafﬁcking to mediate vascular endothelial growth factor receptor - 2 ( vegfr2 ) - dependent signaling . J . Biol . Chem . 2018 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 62 . Acconcia , F . ; Sigismund , S . ; Polo , S . Ubiquitin in trafﬁcking : The network at work . Exp . Cell Res . 2009 , 315 , 1610 – 1618 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 63 . Girnita , L . ; Takahashi , S . I . ; Crudden , C . ; Fukushima , T . ; Worrall , C . ; Furuta , H . ; Yoshihara , H . ; Hakuno , F . ; Girnita , A . Chapter seven - when phosphorylation encounters ubiquitination : A balanced perspective on igf - 1r signaling . Prog . Mol . Biol . Transl . Sci . 2016 , 141 , 277 – 311 . [ PubMed ] 64 . Smith , G . A . ; Tomlinson , D . C . ; Harrison , M . A . ; Ponnambalam , S . Chapter eight - ubiquitin - mediated regulation of cellular responses to vascular endothelial growth factors . Prog . Mol . Biol . Transl . Sci . 2016 , 141 , 313 – 338 . [ PubMed ] 65 . Smith , G . A . ; Fearnley , G . W . ; Abdul - Zani , I . ; Wheatcroft , S . B . ; Tomlinson , D . C . ; Harrison , M . A . ; Ponnambalam , S . Ubiquitination of basal vegfr2 regulates signal transduction and endothelial function . Biol . Open 2017 , 6 , 1404 – 1415 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 66 . Sorkin , A . ; Goh , L . K . Endocytosis and intracellular trafﬁcking of erbbs . Exp . Cell Res . 2008 , 314 , 3093 – 3106 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 67 . Gucwa , A . L . ; Brown , D . A . Uim domain - dependent recruitment of the endocytic adaptor protein eps15 to ubiquitin - enriched endosomes . BMC Cell Biol . 2014 , 15 , 34 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 68 . Lund , P . K . ; Moats - Staats , B . M . ; Simmons , J . G . ; Hoyt , E . ; D’Ercole , A . J . ; Martin , F . ; Van Wyk , J . J . Nucleotide sequence analysis of a cdna encoding human ubiquitin reveals that ubiquitin is synthesized as a precursor . J . Biol . Chem . 1985 , 260 , 7609 – 7613 . [ PubMed ] Cells 2018 , 7 , 22 18 of 24 69 . Wiborg , O . ; Pedersen , M . S . ; Wind , A . ; Berglund , L . E . ; Marcker , K . A . ; Vuust , J . The human ubiquitin multigene family : Some genes contain multiple directly repeated ubiquitin coding sequences . EMBO J . 1985 , 4 , 755 – 759 . [ PubMed ] 70 . McGrath , J . P . ; Jentsch , S . ; Varshavsky , A . Uba 1 : An essential yeast gene encoding ubiquitin - activating enzyme . EMBO J . 1991 , 10 , 227 – 236 . [ PubMed ] 71 . Pelzer , C . ; Kassner , I . ; Matentzoglu , K . ; Singh , R . K . ; Wollscheid , H . P . ; Scheffner , M . ; Schmidtke , G . ; Groettrup , M . Ube1l2 , a novel e1 enzyme speciﬁc for ubiquitin . J . Biol . Chem . 2007 , 282 , 23010 – 23014 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 72 . Desterro , J . M . ; Rodriguez , M . S . ; Kemp , G . D . ; Hay , R . T . Identiﬁcation of the enzyme required for activation of the small ubiquitin - like protein sumo - 1 . J . Biol . Chem . 1999 , 274 , 10618 – 10624 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 73 . Gong , L . ; Yeh , E . T . Identiﬁcation of the activating and conjugating enzymes of the nedd8 conjugation pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 1999 , 274 , 12036 – 12042 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 74 . Van der Veen , A . G . ; Schorpp , K . ; Schlieker , C . ; Buti , L . ; Damon , J . R . ; Spooner , E . ; Ploegh , H . L . ; Jentsch , S . Role of the ubiquitin - like protein urm1 as a noncanonical lysine - directed protein modiﬁer . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2011 , 108 , 1763 – 1770 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 75 . Komatsu , M . ; Chiba , T . ; Tatsumi , K . ; Iemura , S . ; Tanida , I . ; Okazaki , N . ; Ueno , T . ; Kominami , E . ; Natsume , T . ; Tanaka , K . A novel protein - conjugating system for ufm1 , a ubiquitin - fold modiﬁer . EMBO J . 2004 , 23 , 1977 – 1986 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 76 . Yuan , W . ; Krug , R . M . Inﬂuenza b virus ns1 protein inhibits conjugation of the interferon ( ifn ) - induced ubiquitin - like isg15 protein . EMBO J . 2001 , 20 , 362 – 371 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 77 . Huang , D . T . ; Miller , D . W . ; Mathew , R . ; Cassell , R . ; Holton , J . M . ; Roussel , M . F . ; Schulman , B . A . A unique e1 - e2 interaction required for optimal conjugation of the ubiquitin - like protein nedd8 . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 2004 , 11 , 927 – 935 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 78 . Mizushima , N . ; Noda , T . ; Yoshimori , T . ; Tanaka , Y . ; Ishii , T . ; George , M . D . ; Klionsky , D . J . ; Ohsumi , M . ; Ohsumi , Y . A protein conjugation system essential for autophagy . Nature 1998 , 395 , 395 – 398 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 79 . Oweis , W . ; Padala , P . ; Hassouna , F . ; Cohen - Kﬁr , E . ; Gibbs , D . R . ; Todd , E . A . ; Berndsen , C . E . ; Wiener , R . Trans - binding mechanism of ubiquitin - like protein activation revealed by a uba5 - ufm1 complex . Cell Rep . 2016 , 16 , 3113 – 3120 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 80 . Mashahreh , B . ; Hassouna , F . ; Soudah , N . ; Cohen - Kﬁr , E . ; Strulovich , R . ; Haitin , Y . ; Wiener , R . Trans - binding of ufm1 to uba5 stimulates uba5 homodimerization and atp binding . FASEB J . 2018 , fj201701057R . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 81 . Cook , B . W . ; Shaw , G . S . Architecture of the catalytic hpn motif is conserved in all e2 conjugating enzymes . Biochem . J . 2012 , 445 , 167 – 174 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 82 . Wu , P . Y . ; Hanlon , M . ; Eddins , M . ; Tsui , C . ; Rogers , R . S . ; Jensen , J . P . ; Matunis , M . J . ; Weissman , A . M . ; Wolberger , C . ; Pickart , C . M . A conserved catalytic residue in the ubiquitin - conjugating enzyme family . EMBO J . 2003 , 22 , 5241 – 5250 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 83 . Morreale , F . E . ; Walden , H . Types of ubiquitin ligases . Cell 2016 , 165 , 248 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 84 . Li , W . ; Bengtson , M . H . ; Ulbrich , A . ; Matsuda , A . ; Reddy , V . A . ; Orth , A . ; Chanda , S . K . ; Batalov , S . ; Joazeiro , C . A . Genome - wide and functional annotation of human e3 ubiquitin ligases identiﬁes mulan , a mitochondrial e3 that regulates the organelle’s dynamics and signaling . PLoS ONE 2008 , 3 , e1487 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 85 . Huibregtse , J . M . ; Scheffner , M . ; Beaudenon , S . ; Howley , P . M . A family of proteins structurally and functionally related to the e6 - ap ubiquitin - protein ligase . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 1995 , 92 , 5249 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 86 . Kim , H . C . ; Steffen , A . M . ; Oldham , M . L . ; Chen , J . ; Huibregtse , J . M . Structure and function of a hect domain ubiquitin - binding site . EMBO Rep . 2011 , 12 , 334 – 341 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 87 . Hatakeyama , S . ; Nakayama , K . I . U - box proteins as a new family of ubiquitin ligases . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 2003 , 302 , 635 – 645 . [ CrossRef ] 88 . Kamadurai , H . B . ; Souphron , J . ; Scott , D . C . ; Duda , D . M . ; Miller , D . J . ; Stringer , D . ; Piper , R . C . ; Schulman , B . A . Insights into ubiquitin transfer cascades from a structure of a ubch5b approximately ubiquitin - hect ( nedd4l ) complex . Mol . Cell 2009 , 36 , 1095 – 1102 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Cells 2018 , 7 , 22 19 of 24 89 . Deshaies , R . J . ; Joazeiro , C . A . Ring domain e3 ubiquitin ligases . Ann . Rev . Biochem . 2009 , 78 , 399 – 434 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 90 . Pruneda , J . N . ; Littleﬁeld , P . J . ; Soss , S . E . ; Nordquist , K . A . ; Chazin , W . J . ; Brzovic , P . S . ; Klevit , R . E . Structure of an e3 : E2 ~ ub complex reveals an allosteric mechanism shared among ring / u - box ligases . Mol . Cell 2012 , 47 , 933 – 942 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 91 . Kirisako , T . ; Kamei , K . ; Murata , S . ; Kato , M . ; Fukumoto , H . ; Kanie , M . ; Sano , S . ; Tokunaga , F . ; Tanaka , K . ; Iwai , K . A ubiquitin ligase complex assembles linear polyubiquitin chains . EMBO J . 2006 , 25 , 4877 – 4887 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 92 . Guzzo , C . M . ; Berndsen , C . E . ; Zhu , J . ; Gupta , V . ; Datta , A . ; Greenberg , R . A . ; Wolberger , C . ; Matunis , M . J . Rnf4 - dependent hybrid sumo - ubiquitin chains are signals for rap80 and thereby mediate the recruitment of brca1 to sites of DNA damage . Sci . Signal . 2012 , 5 , ra88 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 93 . Schmidt , C . K . ; Galanty , Y . ; Sczaniecka - Clift , M . ; Coates , J . ; Jhujh , S . ; Demir , M . ; Cornwell , M . ; Beli , P . ; Jackson , S . P . Systematic e2 screening reveals a ube2d - rnf138 - ctip axis promoting DNA repair . Nat . Cell Biol . 2015 , 17 , 1458 – 1470 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 94 . Han , D . ; Liang , J . ; Lu , Y . ; Xu , L . ; Miao , S . ; Lu , L . Y . ; Song , W . ; Wang , L . Ubiquitylation of rad51d mediated by e3 ligase rnf138 promotes the homologous recombination repair pathway . PLoS ONE 2016 , 11 , e0155476 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 95 . Uckelmann , M . ; Sixma , T . K . Histone ubiquitination in the DNA damage response . DNA Repair 2017 , 56 , 92 – 101 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 96 . Wijnhoven , P . ; Konietzny , R . ; Blackford , A . N . ; Travers , J . ; Kessler , B . M . ; Nishi , R . ; Jackson , S . P . Usp4 auto - deubiquitylation promotes homologous recombination . Mol . Cell 2015 , 60 , 362 – 373 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 97 . Beli , P . ; Jackson , S . P . Ubiquitin regulates dissociation of DNA repair factors from chromatin . Oncotarget 2015 , 6 , 14727 – 14728 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 98 . Baranes - Bachar , K . ; Levy - Barda , A . ; Oehler , J . ; Reid , D . A . ; Soria - Bretones , I . ; Voss , T . C . ; Chung , D . ; Park , Y . ; Liu , C . ; Yoon , J . B . ; et al . The ubiquitin e3 / e4 ligase ube4a adjusts protein ubiquitylation and accumulation at sites of DNA damage , facilitating double - strand break repair . Mol . Cell 2018 , 69 , 866 – 878 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 99 . Elia , A . E . ; Boardman , A . P . ; Wang , D . C . ; Huttlin , E . L . ; Everley , R . A . ; Dephoure , N . ; Zhou , C . ; Koren , I . ; Gygi , S . P . ; Elledge , S . J . Quantitative proteomic atlas of ubiquitination and acetylation in the DNA damage response . Mol . Cell 2015 , 59 , 867 – 881 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 100 . Gatti , M . ; Pinato , S . ; Maiolica , A . ; Rocchio , F . ; Prato , M . G . ; Aebersold , R . ; Penengo , L . Rnf168 promotes noncanonical k27 ubiquitination to signal DNA damage . Cell Rep . 2015 , 10 , 226 – 238 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 101 . Meyer , H . J . ; Rape , M . Enhanced protein degradation by branched ubiquitin chains . Cell 2014 , 157 , 910 – 921 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 102 . Fei , C . ; Li , Z . ; Li , C . ; Chen , Y . ; Chen , Z . ; He , X . ; Mao , L . ; Wang , X . ; Zeng , R . ; Li , L . Smurf1 - mediated lys29 - linked nonproteolytic polyubiquitination of axin negatively regulates wnt / beta - catenin signaling . Mol . Cell . Biol . 2013 , 33 , 4095 – 4105 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 103 . Lu , Y . ; Lee , B . H . ; King , R . W . ; Finley , D . ; Kirschner , M . W . Substrate degradation by the proteasome : A single - molecule kinetic analysis . Science 2015 , 348 , 1250834 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 104 . Nathan , J . A . ; Kim , H . T . ; Ting , L . ; Gygi , S . P . ; Goldberg , A . L . Why do cellular proteins linked to k63 - polyubiquitin chains not associate with proteasomes ? EMBO J . 2013 , 32 , 552 – 565 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 105 . Liu , C . S . ; Yang - Yen , H . F . ; Suen , C . S . ; Hwang , M . J . ; Yen , J . J . Cbl - mediated k63 - linked ubiquitination of jak2 enhances jak2 phosphorylation and signal transduction . Sci . Rep . 2017 , 7 , 4613 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 106 . Ohtake , F . ; Saeki , Y . ; Ishido , S . ; Kanno , J . ; Tanaka , K . The k48 - k63 branched ubiquitin chain regulates nf - kappab signaling . Mol . Cell 2016 , 64 , 251 – 266 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 107 . Ohtake , F . ; Tsuchiya , H . ; Saeki , Y . ; Tanaka , K . K63 ubiquitylation triggers proteasomal degradation by seeding branched ubiquitin chains . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2018 , 115 , E1401 – E1408 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 108 . Fiil , B . K . ; Damgaard , R . B . ; Wagner , S . A . ; Keusekotten , K . ; Fritsch , M . ; Bekker - Jensen , S . ; Mailand , N . ; Choudhary , C . ; Komander , D . ; Gyrd - Hansen , M . Otulin restricts met1 - linked ubiquitination to control innate immune signaling . Mol . Cell 2013 , 50 , 818 – 830 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Cells 2018 , 7 , 22 20 of 24 109 . Dziedzic , S . A . ; Su , Z . ; Jean Barrett , V . ; Najafov , A . ; Mookhtiar , A . K . ; Amin , P . ; Pan , H . ; Sun , L . ; Zhu , H . ; Ma , A . ; et al . Abin - 1 regulates ripk1 activation by linking met1 ubiquitylation with lys63 deubiquitylation in tnf - rsc . Nat . Cell Biol . 2018 , 20 , 58 – 68 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 110 . Alkan , Z . ; Duong , F . L . ; Hawkes , W . C . Selenoprotein w controls epidermal growth factor receptor surface expression , activation and degradation via receptor ubiquitination . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 2015 , 1853 , 1087 – 1095 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 111 . Haugsten , E . M . ; Zakrzewska , M . ; Brech , A . ; Pust , S . ; Olsnes , S . ; Sandvig , K . ; Wesche , J . Clathrin - and dynamin - independent endocytosis of fgfr3—Implications for signaling . PLoS ONE 2011 , 6 , e21708 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 112 . Lanahan , A . A . ; Hermans , K . ; Claes , F . ; Kerley - Hamilton , J . S . ; Zhuang , Z . W . ; Giordano , F . J . ; Carmeliet , P . ; Simons , M . Vegf receptor 2 endocytic trafﬁcking regulates arterial morphogenesis . Dev . Cell 2010 , 18 , 713 – 724 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 113 . Lu , Z . ; Je , H . S . ; Young , P . ; Gross , J . ; Lu , B . ; Feng , G . Regulation of synaptic growth and maturation by a synapse - associated e3 ubiquitin ligase at the neuromuscular junction . J . Cell Biol . 2007 , 177 , 1077 – 1089 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 114 . Arevalo , J . C . ; Waite , J . ; Rajagopal , R . ; Beyna , M . ; Chen , Z . Y . ; Lee , F . S . ; Chao , M . V . Cell survival through trk neurotrophin receptors is differentially regulated by ubiquitination . Neuron 2006 , 50 , 549 – 559 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 115 . Geetha , T . ; Jiang , J . ; Wooten , M . W . Lysine 63 polyubiquitination of the nerve growth factor receptor trka directs internalization and signaling . Mol . Cell 2005 , 20 , 301 – 312 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 116 . Geetha , T . ; Wooten , M . W . Trka receptor endolysosomal degradation is both ubiquitin and proteasome dependent . Trafﬁc 2008 , 9 , 1146 – 1156 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 117 . Haglund , K . ; Sigismund , S . ; Polo , S . ; Szymkiewicz , I . ; Di Fiore , P . P . ; Dikic , I . Multiple monoubiquitination of rtks is sufﬁcient for their endocytosis and degradation . Nat . Cell Biol . 2003 , 5 , 461 – 466 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 118 . Huang , F . ; Zeng , X . ; Kim , W . ; Balasubramani , M . ; Fortian , A . ; Gygi , S . P . ; Yates , N . A . ; Sorkin , A . Lysine 63 - linked polyubiquitination is required for egf receptor degradation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2013 , 110 , 15722 – 15727 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 119 . Hofmann , K . ; Falquet , L . A ubiquitin - interacting motif conserved in components of the proteasomal and lysosomal protein degradation systems . Trends Biochem . Sci . 2001 , 26 , 347 – 350 . [ CrossRef ] 120 . Polo , S . ; Sigismund , S . ; Faretta , M . ; Guidi , M . ; Capua , M . R . ; Bossi , G . ; Chen , H . ; De Camilli , P . ; Di Fiore , P . P . A single motif responsible for ubiquitin recognition and monoubiquitination in endocytic proteins . Nature 2002 , 416 , 451 – 455 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 121 . Barriere , H . ; Nemes , C . ; Lechardeur , D . ; Khan - Mohammad , M . ; Fruh , K . ; Lukacs , G . L . Molecular basis of oligoubiquitin - dependent internalization of membrane proteins in mammalian cells . Trafﬁc 2006 , 7 , 282 – 297 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 122 . Baldys , A . ; Raymond , J . R . Critical role of escrt machinery in egfr recycling . Biochemistry 2009 , 48 , 9321 – 9323 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 123 . Li , X . ; Letourneau , D . ; Holleran , B . ; Leduc , R . ; Lavigne , P . ; Lavoie , C . Galphas protein binds ubiquitin to regulate epidermal growth factor receptor endosomal sorting . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2017 , 114 , 13477 – 13482 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 124 . Deshar , R . ; Cho , E . B . ; Yoon , S . K . ; Yoon , J . B . Cc2d1a and cc2d1b regulate degradation and signaling of egfr and tlr4 . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 2016 , 480 , 280 – 287 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 125 . Soubeyran , P . ; Kowanetz , K . ; Szymkiewicz , I . ; Langdon , W . Y . ; Dikic , I . Cbl - cin85 - endophilin complex mediates ligand - induced downregulation of egf receptors . Nature 2002 , 416 , 183 – 187 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 126 . Petrelli , A . ; Gilestro , G . F . ; Lanzardo , S . ; Comoglio , P . M . ; Migone , N . ; Giordano , S . The endophilin - cin85 - cbl complex mediates ligand - dependent downregulation of c - met . Nature 2002 , 416 , 187 – 190 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 127 . Diesenberg , K . ; Beerbaum , M . ; Fink , U . ; Schmieder , P . ; Krauss , M . Sept9 negatively regulates ubiquitin - dependent downregulation of egfr . J . Cell Sci . 2015 , 128 , 397 – 407 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 128 . Umebayashi , K . ; Stenmark , H . ; Yoshimori , T . Ubc4 / 5 and c - cbl continue to ubiquitinate egf receptor after internalization to facilitate polyubiquitination and degradation . Mol . Biol . Cell 2008 , 19 , 3454 – 3462 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Cells 2018 , 7 , 22 21 of 24 129 . Malerod , L . ; Stuffers , S . ; Brech , A . ; Stenmark , H . Vps22 / eap30 in escrt - ii mediates endosomal sorting of growth factor and chemokine receptors destined for lysosomal degradation . Trafﬁc 2007 , 8 , 1617 – 1629 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 130 . Longva , K . E . ; Blystad , F . D . ; Stang , E . ; Larsen , A . M . ; Johannessen , L . E . ; Madshus , I . H . Ubiquitination and proteasomal activity is required for transport of the egf receptor to inner membranes of multivesicular bodies . J . Cell Biol . 2002 , 156 , 843 – 854 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 131 . Chi , S . ; Cao , H . ; Wang , Y . ; McNiven , M . A . Recycling of the epidermal growth factor receptor is mediated by a novel form of the clathrin adaptor protein eps15 . J . Biol . Chem . 2011 , 286 , 35196 – 35208 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 132 . Jopling , H . M . ; Odell , A . F . ; Pellet - Many , C . ; Latham , A . M . ; Frankel , P . ; Sivaprasadarao , A . ; Walker , J . H . ; Zachary , I . C . ; Ponnambalam , S . Endosome - to - plasma membrane recycling of vegfr2 receptor tyrosine kinase regulates endothelial function and blood vessel formation . Cells 2014 , 3 , 363 – 385 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 133 . Hellberg , C . ; Schmees , C . ; Karlsson , S . ; Ahgren , A . ; Heldin , C . H . Activation of protein kinase c alpha is necessary for sorting the pdgf beta - receptor to rab4a - dependent recycling . Mol . Biol . Cell 2009 , 20 , 2856 – 2863 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 134 . Romanelli , R . J . ; LeBeau , A . P . ; Fulmer , C . G . ; Lazzarino , D . A . ; Hochberg , A . ; Wood , T . L . Insulin - like growth factor type - i receptor internalization and recycling mediate the sustained phosphorylation of akt . J . Biol . Chem . 2007 , 282 , 22513 – 22524 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 135 . Li , X . ; Lavigne , P . ; Lavoie , C . Gga3 mediates trka endocytic recycling to promote sustained akt phosphorylation and cell survival . Mol . Biol . Cell 2015 , 26 , 4412 – 4426 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 136 . Luiskandl , S . ; Woller , B . ; Schlauf , M . ; Schmid , J . A . ; Herbst , R . Endosomal trafﬁcking of the receptor tyrosine kinase musk proceeds via clathrin - dependent pathways , arf6 and actin . FEBS J . 2013 , 280 , 3281 – 3297 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 137 . Mihai , C . ; Chotani , M . ; Elton , T . S . ; Agarwal , G . Mapping of ddr1 distribution and oligomerization on the cell surface by fret microscopy . J . Mol . Biol . 2009 , 385 , 432 – 445 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 138 . Haugsten , E . M . ; Malecki , J . ; Bjorklund , S . M . ; Olsnes , S . ; Wesche , J . Ubiquitination of ﬁbroblast growth factor receptor 1 is required for its intracellular sorting but not for its endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 2008 , 19 , 3390 – 3403 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 139 . Decker , S . J . Epidermal growth factor and transforming growth factor - alpha induce differential processing of the epidermal growth factor receptor . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 1990 , 166 , 615 – 621 . [ CrossRef ] 140 . Stern , K . A . ; Place , T . L . ; Lill , N . L . Egf and amphiregulin differentially regulate cbl recruitment to endosomes and egf receptor fate . Biochem . J . 2008 , 410 , 585 – 594 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 141 . Baldys , A . ; Gooz , M . ; Morinelli , T . A . ; Lee , M . H . ; Raymond , J . R . , Jr . ; Luttrell , L . M . ; Raymond , J . R . , Sr . Essential role of c - cbl in amphiregulin - induced recycling and signaling of the endogenous epidermal growth factor receptor . Biochemistry 2009 , 48 , 1462 – 1473 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 142 . Roepstorff , K . ; Grandal , M . V . ; Henriksen , L . ; Knudsen , S . L . ; Lerdrup , M . ; Grovdal , L . ; Willumsen , B . M . ; van Deurs , B . Differential effects of egfr ligands on endocytic sorting of the receptor . Trafﬁc 2009 , 10 , 1115 – 1127 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 143 . Sehat , B . ; Toﬁgh , A . ; Lin , Y . ; Trocme , E . ; Liljedahl , U . ; Lagergren , J . ; Larsson , O . Sumoylation mediates the nuclear translocation and signaling of the igf - 1 receptor . Sci . Signal . 2010 , 3 , ra10 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 144 . Knittle , A . M . ; Helkkula , M . ; Johnson , M . S . ; Sundvall , M . ; Elenius , K . Sumoylation regulates nuclear accumulation and signaling activity of the soluble intracellular domain of the erbb4 receptor tyrosine kinase . J . Biol . Chem . 2017 , 292 , 19890 – 19904 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 145 . Deng , H . ; Lin , Y . ; Badin , M . ; Vasilcanu , D . ; Stromberg , T . ; Jernberg - Wiklund , H . ; Sehat , B . ; Larsson , O . Over - accumulation of nuclear igf - 1 receptor in tumor cells requires elevated expression of the receptor and the sumo - conjugating enzyme ubc9 . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 2011 , 404 , 667 – 671 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 146 . Visser Smit , G . D . ; Place , T . L . ; Cole , S . L . ; Clausen , K . A . ; Vemuganti , S . ; Zhang , G . ; Koland , J . G . ; Lill , N . L . Cbl controls egfr fate by regulating early endosome fusion . Sci . Signal . 2009 , 2 , ra86 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 147 . Ravid , T . ; Heidinger , J . M . ; Gee , P . ; Khan , E . M . ; Goldkorn , T . C - cbl - mediated ubiquitinylation is required for epidermal growth factor receptor exit from the early endosomes . J . Biol . Chem . 2004 , 279 , 37153 – 37162 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Cells 2018 , 7 , 22 22 of 24 148 . Severe , N . ; Miraoui , H . ; Marie , P . J . The casitas b lineage lymphoma ( cbl ) mutant g306e enhances osteogenic differentiation in human mesenchymal stromal cells in part by decreased cbl - mediated platelet - derived growth factor receptor alpha and ﬁbroblast growth factor receptor 2 ubiquitination . J . Biol . Chem . 2011 , 286 , 24443 – 24450 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 149 . Reddi , A . L . ; Ying , G . ; Duan , L . ; Chen , G . ; Dimri , M . ; Douillard , P . ; Druker , B . J . ; Naramura , M . ; Band , V . ; Band , H . Binding of cbl to a phospholipase cgamma1 - docking site on platelet - derived growth factor receptor beta provides a dual mechanism of negative regulation . J . Biol . Chem . 2007 , 282 , 29336 – 29347 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 150 . Rorsman , C . ; Tsioumpekou , M . ; Heldin , C . H . ; Lennartsson , J . The ubiquitin ligases c - cbl and cbl - b negatively regulate platelet - derived growth factor ( pdgf ) bb - induced chemotaxis by affecting pdgf receptor beta ( pdgfrbeta ) internalization and signaling . J . Biol . Chem . 2016 , 291 , 11608 – 11618 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 151 . Takahashi , Y . ; Shimokawa , N . ; Esmaeili - Mahani , S . ; Morita , A . ; Masuda , H . ; Iwasaki , T . ; Tamura , J . ; Haglund , K . ; Koibuchi , N . Ligand - induced downregulation of trka is partly regulated through ubiquitination by cbl . FEBS Lett . 2011 , 585 , 1741 – 1747 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 152 . Hyndman , B . D . ; Crupi , M . J . F . ; Peng , S . ; Bone , L . N . ; Rekab , A . N . ; Lian , E . Y . ; Wagner , S . M . ; Antonescu , C . N . ; Mulligan , L . M . Differential recruitment of e3 ubiquitin ligase complexes regulates ret isoform internalization . J . Cell Sci . 2017 , 130 , 3282 – 3296 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 153 . Sharfe , N . ; Freywald , A . ; Toro , A . ; Roifman , C . M . Ephrin - a1 induces c - cbl phosphorylation and epha receptor down - regulation in t cells . J . Immunol . 2003 , 170 , 6024 – 6032 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 154 . Fasen , K . ; Cerretti , D . P . ; Huynh - Do , U . Ligand binding induces cbl - dependent ephb1 receptor degradation through the lysosomal pathway . Trafﬁc 2008 , 9 , 251 – 266 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 155 . Duval , M . ; Bedard - Goulet , S . ; Delisle , C . ; Gratton , J . P . Vascular endothelial growth factor - dependent down - regulation of ﬂk - 1 / kdr involves cbl - mediated ubiquitination . Consequences on nitric oxide production from endothelial cells . J . Biol . Chem . 2003 , 278 , 20091 – 20097 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 156 . Kobayashi , S . ; Sawano , A . ; Nojima , Y . ; Shibuya , M . ; Maru , Y . The c - cbl / cd2ap complex regulates vegf - induced endocytosis and degradation of ﬂt - 1 ( vegfr - 1 ) . FASEB J . 2004 , 18 , 929 – 931 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 157 . Parks , E . E . ; Ceresa , B . P . Cell surface epidermal growth factor receptors increase src and c - cbl activity and receptor ubiquitylation . J . Biol . Chem . 2014 , 289 , 25537 – 25545 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 158 . Emdal , K . B . ; Pedersen , A . K . ; Bekker - Jensen , D . B . ; Tsafou , K . P . ; Horn , H . ; Lindner , S . ; Schulte , J . H . ; Eggert , A . ; Jensen , L . J . ; Francavilla , C . ; et al . Temporal proteomics of ngf - trka signaling identiﬁes an inhibitory role for the e3 ligase cbl - b in neuroblastoma cell differentiation . Sci . Signal . 2015 , 8 , ra40 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 159 . Sirisaengtaksin , N . ; Gireud , M . ; Yan , Q . ; Kubota , Y . ; Meza , D . ; Waymire , J . C . ; Zage , P . E . ; Bean , A . J . Ube4b protein couples ubiquitination and sorting machineries to enable epidermal growth factor receptor ( egfr ) degradation . J . Biol . Chem . 2014 , 289 , 3026 – 3039 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 160 . Gschweitl , M . ; Ulbricht , A . ; Barnes , C . A . ; Enchev , R . I . ; Stoffel - Studer , I . ; Meyer - Schaller , N . ; Huotari , J . ; Yamauchi , Y . ; Greber , U . F . ; Helenius , A . ; et al . A spopl / cullin - 3 ubiquitin ligase complex regulates endocytic trafﬁcking by targeting eps15 at endosomes . eLife 2016 , 5 , e13841 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 161 . Song , R . ; Peng , W . ; Zhang , Y . ; Lv , F . ; Wu , H . K . ; Guo , J . ; Cao , Y . ; Pi , Y . ; Zhang , X . ; Jin , L . ; et al . Central role of e3 ubiquitin ligase mg53 in insulin resistance and metabolic disorders . Nature 2013 , 494 , 375 – 379 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 162 . Nagarajan , A . ; Petersen , M . C . ; Nasiri , A . R . ; Butrico , G . ; Fung , A . ; Ruan , H . B . ; Kursawe , R . ; Caprio , S . ; Thibodeau , J . ; Bourgeois - Daigneault , M . C . ; et al . March1 regulates insulin sensitivity by controlling cell surface insulin receptor levels . Nat . Commun . 2016 , 7 , 12639 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 163 . Sehat , B . ; Andersson , S . ; Girnita , L . ; Larsson , O . Identiﬁcation of c - cbl as a new ligase for insulin - like growth factor - i receptor with distinct roles from mdm2 in receptor ubiquitination and endocytosis . Cancer Res . 2008 , 68 , 5669 – 5677 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 164 . Vecchione , A . ; Marchese , A . ; Henry , P . ; Rotin , D . ; Morrione , A . The grb10 / nedd4 complex regulates ligand - induced ubiquitination and stability of the insulin - like growth factor i receptor . Mol . Cell . Biol . 2003 , 23 , 3363 – 3372 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 165 . Girnita , L . ; Girnita , A . ; Larsson , O . Mdm2 - dependent ubiquitination and degradation of the insulin - like growth factor 1 receptor . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2003 , 100 , 8247 – 8252 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Cells 2018 , 7 , 22 23 of 24 166 . Monami , G . ; Emiliozzi , V . ; Morrione , A . Grb10 / nedd4 - mediated multiubiquitination of the insulin - like growth factor receptor regulates receptor internalization . J . Cell . Physiol . 2008 , 216 , 426 – 437 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 167 . Murdaca , J . ; Treins , C . ; Monthouel - Kartmann , M . N . ; Pontier - Bres , R . ; Kumar , S . ; Van Obberghen , E . ; Giorgetti - Peraldi , S . Grb10 prevents nedd4 - mediated vascular endothelial growth factor receptor - 2 degradation . J . Biol . Chem . 2004 , 279 , 26754 – 26761 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 168 . Hasseine , L . K . ; Murdaca , J . ; Suavet , F . ; Longnus , S . ; Giorgetti - Peraldi , S . ; Van Obberghen , E . Hrs is a positive regulator of vegf and insulin signaling . Exp . Cell Res . 2007 , 313 , 1927 – 1942 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 169 . Ye , Y . ; Scheel , H . ; Hofmann , K . ; Komander , D . Dissection of usp catalytic domains reveals ﬁve common insertion points . Mol . Biosyst . 2009 , 5 , 1797 – 1808 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 170 . Mevissen , T . E . ; Hospenthal , M . K . ; Geurink , P . P . ; Elliott , P . R . ; Akutsu , M . ; Arnaudo , N . ; Ekkebus , R . ; Kulathu , Y . ; Wauer , T . ; El Oualid , F . ; et al . Otu deubiquitinases reveal mechanisms of linkage speciﬁcity and enable ubiquitin chain restriction analysis . Cell 2013 , 154 , 169 – 184 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 171 . Seki , T . ; Gong , L . ; Williams , A . J . ; Sakai , N . ; Todi , S . V . ; Paulson , H . L . Josd1 , a membrane - targeted deubiquitinating enzyme , is activated by ubiquitination and regulates membrane dynamics , cell motility , and endocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 2013 , 288 , 17145 – 17155 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 172 . Abdul Rehman , S . A . ; Kristariyanto , Y . A . ; Choi , S . Y . ; Nkosi , P . J . ; Weidlich , S . ; Labib , K . ; Hofmann , K . ; Kulathu , Y . Mindy - 1 is a member of an evolutionarily conserved and structurally distinct new family of deubiquitinating enzymes . Mol . Cell 2016 , 63 , 146 – 155 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 173 . Kapoor , N . ; Niu , J . ; Saad , Y . ; Kumar , S . ; Sirakova , T . ; Becerra , E . ; Li , X . ; Kolattukudy , P . E . Transcription factors stat6 and klf4 implement macrophage polarization via the dual catalytic powers of mcpip . J . Immunol . 2015 , 194 , 6011 – 6023 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 174 . Liang , J . ; Saad , Y . ; Lei , T . ; Wang , J . ; Qi , D . ; Yang , Q . ; Kolattukudy , P . E . ; Fu , M . Mcp - induced protein 1 deubiquitinates traf proteins and negatively regulates jnk and nf - kappab signaling . J . Exp . Med . 2010 , 207 , 2959 – 2973 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 175 . Komander , D . ; Clague , M . J . ; Urbe , S . Breaking the chains : Structure and function of the deubiquitinases . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2009 , 10 , 550 – 563 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 176 . Grou , C . P . ; Pinto , M . P . ; Mendes , A . V . ; Domingues , P . ; Azevedo , J . E . The de novo synthesis of ubiquitin : Identiﬁcation of deubiquitinases acting on ubiquitin precursors . Sci . Rep . 2015 , 5 , 12836 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 177 . Komander , D . ; Lord , C . J . ; Scheel , H . ; Swift , S . ; Hofmann , K . ; Ashworth , A . ; Barford , D . The structure of the cyld usp domain explains its speciﬁcity for lys63 - linked polyubiquitin and reveals a b box module . Mol . Cell 2008 , 29 , 451 – 464 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 178 . Kristariyanto , Y . A . ; Abdul Rehman , S . A . ; Weidlich , S . ; Knebel , A . ; Kulathu , Y . A single miu motif of mindy - 1 recognizes k48 - linked polyubiquitin chains . EMBO Rep . 2017 , 18 , 392 – 402 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 179 . Sato , Y . ; Okatsu , K . ; Saeki , Y . ; Yamano , K . ; Matsuda , N . ; Kaiho , A . ; Yamagata , A . ; Goto - Ito , S . ; Ishikawa , M . ; Hashimoto , Y . ; et al . Structural basis for speciﬁc cleavage of lys6 - linked polyubiquitin chains by usp30 . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 2017 , 24 , 911 – 919 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 180 . Peth , A . ; Uchiki , T . ; Goldberg , A . L . Atp - dependent steps in the binding of ubiquitin conjugates to the 26s proteasome that commit to degradation . Mol . Cell 2010 , 40 , 671 – 681 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 181 . Harrigan , J . A . ; Jacq , X . ; Martin , N . M . ; Jackson , S . P . Deubiquitylating enzymes and drug discovery : Emerging opportunities . Nat . Rev . Drug Discov . 2018 , 17 , 57 – 77 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 182 . Duex , J . E . ; Sorkin , A . Rna interference screen identiﬁes usp18 as a regulator of epidermal growth factor receptor synthesis . Mol . Biol . Cell 2009 , 20 , 1833 – 1844 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 183 . Duex , J . E . ; Comeau , L . ; Sorkin , A . ; Purow , B . ; Kefas , B . Usp18 regulates epidermal growth factor ( egf ) receptor expression and cancer cell survival via microrna - 7 . J . Biol . Chem . 2011 , 286 , 25377 – 25386 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 184 . McCullough , J . ; Clague , M . J . ; Urbe , S . Amsh is an endosome - associated ubiquitin isopeptidase . J . Cell Biol . 2004 , 166 , 487 – 492 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 185 . McCullough , J . ; Row , P . E . ; Lorenzo , O . ; Doherty , M . ; Beynon , R . ; Clague , M . J . ; Urbe , S . Activation of the endosome - associated ubiquitin isopeptidase amsh by stam , a component of the multivesicular body - sorting machinery . Curr . Biol . CB 2006 , 16 , 160 – 165 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Cells 2018 , 7 , 22 24 of 24 186 . Savio , M . G . ; Wollscheid , N . ; Cavallaro , E . ; Algisi , V . ; Di Fiore , P . P . ; Sigismund , S . ; Maspero , E . ; Polo , S . Usp9x controls egfr fate by deubiquitinating the endocytic adaptor eps15 . Curr . Biol . CB 2016 , 26 , 173 – 183 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 187 . Guo , Y . Y . ; Lu , Y . ; Zheng , Y . ; Chen , X . R . ; Dong , J . L . ; Yuan , R . R . ; Huang , S . H . ; Yu , H . ; Wang , Y . ; Chen , Z . Y . ; et al . Ubiquitin c - terminal hydrolase l1 ( uch - l1 ) promotes hippocampus - dependent memory via its deubiquitinating effect on trkb . J . Neurosci . 2017 , 37 , 5978 – 5995 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 188 . Mizuno , E . ; Kobayashi , K . ; Yamamoto , A . ; Kitamura , N . ; Komada , M . A deubiquitinating enzyme ubpy regulates the level of protein ubiquitination on endosomes . Trafﬁc 2006 , 7 , 1017 – 1031 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 189 . Niendorf , S . ; Oksche , A . ; Kisser , A . ; Lohler , J . ; Prinz , M . ; Schorle , H . ; Feller , S . ; Lewitzky , M . ; Horak , I . ; Knobeloch , K . P . Essential role of ubiquitin - speciﬁc protease 8 for receptor tyrosine kinase stability and endocytic trafﬁcking in vivo . Mol . Cell . Biol . 2007 , 27 , 5029 – 5039 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 190 . Oh , Y . M . ; Lee , S . B . ; Choi , J . ; Suh , H . Y . ; Shim , S . ; Song , Y . J . ; Kim , B . ; Lee , J . M . ; Oh , S . J . ; Jeong , Y . ; et al . Usp8 modulates ubiquitination of lrig1 for met degradation . Sci . Rep . 2014 , 4 , 4980 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 191 . Berlin , I . ; Schwartz , H . ; Nash , P . D . Regulation of epidermal growth factor receptor ubiquitination and trafﬁcking by the usp8 . Stam complex . J . Biol . Chem . 2010 , 285 , 34909 – 34921 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 192 . Reincke , M . ; Sbiera , S . ; Hayakawa , A . ; Theodoropoulou , M . ; Osswald , A . ; Beuschlein , F . ; Meitinger , T . ; Mizuno - Yamasaki , E . ; Kawaguchi , K . ; Saeki , Y . ; et al . Mutations in the deubiquitinase gene usp8 cause cushing ' s disease . Nat . Genet . 2015 , 47 , 31 – 38 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 193 . Smith , G . A . ; Fearnley , G . W . ; Abdul - Zani , I . ; Wheatcroft , S . B . ; Tomlinson , D . C . ; Harrison , M . A . ; Ponnambalam , S . Vegfr2 trafﬁcking , signaling and proteolysis is regulated by the ubiquitin isopeptidase usp8 . Trafﬁc 2016 , 17 , 53 – 65 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 194 . Jian , F . ; Cao , Y . ; Bian , L . ; Sun , Q . Usp8 : A novel therapeutic target for cushing ' s disease . Endocrine 2015 , 50 , 292 – 296 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 195 . Byun , S . ; Lee , S . Y . ; Lee , J . ; Jeong , C . H . ; Farrand , L . ; Lim , S . ; Reddy , K . ; Kim , J . Y . ; Lee , M . H . ; Lee , H . J . ; et al . Usp8 is a novel target for overcoming geﬁtinib resistance in lung cancer . Clin . Cancer Res . 2013 , 19 , 3894 – 3904 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] © 2018 by the authors . Licensee MDPI , Basel , Switzerland . This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution ( CC BY ) license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / ) .