T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y JCB : REPORT © The Rockefeller University Press $ 15 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Vol . 177 , No . 1 , April 9 , 2007 21 – 27 http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200605142 JCB 21 Introduction Many internal organs are lined by a monolayer of polarized epi - thelia with separate apical ( AP ) and basolateral ( BL ) surfaces that are defi ned by distinct protein and lipid compositions and are separated by tight junctions ( Gibson and Perrimon , 2003 ) . The AP surface serves as a barrier to the outside world and is specialized for the exchange of materials with the lumen . The BL surface is adapted for interaction with other cells and for exchange with the bloodstream . Among its many roles , this epithelial barrier is one of the most fundamental components of the innate immune system , protecting organisms from the vast environmental microbiota ; indeed , > 90 % of infectious agents enter through mucosal epithelia . Although an effective defense mechanism against most microbes , pathogenic bacteria have evolved or acquired strategies to circumvent the mucosal barrier ( Kazmierczak et al . , 2001 ) . For example , some professional pathogens such as Salmonella typhimurium and Shigella fl exneri inject into the host cell toxins that subvert host signal transduc - tion pathways and manipulate the host cell cytoskeleton in ways that allow entry through the AP surface of the mucosal barrier ( Cossart and Sansonetti , 2004 ) . In contrast , for opportunistic pathogens , of which Pseudo - monas aeruginosa is a prime example , the mucosal barrier rep - resents a formidable challenge to bacteria - mediated damage or entry . However , in the setting of injured or poorly polarized epi - thelium , P . aeruginosa can initiate colonization and unleash its arsenal of potent virulence factors ( Engel , 2003 ) . Indeed , this gram - negative pathogen is a leading cause of nosocomial infec - tions in hospitalized patients and accounts for its predilection to cause ventilator - associated pneumonia , skin infections in burn patients or at the site of surgical incisions , and catheter - related Pseudomonas aeruginosa exploits a PIP3 - dependent pathway to transform apical into basolateral membrane Arlinet Kierbel , 1 Ama Gassama - Diagne , 3 , 4 , 6 Claudia Rocha , 7 Lilliana Radoshevich , 5 Joan Olson , 7 Keith Mostov , 3 , 4 and Joanne Engel 1 , 2 1 Department of Medicine , 2 Department of Microbiology and Immunology , 3 Department of Anatomy , 4 Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics , and 5 Department of Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program , University of California , San Francisco , San Francisco , CA 94143 6 Institut Federatif de Recherche Claude de Preval , Institut Federatif de Recherche 30 , Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Medicale Unite 563 , Departement Lipoproteines et Mediateurs Lipidiques , Hospital Purpan , 31059 Toulouse , Cedex 3 , France 7 Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine , Medical University of South Carolina , Charleston , SC 29425 P seudomonas aeruginosa , an important human pathogen , preferentially binds and enters injured cells from the basolateral ( BL ) surface . We previously demonstrated that activation of phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) and Akt are necessary and sufﬁ cient for P . aeruginosa entry from the apical ( AP ) surface and that AP addition of phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ( PIP3 ) is sufﬁ cient to convert AP into BL membrane ( Kierbel , A . , A . Gassama - Diagne , K . Mostov , and J . N . Engel . 2005 . Mol . Biol . Cell . 16 : 2577 – 2585 ; Gassama - Diagne , A . , W . Yu , M . ter Beest , F . Martin - Belmonte , A . Kierbel , J . Engel , and K . Mostov . 2006 . Nat . Cell Biol . 8 : 963 – 970 ) . We now show that P . aeruginosa subverts this pathway to gain entry from the AP surface . In polarized monolayers , P . aeruginosa binds near cell – cell junctions without com - promising them where it activates and recruits PI3K to the AP surface . Membrane protrusions enriched for PIP3 and actin accumulate at the AP surface at the site of bacterial binding . These protrusions lack AP membrane markers and are comprised of BL membrane constituents , which are trafﬁ cked there by transcytosis . The end result is that this bacterium transforms AP into BL membrane , creating a local microenvironment that facilitates its colonization and entry into the mucosal barrier . Correspondence to Joanne Engel : jengel @ medicine . ucsf . edu J . Olson’s present address is Dept . of Microbiology , Immunology , and Cell Biology , Robert C . Byrd Health Sciences Center , West Virginia University , Morgantown , WV 26506 . Abbreviations used in this paper : AP , apical ; BL , basolateral ; DN , dominant negative ; LY , LY294002 ; PH , pleckstrin homology ; PI3K , phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase ; PIP3 , phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate . The online version of this article contains supplemental material . JCB • VOLUME 177 • NUMBER 1 • 2007 22 infections , among others ( Mandell et al . , 2000 ) . P . aeruginosa is also a cause of chronic lung infections and ultimately death in patients with cystic fi brosis ( Mandell et al . , 2000 ) . Although usually considered an extracellular pathogen , (cid:2) 50 % of all isolates can be measurably internalized into non - phagocytic cells in vivo as well as in vitro ( Engel , 2003 ) . A seemingly simple but very important question is from what sur - face P . aeruginosa optimally enters the host cells . In tissue cul - ture models , P . aeruginosa is observed to preferentially bind to and enter the cells at the edge and BL surfaces at the site of me - chanical wounding , corresponding to injured and poorly polar - ized cells ( Geiser et al . , 2001 ) . Consistent with this , we have found that several strains of P . aeruginosa enter more effi ciently into incompletely polarized cells ( Kazmierczak et al . , 2004 ; un - published data ) . Phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ( PIP3 ) has re - cently emerged as both a key determinant of epithelial polarity and of pathogen interaction with host cells ( Vanhaesebroeck and Alessi , 2000 ; Wymann et al . , 2003 ; Pizarro - Cerda and Cossart , 2004 ) . In MDCK cells , a well - studied model of polarized epi - thelium , PIP3 is stably localized at the BL membrane and is excluded from the AP plasma membrane ( Watton and Downward , 1999 ; Gassama - Diagne et al . , 2006 ) . The mechanism by which a gradient of this freely diffusible lipid is maintained has not been fully elucidated , but it most likely involves localization of the lipid phosphatase PTEN ( phosphatase and tensin homologue ) to the tight junction ( von Stein et al . , 2005 ) . Phosphatidylin - ositol 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) induces scattering and tubulogenesis in epithelial cells through a novel pathway ( Yu et al . , 2003 ) . We have recently shown that PIP3 plays a key role in determining the composition and identity of the BL surface ( Gassama - Diagne et al . , 2006 ) . Insertion of exogenous PIP3 into the AP surface results in the rapid transformation of regions of the AP surface into a membrane with the composition of the BL surface by redirecting BL transcytosis . Conversely , reduction in the synthesis of PIP3 by the inhibition of PI3K causes a decrease in BL surface area . Together , these results suggest that PIP3 is necessary and suffi cient for the specifi cation of BL membrane . Interestingly , PIP3 is also involved in morphogenesis of the AP surface of photoreceptor cells in Drosophila melanogaster ( Pinal et al . , 2006 ) . In a previous study , we have discovered that the PI3K pathway is necessary and suffi cient for the internalization of P . aeruginosa into epithelial cells ( Kierbel et al . , 2005 ) . In the present study , we demonstrate that this pathogen subverts PI3K to alter membrane polarity . We show that in response to P . aeruginosa binding to the AP surface , many BL proteins as well as PI3K and actin are rapidly redistributed to the regions of bacterial binding at the AP surface without disrupting the integrity of the tight junctions . Concurrently , proteins that are normally res - ident at the AP surface are removed from the regions of bacte - rial attachment . We demonstrate that BL constituents of the Figure 1 . Attachment of P . aeruginosa to the AP membrane of MDCK cells triggers the formation of membrane protrusions . ( a ) Scanning electron micros - copy of MDCK cells infected with P . aeruginosa for 30 min . ( left and middle ) Top - down views of membrane protrusions . The host membrane is indicated by asterisks , whereas bacteria are indicated by the arrowheads . ( right ) Lower magniﬁ cation of the picture in the middle panel showing that bacteria were typically observed to adhere to the cell – cell junctions . ( b and c ) Confocal micrographs of MDCK cells expressing GFP - PH - Akt ( green ; a marker for PIP3 ) in - fected with PKH26 red – labeled P . aeruginosa . ( b ) XZ sections and 3D reconstruction of samples ﬁ xed 30 min after the addition of bacteria . The host cell nu - clei are stained with DAPI ( blue ) . PIP3 - containing protrusions are observed at the site of bacterial binding to the AP surface . The MDCK cells form a single monolayer of cells . ( c ) XZ sections of samples ﬁ xed 2 h after the addition of bacteria . The bacteria were allowed to adhere for 1 h , nonadherent bacteria were removed by washing , and extracellular bacteria were killed by the addition of amikacin for 1 h . The bacteria are fully internalized ; no AP protrusions or AP PIP3 are observed . Bars , 10 μ m . PSEUDOMONAS ALTERS HOST MEMBRANE POLARITY • KIERBEL ET AL . 23 protrusions originate from the BL membrane and are redirected to the AP membrane by a dynamin - and PI3K - dependent trans - port mechanism likely involving transcytosis . By transforming an AP surface into one with BL characteristics , the bacteria cre - ate a local microenvironment that facilitates colonization and entry into the mucosal barrier . Results and discussion P . aeruginosa induces the formation of protrusions on the AP surface near cell – cell junctions In polarized MDCK cells , the pleckstrin homology ( PH ) do - main of Akt fused to GFP ( PH - Akt - GFP ) , a protein probe for PIP3 , localizes exclusively at the BL surface in an LY294002 ( LY ) - dependent manner , whereas a point mutant unable to bind 3 ′ phosphoinositides is cytoplasmic ( Watton and Downward , 1999 ; unpublished data ) . We have previously shown that upon AP P . aeruginosa infection , PH - Akt - GFP relocalized to the site of AP bacterial binding ( Kierbel et al . , 2005 ) . This process as well as subsequent bacterial entry was blocked by the PI3K inhibitor LY , suggesting a key role for PI3K in these events ( Kierbel et al . , 2005 ) . These fi ndings suggested that the bacteria induce the relocalization of lipids normally found only at the BL surface ( Watton and Downward , 1999 ; Yu et al . , 2003 ) . As the PH domain of Akt can also bind to phosphati - dylinositol 3 , 4 , - bisphosphate , we confi rmed that PIP3 was re - cruited to the site of AP bacterial binding using a more specifi c probe , the PH domain of Grp1 fused to GFP ( Klarlund et al . , 1997 , 1998 ) . Polarized confl uent MDCK cells grown on tran - swell fi lters were transiently transfected with PH - Grp1 - GFP and infected with P . aeruginosa ( MOI of 50 ) for 30 min and fi xed . Similar to our results with PH - Akt - GFP , this PIP3 probe showed a BL distribution and localized to the bacterial binding site ( Fig . S1 , available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200605142 / DC1 ) . We further investigated the spatial rela - tionship of the bacteria to the cell surface by scanning electron microscopy . Extensive membrane protrusions from the AP sur - face were observed at the site of the attachment of bacterial aggregates ( Fig . 1 a ) . Most of the bacterial binding occurred at or near cell – cell junctions ( Fig . 1 a , right ) . As P . aeruginosa preferentially binds to BL surfaces when they are accessible , we considered the possibility that the bacteria were binding to BL surfaces of areas of multilayered cells . MDCK cells stably transfected with GFP - PH - Akt were cocultivated with PKH26 red – labeled P . aeruginosa for 30 min . In general , PIP3 - containing protrusions were not associated with multilayered cells ( Fig . 1 b ) . By 2 h , a time at which bacterial internalization is com - plete , protrusions were no longer visible ( Fig . 1 c ) . The bacteria - induced protrusions contain PI3K and actin We investigated whether PI3K , the enzyme that generates PIP3 , is recruited to the AP protrusions . MDCK cell monolayers were infected with bacteria for 30 min , fi xed , stained with an anti - body to PI3K , and examined by confocal microscopy . In unin - fected cells , cytoplasmic PI3K was preferentially found in the BL regions of the cells ( unpublished data ) . Within 30 min after the addition of bacteria , PI3K accumulated at the AP surface underneath the site of bacterial attachment ( Fig . 2 a ) . Membrane protrusion and generation of PIP3 are events often associated with actin rearrangement ( Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ) , and P . aeruginosa entry is inhibited by cytochalasin D ( Evans et al . , 1998 ) . Phalloidin staining revealed fi lamentous ac - tin in the bacteria - induced protrusions ( Fig . 2 b ) . Protrusion for - mation was completely blocked by latrunculin B , indicating that their formation requires fi lamentous actin ( unpublished data ) . P . aeruginosa transforms AP membrane into BL membrane during attachment to the AP surface of polarized MDCK cells We examined the membrane constituents of the bacteria - induced protrusions using antibodies to AP and BL proteins . Surprisingly , gp135 / podocalyxin , a component of AP membranes , was absent from the PIP3 - rich protrusions ( Fig . 3 a ) . Confocal XZ sections revealed the acquisition of the BL markers p58 , β - catenin ( Fig . 3 , b and c ) , and β 1 - integrin ( not depicted ) . These remarkable changes in membrane composition are evident in the 3D recon - structions , which clearly show the bacteria aggregates associated with protrusions of the AP membrane that contain BL proteins and exclude AP proteins . Interestingly , the PIP3 probe GFP - PH - Akt and staining of the BL markers did not completely overlap , which may refl ect the relative rapid degradation of PIP3 at the AP membrane by lipid phosphatases ( von Stein et al . , 2005 ) . Together , these experiments reveal that binding of P . aeruginosa to the AP surface of the epithelial barrier is able to radically alter the composition of the membrane , trans - forming it from an AP surface to one with BL constituents . Figure 2 . PI3K and ﬁ lamentous actin are recruited to the protrusions at the site of bacterial attachment . Confocal micrographs of wild - type MDCK ( a ) or MDCK cells expressing GFP - PH - Akt infected with PKH26 red – labeled P . aeruginosa for 30 min ( b ) . XZ sections revealed the recruitment of PI3K ( green ; a ) and ﬁ lamentous actin ( blue ; b ) to the bacteria - induced protru - sions at the site of AP binding . Bars , 10 μ m . JCB • VOLUME 177 • NUMBER 1 • 2007 24 This transformation is accompanied by the recruitment of PI3K , the generation of PIP3 at the AP surface , and the recruitment of actin into membrane protrusions . AP proteins are lost from pro - trusions , which instead become enriched in BL proteins . These observations rule out the possibility that BL proteins are simply intermixed with AP proteins in these protrusions . BL membrane constituents are recruited to the AP protrusion by BL to AP transcytosis Proteins normally destined for the BL surface could be redi - rected to the AP membrane from intracellular stores or from the BL membrane . To distinguish between these two possibilities , we used a pulse - chase experiment to investigate whether pro - teins from the BL surface were present in the AP protrusion . BL surface molecules were selectively biotinylated at 4 ° C by the addition of sulfo - N - hydroxysulfosuccinimide - biotin to the BL medium . This compound reacts with free amino groups on the surface but does not cross the tight junctions ( Sadoul et al . , 1995 ) . P . aeruginosa was added to the AP surface , and biotinyl - ated BL molecules were detected by fl uorescent streptavidin . As seen in Fig . 4 a ( left ) , biotinylated BL proteins were detect - able in the AP protrusions . In contrast , AP staining was not de - tected in adjacent or uninfected cells ( unpublished data ) . This experiment suggests that BL constituents of the AP protrusions originate from the BL membrane either by disrupt - ing tight junctions or by transcytosis . To test whether the integ - rity of the tight junction was affected , we assayed permeability to FITC - inulin , a low molecular weight molecule that is not able to diffuse through functional tight junctions ( Apodaca et al . , 1995 ) . In control experiments , the monolayer was exposed to 10 mM EDTA for 10 min , a treatment known to disrupt AP junctions . Diffusion of FITC - inulin from the AP to the BL compartment was observed within 20 min and continued to increase for up to 60 min . In contrast , AP addition of bacteria did not increase the diffusion of FITC - inulin compared with uninfected cells . Instead , less FITC - inulin diffusion was observed , suggesting that bacte - ria may increase the stability of tight junctions ( Fig . 4 b ) . We confi rmed these fi ndings by testing whether in the ab - sence of cell permeabilization the AP addition of antibodies to an extracellular domain of the BL protein β 1 - integrin was able to access to the BL membrane . As seen in Fig . 4 c , AP addition of the β 1 - integrin antibody only stained the AP surface at the site of the bacteria - associated protrusion . No BL staining was observed , confi rming that P . aeruginosa did not disrupt the gate function of the adjacent tight junction . Together , these experi - ments strongly suggest that the P . aeruginosa – induced rerout - ing of BL markers does not occur by disruption of tight junctions . We tested whether a dominant - negative ( DN ) mutant of dynamin II , which has previously been shown to inhibit BL endo - cytosis in MDCK cells ( Altschuler et al . , 1998 ) , blocked the re - localization of BL proteins to the bacteria - induced AP protrusion . Figure 3 . P . aeruginosa – triggered AP protru - sions have BL membrane characteristics . XZ and 3D reconstructions of confocal micro - graphs of MDCK cells expressing GFP - PH - Akt infected with PKH26 red – labeled P . aerugi - nosa for 30 min showing both vertical ( XZ ) sec - tions as well as 3D reconstructions of a portion of the monolayer . ( a ) PIP3 ( GFP - PH - Akt ; green ) is recruited to the AP bacteria - induced protru - sion , whereas the AP protein gp135 ( purple ) is absent . ( b and c ) The BL marker proteins p58 ( purple ; b ) and β - catenin ( purple ; c ) are re - cruited to the AP bacteria - induced protrusions . The 3D reconstructions show that BL compo - nents appear to surround the bacterial aggregate . Bars , 10 μ m . PSEUDOMONAS ALTERS HOST MEMBRANE POLARITY • KIERBEL ET AL . 25 Infection of MDCK cells with an adenovirus construct express - ing the DN dynamin II ( K44A ) under the control of a tetracycline - sensitive repressor prevented the accumulation of BL proteins at sites where P . aeruginosa bound to the AP surface ( Fig . 4 d ) . Compared with nontransfected cells in the same sample ( n = 13 ) , relocalization of BL proteins to the site of AP binding was inhibited in cells expressing DN dynamin II by 56 % ( n = 14 ; P < 0 . 01 by chi - squared analysis ) . LY has been shown to inhibit BL to AP transcytosis of ricin or dimeric IgA ( Cardone and Mostov , 1995 ; Hansen et al . , 1995 ) . Consistent with our observed role for transcytosis , LY also inhibited the accumulation of biotinylated BL proteins at the site of AP bacterial binding ( Fig . 4 a ) . Compared with cells treated with DMSO alone ( n = 12 ) , LY prevented the relocal - ization of biotinylated BL proteins by 54 % ( n = 13 ; P < 0 . 01 by chi - squared analysis ) . Together , these results support the idea that a substantial amount of BL plasma membrane components are relocalized to the AP protrusion in a PI3K - dependent manner by transcytosis . We fi nd no evidence that the bacteria disrupt the integrity of the tight junctions . We cannot exclude the possibility that some of the BL proteins found in protrusions are delivered from the Golgi in the biosynthetic pathway , although the long half - life of these proteins makes it unlikely that the amount of proteins available for biosynthetic delivery is large relative to the total intracellular pool . We have recently shown that PIP3 is necessary and suffi - cient to specify BL membrane and that the exogenous addition of PIP3 transforms AP membrane in BL membrane by redirect - ing transcytosis ( Gassama - Diagne et al . , 2006 ) . We have also reported that activation of the PI3K and Akt pathways are nec - essary and suffi cient for P . aeruginosa internalization ( Kierbel et al . , 2005 ) . The present study demonstrates that in the context of polarized MDCK cells , P . aeruginosa , an important human pathogen , subverts this pathway to create a local microenviron - ment that facilitates colonization and entry into the mucosal barrier . Similarly , binding of P . aeruginosa to the AP surface of the epithelial barrier is able to radically alter the composition of the membrane , transforming it from an AP surface to one with BL constituents . This transformation is accompanied by the re - cruitment of PI3K , the generation of PIP3 , and the recruitment of actin into membrane protrusions . It is also possible that P . aeruginosa has additional ways to increase AP PIP3 such as by stimulating PIP3 diffusion and / or by decreasing the activity or levels of lipid phosphatases such as PTEN . In any case , by increasing AP PIP3 , the bacteria appear to stimulate BL to AP transcytosis . For some molecules , Src kinase family – mediated phosphorylation inhibits BL recycling and allows cryptic AP sorting signals to predominate ( Anderson et al . , 2005 ) . Interest - ingly , P . aeruginosa entry correlates with the activation of Src family kinases ( Evans et al . , 2002 ) . We propose that as vesi - cles fuse with the AP membrane and release their cargo , AP constituents are pushed aside . In addition to promoting bacterial Figure 4 . P . aeruginosa induces the relocalization of proteins from the BL to the AP surface by transcytosis . ( a , left ) The BL surface of conﬂ uent MDCK cells was biotinylated for 30 min at 4 ° C . Cells were infected with P . aerugi - nosa expressing GFP for 30 min at 37 ° C , ﬁ xed , and the AP and BL sur - faces were probed with ﬂ uorescent streptavidin ( red ) . Biotinylated BL proteins are only detectable on the BL surface and at the sites of bacterial attachment on the AP surface . ( a , right ) The relocalization of BL proteins is reduced by LY . Cells were preincubated with 100 μ M LY for 1 h . The drug was also present during biotinylation and infection . ( b ) The diffusion from the AP to the BL surface of the small molecule FITC - inulin was measured in uninfected cells , cells infected with P . aeruginosa for 30 min , or after expo - sure to 10 mM EDTA for 10 min . AP addition of P . aeruginosa decreased the monolayer permeability . Error bars represent SD . ( c ) XZ section of MDCK cells infected with GFP – P . aeruginosa and stained with an antibody against an extracellular domain of the BL protein β 1 - integrin ( red ) . The cells were then ﬁ xed and stained with DAPI ( blue ) to visualize the nuclei . The addition of bacteria did not permit diffusion of the antibody to the BL sur - face , suggesting that the tight junctions were not disrupted upon bacterial binding . ( d ) BL surface biotinylation of MDCK T23 cells previously infected with recombinant adenovirus encoding HA - tagged DN dynamin II was performed as described in panel a . DN dynamin II ( blue ) is expressed both in AP and BL membranes . The left panel shows a typical example of the re - localization of biotinylated BL proteins to the site of AP bacterial attachment to a nontransfected cell . The right panel shows that in cells expressing DN dynamin II , the AP accumulation of biotinylated proteins was inhibited . Bars , 10 μ m . JCB • VOLUME 177 • NUMBER 1 • 2007 26 pathogenesis , the rerouting of BL molecules may also benefi t the host by enhancing the innate immune response . We found that the bacteria - induced protrusions were com - monly found at cell – cell junctions . The close proximity to BL constituents at tight junctions may contribute to the rapid ki - netics of the transformation of membrane polarity . This may also refl ect the location of the host cell receptor . Although the cystic fi brosis membrane receptor and asialoganglioside GM1 have been suggested as receptors for entry ( de Bentzmann et al . , 1996 ; Pier et al . , 1997 ) , in the context of MDCK cells , at least , we consider them to be unlikely candidates and are actively investigating other candidate receptors . We imagine that this subversion of host cell polarity is not absolute . Rather , in wounded or disrupted epithelium , the cells at the edge of the wound are poorly polarized , and P . aeruginosa is able to effi ciently bind and coopt PI3K and generate PIP3 at the surface . As the mucosal barrier becomes increasingly differ - entiated and polarized , there is less binding ( unpublished data ) , and the rerouting of BL markers to the AP surface is not as effi - cient , correlating with the decreased susceptibility of the intact epithelium to P . aeruginosa – mediated invasion or damage . Materials and methods Cell preparation and culture MDCK cells ( clone II , T23 , or cells stably transfected with GFP - PH - Akt ; Yu et al . , 2005 ) were grown for 24 h on transwell ﬁ lters as previously described ( Kierbel et al . , 2005 ) . For transient transfections , MDCK cells were transfected with LipofectAMINE 2000 ( Invitrogen ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions . The mammalian expression vector pEGFP containing the PH domain of Grp1 was a gift from M . Birnbaum ( Univer - sity of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA ) . pEGFP - AH , which contains the PH domain of Akt , and the mutant AHR25C ( both constructs encode amino acids 1 – 147 of Akt ) , in which the lipid - binding site is mutated ( Watton and Downward , 1999 ) , were gifts from J . Downward ( London Research Institute , London , UK ) . Antibodies and reagents Antibodies were obtained from the following sources : PI3K antibodies were purchased from Transduction Laboratories ; HA antibody was pur - chased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . ; β 1 - integrin was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection ; p58 antibody was a gift from K . Matlin ( University of Cincinnati , Cincinnati , OH ) ; anti – ZO - 1 ( R40 . 76 ) was a gift from B . Stevenson ( University of Edmonton , Alberta , Canada ) ; and gp135 antibody was a gift from G . Ojakian ( State University of New York Downstate Medical Center , Brooklyn , NY ) . Secondary antibodies used were AlexaFluor594 - or 647 - conjugated antibodies obtained from Invitrogen . Actin ﬁ laments were stained with AlexaFluor350 - phalloidin ( Invitrogen ) . Streptavidin and AlexaFluor594 were obtained from Invitrogen . LY and latrunculin B were purchased from Calbiochem . Immunoﬂ uorescence staining and image analysis Immunoﬂ uorescent staining was performed as previously described ( Apodaca et al . , 1994 ) . Samples were examined with a confocal microscope ( LSM 510 ; Carl Zeiss MicroImaging , Inc . ) using a plan Apochromat 63 × oil objective ( Carl Zeiss MicroImaging , Inc . ) . Images were acquired using Meta 510 software ( Carl Zeiss MicroImaging , Inc . ) , collected as TIFF ﬁ les , and further analyzed with Photoshop 7 . 0 software ( Adobe ) . Bacterial infection The P . aeruginosa strain PAK ( obtained from J . Mattick , University of Queensland , Brisbane , Australia ) was routinely grown shaking overnight in Luria - Bertani broth at 37 ° C . These stationary phase bacteria were la - beled with the Red Fluorescent Cell Linker Mini kit ( PKH26 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) , added at an MOI of 250 to MDCK cells plated at a density of 7 × 10 5 cells on 12 - mM transwells ( Costar ) , and grown for 24 h . After 30 min of infection at 37 ° C , cells were washed three times with PBS , ﬁ xed as previously described ( Apodaca et al . , 1994 ) , and analyzed by confocal microscopy . Similar results were seen at lower MOIs , but fewer bacterial aggregates bound to cells were observed . Scanning microscopy Filter - grown conﬂ uent polarized MDCK cells grown as described in Cell preparation and culture were infected with P . aeruginosa with an MOI of 50 . After 30 min of infection at 37 ° C , cells were washed three times with PBS and ﬁ xed with 2 % cacodylate gluteraldehyde for 30 min and 2 % aqueous osmium tetroxide for 30 min as primary and secondary ﬁ xatives , respectively . Samples were then rinsed with distilled water , dehydrated to 100 % ethanol , and incubated with hexamethyldisilazone ( Sigma - Aldrich ) until dry . Dried samples were mounted on aluminum holders , sputter coated with gold palladium ( 20 - nM coating ) , and examined with a scanning elec - tron microscope ( model 5410 ; JEOL ) . Transcytosis assay MDCK cells were grown as described in Cell preparation and culture , and BL membrane proteins were speciﬁ cally biotinylated with sulfo - N - hydroxy - sulfosuccinimide - biotin at 4 ° C for 30 min as described previously ( Lipschutz et al . , 2001 ) . The biotin solution was removed , and cells were washed with PBS and incubated at 37 ° C for 5 min , at which time bacteria were added to the AP surface for 30 min . Transcytosis of BL proteins to the AP surface was detected by adding streptavidin and AlexaFluor594 conjugate to the AP and BL media for 30 min at 37 ° C , and cells were analyzed by confocal microscopy as described in Immunoﬂ uorescence staining and image analy - sis . In some experiments , cells were preincubated with LY ( 100 μ M in DMSO ) for 1 h . LY was also present during biotinylation and infection . Transfection with DN dynamin II Construction of recombinant adenovirus and infection were performed as previously described ( Altschuler et al . , 1998 ) . MDCK T23 cells ( Barth et al . , 1997 ) were grown for 3 d on 12 - mm transwells . 18 h before the assay , cells were washed ﬁ ve times with PBS lacking CaCl 2 and infected for 2 h with 0 . 14 μ l of virus stock per transwell ( (cid:2) 40 plaque - forming units / cell ) in PBS lacking CaCl 2 . The recombinant adenovirus carries a HA - tagged ver - sion of a DN dynamin II mutant ( K44A ) . The monolayers were washed three times with MEM media supplemented with 5 % FBS , further incubated in the same medium containing a low concentration ( 1 ng / ml ) of doxycy - cline for 16 h , and titrated to allow sufﬁ cient expression of the DN dynamin II protein without obviously disrupting the integrity of the monolayer . Transepithelial permeability MDCK cells were grown as described in Cell preparation and culture and infected with P . aeruginosa for 30 min or exposed to 10 mM EDTA for 10 min . After washing with PBS , 100 μ g / ml of prewarmed PBS + FITC - inulin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) was added to the AP chamber , and prewarmed PBS was added to the BL chamber . Cells were incubated at 37 ° C , and 100 - μ l samples were collected from the BL chamber every 30 min . Fluorescence was quantiﬁ ed using a ﬂ uorescence plate reader ( excitation / emission wavelength at 480 / 530 nm ; 70 % gain ; Cytoﬂ uor ) . Statistical analysis Chi - squared analysis was performed . P < 0 . 05 was considered statisti - cally signiﬁ cant . Online supplemental material Fig . S1 shows that P . aeruginosa – induced AP protrusions contain Grp1 - PH - GFP , a probe for PIP3 . Online supplemental material is available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200605142 / DC1 . We thank Henry Bourne , Eric Brown , Orion Weiner , and members of our laboratories for advice and comments on the paper . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grants ( HL55980 to K . Mostov and J . Engel , DK067153 to K . Mostov , and AI053194 and AI06592 to J . Engel ) . Submitted : 23 May 2006 Accepted : 5 March 2007 References Altschuler , Y . , S . M . Barbas , L . J . Terlecky , K . Tang , S . Hardy , K . E . Mostov , and S . L . Schmid . 1998 . Redundant and distinct functions for dynamin - 1 and dynamin - 2 isoforms . J . Cell Biol . 143 : 1871 – 1881 . PSEUDOMONAS ALTERS HOST MEMBRANE POLARITY • KIERBEL ET AL . 27 Anderson , E . , S . Maday , J . Sfakianos , M . Hull , B . Winckler , D . Sheff , H . Folsch , and I . Mellman . 2005 . Transcytosis of NgCAM in epithelial cells refl ects differential signal recognition on the endocytic and secretory pathways . J . Cell Biol . 170 : 595 – 605 . Apodaca , G . , L . A . Katz , and K . E . Mostov . 1994 . Receptor - mediated transcytosis of IgA in MDCK cells is via apical recycling endosomes . J . Cell Biol . 125 : 67 – 86 . Apodaca , G . , M . Bomsel , R . Lindstedt , J . Engel , D . Frank , K . Mostov , and J . Wiener - Kronish . 1995 . Characterization of Pseudomonas aeruginosa - induced MDCK cell injury : glycosylation defective host cells are resis - tant to bacterial killing . Infect . Immun . 63 : 1541 – 1551 . Barth , A . I . , A . L . Pollack , Y . Altschuler , K . E . Mostov , and W . J . Nelson . 1997 . NH2 - terminal deletion of β - catenin results in stable colocalization of mutant β - catenin with adenomatous polyposis coli protein and altered MDCK cell adhesion . J . Cell Biol . 136 : 693 – 706 . Cardone , M . , and K . Mostov . 1995 . Wortmannin inhibits transcytosis of dimeric IgA by the polymeric immunoglobulin receptor . FEBS Lett . 376 : 74 – 76 . Cossart , P . , and P . J . Sansonetti . 2004 . Bacterial invasion : the paradigms of enteroinvasive pathogens . Science . 304 : 242 – 248 . de Bentzmann , S . , C . Plotkowski , and E . Puchelle . 1996 . Receptors in the Pseudomonas aeruginosa adherence to injured and repairing airway epi - thelium . Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 154 : S155 – S162 . Engel , J . N . 2003 . Molecular pathogenesis of acute Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections . In Severe Infections Caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa . A . R . Hauser and J . Rello , editors . Kluwer Academic Publishers , Boston . 201 – 230 . Evans , D . J . , D . W . Frank , V . Finck - Barbancon , C . Wu , and S . M . Fleiszig . 1998 . Pseudomonas aeruginosa invasion and cytotoxicity are independent events , both of which involve protein tyrosine kinase activity . Infect . Immun . 66 : 1453 – 1459 . Evans , D . J . , T . C . Kuo , M . Kwong , R . Van , and S . M . Fleiszig . 2002 . Mutation of csk , encoding the C - terminal Src kinase , reduces Pseudomonas aerugi - nosa internalization by mammalian cells and enhances bacterial cytotox - icity . Microb . Pathog . 33 : 135 – 143 . Gassama - Diagne , A . , W . Yu , M . ter Beest , F . Martin - Belmonte , A . Kierbel , J . Engel , and K . Mostov . 2006 . Phosphatidylinositol - 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate regulates the formation of the basolateral plasma membrane in epithelial cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 8 : 963 – 970 . Geiser , T . , B . Kazmierczak , L . Garrity - Ryan , M . Matthay , and J . Engel . 2001 . Pseudomonas aeruginosa ExoT inhibits in vitro lung epithelial wound repair . Cell . Microbiol . 3 : 223 – 236 . Gibson , M . C . , and N . Perrimon . 2003 . Apicobasal polarization : epithelial form and function . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 : 747 – 752 . Hansen , S . H . , A . Olsson , and J . E . Casanova . 1995 . Wortmannin , an inhibitor of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase , inhibits transcytosis in polarized epithelial cells . J . Biol . Chem . 270 : 28425 – 28432 . Kazmierczak , B . , K . Mostov , and J . Engel . 2001 . Interaction of bacterial patho - gens with polarized epithelium . Annu . Rev . Microbiol . 55 : 407 – 435 . Kazmierczak , B . I . , K . Mostov , and J . N . Engel . 2004 . Epithelial cell polarity al - ters Rho - GTPase responses to Pseudomonas aeruginosa . Mol . Biol . Cell . 15 : 411 – 419 . Kierbel , A . , A . Gassama - Diagne , K . Mostov , and J . N . Engel . 2005 . The phos - phoinositol - 3 - kinase - protein kinase B / Akt pathway is critical for Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain PAK internalization . Mol . Biol . Cell . 16 : 2577 – 2585 . Klarlund , J . K . , A . Guilherme , J . J . Holik , J . V . Virbasius , A . Chawla , and M . P . Czech . 1997 . Signaling by phosphoinositide - 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate through proteins containing pleckstrin and Sec7 homology domains . Science . 275 : 1927 – 1930 . Klarlund , J . K . , L . E . Rameh , L . C . Cantley , J . M . Buxton , J . J . Holik , C . Sakelis , V . Patki , S . Corvera , and M . P . Czech . 1998 . Regulation of GRP1 - catalyzed ADP ribosylation factor guanine nucleotide exchange by phos - phatidylinositol 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 1859 – 1862 . Lipschutz , J . H . , L . E . O’Brien , Y . Altschuler , D . Avrahami , Y . Nguyen , K . Tang , and K . E . Mostov . 2001 . Analysis of membrane traffi c in polarized epi - thelial cells . In Current Protocols in Cell Biology . John Wiley & Sons Inc . , New York . Mandell , G . L . , J . E . Bennett , and R . Dolin . 2000 . Mandell , Douglas , and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases . Churchill Livingstone , Philadelphia . Pier , G . B . , M . Grout , and T . S . Zaidi . 1997 . Cystic fi brosis transmembrane conduc - tance regulator is an epithelial cell receptor for clearance of Pseudomonas aeruginosa from the lung . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 94 : 12088 – 12093 . Pinal , N . , D . C . Goberdhan , L . Collinson , Y . Fujita , I . M . Cox , C . Wilson , and F . Pichaud . 2006 . Regulated and polarized PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 accumulation is essential for apical membrane morphogenesis in photoreceptor epithelial cells . Curr . Biol . 16 : 140 – 149 . Pizarro - Cerda , J . , and P . Cossart . 2004 . Subversion of phosphoinositide metabo - lism by intracellular bacterial pathogens . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 : 1026 – 1033 . Pollard , T . D . , and G . G . Borisy . 2003 . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin fi laments . Cell . 112 : 453 – 465 . Sadoul , K . , J . Lang , C . Montecucco , U . Weller , R . Regazzi , S . Catsicas , C . B . Wollheim , and P . A . Halban . 1995 . SNAP - 25 is expressed in is - lets of Langerhans and is involved in insulin release . J . Cell Biol . 128 : 1019 – 1028 . Vanhaesebroeck , B . , and D . R . Alessi . 2000 . The PI3K - PDK1 connection : more than just a road to PKB . Biochem . J . 346 : 561 – 576 . von Stein , W . , A . Ramrath , A . Grimm , M . Muller - Borg , and A . Wodarz . 2005 . Direct association of Bazooka / PAR - 3 with the lipid phosphatase PTEN reveals a link between the PAR / aPKC complex and phosphoinositide signaling . Development . 132 : 1675 – 1686 . Watton , S . J . , and J . Downward . 1999 . Akt / PKB localisation and 3 ′ phosphoino - sitide generation at sites of epithelial cell - matrix and cell - cell interaction . Curr . Biol . 9 : 433 – 436 . Wymann , M . P . , M . Zvelebil , and M . Laffargue . 2003 . Phosphoinositide 3 - kinase signalling – which way to target ? Trends Pharmacol . Sci . 24 : 366 – 376 . Yu , W . , L . E . O’Brien , F . Wang , H . Bourne , K . E . Mostov , and M . M . Zegers . 2003 . Hepatocyte growth factor switches orientation of polarity and mode of movement during morphogenesis of multicellular epithelial structures . Mol . Biol . Cell . 14 : 748 – 763 . Yu , W . , A . Datta , P . Leroy , L . E . O’Brien , G . Mak , T . S . Jou , K . S . Matlin , K . E . Mostov , and M . M . Zegers . 2005 . Beta1 - integrin orients epithelial polarity via Rac1 and laminin . Mol . Biol . Cell . 16 : 433 – 445 .