REVIEW Invading one step at a time : the role of invadopodia in tumor metastasis H Paz 1 , 4 , N Pathak 1 , 2 , 4 and J Yang 1 , 2 , 3 The ability to degrade extracellular matrix is critical for tumor cells to invade and metastasize . Recent studies show that tumor cells use specialized actin - based membrane protrusions termed invadopodia to perform matrix degradation . Invadopodia provide an elegant way for tumor cells to precisely couple focal matrix degradation with directional movement . Here we discuss several key components and regulators of invadopodia that have been uniquely implicated in tumor invasion and metastasis . Furthermore , we discuss existing and new therapeutic opportunities to target invadopodia for anti - metastasis treatment . Oncogene ( 2014 ) 33 , 4193 – 4202 ; doi : 10 . 1038 / onc . 2013 . 393 ; published online 30 September 2013 Keywords : invadopodia ; tumor invasion ; metastasis INTRODUCTION Metastasis , the spread of tumor cells from a primary tumor to a secondary site , is a complex , multistep process , and is the main cause of mortality in cancer patients . During metastasis , carcinoma cells invade the surrounding extracellular matrix ( ECM ) , intravasate through endothelium into the systemic circulation , then extra - vasate again through the capillary endothelium and ﬁnally establish secondary tumors at distant sites . 1 Several key stages of metastasis , including invasion , intravasation and extravasation , are thought to involve ECM degradation and remodeling . In recent years , actin - rich subcellular protrusions known as invadopodia have been shown to be critical for ECM degradation . 2 Invadopodia consist of an actin - rich core surrounded by a number of important protein components , including cytoskeletal modulators , adhesion proteins , scaffolding proteins and signaling molecules . 3 The central function of invadopodia is to recruit various matrix proteases to cell – ECM focal contacts for matrix degradation . Unlike other actin - based protrusions such as lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia that are present in normal cells , invadopodia are uniquely present in invasive cancer cells and are considered as the transformed version of podosomes , which are present in highly invasive normal cells such as macrophages , osteoclasts and dendritic cells . In - depth reviews have covered all the molecular components of podosomes / invadopodia and their biological functions in development and pathogenesis . 3 This review focuses on a selective set of invadopodia components and regulators that are relatively unique to invadopodia and are speciﬁcally modulated in human cancers ( Figure 1 , Table 1 ) . In addition , we will discuss the contributions of these invadopodia components to invasion and metastasis , and the therapeutic opportunities to target these components for cancer treatment . STRUCTRUAL COMPONENTS As an actin - based structure , invadopodia engage a large number of structural and regulatory proteins that control actin dynamics , such as Arp2 / 3 , Enabled ( Ena ) / vasodilator - stimulated phospho - protein ( Vasp ) and various small GTPases . Here we discuss three factors , cortactin , MENA and Tks proteins , that have critical roles at invadopodia and have been implicated in tumor progression . Cortactin and MENA are both key factors of actin polymerization and dynamics ; therefore , their roles in tumor invasion and metastasis go beyond invadopodia to general cell migration and other actin - based cellular processes . In contrast , Tks proteins are known to be more speciﬁcally involved in invadopodia formation , therefore their impact on tumor invasion and metastasis is thought to be largely because of their functions at invadopodia . Cortactin Cortactin is a cytoskeletal protein that when phosphorylated can recruit the Arp2 / 3 complex to promote invadopodia formation . Cortactin was originally identiﬁed as a Src phosphorylation target in Src - transformed chicken embryo ﬁbroblasts . 4 Src binds to cortactin through direct interaction with the SH2 domain of Src , 5 and phosphorylates cortactin in v - Src - transformed 3T3 ﬁbroblasts . 4 , 6 As Src kinase has an essential role in invadopodia regulation ( discussed in detail in a later section ) , cortactin has been shown to be a key regulator of actin polymerization at invadopodia in response to Src activation . The association of cortactin with invado - podia was ﬁrst described in MDA - MB - 231 cells , in which micro - injection of anti - cortactin antibodies reduced their ability to degrade ECM . 7 Furthermore , immunoprecipitation of cortactin revealed its presence in invadopodia - enriched membrane fractions . 7 Finally , immunoﬂuorescence indicated cortactin at actively degrading invadopodia . 7 , 8 Knockdown of cortactin in MDA - MB - 231 cells resulted in inhibition of actin / cortactin - positive puncta and matrix degradation , suggesting that cortactin is required for invadopodia formation and function . 8 Cortactin localization at invadopodia coincided with phosphotyrosine puncta , which is consistent with Src regulation of cortactin phosphorylation . 9 Src activation of cortactin resulted in the localization of Nck1 and N - WASP at invadopodia , in addition to the disengagement of coﬁlin , all of 1 Department of Pharmacology , University of California , San Diego , La Jolla , CA , USA ; 2 Biomedical Sciences Program , University of California , San Diego , La Jolla , CA , USA and 3 Department of Pediatrics , University of California , San Diego , La Jolla , CA , USA . Correspondence : Dr J Yang , Department of Pharmacology , University of California , San Diego ( UCSD ) , 9500 Gilman Drive , MC0636 , Biomedical Sciences Program , La Jolla , CA 92093 , USA . E - mail : jingyang @ ucsd . edu 4 These two authors contributed equally to this work . Received 3 June 2013 ; revised 7 August 2013 ; accepted 8 August 2013 ; published online 30 September 2013 Oncogene ( 2014 ) 33 , 4193 – 4202 & 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited All rights reserved 0950 - 9232 / 14 www . nature . com / onc which are required for Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin polymerization to promote invadopodia formation . 10 , 11 As cortactin regulates various actin - based cellular programs , including invadopodia and lamellipodia formation and dynamics , its role in tumor cell invasion and metastasis is well documented . Overexpression of cortactin in NIH3T3 cells resulted in increased invasion in a Matrigel Boyden chamber assay . 12 Similarly , over - expression of cortactin in MDA - MB - 231 cells resulted in increased invasion , which correlated with increased metastatic bone lesions . 13 In contrast , overexpression of a phosphorylation - deﬁcient cortactin inhibited invasion and resulted in minimal bone metastatic lesions . 13 Similar results were obtained in a hepatocellular carcinoma model , where overexpression of wild - type cortactin in the non - metastatic hepatocellular carcinoma cell line KIM1 increased metastatic incidence without affecting primary tumor growth . 14 Cortactin was ﬁrst implicated in the progression of human cancers through gene ampliﬁcation at chromosome 11q in breast and squamous cell carcinomas . 13 , 15 , 16 In addition , high levels of cortactin expression are also observed in human ovarian , bladder and lung cancer . 4 , 7 , 13 , 15 Importantly , overexpression of cortactin is associated with poor patient prognosis in breast and head and neck squamous carcinomas , further highlighting a critical role of cortactin in human tumor progression . 13 , 16 MENA Mena is a member of the Enabled ( Ena ) / VASP family of proteins , which are involved in the regulation of actin polymerization . Mena protein is upregulated in breast , pancreatic , colon , gastric , cervical cancers and melanoma , with the expression of speciﬁc isoforms regulating the invasive properties of breast cancer cells . 17 – 19 Owing to its role in actin polymerization , Mena is a logical regulator of invadopodia formation . Mena was found to co - localize with cortactin and F - actin at invadopodia . 18 In addition , Mena - null mouse mammary tumor virus - polyoma middle T ( MMTV - PyMT ) mammary tumors exhibited reduced invasion into the surrounding stroma . 20 In conjunction , Mena - null mice had signiﬁcantly fewer circulating tumor cells and lung metastases , when compared with control mice , suggesting that Mena expression is necessary for tumor cell intravasation and invasion . 20 Interestingly , gene proﬁling in rat MTLn3 and mouse PyMT breast tumors identiﬁed an invasion - speciﬁc isoform of Mena , called Mena INV , whose expression was correlated with invasive ability . 17 Mena INV increased invasion of MTLn3 cells into collagen gels , indicating a unique role for Mena INV in carcinoma cell invasion . 18 In addition , MtLn3 cells expressing Mena INV exhibited increased membrane protrusions compared with parental MTLn3 cells . 18 In terms of metastatic progression , Mena INV expression was associated with highly metastatic carcinomas in the PyMT mouse mammary tumor model . 21 Philippar et al . 18 also observed that overexpression of Mena INV in MTLn3 cells resulted in increased micrometastatic lung formation , despite no effect on primary tumor growth , again indicating the importance of regulating Mena mRNA splicing in tumor invasion and metastasis . 20 Tks adaptor proteins The Tks adaptor proteins Tks4 and Tks5 are named after tyrosine kinase substrate with 4 or 5 SH3 domains , respectively . Tks proteins only contain SH3 and PH domains for protein – protein and protein – lipid interactions ; therefore they are thought to serve as adaptor proteins that recruit other proteins and lipids 22 for invadopodia assembly . Table 1 . A list of invadopodia components and regulators , their roles in invadopodia , invasion and metastasis , and their therapeutic potentials Components Cancer Invadopodia Invasion Metastasis Therapeutics Core elements Cortactin Breast , head and neck , lung , ovarian and bladder 7 – 11 12 , 13 13 , 14 — MENA Breast , pancreatic , colon , gastric , cervical cancer and melanoma 18 17 – 19 , 21 18 , 20 , 21 — Tks Breast , melanoma 23 , 27 – 29 24 , 29 24 , 30 — Proteases MT1 - MMP Breast , lung , squamous cell , colorectal and melanoma 8 , 40 , 42 44 – 46 48 , 49 50 – 53 ADAM12 Breast , prostate , lung , brain , liver and bone 25 , 57 58 , 62 62 — Serine proteases Breast , colon , ovarian and melanoma 65 , 66 — — 74 , 75 , 79 Regulatory components Src Breast and colon 9 , 81 – 84 9 , 83 – 86 85 , 87 – 89 , 91 89 , 93 – 95 Abl kinases Leukemia and breast 84 , 98 97 , 99 , 100 100 93 , 101 , 102 Integrin — 103 – 106 103 109 — Twist 1 — 24 24 111 , 112 — Cortactin Arp2 / 3 MENA Tks5 P P ADAM12 MT1 - MMP FAP (cid:2) Src Arg / Abl P P PDGFR (cid:2) PDGFR (cid:2) P D G F P Twist1 PDGFR (cid:2) NUCLEUS ECM ECM Matrix Stiffness Matrix Stiffness (cid:2) (cid:3) Figure 1 . An overview of the invadopodia components and regulators discussed in this review . Twist1 - induced expression of PDGFR a leads to increased Src kinase activity , which serves as a trigger for invadopodia formation . Src - mediated phosphorylation of the structural components cortactin and Tks5 , and the Arg / Abl tyrosine kinase promotes invadopodia assembly . Integrin b 1 serves as an adhesion mediator between invadopodia and ECM , an activator of Abl / Arg at invadopodia , a sensor of matrix stiffness to regulate invadopodia assembly and a potential docking site for FAP a . Structural components of invadopodia , which include the actin core , are labeled in blue , proteases are labeled in purple and regulatory components are labeled in green . The role of invadopodia in tumor metastasis H Paz et al 4194 Oncogene ( 2014 ) 4193 – 4202 & 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited The role of Tks5 in invadopodia was ﬁrst discovered using a Src substrate screening assay , and further characterized based on its localization to invadopodia in Src - transformed ﬁbroblasts . 23 Tks5 is required for both invadopodia formation and invasion activity in a variety of human cancer cell lines , as knocking down Tks5 reduced matrix degradation activity and invasion . 24 Likewise , introduction of Tks5 into the human breast epithelial cell line T47D , which lacks endogenous Tks5 expression , promoted invadopodia formation . 23 Tks5 was shown to bind to ADAM12 ( A Disintegrin And Metalloproteinase ) , 25 a metalloproteinase associated with invadopodia . Furthermore , Tks5 is also associated with the actin regulatory protein N - WASP , 26 and involved in the recruitment of AFAPA - 110 , p190RhoGAP and cortactin to invadopodia . 27 Finally , Tks5 binds to p22 phox , a part of the NADPH oxidase complex that generates reactive oxygen species , that facilitates invadopodia assembly and function . 28 The family member Tks4 also localizes to invadopodia in Src - transformed cells and is required for invadopodia assembly . 29 However , Tks4 and Tks5 seem to have non - redundant roles in invadopodia function . Cells lacking Tks4 formed actin puncta resembling invadopodia , but these cells failed to degrade ECM components , even in the presence of high levels of Tks5 . 29 This is thought to be because of a crucial role of Tks4 in recruiting MT1 - matrix metalloproteinase ( MMP ) to invadopodia , as no MT1 - MMP was detected in the rudimentary invadopodia present in Tks4 knockdown cells . 29 To test the role of Tks5 in tumor metastasis , Eckert et al . 24 showed that knocking down Tks5 in Ras - transformed human mammary epithelial cells that overexpress Twist1 inhibited both local invasion and the ability of these cells to form lung metastases , whereas primary tumor formation rates were not altered . These data strongly indicate that Tks5 , and likely its role in invadopodia assembly , is required for the early steps of metastasis . To test whether Tks5 functions during extravasation and metastatic outgrowth , Blouw et al . 30 injected Src - transformed 3T3 cells with Tks5 knockdown into immunocompromised mice via tail vein . Although Tks5 knockdown did not signiﬁcantly affect the number of lung colonies , the metastases derived from the cells with Tks5 knockdown were signiﬁcantly smaller . These data suggest that Tks5 could be further required for the expansion of secondary tumors in distant sites . PROTEASES Given their central function to recruit proteases to cell – matrix contacts for matrix remodeling , invadopodia are shown to contain a large numbers of proteases . The proteases found at invadopodia include metalloproteases ( both secreted and membrane - tethered MMP ) , the ADAM family members and membrane - bound serine proteases , all of which have been implicated in cancer progression and metastasis . Past research has focused on developing metallo - proteinase inhibitors to suppress ECM degradation and tumor metastasis . Although these inhibitors show promising results in cell culture and tumor xenograft models , numerous metalloproteinase inhibitors have failed during clinical trials . 31 Further studies indicate that some metalloproteinases could have antitumorigenic effects . 32 Therefore , the strategy of broadly blocking metallo - proteinases to abrogate metastasis might not be a viable approach to prevent tumor metastasis . Here we discuss a few proteases that are unique to invadopodia and might be promising new targets in inhibiting tumor invasion and metastasis . Metalloproteinases MT1 - MMP . MT1 - MMP ( also known as MMP14 ) , a membrane - anchored metalloproteinase , is considered a central factor of invadopodia - mediated ECM degradation . MT1 - MMP cleaves 33 several substrates in vitro , including ECM components such as ﬁbronectin , type I , II and III collagen , laminins , vitronectin and aggrecans . 34 – 37 In addition , MT1 - MMP is capable of activating other MMP zymogens : MT1 - MMP activates MMP2 by cleaving the N - terminal prodomain of pro - MMP2 38 and MMP9 is activated through an activation cascade involving MT1 - MMP , MMP2 and MMP3 . 39 MT1 - MMP is shown to be required for the matrix degradation activity of invadopodia . Artym et al . 8 found that cortactin aggregation initiated accumulation of MT1 - MMP at invadopodia . This study also found that although MT1 - MMP knockdown moderately impacted the initial stages of invadopodia formation , matrix degradation was strongly suppressed , 8 indicating that MT1 - MMP is essential for functional invadopodia . MT1 - MMP is delivered to invadopodia by multiple routes . Studies from Yu et al . 40 show that N - WASP , which promotes actin nucleation , promotes the delivery of MT1 - MMP from late endosomes to invadopodia . 41 MT1 - MMP can also be mobilized by the Rab8 - dependent secretory pathway and delivered to collagen - contact sites . 42 Finally , MT1 - MMP can also be internalized by both clathrin - and caveolae - mediated endocytosis , 3 , 43 and this internalization serves to recycle MT1 - MMP back to invadopodia when needed . A key inducer of invadopodia , Src kinase , has also been shown to directly regulate the delivery of MT1 - MMP to invadopodia . Src - mediated phosophorylation of MT1 - MMP in its AP2 clathrin adaptor binding domain slows endocytosis of MT1 - MMP and increases matrix degradation activity . 43 In addition , phosphorylation of MT1 - MMP by Src at Tyr573 has been shown to be required for tumor cell proliferation , invasion of three - dimensional ( 3D ) collagen matrices and tumor growth in nude mice . 44 , 45 Finally , a recent study found that this phosphorylation was required for mono - ubiquitination of Lys581 , which is involved in MT1 - MMP trafﬁcking to the cell surface and cellular invasion through collagen matrices . 46 An increase in MT1 - MMP expression is generally associated with poor prognosis in a wide variety of human cancers , including breast , lung , melanoma , colorectal and squamous cell carcinomas . 47 MT1 - MMP expression has also been directly linked to metastasis in mouse tumor models . MT1 - MMP - deﬁcient mice were bred with MMTV - PyMT mice , and then PyMT - positive mammary glands lacking MT1 - MMP were orthotopically transplanted into wild - type mice . Although palpable tumors developed faster with MT1 - MMP - deﬁcient mammary glands , metastatic spread was reduced by 50 % . 48 Consistent with this study , Perentes et al . 49 injected MDA - MB - 231 cells with MT1 - MMP knockdown into the mammary fad pad of severe combined immunodeﬁciency ( SCID ) mice and found that MT1 - MMP knockdown resulted in a signiﬁcant decrease in lung metastasis without affecting primary tumor growth . 49 These results suggest that MT1 - MMP is required for metastatic development in vivo . As blocking MMP activity has failed in clinical trials as an anti - metastasis therapy , possibly due to the broad spectrum of inhibition and severe toxicities , 50 , 51 new therapeutic strategies aim to target the speciﬁc MMPs that contribute to disease progression . 50 A fully humanized monoclonal antibody ( DX - 2400 , Dyax Corporation ) that targets MT1 - MMP at its catalytic domain showed great promise in preclinical studies . DX - 2400 abrogated MMP2 cleavage on tumor and endothelial cells , blocked angiogenesis , and reduced tumor formation and metastasis . 50 , 52 Another humanized antibody targeting the non - catalytic hemopexin domain of MT1 - MMP has recently shown promise in inhibiting invasion and angiogenesis in preclinical studies . 53 The therapeutic potential of targeting MT1 - MMP to inhibit invadopodia - mediated tumor invasion and metastasis holds great future promise . ADAM proteases The ADAMs are a family of disintegrin and metalloproteinases that are involved in a variety of biological processes , including cell The role of invadopodia in tumor metastasis H Paz et al 4195 & 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited Oncogene ( 2014 ) 4193 – 4202 adhesion , migration , proteolysis , myoblast fusion and fertiliza - tion . 54 Here , we focus on ADAM12 because of its more established presence at invadopodia . ADAM12 has two alternatively spliced variants : ADAM12 - L , which consists of pro - , metalloprotease , disintegrin , cysteine - rich , transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains , and ADAM12 - S , which lacks the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains . 55 ADAM12 contributes to invadopodia function at multiple levels , including degrading the ECM , modulating integrin function , and functioning as a sheddase to activate growth factors . 56 ADAM12 is localized to invadopodia , binds to the scaffold protein Tks5 25 and has been found to trigger invadopodia assembly . 57 The sheddase activity of ADAM12 may contribute to the overall degradation activity of invadopodia . A recent study by Diaz et al . 58 demon - strated that ADAM12 expression was elevated in a Notch - dependent manner under hypoxic conditions . ADAM12 promoted the ectodomain shedding of heparin - binding epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) - like growth factor , which in turn induced invadopodia formation and the invasive activity of cancer cells . 58 ADAM12 is implicated in a variety of cancers , including breast , prostate , lung , liver , brain and bone cancers , as well as aggressive ﬁbromatosis . 59 In human breast cancer patients , Roy et al . 60 showed that ADAM12 is a prognostic marker , as urinary levels of ADAM12 increased along with disease stage . Transgenic mice expressing the ADAM12 - S isoform driven by the MMTV - LTR promoter were bred with mice carrying the PyMT oncogene in the mammary gland ; PyMT expression in the mammary gland led to rapid formation of mammary carcinomas . Tumors in mice expressing ADAM12 - S developed faster than in littermates expressing PyMT alone . 61 Similarly , the ADAM12 - S isoform signi - ﬁcantly increased the ability of MCF - 7 cells to migrate and invade , which led to a higher incidence of local and distant metastases in vivo . 62 Interestingly , cells expressing a catalytically dead mutant of ADAM12 - S failed to promote tumor development , indicating that the proteolytic activity of ADAM12 - S is required to promote formation of distant metastases . 62 Serine proteases Two transmembrane type II serine proteases of the dipeptidyl - peptidase ( DPP ) family , ﬁbroblast activation protein ( FAP ; FAP a , also known as seprase ) and DPP4 , have also been associated with invadopodia . Both DPP4 and FAP a contain exopeptidase activity , and FAP a also exhibits endopeptidase activity . 63 , 64 Previous studies have shown that FAP a is localized at invadopodia as a complex with DPP4 65 or , alternatively , associated with a 3 b 1 integrin , with the integrin serving as a docking site for FAP a . 66 The role of FAP a in invadopodia is currently unclear , but some studies suggest that its gelatinase activity may contribute to the overall degradation activity of invadopodia . Christiansen et al . 67 found that FAP a digests collagen I into smaller fragments following initial cleavage by MMP - 1 , suggesting that FAP a works together with other proteases to cleave partially degraded ECM components . A key difference between FAP a and DPP4 is that expression of DPP4 is ubiquitous throughout all tissues , whereas that of FAP a is restricted to tissues undergoing wound healing and epithelial cancers , 64 , 68 thus making FAP a a unique factor in tumor progression . Indeed , FAPA a has been shown to be expressed in a variety of aggressive cancers , including breast , colon and ovarian cancers , and malignant melanoma . 69 In addition , genetic deletion of FAP a inhibited tumor growth in a K - ras - driven model of endogenous lung cancer and in a mouse model of colon cancer . Pharmacological inhibition of FAP a also attenuated tumor growth in these mouse models , indicating that FAP a is a promising target for therapeutic intervention . 70 In human and mouse tumors , FAP a has been shown to be expressed in stromal ﬁbroblasts , carcinoma cells and immune cells . 69 , 71 – 73 What remains to be answered is whether and how FAP a in individual cell types contributes to tumor progress , and whether the role of FAP a at invadopodia is critical for tumor invasion and metastasis . Previous attempts to target FAP a for therapeutic intervention have proven to be challenging . In 2003 , Phase I / II clinical trials for the humanized FAP a monoclonal antibody Sibrotuzumab failed to demonstrate measurable therapeutic activity in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer , 74 with only 2 out of 17 patients having stable disease during the Phase II trial . 74 However , this antibody has not been shown to block any cellular or protease function of FAP a , which might explain the lack of therapeutic effects . In 2007 , a small molecule inhibitor of FAP a , Talabostat , was developed to inhibit the protease activity of FAP a . Again , minimal clinical activity was observed in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer receiving Talabostat alone , 75 or in metastatic melanoma patients receiving Talabostat in conjunction with cisplatin treatment . 76 However , the stability of this inhibitor in vivo is thought be extremely poor , thus limiting its effectiveness . Given these recent setbacks in targeting FAP a , efforts have recently turned to FAP a - mediated immunotherapy . One approach is to develop DNA vaccines to target FAP a , thus eliminating all FAP a - positive cell types in a tumor . Several groups reported that through CD8 þ T - cell - mediated killing , such therapy successfully suppressed primary tumor cell growth and metastasis of implanted breast and colon tumors without obvious toxicity . 77 , 78 Another approach is to deliver radioisotopes speciﬁcally to the tumor site using FAP a antibodies as cargoes . Preclinical studies involving two humanized FAP a monoclonal antibodies ( ESC11 and ESC14 ) labeled with the radiolanthanide 177 Lu have yielded promising results : both antibodies accumulated in human FAP a - positive xenografts and delayed tumor growth . 79 Given that FAP a is expressed in various cell types in a tumor , it is important to recognize that the effect of targeting FAP a on tumor progression cannot solely be explained by inhibition of invadopodia . However , these results suggest a unique approach to targeting components of invadopodia in human cancers . REGULATORY COMPONENTS As ECM is essential for cell survival and proliferation , invadopodia - mediated matrix degradation is a highly regulated process . Understanding the upstream inducing signals of invadopodia formation and function is still in its infancy . A signiﬁcant number of signaling regulators , including EGFR , PDGFR , PI3 kinase ( epidermal growth factor receptor , platelet - derived growth factor receptor , and phosphoinositide 3 , respectively ) and c - Met have been implicated in invadopodia regulation in various cancer cell lines . As many of them have critical roles in multiple cellular processes in cancer , including cell proliferation and apoptosis , it is difﬁcult to attribute their functional impact on tumor progression speciﬁcally to invadopodia . Therefore , here we discuss a few key upstream signaling pathways that have been more uniquely implicated in invadopodia function during tumor progression and metastasis . Phosphorylation via Src and Arg tyrosine kinases Tyrosine phosphorylation of many core components is critical to trigger invadopodia assembly and function . Especially , two tyrosine kinases , Src and Arg , stand out as essential activators of invadopodia . Src kinase . The Src kinase is the founding member of the Src family of non - receptor tyrosine kinases , 80 of which , Src is the only family member that is uniquely linked to invadopodia . The role of Src in invadopodia formation was ﬁrst described by Chen et al . 81 , where Rous sarcoma viral ( RSV ) transformation of chicken embryonic ﬁbroblasts resulted in actin rosette or podosome The role of invadopodia in tumor metastasis H Paz et al 4196 Oncogene ( 2014 ) 4193 – 4202 & 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited formation . In addition , RSV - mediated cellular transformation correlated with the appearance of pp60 Src accumulation at these rosettes . Similarly , invadopodia formation was enhanced with constitutive expression of active c - Src , as evidenced by co - localization of F - actin and cortactin staining . 82 In contrast , overexpression of a kinase - inactive c - Src and knockdown of c - Src by RNAi showed decreased invadopodia formation and degradation activities . 9 , 83 , 84 Closer examination of protrusion formation in MDA - MB - 231 cells revealed that overexpressing wild - type Src or constitutively active Src exhibited invadopodia extension into the collagen gel . 9 Src kinase has been shown to have a major role in the invasive process . Expression of c - Src in SYF ( src (cid:2) / (cid:2) , yes (cid:2) / (cid:2) , fyn (cid:2) / (cid:2) ) murine embryonic ﬁbroblasts promoted invasion , whereas Ras V - 12 failed to do so in a Boyden chamber assay . 85 Similarly , MDA - MB - 231 breast cancer cells treated with Src small interfering RNAs exhibited reduced matrix degradation and invasion through matrix - coated chambers . 84 Treatment with Src inhibitors , Dasatinib , PP2 or SU6656 , in MDA - MB - 231 cells reduced invasion through Matrigel , indicating the importance of Src activity for tumor cell invasion into the ECM . 86 Although Src was originally isolated as an oncogene , recent studies suggest a more critical role for Src in tumor metastasis . 85 , 87 , 88 Speciﬁcally , c - Src activity is correlated with increased bone metastases , poor clinical prognosis and reduced survival for breast and colon carcinoma patients . 86 , 89 , 90 Src gene deletion in MMTV - PyMT mammary tumor models resulted in a reduction in circulating tumor cells , despite no defect in primary mammary tumor initiation and proliferation . 91 Similarly , Src small interfering RNA - treated L3 . 6pl pancreatic cancer cells exhibited a reduction in lung and liver metastasis . 92 c - Src was required for formation of metastatic lung colony formation by H - Ras V - 12 expressing SYF ( src (cid:2) / (cid:2) , yes (cid:2) / (cid:2) , fyn (cid:2) / (cid:2) ) murine embryonic ﬁbroblast cells , supporting the role of Src in tumor progression . 85 Likewise , BoM - 1833 , a bone metastatic derivative of MDA - MB - 231 cells , which were injected into recipient mice , showed increased survival and reduced bone metastases upon treatment with Src small interfering RNA . 89 As Src activity has a prominent role in cancer progression , it is an ideal therapeutic target . The Src selective inhibitor , SU6656 , has been found to inhibit Src kinase activity , as evidenced by reduced levels of phospho - Y418 - Src . SU6656 was also found to signiﬁcantly reduce invadopodia formation , as well as migration and invasion of the human breast cancer line MDA - MB - 231 . 82 KX2 - 391 is a ﬁrst - in - class Src selective inhibitor undergoing clinical trial that targets the unique Src substrate binding site . 93 KX2 - 391 has shown promising preclinical data , with KX2 - 391 treatment in combination with paclitaxel resulting in the regression of pre - established MDA - MB - 231 xenograft tumors . 94 In addition , KX2 - 391 treatment led to reduced metastasis formation of MDA - MB - 231 tumors in the lung and liver . 94 Phase I trials in patients with solid tumors showed that KX2 - 391 is well tolerated and demonstrated preliminary antitumor activity , with several patients displaying halted disease progression . 95 Abl / Arg . Similar to Src kinase , the Abl family of non - receptor tyrosine kinases , which includes c - Abl and the Abl - related gene ( Arg / Abl2 ) , has an important role in tumor progression in human leukemia , non - small cell lung cancer , breast cancer , melanoma and pancreatic cancer . 96 Speciﬁcally , c - Abl and Arg kinase activities have been shown to correlate with poorly differentiated and highly invasive breast cancer lines . 97 The role of Abl / Arg kinase was initially hypothesized in invadopodia formation due to previously known activation of Abl by Src kinases . More speciﬁcally , PDGF and EGF stimulation of ﬁbroblast and breast cancer cells resulted in c - Abl activity through Src and Fyn phosphorylation . 97 , 98 Treatment of various highly invasive breast cancer cell lines with Src inhibitor SU6656 reduced c - Abl and Arg activity . 97 Src activation of Arg is required for cortactin phosphorylation and actin polymerization at invadopodia , as knockdown of Arg in MDA - MB - 231 cells resulted in no cortactin phosphorylation and reduced F - actin barbed - end generation . 84 The Abl family of non - receptor tyrosine kinases has also been localized directly to the invadopodia structure . YFP - tagged wild - type and constitutively active Arg co - localized with cortactin - positive invadopodia in Src expressing NIH3T3 cells , whereas kinase - inactive Arg expression disrupted invadopodia formation . 99 Similarly , immunoﬂuorescence staining of Arg in MDA - MB - 231 cells showed co - localization with Tks5 - positive invadopodia . 84 Abl and Arg kinases also have a signiﬁcant role in tumor invasion and metastasis . Knockdown of Abl and Arg reduced the ability of MDA - MB - 231 , and its metastatic derivatives , to degrade ECM and invade . 97 , 99 Inhibition of Abl kinase activity with STI571 , an Abl / Arg inhibitor , reduced invasion of MDA - MB - 435S breast cancer cells in a Matrigel invasion assay . 97 MDA - MB - 231 cells expressing Arg and Abl small hairpin RNA constructs showed fewer circulating tumor cells in vivo compared with control tumor - bearing mice . 100 Similarly , Gil - Henn et al . 100 showed that STI571 - treated mice showed fewer circulating tumor cells compared with control mice bearing MDA - MB - 231 tumors . These results indicate that Abl kinase activity is required for tumor cell intravasation . A number of tyrosine kinase inhibitors with dual speciﬁcities toward Src and Abl family tyrosine kinases , including Dasatinib , Saracatinib , and Bosutinib , have been developed and showed promising activities against tumor invasion and metastasis in several solid tumors preclinical studies . Speciﬁcally , these inhibitors were found to signiﬁcantly reduce invadopodia formation , as well as migration and invasion of the human breast cancer line MDA - MB - 231 . 86 , 101 , 102 In addition , treatment of mice with Dasatinib led to reduced formation of bone metastases by BoM - 1833 cells . 89 Similar results have been observed in pancreatic tumors , with Dasatinib treatment leading to a reduction in primary tumor growth and metastasis formation by L3 . 6pl cells . 92 However , these inhibitors have shown limited activity in monotherapy trials . 93 It is important to note , however , that completed clinical trials studying the efﬁcacy of Src / Abl inhibitors have been conducted in unselected cancer patients . Many ongoing trials using biomarkers ( such as cortactin phosphorylation ) to pre - select patients who are more likely to beneﬁt from Src / Abl inhibition hold promise for the future success of Src / Able inhibitors in cancer treatment . 93 Integrin - mediated signaling Given that integrins are the key connection between cell protrusions and the surrounding ECM , it is not surprising that they have important roles in invadopodia regulation . Integrin clustering at invadopodia was ﬁrst described in RSV transforma - tion of chicken embryonic ﬁbroblasts ( RSVCEF ) . RSVCEFs cultured with ﬁbronectin - coated beads exhibited invadopodia formation , which was associated with b 1 staining . 103 Interestingly , ﬁbronectin - positive vesicles were found to co - stain with b 1 integrin ; further validating the functional role of invadopodia in matrix degradation . 103 In contrast , murine embryonic ﬁbroblasts overexpressing Src and depleted for b 1 integrin exhibit reduced rosette formation . 104 In addition , treatment of SCC61 squamous cell carcinoma cells with an integrin blocking peptide or a b 1 integrin blocking antibody led to a reduction in actively degrading invadopodia per cell . 105 Finally , knocking down b 1 integrin in MDA - MB - 231 and MTLn3 mammary adenocarcinoma cells led to a reduction in mature invadopodia formation . 106 How integrins regulate invadopodia function has not been clearly elucidated . Various studies indicate that integrins promote invadopodia maturation by serving as a docking station for various proteases and / or activating Arg kinase for actin stabiliza - tion . Laminin peptide activation of b 1 integrin in lysyl oxidase The role of invadopodia in tumor metastasis H Paz et al 4197 & 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited Oncogene ( 2014 ) 4193 – 4202 ( LOX ) human melanoma cells led to increased invadopodia - mediated degradation 107 due to increased seprase / FAPA a recruitment to invadopodia by binding to b 1 integrin . 7 , 107 More recently , b 1 integrin has been found to activate Arg kinase . Fluorescence resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) - based experiments point to direct interaction between b 1 integrin and Arg at Tks5 - positive invadopodia . 106 Changes in integrin - mediated adhesion signaling complexes are known to have an important role in tumor cell proliferation , migration and survival . 108 Speciﬁcally , loss of b 1 integrin in MMTV - driven Erb2 breast tumor mice reduced Y416 c - Src phospho - rylation and metastatic lesion formation in the lungs . 109 Similarly , tail vein injection of MDA - MB - 435 breast cancer cells expressing a constitutively active mutant a v b 3 exhibited enhanced metastatic lung colonization . 109 To date , it is unclear which integrin subunits are the predominant forms required for invadopodia function . As the focus of current integrin - targeted therapies has been on their anti - angiogenic properties , their potential as an anti - metastatic treatment by invadopodia inhibition requires identifying and targeting invadopodia - speciﬁc integrins in the near future . Transcriptional regulation by EMT - inducing factors To detach from the primary tumor and invade through the surrounding tissue , carcinoma cells need to ﬁrst break down cell – cell junctions , become more motile , remodel cell – matrix adhesion sites and invade through the ECM . A developmental program termed epithelial – mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) enables tumor cells to obtain such properties . During EMT , cells need to co - ordinate the dissociation of cell – cell adhesions and the breakthrough of basement membrane to accomplish this complex morphogenetic event . 1 Recent studies indicate a critical role of invadopodia - mediated ECM degradation during EMT . The EMT program is orchestrated by a group of transcription factors , all of which have been implicated in tumor invasion and metastasis . 110 Speciﬁcally , the basic helix - loop - helix ( bHLH ) transcription factor Twist1 was shown to have critical roles in tumor metastasis in both breast tumor xenografts and in mouse skin tumor models . 111 , 112 Eckert et al . 24 found that Twist1 was required for ECM invasion by inducing the formation of invadopodia in human and mouse breast tumor cells . Twist1 was found to directly induce expression of PDGFR a , which then activates Src kinase to promote invadopodia formation . 24 Furthermore , blocking invadopodia formation by knocking down PDGFR a or Tks5 abolished the ability of Twist1 to promote tumor metastasis in mice . This study not only uncovers Twist1 as a novel upstream regulator of invadopodia formation , but also provides a direct link between invadopodia and metastasis . Another potent inducer of EMT is transforming growth factor - b ( TGF b ) . 1 TGF b promotes EMT by activation of extensive intracellular signaling that involves Smad proteins , ERK and Jagged / Notch signaling , among others . 113 Of particular interest in the context of invadopodia , Eckert et al . 24 showed that knocking down Twist1 blocked the ability of TGF b to induce PDGFR a and invadopodia formation . In addition , Pignatelli et al . 114 also demonstrated that Hic - 5 , a focal adhesion adaptor protein induced by TGF b , localized to invadopodia in TGF b - treated MCF - 10A cells . They showed that Hic - 5 was phosphorylated by Src kinase upon TGF b stimulation , and this phosphorylation was required for TGF b - induced invadopodia formation and invasion , thereby further emphasizing the role of EMT - inducing genes in invadopodia regulation . Matrix stiffness and mechanoregulation Recent evidence has implicated matrix stiffness in tumor progression and increased incidence in metastasis through increased collagen deposition . 115 – 117 Several elegant studies show that increasing matrix stiffness without altering bio - chemical components of the ECM can induce a malignant pheno - type , suggesting that mechanical force exerted by a stiff ECM could have a critical role in tumor invasion and metastasis . 118 In mice , LOX - mediated collagen cross - linking stiffens tumor ECM and promotes breast tumor progression . 119 Furthermore , inhibition of LOX blocks tumor invasion and eliminates metastasis formation from orthotopically grown breast tumors . 33 Indeed , ECM rigidity is indicated in invadopodia regulation . Speciﬁcally , Alexander et al . 120 noted that CA1d breast cancer cells plated on increasing concentrations of gelatin showed increased invadopodia formation and ECM degradation . Interestingly , two studies showed that both CA1d and 804G bladder cancer cells exhibited increased invadopodia formation when placed on matrix substrates with increasing mechanical rigidity without changing their biochemical components . 121 Furthermore , these studies showed that invadopodia - mediated ECM degradation only increased when placed on surfaces within the kPa range , which corresponds to the stiffness in tumors . 121 Although it is not well understood how matrix rigidity regulates invadopodia formation , this study suggests that activation of p130Cas and FAK by myosin II , which acts as mechanosensors that transmit mechanical signals from ECM , could have a prominent role . 120 Given the effects of increasing matrix stiffness on invadopodia functions , it is possible that mechanical forces generated by rigid tumor matrix stiffness could modulate invadopodia function to impact tumor progression and metastasis . THE ROLE OF INVADOPODIA IN TUMOR INVASION AND METASTASIS The critical role of invadopodia in ECM degradation explains why the ability to form invadopodia largely correlates with the invasive and metastatic potential of tumor cells . 122 Suppressing invadopodia formation by inhibiting Src , Twist1 or Tks5 has been convincingly shown to inhibit tumor metastasis in various tumor models . Invadopodia could have critical roles during three steps of the metastatic process : invasion into the surrounding stroma , intravasation into the vasculature and extravasation ( Figure 2 ) . Direct in vivo visualization and assessment of invadopodia formation during the metastatic process has proven to be challenging because of the limited numbers of invadopodia - speciﬁc markers in a 3D microenvironment . Furthermore , it remains unclear whether actin - based protrusions observed in two - dimensional culture , including ﬁlopodia and invadopodia , share similar components or merge into one structure in 3D ; thus confusing the issue of deﬁning invadopodia in vivo . New imaging techniques have made it possible to begin to identify invadopodia - like protrusions in vivo ( Figure 2 ) . Using 3D time - lapse imaging , Gligorijevic et al . 123 observed protrusion formation by MTLn3 rat mammary adenocarcinoma xenograft tumors growing in the mammary fat pad of SCID mice . These protrusions were positive for cortactin and proteolytic activity , as evidenced by cleaved collagen 3 / 4 staining , indicating the presence of invadopodia in vivo . Looking speciﬁcally at the intravasation , Gligorijevic et al . 123 used the photoconvertible Dendra2 protein to trace tumor cell intravasation in vivo . Control MTLn3 primary tumor cells were shown to disappear from the imaging area due to dissemination of cells into the blood stream . In contrast , knocking down N - WASP resulted in no visible dissemination . Yamaguchi et al . 124 observed similar invadopodia - like protrusions during tumor cell intravasation using intravital imaging . Green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) expressing MTLn3 cells revealed invadopodia - like protrusions extending into the blood vessel wall . These invadopodia - like protrusions were shown to help tumor cells to penetrate the ECM surrounding the blood vessel walls and to squeeze through the endothelial barrier . 124 Together , these data strongly support the notion that invadopodia are required for tumor cell intravasation ( Figure 2 ) . The role of invadopodia in tumor metastasis H Paz et al 4198 Oncogene ( 2014 ) 4193 – 4202 & 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited Assessment of invadopodia formation during the extravasation process is more limited ; however , protrusive structures have been identiﬁed by actively extravasating tumor cells . 125 , 126 Speciﬁcally , time course observations of intra - meseneric vein injection of GFP - positive rat tongue carcinoma cells reveal clusters of tumor cells in the sinusoids . 125 Over time , the authors noted focal loss of basement membrane at sinusoidal areas where extravasation was taking place . 125 The loss of basement membrane indicates potential sites of active ECM degradation by invadopodia . Protrusive structures have also been identiﬁed by actively extra - vasating MDA - MB - 435 cells expressing Twist1 upon injection into the vasculature of zebraﬁsh . 126 Direct imaging of tumor cells in the vasculature revealed that Twist1 - overexpressing cells display large , rounded protrusions , 126 suggesting that invadopodia - like protrusions by extravasating tumor cells contribute to ECM degradation and breaking through the endothelium barrier ( Figure 2 ) . FUTURE DIRECTIONS AND THERAPEUTIC IMPLICATIONS As discussed , recent progress suggests an essential role of invadopodia in tumor invasion and metastasis . The speciﬁc presence of invadopodia in invasive tumor cells and their unique ability to precisely co - ordinate localized ECM degradation with cell movement make them ideal targets for anti - metastasis therapies . A number of critical issues need to be resolved to put invadopodia at the forefront of tumor metastasis research and treatment . First , although actin assembly and elongation during invadopodia initiation have been extensively studied , it remains unclear what and how matrix degrading enzymes are recruited to invadopodia to perform their functions . As broad inhibition of MMPs has not been successful in blocking metastasis , the strategy to inhibit protease recruitment could be a promising new route to speciﬁcally target ECM degradation and tumor invasion . Second , it remains unclear whether and how the molecular components and regulation of invadopodia and other actin - based membrane protrusions are different . As many invadopodia components have critical roles in various cellular processes , such as proliferation , apoptosis and migration , it is difﬁcult to attribute all their observed activities on tumor progression to invadopodia function . Understanding such differences would further solidify the unique role of invadopodia in tumor metastasis in vivo and lead to more speciﬁc targeting therapies against invadopodia in tumors without affecting normal cellular functions . To move invadopodia inhibitors into therapeutic applications against tumor metastasis , we ﬁrst need to determine how to apply invadopodia inhibitors for cancer treatment . As discussed , the main function of invadopodia in tumors is to promote matrix degradation and tumor invasion , but not to regulate cell proliferation or survival . Therefore , the main utility of invadopodia inhibitors should be to prevent primary and secondary metastasis occurrences , instead of inhibiting the growth of established primary tumors and metastases . Invadopodia inhibitors could be beneﬁcial in preventing new metastasis development in a number of metastasis - prone cancer patient groups . Using breast cancer as an example , a group of cancer patients who have already developed limited metastatic diseases , such as a single brain metastasis , may use invadopodia inhibitors to prevent secondary metastasis lesions in the brain . Also , patients that have presented lymph node positivity could beneﬁt from invadopodia inhibitors to prevent distant metastasis development . Furthermore , recent gene expression proﬁling and biomarker studies make it possible to predict long - term metastasis occurrence and survival outcome in early - stage breast cancer patients . Invadopodia inhibitors , in combination with traditional chemotherapies , could potentially reduce metastasis development in a selected high - risk patient population based on such molecular proﬁling . Another pressing issue that faces the entire metastasis ﬁeld , including invadopodia research , is how to develop proper clinical trials to test anti - metastatic agents such as invadopodia inhibitors . As discussed above , invadopodia mainly function to promote matrix degradation , thus perturbation of their functions in tumors have little or no effect on tumor proliferation . Unfortunately , the current clinical trial system requires all anti - cancer agents to show efﬁcacy in phase II by shrinking established primary tumors and / or distant metastases in patients before moving to phase III trials and regulatory approval . Only after approval can these agents be tested in metastasis prevention trials for more early - stage cancer patients . As invadopodia - speciﬁc inhibitors are unlikely to shrink existing tumors and metastases , these inhibitors would fail in Figure 2 . The role of invadopodia in metastasis progression . Tumor metastasis takes place in a series of steps : invasion into the surrounding stroma ( a ) , intravasation into the vasculature ( b ) , extravasation out of the vasculature ( c ) and colonization at distant sites . Given that invadopodia function to degrade ECM , invadopodia are thought to have critical roles during various steps of metastasis ( a – c ) . The role of invadopodia in tumor metastasis H Paz et al 4199 & 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited Oncogene ( 2014 ) 4193 – 4202 current phase II clinical trials even though they might be potent to prevent new metastasis occurrence . A stimulating article by Dr PS Steeg 127 has proposed that the rate of new metastasis occurrence in metastasis high - risk patients as a more appropriate end point for metastasis prevention trials . Given the unique role of invadopodia in tumor invasion and metastasis , invadopodia inhibitors need to be tested in better - designed metastasis prevention trials to explore their full potential in combating tumor metastasis . CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare no conﬂict of interest . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We apologize to the many researchers in this ﬁeld whose work we were unable to cite due to space restrictions . Our research on tumor metastasis is supported by grants from National Institutes of Health 1DP2OD002420 , National Cancer Institute 1RO1CA168689 , American Cancer Society grant RSG - 09 - 282 - 01 - CSM , The Hartwell Foundation and DOD Breast Cancer Program W81XWH - 13 - 1 - 0132 to JY , by the NIH IRACDA training grant 5K12GM068524 to HP , and by the NIH Pre - doctoral Training grant in Pharmaceutical Science 5T32GM007752 to NP . REFERENCES 1 Thiery JP . Epithelial - mesenchymal transitions in tumour progression . Nat Rev Cancer 2002 ; 2 : 442 – 454 . 2 Linder S . The matrix corroded : podosomes and invadopodia in extracellular matrix degradation . Trends Cell Biol 2007 ; 17 : 107 – 117 . 3 Murphy DA , Courtneidge SA . The ‘ins’ and ‘outs’ of podosomes and invadopodia : characteristics , formation and function . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2011 ; 12 : 413 – 426 . 4 Weed SA , Parsons JT . Cortactin : coupling membrane dynamics to cortical actin assembly . Oncogene 2001 ; 20 : 6418 – 6434 . 5 Okamura H , Resh MD . p80 / 85 cortactin associates with the Src SH2 domain and colocalizes with v - Src in transformed cells . J Biol Chem 1995 ; 270 : 26613 – 26618 . 6 Huang C , Liu J , Haudenschild CC , Zhan X . The role of tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin in the locomotion of endothelial cells . J Biol Chem 1998 ; 273 : 25770 – 25776 . 7 Bowden ET , Barth M , Thomas D , Glazer RI , Mueller SC . An invasion - related complex of cortactin , paxillin and PKCmu associates with invadopodia at sites of extracellular matrix degradation . Oncogene 1999 ; 18 : 4440 – 4449 . 8 Artym VV , Zhang Y , Seillier - Moiseiwitsch F , Yamada KM , Mueller SC . Dynamic interactions of cortactin and membrane type 1 matrix metalloproteinase at invadopodia : deﬁning the stages of invadopodia formation and function . Cancer Res 2006 ; 66 : 3034 – 3043 . 9 Bowden ET , Onikoyi E , Slack R , Myoui A , Yoneda T , Yamada KM et al . Co - locali - zation of cortactin and phosphotyrosine identiﬁes active invadopodia in human breast cancer cells . Exp Cell Res 2006 ; 312 : 1240 – 1253 . 10 Yamaguchi H , Lorenz M , Kempiak S , Sarmiento C , Coniglio S , Symons M et al . Molecular mechanisms of invadopodium formation : the role of the N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 complex pathway and coﬁlin . J Cell Biol 2005 ; 168 : 441 – 452 . 11 Oser M , Yamaguchi H , Mader CC , Bravo - Cordero JJ , Arias M , Chen X et al . Cortactin regulates coﬁlin and N - WASp activities to control the stages of invadopodium assembly and maturation . J Cell Biol 2009 ; 186 : 571 – 587 . 12 Patel AS , Schechter GL , Wasilenko WJ , Somers KD . Overexpression of EMS1 / cortactin in NIH3T3 ﬁbroblasts causes increased cell motility and invasion in vitro . Oncogene 1998 ; 16 : 3227 – 3232 . 13 Li Y , Tondravi M , Liu J , Smith E , Haudenschild CC , Kaczmarek M et al . Cortactin potentiates bone metastasis of breast cancer cells . Cancer Res 2001 ; 61 : 6906 – 6911 . 14 Chuma M , Sakamoto M , Yasuda J , Fujii G , Nakanishi K , Tsuchiya A et al . Over - expression of cortactin is involved in motility and metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma . J Hepatol 2004 ; 41 : 629 – 636 . 15 Schuuring E . The involvement of the chromosome 11q13 region in human malignancies : cyclin D1 and EMS1 are two new candidate oncogenes - - a review . Gene 1995 ; 159 : 83 – 96 . 16 Weaver AM . Cortactin in tumor invasiveness . Cancer Lett 2008 ; 265 : 157 – 166 . 17 Goswami S , Philippar U , Sun D , Patsialou A , Avraham J , Wang W et al . Identiﬁcation of invasion speciﬁc splice variants of the cytoskeletal protein Mena present in mammary tumor cells during invasion in vivo . Clin Exp Metastasis 2009 ; 26 : 153 – 159 . 18 Philippar U , Roussos ET , Oser M , Yamaguchi H , Kim HD , Giampieri S et al . A Mena invasion isoform potentiates EGF - induced carcinoma cell invasion and metastasis . Dev Cell 2008 ; 15 : 813 – 828 . 19 Gertler F , Condeelis J . Metastasis : tumor cells becoming MENAcing . Trends Cell Biol 2011 ; 21 : 81 – 90 . 20 Roussos ET , Wang Y , Wyckoff JB , Sellers RS , Wang W , Li J et al . Mena deﬁciency delays tumor progression and decreases metastasis in polyoma middle - T transgenic mouse mammary tumors . Breast Cancer Res 2010 ; 12 : R101 . 21 Roussos ET , Balsamo M , Alford SK , Wyckoff JB , Gligorijevic B , Wang Y et al . Mena invasive ( MenaINV ) promotes multicellular streaming motility and transendothelial migration in a mouse model of breast cancer . J Cell Sci 2011 ; 124 : 2120 – 2131 . 22 Courtneidge SA , Azucena EF , Pass I , Seals DF , Tesfay L . The SRC substrate Tks5 , podosomes ( invadopodia ) , and cancer cell invasion . Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 2005 ; 70 : 167 – 171 . 23 Seals DF , Azucena Jr . EF , Pass I , Tesfay L , Gordon R , Woodrow M et al . The adaptor protein Tks5 / Fish is required for podosome formation and function , and for the protease - driven invasion of cancer cells . Cancer Cell 2005 ; 7 : 155 – 165 . 24 Eckert MA , Lwin TM , Chang AT , Kim J , Danis E , Ohno - Machado L et al . Twist1 - induced invadopodia formation promotes tumor metastasis . Cancer Cell 2011 ; 19 : 372 – 386 . 25 Abram CL , Seals DF , Pass I , Salinsky D , Maurer L , Roth TM et al . The adaptor protein ﬁsh associates with members of the ADAMs family and localizes to podosomes of Src - transformed cells . J Biol Chem 2003 ; 278 : 16844 – 16851 . 26 Oikawa T , Itoh T , Takenawa T . Sequential signals toward podosome formation in NIH - src cells . J Cell Biol 2008 ; 182 : 157 – 169 . 27 Crimaldi L , Courtneidge SA , Gimona M . Tks5 recruits AFAP - 110 , p190RhoGAP , and cortactin for podosome formation . Exp Cell Res 2009 ; 315 : 2581 – 2592 . 28 Diaz B , Shani G , Pass I , Anderson D , Quintavalle M , Courtneidge SA . Tks5 - dependent , nox - mediated generation of reactive oxygen species is necessary for invadopodia formation . Sci Signal 2009 ; 2 : ra53 . 29 Buschman MD , Bromann PA , Cejudo - Martin P , Wen F , Pass I , Courtneidge SA . The novel adaptor protein Tks4 ( SH3PXD2B ) is required for functional podosome formation . Mol Biol Cell 2009 ; 20 : 1302 – 1311 . 30 Blouw B , Seals DF , Pass I , Diaz B , Courtneidge SA . A role for the podosome / invadopodia scaffold protein Tks5 in tumor growth in vivo . Eur J Cell Biol 2008 ; 87 : 555 – 567 . 31 Overall CM , Kleifeld O . Tumour microenvironment—opinion : validating matrix metalloproteinases as drug targets and anti - targets for cancer therapy . Nat Rev Cancer 2006 ; 6 : 227 – 239 . 32 Freije JM , Balbin M , Pendas AM , Sanchez LM , Puente XS , Lopez - Otin C . Matrix metalloproteinases and tumor progression . Adv Exp Med Biol 2003 ; 532 : 91 – 107 . 33 Yana I , Weiss SJ . Regulation of membrane type - 1 matrix metalloproteinase activation by proprotein convertases . Mol Biol Cell 2000 ; 11 : 2387 – 2401 . 34 Ohuchi E , Imai K , Fujii Y , Sato H , Seiki M , Okada Y . Membrane type 1 matrix metalloproteinase digests interstitial collagens and other extracellular matrix macromolecules . J Biol Chem 1997 ; 272 : 2446 – 2451 . 35 d’Ortho MP , Will H , Atkinson S , Butler G , Messent A , Gavrilovic J et al . Membrane - type matrix metalloproteinases 1 and 2 exhibit broad - spectrum proteolytic capacities comparable to many matrix metalloproteinases . Eur J Biochem 1997 ; 250 : 751 – 757 . 36 Fosang AJ , Last K , Fujii Y , Seiki M , Okada Y . Membrane - type 1 MMP ( MMP - 14 ) cleaves at three sites in the aggrecan interglobular domain . FEBS Lett 1998 ; 430 : 186 – 190 . 37 Koshikawa N , Giannelli G , Cirulli V , Miyazaki K , Quaranta V . Role of cell surface metalloprotease MT1 - MMP in epithelial cell migration over laminin - 5 . J Cell Biol 2000 ; 148 : 615 – 624 . 38 Deryugina EI , Ratnikov B , Monosov E , Postnova TI , DiScipio R , Smith JW et al . MT1 - MMP initiates activation of pro - MMP - 2 and integrin alphavbeta3 promotes maturation of MMP - 2 in breast carcinoma cells . Exp Cell Res 2001 ; 263 : 209 – 223 . 39 Toth M , Chvyrkova I , Bernardo MM , Hernandez - Barrantes S , Fridman R . Pro - MMP - 9 activation by the MT1 - MMP / MMP - 2 axis and MMP - 3 : role of TIMP - 2 and plasma membranes . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2003 ; 308 : 386 – 395 . 40 Yu X , Zech T , McDonald L , Gonzalez EG , Li A , Macpherson I et al . N - WASP coordinates the delivery and F - actin - mediated capture of MT1 - MMP at invasive pseudopods . J Cell Biol 2012 ; 199 : 527 – 544 . 41 Steffen A , Le Dez G , Poincloux R , Recchi C , Nassoy P , Rottner K et al . MT1 - MMP - dependent invasion is regulated by TI - VAMP / VAMP7 . Curr Biol 2008 ; 18 : 926 – 931 . 42 Bravo - Cordero JJ , Marrero - Diaz R , Megias D , Genis L , Garcia - Grande A , Garcia MA et al . MT1 - MMP proinvasive activity is regulated by a novel Rab8 - dependent exocytic pathway . EMBO J 2007 ; 26 : 1499 – 1510 . 43 Poincloux R , Lizarraga F , Chavrier P . Matrix invasion by tumour cells : a focus on MT1 - MMP trafﬁcking to invadopodia . J Cell Sci 2009 ; 122 : 3015 – 3024 . 44 Nyalendo C , Beaulieu E , Sartelet H , Michaud M , Fontaine N , Gingras D et al . Impaired tyrosine phosphorylation of membrane type 1 - matrix The role of invadopodia in tumor metastasis H Paz et al 4200 Oncogene ( 2014 ) 4193 – 4202 & 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited metalloproteinase reduces tumor cell proliferation in three - dimensional matrices and abrogates tumor growth in mice . Carcinogenesis 2008 ; 29 : 1655 – 1664 . 45 Nyalendo C , Michaud M , Beaulieu E , Roghi C , Murphy G , Gingras D et al . Src - dependent phosphorylation of membrane type I matrix metalloproteinase on cytoplasmic tyrosine 573 : role in endothelial and tumor cell migration . J Biol Chem 2007 ; 282 : 15690 – 15699 . 46 Eisenach PA , de Sampaio PC , Murphy G , Roghi C . Membrane type 1 matrix metalloproteinase ( MT1 - MMP ) ubiquitination at Lys581 increases cellular inva - sion through type I collagen . J Biol Chem 2012 ; 287 : 11533 – 11545 . 47 Egeblad M , Werb Z . New functions for the matrix metalloproteinases in cancer progression . Nat Rev Cancer 2002 ; 2 : 161 – 174 . 48 Szabova L , Chrysovergis K , Yamada SS , Holmbeck K . MT1 - MMP is required for efﬁcient tumor dissemination in experimental metastatic disease . Oncogene 2008 ; 27 : 3274 – 3281 . 49 Perentes JY , Kirkpatrick ND , Nagano S , Smith EY , Shaver CM , Sgroi D et al . Cancer cell - associated MT1 - MMP promotes blood vessel invasion and distant metastasis in triple - negative mammary tumors . Cancer Res 2011 ; 71 : 4527 – 4538 . 50 Devy L , Dransﬁeld DT . New strategies for the next generation of matrix - metal - loproteinase inhibitors : selectively targeting membrane - anchored MMPs with therapeutic antibodies . Biochem Res Int 2011 ; 2011 : 191670 . 51 Gialeli C , Theocharis AD , Karamanos NK . Roles of matrix metalloproteinases in cancer progression and their pharmacological targeting . FEBS J 2011 ; 278 : 16 – 27 . 52 Devy L , Huang L , Naa L , Yanamandra N , Pieters H , Frans N et al . Selective inhibition of matrix metalloproteinase - 14 blocks tumor growth , invasion , and angiogenesis . Cancer Res 2009 ; 69 : 1517 – 1526 . 53 Basu B , Correa de Sampaio P , Mohammed H , Fogarasi M , Corrie P , Watkins NA et al . Inhibition of MT1 - MMP activity using functional antibody fragments selected against its hemopexin domain . Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2012 ; 44 : 393 – 403 . 54 Seals DF , Courtneidge SA . The ADAMs family of metalloproteases : multidomain proteins with multiple functions . Genes Dev 2003 ; 17 : 7 – 30 . 55 Kveiborg M , Albrechtsen R , Couchman JR , Wewer UM . Cellular roles of ADAM12 in health and disease . Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2008 ; 40 : 1685 – 1702 . 56 Moss ML , Lambert MH . Shedding of membrane proteins by ADAM family pro - teases . Essays Biochem 2002 ; 38 : 141 – 153 . 57 Albrechtsen R , Stautz D , Sanjay A , Kveiborg M , Wewer UM . Extracellular engagement of ADAM12 induces clusters of invadopodia with localized ecto - domain shedding activity . Exp Cell Res 2011 ; 317 : 195 – 209 . 58 Diaz B , Yuen A , Iizuka S , Higashiyama S , Courtneidge SA . Notch increases the shedding of HB - EGF by ADAM12 to potentiate invadopodia formation in hypoxia . J Cell Biol 2013 ; 201 : 279 – 292 . 59 Handbook of proteolytic enzymes , volumes 1 , 2 and 3 . Third edition , Anticancer Res 2013 ; 33 : 2345 . 60 Roy R , Wewer UM , Zurakowski D , Pories SE , Moses MA . ADAM 12 cleaves extracellular matrix proteins and correlates with cancer status and stage . J Biol Chem 2004 ; 279 : 51323 – 51330 . 61 Kveiborg M , Frohlich C , Albrechtsen R , Tischler V , Dietrich N , Holck P et al . A role for ADAM12 in breast tumor progression and stromal cell apoptosis . Cancer Res 2005 ; 65 : 4754 – 4761 . 62 Roy R , Rodig S , Bielenberg D , Zurakowski D , Moses MA . ADAM12 transmembrane and secreted isoforms promote breast tumor growth : a distinct role for ADAM12 - S protein in tumor metastasis . J Biol Chem 2011 ; 286 : 20758 – 20768 . 63 Meadows SA , Edosada CY , Mayeda M , Tran T , Quan C , Raab H et al . Ala657 and conserved active site residues promote ﬁbroblast activation protein endo - peptidase activity via distinct mechanisms of transition state stabilization . Bio - chemistry 2007 ; 46 : 4598 – 4605 . 64 O’Brien P , O’Connor BF . Seprase : an overview of an important matrix serine protease . Biochim Biophys Acta 2008 ; 1784 : 1130 – 1145 . 65 Ghersi G , Zhao Q , Salamone M , Yeh Y , Zucker S , Chen WT . The protease complex consisting of dipeptidyl peptidase IV and seprase plays a role in the migration and invasion of human endothelial cells in collagenous matrices . Cancer Res 2006 ; 66 : 4652 – 4661 . 66 Mueller SC , Ghersi G , Akiyama SK , Sang QX , Howard L , Pineiro - Sanchez M et al . A novel protease - docking function of integrin at invadopodia . J Biol Chem 1999 ; 274 : 24947 – 24952 . 67 Christiansen VJ , Jackson KW , Lee KN , McKee PA . Effect of ﬁbroblast activation protein and alpha2 - antiplasmin cleaving enzyme on collagen types I , III , and IV . Arch Biochem Biophys 2007 ; 457 : 177 – 186 . 68 Busek P , Malik R , Sedo A . Dipeptidyl peptidase IV activity and / or structure homologues ( DASH ) and their substrates in cancer . Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2004 ; 36 : 408 – 421 . 69 Chen D , Kennedy A , Wang JY , Zeng W , Zhao Q , Pearl M et al . Activation of EDTA - resistant gelatinases in malignant human tumors . Cancer Res 2006 ; 66 : 9977 – 9985 . 70 Santos AM , Jung J , Aziz N , Kissil JL , Pure E . Targeting ﬁbroblast activation protein inhibits tumor stromagenesis and growth in mice . J Clin Invest 2009 ; 119 : 3613 – 3625 . 71 Pure E . The road to integrative cancer therapies : emergence of a tumor - asso - ciated ﬁbroblast protease as a potential therapeutic target in cancer . Expert Opin Ther Targets 2009 ; 13 : 967 – 973 . 72 Henry LR , Lee HO , Lee JS , Klein - Szanto A , Watts P , Ross EA et al . Clinical impli - cations of ﬁbroblast activation protein in patients with colon cancer . Clin Cancer Res 2007 ; 13 : 1736 – 1741 . 73 Kraman M , Bambrough PJ , Arnold JN , Roberts EW , Magiera L , Jones JO et al . Suppression of antitumor immunity by stromal cells expressing ﬁbroblast activation protein - alpha . Science 2010 ; 330 : 827 – 830 . 74 Hofheinz RD , al - Batran SE , Hartmann F , Hartung G , Jager D , Renner C et al . Stromal antigen targeting by a humanised monoclonal antibody : an early phase II trial of sibrotuzumab in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer . Onkologie 2003 ; 26 : 44 – 48 . 75 Narra K , Mullins SR , Lee HO , Strzemkowski - Brun B , Magalong K , Christiansen VJ et al . Phase II trial of single agent Val - boroPro ( Talabostat ) inhibiting Fibroblast Activation Protein in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer . Cancer Biol Ther 2007 ; 6 : 1691 – 1699 . 76 Eager RM , Cunningham CC , Senzer NN , Stephenson Jr . J , Anthony SP , O’Day SJ et al . Phase II assessment of talabostat and cisplatin in second - line stage IV melanoma . BMC Cancer 2009 ; 9 : 263 . 77 Lee J , Fassnacht M , Nair S , Boczkowski D , Gilboa E . Tumor immunotherapy targeting ﬁbroblast activation protein , a product expressed in tumor - associated ﬁbroblasts . Cancer Res 2005 ; 65 : 11156 – 11163 . 78 Loefﬂer M , Kruger JA , Niethammer AG , Reisfeld RA . Targeting tumor - associated ﬁbroblasts improves cancer chemotherapy by increasing intratumoral drug uptake . J Clin Invest 2006 ; 116 : 1955 – 1962 . 79 Fischer E , Chaitanya K , Wuest T , Wadle A , Scott AM , van den Broek M et al . Radioimmunotherapy of ﬁbroblast activation protein positive tumors by rapidly internalizing antibodies . Clin Cancer Res 2012 ; 18 : 6208 – 6218 . 80 Summy JM , Gallick GE . Src family kinases in tumor progression and metastasis . Cancer Metastasis Rev 2003 ; 22 : 337 – 358 . 81 Chen WT , Chen JM , Parsons SJ , Parsons JT . Local degradation of ﬁbronectin at sites of expression of the transforming gene product pp60src . Nature 1985 ; 316 : 156 – 158 . 82 Balzer EM , Whipple RA , Thompson K , Boggs AE , Slovic J , Cho EH et al . c - Src differentially regulates the functions of microtentacles and invadopodia . Onco - gene 2010 ; 29 : 6402 – 6408 . 83 Kelley LC , Ammer AG , Hayes KE , Martin KH , Machida K , Jia L et al . Oncogenic Src requires a wild - type counterpart to regulate invadopodia maturation . J Cell Sci 2010 ; 123 : 3923 – 3932 . 84 Mader CC , Oser M , Magalhaes MA , Bravo - Cordero JJ , Condeelis J , Koleske AJ et al . An EGFR - Src - Arg - cortactin pathway mediates functional maturation of invado - podia and breast cancer cell invasion . Cancer Res 2011 ; 71 : 1730 – 1741 . 85 Chan PC , Chen HC . p120RasGAP - mediated activation of c - Src is critical for oncogenic Ras to induce tumor invasion . Cancer Res 2012 ; 72 : 2405 – 2415 . 86 Sanchez - Bailon MP , Calcabrini A , Gomez - Dominguez D , Morte B , Martin - Forero E , Gomez - Lopez G et al . Src kinases catalytic activity regulates proliferation , migration and invasiveness of MDA - MB - 231 breast cancer cells . Cell Signal 2012 ; 24 : 1276 – 1286 . 87 Yeatman TJ . A renaissance for SRC . Nat Rev Cancer 2004 ; 4 : 470 – 480 . 88 Ishizawar R , Parsons SJ . c - Src and cooperating partners in human cancer . Cancer Cell 2004 ; 6 : 209 – 214 . 89 Zhang XH , Wang Q , Gerald W , Hudis CA , Norton L , Smid M et al . Latent bone metastasis in breast cancer tied to Src - dependent survival signals . Cancer Cell 2009 ; 16 : 67 – 78 . 90 Aligayer H , Boyd DD , Heiss MM , Abdalla EK , Curley SA , Gallick GE . Activation of Src kinase in primary colorectal carcinoma : an indicator of poor clinical prog - nosis . Cancer 2002 ; 94 : 344 – 351 . 91 Wang S , Yuan Y , Liao L , Kuang SQ , Tien JC , O’Malley BW et al . Disruption of the SRC - 1 gene in mice suppresses breast cancer metastasis without affecting pri - mary tumor formation . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009 ; 106 : 151 – 156 . 92 Trevino JG , Summy JM , Lesslie DP , Parikh NU , Hong DS , Lee FY et al . Inhibition of SRC expression and activity inhibits tumor progression and metastasis of human pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells in an orthotopic nude mouse model . Am J Pathol 2006 ; 168 : 962 – 972 . 93 Puls LN , Eadens M , Messersmith W . Current status of SRC inhibitors in solid tumor malignancies . Oncologist 2010 ; 16 : 566 – 578 . 94 Anbalagan M , Carrier L , Glodowski S , Hangauer D , Shan B , Rowan BG . KX - 01 , a novel Src kinase inhibitor directed toward the peptide substrate site , synergizes with tamoxifen in estrogen receptor alpha positive breast cancer . Breast Cancer Res Treat 2012 ; 132 : 391 – 409 . The role of invadopodia in tumor metastasis H Paz et al 4201 & 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited Oncogene ( 2014 ) 4193 – 4202 95 Naing A , Cohen R , Dy GK , Hong DS , Dyster L , Hangauer DG et al . A phase I trial of KX2 - 391 , a novel non - ATP competitive substrate - pocket - directed SRC inhibitor , in patients with advanced malignancies . Invest New Drugs 2013 ; 31 : 967 – 973 . 96 Lin J , Arlinghaus R . Activated c - Abl tyrosine kinase in malignant solid tumors . Oncogene 2008 ; 27 : 4385 – 4391 . 97 Srinivasan D , Plattner R . Activation of Abl tyrosine kinases promotes invasion of aggressive breast cancer cells . Cancer Res 2006 ; 66 : 5648 – 5655 . 98 Plattner R , Kadlec L , DeMali KA , Kazlauskas A , Pendergast AM . c - Abl is activated by growth factors and Src family kinases and has a role in the cellular response to PDGF . Genes Dev 1999 ; 13 : 2400 – 2411 . 99 Smith - Pearson PS , Greuber EK , Yogalingam G , Pendergast AM . Abl kinases are required for invadopodia formation and chemokine - induced invasion . J Biol Chem 2010 ; 285 : 40201 – 40211 . 100 Gil - Henn H , Patsialou A , Wang Y , Warren MS , Condeelis JS , Koleske AJ . Arg / Abl2 promotes invasion and attenuates proliferation of breast cancer in vivo . Onco - gene 2013 ; 32 : 2622 – 2630 . 101 Jallal H , Valentino ML , Chen G , Boschelli F , Ali S , Rabbani SA . A Src / Abl kinase inhibitor , SKI - 606 , blocks breast cancer invasion , growth , and metastasis in vitro and in vivo . Cancer Res 2007 ; 67 : 1580 – 1588 . 102 Mayer EL , Krop IE . Advances in targeting SRC in the treatment of breast cancer and other solid malignancies . Clin Cancer Res 2010 ; 16 : 3526 – 3532 . 103 Mueller SC , Chen WT . Cellular invasion into matrix beads : localization of beta 1 integrins and ﬁbronectin to the invadopodia . J Cell Sci 1991 ; 99 ( Pt 2 ) : 213 – 225 . 104 Destaing O , Planus E , Bouvard D , Oddou C , Badowski C , Bossy V et al . beta1A integrin is a master regulator of invadosome organization and function . Mol Biol Cell 2010 ; 21 : 4108 – 4119 . 105 Branch KM , Hoshino D , Weaver AM . Adhesion rings surround invadopodia and promote maturation . Biol Open 2012 ; 1 : 711 – 722 . 106 Beaty BT , Sharma VP , Bravo - Cordero JJ , Simpson MA , Eddy RJ , Koleske AJ et al . beta1 integrin regulates Arg to promote invadopodial maturation and matrix degradation . Mol Biol Cell 2013 ; 24 : 1661 – 1675 . 107 Nakahara H , Nomizu M , Akiyama SK , Yamada Y , Yeh Y , Chen WT . A mechanism for regulation of melanoma invasion . Ligation of alpha6beta1 integrin by lami - nin G peptides . J Biol Chem 1996 ; 271 : 27221 – 27224 . 108 Desgrosellier JS , Cheresh DA . Integrins in cancer : biological implications and therapeutic opportunities . Nat Rev Cancer 2010 ; 10 : 9 – 22 . 109 Huck L , Pontier SM , Zuo DM , Muller WJ . beta1 - integrin is dispensable for the induction of ErbB2 mammary tumors but plays a critical role in the metastatic phase of tumor progression . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010 ; 107 : 15559 – 15564 . 110 Thiery JP , Acloque H , Huang RY , Nieto MA . Epithelial - mesenchymal transitions in development and disease . Cell 2009 ; 139 : 871 – 890 . 111 Yang J , Mani SA , Donaher JL , Ramaswamy S , Itzykson RA , Come C et al . Twist , a master regulator of morphogenesis , plays an essential role in tumor metastasis . Cell 2004 ; 117 : 927 – 939 . 112 Tsai JH , Donaher JL , Murphy DA , Chau S , Yang J . Spatiotemporal regulation of epithelial - mesenchymal transition is essential for squamous cell carcinoma metastasis . Cancer Cell 2012 ; 22 : 725 – 736 . 113 Zavadil J , Bottinger EP . TGF - b and epithelial - to - mesenchymal transitions . Oncogene 2005 ; 24 : 5764 – 5774 . 114 Pignatelli J , Tumbarello DA , Schmidt RP , Turner CE . Hic - 5 promotes invadopodia formation and invasion during TGF - beta - induced epithelial - mesenchymal tran - sition . J Cell Biol 2012 ; 197 : 421 – 437 . 115 Levental KR , Yu H , Kass L , Lakins JN , Egeblad M , Erler JT et al . Matrix crosslinking forces tumor progression by enhancing integrin signaling . Cell 2009 ; 139 : 891 – 906 . 116 Parekh A , Weaver AM . Regulation of cancer invasiveness by the physical extracellular matrix environment . Cell Adh Migr 2009 ; 3 : 288 – 292 . 117 Ramaswamy S , Ross KN , Lander ES , Golub TR . A molecular signature of metastasis in primary solid tumors . Nat Genet 2003 ; 33 : 49 – 54 . 118 Paszek MJ , Zahir N , Johnson KR , Lakins JN , Rozenberg GI , Gefen A et al . Tensional homeostasis and the malignant phenotype . Cancer Cell 2005 ; 8 : 241 – 254 . 119 Erler JT , Bennewith KL , Nicolau M , Dornhofer N , Kong C , Le QT et al . Lysyl oxidase is essential for hypoxia - induced metastasis . Nature 2006 ; 440 : 1222 – 1226 . 120 Alexander NR , Branch KM , Parekh A , Clark ES , Iwueke IC , Guelcher SA et al . Extracellular matrix rigidity promotes invadopodia activity . Curr Biol 2008 ; 18 : 1295 – 1299 . 121 Parekh A , Ruppender NS , Branch KM , Sewell - Loftin MK , Lin J , Boyer PD et al . Sensing and modulation of invadopodia across a wide range of rigidities . Biophys J 2011 ; 100 : 573 – 582 . 122 Yamaguchi H . Pathological roles of invadopodia in cancer invasion and metastasis . Eur J Cell Biol 2012 ; 91 : 902 – 907 . 123 Gligorijevic B , Wyckoff J , Yamaguchi H , Wang Y , Roussos ET , Condeelis J . N - WASP - mediated invadopodium formation is involved in intravasation and lung metastasis of mammary tumors . J Cell Sci 2012 ; 125 : 724 – 734 . 124 Yamaguchi H , Wyckoff J , Condeelis J . Cell migration in tumors . Curr Opin Cell Biol 2005 ; 17 : 559 – 564 . 125 Ito S , Nakanishi H , Ikehara Y , Kato T , Kasai Y , Ito K et al . Real - time observation of micrometastasis formation in the living mouse liver using a green ﬂuorescent protein gene - tagged rat tongue carcinoma cell line . Int J Cancer 2001 ; 93 : 212 – 217 . 126 Stoletov K , Kato H , Zardouzian E , Kelber J , Yang J , Shattil S et al . Visualizing extra - vasation dynamics of metastatic tumor cells . J Cell Sci 2010 ; 123 : 2332 – 2341 . 127 Steeg PS . Perspective : the right trials . Nature 2012 ; 485 : S58 – S59 . The role of invadopodia in tumor metastasis H Paz et al 4202 Oncogene ( 2014 ) 4193 – 4202 & 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited