Normative Influences on Thoughtful Online Participation Abhay Sukumaran 1 , Stephanie Vezich 2 , Melanie McHugh 1 , Clifford Nass 1 1 Department of Communication 450 Serra Mall Stanford University , Stanford , CA 94305 { abhays , mmchugh , nass } @ stanford . edu 2 Department of Psychology University of California Los Angeles 1285 Franz Hall , Los Angeles , CA 90095 isvezich @ ucla . edu ABSTRACT We describe two experiments on whether individual thoughtful effort during online commenting is shaped by situational norms derived from the behavior of social others and the design of the environment , respectively . By measuring the length of participants’ comments on a news website , the time taken to write them , and the number of issue - relevant thoughts they contain , we demonstrate that participants conform to high vs . low norms of thoughtfulness manifested through either the apparent behavior of other users or through visual , textual and interactional design features conceptually associated with thoughtfulness . Theoretical and applied insights for designing online participatory environments are discussed . Author Keywords Online comments , user - generated content , thoughtfulness , social norms , environmental norms . ACM Classification Keywords H5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . ACM General Terms Experimentation . INTRODUCTION A widespread form of public discourse is conducted through participation in online comments on shared media such as news stories and blog posts [ 25 ] . While such participation holds much potential for enabling a more participatory media culture [ 14 ] and fostering offline civic engagement [ 41 ] , online comment spaces are often plagued by banality and thoughtlessness rather than edifying discussion . Improving participatory online behavior is thus a central concern for designers . While such regulation has traditionally been achieved through moderation systems [ 18 ] , recent research has also focused on subjective perceptions that people form about their online social situations . Online contributions can be motivated , for example , by the individual’s perception of their level of participation relative to others [ 4 ] or their degree of identification with a social group [ 33 ] . In the physical world , interpersonal situations are rife with behavioral influences traceable to social norms , i . e . , shared standards of expected behavior inferred from what others are doing [ 6 ] . Research also suggests that norms can be derived not only from other people but also from features of the immediate environment that are mentally associated with specific categories of social behavior [ 1 , 15 ] . We suggest that online comment spaces present fundamentally social yet rather ambiguous situations that are likely to be subject to such normative influence . In two experimental studies , we explore whether thoughtful participation in online comment spaces can be induced via social norms . The first experiment shows that people tend to conform to standards of thoughtfulness in commenting behavior set by others . The second experiment demonstrates that a similar effect can be achieved by introducing design elements conceptually associated with thoughtfulness in an online comment space . We interpret these results in light of social psychological theories of how environmental and social cues influence perception and behavior in interpersonal situations , and discuss the implications of these findings for designers of participatory technologies . RELATED WORK We briefly review prior research to establish support for two related ideas that correspond to these two empirical studies . First , individuals in social settings often turn to normative indicators in the behavior of others to guide their own decisions and actions , particularly when the setting is ambiguous . Second , even when others are not present , social environments can possess features mentally associated with such standards of normative conduct . Whenever available , we also cite evidence that such effects can exert themselves in online settings as well as physical ones . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . CHI 2011 , May 7 – 12 , 2011 , Vancouver , BC , Canada . Copyright 2011 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 0267 - 8 / 11 / 05 . . . . $ 10 . 00 . CHI 2011 • Session : Incentives & User Generated Content May 7 – 12 , 2011 • Vancouver , BC , Canada 3401 The Power of Social Norms The study of social conformity , or how individuals shift their perceptions and actions to match a consensus exhibited by others in interpersonal settings , has a long history dating back to classic experiments on group pressure that showed that visual perceptual judgments can be socially influenced [ 35 ] . Extensive research has since shown that salient social norms , “rules and standards understood by members of a group that guide and / or constrain behavior without the force of laws” [ 8 ] , can induce people to behave in a manner consistent with those norms . Evidence that people tend to conform to descriptive standards of normative behavior ( what the majority of others in the same situation are doing ) has been found in contexts as varied as littering in public [ 7 ] , college alcohol abuse [ 27 ] , and household energy conservation [ 5 ] . When individuals encounter a social situation , especially one where ambiguity exists about what the “usual” or “correct” behavior is , they are likely to turn to cues in the behavior of others to determine such standards . Such a “descriptive social norm” tends to produce conformity in the individual when goals of seeking social approval , forming an accurate interpretation of reality , or maintaining a positive self - concept are present , as in much of everyday life [ 6 ] . A few relevant examples from this literature will explain more fully how and when norms operate in social settings . Cialdini , Reno and Kallgren [ 7 ] showed that littering in public spaces could be reduced via appropriately employing descriptive social norms . In one study , participants returning to their cars in a parking garage had to decide how to dispose of a large handbill placed on their windshields . Participants were found to litter more if their surroundings were already littered than if their immediate environment was clean . Elevating the psychological salience of the norm by highlighting a single prominent violation resulted in even greater conformity : when a single obvious piece of litter was already present , there was even less subsequent littering than in a completely clean surrounding environment [ 7 , Study 2 ] . Social norms can also be effective when merely described as part of an appeal to engage in a particular behavior . In an experiment that used normative messages to promote towel reuse in hotel rooms , Goldstein , Cialdini and Griskevicius [ 11 ] found that an appeal containing a descriptive norm ( “75 % of guests reuse” ) resulted in more reuse behavior than a general appeal ( “help save the environment” ) . Additionally , a norm description that referenced the similarity between the current situation and the one previously experienced by anonymous others ( “75 % of guests who stayed in this room reused” ) was more successful in inducing compliance than descriptions referencing social similarity with others ( “fellow citizens” , “men and women helping to save the environment” ) . In general , the notion that people frequently perceive social situations in terms of salient standards of behavior , that they consequently adhere to , is well - supported by this literature . Social Norms in Online Behavior In text - based online settings , despite concerns about limited nonverbal social cues [ 16 ] and the low psychological salience ( “social presence” ) of others [ 12 ] , several large empirical investigations in contexts such as music markets [ 32 ] , news aggregators [ 20 ] and online video [ 38 ] show that people’s preferences for online content can be swayed dramatically by consensus information from anonymous others . In addition to influences on content choice , effects on behavior of social norms have also been demonstrated in computer - mediated communication . In an analysis of text - based communication among students in an online classroom , Postmes , Spears and Lea [ 29 ] found that different social clusters of communicators converged towards different standards of interaction style ( e . g . , paralinguistic cues ) and message content ( e . g . , number of personal disclosures ) . When studying norms in online spaces , researchers have often focused on how conformity to prevailing attitudes and behaviors within an online group can be induced by increasing the individual’s social identification with the group , particularly in anonymous settings [ 30 , 34 ] , although some work has also examined conformity to externally induced norms such as a prosocial vs . efficacy orientation [ 30 ] . Chen et al . [ 4 ] specifically examined whether contributions to online communities could be increased by supplying individuals with information about socially normative contribution levels . They sent personalized messages to users of a movie recommendation website telling them whether their level of contribution of movie ratings was below or above the median for users that had joined at roughly the same time . Results showed that individuals’ monthly contributions of ratings following such messages converged toward the median in both cases , though the most dramatic shift ( 530 % increase ) was observed in contributions from the below - median group of users . Commenting as Ambiguous Social Activity People are more apt to turn to social norms for behavioral guidance when the immediate social situation can be interpreted in a number of different ways [ 19 , 40 ] . We suggest that online comment spaces are particularly likely to exhibit strong normative influences because the social context of online communication is often highly ambiguous [ 4 ] . In typical instances of online commenting , the other participants in the conversation are anonymous , and the individual contributor rarely possesses definitive information about their personalities , motivations , and habits . Contributors may enter or exit the discussion at any time , resulting in a lack of shared conversational history and obscuring the true size and boundaries of the audience . Participating online through commenting , therefore , is not unlike entering a social contract where all the parties and terms are thoroughly ambiguous . While such ambiguity is not necessary for normative influence to occur , it does CHI 2011 • Session : Incentives & User Generated Content May 7 – 12 , 2011 • Vancouver , BC , Canada 3402 increase the chances of a strong effect and therefore motivates our experimental approach . In an unfamiliar online comment space , we expect that the existence of a clear , psychologically salient social norm indicating the standard level of thoughtfulness in contributions is likely to cause individuals to conform to it . Study 1 in this paper aims to assess whether this is indeed the case . Environment as a Source of Situational Norms The behavior of interpersonal others is not the only source of inferences about norms . Everyday physical environments and objects possess pre - established associations with normative behaviors : people tend to act differently when they are in a church , for instance , as opposed to a football stadium . There is a growing body of “environmental priming” research based on the principle that exposure to such environments or depictions thereof can prime ( increase the cognitive accessibility ) of the associated social norm . Aarts and Dijksterhuis [ 1 ] experimentally examined two such environmental associations , the norm of being quiet in libraries and the norm of being well - mannered in exclusive restaurants . When asked to read a passage aloud , participants who had previously seen pictures of a library spoke more softly than did participants who had seen pictures of a railway station . Similarly , prior exposure to pictures of an exclusive restaurant caused participants to clean crumbs off a table during a subsequent task involving eating a biscuit . Notably , such “situational norms” were only effective when a goal to actually visit these environments was made salient . Berger , Meredith , and Wheeler [ 2 ] analyzed voting data for a school funding measure and found that the polling location made a difference to the vote : people that cast their votes while physically present in schools were more likely to support the measure . In a follow - up experiment that supported an underlying priming mechanism , exposure to pictures of schools vs . neutral locations ( such as office buildings ) was found to enhance participants’ support for a tax increase for school funding . Kay et al . [ 15 ] showed that the mere presence of mundane objects from the “business world” ( e . g . , briefcases ) in the immediate environment could cause people to interpret ambiguous accounts of social behavior in competitive rather than cooperative terms , as well as cause them to be more selfish in a social dilemma task involving allocation of money . It is worth noting that priming experiments mostly focus on automatic , unconscious influences on behavior : participants are typically unaware that the priming stimulus is related to the subsequent task . Website Designs as Sources of Primes The typical experimental technique in norm priming is to employ an initial task that makes the participant think about concepts related to the norm , for instance by having her unscramble sentences semantically related to the target concept [ 36 ] . While this approach has been used to prime norms in online communication [ 30 ] , not much prior work exists on how features inherent to the online environment itself might function as primes . One exception , although it involves priming the salience of product attributes rather than norms , is a study by Mandel and Johnson that showed that visual elements in the background of a web page could focus the user’s attention on particular product characteristics during online shopping [ 24 ] . For example , website backgrounds that were either blue with clouds ( “comfort” ) or green with pennies ( “price” ) caused experimental participants to favor products on the basis of the primed attribute . There is however a growing body of research into effects of visual aesthetics on website impression formation , particularly focusing on the relationship between aesthetically pleasing design and user impressions of usability and trust [ 31 , 39 ] . The bottom line is that users can have almost instantaneous affective responses to website “look and feel” [ 22 ] . One design feature that can make specific normative associations salient is labeling . A series of studies by Liberman , Samuels and Ross [ 21 ] used a variation of the prisoner’s dilemma game to show that individuals were much more apt to cooperate when the situation was labeled as the “Community Game” rather than the “Wall Street Game” . Using measures of cognitive accessibility , the researchers showed that the two labels primed participants with either cooperative or competitive behavioral norms . Notably , people tended to underestimate the true extent of such normative influence : their predictions for the differences in cooperative behavior ( by both themselves and others ) under contrasting labeling conditions were much smaller than the actual differences observed in behavior in the experiment mentioned above , showing that people were apt to discount the influence of the label . Based on this evidence , we expected that the presence of visual and textual design elements associated conceptually with thoughtful behavior would cause individuals in an online comment space to modify their actions accordingly . In other words , designing the environment in a way that evoked normative associations with either high or low degrees of thoughtfulness would make norm - consistent commenting behavior more likely , even though the commenters might underestimate such influence during self - report . Study 2 was designed to explore this relationship . The following sections describe experimental designs and findings for both studies . STUDY 1 To assess the effects of social norm , we examined the following hypothesis about comments on an online news site : CHI 2011 • Session : Incentives & User Generated Content May 7 – 12 , 2011 • Vancouver , BC , Canada 3403 H1 : Individuals exposed to highly thoughtful behavior from others will be more thoughtful in their own online comment contributions than individuals exposed to behavior exhibiting a low degree of thoughtfulness . Participants A total of 24 ( 7 male and 17 female ) participants from an introductory Communication class took part in this study , for which they received credit toward a course requirement . Comments Pretest We selected six opinion pieces dating from December 2009 to January 2010 from the CNN and New York Times websites . The articles represented a range of topics : ( 1 ) college education and SAT tests , ( 2 ) late night talk show hosts , ( 3 ) celebrity product endorsements , ( 4 ) luxury goods during an economic recession , ( 5 ) political activism of literary figures , and ( 6 ) radicalism among engineers . These articles were edited down to approximately 350 words each . To create the thoughtfulness social norm manipulation , we pretested the perceived thoughtfulness of several comments on each article . Two different categories of comments were tested : a “high - thoughtful” type which was about 50 words long and offered elaborated arguments and insightful ideas relevant to the article ; and a “low - thoughtful” type which was about 15 words long and expressed banal or poorly reasoned opinions . The following are examples of the two types of comments for one of the articles , an opinion piece suggesting that engineers are more likely to be involved with radical movements than people from other professional backgrounds : High - thoughtful . “This study may invert cause and effect with the statement that engineers are “more likely to become violent terrorists . ” Isn’t it at least equally plausible that individuals who wanted to blow things up would seek to learn how by studying engineering — particularly where , as here , very , very few people become violent terrorists ? ” Low - thoughtful . “hello ? - engineers are nerds - and nerds are anti - social . QED - sheesh , i should start charging for elementary truisms” Pretest participants ( N = 12 ) were asked to read all articles and rate each comment on a 10 - point Likert scale ranging from “not thoughtful at all” ( = 1 ) to “extremely thoughtful” ( = 10 ) . After averaging ratings across participants , we discarded any comments that showed high variance or were not rated close to their category means , ultimately arriving at a set of eight comments for each article ( four of each type ) . Category means for the selected comments confirmed that they were indeed perceived as low or high in thoughtfulness ( see Table 1 ) . Materials and Procedure These articles and comments were then incorporated into a simulated news website . Figure 1 shows the appearance of the site , which was designed to be as visually minimal as possible . During the experiment , instructions and progress indicators were provided through a frame at the top of the page . Each page displayed a news article , followed by comments ostensibly written by other users , and a text box for participants to enter their own comments . Participants were instructed to read a series of three news articles on this website . In each case , they were asked to first read the article and its comments and then supply at least one comment of their own . The articles were randomly drawn from our preselected sample of six opinion pieces . The study was conducted as a between - participants experiment with one independent variable , descriptive social norm , having two levels . In the “high thoughtfulness” condition , each article was followed by its four ( pretested ) highly thoughtful comments ; conversely , the “low thoughtfulness” condition displayed the four comments pretested to be low in thoughtfulness . We thus manipulated the apparent behavior of other users of the news site to exhibit either a high or a low standard of thoughtfulness in comment contributions . Drawing on the littering norms studies described previously [ 7 ] , we also included one comment on each of the articles that ran counter to the Article Index 1 2 3 4 5 6 HT 5 . 8 ( 2 . 5 ) 6 . 0 ( 2 . 3 ) 6 . 0 ( 2 . 0 ) 5 . 4 ( 2 . 4 ) 6 . 8 ( 1 . 0 ) 5 . 9 ( 2 . 1 ) LT 2 . 6 ( 1 . 4 ) 2 . 1 ( 1 . 2 ) 2 . 0 ( 1 . 7 ) 3 . 0 ( 2 . 5 ) 2 . 0 ( 1 . 8 ) 2 . 0 ( 1 . 9 ) Table 1 . Mean pretest thoughtfulness ratings of comments by article and category . HT = high - thoughtful comments , LT = low - thoughtful comments . Figures in parentheses are standard deviations . Figure 1 . Top and bottom parts of the web page in Study 1 showing an article and its comments . CHI 2011 • Session : Incentives & User Generated Content May 7 – 12 , 2011 • Vancouver , BC , Canada 3404 norm ( e . g . , a thoughtful comment in the low thoughtfulness condition ) , reasoning that a single violator would increase the salience of the norm as well as make the distribution of comments seem less artificial . This brought the total number of comments on each article to five . The presentation order of the comments was randomized for each participant , and generic usernames ( e . g . “Fletcher00” ) and plausible timestamps were attached to each comment . The primary outcome of interest was the degree of thoughtfulness in comments written by our participants . We assessed this using three commonly used measures drawn from cognitive response measurement literature [ 3 ] . First , we measured the volume of contribution , as the number of words in each comment . Second , we recorded the time taken to write each comment , as the interval ( in seconds ) between starting to enter text in the comment box and clicking the submit button . Finally , each comment was manually coded for thoughtfulness in the following manner . Two raters who were unaware of hypotheses and experimental conditions first unitized each comment into its constituent ideas , opinions , or arguments ( see [ 3 ] ) . Working independently , they then rated each unit as relevant or irrelevant to the given article ( see [ 23 ] ) . The total number of issue - relevant thoughts served as a qualitatively assessed measure of thoughtfulness . We also measured participants’ overt sense of expected behavior in the given situation . After commenting on the three articles , participants were shown another article and asked to “predict what kinds of comments people might post on this page” . They did so by specifying which comment was likelier to appear out of a pair of comments that expressed a similar opinion ( agreeing or disagreeing with article ) , but with different levels of thoughtfulness . For instance , one story we used questioned the non - profit nature of the College Board , the institution responsible for conducting the SAT college admissions tests . One pair of potential comments on this story was : A . “The SAT got me into college so I like it . In fact , let ' s create more standardized tests ! ” B . “Yes , standardized tests may not test knowledge completely fairly , but no one has arrived at a better gauge of college readiness . In the grand scheme of not - for - profits , at least the College Board is providing a valuable metric for college admissions” Participants were instructed to indicate whether they thought a comment of type A or type B was more likely to appear , on a seven - point Likert scale ranging from “definitely A more likely” ( = 1 ) to “definitely B more likely” ( = 7 ) . Each participant was presented with two such comment pairs that counterbalanced agreeing and disagreeing statements . The two likelihood ratings were averaged such that a higher value on this measure indicated a higher perceived likelihood that the thoughtful types of comments would be posted by others . Finally , participants filled out a post - experiment questionnaire with two measures pertaining to their experience with the website . First , they provided an index of site appeal , by rating whether the adjectives fun , appealing , and boring ( reverse coded ) described the site . Next , they provided an index of perceived thoughtfulness of others encountered on the site , by rating whether the other users could be described by the terms thoughtful , reasonable , intelligent , uninteresting ( reverse coded ) . All ratings were obtained on 10 - point Likert scales ranging from “does not describe at all” ( = 1 ) to “describes completely” ( = 10 ) . Results and discussion All participants contributed one comment per story even though they were free to contribute multiple comments , resulting in a total of 72 comments . Manual coding of the relevance of thoughts in each comment was found to be reliable across the two raters ( Kippendorff’s α = 0 . 90 ) ; disagreements were resolved by discussion . Overall means and standard deviations for measures related to commenting behavior were as follows : comment length M = 34 . 3 , SD = 30 . 4 ; comment time M = 73 . 3 , SD = 62 . 2 ; and issue - relevant thoughts M = 1 . 36 , SD = 1 . 12 . Comment length and number of relevant thoughts were highly correlated ( r = . 85 ) , and comment time was moderately correlated with both length and relevant thoughts ( r = . 70 and r = . 57 , respectively ) . Not surprisingly , the measures of comment length , comment time , and number of issue - relevant thoughts were found to be lognormally distributed . We transformed these data by taking the natural logarithm ( after adding one to accommodate zero values ) prior to further calculations . For all measures except the post - experiment questionnaire items , we also controlled for variation across different news articles by computing z - scores within each article . Finally , mean values on each dependent variable were computed within each participant . We carried out a series of one - tailed t - tests to assess the effects of the manipulation ( social norm : high thoughtfulness vs . low thoughtfulness ) on the dependent measures . These results are described statistically in Table 2 . We found significant effects of social norm on all three measures related to participants’ commenting behavior . Relative to the low thoughtfulness condition , participants in the high thoughtfulness condition contributed longer comments , spent more time writing them , and presented more issue - relevant thoughts . Here are examples of participant - submitted comments in the two conditions : In high thoughtful condition : “This is new knowledge to me , and somewhat frightens me to know that terrorist groups are specifically targeting people who will be talented in creating weapons of mass destruction . This information should be used to help deter engineers in Arab countries from this fate - - possibly provide knowledge of job CHI 2011 • Session : Incentives & User Generated Content May 7 – 12 , 2011 • Vancouver , BC , Canada 3405 options in other countries so the frustration discussed in this article does not occur . ” In low thoughtful condition : “I never would have made that connection between engineers and terrorists . . . I want some more information . ” Analysis of the perceived likelihood of thoughtful comments on the additional ( fourth ) article revealed that participants judged thoughtful comments from others significantly more likely when the social norm was high in thoughtfulness relative to low in thoughtfulness . The questionnaire - based indexes of site appeal and perceived thoughtfulness of others were found to be reliable ( Cronbach’s α = . 79 and α = . 89 , respectively ) . Participants perceived other users to be significantly more thoughtful in the highly thoughtful social norm condition ( a manipulation check ) . Participants in different conditions did not vary in how appealing they found the site . These findings lend considerable support to the notion that exposure to locally situated social behavior that indicates a normative level of thoughtfulness in an online comment space can induce individuals to conform to this standard in their own commenting activity , as well as cause them to judge such norm - consistent behavior likely on the part of others . Given the previously discussed evidence that features of the environment can exert similar normative influences , it should be possible to obtain analogous effects on commenting behavior when the design of the online space evokes conceptual associations with a particular standard of thoughtfulness . It is also relevant to the design goal of inducing thoughtful participation to see if the normative approach is effective even when others are not present ; we explored this possibility in Study 2 . We used a variation of the simulated news website in this study where we eliminated the comments from others and manipulated only the design elements of the website . STUDY 2 We tested the following hypothesis in this experiment : H2 : Individuals will be more thoughtful in their online comment contributions when the design of the environment contains normative cues associated with high thoughtfulness than when the design of the environment contains normative cues associated with low thoughtfulness . Visual Design Pretest As part of the design manipulation , we created two types of visual styles for the news website ( Figure 2 ) . One had a formal and serious appearance , employing a subdued color scheme , traditional serif fonts , and a photograph of a bookshelf . The second was designed to appear visually casual and informal , using a colorful palette , smileys , and a picture of a sandbox filled with toys . Pretest participants ( N = 50 ) were shown both websites ( without the commenting elements ) , and asked to rate the extent to which they appeared thoughtful , serious , and formal on a 10 - point Likert scale ranging from “not at all” ( = 1 ) to “extremely” ( = 10 ) . The three ratings were combined into an index of thoughtful visual appearance ( Cronbach’s α = . 74 ) . As confirmed by a one - tailed t - test ( t ( 98 ) = 10 . 6 , p < . 001 ) , the Figure 2 . Examples of pages using the high thoughtful ( top ) and low thoughtful ( bottom ) visual styles in Study 2 . Social Norm Thoughtfulness DV High Low Test statistic Comment length 0 . 34 ( 0 . 57 ) - 0 . 20 ( 0 . 62 ) t ( 22 ) = 2 . 22 , p = . 02 * Comment time 0 . 35 ( 0 . 67 ) - 0 . 33 ( 0 . 76 ) t ( 22 ) = 2 . 33 , p = . 01 * Issue - relevant thoughts 0 . 21 ( 0 . 45 ) - 1 . 3 ( 0 . 44 ) t ( 22 ) = 1 . 87 , p = . 04 * Likelihood of thoughtful comments 0 . 36 ( 0 . 73 ) - 0 . 36 ( 0 . 84 ) t ( 22 ) = 2 . 22 , p = . 02 * Site appeal 3 . 93 ( 1 . 55 ) 3 . 20 ( 1 . 66 ) t ( 22 ) = 1 . 12 , p = . 14 Thoughtfulness of others 6 . 56 ( 1 . 37 ) 5 . 00 ( 1 . 72 ) t ( 22 ) = 2 . 46 , p = . 01 * Table 2 . Social norm effects on mean values of dependent measures in Study 1 . Figures in parentheses are standard deviations . * indicates p < . 05 . CHI 2011 • Session : Incentives & User Generated Content May 7 – 12 , 2011 • Vancouver , BC , Canada 3406 first design was judged significantly more thoughtful ( M = 6 . 5 , SD = 1 . 5 ) than the second one ( M = 3 . 1 , SD = 1 . 7 ) . Participants A total of 24 ( 7 male and 17 female ) participants from an introductory Communication class took part in this study , for which they received credit toward a course requirement . Design and Materials Study 2 was a between - participants experiment with one independent variable , site design , with two levels : high thoughtful environment vs . low thoughtful environment . The design manipulation was operationalized in the following ways : visual appearance , a captcha test containing priming words , and changes to the characteristics of the comment box . Visual appearance Participants in the high and low thoughtful environment conditions saw the high and low thoughtful visual styles for the website ( see Figure 2 ) . Captcha with priming words Before participants could add comments , they had to fill out a one - time captcha form similar to that used by many comment systems to block automated “bot” submissions . In the high thoughtful environment condition , the captcha contained , in random order , three words highly related to thoughtfulness and one neutral word ( Figure 3 ) . These words were randomly drawn from a pretested pool of terms highly related with the concept of thoughtfulness : thoughtful , understanding , conscientious , aware , enlightened , receptive , appreciate , and construct . The neutral words were drawn from magenta , curtains , boxes , cardboard , carpentry , and waterfall . Completing this captcha was intended to increase the cognitive accessibility of thoughtful behavioral norms . In the low thoughtful environment , the “priming captcha” used three words that were highly negatively related to thoughtfulness ( drawn from thoughtless , unaware , sloppy , combative , destroy , complain , careless , flippant ) and one neutral word . Comment box characteristics In the high vs . low thoughtful environments , the comment box had the following variations : • Displayed a label : “Please enrich the discussion by adding your comments . ” vs . “Got something to say ? ? ” • Displayed default text : “Please try to make your contributions as constructive as possible . You will review your comment before making it final . ” vs . “Have your say here ! ” • Could accommodate eight lines before scrolling vs . three lines before scrolling • Users could preview and edit their comment before final submission vs . no preview functionality Thus , participants in the two conditions were exposed to visual , semantic and interactional cues in the design to maximize or minimize the association with thoughtful behavior . Owing to the complex , multidimensional nature of the thoughtfulness construct , we chose to induce it in multiple ways so as to create a strong manipulation appropriate to a first study . Reasons of external validity motivated the choice of these particular cues . As in Study 1 , participants were instructed to visit the website , read three opinion pieces , and supply comment ( s ) on each of them . The participant was always the first commenter on each article in this study . The dependent measures of comment length , comment time , number of issue - relevant thoughts , expected likelihood of thoughtful comments , and perceptions of site appeal were the same as in Study 1 . Questionnaire items that referred to impressions of other users were not used since no behavior from them was visible in this experiment . Results and Discussion Again , all participants elected to contribute only one comment per article , for a total of 72 comments . In the Figure 3 . Example of a priming captcha in the high thoughtful environment condition in Study 2 . Thoughtfulness of environment DV High Low Test statistic Comment length 0 . 17 ( 0 . 60 ) - 0 . 51 ( 0 . 52 ) t ( 22 ) = 2 . 98 , p < . 01 * * Comment time 0 . 20 ( 0 . 52 ) - 0 . 45 ( 0 . 66 ) t ( 22 ) = 2 . 68 , p = . 01 * Number of issue - relevant thoughts 0 . 12 ( 0 . 58 ) - 0 . 40 ( 0 . 54 ) t ( 22 ) = 2 . 25 , p = . 02 * Likelihood of thoughtful comments - 0 . 01 ( 0 . 73 ) 0 . 01 ( 0 . 70 ) t ( 22 ) = 0 . 003 p = . 51 Site appeal 4 . 81 ( 1 . 91 ) 5 . 08 ( 1 . 37 ) t ( 22 ) = 0 . 41 , p = . 66 Table 3 . Design condition effects on mean values of dependent measures in Study 2 . Figures in parentheses are standard deviations . * indicates p < . 05 . * * indicates p < . 01 . CHI 2011 • Session : Incentives & User Generated Content May 7 – 12 , 2011 • Vancouver , BC , Canada 3407 condition where the preview feature was present , eight comments ( 22 % ) were edited before finalization , mostly to make minor spelling and grammar changes . Time spent actively revising these comments was included in the comment time measure . Manual coding for issue relevance of thoughts in each comment was found to be reliable across the two raters ( Kippendorff’s α = 0 . 81 ) ; disagreements were resolved by discussion . Overall means for measures related to comment behavior were as follows : comment length M = 39 . 7 , SD = 36 ; comment time M = 98 . 6 , SD = 94 . 6 ; and issue - relevant thoughts M = 1 . 57 , SD = 1 . 29 . All three were highly correlated ( all r > . 78 ) . The same transformations used in Study 1 ( log and z - score ) were applied as appropriate . We then carried out a series of one - tailed t - tests to assess the effects of the experimental manipulation ( site design : high thoughtful environment vs . low thoughtful environment ) on the dependent measures . These results are described statistically in Table 3 . As in Study 1 , commenting behavior was significantly different across the two conditions ( p < . 05 ) . Relative to the low thoughtfulness environment , participants in the high thoughtfulness environment contributed longer comments , spent more time writing them , and presented more issue - relevant thoughts . Here are examples of participant - submitted comments in the two conditions : In high thoughtful environment : “I had never thought of this relationship before but now that I have been exposed to it , I can definitely see how this sort of thing could happen . First of all , engineers ( as opposed to doctors , people in finance , etc ) have the skills and knowledge of how to commit acts of terrorism . Secondly , the fact that they were trained and educated with the expectation of achieving success means that they would obviously be more frustrated by the lack of career options than those with lower expectations of attaining successful jobs . ” In low thoughtful environment : “I don ' t think saying it is difficult for engineers to find jobs is a good excuse for many of them becoming terrorists . ” Participants did not show differences by condition on the index of site appeal ( Cronbach’s α = . 75 ) . The results discussed thus far match the pattern of Study 1 , showing that thoughtfulness in commenting behavior can be influenced by normative cues in the design of the site , even in the absence of indications of others’ behavior . However , participants did not have different expectations across design conditions for the relative likelihood of highly thoughtful comments from others . One possible explanation is that situational norms were cognitively activated in participants without their conscious awareness , as in the environmental priming studies described . More specific experiments that manipulate explicit and implicit cues independently would be needed to make any definitive claims about an underlying mechanism . CONCLUSIONS In this work , we characterized online commenting as a fundamentally social activity that nevertheless includes a good deal of ambiguity about the social situation . We were motivated by a large social psychological literature indicating that normative information about the situation , whether supplied through other people or through the environment , can be a powerful determinant of individual action . By perceiving others as following a particular standard of thoughtfulness in the same situation , people could be induced to reflect that standard in their own comments ( Study 1 ) . An environment embedded with cues designed to evoke a thoughtfulness standard could similarly shift behavior towards the standard even though no others were present ( Study 2 ) . Theoretical and practical implications Studies of normative social influence online have often occurred in settings where a continued sense of group or community membership is present [ 30 ] . The current research , in particular Study 1 , suggests that norms can be derived from a more minimal notion of membership : participation on the same website . These norms form part of a local , subjectively interpreted social context for online participation that can be shaped through appropriate design . This work also has implications for the considerable research interest in modeling problems of online participation , particularly collective action , as social dilemmas [ 17 ] . It is well established that behavior in social dilemmas can be shaped by different subjective interpretations of the dilemma based on available social information such as a cooperative norm [ 10 ] . Applying norms theory to the design of persuasive messages that promote self - enhancing or prosocial behavior is a very active area of research [ 28 ] . By framing thoughtful online behavior in similar terms , the present work contributes to literature ( e . g . [ 4 ] ) , that suggests significant potential in deploying such normative messages online . Because norms have the capacity to guide behavior without absolute constraints , they also suggest an alternative to current moderation - based approaches to regulating online participation . Designers of technological spaces that support social interaction have long recognized that technological affordances and environments are socially constructed by their users [ 13 ] . Findings from Study 2 indicate that one way to begin addressing the social nature of technologies is to examine how digital environments can be associated with particular sets of norms much as physical environments can . Our work also suggests that choices designers make about representing social behavior , for example by making salient particular actions and deemphasizing others , should be evaluated in terms of their implications for how individuals subjectively perceive their local social context . CHI 2011 • Session : Incentives & User Generated Content May 7 – 12 , 2011 • Vancouver , BC , Canada 3408 Limitations and unanswered questions This work also raises a number of questions for future research . First , we induced the general norm of thoughtfulness in multiple ways : using level of reasoning and length , visual design , and semantic priming . Additional experiments should adopt more targeted manipulations that unpack the various dimensions of thoughtfulness . Second , we only demonstrated the effects of one kind of norm ( descriptive ) on behavior . A social situation might involve other types of norms working in combination , e . g . , an injunctive norm that specifies what one should do instead of describing what the majority of people are doing [ 7 ] . In addition , certain types of norm activation can lead to contrast effects ( shifts opposite to the norm ) on how others are perceived [ 37 ] . Further experiments should draw on this literature to explore more precisely the typology of normative effects , as well as possible interactions between social and design influences , especially before design interventions in field settings are attempted . Third , although we have shown that both social behavior and features of design can have similar consequences on thoughtful behavior , the underlying mechanism is not clearly specified . In particular , the different pattern of results for expected behavior of others in the two studies highlights the possibility that people’s conscious awareness of the normative character of the situation is not necessarily correlated with their behavior . Indeed , current research suggests that people often discount the degree of normative influence upon them [ 26 ] and that behavioral consequences of primed norms can be automatic and unmediated by reasoned situational perceptions [ 9 ] . Experiments that focus specifically on measuring cognitive accessibility of norm - consistent concepts vs . self - declared awareness of norms would shed light on these questions . We are hopeful that our findings would facilitate such work , and more broadly encourage research in the HCI community that employs experimental paradigms from social psychology to explore how designs of online participatory spaces can communicate social information , as well as the reciprocal influences of social activity within these spaces on the way people construe their surrounding technological environments . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Nathan Marrocco , Dong Liu , Omosola Odetunde , Michelle Mederos and Dean Eckles for their assistance . REFERENCES 1 . Aarts , H . and Dijksterhuis , A . , The silence of the library : Environment , situational norm , and social behavior . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 84 , 2 ( 2003 ) , 18 - 28 . 2 . Berger , J . , Meredith , M . , and Wheeler , S . C . , Contextual priming : Where people vote affects how they vote . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105 , 26 ( 2008 ) , 8846 - 49 . 3 . Cacioppo , J . T . and Petty , R . E . , “Social psychological procedures for cognitive response assessment : The thought - listing technique , ” in Cognitive Assessment , T . V . Merluzzi , C . R . Glass , and M . Genest ( Eds . ) , Guilford Press , New York , 1981 , 309 - 342 . 4 . Chen , Y . , Harper , F . M . , Konstan , J . , and Li , S . X . , Social Comparisons and Contributions to Online Communities : A Field Experiment on MovieLens . American Economic Review 100 , 4 ( 2010 ) , 1358 – 98 . 5 . Cialdini , R . B . , Crafting normative messages to protect the environment . Current Directions in Psychological Science 12 , 4 ( 2003 ) , 105 - 109 . 6 . Cialdini , R . B . and Goldstein , N . J . , Social influence : Compliance and conformity . Annual Review of Psychology 55 ( 2004 ) , 591 - 621 . 7 . Cialdini , R . B . , Reno , R . R . , and Kallgren , C . A . , A focus theory of normative conduct : Recycling the concept of norms to reduce littering in public places . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 58 , 6 ( 1990 ) , 1015 - 26 . 8 . Cialdini , R . B . and Trost , M . R . , “Social Influence : Social Norms , Conformity , and Compliance , ” in The Handbook of Social Psychology , D . T . Gilbert , Fiske , S . T . , Lindzey , G . ( Eds . ) , ( 1998 ) , Oxford Univ . Pr , 151 - 192 . 9 . Dijksterhuis , A . and Bargh , J . A . , The perception - behavior expressway : Automatic effects of social perception on social behavior . Advances in Experimental Social Psychology 33 ( 2001 ) , 1 - 40 . 10 . Fleishman , J . A . , The effects of decision framing and others ' behavior on cooperation in a social dilemma . Journal of Conflict Resolution 32 , 1 ( 1988 ) , 162 - 180 . 11 . Goldstein , N . J . , Cialdini , R . B . , and Griskevicius , V . , A room with a viewpoint : Using social norms to motivate environmental conservation in hotels . Journal of Consumer Research 35 , 3 ( 2008 ) , 472 - 482 . 12 . Gunawardena , C . N . and Zittle , F . J . , Social presence as a predictor of satisfaction within a computer - mediated conferencing environment . American journal of distance education 11 , 3 ( 1997 ) , 8 - 26 . 13 . Harrison , S . and Dourish , P . Re - place - ing space : the roles of place and space in collaborative systems . In Proc . ACM CSCW ( 1996 ) , 67 - 76 . 14 . Jenkins , H . , Convergence culture : Where old and new media collide . NYU Press , 2006 . 15 . Kay , A . C . , Wheeler , S . C . , Bargh , J . A . , and Ross , L . , Material priming : The influence of mundane physical objects on situational construal and competitive behavioral choice . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 95 , 1 ( 2004 ) , 83 - 96 . CHI 2011 • Session : Incentives & User Generated Content May 7 – 12 , 2011 • Vancouver , BC , Canada 3409 16 . Kiesler , S . , Siegel , J . , and McGuire , T . W . , Social psychological aspects of computer - mediated communication . The American psychologist 39 , 10 ( 1984 ) , 1123 - 34 . 17 . Kollock , P . and Smith , M . , “Managing the virtual commons : Cooperation and conflict in computer communities , ” in Computer - Mediated Communication : Linguistic , Social , and Cross - Cultural Perspectives , S . Herring ( Ed . ) , John Benjamins , Amsterdam , 1996 , 109 - 128 . 18 . Lampe , C . and Resnick , P . Slash ( dot ) and burn : distributed moderation in a large online conversation space . In Proc CHI 2004 , ACM Press ( 2004 ) , 543 - 550 . 19 . Latané , B . and Darley , J . M . , Bystander apathy . American Scientist 57 , 2 ( 1969 ) , 244 - 268 . 20 . Lerman , K . , Social information processing in news aggregation . IEEE Internet Computing 11 , 6 ( 2007 ) , 16 - 28 . 21 . Liberman , V . , Samuels , S . M . , and Ross , L . , The name of the game : Predictive power of reputations versus situational labels in determining prisoner ' s dilemma game moves . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 30 , 9 ( 2004 ) , 1175 - 85 . 22 . Lindgaard , G . , Fernandes , G . , Dudek , C . , and Brown , J . , Attention web designers : You have 50 milliseconds to make a good first impression ! Behaviour & Information Technology 25 , 2 ( 2006 ) , 115 - 126 . 23 . Maheswaran , D . and Chaiken , S . , Promoting systematic processing in low - motivation settings : Effect of incongruent information on processing and judgment . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 61 , 1 ( 1991 ) , 13 - 25 . 24 . Mandel , N . and Johnson , E . J . , When Web Pages Influence Choice : Effects of Visual Primes on Experts and Novices . Journal of Consumer Research : An Interdisciplinary Quarterly 29 , 2 ( 2002 ) , 235 - 245 . 25 . Mishne , G . and Glance , N . Leave a reply : An analysis of weblog comments . In Third annual workshop on the Weblogging ecosystem : WWW ( 2006 ) . 26 . Nolan , J . M . , Schultz , P . , Cialdini , R . B . , Goldstein , N . J . , and Griskevicius , V . , Normative social influence is underdetected . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 34 , 7 ( 2008 ) , 913 - 923 . 27 . Perkins , H . W . , The social norms approach to preventing school and college age substance abuse : A handbook for educators , counselors , and clinicians . Jossey - Bass , San Francisco , CA , 2003 . 28 . Perkins , H . W . , Haines , M . P . , and Rice , R . , Misperceiving the college drinking norm and related problems : a nationwide study of exposure to prevention information , perceived norms and student alcohol misuse . Journal of Studies on Alcohol 66 , 4 ( 2005 ) , 470 - 478 . 29 . Postmes , T . , Spears , R . , and Lea , M . , The formation of group norms in computer - mediated communication . Human Communication Research 26 , 3 ( 2000 ) , 341 - 371 . 30 . Postmes , T . , Spears , R . , Sakhel , K . , and De Groot , D . , Social influence in computer - mediated communication : The effects of anonymity on group behavior . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 27 , 10 ( 2001 ) , 1243 - 54 . 31 . Robins , D . and Holmes , J . , Aesthetics and credibility in web site design . Information Processing & Management 44 , 1 ( 2008 ) , 386 - 399 . 32 . Salganik , M . J . , Dodds , P . S . , and Watts , D . J . , Experimental study of inequality and unpredictability in an artificial cultural market . Science 311 , 5762 ( 2006 ) , 854 - 856 . 33 . Sassenberg , K . , Common Bond and Common Identity Groups on the Internet : Attachment and Normative Behavior in On - Topic and Off - Topic Chats . Group Dynamics 6 , 1 ( 2002 ) , 27 - 37 . 34 . Sassenberg , K . and Boos , M . , Attitude change in computer - mediated communication : Effects of anonymity and category norms . Group Processes & Intergroup Relations 6 , 4 ( 2003 ) , 405 - 422 . 35 . Sherif , M . , A study of some social factors in perception . Archives of Psychology ( Columbia University ) 187 , 1935 . 36 . Srull , T . K . and Wyer , R . S . , Category accessibility and social perception : Some implications for the study of person memory and interpersonal judgments . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 38 , 6 ( 1980 ) , 841 - 856 . 37 . Stapel , D . A . and Koomen , W . , When Stereotype Activation Results in ( Counter ) Stereotypical Judgments : Priming Stereo - type - Relevant Traits and Exemplars . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 34 , ( 1998 ) , 136 - 163 . 38 . Szabo , G . and Huberman , B . A . , “Predicting the popularity of online content , ” in eprint arXiv : 0811 . 0405 ( 2008 ) . http : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 1295610 . 39 . Tractinsky , N . , Katz , A . S . , and Ikar , D . , What is beautiful is usable . Interacting with computers 13 , 2 ( 2000 ) , 127 - 145 . 40 . Turner , J . C . , Social influence . Wadsworth , 1991 . 41 . Wellman , B . , Haase , A . Q . , Witte , J . , and Hampton , K . , Does the Internet increase , decrease , or supplement social capital ? : social networks , participation , and community commitment . American Behavioral Scientist 45 , 3 ( 2001 ) , 436 - 455 . CHI 2011 • Session : Incentives & User Generated Content May 7 – 12 , 2011 • Vancouver , BC , Canada 3410