/ www . sciencexpress . org / 14 July 2011 / Page 1 / 10 . 1126 / science . 1207745 The advent of the Internet , with sophisticated algorithmic search engines , has made accessing information as easy as lifting a finger . No longer do we have to make costly efforts to find the things we want . We can “Google” the old classmate , find articles online , or look up the actor who was on the tip of our tongue . The results of four studies suggest that when faced with difficult questions , people are primed to think about computers and that when people expect to have future access to information , they have lower rates of recall of the information itself and enhanced recall instead for where to access it . The Internet has become a primary form of external or transactive memory , where information is stored collectively outside ourselves . In a development that would have seemed extraordinary just over a decade ago , many of us have constant access to information . If we need to find out the score of a ballgame , learn how to perform a complicated statistical test , or simply remember the name of the actress in the classic movie we are viewing , we need only turn to our laptops , tablets , or smartphones and we can find the answers immediately . It has become so commonplace to look up the answer to any question the moment it occurs , it can feel like going through withdrawal when we can’t find out something immediately . We are seldom offline unless by choice and it is hard to remember how we found information before the Internet became a ubiquitous presence in our lives . The Internet , with its search engines such as Google and databases such as IMDB and the information stored there , has become an external memory source that we can access at any time . Storing information externally is nothing particularly novel , even before the advent of computers . In any long term relationship , a team work environment , or other ongoing group , people typically develop a group or transactive memory ( 1 ) , a combination of memory stores held directly by individuals and the memory stores they can access because they know someone who knows that information . Like linked computers that can address each other’s memories , people in dyads or groups form transactive memory systems ( 2 , 3 ) . The present research explores whether having online access to search engines , databases , and the like , has become a primary transactive memory source in itself . We investigate whether the Internet has become an external memory system that is primed by the need to acquire information . If asked the question whether there are any countries with only one color in their flag , for example , do we think about flags—or immediately think to go online to find out ? Our research then tested if , once information has been accessed , our internal encoding is increased for where the information is to be found rather than for the information itself . In Experiment 1 , participants were tested in two within - subject conditions ( 4 ) . Participants answered either easy or hard yes / no trivia questions , in two blocks . Each block was followed by a modified Stroop task ( a color naming task with words presented in either blue or red ) to test reaction times to matched computer and non - computer terms ( including general and brand names for both word groups ) . People who have been disposed to think about a certain topic typically show slowed reaction times ( RTs ) for naming the color of the word when the word itself is of interest and is more accessible , because the word captures attention and interferes with the fastest possible color naming . Paired within - subject t - tests were conducted on color - naming reaction times to computer and general words after the easy and difficult question blocks . Confirming our hypothesis , computer words were more accessible ( color - naming RT M = 712 milliseconds ( ms ) , SD = 413 ms ) than general words ( M = 591 ms , SD = 204 ms ) after participants had encountered a series of questions to which they did not know the answers , t ( 68 ) = 3 . 26 , P < . 003 , two - tailed . It seems that when we are faced with a gap in our knowledge , we are primed to turn to the computer to rectify the situation . Computer terms also interfered somewhat more with color naming ( M = 603 ms , SD = 193 ms ) than general terms ( M = 559 ms , SD = 182 ms ) after easy questions , t ( 68 ) = 2 . 98 , P < Google Effects on Memory : Cognitive Consequences of Having Information at Our Fingertips Betsy Sparrow , 1 * Jenny Liu , 2 Daniel M . Wegner 3 1 Department of Psychology , Columbia University , 1190 Amsterdam Avenue , New York , NY 10027 , USA . 2 Department of Psychology , University of Wisconsin – Madison , 1202 West Johnson Street , Madison , WI 53706 , USA . 3 Department of Psychology , Harvard University , 33 Kirkland Street , Cambridge , MA 02138 , USA . * To whom correspondence should be addressed . E - mail : sparrow @ psych . columbia . edu on J u l y 14 , 20 11 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m / www . sciencexpress . org / 14 July 2011 / Page 2 / 10 . 1126 / science . 1207745 . 005 , suggesting that the computer may be primed when the concept of knowledge in general is activated . Comparison using a repeated measures analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) of specific search engines ( Google / Yahoo ) and general consumer good brand names ( Target / Nike ) revealed an interaction with easy vs . hard question blocks , F ( 1 , 66 ) = 5 . 02 , P < . 03 , such that search engine brands after both easy ( M = 638 ms , SD = 260 ms ) and hard questions ( M = 818 ms , SD = 517 ms ) created more interference than general brands after easy ( M = 584 ms , SD = 220 ms ) and hard ( M = 614 ms , SD = 226 ms ) ( Fig . 1 ) . Simple effects tests showed the interaction was driven by a significant increase in RT for the two search engine terms after the hard question block , F ( 1 , 66 ) = 4 . 44 , P < . 04 ( Fig . 1 ) . Although the concept of knowledge in general seems to prime thoughts of computers , even when answers are known ; not knowing the answer to general knowledge questions primes the need to search for the answer , and subsequently computer interference is particularly acute . In Experiment 2 , we tested whether people remembered information they expected to have later access to—as they might with information they could look up online ( 4 ) . Participants were tested in a 2 × 2 between - subject experiment by reading 40 memorable trivia statements of the type that one would look up online ( both of the new information variety e . g . , “An ostrich’s eye is bigger than its brain” and information that may be remembered generally , but not in specific details , e . g . , “The space shuttle Columbia disintegrated during re - entry over Texas in Feb . 2003 . ” ) . They then typed them into the computer to assure attention ( and also to provide a more generous test of memory ) . Half the participants believed the computer would save what was typed ; half believed the item would be erased . In addition , half of the participants in each of the saved and erased conditions were asked explicitly to try to remember the information . After the reading and typing task , participants wrote down as many of the statements as they could remember . A between - subjects 2 ( saved / erased ) × 2 ( explicit memory instructions vs . none ) ANOVA revealed a significant main effect for only the saved / erased manipulation , as those who believed that the computer erased what they typed had the best recall , omnibus F ( 3 , 56 ) = 2 . 80 , P < . 05 , ( Erase M = . 31 , SD = . 04 and Erase Remember M = . 29 , SD = . 07 , paired comparisons of erased conditions ns ) compared to those who believed the computer would be their memory source ( Save M = . 22 , SD = . 07 and Save Remember M = . 19 , SD = . 09 , paired comparisons of saved conditions ns ) . This finding corresponds to previous work on directed forgetting , showing that when people don’t believe they will need information for a later exam , they do not recall it at the same rate as when they do believe they will need it ( 5 ) . Participants apparently did not make the effort to remember when they thought they could later look up the trivia statements they had read . Since search engines are continually available to us , we may often be in a state of not feeling we need to encode the information internally . When we need it , we will look it up . The main effect of the instruction to explicitly remember or not was not significant , which is similar to findings in the learning literature on intentional versus incidental studying of material , which generally finds there is no difference of explicit instruction ( 6 , 7 ) . Participants were more impacted by the cue that information would or would not be available to them later , regardless of whether they thought they would be tested on it . In Experiment 3 , we tested memory for where to find information that one might look up online . Participants again read and typed in items of memorable trivia , this time in 3 within - subject conditions ( 4 ) . For one - third of the questions , participants were shown “Your entry has been saved . ” For a second third , participants were shown “Your entry has been saved into the ( one of 5 ) folder ( “FACTS” “DATA , ” “INFO , ” “NAMES , ” “ITEMS , ” “POINTS”—generic interchangeable folder names to which the statements had previously been randomly assigned ) and for the final third , participants were told “Your entry has been erased . ” Participants were given the expectation that they would have access to what they saved through a pretend practice trial where they had access to the file folders during a “recall” task . Thus , generically saved , saved in a specific folder , and erased trials were created for all participants . Participants were then given a recognition task . They saw all 30 statements , half of which had been altered slightly ( names or dates altered ) . Participants had to judge yes or no whether the statement they were now shown was exactly what they had read , whether the statement had been saved or erased , and finally , if the statement had been saved to a folder , which folder it had been saved into ( they were given the folder names , and also had “no specific folder” and “erased” as answer options to this last question ) . Overall , in answer to the question “Was this statement exactly what you read ? ” participants recognized the accuracy of a large proportion of statements . But for those statements they believed had been erased , participants had the best memory ( Erase M = . 93 , SD = . 09 , pairwise comparisons to both saved conditions P < . 05 ) compared to the statements participants believed they would continue to have access to ( Saved generically M = . 88 , SD = . 12 and saved specifically to a folder M = . 85 , SD = . 12 pairwise ns ) , repeated measures omnibus F ( 1 , 27 ) = 4 . 01 , P < . 03 . However , the opposite pattern was found for the question , “Was this statement saved or erased ? ” Participants accurately remembered what they had saved ( saved generically M = . 61 , SD = . 21 and saved into a folder M = . 66 , SD = . 20 pairwise on J u l y 14 , 20 11 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m / www . sciencexpress . org / 14 July 2011 / Page 3 / 10 . 1126 / science . 1207745 ns ) more than they accurately remembered what they had erased ( M = . 51 , SD = . 19 pairwise comparisons with both saved conditions P < . 04 ) , repeated measures ANOVA omnibus F ( 1 , 27 ) = 5 . 34 , P < . 03 . Thus it appears that believing that one won’t have access to the information in the future enhances memory for the information itself , whereas believing the information was saved externally enhances memory for the fact that the information could be accessed , at least in general . In this recognition task , when asked “If the information was saved , what folder was it saved into ? ” participants did remember more that the information was erased ( M = . 54 , SD = . 19 , pairwise comparisons with both saved conditions P < . 001 ) than specifically whether the information was generically saved or which folder it was saved into ( Saved generically M = . 30 , SD = . 20 and saved into a specific folder M = . 23 , SD = . 14 , pairwise comparisons ns ) , repeated - measures ANOVA omnibus F ( 1 , 27 ) = 21 . 67 , P < . 001 . This result is a reminder of the experience of remembering something you have read online that you would like to see again or share , but no longer remembering where you saw it or what steps you took to find it in the first place . Or even knowing that a file is saved onto your hard drive , but having to use the search feature to find it . The fact that some of the statements were saved in a general folder was important to include to rule out increased memory demands in the two saved conditions , but does not parallel the continuous access to information we experience with current technology , in that there is no nameless depository of leftover information we would check after searching the obvious places . In addition , recognition is not usually the task we are charged with when answering someone’s question . We need to recall the information we have gathered . Experiment 4 was conducted to see if people would recall where to find information more than the information itself . All participants expected trivia statements they read and then typed to be saved to a specific folder with a generic name ( “Facts , etc” as in the previous experiment , although in this case there were no practice trials and the names and number of folders was never explicitly called to the participants’ attention ) ( 4 ) . Participants were then given a recall task , in which they were given 10 minutes to write down as many of the statements as they remembered . Participants finally were given an identifying feature of the statement that they read ( and that had been saved ) , and they had to answer with the folder name in which it was saved . For example , for the statement “An ostrich’s eye is bigger than its brain” the question would be “What folder was the statement about the ostrich saved in ? ” Participants had to type into a dialog box called “Items” to recall this particular folder correctly . Folder names were not mentioned again , past the original typing period , and participants were never explicitly told there were 5 folder names the items were saved in . Overall , participants recalled the places where the statements were kept ( M = . 49 , SD = . 26 ) compared to the statements themselves ( M = . 23 , SD = . 14 ) , between - subject t ( 31 ) = 6 . 70 , P < . 001 two tailed . These results seem remarkable on the surface , given the memorable nature of the statements and then unmemorable nature of the folder names . Also , these recall results are striking in comparison to the dismal level of recognition of which folder the statement was saved into in Experiment 3 . However , several caveats need to be mentioned . Participants did have a cue to memory ( a word from the trivia statement ) with the folder recall that the statements themselves did not have . We were not able to counterbalance the trivia and the folders trials , such that the folders were as numerous as the statements , which would be necessary to counterbalance the un - cued and cued recall tasks . However if we look at the pattern of what was remembered , the results do suggest “where” was prioritized in memory , with the advantage going to “where” when “what” was forgotten . You might expect with the advantages of cued recall , that participants would most remember the folder statements were saved in if they were cued both by our question , and by their recalling the statement in the first place . To examine this , an if / then analysis was then conducted giving participants separate scores for whether they 1 ) recalled both the statement and the folder it was saved into , 2 ) recalled the statement , but not the folder , 3 ) didn’t recall the statement , but recalled the folder and 4 ) recalled neither the folder nor statement . Participants were particularly poor at recalling both statement and folder ( M = . 17 , SD = . 16 ) and recalling the statement , but not the folder ( M = . 11 , SD = . 08 pairwise comparison , ns ) . They were significantly more likely to recall nothing ( M = . 38 , SD = . 24 ) , but surprisingly equally likely to recall the folder , when they didn’t recall the statement ( M = . 30 , SD = . 16 pairwise ns ) , repeated measures ANOVA omnibus F ( 1 , 31 ) = 11 . 57 , P < . 003 ( Fig . 2 ) . It would seem from this pattern that people don’t remember where when they know what , but do remember where to find it when they don’t recall the information . This is preliminary evidence that when people expect information to remain continuously available ( such as we expect with Internet access ) , we are more likely to remember where to find it than we are to remember the details of the item . One could argue that this is an adaptive use of memory—to include the computer and online search engines as an external memory system that can be accessed at will . Relying on our computers and the information stored on the Internet for memory depends on several of the same transactive memory processes that underlie social information on J u l y 14 , 20 11 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m / www . sciencexpress . org / 14 July 2011 / Page 4 / 10 . 1126 / science . 1207745 sharing in general . These studies suggest that people share information easily because they rapidly think of computers when they find they need knowledge ( Expt . 1 ) . The social form of information storage is also reflected in the findings that people forget items they think will be available externally , and remember items they think will not be available ( Expts . 2 and 3 ) . And transactive memory is also evident when people seem better able to remember which computer folder an item has been stored in than the identity of the item itself ( Expt . 4 ) . These results suggest that processes of human memory are adapting to the advent of new computing and communication technology . Just as we learn through transactive memory who knows what in our families and offices , we are learning what the computer “knows” and when we should attend to where we have stored information in our computer - based memories . We are becoming symbiotic with our computer tools ( 8 ) , growing into interconnected systems that remember less by knowing information than by knowing where the information can be found . This gives us the advantage of access to a vast range of information—although the disadvantages of being constantly “wired” are still being debated ( 9 ) . It may be no more that nostalgia at this point , however , to wish we were less dependent on our gadgets . We have become dependent on them to the same degree we are dependent on all the knowledge we gain from our friends and coworkers—and lose if they are out of touch . The experience of losing our Internet connection becomes more and more like losing a friend . We must remain plugged in to know what Google knows . References and Notes 1 . D . M . Wegner , in Theories of Group Behavior , B . Mullen , G . R . Goethals , Eds . ( Springer - Verlag , New York , 1986 ) , pp . 185 – 208 . 2 . D . M . Wegner , A computer network model of human transactive memory . Soc Cog . 13 , 1 ( 1995 ) . 3 . V . Peltokorpi , Transactive memory systems . Rev . Gen . Psychol . 12 , 378 ( 2008 ) . 4 . Materials and methods are available as supporting material on Science Online . 5 . R . A . Bjork , Theoretical implications of directed forgetting , in Coding Processes in Human Memory , A . W . Melton , E . Martin , Eds . ( Winston , Washington , DC , 1972 ) , pp . 217 – 235 . 6 . F . I . Craik , E . Tulving , Depth of processing and the retention of words in episodic memory . J . Exp . Psychol . G . 104 , 268 ( 1975 ) . 7 . T . S . Hyde , J . J . Jenkins , Differential effects of incidental tasks on the organization of recall of a list of highly associated words . J . Exp . Psychol . 82 , 472 ( 1969 ) . 8 . A . Clark , Natural - Born Cyborgs : Minds , Technologies , and the Future of Human Intelligence ( Oxford University Press , New York , 2003 ) . 9 . N . Carr , Is Google making us stupid ? The Atlantic 302 , 56 ( 2008 ) . Acknowledgments : We acknowledge the financial support of Columbia University to B . S . and NSF grant BNS - 0841746 to D . M . W . Raw data are available from B . S . Supporting Online Material www . sciencemag . org / cgi / content / full / science . 1207745 / DC1 Materials and Methods References 10 – 13 2 May 2011 ; accepted 27 June 2011 Published online 14 July 2011 ; 10 . 1126 / science . 1207745 Fig 1 . Accessibility of brand names ( as measured by color - naming reaction time ) following blocks of easy or hard test items . Error bars are ±SEM . Fig 2 . An if / then analysis of memory for what the information is and where to find it . Scale is measured in proportion recalled . Error bars are ±SEM . on J u l y 14 , 20 11 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m on J u l y 14 , 20 11 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m on J u l y 14 , 20 11 www . sc i en c e m ag . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m