Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) 1 3 e - ISSN 2150 - 5551 CN 31 - 2103 / TB REVIEW Cite as Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 Received : 27 May 2023 Accepted : 25 July 2023 Published online : 31 October 2023 © The Author ( s ) 2023 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40820 - 023 - 01187 - 2 Intelligent Vascularized 3D / 4D / 5D / 6D‑Printed Tissue Scaffolds Xiaoyu Han 1 , 2 , Qimanguli Saiding 1 , Xiaolu Cai 3 , Yi Xiao 4 , Peng Wang 2 , Zhengwei Cai 1 , Xuan Gong 5 , Weiming Gong 2 * , Xingcai Zhang 4 * , Wenguo Cui 1 * HIGHLIGHTS • Comprehensive and systematic discussion of vascularized additive manufacturing scaffolds for bone tissue repair is provided . • The development mechanism of blood vessels and the relationship between bone tissue engineering and blood vessels are discussed . • Vascularized additively manufactured scaffolds in tissue repair are discussed in terms of issues , opportunities , and challenges . • Intelligent vascularized 3D / 4D / 5D / 6D - printed tissue scaffolds are discussed . ABSTRACT Blood vessels are essential for nutrient and oxy - gen delivery and waste removal . Scaffold - repairing materials with functional vascular networks are widely used in bone tissue engi - neering . Additive manufacturing is a manufacturing technology that creates three - dimensional solids by stacking substances layer by layer , mainly including but not limited to 3D printing , but also 4D print - ing , 5D printing and 6D printing . It can be effectively combined with Xiaoyu Han , Qimanguli Saiding , and Xiaolu Cai contributed equally to this work . * Weiming Gong , wm _ gong @ 126 . com ; Xingcai Zhang , xingcai @ seas . harvard . edu ; Wenguo Cui , wgcui80 @ hotmail . com 1 Department of Orthopaedics , Shanghai Key Laboratory for Prevention and Treatment of Bone and Joint Diseases , Shanghai Institute of Traumatology and Orthopaedics , Ruijin Hospital , Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine , 197 Ruijin 2nd Road , Shanghai 200025 , People’s Republic of China 2 Department of Orthopedics , Jinan Central Hospital , Shandong First Medical University and Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences , 105 Jiefang Road , Lixia District , Jinan 250013 , Shandong , People’s Republic of China 3 Department of Biomedical Engineering , College of Life Science and Technology , Huazhong University of Science and Technology , Wuhan 430074 , Hubei , People’s Republic of China 4 School of Engineering and Applied Sciences , Harvard University , Cambridge , MA 02138 , USA 5 University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center , Dallas , TX 75390 - 9096 , USA Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 239 Page 2 of 43 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40820 - 023 - 01187 - 2 © The authors vascularization to meet the needs of vascularized tissue scaffolds by precisely tuning the mechanical structure and biological properties of smart vascular scaffolds . Herein , the development of neovascularization to vascularization to bone tissue engineering is systemati - cally discussed in terms of the importance of vascularization to the tissue . Additionally , the research progress and future prospects of vascularized 3D printed scaffold materials are highlighted and presented in four categories : functional vascularized 3D printed scaffolds , cell - based vascularized 3D printed scaffolds , vascularized 3D printed scaffolds loaded with specific carriers and bionic vascularized 3D printed scaffolds . Finally , a brief review of vascularized additive manufacturing - tissue scaffolds in related tissues such as the vascular tissue engineering , cardiovascular system , skeletal muscle , soft tissue and a discussion of the challenges and development efforts leading to significant advances in intelligent vascularized tissue regeneration is presented . KEYWORDS Intelligent ; Additive manufacturing ; Tissue engineering ; Vascularization ; Osteogenesis 1 Introduction Professor Charles Hull first proposed the concept of 3 - dimensional printing ( 3D printing ) in the 1980s and invented the first 3D printer , thus establishing the 3D print - ing system [ 1 , 2 ] . In 3D printing technology , also known as additive manufacturing , a 3D model is first created through computer - aided design ( CAD ) software and then printed in a predefined path using a robotic arm or noz - zle . Recently , 3D bioprinting has emerged as a promising alternative method and is now widely used to manufacture functional tissue structures with complex geometries [ 3 – 5 ] . This technology aims to replace or regenerate damaged tis - sues and organs , such as bone , liver , cartilage , and heart [ 6 , 7 ] . Compared with traditional processes , this technol - ogy provides unparalleled precision and high reproducibil - ity , enabling much faster and precise material preparation , shortening time , and reducing manufacturing costs [ 8 – 11 ] . Thus , 3D printing technology is predicted to lead to the next industrial revolution [ 12 ] . Based on the concept of 3D print - ing , Tibbits from the Massachusetts Institute of Technol - ogy first introduced 4 - dimensional printing ( 4D printing ) technology at the 2013 Technology , Entertainment Design ( TED ) conference . The printed rope on display can be auto - matically folded into a three - dimensional structure with the word Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( MIT ) when placed in the water , which has since opened the door to the study of 4D printing [ 13 ] . 4D printing refers to the fact that the shapes or functionalities of the 3D printed object can change spontaneously and programmatically under a specific external stimulus . This kind of change can be pre - designed , “programmable” , and the type of nature of the change , as well as the manner and extent of the change , can be car - ried out in the pre - designed manner [ 14 ] . 4D printing not only makes the preparation of complex structures possible , but also makes the prepared structures dynamic and intel - ligent , which is of great significance to shorten the process of bone repair and accelerate bone healing . With the boom in 3D printing and 4D printing , the concepts of 5 - dimen - sional printing ( 5D printing ) and 6 - dimensional printing ( 6D printing ) have been proposed in recent years to refine additive manufacturing - technologies and have a wide range of applications . 5D printing uses a five - axis printing tech - nology that not only works on the X , Y , and Z axes , but also print on the other two axes to produce multi - dimensional objects . Unlike 3D - printed objects , 5D - printed objects have stronger mechanical properties and also saving a great deal of raw material [ 15 ] . The concept of 6D printing , which is also being introduced for the first time in 2021 , can be seen as a combination of 4D and 5D printing . In other words , 6D printed objects have strong mechanical properties as well as being able to respond to external stimuli , a new type of intelligent material [ 16 ] . When treating tissue defects such as large bone defects – defects that of 2 cm or more in length or defects larger than 2 – 2 . 5 times the diameter of the long bone , caused by high - energy trauma , severe infection , bone tumor removal , and so on , failure rates of bone repair may reach up to 50 % , which places a heavy burden on families and society [ 17 , 18 ] . Failure of bone healing will eventually inhibit the blood supply to the tissue , leading to bone tissue ischemia , osteonecrosis , and bone nonunion , thus making stent implantation inevitable . In recent years , a wide variety of tissue - engineered scaffolds have been designed to repair bone defects . The most commonly used bone graft materials include autologous bones , allogeneic bones , metals , and syn - thetic materials . However , the application of conventional bone repair materials is limited due to insufficient donors , Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 Page 3 of 43 239 1 3 single structure , and lack of functionality . In addition , bone is a highly vascularized tissue , and the establishment of a vascular network is vital for bone development and repair after bone injury , making the formation and maturation of blood vessels the critical factor for bone regeneration [ 19 – 22 ] . 3D printing technology is an efficient and straight - forward technology with unique advantages in the design and regulation of personalization , precision , mechanical strength , and porosity , as well as the complex spatial struc - ture of scaffolds , which can better meet the conditions of vascularized osteogenesis [ 23 – 26 ] . As a result , 3D printing technology is extensively used in bone and other tissue engi - neering [ 27 ] . Compared with the constructs manufactured by 3D printing , the constructs manufactured by 4D printing not only have the three - dimensional structure , but the constructs can also exhibit different shapes at different points in time , which means that 4D printing technology can not only man - ufacture complex and diverse three - dimensional constructs , but the 4D constructs are no longer static and inanimate , but intelligent and dynamic [ 28 ] . The printed objects can change their shapes or functionalities when an external stimulus is imposed or when cell fusion or post - printing self - assembly occurs and adapt to the native microenvironment of the bone defect area , providing a new strategy for bone tissue engi - neering . In addition to good osteogenic properties , timely and adequate vascularization is also essential for successful bone repair scaffolds . On top of 3D and 4D printing , the introduction of 5D and 6D printing has opened up a new era of intelligent , high - strength vascularized bone repair materi - als . Therefore , this review focuses on vascularized additive manufacturing - printed bone repair biomaterials . So far , there have been studies on vascularization , 3D printing , 4D printing , 5D printing [ 29 ] , 6D printing [ 30 ] , and biomaterials regarding bone regeneration . However , the research on additive manufacturing - vascularization in bone tissue repair and reconstruction is summarized based on the unique entry point of the importance of vascularization in bone repair . Firstly , the development and significance of vascularity in bone tissue is described in four ways : neovas - cularization and development , specific vascular networks in tissues , vascularization and tissue repair , and vasculariza - tion and tissue engineering . Next , the research progress and approaches of vascularized 3D - printed bone repair materials are summarized and presented in four categories : functional vascularized 3D - printed scaffolds , cell - based vascularized 3D - printed scaffolds , vascularized 3D - printed scaffolds loaded with specific carriers , and bionic vascularized 3D - printed scaffolds ( Table 1 ) . Additionally , by listing the application examples of 4D printing in vascularized bone tis - sue engineering and related fields , analyzing the advantages of 4D printing and summarized and prospected the applica - tion of 4D printing in bone tissue engineering in the future . Moreover , the vascularized 4D printed scaffolds in the bone were reviewed and the fundamental mechanisms responsible for the functionalities were discussed in detail . Besides , the excellent advantages of 5D / 6D printing scaffolds in creat - ing multi - dimensional tissues especially artificial tissues like bones with curved surfaces and much stronger mechanical properties and their challenges in industrialization are dis - cussed . Finally , the related application of vascularized addi - tive manufacturing - scaffolds briefly summarized for future explorations and it drew a conclusion and prospect on the research of vascularized additive manufacturing - bone repair materials ( Scheme 1 ) . 2 Vascularization in Tissue Repair and Reconstruction Herein , the importance of vascularization for tissues , using the bone tissue as a starting example , is firstly discussed from four aspects : neovascularization and development , spe - cific vascular networks in tissues , vascularization and tissue repair , and vascularization and tissue engineering . 2 . 1 Regeneration and Development of Blood Vessels in Tissues Blood vessels are an important part of the circulatory system in the human body , which deliver nutrients to various organs and tissues , transport metabolic wastes , and establish a connection between tissues [ 31 , 32 ] . The formation of blood vessels mainly includes angiogenesis and neovascularization [ 33 ] . Vasculogenesis is mainly the differentiation and development of endothelial progenitor cells and the formation of a primitive vascular network . In comparison , angiogenesis is the formation of new blood vessels on top of the already existing ones . As for the human body , when the initial vascular network forms into more complex vascular networks , vasculogenesis is fol - lowed by angiogenesis thus making it crucial for the repair process of various damaged tissue , including bone defects . Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 239 Page 4 of 43 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40820 - 023 - 01187 - 2 © The authors Table 1 The research progress and approaches of vascularized 3D - printed bone repair materials Modification Property Therapy model References Functionalized 3D printed scaffolds Tantalum scaffold / poly dopamine / mag - nesium Sustained ion release enhanced vascular - ized bone formation Rat femur condyles bone defect [ 96 ] PCL / HA scaffold / Sr 2 + / Fe 3 + Synergetic release of Sr2 + / Fe3 + achieved bone regeneration with immunomodula - tion , angiogenesis , and osteogenesis Rat cranial defect [ 155 ] TCP scaffold / SiO 2 and ZnO dopants Addition of SiO 2 and ZnO to the scaf - folds facilitated cellular attachment and proliferation In vitro cell experiments [ 156 ] PCL scaffold / surface aminolysis / DFO Controlled release of DFO achieved the rapid 3D vascularization and bone regeneration Rat femur defect [ 103 ] MBG / PHBHHx scaffold / DMOG Sustained DMOG release enhances the angiogenesis and osteogenesis Rat bone defect [ 157 ] β - TCP scaffold / RGD - phage Stable REG production induced the regen - eration of vascularized bone Rat radius defect [ 160 ] Mesoporous calcium silicate scaffold / SVVYGLR The stable and sustained release of SVVY - GLR promoted more tubular vessel formation and homogeneous new bone regeneration Rabbit radial defect [ 161 ] Hydroxyapatite / calcium sulfate scaffold / VEGF The stable release of VEGF improved bone regeneration and angiogenesis Rabbit femur defect [ 163 ] PLA scaffold / gelatin and Polylysine / BMP - 2 / VEGF Sequential release of BMP - 2 / VEGF in spatiotemporal successfully induced angiogenesis and osteogenesis In vitro cell experiments [ 164 ] PCL scaffold / BMP - 2 / VEGF Spatially and temporally delivered BMP - 2 and VEGF sequentially promoted angio - genesis and bone regeneration Subcutaneous model of mice [ 165 ] Special carrier‑loaded 3D printed scaffolds Ti 6 Al 4 V scaffold / poloxamer 407 hydrogel / simvastatin Sustained release of simvastatin promotes osteogenesis and angiogenesis Rabbit tibial defect [ 174 ] Gel / alginate / β - TCP scaffold PLGA micro - spheres / VEGF Sustained release of VEGF promotes osteogenesis and angiogenesis In vitro cell experiments [ 178 ] β - TCP scaffold / Gel microspheres / Lipo - some DFO Controlled release of DFO promotes osteogenesis and angiogenesis Rat femoral defect [ 104 ] PCL scaffold / exosomes / VEGF Delivery and protection of VEGF pro - moted osteogenesis and angiogenesis Rat radial defect [ 182 ] Cell‑modified 3D printed scaffolds PLA scaffold / EPCs / hBMSCs Improved cell survival , oxygen diffusion , and nutrients . Promoted Osteogenesis and angiogenesis In vitro cell experiments [ 187 ] PCL / HA scaffold / hydrogel ADMSC / HUVECs Accelerated the establishment of vascular network Subcutaneous model of mice [ 189 ] PCL / HA scaffold / SVFCs hydrogel Short - term hypoxia promoted vasculariza - tion Subcutaneous model of mice [ 191 ] PDACS / PCL / WJMSCs / HUVECs hydro - gel scaffold Promoted the formation of the vascular network and enhanced osteogenesis In vitro cell experiments [ 192 ] Hyaluronic acid ( HAMA ) / alginate / HUVECs microvessels Injection and suturing , be introduced into large bone repair implants for pre - vascu - larization and osteogenesis promotion Subcutaneously in a murine model [ 190 ] PCL / TCP / hFASCs hydrogel scaffold Promoted osteogenesis and vasculogenesis Rat cranial defect [ 193 ] HUVECs / ASCs hydrogel scaffold Promoted osteogenesis and vasculogenesis Mice muscle implantation [ 194 ] BMP - hBMSCs / GelMA scaffold Promoted osteogenesis and vasculogenesis Mice muscle implantation [ 195 ] Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 Page 5 of 43 239 1 3 Three main types of new blood vessel growth exist : sprout - ing , non - sprouting , and encapsulated neovascularization [ 34 – 38 ] . Neovascularization is a complex multi - step pro - cess , regulated directly or indirectly by many growth fac - tors and cytokines . The basic steps are as follows : first , the matrix enzymes degrade the vascular stromal membrane , and various cytokines stimulate endothelial cells to form new capillary sprouts . Then , the sprouts interconnect with each other to form a new ring structure , which initiates blood flow . The stromal membrane is also remodeled by the interaction of endothelial cells and pericytes , thus promoting maturation and integrity of neovascularization [ 39 , 40 ] . The vasculogenesis and angiogenesis process for blood vessel formation and maturation is shown in Fig . 1a . Neovascularization and the development of blood ves - sels are closely related to the growth and development of the human body and the repair of damaged tissue . The field of vascular biology influences almost all living sys - tems . Bone tissue is a highly vascularized and calcified system in the body , which provides support and protec - tion to other organs and plays an important role in the locomotor system . There is a lifelong dynamic balance between bone resorption and bone remodeling [ 41 – 43 ] . It has been reported that approximately 25 % of bone tra - beculae and 3 % of cortical bone are removed and replaced each year , and it is this constant renewal that also effec - tively enhances the strength and toughness of the bone and greatly reduces the risk of fracture . This dynamic balance of bone is achieved by the development of a strong vas - cular network [ 44 – 46 ] . The blood circulation and regen - eration of blood vessels are closely related to the normal development , growth , remodeling , and repair of bone . The vascular network in the bone not only serves as a “high - way” for transporting nutrients , oxygen , and hormones but also as a “telephone line” for the transmission of signals between bone units and between bone and surrounding tissues . 2 . 2 Specific Vascular Network in Tissues The vascular network in bone tissue has a distinct hierar - chical and structural specificity [ 47 ] . Kusumbe et al . used immunofluorescence labeling to classify this specific vascu - lar network into H - and L - type vessels in bone tissue . H - type vessels are mainly distributed in the metaphysis and endos - teum , while L - type vessels are distributed in the medullary Table 1 ( continued ) Modification Property Therapy model References Alginate / HA / plasmid MSCs / PCL scaffold BMP - transfected cells promoted osteogen - esis and angiogenesis Subcutaneous model of mice [ 196 ] MSCs / EVs / PLA scaffold Increased the expression of osteogenic and angiogenic markers Rat cranial defect [ 197 ] Bionic 3D printed scaffolds β - TCP scaffold / MSCs / ECFCs Hydrogel Realized central vascularization and Osteogenesis Rabbit femoral defect [ 210 ] OCP / GelMA hydrogel / HUVECs scaffold Simulated bone structure ; accelerated osteogenesis and angiogenesis In vitro cell experiments [ 211 ] CDHA / axial vascular pedicle scaffold Simulated bone structure achieved osteo - genesis and angiogenesis Sheep large bone defect [ 212 ] PLGA / β - TCP / CMs AV bundle scaffold Combined of an AV bundle and rhBMP - 2 Rabbit intramuscular pocket [ 213 ] Bioceramics / autologous total bone mar - row / femoral vein scaffold Illustrated the capacity of an intrinsic vas - cularization by a single vein to support ectopic bone formation Subcutaneous model of mouse , sheep , rat , rabbit [ 214 ] AKT hollow - channel scaffold Multi - channel structure achieved osteo - genesis and angiogenesis Rabbit cranial defect ; Rat muscle implan - tation [ 215 ] BRT - H scaffold Hollow - pipe structure with bioactive ions accelerated osteogenesis and vasculari - zation Rabbit radius segmental defect [ 216 ] AKT / bio - ceramic / bioactive glass scaffold Haversian bone – mimicking scaffold pro - moted osteogenesis and angiogenesis Rabbit femoral defect [ 217 ] Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 239 Page 6 of 43 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40820 - 023 - 01187 - 2 © The authors Scheme 1 Schematic representation of materials and approaches for intelligent vascularized additive manufacturing - scaffolds . A Schematic diagram of the application of additive manufacturing in bone tissue . Three main parts are described : the raw material for additive manufacturing , the printing process and the application scenario . ( From left to right ) B Four representative modifications of 3D vascularized scaffolds : func - tional vascularized 3D printed scaffolds , vascularized 3D printed scaffolds loaded with specific carriers , bionic vascularized 3D printed scaffolds cell - based and vascularized 3D printed scaffolds . ( From the top left , clockwise ) C The response process of a 4D printed vascularized scaffold . From left to right : the printing process , the processes of dissolution , light , magnetism and temperature over time , the potential for applications in vascularized osteogenesis . D and E The printing process for 4D and 5D printing Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 Page 7 of 43 239 1 3 cavity of the diaphysis [ 37 , 48 ] . H - type vascular endothelial cells express significantly more CD31 and endomucin than L - type vascular endothelial cells and are strongly associ - ated with PDGFRß perivascular cells and osteoprogenitor cells that express osterix . The two types of vessels crosslink with each other to form a bone tissue - specific vascular net - work . More interestingly , when the nutrient artery crosses the bone cortex to reach the medullary cavity , it first flows into the H - type vascular network within the metaphysis and periosteum , then the L - type vascular network , and finally into the central vein near the growth plate [ 48 – 50 ] . As a result , different microenvironments can be detected in dif - ferent parts of the postnatal long bones , relative hypoxia within the diaphysis , but better oxygenation in the meta - physis . This also explains why bone tissue in the metaphysis is more active than it in the diaphysis . Also , the number of H - vessels decreased with age while the L - vessels did not [ 35 , 48 ] . The same phenomenon was found in aged and ova - riectomized osteoporotic rats , suggesting that estrogen may induce angiogenesis and that the decrease in specific H - type vessels is closely associated with both osteoporosis and bone formation ( Fig . 1b ) . 2 . 3 Vascularization and Tissue Repair It is well known that bone defects are mainly repaired through both intramembranous osteogenesis and endochondral osteo - genesis . Intramembranous osteogenesis is commonly found in flat bones and irregular bones , while endochondral osteo - genesis is common in long bones of the extremities [ 51 – 53 ] . It is emphasized that in either of the osteogenic approaches , osteogenesis and vascularization are closely related in time and space , and vascularization is a prerequisite for osteogen - esis [ 54 , 55 ] . For example , chondrocytes and osteoblasts can release the vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) , and in turn , endothelial cells can provide signals to osteoblasts . This signaling pathway has a profound effect on bone repair and development [ 52 , 56 , 57 ] . When a fracture or bone defect occurs , the local oxygen supply decreases rapidly , resulting in a hypoxic environment due to the disruption of blood ves - sels . At the same time , a large number of blood cells form clots for hemostasis at the site of injury [ 31 , 58 ] . Subse - quently , inflammatory cells , fibroblasts , mesenchymal stem cells , and endothelial cells accumulate at the bone defect site [ 59 , 60 ] . Owing to the early hypoxic environment as well as growth factors and cytokines , non - infectious inflammation and vascularization immediately initiated which are vitally important for fracture healing [ 61 , 62 ] . The release of growth factors promotes the rapid migration of endothelial cells to the hypoxic area to guide vascular invasion , followed by the proliferation of stalk cells to form an effective vascular network [ 58 , 63 , 64 ] . Moreover , endothelial cells can effec - tively mediate the migration of osteoblasts and osteoclasts to the site of bone defect , accelerating the process of bone regeneration [ 65 ] . Collectively , the repair and homeostasis of the skeletal system are guaranteed by a dynamic balance of osteolysis - osteogenesis accompanied by vascularization , together with the interaction of multiple signaling molecules ( VEGF , PDGF , BMP - 2 , FGF , etc . ) and the joint participation of multi - system cells ( Fig . 1c ) . 2 . 4 Vascularization and Tissue Engineering Tissue repair is a regeneration process in which most tissue injuries can be restored to pre - injury levels through the recruit - ment and differentiation of stem cells from the ( bone ) tissue and vascular tissue , but 10 % of the defects remain nonunion [ 66 , 67 ] . Vascularization plays a crucial role in tissue repair and homeostasis , as ( bone ) tissues beyond 200 μm from blood vessels in thickness cannot survive properly due to the lack of nutrients , including oxygen and glucose , and the accumula - tion of metabolic “waste” , such as carbon dioxide and urea [ 68 – 70 ] . When a tissue defect occurs , the vascular networks usually break down , characterized by the reduction of the growth and the reconstruction of the native vascular networks , especially in the central area of the tissue defect , resulting in the insufficient and delayed supply of nutrients [ 71 – 74 ] . There - fore , the rate , range , and density of angiogenesis determine the efficiency of tissue regeneration and tissue defect repair . However , implanted tissue tissue - engineered grafts also suffer from an inadequate exchange of nutrients , resulting in slower cell growth , uneven internal and external osteogenic and vas - culogenic induction , even cellular ischemia and necrosis , thus limiting the clinical transformation of tissue engineering mate - rials . Vascular insufficiency is an obstacle to the survival of tis - sue engineering grafts . Therefore , the main challenge of tissue regeneration is rapid and adequate vascularization , which is a prerequisite for cell survival and implant integration [ 75 – 77 ] . Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 239 Page 8 of 43 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40820 - 023 - 01187 - 2 © The authors 2 . 5 Vascularization and the Biochemical Microenvironment of Bone Tissue Cells In the application of vascularized bone tissue engineering , the implantation of vascularized additive manufacturing - scaffolds is used to accelerate the osteogenic process by rapidly building a mature vascular network to facilitate material exchange at the graft site and further stabilize the biochemical microenvironment of bone tissue cells [ 78 , 79 ] . However , a prerequisite for all this is that the vascularized scaffold must have the mechanical properties required for bone tissue engineering . It is well known that , on a macro - scopic scale , typical long bones include cortical bone ( dense bone ) , trabecular bone ( cancellous bone or cancellous bone ) , etc . Cortical bone has a high compressive modulus of elas - ticity ( E ≈ 7 . 0 – 30 GPa ) , high resistance to axial , bending and torsional loads and high compressive strength ( Sc ≈ 100 – 230 MPa ) [ 80 , 81 ] . In contrast , bone trabeculae have a strength of E ≈ 0 . 1 – 5 GPa and Sc ≈ 2 – 12 Mpa [ 82 ] . This therefore requires the researcher to personalize the vascu - larized additive manufacturing - scaffold for different tissue sites . In addition , a thorough understanding of the cellu - lar and biochemical composition of bone tissue is required in order to better exploit the role of vascularized additive manufacturing - scaffolds in bone tissue engineering . Bone is a heterogeneous composite material consisting of minerals , collagen ( type I ) and water . In addition , small amounts of other organic substances such as polysaccharides , proteins , Fig . 1 Blood vessel formation and function in the bone tissue . a Vasculogenesis and angiogenesis . Two distinct mechanisms of blood ves - sel formation . Vasculogenesis gives rise to the primitive vascular plexus during embryogenesis . Stimulated by tumors and hypoxic conditions , angiogenesis remodels and expands the vascular network . Reproduced with permission [ 33 ] . Copyright 2012 , American Association for the Advancement of Science . b Perivascular cells associated with blood vessels in the bone . Larger arteries are covered by smooth muscle cells that are connected to the H capillaries while mesenchymal cells are found on sinusoidal type L - vessels . c Illustration of intramembranous angiogen - esis . Mesenchymal cells condense to form sponge - like structures and differentiate into osteoprogenitors and osteoblasts . Matrix proteins and pro - angiogenic factors generated by the ossification centers then attract blood vessels . b and c are reproduced with permission [ 48 ] . Copyright 2016 , The Company of Biologists Ltd Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 Page 9 of 43 239 1 3 proteoglycans , salivary proteins and lipids are present in this dynamic / vascularized tissue , which give it its tensile , compressive , flexural and elastic properties [ 83 ] . Interest - ingly , bone tissue also includes many bioactive molecules such as alkaline phosphatase , bone marrow matrix pro - tein - 2 , collagen , elastin , vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) and osteocalcin . These active molecules play an important role in the regulation of bone resorption , bone formation , bone repair , bone metabolism and bone growth [ 84 , 85 ] . Hydroxyapatite ( HAp ) is the main component of bone minerals and is responsible for providing proper struc - tural support [ 86 ] . In addition , the bone has a cellular phase consisting of four main cell types : osteoblasts ( bone tissue formation ) , osteoclasts ( bone tissue resorption ) , osteocytes ( bone tissue maintenance ) and bone lining cells , which work closely together on the vascular “highway” to carry out a variety of complex life activities through the efficient trans - mission of signals by active molecules . These cells work closely together to perform a variety of complex life activi - ties through the efficient signalling of active molecules along the vascular ‘highway’ . A well - established vascular network is therefore essential [ 87 ] . More importantly , bone defects cannot be repaired without osteoblasts , which need to be maintained in a favorable biochemical microenvironment in order to grow and function properly , of which vasculari - zation is an important part of the process . It is the blood vessels that supply oxygen and nutrients and the biochemi - cal microenvironment they provide to bone tissue cells that is essential for their normal growth and development . The growth and development of bone tissue cells is a complex process involving many cellular and molecular interactions [ 88 ] . Vascularization is closely related to apoptosis , vascu - lar evolution and bone regeneration . Vascularization occurs through the involvement of a variety of molecular regula - tors and signal transduction molecules , of which Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor ( VEGF ) is one of the most criti - cal promoters , a cytokine produced by many tumor cells and other tissue cells that promotes not only intracellular neovascularization but also promote the growth and differ - entiation of existing blood vessels [ 89 , 90 ] . How to balance the physiological processes of osteogenesis and vasculariza - tion in applications in bone tissue engineering is therefore a challenge for the future development of smart additive manufacturing - scaffolds . 3 Vascularization and Graft Materials Tissue grafting is the traditional approach for tissue defect treatment . Using the bone tissue as an example , the materials commonly used as bone grafts can be classified into four cat - egories : autologous bone grafts , allogeneic bone grafts , met - als , and synthetic materials [ 91 – 93 ] . Just as its name implies , the autologous bone graft usually derives from the patient himself to fill the defect area [ 94 ] . It is considered the " gold standard " for bone grafting due to its good histocompatibil - ity and non - immunogenicity but consequently causing sec - ondary trauma . Autografts also exhibited limitations in their clinical application due to the high cost , easy deformities , and surgical risks , such as inflammation , infection , bleeding , and pain [ 95 ] . Allogeneic bone grafting is another popular option in which the bone tissue graft is derived from a donor , usually from a cadaver . Cheaper though , allografts exhibit much lower osteogenetic capability due to the decreased cel - lular components after a rigorous sterilization and disinfec - tion process . Besides , being histocompatible to some extent , they still are immunogenic and infectious . Metallic bone graft materials , such as titanium and zinc alloys , are also widely used in clinical practice [ 96 , 97 ] . There are three sig - nificant advantages of metallic materials : first of all , metallic materials can provide required mechanical support by virtue of their inherent advantages . What’s more , as the materials undergo strict sterilization , the risk of infection and immu - nogenicity is reduced . Finally , materials such as zinc are preferred because of their intrinsic osteoinduction ability . Nonetheless , the life cycle of the implant is often challenged and requires revision surgery , especially in younger patients . In addition , the non - degradability , high stiffness , and poor osseointegration place restrictions on the application of metallic materials . With consideration of the above prob - lems , synthetic materials such as polymers or bioceramics have emerged [ 98 ] . The advantages of synthetic materials lie in three main aspects . First , similar to metallic materials , synthetic materials can reduce the risk of infection , disease transmission , and immunogenicity . Second , polymers such as polycaprolactone ( PCL ) have been widely used because of their superior properties such as better biocompatibility , more modification sites , and sufficient mechanical support . Third , bioceramic such as tricalcium phosphate , whose composition is similar to natural bone , has the advantages of osteoinduction and excellent mechanical properties [ 99 ] . Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 239 Page 10 of 43 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40820 - 023 - 01187 - 2 © The authors Among the four mentioned bone grafting materials , autologous bone grafts are the best in terms of vasculariza - tion and osseointegration ability [ 100 ] . This is because the skeletal system itself is a large vascular network , and autolo - gous bone grafting is equivalent to transplanting the patient’s vascular network to the bone defect site . On the other hand , allogeneic bone grafts can merely provide structural support ignoring the vascularization [ 101 ] . As the materials such as metallic materials , polymers , and bioceramics present relatively week performance in vascularization , it’s of great necessity for subsequent modification and assembly to meet this demand . All of the above materials can accelerate the repair of bone defects to varying extents , however , the ideal bone repairing scaffold should be characterized as follows : osteoinductive and osteoconductive properties , vasculari - zation , biocompatibility , personalization , long shelf - life , and low cost . In seeking to address these challenges , tissue engineering has made tremendous progress in promoting the design and structure of scaffolds over the past few decades , particularly by using 3D printing technology to simulate the biological , mechanical , and chemical properties of the target tissue [ 102 ] . Thus , it is helpful to create grafts that are more in line with the function and structure of natural bone tissue , minimizing the gap between tissue engineering materials and native tissue , therefore ensuring the effective - ness of material - based bone regeneration , particularly the vascularization of the 3D printed scaffolds is a promising orientation [ 103 , 104 ] . 4 3D printing Technology and Materials 4 . 1 3D Printing Technology 3D printing technology , or additive manufacturing , is the construction of a three - dimensional object from a digital model by stacking layer by layer using adhesive materi - als , such as powdered metals or plastics [ 105 ] . As for the 3D printing process , the first step is to construct a model by computer - aided design ( CAD ) or other computer soft - ware , then “slicing” the established 3D model into layer - by - layer cross - sectional data , generating a file format ( usually STL format ) that is recognizable by the printer , and finally transmitting this information to the 3D printer [ 9 , 106 ] . The printer controls the machine to stack these 2D slices based on the description of the ‘sliced’ data , eventually shaping a solid object . 3D printing has many advantages over traditional manufacturing techniques [ 107 , 108 ] . Using computer - aided design ( CAD ) technology can simplify the manufacturing process , and computed tomography ( CT ) and magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) can be applied to collect patient data and create personalized 3D - printed scaffolds [ 26 , 109 ] . 3D printing technology is simple and efficient in designing and producing scaffolds with unique features , such as personalization , accuracy , mechanical strength , porosity , and complex spatial structures . To date , various ways of 3D printing have been reported , such as droplet - based , extru - sion - based , and laser - assisted 3D printing [ 105 ] ( Fig . 2a – c ) . Droplet - based printing has been well developed in the twenty - first century . It is a simple and flexible technique that allows precise droplet distribution on the substrate without contact between the nozzle and the substrate by controlling the droplet . There are three types : inkjet print - ing , acoustic - droplet - ejection printing , and micro - valve printing . Here , we focus on inkjet printing [ 110 – 113 ] . Inkjet printing is a common 3D printing technology that includes continuous inkjet , drop - on - demand inkjet , and electrohydrodynamic jet printing [ 114 ] . It uses a com - puter - controlled thermal or piezoelectric ( acoustic ) actua - tor to generate droplets from the ink in the cartridge and eject the droplets onto the substrate to build 3D structures . The advantages of injecting printing are its fast speed ( up to 10 , 000 drops per second ) , low cost , and high printing accuracy . However , the major drawback of inkjet printing is that bioink used in printing contains cells , which could cause nozzle clogging and lead to uneven water droplets [ 115 ] . Extrusion - based 3D printing is the most widely used method because it is simple , economic , and suitable for mass production [ 116 ] . It is capable of delivering a broad range of cells and materials and has a wide range of material selectivity . For extrusion - based 3D printing , hydrogels with cells and polymers ( e . g . , PCL ) are most often adopted . Extrusion - based printers disperse bioink by pneumatic or mechanical systems [ 117 ] . These systems physically or chemically solidify 2D patterns , which are stacked to create 3D structures [ 118 ] . Such printers can efficiently print highly viscous biomaterials with good cell viability . However , the resolution of extrusion - based print - ing is very low ( ~ 200 µm ) [ 119 ] . Laser - assisted printing , which uses laser beam pulses to print cells , was firstly introduced in the 1940s [ 120 ] . During the printing process , the laser pulse creates a high - pressure bubble , which exerts Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 Page 11 of 43 239 1 3 pressure on the bioink layer and forces the bioink to flow to the substrate underneath [ 121 ] . The bioink is instantane - ously crosslinked as soon as it reaches the substrate . This non - contact printing method separates the inkjet from the bioink , hence there is no contact between the inkjet and bioink , which eliminates the possibility of contamination . In addition , it can maximize the cell viability regardless of high viscosity of the bioink and since there is no nozzle , clogging is avoided [ 122 ] . However , the high cost and the limited choice of bioink are the existing disadvantages . 4 . 2 Materials for 3D Printing 3D printing materials that are often used for bone defect repair can be classified into four categories : inorganic , organic , natural , and composite materials ( Fig . 2d – g ) [ 123 , 124 ] . Inorganic materials mainly include metals , bioceramic , and bioglass . As the earliest materials used for the personal - ized printing of prostheses in the clinic , metallic materials have some unique advantages . Widely used metallic materi - als include stainless steel , and various alloys like titanium , magnesium , zinc , and cobalt - based alloys [ 125 ] . These materials are chemically stable , biocompatible , mechani - cally strong for bone defect repair . Moreover , some active metal ions such as Mg 2 + , Cu 2 + , and Co 2 + are not only osteo - inductive but can also promote vascularization in the bone tissue . The second commonest inorganic material is bioce - ramic , mainly including hydroxyapatite ( HAp ) and trical - cium phosphate ( TCP ) [ 99 , 126 ] . The calcium - phosphorus ratio of hydroxyapatite is 1 . 667 , which is consistent with Fig . 2 3D printing - compatible techniques . Inject printing ( a ) , extrusion - based printing ( b ) , and laser - assisted printing ( c ) . The biomaterial inks are used in 3D printing . a – c are reproduced with permission [ 105 ] . Copyright 2019 , Royal Society of Chemistry . The composite materials ( d ) ( Reproduced with permission [ 123 ] . Copyright 2019 , Elsevier . ) , natural materials ( e ) ( Reproduced with permission [ 124 ] . Copyright 2019 , Wiley ) , inorganic materials ( f ) ( Reproduced with permission [ 126 ] . Copyright 2018 , MDPI ) and organic materials ( g ) ( Reproduced with permis - sion [ 131 ] . Copyright 2013 , Wiley ) Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 239 Page 12 of 43 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40820 - 023 - 01187 - 2 © The authors that in human bone . Being a major component of human bone tissue and teeth , HAp has satisfactory biocompatibility and osseointegration ability . On the other hand , the ratio of calcium to phosphorus of TCP is 1 . 5 , including α - TCP and β - TCP , of which β - TCP is the most widely used . Compared with HAp , β - TCP has better biodegradability and osteogenic properties [ 123 ] . On implantation , the calcium - phosphorus ratio in the blood remains normal , even with various ions released from the degradation of β - TCP [ 127 ] . However , low mechanical strength and fracture toughness , as well as poor workability are still the big challenges to be over - come . Composed of silicate and phosphate , bioglass shows excellent bone - conduction activity [ 128 ] . With 3D printing technology , the shape and size of bioglass can be precisely controlled to manufacture nano - bioglass with a controllable porous structure , excellent mechanical properties , bioactiv - ity , and drug - loading capacity [ 129 ] . Nevertheless , bioglass is a fragile material that cannot be used as a primary load - bearing scaffold but is mostly used for bone filling [ 130 ] . Organic materials such as polylactic acid ( PLA ) , polycap - rolactone ( PCL ) , and polyglycolic acid ( PGA ) , have shown poor mechanical strength but superior flexibility to make it practical for manipulating their properties such as molecu - lar weight and chemical composition , which is beneficial for designing custom - tailored scaffolds [ 131 ] . Moreover , the functionality of organic synthetic scaffolds in terms of vascularization and osteoinduction can be further improved by surface modification of the 3D - printed scaffolds [ 103 ] . Natural materials—gelatin , sodium alginate , chitosan , col - lagen , possess good biocompatibility , biodegradability , and low immunogenicity , providing a more favorable microenvi - ronment for cell attachment and proliferation [ 132 ] . In bone tissue engineering , natural materials are mostly used as car - riers of boink , however , its singular application is limited by the under demand mechanical strength for supporting bone tissues [ 133 ] . A composite material is a combination of two or more metals , organic , inorganic , or natural components with a specific ratio . Although each material has its unique advantages , composite materials are before manufacturing versatile and personalized 3D - printed scaffolds [ 123 ] . Com - posite materials such as PCL / HA , PGA / PLA , and MgPSr / PCL have been extensively used in bone tissue engineering [ 134 ] . Such combination can impart a certain mechanical strength to the scaffold and also provide maximum function - ality to meet the requirements for bone repair . Bioink is a mixture of cells , biomaterials and bioactive mol - ecules and is widely used in bone tissue engineering . Bioink provides stable 3D structures to promote tissue development and maturation and also mimic tissue microenvironments in situ [ 25 , 135 ] . 3D printing technology can combine two or more types of bioink , yet more research is needed to dem - onstrate how bioink can be applied to modulate cellular fate in a better way . An ideal bioink should have the following characteristics [ 136 ] . ( 1 ) Printability : The bioink must have rheological and phase transition properties that conform to its adapted bioprinting technology to provide the highest possible printing accuracy . ( 2 ) Cytocompatibility : Both the composi - tion and the degradation products of bioinks must meet the conditions for living cells to survive and minimize the impact on cell growth and differentiation . In the printing process , the bioink must provide a certain degree of protection for living cells and other biologically active components and protect the cell viability from pressure , shear stress , and various chemi - cal reagents s during the printing process . ( 3 ) Versatility : The external intervenes of the bioink , such as the printing method , cross - linking method , and type of bioactive loadings , should be adjustable enough to meet the complex requirements of tissue engineering applications [ 137 ] . Bioink is a solution of biomaterial containing living cells and is a key component of bioprinting [ 138 ] . It is important that the material present in the biomaterial solution protects the cells from stressors dur - ing the printing process [ 139 , 140 ] . The four main types of bioink materials are hydrogels , microcarriers , cell aggregates and extracellular matrix proteins [ 141 , 142 ] . Natural polymer components in bioinks include : including gelatin , hyaluronic acid , silk protein and elastin . Synthetic polymers include : amphiphilic block copolymers , PEG , poly ( PNIPAAM ) and polyphosphonitrile . ( 1 ) Polymer hydrogels : Hydrogels are cross - linked hydrated networks of natural or synthetic poly - mers that are highly biocompatible and biodegradable and do not cause rejection reactions or other adverse effects . In recent years , this type of hydrogel type has been widely used for the repair and growth of vascularized bone tissue [ 143 ] . Polymeric hydrogel type bio - ink materials can have their physical and chemical properties modified to meet specific application requirements by adjusting the degree of cross - linking , mono - mer type and concentration . In addition , polymeric hydrogel - type bioink materials confer the biological signals required for tissue engineering , helping to treat bone defects and promote the growth of vascularized tissue . However , the mechanical strength of hydrogel - type bioinks is inferior and polymeric Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 Page 13 of 43 239 1 3 hydrogel - type bioink materials generally have a lower mechan - ical strength than other materials such as metals and ceramics , a shortcoming that may limit their use in certain applications ( e . g . , in areas of bone defects that carry greater weight ) . In conclusion , polymeric hydrogel type bioink materials have a range of advantages and disadvantages in vascularized bone tissue [ 144 , 145 ] . Application design requires attention to the modulation of material properties and consideration of biodeg - radation behavior in order to maximize their therapeutic effect and to achieve their maximum potential in the reconstruction and growth of vascularized bone tissue . ( 2 ) Microcarrier - type bioinks allow seeded cells to expand extensively while form - ing multicellular aggregates and also exert phenotypic con - trol on seeded cells . These effects of microcarriers are mainly achieved by anchoring substrates of dependent cells [ 146 ] . The material of the microcarriers can be synthetic polymers , glass or natural polymers such as cellulose , gelatin or collagen . Most importantly , due to its porous spherical form , cells can attach to the surface of the microcarrier and proliferate [ 147 ] . In addition , the porous morphology also improves the transfer of gases and nutrients and allows a larger surface area for cell attachment . It is well known that the core of vascularization is to greatly improve the exchange of materials between the graft and the host , to maintain the balance of the local microenvi - ronment of the bone injury and to accelerate the bone repair process [ 148 ] . ( 3 ) The cellular aggregates type of bioink is a scaffold - free alternative to bioink and consists mainly of tissue spheres , cell granules and tissue chains , where the type I trans - membrane protein calmodulin causes intercellular adhesion and cell aggregation , which is important for the efficient estab - lishment of intercellular material exchange and a vascularized network . In addition , the cell aggregate type of bioink material provides a favorable micro - environment that contributes to the survival and proliferation of osteoblasts , thus promoting the repair and regeneration of bone tissue . The bioink material of the living cell type has histological similarities that allow for cellular guidance , allowing new bone tissue to form reli - able connections with surrounding cells and tissues , further promoting vascularization and thus improving bone tissue repair and regeneration [ 7 ] . However , it is worth noting that the cell aggregation type of bioink requires high cell quality , the low survival rate of the printed live cells and the difficulty in controlling the consistency of the finished product during industrial production due to a combination of cell , printing parameters and environmental issues are all issues that need to be addressed in the future . ( 4 ) Extracellular matrix protein is a mixture of active component proteins left over after elu - tion of cells by surfactants and can be obtained from a variety of tissues [ 149 , 150 ] . Its main function depends on the type of primary tissue , different tissues have different functions and can be obtained from tissues such as skin , adipose tissue , cartilage , bone and heart . The microenvironment formed by extracellular matrix protein types of bioink is important for cell differentiation and function and can be directed to induce differentiation into target tissues . However , it is worth noting that for harder material tissues , such as bone and cartilage , ceramic materials or composite scaffolds are still required to produce mechanically stable scaffolds . 5 Functionalized 3D‑Printed Scaffolds Promote Vascularization in Tissues The establishment of a vascular network has an important role in bone growth and bone regeneration [ 72 ] . Although the porous structure of 3D - printed scaffolds has positive implica - tions for bone repair , the lack of surface - active groups reduces the ability of scaffolds to vascularize , thus hindering the over - all bone repair process . Introducing bioactive groups is an effective way to impart the inert surface with desirable bio - logical properties to address this issue [ 151 – 153 ] . Researchers have been working on modifying active groups onto scaffolds through physical doping and chemical approaches to endow 3D - printed scaffolds with vascularization capability [ 154 ] . The reported functionalization methods so far include metals , active drugs , protein or peptides , and growth factors . 5 . 1 Metal‑Modified 3D Printed Scaffolds for Vascularization The metal - modified 3D - printed scaffolds are becoming increasingly attractive and promising in bone tissue engi - neering . Among the various approaches , introducing active metals , such as Cu , Zn , Ca , and Mg is an effective way to render inert surfaces with the desirable vascularization prop - erties . Among the metals , magnesium ( Mg ) is an essential element in bone development good osteogenic and angio - genic abilities . Ma et al . Used the self - polymerization pro - cess of dopamine to modify 3D - printed titanium ( Ta ) scaf - folds with magnesium ions and polydopamine to construct the Mg – PDA – Ta scaffolds , which exhibited good biocom - patibility and a high ion release rate ( Fig . 3a – d ) . Magnesium Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 239 Page 14 of 43 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40820 - 023 - 01187 - 2 © The authors ion doping significantly improved the scaffold’s in vitro adhesion , angiogenesis , and osteogenic ability . Ta – PDA – Mg significantly promoted vascularized bone formation in a rat femoral condyle bone defect model , thus ensuring more rapid and durable osseointegration of the porous scaffold [ 96 ] . Using extrusion - based cryogenic 3D printing and lyo - philization , Yang et al . reported novel gradient SrFeHA / PCL scaffolds in another study . As expected , these scaffolds exhibited a 3D interconnected porous structure and rough microsurfaces , as well as a controlled release of bioactive Sr 2 + / Fe 3 + from the SrFeHA components [ 155 ] . With these advantageous properties , the printed scaffolds achieve prac - tical biological applications in vitro and in vivo . They not only directly promote MC3T3 osteogenic differentiation and HUVEC angiogenic function but also manipulate favorable macrophage activation to simultaneously promote osteo - genesis / angiogenesis . In addition , the superiority in deter - mining immune response , vascular regeneration , and in situ osteogenesis was further confirmed by the results of in vivo subcutaneous implantation and cranial defect repair . Using 3D printing technique , β - TCP porous scaffolds containing SiO 2 and ZnO with a pore size of approximately 317 µm were prepared by Fielding et al . The transplantation of the scaffold material to femoral defects in nude mice showed that a large amount of type I collagen and osteocalcin was produced on the scaffold after four weeks . The β - TCP porous scaffold containing SiO 2 and ZnO significantly promoted the growth of new vasculature and bone formation compared with the single β - TCP porous scaffold [ 156 ] . 5 . 2 Surface Drug‑modified 3D‑PRINTED Scaffolds for Vascularization Small molecular drugs for angiogenesis and vascularization are widely applied in bone tissue engineering , either by car - rier delivery or by modification onto the scaffold directly . Examples of carrier delivery will be elaborated in the next section , while this section will focus on the examples of surface modification . For example , Yan et al . successfully prepared a 3D - printed biodegradable scaffold by modify - ing the scaffold surface by desferrioxamine ( DFO ) , a small - molecule compound with pro - angiogenic and pro - osteogenic functions , using surface ammonolysis and layer assembly techniques [ 103 ] . The release of DFO could be controlled by the modified scaffold , which is necessary for angiogenesis and osteogenesis and matches with bone development and reconstruction . The scaffold significantly promoted the for - mation of the vascular configuration of human umbilical vein endothelial cells , the production of mineralized matrix , and the expression of osteogenic - related genes during the osteogenic differentiation of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells ( hBMSC ) , as has been shown in vitro studies . In vivo experiments showed that vascularization and bone regeneration at the defect site in a rat bone defect model could be promoted by the modified scaffold ( Fig . 3e – g ) . Zhu et al . designed a composite scaffold ( MPHS ) consist - ing of dimethylallyl glycine ( DMOG ) , mesoporous bioactive glasses , and polymer poly ( 3 - hydroxybutyrate - co - 3 - hydrox - yhexanoate ) by physical doping and investigated whether the sustained release of DMOG promotes local angiogenesis and bone healing . The DMOG release patterns of scaffolds loaded with different DMOG doses were evaluated in vitro . Furthermore , they investigated the effects of DMOG deliv - ery on hBMSC adhesion , proliferation , osteogenic differen - tiation , and angiogenesis - related gene expression . In vivo experiments were performed to evaluate the effect of com - posite scaffolds on vascularization and osteogenesis . The results showed that DMOG was consistently released from MPHS scaffolds over four weeks and significantly enhanced the angiogenesis and osteogenesis in the defects [ 157 ] . 5 . 3 Protein / Peptide‑Modified 3D Printed Scaffolds for Vascularization It has been demonstrated that surface modification by encapsulation of fibronectin , collagen , or laminin can alter the surface morphology of the materials . As a result , the material can modulate the cellular behavior to influence the microstructure and biological function of the tissue it forms . Klein et al . modified the surface of 3D - printed scaf - folds with bone sialoprotein ( BSP ) by physisorption based on the high affinity of CaP biomaterials for proteins [ 158 ] . BSP is a non - collagenous protein of the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) that can bind to hydroxyapatite via its specific bind - ing sites . BSP triggers the mineralization of the ECM and can attract osteoblasts to promote osteoblast adhesion and differentiation via the vitronectin receptor ( αvβ3 ) . BSP also promotes endothelial cell migration , attachment , and angio - genesis . Physisorbed BSP has slow - release kinetics in vitro and effectively promotes the osteogenic differentiation of Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 Page 15 of 43 239 1 3 F i g . 3 M e t a l - b a s e d a nd d r ug m od i fi ca ti on a pp r o ac h e s f o r v a s c u l a r i ze d 3 D p r i n t e d n e t w o r k s . a S c h e m a ti c ill u s t r a ti on o f m e t a l i on s m od i fi ca ti on on t o t h e 3 D p r i n t e d s ca ff o l d s . b S c h e m a ti c p r e s e n t a ti on o f t h e f a b r i ca ti on p r o ce ss a nd S E M o f t h e s a m p l e s . c , d O p ti ca l i m a g e s a nd c u m u l a ti v e r e l ea s e p r o fi l e o f m e t a l i o n s . a – d a r e r e p r odu ce d w it h p e r m i ss i on [ 96 ] . C opy r i gh t 2020 , E l s e v i e r . e S c h e m a ti c d i a g r a m o f D F O on t h e s u rf ace o f 3 D p r i n t e d P C L s ca ff o l d a nd it s b i o l og i ca l f un c ti on f o r bon e r e g e n e r a ti on i n bon e d e f ec t m od e l . f T yp i ca l X - r a y pho t og r a phy a nd d i g it a ll y r ec on s t r u c t e d r a d i og r a ph ( D RR ) a f t e r m i c r o - C T s ca nn i ng o f t h e n e w v a s c u l a r f o r m e d i n s i d e t h e bon e d e f ec t s it e . g D yn a m i c h i s t o l ogy o f t h e n e w l y f o r m e d bon e u s i ng dou - b l e ca l ce i n l a b e li ng a f t e r s ca ff o l d s i n s e r ti on a nd t h e s u mm a r i ze d d a t a s ho w i ng t h e d i ff e r e n ce o f t h e m i n e r a l a ppo s iti on a l r a t e a m ong d i ff e r e n t g r oup s . e – g a r e r e p r odu ce d w it h p e r m i ss i on [ 103 ] . C opy r i gh t 2 018 , E l s e v i e r Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 239 Page 16 of 43 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40820 - 023 - 01187 - 2 © The authors primary human osteoblasts and the formation of endothelial cell ( ECs ) vascular networks . Compared with intact proteins , peptides are more capable of precisely control the biological effects they induce and easier to act on substrates . When applied for medical treat - ment , the advantages of peptides are rapid metabolism , low risk of the immune response , and small molecular weight . Specific peptides can promote the adhesion of endothelial progenitor cells on their surface through specific peptide sequences of adhesion proteins or extracellular matrix mol - ecules , thereby reducing the rolling velocity of ECs when in contact with them , supporting dynamic adhesion and trig - gering vascularity . For example , αv - containing integrins are highly expressed in activated ECs in the vasculature dur - ing trauma healing , which is crucial for vascular regenera - tion . This integrin regulates ECs migration and apoptotic adhesion by explicitly recognizing the Arg - Gly - Asp ( RGD ) peptide in the ECM , thereby promoting neovascularization [ 159 ] . Based on this , Wang et al . first constructed a biphasic calcium phosphate ( BCP ) bionic scaffold using hydroxyapa - tite ( HA ) and β - tricalcium phosphate ( β - TCP ) with a mass ratio of 60 / 40 . Subsequently , RGD - phage nanofibers were constructed by a genetic engineering approach . Then , RGD - phage nanofibers ( negatively charged ) were stably bound to chitosan ( positively charged ) by electrostatic interactions to be attached to the surface of the 3D - printed bioceramic scaffold . In a rat radial defect model , micro - CT showed that the metric of the bone bulk density almost reached normal control levels , and the internal vascularization in the scaf - fold was successfully induced [ 160 ] . SVVYGLR peptide is an important peptide fragment of osteopontin ( OPN ) , which has the advantage of a small molecular weight . This peptide is expected to stimulate neovascularization and improve internal ischemia of the bone repair material . Unlike RGD , which has a non - specific pro - adhesive effect , SVVYGLR is a specific pro - vascular peptide . Although it could not promote the proliferation of ECs , it significantly enhanced their adhesion and lumen formation activity . Its vasculariza - tion effect is comparable to or even more potent than that of VEGF . The OPN - derived SVVYGLR peptide with dual pro - vascularization and pro - osteogenic effects was covalently bound to the surface of mesoporous calcium silicate ( MCS ) powder material to activate the scaffold material , thereby constructing an SVVYGLR - MCS composite scaffold by 3D printing technology . The SVVYGLR - MCS artificial bone scaffold exhibited good mechanical properties and is suitable for bone defect repair . In vitro , the composite scaffold is beneficial for the osteogenic differentiation of rat BMSCs , adhesion of HUVECs , and lumen formation . In vivo , the composite scaffold has better internal osteogenesis and vascularization than the MCS group in the repair of bone defects [ 161 ] . 5 . 4 Growth Factor‑Modified 3D‑Printed Scaffolds for Vascularization Many growth factors , such as angiogenic and osteogenic fac - tors are involved in the bone regeneration process . There - fore , integrating various growth factors into 3D - printed scaf - folds to build vascular networks is another effective bone tissue engineering strategy . Growth factors are involved in the regulation of different stages of bone regeneration , for example , regulating cellular responses accelerating the for - mation of new tissues , etc . Physically encapsulating cova - lently or non - covalently binding growth factors into scaf - folds can effectively promote the ex vivo osteogenic and angiogenic capacity of 3D - printed scaffold materials . The widely used growth factors include vascular platelet - derived growth factor ( PDGF ) , endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) , fibroblast growth factor ( FGF ) , epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) , erythropoietin ( EPO ) , transforming growth factor ( TGF ) , hypoxia - inducible factor ( HIF ) - 1 , bone morphoge - netic protein - 2 ( BMP - 2 ) , and BMP - 7 [ 162 ] . Among these growth factors , VEGF is considered to be the most critical signaling molecule for stimulating angiogenesis . It is an important regulator of physiological angiogenesis during embryogenesis . In addition , VEGF promotes intramembranous and endochondral ossification by inducing neovascularization . The hybrid mesoporous 3D - printed scaffold hydroxyapatite / calcium sulfate ( HACS ) was fabricated by Chen et al . using hydroxyapa - tite , calcium sulfate , and polycaprolactone . This scaf - fold was then modified with a VEGF . They recorded the in vitro release profile to show that the HACS scaffold was able to release VEGF in a time - dependent manner . The in vivo experimental results in a rabbit femoral bone defect model revealed that HACS / VEGF has good osteogenic induction [ 163 ] . In another related study , a hydroxyapa - tite porous scaffold was prepared by low - temperature 3D printing and layer - by - layer ( LBL ) assembly , followed by loading BMP - 2 and VEGF onto the 3D - printed scaffold Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 Page 17 of 43 239 1 3 by simple adsorption . Experimental results suggest an excellent osteogenic and angiogenic ability of the BMP - 2 / VEGF composite scaffold to promote new bone generation ( Fig . 4a – c ) [ 164 ] . By adopting 3D printing technology , Park et al . fabricated a BMP - 2 and VEGF - loaded scaffold , with BMP - 2 loaded in the peripheral region of the scaffold and VEGF in the central region . This scaffold allowed for sustained release of BMP - 2 but the rapid release of VEGF to achieve early vascularization and late osteogenesis for bone defect repair [ 165 ] . 6 Special Carrier‑Loaded 3D‑Printed Scaffolds for Tissue Vascularization Osteogenesis is a process closely coupled with vasculariza - tion , and recent researches have focused on achieving effec - tive and complete vascularization in 3D - printed scaffolds . Fig . 4 Surface functionalization through polypeptide and growth factors grafting . a Schematic representation of the fabrication process of nano - coating modified 3D printed scaffolds and the sequential release of growth factors in the nanocoating film . b Protein release profiles of nanocoat - ing within 2 weeks . c Fluorescent images of hMSCs and HUVECs on the 3D printed scaffolds . The hMSCs exhibited a well - distributed spread on scaffold surface , while the HUVECs formed an aggregative microvascular networks . a – c are reproduced with permission [ 164 ] . Copyright 2016 , Wiley Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 239 Page 18 of 43 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40820 - 023 - 01187 - 2 © The authors Most recent studies have reported that combining active small molecules with 3D - printed scaffolds through suitable carriers to obtain a sustained and stable controlled release profile and endow the scaffolds with vascularization ability [ 166 – 168 ] . Commonly used active small molecules include drugs ( DFO , simvastatin ) and growth factors ( VEGF , BMP - 2 ) [ 169 ] . Widely used carriers can be broadly classified into three main categories : hydrogels , microspheres , and nano - particles ( liposomes , exosomes , etc . ) . 6 . 1 Hydrogel Carrier‑Modified 3D‑Printed Scaffold Hydrogels are formed by one or more monomers that are cross - linked into a net structure by a simple reaction . Their applica - tion in the biomedical fields has been extensively developed since 1960 when hydrogels were first used to treat ophthalmic diseases [ 170 , 171 ] . The highly hydrated nature of hydrogels makes them very biocompatible . Owing to their excellent mechanical properties , hydrogels have attracted wide atten - tion in biomedical fields , such as bone and cartilage repair , wound dressing , wound healing , cell culture , and nerve repair . Hydrogels are also an excellent carrier for drug and small mol - ecule delivery . The structure of hydrogels is porous , and the internal three - dimensional network is interconnected , such that the polymer molecules are easy to be modified . These prop - erties make hydrogels immensely versatile for drug delivery [ 172 ] . On the other hand , hydrogels have superior hydrophilic - ity and injectability and can construct a controlled - release drug delivery system to overcome the disadvantages of traditional drug therapy , which requires high drug doses or multiple doses for treatment [ 173 ] . This superiority may improve the thera - peutic effectiveness , minimize unnecessary pain for patients , and reduce the risk of toxic side effects . Liu et al . successfully prepared a hydrogel - based 3D - printed composite scaffold by injecting a simvastatin - encapsulated poloxamer 407 thermo - sensitive hydrogel , which serves as a controlled release system for vascularized drugs , into a 3D - printed porous titanium scaf - fold . Simvastatin was continuously released from the scaffold for up to 11 days in vitro , which was greatly superior to con - ventional delivery systems . The effects of the composite mate - rial on osseointegration , bone ingrowth and neovascularization were evaluated in vivo using a rabbit tibial defect model . It was revealed that the composite scaffold significantly improved neovascularization , osseointegration , and bone repair due to the sustained release of simvastatin and the osteogenic effect of 3D printing [ 174 ] . 6 . 2 Microsphere Carrier‑Modified 3D‑Printed Scaffold In recent years , micro - nano drug delivery systems have con - sistently drawn attention and made rapid progress , especially in pharmaceutical and materials science , where micro - nano carriers of different sizes , structures , and functions have been designed [ 175 ] . They mainly include microalgae , micro - spheres , liposomes , and exosomes . These carriers are small , usually ranging from a few nanometers to a few hundred microns , and are injected into patients by the intravenous or local administration [ 176 ] . They not only protect the drug activity from being altered or excreted from the body but also extend the blood circulation time and improve the stability of the drugs , enhance drug accumulation , improve the killing efficiency of the drugs while increasing the drug tolerabil - ity , and even enable synergistic treatment with multiple drugs [ 92 , 177 ] . Fahimipour et al . used a double emulsion solvent evaporation technique to prepare poly ( lactic - co - glycolic ) acid ( PLGA ) microspheres to encapsulate VEGF and subsequently doped PLGA microspheres into gelatin / alginate / β - TCP to form a 3D printing ink to print and fabricate custom - tailored bone repair scaffolds . In vitro release experiments demonstrated the sustained release of VEGF from PLGA microspheres within ten days , and the biological concentration was sufficient for vascularization . Apart from that , the human umbilical vein endothelial cells ( HUVECs ) and osteoblasts that inoculated on the scaffold also exhibited good cell viability , and the ALP activity was greatly increased because of the presence of VEGF . This study once again elucidated the significance of vascularized osteogenesis [ 178 ] . 6 . 3 Liposome Carrier‑Modified 3D‑Printed Scaffold Liposomes are self - assembled vesicles of lipid – water mix - tures that are similar to cellular transit vesicles in which the lipid components consist of phospholipids and cholesterol [ 179 ] . A lipid bilayer is formed under certain interventional conditions ( usually ultrasound ) , which render liposomes the ability to encapsulate both hydrophilic and lipophilic drugs [ 180 ] . Therefore , liposomes are considered to be the most classic nano - drug delivery system [ 181 ] . Being non - toxic , non - immunogenic , and fully biodegradable drug carriers Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 Page 19 of 43 239 1 3 with the ability to control drug release , liposomes also can reduce side effects . Our previous work was inspired by the special biological structure of “lotus seedpod” and the con - cept of internal vascularization , a porous bioceramic scaf - fold was constructed as the “coat” of “lotus seedpod” by 3D printing ( Fig . 5a – f ) . DFO - loaded liposomes were physi - cally combined with microfluidic hydrogel microspheres and became “lotus seeds” by immersion adsorption . Then , the “lotus seeds” were directly injected into the interior of the 3D - printed scaffold to construct an internally vascular - ized bioceramic 3D - printed scaffold to facilitate the repair of bone defects . It’s observed that DFO s was released in a sustained manner from the composite scaffold in vitro for up to seven days , which is significant for reducing the toxic effects of DFO and continuously inducing vascularized oste - ogenesis . The composite scaffolds has also shown excellent osteogenic ability in subsequent in vitro and in vivo experi - ments [ 104 ] . 6 . 4 Exosome Carrier‑Modified 3D‑Printed Scaffold Exosomes are nanoscale extracellular vesicles composed of proteins , nucleic acids , and lipids , which are widely found in various biological fluids , such as blood , saliva , and urine . Inside the exosomes , a variety of content molecules such as proteins , mRNA , non - coding RNA , DNA , and lipids are present [ 169 ] . Exosomes have attracted great interest in the field of regenerative medicine , for they are recognized as an ideal nanocarrier for drugs due to their overall biocompat - ibility , good tolerability , and low toxicity , as well as their immune escapability [ 167 ] . The conventional delivery of small molecular proteins and genes , such as VEGF and BMP - 2 , in bone tissue engineering , has some limitations , such as uncontrollable release , need for high doses with a short half - life , and low transfection efficiency . Therefore , exosome - loaded small molecular active protein systems are particularly favored . Zha et al . used ATDC5 - derived exosomes to encapsulate the VEGF gene and efficiently combined exosomes with 3D - printed scaffolds via the spe - cific exosome - anchoring peptide CP05 ( Fig . 5g – i ) . In vitro experiments showed that exosomes can not only modulate the release of VEGF but also promote the differentiation of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells toward osteogen - esis . In vivo experiments using a rat radial defect model demonstrated that the exosome - mediated engineered bone scaffold could effectively induce massive bone regeneration with vascularization [ 182 ] . 7 Cell‑Modified 3D‑Printed Scaffolds for Vascularization in Tissues An ideal bone scaffold material should not only have good biocompatibility , bioactivity , biodegradability , and mechani - cal support but also needs to satisfy the demands for vas - cularization and bone growth [ 183 ] . Scaffolds and seeded cells are essential for the construction of biologically active tissue engineering scaffolds that can be rapidly vascular - ized [ 184 ] . In bone tissue engineering , the most extensively used cells to induce vascularization for osteogenesis are mesenchymal stem cells ( MSCs ) and ECs . The primary sources of MSCs are bone marrow , adipose tissue , umbili - cal cord , and placenta [ 185 ] . Here , we focus on BMSCs , whose biological properties are embodied in the osteogenic differentiation ability , regenerative potential , directional migration ability , and the production of the corresponding growth factors and cytokines to promote the repair of bone injury [ 186 ] . Endothelial cells are essential cells in the pro - cess of blood vessel formation . In bone tissue engineering , by virtue of the presence of endothelial cells , 3D - printed scaffolds can rapidly form a vascular network and integrate with the circulatory system to provide nutrients to the defect site , rapidly transport metabolic waste , and accelerate bone repair [ 187 ] . According to the 3D printing bioink compo - sition , 3D - printed scaffolds are classified into three main categories : 3D - printed scaffolds with “cell” modification , 3D - printed scaffolds with composite cell ink , and 3D - printed scaffolds with “gene” - modified cell ink . 7 . 1 3D‑Printed Scaffolds with “Cellular” Modifications Guduric et al . constructed polylactic acid ( PLA ) scaf - folds with cell modification using layer - by - layer assembly . Therein , the PLA scaffold was prepared by 3D printing , and human bone marrow stromal cells ( hBMSCs ) and endothe - lial progenitor cells ( EPCs ) were then inoculated on the sur - face of the scaffold . The in vitro study demonstrated that this unique scaffold assembly promoted homogeneous cell colonization and proliferation within the scaffold , ensuring homogeneous distribution and adequate vascularization of cells inside the scaffold , which may have a broad range of Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 239 Page 20 of 43 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40820 - 023 - 01187 - 2 © The authors F i g . 5 S p ec i a l ca rr i e r s l o a d e d 3 D p r i n ti ng s ca ff o l d s . a T h e s c h e m a ti c r e p r e s e n t a ti on o f d e s i gn i ng a l o t u s s ee dpod - i n s p i r e d i n t e r n a l v a s c u l a r i ze d 3 D p r i n t e d b i o ce r a m i c s ca ff o l d w it h i n t e r - n a l v a s c u l a r i za ti o n a nd o s t e og e n e s i s f un c ti on a liti e s . b F l uo r e s ce n t m i c r o s c op i c i m a g e s o f G e l M A M i c r o s ph e r e s . c T h e i n v it r o r e l ea s e p r o fi l e . d C h a r ac t e r i za ti on o f li po s o m e p a r ti c l e s v i a D L S . e T h e doub l e ca l ce i n l a b e li ng a nd t h e qu a n ti t i v e r e s u lt s . f I mm uno fl uo r e s ce n ce s t a i n i ng o f t h e a ng i og e n e s i s a nd o s t e og e n e s i s r e l a t e d g e n e s A - F a r e r e p r odu ce d w it h p e r m i ss i on [ 104 ] . C opy r i gh t 2021 , E l s e v i e r . g G e n e r a l ill u s t r a ti on o f e ng i n ee r e d e xo s o m e e nh a n ce d t h e r a p i e s on o s t e og e n e s i s a nd a ng i og e n e s i s . h TE M i m a g e s a nd p r o t e i n m a r k e r s o f e xo s o m e s . T h e i mm uno fl uo r e s ce n ce i m a g e o f m od i fi e d s ca ff o l d a nd t h e e xo s o m e s . g – i a r e r e p r odu ce d w it h p e r m i ss i on [ 182 ] . C opy r i gh t 2021 , I vy s p r i ng I n t e r n a ti on a l P ub li s h e r Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 Page 21 of 43 239 1 3 applications in bone tissue engineering [ 188 ] . Kuss et al . proposed the concept of “pre - vascularization” , which first used 3D printing technology to prepare a polycaprolactone / hydroxyapatite composite scaffold , followed by the surface modification of hydrogels loaded with human adipose - derived mesenchymal stem cells ( ADMSCs ) and HUVECs as a coating of the composite scaffold . In this study , it was found that co - culturing ADMSC – HUVEC with porous 3D - printed scaffolds in vitro can generate capillary - like networks . In vivo experiments demonstrated that the hydro - gel system facilitated micro - vessel and lumen formation and promoted the anastomosis of the human - derived vascular network with the host murine vascular system . These results also demonstrated the potential of “pre - vascularization” of 3D - printed scaffolds for the preparation of large bone defects [ 189 ] . Li et al . combined cell - laden bioink coaxial micro - fluidics and microsurgical techniques to construct bionic engineered custom microvessels with controlled length and budding type of vascularization . The microvessels have excellent injectability and sutureability and can be effec - tively introduced into 3D printed implants to promote tissue vascularization [ 190 ] ( Fig . 6a – e ) . 7 . 2 3D‑Printed Scaffold with Composite Cell Ink Kuss et al . introduced the concept of short - term hypoxic preconditioning based on “pre - vascularization” . The bioink for the 3D - printed scaffold in this study was composed of polycaprolactone / hydroxyapatite ( PCL / HAp ) and stromal vascular fraction cells ( SVFCs ) - laden hydrogel . The scaf - folds pretreated in normoxic or short - term hypoxic envi - ronments were subsequently implanted into athymic mice . It was found that short - term hypoxic conditions promoted ex vivo microvessel formation and accelerated the integra - tion with existing host vessels , as well as the potential of pre - vascularization for 3D bone tissue engineering applications [ 191 ] . Chen et al . used hydrogels loaded with MSCs and ECs to prepare dopamine - modified calcium polydopamine - modified calcium silicate ( PDACS ) / PCL scaffolds [ 192 ] . Kang et al . fabricated a 3D printed bone construct through an integrated tissue - organ printer ( ITOP ) , and successively enhanced mechanical stability of bioink by effectively com - bining cell loaded hydrogels with biodegradable polymers . In vivo experiments show that the 3D printing scaffold with composite cells has better effect of vascularization and osteogenesis without central necrosis . Von Willebrand factor ( vWF ) immunostaining showed large blood vessel formation within newly formed bone tissue throughout the bioprinted bone constructs , including the central portion . Evaluation of the vascularization ability of the composite scaffolds and their cellular behavior in vitro showed that this cell - rich 3D - printed scaffold not only enhanced the expression of BMP - 2 but also stimulated the development of vascular networks [ 193 ] . Rukavina et al . adopted extrusion - based and drop - on - demand bioprinting techniques to con - struct pre - vascularized bone tissue with bioink - containing human adipose - derived mesenchymal stem cells ( hASCs ) and human umbilical vein endothelial cells ( HUVECs ) . In particular , the formation of a micro - vessel network was detected in vivo experiments but also the formation of the calcified bone matrix was observed , which is important for vascularized osteogenesis [ 194 ] . 7 . 3 3D‑Printed Scaffold with " Genetically " Modified Cell Ink The effective combination of genetic engineering and regenerative medicine can further enhance the function - ality of vascularized scaffolds . Lin et al . constructed bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells bearing the BMP - 2 gene by lentiviral transfection and subsequent introduction of the specifically functionalized stem cells into 3D - printed hydrogel scaffolds . The results showed that BMP - 2 - HBM - SCs encapsulated in the scaffold could highly express BMP - 2 in a sustained manner , and histological staining 14 days after implantation showed that BMP significantly promoted the formation of new bone and blood vessels [ 195 ] . Cunniffe et al . developed a gene - activated bioink using plasmid , alginate , BMSCs , and nano - hydroxyapatite , which was co - printed with PCL . This study demonstrated in vitro that BMSCs that were successfully transfected by plasmids sustained high expression of BMP - 2 and TGF - β3 , thus promoting high levels of vascularization and mineralization [ 196 ] . Pizzicannella et al . used MSC cells and extracellular vesicles ( EVs ) in combination with PLA to form a bioink . Although cell transfection was not Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 239 Page 22 of 43 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40820 - 023 - 01187 - 2 © The authors involved , the extracellular vesicles could carry and transfer proteins , mRNA , and microRNA to the target cells . In the subsequent ex vivo experiments , it was evidenced that the presence of EVs significantly increased the expression of relevant genes and accelerated the vascularized regenera - tion of cranial bone [ 197 ] . 8 Bionic 3D‑Printed Scaffold for Vascularization in Tissues The concept of " bionics " is attracting more and more atten - tion in the field of biomaterials . In 1960 , bionics was for - mally proposed as a discipline by Steele at a bionics confer - ence in the USA [ 198 , 199 ] . Bionics is an interdisciplinary field that combines biology and technology , where the Fig . 6 The cell - based and gene - based bioactive 3D printing vascular networks . a Schematic view of the printing process with cell - based bioink and microstructure images of the printed scaffolds . b Schematic diagram of the preparation of a repair hydrogel vascular scaffold containing human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells ( HUMSC ) . c Live - dead staining to test the effectiveness of hydrogel vascular scaffolds for sprout - ing . d , e Confocal microscopy images tracing hydrogel vascular scaffold germination length and branching points over time . White triangular arrows indicate tip cells . While the long arrows indicate the invasion the direction of the newly formed network . a – e are reproduced with permis - sion [ 190 ] . Copyright 2022 , Wiley Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 Page 23 of 43 239 1 3 principles of structural and functional work of living organ - isms are studied and new devices , tools , and technologies are invented based on these principles to develop advanced tech - nologies for production , learning , and life . It is well known that bone tissue is a highly dense connective tissue with a unique structure [ 200 – 202 ] . It consists mainly of peripheral cortical bone—the “shell”—and central cancellous bone— the “core” . Therefore , it is also a specific “core – shell” structure [ 203 ] . The cortical bone , also called dense bone , is composed of closely spaced bone units , maintaining the hardness and denseness of the bone [ 204 ] . There are Haver - sian canals in the cortical bone with abundant blood vessels and nerves in the longitudinal direction [ 205 ] . The vessels in the Haversian canals are interconnected by vessels in the transverse direction , called Volkmann’s canals . The cancel - lous bone is spongy and consists of intertwined trabeculae , which have abundant blood flow and can also be seen as a robust capillary network distributed throughout the inte - rior of the bone [ 42 , 206 ] . Besides , bone tissue can also be regarded as a huge network of calcium and phosphate , which are smartly integrated with blood vessels , “communicate” with each other and together maintain the dynamic balance of the bone tissue [ 43 , 207 , 208 ] . In the field of bone tissue engineering , “bionics” and biomaterials have been strongly linked , both in terms of bone tissue structure and compo - sition , to more closely resemble natural bone tissue , with better biocompatibility and osseointegration capabilities [ 209 ] . Eventually , based on the great challenge of how to completely “centralize” the vascularization of bone tissue engineering scaffolds , bionic scaffolds have emerged . Bion - ics can be divided into three main categories : 3D - printed scaffolds ( “shell” ) and hydrogels ( “core” ) , 3D - printed scaf - folds ( “shell” ) with hollow pipes ( “core” ) , and 3D - printed stents ( “shell” ) with vascular tips ( “core” ) . 8 . 1 3D‑Printed Scaffolds ( " Shell " ) and Hydrogels ( " Core " ) Wang et al . proposed the concept of centrally vascular - ized bone tissue engineering by first printing a β - TCP scaf - fold through 3D printing technology and then coculture it with MSCs cells in vitro as the “shell” for osteogenesis ( Fig . 7a – c ) . Subsequently , MSC and ECFC cells were incorporated into rat tail collagen and plasma fibronectin to fabricate a composite hydrogel , which was then injected into the 3D - printed scaffold as a vascularized “core” . This unique “core – shell” structure outperformed other osteogenic or vascularized scaffolds in vitro , demonstrating excellent osteogenic and vascularization ability . Furthermore , it formed a unique burrito - like vascular network around and in the center of the scaffold , indicating a potential synergy between the osteogenic shell and the vascularized core . This successfully bridged the defect between the outer cortical bone - like tissue and the inner cancellous bone - like tissue , revealing the importance of vascularization in osteogenesis [ 210 ] . Anada et al . utilized a two - step 3D printing technique and first printed an outer gel ring of octacalcium phosphate ( OCP ) —GelMA to mimic cortical bone , followed by using HUVECs spheroids and gelatin methacrylate ( GelMA ) hydrogel as the raw materials to print a central GelMA ring - containing HUVECs spheroids to mimic the bone marrow space . This experiment demonstrated that HUVECs sphe - roids formed capillary - like structures in vitro and showed that this composite scaffold could stimulate the osteogenic differentiation of MSCs , further demonstrating the associa - tion between vascularization and osteogenesis [ 211 ] . 8 . 2 3D‑Printed Stent ( " Shell " ) and Vascular Tip ( " Core " ) Vidal et al . used 3D printing technology to print custom - ized calcium phosphate scaffolds as the “shell” for sheep bone defect areas . They treated each of three identical groups of sheep either with blank control , calcium phos - phate scaffolds alone , or calcium phosphate scaffolds with axial vascular pedicle . This study demonstrated that the presence of the pedicle further enhanced bone formation , and the histological results confirmed that the porous 3D scaffold containing the vascular pedicle can induce the most active bone growth , resulting in the best osteogenic outcome [ 212 ] . Li et al . constructed rhBMP - 2 - loaded chi - tosan microspheres by an emulsion cross - linking method and prepared a ( PLGA / β - TCP ) dual - component scaffold by 3D printing [ 213 ] . Charbonnier et al . first used 3D printing technology and fabricated microporous bioceramics scaf - folds , loaded with autologous total bone marrow obtained by needle aspiration . The femoral vein was then inserted into the center of the stent to assess the effect of a cen - tral flow - through vein on bone formation from marrow in a subcutaneous site . In vivo experiments showed that Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 239 Page 24 of 43 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40820 - 023 - 01187 - 2 © The authors there were a lot of new bone formation in the experimental group with intravenous perfusion . This is the first report illustrating the capacity of an intrinsic vascularization by a single vein to support ectopic bone formation from untreated marrow ( Fig . 7d , e ) . Then , the rhBMP - 2 - loaded chitosan microspheres were uniformly injected into the 3D - printed scaffold and freeze - dried as an osteogenic shell structure , followed by the implantation of arteriovenous bundles in the center to prepare vascularized bone flaps . It was demonstrated that the controlled release of rhBMP2 from chitosan microspheres could successfully induce ectopic bone formation within the scaffold . In addition , owing to the presence of central arteriovenous bundles and the coupling of osteogenesis and vascularization , this composite scaffold significantly accelerates the osteogenic process [ 214 ] . 8 . 3 3D‑Printed Scaffold ( " Shell " ) and Hollow Pipe ( " Core " ) Inspired by the " lotus root " , Feng et al . fabricated bionic hollow pipe structures , which are an ideal model with low density , high porosity , and low flow resistance ( Fig . 8a , b ) . With the hollow and porous scaffolds prepared by 3D print - ing , the porous structures can promote blood perfusion , increase the transportation efficiency of oxygen / nutrients and metabolic wastes , and induce tissue growth along the porous channels . This study demonstrated that the bionic " lotus root " 3D - printed scaffolds can significantly enhance cell attachment and proliferation in vitro and promote vas - cularization and osteogenesis in vivo [ 215 ] . Zhang et al . adopted the coaxial 3D printing technique with a modified core / shell printer nozzle and a viscoelastic bioceramic slurry Fig . 7 Structural mimicking 3D printing approaches . a Experimental design of a centrally vascularized tissue engineering bone graft with the unique core – shell composite structure . b SEM characterization and cellular adhesion of implanted cells to the scaffolds . c Evaluation of neovas - cularization of different types of scaffolds through enhanced micro - CT imaging in rabbit femoral bone defect model . a – c are reproduced with permission [ 210 ] . Copyright 2018 , Mary Ann Liebert , Inc . d Marrow retaining scaffold design and dimensions and positioning of vessels with perforated plastic retainer and scaffold assembly in plastic retainer . e Backscattered SEM axial sections from the top , middle , and bottom of scaf - folds with high magnification regions . d , e are reproduced with permission [ 214 ] . Copyright 2019 , Wiley Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 Page 25 of 43 239 1 3 to produce a silicate bioceramic ( BRT – H ) scaffold with an outer diameter of 1 mm and an inner diameter of 500 μm . The compressive strength of the scaffold was up to 26 MPa . The BRT scaffold cannot only affect osteogenesis by releas - ing bioactive ions but also promote angiogenesis by inducing endothelial cell migration . More interestingly , the hollow pipes can significantly facilitate the host vessels permeate into the pipes and of great benefit for transporting stem cells and growth factors to promote vascularized osteogenesis [ 216 ] . Based on digital laser processing ( DLP ) , Zhang et al . successfully prepared a Haversian bone - mimicking scaffold with complete hierarchical Haversian bone structures . By altering the parameters of the Haversian bone - mimicking structure , the compressive strength and porosity of the 3D - printed scaffold could be manipulated . The Haversian bone - mimicking scaffold showed great potential for multi - cellular delivery , as it could induce osteogenesis , angiogen - esis , and neurogenic differentiation in vitro , and boost the ingrowth of vessels and the formation of new bone in vivo . By mimicking native complex bone tissue , this study pro - vides a novel strategy to design biomaterials that are struc - tured and functionalized for application in tissue regenera - tion ( Fig . 8c , d ) [ 217 ] . To sum up , the unique “core – shell” bionic scaffold has emerged as a solution in bone tissue engi - neering , particularly for the treatment of large bone defects . The superiorities in central vascularization , nutrient , and Fig . 8 Structural mimicking designs for vascularized tissue constructs . a The schemata of the functions of lotus root microstructure and the application of lotus root - like biomimetic materials in tissue regeneration . Traditional and embedded structure of 3D printed nozzle and the print - ing process . b Fluorescence image of histological sections of biomimetic scaffolds , the optical and magnified blood vessels within the scaffolds , and the micro - CT analysis of newly formed c , bone tissue . a , b are reproduced with permission [ 215 ] . Copyright 2017 , Wiley . c Bioprinting process of the Haversian bone - mimicking scaffolds . d The histological studies of the Haversian bone - mimicking scaffold implants to evaluate vasculogenesis and osteogenesis properties . c , d are reproduced with permission [ 217 ] . Copyright 2020 , American Association for the Advance - ment of Science Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 239 Page 26 of 43 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40820 - 023 - 01187 - 2 © The authors metabolic waste transportation , and the coupling of vas - cularization and osteogenesis endow bionic scaffolds with broad and promising application prospects . 9 Vascularized 4D Printed Scaffolds in the Tissues The main principle of 4D printing technology is based on 3D printing , using 3D printing method and the intelligent materi - als ( SMP is the most widely used ) as printing ink , to design the material functionality , molding process and final programming behavior into the initial configuration [ 218 ] . After the printing is formed , the external stimulus is used to precisely control the change of the shape and functional of the 4D printing objects to meet the needs of the application [ 219 ] . The external stimu - lus mainly includes physical factors ( temperature and humid - ity , force , sound and photoelectricity , time ) , chemical factors ( pH , acid and base , catalyst ) and biological factors ( sugar salinity , enzyme ) [ 220 ] . These changes mainly include physi - cal changes ( geometry , specific gravity , structure , force , light , electric , thermal and magnetic properties ) , chemical changes ( oxidation , reduction , catalysis and stability ) and physiologi - cal changes ( cell activity , enzyme activity , reproduction and repair ) , which changes are usually spontaneous , change over time , do not need own energy , and can use energy stored or transformed from external conditions and innovative technolo - gies that integrate product design , manufacturing , and assem - bly have been realized [ 221 ] . The 4D objects are no longer static and inanimate , but intelligent and dynamic . The material can be directly “programmed” to design the deformation of the structure into the material and simplify the manufacturing process . In conclusion , 4D printing technology is an additive manufacturing - technology of intelligent materials . Smart materials , also known as intelligent materials , which are responsive to the external stimulus including heat , moisture , stress , pH , and magnetic fields , have found exten - sive applications in sensors , actuators , soft robots , medical devices and artificial muscles , which mainly includes Shape memory polymer ( SMP ) , shape memory alloy ( SMA ) , shape memory hydrogels ( SMHs ) , electroactive polymer ( EAP ) and etc . [ 222 ] . Shape memory polymer is the most widely used intelligent material in the field of 4D printing . It refers to a kind of polymer material that can change their shape and functional according to the external stimulus and adjust its state parameters , so as to back to the preset state [ 223 ] . Compared with shape memory alloy , it has better plastic - ity , good biocompatibility , mechanical properties and shape memory properties . Shape memory alloy is an intelligent material which can be used to restore shape by thermal drive [ 224 ] . It has the characteristics of low driving volt - age , high strain performance , large rigidity and wide strain range , and has great value in the application of 4D printing technology . Shape memory hydrogel ( SMHs ) is also a very popular intelligent material [ 225 ] . Its working mechanism is that the molecular chains in polymers undergo revers - ible hydration under different conditions and change volume through shrinkage and swelling so as to realize the shape memory function of SMHs [ 226 , 227 ] . The shape memory hydrogel is mainly driven by water . The printed structure has a great dependence on the environment . To achieve the shape change without changing the volume of the hydrogel , more complex chemical reaction and structural design are needed . 4D printing technology is one of the methods to change the shape of SMHS , which has been applied in the medical field [ 228 ] . Electroactive polymer ( EAP ) is a new type of intelligent material which can produce shape change under electric field excitation . It has special electrical and mechanical properties . Compared with traditional piezo - electric materials , EAP has the advantages of light weight , high driving efficiency and good seismic performance . The artificial muscle actuator based on EAP combined with 4D printing has greater strain performance , which is one of the most potential biomimetic materials [ 224 ] . Bone tissue regeneration is a dynamic process , and these dynamic functional conformation changes are caused by inter - nal mechanisms that respond to internal or external stimuli , which cannot be simulated by 3D printing [ 229 ] . The 4D printed objects can change over time under different stimuli and adapt to the native microenvironment of the defect area , providing a new strategy for bone tissue engineering [ 228 , 230 ] . In addition , the biomimetic bone microenvironment established by 4D printing also affects the cell behavior in the post - printing stage and enhances the differentiation of stem cells [ 224 ] . In vascularized bone tissue engineering , the rapid establishment of a microvascular network is the key to success . The diameters of natural capillaries and ven - ules are mostly 8 – 20 μm . The cortical bone also contains the Haversian canal , in which the diameter of the central vessel is 60 – 90 μm . Traditional 3D printing technology is unable to meet the requirements . Based on the shortcomings of 3D printing , Kirillova et al . used 4D printing technology to be Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 Page 27 of 43 239 1 3 fabricated hollow self - folding tubes with diameters compara - ble to those of the smallest blood vessels by combining mouse MSCs with methacrylate alginate and hyaluronic acid hybrid hydrogels [ 227 ] . This kind of blood vessel can maintain the cells in the hydrogel to survive for at least 7 days in vitro , and the cell viability is not affected . The successful preparation of such microvessels is of great significance to vascularized bone tissue engineering ( Fig . 9a – d ) . In another study , Devil - lard et al . used 4D printing to embed thrombin and alkaline phosphatase in bio - ink [ 225 ] . The encapsulated alkaline phos - phatase can make local and pre - programmed calcifications of 3D object parts . And the diffusion of thrombin from the object allows the formation of fibrin biofilm directly on the surface of the 3D object . Through this special method , it can make vascularized alveolar bone constructs . This research also provides a new direction for the manufacture of multi - active 4D printed vascularized bone tissue ( Fig . 9d , e ) . These advances in 4D printing technology can modify the traditional 3D printed bone structure , enhance its shape and function adaptability , and provide additional potential for manufactur - ing complex printed bone structures in future clinical applica - tions to dynamically adapt to defective areas . 10 5D / 6D Printing in Bone Tissue Engineering and the Challenges of Industrialization The printing technology revolution is underway , with 5D and 6D printing developing as two emerging innovative and widely used technologies , while 3D and 4D printing are facing chal - lenges . The 5D printing technology was first implemented by William Yerazunis , Senior Principal Research Scientist at Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs ( MERL ) , in 2018 [ 231 ] . Besides , professor William Yerazunis made the initiative to step into the future and potentially take 5D printing to new heights . In contrast to 3D printing technology , 5D printing can be done on the traditional X , Y and Z axes , with the addition of two other axes , which involves the motion of the printing head along with the rotation of the print bed at defined angles [ 232 ] . 5D printing is an emerging additive manufacturing - technology that can create multi - dimensional products especially curved layers using five - axis printers whose printer heads & printable objects have five degrees of freedom as the printer bed can move back and forth with additional two axes . The competitive advantage of 5D printing compared with 3D printing is that it can produce stronger objects using less material . As the human skeleton is not a simple flat surface but a curved surface with a certain degree of curvature , 5D printing can meet the needs of this artificial bone , providing strong mechanical properties while having a curved surface , 5D printing has great potential for artificial bone production [ 233 , 234 ] . In Orthopedic sur - gery , complex and strong implants with curved surfaces are an essential requirement . 5D printing prints these complex surgi - cal implants as per actual surgery of patient and also applicable in surgical planning , teaching , and learning . So , 5D printing can easily create a sophisticated and curved structure which requires a lot of strength [ 15 , 234 ] . Here , an attempt is made to introduce the concept of 6D printing , which can be regarded as a child born from the marriage between 4D printing and 5D printing . The main advantage of 6D printing is the ability to print in more directions and along more complex and even curved paths , thus leading to more elaborate products in terms of achieving a level of structural integrity and intelligence . In addition , a properly set up approach to 6D printing can reduce the use of raw materials while providing shorter processing times due to its inherent processing flexibility [ 16 ] . Note that , on the whole , the proposed idea aims to improve the qual - ity , programmability and tunability of the multi - intelligent response of printed objects to meet the needs of vascularized bone tissue engineering . Apart from the advantages mentioned above , the main limitation of 5D and 6D printing in terms of industrialization is the additional cost of the two axes , which people do not value as a technological revolution . The 5D and 6D printing covered in this overview refers to the actual degrees of freedom of the print head and print platform in the printing device . Furthermore , it is worth noting that printers with 5D and 6D degrees of freedom still perform 3D / 4D print - ing . Running bespoke machines also requires more accurate software and hardware , which is a challenge for both individu - als and society . Another limitation is the highly skilled human resources required to operate and maintain the machines , which means more expenditure in terms of time and money . 11 Vascularized Additive Manufacturing‑Scaffolds in General Tissue Engineering Fields Tissue engineering has been a brand - new approach to solve the problems of tissue repairing and organ recon - struction in regenerative medicine [ 23 , 235 , 236 ] . Additive Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 239 Page 28 of 43 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40820 - 023 - 01187 - 2 © The authors F i g . 9 S c h e m a ti c ill u s t r a ti on o f t h e 4 D p r i n t e d v a s c u l a r i ze d s ca ff o l d s a pp li ca ti on i n ti ss u e e ng i n ee r i ng . a S c h e m e o f t h e 4 D b i o f a b r i ca ti on o f s e l f - f o l d i ng hyd r og e l - b a s e d ( ce ll - l a d e n ) t ub e s . b S e l f - f o l d i ng hyd r og e l - b a s e d ( ce ll - l a d e n ) t ub e s r e s pon s i v e n e ss : ca r t oon s ( upp e r p a n e l ) a nd r e p r e s e n t a ti v e pho t og r a ph s ( l o w e r p a n e l ) . c R e p r e s e n t a ti v e fl uo r e s ce n ce m i c r o s c opy i m a g e s o f t h e ce ll - l a d e n t ub e s a f t e r 1 d ( l e f t c o l u m n ) , 2 d ( m i dd l e c o l u m n ) , a nd 7 d ( r i gh t c o l u m n ) o f c u lt u r e [ 227 ] . C opy r i gh t 2017 , W il e y . d A l k a li n e pho s ph a t a s e a nd t h r o m b i n 4 D ac ti v it y [ 225 ] . C opy r i gh t 2018 , W il e y . e T h e s e qu e n ti a l ca t a l y s i s ac ti v iti e s o f 4 D ob j ec t l ea d i ng t o fi b r i n d e po s iti on a nd ca l c i fi ca ti on [ 225 ] C opy r i gh t 2018 , W il e y Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 Page 29 of 43 239 1 3 manufacturing - technology can construct complex and systematic vascular networks , then protect and mimic the metabolic functions of natural tissues , and thus provide the possibility for further applications of tissue engineer - ing [ 8 ] . In this paper , the application of additive man - ufacturing - technology in vascularized bone tissue engi - neering has been reviewed . Furthermore , the application of additive manufacturing - technology in vascular tissue engineering , cardiovascular system , skeletal muscle , soft tissue ( adipose tissue and skin ) , tissue metabolism , surgery and cancer in this chapter is briefly presented ( Scheme 2 ) . The construction of functional vascular networks not only enables tissue repair and regeneration , but also facilitates research and development of tumor therapy and artifi - cial organs , which is of great significance for improving human health . Vascularization engineering is widely used because it can be constructed through different technical routes , greatly increasing the operability and control of vascularization engineering [ 237 ] . There are a number of methods for constructing vascularized tissue engineering , including sound Patterning , volumetric printing , guidance provided by anisotropic particles and gels , DLP printing , among others . ( 1 ) Sound Patterning involves the use of acoustic surface standing waves ( e . g . , Faraday waves ) to drive cells , organoids or inorganic particles to form a target spatial pattern on demand . The technique allows parameters ( sound frequency , amplitude , chamber shape ) to be adjusted to generate morphologically relevant tissue under non - contact , rapid and gentle culture conditions . Both Petta et al . and Marzio et al . have been successful in studies of acoustically induced angiogenesis [ 238 , 239 ] . ( 2 ) Volumetric printing , an ultra - fast , light - based tech - nology that sculpts cell - filled hydrogel bioresins into 3D structures in a layer - less manner , allows for spatial pat - terning of multiple ink / cell types , offering greater design freedom than traditional bioprinting . Größbacher et al . , Ribezzi et al . , Falandt et al . and Bernal et al . have all achieved success in vascularisation engineering using bio - volume printing , even with large vessels and microcapil - laries [ 240 – 243 ] . ( 3 ) Licht et al . , Terpstra et al . and Tang et al . have been successful in the field of vascularization engineering using guidance provided by anisotropic par - ticles and gels , DLP printing , in acute spinal cord injury , meniscal models and tumor models respectively [ 244 – 246 ] Scheme 2 Schematic illustration of the vascularized additive manufacturing - scaffolds application in related areas . a Cardiac patch with unique 4D self - deforming capability [ 248 ] . b Biomimetic muscle fiber structure of 3D printed skeletal muscle [ 193 ] . c Self - filled vascularized soft tis - sue [ 250 ] . d Vascularized 3D printed objects with self - generated oxygen [ 252 ] . e Patient - specific aortic root models with internal sensors [ 253 ] . f Endothelialized vascular beds to elucidate the contribution of hydrodynamics in determining sites of circulating tumor cell ( CTC ) vascular colonization [ 254 ] Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 239 Page 30 of 43 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40820 - 023 - 01187 - 2 © The authors The contractile activity of the heart is regarded as the engine of the cardiovascular system , in which the blood vessels have a complex tree - like structure , including the smallest capillary with a diameter from 5 to 10 mm and the largest artery with a diameter of 30 mm [ 5 ] . With the development of 3D / 4D vascular network , the use of 3D / 4D printed technology to reconstruct vascular tissue has been the focus of clinical research [ 247 ] . Scott et al . reported a biological manufacturing method , via embedded three - dimensional bioprinting , which introduces vascular net - works into organ building blocks ( OBBs ) , and the matrix shows the required self - healing and viscoplastic behavior , and the subsequent construction of perfusable cardiac tis - sue with synchronously fusing and beating activity [ 27 ] . In another study , this specific design improves the bio - mechanical properties of the patch itself and the dynamic fusion of the patch with the beating heart by combining the unique 4D self - deforming capability with an expand - able microstructure . Vascular and myocyte maturation were improved in vivo and in vitro under physiologically related mechanical stimulation [ 248 ] ( Scheme 2a ) . Skel - etal muscle is connected to the bone through tendons , and the movement is controlled by the force generated by con - traction . In addition , skeletal muscle is also a kind of high vascularized tissue as bone . In order to achieve effective transmission , vascularized skeletal muscle printing needs to control the vascular network more accurately . Kang et al . presented an integrated tissue – organ printer ( ITOP ) and fabricated an organized soft tissue—a 3D muscle con - struct 15 mm × 5 mm × 1 mm in dimension . Immediately after printing , the printed structures contained muscle fiber – like bundles ( ~ 400 µm width ) , supporting PCL pil - lars and Pluronic F - 127 hydrogel as a temporary structure [ 193 ] ( Scheme 2b ) . Soft tissues include skin , adipose tis - sue , nerves , etc . Of these , the skin is the largest organ of the human body and fatty tissue is also involved , covers the surface of the body , providing protection and indis - pensable sensitive such as feeling , secretion , excretion , breathing and other functions [ 249 ] . The soft , elastomeric aliphatic polycarbonate - based materials were designed by Weems et al . to undergo 4D printing into supportive soft tissue engineering scaffolds . The 4D printed scaf - fold allowed them to fill model soft tissue voids without deforming the surrounding material , and in vivo , infiltra - tion of adipocyte lobules into surface eroded scaffolds can be observed at 2 months , while neovascularization is observed [ 250 ] ( Scheme 2c ) . In addition to applications in macroscopic tissues , there are also applications in micro - scopic cellular metabolism . Miller et al . printed rigid 3D filament networks of carbohydrate glass that could be lined with endothelial cells and perfused with blood under high - pressure pulsatile flow . The perfusion of vascular channels maintained the metabolic function of primary rat hepato - cytes , whose core function would otherwise be inhibited [ 251 ] . In another study , Zhang et al . at Harvard Univer - sity , used three - dimensional ( 3D ) bioprinting containing patterns of green algae ( Chlamydomonas reinhardtii ) as a natural photosynthetic oxygen generator . This enabled photosynthetic oxygen ( O 2 ) to be supplied to the volu - metric extracellular matrix within mammalian cells . The researchers were able to enzymatically remove the pat - tern of bio - printed Chlamydomonas reinhardtii from the matrix after subsequent reendothelialization of the formed hollow perfusable microchannels , resulting in biologically relevant vascularized mammalian tissue constructs [ 252 ] ( Scheme 2d ) . What’s more , It is also used in clinical treat - ment , mainly in surgery and oncology . Haghiashtiani et al . printed patient - specific aortic root models with internal sensors for minimally invasive applications . These models may pave exciting avenues for mitigating the risks of post - operative complications and facilitating the development of next - generation medical devices [ 253 ] ( Scheme 2e ) . In another study , Gillaspie et al . used 5D printing technol - ogy to develop models of complex tumors , which helped with surgical planning , predicting potential difficulties , reducing surgical risks , teaching learners and educating patients [ 15 ] . Hynes et al . have bio - printed endothelial - ized vascular beds and perfused these constructs with metastatic mammary gland cells under physiological flow rates to elucidate the contribution of hydrodynamics in determining sites of circulating tumor cell ( CTC ) vascular colonization [ 254 ] ( Scheme 2f ) . All kinds of application examples show that additive manufacturing has a broad application prospect in the field of regenerative medicine and provides a cutting - edge method for the structural design of organ regeneration complex tissues . By now , the additive manufacturing of some tissues and organs that have been completed is still far from clinical application [ 5 , 255 – 257 ] . How to improve the mechanical strength while building a blood vessel network in a shorter time to promote tissue survival and regeneration is the main direction of future efforts . Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 Page 31 of 43 239 1 3 12 Conclusions and Prospects Timely and effective vascularization has always been a key to bone repair . Additive manufacturing - technology can effectively combine tissue engineering and vascular - ized osteogenesis and print multi - functional scaffolds for clinical transplantation [ 67 ] . It has become an emerging , precise , and personalized technique for constructing vas - cularized bone tissue engineering scaffolds . Although sev - eral reviews have discussed 3D / 4D printing scaffold vascu - larization , to the best of our knowledge , this review is the first comprehensive review of vascularized 3D / 4D / 5D / 6D - printed bone repair biomaterials that includes research advances in vascularization in tissue repair and regenera - tion , tissue graft materials , techniques , and materials of 3D printing , 3D - printed scaffolds for vascularized osteo - genesis , 4D printing , materials and applications in vascu - larized bone tissue engineering , the excellent advantages of 5D / 6D printing scaffolds in bone tissue engineering and vascularized additive manufacturing - scaffolds in related fields , Even though many successful cases of vascularized additive manufacturing - scaffolds have been reported , there are still several challenges that need to be focused on and overcome . ( 1 ) Different regions of human tissues may have various biomechanical properties and structural architec - tures , and the complex microenvironment of tissues makes bionic printing more difficult [ 206 ] . Therefore , obtaining precise data to print personalized vascular - ized scaffolds and further improving the osseointegra - tion ability of the scaffolds will be a focus of future research . ( 2 ) For tissue functionalization and carrier loading of 3D / 4D / 5D / 6D - printed vascularized scaffolds with bioactive small molecules , the biggest limitation is that the release behavior is not sufficiently sustained during the whole tissue repair process . Evaluation of the results showed that the most sustained release was only about four weeks , which is far from sufficient for the whole tissue repair process [ 157 ] . Thus , sustain - ing the release of active molecules with the premise of biosafety and early vascularization is the direction for future investigation . ( 3 ) Currently , the approaches to construct vascularized 3D / 4D / 5D / 6D - printed scaffolds for tissue repair still focus on the delivery of functional groups , cells , or bioactive small molecules . Maintaining the activity of the bioactive components that modified the scaffold surface or were encapsulated inside the scaffold and ensuring a sustained release are needed to be explored and investigated in future studies [ 258 – 262 ] . ( 4 ) As a strong connective - tissue that covering the tis - sue surface periosteum is important for tissue repair because it provides the blood supply and nutrients for tissue repair . In addition , the periosteum is abundant in nerves , thus tissue fracture also incurs nerve dam - age [ 263 , 264 ] . Investigating the combination of vas - cularized additive manufacturing - tissue scaffolds and nerve regeneration is believed to further promote the research on tissue repair biomaterials . ( 5 ) Tissues are in a dynamic equilibrium between the osteoclasts formed by the differentiation of hemat - opoietic stem cells resulting from the resorption of dead tissue and the osteoblasts derived from differ - entiation of mesenchymal stem cells [ 43 ] . Given that seeking a new balance between osteoblasts and oste - oclasts in the application of additive manufacturing for vascularized osteogenesis also needs to be further explored . ( 6 ) Tissue mineralization is dependent on calcium and phosphorus metabolism , of which calcium ions are important for the coagulation system . When a fracture occurs , calcium ions are involved in both the blood clot formation at the early stage and affect profoundly calcium and phosphorus metabolism at a later stage [ 265 – 268 ] . Using additive manufacturing - technology to alter vascularized osteogenesis by regulating cal - cium ions would be a valuable research direction . ( 7 ) The immune microenvironment has been shown to play an important role in the tissue repair process . The immune system , skeletal system , and vascular sys - tem are closely associated and share many cytokines related to the regulation of the immune microenvi - ronment , which together maintain the stability of the tissue microenvironment [ 269 – 271 ] . Therefore , in the future , combining the immune system regulation with vascularized additive manufacturing - scaffolds to induce osteogenesis could be a new research topic . ( 8 ) Although 4D / 6D printing integrates the concept of time , the deformation process of 4D / 6D printing structure is only a simple shape change , which cannot meet the complex and changeable clinical applications [ 272 ] . What’s more , it is a challenge for us to accu - rately control the changes of 4D / 6D printed objects while improving the printing resolution , whether the structural changes can bring about functional optimi - zation . Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 239 Page 32 of 43 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40820 - 023 - 01187 - 2 © The authors ( 9 ) The deformation mechanism is triggered by a variety of stimuli , such as temperature , pH , ultraviolet light and so on . When these stimulating factors change dra - matically ( e . g . , temperature 4 – 40 °C , pH too acidic or too alkaline ) , whether they will affect the cell viabil - ity , and then affect the next tissue repair process , is what we need to tackle in the future research . ( 10 ) Although a large number of stimulus - responsive bio - materials have been used in 4D printing technology , it is very important to introduce computer design technology and complex multiple stimulus – response programs to realize the manufacture of complex self - transforming objects in order to promote the large - scale production and fine program control of 4D bio - printing in tissue engineering . However , the cost of these stimulus responses and programmable bioma - terials can be expensive . At the same time , large - scale production should also be feasible and controllable . Therefore , there is still a trade - off between the fea - sibility of manufacturing and the advantages of 4D bio - printing . ( 11 ) As for 5D and 6D printing , it is important to find a balance between print head print angle and extrusion speed , so that each part works well together to print complex objects and keep the printed object active . This is the key to popularizing 5D and 6D printing technologies in the future . ( 12 ) Current approaches for vascularized additive manu - facturing - scaffolds are mostly limited to single - fac - tor analysis and lack the investigation of biological systems . As a result , the biological study of additive manufacturing - materials has not been fully devel - oped yet . At the same time , the biological effects are codetermined by the tissue microenvironment and multi - system cells [ 272 – 274 ] . As the tissue micro - environment is in a dynamic equilibrium , it will be challenging to maintain the balance among the scaf - folds’ mechanical properties , vascularized active components , biocompatibility , and implant microen - vironment using additive manufacturing - technology . Finally , it is believed that our unremitting efforts and research will lead to significant advancements in the field of tissue regeneration . ( 13 ) In vitro modelling is one of the important applications of vascularized additive manufacturing - scaffolds , as it increases the degree of simulation of the scaffold and thus allows for a better study of the interaction between vascularized additive manufacturing - scaf - folds and human physiology . In the study of some dis - ease treatment processes , such as myocardial infarc - tion and glandular duct syndrome , in vitro models can also be used as simulation objects to easily detect and predict disease progression from dynamic simulations within the blood vessels . ( 14 ) In vitro models of vascularized additive manufactur - ing - scaffolds can of course also provide better support for drug screening . As vascularized additive manufac - turing - scaffold in vitro models are able to simulate the human vascular system , drugs often better mimic the actual situation when interacting with the scaffold models , thus improving the accuracy of drug studies . ( 15 ) Vascularized additive manufacturing - scaffolds can also be used for organ transplantation . Organ transplantation has been a popular area of research in medicine due to the lack of organs available for transplantation . In contrast , vascularized additive manufacturing - scaffolds can not only provide multi - ple components for cell growth in organs , but can also be precisely tailored to complex biological structures , thus providing new ideas and opportunities for organ transplantation . Acknowledgements This work was supported by grants from the National Key Research and Development Program of China ( 2020YFA0908200 ) , Shanghai Municipal Education Commis - sion—Gaofeng Clinical Medicine Grant Support ( 20171906 ) , Shanghai Municipal Health and Family Planning Commission ( 2022XD055 ) , Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province ( Shandong ) ( ZR2020QH121 ) and GuangCi Professorship Pro - gram of Ruijin Hospital Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine . Dr . Zhang acknowledges the love and support from grandparents Wenqing Zhang and Yinmei Qiu and MIT professor Mildred Dresselhaus . Funding Open access funding provided by Shanghai Jiao Tong University . Declarations Conflict of interest All authors declare that there are no competing interests . They have no known competing financial interests or per - sonal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work re - ported in this paper . All authors declare that there are no competing interests . Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4 . 0 International License , which permits use , sharing , adaptation , distribution and reproduction in any medium or format , as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author ( s ) and the source , provide a link to the Creative Commons licence , and indicate if changes were made . The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Com - mons licence , unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material . If material is not included in the article’s Creative Com - mons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 Page 33 of 43 239 1 3 regulation or exceeds the permitted use , you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder . To view a copy of this licence , visit http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / . References 1 . B . E . Kelly , I . Bhattacharya , H . Heidari , M . Shusteff , C . M . Spadaccini et al . , Volumetric additive manufacturing via tomographic reconstruction . Science 363 ( 6431 ) , 1075 – 1079 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / scien ce . aau71 14 2 . C . W . Hull , Apparatus for production of three - dimensional objects by stereolithography , US4575330A , ( 1986 ) 3 . A . J . Hart , A . Rao , How to print a 3D object all at once . Sci - ence 363 ( 6431 ) , 1042 – 1043 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / scien ce . aaw70 62 4 . K . Liang , S . Carmone , D . Brambilla , J . C . Leroux , 3D printing of a wearable personalized oral delivery device : A first - in - human study . Sci . Adv . 4 ( 5 ) , eaat2544 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / sciadv . aat25 44 5 . A . Lee , A . R . Hudson , D . J . Shiwarski , J . W . Tashman , T . J . Hin - ton et al . , 3D bioprinting of collagen to rebuild components of the human heart . Science 365 ( 6452 ) , 482 – 487 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / scien ce . aav90 51 6 . R . L . Truby , J . A . Lewis , Printing soft matter in three dimen - sions . Nature 540 ( 763 ) , 371 – 378 ( 2016 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / natur e21003 7 . S . V . Murphy , A . Atala , 3D bioprinting of tissues and organs . Nat . Biotechnol . 32 ( 8 ) , 773 – 785 ( 2014 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nbt . 2958 8 . S . V . Murphy , P . De Coppi , A . Atala , Opportunities and challenges of translational 3D bioprinting . Nat . Biomed . Eng . 4 ( 4 ) , 370 – 380 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41551 - 019 - 0471 - 7 9 . J . H . Li , M . Pumera , 3D printing of functional microrobots . Chem . Soc . Rev 50 ( 4 ) , 2794 – 2838 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1039 / d0cs0 1062f 10 . L . L . Ouyang , J . P . K . Armstrong , Y . Y . Lin , J . P . Wojciechowski , C . Lee - Reeves et al . , Expanding and optimizing 3D bioprint - ing capabilities using complementary network bioinks . Sci . Adv . 6 ( 38 ) , 5529 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / sciadv . abc55 29 11 . A . Urciuolo , I . Poli , L . Brandolino , P . Raffa , V . Scatto - lini et al . , Intravital three - dimensional bioprinting . Nat . Biomed . Eng . 4 ( 9 ) , 901 – 915 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41551 - 020 - 0568 - z 12 . L . Moroni , J . A . Burdick , C . Highley , S . J . Lee , Y . Morimoto et al . , Biofabrication strategies for 3D in vitro models and regenerative medicine . Nat . Rev . Mater . 3 ( 5 ) , 21 – 37 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41578 - 018 - 0006 - y 13 . S . Tibbits , The emergence of " 4D printing " , TED Talk , USA , 10 , ( 2013 ) 14 . Z . Ding , C . Yuan , X . Peng , T . Wang , H . J . Qi et al . , Direct 4D printing via active composite materials . Sci . Adv . 3 ( 4 ) , e1602890 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / sciadv . 16028 90 15 . E . A . Gillaspie , J . S . Matsumoto , N . E . Morris , R . J . Downey , K . R . Shen et al . , From 3 - dimensional printing to 5 - dimen - sional printing : enhancing thoracic surgical planning and resection of complex tumors . Ann . Thorac . Surg . 101 ( 5 ) , 1958 – 1962 ( 2016 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . athor acsur . 2015 . 12 . 075 16 . S . K . Georgantzinos , G . I . Giannopoulos , P . A . Bakalis , Addi - tive manufacturing for effective smart structures : the idea of 6D printing . J . Composites Sci . 5 , 119 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / jcs50 50119 17 . J . F . Liao , R . X . Han , Y . Z . Wu , Z . Y . Qian , Review of a new bone tumor therapy strategy based on bifunctional bioma - terials . Bone Res . 9 ( 1 ) , 18 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41413 - 021 - 00139 - z 18 . L . G . Griffith , G . Naughton , Tissue engineering : current challenges and expanding opportunities . Science 295 ( 5557 ) , 1009 – 1014 ( 2002 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / scien ce . 10692 10 19 . L . Claes , S . Recknagel , A . Ignatius , Fracture healing under healthy and inflammatory conditions . Nat . Rev . Rheuma - tol . 8 ( 3 ) , 133 – 143 ( 2012 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrrhe um . 2012 . 1 20 . A . Gruneboom , I . Hawwari , D . Weidner , S . Culemann , S . Muller et al . , A network of trans - cortical capillaries as main - stay for blood circulation in long bones . Nat . Metab . 1 ( 2 ) , 236 – 250 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s42255 - 018 - 0016 - 5 21 . B . Grigoryan , S . Paulsen , D . Corbett , D . Sazer , C . Fortin et al . , BIOMEDICINE Multivascular networks and functional intravascular topologies within biocompatible hydrogels . Sci - ence 364 ( 6439 ) , 458 – 464 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / scien ce . aav97 50 22 . E . Bueno , J . Glowacki , Cell - free and cell - based approaches for bone regeneration . Nat . Rev . Rheumatol . 5 ( 12 ) , 685 – 697 ( 2009 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrrhe um . 2009 . 228 23 . C . Kim , S . Hong , D . Shin , S . An , X . Zhang , W . Jhe , Sorting gold and sand ( Silica ) using atomic force microscope - based dielectrophoresis . Nano - Micro Lett . 14 , 13 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40820 - 021 - 00760 - x 24 . J . Gong , C . C . L . Schuurmans , A . M . V . Genderen , X . Cao , W . Li et al . , Complexation - induced resolution enhancement of 3D - printed hydrogel constructs . Nat . Commun . 11 ( 1 ) , 1267 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 020 - 14997 - 4 25 . Z . Lei , W . Zhu , X . Zhang , X . Wang , P . Wu , Bio - inspired ionic skin for theranostics . Adv . Funct . Mater . 31 ( 8 ) , 2008020 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adfm . 20200 8020 26 . S . Camarero - Espinosa , L . Moroni , Janus 3D printed dynamic scaffolds for nanovibration - driven bone regeneration . Nat . Commun . 12 ( 1 ) , 1031 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 021 - 21325 - x 27 . M . A . Skylar - Scott , S . G . M . Uzel , L . L . Nam , J . H . Ahrens , R . L . Truby , J . Lewis et al . , Biomanufacturing of organ - specific tissues with high cellular density and embedded vascular channels . Sci . Adv . 5 ( 9 ) , eaaw2459 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / sciadv . aaw24 59 28 . A . S . Gladman , E . A . Matsumoto , R . G . Nuzzo , L . Mahade - van , J . A . Lewis et al . , Biomimetic 4D printing . Nat . Mater . 15 ( 4 ) , 413 – 418 ( 2016 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / NMAT4 544 Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 239 Page 34 of 43 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40820 - 023 - 01187 - 2 © The authors 29 . A . V . Vasiliadis , N . K . Koukoulias , From three - dimensional ( 3D ) - to 6D - printing technology in orthopedics : science fiction or scientific reality ? J . Funct . Biomater . 13 ( 3 ) , 101 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / jfb13 030101 30 . S . Nida , J . A . Moses , C . Anandharamakrishnan , Emerg - ing applications of 5D / 6D printing in the food industry . J . Agric . Food . Res . 10 , 100392 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jafr . 2022 . 100392 31 . P . Carmeliet , R . K . Jain , Molecular mechanisms and clinical applications of angiogenesis . Nature 473 ( 7347 ) , 298 – 307 ( 2011 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / natur e10144 32 . R . A . Wimmer , A . Leopoldi , M . Aichinger , N . Wick , B . Hantusch et al . , Human blood vessel organoids as a model of diabetic vasculopathy . Nature 565 ( 7740 ) , 505 – 510 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 018 - 0858 - 8 33 . H . Bae , A . S . Puranik , R . Gauvin , F . Edalat , B . Carrillo - Conde et al . , Building vascular networks . Sci . Transl . Med . 4 ( 160 ) , 160ps23 ( 2012 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / scitr anslm ed . 30036 88 34 . X . Wang , J . Jin , R . Hou , M . Zhou , X . Mou et al . , Differ - entiation of bMSCs on biocompatible , biodegradable , and biomimetic scaffolds for largely defected tissue repair . ACS Appl . Bio Mater . 3 ( 1 ) , 735 – 746 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acsabm . 9b010 63 35 . L . Jin , X . Guo , D . Gao , C . Wu , B . Hu et al . , NIR - responsive MXene nanobelts for wound healing . NPG Asia Mater . 13 ( 1 ) , 24 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41427 - 021 - 00289 - w 36 . A . P . Kusumbe , S . K . Ramasamy , T . Itkin , M . A . Mae , U . H . Langen et al . , Age - dependent modulation of vascular niches for haematopoietic stem cells . Nat . Med . 532 , 380 – 384 ( 2016 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / natur e17638 37 . A . P . Kusumbe , S . K . Ramasamy , R . H . Adams , Coupling of angiogenesis and osteogenesis by a specific vessel subtype in bone . Nature 507 ( 7492 ) , 323 – 328 ( 2014 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / natur e13145 38 . R . K . Jain , Molecular regulation of vessel maturation . Nat . Med . 9 ( 6 ) , 685 – 693 ( 2003 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nm0603 - 685 39 . C . Margadant , Positive and negative feedback mechanisms controlling tip / stalk cell identity during sprouting angio - genesis . Angiogenesis 23 ( 2 ) , 75 – 77 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10456 - 020 - 09706 - 0 40 . R . O . Alabi , G . Farber , C . P . Blobel , Intriguing roles for endothelial ADAM10 / notch signaling in the development of organ - specific vascular beds . Physiol . Rev . 98 ( 4 ) , 2025 – 2061 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1152 / physr ev . 00029 . 2017 41 . H . G . Augustin , G . Y . Koh , Organotypic vasculature : from descriptive heterogeneity to functional pathophysiology . Science 357 ( 6353 ) , eaal2379 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / scien ce . aal23 79 42 . F . Jia , L . Ruan , C . Du , Y . Liu , X . Cai et al . , The nano - formula of zoledronic acid and calcium carbonate targets osteoclasts and reverses osteoporosis . Biomaterials 296 , 122059 ( 2023 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioma teria ls . 2023 . 122059 43 . J . Zhou , Z . Zhang , J . Joseph , X . Zhang , B . E . Ferdows et al . , Biomaterials and nanomedicine for bone regeneration : progress and future prospects . Exploration 1 ( 2 ) , 20210011 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / EXP . 20210 011 44 . F . J . A . de Paula , C . J . Rosen , Marrow adipocytes : origin , struc - ture , and function . Annu . Rev . Physiol . 82 , 461 – 484 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annur ev - physi ol - 021119 - 034513 45 . M . Murshed , Mechanism of bone mineralization . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med . 8 ( 12 ) , a0311229 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / cshpe rspect . a0406 67 46 . J . M . Kanczler , R . O . Oreffo , Osteogenesis and angiogenesis : The potential for engineering bone . Eur . Cell . Mater . 15 ( 4 ) , 100 – 114 ( 2008 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 22203 / eCM . v015a 08 47 . D . Lopes , C . Martins - Cruz , M . B . Oliveira , J . F . Mano , Bone physiology as inspiration for tissue regenerative therapies . Biomaterials 185 , 240 – 275 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioma teria ls . 2018 . 09 . 028 48 . K . K . Sivaraj , R . H . Adams , Blood vessel formation and function in bone . Development 143 ( 15 ) , 2706 – 2715 ( 2016 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1242 / dev . 136861 49 . P . Carmeliet , R . K . Jain , Angiogenesis in cancer and other diseases . Nature 407 ( 6801 ) , 249 – 257 ( 2000 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 35025 220 50 . J . K . Zhang , J . Pan , W . Jing , Motivating role of type H ves - sels in bone regeneration . Cell Prolif 53 ( 9 ) , e12874 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / cpr . 12874 51 . N . G . Schott , N . E . Friend , J . P . Stegemann , Coupling osteo - genesis and vasculogenesis in engineered orthopedic tis - sues . Tissue Eng . Part . B - Rev . 27 ( 3 ) , 199 – 214 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1089 / ten . teb . 2020 . 0132 52 . L . Wu , Y . Gu , L . Liu , J . Tang , J . Mao et al . , Hierarchical micro / nanofibrous membranes of sustained releasing VEGF for periosteal regeneration . Biomaterials 227 , 119555 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioma teria ls . 2019 . 119555 53 . A . Petersen , A . Princ , G . Korus , A . Ellinghaus , H . Leemhuis et al . , A biomaterial with a channel - like pore architecture induces endochondral healing of bone defects . Nat . Commun . 9 , 4430 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 06504 - 7 54 . A . Salhotra , H . N . Shah , B . Levi , M . T . Longaker , Mech - anisms of bone development and repair . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . 21 ( 11 ) , 696 – 711 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41580 - 020 - 00279 - w 55 . M . Marchand , C . Monnot , L . Muller , S . Germain , Extra - cellular matrix scaffolding in angiogenesis and capillary homeostasis . Semin . Cell . Dev . Biol . 89 , 147 – 156 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . semcdb . 2018 . 08 . 007 56 . M . Simons , E . Gordon , L . Claesson - Welsh , Mechanisms and regulation of endothelial VEGF receptor signalling . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Bio . 17 ( 10 ) , 611 – 625 ( 2016 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm . 2016 . 87 57 . J . P . Fu , A . Warmflash , M . P . Lutolf , Stem - cell - based embryo models for fundamental research and translation . Nat . Mater . 20 ( 2 ) , 132 – 144 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41563 - 020 - 00829 - 9 Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 Page 35 of 43 239 1 3 58 . H . C . H . Ko , B . K . Milthorpe , C . McFarland , Engineering thick tissues : the vascularisation problem . Eur . Cell . Mater . 14 , 1 – 18 ( 2007 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 22203 / ecm . v014a 01 59 . C . S . Lee , H . Hwang , S . Kim , J . B . Fan , T . Aghaloo et al . , Inspired by Nature : facile design of nanoclay - organic hydro - gel bone sealant with multifunctional properties for robust bone regeneration . Adv . Funct . Mater . 30 ( 43 ) , 2003717 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adfm . 20200 3717 60 . N . Kohli , S . Ho , S . J . Brown , P . Sawadkar , V . Sharma et al . , Bone remodelling in vitro : where are we headed ? A review on the current understanding of physiological bone remodelling and inflammation and the strategies for testing biomaterials in vitro . Bone 110 , 38 – 46 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bone . 2018 . 01 . 015 61 . C . Gerri , R . Marín - Juez , M . Marass , A . Marks , H . Maischein et al . , Hif - 1 alpha regulates macrophage - endothelial inter - actions during blood vessel development in zebrafish . Nat . Commun . 8 , 15492 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomm s15492 62 . Q . Q . Yao , Y . X . Liu , J . N . Tao , K . M . Baumgarten , H . Sun , Hypoxia - mimicking nanofibrous scaffolds promote endog - enous bone regeneration . ACS . Appl . Mater . Interfaces 8 , 32450 – 32459 ( 2016 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acsami . 6b105 38 63 . Y . Wang , C . Wan , L . Deng , X . Liu , X . Cao et al . , The hypoxia - inducible factor a pathway couples angiogenesis to osteogenesis during skeletal development . J . Clin . Invest . 117 , 1616 – 1626 ( 2007 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1172 / JCI31 581 64 . G . D . G . Barabaschi , V . Manoharan , Q . Li , L . E . Bertassoni et al . , Engineering pre - vascularized scaffolds for bone regen - eration . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . ( 2015 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 22345 - 2 _ 5 65 . M . E . Pitulescu , I . Schmidt , B . D . Giaimo , T . Antoine , F . Berk - enfeld et al . , Dll4 and Notch signalling couples sprouting angiogenesis and artery formation . Nat . Cell . Biol . 19 ( 8 ) , 915 – 927 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb35 55 66 . J . Li , Z . Li , D . Chu , L . Jin , X . Zhang et al . , Fabrication and biocompatibility of core - shell structured magnetic fibrous scaffold . J . Biomed . Nanotechnol . 15 , 500 – 506 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1166 / jbn . 2019 . 2701 67 . P . J . Wang , Y . Z . Sun , X . Q . Shi , H . X . Shen , H . H . Ning et al . , 3D printing of tissue engineering scaffolds : a focus on vas - cular regeneration . Biodes . Manuf . 4 ( 2 ) , 344 – 378 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s42242 - 020 - 00109 - 0 68 . S . Yin , W . J . Zhang , Z . Y . Zhang , X . Q . Jiang , Recent advances in scaffold design and material for vascularized tissue - engineered bone regeneration . Adv . Healthc . Mater . 8 ( 10 ) , e1801433 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adhm . 20180 1433 69 . D . Y . Zhao , W . B . Jiang , Y . Wang , C . D . Wang , X . L . Zhang , Three - dimensional - printed poly - l - lactic acid scaffolds with different pore sizes influence periosteal distraction osteogene - sis of a rabbit skull . Biomed . Res . Int . 2020 , 7381391 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1155 / 2020 / 73813 91 70 . I . Matai , G . Kaur , A . Seyedsalehi , A . McClinton , C . Lau - rencin , Progress in 3D bioprinting technology for tissue / organ regenerative engineering . Biomaterials 226 , 119536 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioma teria ls 71 . S . Bose , N . Sarkar , Natural medicine compounds in bone tissue engineering . Trends Biotechnol . 38 , 404 – 417 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tibte ch . 2019 . 11 . 005 72 . S . Y . Hann , H . T . Cui , T . Esworthy , S . D . Miao , X . Zhou et al . , Recent advances in 3D printing : vascular network for tis - sue and organ regeneration . Transl . Res . 211 , 46 – 63 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . trsl . 2019 . 04 . 002 73 . P . Chandra , A . Atala , Engineering blood vessels and vascular - ized tissues : technology trends and potential clinical applica - tions . Clin . Sci . 133 , 1115 – 1135 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1042 / CS201 80155 74 . T . Wang , Y . K . Zhai , M . Nuzzo , X . Yang , Y . Yang et al . , Layer - by - layer nanofiber - enabled engineering of biomimetic periosteum for bone repair and reconstruction . Biomaterials 182 , 279 – 288 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioma teria ls . 2018 . 08 . 028 75 . A . Marrella , T . Y . Lee , D . H . Lee , S . Karuthedom , D . Syla et al . , Engineering vascularized and innervated bone bio - materials for improved skeletal tissue regeneration . Mater . Today 21 ( 4 ) , 362 – 376 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . mat - tod . 2017 . 10 . 005 76 . M . O . Wang , C . E . Vorwald , M . L . Dreher , E . J . Mott , M . H . Cheng et al . , Evaluating 3D - printed biomaterials as scaffolds for vascularized bone tissue engineering . Adv . Mater . 27 ( 1 ) , 138 – 144 ( 2015 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adma . 20140 3943 77 . K . Schmidt - Bleek , A . Petersen , A . Dienelt , C . Schwarz , G . N . Duda et al . , Initiation and early control of tissue regenera - tion : bone healing as a model system for tissue regeneration . Expert Opin . Biol . Ther . 14 , 247 – 259 ( 2014 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1517 / 14712 598 . 2014 . 857653 78 . Z . Amini , R . Lari , Tissue cell , a systematic review of decel - lularized allograft and xenograft - derived scaffolds in bone tissue regeneration . Tissue Cell 69 , 101494 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tice . 2021 . 101494 79 . W . Park , G . Gao , D . W . Cho , Tissue - specific decellularized extracellular matrix bioinks for musculoskeletal tissue regen - eration and modeling using 3d bioprinting technology . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 22 ( 15 ) , 7837 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / ijms2 21578 37 80 . Z . Yazdanpanah , J . D . Zahra , D . M . L . Cooper , X . B . Chen , 3D bioprinted scaffolds for bone tissue engineering : state - of - the - art and emerging technologies . Front . Bioeng . Biotech . 10 , 824156 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fbioe . 2022 . 824156 81 . X . Chatzistavrou , P . Newby , A . R . Boccaccini , Bioactive glass and glass - ceramic scaffolds for bone tissue engineering , in Bioactive Glasses . ( Elsevier , 2011 ) , pp . 107 – 128 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1533 / 97808 57093 318 . 2 . 107 82 . D . W . Hutmacher , J . T . Schantz , C . X . F . Lam , K . C . Tan , T . C . Lim , State of the art and future directions of scaffold - based bone engineering from a biomaterials perspective . J . Tissue Eng . Regen . Med . 1 ( 4 ) , 245 – 260 ( 2007 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / term . 24 83 . S . L . Wu , X . M . Liu , K . W . K . Yeung , C . S . Liu , X . J . Yang , Bio - mimetic porous scaffolds for bone tissue engineering . Mater . Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 239 Page 36 of 43 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40820 - 023 - 01187 - 2 © The authors Sci . Eng . R - Rep . 80 , 1 – 36 ( 2014 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . mser . 2014 . 04 . 001 84 . T . Yang , Z . C . Hao , Z . Z . Wu , B . X . Xu , J . C . Liu et al . , An engineered lamellar bone mimicking full - scale hierarchical architecture for bone regeneration . Bioact . Mater . 27 , 181 – 199 ( 2023 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioac tmat . 2023 . 03 . 024 85 . B . Safari , A . Aghanejad , L . Roshangar , S . Davaran , Osteo - genic effects of the bioactive small molecules and minerals in the scaffold - based bone tissue engineering . Colloids Surf . B 198 , 111462 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . colsu rfb . 2020 . 111462 86 . A . Grosso , A . Lunger , M . G . Burger , P . S . Briquez , F . C . S . Mai et al . , VEGF dose controls the coupling of angiogenesis and osteogenesis in engineered bone . NPJ Regen . Med . 8 ( 1 ) , 15 ( 2023 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41536 - 023 - 00288 - 1 87 . S . Y . Lv , X . Yuan , J . Xiao , X . L . Jiang , Hemostasis - osteogen - esis integrated Janus carboxymethyl chitin / hydroxyapatite porous membrane for bone defect repair . Carbohyd . Polym . 313 , 120888 ( 2023 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . carbp ol . 2023 . 120888 88 . D . J . Hadjidakis , I . I . Androulakis , Bone remodeling . Ann . New York Acad . Sci . 1092 , 385 – 396 ( 2007 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1196 / annals . 1365 . 035 89 . R . Florencio - Silva , G . R . D . Sasso , E . Sasso - Cerri , M . J . Simões , P . S . Cerri , Biology of bone tissue : structure , func - tion , and factors that influence bone cells . Biomed . Res . Int . 2015 , 421746 ( 2015 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1155 / 2015 / 421746 90 . M . G . Burger , A . Grosso , P . S . Briquez , G . M . E . Born , A . Lunger et al . , Robust coupling of angiogenesis and osteo - genesis by VEGF - decorated matrices for bone regeneration . Acta Biomater . 149 , 111 – 125 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . actbio . 2022 . 07 . 014 91 . Z . Amini , R . Lari , A systematic review of decellularized allo - graft and xenograft - derived scaffolds in bone tissue regenera - tion . Tissue Cell 69 , 101494 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tice . 2021 . 101494 92 . X . Zhao , S . Liu , L . Yildirimer , H . Zhao , R . H . Ding , Injectable stem cell - laden photocrosslinkable microspheres fabricated using microfluidics for rapid generation of osteogenic tissue constructs . Adv . Func . Mater . 26 , 2809 – 2819 ( 2016 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adfm . 20150 4943 93 . B . L . Norris , M . Vanderkarr , C . Sparks , A . Chitnis , B . Ray et al . , Treatments , cost and healthcare utilization of patients with segmental bone defects . Injury 52 ( 10 ) , 2935 – 2940 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . injury . 2021 . 01 . 016 94 . G . Battafarano , M . Rossi , V . De Martino , F . Marampon , L . Borro et al . , Strategies for bone regeneration : from graft to tissue engineering . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 22 ( 3 ) , 1128 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / ijms2 20311 28 95 . Q . Zhang , W . Wu , C . Y . Qian , W . S . Xiao , H . Zhu et al . , Advanced biomaterials for repairing and reconstruction of mandibular defects . Mater . Sci . Eng . C Mater . Biol . Appl . 103 , 109858 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . msec . 2019 . 109858 96 . L . M . Ma , S . Cheng , X . F . Ji , Y . Zhou , Y . Zhang et al . , Immo - bilizing magnesium ions on 3D printed porous tantalum scaffolds with polydopamine for improved vascularization and osteogenesis . Mater . Sci . Eng . C Mater . Biol . Appl . 117 , 111303 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . msec . 2020 . 111303 97 . C . Polley , T . Distler , R . Detsch , H . Lund , A . Springer et al . , 3D printing of piezoelectric barium titanate - hydroxyapatite scaffolds with interconnected porosity for bone tissue engi - neering . Materials 13 ( 7 ) , 1773 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / ma130 71773 98 . D . Y . Zhao , T . T . Zhu , J . Li , L . G . Cui , Z . Zhang , Poly ( lactic - co - glycolic acid ) - based composite bone - substitute materi - als . Bioact . Mater . 6 ( 2 ) , 346 – 360 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioac tmat . 2020 . 08 . 016 99 . H . H . K . Xu , P . Wang , L . Wang , C . Y . Bao , Q . M . Chen et al . , Calcium phosphate cements for bone engineering and their biological properties . Bone Res . 5 , 17056 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / boner es . 2017 . 56 100 . W . Wang , K . W . K . Yeung , Bone grafts and biomaterials sub - stitutes for bone defect repair : a review . Bioact . Mater . 2 ( 4 ) , 224 – 247 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioac tmat . 2017 . 05 . 007 101 . K . M . Emara , R . A . Diab , A . K . Emara , Recent biologi - cal trends in management of fracture non - union . World J . Orthop . 6 ( 8 ) , 623 – 628 ( 2015 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5312 / wjo . v6 . i8 . 623 102 . R . Chen , J . Wang , C . S . Liu , Biomaterials act as enhancers of growth factors in bone regeneration . Adv . Func . Mater . 26 ( 48 ) , 8810 – 8823 ( 2016 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adfm . 20160 3197 103 . Y . F . Yan , H . Chen , H . B . Zhang , C . J . Guo , K . Yang et al . , Vascularized 3D printed scaffolds for promoting bone regen - eration . Biomaterials 190 , 97 – 110 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioma teria ls . 2018 . 10 . 033 104 . X . Y . Han , M . J . Sun , B . Chen , Q . Saiding , J . Y . Zhang et al . , Lotus seedpod - inspired internal vascularized 3D printed scaffold for bone tissue repair . Bioact . Mater . 6 , 1639 – 1652 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioac tmat . 2020 . 11 . 019 105 . L . Valot , J . Martinez , A . Mehdi , G . Subra , Chemical insights into bioinks for 3D printing . Chem . Soc . Rev . 48 ( 15 ) , 4049 – 4086 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1039 / c7cs0 0718c 106 . Y . Chen , W . L . Li , C . Zhang , Z . Y . Wu , J . Liu , Recent devel - opments of biomaterials for additive manufacturing of bone scaffolds . Adv . Healthc . Mater . 9 ( 23 ) , e2000724 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adhm . 20200 0724 107 . X . Q . Zheng , J . F . Huang , J . L . Lin , D . J . Yang , T . Z . Xu et al . , 3D bioprinting in orthopedics translational research . J . Bio - mater . Sci . Polym . Ed . 30 ( 13 ) , 1172 – 1187 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09205 063 . 2019 . 16239 89 108 . Y . Wang et al . , Nature - inspired micropatterns . Nat . Rev . Methods Primers ( 2023 ) . 109 . U . Ghosh , S . Ning , Y . Z . Wang , Y . L . Kong , Addressing unmet clinical needs with 3D printing technologies . Adv . Healthc . Mater . 7 ( 17 ) , e1800417 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adhm . 20180 0417 110 . V . K . Lee , D . Y . Kim , H . G . Ngo , Y . Lee , L . Seo et al . , Creating perfused functional vascular channels using 3D bio - printing Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 Page 37 of 43 239 1 3 technology . Biomaterials 35 , 8092 – 8102 ( 2014 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioma teria ls . 2014 . 05 . 083 111 . X . Cui , T . Boland , Human microvasculature fabrication using thermal inkjet printing technology . Biomaterials 30 , 6221 – 6227 ( 2009 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioma teria ls . 2009 . 07 . 056 112 . Z . Wang , W . Kapadia , C . D . Li , F . Lin , R . F . Pereira et al . , Tissue - specific engineering : 3D bioprinting in regenerative medicine . J . Control . Release 329 , 237 – 256 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jconr el . 2020 . 11 . 044 113 . F . Zheng , B . Derby , J . S . Wong , Fabrication of microvascular constructs using high resolution electrohydrodynamic inkjet printing . Biofabrication 13 ( 3 ) , 035006 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 1758 - 5090 / abd158 114 . H . Balakrishnan , F . Badar , E . H . Doeven , J . I . Novak , A . Merenda et al . , 3D printing : an alternative microfabrication approach with unprecedented opportunities in design . Anal . Chem . 93 ( 1 ) , 350 – 366 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acs . analc hem . 0c046 72 115 . S . S . Rahman , M . Arshad , A . Qureshi , A . Ullah , Fabrication of a self - healing , 3D printable , and reprocessable biobased elastomer . ACS . Appl . Mater . Interfaces 12 , 51927 – 51939 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acsami . 0c142 20 116 . L . Y . Daikuara , Z . L . Yue , D . Skropeta , G . G . Wallace , In vitro characterisation of 3D printed platelet lysate - based bioink for potential application in skin tissue engineering . Acta Bio - mater . 123 , 286 – 297 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . actbio . 2021 . 01 . 021 117 . P . Monks , J . K . Wychowaniec , E . McKiernan , S . Clerkin , J . Crean et al . , Spatiotemporally resolved heat dissipation in 3D patterned magnetically responsive hydrogels . Small 17 ( 5 ) , 2004452 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / smll . 20200 4452 118 . O . Messaoudi , C . Henrionnet , K . Bourge , D . Loeuille , P . Gil - let et al . , Stem cells and extrusion 3D printing for hyaline cartilage engineering . Cells 10 ( 1 ) , 2 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / cells 10010 002 119 . V . F . Sager , M . B . Munk , M . S . Hansen , W . Bredie , L . Ahrné , Formulation of heat - induced whey protein gels for extrusion - based 3D printing . Foods 10 ( 1 ) , 8 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / foods 10010 008 120 . J . M . Unagolla , A . C . Jayasuriya , Hydrogel - based 3D bioprint - ing : A comprehensive review on cell - laden hydrogels , bioink formulations , and future perspectives . Appl . Mater . Today 18 , 100479 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . apmt . 2019 . 100479 121 . J . Z . Zhu , Q . Zhang , T . Q . Yang , Y . Liu , R . Liu , 3D printing of multi - scalable structures via high penetration near - infrared photopolymerization . Nat . Commun . 11 ( 1 ) , 3462 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 020 - 17251 - z 122 . O . Kérourédan , D . Hakobyan , M . Rémy , S . Ziane , N . Dusserre et al . , In situ prevascularization designed by laser - assisted bioprinting : effect on bone regeneration . Biofabri - cation 11 ( 4 ) , 045002 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 1758 - 5090 / ab2620 123 . Y . Lai , Y . Li , H . Cao , J . Long , X . Wang et al . , Osteogenic magnesium incorporated into PLGA / TCP porous scaf - fold by 3D printing for repairing challenging bone defect . Biomaterials 197 , 207 – 219 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioma teria ls . 2019 . 01 . 013 124 . A . L . Rutz , K . E . Hyland , A . E . Jakus , W . R . Burghardt , R . N . Shah , A multimaterial bioink method for 3D printing tun - able , cell - compatible hydrogels . Adv . Mater . 27 , 1607 – 1614 ( 2015 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adma . 20140 5076 125 . S . Barui , A . K . Panda , S . Naskar , R . Kuppuraj , S . Basu et al . , 3D inkjet printing of biomaterials with strength reliability and cytocompatibility : quantitative process strategy for Ti - 6Al - 4V . Biomaterials 213 , 119212 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioma teria ls . 2019 . 05 . 023 126 . S . C . Cox , J . A . Thornby , G . J . Gibbons , M . A . Williams , K . K . Mallick , 3D printing of porous hydroxyapatite scaffolds intended for use in bone tissue engineering applications . Mater . Sci . Eng . C Mater . Biol . Appl . 47 , 237 – 247 ( 2015 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . msec . 2014 . 11 . 024 127 . P . Feng , P . Wu , C . D . Gao , Y . W . Yang , W . Guo et al . , A mul - timaterial scaffold with tunable properties : toward bone tis - sue repair . Adv . Sci . 5 ( 6 ) , 1700817 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / advs . 20170 0817 128 . M . T . Matter , J . H . Li , I . Lese , C . Schreiner , L . Bernard et al . , Multiscale analysis of metal oxide nanoparticles in tissue : insights into biodistribution and biotransformation . Adv . Sci . 7 ( 15 ) , 2000912 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / advs . 20200 0912 129 . J . V . John , A . McCarthy , H . J . Wang , S . X . Chen , Y . Su et al . , Engineering biomimetic nanofiber microspheres with tailored size , predesigned structure , and desired composition via gas bubble - mediated coaxial electrospray . Small 16 , e1907393 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / smll . 20190 7393 130 . L . J . Xu , S . Gao , R . B . Zhou , F . Zhou , Y . Qiao et al . , Bioac - tive pore - forming bone adhesives facilitating cell ingrowth for fracture healing . Adv . Mater . 32 ( 10 ) , e1907491 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adma . 20190 7491 131 . S . Z . Guo , F . Gosselin , N . Guerin , A . M . Lanouette , M . C . Heuzey , Solvent - cast three - dimensional printing of multi - functional microsystems . Small 9 , 4118 – 4122 ( 2013 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / smll . 20130 0975 132 . Z . Li , X . Zhang , Z . Guo , L . Shi , L . Jin et al . , Nature - derived bionanomaterials for sustained release of 5 - fluorouracil to inhibit subconjunctival fibrosis . Mater . Today Adv . 11 , 100150 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . mtadv . 2021 . 100150 133 . B . Sacchetti , A . Funari , S . Michienzi , S . Di Cesare , S . Piersanti et al . , Self - renewing osteoprogenitors in bone mar - row sinusoids can organize a hematopoietic microenviron - ment . Cell 131 , 324 – 336 ( 2007 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2007 . 08 . 025 134 . M . Godoy - Gallardo , N . Portolés - Gil , A . López - Periago , C . Domingo , L . Hosta - Rigau , Multi - layered polydopa - mine coatings for the immobilization of growth factors onto highly - interconnected and bimodal PCL / HA - based scaf - folds . Mater . Sci . Eng . C Mater . Biol . Appl . 117 , 111245 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . msec . 2020 . 111245 135 . H . Susapto , D . Alhattab , S . Abdelrahman , Z . Khan , S . Alshehri et al . , Ultrashort peptide bioinks support auto - mated printing of large - scale constructs assuring long - term Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 239 Page 38 of 43 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40820 - 023 - 01187 - 2 © The authors survival of printed tissue constructs . Nano Lett . 21 ( 7 ) , 2719 – 2729 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acs . nanol ett . 0c044 26 136 . A . Pössl , D . Hartzke , T . M . Schmidts , F . E . Runkel , P . Schlupp , A targeted rheological bioink development guideline and its systematic correlation with printing behavior . Biofabrication 13 ( 3 ) , 035021 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 1758 - 5090 / abde1e 137 . L . Ning , C . Gil , B . Hwang , A . Theus , L . Perez et al . , Bio - mechanical factors in three - dimensional tissue bioprinting . Appl . Phys . Rev . 7 ( 4 ) , 041319 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1063 / 5 . 00232 06 138 . E . P . Chen , Z . Toksoy , B . A . Davis , J . P . Geibel , Geibel , 3D Bioprinting of Vascularized Tissues for in vitro and in viv . Front . Bioeng . Biotech . 9 , 664188 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fbioe . 2021 . 664188 139 . Z . L . Li , Q . H . Wang , G . D . Liu , A review of 3D printed bone implants . Micromachines 13 ( 4 ) , 528 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / mi130 40528 140 . J . H . Shim , J . Y . Won , J . Park , J . H . Bae , G . Ahn et al . , Effects of 3D - printed polycaprolactone / β - tricalcium phosphate mem - branes on guided bone regeneration . Int J . Mol . Sci . 18 ( 5 ) , 899 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / ijms1 80508 99 141 . B . S . Kim , S . Das , J . Jang , D . W . Cho , Decellularized extra - cellular matrix - based bioinks for engineering tissue - and organ - specific microenvironments . Chem . Rev . 120 ( 19 ) , 10608 – 10661 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acs . chemr ev . 9b008 08 142 . W . J . Peng , D . Unutmaz , I . T . Ozbolat , Bioprinting towards physiologically relevant tissue models for pharmaceutics . Trends Biotechnol . 34 , 722 – 732 ( 2016 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tibte ch . 2016 . 05 . 013 143 . J . E . Kim , S . H . Kim , Y . Jung , Current status of three - dimen - sional printing inks for soft tissue regeneration . Tiss . Eng . Regen . Med . 13 ( 6 ) , 636 – 646 ( 2016 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s13770 - 016 - 0125 - 8 144 . H . P . Tan , K . G . Marra , Injectable , biodegradable hydrogels for tissue engineering applications . Materials 3 , 1746 – 1767 ( 2010 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / ma303 1746 145 . G . D . Nicodemus , S . J . Bryant , Cell encapsulation in biode - gradable hydrogels for tissue engineering applications . Tiss . Eng . Pt . B - Rev . 14 , 149 – 165 ( 2008 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1089 / ten . teb . 2007 . 0332 146 . R . Levato , J . Visser , J . A . Planell , E . Engel , J . Malda et al . , Biofabrication of tissue constructs by 3D bioprinting of cell - laden microcarriers . Biofabrication 6 , 035020 ( 2014 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 1758 - 5082 / 6 / 3 / 035020 147 . J . Malda , C . G . Frondoza , Microcarriers in the engineering of cartilage and bone . Trends . Biotechnol . 24 , 299 – 304 ( 2006 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tibte ch . 2006 . 04 . 009 148 . P . H . Jakob , J . Kehrer , P . Flood , C . Wiegel , U . Haselmann et al . , A 3 - D cell culture system to study epithelia functions using microcarriers . Cytotechnology 68 ( 5 ) , 1813 – 1825 ( 2016 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10616 - 015 - 9935 - 0 149 . A . Akkouch , Y . Yu , I . T . Ozbolat , Microfabrication of scaf - fold - free tissue strands for three - dimensional tissue engineer - ing . Biofabrication 7 , 031002 ( 2015 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 1758 - 5090 / 7 / 3 / 031002 150 . D . Del Duca , T . Werbowetski , R . F . Del Maestro , Spheroid preparation from hanging drops : characterization of a model of brain tumor invasion . J . Neurooncol . 67 ( 3 ) , 295 – 303 ( 2004 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1023 / B : NEON . 00000 24220 . 07063 . 70 151 . S . K . Nandi , G . Fielding , D . Banerjee , A . Bandyopadhyay , S . Bose , 3D - printed beta - TCP bone tissue engineering scaffolds : Effects of chemistry on in vivo biological properties in a rab - bit tibia model . J . Mater . Res . 33 , 1939 – 1947 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1557 / jmr . 2018 . 233 152 . A . Kumar , K . C . Nune , R . D . K . Misra , Design and biological functionality of a novel hybrid Ti - 6Al - 4V / hydrogel system for reconstruction of bone defects . J . Tissue Eng . Regen . Med . 12 ( 4 ) , 1133 – 1144 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / term . 2614 153 . Z . Li , X . Zhang , J . Ouyang et al . , Ca 2 + - supplying black phosphorus - based scaffolds fabricated with microfluidic tech - nology for osteogenesis . Bioact . Mater . 6 ( 11 ) , 4053 – 4064 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1166 / jbn . 2019 . 2846 154 . G . Q . Pan , S . J . Sun , W . Zhang , R . B . Zhao , W . G . Cui et al . , Biomimetic design of mussel - derived bioactive peptides for dual - functionalization of titanium - based biomaterials . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 138 ( 45 ) , 15078 – 15086 ( 2016 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / jacs . 6b097 70 155 . L . Yang , I . Ullah , K . D . Yu , W . C . Zhang , J . G . Zhou et al . , Bio - active Sr 2 + / Fe 3 + co - substituted hydroxyapatite in cryogeni - cally 3D printed porous scaffolds for bone tissue engineering . Biofabrication 13 , 035007 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 1758 - 5090 / abcf8d 156 . G . A . Fielding , A . Bandyopadhyay , S . Bose , Effects of silica and zinc oxide doping on mechanical and biological proper - ties of 3D printed tricalcium phosphate tissue engineering scaffolds . Dent . Mater . 28 ( 2 ) , 113 – 122 ( 2012 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . dental . 2011 . 09 . 010 157 . M . Zhu , S . C . Zhao , C . Xin , Y . F . Zhu , C . Q . Zhang , 3D - printed dimethyloxallyl glycine delivery scaffolds to improve angi - ogenesis and osteogenesis . Biomater . Sci . 3 , 1236 – 1244 ( 2015 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1039 / c5bm0 0132c 158 . A . Klein , A . Baranowski , U . Ritz , H . Gotz , S . Heinemann et al . , Effect of bone sialoprotein coated three - dimensional printed calcium phosphate scaffolds on primary human osteoblasts . J . Biomed . Mater . Res . B Appl . Biomater . 106 , 2565 – 2575 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jbm . b . 34073 159 . C . B . Ahn , Y . Kim , S . J . Park , Y . Hwang , J . W . Lee , Develop - ment of arginine - glycine - aspartate - immobilized 3D printed poly ( propylene fumarate ) scaffolds for cartilage tissue engi - neering . J . Biomater . Sci . Polym . Ed . 29 , 917 – 931 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09205 063 . 2017 . 13830 20 160 . J . Wang , M . Yang , Y . Zhu , L . Wang , A . P . Tomsia et al . , Phage nanofibers induce vascularized osteogenesis in 3D printed bone scaffolds . Adv . Mater . 26 , 4961 – 4966 ( 2014 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adma . 20140 0154 Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 Page 39 of 43 239 1 3 161 . M . Zhu , H . He , Q . Meng , Y . Zhu , X . Ye et al . , Osteopontin sequence modified mesoporous calcium silicate scaffolds to promote angiogenesis in bone tissue regeneration . J . Mater . Chem . B 8 , 5849 – 5861 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1039 / d0tb0 0527d 162 . C . Wang , J . Lai , K . Li , S . Zhu , B . Lu et al . , Cryogenic 3D printing of dual - delivery scaffolds for improved bone regen - eration with enhanced vascularization . Bioact . Mater . 6 , 137 – 145 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioac tmat . 2020 . 07 . 007 163 . C . Y . Chen , C . C . Chen , C . Y . Wang , A . K . Lee , C . L . Yeh et al . , Assessment of the release of vascular endothelial growth fac - tor from 3D - printed poly - epsilon - caprolactone / hydroxyapa - tite / calcium sulfate scaffold with enhanced osteogenic capac - ity . Polymers 12 , 1455 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / polym 12071 455 164 . H . Cui , W . Zhu , B . Holmes , L . G . Zhang , Biologically inspired smart release system based on 3D bioprinted per - fused scaffold for vascularized tissue regeneration . Adv . Sci . 3 , 1600058 ( 2016 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / advs . 20160 0058 165 . J . Y . Park , J . H . Shim , S . A . Choi , J . Jang , M . Kim et al . , 3D printing technology to control BMP - 2 and VEGF delivery spatially and temporally to promote large - volume bone regen - eration . J . Mater . Chem . B 3 , 5415 – 5425 ( 2015 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1039 / c5tb0 0637f 166 . E . Avolio , V . Alvino , M . Ghorbel , P . Campagnolo et al . , Perivascular cells and tissue engineering : current applica - tions and untapped potential . Pharmacol . Ther . 171 , 83 – 92 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pharm thera . 2016 . 11 . 002 167 . Y . Yu , W . Zhang , Y . Guo , H . Peng , M . Zhu et al . , Engineer - ing of exosome - triggered enzyme - powered DNA motors for highly sensitive fluorescence detection of tumor - derived exosomes . Biosens . Bioelectron . 167 , 112482 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bios . 2020 . 112482 168 . F . Xiong , X . Ling , X . Chen , J . Chen , J . Tan et al . , Pursuing specific chemotherapy of orthotopic breast cancer with lung metastasis from docking nanoparticles driven by bioinspired exosomes . Nano Lett . 19 , 3256 – 3266 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acs . nanol ett . 9b008 24 169 . J . Polanco , G . Hand , A . Briner , C . Li , J . Götz , Exosomes induce endolysosomal permeabilization as a gateway by which exosomal tau seeds escape into the cytosol . Acta Neuropathol . 141 , 235 – 356 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00401 - 020 - 02254 - 3 170 . A . S . Hoffman , Hydrogels for biomedical applications . Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 54 , 3 – 12 ( 2002 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . addr . 2012 . 09 . 010 171 . K . Zhou , P . Yu , X . Shi , T . Ling , W . Zeng et al . , Hierarchi - cally porous hydroxyapatite hybrid scaffold incorporated with reduced graphene oxide for rapid bone ingrowth and repair . ACS Nano 13 , 9595 – 9606 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acsna no . 9b047 23 172 . G . U . Ruiz - Esparza et al . , Nanoengineered shear - thinning hydrogel barrier for preventing postoperative abdominal adhesions . Nano - Micro Lett . 13 , 212 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40820 - 021 - 00712 - 5 173 . J . Ouyang et al . , A facile and general method for synthesis of antibiotic - free protein - based hydrogel : Wound dressing for the eradication of drug - resistant bacteria and biofilms . Bioact . Mater . 18 , 446 – 458 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioac tmat . 2022 . 03 . 033 174 . H . Liu , W . Li , C . Liu , J . Tan , H . Wang et al . , Incorporating simvastatin / poloxamer 407 hydrogel into 3D - printed porous Ti6Al4V scaffolds for the promotion of angiogenesis , osse - ointegration and bone ingrowth . Biofabrication 8 , 045012 ( 2016 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 1758 - 5090 / 8 / 4 / 045012 175 . D . Zhang , D . Zhong , J . Ouyang , J . He , Y . Qi et al . , Micro - algae - based oral microcarriers for gut microbiota homeo - stasis and intestinal protection in cancer radiotherapy . Nat . Commun . 13 ( 1 ) , 1413 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 28744 - 4 176 . J . Yang , X . Zhang , C . Liu , Z . Wang , L . Deng et al . , Biologi - cally modified nanoparticles as theranostic bionanomateri - als . Prog . Mater . Sci . 118 , 100768 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pmats ci . 2020 . 100768 177 . D . O . Lopez - Cantu , X . Wang , H . Carrasco - Magallanes , S . Afewerki , X . Zhang et al . , From bench to the clinic : the path to translation of nanotechnology - enabled mRNA SARS - CoV - 2 vaccines . Nano - Micro Lett . 14 , 41 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40820 - 021 - 00771 - 8 178 . F . Fahimipour , M . Rasoulianboroujeni , E . Dashtimoghadam , K . Khoshroo , M . Tahriri et al . , 3D printed TCP - based scaf - fold incorporating VEGF - loaded PLGA microspheres for craniofacial tissue engineering . Dent . Mater . 33 , 1205 – 1216 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . dental . 2017 . 06 . 016 179 . X . Zhang , L . Hai , Y . Gao , G . Yu , Y . Sun , Lipid nanomateri - als - based RNA therapy and cancer treatment . Acta Pharm . Sin . B 13 , 903 ( 2023 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . apsb . 2022 . 10 . 004 180 . X . Huang , N . Kong , X . Zhang , Y . Cao , R . Langer et al . , The landscape of mRNA nanomedicine . Nat . Med . 28 , 2273 – 2287 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41591 - 022 - 02061 - 1 181 . D . Gao , T . Chen , S . Chen , X . Ren , Y . Han et al . , Target - ing hypoxic tumors with hybrid nanobullets for oxygen - independent synergistic photothermal and thermodynamic therapy . Nano - Micro Lett . 13 , 99 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40820 - 021 - 00616 - 4 182 . Y . Zha , Y . Li , T . Lin , J . Chen , S . Zhang et al . , Progenitor cell - derived exosomes endowed with VEGF plasmids enhance osteogenic induction and vascular remodeling in large segmental bone defects . Theranostics 11 , 397 – 409 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7150 / thno . 50741 183 . L . Jin , X . Zhang , Z . Li , G . Chen , J . Li et al . , Three - dimen - sional nanofibrous microenvironment designed for the regula - tion of mesenchymal stem cells . Appl . Nanosci . 8 , 1915 – 1924 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s13204 - 018 - 0877 - 7 184 . Y . Atlas , C . Gorin , A . Novais , M . Marchand , E . Chatzopou - lou et al . , Microvascular maturation by mesenchymal stem cells in vitro improves blood perfusion in implanted tissue constructs . Biomaterials 268 , 120594 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioma teria ls . 2020 . 120594 Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 239 Page 40 of 43 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40820 - 023 - 01187 - 2 © The authors 185 . Q . Zhu , X . Ling , Y . Yang , J . Zhang , Q . Li et al . , Embry - onic stem cells - derived exosomes endowed with targeting properties as chemotherapeutics delivery vehicles for glio - blastoma therapy . Adv . Sci . 6 , 1801899 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / advs . 20180 1899 186 . X . Wang , J . Jin , R . Hou , M . Zhou , X . Mou et al . , Differ - entiation of BMSCs on biocompatible , biodegradable , and biomimetic scaffolds for largely defected tissue repair . ACS Appl . Bio . Mater . 3 ( 1 ) , 735 – 746 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acsabm . 9b010 63 187 . E . Kozhevnikov , S . Qiao , F . Han , W . Yan , Y . Zhao et al . , A dual - transduction - integrated biosensing system to examine the 3D cell - culture for bone regeneration . Biosens . Bioel - ectron . 141 , 111481 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bios . 2019 . 111481 188 . V . Guduric , C . Metz , R . Siadous , R . Bareille , R . Levato et al . , Layer - by - layer bioassembly of cellularized polylac - tic acid porous membranes for bone tissue engineering . J . Mater . Sci . Mater . Med . 28 , 78 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10856 - 017 - 5887 - 6 189 . M . A . Kuss , S . Wu , Y . Wang , J . B . Untrauer , W . Li et al . , Prevascularization of 3D printed bone scaffolds by bioac - tive hydrogels and cell co - culture . J . Biomed . Mater . Res . B Appl . Biomater . 106 , 1788 – 1798 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jbm . b . 33994 190 . C . Li , X . Han , Z . Ma , T . Jie , J . Wang , Engineered customiz - able microvessels for progressive vascularization in large regenerative implants . Adv . Healthc . Mater . 11 , 2101836 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adhm . 20210 1836 191 . M . A . Kuss , R . Harms , S . Wu , Y . Wang , J . B . Untrauer et al . , Short - term hypoxic preconditioning promotes prevascu - larization in 3D bioprinted bone constructs with stromal vascular fraction derived cells . RSC Adv . 7 , 29312 – 29320 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1039 / c7ra0 4372d 192 . Y . W . Chen , Y . F . Shen , C . C . Ho , J . Yu , Y . A . Wu et al . , Oste - ogenic and angiogenic potentials of the cell - laden hydro - gel / mussel - inspired calcium silicate complex hierarchical porous scaffold fabricated by 3D bioprinting . Mater . Sci . Eng . C Mater . Biol . Appl . 91 , 679 – 687 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . msec . 2018 . 06 . 005 193 . H . W . Kang , S . J . Lee , I . K . Ko , C . Kengla , J . J . Yoo et al . , A 3D bioprinting system to produce human - scale tissue constructs with structural integrity . Nat . Biotechnol . 34 , 312 – 319 ( 2016 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nbt . 3413 194 . P . Rukavina , F . Koch , M . Wehrle , K . Trondle , G . B . Stark et al . , In vivo evaluation of bioprinted prevascularized bone tissue . Biotechnol . Bioeng . 117 , 3902 – 3911 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / bit . 27527 195 . H . Lin , Y . Tang , T . P . Lozito , N . Oyster , B . Wang et al . , Efficient in vivo bone formation by BMP - 2 engineered human mesenchymal stem cells encapsulated in a projec - tion stereolithographically fabricated hydrogel scaffold . Stem Cell . Res . Ther . 10 , 254 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s13287 - 019 - 1350 - 6 196 . G . M . Cunniffe , T . Gonzalez - Fernandez , A . Daly , B . N . Sathy , O . Jeon et al . , Three - dimensional bioprinting of polycaprolactone reinforced gene activated bioinks for bone tissue engineering . Tissue . Eng . Part A 23 , 891 – 900 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1089 / ten . tea . 2016 . 0498 197 . J . Pizzicannella , F . Diomede , A . Gugliandolo , L . Chiri - costa , P . Bramanti et al . , 3D printing PLA / Gingival stem cells / EVs upregulate miR - 2861 and - 210 during osteoan - giogenesis commitment . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 20 , 3256 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / ijms2 01332 56 198 . J . Zhang , H . Eyisoylu , X . Qin , M . Rubert , R . Müller , 3D bioprinting of graphene oxide - incorporated cell - laden bone mimicking scaffolds for promoting scaffold fidelity , osteo - genic differentiation and mineralization . Acta Biomater . 121 , 637 – 652 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . actbio . 2020 . 12 . 026 199 . L . Yu , Y . Cai , H . Wang , L . Pan , J . Li et al . , Biomimetic bone regeneration using angle - ply collagen membrane - supported cell sheets subjected to mechanical condition - ing . Acta Biomater . 112 , 75 – 86 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . actbio . 2020 . 05 . 041 200 . Q . Cheng , C . Huang , A . Tomsia , Freeze casting for assem - bling bioinspired structural materials . Adv . Mater . 29 , 1703155 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adma . 20170 3155 201 . D . de Melo Pereira , P . J . Habibovic , Biomineralization - inspired material design for bone regeneration . Adv . Healthc . Mater . 7 , 1800700 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adhm . 20180 0700 202 . B . Adele , Bone mineral crystal size . Osteoporo - sis Int . 14 , S16 – S20 ( 2003 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00198 - 003 - 1468 - 2 203 . W . J . Landis , R . Jacquet , Association of calcium and phos - phate ions with collagen in the mineralization of vertebrate tissues . Calcif . Tissue . Int . 93 , 329 – 337 ( 2013 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00223 - 013 - 9725 - 7 204 . M . Fernandez - Yague , S . Abbah , L . McNamara , D . Zeugo - lis , A . Pandit et al . , Biomimetic approaches in bone tissue engineering : integrating biological and physicomechanical strategies . Adv . Drug . Deliv . Rev . 94 , 1 – 29 ( 2015 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . addr . 2014 . 09 . 005 205 . E . A . Zimmermann , R . O . Ritchie , Bone as a structural mate - rial . Adv . Healthc . Mater . 4 , 1287 – 1304 ( 2015 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adhm . 20150 0070 206 . M . Murshed , M . McKee , Molecular determinants of extracel - lular matrix mineralization in bone and blood vessels . Curr . Opin . Nephrol . Hypertens . 19 , 359 – 365 ( 2010 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1097 / MNH . 0b013 e3283 393a2b 207 . B . Langdahl , S . Ferrari , D . Dempster , Bone modeling and remodeling : potential as therapeutic targets for the treatment of osteoporosis . Ther . Adv . Musculoskelet . Dis . 8 , 225 – 235 ( 2016 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 17597 20X16 670154 208 . Y . Liu , D . Luo , T . Wang , Hierarchical structures of bone and bioinspired bone tissue engineering . Small 12 , 4611 – 4632 ( 2016 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / smll . 20160 0626 209 . O . Tertuliano , J . Greer , The nanocomposite nature of bone drives its strength and damage resistance . Nat . Mater . 15 , 1195 – 1202 ( 2016 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / NMAT4 719 Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 Page 41 of 43 239 1 3 210 . L . Wang , L . X . Zhu , Z . Wang , A . J . Lou , Y . X . Yang et al . , Development of a centrally vascularized tissue engineering bone graft with the unique core - shell composite structure for large femoral bone defect treatment . Biomaterials 175 , 44 – 60 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioma teria ls . 2018 . 05 . 017 211 . T . Anada , C . C . Pan , A . M . Stahl , S . Mori , J . Fukuda et al . , Vascularized bone - mimetic hydrogel constructs by 3D bio - printing to promote osteogenesis and angiogenesis . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 20 , 1096 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / ijms2 00510 96 212 . L . Vidal , C . Kampleitner , S . Krissian , M . A . Brennan , O . Hoffmann et al . , Regeneration of segmental defects in meta - tarsus of sheep with vascularized and customized 3D - printed calcium phosphate scaffolds . Sci . Rep . 10 , 7068 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 63742 - w 213 . B . Li , C . Ruan , Y . Ma , Z . Huang , Z . Huang et al . , Fabrication of vascularized bone flaps with sustained release of recombi - nant human bone morphogenetic protein - 2 and arteriovenous bundle . Tissue . Eng . Part . A 24 , 1413 – 1422 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1089 / ten . tea . 2018 . 0002 214 . B . Charbonnier , A . Baradaran , D . Sato , O . Alghamdi , Z . Zhang et al . , Material - induced venosome - supported bone tubes . Adv . Sci . 6 , 1900844 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / advs . 20190 0844 215 . C . Feng , W . Zhang , C . Deng , G . Li , J . Chang et al . , 3D print - ing of lotus root - like biomimetic materials for cell delivery and tissue regeneration . Adv . Sci . 4 , 1700401 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / advs . 20170 0401 216 . W . Zhang , C . Feng , G . Yang , G . Li , X . Ding et al . , 3D - printed scaffolds with synergistic effect of hollow - pipe structure and bioactive ions for vascularized bone regeneration . Biomateri - als 135 , 85 – 95 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioma teria ls . 2017 . 05 . 005 217 . M . Zhang , R . C . Lin , X . Wang , J . M . Xue , C . J . Deng et al . , 3D printing of Haversian bone – mimicking scaffolds for multi - cellular delivery in bone regeneration . Sci . Adv . 6 , eaaz6725 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / sciadv . aaz67 25 218 . B . Gao , Q . Yang , X . Zhao , G . Jin , Y . Ma et al . , 4D bioprinting for biomedical applications . Trends Biotechnol . 34 , 746 – 756 ( 2016 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tibte ch . 2016 . 03 . 004 219 . S . Miao , N . Castro , M . Nowicki , L . Xia , H . Cui et al . , 4D printing of polymeric materials for tissue and organ regenera - tion . Mater . Today 20 , 577 – 591 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . mattod . 2017 . 06 . 005 220 . M . Falahati , P . Ahmadvand , S . Safaee , Y . C . Chang , Z . Lyu et al . , Smart polymers and nanocomposites for 3D and 4D printing . Mater . Today 40 , 215 – 245 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . mattod . 2020 . 06 . 001 221 . Z . Wan , P . Zhang , Y . Liu , L . Lv , Y . Zhou et al . , Four - dimen - sional bioprinting : current developments and applications in bone tissue engineering . Acta Biomater . 101 , 26 – 42 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . actbio . 2019 . 10 . 038 222 . A . Melocchi , M . Uboldi , M . Cerea , A . Foppoli , A . Maroni et al . , Shape memory materials and 4D printing in pharmaceutics . Adv . Drug . Deliv . Rev . 173 , 216 – 237 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . addr . 2021 . 03 . 013 223 . C . Zhang , D . Cai , P . Liao , J . W . Su , H . Deng et al . , 4D Printing of shape - memory polymeric scaffolds for adap - tive biomedical implantation . Acta Biomater . 122 , 101 – 110 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . actbio . 2020 . 12 . 042 224 . A . K . Miri , A . Khalilpour , B . Cecen , S . Maharjan , S . R . Shin et al . , Multiscale bioprinting of vascularized models . Bio - materials 198 , 204 – 216 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioma teria ls . 2018 . 08 . 006 225 . C . D . Devillard , C . A . Mandon , S . A . Lambert , L . J . Blum , C . A . Marquette , Bioinspired multi - activities 4D printing objects : a new approach toward complex tissue engineering . Biotechnol . J . 13 , 1800098 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / biot . 20180 0098 226 . C . de Marco , S . Pané , B . J . Nelson , 4D printing and robot - ics . Sci . Robot . 3 , eaau0449 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / sciro botics . aau04 49 227 . A . Kirillova , R . Maxson , G . Stoychev , C . T . Gomillion , L . Ionov , 4D biofabrication using shape - morphing hydrogels . Adv . Mater . 29 , 1703443 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adma . 20170 3443 228 . M . Rafiee , R . D . Farahani , D . Therriault , Multi - material 3D and 4D printing : a survey . Adv . Sci . 7 , 1902307 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / advs . 20190 2307 229 . T . A . Einhorn , L . C . Gerstenfeld , Fracture healing : mecha - nisms and interventions . Nat . Rev . Rheumatol . 11 , 45 – 54 ( 2015 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrrhe um . 2014 . 164 230 . T . Wohlers , T . Gornet , History of additive manufacturing , 2014 . 231 . P . Kumar , S . Roy , H . Hegde , S . Bharti , M . Kumar , 4D and 5D Printing , in 3D Printing Technology in Nanomedicine . ( Elsevier , 2019 ) , pp . 143 – 163 232 . A . Haleem , M . Javaid , R . Vaishya , 5D printing and its expected applications in orthopaedics . J . Clin . Orthop . Trauma . 10 , 809 – 810 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jcot . 2018 . 11 . 014 233 . J . V . Zeijderveld , 5D printing : a new branch of additive manufacturing . Sculpteo report . 2018 . 234 . A . Haleem , M . Javaid , Expected applications of five - dimen - sional ( 5D ) printing in the medical field . Curr . Med . Res . Pract . 9 , 208 – 209 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cmrp . 2019 . 07 . 011 235 . H . Yang , L . Sun , Y . Pang , D . Hu , H . Xu et al . , Three - dimen - sional bioprinted hepatorganoids prolong survival of mice with liver failure . Gut 70 , 567 – 574 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1136 / gutjnl - 2019 - 319960 236 . T . Mirabella , J . W . MacArthur , D . Cheng , C . K . Ozaki , Y . J . Woo et al . , 3D - printed vascular networks direct therapeu - tic angiogenesis in ischaemia . Nat . Biomed . Eng . 1 , 0083 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41551 - 017 - 0083 237 . P . Gupta , B . B . Mandal , Tissue - engineered vascular grafts : emerging trends and technologies . Adv . Funct . Mater . 31 , 2100027 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adfm . 20210 0027 Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 239 Page 42 of 43 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40820 - 023 - 01187 - 2 © The authors 238 . D . Petta , V . Basoli , D . Pellicciotta , R . Tognato , J . Barcik et al . , Sound - induced morphogenesis of multicellular sys - tems for rapid orchestration of vascular networks . Biofabrica - tion 13 , 015004 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 1758 - 5090 / abbb9c 239 . N . Di Marzio , P . Ananthanarayanan , A . Geraldine - Guex , M . Alini , C . Riganti et al . , Sound - based assembly of a micro - capillary network in a saturn - like tumor model for drug test - ing . Mater . Today Bio . 16 , 100357 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . mtbio . 2022 . 100357 240 . G . GroSSbacher , M . Bartolf - Kopp , C . Gergely , P . N . Bernal , S . Florczak , Volumetric printing across melt electrowritten scaffolds fabricates multi - material living constructs with tun - able architecture and mechanics . Adv . Mater . ( 2023 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adma . 20230 0756 241 . D . Ribezzi , M . Gueye , S . Florczak , F . Dusi , D . de Vos et al . , Shaping synthetic multicellular and complex multimaterial tissues via embedded extrusion - volumetric printing of micro - gels . Adv . Mater . ( 2023 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adma . 20230 1673 242 . P . N . Bernal , P . Delrot , D . Loterie , Y . Li , J . Malda et al . , Volu - metric bioprinting of complex living - tissue constructs within seconds . Adv . Mater . 31 , 1904209 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adma . 20190 4209 243 . M . Falandt , P . N . Bernal , O . Dudaryeva , S . Florczak , G . Grossbacher et al . , Spatial - selective volumetric 4D printing and single - photon grafting of biomolecules within centim - eter - scale hydrogels via tomographic manufacturing . Adv . Mater . Technol . ( 2023 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / admt . 20230 0026 244 . M . L . Terpstra , J . Y . Li , A . Mensinga , M . de Ruijter , M . H . P . van Rijen et al . , Bioink with cartilage - derived extracellular matrix microfibers enables spatial control of vascular capil - lary formation in bioprinted constructs . Biofabrication 14 , 034104 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 1758 - 5090 / ac6282 245 . C . Licht , J . C . Rose , A . O . Anarkoli , D . Blondel , M . Roccio et al . , Synthetic 3D peg - anisogel tailored with fibronectin fragments induce aligned nerve extension . Biomacromol 20 , 4075 – 4087 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acs . biomac . 9b008 91 246 . M . Tang , S . K . Tiwari , K . Agrawal , M . T . Tan , J . S . Dang et al . , Rapid 3D bioprinting of glioblastoma model mimicking native biophysical heterogeneity . Small 17 , 2006050 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / smll . 20200 6050 247 . S . Lee , E . S . Sani , A . R . Spencer , Y . Guan , A . S . Weiss et al . , Human - recombinant - elastin - based bioinks for 3D bioprinting of vascularized soft tissues . Adv . Mater . 32 , 2003915 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adma . 20200 3915 248 . H . T . Cui , C . Y . Liu , T . Esworthy , Y . M . Huang , Z . X . Yu et al . , 4D physiologically adaptable cardiac patch : a 4 - month in vivo study for the treatment of myocardial infarction . Sci . Adv . 6 , eabb5067 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / sciadv . abb50 67 249 . B . S . Kim , Y . W . Kwon , J . S . Kong , G . T . Park , G . Gao et al . , 3D cell printing of in vitro stabilized skin model and in vivo pre - vascularized skin patch using tissue - specific extracellular matrix bioink : a step towards advanced skin tissue engineer - ing . Biomaterials 168 , 38 – 53 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioma teria ls . 2018 . 03 . 040 250 . A . C . Weems , M . C . Arno , W . Yu , R . T . R . Huckstepp , A . P . Dove et al . , 4D polycarbonates via stereolithography as scaf - folds for soft tissue repair . Nat . Commun . 12 , 3771 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 021 - 23956 - 6 251 . J . S . Miller , K . R . Stevens , M . T . Yang , B . M . Baker , D . H . Nguyen et al . , Rapid casting of patterned vascular networks for perfusable engineered three - dimensional tissues . Nat . Mater . 11 , 768 – 774 ( 2012 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / NMAT3 357 252 . S . Maharjan , J . Alva , C . Camara , A . G . Rubio , D . Hernandez et al . , Symbiotic photosynthetic oxygenation within 3D - bio - printed vascularized tissues . Matter 4 , 217 – 240 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . matt . 2020 . 10 . 022 253 . G . Haghiashtiani , K . Qiu , J . D . Z . Sanchez , Z . J . Fuenning , P . Nair et al . , 3D printed patient - specific aortic root models with internal sensors for minimally invasive applications . Sci . Adv . 6 , eabb4641 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / sciadv . abb46 41 254 . W . F . Hynes , M . Pepona , C . Robertson , J . Alvarado , K . Dub - bin et al . , Examining metastatic behavior within 3D bio - printed vasculature for the validation of a 3D computational flow model . Sci . Adv . 6 , eabb3308 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / sciadv . abb33 08 255 . R . Lozano , L . Stevens , B . C . Thompson , K . J . Gilmore , R . Gorkin et al . , 3D printing of layered brain - like structures using peptide modified gellan gum substrates . Biomaterials 67 , 264 – 273 ( 2015 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioma teria ls . 2015 . 07 . 022 256 . D . Huh , B . Matthews , A . Mammoto , M . Montoya - Zavala , H . Hsin et al . , Reconstituting organ - level lung functions on a chip . Science 328 , 1662 – 1668 ( 2010 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / scien ce . 11883 02 257 . S . Miao , H . Cui , T . Esworthy , B . Mahadik , S . J . Lee et al . , 4D self - morphing culture substrate for modulating cell dif - ferentiation . Adv . Sci . 7 , 1902403 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / advs . 20190 2403 258 . Z . R . Li , D . D . Chu , G . X . Chen , L . Q . Shi , L . Jin et al . , Bio - compatible and biodegradable 3D double - network fibrous scaffold for excellent cell growth . J . Biomed . Nanotechnol . 15 , 2209 – 2215 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1166 / jbn . 2019 . 2846 259 . L . Jin , X . Q . Guo , D . Gao , C . Wu , B . Hu et al . , NIR - responsive MXene nanobelts for wound healing . NPG Asia Mater . 13 , 24 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41427 - 021 - 00289 - w 260 . Z . Lei , W . Zhu , X . Zhang , X . Wang , P . Wu , Bio - inspired ionic skin for theranostics . Adv . Funct . Mater . 31 , 2008020 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adfm . 20200 8020 261 . J . Ouyang , X . Ji , X . Zhang , C . Feng , Z . Tang et al . , In situ sprayed NIR - responsive , analgesic black phosphorus - based gel for diabetic ulcer treatment . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 117 , 28667 – 28667 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 20162 68117 262 . R . Huang , X . Chen , Y . Dong , X . Zhang , Y . Wei et al . , MXene composite nanofibers for cell culture and tissue engineering . Nano - Micro Lett . ( 2023 ) 15 : 239 Page 43 of 43 239 1 3 ACS Appl . Bio . Mater . 3 , 2125 – 2131 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acsabm . 0c000 07 263 . J . Baldwin , F . Wagner , L . Martine , B . Holzapfel , C . Theodo - ropoulos et al . , Periosteum tissue engineering in an orthotopic in vivo platform . Biomaterials 121 , 193 – 204 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioma teria ls . 2016 . 11 . 016 264 . K . Xi , Y . Gu , J . Tang , H . Chen , Y . Xu et al . , Microenviron - ment - responsive immunoregulatory electrospun fibers for promoting nerve function recovery . Nat . Commun . 11 , 4504 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 020 - 18265 - 3 265 . Z . Li , D . Chu , Y . Gao , L . Jin , X . Zhang et al . , Biomim - icry , biomineralization , and bioregeneration of bone using advanced three - dimensional fibrous hydroxyapatite scaf - fold . Mater . Today Adv . 3 , 100014 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . mtadv . 2019 . 100014 266 . Z . Li , X . Zhang , J . Ouyang , D . Chu , F . Han et al . , Ca 2 + - supplying black phosphorus - based scaffolds fabricated with microfluidic technology for osteogenesis . Bioact . Mater . 6 , 4053 – 4064 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioac tmat . 2021 . 04 . 014 267 . A . Shokoohmand , J . Ren , J . Baldwin , A . Atack , A . Shafiee et al . , Microenvironment engineering of osteoblastic bone metastases reveals osteomimicry of patient - derived prostate cancer xenografts . Biomaterials 220 , 119402 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioma teria ls . 2019 . 119402 268 . S . Lin , G . Yang , F . Jiang , M . Zhou , S . Yin et al . , A magne - sium - enriched 3D culture system that mimics the bone devel - opment microenvironment for vascularized bone regenera - tion . Adv . Sci . 6 , 1900209 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / advs . 20190 0209 269 . A . Gonzalez - Pujana , K . Vining , D . Zhang , E . Santos - Viz - caino , M . Igartua et al . , Multifunctional biomimetic hydrogel systems to boost the immunomodulatory potential of mes - enchymal stromal cells . Biomaterials 257 , 120266 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bioma teria ls . 2020 . 120266 270 . M . Zou , J . Sun , Z . Xiang , Induction of M2 - type macrophage differentiation for bone defect repair via an interpenetration network hydrogel with a GO - based controlled release system . Adv . Healthc . Mater . 10 , 2001502 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adhm . 20200 1502 271 . W . Yu , C . Chen , X . Kou , B . Sui , T . Yu et al . , Mechanical force - driven TNF alpha endocytosis governs stem cell home - ostasis . Bone . Res . 8 , 44 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41413 - 020 - 00117 - x 272 . J . Liao , C . Ye , J . Guo , C . E . Garciamendez - Mijares , P . Agrawal et al . , 3D - printable colloidal photonic crystals . Mater . Today 56 , 29 – 41 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . mattod . 2022 . 02 . 014 273 . G . Thrivikraman , A . Athirasala , R . Gordon , L . Zhang , R . Ber - gan et al . , Rapid fabrication of vascularized and innervated cell - laden bone models with biomimetic intrafibrillar colla - gen mineralization . Nat . Commun . 10 , 3520 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 019 - 11455 - 8 274 . W . Orapiriyakul , M . Tsimbouri , P . Childs , P . Campsie , J . Wells et al . , Nanovibrational stimulation of mesenchymal stem cells induces therapeutic reactive oxygen species and inflammation for three - dimensional bone tissue engineering . ACS Nano 14 , 10027 – 10044 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acsna no . 0c031 30