Cell Stem Cell Article Kinome - wide Functional Analysis Highlights the Role of Cytoskeletal Remodeling in Somatic Cell Reprogramming Kumi Sakurai , 1 , 9 Indrani Talukdar , 1 , 9 Veena S . Patil , 1 , 9 Jason Dang , 1 , 2 Zhonghan Li , 1 , 3 Kung - Yen Chang , 1 Chih - Chung Lu , 1 Violaine Delorme - Walker , 4 Celine DerMardirossian , 4 Karen Anderson , 5 Dorit Hanein , 5 Chao - Shun Yang , 1 , 3 Dongmei Wu , 6 Yang Liu , 6 and Tariq M . Rana 1 , 3 , 7 , 8 , * 1 Program for RNA Biology , Sanford - Burnham Medical Research Institute , 10901 North Torrey Pines Road , La Jolla , CA 92037 , USA 2 Department of Bioengineering , University of California , San Diego , La Jolla , CA 92093 , USA 3 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology , University of Massachusetts Medical School , Worcester , MA 01605 , USA 4 Department of Immunology andMicrobialScience , TheScripps ResearchInstitute , 10550NorthTorreyPines Road , LaJolla , CA92037 , USA 5 Bioinformatics and Systems Biology Program , Sanford - Burnham Medical Research Institute , 10901 North Torrey Pines Road , La Jolla , CA 92037 , USA 6 CIRM Stem Cell and iPSC Core Facility , Sanford - Burnham Medical Research Institute , 10901 North Torrey Pines Road , La Jolla , CA 92037 , USA 7 Department of Pediatrics , Rady Children’s Hospital San Diego and University of California San Diego , La Jolla , CA 92093 , USA 8 Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program , University of California San Diego , La Jolla , CA 92093 , USA 9 These authors contributed equally to this work * Correspondence : trana @ sanfordburnham . org http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . stem . 2014 . 03 . 001 SUMMARY The creation of induced pluripotent stem cells ( iPSCs ) from somatic cells by ectopic expression of transcription factors has galvanized the ﬁelds of regenerative medicine and developmental biology . Here , we report a kinome - wide RNAi - based analysis to identify kinases that regulate somatic cell reprog - ramming to iPSCs . We prepared 3 , 686 small hairpin RNA ( shRNA ) lentiviruses targeting 734 kinase genes covering the entire mouse kinome and individually examined their effects on iPSC generation . We iden - tiﬁed 59 kinases as barriers to iPSC generation and characterized seven of them further . We found that shRNA - mediated knockdown of the serine / threonine kinases TESK1 or LIMK2 promoted mesenchymal - to - epithelial transition , decreased COFILIN phos - phorylation , and disrupted Actin ﬁlament structures during reprogramming of mouse embryonic ﬁbro - blasts . Similarly , knockdown of TESK1 in human ﬁbroblasts also promoted reprogramming to iPSCs . Our study reveals the breadth of kinase networks regulating pluripotency and identiﬁes a role for cyto - skeletal remodeling in modulating the somatic cell reprogramming process . INTRODUCTION Generation of induced pluripotent stem cells ( iPSCs ) by ectopic expression of four transcription factors , Oct4 , Sox2 , Klf4 , and c - Myc ( OSKM , referred tohere as 4F ) ( Takahashi andYamanaka , 2006 ) has created enthusiasm in regenerative medicine and developmental biology . iPSCs , which exhibit properties similar to embryonic stem cells ( ESCs ) , can be generated from human and mouse cells not only with OSKM ( Lowry et al . , 2008 ; Park et al . , 2008 ; Takahashi et al . , 2007 ; Wernig et al . , 2007 ) but also with an alternative set of factors , namely , Oct4 , Sox2 , Nanog , and Lin28 ( Yu et al . , 2007 ) . Numerous cell types from different tissues have been successfully reprogrammed , but in each case , heterogeneity , retroviral integration , and low reprogram - ming efﬁciency have been the major roadblocks to iPSC deriva - tion and therapeutic use . Recent efforts have focused on screening for small molecules that enhance reprogramming efﬁciency and / or ondeveloping new methods for iPSC derivation ( Ichida et al . , 2009 ; Lyssiotis et al . , 2009 ; Maherali and Hoched - linger , 2009 ; Shi et al . , 2008 ; Yang et al . , 2011 ) . Intriguingly , a recent study reported that a cocktail of seven compounds could generate iPS cells from mouse somatic cells , up to 0 . 2 % efﬁciency , without any exogenous transcription factors ( Hou et al . , 2013 ) . Recent years have seen rapid progress in the development of patient - speciﬁc iPSCs , which have created new opportunities not only to understand disease pathophysiology but also to develop therapeutics . Although recent technological advances have increased our understanding of the genomic and proteomic networks involved in reprogramming , relatively little is known about the signaling networks that regulate ESC fate and iPSC generation . Protein kinases regulate signal transduction in all eukaryotic cells and play essential roles in many processes , including cell proliferation , cell cycle progression , metabolic homeostasis , transcriptional activation , neurotransmission , dif - ferentiation and development , and aging ( Lu and Hunter , 2009 ) . Thus , we hypothesized that kinases would likely play pivotal roles in inducing pluripotency and determining cell fates during differentiation . A recent kinase inhibitors screen identifying small molecules that enhance , or present a barrier to , reprogramming further supports this hypothesis ( Li and Rana , 2012 ) . For Cell Stem Cell 14 , 523 – 534 , April 3 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 523 example , inhibitors of p38 , inositol trisphosphate 3 - kinase , and Aurora kinase A potently enhanced reprogramming efﬁciencies and iPSCs achieved a fully reprogrammed state ( Li and Rana , 2012 ) . In addition , short hairpin RNA screen targeting 104 ESC - associated phosphoregulators identiﬁed Aurora kinase A as an essential kinase in ESC because depletion of this kinase severely affected self - renewal and differentiation ( Lee et al . , 2012 ) . Here , we report a kinome - wide RNAi screen to identify kinases that regulate somatic cell reprogramming to iPSCs . In particular , we uncovered a critical role for cytoskeletal remodeling in iPSC generation and identiﬁed two key serine / threonine kinases , TESK1 ( testicular protein kinase 1 ) and LIMK2 ( LIM kinase 2 ) , which speciﬁcally phosphorylate the actin - binding protein COFILIN ( COF ) and modulate reorganizationofthe actincytoskel - etonduringreprogramming . Overthepastseveralyears , anumber of kinases and transcription factors have been discovered to have important functions in reprogramming , but the role of cytoskeletal remodeling in pluripotency and cell fate decisions has not been explored . Our results show that knockdown of TESK1 or LIMK2 in mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts ( MEFs ) promotes mesenchymal - to - epithelial ( MET ) transition , decreases COF phosphorylation , and disrupts the actin cytoskeleton during reprogramming . RESULTS A Kinome - wide Functional Analysis Identiﬁes Kinases Regulating Reprogramming To identify and determine the function of kinases that regulate somatic cell reprogramming to iPSCs , we carried out a whole - kinome RNAi screen ( Figure 1A ) . MEFs harboring a stably inte - grated Oct4 / Pou5f1 - driven GFP construct served as a reporter cell line allowing us to monitor iPSC generation quantitatively . Oct4 - GFP MEFs were retrovirally transduced with OSKM ( 4F ) and GFP + colonies , indicative of fully reprogrammed iPSCs . These cells were used to screen a 3 , 686 lentiviral shRNA library targeting 734 kinase genes covering the entire mouse kinome . Oct4 - GFP MEFs were transduced with the shRNA lentiviruses 3 days after 4F infection and examined in the iPSC generation assay (cid:1) 13 days later ( Figure 1A ; Experimental Procedures ) . A dot - plot representation of the results of the primary screen shows the fold change in GFP + colony counts after normalization to GFP + colonies in control pLKO lentivirus - infected cells ( Figure 1B ) . In the primary screen , a kinase was classiﬁed as a positive hit if : ( 1 ) two to ﬁve small hairpin RNA ( shRNA ) constructs targeting a single kinase caused R 2 - fold increase in the number of GFP + cells ( indicated by a red line in Figure 1B ) , or ( 2 ) a single shRNA targeting a single kinase caused a R 6 - fold increase in GFP + cells ( Figure 1B ) . The primary screen revealed 153 hits , which underwent a secondary validation screen in a 12 - well format ( Figure S1A available online ) , yielding 59 hits ( Figure S1B ; Tables S1 and S2 ) . Finally , the 59 hits were further validated in a tertiary screen performed in the same format and repeated ﬁve times . Because cell cycle control is one of the key pathways that regu - late the reprogramming process ( Ruiz et al . , 2011 ) , we selected a panel of 15 candidate kinases from the 59 genes for examination of their effects on the cell cycle ( Table S3 ) . Small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) - mediated knockdown of most of the 15 genes A B Figure 1 . Kinome - wide RNAi Screen for Reg - ulators of Somatic Cell Reprogramming ( A ) Experimental design . Oct4 - GFP MEFs were transducedonday0 ( D0 ) withretrovirusesencoding the four pluripotency factors , Oct4 , Sox2 , Klf4 , and c - Myc ( OSKM ; 4F ) , to induce reprogramming . A total of 3 , 686 lentiviruses carrying shRNAs targeting the entire kinome were produced in 293FT cells . On day 3 after 4F transduction , MEFs were infected with individual lentiviruses in separate wells . ES medium was changed on day 4 and every other day thereafter until GFP + colonies were quantiﬁed on day 20 . The pLKO . 1 / TRC - Mm1 . 0 vector expresses shRNAs from a U6 promoter and includes down - stream central polypurine tracts ( cPPT ) . ( B ) Identiﬁcation of barrier kinases from the primary screen . Dot - plot shows the result of the primary screen assessing the effects of 3 , 686 shRNAs targeting 734 kinase genes . Results are expressed as the fold change in GFP + colony counts after normalization to the control pLKO lentiviral - infected cells . The red line indicates the 2 - fold threshold used to select barrier kinases as hits . Validation of 153 genes from the primary screen was performed in duplicate in a 12 - well format in the secondary screen . Subsequently , 59 genes were further vali - dated in a tertiary screen in a 12 - well format in duplicateandrepeatedﬁvetimes . Reddotsindicate shRNAs targeting the six kinases that were selected for further investigation . See also Figure S1 and Tables S1 – S3 . Cell Stem Cell Kinome - Based Mechanisms of iPSC Generation 524 Cell Stem Cell 14 , 523 – 534 , April 3 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . decreased the frequency of MEFs in the G1 phase of the cell cycle and increased the percentage in G2 , similar to the effects of p53 knockdown ( Figures S1C – S1F ) . Identiﬁcation of Seven Kinases that Promote MET in the Initial Reprogramming Step We used IPA software ( Ingenuity System version 8 . 7 ) to analyze the molecular functions and canonical pathways that were sig - niﬁcantly overrepresented among the 59 identiﬁed kinases ( right - tailed Fisher’s exact test , p < 0 . 05 ) and then analyzed the biological functional networks using the Ingenuity Pathways Knowledge Base ( IPKB ) system . From this , we identiﬁed four networks in which the 59 kinases showed highly interconnected molecular functions : ( 1 ) amino acid metabolism , posttransla - tional modiﬁcation , and small molecule biochemistry , ( 2 ) gene A B Figure 2 . Lentivirus - Based Knockdown of Seven Kinases at Different Times during Reprogramming Reveals the Existence of Time Windows Critical for Enhancing Re - programming and Their Role in MET ( A ) Theeffects ofsilencing p53and sevenselected kinases on reprogramming efﬁciency were evalu - ated at different times after 4F transduction . Oct4 - GFPMEFsweretransducedwith4Fandpassaged at 2 days postinfection ( dpi ) . Lentivirus - based shRNA knockdown was performed on the indi - cated days by adding fresh virus - containing supernatants . GFP + colonies were counted on 18 dpi . Results show the fold increase in GFP + col - onies relative to numbers obtained with empty pLKO . 1 . Results are mean ± SD of two indepen - dent experiments performed in triplicate . ( B ) Knockdown of p53 and the seven kinases enhances MET in 4F - transduced MEFs . E - cad - herin expression served as a marker for induction of MET during the initial stage of reprogramming . MEFsweretransducedwithshRNAstargetingp53 or the seven kinases in the presence of 4F . Empty vector or a nontargeting shRNA served as con - trols . Total RNA was harvested on day 3 after shRNA lentiviral infection and E - cadherin expres - sion was measured by RT - qPCR . See also Figure S2 and Table S4 . expression and cellular development , ( 3 ) cell cycle , cell signaling , and cell death , and ( 4 ) cellular growth and proliferation and cancer ( Figure S2A ) . Of the 59 kinases identiﬁed as barriers in iPSC generation , ﬁve function in the integrin - linked kinase ( ILK ) signaling network . For further study , we selected seven kinases that ( 1 ) when knocked down , resulted in a consistent > 2 - fold increase in GFP + colony formation in multiple experiments , ( 2 ) were more highly ex - pressed in MEFs than in mESCs , and ( 3 ) were involved in a variety of functions that might relate to development and iPSC biology ( Tables S2 and S4 ) . These kinases were DGK ε , PLK2 , TESK1 , LIMK2 , BMP2K , BMPR2 , and MAPK1 . The function of MAPK1 as a barrier to iPSC gener - ation has previously been reported ( Nichols et al . , 2009 ) . To determine the time frame during which these kinases function in reprogramming , MEFs were transfected with speciﬁc shRNAs at various times between 3 and 10 days postinfection ( dpi ) with 4F . As shown in Figure 2 , the effect of shRNA - mediated knock - down ( KD ) of p53 ( a positive control ) or TESK1 on reprogram - ming was maximal when shRNA was transduced on 6 dpi . A similar trend was observed when BMP2K expression was reduced , whereas maximal enhancement of reprogramming efﬁciency by the remaining kinases was obtained when they were knocked down on 3 dpi and did not change thereafter . The efﬁciency of shRNA - mediated KD of kinases was conﬁrmed by measuring mRNA on different days ( Figure S2B ) . Cell Stem Cell Kinome - Based Mechanisms of iPSC Generation Cell Stem Cell 14 , 523 – 534 , April 3 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 525 Based on recent reports that MET is required at the initial stages of reprogramming ( Li et al . , 2010 ; Samavarchi - Tehrani et al . , 2010 ) , we examined E - cadherin expression , which is upregulated during MET , to determine whether shRNAs targeting the seven kinases facilitated this step of iPSC generation . Efﬁcient knockdown of all target kinases ( Figure S2C ) resulted in a 1 . 5 - to 2 - fold increase in E - cadherin expression compared to control MEFs infected with nontargeting shRNA vector ( Figure 2B ) , which was similar to that induced by knockdown of p53 ( (cid:1) 2 . 5 - fold ; Figure 2B ) . Collectively , these data indicate that knockdown of the selected seven kinases promotes MET at the initial reprogram - ming step . Kinase - Depleted MEFs Reprogram to the Fully Pluripotent State To address if the overexpression of a barrier kinase would compromise reprogramming , we cloned and expressed TESK1 or HA - TESK1 during 4F transduction . Immunoblotting conﬁrmed the protein expression and function by enhancing COF phos - phorylation ( Figure S4B ) . We observed that overexpression of TESK1 decreased reprogramming efﬁciency of MEFs by more than 80 % ( Figure 3A ) . Next , to determine if MEFs could be fully reprogrammed following knockdown of the barrier kinases , we characterized iPSC clones obtained following silencing of each kinase . After conﬁrming that the shRNAs were integrated into the iPSC Figure 3 . shTESK1 - iPSCs Exhibit a Fully Pluripotent State ( A ) TESK1 overexpression compromises reprogramming efﬁciency . TESK1 or HA - TESK1 were cloned and expressed during 4F transduction . Immunoblotting conﬁrmed the protein expression and function by enhancing coﬁlin phosphorylation ( Figure S4B ) . Reprogramming efﬁciency was decreased more than 80 % in TESK1 - overexpressing cells compared with pMX - dsRed control - transduced cells . ( B ) shTESK1 - iPSCs switch on endogenous mESC markers . GFP + shTESK1 - iPSCs cultured on feeder layers and collected on 16 dpi show positive staining for SSEA - 1 , Nanog , and alkaline phosphatase ( AP ) , all indicators of pluripotency . ( C ) shTESK1 - iPSCs can differentiate into three germ layers in vitro . Embryoid bodies formed from shTESK1 - iPSCs were collected on day 14 , ﬁxed with 4 % PFA and immunostained for b - tubulin III ( ectoderm ) , sarcomeric actinin ( mesoderm ) , or a - fetoprotein ( AFP ; endoderm ) . Insets show DAPI staining of nuclei ( blue ) in a wider ﬁeld of view . ( D ) shTESK1 - iPSCs can differentiate into many lineages in vivo . shTESK1 - iPSCs were injected subcutaneously into the backs of Nude mice . Teratomas were removed at 3 – 4 weeks and stained with H & E . ( E ) shTESK1 - iPSCs show gene expression proﬁles similar to mESCs . Genome - wide mRNA expression of shTESK1 - iPSCs was compared with mESCs and MEF controls . See also Figure S3 . Cell Stem Cell Kinome - Based Mechanisms of iPSC Generation 526 Cell Stem Cell 14 , 523 – 534 , April 3 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . genomes ( Figure S3A ) , we derived several iPSC clones for each kinase shRNA and examined them for expression of pluripotency markers . All clones were GFP + , indicative of reactivated Oct4 expression , and expressed alkaline phosphatase ( AP ) , Nanog , and SSEA1 ( Figures 3B and S3B ) . To investigate whether shRNA - iPSCs exhibited the full differentiation capacity of mESCs , we evaluated embryoid body ( EB ) formation . All derived clones showed efﬁcient EB formation , and EBs showed positive staining for the lineage markers b - tubulin III ( ectoderm ) , a - feto - protein ( AFP ; endoderm ) , and a - actinin ( mesoderm ) ( Figures 3C and S3C ) . We also examined the pluripotency of shTESK1 - iPSCs in vivo by examining teratoma formation in Nude mice ; indeed , we found that teratomas containing all germ layers were readily formed within 3 – 4 weeks of cell injection ( Figure 3D ) . Whole - genome mRNA expression proﬁling also indicated that shTESK1 - derived iPSC clones exhibited a gene expression pattern more similar to mESCs than to MEFs ( Figure 3E ) . shTESK1 - iPSCs were also able to generate chimeric mice when injected into recipient blastocysts ( Figures S3D and S3E ) . Additional siTESK1 - iPSCs were derived and their differen - tiation capacity was conﬁrmed by formation of teratomas ( Fig - ure S3F ) and generation of live chimeric mice ( Figure S3G ) . Taken together , these data suggest that the kinase RNAi - derived iPSCs had reached a fully reprogrammed state . TESK1 Regulates Reprogramming through Effects on the Cytoskeleton The functional activity and mechanism of two kinases was examined in further detail . TESK1 and LIMKs speciﬁcally phos - phorylate the Actin - binding protein COF at serine 3 ( Ser - 3 ) in vitro and in vivo , and TESK1 stimulates formation of both actin stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions ( Toshima et al . , 2001 ) . Coﬁlin binding depolymerizes Actin , an activity inhibited by Ser - 3 phosphorylation ( Agnew et al . , 1995 ) . LIMK1 phosphorylation of COF has been suggested to play a role in Rac - mediated reor - ganization of the actin cytoskeleton ( Yang et al . , 1998 ) . Because our analysis of the ILK signaling network by the IPKB system ( Figure S5A ) suggested that two of our identiﬁed kinases , TESK1 and LIMK2 , phosphorylate COF , we hypothesized that knockdown of TESK1 and LIMK2 might enhance iPSC genera - tion through effects on the actin cytoskeleton . Consistent with this , MEFs expressed higher levels of TESK1and phosphorylated coﬁlin ( P - COF ) than mESCs ( Figure 4A ) and exhibited a more highly organized actin cytoskeleton under confocal microscopy ( Figure 4B ) . Quantitative analysis of band intensities revealed that mES cells had (cid:1) 70 % lower P - COF / T - COF levels compared to MEFs ( Figure 4A ) . To determine the role of TESK1 in stabilization of the cyto - skeleton , we evaluated actin organization in MEFs treated with control siRNA or si TESK1 . TESK1 - KD MEFs showed decreased levels of P - COF , but not total coﬁlin ( T - COF ) ( Fig - ure 4A , right ) , and clear perturbation of the actin cytoskeleton , visualized by confocal microscopy ( Figure 4C ) . Whereas MEFs expressing control siRNA exhibited polynucleation of actin ﬁlaments , this ﬁlamentous structure was disrupted in TESK1 - KD and COF - KD MEFs ( Figure 4C ) . These ﬁndings were supported by electron microscopic ( EM ) analysis of whole - mount MEFs cells expressing control or TESK1 shRNA ( Figure 4D ) . This analysis allowed us to directly image the distinct morphologies of the leading edges of the cells and their associated transverse Actin bundles ( Figure 4D , dark gray or highlighted in red ) . In control cells , dense , directional stress ﬁbers were found at the cell edge interspersed with isotropic actin networks . In contrast , the morphology of TESK1 - KD MEFs revealed a loss of ﬁlaments in the ordered array of bun - dles , but the homogenous , isotropic ﬁlament networks were maintained . A few rufﬂes were also visible at the leading edge area ( Figure 4D , arrows ) , and the few bundles present in the TESK1 - KD cells were superimposed by a dense , homogeneous ﬁlament array characteristic of a lamella network . These struc - turally distinct networks are also deﬁned by their molecular , kinetic , and kinematic signatures . We next examined coﬁlin phosphorylation and structural changes in the actin cytoskeleton structures during reprogram - ming . For this , MEFs were transduced with OSKM followed by sh TESK1 , sh LIMK2 , or control shRNA on various days ( D2 , D4 , and D6 ) . TESK1 and LIMK2 knockdown MEFs showed decreased levels of P - COF compared with control MEFs , and these changes correlated well with the enhanced remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton in TESK1 - and LIMK2 - KD cells ( Fig - ure S4A ) . Collectively , these ﬁndings suggest that TESK1 and LIMK2 play important roles in remodeling of the actin cytoskel - eton during iPSC generation . To probe this further , we examined the effects of retroviral - mediated overexpression of unmodiﬁed or HA - tagged TESK1 protein in MEFs ( conﬁrmed by immunoblotting ; Figure S4B ) . Notably , overexpression of TESK1 resulted in a corresponding increase in phosphorylated , but not total , COF ( Figure S4B ) . Moreover , overexpression of TESK1 decreased reprogramming efﬁciency of MEFs by more than 80 % ( Figure 3A ) and decreased pluripotent marker expression in CCE mESCs ( Figure S5E ) . These data conﬁrm that TESK1 acts as a barrier kinase for iPSC generation and further suggest that TESK1 and LIMK2 modulate reprogramming through effects on COF phosphoryla - tion and cytoskeletal remodeling . Recently , Wiggan et al . ( 2012 ) reported that from unicellular organisms to humans , ADF / coﬁlins have a conserved function to inhibit Myosin II - Actin binding . Because phosphorylation of coﬁlin inactivates its interaction with Actin , we reasoned that TESK1 or coﬁlin depletion would regulate the physiological and competitive equilibrium between actin - coﬁlin and myosin - actin interactions , thus providing further insight into the TESK1 role in cytoskeletal reorganization . To address this hypothesis , we treated MEF cells with siRNAs targeting TESK1 , COFILIN ( COF ) , or si NT and untreated MEF cells were used as controls . Confocal images of MEF cells immunostained for Myo IIb ( green ) and F - actin using Rhodamine phalloidin ( red ) were obtained ( Figure S4E ) . In control cells , MyoIIb was found on the Actin cables ( marked by broken white line ) . Similarly , in si COF - treated cells , Myo IIb was also located on the actin cables ( marked by broken lines ) . On the other hand , in si TESK1 - treated cells , MyoIIb was found dispersed without forming obvious foci on the Actin cables . In TESK1 knockdown cells , which have less P - COF than control NT cells and hence increased levels of active COF , we found decreased colocalization of Myosin on the Actin cables compared to either control or COF knockdown cells . These ﬁndings further support our results presented above suggesting that TESK1 regulates the Actin cytoskeleton through Cell Stem Cell Kinome - Based Mechanisms of iPSC Generation Cell Stem Cell 14 , 523 – 534 , April 3 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 527 ( legend on next page ) Cell Stem Cell Kinome - Based Mechanisms of iPSC Generation 528 Cell Stem Cell 14 , 523 – 534 , April 3 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . COF phosphorylation and TESK1 indeed plays a role in main - taining the equilibrium between active and phospho - COF levels in MEF cells . Coﬁlin Phosphorylation Modulates Reprogramming To determine the dynamics of coﬁlin phosphorylation ( P - COF ) during reprogramming , MEFs were transduced with OSKM , cells were harvested on various days ( D3 , D6 , and D9 ) , and P - COF and total coﬁlin ( T - COF ) levels were analyzed by immunoblot - ting . When compared with mES and MEF cells , P - COF was grad - ually increased during reprogramming from D3 to D9 while T - COF remained unchanged ( Figure 5A ) . We also analyzed E - CAD expression levels that served as an indicator of MET and ES cell states ( Figure 5A ) . To determine whether coﬁlin phosphorylation is speciﬁcally required to induce cytoskeletal remodeling and affect reprog - ramming , we transduced MEF cells with one of two retroviral GFP constructs encoding wild - type coﬁlin ( COF - WT - GFP ) or a nonphosphorylatable serine 3 point mutant ( COF - S3A - GFP ) . Extracts of these cells were prepared and analyzed by immuno - blotting to verify protein expression and conﬁrm that COF - WT - GFP but not COF - S3A - GFP was phosphorylated in MEFs ( Figure 5B ) . Next , we analyzed reprogramming of MEFs express - ing COF - WT - GFP or COF - S3A - GFP in the presence and absence of TESK1 . Because TESK1 and LIMK2 are not limiting in cells , we reasoned that overexpression of wild - type coﬁlin would lead to increased amount of P - COF , unlike in the situation where overexpression of mutant COF that cannot be phosphor - ylated . In addition , overexpression of WT - COF may not compet - itively perturb the balance between the nonphosphorylated and P - COF while mutant COF overexpression would tilt the balance toward the nonphosphorylated - COF . Thus , an increase in iPS generation should be observed when mutant COF was over - expressed and not with COF - WT overexpression . Consistent with our rationale , overexpression of the nonphosphorylatable COF - S3A - GFP mutant protein showed enhanced iPSC pro - duction mimicking the TESK1 knockdown effects , while the overexpression of its wild - type counterpart showed insigniﬁcant reduction in the iPS colony formation ( Figure 5C ) . Furthermore , overexpression of the HA - TESK1 along with either COF - S3A - GFP or COF - WT - GFP rescues the phenotype shown by over - expression of these constructs in isolation . Taken together , these results establish the speciﬁcity of coﬁlin phosphorylation and its role in iPSC production and further support the notion that TESK1 acts as a barrier to reprogramming by promoting coﬁlin phosphorylation . Crosstalk between Enzymes of the ILK and TGF - b Pathways Regulates Cytoskeletal Remodeling Coﬁlin phosphorylation and actin cytoskeleton remodeling are observed following activation of both the ILK pathway enzyme , TESK1 ( Toshima et al . , 2001 ) , and the TGF - b pathway enzyme , LIMK2 ( Vardouli et al . , 2005 ) . Therefore , we next asked whether there might be crosstalk between these pathways during reprog - ramming . The involvement of TGF - b and its downstream effector protein ERK1 / 2 in reprogramming of somatic cells is well estab - lished . Inhibition of the TGF - b pathway activates reprogramming ( Ichida et al . , 2009 ; Li et al . , 2009 ; Lyssiotis et al . , 2009 ; Maherali and Hochedlinger , 2009 ; Shi et al . , 2008 ) , and blocking ERK activity can lead to reprogramming of neural stem cells ( Silva et al . , 2008 ) . Mouse ESC self - renewal is promoted by suppres - sion of the phosphatase SHP - 2 and ERK1 / 2 , and conversely , is impaired by ERK activation ( Burdon et al . , 1999 ) . As reported previously , we observed that ERK phosphorylation is downregu - lated in mESCs compared with MEFs ( Figure 5D ) , which secures the ground state of ESC self - renewal ( Nichols et al . , 2009 ) . Inter - estingly , we found that expression of phosphorylated ERK1 / 2 was decreased in shTESK1 - KD MEFs , whereas total ERK 1 / 2 and Spry2 levels were unaffected ( Figure 5D ) . To determine if crosstalk between the ILK and TGF - b path - ways might contribute to regulation of the cytoskeletal structure in MEFs , cells were seeded on control plates coated with gelatin , or plates coated with the integrin ligand ﬁbronectin or a ﬁbro - nectin analog . Cells were untreated or 4F - transduced and then harvested on different days . Immunoblot analysis of total cell lysates showed that incubation of cells on ﬁbronectin or the analog induced ERK1 / 2 and coﬁlin phosphorylation but did not affect total ERK and coﬁlin levels ( Figure 5E ) . Actin cytoskeletal remodeling was also observed upon treatment with the ligands . Both ﬁbronectin and its analog induced an extensive poly - nucleated mesh - like network of the actin cytoskeleton in the presence and the absence of 4F ( Figure S5B ) . Treatment of cells with the TGF - b R1 inhibitor accelerated dissolution of the ﬁla - mentous structure , and this was evident as early as day 3 ( data not shown ) . These data altogether suggest the existence of crosstalk between the ILK and TGF - b pathways at the level Figure 4 . TESK1 Regulates Cytoskeletal Remodeling during Reprogramming ( A ) TESK1 is highly expressed in MEFs and regulates coﬁlin phosphorylation . TESK1 , phosphorylated ( P - ) coﬁlin , and total ( T - ) coﬁlin expression levels were detected by immunoblotting of extracts from Oct4 - GFP MEFs , mESCs , or MEFs transfected with TESK1 - targeting siRNA ( si TESK1 ) or control siRNA ( si NT ) . GAPDH served as an internal control . ( B ) Visualization of polynucleation of actin ﬁlaments . Actin ﬁlaments were detected by staining MEFs and mESCs with rhodamine - labeled phalloidin . Scale bars represent 20 m m ( C ) TESK1 knockdown disrupts actin ﬁlamentous structure . Actin cytoskeleton organization was visualized by confocal microscopy of MEFs transfected with controlsiRNAorsRNAtargeting TESK1 or COF . Thetop , middle , andbottompanelsshowthebasalsection , middlesection , andZ - projection , respectively . Scale bars represent 5 m m . ( D ) ImagingofMEFsexpressingnontargetingshRNA ( toprow , control ) orsh TESK1 ( bottomrow ) wasperformedusingacorrelativeLightandElectronMicroscopy ( cLEM ) approach . The same cells ( regions ) are imaged by light microscopy ( LM ) ( left columns ) followed by Transmission Electron microscopy ( TEM ) . The white boxes in the left columns ( LM ) mark the areas also imaged by TEM in the subsequent columns . An isotropic F - actin network and vertical rufﬂes ( blue arrows ) dominate the images of whole - mount sh TESK1 cells , whereas in the control , shRNA cells , a clear dense population of oriented actin bundles ( colored in red ) can be observed . LM image is rotated by (cid:1) 45 (cid:3) anticlockwise in the TEM presentation of the control cells , and in the sh TESK1 panel the LM view is rotated by (cid:1) 20 (cid:3) anticlockwise with respect to the TEM images . Scale bars represent 20 m m . See also Figure S4 . Cell Stem Cell Kinome - Based Mechanisms of iPSC Generation Cell Stem Cell 14 , 523 – 534 , April 3 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 529 of ERK and coﬁlin phosphorylation , which is supported by the observations on actin cytoskeleton remodeling . Expression of ILK Pathway Genes and TESK1 Is Altered during Reprogramming To determine how the expression of ILK pathway genes changes during reprogramming , we examined expression in MEFs on different days after 4F transduction and compared the pattern with that in MEFs and mESCs . Virtually all of the ILK pathway genes examined were severely downregulated in CCE mESCs compared withMEFs ( Figure S5C ) . However , theexpression pat - terns of individual genes varied over the course of reprogram - ming . Some genes were downregulated as earlyas 3 dpi ( Integrin b 3 , ILK , b - actin ) , others were up - or downregulated during the reprogramming process and were then extinguished at the fully pluripotent stage ( Integrin a 6 and b 1 ) , and some showed very little change in expression during reprogramming ( Rac and LIMK2 ) . Interestingly , TESK1 and LIMK1 were upregulated soon after 4F transduction and were fully downregulated only at the ESC stage ( Figure S5C ) . We also examined which transcrip - tion factor ( s ) play critical roles in regulating expression of individual genes by transducing MEFs with the four factors in all possible combinations . qRT - PCR analysis of cells on 8 dpi iden - tiﬁed Klf4 as the key regulator of TESK1 expression , although otherfactorsalsocontributed ( Figure S5D ) . Furthermore , overex - pression of HA - TESK1 in ES cells reduced the levels of pluripo - tency marker genes ( Figure S5E ) . Klf4 also regulated the expres - sion of LIMK1 and b - actin . For LIMK2 , Rac , ILK , and Integrin b 1 A B C D E Figure 5 . Coﬁlin Phosphorylation Modulates Reprogramming ( A ) Coﬁlin phosphorylation ( P - COF ) is dynamically regulated during the reprogramming process . 4F transduced MEFs were harvested on different days ( D3 , D6 , andD9 ) andthecelllysateswereusedtoanalyzeP - COFandtotalcoﬁlin ( T - COF ) levelsbyimmunoblotting . GAPDHservedasloadingcontrolwhileE - CADserved as marker for MET and ES cell states . ( B ) ImmunoblotanalysisofMEFcellsoverexpressingGFP - fusionproteins , wild - typecoﬁlin ( COF - WT - GFP ) oramutantcoﬁlin ( COF - S3A - GFP ) , inthepresenceof nontargeting ( siNT ) or coﬁlin - targeting ( siCOF ) siRNA . Empty expression vector was used as a transfection control and GAPDH was used as loading control . Arrowhead indicates exogenously expressed coﬁlin - GFP and arrow indicates endogenous coﬁlin . ( C ) Phosphorylation incompetent coﬁlin promotes iPSC generation . Quantiﬁcation of SSEA1 + iPSC colonies obtained from MEFs transduced with OSKM plus empty vector , wild - type coﬁlin ( COF - WT - GFP ) , mutant coﬁlin ( COF - S3A - GFP ) , COF - WT - GFP + HA - TESK1 , or COF - S3A - GFP + HA - TESK1 . Results are the means ± SD of three independent experiments . ( D ) Knockdown of TESK1 decreases ERK phosphorylation . Immunoblotting of TESK1 , ERK1 / 2 , phospho - ERK1 / 2 , and Spry2 in Oct4 - GFP MEFs , mESCs , and nontargeting ( NT ) shRNA - and shTESK1 - transduced Oct4 - GFP MEFs 4 days posttransduction . GAPDH served as an internal control . ( E ) Activation of the ILK signaling pathway results in ERK and coﬁlin phosphorylation . MEFs were grown on plates coated with ﬁbronectin ( Fbn ) or a ﬁbronectin analog ( Fbn - Anlg ) to induce the ILK signaling pathway . MEFs seeded on gelatin - coated plates served as controls . Immunoblot analysis of phospho - and total ERK and coﬁlin in cell lysates prepared on 4 dpi . See also Figure S5 . Cell Stem Cell Kinome - Based Mechanisms of iPSC Generation 530 Cell Stem Cell 14 , 523 – 534 , April 3 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . expression , no single factor appeared to inﬂuence their expres - sion preferentially . Integrin a 6 and b 3 were upregulated by Klf4 but downregulated by other factors ( Figure S5F ) . Taken together , thesedataindicate that theexpression ofILKpathway genesand TESK1 is regulated by all four reprogramming factors , with Klf4 playing the most signiﬁcant role . TESK1 Knockdown Promotes Reprogramming of Human Fibroblasts To assess whether TESK1 knockdown could promote human iPSC generation , human foreskin ﬁbroblast ( BJ ) cells were trans - fected with control or TESK1 - targeting siRNA and reprogrammed to iPSCs using episomal DNA vectors . TESK1 siRNA effectively reduced TESK1 mRNA levels and resulted in an increase in AP + colonies ( Figure 6A ) . iPSCs derived from control and si TESK1 ﬁbroblastsexhibitedsimilarmorphology ( Figure6B ) . Furtherchar - acterization of human siTESK1 - iPSCs by immunohistochemistry showedthatthesecellsexpressedhumanESCmarkers , including A D E B C Figure 6 . TESK1 Knockdown Promotes Reprogramming of Human Fibroblasts ( A ) Left : number of AP + clones derived from human BJ ﬁbroblasts transfected with non - targeting ( siNTC ) or TESK1 - targeting ( siTESK1 ) siRNA . Right : RT - qPCR of TESK1 mRNA levels in control and TESK1 - KD cells . ( B ) Representative AP + clones derived from reprogrammingofhumanBJcellsexpressingsi NT or si TESK1 . ( C ) Expression of ESC pluripotent markers in iPSCs derived from human BJ cells expressing siTESK1 . Staining for SSEA - 3 , NANOG , SOX2 , Tra - 1 - 81 , Tra - 1 - 60 , and OCT4 was performed . ( D ) Teratoma formation shows the pluripotency of iPSCs . Cells were injected into SCID mice and tumors were harvested 8 weeks later and stained with H & E . ( E ) Normal karyotype of a human siTESK1 - iPSC clone . See also Figure S6 . OCT4 , SOX2 , NANOG , Tra - 160 , Tra - 1 - 81 , and SSEA3 ( Figure 6C ) , indicating that these cells have achieved an ESC - like pluripotent state . Next , we determined the differentiation capabilities of si - TESK1 - iPSCs in vitro with EB formation assays and in vivo by teratoma formation in mice . EBs expressed markers of three germ layers , including SOX17 , FOXA2 , GATA4 , NESTIN , and PAX6 , on day 14 af - ter inducing differentiation ( Figure S6 ) . Similarly , teratomas formed 8 weeks after transplantation of human iPSCs into the dorsal ﬂanks of severe combined immu - nodeﬁciency ( SCID ) mice contained tis - sues from three germ layers , including neural rosette - like structures ( ectoderm ) , striated muscle ( mesoderm ) , and intes - tine - likestructures ( endoderm ) ( Figure6D ) . Further , karyotyping of the siTESK1 - iPSCs showed normal chro - mosome structures ( Figure 6E ) . Together , these results demon - strate that TESK1 KD promotes the generation of human iPSCs that are pluripotent and have a normal karyotype . DISCUSSION Using Oct4 - GFP MEFs and standard OSKM reprogramming protocols , we performed a kinome - wide functional genomics screen to identify the role of kinases in iPSC generation . In partic - ular , we were interested in identifying signaling mechanisms or networks that could act as barriers to reprogramming . Induced reprogramming is an unnatural phenomena governed by the addition of transcription factors , RNA , or small molecules where one cell type is changed to another . In our case , we reprog - rammed MEFs to iPSCs by using OSKM transcription factors . Therefore , addition of four factors in MEFs would upregulate resistance mechanisms for cell fate changes that we denote as Cell Stem Cell Kinome - Based Mechanisms of iPSC Generation Cell Stem Cell 14 , 523 – 534 , April 3 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 531 ‘‘barrier pathways . ’’ We reasoned that knockdown of kinases that lower these barrier signaling mechanisms would enhance reprogramming . Our kinome wide RNAi screen identiﬁed 59 kinases involved in diverse highly interconnected molecular functions that acted as barriers to iPSC generation . Interestingly , of the 59 kinases identiﬁed as barriers in iPSC generation , ﬁve function in the integrin - linked kinase ( ILK ) signaling network . After in - depth analysis of seven of the kinases , we observed that of TESK1 or LIMK2 silencing in MEFs promoted MET , decreased coﬁlin phosphorylation , and disrupted actin ﬁlament structures during reprogramming . The morphology of TESK1 - KD MEFs visualized by both ﬂuorescence confocal microscopy and EM showed disruption of actin ﬁlaments in the ordered array of bundles . Using integrin ligands and small molecule inhibitors of TGF b R1 , we found the existence of a crosstalk between the ILK and TGF b pathways to regulate cytoskeletal remodeling . Figure 7 . Interactome Network of Kinases and Cytoskeletal Remodeling in Reprog - ramming ( A ) Interactome network of kinases and transcrip - tion factors in iPSC generation . The interactome network depicts the functional associations of 24 bridge proteins that connect 28 barrier kinases and four transcription factors . The predicted network was generated by STRING ( version 9 . 0 ) on the basis of protein interactions of high conﬁ - dence ( score > 0 . 7 ) . Each bridge protein is associated with at least two barrier kinases and one transcription factor . Top - ranked functional annotations generated by Ingenuity IPA suggests the bridge proteins are likely to be involved in the EMT and / or MET programs . Nodes and edges represent proteins and predicted functional associations , respectively . The colored lines indi - cate the seven types of evidence used in predict - ing the associations : red for fusion , green for neighborhood , blue for cooccurrence , purple for experimental , yellow for text mining , light blue for database , and black for coexpression evi - dence ( see Table S5 ) . ( B ) Proposed mechanism for TESK1 and LIMK2 function in cytoskeletal remodeling and iPSC generation . TESK1 or LIMK2 phosphorylates coﬁlin to promote the formation and / or stabili - zation of the cytoskeletal structures involved in EMT and cellular differentiation . RNAi - mediated silencing of either kinase inhibits coﬁlin phos - phorylation , which in turn disrupts actin poly - nucleation , promotes the MET transition step of reprogramming in 4F - infected MEFs , and thus enhances iPSC generation . To build a kinome interaction network for iPSC generation and to understand the functions of the 59 barrier kinases and OSKM , the known and predicted protein interactions of barrier kinases and transcription factors were derived from the STRING database with high conﬁdence score . We ﬁrst analyzed the distribution and number of interacting proteins for each kinase because we reasoned that the proteins functionally interacting with both kinases and transcription factors would be likely to play important roles in iPSC generation . To narrow down the many interactions generated from the prediction and to increase the reliability of the interpretation , our analysis included only those proteins having functional associations with two or more kinases and at least one transcription factor . A total of 24 bridge proteins , listed in Table S4 , were found to connect 28 barrier kinases and four transcription factors in iPSC generation . The interactome network showing the bridge proteins clustered in the middle tier is illustrated in Figure 7A . The analysis of canonical pathways indicated that most of the bridge proteins are components of signaling and cell communi - cation pathways that trigger and regulate the EMT ( Table S5 ) . The top - ranked functional annotation of the bridge proteins in the enrichment analysis by Ingenuity IPA also suggested that Cell Stem Cell Kinome - Based Mechanisms of iPSC Generation 532 Cell Stem Cell 14 , 523 – 534 , April 3 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . these proteins were involved in the EMT and / or MET processes ( Figure 7A ) . Our results suggest a model in which TESK1 and LIMK2 regulate cytoskeletal changes during reprogramming through phosphorylation of coﬁlin and / or stabilization of the actin cytoskeleton . In the cell , phosphorylated and nonphosphory - lated forms of coﬁlin exist in dynamic equilibrium maintained by kinases and phosphatases . Two coﬁlin - speciﬁc phospha - tases , slingshot and chronophin , dephosphorylate coﬁlin and induce actin depolymerization in response to a number of stimuli ( Kligys et al . , 2007 ) . Our data suggest a sequence of events in which RNAi - mediated silencing of TESK1 or LIMK2 in MEFs inhibits coﬁlin phosphorylation , disrupts actin polymerization , increases E - cadherin expression , promotes the MET step of reprogramming , and thus enhances iPSC generation ( Figure 7B ) . Indeed , knockdown of the slingshot protein SSH1 in MEFs with OSKM , hyperphosphorylated coﬁlin and decreased the reprog - ramming efﬁciency by 40 % ( Figures S4C and S4D ) , further supporting the role of coﬁlin dephosphorylation in reprogram - ming . iPSC generation is not an efﬁcient process and large heterogeneous populations of cells are created at various stages of reprogramming , most of which do not successfully attain the pluripotent state . As such , partially reprogrammed cells , which represent the large majority of cells , exhibit increased TESK1 expression , consistent with it being a barrier to reprogramming . Cells that are successfully reprogrammed , however , must have actin depolymerization to achieve their well established ES - like morphology as shown in Figure 4B . Reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton is critical in many cellular functions , including motility , adhesion , morphogenesis , and cytokinesis . Another intriguing possibility is that reorganization of the actin cytoskel - eton following TESK1 or LIMK2 depletion alters the extracellular matrix structural framework to create an ESC niche , thereby facilitating iPSC generation . Future studies should shed light on these mechanisms . Overall , our study describes kinase regu - lators and networks involved in iPSC creation . These ﬁndings should foster the development of new technologies and increase our understanding of the mechanisms underlying somatic cell reprogramming . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES MEF Reprogramming MEFs were isolated from E13 . 5 embryos derived from Oct4 - GFP mice ( Jackson Laboratory , # 008214 ) ( Lengner et al . , 2007 ) and used ( up to pas - sage4 ) forinduction experiments . Oct4 - GFPMEFswere maintainedingrowth medium ( DMEM , 10 % FBS , L - glutamine , MEM - NEAA ) . With slight modiﬁca - tion , retrovirus production and induction of iPSCs were performed following the Takahashi et al . ( 2007 ) protocol . Lentivirus - containing media collected from infected 293FT cell cultures were added to the MEF plates on day 3 . On the following day , medium was replaced with fresh MEF medium ; from day 5 onward , the medium was replaced with mESC growth medium ( DMEM , 15 % FBS , LIF , monothioglycerol [ MTG ] , L - glutamine , MEM - NEAA ) every other day until GFP + colony counting and picking ( days 14 – 18 ) . GFP + iPSC colonies were trypsinized , resuspended in mESC medium , and plated on 12 - well plates with an irradiated MEF feeder layer . iPSC clones were seeded on 24 - well plates with feeder layers for immunostaining . For time course experiments , lentivirus - containing media were prepared fresh for each time point and were added to the MEF plates on indicated dpi . The medium was replaced with mESC growth medium on the following day and then every other day until counting of GFP + colonies . Teratoma Formation by Mouse iPSCs iPSCs were trypsinized and resuspended in EB medium at 1 3 10 6 cells / ml . Nude mice were anesthetized with Avertin and 150 m l of iPSCs were injected subcutaneously into the back . Teratomas were visible after 1 week and surgi - cally removed at 3 – 4 weeks . Tissues were ﬁxed in zinc formalin solution over - night , washed three times with PBS , and stained with hematoxylin and eosin ( H & E ) . All animal work was approved by the Institutional Review Board and was performed following Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee guidelines . mRNA Microarray Analysis Total RNA was extracted from derived iPSCs using Trizol . mRNA microarray analysis was carried out by the microarray facility at the Sanford - Burnham Medical Research Institute . ArrayExpressaccession : E - MTAB - 2258 . A scatter plot was used to compare the genome - wide mRNA expression proﬁles of iPSCs , MEFs , and mESCs . Interaction Network Analysis The protein - protein interactions of barrier kinases and four transcription factors , Myc , Klf4 , Pou5f1 , andSox2 , werecollected bysearchingtheSTRING database ( Szklarczyketal . , 2011 ) , version9 . 0 , withaconﬁdencescoreof > 0 . 7 . The enrichment analysis of the bridge proteins between barrier kinases and transcription factors was performed using Ingenuity IPA . The annotation of KEGG canonical pathways was downloaded from the Molecular Signatures Database ( MSigDB ) ( Subramanian et al . , 2005 ) , version 3 . 0 . Confocal Microscopy The cells were treated with siRNAs and seeded onto the micro well dishes , 3 days and 1 day prior to immunostaining , respectively . The cells were washed with PBS and ﬁxed in 4 % paraformaldehyde for 20 min at room temperature ( RT ) followed by a PBS wash and permeabilizing with PBS with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 ( PBST ) for 5 min . Cells were blocked with 5 % BSA in PBST for 1 hr , incubated with primary antibodies diluted in 2 . 5 % BSA in PBST for 1 hr at RT , and washed with PBST . After incubating with secondaryantibodies ( 1 : 400 ) for1hratRT ( dilutedin2 . 5 % BSAinPBST ) , cells were washed withPBST and rinsed twice withPBS . For F - actin , thecells were stained with Rhodamine Phalloidin at 1 : 40 dilution in PBST for 20 min at RT . The Myosin antibodies were obtained from Cell Signaling ( catalog # 5144 ) . The images were acquired on Zeiss LSM710 confocal microscope and pro - cessed using Image J and Photoshop . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information for this article includes Extended Experimental Procedures , sixﬁgures , andﬁvetablesandcanbefoundwiththisarticleonline at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . stem . 2014 . 03 . 001 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We are grateful for the following shared resource facilities at the Sanford - Burnham Medical Research Institute : genomics and informatics and data management cores for help with mRNA array experiments and data analysis , the animal facility for generation of teratomas and chimeric mice , the histology and molecular pathology core for characterization of tissues , and the cell imaging core for confocal microscopy . This work was supported in part by National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) grants ( to T . M . R . and C . D . ) . Stem cell and iPS core is supported in part by a grant from California Institute for Regenera - tive Medicine ( CIRM ) . The correlative light and electron microscopy studies were supported by NIH grant P01 - GM098412 ( to D . H . ) . C . - C . Lu died at a young age from nonsmall cell lung cancer on October 9 , 2011 . Received : July 16 , 2013 Revised : December 2 , 2013 Accepted : March 4 , 2014 Published : April 3 , 2014 Cell Stem Cell Kinome - Based Mechanisms of iPSC Generation Cell Stem Cell 14 , 523 – 534 , April 3 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 533 REFERENCES Agnew , B . J . , Minamide , L . S . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 1995 ) . Reactivation of phos - phorylated actin depolymerizing factor and identiﬁcation of theregulatory site . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 17582 – 17587 . Burdon , T . , Stracey , C . , Chambers , I . , Nichols , J . , and Smith , A . ( 1999 ) . Suppression of SHP - 2 and ERK signalling promotes self - renewal of mouse embryonic stem cells . Dev . Biol . 210 , 30 – 43 . Hou , P . , Li , Y . , Zhang , X . , Liu , C . , Guan , J . , Li , H . , Zhao , T . , Ye , J . , Yang , W . , Liu , K . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Pluripotent stem cells induced from mouse somatic cells by small - molecule compounds . Science 341 , 651 – 654 . Ichida , J . K . , Blanchard , J . , Lam , K . , Son , E . Y . , Chung , J . E . , Egli , D . , Loh , K . M . , Carter , A . C . , Di Giorgio , F . P . , Koszka , K . , et al . ( 2009 ) . A small - molecule inhib - itor of tgf - Beta signaling replaces sox2 in reprogramming by inducing nanog . Cell Stem Cell 5 , 491 – 503 . Kligys , K . , Claiborne , J . N . , DeBiase , P . J . , Hopkinson , S . B . , Wu , Y . , Mizuno , K . , and Jones , J . C . ( 2007 ) . The slingshot family of phosphatases mediates Rac1 regulation of coﬁlin phosphorylation , laminin - 332 organization , and motility behavior of keratinocytes . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 32520 – 32528 . Lee , D . F . , Su , J . , Ang , Y . S . , Carvajal - Vergara , X . , Mulero - Navarro , S . , Pereira , C . F . , Gingold , J . , Wang , H . L . , Zhao , R . , Sevilla , A . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Regulation of embryonic and induced pluripotency by aurora kinase - p53 signaling . Cell Stem Cell 11 , 179 – 194 . Lengner , C . J . , Camargo , F . D . , Hochedlinger , K . , Welstead , G . G . , Zaidi , S . , Gokhale , S . , Scholer , H . R . , Tomilin , A . , and Jaenisch , R . ( 2007 ) . Oct4 expres - sionisnotrequired for mouse somatic stem cell self - renewal . Cell Stem Cell 1 , 403 – 415 . Li , Z . , and Rana , T . M . ( 2012 ) . A kinase inhibitor screen identiﬁes small - mole - culeenhancersofreprogrammingandiPScellgeneration . Naturecommunica - tions 3 , 1085 . Li , W . , Wei , W . , Zhu , S . , Zhu , J . , Shi , Y . , Lin , T . , Hao , E . , Hayek , A . , Deng , H . , and Ding , S . ( 2009 ) . Generation of rat and human induced pluripotent stem cells by combining genetic reprogramming and chemical inhibitors . Cell Stem Cell 4 , 16 – 19 . Li , R . , Liang , J . , Ni , S . , Zhou , T . , Qing , X . , Li , H . , He , W . , Chen , J . , Li , F . , Zhuang , Q . , etal . ( 2010 ) . Amesenchymal - to - epithelialtransitioninitiatesandisrequired for the nuclear reprogramming of mouse ﬁbroblasts . Cell Stem Cell 7 , 51 – 63 . Lowry , W . E . , Richter , L . , Yachechko , R . , Pyle , A . D . , Tchieu , J . , Sridharan , R . , Clark , A . T . , and Plath , K . ( 2008 ) . Generation of human induced pluripotent stemcellsfromdermalﬁbroblasts . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 2883 – 2888 . Lu , Z . , andHunter , T . ( 2009 ) . Degradationofactivatedproteinkinasesbyubiq - uitination . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 78 , 435 – 475 . Lyssiotis , C . A . , Foreman , R . K . , Staerk , J . , Garcia , M . , Mathur , D . , Markoulaki , S . , Hanna , J . , Lairson , L . L . , Charette , B . D . , Bouchez , L . C . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Reprogramming of murine ﬁbroblasts to induced pluripotent stem cells with chemical complementation of Klf4 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 8912 – 8917 . Maherali , N . , and Hochedlinger , K . ( 2009 ) . Tgfbetasignalinhibition cooperates intheinductionofiPSCsandreplacesSox2andcMyc . Currentbiology : CB 19 , 1718 – 1723 . Nichols , J . , Silva , J . , Roode , M . , and Smith , A . ( 2009 ) . Suppression of Erk signalling promotes ground state pluripotency in the mouse embryo . Development 136 , 3215 – 3222 . Park , I . H . , Zhao , R . , West , J . A . , Yabuuchi , A . , Huo , H . , Ince , T . A . , Lerou , P . H . , Lensch , M . W . , and Daley , G . Q . ( 2008 ) . Reprogramming of human somatic cells to pluripotency with deﬁned factors . Nature 451 , 141 – 146 . Ruiz , S . , Panopoulos , A . D . , Herrerı´as , A . , Bissig , K . D . , Lutz , M . , Berggren , W . T . , Verma , I . M . , and Izpisua Belmonte , J . C . ( 2011 ) . A high proliferation rate is required for cell reprogramming and maintenance of human embryonic stem cell identity . Curr . Biol . 21 , 45 – 52 . Samavarchi - Tehrani , P . , Golipour , A . , David , L . , Sung , H . K . , Beyer , T . A . , Datti , A . , Woltjen , K . , Nagy , A . , and Wrana , J . L . ( 2010 ) . Functional genomics reveals a BMP - driven mesenchymal - to - epithelial transition in the initiation of somatic cell reprogramming . Cell Stem Cell 7 , 64 – 77 . Shi , Y . , Desponts , C . , Do , J . T . , Hahm , H . S . , Scho¨ler , H . R . , and Ding , S . ( 2008 ) . Induction of pluripotent stem cells from mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts by Oct4 and Klf4 with small - molecule compounds . Cell Stem Cell 3 , 568 – 574 . Silva , J . , Barrandon , O . , Nichols , J . , Kawaguchi , J . , Theunissen , T . W . , and Smith , A . ( 2008 ) . Promotion of reprogramming to ground state pluripotency by signal inhibition . PLoS Biol . 6 , e253 . Subramanian , A . , Tamayo , P . , Mootha , V . K . , Mukherjee , S . , Ebert , B . L . , Gillette , M . A . , Paulovich , A . , Pomeroy , S . L . , Golub , T . R . , Lander , E . S . , and Mesirov , J . P . ( 2005 ) . Gene set enrichment analysis : a knowledge - based approach for interpreting genome - wide expression proﬁles . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 15545 – 15550 . Szklarczyk , D . , Franceschini , A . , Kuhn , M . , Simonovic , M . , Roth , A . , Minguez , P . , Doerks , T . , Stark , M . , Muller , J . , Bork , P . , et al . ( 2011 ) . The STRING data - base in 2011 : functional interaction networks of proteins , globally integrated and scored . Nucleic Acids Res . 39 ( Database issue ) , D561 – D568 . Takahashi , K . , and Yamanaka , S . ( 2006 ) . Induction of pluripotent stem cells from mouse embryonic and adult ﬁbroblast cultures by deﬁned factors . Cell 126 , 663 – 676 . Takahashi , K . , Tanabe , K . , Ohnuki , M . , Narita , M . , Ichisaka , T . , Tomoda , K . , andYamanaka , S . ( 2007 ) . Inductionofpluripotentstemcellsfromadulthuman ﬁbroblasts by deﬁned factors . Cell 131 , 861 – 872 . Toshima , J . , Toshima , J . Y . , Amano , T . , Yang , N . , Narumiya , S . , and Mizuno , K . ( 2001 ) . Coﬁlinphosphorylationbyproteinkinasetesticularproteinkinase1and itsrolein integrin - mediatedactin reorganization and focal adhesion formation . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 1131 – 1145 . Vardouli , L . , Moustakas , A . , andStournaras , C . ( 2005 ) . LIM - kinase2andcoﬁlin phosphorylation mediate actin cytoskeleton reorganization induced by trans - forming growth factor - beta . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 11448 – 11457 . Wernig , M . , Meissner , A . , Foreman , R . , Brambrink , T . , Ku , M . , Hochedlinger , K . , Bernstein , B . E . , and Jaenisch , R . ( 2007 ) . In vitro reprogramming of ﬁbro - blasts into a pluripotent ES - cell - like state . Nature 448 , 318 – 324 . Wiggan , O . , Shaw , A . E . , DeLuca , J . G . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 2012 ) . ADF / coﬁlin regulates actomyosin assembly through competitive inhibition of myosin II binding to F - actin . Dev . Cell 22 , 530 – 543 . Yang , N . , Higuchi , O . , Ohashi , K . , Nagata , K . , Wada , A . , Kangawa , K . , Nishida , E . , and Mizuno , K . ( 1998 ) . Coﬁlin phosphorylation by LIM - kinase 1 and its role in Rac - mediated actin reorganization . Nature 393 , 809 – 812 . Yang , C . S . , Lopez , C . G . , and Rana , T . M . ( 2011 ) . Discovery of nonsteroidal anti - inﬂammatory drug and anticancer drug enhancing reprogramming and induced pluripotent stem cell generation . Stem Cells 29 , 1528 – 1536 . Yu , J . , Vodyanik , M . A . , Smuga - Otto , K . , Antosiewicz - Bourget , J . , Frane , J . L . , Tian , S . , Nie , J . , Jonsdottir , G . A . , Ruotti , V . , Stewart , R . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Induced pluripotent stem cell lines derived from human somatic cells . Science 318 , 1917 – 1920 . Cell Stem Cell Kinome - Based Mechanisms of iPSC Generation 534 Cell Stem Cell 14 , 523 – 534 , April 3 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc .