Special issue : Research report The transliminal brain at rest : Baseline EEG , unusual experiences , and access to unconscious mental activity Jessica I . Fleck a , * , Deborah L . Green b , Jennifer L . Stevenson d , Lisa Payne b , Edward M . Bowden c , Mark Jung - Beeman c and John Kounios b a The Richard Stockton College of New Jersey , USA b Drexel University , USA c Northwestern University , USA d University of Wisconsin - Madison , USA a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 20 July 2006 Reviewed 10 January 2007 Revised 2 August 2007 Accepted 7 August 2007 Published online 15 August 2008 Keywords : Transliminality Baseline EEG Schizotypy Paranormal beliefs Hemispheric asymmetry a b s t r a c t Transliminality reﬂects individual differences in the threshold at which unconscious processes or external stimuli enter into consciousness . Individuals high in transliminality possess characteristics such as magical ideation , belief in the paranormal , and creative personality traits , and also report the occurrence of manic / mystic experiences . The goal of the present research was to determine if resting brain activity differs for individuals high versus low in transliminality . We compared baseline EEG recordings ( eyes - closed ) between individuals high versus low in transliminality , assessed using The Revised Transliminality Scale of Lange et al . ( 2000 ) . Identifying reliable differences at rest between high - and low - transliminality individuals would support a predisposition for transliminality - related traits . Individuals high in transliminality exhibited lower alpha , beta , and gamma power than individuals low in transliminality over left posterior association cortex and lower high alpha , low beta , and gamma power over the right superior temporal region . In contrast , when compared to individuals low in transliminality , individuals high in transliminality exhibited greater gamma power over the frontal - midline region . These results are consistent with prior research reporting reductions in left temporal / parietal activity , as well as the desynchronization of right temporal activity in schizotypy and related schizophrenia spectrum disorders . Further , differences between high - and low - trans - liminality groups extend existing theories linking altered hemispheric asymmetries in brain activity to a predisposition toward schizophrenia , paranormal beliefs , and unusual experiences . ª 2008 Elsevier Srl . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction The ﬂow of information from unconscious to conscious awareness has been of great interest for centuries ( e . g . , Wallas , 1926 ) . James ( 1890 ) suggested that thought was ongoing , switching intermittently between internal and external stimuli , relying heavily on processes needed to inte - grate the past with the present . More recently , researchers * Corresponding author . The Richard Stockton College of New Jersey , Division of Social and Behavioral Sciences , Pomona , NJ 08240 , USA . E - mail address : jessica . ﬂeck @ stockton . edu ( J . I . Fleck ) . available at www . sciencedirect . com journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / cortex 0010 - 9452 / $ – see front matter ª 2008 Elsevier Srl . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cortex . 2007 . 08 . 024 cortex 44 ( 2008 ) 1353 – 1363