B R I E F C O M M U N I C A T I O N S 574 VOLUME 11 NUMBER 6 JUNE 2004 NATURE STRUCTURAL & MOLECULAR BIOLOGY The stalk region of dynamin drives the constriction of dynamin tubes Yen - Ju Chen 1 , Peijun Zhang 2 , Edward H Egelman 1 & Jenny E Hinshaw 2 The GTPase dynamin is essential for numerous vesiculation events including clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Upon GTP hydrolysis , dynamin constricts a lipid bilayer . Previously , a three - dimensional structure of mutant dynamin in the constricted state was determined by helical reconstruction methods . We solved the nonconstricted state by a single - particle approach and show that the stalk region of dynamin undergoes a large conformational change that drives tube constriction . The GTPase dynamin ( 98 kDa ) is involved in many aspects of mem - brane trafficking events ( reviewed in refs . 1 , 2 ) . During endocytosis , dynamin surrounds the neck of clathrin - coated vesicles , and hydrolyzes GTP to facilitate fission of the neck 1 , 3 . Dynamin contains five domains : an N - terminal GTPase domain , a middle domain , a pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domain , a GTPase effector domain ( GED ) and a C - terminal proline - rich domain ( PRD ) 1 . The GTPase , middle and GED domains have all been implicated in self - assembly of dynamin . The GED has been shown to bind to the GTPase and mid - dle domains and to an adjacent GED 4 . Dynamin assembly stimulates GTP hydrolysis . Dynamin self - assembles into helical arrays , a process that is enhanced by binding to lipids or proteins that provide multiple binding sites . Dynamin binds to lipids through its PH domain , a com - mon membrane - binding domain , and forms dynamin - lipid tubes that constrict and fragment upon GTP hydrolysis 5 . This interaction potentially mimics the function of dynamin at the necks of clathrin - coated pits . ∆ PRD dynamin ( lacking residues 751 – 864 ) behaves like wild - type dynamin and rapidly constricts upon GTP hydrolysis 5 – 7 . However , ∆ PRD dynamin also constricts dynamin tubes , albeit slowly , upon GTP binding without GTP hydrolysis 6 . Previously , a three - dimensional reconstruction of ∆ PRD dynamin in the con - stricted state with the nonhydrolyzable GTP analog , GMP - PCP , was generated by helical reconstruction 6 . Here we studied the noncon - stricted state of ∆ PRD dynamin using EM and single - particle image analysis . In contrast to the constricted dynamin tubes , which are rela - tively straight and well ordered , the nonconstricted ∆ PRD dynamin tubes ( Fig . 1a ) are more curved and flexible , and have a variable pitch , making application of the helical reconstruction method impossible . To surmount these problems , we used iterative helical real space reconstruction ( IHRSR ) 8 to generate three - dimensional reconstruc - tions of the nonconstricted state of ∆ PRD dynamin . From cryo - EM images of unstained dynamin lipid tubes , 16 , 299 overlapping segments were extracted , where each segment was ∼ 670 Å long . We found that the pitch of the 1 - start helix within these dynamin tubes varies considerably ( Fig . 1b ) ; however , most segments have a pitch between 104 and 120 Å . We found little variability in pitch in the constricted tubes ( data not shown ) . The image segments with a pitch of ∼ 106 Å , the single largest class , were used for reconstruction . We found two solutions , one with ∼ 13 . 8 subunits per turn of the 106 Å pitch helix , and the other with ∼ 14 . 2 subunits per turn of this helix . At the available resolution ( ∼ 20 Å ) the projections of these reconstruc - tions could not be distinguished , and both were consistent with the cryo - EM images . Electron micrographs of metal - shadowed tubes showed that the handedness of the helical surface features was only consistent with a symmetry of ∼ 14 . 2 subunits per turn of a right - handed 1 - start helix . For the constricted state , IHRSR finds ∼ 13 . 2 sub - units per turn of a 1 - start helix with a pitch of 94 Å , consistent with previous results obtained by helical reconstruction 6 . Using IHRSR , we can add segments with appropriate shifts and rotations to form images of ideal tubes . Such a reconstituted image of a nonconstricted tube ( Fig . 1c ) and a constricted tube ( Fig . 1d ) are shown for comparison . The reconstruction of the nonconstricted and constricted dynamin tubes reveal three radial layers 6 ( Fig . 2a , b ) . The outer diameter of the nonconstricted dynamin tube is ∼ 500 Å , compared with ∼ 400 Å for the constricted tube . This difference is mainly due to the increase in 1 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics , University of Virginia , Charlottesville , Virginia , USA . 2 Laboratory of Cell Biochemistry and Biology , National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , Maryland , USA . Correspondence should be addressed to E . H . E . ( egelman @ virginia . edu ) . Published online 9 May 2004 ; doi : 10 . 1038 / nsmb762 Figure 1 Image analysis of dynamin lipid tubes . ( a ) Electron micrograph of an unstained , frozen - hydrated dynamin lipid tube . Box indicates the size of the segments that were used for further processing . ( b ) Pitch distribution of nonconstricted dynamin segments . Fourier - transform intensities from segments were cross - correlated against the transforms of reference structures having a pitch from 90 to 138 Å . ( c , d ) Images of an ideal dynamin tube in the nonconstricted ( c ) and constricted ( d ) state were reconstituted after determining the helical symmetry and orientation of each segment . The reconstituted filaments contain 1 , 916 ( c ) and 1 , 822 ( d ) segments . © 2004 N a t u r e P ub li s h i ng G r oup h tt p : / / www . n a t u r e . c o m / n a t s t r u c t m o l b i o l B R I E F COM M U N I C AT I O N S NATURE STRUCTURAL & MOLECULAR BIOLOGY VOLUME 11 NUMBER 6 JUNE 2004 575 radius of the lipid membrane , rather than an expansion of the dynamin subunits between the radial layers , as the distance from the outer surface of the dynamin tube to the membrane is quite similar in both states ( Fig . 2c , d , black arrowheads ) . The circumference of the membrane doubles from the constricted to the nonconstricted state , even though there is only a change from 13 . 2 subunits per turn of a 94 Å – pitch helix to 14 . 2 subunits per turn of a 106 Å – pitch helix . Therefore , the large radial increase in the dynamin tube is predo - minantly caused by an intrinsic conformational change within or between dynamin molecules . A comparison of the two reconstructions shows that the most obvi - ous difference between the two states is in the middle layer , which forms a zigzag pattern in the constricted state ( Fig . 2b , blue ) , whereas in the nonconstricted state this region is fairly straight ( Fig . 2a , blue ) . This region , called the ‘stalk’ in the previous study 6 , was suggested to contain both the GED and middle domain 6 . They both are predicted to form coiled coils and are the major part of dynamin involved in oligomer - ization 4 , 9 . Therefore , the coiled - coil domains of dynamin must be bent to fit into the density . The straightening of this region in the noncon - stricted state suggests that GTP binding to the GTPase domain of ∆ PRD dynamin may cause a conformational change in this coiled - coil region . In contrast to the stalk region , the PH and GTPase domains ( Fig . 2a , b , yellow and green , respectively ) show little conformation change . A simple geometrical model can explain the transition between the nonconstricted and constricted states . The putative coiled - coil density ( Fig . 2a , b , blue ) is at a radius of ∼ 160 Å from the helical axis in the non - constricted state and a radius of ∼ 120 Å in the constricted state . From the pitch of 106 Å in the nonconstricted state and of 94 Å in the con - stricted state , the path length of each subunit in the stalk region along the 1 - start helix is ∼ 71 Å in nonconstricted dynamin and ∼ 57 Å in con - stricted dynamin . If one assumes that the coiled - coil structure of the stalk is fairly straight in the nonconstricted state , then a bend of ∼ 110° in the constricted state would shorten a 71 - Å span to 57 Å ( Fig . 2e , f ) , consistent with the degree of bending actually observed in the recon - struction of the constricted state ( Fig . 2b ) . The EM data shows that GTP binding causes the large constriction of the ∆ PRD dynamin tubes ; this represents the constricted state of wild - type dynamin during GTP hydrolysis 5 , 6 . Our results show that the transition between the two states is accompanied by only a small change in the axial rise per dynamin dimer , from 7 . 6 Å in the nonconstricted state with a 106 - Å pitch to 7 . 1 Å in the constricted state with a 94 - Å pitch ( Fig 2e , f ) . If the number of dynamin subunits around the neck of a nascent clathrin - coated vesicle does not change during the GTP binding and hydrolysis cycle , the overall length of the dynamin region will change by only ∼ 6 % and the pitch of the dynamin helix by ∼ 13 % , but the circumference of the lipid will change by a factor of ∼ 200 % . We therefore believe that the main force for fission is the radial constriction of the dynamin tube . The rate - limiting step of dynamin GTPase activity is GTP cleavage , which has a rate ∼ 100 - fold greater for polymerized dynamin than for monomeric dynamin 10 . Dynamin polymerization shows a strong posi - tive cooperativity 11 . We speculate that the rapid constriction of the wild - type dynamin lipid tube during GTP hydrolysis may destabilize the membrane , causing the separation of endocytotic vesicles . Our results do not exclude the possibility that a conformational change of dynamin tubes may expose some motifs on dynamin that can serve as a switch , a model in which dynamin acts as a regulatory GTPase . However , at this resolution ( ∼ 20 Å ) , there is no substantial change in the surface of the dynamin tube that would be accessed by other proteins . Our results also differ from the previously observed pitch extension seen during GTP hydrolysis by dynamin on rigid lipid tubes 12 . We suggest that the fixed radii of those tubes prevented dynamin constriction . Although further investigation is needed to understand the relationship of nucleotide binding to the conformational change in the stalk region of dynamin , our results directly support that dynamin acts as a mechanochemical transducer that uses the energy obtained from GTP hydrolysis to achieve membrane constriction . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank K . - H . Moon for his help with the helical hand determination . This work was supported by a grant from the US National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering , US National Institutes of Health , to E . H . E . COMPETING INTERESTS STATEMENT The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests . Received 9 February ; accepted 22 March 2004 Published online at http : / / www . nature . com / nsmb / 1 . Hinshaw , J . E . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 16 , 483 – 519 ( 2000 ) . 2 . Danino , D . & Hinshaw , J . E . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 13 , 454 – 460 ( 2001 ) . 3 . Song , B . D . & Schmid , S . L . Biochemistry 42 , 1369 – 1376 ( 2003 ) . 4 . Smirnova , E . , Shurland , D . L . , Newman - Smith , E . D . , Pishvaee , B . & van der Bliek , A . M . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 14942 – 14947 ( 1999 ) . 5 . Sweitzer , S . M . & Hinshaw , J . E . Cell 93 , 1021 – 1029 ( 1998 ) . 6 . Zhang , P . & Hinshaw , J . E . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 922 – 926 ( 2001 ) . 7 . Danino , D . , Moon , K . & Hinshaw , J . E . J . Struct . Biol . in the press . 8 . Egelman , E . H . Ultramicroscopy 85 , 225 – 234 ( 2000 ) . 9 . Okamoto , P . M . , Tripet , B . , Litowski , J . , Hodges , R . S . & Vallee , R . B . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 10277 – 10286 ( 1999 ) . 10 . Eccleston , J . F . , Binns , D . D . , Davis , C . T . , Albanesi , J . P . & Jameson , D . M . Eur . Biophys . J . 31 , 275 – 282 ( 2002 ) . 11 . Warnock , D . E . , Hinshaw , J . E . & Schmid , S . L . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 22310 – 22314 ( 1996 ) . 12 . Stowell , M . H . , Marks , B . , Wigge , P . & McMahon , H . T . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 27 – 32 ( 1999 ) . Figure 2 Comparison of ∆ PRD dynamin lipid tubes in nonconstricted and constricted states . ( a , b ) Surface renderings of nonconstricted and constricted states , respectively . ( c , d ) Contour plots of nonconstricted and constricted states , respectively , showing the density perpendicular to the filament axis . Green , GTPase domain ; blue , middle domain and GED , previously called stalk 6 ; yellow , PH domain ; gray , lipid tube . Black arrowheads indicate distance from outer surface to inner membrane . ( e , f ) Geometrical models of nonconstricted and constricted states , respectively , for the putative coiled - coil region . ■ , (cid:1) PH domain ; ● , (cid:2) , GTPase domain . Our reconstruction and previous results 6 suggest that the asymmetrical unit of dynamin lipid tube is actually a dimer of dynamin . © 2004 N a t u r e P ub li s h i ng G r oup h tt p : / / www . n a t u r e . c o m / n a t s t r u c t m o l b i o l