- ~ . - ' ~ . : ; ~ ll ELSEVIER Information & Management 28 ( 1995 ) 251 - 259 Research Promoting consensus in small decision making groups Bernard C . Y . Tan , Hock - Hal Teo , Kwok - Kee Wei Department of Information Systems and Computer Science , National University of Singapore , 10 Kent Ridge Crescent , Singapore 0511 , Republic of Singapore Abstract Groups are sometimes convened to make decisions that promote wider acceptance of and greater commitment to the results . To accomplish this objective , groups need to achieve an acceptable consensus level . Group support systems ( GSS ) offer a means of enhancing consensus . In this study , a consensus monitor incorporated in a GSS was used by small decision making groups in an experimental setting . Groups that used the consensus monitor several times achieved higher post - meeting consensus than groups that used the consensus monitor only once . However , these groups did not differ in terms of perceived decision quality and perceived decision process quality . The implications of these findings are discussed . Keywords : Group support systems ; Consensus monitor ; Group decision making ; Group consensus 1 . Introduction Modern societies rely heavily on group deci - sions 13 . Groups possess several advantages over individuals as decision makers . First , groups are more likely than individuals to have a broad and better range of skills and knowledge pertaining to the decision . Second , groups provide the oppor - tunity for an effective division of labour to ac - quire and process the vast amount of information needed for the decision . Third , when groups are composed of members representing a diversity of interests , the decision is perceived to be more representative of the needs of members . This results in wider acceptance of and greater com - mitment to the decision . Although groups offer several potential bene - fits as decision makers , they do not necessarily materialize . Hill 20 reviewed 60 years of empiri - cal research and concluded that groups seldom 0378 - 7206 / 95 / $ 09 . 50 © 1995 Elsevier Science B . V . All rights SSDI 0378 - 7206 ( 94 ) 00047 - 6 perform to the level of their best member . This suggests that groups may not make optimal use of the complete range of skills and knowledge they possess . This could be the result of conformance pressure 18 or evaluation apprehension 11 . Conformance pressure arises when group mem - bers refrain from contributing ideas against ma - jority thinking because of politeness or fear . Eval - uation apprehension results when group mem - bers withhold novel ideas due to fear of negative evaluation from the group . The ability of groups to process a vast amount of information effectively is contingent upon their ability to cope with information overload 21 . Even when groups are able to handle this prob - lem effectively , there is still the possibility of incomplete use of information 22 . The accep - tance of and commitment to the decision are also dependent upon the consensus level achieved . If group members do not agree with each other and reserved 252 B . C Y . Tan et al . / Information & Management 28 ( 1995 ) 251 - 259 with the decision , it is unlikely that they will accept and be committed to the decision . A group decision reached as a result of conformance pres - sure or domination by a minority is likely to be no better than an individual decision . Group techniques and GSS 10 , 27 have been proposed as means to enhance group effective - ness . GSS combine communication , computer , and decision support technologies to support problem formulation and solution during group decision making . This study examines how a GSS can be used to promote consensus in small deci - sion making groups so as to facilitate wider ac - ceptance of and commitment to the decision . judgement theory 5 , which posits that disagree - ment in decisions between individuals can be partially attributed to the differences in impor - tance placed by them on each piece of informa - tion and the differences in the manner with which they relate information to their final decisions . This technique suggests that group members be provided with feedback on how others arrived at their decisions . The feedback will enable group members to explore the reasons behind their differing decisions and thus resolve their differ - ences . 2 . 2 . GSS 2 . Promoting consensus Preference tasks are widespread in organiza - tions because the preferences of decision makers dominate many important decisions . They are often performed by groups to ensure wider ac - ceptance of the decisions . Groups performing preference tasks are often judged in terms of consensus level , perceived decision quality , and perceived decision process quality 35 . The at - tainment of high consensus level is important . Group members must agree before they can ac - cept and be committed to the decisions . 2 . 1 . Group techniques When applying nominal group technique ( NGT ) , a group goes through a series of rounds to vote on alternatives . In each round , all group members cast their votes . After this , the results are summarized and discussed by the group be - fore the next vote . This process iterates until the group has reached consensus . NGT promotes consensus in two ways . First , by providing all group members with an equal opportunity to vote , it facilitates personal involvement and en - courages contribution . Second , group members discuss the results of each vote before proceeding to the next . This permits group members to re - solve differences gradually and move towards consensus . Social judgement analysis is based on social GSS add an anonymous electronic communi - cation channel . Besides encouraging personal ex - pression , it helps group members who are reti - cent about open communication to contribute their views . This is likely to lead to greater per - sonal involvement , greater individual contribu - tion , and better group consensus . However , this theoretical benefit of GSS has not been consis - tently demonstrated in empirical research . In contrast , several studies have reported negative GSS effects on group consensus 14 , 23 , 34 , 36 . The fuzzy model of consensus 31 provides a means of measuring the consensus level of small decision making groups . It accepts , as inputs , the individual decisions of all group members on all alternatives . It produces an output value indicat - ing the consensus level for the entire group on all alternatives . This output value ranges from 0 ( total disagreement ) to 1 ( total agreement ) . This model can be used to measure group consensus after each vote . A consensus monitor based on this model can be incorporated in a GSS . If the consensus level is not up to expectation , group members can proceed to discuss their differences and repeat the vote . 3 . Hypotheses The research model ( see Fig . 1 ) is based on a conceptual framework for the study of groups 25 . In this study , task characteristics are con - trolled by using the same preference task for all B . C . Y . Tan et aL / Information & Management 28 ( 1995 ) 251 - 259 253 Task characteristics Group characteristics Five - person groups ( controlled ) Preference task ( controlled ) Face - to - face groups ( controlled ) Pre - meeting consensus ( measured ) Group decision outcome Post - meeting consensus ( measured ) Perceived decision quality ( measured ) Perceived decision process quality ( measured ) 1 GSS characteristics GSS ( controlled ) Consensus mon tor ( man pu ated Fig . 1 . The research model . groups . Three aspects of group characteristics are important : group size 9 , group proximity 3 , and pre - meeting consensus . The first two are con - trolled by using five - person , face - to - face groups . Pre - meeting consensus is measured and used as a covariate during data analysis . GSS characteris - tics are controlled by using the same GSS for all groups . The use of consensus monitor is manipu - lated at two levels : single and multiple use . Post - meeting consensus measures the ability of groups to attain consensus during decision mak - ing . Perceived decision quality can be used as a surrogate measure for actual decision quality for preference tasks which do not have objective cor - rect answers 16 . Perceived decision process quality measures the extent to which group mem - bers are satisfied with their decision making method . A consensus monitor is able to highlight issues of disagreement among group members and show the extent of disagreement . Each vote helps group members to focus their attention on contentious issues so that they can try to resolve them . Each use of the consensus monitor is likely to help a decision making group increase its consensus level , though successive increases are likely to come at a diminishing rate . Hypothesis 1 : Post - meeting consensus will be higher in groups that use the consensus monitor several times than in groups that use the consen - sus monitor only once . Since group members are likely to possess differing preferences , it is necessary for them to narrow their differences when performing a pref - erence task . A group decision is reached when the group has achieved an acceptable consensus level or when the group has reached their dead - line . For the former , group members are more likely to feel that their decision is right and the process complete and appropriate . For the latter , group members compromise reluctantly and are more likely to feel bad about their decision and inadequate about the process . Since multiple use of the consensus monitor is likely to increase the consensus level , it is also likely to result in higher perceived decision quality and perceived decision process quality . Hypothesis 2 : Perceived decision quality will be higher in groups that use the consensus monitor several times than in groups that use the consen - sus monitor only once . Hypothesis 3 : Perceived decision process qual - ity will be higher in groups that use the consensus monitor several times than in groups that use the consensus monitor only once . 4 . Methodology A controlled laboratory experiment was con - ducted . Small face - to - face groups were employed because organizational decisions are often made by such groups . A group size of 5 was chosen because this appears to be the optimal size 19 , 33 and average number of participants in organiza - tional meetings 8 . 4 . 1 . The task The task employed was the Personal Trust Foundation task developed by Watson 35 . It required subjects to allocate a fixed sum of money to 6 competing projects , which were based on the 6 basic motives in personality ( theoretical , eco - nomic , aesthetic , social , political , and religious ) described by Spranger 32 . 4 . 2 . The GSS and consensus monitor The GSS used was the Software Aided Group Environment ( SAGE ) system 37 . SAGE is im - 254 B . C . Y . Tan et aL / Information & Management 28 ( 1995 ) 251 - 259 Public terminal ~ creen ion 1 lering uation aids : houghts Private terminals Fig . 2 . Structure of SAGE . plemented on HyperCard and runs on a network of Macintosh personal computers ( see Fig . 2 ) . It consists of two major programs : public and pri - vate . The former collected group member inputs and transmitted them to the latter , which aggre - gated , stored , and displayed them on the public screen . The Idea Gathering and Idea Evaluation modules of SAGE permitted group members to express and rate their inputs respectively . The consensus monitor is a decision aid in SAGE . Its inputs were the decisions of all group members , who allocated funds among alterna - tives . Instead of computing an overall consensus level for the group on all alternatives , it used a modified version of the fuzzy model of consensus to produce a consensus level for the group for each alternative ( see Appendix ) . This permitted group members to assess the extent to which they agreed or disagreed on each alternative and fo - cused their attention on contentious issues . Its output could be viewed in both tabular and graphical forms . 4 . 3 . The procedure The experiment involved : ( 1 ) A warm - up task to alleviate problems asso - ciated with groups that have not worked together 4 ; ( 2 ) The actual task , performed separately , to compute pre - meeting consensus ; ( 3 ) Thorough training in the use of SAGE and the consensus monitor to minimize problems aris - ing from misuse ; ( 4 ) The actual task , performed collectively us - ing SAGE and the consensus monitor . Half the groups could use the consensus monitor only once ; the other half could use it several times . There were no restrictions on the number of rounds of discussion and votes for all groups . The time required to reach consensus was recorded ; ( 5 ) The actual task , performed individually again , to compute post - meeting consensus ; ( 6 ) Responses to two instruments that mea - sured perceived decision quality and perceived decision process quality ; and ( 7 ) Completion of a questionnaire eliciting sub - ject ' s age , gender , experience with group decision making , and experience with computers . 4 . 4 . The subjects A total of 22 groups ( 110 subjects ) participated in the study . The subjects were information sys - tems undergraduates from the National Univer - sity of Singapore . They were randomly assigned to groups , which were randomly assigned to treat - ments . This served to control for individual dif - ferences that might affect group decision out - come 15 , 30 . 4 . 5 . Pilot study A pilot study , involving 9 groups ( 45 subjects ) , was conducted to assess the feasibility of the consensus monitor concept . Results showed that groups that used it several times achieved signifi - cantly higher group consensus and perceived de - cision quality . However , because of the small sample size and low statistical power , these find - ings should not be considered conclusive . Never - theless , the pilot study justified the need for more research . 5 . Results A 5 percent level of significance was used for all statistical tests . The t - test and Mann - Whitney B . C . Y Tan et al . / Information & Management 28 ( 1995 ) 251 - 259 255 Table 1 Mean ( standard deviation ) of covariate and dependent vari - ables Consensus monitor use Single Multiple Pre - meeting consensus Post - meeting consensus Perceived decision quality Perceived decision process quality Number of groups 0 . 35 ( 0 . 09 ) 0 . 39 ( 0 . 14 ) 0 . 47 ( 0 . 11 ) 0 . 63 ( 0 . 19 ) 32 . 6 ( 2 . 4 ) 34 . 1 ( 2 . 9 ) 12 . 7 ( 2 . 5 ) 13 . 6 ( 1 . 7 ) 11 11 test were used to detect pre - meeting differences between treatments . No significant differences were found for age , gender , experience with group decision making , experience with computers , and time to reach consensus . Hence , these variables were not included as covariates in the actual data analysis . The analysis of covariance ( ANCOVA ) test was used to detect significant effects of the dependent variables . The independent variable was consensus monitor use . The covariate was pre - meeting consensus . Table 1 presents descrip - tive statistics of the covariate and dependent vari - ables . Table 2 shows the results of ANCOVA tests for the dependent variables . All dependent variables met the requirements for homogeneity of variances and normality of error terms 26 . The ANCOVA test has two other requirements relating the dependent vari - ables and covariate : linearity and homogeneity of regressions 24 . Violations of these requirements are not critical if the covariate has a normal distribution 12 . The Shapiro - Wilk ' s test 6 showed that pre - meeting consensus had a normal distribution . 5 . 1 . Post - meeting consensus Both pre - meeting and post - meeting consensus were computed using the fuzzy model . This model Table 3 Items measuring perceived decision quality Item Weight Goal directedness 1 . 1 Relevance of issues 1 . 7 Amplification 1 . 2 Evenness of participation 0 . 1 Examination of issues 0 . 9 Handling of issues 1 . 6 Interpersonal relations 0 . 4 produces a score ranging from 0 to 1 , with a higher score indicating better agreement of the group . Consensus monitor use had a significant effect on post - meeting consensus ( p = 0 . 03 ) . Groups that used the consensus monitor several times achieved higher post - meeting consensus than groups that used the consensus monitor only once . Hypothesis 1 was supported . 5 . 2 . Perceived decision quality Perceived decision quality was measured using an instrument with 7 items having unequal weights 16 ( see Table 3 ) . It produces a value ranging from 7 to 49 . The higher the measure , the better the group perception of its decision . These 7 items had a Cronbach ' s alpha 7 of 0 . 81 , satisfy - ing Nunnally ' s 28 criteria for reliability . No sig - nificant effects were observed for perceived deci - sion quality . Hypotheses 2 was not supported . 5 . 3 . Perceived decision process quality An instrument developed by Green and Taber 17 was used to measure perceived decision pro - cess quality ( see Table 4 ) . It has 5 items with equal weight and produces a value ranging from 5 Table 2 Results of ANCOVA tests for dependent variables Consensus monitor use Pre - meeting consensus Interaction Post - meeting consensus Perceived decision quality Perceived decision process quality F = 5 . 54 F = 2 . 27 F = 3 . 07 p = 0 . 03 * p = 0 . 12 p = 0 . 10 F = 1 . 12 F = 0 . 51 F = 2 . 22 p = 0 . 30 p = 0 . 48 p = 0 . 15 F = 1 . 01 F = 0 . 26 F = 1 . 86 p = 0 . 33 p = 0 . 61 p = 0 . 19 p < 0 . 05 . 256 B . C Y . Tan et al . / Information & Management 28 ( 1995 ) 251 - 259 Table 4 Items measuring perceived decision process quality Item Inefficient . . . Efficient Uncoordinated . . . Coordinated Unfair . . . Fair Confusing . . . Understandable Satisfying . . . Dissatisfying to 25 . A higher measure is associated with better group perception of the decision making process . The 5 items had a Cronbach ' s alpha of 0 . 88 , satisfying Nunnally ' s criteria for reliability . There were no significant effects for perceived decision process quality . Hypothesis 3 was not supported . 6 . Discussion Consensus is an important group decision out - come . Measures to promote consensus include the use of group techniques and GSS . Group techniques achieve their objective by encouraging personal involvement and highlighting differences in opinions . GSS can incorporate group tech - niques and build on their strengths by providing better ways to highlight differences in opinions through computation . In this study , groups that used the consensus monitor several times achieved better consensus than groups that used it only once . Previous GSS empirical studies involving pref - erence tasks found that the use of group tech - niques raises post - meeting consensus . However , they also reported that the introduction of GSS , on top of group techniques , results in a lowering of post - meeting consensus . Moreover , a GSS did not raise perceived decision quality and perceived decision process quality . Given that consensus attainment is essential for the completion of pref - erence tasks , these findings imply that decision making groups solving preference tasks are not likely to use GSS unless a remedy can be found . This study shows that a consensus monitor is a potential answer . The consensus monitor has helped to promote consensus . Future research should examine whether groups using a GSS with a consensus monitor can outperform groups sup - ported by group techniques in terms of group consensus . The consensus monitor highlights contentious issues for group members . The intention is to help them focus their attention on relevant issues to resolve conflicts . However , it is not known how group members actually used the additional in - formation . Two scenarios are possible . First , group members might have adopted a construc - tive approach and examined all viewpoints on contentious issues to gain a broader perspective before attempting to resolve them . Second , group members might have taken an undesirable ap - proach whereby the more dominating group members used the additional information to help them pinpoint areas where they could apply pres - sure on others . Since a higher consensus level was not accompanied by better perceived decision quality and perceived decision process quality , it is plausible that the second scenario actually re - flects the decision making process of many groups allowed to use the consensus monitor several times . The scenarios represent faithful and ironic use of the consensus monitor respectively 29 . Given that ironic use of decision aids in GSS can result in unintended and undesirable effects , future re - search should investigate how a consensus moni - tor is actually used . Besides identifying the condi - tions under which ironic use of a consensus moni - tor is likely , this knowledge will provide clues on how to minimize ironic use . 7 . Conclusion This study suffers from limitations associated with experimental groups and an artificial setting . Given that the emphasis of an experimental in - vestigation is on internal rather than external validity 2 , any attempt to generalize the findings of this study to other populations and settings must be made with caution . With their computational power and vast stor - age capacities , GSS open up a new avenue to enhance group performance . Group techniques can be combined with statistical or other tech - B . C . Y . Tan et al . / Information & Management 28 ( 1995 ) 251 - 259 257 niques requiring vast computation and storage . Like several other GSS studies 1 , this study is a step along this new avenue . Acknowledgements The authors thank the editor and anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments and sugges - tions . Lzt = 2 ( Czt * Czt ' ) / m ( m - 1 ) , where Czt ' is the transpose of Czt and * is the operator multiply - ing the first matrix by the second matrix . Let Lz be the consensus level of the group for alternative z . Lz = folLZt dt References Appendix 1 Let A be the set of n alternatives considered by a group . A = { A1 , A2 . . . . . An } , where Az is the alternative z , Let R be the fuzzy preference relation defined over all pairs of alternatives for an individual . Ri , j = 0 if i = j , Rij = Fi / ( Fi + Fj ) otherwise , where Fz is the funds allocated to Az . Let Rt be the threshold preference relation for R . Rt is a transformation of R , obtained by thresholding the values of R at level t where 0 = < t = < l . Rti ~ i = 1 if Ri , j > = t , Rti , j = 0 otherwise . Let CzR1t , R2t be the consensus level between two group members , R1 and R2 , for alternative z at level t . CzR1t , R2t = ( R1t * R1t ' ) / ( ( R1t * R1t ' ) + ( R2t * R2t ' ) - ( R1t * R2t ' ) ) , where Rzt ' is the transpose of Rzt and * is the operator multiplying the first matrix ( zth row ) by the second matrix ( zth column ) . Let G be the set of m members in the group . G = { R1 , R2 . . . . . Rm } , where Rz is the group member z . Let Czt be the consensus relation defined over all pairs of group members for alternative z at level t . Cztx , y = 0 if x - - - y , Cztx , y = CzRxt , Ryt otherwise . Let Lzt be the consensus level of the group for alternative z at level t . 1 Aiken , M . and Carlisle , J . " An Automated Idea Consoli - dation Tool for Computer Supported Cooperative Work , " Information and Management , 1992 , 23 ( 6 ) , pp . 373 - 382 . 2 Babbie , E . The Practice of Social Research , Wadsworth : Belmont , CA , 1992 . 3 Beauclair , R . A . and Jelassi , M . T . " An Integrated Frame - work for Group Decision Support Systems Design , " In - formation and Management , 1987 , 13 ( 3 ) , pp . 143 - 153 . 4 Bormann , E . G . Discussion and Group Methods : Theory and Practice , Harper and Row : New York , NY , 1975 . 5 Brehmer , B . " Social Judgement Theory and the Analysis of Interpersonal Conflict , " Psychological Bulletin , 1976 , 83 ( 6 ) , pp . 985 - 1003 . 6 Conover , W . J . Practical Nonparametric Statistics , John Wiley : New York , NY , 1980 . 7 Cronbach , L . , Gleser , G . , Nanda , H . and Rajaratnam , N . The Dependability of Behavioral Measurement : The Theory of Generalizability for Score and Profiles , John Wiley : New York , NY , 1972 . 8 Datamation . " Hardware : Offline , " May 15 , 1986 , 32 ( 10 ) , p . 109 . 9 Dennis , A . R . , Heminger , A . R , , Nunamaker , J . F . and Vogel , D . R . " Bringing Automated Support to Large Groups : The Burr - Brown Experience , " Information and Management , 1990 , 18 ( 3 ) , pp . 111 - 121 . 10 DeSanctis , G . and Gallupe , R . B . " A Foundation for the Study of Group Decision Support Systems , " Manage - ment Science , 1987 , 33 ( 5 ) , pp . 589 - 609 . 11 Diehl , M . and Stroebe , W . " Productivity Loss in Brain - storming Groups : Towards the Solution of a Riddle , " Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1987 , 53 ( 3 ) , pp . 497 - 509 . 12 Elashoff , J . D . " Analysis of Covariance : A Delicate In - strument , " American Education Research Journal , 1969 , 6 , pp . 383 - 401 . 13 Fisher , B . A . Small Group Decision Making : Communica - tion and the Group Process , McGraw Hill : New York , NY , 1989 . 14 George , J . F . , Easton , G . K . , Nunamaker , J . F . and Northcraft , G . B . " A Study of Collaborative Work with and without Computer - Based Support , " Information Sys - tems Research , 1990 , 1 ( 4 ) , pp . 394 - 415 . 258 B . C Y . Tan et al . / Information & Management 28 ( 1995 ) 251 - 259 15 Gordon , M . E . , Slade , LA . and Schmitt , N . " The ' Sci - ence of the Sophomore ' Revisited : From Conjecture to Empiricism , " Academy of Management Review , 1986 , 11 ( 1 ) , pp . 191 - 207 . 16 Gouran , D . S . , Brown , C . and Henry , D . R . " Behavioral Correlates of Perceptions of Quality in Decision - Making Discussions , " Communication Monographs , 1978 , 45 ( 1 ) , pp . 51 - 63 . 17 Green , S . G . and Taber , T . D . " The Effects of Three Social Decision Schemes on Decision Group Processes , " Organizational Behavior and Human Performance , 1980 , 25 ( 1 ) , pp . 97 - 106 . 18 Hackman , J . R . and Kaplan , R . E . " Interventions into Group Process : An Approach to Improving the Effective - ness of Groups , " Decision Sciences , 1974 , 5 ( 3 ) , pp . 459 - 480 . 19 Hackman , J . R . and Vidmar , N . " Effects of Size and Task Type on Group Performance and Member Reactions , " Sociometry , 1970 , 33 ( 1 ) , pp . 37 - 54 . 20 Hill , G . W . " Group versus Individual Performance : Are N + 1 Heads Better than One ? " Psychological Bulletin , 1982 , 91 ( 3 ) , pp . 517 - 539 . 21 Hiltz , S . R . and Turoff , M . " Structuring Computer - Medi - ated Computer Systems to Avoid Information Overload , " Communications of the ACM , 1985 , 28 ( 7 ) , pp . 680 - 689 . 22 Hirokawa , R . Y . and Pace , R . A . " A Descriptive Investiga - tion of the Possible Communication Based Reasons for Effective and Ineffective Group Decision Making , " Com - munication Monographs , 1983 , 50 ( 4 ) , pp . 363 - 379 . 23 Ho , T . H . and Raman , K . S . " The Effect of GDSS and Elected Leadership on Small Group Meetings , " Journal of Management Information Systems , 1991 , 8 ( 2 ) , pp . 109 - 133 . 24 Kufs , C . " Analysis of Covariance , " in Barukowski , R . S . ( ed . ) , Computer Packages and Research Design , Univer - sity Press of America : New York , NY , 1983 , pp . 285 - 288 . 25 McGrath , J . E . Groups : Interaction and Performance , Prentice - Hall : Englewood Cliffs , NJ , 1984 . 26 Neter , J . , Wasserman , W . and Kutner , M . H . Applied Linear Statistical Models : Regression , Analysis of Vari - ance , and Experimental Designs , Irwin : Homewood , IL , 1990 . 27 Nunamaker , J . F . , Dennis , A . R . , Valacich , J . S . , Vogel , D . R . and George , J . F . " Electronic Meeting Systems to Support Group Work , " Communications of the ACM , 1991 , 34 ( 7 ) , pp . 40 - 61 . 28 Nunnally , J . C . Psychometric Theory , McGraw Hill : New York , NY , 1978 . 29 Poole , M . S . and DeSanctis , G . " Understanding the Use of Group Decision Support Systems : The Theory of Adaptive Structuration , " in Fulk , J . and Steinfield , C . ( eds . ) , Organizations and Communication Technology , Sage : Newburk Park , CA , 1990 , pp . 173 - 193 . 30 Remus , W . E . " Graduate Students as Surrogates for Managers in Experiments on Business Decision Making , " Journal of Business Research , 1986 , 14 ( 1 ) , pp . 19 - 25 . 31 SpiUman , B . , Spillman , R . and Bezdek , J . " A Fuzzy Analysis of Consensus in Small Groups , " in Wang , P . P . and Chang , S . K . ( eds . ) , Fuzzy Sets : Theory and Applica - tion to Policy Analysis and Information Systems , Plenum : New York , NY , 1980 , pp . 291 - 308 . 32 Spranger , E . Types of Men , Max Niemeyer Verlag : Halle , 1928 . 33 Steiner , I . D . Group Process and Productivity , Academic Press : New York , NY , 1972 . 34 Tan , B . C . Y . , Raman , K . S . and Wei , K . K . " An Empirical Study of the Task Dimension of Group Support System , " IEEE Transactions on Systems , Man , and Cybernetics , 1994 , 24 ( 7 ) , pp . 1054 - 1060 . 35 Watson , R . T . A Study of Group Decision Support Sys - tem Use in Three and Four Person Groups for a Prefer - ence Allocation Decision , Unpublished Ph . D . disserta - tion , University of Minnesota , 1987 . 36 Watson , R . T . , DeSanctis , G . and Poole , M . S . " Using a GDSS to Facilitate Group Consensus : Some Intended and Unintended Consequences , " MIS Quarterly , 1988 , 12 ( 3 ) , pp . 463 - 478 . 37 Wei , K . K . , Tan , B . C . Y . and Raman , K . S . " SAGE : A HyperCard - Based GDSS , " Proceedings of the Twenty - Fifth Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , 1992 , 4 , pp . 14 - 22 . Bernard C . Y . Tan received his B . Sc . ( Hons . ) and M . Sc . degrees in Com - puter and Information Sciences , in 1989 and 1991 respectively , from the National University of Singapore . He was a Research Assistant from 1989 to 1991 and has been a Teaching As - sistant since 1991 at the National University of Singapore , where he is presently pursuing his Ph . D . degree . His research interests include Group Support Systems , Electronic Data In - terchange , and Database Systems . Kwok - Kee Wei received his D . Phil . degree in Computer Science in 1986 from the University of York ( United Kingdom ) . He is presently a Senior Lecturer at the National University of Singapore . He has published in jour - nals such as MIS Quarterly , IEEE Transactions on Systems , Man , and Cybernetics , ACM SIGMOD Records , and International Journal of Human - Computer Studies . His research inter - ests include Group Support Systems , User - Database Interaction , and Electronic Data Interchange . B , C Y . Tan et al . / Information & Management 28 ( 1995 ) 251 - 259 259 Hock - Hai Teo received his B . Sc . ( Hons . ) degree in Computer and In - formation Sciences in 1990 from the National University of Singapore . He was a systems analyst from 1990 to 1992 at the Urban Redevelopment Authority in Singapore and has been a Teaching Assistant since 1992 at the National University of Singapore , where he is presently pursuing his M . Sc . degree . His research interests include Group Support Systems , Electronic Data Interchange , and Strategic Information Sys - tems Planning .