93 ISSN 1990 - 7478 , Biochemistry ( Moscow ) , Supplement Series A : Membrane and Cell Biology , 2018 , Vol . 12 , No . 2 , pp . 93 – 106 . © Pleiades Publishing , Ltd . , 2018 . Original Russian Text © A . A . Byvalov , V . L . Kononenko , I . V . Konyshev , 2018 , published in Biologicheskie Membrany , 2018 , Vol . 35 , No . 2 , pp . 115 – 130 . Single - Cell Force Spectroscopy of Interaction of Lipopolysaccharides from Yersinia pseudotuberculosis and Yersinia pestis with J774 Macrophage Membrane Using Optical Tweezers A . A . Byvalov a , b , V . L . Kononenko c , d , * , and I . V . Konyshev a , b a Vyatka State University , Kirov , 610000 Russia b Institute of Physiology , Komi Research Center , Ural Branch , Russian Academy of Sciences , Syktyvkar , 167982 Russia c Emanuel Institute of Biochemical Physics , Russian Academy of Sciences , Moscow , 119334 Russia d Dmitry Rogachev National Medical Research Center of Pediatric Hematology , Oncology and Immunology , Moscow , 117997 Russia * e - mail : vlkononenko @ gmail . com Received May 4 , 2017 ; in final form , June 19 , 2017 Abstract —In order to investigate quantitatively the role of lipopolysaccharides ( LPS ) from outer bacterial membrane at the initial state of bacterium adhesion to a host cell membrane , a model system for single cell force spectroscopy was developed and used . The system comprised of an LPS - coated microsphere placed into optical trap and a J774 macrophage being approached the microsphere to initiate their binding and then moved back to rupture the bond . An “object shadow” phenomenon was discovered , manifested as large - scale variations of the signal of photodetector registering the trapped microsphere displacement , such variations emerging long before the actual interaction between the macrophage and microsphere . The theory and the measurements technique were developed for registration of the force required for detachment of bounded microsphere from the object investigated by means of optical tweezers under the “object shadow” conditions . Characteristic spectra of binding force between J774 macrophage and microspheres functionalized with var - ious LPS , as well as LPS plus complementary antibodies preparations were obtained at the rate of detachment force application of 3 – 6 pN / s . Force spectrum characteristic of Yersinia pseudotuberculosis LPS possessing O - antigen had a maximum at ~ 14 pN with half - width of ~ 23 pN . The treatment of O - antigen with comple - mentary antibodies resulted in transformation of this spectrum into a spectrum with maximum at ~ 10 pN and half - width of ~ 14 pN , being almost identical to the spectrum of Y . pestis LPS devoid of O - antigen , with a maximum at ~ 9 pN and half - width of ~ 13 pN . A possible mechanism of force spectra formation has been proposed under assumptions of nonspecific binding of O - antigen and probable receptor - type binding of LPS core region to the macrophage surface . The elastic modulus of macrophage envelope , as estimated using anal - ysis of displacement of the contacting microsphere as an indenter , was ≈ 0 . 17 pN / nm . Keywords : adhesion force , lipopolysaccharide , Yersinia , cell membrane , macrophage , force spectroscopy , optical tweezers DOI : 10 . 1134 / S1990747818020058 INTRODUCTION Bacterial infection is a multistage process involving the adhesion of bacterium to the corresponding layer of epithelium [ 1 , 2 ] , penetration through this layer [ 3 ] , subsequent interaction of bacterium with innate immune factors [ 4 – 6 ] , and then , for bacteria , which were able to overcome this barrier , the interaction with the adaptive immune system [ 6 , 7 ] . Each stage is char - acterized by specific mechanisms of interaction of bacteria with various cells . However , any of these stages may be critical to the development or termina - tion of the infectious process . In this context , studies of molecular - force pattern of the initial , relatively sim - ple stage of the process – the adhesion of the bacterial membrane to various , including immunocompetent cells , are of particular interest for explaining the nature of interactions in the “parasite – host” system . They are also important for the development of fundamen - tally new approaches to combat infectious diseases . One of them is an anti - adhesion therapy based on the inhibition of initial adhesion of pathogenic bacteria instead of trying to struggle them at the postadhesion stage [ 8 , 9 ] . The membrane adhesion stage is crucial for infec - tion . It consists of two fundamentally different stages [ 1 , 10 ] . At the first stage , called below the “sticking” , the reversible , nonspecific binding of the adjoined cell membranes occurs . Here , a bacterium overcomes the ARTICLES 94 BIOCHEMISTRY ( MOSCOW ) , SUPPLEMENT SERIES A : MEMBRANE AND CELL BIOLOGY Vol . 12 No . 2 2018 BYVALOV et al . barrier of mutual repulsion of two negatively charged membranes . It is generally accepted that the main role in this complex process is played by hydrophobic interactions involving macromolecules exposed to the surrounding medium [ 10 , 11 ] . At the second stage , practically irreversible attraction of the cell surfaces due to a significantly stronger ligand – receptor inter - action between the membranes of bacteria and target cells is established [ 2 , 10 ] . Arguments of functional nature lead to a conclusion that “sticking” must satisfy two mutually contradictory requirements . On the one hand , the primary attachment should not be selective and too tight , ensuring reversibility of the binding in case a bacterium contacted a “non - targeted” cell . On the other hand , it must be of sufficient strength and duration to ensure that a ligand – receptor binding of a bacterium with a target cell could be implemented in the case of the bacterial “target sticking” , occurring in the conditions of divisive influence of Brownian motion and physiological processes of mass transfer in close proximity to epithelial surfaces of the organism . Such binding requires a certain time for the formation of appropriate number of bonds between randomly distributed ligands and receptors on the membranes coming into contact , their surface concentrations being rather small . These features of the primary interaction of the bacterial and target cell membranes allow one to con - clude that from the bacterium side it is ensured by the macromolecules with the highest surface concentra - tion . In Gram - negative bacteria , including some of the most dangerous pathogens , such molecules are the outer membrane lipopolysaccharides ( LPS ) [ 9 ] . For instance , an Escherichia coli cell contains ~ 3 . 5 × 10 6 molecules of LPS , which occupy ~ 4 . 9 μm 2 out of ~ 6 . 7 μm 2 of the cell surface area [ 9 ] . The LPS molecule of Gram - negative bacteria consists , generally , of three structural units : the negatively charged lipid A anchored in the outer membrane , the central oligosaccharide ( the core region ) exposed to the environment , and the polysac - charide chain ( O - antigen ) connected to the core from outside , the number of units of which may vary from zero to 40 – 50 or more depending on the bacterium species and the growth conditions [ 12 – 14 ] . Thus , the bacterium surface , negatively charged on average , has a fairly uniform dense coating from hydrophilic poly - saccharide chains with a size of ~ 20 – 40 nm [ 15 , 16 ] . Electrostatic , hydrophobic , steric , and entropic inter - actions are natural mechanisms of initial adhesion of such objects [ 17 ] . A number of data allows a suggestion that at the stage of sticking the receptor binding of LPS with the membrane of target cell may manifest itself along with the expected non - specific interaction [ 18 – 20 ] . The data concerning the forces of nonspecific bac - terial adhesion to the target cells and the role of LPS in this process , as well as the details of the participation of the main structural components of these molecules are insufficient and largely controversial [ 13 ] . At the cellular level , the data were obtained by observing the adhesion of bacterial mutants in culture , and they are mostly qualitative . Quantitative data were obtained mainly for adhesion of bacteria and bacterial compo - nents to non - biological substrates [ 13 , 16 ] . Accord - ingly , their relevance to the biological membranes is unclear . Quantitative study of the adhesion of individ - ual bacteria , as well as macromolecular complexes of their outer membrane to living cells , being of greatest interest to the problem , is at its beginning only . A few studies were performed using atomic force microscopy [ 22 ] ( after a mild fixation of cells with glutaraldehyde ) , magnetic [ 23 , 24 ] and optical [ 25 ] tweezers . The mechanisms of the initial stage of binding to the cells have not been practically studied . For Gram - negative bacteria , the most important is the study of the role of LPS polysaccharide chains in this process due to the dominant presence of LPS on the surface of these bac - teria . It was established already that the chain length may affect virulence and binding of bacteria in a mul - tidirectional manner [ 26 , 27 ] , but the mechanisms of this effect are not clear . In our previous study [ 28 ] , an essential role of O - side chains of LPS in adhesion of Yersinia pseudo - tuberculosis to J774 macrophages was established . The importance of this factor for the realization of the bac - terial pathogenetic potential and for the development of new antibacterial therapy methods was analyzed as well [ 28 ] . The studies were performed using the model system , comprised of a macrophage and a micro - sphere coated with bacterial LPS and placed into the optical trap for measuring the force of microsphere detachment from the macrophage . The aim of the present work was to study quantita - tively on the basis of this system the contribution of bacterial LPS to the binding force between the mem - branes of Gram - negative bacterium and a host cell at the stage of initial adhesion during the infection , in par - ticular , to clarify the role and mechanisms of participa - tion of main structural components of LPS in the shape formation of binding force spectrum . The LPS prepara - tions from two species of Yersinia – Y . pseudotuberculo - sis and Y . pestis – were used . They are genetically rela - tives : it was shown earlier that Y . pseudotuberculosis is an evolutionary ancestor of Y . pestis [ 29 ] . However , their LPS differ fundamentally : Y . pseudotuberculosis LPS contains O - side chains , while Y . pestis LPS does not contain them , although the structure of their lipid A and core region is almost identical [ 30 , 31 ] . The choice of these LPS is also due to the high epidemio - logical significance of Yersinia . The choice of macro - phages as a second participant of the model system was determined by the fact that they are one of the main cellular targets of a host and key mediators of the LPS - dependent immune response formation during the infection .