REPORT Suppression of Grb2 expression improved hepatic steatosis , oxidative stress , and apoptosis induced by palmitic acid in vitro partly through insulin signaling alteration Xiangxiang Shan & Yufeng Miao & Rengen Fan & Changzhi Song & Guangzhou Wu & Zhengqiang Wan & Jian Zhu & Guan Sun & Wenzhang Zha & Xiangming Mu & Guangjun Zhou & Yan Chen Received : 11 March 2013 / Accepted : 26 May 2013 / Published online : 15 June 2013 / Editor : T . Okamoto # The Society for In Vitro Biology 2013 Abstract In this study , we aimed to study the role of growth factor receptor - bound protein 2 ( Grb2 ) in palmitic acid - induced steatosis and other “ fatty liver ” symptoms in vitro . HepG2 cells , with or without stably suppressed Grb2 expres - sion , were incubated with palmitic acid for 24 h to induce typical clinical “ fatty liver ” features , including steatosis , impaired glucose metabolism , oxidative stress , and apopto - sis . MTT and Oil Red O assays were applied to test cell viability and fat deposition , respectively . Glucose uptake assay was used to evaluate the glucose utilization of cells . Quantitative polymerase chain reaction and Western blot were used to measure expressional changes of key markers of insulin signaling , lipid / glucose metabolism , oxidative stress , and apoptosis . After 24 - h palmitic acid induction , increased fat accumulation , reduced glucose uptake , im - paired insulin signaling , enhanced oxidative stress , and Xiangxiang Shan and Yufeng Miao contributed equally to this work . Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article ( doi : 10 . 1007 / s11626 - 013 - 9646 - 9 ) contains supplementary material , which is available to authorized users . X . Shan Department of Geraeology , Yancheng City No . 1 People ’ s Hospital , Yancheng 224001 , China e - mail : xx . shan @ 163 . com Y . Miao Department of Medical Oncology , Yancheng City No . 1 People ’ s Hospital , Yancheng 224001 , China e - mail : yf . miao @ 126 . com R . Fan ( * ) : W . Zha : X . Mu : G . Zhou : Y . Chen Department of General Surgery , Yancheng City No . 1 People ’ s Hospital , Yancheng 224001 , China e - mail : fanrengen2011 @ 163 . com W . Zha e - mail : wzzha @ 126 . com X . Mu e - mail : xiangming @ sina . com G . Zhou e - mail : icasazhou @ 163 . com Y . Chen e - mail : yanchen @ 163 . com C . Song Department of Orthopaedics , Yancheng City No . 1 People ’ s Hospital , Yancheng 224001 , China e - mail : song1984 @ 163 . com G . Wu Department of Thoracic Surgery , Yancheng City No . 1 People ’ s Hospital , Yancheng 224001 , China e - mail : gz . wu @ 126 . com Z . Wan : J . Zhu : G . Sun Department of Neurosurgery , Yancheng City No . 1 People ’ s Hospital , Yancheng 224001 , China Z . Wan e - mail : ppigpug @ 163 . com J . Zhu e - mail : jianzhu @ 126 . com G . Sun e - mail : guan . sun @ 163 . com In Vitro Cell . Dev . Biol . — Animal ( 2013 ) 49 : 576 – 582 DOI 10 . 1007 / s11626 - 013 - 9646 - 9 increased apoptosis were observed in HepG2 cells . Suppres - sion of Grb2 in HepG2 significantly reduced fat accumula - tion , improved glucose metabolism , ameliorated oxidative stress , and restored the activity of insulin receptor substrate - 1 / Akt and MEK / ERK pathways . In addition , Grb2 deficien - cy attenuated hepatic apoptosis shown by reduced activation of caspase - 3 and fluorescent staining . Modulation of Bcl - 2 and Bak1 also contributed to reduced apoptosis . In conclu - sion , suppression of Grb2 expression in HepG2 cells im - proved hepatic steatosis , glucose metabolism , oxidative stress , and apoptosis induced by palmitic acid incubation partly though modulating the insulin signaling pathway . Keywords Grb2 . HepG2 . Steatosis . Apoptosis . Insulin signaling Introduction Insulin resistance ( IR ) refers to a physiological condition when cellular responses to insulin hormone are impaired . As a result , an enhanced level of insulin is needed to pose its normal actions on cells . IR is closely related to a large number of pathological conditions including metabolic syndrome , non - alcoholic fatty liver disease ( NAFLD ) , and type 2 diabe - tes ( Samuel and Shulman 2012 ) . The action of insulin starts from the binding of insulin to its receptor on targeted cell membrane . Then , insulin receptor will be autophosphorylated to activate downstream signaling pathways mainly including the phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) and the mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) pathways . The activation of PI3K and downstream Akt pathway is through tyrosine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate ( IRS ) - 1 and 2 leading to promoted glycogen synthesis and suppressed glu - coneogenesis ( Sowers 2004 ) . In contrast , activation of the MAPK pathways ( e . g . , the MEK / ERK pathway ) is mainly through the recruitment of adaptor proteins ( e . g . , Src and growth factor receptor - bound protein 2 ( Grb2 ) ) to the phos - phorylated insulin receptors ( Burks and White 2001 ) . Under pathological condition like IR , both pathways are impaired , contributing to deregulated metabolism of glucose and lipid . In the liver , IR is thought to be the “ first - hit ” of the NAFLD pathological progression , which leads to deregulated lipid metabolism and other events in the “ second - hit ” including fibrosis , oxidative status , inflammation , and necro - apoptosis ( Malaguarnera et al . 2009 ) . Therefore , improving IR is vital for the treatment of NAFLD and other metabolic diseases . As an important adaptor protein , Grb2 links to epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase by its SH2 domain , then activates the Ras / Raf / MEK / ERK pathway . The activa - tion of Ras is from the binding of GTP which is converted from GDP by the association of Grb2 and c - Met ( Schlessinger 2000 ) . Although some recent studies investigated the involvements of Grb2 in hepatic diseases ( Johmura et al . 2003 ; Kondo et al . 2008 ; Li et al . 2011 ) , the specific role of this gene in NAFLD is largely unknown . In the current study , we showed that suppression of Grb2 in cell line improved steatosis , lipid / glucose metabolism , oxidative stress , and apo - ptosis induced by palmitic acid incubation . The improvements are partially through the restoration of insulin signaling , in - cluding IRS / Akt and MEK / ERK pathways . Materials and Methods Cell culture and treatment . The Grb2 - suppressed RNA in - terference stable HepG2 cell line was constructed and maintained according to the protocol of Langlais et al . ( 2004 ) with minor modifications . The origin of HepG2 cells was from ATCC ( ATCC , Manassas , VA ) . HepG2 with suppressed ex - pression of Grb2 and normal HepG2 cells were cultured in DMEM medium with 25 mM glucose and supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( Invitrogen , Grand Island , NY ) under conditions of 37°C , 5 % CO 2 , and 95 % humidity . Before experiment , cells were seeded in Costar® six - well culture plates ( Corning Incorporated , Corning , NY ) with a confluence of ∼ 50 – 60 % for another 12 - h culture . For the induction of steatosis , palmitic acid ( Sigma Chemical , St . Louis , MO ) was conjugated to fatty acid – free bovine serum albumin ( Sigma ) before the treatment . After that , 200 μ M palmitic acid was administrated to HepG2 cells ( ∼ 70 % confluence , monolayer ) for 24 h . The “ n number ” was 5 for each group . MTT assay . Cell viability was measured by measuring the mitochondrial conversion of MTT to a purple color product . After treatment with palmitic acid , cells were incubated with 5 mg / ml MTT for 3 h , and subsequently dissolved in dimeth - yl sulfoxide . Absorbance was measured at 570 nm . Oil Red O staining . Lipid accumulation in cell culture was measured by using Oil Red O staining . Briefly , cells were washed with sterile PBS for three times and then fixed with 10 % formalin in PBS ( pH = 7 . 4 ) for 15 min . Then , cells were washed with distilled water for three times and stained in diluted Oil Red O reagent for 1 h . Typical staining results were captured and analyzed by Zeiss Axioplan microscope ( Carl Zeiss Microscopy , Jena , Germany ) and ImageJ soft - ware , respectively . Quantitative RT - PCR measurement . After palmitic treat - ment , cells were washed by PBS and then subjected to RNA extraction using Trizol reagent ( Invitrogen ) according to the manual . Complementary DNA was synthesized from extracted total RNA using superscript II system ( Invitrogen ) . Primers used for quantitative reverse transcription polymer - ase chain reaction ( RT - PCR ) conducted in ABI Prism 7300 GRB2 DEFICIENCY IMPROVES STEATOSIS 577 machine with ABI SYBR green system ( Applied Biosystems , Forster City , CA ) were listed in Table 1 . Parallel amplification of β - actin was used as the internal control . Quantitation of gene expression was conducted by using comparative Ct method . Western blot . Total protein was extracted using RIPA buffer ( Sigma ) from treated cells . Western blot was performed to using specific antibodies to Grb2 , phosphorylated IRS - 1 at Ser612 , total IRS - 1 , phosphorylated Akt at Thr308 , total Akt , phosphorylated MEK at Ser217 / 221 , total MEK , phos - phorylated ERK at Thr202 / Tyr204 , total ERK , cleaved caspase - 3 , and β - actin . All antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling ( Beverly , MA ) and diluted at 1 : 1 , 000 ratio . Antibody for GLUT1 was from Abcam with 1 : 1 , 000 dilution in use . Specific horse radish peroxidase - conjugated second - ary antibody ( anti - rabbit at 1 : 5 , 000 dilution , Cell Signaling ) was used and proteins were visualized by the chemilumines - cence method . Malondialdehyde ( MDA ) assay . To study the oxidative sta - tus under different treatments , the formation of lipid perox - idation product malondialdehyde ( MDA ) was measured by using Lipid Peroxidation ( MDA ) Assay Kit from Abcam ( Abcam , Cambridge , UK ) . 2 - Deoxyglucose uptake . Cellular glucose uptake was mea - sured as previously described ( Mao et al . 2006 ) . Briefly , after palmitate treatment , cells were incubated in transport solu - tion with 2 - deoxyl - D - 2 - [ 3 H ] - glucose ( 0 . 5 μ Ci / ml ; American Radiolabeled Chemicals , St . Louis , MO ) and 10 μ M 2 - deoxyglucose ( Sigma ) for 10 min . Then , cells were washed by PBS and lysed by 0 . 1 M NaOH solution . Apoptotic measurements by Hoechst 33342 and propidium iodide double staining . After treatment with palmitic acid , Hoechst 33342 ( 5 μ g / ml ; Sigma ) and propidium iodide ( PI , 5 μ g / ml ; Sigma ) were added to each well to stain live cells for 15 min . Cells with PI positive staining were calculated against the total cell number shown by Hoechst staining . Statistical analysis . In this study , data were analyzed by using a two - way ANOVA with a Bonferroni multiple com - parison post - test except cell viability results which used one - way ANOVA . All endpoint measurements were normalized to corresponding cell viability results . A p < 0 . 05 is consid - ered to be statistically significant . Error bars represent stan - dard error of the mean of samples within a group . Different letters represent significant change between different groups . Results Inhibition of Grb2 decreased lipid accumulation and increased cell viability . Twenty - four - hour treatment with palmitic acid significantly increased the fat accumulation in HepG2 cells as shown by Oil Red O staining results ( Fig . 1 A and B ) . However , in Grb2 - deficient HepG2 cells , the deposition of fat after palmitic acid treatment was significantly less than that in normal cells with palmitic acid treatment ( Fig . 1 C and D ) . In addition , treatment of palmitic acid significantly re - duced cell viability , when compared with the control cells . Deficiency of Grb2 expression partially restored the cell viability ( Fig . 1 E ) . Deficiency of endogenous Grb2 in HepG2 cells did not influence the fat accumulation and cell viability of untreated cells ( Electronic supplementary material ( ESM ) Fig . 1 ) . Suppression of Grb2 expression improved glucose metabolism and lipid metabolism . To test the effects of palmitic acid and Grb2 suppression on the metabolisms of lipid and glucose , we firstly tested the uptake of 2 - deoxyglucose by HepG2 cells in different groups . Palmiate acid - treated group showed im - paired glucose metabolism , which was fully restored by the suppression of Grb2 expression in cells ( Fig . 2 A ) . The reduced glucose uptake was positively correlated with reduced protein expression of glucose transporter GLUT1 ( Fig . 2 B ) . To further investigate the mechanism of palmitic acid - induced lipid me - tabolism dysfunction , lipogenic gene SREBP - 1c and lipolysis gene PNPLA2 were characterized in different groups . After palmitic acid treatment , when compared with the control group , SREBP - 1c was induced while PNPLA2 was inhibited leading to a net accumulation of lipid in the cells ( Fig . 1 B ) . Suppression of Grb2 expression reduced the expression of SREBP - 1c and restored PNPLA2 level , contributing to the rebalanced lipid metabolism ( Fig . 2 C and D ) . Table 1 . Primer sequence for quantitative RT - PCR Gene Direction Sequence SREBP - 1c Forward 5 ′ - GCCCCTGTAACGACCACTG - 3 ′ Reverse 5 ′ - CAGCGAGTCTGCCTTGATG - 3 ′ PNPLA2 Forward 5 ′ - GGCTTCCTCGGCGTCTACTA - 3 ′ Reverse 5 ′ - TTTACCAGGTTGAAGGAGGGG - 3 ′ Bcl - 2 Forward 5 ′ - GGTGGGGTCATGTGTGTGG - 3 ′ Reverse 5 ′ - CGGTTCAGGTACTCAGTCATCC - 3 ′ Bak1 Forward 5 ′ - ATGGTCACCTTACCTCTGCAA - 3 ′ Reverse 5 ′ - TCATAGCGTCGGTTGATGTCG - 3 ′ CAT Forward 5 ′ - TGGAGCTGGTAACCCAGTAGG - 3 ′ Reverse 5 ′ - CCTTTGCCTTGGAGTATTTGGTA - 3 ′ SOD1 Forward 5 ′ - GGTGGGCCAAAGGATGAAGAG - 3 ′ Reverse 5 ′ - CCACAAGCCAAACGACTTCC - 3 ′ β - actin Forward 5 ′ - GGCATTCACGAGACCACCTAC - 3 ′ Reverse 5 ′ - CGACATGACGTTGTTGGCATAC - 3 ′ 578 SHAN ET AL . Suppression of Grb2 - ameliorated oxidative stress induced by palmitic acid . Palmitic acid incubation significantly in - creased the formation of MDA , the end product of lipid peroxidation in HepG2 cells . Suppression of Grb2 partially reduced the MDA formation , representing an ameliorated cellular status of oxidative stress ( Fig . 3 A ) . To further inves - tigate the mechanism , we measured the mRNA expressions of endogenous antioxidant enzymes CAT and SOD1 . Palmitic acid treatment significantly reduced the expression of CAT but not SOD1 , indicating a partially impaired endogenous antioxidant system of the cell ( Fig . 3 B and C ) . Grb2 deficien - cy completely restored the level of CAT ( Fig . 3 B ) . Deficiency of Grb2 restored IRS / Akt and MEK / ERK signaling . After incubation with palmitic acid , the activities ( phosphorylation ) of IRS / Akt and MEK / ERK were inhibited in HepG2 cells , reflecting impaired insulin signaling in the cells ( Fig . 4 ) . When the endogenous expression of Grb2 was stably suppressed , the phosphorylation of these two path - ways was either fully or partially restored , indicating a Figure 1 . Grb2 suppression attenuated fat accumulation and improved cell viability . Representative pictures for Oil Red O staining of HepG2 cells of ( A ) control , ( B ) palmitic acid , and ( C ) palmitic acid + Grb2 suppression . Quantification of Oil Red O signals was concluded in ( D ) . Cell viability was measured by MTTassay ( E ) . Data were analyzed by using a two - way ANOVA ( except for cell viability results which used one - way ANOVA ) with a Bonferroni multiple comparison post - test unless otherwise indicated . We considered p < 0 . 05 to be statistically significant . Error bars represent standard error of the mean of samples within a group ( n = 5 ) . Different letters represent significant change between different groups . Magnification ×400 . Typical Oil Red O staining was indicated by arrows . GRB2 DEFICIENCY IMPROVES STEATOSIS 579 recovery of the impaired IRS / Akt and MEK / ERK signaling ( Fig . 4 ) . It is interesting that palmitic acid also abolished the total expression of IRS - 1 protein ( Fig . 4 A ) . Deficiency of Grb2 attenuated hepatic apoptosis . As an important clinical symptom of NAFLD , apoptosis is posi - tively related to the severity of NAFLD progression . In the Figure 2 . Grb2 suppression improved glucose and lipid metabolism . Glucose uptake results of different treatment groups were shown in panel ( A ) , measured by 2 - deoxyl - D - 2 - [ 3 H ] - glucose uptake assay . The alteration of glucose uptake was associated with GLUT1 expressional changes ( B ) . For lipid metabolism , the expressional changes of ( C ) lipogenic gene SREBP - 1c and ( D ) lipolytic gene PNPLA2 were measured by quantitative PCR . Data were analyzed by using a two - way ANOVAwith a Bonferroni multiple comparison post - test unless otherwise indicated . We considered p < 0 . 05 to be statistically significant . Error bars represent standard error of the mean of samples within a group ( n = 5 ) . Different letters represent significant change between different groups . Figure 3 . Grb2 suppression ameliorated oxidative stress . The changes of ( A ) MDA formation , ( B ) CAT mRNA expression , and ( C ) SOD1 mRNA expression were evaluated in different groups of cells . Data were analyzed by using a two - way ANOVAwith a Bonferroni multiple comparison post - test unless otherwise indicated . We considered p < 0 . 05 to be statistically significant . Error bars represent standard error of the mean of samples within a group ( n = 5 ) . Different letters represent significant change between different groups . 580 SHAN ET AL . current study , treatment with palmitic acid induced evident cellular apoptosis , shown by the double - staining with Hoechst 33342 and PI . When compared with the control apoptotic rate ( ∼ 5 % ) , palmitic acid - treated cell showed a significant increase of apoptosis ( ∼ 43 % ) , which was attenu - ated by the Grb2 deficiency ( ∼ 20 % ; Fig . 5 A ) . Consistently , cleaved caspase - 3 showed a significant increase in the palmitic acid group ( Fig . 5 B ) . Suppression of Grb2 gene reduced the level of cleaved caspase - 3 . To further examine the mechanism of apoptotic induction and attenuation , we measured the mRNA expressional changes of anti - apoptotic gene Bcl - 2 and pro - apoptotic gene Bak1 in the cells . After palmitic treatment , expression of Bcl - 2 was inhibited while Bak1 showed enhanced expression . Inhibition of endoge - nous Grb2 counter - acted such effects ( Fig . 5 C and D ) . Discussion As the “ first - hit ” of NAFLD and other symptoms of meta - bolic syndrome , IR received increasing attention in the past decade , since improvement of IR may dramatically retard the pathological progression of NAFLD . In clinical studies , application of insulin sensitizers ( e . g . , metformin ) is adopted to improve hyperinsulinemia and hyperlipidemia in periph - eral adipocyte ( Samuel and Shulman 2012 ) . However , due to obvious side effects of these drugs , their usages in clinical trials are strictly controlled in Western countries ( Tiikkainen et al . 2004 ; Mazza et al . 2012 ) . Therefore , developing novel molecular therapeutic target for IR is another important strategy for the therapy of NAFLD and metabolic syndrome . Exploring the involvement of insulin signaling in the Figure 4 . Grb2 suppression restored insulin signaling . Representative pictures of Western blot results of ( A ) IRS - 1 / Akt and ( B ) MEK / ERK pathways were shown to evaluate the effects of Grb2 suppression on insulin signaling . Figure 5 . Grb2 suppression reduced hepatic apoptosis in HepG2 cells . ( A ) Cells were stained with Hoechst 33342 and propidium iodide after palmitic acid treatment . Cells with propidium iodide positive staining were calculated against the total cell number shown by Hoechst staining . ( B ) Quantified results of cleaved caspase - 3 Western blot . Data were analyzed by using a two - way ANOVA with a Bonferroni multiple comparison post - test unless otherwise indicated . We considered p < 0 . 05 to be statistically significant . Error bars represent standard error of the mean of samples within a group ( n = 5 ) . Different letters represent significant change between different groups . GRB2 DEFICIENCY IMPROVES STEATOSIS 581 amelioration of steatosis in a cell model may shed some significant light on the molecular mechanistic studies of IR and NAFLD . It is well - established that impaired insulin signaling in the liver is primarily attributed from impaired signaling of IRS - dependent pathways , including PI3K / Akt and MEK / ERK pathways . In the current study , both pathways were inhibited after the incubation with palmitic acid for 24 h , indicating the occurrence of lipid metabolism dys - function and insulin signaling impairment after treatment with high concentration long - chain lipid . Grb2 deficiency drastically restored the signaling of these two pathways , exhibiting a beneficial effect on insulin and lipid signaling ( Fig . 4 ) . This result is consistent with a recent reported that downregulation of Grb2 contributed to the insulin sensitiz - ing effect during calorie restriction ( Liu et al . 2009 ) . In addition , we found that sensitized insulin signaling further improved glucose homeostasis ( Fig . 2 A and B ) , through improving the signaling of PI3K / GSK3 pathway and glu - cose transporter GLUT1 pathway ( Leto and Saltiel 2012 ) . In this study , the fat accumulation induced by palmitic acid was significantly reduced by the Grb2 deficiency , via rebalancing the expressions of lipogenic gene and lipolytic gene ( Figs . 1 and 2 B and C ) . According to the positive feedback loop between insulin signaling and dysregulated lipid metabolism , it is not surprising that improved insulin signaling ameliorates fat deposition in hepatocytes ( Howard 1999 ) . Furthermore , as direct consequence of steatosis and impaired insulin / glucose pathways , lipid peroxidation was induced by palmitic acid treatment . Grb2 deficiency also partly reduced this phenomenon via restoring the antioxidant system ( Fig . 3 ) . Apoptosis is one of the prominent features of NAFLD clinically . Recently , serum apoptotic markers are emerging as surrogate markers for NAFLD ( Wieckowska et al . 2006 ) . Attenuation of apoptosis is also a strategy to control the progression of NAFLD in both basic research and clinical trial ( Smith and Adams 2011 ) . In this study , palmitic acid incubation , when inducing evident steatosis via impaired insulin signaling , also triggered the apoptotic mechanism of HepG2 cells through intrinsic apoptotic pathway ( i . e . , through modulating Bcl - 2 and Bak1 expression ; Fig . 5 ) . Suppression of Grb2 played important anti - apoptotic role during palmitic treatment , probably as a direct consequence of improved steatosis through the oxidative stress attenua - tion . However , the detail intermediate mechanisms ( e . g . , inflammatory responses and transcriptional factor ) need fur - ther investigation . In conclusion , in the current study , we demonstrated that when the expression of Grb2 was inhibited in vitro , steatosis , impaired glucose utilization , oxidative stress , and apoptosis induced by palmitic acid were significantly attenuated partly through insulin signaling pathway alteration . Grb2 is a possible therapeutic target for the treatment of NAFLD and other metabolic syndrome . References Burks D . J . ; White M . F . IRS proteins and beta - cell function . Diabetes 50 ( Suppl 1 ) : S140 – 145 ; 2001 . Howard B . V . Insulin resistance and lipid metabolism . Am . J . Cardiol . 84 : 28J – 32J ; 1999 . Johmura S . ; Oh - hora M . ; Inabe K . ; Nishikawa Y . ; Hayashi K . ; Vigorito E . ; Kitamura D . ; Turner M . ; Shingu K . ; Hikida M . ; Kurosaki T . Regulation of Vav localization in membrane rafts by adaptor molecules Grb2 and BLNK . Immunity 18 : 777 – 787 ; 2003 . Kondo A . ; Hirayama N . ; Sugito Y . ; Shono M . ; Tanaka T . ; Kitamura N . Coupling of Grb2 to Gab1 mediates hepatocyte growth factor - induced high intensity ERK signal required for inhibition of HepG2 hepatoma cell proliferation . J . Biol . Chem . 283 : 1428 – 1436 ; 2008 . Langlais P . ; Dong L . Q . ; Ramos F . J . ; Hu D . ; Li Y . ; Quon M . J . ; Liu F . Negative regulation of insulin - stimulated mitogen - activated pro - tein kinase signaling by Grb10 . Mol . Endocrinol . 18 : 350 – 358 ; 2004 . Leto D . ; Saltiel A . R . Regulation of glucose transport by insulin : traffic control of GLUT4 . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 13 : 383 – 396 ; 2012 . Li J . W . ; Wang G . P . ; Fan J . Y . ; Chang C . F . ; Xu C . S . Eight paths of ERK1 / 2 signalling pathway regulating hepatocyte proliferation in rat liver regeneration . J . Genet . 90 : 435 – 442 ; 2011 . Liu X . ; Liu M . ; Zhang J . ; Bai X . ; Ramos F . ; Van Remmen H . ; Richardson A . ; Liu F . Y . ; Dong L . Q . ; Liu F . Downregulation of Grb2 contributes to the insulin - sensitizing effect of calorie restriction . Am . J . Physiol . Endocrinol . Metab . 296 : E1067 – E1075 ; 2009 . Malaguarnera M . ; Di Rosa M . ; Nicoletti F . ; Malaguarnera L . Molecular mechanisms involved in NAFLD progression . J . Mol . Med . 87 : 679 – 695 ; 2009 . Mao X . ; Kikani C . K . ; Riojas R . A . ; Langlais P . ; Wang L . ; Ramos F . J . ; Fang Q . ; Christ - Roberts C . Y . ; Hong J . Y . ; Kim R . Y . ; Liu F . ; Dong L . Q . APPL1 binds to adiponectin receptors and mediates adiponectin signalling and function . Nat . Cell . Biol . 8 : 516 – 523 ; 2006 . Mazza A . ; Fruci B . ; Garinis G . A . ; Giuliano S . ; Malaguarnera R . ; Belfiore A . The role of metformin in the management of NAFLD . Exp . Diabetes . Res . 2012 : 716404 ; 2012 . Samuel V . T . ; Shulman G . I . Mechanisms for insulin resistance : common threads and missing links . Cell 148 : 852 – 871 ; 2012 . Schlessinger J . Cell signaling by receptor tyrosine kinases . Cell 103 : 211 – 225 ; 2000 . Sowers J . R . Insulin resistance and hypertension . Am . J . Physiol . Heart Circ . Physiol . 286 : H1597 – 1602 ; 2004 . Smith B . W . ; Adams L . A . Non - alcoholic fatty liver disease . Crit . Rev . Clin . Lab . Sci . 48 : 97 – 113 ; 2011 . Tiikkainen M . ; Häkkinen A . M . ; Korsheninnikova E . ; Nyman T . ; Mäkimattila S . ; Yki - Järvinen H . Effects of rosiglitazone and met - formin on liver fat content , hepatic insulin resistance , insulin clearance , and gene expression in adipose tissue in patients with type 2 diabetes . Diabetes 53 : 2169 – 2176 ; 2004 . Wieckowska A . ; Zein N . N . ; Yerian L . M . ; Lopez A . R . ; McCullough A . J . ; Feldstein A . E . In vivo assessment of liver cell apoptosis as a novel biomarker of disease severity in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease . Hepatology 44 : 27 – 33 ; 2006 . 582 SHAN ET AL .