“Isn’t this Marvelous” Supporting Older Adults’ Wellbeing with Smart Home Devices Through Curiosity , Play and Experimentation Yolande Strengers Melisa Duque Michael Mortimer Emerging Technologies Research Lab , Emerging Technologies Research Lab , CADET Virtual Reality Training and Monash University Monash University Simulation Lab , Deakin University yolande . strengers @ monash . edu melisa . duque @ monash . edu m . mortimer @ deakin . edu . au Sarah Pink Rex Martin Larissa Nicholls Emerging Technologies Research Lab , Emerging Technologies Research Lab , Emerging Technologies Research Lab , Monash University Monash University Monash University sarah . pink @ monash . edu rex . martin @ monash . edu larissa . nicholls @ monash . edu Ben Horan Alicia Eugene Sue Thomson CADET Virtual Reality Training and Harvest Community Sector McLean Care Simulation Lab , Deakin University Consulting sue . thomson @ mcleancare . org . au ben . horan @ deakin . edu . au aubadeconsultants @ gmail . com ABSTRACT HCI research involving older adults has typically focused on improv - ing technology skills , mobility and health outcomes . Technology for positive ageing emphasizing creativity , inquisitiveness and re - sourcefulness is less commonly explored . This article builds on this research to contribute an understanding of the importance of cu - riosity , play and experimentation in supporting positive wellbeing outcomes for older adults living with smart home devices . The re - search was conducted in regional Australia by an aged care provider and two universities . Twenty - three households participated in the interdisciplinary in - home ethnographic and technological smart device trial that included voice assistants , robotic vacuums , smart kettles and smart lights . The article discusses routines and interac - tions involving these devices , which resulted in wellbeing outcomes that built participants’ digital living skills . These fndings inform concluding recommendations about how to design smart home devices , aged care programs and services involving emerging tech - nologies , to support positive ageing . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Human computer interaction ( HCI ) ; Empirical studies in HCI ; Human computer interaction ( HCI ) ; HCI design and evaluation methods ; Field studies ; Accessibility ; Empirical studies in accessibility . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the frst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specifc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia © 2022 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9358 - 4 / 22 / 06 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3532106 . 3533502 KEYWORDS positive ageing , digital living skills , smart home , ageing in place ACM Reference Format : Yolande Strengers , Melisa Duque , Michael Mortimer , Sarah Pink , Rex Martin , Larissa Nicholls , Ben Horan , Alicia Eugene , and Sue Thomson . 2022 . “Isn’t this Marvelous” : Supporting Older Adults’ Wellbeing with Smart Home De - vices Through Curiosity , Play and Experimentation . In Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ’22 ) , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 19 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3532106 . 3533502 1 INTRODUCTION The world’s population is ageing rapidly , leading to increasing in - terest in smart home technologies for supporting people to live independently at home for longer . However , older adults have typi - cally been a marginalized or undervalued group in the design of smart home devices and are insufciently accounted for in user studies [ 42 ] . In addition , the potential applications or benefts aris - ing from smart home technologies for seniors have thus far been considered within a relatively narrow scope . This includes preven - tative health measures , addressing social isolation , reducing and responding to accidents , supporting the work of both formal and informal carers , improving access to health services , and reduc - ing care costs [ 9 , 12 , 41 ] . User research has subsequently focused mainly on barriers to technology adoption and on users’ attitudes towards specifc technologies , with monitoring older people’s activ - ity the most common form of technological intervention [ 12 ] . This leaves open questions about how smart home technologies can sup - port a broader range of benefts to wellbeing , such as those found in studies with younger adults including improved convenience , entertainment , productivity , play and pleasure [ 26 , 29 , 75 , 76 ] . This paper examines older adults’ routines and interactions with smart home devices in order to better understand how these can support wellbeing and build their digital living skills . The paper has two key aims and contributions . First , to identify the wellbeing benefts and challenges of incorporating smart home devices into 707 DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia Yolande Strengers et al . Figure 1 : Location of trial feld sites across regional and rural Australia . Supplied by authors . the everyday routines of older adults , through a novel trial that demonstrates the benefts of a hybrid system of support for at - home aged care . And second , to highlight the critical role of curiosity , play and experimentation as ways to build older adults’ digital living skills and support positive ageing . We draw on selected fndings from a project which trialed a set of commercially available smart home products and brands with a wide array of functionalities . These were embedded into the homes and lives of people aged between 74 and 94 and living in rural and regional Australia . The interdisciplinary in - home ethnographic and technological smart device trial was undertaken over a period of 4 to 6 months by an aged care provider and two universities , and delivered across the New England region of New South Wales ( NSW ) and the Darling Downs region of South - East Queensland ( see Figure 1 ) . The communities in these areas span a wide geographic area and are predominantly farming and primary production areas that have poorer access to healthcare and lower digital inclusion relative to their urban counterparts ( particularly for those aged 65 or older ) [ 80 ] . These communities also have poorer outcomes against a range of health and wellbeing indicators . As such , engaging this 2 RELATED WORK 2 . 1 Research with Older Adults cohort in research on the potential positive ageing possibilities of smart home technologies is important but also challenging . Instead of viewing the challenges people face in later stages of life as ‘defcits’ that need to be overcome or compensated for , this study approached the research through a positive ageing lens , building on the signifcant ‘myth - busting’ research undertaken in Human Computer Interaction ( HCI ) and elsewhere [ e . g . 15 ] , to chal - lenge common assumptions about older adults as frail , technically incompetent , and lacking the interest and ability to learn new skills . Following HCI scholars [ 23 , 35 , 48 ] , our study adopted assumptions that seniors are resourceful , inquisitive and creative . The paper is organized as follows . Section 2 provides related work involving older adults and emerging technologies with a fo - cus on positive ageing and smart devices . It also includes a working defnition of wellbeing and digital living skills . Section 3 outlines the project design and introduces the participants and trial devices . Section 4 discusses the wellbeing outcomes ofered by interactions with smart home devices across four sets of everyday routines : vac - uuming , boiling water for hot drinks , light assistance , and having fun with the devices . These fndings highlight the importance of building digital living skills through curiosity , play and experimen - tation . Section 5 identifes the recommendations of the research for : designing smart home devices , aged care programs and services involving emerging technologies , and future research . We conclude that smart home devices can support wellbeing outcomes for older people if they facilitate curiosity , play and experimentation and are integrated into a system of support . There is an established and growing HCI literature focused on designing digital technologies with and for older adults [ 40 ] . Re - search has focused primarily on telehealth and care [ for examples see : 5 , 13 ] , and to a lesser extent on related subjects like enter - tainment and socializing [ 6 , 39 ] . Although not limited to HCI , van Hoof et al . and Liu et al . [ 41 , 83 ] provide useful overviews of the types of smart telehealth technologies most commonly deployed in aged care for supporting health outcomes . While quantitative and technical analyses dominate the HCI research in this area , there is growing interest in qualitative research , including studies grounded in participatory design and ethnography [ 5 , 48 , 64 ] . As noted by several scholars however , studies with seniors have tended to adopt a view of ageing as a process of decline , and of older people as a 708 “Isn’t this Marvelous” DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia largely homogenous group with physical and cognitive deteriora - tion [ 32 , 33 , 66 , 84 ] . For example , in a discourse analysis of 644 ACM SIGCHI papers , Vines et al . [ 84 ] identify a “discourse of defcits” regarding older people and their interactions with technology that is prevalent in the literature . The authors argue that this narrative implicitly associates older people and the process of ageing with “declines in abilities and associated reductions in performance when using technology” [ 84 ] . The outcome of this research has been focused on ensuring that technology design is simpler and more accessible , which often re - sults in reduced functionality in order to overcome ( sometimes assumed ) barriers to use [ 33 ] . Common usability issues for the age - ing population include difculties in using voice [ 24 , 91 ] and touch activation [ 30 , 38 ] , and poor digital literacy [ 20 ] . While this research has addressed important limitations and difculties faced when us - ing technologies , it is limited in focus to functionality designed to mainly address cognitive , physical and technical shortcomings . For instance , Durick et al . [ 15 ] reviewed literature that aims to provide social and technical solutions for the ageing popula - tion , within the felds of gerontology , gerontechnology , HCI and government policy . They identify and ‘bust’ six common ageing myths ( originally identifed by Sperry and Prosen , discussed in [ 27 ] ) grounded in assumptions that all older adults are the same ; socially isolated and lonely ; a burden on society ; chronically ill ; incapable of learning new , mainstream , technologies ; and unable to use tech - nology . Durick et al . [ 15 ] provide alternatives to these assumptions , fnding that seniors are diverse ; can and do have meaningful rela - tionships ; manage age - related illness while maintaining wellbeing ; have the capacity ( but not necessarily the need ) to learn new , main - stream technologies ; and can use technologies , but ‘how’ and ‘how often’ is determined by design processes and societal attitudes . Other researchers have challenged ‘defcit’ assumptions by ex - ploring peoples’ competences in engaging with emerging tech - nologies as they age , using innovative design processes such as thing ethnography , and emphasizing older adults’ creativity and re - sourcefulness [ 17 , 23 , 32 , 48 , 63 ] . While past work explores younger people’s “joy of hacking” [ 43 ] and the ways in which smart home devices can become hobbies in smart homes [ 77 ] , far less attention has been paid to ways older adults approach this . Following this research , our study and analysis was approached with the under - standing that seniors are creative , resourceful and competent . 2 . 2 Supporting ( Playful ) Positive Ageing with Emerging Technologies There is a growing body of HCI research that views ageing as a pos - itive , evolving and heterogenous process , which can be supported by emerging technologies . Instead of examining ageing and technol - ogy use through negatively - framed or potentially decontextualized issues like declining health or increased social isolation , positive ageing research focuses on supporting older adults wellbeing and independence [ 45 ] . There is now broad agreement within this lit - erature that emerging technologies can support positive ageing , such as by fostering social connection and participation , enabling independence and autonomy , providing access to public services , and assisting with age - related impairments and limitations [ 47 ] . An emerging body of literature has also established the importance of playfulness and creativity in supporting ageing [ 63 , 90 ] , and its associated benefts for wellbeing [ 68 ] . For instance , Lazar et al . outline a critical lens on dementia and design in HCI by employing art therapy as a creative way to engage people as “artists’ in the design of technology installations , which uniquely brings out and builds empathy for people’s experiences of living with dementia [ 35 ] . In another study investigating how older adults engage across platforms , devices and modalities , Richards et al . [ 63 ] found that participants creatively repurposed technologies originally intended for work or productivity purposes , into activities that provided playfulness and spontaneity . This leads the authors to recommend designing playful technologies for older adults that enable them to engage in meaningful relational experiences and sharing . While there is now a rich body of research on how smart de - vices can support positive ageing , this has focused less on the role and importance of playfulness [ 71 ] . Nonetheless , this research points to other crucial aspects of positive ageing , such as com - munity and service - oriented approaches to care , and supporting creativity and independence amongst older adults . A 2019 study by Greig et al . [ 25 ] found that smart home devices supported healthier lifestyles and greater independence by enabling “an increased range of psychosocial activities . . . improving mental wellbeing . . . social interactions . . . [ and ] facilitating in - home management of signif - cant health issues” [ 25 ] . Crucial to the success of this study was its holistic community - based approach to care , rather than one based around individual households . Righi et al . [ 64 ] suggest that older adults are commonly regarded as passive recipients of technology in the smart city literature , and note a subsequent focus on reducing physical and architectural barriers to make ICT more age - friendly . Through an ethnographic study of two smart communities in Spain , the authors fnd that older people actively exercise agency in cre - atively adapting smart technologies for their own needs . Although the paper’s focus is the broader smart city context , the authors’ conclusion that older adults can and do exercise their independence through smart devices serves to reposition older people as capable co - creators of technology , rather than just passive users . Questions regarding the usability of smart home devices and applications in diverse cultural contexts is another area of emerging interest for research with older adults [ 1 , 31 ] . For example , Lê et al . [ 36 ] note that individualistic cultures like those in the West value independent living more highly than collectivist cultures . More broadly , the research on positive ageing with technology highlights the importance of understanding ageing as “a heterogenous experi - ence , marked by both structural ( e . g . social , class , education ) and agentic dimensions ( e . g . individual action , attitudes and disposi - tions” [ 47 ] . There is also now considerable literature on how intelligent or digital voice assistants can support older adults to age at home [ 72 ] . This research has focused on health benefts , such as how older people use voice assistants to access consumer health information and resources , or to aid older adults in health and wellness tasks [ 69 ] . Some studies have indicated that interest wanes quickly for other tasks ( like playing music ) [ 60 ] , and that older adults fnd difculty identifying valuable uses for these devices , or doubt their skills and ability to continue using them [ 82 ] . Assurance of security and control are other key needs for older people when using voice 709 DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia Yolande Strengers et al . assistants [ 34 ] . Some studies have highlighted how older people relate to and anthropomorphize voice assistants , which can pro - vide companionship for older adults [ 59 ] , as we have discussed elsewhere [ 14 ] . Beyond HCI , research has explored the intersections between ageing in place , smart technologies , and health and wellbeing out - comes for older people [ e . g . 10 , 14 , 28 , 46 ] . Carnemolla [ 7 ] examines the connections between the Internet of Things ( IoT ) , the built en - vironment and caregiving in the context of ageing in place , arguing that IoT devices can support interventions that enable older adults to remain independent , healthy and safe , despite identifying sig - nifcant potential drawbacks to smart technology interventions , including difculty of use , reluctance to use , and ongoing concerns around maintenance . Conversely , Quan - Haase et al . [ 62 ] argue that the non - use of ICT may prevent older people from accessing community services or important social information , thereby nega - tively impacting wellbeing . These studies illustrate the considerable complexity and varied benefts and challenges in older adults’ incor - poration of smart technologies into their everyday lives . However , they tell us little about the role of curiosity , play and experimen - tation in supporting wellbeing for seniors , and rarely extend to considerations beyond health benefts . 2 . 3 Understanding Wellbeing and Digital Living Skills for Older Adults The term wellbeing is widely used , however it is neither easily nor uniformly defned in the ageing literature , and is used inconsistently by both researchers and laypeople [ 73 ] . Broadly defned , wellbeing is associated with being content , healthy or comfortable [ 61 ] . The Organisation for Economic Co - operation and Development ( OECD ) [ 50 ] states that “well - being is multidimensional , covering aspects of life ranging from civic engagement to housing , from household income to work - life - balance , and from skills to health status” . The Australian Institute of Health and Welfare [ 85 ] considers wellbe - ing as a product of determinants of wellbeing ( including material resources and family functioning ) , welfare services and supports , and contextual factors ( such as ageing ) . Wellbeing indicators ( that make up overall welfare ) , include material living conditions , health and vitality , environment , work , personal safety , skills and learning , and community engagement . In this study and article , we take a deliberately broad and open defnition of wellbeing , informed by Nassir et al . ’s [ 45 ] pillars and elements of positive ageing , which encompass physical , mental and emotional or spiritual health ; social , paid work or volunteering participation ; fnancial security and , wellbeing and environment . Additionally , we follow Neves and Vetere [ 47 ] in being guided by the needs , desires and aspirations of older adults to understand their wellbeing and support positive ageing . A common focus of improving wellbeing for older adults with the aid of technology involves improving digital literacy [ 2 , 4 ] . Broadly defned , digital literacy refers to the ability to read , write , communi - cate and understand through and with technology [ 3 ] . While digital literacy in relation to smart home technologies is important , the wellbeing literature points towards an added need : the ability for technology to support independent living skills . Independent liv - ing involves practical , cognitive or physical skills , such as physical strength to provide self - care and avoid falls , ability to obtain and prepare meals at home , and available transportation for activities outside the home . Additionally , independent living skills can refer to the ability to care for one’s home and fnancial management and engage in social interactions . These criteria inform independent liv - ing assessments by public health and housing support systems ( see , for example , https : / / www . facs . nsw . gov . au / download ? fle = 329236 . . They are similar to ‘activities of daily living’ , which Edemekon et al . identify as ambulating , feeding , dressing , personal hygiene , continence and toileting [ 16 ] . There is considerable debate about whether and to what extent emerging technologies like assistive robots can support older people to perform these skills [ 37 ] . In this paper , we draw on digital literacy and independent living skills to propose the concept of digital living skills , as the practical day - to - day interactions and mediations required to understand , op - erate , manage and curate digital technologies in the home . Digital living skills go beyond either understanding how to use and inter - pret digital technologies or being able to live independently ( with or without technology ) . They refer to how digital tech can support daily activities and tasks , and how those technologies themselves involve ‘living skills’ , such as how and where to safely locate them within the home environment . Learning through doing is a central component of many learning and practice theories [ e . g . 86 ] , and underpins the way we explore the concept through our fndings . Specifcally , in this article we explore how the experience of embed - ding smart home technologies into everyday routines can support older adults in building digital living skills . With these elements as our starting point , our project and study design are detailed below . 3 PROJECT AND STUDY DESIGN 3 . 1 Overview of the Project The research discussed in this paper was an Australian collabo - ration between McLean Care , a specialist not - for - proft regional , rural and remote aged care provider ; social science researchers from Monash University and engineering researchers from Deakin University . The project , funded by an Australian Government Com - monwealth Home Support Programme Innovation Grant , trialed smart home devices in older people’s homes , with the wider aims of : understanding how these technologies can support people in im - proving wellness outcomes and living independently in the home ; evaluating the benefts , opportunities and challenges of incorporat - ing smart home devices into older people’s homes and lives ; and understanding the usability challenges , expectations , hopes and anxieties seniors have of smart home devices in assisting them to live more independently and to improve their wellness and wellbe - ing . The project ran for 12 months during 2019 - 2020 , with the trial component occurring between January and June 2020 . The frst cases of COVID - 19 were detected in Australia part - way through the trial in March 2020 . This resulted in physical distancing restrictions and stay - at - home orders which impacted on the trial and required modifcation of the research process described below ( section 3 . 4 ) . A Project Technician was appointed at the commencement of the project to provide tailored smart device installation in participant homes as well as ongoing technical support throughout the trial . While the project involved a range of activities , this paper focuses 710 “Isn’t this Marvelous” DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia Table 1 : Participant characteristics . Characteristic Category Values Participants Women 19 Men 14 Total 33 Households Single 10 Dual 11 3 + 2 Total 23 Age 70 - 74 1 75 - 79 10 80 - 84 13 85 - 90 7 90 - 94 2 Average 81 . 8 Range 73 - 93 Participant location ( NSW ) Gunnedah 6 households , 9 participants Tamworth 4 households , 8 participants Inverall 13 households , 17 participants Pets Dogs 3 dogs , 3 households Cats 1 cat , 1 household Birds 7 birds , 4 households Home Ownership Homeowner 14 Shared ownership 5 Undisclosed 4 Ongoing device use Before or on end of trial 14 Beyond trial 9 on the fndings from the combined ethnographic research and usage data collection conducted by the two university teams . 3 . 2 Participant Recruitment and Selection Participant households were recruited by McLean Care from their existing client base in the regional NSW communities of Inverell , Tamworth and Gunnedah ( see Figure 1 ) , and according to the fol - lowing criteria : being a government funded recipient of support services and aged over 65 ( or over 50 for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people due to their lower life expectancy ) ; not living full - time with anyone under the age of 65 ( or 50 for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people ) as this may have caused interference with the devices and impacted the reliability of the research results ; having reliable mobile phone reception in their home ( this was required to provide an internet connection for the smart devices using a 4G mobile router ) ; and having no signifcant visual or hear - ing impairments which would impact their ability to operate the devices . While this limited the scope of the study it did provide an opportunity to explore the real - world potential of smart devices for largely able - bodied and healthy older adults that had the required technology infrastructure . Human Ethics approval was received by both Universities and an informed consent process was established by McLean Care in order to select appropriate participants . Ongoing conversations about participant consent , ethics and safety were central to the project and were continually reviewed and revised by the project team throughout the trial . Participants’ real names are used in this paper where they gave permission and pseudonyms are used for all other participants . Data collected from the smart home devices were recorded for each of the homes using household pseudonyms to ensure user anonymity . Potential participants were selected from a list of McLean Care’s government funded clients and contacted by telephone by the Project Manager ( employed by the aged care provider ) . During the phone call , further information was provided about the project and its aims . The eligibility of potential participants was verifed and they were given the opportunity to ask any questions , including what participation would entail in practical terms . Overall , a total of 33 participants were recruited across 23 households with diverse characteristics ( see Table 1 ) . Fourteen of these households retained the devices beyond completion of the trial through an agreement with McLean Care . Nine households decided to withdraw from the trial and return the devices either during or upon conclusion of the trial . 1 As a thank you for their time , each household received an AUD $ 50 supermarket gift voucher after completing the frst and fnal stages of the ethnographic research ( up to 2 vouchers per household ) . 1 Participants gave a range of reasons for not wanting to keep the technologies , includ - ing fnancial concerns , inability to operate and maintain the devices independently , health concerns , or the physical space taken up by the devices . Discontinuing , however , was not an indicator of overall dissatisfaction , since participants who withdrew from the trial valued the learning involved . 711 DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia Yolande Strengers et al . Table 2 : List of smart devices installed into participants’ homes . Device Number Installed Homes Installed Google Home 81 23 Aeotec Smart Light 58 22 Aeotec Smart Switch 18 10 Fibaro Smart Button 62 23 Aeotec Motion Sensor 1 1 Fibaro Door Sensor 8 6 Fibaro Key Fob 10 10 Roomba Vacuum 15 15 Kogan Smart Kettle 13 13 Sonos Speaker 3 3 Remote CT IR Controller 5 5 Netamo Weather Station 2 2 Fibaro Flood Sensor 2 1 Clock 4 4 iPad 23 23 Following recruitment of participating households , the Project Technician visited each household to further discuss the project , gain signed consent to participate , understand the layout of the par - ticipant’s home , and collaborate with the participants to determine which devices might best meet the household’s needs . Participants were shown a sample of each of the devices from which they se - lected those they would like to be installed as part of the trial by the Project Technician on a subsequent visit . On the second visit , the selected devices were installed and confgured and participants were given basic training in how to operate the devices . Providing participants with continued support was fundamen - tal to the project . User guides for each device were prepared and left with participants for reference as required . Participants were able to call the technician for troubleshooting support . Devices were remotely monitored enabling proactive support when a noti - fcation was received that a device was ofine or dormant for an extended period of time . The Project Technician visited participants’ homes when issues could not be resolved over the phone . During the COVID - 19 pandemic additional infection control and safety measures were implemented and in - home visits were limited . 3 . 3 Overview of the Devices An internal selection process was undertaken by the project team to identify smart home devices that would be ft for purpose and available to be selected by participants throughout the trial . The process involved a range of commercially available smart home de - vices and considered functionality , capability ( e . g . communication protocols , proprietary technologies , closed or open systems ) and connectivity ( internet , network and other requirements ) . Availabil - ity of the required number of devices by suppliers also infuenced the fnal selection of devices . Only ‘plug and play’ devices and ones that were able to be easily removed , if required , and not requiring hard - wiring or permanent modifcation to participants’ homes were selected . The device selection process was conducted independently of any advice or incentives provided by device manufacturers or distributors . Table 2 provides an overview of the diferent devices installed into each of the participating households . 3 . 4 Research Process and Methodology The interdisciplinary methodology developed in this project uniquely brings together two distinctive approaches . Visual [ 51 ] , and digital [ 54 ] design ethnography methods informed by socio - logical and anthropology theory developed by Monash University were used to create intensive and in - depth research encounters with participants . These were conducted in person in participants’ homes and via video or phone calls . These were combined with smart device data collection and technical monitoring methods developed by the Deakin University engineering research team . The delivery of these methods was impacted by both the summer bushfres of late 2019 and early 2020 , and the global COVID - 19 pandemic . As such , the teams adapted their approaches to working remotely with both participants and McLean Care 3 . 4 . 1 Smart Home Data Collection and Monitoring . Figure 2 pro - vides an overview of the smart home confguration installed into participating households for supporting operation of the smart home devices and the collection of research data . The Figure doesn’t show the specifc selection of smart home devices as this varied sig - nifcantly across diferent homes ( see Table 2 ) . The underlying smart home confguration comprised a small 4RU server rack housing a Netgear M2 4G router , Draytek Vigor2762n router , Fibraro Home Center 2 , Raspberry Pi 3B , Smart Home automationbridge and Eaton 3S700AU 420 Watt UPS ( Uninterrupted Power Supply ) . The Net - gear router provided access to the internet via a wireless 4G mobile data connection and passed this through to the Draytek router in bridge mode . The Draytek router provided a DHCP ( Dynamic Host Confguration Protocol ) server to manage the internal network and both VPN ( Virtual Private Network ) and SSH ( Secure Shell ) services for remote access . The Fibaro Home Center 2 was used to confgure and manage smart home devices , but also monitored the status of smart home devices and provided access to information via a REST 712 “Isn’t this Marvelous” DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia Figure 2 : Smart home confguration for supporting smart devices and collecting usage data . Supplied by authors . ( Representational State Transfer ) API ( Application Programming Interface ) . The Raspberry Pi ran a Python script that would poll the status of each device every fve seconds using the REST API and then log any changes observed . The Smart Home automationbridge is a proprietary device designed to improve compatibility and the network confguration between diferent smart home devices and services . The automationbridge was used to reduce the latency be - tween the Google and Fibaro smart device services , such as when , for example , participants requested to turn on a smart light via a Google Home voice request . Participants were provided with a brief overview of the technical setup and given instruction on how to use each of the smart home devices installed within their home . To support the operation and monitoring of the smart home devices as well as the corresponding data collection activities , the Deakin University team developed a data collection framework . The data collection framework used household pseudonyms ( i . e . , home01 , home02 , etc . ) to record device usage to allow analysis at both the household and aggregate levels while ensuring participant anonymity . Participants were briefed on the data being collected by the devices before providing consent to participate in the trial . Device specifc accounts ( e . g . , Google Home ) also used household pseudonyms and project member contact details where required . The data collection framework included a notifcation system that monitored the internet connection of each home by sending a ping from the data collection server . If the network in a participating home didn’t respond after three requests ( with 60 - minute intervals ) , the server would send an email to the research team . The Raspberry Pi script monitoring the Fibaro Home Centre logged all smart home activity detected by the Fibaro Home Centre . This data was then stored both locally in JSON - formatted ( Javascript Object Notation ) daily log fles as a local backup , and then remotely to a MongoDB database running on a dedicated server . 3 . 4 . 2 Ethnographic Research . Existing research in HCI design and social science [ 57 ] has demonstrated the value of ethnographic video tours and reenactment methods for investigating how people live and engage with digital and emerging smart technologies in their homes [ 55 ] . These methods and their theoretical underpin - nings are well established visual [ 51 ] and digital [ 51 ] ethnography practices . The ethnographic researchers in this project worked in groups of two or three to collaborate with participants and explore their experiences of using and learning with the devices , while video recording the process . In order to continue the project during the COVID - 19 pandemic , new online digital video ethnography methods were developed . These methods enabled researchers to maintain close discussions with participants in their homes using video conferencing and mobile platforms . The ethnographic research was undertaken in three stages . The frst stage involved in - person ethnographic interviews and activi - ties undertaken with participants in their homes between one to two weeks after installation of the smart home devices . These in - terviews and activities were video and audio recorded ( based on participants choices and with their ethical consent ) and transcribed . These methods were designed to : take researchers into participants’ homes and everyday lives to understand the complexities of the circumstances in which they experienced the devices ; reveal oth - erwise invisible aspects of participants’ sensory , emotional and practical experiences of using the devices ; and understand how participants learned to use the devices , how they were benefcial , how they creatively improvised to make the devices work for them , and where they experienced challenges . These encounters included , for instance , interviewing participants and touring their homes to understand how each installed device had become embedded in their home life , and using devices with participants including talking with the voice assistant devices . During these home vis - its by the Monash University team , an engineer from the Deakin 713 DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia Yolande Strengers et al . Table 3 : Voice request categories and corresponding keywords used for analysis . Category Keyword ( s ) Smart switch " switch " , " turn fan " Smart light " light " News “news” Music “music” , “play” Weather “weather” , “rain” , “temp” Time “time” Volume “volume” Failed requests “unknown voice command” Humor “joke” Smart kettle “kettle” Roomba vacuum “vacuum” Video calls “call” University team setup the data collection and monitoring services , troubleshot any technical issues , and worked with participants to ensure that they could use the devices . Before leaving , the ethno - graphic researchers notifed participants about the upcoming plans for a follow up phone call and a second visit for a fnal project interview . The second stage entailed short follow - up phone calls ( between 10 and 20 minutes ) to representatives from each participating house - hold . The purpose of these calls was to stay in touch with partici - pants and catch up on their experiences . Where possible , partici - pants used and experimented with the devices during these calls . These calls also served to uncover any changes in experiences with the devices as a result of COVID - 19 and participants spending more time at home with physical distancing restrictions in place . The third and fnal round of ethnographic feldwork was un - dertaken remotely due to COVID - 19 restrictions and because the participants belonged to a vulnerable group . These virtual home visits involved using digital platforms and devices such as mobile phones and tablets for voice and video calls . These calls enabled researchers to access participants in their homes using both au - dio and video , aided by prior knowledge of the layout and use of the home ( gained in stage one ) in order to explore participants’ evaluations of and refections on the devices themselves and the trial . 3 . 5 Analysis 3 . 5 . 1 Analysis of Smart Home Data . Usage data for each consenting household was collected and stored on a centralized database using household pseudonyms to ensure anonymity as described in section 3 . 4 . 1 . This data included smart light , smart button , motion and door sensor , smart switch , and key fob activity as detected by the Fibaro Home Center gateway . Google Home device data ( voice requests ) was collected from the associated Google accounts using the Google Takeout feature . Usage data for the smart kettle and robotic vacuum were determined indirectly based on voice requests made to Google Home . Data stored on the centralized database was analyzed at the device , home , and aggregate levels using descriptive analysis techniques . Google Home voice requests were categorized using a series of keywords as shown in Table 3 3 . 5 . 2 Ethnographic Analysis . In the ethnographic analysis each household was treated as a case . Due to the depth and richness of the transcripts and video materials , each research team member focused on a set of cases and developed a descriptive and contextual narrative around the household and their experiences of trial , as well as analyzing their materials . Each case was analyzed in two ways . The frst was using a set of questions designed to explore how the devices became part of participants’ routines ; the creative improvisation , practices , spatialities , social , emotional and sensory relations of participants’ home lives ; and participants’ expectations , hopes and anxieties surrounding the devices . Simultaneously addi - tional recurring themes and corresponding insights from the case materials were noted . These related mainly to future design needs including , for instance , the importance of attention to sensory and service design . These aspects of the experience and the use of the devices were examined in relation to how they contributed to three categories of interest relating to participant wellbeing : independent living ; benefts , opportunities , challenges and enablers ; and usabil - ity . The fndings reported on in this paper relate to the functional and fun wellbeing outcomes of participants’ engagements with the devices that built their digital living skills and were identifed as fol - lows . Initial hunches [ 56 ] were derived from close analysis of each case ( households ) and these were tested across the sample . Where these emerged as repeated patterns , they were also refected in the themes , and corresponded with the three categories of interest . This method of aggregating the qualitative data to detect patterns and overall insights responded to our questions and could be evidenced back through the case materials . 3 . 5 . 3 Cross - Analysis between the Research Teams . The research team met regularly to analyze and discuss the fndings at key stages of the project . This was approached by frst reviewing the avail - able device usage data and contextualizing and interpreting the usage trends and patterns through the ethnographic insights . Ethno - graphic fndings were then identifed and cross - checked with avail - able usage data to confrm the insights and identify anomalies . This process of regularly discussing both sets of insights ( qualitative and quantitative ) revealed gaps in each that fed into subsequent research activities and analysis . For instance , collected digital data 714 “Isn’t this Marvelous” DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia Figure 3 : Examples of participants’ experimenting with the smart home devices . Clockwise from top left : Participant opening Sonos music app on their Apple iPad , participant watching Roomba work , Cheeky the bird watching the research team and monitoring the smart devices , Beryl experimenting with the Google Home digital voice assistant , red light in Beryl’s kitchen , participant trying to activate devices with the fob key . Supplied by authors . of voice requests logged failures of delivering responses , but didn’t reveal the commands that participants attempted to use in these failed interactions . For these kinds of situations , the ethnographic team was able to learn about the commands used by participants , those that worked and those that didn’t . From these combination of data sets and together with the Project Technician the team was able to identify challenges and address to prevent these from becoming a recurrent barrier . 4 LIVING WITH SMART HOME DEVICES This section focuses on wellbeing outcomes ( benefts and chal - lenges ) facilitated by participants’ interactions with the devices in relation to four everyday routines : vacuuming , boiling water , light assistance and having fun ( summarized in Table 4 and depicted in Figure 3 ) . Through these examples , we demonstrate the role of curiosity , play and experimentation in building participants’ digital living skills with the devices . Findings are discussed using illustra - tive quotes from the ethnographic research and usage data provided by the devices as described in section 3 . 4 . Participant quotes and Google transcripts are included verbatim to preserve participant language and demonstrate Google’s ( mis ) interpretations of partici - pants’ voice commands . 4 . 1 Vacuuming Fifteen of the participating households had a Roomba robotic vac - uum cleaner installed . The Roomba was able to be operated via either touch screen ( Apple iPad tablet ) or voice control ( Google Home digital voice assistant ) . When operated by the iPad , the vac - uum usage wasn’t able to be captured due to technical constraints , but was captured when it was controlled by voice activation . The number of vacuum related voice requests made daily for 15 homes averaged to 2 . 4 requests per home weekly . These voice requests associated with the vacuuming comprised 3 . 7 % of all voice requests over the trial period . This was also the seventh most common cate - gory of voice requests . The use of the Roomba vacuum via voice request was reasonably consistent throughout the trial suggesting that participants were using the vacuums as part of their daily routines . Two households found the robotic vacuum too stressful and re - quested that it be removed . This was due to anxiety around potential safety concerns that the vacuum cleaner may operate unexpectedly ( e . g . during the night ) and potentially pose a tripping hazard . For most households , however , the robot vacuum was a welcome device that allowed them to conveniently continue cleaning their foors between visits from professional cleaners . While the vacuum reduced participants’ need to engage in phys - ically demanding manual vacuuming or sweeping , it was also a source of fun , especially when initially introduced to participants . Indeed , one of the most rewarding aspects of the trial for partic - ipants was exposure to new technologies , which provided an op - portunity to play and experiment with diferent functionalities and new experiences , often in collaboration with others . For instance , at the beginning of the trial some participants were fascinated by the activities of the Roomba , as one participant described it : “We sat down and we’re watching it [ laughing ] you know” ( see Figure 3 ) . Similarly , as Jodie explained , “I was just so grateful actually , I was thinking , oh , isn’t this marvelous , he’s [ the robotic vacuum ] cleaning the place up and really cleaning . ” While the robot vacuum cleaner did not replace the need for professional vacuuming services , it freed up cleaners’ time for other activities . As Betty explained : “They [ cleaners ] only clean a couple of them [ rooms ] . I don’t let them clean the lounge room because the robot [ Roomba ] does that . ” Because professional cleaning visits were typically every fortnight , participants found the Roomba valu - able in vacuuming high trafc areas ( corridors , living rooms and kitchen ) in between visits . With the arrival of COVID - 19 partway through the trial , many participants became increasingly concerned about managing their potential exposure to the virus and subse - quently restricted visitors to their homes ( or were required to by government restrictions ) . In some cases , participants chose to suspend the professional cleaning services they would normally receive from the aged care provider . Helen , for example , explained how “since we’ve had 715 DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia Yolande Strengers et al . Table 4 : Summary of benefts and challenges to wellbeing . Everyday Routines Benefts to Wellbeing Challenges to wellbeing Vacuuming •Less physical vacuuming and sweeping work required and / or having clean foors more of the time ( including when COVID - 19 restrictions challenged in - home cleaning services ) . •Sense of control and independence to meet expectations around cleanliness . •Convenience ( charging and cleaning ) . •Aesthetic considerations and space constraints . •Concern about tripping hazards and safety . •Stress from device operating at inappropriate and unintended times . •Additional digital housekeeping due to needing to monitor operation . Boiling water ( for hot drinks and cooking ) •Reduced physical demand by boiling kettle remotely , especially for people with mobility or pain issues . •Convenience and ease in having a choice of manual , digital and voice commands . •Functionality at a distance via visual cues and sounds . •Concern about the weight of the kettle for other older adults . •Anxiety about smart kettle being empty when boiling remotely . •Difculty shifting from manual to voice activation . Light assistance •Sense of security from light quality and brightness options . •Convenience and safety through lighting areas from smart lights and buttons . •Security and peace of mind from garage or regular doors being closed . •Confdence that medication is being taken at the correct time . •Confusion caused by need for physical switch to be on in order for smart lights to work . •Difculty breaking the habit of using the physical light switch and the inconvenience and confusion from this resulting in deactivating of remote functionality . •Frustration at unreliability of push buttons or voice assistance to remotely activate devices . •Mood enhancement and sensory experiences via colored lights , novelty , and the option to personalize light indicator colors . Having fun •A sense of wonder , delight and opportunity to relive treasured memories via easy access to on - demand music . •Companionship , pleasure and pain management from music . •Frustration when voice assistant didn’t understand music requests . •Concerns about privacy and afordability with advertising for music subscription services on voice assistant . •Entertainment from experimenting with the voice assistant responses and factual information ( including : trivia games , jokes , news , cooking recipes and weather updates ) . •Curious interactions learning about the interconnected functionalities and responses of smart devices ( e . g . lights , kettle , vacuum ) via the voice assistants . •Confusion when failed command interactions with voice assistants resulted in barriers to use other smart home devices ( e . g . lights , kettle and vacuum ) . •Mood enhancement and sensory experiences in diferent rooms . Roomba , it’s done most of the work because we haven’t had the McLean Care home girls here working because of the virus” . Helen and Ken also shared their joyful curiosity when recalling the anec - dote of the Roomba fnding a pair of socks that their son had lost in his previous visit : “Roomba brought them out from under the bed . [ laughing ] . . . Brought that and a shopping bag . . . and so that was a surprise . [ laughing ] ” . The robotic vacuum cleaner was reassuring for participants like Helen and Ken , contributing to their sense of control and independence during the otherwise stressful onset of the pandemic . Like cleanliness , home aesthetics was an important aspect of wellbeing for most older people , consistent with smart home stud - ies more broadly [ 77 , 79 ] . Smart home devices can detract from home aesthetics and these considerations informed participants’ placement of highly visible devices such as the robotic vacuum . Beryl , for example , said she would initially give the Roomba robot a “six months’ holiday” in a high visibility spot in her lounge room , even though it would not be able to stay there “full time” . Four months later she and her husband David had moved the vacuum’s home base “in the corner” to avoid detracting from Beryl’s carefully 716 “Isn’t this Marvelous” DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia curated room aesthetics . Experimenting and playing around with the location of the devices to negotiate central accessibility with aesthetics , was therefore central to their incorporation into daily routines . One wellbeing challenge encountered by participants using was the need to monitor the robot vacuum when operating to ensure it did not become a trip hazard . Considerable experimentation was required to negotiate and manage the vacuum’s movements around the home . In some households , this perceived ( and actual ) need for supervision detracted from the vacuum’s benefts , as was found in other research [ 19 , 49 ] . For instance , besides using the “stopper” ( the vacuum’s virtual barrier ) , some households began closing doors around the home to prevent the vacuum from moving around of its own accord . John and Shirley , for example , explained how they had to move the vacuum into a room where they could “shut the door if the little thing leaves its bed [ charging station ] , which it did do one night . ” However , this resulted in the robot “banging on the door because it’s charged itself and it’s ready to go back to work . ” In this and other ways , participants described the need to undertake additional ‘digital housekeeping’ [ 65 , 77 , 81 ] to supervise the robotic vacuum , despite the associated reduction in physical labor required to clean foors . Ken explained the work involved as follows : “I usually send it [ the vacuum ] . . . First [ to ] the dining room , and then the family room so we can move the furniture , and then it tracks up and down and plans it and then we put that furniture back . . . I do the laboring for the room , but I shift the things that need to be shifted , so it can go wherever it wants to . It’s magic . It goes under the beds and everything [ laughs ] . ” Importantly , it was this continual “laboring” which built partici - pants’ familiarity with the robot vacuum , and in turn their digital living skills . This was underpinned by participants’ sense of cu - riosity and marvel with the devices , as Ken expresses above . As demonstrated by this and the previous examples , digital living skills did not only involve understanding how the robot functioned or operated , but required practical adjustments and experimentation to curate the devices within the home . Participants expressed a sense of satisfaction and achievement when able to troubleshoot issues by themselves , with guidance from the project team and sometimes their families . Coreen , for example , expressed her frustrations with the robotic vacuum when it wouldn’t “behave himself and do what I want him to do . ” She explained that “when I’m in the right mood to battle with him” she would retry trying to activate it , following the “hints . . . I need to experiment with” provided by the Project Technician . One week later Coreen reported that “I just had a blast , it worked perfectly . . . Roomba was such a good boy . ” As Coreen illustrates , while par - ticipants clearly faced challenges in embedding devices into their everyday routines and maintaining functionality , this process of bespoke learning and experimentation , in collaboration with each other , their families and the project team , built participants’ digital living skills in ways that formal learning did not . A playful approach was key to this process , as illustrated by Coreen’s refections of having a “blast” , and her characterization of the robot as a “good boy” . Thus , it was through these curious and experimental encoun - ters that participants were able to realize the wellbeing benefts of smart home devices , but also of the combined services of care that these smart home devices were embedded into as ofered by the trial . 4 . 2 Boiling Water ( for Hot Drinks and Cooking ) Kogan smart kettles were installed in 13 households , enabling hands - free and remote activation of the kettle to boil water ( via their voice assistant ) . Smart kettles were mostly used for making cups of tea and cofee during the day , for cooking , and in one household to refll a hot water bottle used for pain management . The number of smart kettle related voice requests made daily for 13 homes ; this equated to a daily average of 1 . 4 requests per home . Smart kettle voice requests made up 12 . 6 % of all requests over the trial period which was the fourth most common voice request category . The use of smart kettles by all participant households gradually declined from the beginning of the trial in March until around the beginning of May . The kettle’s remote activation feature was a ‘small convenience’ [ 76 ] and novelty , but not considered a necessity for most . Partici - pants with mobility challenges beneftted from not needing to stand and wait for it to boil , and others found it convenient and joyful in the sense described by Robert : “I’ve realized now that when I wake up in the morning , I go , ’Hey kettle . Turn on’ . It’s ready for a cup of tea or cofee when I walk out to the kitchen . ” Once activated , func - tional indicators reassured participants that the kettle was on . For example , the blue light and the kettle’s transparent glass body made it easy for participants to know ( by visual and hearing cues ) when the kettle was heating water . As well as voice activation for the kettle , which some participants appreciated both as daily comfort and as a source of entertainment when family and friends visited them . As Mary shared “it’s been a good talking point , yeah” . In Robin’s case , her family took turns to experiment with the kettle when they visited : “They come in and say , is the kettle on ? I said , no , not yet . So they ask Google to put it on . ” Besides the voice activation , the conventional manual function allowed many participants to continue their routine and preferred manual mode of operation . However , this also caused complica - tions in some households because when participants switched the kettle ( and other devices ) of manually , this deactivated their re - mote functionality . Speaking about his “not very computer minded” wife , Peter explained how , “she just switches the kettle on , and then when it gets to the boiling stage , she switches it of at the wall . ” This resulted in additional digital housekeeping for Peter . As he explained , “Of course , that upsets Google , then I’ve got to go through the procedure of setting up re - programs . ” Ultimately , experimentation and personal tailoring of these functions within each home provided a sense of security for participants and gave them control and confdence to use and build confdence in using the kettle . Six households were concerned about the weight of the kettle . All these participants were able to lift the kettle but not all were comfortable doing so . Helen , after experimenting with diferent ways of operating it , found that “you hold it with two hands and 717 DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia Yolande Strengers et al . it’s quite alright” . However , some participants were concerned that other older people might not be able to lift it . Edna explained , “I thought , for someone in senior years , that is much too heavy a kettle . . . You need something that probably only holds about three cups or four cups , nothing more . ” As suggested by Edna , some participants addressed the kettle’s weight concerns by only flling it part way , which also delivered energy saving benefts . As Roy described : “That kettle would only be rather heavy if you flled it right up but see . . . there’s no point in boiling water you’re not going to use” . However , limiting the amount of water did require participants to ensure there was enough water to boil , otherwise as Mary said , “I don’t want to be responsible for blowing it up . ” Getting around this concern , Robin explained how she embedded flling the kettle into her evening routine to ensure safe and comfortable remote activation in the morning : “I always put enough water in it before I go to bed . ” In this and other ways participants demonstrated their resourcefulness and creativity in embedding the devices into their routines to ensure the kettle’s conveniences were accessible . Some participants were more willing and patient to develop dig - ital living skills with the kettle , like Hilda who commented , “I was patient with it and I said no , I’ll just try it again” . Others , like Mary , felt it was too complex and unnecessary compared to what they were already familiar with : “Talking to a thing that turns a kettle on . It is a bit silly really , isn’t it ? ” User guides provided at the beginning of the trial were rarely used . Instead , it was the ‘in - the - moment’ , human - centric and activity - based learning - through - doing which participants valued most throughout the trial , as demonstrated through their engagement with the kettle . Remembering the voice commands for the Google Home digital voice assistant also proved challenging for some participants , par - ticularly when using it to activate other devices such as the kettle . Hilda , for example , expressed a commonly shared experience about how the kettle ( and Google ) ignored her requests to boil the “jug” ( Australian slang term for kettle ) . As Hilda explained : “Some of the language was a little bit – you had to fnd the right wording for it . We didn’t succeed with the frst one like “Jug” so we used “Kettle” . We just sort of talked until we try to fnd the right word for Google . ” Finding the “right word” , as Hilda put it , sometimes involved considerable experimentation and practice . Hilda explained how “I think you’ve got to train your brain to do that , how you speak to Google . ” Eventually Hilda did learn the correct commands for Google and her other devices , commenting that “It was about pa - tience with me I think , ” as the smart devices became part of her daily routines and felt “just like every day . ” Refecting on similar challenges , other participants found it difcult to remember the “new language” ( Claire ) , or the specifc sequences of words forming the commands , such as those required to instruct Google Home to activate ( e . g . , “Hey Google” or “OK Google” ) . The older adults in our study recognized the need to regularly practice these com - mands to become familiar with them and to learn them over time , which provided a sense of accomplishment and mental activity . As Claire explained , engaging with the voice assistant “keeps your mind active I suppose to a certain extent . ” Central to this process was continual experimentation and curiosity with the devices . 4 . 3 Light Assistance Using existing household lamps and those provided by the trial , 58 Aeotec smart lights were installed across 22 trial homes . The smart lights illuminated rooms and corridors at night and were also set up as sensor - activated colored lights , to remind participants to take their medication or close garage doors . Smart lights were controlled by voice activation ( via Google Home ) , push buttons ( placed near beds and chairs ) , sensors , fobs and / or tablets . The total number of daily smart light requests for 22 homes equated to a daily average of 6 . 1 requests per home . Smart light voice requests made up 14 % of all requests over the trial period which was the third most common voice request category . Usage remained quite consistent throughout the trial suggesting participants had adopted them as part of their daily routines . Push buttons for smart lights located on participants’ bedside tables enabled positive health and wellbeing outcomes by ensuring that walking routes to the bathroom or kitchen were safely lit at night before getting out of bed . This gave participants additional confdence about their safety and some believed it helped to reduce their risks of falling at night . Manual activation using remote but - tons meant each person in the household could turn lights on and of at multiple locations without using voice activation and poten - tially waking up partners or pets . Participants were particularly satisfed with the quality of the bright lighting provided by these smart lights , and the ability to adjust the brightness of the lights . As Owen explained , “you do need bright lighting in the bathroom , at our age , because you can’t aford to have anything on the foor because you easily tripped over . ” Realizing the benefts of the smart lights involved considerable experimentation and tailoring . Robert , for example , found that after experimenting with diferent percentages of brightness and dropping “the bathroom and bedroom ones down to 15 % so that it’s just enough to get up in the middle of the night and not trip over the end of the bed” worked well for him . Robin also enjoyed playing around with the light levels to suit her room needs and moods , “I quite like the dimmer thingies on the lights . . . I think the bedroom’s on about 50 . This [ kitchen one ] a bit higher , I think they’re 80 . Or the one in my chair is usually on full . ” In some households , colored lights provided diferent reminders ( e . g . red light at medication times , blue to indicate water leaks , green to remind when the garage door was left open ) . For example , in four households , a Fibaro door sensor was installed in the medicine cupboard and combined with an Aeotec smart light . The light was put on a time - based schedule that related to when participants were required to take their medication . The light would remain on ( displaying with a red bulb ) until the door was opened and subse - quently closed when the participant accessed their medication . The three participants who used it for this purpose found it extremely useful . For instance , the red light gave Robert diferent options to support his memory , physical health , mobility and sense of safety at day and night , and became part of everyday routines : “The red light to remind me of my pills works beautifully , has never failed . ” The fourth participant with this feature , Beryl , used it as a safety system to monitor the medicine cupboard while grandchildren were visiting . Beryl described how her family had fun with this function by joking with the children about their kitchen being a “red light” 718 “Isn’t this Marvelous” DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia district ( making a reference to light associations with sex work ambiences ) ( see Figure 3 ) . It was through this reference to play that Beryl approached her continual learning with the devices . This sense of fun and play was expressed by other participants in relation to the trial . As Ann shared , “look honestly , it’s been an experience . . . . I’ve enjoyed and people got the giggles here one day because our son was sitting here and I turned the light on and then the fan came on behind him” . Such demonstrations often unfolded into playful opportunities for participants to practice , test and demonstrate their new digital living skills with others . While participants appreciated the range of options the smart lights and switches provided , breaking the life - long and embod - ied memory of turning lights on and of at their physical switches was challenging , and felt counterintuitive at frst . Participants also needed considerable patience when experiencing the small delays when activating smart lights ( compared to the immediacy of ‘nor - mal’ lights ) , and ‘glitches’ in the interface between the voice assis - tant and the lights . For example , Coreen detailed a common “silly” experience of Google saying “the number 1 light or the winter room light is not available , you need to set it up again . And then it comes on . ” Some participants continued to keep personal torches close as ‘fail - safe’ alternatives , particularly for when there were technical or electrical disruptions . Others experimented with the devices until they found an approach that worked for them . In this way , participants were again creative and resourceful in the ways they integrated smart devices together with their older technologies to maintain wellbeing . Participants generally found operating the smart home devices ( e . g . , lights , kettle , vacuum ) with Google Home voice commands convenient and helpful , especially when their own bodily move - ment was limited , painful or tiring . However , seven households ( 4 single women and 3 couples ) were concerned that by undertaking tasks they would normally do themselves , the devices encouraged sedentary behavior , and that they would lose the exercise benefts associated with everyday activities such as getting up to turn a light or kettle on or of . To manage their concerns , some partici - pants kept a daily balance between using voice activation and their conventional routines of manual activation . For example , Hilda and Owen intentionally placed the push buttons far from their bed or couch to make themselves get up and walk to stay active at home . As Hilda explained : “If we got it here [ side table ] , that’s not good for us because we need to move around . You can sit on the lounge and you just get too lazy . ” Most participants approached this as an ongoing process of experimentation , involving tailoring the devices to their home and routines , so that they could learn to live with them . Light assistance benefts could also be outweighed by the chal - lenges in operating touch or hand - operated devices . In these cases , curiosity , play and experimentation was not always an option . For example , the key fob ( installed in ten homes as an additional control for the smart devices ) was particularly difcult to use due to its small size , shape and it’s command structure that used arbitrary symbolic buttons ( e . g . * , + , - , o ) ( see Figure 3 ) . Some participants also experienced trouble memorizing the function of each of the fob’s six buttons , further reducing its intended function as a singular remote for various smart devices ( see Figure 3 ) . As John explained , “They’re [ the fob ] not suitable for people with . . . anything wrong with their hands . ” Other participants like Mary found using the touchscreen on the iPad challenging because it did not pick up the movement of their “cold fngers . ” John’s concerns emphasized the importance of designing technologies to support the needs of older adults : “People don’t realize that when people get a bit of age on them , there’s a lot of things they can’t do . Their hands have got arthritis and all that . ” Mary and John’s experience suggests that where experimentation or adaptation cannot occur , smart home devices are unlikely to be incorporated into older adults’ routines . 4 . 4 Having Fun One of the key ways in which participants had fun with the de - vices was by playing music via their Google Home voice assistant . Playing music was the ffth most common voice request category ( 10 . 7 % ) . Participants experimented widely with this functionality and explored a range of music options ( see Table 5 ) . In this way , curiosity , playfulness and experimentation were central to building digital living skills with Google Home voice assistants throughout the trial . Three homes also trialed a Sonos smart speaker using the iPad tablet to fnd and play songs , and reported very pleasing sound quality . Prior to the trial , participants mostly accessed music via their own personal CD , DVD or record collections , or through radio and television stations . Google Home and the Sonos speakers therefore gave participants a signifcantly expanded range of music options that was appreciated by participants , as Robert explained : “I just love the music . I’ve actually had the three dif - ferent speakers playing at once , because as you know , my house is in three levels , and it’s just great , there’s music everywhere all the time , and the selections , I just say , ‘Give me some Japanese traditional music’ , or , ‘Some Chinese traditional music’ , or , ‘Some nice relaxing piano music’ , and that little machine is very obliging . ” Several participants had previously experienced on - demand mu - sic via YouTube on Facebook , but for most , Google Home provided their introduction to music streaming services like YouTube and Spotify . Participants discussed and demonstrated the wellbeing benefts that arose from listening to and experimenting with the music options available through their digital voice assistant . These included a sense of wonder and delight , with diferent sensory soundscapes and moods enabled in multiple rooms of the home , and moments to relive treasured memories . For instance , Beryl’s husband David became deeply engaged in listening to the device when he requested it play “Celtic Women” music as a demonstra - tion with the research team . Not only did playing this music ofer the couple ( and the whole team ) enjoyment in the moment , it also allowed the couple to reminisce about their past and refect on what was meaningful for them as a family . As Beryl shared : " This is a lovely one . Oh , he’ll be very thrilled with that . He does listen to a lot of music really . You’ve made his day . He’ll be able to put that on now . . . It’s lovely [ the song playing ] . All of our children played in the band as they grew up , in the brass band , and so music’s always been part of our life , so it’s lovely . " 719 DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia Yolande Strengers et al . Table 5 : Music requests with Google Home ( from voice transcripts ) . Request No . Voice Request 1 “Play some country and western” 2 “Play some Elvis Presley” 3 “Play some go to sleep music” 4 “Play Triple J” 5 “Play relaxing music on speaker” 6 “Play some traditional Chinese music on speaker” 7 “Play hip hop music” 8 “Play some inspirational tunes” 9 “Play Andre Rieu” 10 “Play dance monkey” Table 6 : Google Home responses with music - related subscription ofers ( from Google response transcripts ) . Response No . Voice Assistant Response 1 “To do that on YouTube Music , you’ll need a Premium subscription . ” 2 “Choosing songs is only available for YouTube Music Premium members . ” 3 “It looks like Classical is a playlist that’s only available for YouTube Music Premium members . ” 4 “It looks like 70’s Music Hits Playlist - Best of 70s Music is a playlist that’s only available for YouTube Music Premium members . ” 5 “Choosing songs is only available to Spotify Premium subscribers . ” 6 “Playing albums is only available to Spotify Premium subscribers . ” 7 “Choosing songs is only available to Spotify Premium subscribers . But give this Spotify Zorba the Greek : Zorba’s Dance station a listen . Playing on Speaker . . . ” 8 “Choosing songs is only available to Spotify Premium subscribers . But give this Spotify Killing Me Softly with His Song station a listen . Playing on Speaker . . . ” Listening to music also provided a sense of companionship and pleasure when alone , assistance in getting to sleep at night , help with pain management routines , and connection to participants’ geographical and cultural region . Helen , for example , found that playing music using Google Home and the Sonos speaker helped with her chronic pain and fatigue . Her rheumatologist had rec - ommended that she play ‘tranquility’ music to help her manage pain . Speaking about her experience , Helen commented how “it’s remarkable just how much it does make your body relax . . . it’s been a help for me” . Helen’s husband Ken explained how “sometimes we select jazz or we select classics and it just plays for hours” and the music is “better than painkillers sometimes” . However , as found with other smart home device interactions , participants’ requests to play music weren’t always successful . More broadly , Google Home was unable to understand 15 . 1 % of all voice requests participants made . Google also misunderstood or couldn’t provide assistance for 8 % of successfully received voice requests and therefore gave negative responses . Additionally , some participants raised privacy and afordability concerns about the digital voice assistant ofering participants automated options for online sub - scriptions and other purchases . Some of Google Home’s responses to these requests suggested that a greater level of access is provided to those who have subscriptions , as shown in Table 6 . Participants always declined subscription ofers , and some participants like Ken noted how it detracted from the overall experience , despite being an inevitable outcome of accessing digital services : “It plays [ music ] for a certain amount of time and then it goes on with the advertising about YouTube and how much you’re going to get YouTube for at premium rates and all that sort of thing . That’s a bit of a downfall with it , but it’s only periodic , so you can still enjoy the music . ” In addition to playing music , participants engaged in other forms of fun with the devices through their everyday routines . Some de - lighted in tablet screensavers showing nature - based scenes . As Brenda expressed it , “I love all the photos that show on the screen . They’re lovely . . . I can sit here and just watch that and really en - joy it . ” Jodie also used the tablet to search and watch “funny dogs” videos with “Buddy” her pet bird . Like Jodie , other participants de - scribed how their pets became part of the fun and experimentation as they made sense of these new devices in their environments ( see Figure 3 ) . Participants often described their fun experiences by recounting humorous stories about the devices’ curious or funny ‘behavior’ . For example , two participants discussed how they found their voice assistant’s attempts to educate them amusing . Francis explained how one night he asked Google Home to turn on the lights , “it must have been half a dozen times , and then Google fashed on and really scolded me , he [ Google ] said , ‘you should . . . only need 720 “Isn’t this Marvelous” DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia Table 7 : Experimenting with Google Home : participant requests ( from voice transcripts ) . Request No . Voice Request 1 “How do you cook a chocolate cake” 2 “What time does Regional Airlines depart Inverell tomorrow for Brisbane Sydney” 3 “What time does Big W in Tamworth open on Sundays” 4 “Can you fx the door handle please” 5 “Let’s play Scrabble” 6 “Can you sound like a bird ? ” 7 “How long do cats sleep” 8 “What is the estimated cost of Australia’s future submarines” 9 “Recipe for chicken stock” 10 “What is the postcode for Ingham North Queensland” me three times a night” . Francis found this response funny : “Well I really had to laugh because she [ Google ] sounded so cross that I hadn’t used her all day . ” Similarly , Beryl joked about how she’d been “reprimanded” by Google early on in the trial when she tried asking for weather , time and other information in the morning . As Beryl explained , “she [ Google ] said , ‘you know , you would save us a lot of time if you just said : Good morning”’ and she [ Google ] said ‘I’ll tell you all of it , it’s a spiel’ . So I got reprimanded . Yes , it was funny . ” Participants spontaneously asked Google for jokes during the day , which was a novel way to practice voice commands , explore functionality , and be entertained — even by the inability of the voice assistant to produce a good joke . As Shirley said : “I’m always asking , when I walk past it , I ask it a question , you know . I said , ‘well , if you won’t answer me , tell me a joke’ . And the jokes are very poor . . . not very funny” . Robert agreed : “I like them a bit risqué if they’re a joke [ laughter ] . Yeah , most of those jokes are kindergarten stuf as far as I’m concerned” . Besides jokes , a few participants also engaged with the voice assistants to provide trivia and experiment with new recipes . More broadly , older adults in our study demonstrated consid - erable inquisitiveness in their interactions with smart devices , as demonstrated by the increased range of voice commands made over time . Voice requests for general information made up 28 . 3 % of all requests over the period of the trial making it the most common voice requested category . Participants made a range of requests to their voice assistant , ranging from asking it to play scrabble through to making “sound like a bird” ( see Table 7 ) . Robert , for example , explained that the scope of possibilities was wide : “every now and then I just ask it all sorts of questions , what’s the time , what’s the date , how far is it from here to Melbourne , little things like that . ” Situating the devices and their capacities through curiosity , play and experimentation enabled participants to draw them into their own familiar narratives . Experiencing fun and pleasure was also a way in which participants practiced and developed confdence with their smart devices , further building their digital living skills . This allowed participants to demystify technologies that before the trial they felt intimidated by , in a context where they felt supported but gained the confdence to make informed choices regarding how to use the devices , and if they wished to keep them . 5 DISCUSSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS Our fndings indicate that interactions with smart home devices can facilitate a range of unique wellbeing benefts and challenges for older people . Critical to positive ageing outcomes is experi - mentation , play and curiosity with the devices , which supports participants’ digital living skills as the devices are tailored within unique home environments and towards participants’ individual circumstances and routines . In this section we summarize and ex - trapolate our insights to propose a set of recommendations for the design of smart home devices for older people , the programs and services most likely to support positive ageing outcomes , and future research opportunities . 5 . 1 Ongoing Experimentation in a Life stage of Impermanence and Change Even though we often think of older adults’ lives as relatively rou - tinised and stable , people in this age group commonly have a strong sense of their own vulnerability in the context of their lifetime . For instance , our participants were aware that a fall or small injury could mean they would no longer be able to live independently , as discussed in relation to avoiding trip hazards posed by the vacuum , handling of the kettle , and using lights to maintain safe walking routes at night ( see section 4 ) . Participants were also acutely aware of the risks of becoming sedentary by handing over small everyday tasks to new technology , such as turning devices on and of from the couch using push buttons , sensors or voice control ( see section 4 . 3 ) . These considerations impact on older adults’ approach to smart home devices in various ways . First , it may make them more likely to be cautious about making large or new investments in smart home devices and automated systems , more broadly suggesting that their visions of their own futures are short term or changeable . Edna , for example , explained that she was , “a day at a time girl . ” This self - recognition of older adults’ vulnerability makes of - the - shelf and easily replaceable or removable devices like those installed in this trial particularly relevant for these households . Second , these considerations also highlight the signifcance of ongoing experi - mentation and adaptation as older adults’ lives , and circumstances change . More permanent installations or systems ( such as in - built or wall mounted tablets and switches ) are likely to be less appealing 721 DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia Yolande Strengers et al . for older adults if they require retrofts to their current homes or signifcant fnancial investments . 5 . 2 Design for Fun , Pleasure and Play In line with past research that frames older adults as inquisitive and creative [ 23 , 70 , 78 ] , a key fnding and recommendation from our study is the importance of designing for older adults’ fun , pleasure and play . While similar fndings have been reported in studies with younger people [ 21 , 75 ] and in some studies with older adults or people living with dementia [ 35 , 63 ] , the role of having fun with emerging technologies has been signifcantly underemphasized in the positive ageing literature . In addition to utilitarian or functional outcomes from using smart devices , our participants demonstrated their enthusiasm to experiment and have fun with the technology ( and us ) throughout the trial . Importantly , playing around with the devices was incorporated into routines that delivered functional benefts ( e . g . vacuuming and light ) , as well as those providing en - tertainment and leisure ( e . g . playing music or enjoying jokes via the digital voice assistant ) . Play and pleasure also included partici - pants’ desires to create moods and aesthetic experiences with and through the smart devices , as found in other smart home studies [ 75 , 89 ] , and similar to the ways younger adults engage with these technologies [ 52 ] , and how people constitute and experience the home as a sensory environment [ 53 ] . Importantly , our fndings demonstrate how playful interactions with smart devices aren’t only about frivolity and fun : they also pro - vide health benefts such as pain relief and allowed the older adults in our study to reconnect with treasured memories ( see section 4 . 4 ) . Most critically , we found that playing around with devices was one of the key routes through which participants built their digital living skills with the devices and others , including the project team and family members . This process was distinct from formal learning opportunities ofered by user guides and other materials provided as part of the trial , which weren’t normally consulted by partici - pants ( see section 5 . 4 ) . Such fndings are particularly important for future studies , trials and technologies aimed at the ageing popu - lation , given that defnitions and accounts of wellbeing amongst older adults rarely account for these benefts , or frame trials , pro - grams and services to include them . However , experimentation with smart devices for pleasure and play generates additional risks to wellbeing that need to be considered and addressed in their de - sign , deployment and use , such as those pertaining to security and privacy [ 17 , 22 , 60 , 88 ] . As proposed by Lazar et al . [ 35 ] , a critical component of design - ing for playfulness is therefore epistemological or methodological , and bound up in a view of knowledge creation and meaning - making as contextualized , embodied and experiential . This means that we should understand design for play and curiosity as a process and approach to engaging with technologies like smart devices , rather than a more literal or prescriptive recommendation to design tech - nology only intended for games or fun . As others have suggested [ 63 ] , playfulness can be found in engagement with many technolo - gies , and as we have argued , it is as much a process through which to learn with and about new technologies as it is an outcome of that engagement . 5 . 3 Design and Install Smart Home Technologies to Support Older People’s Specifc Usability Requirements A key success of this trial was its focus on providing a personalized set of devices that were ofered to each household , and an instal - lation process which was uniquely tailored to each household’s needs , including their housing , infrastructural and living situation ( see section 3 ) . Future programs and trials need to ensure that smart home devices are ft - for - purpose and suited to older adults’ physical space , aesthetic sensibilities , infrastructure availability and relia - bility ( e . g . internet and electricity ) , abilities and life circumstances , and to recognize that these are likely to change over time . As found in other studies , smart devices that support positive ageing and wellbeing are likely to require design modifcations that cater to the unique and sometimes specialized user needs of older adults [ 6 , 44 , 58 ] . Some of these potential design adaptations ( reaf - frmed in this study ) include : more age - and culturally - appropriate language ( for requests and responses ) , increased button and text size , higher levels of color contrast , lighter weight , and the capacity to be fxed in place to maintain function and reduce the likelihood of device under - use and unnecessary e - waste . Given the curiosity and resourcefulness demonstrated by older adults in this and other research , there is a signifcant opportunity for older people to be in - volved in the co - design of technologies that better suit their unique usability requirements and lifestyles . Another usability consideration for older adults highlighted in this and other studies relates to how smart home technologies may contribute to negative wellbeing outcomes for older adults if they lead to reduced memory capacity or sedentary behavior due to over - reliance on Internet - enabled devices [ 11 , 18 ] . It is therefore important that smart and emerging technologies which are inte - grated into older people’s homes and lives support their mobility , independence and memory by maintaining movement throughout the day and encouraging recall , mental stimulation and access to programs or apps that assist them with learning new skills . 5 . 4 Provide Tailored and Practical Opportunities to Build Digital Living Skills A key success and beneft of this study was the tailored learning opportunities it provided to participants . In particular , the in - situ technology demonstrations , and ongoing personal interactions with the Project Technician and research team provided valued learning opportunities for participants throughout the trial . This provided a scafolded approach to learning , with additional applications and devices added to some participants’ homes as they became more confdent and capable with the technology . Importantly , technical learning opportunities were embedded in participants’ everyday routines , which in turn improved partici - pants’ competence and digital living skills . More formal technical training opportunities , such as engaging with the user guides pro - vided by the trial , were not commonly taken up or used ( see sections 4 . 1 and 4 . 2 ) . Instead , it was these in - situ and activity - based learning opportunities that were critical to the way older adults built their skills with the devices over time , and integrated devices into every - day routines . As identifed in section 4 and discussed in section 5 . 2 above , key to these learning opportunities were the ways in which 722 “Isn’t this Marvelous” DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia older adults’ approached the trial and devices through curiosity , play and experimentation . Providing these learning opportunities to build digital living skills – including those relating to privacy and security – is likely to be critical to the success of future technology projects with older adults , and is a key fnding and recommendation of our study . 5 . 5 Provide Smart Home Technologies for Older Adults as Part of Flexible and Hybrid Crisis - Ready Care Systems The unique circumstances of the pandemic experienced during this trial , including periods of physical distancing that prohibited in - home visits to this vulnerable group , demonstrate the potential wellbeing benefts and challenges of using smart devices to support positive ageing during crises . Our fndings suggest the need for fexible ‘crisis - ready’ care systems , where face - to - face services can rapidly be supported by smart and other assistive technologies on a temporary basis . Such systems need to account for the possibility of in - home support being restricted or ceased , and also consider the potential for smart devices to carry out some tasks previously performed by in - home services ( such as the vacuuming performed by the robot vacuum in our study ) . Beyond the pandemic , the implications of this research for aged care providers , policy makers or HCI designers wishing to deploy similar smart devices in older adult homes are that these technolo - gies must be viewed as supplements – rather than replacements – to other aged care services . This aligns with smart home literature which has resisted and complicated the technological solutionism narrative that positions smart home devices as capable of indepen - dently ‘taking care’ of the home and its occupants [ 8 , 67 , 74 , 87 ] . The devices trialed in this project could enhance wellbeing out - comes for older people ageing in place , but only when provided as optional extras alongside their in - home services , which remain of high importance for the sense of community connection , social interaction and reliability . 6 CONCLUSION In this paper we have explored the wellbeing outcomes of a smart home trial with older adults , which was a unique partnership be - tween an Australian aged care provider and two universities , deliv - ering extensive technical support , ethnographic research insights and smart device user data . This novel interdisciplinary study pro - vides one of the most comprehensive , in - situ evaluations of smart home devices with older adults ever conducted . Set within the pos - itive ageing literature , this paper has identifed the critical role of curiosity , play and experimentation in delivering wellbeing out - comes and building older adults’ digital living skills with smart home devices . From these fndings we have provided recommen - dations which recognize older adults’ unique life experience , their desire to have fun and experience pleasure , the usability require - ments and opportunities for co - design , the importance of tailored learning opportunities , and the need to deliver aged care programs that are fexible , crisis - ready and part of hybrid systems of care . This research was limited by being conducted in regional Aus - tralia with a small number of participants and a select set of smart home devices that varied between households . Nonetheless , the fndings and recommendations ofer wider signifcance for the de - sign and deployment of smart devices to support positive ageing . Specifcally , our study demonstrates the need to approach the de - sign and potential value of smart devices for older people in ways that include opportunities to deliver both functional and fun out - comes . Our research also highlights opportunities and challenges for digital literacy and independent living that are likely to res - onate with other older adult communities . In particular , we have demonstrated the importance for older adults to develop digital living skills in partnership with others , through curious , playful and experimental encounters . We conclude that when viewed through a positive ageing lens with an appreciation of older adults’ creativity , inquisitiveness and resourcefulness , and when embedded into a system of support , smart devices can support an expanded range of wellbeing out - comes than previously considered . Rather than focusing on formal learning and traditionally - framed benefts to health and mobility , our research indicates that experimenting with smart devices pro - vides routes to realizing positive wellbeing outcomes with smart devices , that in turn builds older adults’ digital living skills . These fndings identify new opportunities in the design and evaluation of positive ageing for future studies , programs and services involving smart and other emerging technologies . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This project received funding from the Australian Government through a Department of Health Commonwealth Home Support Programme Innovation Grant . The project was undertaken through a collaborative partnership between McLean Care , Deakin Univer - sity and Monash University . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Anam Ashraf , Jian Hua Liu and Qasim Rauf . 2020 . Aging Population Perception and Post Adoption Behavior About the Usability of Smart Home Technology of Pakistani Culture . In Proceedings of Proceedings of 2020 the 6th International Conference on Computing and Data Engineering . Association for Computing Machinery , Sanya , China , 179 – 188 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3379247 . 3379248 [ 2 ] Keith Atkinson , Jaclyn Barnes , Judith Albee , Peter Anttila , Judith Haataja , Kanak Nanavati , Kelly Steelman and Charles Wallace . 2016 . Breaking Barriers to Digital Literacy : An Intergenerational Social - Cognitive Approach . In Proceedings of the 18th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility . Association for Computing Machinery , Reno , Nevada , USA , 239 – 244 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2982142 . 2982183 [ 3 ] David Bawden . 2008 . Origins and Concepts of Digital Literacy . Digital literacies : Concepts , policies and practices 30 , 2008 , 17 - 32 . [ 4 ] Priyankar Bhattacharjee , Steven Baker and Jenny Waycott . 2020 . Older Adults and Their Acquisition of Digital Skills : A Review of Current Research Evidence . In Proceedings of 32nd Australian Conference on Human - Computer Interaction . Association for Computing Machinery , Sydney , NSW , Australia , 437 – 443 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3441000 . 3441053 [ 5 ] Aikaterini Bourazeri and Simone Stumpf . 2018 . Co - Designing Smart Home Tech - nology with People with Dementia or Parkinson’s Disease . In Proceedings of the 10th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction . Association for Com - puting Machinery , Oslo , Norway , 609 – 621 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3240167 . 3240197 [ 6 ] Callejas and Ramón López - Cózar . 2009 . Designing Smart Home Interfaces for the Elderly . SIGACCESS Access . Comput . , 95 , 10 – 16 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1651259 . 1651261 [ 7 ] Phillippa Carnemolla . 2018 . Ageing in Place and the Internet of Things – How Smart Home Technologies , the Built Environment and Caregiving Intersect . Visualization in Engineering 6 , 1 , 7 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s40327 - 018 - 0066 - 5 [ 8 ] Kari Dahlgren , Sarah Pink , Yolande Strengers , Larissa Nicholls and Jathan Sadowski . 2021 . Personalization and the Smart Home : Questioning Techno - Hedonist Imaginaries . Convergence , 27 , 5 , 1155 - 1169 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 13548565211036801 723 DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia Yolande Strengers et al . [ 9 ] M . Deen . 2015 . Information and Communications Technologies for Elderly Ubiq - uitous Healthcare in a Smart Home . Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 19 , 3 - 4 , 573 - 599 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00779 - 015 - 0856 - x [ 10 ] Julie A . Delello and Rochell R . McWhorter . 2015 . Reducing the Digital Divide : Connecting Older Adults to Ipad Technology . Journal of Applied Gerontology 36 , 1 , 3 - 28 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0733464815589985 [ 11 ] George Demiris and Brian Hensel . 2009 . “Smart Homes” for Patients at the End of Life . Journal of Housing For the Elderly 23 , 1 - 2 , 106 - 115 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 02763890802665049 [ 12 ] George Demiris and Brian K Hensel . 2008 . Technologies for an Aging Society : A Systematic Review of “Smart Home” Applications . Yearbook of medical informatics 17 , 01 , 33 - 40 . [ 13 ] Julie Doyle , Niamh Caprani and Rodd Bond . 2015 . Older Adults’ Attitudes to Self - Management of Health and Wellness through Smart Home Data . ICST ( Institute for Computer Sciences , Social - Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering ) , Istanbul , Turkey . [ 14 ] Melisa Duque , Sarah Pink , Yolande Strengers , Rex Martin and Larissa Nicholls . 2021 . Automation , Wellbeing and Digital Voice Assistants : Older People and Google Devices . Convergence , 27 , 5 , 1189 - 1206 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 13548565211038537 [ 15 ] Jeannette Durick , Toni Robertson , Margot Brereton , Frank Vetere and Bjorn Nansen . 2013 . Dispelling Ageing Myths in Technology Design . In Proceedings of the 25th Australian Computer - Human Interaction Conference : Augmentation , Application , Innovation , Collaboration . Association for Computing Machinery , Adelaide , Australia , 467 – 476 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2541016 . 2541040 [ 16 ] Peter F Edemekong , Deb L Bomgaars and Shoshana B Levy . 2017 . Activities of Daily Living ( Adls ) . In : StatPearls [ Internet ] . Treasure Island ( FL ) : StatPearls Publishing . https : / / pubmed . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / 29261878 / [ 17 ] Susan M Ferreira , Sergio Sayago and Josep Blat . 2019 . Older People Positive , Active and Creative Ict Use : A Study in Three Countries . In : Sayago , S . ( eds ) Perspectives on Human - Computer Interaction Research with Older People , Springer , 183 - 197 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 030 - 06076 - 3 _ 12 [ 18 ] Joseph Firth , John Torous , Brendon Stubbs , Josh A . Firth , Genevieve Z . Steiner , Lee Smith , Mario Alvarez - Jimenez , John Gleeson , Davy Vancampfort , Christopher J . Armitage and Jerome Sarris . 2019 . The “Online Brain” : How the Internet May Be Changing Our Cognition . World Psychiatry 18 , 2 , 119 - 129 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / wps . 20617 [ 19 ] Jodi Forlizzi and Carl DiSalvo . 2006 . Service Robots in the Domestic Environ - ment : A Study of the Roomba Vacuum in the Home . In Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGCHI / SIGART conference on Human - robot interaction . Association for Computing Machinery , 258 – 265 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1121241 . 1121286 [ 20 ] Rachel Franz and Barbara Barbosa Neves . 2019 . Usability Is Ageless : Conducting Usability Tests with Older Adults . In : Neves , B . , Vetere , F . ( eds ) Ageing and Digital Technology . Springer , Singapore , 99 - 114 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 981 - 13 - 3693 - 5 _ 7 [ 21 ] D . D . Furszyfer Del Rio , B . K . Sovacool and M . Martiskainen . 2021 . Controllable , Frightening , or Fun ? Exploring the Gendered Dynamics of Smart Home Tech - nology Preferences in the United Kingdom . Energy Research & Social Science 77 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . erss . 2021 . 102105 [ 22 ] Chuhan Gao , Varun Chandrasekaran , Kassem Fawaz and Suman Banerjee . 2018 . Traversing the Quagmire That Is Privacy in Your Smart Home . In Proceedings of the 2018 Workshop on IoT Security and Privacy - IoT S & P ’18 . Association of Computing Machinery , Budapest , Hungary , 22 - 28 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3229565 . 3229573 [ 23 ] Elisa Giaccardi , Lenneke Kuijer and Louis Neven . Year . Design for Resourceful Ageing : Intervening in the Ethics of Gerontechnology . In Proceedings of 2016 Design Research Society Conference ( DRS 2016 ) , June 27 - 30 , 2016 , Brighton , UK . [ 24 ] Peter Gregor , Alan F . Newell and Mary Zajicek . 2002 . Designing for Dynamic Diversity : Interfaces for Older People . In Proceedings of the ffth international ACM conference on Assistive technologies . Association for Computing Machinery , Edinburgh , Scotland , 151 – 156 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 638249 . 638277 [ 25 ] Jenni Greig , Sabih - Ur Rehman , Anwaar Ul - Haq , Greg Dresser and Oliver K . Burmeister . 2019 . Transforming Ageing in Community : Addressing Global Age - ing Vulnerabilities through Smart Communities . In Proceedings of the 9th In - ternational Conference on Communities ; Technologies - Transforming Commu - nities . Association for Computing Machinery , Vienna , Austria , 228 – 238 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3328320 . 3328380 [ 26 ] Tom Hargreaves , Charlie Wilson and Richard Hauxwell - Baldwin . 2018 . Learning to Live in a Smart Home . Building Research & Information 46 , 1 , 127 - 139 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09613218 . 2017 . 1286882 [ 27 ] Peter W Harvey and Ian Thurnwald . 2009 . Ageing Well , Ageing Productively : The Essential Contribution of Australia’s Ageing Population to the Social and Economic Prosperity of the Nation . Health Sociology Review 18 , 4 , 379 - 386 . [ 28 ] Rowena Hill , Lucy R . Betts and Sarah E . Gardner . 2015 . Older Adults’ Experiences and Perceptions of Digital Technology : ( Dis ) Empowerment , Wellbeing , and In - clusion . Computers in Human Behavior 48 , 415 - 423 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2015 . 01 . 062 [ 29 ] Rikke Hagensby Jensen , Yolande Strengers , Jesper Kjeldskov , Larissa Nicholls and Mikael B . Skov . 2018 . Designing the Desirable Smart Home : A Study of Household & Nbsp ; Experiences and Energy Consumption Impacts . In Proceedings of the 2018 Chi Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , Association for Computing Machinery , Paper 4 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173578 [ 30 ] Zhao Xia Jin , Tom Plocher and Liana Kif . 2007 . Touch Screen User Interfaces for Older Adults : Button Size and Spacing . In : Stephanidis , C . ( eds ) Universal Access in Human Computer Interaction . Coping with Diversity . UAHCI 2007 . Lecture Notes in Computer Science , vol 4554 . Springer , Berlin , Heidelberg , 933 - 941 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 540 - 73279 - 2 _ 104 [ 31 ] Hyang Sook Kim , Hyo Chang Kim and Yong Gu Ji . 2015 . Understanding the Elders’ Interaction with Smart Home in Korea . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , Seoul , Republic of Korea , 2067 – 2072 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702613 . 2732767 [ 32 ] Masako Kitazaki , Iohanna Nicenboim and Elisa Giaccardi . 2019 . Connected Re - sources - Empowering Older People to Age Resourcefully . In Proceedings of Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , Glasgow , Scotland Uk , Paper VS06 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290607 . 3311774 [ 33 ] Bran Knowles , Vicki L . Hanson , Yvonne Rogers , Anne Marie Piper , Jenny Waycott and Nigel Davies . 2019 . Hci and Aging : Beyond Accessibility . In Proceedings of Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , Glasgow , Scotland Uk , Paper W07 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290607 . 3299025 [ 34 ] Jarosław Kowalski , Anna Jaskulska , Kinga Skorupska , Katarzyna Abramczuk , Cezary Biele , Wiesław Kopeć and Krzysztof Marasek . 2019 . Older Adults and Voice Interaction : A Pilot Study with Google Home . In Proceedings of Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , Glasgow , Scotland Uk , Paper LBW0187 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290607 . 3312973 [ 35 ] Amanda Lazar , Caroline Edasis and Anne Marie Piper . 2017 . A Critical Lens on Dementia and Design in Hci . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , Denver , Colorado , USA , 2175 – 2188 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025522 [ 36 ] Quynh Lê , Hoang Nguyen and Tony Barnett . 2012 . Smart Homes for Older People : Positive Aging in a Digital World . Future Internet 4 , 2 , 607 - 617 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3390 / f4020607 [ 37 ] P . Lehoux and D . Grimard . 2018 . When Robots Care : Public Deliberations on How Technology and Humans May Support Independent Living for Older Adults . Social Science & Medicine 211 , 330 - 337 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . socscimed . 2018 . 06 . 038 [ 38 ] Guillaume Lepicard and Nadine Vigouroux . 2010 . Touch Screen User Interfaces for Older Subjects : Efect of the Targets Number and the Two Hands Use . In Proceedings of the 12th international conference on Computers helping people with special needs . Springer - Verlag , Vienna , Austria , 592 – 599 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 14100 - 3 _ 88 [ 39 ] Siân E Lindley , Richard Harper and Abigail Sellen . 2008 . Designing for Elders : Exploring the Complexity of Relationships in Later Life . People and Computers XXII Culture , Creativity , Interaction 22 , 77 - 86 . https : / / www . scienceopen . com / hosted - document ? doi = 10 . 14236 / ewic / HCI2008 . 8 [ 40 ] Stephen Lindsay , Daniel Jackson , Guy Schofeld and Patrick Olivier . 2012 . Engag - ing Older People Using Participatory Design . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Confer - ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machin - ery , Austin , Texas , USA , 1199 – 1208 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208570 [ 41 ] Lili Liu , Eleni Stroulia , Ioanis Nikolaidis , Antonio Miguel - Cruz and Adriana Rios Rincon . 2016 . Smart Homes and Home Health Monitoring Technologies for Older Adults : A Systematic Review . International Journal of Medical Informatics 91 , 44 - 59 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijmedinf . 2016 . 04 . 007 [ 42 ] Athena McLean . 2011 . Ethical Frontiers of ICT and Older Users : Cultural , Prag - matic and Ethical Issues . Ethics Inf Technol 13 , 313 – 326 . [ 43 ] Sarah Mennicken and Elaine M . Huang . 2012 . Hacking the Natural Habitat : An in - the - Wild Study of Smart Homes , Their Development , and the People Who Live in Them . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Persuasive Computing Springer Berlin Heidelberg , 143 - 160 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 31205 - 2 _ 10 [ 44 ] Masi Mohammadi . 2011 . Teaching Existing Homes to Be Connected . In Proceed - ings of the 5th International Conference on Rehabilitation Engineering & Assis - tive Technology . Singapore Therapeutic , Assistive & Rehabilitative Technologies ( START ) Centre , Bangkok , Thailand , Article 25 . [ 45 ] Soud Nassir , Tuck Wah Leong and Toni Robertson . 2015 . Positive Ageing : El - ements and Factors for Design . In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Australian Special Interest Group for Computer Human Interaction . Association for Computing Machinery , Parkville , VIC , Australia , 264 – 268 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2838739 . 2838796 [ 46 ] Barbara Barbosa Neves and Frank Vetere . 2019 . Ageing and Digital Technology : Designing and Evaluating Emerging Technologies for Older Adults . Singapore : Springer Singapore Pte . Limited , Singapore . 724 “Isn’t this Marvelous” [ 47 ] Barbara Barbosa Neves and Frank Vetere . 2019 . Ageing and Emerging Digital Technologies . In Ageing and Digital Technology : Designing and Evaluating Emerg - ing Technologies for Older Adults , Barbara Barbosa Neves and Frank Vetere Eds . Springer Singapore , Singapore , 1 - 14 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 981 - 13 - 3693 - 5 _ 1 [ 48 ] Iohanna Nicenboim , Elisa Giaccardi and Lenneke Kuijer . 2018 . Designing Con - nected Resources for Older People . In Proceedings of Proceedings of the 2018 Designing Interactive Systems Conference . Association for Computing Machinery , Hong Kong , China , 413 – 425 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3196709 . 3196808 [ 49 ] Larissa Nicholls and Yolande Strengers . 2019 . Robotic Vacuum Cleaners Save Energy ? Raising Cleanliness Conventions and Energy Demand in Australian Households with Smart Home Technologies . Energy Research & Social Science 50 , 73 - 81 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . erss . 2018 . 11 . 019 [ 50 ] OECD . 2015 . How’s Life ? 2015 : Measuring Well - Being . OECD Publishing , Paris . [ 51 ] S Pink . 2021 . Doing Visual Ethnography . SAGE Publications . [ 52 ] S . Pink , K . L . Mackley , R . Morosanu , V . Mitchell and T . Bhamra . 2017 . Making Homes : Ethnography and Design , Routledge . [ 53 ] Sarah Pink . 2004 . Home Truths : Gender , Domestic Objects and Everyday Life ( English ed . ) . Berg , Oxford and New York . [ 54 ] Sarah Pink . 2016 . Digital Ethnography : Principles and Practice . Thousand Oaks , California : SAGE Publications , London . [ 55 ] Sarah Pink . 2017 . Making Homes : Ethnography and Design . London : Bloomsbury Academic . [ 56 ] Sarah Pink . 2021 . The Ethnographic Hunch : Analysis in the Field and at the Desk . In Experimenting with Ethnography , B Winthereik and A Ballestero Eds . Duke University Press , Durham , NC . [ 57 ] Sarah Pink , Kerstin Leder Mackley , Val Mitchell , Marcus Hanratty , Carolina Escobar - Tello , Tracy Bhamra and Roxana Morosanu . 2013 . Applying the Lens of Sensory Ethnography to Sustainable Hci . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 20 , 4 , Article 25 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2494261 [ 58 ] François Portet , Michel Vacher , Caroline Golanski , Camille Roux and Brigitte Meillon . 2013 . Design and Evaluation of a Smart Home Voice Interface for the Elderly : Acceptability and Objection Aspects . Personal Ubiquitous Comput . 17 , 1 , 127 – 144 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00779 - 011 - 0470 - 5 [ 59 ] Alisha Pradhan , Leah Findlater and Amanda Lazar . 2019 . " Phantom Friend " or " Just a Box with Information " : Personifcation and Ontological Categorization of Smart Speaker - Based Voice Assistants by Older Adults . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 3 , CSCW , Article 214 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359316 [ 60 ] Alisha Pradhan , Amanda Lazar and Leah Findlater . 2020 . Use of Intelligent Voice Assistants by Older Adults with Low Technology Use . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 27 , 4 , Article 31 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3373759 [ 61 ] Oxford University Press . 2019 . Oxford Living Dictionaries : Well - Being . Retrieved 25 Aug , 2020 from www . lexico . com / defnition / well - being . [ 62 ] Anabel Quan - Haase , Hua Wang , Barry Wellman and Renwen Zhang . 2018 . Weav - ing Family Connections on and Ofine : The Turn to Networked Individualism . In Connecting Families ? , Barbara Barbosa Neves and Cláudia Casimiro Eds . Bristol University Press , 59 - 80 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2307 / j . ctv2867xm . 10 [ 63 ] Olivia K . Richards , Gabriela Marcu and Robin N . Brewer . 2021 . Hugs , Bible Study , and Speakeasies : Designing for Older Adults’ Multimodal Connectedness . In Proceedings of Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2021 . Association for Computing Machinery , Virtual Event , USA , 815 – 831 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3461778 . 3462075 [ 64 ] Valeria Righi , Sergio Sayago and Josep Blat . 2015 . Urban Ageing : Technology , Agency and Community in Smarter Cities for Older People . In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Communities and Technologies . Association for Computing Machinery , Limerick , Ireland , 119 – 128 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2768545 . 2768552 [ 65 ] Jennifer A . Rode and Erika Shehan Poole . 2018 . Putting the Gender Back in Digital Housekeeping . In Proceedings of the 4th Conference on Gender & IT . Association for Computing Machinery , Heilbronn , Germany , 79 – 90 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3196839 . 3196845 [ 66 ] Yvonne Rogers , Jeni Paay , Margot Brereton , Kate L . Vaisutis , Gary Marsden and Frank Vetere . 2014 . Never Too Old : Engaging Retired People Inventing the Future with Makey Makey . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , Toronto , Ontario , Canada , 3913 – 3922 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557184 [ 67 ] Jathan Sadowski , Yolande Strengers and Jenny Kennedy . 2021 . More Work for Big Mother : Revaluing Care and Control in Smart Homes . Environment and Planning A : Economy and Space . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0308518X211022366 [ 68 ] Yvette C Saliba and Sejal M Barden . 2021 . Playfulness and Older Adults : Impli - cations for Quality of Life . Journal of Mental Health Counseling 43 , 2 , 157 - 171 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 17744 / mehc . 43 . 2 . 05 [ 69 ] Jamie Sanders and Aqueasha Martin - Hammond . 2019 . Exploring Autonomy in the Design of an Intelligent Health Assistant for Older Adults . In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces : Companion . Association for Computing Machinery , Marina del Ray , California , 95 – 96 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3308557 . 3308713 [ 70 ] Sergio Sayago . 2019 . Perspectives on Human - Computer Interaction Research with Older People . Cham : Springer International Publishing AG , Cham . DIS ’22 , June 13 – 17 , 2022 , Virtual Event , Australia [ 71 ] Sergio Sayago , Barbara Barbosa Neves and Benjamin R Cowan . 2019 . Voice Assistants and Older People : Some Open Issues . In Proceedings of the 1st Interna - tional Conference on Conversational User Interfaces . Association for Computing Machinery , Dublin , Ireland , Article 7 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3342775 . 3342803 [ 72 ] Korok Sengupta , Sayan Sarcar , Alisha Pradhan , Roisin McNaney , Sergio Sayago , Debaleena Chattopadhyay and Anirudha Joshi . 2020 . Challenges and Opportuni - ties of Leveraging Intelligent Conversational Assistant to Improve the Well - Being of Older Adults . In Proceedings of Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , Honolulu , HI , USA , 1 – 4 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3334480 . 3381057 [ 73 ] Andrew Sixsmith , Nick Hine , Ian Neild , Nick Clarke , Steve Brown and Paul Garner . 2007 . Monitoring the Well - Being of Older People . Topics in Geriatric Rehabilitation 23 , 1 , 9 - 23 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1097 / 00013614 - 200701000 - 00004 [ 74 ] Yolande Strengers , Mike Hazas , Larissa Nicholls , Jesper Kjeldskov and Mikael B Skov . 2020 . Pursuing Pleasance : Interrogating Energy - Intensive Visions for the Smart Home . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 136 , 102379 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2019 . 102379 [ 75 ] Yolande Strengers , Jenny Kennedy , Paula Arcari , Larissa Nicholls and Melissa Gregg . Year . Protection , Productivity and Pleasure in the Smart Home : Emerging Expectations and Gendered Insights from Australian Early Adopters . In Proceed - ings of Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 - 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300875 [ 76 ] Yolande Strengers and Larissa Nicholls . 2017 . Convenience and Energy Con - sumption in the Smart Home of the Future : Industry Visions from Australia and Beyond . Energy Research & Social Science 32 , 86 - 93 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . erss . 2017 . 02 . 008 [ 77 ] Yolande Strengers and Larissa Nicholls . 2018 . Aesthetic Pleasures and Gendered Tech - Work in the 21st - Century Smart Home . Media International Australia 166 , 1 , 70 - 80 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1329878X17737661 [ 78 ] Helena Sustar , Sara Jones and Andy Dearden . Year . Older People as Equal Partners in Creative Design . In Proceedings of Springer Berlin Heidelberg , 649 - 656 . https : / / link . springer . com / chapter / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 39062 - 3 _ 45 [ 79 ] Leila Takayama , Caroline Pantofaru , David Robson , Bianca Soto and Michael Barry . 2012 . Making Technology Homey : Finding Sources of Satisfaction and Meaning in Home Automation . In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Conference on Ubiquitous Computing . Association for Computing Machinery , Pittsburgh , Penn - sylvania , 511 – 520 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2370216 . 2370292 [ 80 ] J Thomas , J Barraket , CK Wilson , I Holcombe - James , J Kennedy , E Rennie , S Ewing and T MacDonald . 2020 . Measuring Australia’s Digital Divide : The Australian Digital Inclusion Index 2020 . [ 81 ] P . Tolmie , A . Crabtree , T . Rodden , C . Greenhalgh and S . Benford . 2007 . Making the Home Network at Home : Digital Housekeeping . In Proceedings of ECSCW’07 . 331 - 350 . https : / / link . springer . com / chapter / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 84800 - 031 - 5 _ 18 [ 82 ] Milka Trajkova and Aqueasha Martin - Hammond . 2020 . " Alexa Is a Toy " : Exploring Older Adults’ Reasons for Using , Limiting , and Abandoning Echo . In Proceedings of the 2020 Chi Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , Association for Computing Machinery , 1 – 13 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376760 [ 83 ] Joost van Hoof , George Demiris and Eveline J . M . Wouters . 2017 . Handbook of Smart Homes , Health Care and Well - Being ( 1st ed . 2017 . ) . Cham : Springer International Publishing : Imprint : Springer , [ 84 ] John Vines , Gary Pritchard , Peter Wright , Patrick Olivier and Katie Brittain . 2015 . An Age - Old Problem : Examining the Discourses of Ageing in Hci and Strategies for Future Research . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 22 , 1 , Article 2 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2696867 [ 85 ] Australian Institute of Health and Welfare . 2019 . Understanding Welfare and Wellbeing . Retrieved 25 August , 2020 from www . aihw . gov . au / reports / australias - welfare / understanding - welfare - and - wellbeing . [ 86 ] Etienne Wenger . 1998 . Communities of Practice : Learning , Meaning , and Identity . Cambridge University Press , New York . [ 87 ] Charlie Wilson , Tom Hargreaves and Richard Hauxwell - baldwin . 2015 . Smart Homes and Their Users : A Systematic Analysis and Key Challenges . Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 19 , 2 , 463 - 476 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00779 - 014 - 0813 - 0 [ 88 ] Charlie Wilson , Tom Hargreaves and Richard Hauxwell - Baldwin . 2017 . Benefts and Risks of Smart Home Technologies . Energy Policy 103 , 72 - 83 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . enpol . 2016 . 12 . 047 [ 89 ] Allison Woodruf , Sally Augustin and Brooke Foucault . 2007 . Sabbath Day Home Automation : " It’s Like Mixing Technology and Religion " . In Proceedings of the Sigchi Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , Association for Com - puting Machinery , 527 – 536 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1240624 . 1240710 [ 90 ] Careen Yarnal and Xinyi Qian . 2011 . Older - Adult Playfulness : An Innovative Construct and Measurement for Healthy Aging Research . American Journal of Play 4 , 1 , 52 - 79 . [ 91 ] Randall Ziman and Greg Walsh . 2018 . Factors Afecting Seniors’ Perceptions of Voice - Enabled User Interfaces . In Proceedings of Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , Montreal QC , Canada , Paper LBW591 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3170427 . 3188575 725