ª The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 2000 / 01 / 127 / 10 $ 5 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 148 , Number 1 , January 10 , 2000 127 – 136 http : / / www . jcb . org 127 Cell Spreading and Lamellipodial Extension Rate Is Regulated by Membrane Tension Drazen Raucher and Michael P . Sheetz Department of Cell Biology , Duke University Medical Center , Durham , North Carolina 27710 Abstract . Cell spreading and motility require the ex - tension of the plasma membrane in association with the assembly of actin . In vitro , extension must overcome re - sistance from tension within the plasma membrane . We report here that the addition of either amphiphilic com - pounds or ﬂuorescent lipids that expanded the plasma membrane increased the rate of cell spreading and lamellipodial extension , stimulated new lamellipodial extensions , and caused a decrease in the apparent membrane tension . Further , in PDGF - stimulated motility , the increase in the lamellipodial extension rate was associated with a decrease in the apparent mem - brane tension and decreased membrane – cytoskeleton adhesion through phosphatidylinositol diphosphate hydrolysis . Conversely , when membrane tension was in - creased by osmotically swelling cells , the extension rate decreased . Therefore , we suggest that the lamellipodial extension process can be activated by a physical signal ( perhaps secondarily ) , and the rate of extension is di - rectly dependent upon the tension in the plasma mem - brane . Quantitative analysis shows that the lamellipo - dial extension rate is inversely correlated with the apparent membrane tension . These studies describe a physical chemical mechanism involving changes in membrane – cytoskeleton adhesion through phosphati - dylinositol 4 , 5 - biphosphate – protein interactions for modulating and stimulating the biochemical processes that power lamellipodial extension . Key words : membrane – cytoskeleton adhesion • membrane expansion • laser optical tweezers • cell spreading • membrane tether Introduction Cell adhesion and motility play central roles in a variety of biological phenomena , including embryonic development , inflammation , and wound healing . Both cell adhesion and motility involve the extension of the plasma membrane , and alterations in the rate of extension would be expected to have dramatic effects on many processes . Extension oc - curs through the formation of either thin actin - rich veils called lamellipodia or fingerlike projections called filopo - dia . Both types of extension involve the polymerization of actin filaments coupled with displacement of the plasma membrane . The load against which this process must work is provided by external objects and tension within the plasma membrane ( Oster , 1988 ; Peskin et al . , 1993 ; Mogil - ner and Oster , 1996 ) . There are very significant tensions in plasma membranes ( Dai and Sheetz , 1995a ; Dai et al . , 1997 ) and increasing membrane tension in snail neuronal growth cones by hypotonic swelling caused lamellipodial and filopodial retraction ( Dai et al . , 1998 ) . The quantita - tive relationship between the extension rate and the ten - sion is unknown . Therefore , we have measured lamellipo - dial extension and membrane tension in parallel under a variety of conditions . Several different systems are postulated to drive exten - sion of the leading edges of cells ( Theriot , 1997 ; Condeelis , 1993 ; Stossel , 1993 ; Heidemann and Buxbaum , 1998 ) . The role of the extension system is to create a gap at the grow - ing end of the actin filaments to allow further assembly . Whether the mechanism involves the creation of an os - motic pressure pushing the membrane forward or a me - chanical displacement of the membrane coupled with fila - ment assembly , the velocity of the extension should be inversely dependent upon the resistive force at the mem - brane surface . For cells moving through tissues , the resis - tive force is largely from the surrounding extracellular ma - trix . However , for cells in vitro , the major force resisting extension arises from tension in the plasma membrane . Models of the extension process at the biophysical level have predicted that the velocity of the lamellipodial exten - sion would decrease with the increasing tension , although the exact relationship depends on the model ( Oster , 1988 ; Mogilner and Oster , 1996 ) . Address correspondence to Dr . Michael P . Sheetz , Department of Cell Biology , Box 3709 , Duke University Medical Center , Durham , NC 27710 . Tel . : ( 919 ) 684 - 8091 . Fax : ( 919 ) 684 - 8592 . E - mail : m . sheetz @ cellbio . duke . edu The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 148 , 2000 128 In many instances , the initiation of extension is stimu - lated , perhaps mechanically but definitely biochemically . The release of a cell tail and the addition of chemoattrac - tants and migratory hormones all caused the cell to initiate new extensions ( Chen , 1981 ; Weber et al . , 1995 ; Heldin , 1997 ) . From the measurements of tail retraction coupled with leading edge extension , the change in the cell shape was seen as a release of the tension that prevented forward extension . One possibility is that a decrease in membrane tension after tail release would result in increased mem - brane extension . Chemoattractants and migratory hor - mones activate the extension process at the biochemical level , but the downstream signaling pathways could ini - tiate changes in membrane tension as well . The extension process could be enhanced by a physical change such as a decrease in the resistance to extension , which was coupled with activation of the extension process . Apparent membrane tension can be measured from the force exerted on membrane tethers . Because of confor - mity of the membrane to the cytoskeleton , the apparent membrane tension contains components of membrane – cytoskeleton adhesion as well as tension in the bilayer plane . For animal cells with nonspherical shapes , mem - brane tension is largely determined by the membrane cy - toskeleton adhesion ( Sheetz and Dai , 1996 ) . Recent com - parisons of forces on tethers formed from normal plasma membranes and from adjacent membranous blebs , in which the membrane has separated from the cytoskeleton , show that in - plane bilayer tension accounts for less than one quarter of the apparent membrane tension ( Dai and Sheetz , 1999 ) . For many processes including endocytosis and extension , the membrane – cytoskeleton adhesion com - ponent of the tether force could be important . In the case of endocytosis , clathrin must displace the normal mem - brane - associated cytoskeleton to cause endocytosis , and there is an inverse correlation between the endocytosis rate and tether force ( Dai et al . , 1997 ; Raucher and Sheetz , 1999 ) . In the case of membrane extension , the attachment of the protein complex that drives extension of the plasma membrane , such as Arp2 / 3 ( Mullins et al . , 1998 , Welch et al . , 1998 ) , requires displacement of the normal cytoskele - tal components and , thus , could be sensitive to changes in membrane – cytoskeleton adhesion as well as the tension in the bilayer plane . There are several ways to nonspecifically alter mem - brane tension . Detergents , organic solvents , or local anes - thetics cause expansion of the plasma membrane ( for review see Seeman , 1972 ) and , consequently , cause a de - crease in apparent membrane tension . Conversely , os - motic swelling of a cell causes an increase in membrane tension . Thus , the tension can be modulated in predictable ways to determine if the cellular functions are modulated in a corresponding fashion . In other studies , high mem - brane tension and low endocytosis rates were reversed by the addition of detergents ( Dai et al . , 1997 ; Raucher and Sheetz , 1999 ) . We have now measured the relationship be - tween tether force and the rate of lamellipodial extension under a variety of conditions . Interestingly , an inverse re - lationship between tension and extension rate was ob - served in the quantitative analysis . Further , we found that the process of lamellipodial extension was dramatically stimulated by a nonspecific decrease in membrane tension . Materials and Methods Cells NIH 3T3 cells ( a mouse fibroblast line ) were grown in DME ( Gibco Labo - ratories ) supplemented with 10 % FBS ( Gibco Laboratories ) , 100 units / ml penicillin , 100 mg / ml streptomycin , and 7 . 5 mM Hepes at 37 8 C in 5 % CO 2 . Cells were removed from tissue culture flasks by brief treatment with trypsin - EDTA ( Gibco Laboratories ) , and plated onto glass coverslips . Cells were used for experiments 1 – 2 d after plating . Bead Preparation To prepare IgG - coated beads , mouse IgG ( Sigma Chemical Co . ) was solu - bilized at a concentration of 1 mg / ml in PBS ( Gibco Laboratories ) . 50 ml of carboxylated polystyrene microparticles ( 1 mm diam , Polysciences Inc . ) was added to 100 ml of the above IgG solution and incubated at 4 8 C over - night . The beads were rinsed by pelleting and resuspension in PBS and fi - nally resuspended in 100 ml of DME . For the experiments , the bead solu - tion was diluted 1 : 100 NIH 3T3 medium . Laser Optical Trap Manipulations The NIH 3T3 fibroblasts were viewed by a video - enhanced differential in - terference contrast ( DIC ) 1 microscope equipped with laser optical twee - zers ( Choquet et al . , 1997 ) . Beads were trapped with 600 mW of laser power , attached to the cell membrane , and pulled away from the cell sur - face , forming a membrane tether . The tether force was calculated from the displacement of the bead from the center of the laser trap during tether formation and the trap calibration ( Dai and Sheetz , 1995b ) . Cell Spreading Measurements We measured the spreading of NIH 3T3 cells on uncoated glass coverslips in an assay similar to that described earlier ( Felsenfeld et al . , 1999 ) . Cells in confluent cultures were briefly trypsinized ( 1 – 2 min ) , and then plated on acid - washed glass coverslips at a density of 10 6 cells / ml in DME with 10 % FBS . Cells were incubated at 37 8 C either in the presence or in ab - sence of 0 . 4 mM deoxycholate for 15 or 30 min . Nonadherent cells were washed out and adherent cells were fixed by 4 % paraformaldehyde . Ad - herent cells were scored by visual examination in the DIC microscope . The number of adherent cells that were spread in the presence of deoxy - cholate was normalized to the number of adherent cells in the control so - lution . Results represent the average of three independent experiments ( for each experimental point . 500 cells were counted ) . Measurement of Lamellipodial Extension Rate The morphology of cultures of NIH 3T3 fibroblasts growing under the conditions employed in this study is very similar to that described previ - ously ( Lombardi et al . , 1990 ; Symons and Mitchison , 1991 ) . The fibro - blasts are spread and move relatively slowly across the substratum . The motility of individual fibroblasts caused changes in morphology with time . Typical fibroblasts have a trigonal shape with a broad lamellipodium at the leading edge and a pointed trailing tail . The characteristic size and cell shape is preserved for long periods , provided that no major changes occur in external conditions . Here , we define lamellipodia as those thin regions 3 – 10 microns wide located at the cell periphery where the actin meshwork is much more dense than in the remainder of the cell ( Vasiliev , 1991 ) . To measure the lamellipodial extension rate , we have used the following cri - teria . We selected fibroblasts that had a trigonal shape with a broad lamel - lipodium ( at least 6 microns wide ) at the leading edge . We selected events where the period of extension was greater than 30 s . Successive positions of the tip of leading lamella were measured every 3 s . When the edge is ex - 1 Abbreviations used in this paper : b - DPH - HPC , 2 - ( 3 - ( diphenylhexatrie - nyl ) propanoyl ) - 1 - hexadecanoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphocholine ; C 5 - DMB - SM , N - ( 4 , 4 - difluoro - 5 , 7 - dimethyl - 4 - bora - 3 a , 4 a - diaza - indacene - 3 - pentanoyl ) sphin - gosyl phosphocholine ( BODIPY FL C 5 - sphyngomyelin ) ; DiA , 4 - 4 ( 4 - ( di - decylamino ) styryl ) - N - methyl - pyridiniumiodide ( 4 - Di - 10 - ASP ) ; DIC , dif - ferential interference contrast ; FITC - PL ; L - a - phosphatidylethanolamine , dipalmitoyl , N - ( 5 - fluoresceinthiocarbamoyl ) ; PIP 2 , phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - biphosphate . Raucher et al . Cell Spreading , Lamellipodial Extension , and Membrane Tension 129 tending , it moves forward continuously as the slope of the edge position versus time plot shows ( see Fig . 2 d ) . The distance moved was defined as the distance from the initial position of the lamellipodial edge at the be - ginning of extension . To measure the lamellipodial extension , a line was positioned at several locations on the actively spreading lamellipodia , and the position of the edge was recorded . We only considered the cells whose lamellipodial extension rate remained roughly constant over the period of observation ( r 2 . 0 . 96 for every fitted line ) , which occurred in about half of the cases recorded . Results were the same when we compared the rela - tive extension rate within individual cells before and after cell exposure to membrane expanding drugs . Therefore , although the determination of the edge position for a given time point may be subjective , a constant rate of extension was consistently observed . Cell Labeling with Fluorescent Phospholipids Cells were incubated with 2 mM L - a - phosphatidylethanolamine , dipalmi - toyl , N - ( 5 - fluoresceinthiocarbamoyl ) ( FITC - PL ; Sigma Chemical Co . ) or 2 mM 2 - ( 3 - ( diphenylhexatrienyl ) propanoyl ) - 1 - hexadecanoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphocholine ( b - DPH - HPC ) , or 5 mM N - ( 4 , 4 - difluoro - 5 , 7 - dimethyl - 4 - bora - 3 a , 4 a - diaza - indacene - 3 - pentanoyl ) sphingosyl phosphocholine ( BODIPY FL C 5 - sphyngomyelin ) ( C 5 - DMB - SM ; Molecular Probes , Inc . ) for 10 min to label plasma membrane , and then washed with medium . Results Effect of Membrane Expansion on Cell Spreading In response to contact with the substrate , NIH 3T3 fibro - blasts adhere to the surface , and then spread out to ac - quire a flattened morphology ( Fig . 1 a ) . This process of cell adhesion and spreading is mediated by integrins and involves complex dynamic rearrangements of the actin cy - toskeleton . This dynamic process is coordinated and con - trolled by the Arp2 / 3 protein complex and intracellular signaling pathways ( for reviews see Hartwig et al . , 1996 ; Welch et al . , 1997 ) . How specific signaling pathways regu - late the cytoskeleton during cell spreading is , however , poorly understood . To test whether perturbation of the membrane bilayer affects cell spreading , we expanded the membrane bilayer by addition of the detergent , de - oxycholic acid , and measured the cell spreading rate . Fig . 1 ( a and b ) show video - enhanced DIC images of cells spread in the absence and presence of deoxycholic acid . Quantification of cell spreading after 15 and 30 min shows more than a twofold increase in cell spreading af - ter deoxycholic acid treatment ( Fig . 1 c ) . These results suggest that the cell spreading rate is increased by the membrane bilayer expansion , i . e . , by reduction in the membrane tension . Cells spread by putting out extensions that contact the surface , forming adhesions , and then exert tension to fur - ther draw cytoplasm outward . This process is reminis - cent of the lamellipodial extensions , and this similarity prompted us to investigate the role of membrane tension in lamellipodial extension of spread cells . Characterization of Lamellipodial Extension Lamellipodial extension in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts is rela - tively uniform in rate and localized to a small fraction of the cell edge . These fibroblasts are spread and move rela - tively slowly across the substratum . Many cells have a tri - gonal shape with a broad lamellipodium at the leading edge and a pointed trailing tail . The leading edge normally un - dergoes cycles of extension and retraction . When the edge is extending , it moves forward continuously as the slope of the edge position versus time plot shows ( Fig . 2 d ) . The lamellipodial extension rate is determined from the slope of the plot ( 5 m m / min in this case ) and it is in quantitative agreement with actin polymerization rate in lamellipodia and the rate measured in similar fibroblasts ( Felder and Elson , 1990 ) . The average interval for extension is 1 – 2 min and , during that period , the edge moves continuously for - ward for a distance of 5 – 10 microns . We selected events where the period of extension was . 30 s . These observa - tions are consistent with the idea that the process of lamel - lipodial extension is a stochastic process presumably cata - lyzed by an activated protein complex in the lamellipodial region . Figure 1 . Effect of membrane expand - ing reagent , deoxycholate , on cell spreading . After brief trypsinization , NIH 3T3 cells were plated on acid - washed glass coverslips either without or with 0 . 4 mM of deoxycholate added to the medium . Coverslips were washed and fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde after 15 or 30 min . Adherent cells were counted by visual examination with DIC microscopy ( see micrographs of cell spreading without [ a ] or with [ b ] deoxycholate ) , and the relative num - ber of spread cells with respect to the control cells was calculated ( c ) rep - resent the average of three indepen - dent experiments , in each of which . 500 cells were counted ) . Error bars are SEM . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 148 , 2000 130 Reagents that Increase Membrane Area Increase Lamellipodial Extension In other studies , we noted that the addition of sublytic concentrations of detergent to cells caused the dramatic extension of lamellipodia . When 0 . 4 mM of deoxycholate was added to NIH 3T3 cells , the rate of extension of lamel - lipodia increased from 5 . 0 to 7 . 2 m m / min . Although the rate of extension was increased , the frequency and dura - tion of the extension process were not changed in the lead - ing edge of the cell . However , in regions away from the leading edge there was a threefold higher probability of extension in the presence of detergent ( Fig . 2 f ) . Extension was observed at many new sites ( Fig . 2 c , arrow ) , indicat - ing that the addition of detergent initiated extension . To quantify this phenomenon , we measured the frequency of lamellipodial extension from 10 min before until 10 min after addition of deoxycholate , ( Fig . 2 f , top ) . In each minute , the number of extending lamellae of the cell was counted , normalized to the total number of extending lamellae before addition of deoxycholate , and averaged Figure 2 . Lamellipodial exten - sion in NIH 3T3 cells . ( a ) Photo - micrograph of an NIH 3T3 cell observed during the initial for - mation of a lamellipodial pro - trusion . ( b ) The same cell 1 min after solution was rapidly ex - changed with a solution contain - ing 0 . 4 mM deoxycholic acid . ( c ) The cell after 2 min in the de - oxycholate solution . For com - parison , the outline represents the initial cell contour from a . Bar , 10 m m . ( d ) Lamellipodial extension rates were averaged over 40 – 60 s by fitting a straight line to a plot of distance moved versus time , with the position measured every 3 s . The dis - tance moved was defined as the distance from the initial position of the lamellipodial edge at the beginning of extension ( inset ) . For all cells shown , the rate re - mained roughly constant over the period of observation ( r 2 . 0 . 96 for every fitted line ) . ( e ) Average lamellipodial extension rate in control medium , the presence of 0 . 4 mM deoxycho - late , 1 % ethanol , or 0 . 1 mM DiA - treated cells . Error bars show SEM for three to five mea - surements for 10 – 12 cells . ( f ) The number of lamellipodial extensions was monitored for 10 min before the addition ( at time zero ) and 10 min after the addition of deoxycholate ( top ) . In each minute , the number of lamellipodial extensions ( extend - ing for longer than 25 s ) was counted , normalized to total number of lamellipodial ex - tensions during the 10 min be - fore the addition of deoxycho - late , and averaged for at least 20 cells . The bottom represents the control experiment , where at time zero only fresh me - dium was added . Error bars rep - resent SEM . Raucher et al . Cell Spreading , Lamellipodial Extension , and Membrane Tension 131 for at least 20 cells . As shown in Fig . 2 f , there is a dramatic increase in the number of lamellipodial extensions imme - diately after addition of deoxycholate . To assure that this increase is not an artifact caused simply by the addition of fresh medium , we quantified extension before and after buffer addition . As shown in Fig . 2 f ( bottom ) , the addition of fresh media without deoxycholate did not cause any sig - nificant change in the number of lamellipodial extensions . These results indicate that in the presence of the mem - brane expansion reagent , deoxycholate , both the rate of extension of membranes and the probability of extension were increased . Because deoxycholate was an anionic detergent and may have had unusual properties , we tested the effect of a neutral alcohol and a hydrophobic lipid label on motility as well . Addition of ethanol ( 1 % ) or the fluorescent mem - brane marker DiA , 4 - 4 ( 4 - ( didecylamino ) styryl ) - N - methyl - pyridiniumiodide ( 4 - Di - 10 - ASP ) ( DiA ) ( 0 . 1 mM ) in - creased the lamellipodial extension rate to 7 . 7 m m / min and 6 . 3 m m / min , respectively ( Fig . 2 e ) . In both of those cases , there was also a dramatic increase in the frequency of membrane extension in the cells . Thus , both the initiation of extension and the rate of extension are increased by the addition of a variety of compounds that intercalate into the plasma membrane . Membrane Tension Measurements One explanation for the increase in the extension rate is that the amphiphilic compounds decreased the resistance to extension by decreasing membrane tension . We have estimated membrane tension by measuring the tether force with the laser tweezers . Latex beads coated with rat IgG ( Dai and Sheetz , 1995b ) were attached to the plasma membrane by holding them on the membrane surface and tethers were formed by pulling on the beads with the laser tweezers ( Fig . 3 a ) . Tethers were always fluid , and when the beads were released , the tethers retracted in , 0 . 1 s . The force needed to hold the tether at a constant length was measured from the displacement of the bead in the la - ser trap ( Dai and Sheetz , 1995b ) ( Fig . 3 b ) . We found that tether force was constant in the population of NIH 3T3 cells at 7 . 0 6 0 . 5 pN ( Fig . 3 c ) . When 0 . 4 mM deoxycholate was added , tether force was decreased to 3 . 5 6 0 . 5 pN . In the presence of 1 % ethanol or 0 . 1 mM DiA , tether force decreased to 5 . 1 6 0 . 4 pN and 5 . 5 6 0 . 5 pN , respectively . Thus , the amphiphilic compounds decrease membrane tension , as estimated from tether force measurements . Lamellipodial Extension and Membrane Tension after Incubation with Fluorescent Phospholipids Detergents and solvents intercalate into a membrane bi - layer , alter the membrane’s stable composition , expand the membrane area and , consequently , decrease mem - brane tension . A similar approach to expand the mem - brane area and decrease membrane tension involves the use of fluorescent lipid analogues . Fluorescent lipid ana - logues can be readily integrated into the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane bilayer of intact cells by sponta - neous monomeric lipid transfer . Thus , to further test whether the lamellipodial extension rate is dependent on membrane tension , we have also used fluorescent lipid an - alogues to expand the membrane area and decrease the membrane tension . When NIH 3T3 fibroblasts are incu - bated with 5 mM of a Bodipy - labeled sphingomyelin ana - logue , C 5 - DMB - SM , and washed , a continuous plasma membrane fluorescence was observed ( Fig . 4 a ) . A similar plasma membrane staining pattern was observed after cells were incubated with an FITC - phosphatidylethanola - mine analogue , FITC - PL ( Fig . 4 b ) , or a phosphatidylcho - line analogue , b - DPH - HPC ( Fig . 4 c ) . Whereas incorpora - tion of C 5 - DMB - SM into membrane bilayers resulted in a 15 % decrease in tether force with respect to control cells , Figure 3 . Tether force measurements . ( a ) Video - enhanced DIC micrograph of membrane tension measurement . Polysty - rene beads were coated with mouse IgG and attached to the plasma membrane by holding them on the membrane surface , and tethers ( denoted by arrow ) were formed by pulling on the beads with the laser tweezers . ( b ) Displacement of the bead from the center of the laser trap was measured during tether formation . From calibration of the tweezers ( Kuo and Sheetz , 1993 ) displacement may be con - verted to the tether force ( force needed to hold the tether at a constant length ) . ( c ) Average tether force in control cells , 0 . 4 mM deoxycholate , 1 % ethanol , or 0 . 1 mM DiA - treated cells . Error bars show SEM for 12 – 16 cells from two to five measure - ments . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 148 , 2000 132 FITC - PL or b - DPH - HPC phospholipids reduced the tether force z 25 % ( Fig . 4 d ) . As shown in Fig . 4 d , the lamellipodial extension rate increased by 30 % in C 5 - DMB - SM – treated cells and . 40 % in FITC - PL or b - DPH - HPC – labeled cells , with respect to control cells . In sum - mary , fluorescent lipid incorporation induced a decrease in membrane tension , which was accompanied by an in - crease in the lamellipodial extension rate . The percentage of change in both the extension rate and membrane ten - sion was proportionally the same for all phospholipids and deoxycholate . With ethanol , there was a greater change in the extension rate than expected for the change in tension . Of the compounds used , ethanol was unusual because it was an uncharged alcohol that would readily cross the membrane . With all of the charged compounds that slowly cross the membrane , there was a proportional change in the tension and extension rate . Deoxycholic Acid Titration To further explore the correlation between tether force and extension rate , we measured the changes in both pa - rameters as a function of deoxycholic acid concentration ( Fig . 5 ) . There was an almost linear decrease in the tether force with increasing deoxycholic acid concentration , and ( Fig . 5 b ) in parallel , an increase in the lamellipodial ex - tension rate ( Fig . 5 a ) . If there is an inverse dependence of the lamellipodial extension rate on the membrane tension , then the lamelli - podial extension rate should continuously increase with a decrease in the membrane tension . Indeed , when the lamellipodial extension rate was plotted versus the tether force for different concentrations of deoxycholate acid , 0 . 1 mM fluorescent dye DiA , fluorescent phospholipids from Fig . 4 and hypotonic solution represented in Fig . 6 , an in - verse relationship was readily apparent ( Fig . 5 c ) . Thus , different membrane expanding reagents cause a propor - tional change in both tension and extension rate . Hypotonic Swelling Increases Membrane Tension and Decreases the Lamellipodial Extension Rate In the experiments above , we measured the effect of mem - brane tension reduction on the lamellipodial extension rate . We wanted to test if increasing membrane tension by hypotonic swelling would decrease the lamellipodial ex - tension rate . In snail neurons , hypotonic swelling caused filopodia and lamellipodia to retract ( Dai et al . , 1998 ) . Figure 4 . Tether force and lamellipo - dial extension rate after incorporation of fluorescent phospholipids into the plasma membrane . Fluorescence mi - crographs of NIH 3T3 fibroblasts plasma membrane fluorescence after incubation with the following : ( a ) C 5 - DMB - SM ; ( b ) FITC - PL ; and ( c ) Phos - phatidylcholine analogue ( b - DPH - HPC ) . ( d ) Average relative tether force and average relative lamellipo - dial extension rate in NIH 3T3 fibro - blasts after the incubation with various fluorescent phospholipids . Figure 5 . Lamellipodial extension rates and tether force are in - versely proportional . ( a ) Tether force after application of in - creasing concentration of deoxycholate . ( b ) Lamellipodial exten - sion rates in increasing concentrations of deoxycholate . ( c ) Lamellipodial extension rates versus tether force for various con - centrations of deoxycholate , 0 . 1 mM fluorescent dye DiA , fluo - rescent phospholipids from Fig . 4 , and hypotonic solution repre - sented in Fig . 6 . Raucher et al . Cell Spreading , Lamellipodial Extension , and Membrane Tension 133 When 3T3 cells were placed in hypotonic media , there was a dramatic increase in the tether force ( Fig . 6 a ) and about a 15 % decrease in the lamellipodial extension rate ( Fig . 6 b ) . Interestingly , as shown in Fig . 6 , this decrease in the lamellipodial extension rate may be reversed by reducing the membrane tension with 0 . 4 mM deoxycholate . In sum - mary , whereas a decrease in membrane tension by am - phiphilic compounds and fluorescent phospholipids is ac - companied by an increase in the lamellipodial extension rate , an increase in membrane tension in hypotonic solu - tion is accompanied by a decrease in the lamellipodial ex - tension rate . These results indicate that there is an inverse relationship between the membrane tension and the la - mellipodial extension rate . Lamellipodial Extension Rate and Tether Force in PDGF - activated Cells Dramatic changes in surface morphology such as out - growth of new membrane lamellae and filopodia are often seen in response to growth hormones . These effects seem to reflect changes in the actin cytoskeleton . From our previous studies , we found that apparent membrane ten - sion is dependent on membrane – cytoskeleton attachment through phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - biphosphate ( PIP 2 ) – cytoskeleton interaction ( Raucher et al . , 1999 ) . Thus , to further examine the role of membrane tension in lamelli - podial protrusion , we measured the tether force and the lamellipodial extension rate during PDGF activation . As shown in Fig . 7 , 5 min after addition of PDGF , the lamelli - podial extension rate increased 40 % with respect to con - trol cells , whereas the membrane tension decreased 15 % with respect to controls . The increase in extension rate was greater than expected for the level of decrease in mem - brane tension based upon the changes with lipids or deter - gents . The lamellipodial extension rate further increased when PDGF was combined with deoxycholic acid ( z 65 % with respect to the control cells ) . Since deoxycholic acid it - self caused only a 50 % increase in the lamellipodial exten - sion rate , it is very likely that the underlying mechanisms of lamellipodial extension mediated by deoxycholic acid and PDGF are independent . One possible explanation for the disproportionately high activation of motility com - pared with the change in apparent membrane tension is that the effect of PDGF is localized to regions of lamelli - podial extension , where it is much more pronounced than the global effect on membrane tension . If the PDGF effect was mediated by a membrane - associated enzyme , then the change could be localized . Binding of PDGF to the PDGF receptor activates phos - pholipase C . Therefore , to further explore if signal trans - duction processes can directly modulate membrane ten - sion and , consequently , changes in lamellipodial extension rate , we have used U73122 , an inhibitor of phospholipase C . As shown in Fig . 7 c , the increase in the lamellipodial extension rate caused by PDGF is blocked by U73122 . In - hibition of phospholipase C during PDGF stimuli also in - creases membrane tension ( Fig . 7 d ) , suggesting that the activation of phospholipase C is an important step in the control of membrane tension and , consequently , lamelli - podial extension rate . Discussion In previous models of the extension process , the plasma membrane was assumed to inhibit actin polymerization . How that inhibition could be quantified was not clear . We provide here evidence that the membrane tension is inhib - iting extension and there is an inverse relationship be - tween tension and extension rate . Further and perhaps surprisingly , a rapid drop in membrane tension initiates the generation of new lamellipodial extensions , as sche - matically represented in Fig . 8 a . Hormonal activation of motility is accompanied by a decrease in membrane ten - sion , and motility can be further increased by expansion of the plasma membrane by amphiphilic compounds ( Fig . 8 b ) . These findings provide a means for quantitating the in - hibition of lamellipodial extension by membrane tension , and indicate that tension changes can stimulate the bio - chemical process underlying extension . That membrane tension may regulate the actin polymer - ization rate during lamellipodial extension is consistent with Brownian - ratchet models ( Peskin et al . , 1993 ) . The Brownian - ratchet model is a simple explanation for lamel - lipodial protrusion in which the fluid membrane bilayer at the leading edge , once free from constraints , fluctuates as a result of Brownian motion . Each time the membrane is displaced a distance sufficient to permit addition of an ac - tin monomer , the return of the membrane to its original position is prevented . As the filaments polymerize , their Brownian motion impinges on the cytoplasmic surface of the plasma membrane and exerts a pressure , deforming the membrane . Since the extent of deformation depends Figure 6 . Lamellipodial extension rates and tether force mea - surements in hypotonic media . ( a ) Tether force measured after 3 min in hypotonic solution ( 30 % dH 2 O ) , after the hypotonic solu - tion was combined with 0 . 4 mM deoxycholic acid , or after 0 . 4 mM deoxycholic acid alone . ( b ) Lamellipodial extension rates mea - sured under same conditions as in a . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 148 , 2000 134 on the resistance tension in the membrane , lowering the membrane tension would enhance the rate of actin po - lymerization and , consequently , lamellipodial extension rate . This concept is experimentally demonstrated in our study . We have shown that a decrease in membrane ten - sion by amphiphilic compounds and fluorescent phospho - lipids is accompanied by an increase in the lamellipodial extension rate . Furthermore , a membrane tension in - crease , induced by a hypotonic solution , was accompanied by a decrease in the lamellipodial extension rate . These data suggest an important role for membrane tension in regulation of the lamellipodial extension rate . The concept that physical parameters may stimulate al - terations in cellular biochemistry and regulate many cellu - lar functions , such as cell motility , has been confirmed ex - perimentally many times ( Watson , 1991 ; Khan and Sheetz , 1997 ) . Kolega ( 1986 ) found that stretching an epithelial cell causes it to withdraw its lateral protrusions , and that suppression of spreading activity , at least in the case of fi - broblasts and nerve axons , is reversed upon release of ten - sion . Similarly , in certain growth cones and cells , the poly - merization of actin into filopodia - like processes can be induced by the physical separation of the membrane from the cytoskeleton ( Sheetz et al . , 1992 ) . Using the laser tweezers to pull on membrane - attached latex beads , cylin - ders of membrane were formed that became rigid and be - haved like filopodia . This implies that the membrane has an inhibitory role in protrusion formation and that the normal extension process may be limited by membrane tension . Quantitative Relationship between Tension and Extension Rate Previous models of the extension process have suggested that the plasma membrane resists actin polymerization , Figure 7 . Tether force and lamellipodial extension rate after PDGF activation . ( a ) Lamellipodial extension rates measured after 5 min in 40 ng / ml PDGF , after PDGF was combined with 0 . 4 mM deoxycholic acid , and after 0 . 4 mM deoxycholic acid treatment alone . ( b ) Tether force measured under same conditions as in a . ( c ) Lamellipodial extension rates measured after 5 min in 40 ng / ml PDGF , after PDGF was combined with 1 m m U73122 , and after 1 m m U73122 treatment alone . ( d ) Tether force measured under same conditions as in c . Figure 8 . PDGF and membrane expanding reagents initiate the generation of new lamellipodial extensions and stimulate lamelli - podial extension rates . ( a ) A rapid drop in membrane tension caused by PDGF or membrane expanding reagents initiates the generation of new lamellipodial extensions . ( b ) There is an in - verse relationship between tension and extension rate , and ten - sion changes caused by PDGF , or membrane expanding re - agents , can stimulate the biochemical processes underlying extension , such as actin polymerization . Raucher et al . Cell Spreading , Lamellipodial Extension , and Membrane Tension 135 implying that membrane tension may have a direct role in regulating the lamellipodial extension rate . These mea - surements of tether force show that tether force is a tightly regulated parameter in motile cells that is inversely corre - lated with the lamellipodial extension rate . From the tether force , we can estimate membrane tension using the membrane bending stiffness measured in other systems , and the estimated membrane tension is on the order of 0 . 03 mN / m . This apparent tension includes the mem - brane – cytoskeleton adhesion term , which is the major fac - tor in nonspherical cells . This value is on the same order of magnitude as assumed by Mogliner and Oster ( 1996 ) and , therefore , allows those values to be used . However , the basis given for choosing that number comes from mono - layer surface pressure studies in vitro and not from mea - surements of cell membrane tension . Recent studies provide a theoretical basis for modeling the growth of the actin filaments by a simple Brownian - ratchet mechanism versus a motor driven mechanism . Quantitative analysis of the relationship between the ex - tension rate and the force exerted on the filament ends could be used to differentiate between some motor and pure ratchet mechanisms . The linear inverse relationship given by Fig . 5 c is most consistent with the more linear motor models . However , the exact force exerted by the membrane is not known and the effects of membrane – cytoskeleton attachment on the extension process are un - known . Further , multiple assumptions were made in the estimates of the membrane tension . An additional factor that has not been considered is the balance of pressures in the internal and external bilayer halves or the bilayer cou - ple balance ( Sheetz and Singer , 1974 ) , which would clearly be different for the permeant ethanol and impermeable phospholipids . More work is needed to define the changes in the membrane – cytoskeleton adhesion and in - plane ten - sion terms with the addition of various agents . Evidence for Mechanical Stimulation of Extension These studies provide additional evidence that a mechani - cal signal can stimulate extension . The initial observations that extension is stimulated by the release of fibroblast tails could have several different interpretations ( Chen , 1981 ) . Since many different amphiphilic compounds stim - ulate extension , it is unlikely that a common biochemical pathway is directly activated by all the compounds and tail release . Thus , we suggest that the drop in membrane ten - sion with tail release and detergent or lipid addition stimu - lates processes by a physical alteration of the rate - limiting step in lamellipodial extension . Because the tether force is a tightly regulated parameter in a given cell population , there must be enzymatic systems that sense and adjust the tension , and it is only necessary that such a sensor be cou - pled to motility . A possible reason for increased extension with the lower membrane tension is that extension of lamellipodia would serve to increase the cell surface area for a given volume and would help to increase the mem - brane tension to the normal value . While it is evident that membrane tension is an ideal candidate to play a mechanical role in regulating lamelli - podial protrusions , the molecular mechanisms involved in regulating membrane tension are , however , unclear . One hypothesis is that membrane tension is regulated by mem - brane dynamics , i . e . , the balance of exocytosis of mem - brane from an intracellular reservoir and endocytosis of plasma membrane . Another hypothesis is that membrane – cytoskeleton adhesion controls the tension and protrusion locally . A third hypothesis is that the membrane is added locally to stimulate extension . This last hypothesis arose from the observation of rearward movement of small par - ticles attached at the leading edge of the migrating cells over the dorsal surface of the cell ( Abercrombie et al . , 1970 ) and was supported by the observation that newly synthesized viral glycoproteins in cells are preferentially inserted into the leading portion of the plasma membrane ( Bergman et al . , 1983 ) . However , no net flow of mem - brane has been found in the plasma membranes of rapidly migrating keratocytes or macrophages ( Kucik et al . , 1989 ; Lee et al . , 1990 ) . In addition , the membrane can be rapidly moved across the cell surface obviating the need for local addition ( Dai and Sheetz , 1995a ; Hochmuth et al . , 1996 ) . Thus , we suggest that local addition of membrane is not a significant factor in lamellipodial extension . There is evidence that the two other mechanisms can be important . In the case of membrane dynamics , disruption of the Golgi apparatus by Brefeldin A results in inhibition of vesicle transport to the cell surface ( Pelham , 1991 ; Klausner et al . , 1992 ; Bershadsky and Futerman , 1994 ) . If exocytosis is inhibited and endocytosis continues , then there should be an increase in membrane tension as we have observed ( preliminary data ) . The higher tension should inhibit lamellipodial activity as was observed . We observed here that signal transduction processes modulate membrane tension in parallel with an alteration in the lamellipodial extension rate . PDGF receptor - trig - gered signal transduction increases the lamellipodial ex - tension rate in correlation with a decrease in membrane tension . This response is blocked by the phospholipase C inhibitor , U73122 , suggesting that phospholipase C activa - tion may play an important role in regulating membrane tension and , consequently , lamellipodial extension rate . In the case of local control of membrane – cytoskeleton adhesion , there is evidence that the activation of chemo - tactic receptors can cause extension locally ( Mogilner and Oster , 1996 ) . In many cases , those signals are activating a lipase C to hydrolyze PIP 2 to inositol 1 , 4 , 5 - triphosphate and diacylglycerol . Loss of PIP 2 decreases membrane – cytoskeleton adhesion ( Raucher et al . , 1999 ) and conse - quently a local decrease in membrane – cytoskeleton adhe - sion would increase lamellipodial extension rate . This is supported with observation that the plasma membrane of cells conforms to the shape of the cortical cytoskeleton , implying that membrane tension is largely determined by adhesion energy between the plasma membrane and the cytoskeleton . Therefore , cytoskeletal – membrane interac - tions may be the major factor inhibiting the formation and retraction of filopodia , lamellipodia , neurites , and other membrane processes in response to chemoattractants and other stimuli . Other Examples of Correlation between Extension and Membrane Tension There are many other examples where a correlation exists The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 148 , 2000 136 between extension and membrane tension . Stimulation of secretion of RBL cells results in a stimulation of actin - based motility that appears as the extension of thin veils of actin on the upper surface of the cells . Secretion in RBL cells is coupled with a large decrease in the tether force that is associated with an increase in the endocytosis rate ( Dai et al . , 1997 ) . The assembly of actin in the veils is anal - ogous to the extension of lamellipodia , and provides evi - dence that the drop in membrane tension may contribute to the burst of motile activity after secretion . There are clearly other signaling pathways coupled with secretion , but the physical changes could favor such activity . Entry and exit from mitosis have been shown to correlate with an inhibition of and stimulation of motility , respectively . As cells enter mitosis , there is a dramatic increase in mem - brane tension that will cause cell rounding and will block motility ( Raucher and Sheetz , 1999 ) . Blocking actin - based motility may be particularly useful to the cell to enable it to organize the spindle for mitosis and to organize for cy - tokinesis . During cytokinesis there is a drop in the appar - ent membrane tension that increases cell motility and en - ables the cleavage furrow to form . Regardless of the actual mechanism that is used by the cell to regulate apparent membrane tension , this study clearly demonstrates that the lamellipodial extension rate correlates inversely with membrane tension as measured by tether force . The fact that membrane tension in these cells is determined by the membrane – cytoskeleton adhe - sion means that factors that alter adhesion can alter motil - ity , such as PIP 2 , as we suggest here . Modulation of the lamellipodial extension rate by membrane tension indi - cates that the cellular plasma membrane is not simply an oil film that conforms to the cytoskeleton . However , with its inelastic physical properties , it also has a mechanical role in controlling cell protrusions and guiding directional growth and the underlying actin network . This model can account for the regulation of the lamellipodial extension rate and suggests simple treatments to modulate the level and rate of extension . Submitted : 15 July 1999 Revised : 1 December 1999 Accepted : 1 December 1999 References Abercrombie , M . , J . E . Heaysman , and S . M . Pegrum . 1970 . The locomotion of fibroblasts in culture . 3 . Movements of particles on the dorsal surface of the leading lamella . Exp . Cell Res . 62 : 389 – 398 . Bergman , J . E . , A . Kupfer , and S . J . Singer . 1983 . Membrane insertion and at the leading edge of motile fibroblasts . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 80 : 1367 – 1371 . Bershadsky , A . D . , and A . H . Futerman . 1994 . Disruption of the Golgi apparatus by brefeldin A blocks cell polarization and inhibits directed cell migration . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 91 : 5686 – 5689 . Chen , W . T . 1981 . Mechanism of retraction of the trailing edge during fibroblast movement . J . Cell Biol . 90 : 187 – 200 . Condeelis , J . 1993 . Life at the leading edge : the formation of cell protrusions . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 9 : 411 – 444 . Choquet , D . , D . P . Felsenfeld , and M . P . Sheetz . 1997 . Extracellular matrix rigid - ity causes strengthening of integrin - cytoskeleton linkages . Cell . 88 : 39 – 48 . Dai , J . , and M . P . Sheetz . 1995a . Axon membrane flows from the growth cone to the cell body . Cell . 83 : 693 – 701 . Dai , J . , and M . P . Sheetz . 1995b . Mechanical properties of neuronal growth cone membranes studied by tether formation with laser optical tweezers . Biophys . J . 68 : 988 – 996 . Dai , J . , and M . P . Sheetz . 1999 . Membrane tethers formation from blebbing cells . Biophys . J . 77 : 3363 – 3370 . Dai , J . , H . P . Ting - Beall , and M . P . Sheetz . 1997 . The secretion - coupled endocy - tosis correlates with membrane tension changes in RBL 2H3 cells . Gen . Physiol . 110 : 1 – 10 . Dai , J . , M . P . Sheetz , X . Wan , and C . E . Morris . 1998 . Membrane tension in swelling and shrinking molluscan neurons . J . Neurosci . 18 : 6681 – 6692 . Felder , S . , and E . L . Elson . 1990 . Mechanics of fibroblast locomotion : quantita - tive analysis of forces and motions at the leading lamellas of fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 2513 – 2526 . Felsenfeld , D . P . , P . L . Schwartzberg , A . Venegas , R . Tse , and M . P . Sheetz . 1999 . Selective regulation of integrin—cytoskeleton interactions by the tyrosine kinase Src . Nat . Cell . Biol . 1 : 200 – 206 . Hartwig , J . H . , S . Kung , T . Kovacsovics , P . A . Janmey , L . C . Cantley , T . P . Stossel , and A . Toker . 1996 . D3 phosphoinositides and outside - in integrin signaling by glycoprotein IIb - IIIa mediate platelet actin assembly and filopodial extension induced by phorbol 12 - myristate 13 - acetate . J . Biol . Chem . 271 : 32986 - 32993 . Heidemann , S . R . , and R . E . Buxbaum . 1998 . Cell crawling : first the motor , now the transmission . J . Cell Biol . 141 : 1 – 4 . Heldin , C . H . 1997 . Simultaneous induction of stimulatory and inhibitory signals by PDGF . FEBS ( Fed . Eur . Biochem . Soc . ) Lett . 410 : 17 – 21 . Hochmuth , F . M . , J . Y . Shao , J . Dai , and M . P . Sheetz . 1996 . Deformation and flow of membrane into tethers extracted from neuronal growth cones . Bio - phys . J . 70 : 358 – 369 . Khan , S . , and M . P . Sheetz . 1997 . Force effects on biochemical kinetics . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 66 : 785 – 805 . Klausner , R . D . , J . G . Donaldson , and J . Lippincott - Schwartz . 1992 . Brefeldin A : insights into the control of membrane traffic and organelle structure . J . Cell Biol . 116 : 1071 – 1080 . Kolega , J . 1986 . Effects of mechanical tension on protrusive activity and mi - crofilament and intermediate filament organization in an epidermal epithe - lium moving in culture . J . Cell Biol . 102 : 1400 – 1411 . Kucik , D . F . , E . L . Elson , and M . P . Sheetz . 1989 . Forward transport of glycopro - teins on leading lamellipodia in locomoting cells . Nature . 340 : 315 – 317 . Kuo , S . C . , and M . P . Sheetz . 1993 . Force of single kinesin molecules measured with optical tweezers . Science . 260 : 232 – 234 . Lee , J . , M . Gustafsson , K . E . Magnusson , and K . Jacobson . 1990 . The direction of membrane lipid flow in locomoting polymorphonuclear leukocytes . Sci - ence . 24 7 : 1229 – 1233 . Lombardi , L . , D . Ballinari , I . Bongarzone , M . Migliari , P . Mondellini , C . Tra - versari , and S . Modina . 1990 . Ultrastructural cytoskeleton alterations and modification of actin expression in the NIH / 3T3 cell line after transforma - tion with Ha - ras - activated oncogene . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 15 : 220 – 229 . Mogilner , A . , and G . Oster . 1996 . Cell motility driven by actin polymerization . Biophys . J . 71 : 3030 – 3045 . Mullins , R . D . , J . A . Heuser , and T . D . Pollard . 1998 . The interaction of Arp2 / 3 complex with actin : nucleation , high affinity pointed end capping , and for - mation of branching networks of filaments . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 95 : 6181 – 6189 . Oster , G . 1988 . Biophysics of the leading lamella . Cell . Motil . Cytoskeleton 10 : 164 – 171 . Pelham , H . R . 1991 . Recycling of proteins between the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi complex . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 3 : 585 – 591 . Peskin , C . S . , G . M . Odell , and G . F . Oster . 1993 . Cellular motions and thermal functions : the Brownian ratchet . Biophys . J . 65 : 316 – 324 . Raucher , D . , and M . P . Sheetz . 1999 . Membrane expansion increases endocyto - sis rate during mitosis . J . Cell Biol . 144 : 497 – 506 . Raucher , D . , T . Stauffer , W . Chen , K . Shen , S . Guo , Y . D . York , M . P . Sheetz , and T . Meyer . 1999 . Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate functions as a second messenger that regulates cytoskeletal - plasma membrane adhesion . Cell . In press . Seeman , P . 1972 . The membrane actions of anesthetics and tranquilizers . Phar - macol . Rev . 24 : 583 – 655 . Sheetz , M . P . , and S . J . Singer . 1974 . Biological membranes as bilayer couples . A molecular mechanism of drug - erythrocyte interactions . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 71 : 4457 – 4461 . Sheetz , M . P . , and J . Dai . 1996 . Modulation of membrane dynamics and cell mo - tility by membrane tension . Trends Cell Biol . 6 : 85 – 89 . Sheetz , M . P . , D . B . Wayne , and A . L . Pearlman . 1992 . Extension of filopodia by motor - dependent actin assembly . Cell . Motil . Cytoskeleton . 22 : 160 – 169 . Stossel , T . P . 1993 . On the crawling animal cells . Science . 260 : 1086 – 1094 . Symons , M . H . , and T . J . Mitchison . 1991 . Control of actin polymerization in live and permeabilized fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 114 : 503 – 513 . Theriot , J . A . 1997 . Accelerating on a treadmill : ADF / cofilin promotes rapid ac - tin filament turnover in the dynamic cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 136 : 1165 – 1168 . Vasiliev , J . M . 1991 . Polarization of pseudopodial activities : cytoskeletal mecha - nisms . J . Cell Sci . 98 : 1 – 4 . Watson , P . A . 1991 . Function follows form : generation of intracellular signals by cell deformation . FASEB ( Fed . Am . Soc . Exp . Biol . ) J . 5 : 2013 – 2019 . Weber , I . , E . Wallraff , R . Albrecht , and G . J . Gerisch . 1995 . Motility and sub - stratum adhesion of Dictyostelium wild - type and cytoskeletal mutant cells : a study by RICM / bright - field double - view image analysis . Cell Sci . 108 : 1519 – 1530 . Welch , M . D . , A . H . DePace , S . Verma , A . Iwamatsu , and T . J . Mitchison . 1997 . The human Arp2 / 3 complex is composed of evolutionarily conserved sub - units and is localized to cellular regions of dynamic actin filament assembly . J . Cell . Biol . 138 : 375 – 384 . Welch , M . D . , J . Rosenblatt , J . Skoble , D . A . Portnoy , and T . J . Mitchison . 1998 . Interaction of human Arp2 / 3 complex and the Listeria monocytogenes ActA protein in actin filament nucleation . Science . 281 : 105 – 108 .