Accelerating Innovation Through Analogy Mining Tom Hope 1 , Joel Chan 2 , Aniket Kittur 2 and Dafna Shahaf 1 1 The Hebrew University of Jerusalem 2 Carnegie Mellon University tom . hope @ mail . huji . ac . il , joelchan @ umd . edu , nkittur @ cs . cmu . edu , dshahaf @ cs . huji . ac . il Abstract The availability of large idea repositories ( e . g . , patents ) could signiﬁcantly accelerate innovation and discovery by providing people inspiration from solutions to analogous problems . However , ﬁnd - ing useful analogies in these large , messy , real - world repositories remains a persistent challenge for both humans and computers . Previous ap - proaches include costly hand - created databases that do not scale , or machine - learning similarity met - rics that struggle to account for structural similar - ity , which is central to analogy . In this paper 1 we explore the viability and value of learning sim - ple structural representations . Our approach com - bines crowdsourcing and recurrent neural networks to extract purpose and mechanism vector represen - tations from product descriptions . We demonstrate that these learned vectors allow us to ﬁnd analo - gies with higher precision and recall than tradi - tional methods . In an ideation experiment , analo - gies retrieved by our models signiﬁcantly increased people’s likelihood of generating creative ideas . 1 Introduction The ability to ﬁnd useful analogies is critical to driving in - novation in a variety of domains . Many important discov - eries in science were driven by analogies : for example , an analogy between bacteria and slot machines helped Salvador Luria advance the theory of bacterial mutation . An analogy to a bicycle allowed the Wright brothers to design a steer - able aircraft . Whether architecture , design , technology , art , or mathematics , the ability to ﬁnd and apply patterns from other domains is fundamental to human achievement [ Hesse , 1966 ; Markman and Loewenstein , 2010 ; Dahl and Moreau , 2002 ] . The explosion of available online data represents an un - precedented opportunity to ﬁnd new analogies and accelerate human progress across domains . The US Patent database has full text for more than 9 million patents . Millions of scientiﬁc papers and legal cases are searchable on the web . Websites like InnoCentive 2 , Quirky 3 and OpenIDEO 4 contain millions of ideas , problems and solutions . 1 See full version [ Hope et al . , 2017 ] 2 innocentive . com 3 quirky . com 4 OpenIDEO . com We believe these datasets form a treasure trove of analogies that can accelerate problem solving , innovation and discov - ery . In a striking recent example , a car mechanic invented a simple device to ease difﬁcult childbirths by drawing an anal - ogy to extracting a cork from a wine bottle , which he discov - ered in a YouTube video . We imagine a future in which peo - ple could search through data based on deep analogical simi - larity rather than simple keywords ; lawyers or legal scholars could ﬁnd legal precedents sharing similar systems of rela - tions to a contemporary case ; and product or service design - ers could mine myriad potential solutions to their problem . However , sifting through massive data sources to ﬁnd analogies poses a serious challenge for both humans and ma - chines . In humans , memory retrieval is highly sensitive to surface similarity , favoring near , within - domain analogs that share object attributes over far , structurally similar analogs that share object relations [ Gentner et al . , 1985 ; Holyoak and Thagard , 1996 ; Gentner et al . , 1993 ; Gick and Holyoak , 1983 ] . Analogical processing also incurs a heavy cognitive load , taxing working memory when even a few relations are required to be processed [ Halford et al . , 2005 ] . Finding analogies is challenging for machines as well , as it is based on having an understanding of the deep relational similarity between two entities that may be very different in terms of surface attributes [ Gentner , 1983 ] . Recent advances in data mining and information retrieval use vector represen - tations in order to calculate similarity measures [ Mikolov et al . , 2013 ; Deerwester et al . , 1990 ; Blei et al . , 2003 ] . These approaches excel at detecting surface similarity , but are often unable to detect similarity between documents whose word distributions are disparate . The problem is especially acute when the source and target domains are different ( e . g . , bacte - rial mutation and slot machines ) . In this paper , we are interested in automatically discover - ing analogies in large , unstructured data sets . In particular , we focus on a corpus of product innovations . There are two insights behind our approach that we believe may make this problem tractable despite its longstanding status as a “holy grail” in both cognitive science and AI . First , rather than try - ing to solve the problem of fully structured analogical reason - ing , we instead explore the idea that we can use weaker struc - tural representations that can be learned and reasoned with at scale ( in other words , there is a tradeoff between the ease of extraction of a structure and its expressivity ) . Speciﬁcally , we investigate the weaker structural representation of an idea’s Proceedings of the Twenty - Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence ( IJCAI - 18 ) 5274 purpose and mechanism as a way to ﬁnd useful analogies . The second insight is that advances in crowdsourcing have made it possible to harvest rich signals of analogical struc - ture that can help machine learning models learn in ways that would not be possible with existing datasets alone . Our approach uses the behavioral traces of crowd work - ers searching for analogies and identifying the purpose and mechanisms of ideas , then developing machine learning mod - els and similarity metrics suited for analogy mining . We demonstrate that our methods allow us to ﬁnd analogies with higher precision and recall than traditional information - retrieval methods . In a user study , we show that we can gener - ate far analogies that “inspire” participants to generate more innovative ideas than alternative baselines , increasing the rel - ative proportion of positively - rated ideas by at least 25 % . 2 Learning a Representation for Analogies 2 . 1 Motivation Much work in computation analogy has focused on fully structured data , often with logic - based representations . For example [ Falkenhainer et al . , 1989 ] , CAUSE ( GREATER - THAN [ TEMPERATURE ( coffee ) , TEMPERATURE ( ice - cube ) ] , FLOW ( coffee , ice - cube , heat , bar ) ) These representations , while very expressive , are notori - ously difﬁcult to obtain . In this section , our goal is to come up with a weaker representation that can be learned , while still being expressive enough to allow analogical mining . Analogies between product ideas are intricately related to their purpose and mechanism . Informally , a product’s pur - pose is “what it does , what it is used for” , and a product’s mechanism is “how it does it , how it works” . The importance of purpose and mechanism is theoretically rooted in early cognitive psychology work on schema induction , which de - ﬁne the core components of a schema as a goal and proposed solution to it [ Gick and Holyoak , 1983 ] . More recently , the practical value of deﬁning a problem schema as a purpose and mechanism has been demonstrated to have empirical beneﬁts in ﬁnding and using analogies to augment idea generation [ Yu et al . , 2016b ; 2016a ; 2014b ; 2014a ] . Separating an idea into purpose and mechanisms enables core analogical innovation processes . Assume ( for the mo - ment ) that we have for each product i two vectors , p i and m i , representing the product’s purpose and mechanism , respec - tively . Using this representation , we can apply rich queries to our corpus of products , such as : Same purpose , different mechanism . Given the cor - pus of all products P , a product i with ( normalized ) pur - pose and mechanism vectors p i ; m i , and distance metrics d p ( (cid:1) ; (cid:1) ) ; d m ( (cid:1) ; (cid:1) ) between purpose and mechanism vectors ( re - spectively ) , solve : argmin ~ i d p ( p i ; p ~ i ) s : t : d m ( m i ; m ~ i ) (cid:21) threshold ; ( 1 ) Same Mechanism , different purpose ( re - purposing ) . Solve : argmin ~ i d m ( m i ; m ~ i ) s : t : d p ( p i ; p ~ i ) (cid:21) threshold ( 2 ) Importantly , our dataset of product descriptions contains noisy texts , often written informally by non - professional peo - ple . In these texts product descriptions are often lacking de - tail or are ill - deﬁned . To automatically describe a product in Figure 1 : Collecting purpose , mechanism annotations . terms of a richer , formal functional model such as in engineer - ing research [ Hirtz et al . , 2002 ; Ookubo et al . , 2007 ] would require an inordinate amount of meticulous data annotation and collection by professional engineers . 2 . 2 Data Innovation Corpus . We test our approach with a corpus of product descriptions from Quirky . com , an online crowd - sourced product innovation website . Quirky is representa - tive of the kinds of datasets we are interested in because it is large ( at the time of writing , it hosts upwards of 10 , 000 prod - uct ideas , of which our corpus included 8500 ) , unstructured ( ideas are described in natural language ) , and covers a variety of domains which makes cross - domain analogies possible . Collecting Purpose and Mechanism Data . We needed to collect analogy - speciﬁc data to train our model . We aim to develop a lightweight task that avoids complex structured representations , so we can scale up the collection of annota - tions through the use of crowdsourcing [ Kittur et al . , 2008 ] . We show Amazon Mechanical Turk ( AMT ) crowd workers a product description , asking them to annotate the parts of the text related to the purposes and mechanisms of the product . We frame the problem in simple terms , guiding workers to look for chunks of text talking about “what the product does , what it is good for” ( purposes ) , and “how it works , what are its components” ( mechanisms ) . See Figure 1 . 2 . 3 Method Extracting Purpose and Mechanism vectors In this section , we describe our approach to learning to extract purpose and mechanism product representations . We begin with a set of N training product texts X N = f x 1 ; x 2 ; : : : ; x N g , where each x i is a variable - length se - quence of tokens ( x 1 i ; x 2 i ; : : : ; x Ti ) . For each document x i , we collect a set of K purpose annotations and K mechanism annotations , where K is the number of workers who anno - tate each document . We deﬁne the purpose annotation to be a binary vector ~ p i k = ( ~ p 1 i k ; ~ p 2 i k ; : : : ; ~ p Ti k ) of the same length as x i , with ~ p ji k = 1 if token x ji is annotated as purpose by annotator k , ~ p ji k = 0 if not . In the same way , we denote the mechanism annotation with ~ m i k = ( ~ m 1 i k ; ~ m 2 i k ; : : : ; ~ m Ti k ) . We apply a simple and soft aggregation of the K annota - tions . In simple terms , we look at all words that were an - notated , and take a TF - IDF - weighted average of their GloVe [ Pennington et al . , 2014 ] word vectors ( pre - trained on Com - mon Crawl web data ) , resulting in weighted - average vectors Proceedings of the Twenty - Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence ( IJCAI - 18 ) 5275 p i 2 R 300 and m i 2 R 300 for purpose and mechanism an - notations , respectively . We consider p i ; m i to be target vec - tors we aim to predict for unseen texts . By concatenating all annotations and weighting by TF - IDF , we naturally assign higher impact to words considered important by all annota - tors with respect to purpose / mechanism . Learning purpose and mechanism We now have N training product texts X N = f x 1 ; x 2 ; : : : ; x N g , and N corresponding target tuples Y N = f ( p 1 ; m 1 ) ; ( p 2 ; m 2 ) ; : : : ; ( p N ; m N ) g . We represent each x i with its pre - trained GloVe vectors , w i . Our goal is to learn a function f ( w i ) that predicts ( p i ; m i ) . To this end , we model f ( (cid:1) ) with a Recurrent Neural Network as that takes as input the variable - length sequence w i , processes it with a bidirectional RNN ( BiRNN ) to form a shared document representation . Following this layer , more layers are added to extract two separate product and mechanism representations ^ p i ; ^ m i , ﬁnally predicting the targets ( p i ; m i ) in a multiple - output regression setting . We qualitatively examine what our representations learned by ﬁnding words in our vocabulary that are close to the purpose / mechanism representations ( see [ Hope et al . , 2017 ] for details ) . For example , for a yogurt making machine , we obtain “pump , steel , electric” for mechanism and “food , produce , concentrate” for purpose . 3 Evaluation : Analogies We begin with evaluating the predicted ^ p i ; ^ m i in the con - text of their ability to capture distances that reﬂect analogies , which is the primary focus of this paper . To do so , we ﬁrst create a dataset of analogies and non - analogies . 3 . 1 Collecting Analogies via Crowdsourcing We crowdsourced analogy ﬁnding within a set of about 8000 Quirky products . AMT crowd workers used our search in - terface to collect analogies for about 200 seed documents . Median completion time for each seed was 7 minutes . Pairs that were tagged as matches became positive examples in our analogy dataset . Borrowing from information retrieval , we assume that people read the search results sequentially , and treat the implicitly rejected documents ( i . e . , documents that were not matches , despite appearing before matches ) as neg - atives . To further increase the chance that the document has actually been read , we restrict ourselves to the top - 5 results . Results . We rank all pairs in the test data ( N = 2500 , with training done on about 5500 products ) based on their dis - tances , according to various metrics including our own , and measure precision and recall @ K results . Across all levels of K – top - % 1 , % 5 , % 10 , % 15 , % 20 , % 25 – our approach outperformed the baselines . As an example , our approach is able to obtain precision @ top - % 1 of 0 : 74 , while stan - dard approaches such as TF - IDF , average of GloVe word vec - tors with TF - IDF weighting , LDA and LSA and yield only 0 : 63 ; 0 : 61 ; 0 : 43 ; 0 : 41 , respectively . See [ Hope et al . , 2017 ] for full results . Note that a considerable portion of test prod - uct pairs were tagged by workers as analogies despite having only surface similarity , likely due to the strong tendency to - wards surface features in analogical retrieval [ Gentner et al . , 1993 ] . This created mislabeled positive examples that favor the surface - based baselines . 4 Evaluation : Ideation by analogy Since a major application of the enhanced search and retrieval capabilities of analogy is enhanced creativity , we now evalu - ate the usefulness of our algorithms . We examine the degree to which our model’s retrieved output improves people’s abil - ity to generate creative ideas , compared to other methods . To do so we use a standard ideation task in which participants re - design an existing product [ Ullman , 2002 ] , and are given in - spirations to help them – either from our approach , a TF - IDF baseline , or a random baseline . See Figure 2 for an example task given to crowdworkers ( here , a cell phone charger case ) . The middle part shows the top 3 inspirations per condition . Our assumption is that our approach will help users explore more diverse parts of the design space ( that are still relevant ) . We hypothesize that our approach will lead to better results than the TF - IDF baseline ( highly relevant but non - diverse ) and the random baseline ( highly diverse but low relevance ) . 4 . 1 Experiment Design We recruited 38 AMT workers to redesign an existing prod - uct , a common creative task in design ﬁrms [ Ullman , 2002 ] . To ensure robustness of effects , the experiment included 12 different “seed” products . Participants were paid $ 1 . 5 . To maximize statistical power , we utilized a within - subjects de - sign with a single manipulated factor , inspiration type : (cid:15) ANALOGY : For each seed product we ﬁnd 12 inspiration products with similar purposes but far mechanism . We use a combination of clustering by the purpose metric d p ( (cid:1) ; (cid:1) ) and diversiﬁcation by mechanism metric d m ( (cid:1) ; (cid:1) ) with a MAX - MIN diversiﬁcation approach [ Ravi et al . , 1994 ] . (cid:15) BASELINE : SURFACE : participants receive product in - spirations retrieved using TF - IDF , by ﬁnding the top 12 products similar to the seed . This baseline is meant to sim - ulate current search engines . (cid:15) BASELINE : RANDOM : participants receive 12 product inspirations randomly sampled from our product corpus . Participants completed the redesign task under each of the 3 inspiration type conditions . The order of conditions was counterbalanced to prevent order effects . To ensure unbiased permutations , we used the Fisher - Yates shufﬂe . Since prior work has shown that people beneﬁt more from analogies if they receive them after ideation has begun [ Tseng et al . , 2008 ] , the ideation task proceeded in two phases : 1 ) generating ideas unassisted for one minute , then 2 ) receiving 12 inspirations and generating more ideas for 6 minutes . The inspirations were laid out in four pages , 3 inspirations per page , and the users could freely browse them . Figure 2 provides an overview of the experiment and an excerpt from the data . The task was to redesign a cell phone charger case . The SURFACE baseline retrieves products that are very phone - related . In contrast , our algorithm retrieves di - verse results such as a human pulley - powered electricity gen - erator suit . The bottom of the ﬁgure shows ideas generated by users in each condition . Interestingly , the user exposed to our approach suggested a case that generates power using movement , potentially inspired by the suit . 4 . 2 Results Measures . Following [ Reinig et al . , 2007 ] , we measured cre - ative output as the rate at which a participant generates good Proceedings of the Twenty - Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence ( IJCAI - 18 ) 5276 Figure 2 : Overview and excerpts of the ideation experiment . Top : Seed product . Workers were asked to solve the same problem in a different way . Middle : Top 3 inspirations for each of the conditions . Note that the TF - IDF baseline returns results from the same domain , while our method returns a broader range of products . Bottom : Ideas generated by users exposed to the different conditions . ideas . We recruited ﬁve graduate students to judge each idea generated by our participants as good or not . Our deﬁnition of “good” follows the standard deﬁnition of creativity in the literature as a combination of novelty , quality , and feasibility [ Runco and Jaeger , 2012 ] . Each judge was instructed to judge an idea as good if it satisﬁed all of the following criteria : 1 ) it uses a different mechanism / technology than the origi - nal product ( novelty ) , 2 ) it proposes a mechanism / technology that would achieve the same purpose as the original product ( quality ) , and 3 ) could be implemented using existing tech - nology and does not defy physics ( feasibility ) . Agreement between the judges was substantial ( Fleiss kappa 0 . 51 ) , lending our measure of creativity acceptable inter - rater reliability . The ﬁnal measure of whether an idea was good or not was computed by thresholding the number of votes , so that good = 1 if at least k judges rated it as good . We report results for both liberal and strict settings k = 2 ; 3 . Evaluation . In summary , across both liberal and strict set - tings , our approach was able to generate a considerably large relative positive effect leading to better ideas , both in terms of the absolute number of positively - rated ideas and in terms of proportions . For k = 2 , the proportion of good ideas in our condition was 46 % ( N = 105 ) . Next was the random base - line with 37 % ( 49 ) , and ﬁnally the TF - IDF baseline achieved 30 % ( N = 54 ) . These results are signiﬁcant by a (cid:31) 2 propor - tion test ( p (cid:20) : 01 ) . For k = 3 ( majority vote ) , the propor - tion of good ideas in our condition was 38 % ( N = 118 ) , the random baseline had 22 % ( 68 ) , and the TF - IDF baseline achieved 21 % ( N = 63 ) , with p < : 01 . In addition , to model confounding factors , we used a gen - eralized linear mixed model with a ﬁxed effect of inspira - tion condition , and random effects of participant and seed ( to model within - participant and within - seed dependencies be - tween ideas ) . Here too , our method led to a signiﬁcantly higher probability for good ideas . For k = 2 , pr ( Good ) = 0 : 71 , 95 % conﬁdence interval = [ 0 : 48 , 0 : 87 ] in our condition . TF - IDF had pr ( Good ) = 0 : 28 [ 0 : 16 , 0 : 44 ] , and random had pr ( Good ) = 0 : 27 [ 0 : 16 , 0 : 41 ] . For k = 3 , we had pr ( Good ) = 0 : 56 , [ 0 : 36 , 0 : 75 ] . TF - IDF had pr ( Good ) = 0 : 16 [ 0 : 08 , 0 : 27 ] , and random had pr ( Good ) = 0 : 14 [ 0 : 08 , 0 : 24 ] , B = (cid:0) 1 : 94 , p < : 01 vs . TF - IDF , and B = (cid:0) 2 : 05 , p < : 01 vs . random . 5 Discussion and Conclusion In this paper , we sought to develop a scalable approach to ﬁnding analogies in large , messy , real - world datasets . We ex - plored the potential of learning and leveraging a weak struc - tural representation ( i . e . , purpose and mechanism vectors ) for product descriptions . We use crowdsourcing to obtain pur - pose / mechanism annotations , and use an RNN to learn pur - pose and mechanism vectors for each product . We demon - strate that these learned vectors allow us to ﬁnd analogies with higher precision than traditional information - retrieval similarity metrics like TF - IDF , LSA , GloVe and LDA . Our ideation study further illustrates the effectiveness of our approach : participants had a higher likelihood of gen - erating good ideas for the redesign ideation task when they received inspirations from our method , compared to a tra - ditional ( TF - IDF ) baseline or random sampling approach . From a psychological perspective , the beneﬁts of our inspi - rations are likely due to our approach’s superior ability to sample diverse yet still structurally similar inspirations , since diversity is a known robust booster for creative ability [ Chan and Schunn , 2015 ] . The TF - IDF approach yielded inspira - tions likely to be relevant but also homogeneous , while the random approach yields diversity but not relevance . While moving to a “weak” structural representation based on purpose and mechanism signiﬁcantly increased the fea - sibility of analogy - ﬁnding , extensions may be necessary to generalize to other domains besides product descriptions . For example , our purpose and mechanism vectors did not distin - guish between higher and lower level purposes / mechanisms , or core / peripheral purposes / mechanisms , and also did not en - code dependencies between particular purposes / mechanisms . These are potentially fruitful areas for future work . Acknowledgments This work was supported by NSF grants CHS - 1526665 , IIS - 1149797 , IIS - 1217559 , Carnegie Mellon’s Web2020 initia - tive , Bosch , Google , ISF grant 1764 / 15 and Alon grant . Dafna Shahaf is a Harry & Abe Sherman assistant professor . Proceedings of the Twenty - Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence ( IJCAI - 18 ) 5277 References [ Blei et al . , 2003 ] David M . Blei , Andrew Y . Ng , Michael I . Jordan , and John Lafferty . Latent Dirichlet Allocation . Journal of Machine Learning Research , pages 993 – 1022 , 2003 . [ Chan and Schunn , 2015 ] Joel Chan and Christian D . Schunn . The importance of iteration in creative concep - tual combination . Cognition , 145 : 104 – 115 , 2015 . [ Dahl and Moreau , 2002 ] Darren W Dahl and Page Moreau . The inﬂuence and value of analogical thinking during new product ideation . Journal of Marketing Research , 39 ( 1 ) , 2002 . [ Deerwester et al . , 1990 ] Scott Deerwester , Susan T . Du - mais , Geroge W . Furnas , and Thomas K . Landauer . In - dexing by Latent Semantic Analysis . JASIST , 41 ( 6 ) : 1990 , 1990 . [ Falkenhainer et al . , 1989 ] Brian Falkenhainer , Kenneth D . Forbus , and Dedre Gentner . The structure - mapping en - gine : Algorithm and examples . Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 41 ( 1 ) , 1989 . [ Gentner et al . , 1985 ] Dedre Gentner , Russell Landers , et al . Analogical reminding : A good match is hard to ﬁnd . In Proceedings of the international conference on systems , man and cybernetics , pages 607 – 613 , 1985 . [ Gentner et al . , 1993 ] Dedre Gentner , Mary Jo Rattermann , and Kenneth D Forbus . The roles of similarity in transfer : Separating retrievability from inferential soundness . Cog - nitive psychology , 25 ( 4 ) : 524 – 575 , 1993 . [ Gentner , 1983 ] Dedre Gentner . Structure - mapping : A the - oretical framework for analogy * . Cognitive science , 7 ( 2 ) : 155 – 170 , 1983 . [ Gick and Holyoak , 1983 ] M . L . Gick and K . J . Holyoak . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognitive Psy - chology , 15 ( 1 ) : 1 – 38 , 1983 . [ Halford et al . , 2005 ] Graeme S Halford , Rosemary Baker , Julie E McCredden , and John D Bain . How many vari - ables can humans process ? Psychological science , 16 ( 1 ) , 2005 . [ Hesse , 1966 ] Mary B Hesse . Models and analogies in sci - ence . 1966 . [ Hirtz et al . , 2002 ] Julie Hirtz , Robert B Stone , Daniel A McAdams , Simon Szykman , and Kristin L Wood . A func - tional basis for engineering design : reconciling and evolv - ing previous efforts . Research in engineering Design , 13 ( 2 ) : 65 – 82 , 2002 . [ Holyoak and Thagard , 1996 ] Keith James Holyoak and Paul Thagard . Mental leaps : Analogy in creative thought . MIT press , 1996 . [ Hope et al . , 2017 ] Tom Hope , Joel Chan , Aniket Kittur , and Dafna Shahaf . Accelerating innovation through analogy mining . In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD Inter - national Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , pages 235 – 243 . ACM , 2017 . [ Kittur et al . , 2008 ] Aniket Kittur , Ed H . Chi , and Bongwon Suh . Crowdsourcing User Studies with Mechanical Turk . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Fac - tors in Computing Systems , CHI ’08 , pages 453 – 456 , New York , NY , USA , 2008 . ACM . [ Markman and Loewenstein , 2010 ] Arthur B Markman and Jeffrey Loewenstein . Structural comparison and consumer choice . Journal of Consumer Psychology , 20 ( 2 ) : 126 – 137 , 2010 . [ Mikolov et al . , 2013 ] Tomas Mikolov , Kai Chen , Greg Cor - rado , and Jeffrey Dean . Efﬁcient Estimation of Word Rep - resentations in Vector Space . arXiv : 1301 . 3781 [ cs ] , Jan - uary 2013 . arXiv : 1301 . 3781 . [ Ookubo et al . , 2007 ] Masanori Ookubo , Yusuke Koji , Munehiko Sasajima , Yoshinobu Kitamura , and Riichiro Mizoguchi . Towards interoperability between functional taxonomies using an ontology - based mapping . In Proc . of ICED 2007 , 2007 . [ Pennington et al . , 2014 ] Jeffrey Pennington , Richard Socher , and Christopher D Manning . Glove : Global vectors for word representation . In EMNLP , volume 14 , pages 1532 – 43 , 2014 . [ Ravi et al . , 1994 ] Sekharipuram S Ravi , Daniel J Rosenkrantz , and Giri Kumar Tayi . Heuristic and special case algorithms for dispersion problems . Operations Research , 42 ( 2 ) : 299 – 310 , 1994 . [ Reinig et al . , 2007 ] Bruce A . Reinig , Robert O . Briggs , and Jay F . Nunamaker . On the Measurement of Ideation Quality . Journal of Management Information Systems , 23 ( 4 ) : 143 – 161 , May 2007 . [ Runco and Jaeger , 2012 ] Mark A . Runco and Garrett J . Jaeger . The Standard Deﬁnition of Creativity . Creativity Research Journal , 24 ( 1 ) : 92 – 96 , January 2012 . [ Tseng et al . , 2008 ] Ian Tseng , Jarrod Moss , Jonathan Ca - gan , and Kenneth Kotovsky . The role of timing and ana - logical similarity in the stimulation of idea generation in design . Design Studies , 29 ( 3 ) : 203 – 221 , 2008 . [ Ullman , 2002 ] D . Ullman . The Mechanical Design Process . New York , NY , 3 edition , 2002 . [ Yu et al . , 2014a ] L Yu , B Kraut , and A Kittur . Distributed analogical idea generation : innovating with crowds . In CHI’14 , 2014 . [ Yu et al . , 2014b ] Lixiu Yu , Aniket Kittur , and Robert E Kraut . Searching for analogical ideas with crowds . In Pro - ceedings of the 32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors in computing systems , 2014 . [ Yu et al . , 2016a ] Lixiu Yu , Aniket Kittur , and Robert E Kraut . Encouraging “outside - the - box” thinking in crowd innovation through identifying domains of expertise . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing , pages 1214 – 1222 . ACM , 2016 . [ Yu et al . , 2016b ] Lixiu Yu , Robert E Kraut , and Aniket Kit - tur . Distributed analogical idea generation with multiple constraints . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work & Social Com - puting , pages 1236 – 1245 . ACM , 2016 . Proceedings of the Twenty - Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence ( IJCAI - 18 ) 5278