Supplementary Data for Membrane Binding and Self - Association of the Epsin N - Terminal Homology Domain Chun - Liang Lai § 1 , Christine C . Jao § 2 , Edward Lyman 3 , Jennifer L . Gallop 4 , Brian J . Peter 4 , Harvey T . McMahon 4 , Ralf Langen 2 * , and Gregory A . Voth 1 * 1 Department of Chemistry , Institute of Biophysical Dynamics , James Franck Institute , and Computation Institute , University of Chicago , 5735 S Ellis Ave . , Chicago , IL 60637 , USA . 2 Zilkha Neurogenetic Institute , University of Southern California , 1501 San Pablo Street , Los Angeles , CA 90033 3 Department of Physics and Astrophysics , and Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry , University of Delaware , Newark , DE 19716 4 MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology , University of Cambridge , Hills Road , Cambridge , CB2 2QH , UK . The N - terminus of the epsin 1 ENTH domain becomes structured upon membrane interaction In order to test whether the N - terminus of epsin 1 undergoes a conformational change upon membrane interaction , we generated spin labeled derivatives of the epsin 1 ENTH domain and recorded their EPR spectra in solution and when bound to liposomes containing 10 % phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PIP 2 ) . As illustrated in Fig . S1 , all EPR spectra for the singly labeled N - terminal sites ( positions 4 - 14 ) give rise to sharp and narrowly spaced lines of large amplitude when no liposomes are present ( Fig . S1 , black dashed line ) . These spectra indicate very high mobility and are in agreement with the highly dynamic structure of the N - terminus shown by NMR and X - ray crystallography . 1 , 2 Next , the spin labeled derivatives were bound to liposomes containing 10 % PIP 2 . All samples bound to membranes as assayed by co - sedimentation studies 2 and retained their ability to induce membrane curvature . Under the present conditions , the epsin derivatives caused tubulation as well as vesiculation with the latter being the predominant species as judged by negative stain electron microscopy ( EM data not shown ) . It should be noted that the 7R1 derivative was not generated because this residue is involved in coordinating headgroup binding via two contacts . 2 In the presence of liposomes containing 10 % PIP 2 ( Fig . S1 , red trace ) , all spectra exhibit pronounced line broadening and concomitant reduction in signal amplitude in agreement with a previous study . 3 To visualize the line shape changes of the R1 sidechain in the liposome - bound form , all spectra measured in the presence of membrane are shown at five - fold increased magnification . Most spectra display the characteristic line shapes observed for surface sites in a - helical structures . The spectrum for 8R1 is more complex as it has an additional sharp component ( Fig . S1 , green trace ) that could readily be subtracted using the spectrum of the unbound protein and the resulting spectrum is indicated by the red trace . According to the crystal structure of epsin 1 , the ENTH domain in the presence of the headgroup IP 3 , 2 R8 forms a direct contact with the headgroup and this mutation is likely to reduce ( but not abolish ) the binding affinity . More strongly immobilized components are observed at a few sites ( 5R1 , 8R1 , 9R1 , and 12R1 , Fig . S1 , see arrow ) suggesting that the R1 motion is restricted at these sites , possibly due to contacts with nearby residues or headgroups ( see below ) . These spectral changes indicate structural ordering in residues 4 through 14 in the presence of liposomes . Secondary structure and membrane topology of liposome - bound H 0 To further characterize the structure and topology of the membrane - bound form of the ENTH domain , we measured the accessibilities of the R1 side chain to the paramagnetic colliders , O 2 and NiEDDA . The nonpolar O 2 preferentially partitions in the hydrophobic environment of the membrane while the more polar NiEDDA preferentially partitions in the solvent . Thus , membrane - exposed residues are more O 2 accessible while solvent - exposed sites are more accessible to NiEDDA . 4 - 6 When plotted as a function of residue number , the accessibility parameters ( P O 2 and P NiEDDA ) exhibit periodic and out - of - phase oscillations that are highly characteristic of regions that are exposed to membrane on one side and to the aqueous environment on the other . The accessibility data can be conveniently summarized by the depth parameter F ( where F = LN [ P O 2 / P NiEDDA ] ) which increases proportionally with increasing immersion depth in the bilayer . As shown in Fig . 1e , F oscillates periodically with respect to residue number and the period of this oscillation corresponds to that of an a - helix . In this helix , residues 6 , 10 , 13 and 14 are lipid - exposed ( magenta filled circles ) while residues 5 , 8 , and 12 are the most solvent accessible ( green filled circles ) . Moreover , when plotted using a helical wheel representation ( Fig . 1f ) , the lipid - exposed residues ( magenta ) cluster together and lie on the opposite side of the solvent accessible residues ( green ) . Previous studies using SDSL demonstrated that F values are proportional to the depth of membrane insertion , and that this depth can be calibrated using spin - labeled derivatives of phospholipids . 6 Based on the calibration described in Materials and Methods , the average immersion depth of the lipid - facing R1 side chains ( F maxima ) is on the order of 8 Å . Inasmuch as the nitroxide moiety of the R1 sidechain is typically within 7 - 10 Å of the center of the helix , 7 we can estimate that the center of the epsin 1 ENTH domain N - terminal helix is , therefore , at the level of the headgroups where it is likely to exert membrane “wedge” effects , leading to membrane curvature generation . Fig . S1 . X - band EPR spectra of R1 - labeled epsin 1 ENTH domain derivatives in buffer in absence ( black dashed line ) and presence of lipid ( red solid line ) . The green trace for 8R1 is the experimentally determined spectrum prior to subtraction of the spectrum for the soluble form . All spectra were normalized to the same number of spins and the spectra for the membrane - bound forms are shown at five - fold magnification . The scan width for all spectra is 100 Gauss . Fig . S2 . Time dependence of local orientational order parameter for the type A tube systems . Local orientational order parameter is defined to quantify relative orientation ENTH with respect to neighboring ENTHs . This order parameter is calculated as the dot product of orientations between two H 0 of ENTH , averaged over all pairs that are within 5 nm , and indicates the average alignment among local neighborhoods of ENTHs . A perfectly aligned neighborhood has an averaged value of 1 . The control experiment ( red line ) is used to study the condition in the absence of additional attractive interactions between CG site 1 and CG sites 2 for inter - protein interactions . Details of the CG simulation system setup can be found in the Materials and Methods section of the main text . Fig . S3 . Time dependence of local orientational order parameter for the membrane vesicle system . Local orientational order parameter is defined to quantify relative orientation ENTH with respect to neighboring ENTHs . This order parameter is calculated as the dot product of orientations between two H 0 of ENTH , averaged over all pairs that are within 5 nm , and indicates the average alignment among local neighborhoods of ENTHs . A perfectly aligned neighborhood has an averaged value of 1 . The black line represents the system with randomly arranging ENTH monomers on the surface of membrane vesicle , whereas the red line is the control experiment starting off by randomly arranging ENTH dimers on the surface of the membrane vesicle . Details of the CG simulation system setup can be found in the Materials and Methods section of the main text . Table S1 . Type B tube is divided into either five or seven segments and computed averaged local orientational order parameter for each individual segment . Data used to compute averaged local orientational order parameter were taken from the last 4 . 5M timesteps of trajectory of the type B tube system . The errors of the local orientational order parameter results in this table fall within a range + / - 0 . 01 . The error was estimated by calculating the standard deviation of the averaged order parameter over 1 . 5M trajectory blocks over the last 4 . 5M timesteps of simulation trajectory . Five segments Seven segments 1 0 . 87 0 . 86 2 0 . 91 0 . 87 3 0 . 90 0 . 93 4 0 . 92 0 . 89 5 0 . 84 0 . 94 6 0 . 90 7 0 . 90 References : 1 . Itoh , T . , Koshiba , S . , Kigawa , T . , Kikuchi , A . , Yokoyama , S . & Takenawa , T . ( 2001 ) . Role of the ENTH domain in phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate binding and endocytosis . Science , 291 , 1047 - 1051 . 2 . Ford , M . G . J . , Mills , I . G . , Peter , B . J . , Vallis , Y . , Praefcke , G . J . K . , Evans , P . R . & McMahon , H . T . ( 2002 ) . Curvature of clathrin - coated pits driven by epsin . Nature , 419 , 361 - 366 . 3 . Kweon , D . H . , Shin , Y . K . , Shin , J . Y . , Lee , J . H . , Lee , J . B . , Seo , J . H . & Kim , Y . S . ( 2006 ) . Membrane topology of helix 0 of the Epsin N - terminal homology domain . Mol . Cells , 21 , 428 - 435 . 4 . Hubbell , W . L . , Gross , A . , Langen , R . & Lietzow , M . A . ( 1998 ) . Recent advances in site - directed spin labeling of proteins . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 8 , 649 - 56 . 5 . Hubbell , W . L . , Cafiso , D . S . & Altenbach , C . ( 2000 ) . Identifying conformational changes with site - directed spin labeling . Nat . Struct . Biol . 7 , 735 - 739 . 6 . Altenbach , C . , Greenhalgh , D . A . , Khorana , H . G . & Hubbell , W . L . ( 1994 ) . A collision gradient method to determine the immersion depth of nitroxides in lipid bilayers : application to spin - labeled mutants of bacteriorhodopsin . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA , 91 , 1667 - 1671 . 7 . Langen , R . , Oh , K . J . , Cascio , D . & Hubbell , W . L . ( 2000 ) . Crystal structures of spin labeled T4 lysozyme mutants : implications for the interpretation of EPR spectra in terms of structure . Biochemistry , 39 , 8396 - 8405 .