Understanding and Augmenting Ideation Processes Maximilian Mackeprang Human - Centered Computing Freie Universität Berlin Berlin , 14195 , Germandy maximilian . mackeprang @ fu - berlin . de Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . CC ’19 , June 23 – 26 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5917 - 7 / 19 / 06 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3325480 . 3326563 Abstract To effectively support individual contributors in large scale ideation settings , we need a computational understand - ing of their cognitive processes . Although related work ex - ists that references models from psychology , there are two shortcomings in existing approaches : First , they only anal - yse ideas on a statistical level . Second , they lack a notion of individual ideator differences . This work proposes a new user model for ideation , based on process - models from psychology and knowledge - graph based information extrac - tion from submitted idea - texts . By building a computational model of ideation , this work aims to enable new graph - based analysis methods of cognitive ideation processes and new approaches to adaptive ideation support systems . These systems could be used to detect and counter ﬁxa - tion in individuals and to guide group efforts based on cate - gories that should be explored . Author Keywords Ideation ; Computational Cognitive Models ; Intelligent User Interfaces Introduction Contemporary challenges in society , technology , science and nature can only be tackled by leveraging diverse , inter - disciplinary sources . Collaborative ideation platforms have emerged as a promising solution to obtain heterogeneous Session : Graduate Student Symposium CC ’19 , June 23 – 26 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 640 ideas from the crowd . In practice , however , many ideas generated on these platforms are mundane , rudimentary and repetitive [ 15 ] . Therefore , improving creativity ( deﬁned as novelty and usefulness of an idea [ 12 ] ) is an elementary goal in online ideation settings . Furthermore , creativity sup - port is considered one of the great challenges in HCI [ 14 ] . This work focuses on creativity in the context of ideation which , for this context , will be deﬁned as the generation of ideas , encoded in texts , based on a ﬁxed problem or task statement for a bounded amount of time ( ideation session ) . To improve creativity in this context , research in collabo - rative ideation has shown that computational support of individuals via the deployment of inspiring ideas of others shows great promise [ 2 , 3 , 6 ] . Although different modes of timing and content are analyzed in this area , there are two areas for improvement in this ﬁeld : First , the existing approaches to creativity - enhancing interventions analyze ideas only on a statistical level . Interventions are only de - ployed using statistical similarity measures between ideas ( for example cosine similarity based on phrase embed - dings ) without analyzing the meaning in depth . Secondly , existing approaches don’t account for individual differences in ideators when deploying interventions . Studies mainly fo - cus on increasing the average creativity of ideas without fur - ther analysis of intervention impact on different participants ( for example ideators could be either confused or inspired by semantically far ideas depending on their personality ) . In my thesis , I want to investigate better approaches to both of these problems by creating a user model of ideators in the context of large scale ideation . By building a computa - tional model of individual cognitive processes in users I can infer individual contexts and differences of users in order to create personalized creativity - enhancing interventions . I want to investigate the applicability of this model by con - ducting case studies in ideation support . In order to further deﬁne this approach , the next section focuses on the indi - vidual aspects of the above statements . Process Model The ﬁrst part is to model cognitive processes happening within a person that lead to the generation of ideas in a ses - sion . In order to understand the inﬂuence of external stimuli and to identify valuable ones , an understanding about those processes is needed . Although there are different models of creativity in literature from psychology ( e . g . [ 1 , 9 , 13 , 18 ] ) , they commonly focus on a high level description of creative processes in a social context . This thesis aims to create a so called computational cognitive model : A model that de - scribes a human cognitive function in computational terms . In contrast to cognitive models from psychology , a compu - tational cognitive model has to be formal and unambiguous , so that it can be implemented [ 11 ] . User Model A user model describes characteristics of users as a combi - nation of data collected about the user and a classiﬁcation into a cluster of archetypal behavior [ 5 ] . In the ideation con - text , an individual may have different cognitive strategies to generate ideas , personality features that inﬂuence their response to stimuli or explicit preferences towards ideation tasks . These personal differences have to be in the process model as well . Contributions The work in this thesis can be divided into three areas : In - formation Extraction , Model Building and Use Cases . In the subsequent sections , each area will be reviewed in terms of work done , ongoing work and vision . Information Extraction In order to implement a model of cognitive processes during ideation , a method of inferring the mental state of ideators Session : Graduate Student Symposium CC ’19 , June 23 – 26 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 641 Super Classes Ideas Display maps on part of the windshield of car . Turning all types of glass into transparent displays , such as windows and doors . Glass Windshield Sheet glass Material Figure 1 : Example of how terms in ideas are linked to concepts in a knowledge graph . ( for example : current train of thought , need for inspiration ) is needed . As a comprehensive understanding of these cognitive processes is not possible at the moment , the ap - proach of this work is to build heuristics based on the data obtained in the ideation session . One approach to gaining this information is to analyze idea texts submitted by the ideator . The terms used within the ideas are linked to con - cepts in general knowledge graphs ( see sidebar ) . To obtain the links between terms in the idea texts and concepts , an approach called Interactive Concept Validation ( ICV ) was developed . In this approach , users disambiguate terms in their ideas by interactively selecting the most suitable con - cept from a set of concept candidates [ 8 ] . Using knowledge from the knowledge graph ( for example superclasses , see ﬁgure 1 ) enables the inference of cognitive states in the user , based on content features ( as opposed to statistical analysis ) . To better understand the quality of concepts ob - tained via ICV and the impact on ideation metrics , studies were conducted using Amazon Mechanical Turk . General Knowledge Graphs General Knowledge Graphs store large scale , cross - domain knowledge ( e . g . encyclopedic facts ) in a structured graph - data for - mat ; They are often col - laboratively created and openly available [ 4 ] . Exam - ples for general knowledge graph projects are Wikidata ( http : / / wikidata . org / ) , or DBpe - dia ( http : / / dbpedia . org / ) . Model Building The next step towards a computational cognitive model of ideation is to link the obtained data ( along with metadata about idea timings ) to models in psychology . One promis - ing model is the Search for Ideas in Associative Memory ( SIAM ) model , proposed by Nijstad and Stroebe [ 10 ] . This model assumes that ideation happens in two steps : First , ideators sample an Image ( images are deﬁned as cognitive concepts with corresponding features and fuzzy bound - aries , for example Hotel ) from their long - term memory ( LTM ) and load it into their working memory . Second they use this active image to generate ideas . When ideators fail to come up with ideas for the active image , they leave the second step and sample a new image from LTM . The ﬁrst hypothesis is that there is a conceptual overlap between the images described in SIAM and concepts used in gen - eral knowledge graphs . To verify this hypothesis , a corre - lation analysis between graph - based features extracted in the ICV - studies and predictions made by the SIAM model will be conducted . Although SIAM provides a great base - line to further understand cognitive processes , it has two key features missing to use it as a computational model : First , to computationally model the input to the ideation , a structured data representation of images both in long - and short - term memory is needed . Next , SIAM doesn’t provide a detailed description of how to get from active images to ideas . A computational model needs to be able to create concept - based representation of ideas generated from an active image , in order to generate output data that can be validated . In the case of ideation strategy , a possible approach could be to implement baseline ideation strategies from related work ( for example conceptual recombination , as described by Suchanek et al . [ 17 ] ) , and analyze how much of the obtained idea data can be explained by them . In case of Session : Graduate Student Symposium CC ’19 , June 23 – 26 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 642 ideator background and context , a possible approach could be to use association graphs like conceptnet 1 to construct an inferred context from already obtained idea data . This could then be used to associate concepts in the ideas with different archetypal contexts . Figure 2 shows an exam - ple for an updated SIAM model , that could be used as the baseline for implementation . Figure 2 : A sample baseline model of individual cognitive processes during ideation Use Cases Since a comprehensive evaluation of all aspects of the model is out of the scope , the chosen approach is to eval - uate use cases of the model in a descriptive , qualitative manner . As of the time of writing , the following use cases are planned : Evaluating the impact of different levels of interventions . Different types of ideators could react different to different display modes of creativity enhancing interventions ( e . g . a notiﬁcation tooltip vs a blocking modal ) . An example re - search question could be : " Does using different interface pro - activity levels [ 7 ] for creativity - enhancing interventions enhance ideation outcome ? " . Evaluating the impact of different inspiration media on user classes . To validate the computational cognitive model , research into different creativity - enhancing interventions will be conducted by means of experimental studies . An example research question could be : " Based on the model , how does the deployment of image stimuli effect different types of users ? " Countering Fixation in Ideators by adaptive Inspiration De - ployment . One of the key challenges to brainstorming as reported by related work is the effect of Fixation : Concen - 1 ConceptNet is a network of word associations , build on crowd - sourcing and information extraction [ 16 ] . trating on a detail and or concept and therefore blocking out other trail of thoughts that could lead to more ideas . Us - ing the concepts used within the ideas submitted , the sys - tem could try to detect ﬁxation effects and counterbalance them via deployment of interventions designed to switch the ideators context . Outlook : Guiding large groups in collaborative ideation . A main motivation for this work is the automated support of large scale ideation . Moving beyond the individual focus of a cognitive model , knowledge graphs could be used to support the effort of an ideator group with respect to the solution space as well . By linking concepts used in the in - dividual sessions , the system could use this information to map the coverage of different topics and guide ideators to concepts not well explored . Summary Ideas generated in large scale ideation sessions tend to be mundane , rudimentary and repetitive , making computa - tional support of these sessions a desirable goal . Although recent work has shown the effectiveness of inspiration de - ployment in this context , in order to further improve ideation outcomes , a better understanding of cognitive processes and user differences is necessary . This works aims to ﬁll this gap by building a computational cognitive model , based on knowledge - graph concepts obtained from the submitted idea - texts . By using knowledge graph concepts , this work enables new content - based analysis of idea - texts that will be used to infer cognitive states of ideators and test the ef - fectiveness of the model in three use cases . By building a computational model , this work hopes to lay a foundation for a new graph - based analysis approach to understand and augment ideation processes . Session : Graduate Student Symposium CC ’19 , June 23 – 26 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 643 References [ 1 ] Teresa M Amabile . 2012 . Componential theory of creativity . Harvard Business School 12 , 96 ( 2012 ) , 1 – 10 . [ 2 ] Joel Chan , Steven Dang , and Steven P Dow . 2016 . Improving crowd innovation with expert facilitation . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing . ACM , 1223 – 1235 . [ 3 ] Joel Chan , Pao Siangliulue , Denisa Qori McDonald , Ruixue Liu , Reza Moradinezhad , Safa Aman , Erin T Solovey , Krzysztof Z Gajos , and Steven P Dow . 2017 . Semantically Far Inspirations Considered Harmful ? : Accounting for Cognitive States in Collaborative Ideation . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and Cognition . ACM , 93 – 105 . [ 4 ] Michael Färber , Basil Ell , Carsten Menne , and Achim Rettinger . 2015 . A comparative survey of dbpedia , freebase , opencyc , wikidata , and yago . Semantic Web Journal 1 ( 2015 ) , 1 – 5 . [ 5 ] Gerhard Fischer . 2001 . User modeling in human – computer interaction . User modeling and user - adapted interaction 11 , 1 - 2 ( 2001 ) , 65 – 86 . [ 6 ] Victor Girotto , Erin Walker , and Winslow Burleson . 2017 . The effect of peripheral micro - tasks on crowd ideation . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 1843 – 1854 . [ 7 ] Charles L Isbell and Jeffrey S Pierce . 2005 . An IP continuum for adaptive interface design . In Proc . of HCI International . [ 8 ] Maximilian Mackeprang , Abderrahmane Khiat , and Claudia Müller - Birn . 2018 . Concept Validation during Collaborative Ideation and Its Effect on Ideation Outcome . In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , LBW033 . [ 9 ] Sarnoff Mednick . 1962 . The associative basis of the creative process . Psychological review 69 , 3 ( 1962 ) , 220 . [ 10 ] Bernard A Nijstad and Wolfgang Stroebe . 2006 . How the group affects the mind : A cognitive model of idea generation in groups . Personality and social psychology review 10 , 3 ( 2006 ) , 186 – 213 . [ 11 ] Ana - Maria Olte¸teanu , Zoe Falomir , and Christian Freksa . 2018 . Artiﬁcial cognitive systems that can answer human creativity tests : An approach and two case studies . IEEE Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental Systems 10 , 2 ( 2018 ) , 469 – 475 . [ 12 ] Mark A Runco and Garrett J Jaeger . 2012 . The standard deﬁnition of creativity . Creativity Research Journal 24 , 1 ( 2012 ) , 92 – 96 . [ 13 ] Young Wook Seo , Seong Wook Chae , and Kun Chang Lee . 2015 . The impact of absorptive capacity , exploration , and exploitation on individual creativity : Moderating effect of subjective well - being . Computers in Human Behavior 42 ( 2015 ) , 68 – 82 . [ 14 ] Ben Shneiderman . 2009 . Creativity support tools : A grand challenge for HCI researchers . In Engineering the User Interface . Springer , 1 – 9 . Session : Graduate Student Symposium CC ’19 , June 23 – 26 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 644 [ 15 ] Pao Siangliulue , Joel Chan , Steven P Dow , and Krzysztof Z Gajos . 2016 . IdeaHound : improving large - scale collaborative ideation with crowd - powered real - time semantic modeling . In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology . ACM , 609 – 624 . [ 16 ] Robert Speer and Catherine Havasi . 2012 . Representing General Relational Knowledge in ConceptNet 5 . . In LREC . 3679 – 3686 . [ 17 ] Fabian M Suchanek , Colette Menard , Meghyn Bienvenu , and Cyril Chapellier . 2016 . Can you imagine . . . a language for combinatorial creativity ? . In International Semantic Web Conference . Springer , 532 – 548 . [ 18 ] Donald J Trefﬁnger . 1995 . Creative problem solving : Overview and educational implications . Educational Psychology Review 7 , 3 ( 1995 ) , 301 – 312 . Session : Graduate Student Symposium CC ’19 , June 23 – 26 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 645