Effects of Awareness Support on Groupware Usability Carl Gutwin Department of Computer Science University of Saskatchewan Saskatoon , SK , S7N 5A9 , Canada + 1 306 966 - 4886 gutwin @ cs . usask . ca www . cs . usask . ca / faculty / gutwin Saul Greenberg Department of Computer Science University of Calgary Calgary , AB , T2N 1N4 , Canada + 1 403 220 - 6087 saul @ cpsc . ucalgary . ca www . cpsc . ucalgary . ca / ~ saul ABSTRACT Collaboration in current real - time groupware systems is often an awkward and clumsy process . We hypothesize that better support for workspace awareness can improve the usability of these shared computational workspaces . We conducted an experiment that compared people’s performance on two versions of a groupware interface . The interfaces used workspace miniatures to provide different levels of support for workspace awareness . The basic miniature showed information only about the local user , and the enhanced miniature showed the location and activity of others in the workspace as well . In two of three task types tested , completion times were lower with increased awareness support , and in one task type , communication was more efficient . Participants also greatly preferred the awareness - enhanced system . The study provides empirical evidence of , and underlying reasons for , the value of supporting workspace awareness in groupware . Keywords workspace awareness , groupware , usability INTRODUCTION Real - time distributed groupware allows people to work together at the same time from different places . Many of these systems provide shared computational workspaces— two - dimensional areas akin to whiteboards or tabletops— where people can create and manipulate task artifacts . Although many of the technical problems of constructing these systems have been solved , their usability problems have not yet been eliminated . Collaboration in groupware workspaces is often awkward , stilted , and frustrating compared to face - to - face settings . The difficulty is particularly acute when the workspace is larger than the screen and people navigate independently through the workspace ( called relaxed - WYSIWIS view sharing [ 12 ] ) . Part of the problem with current systems is that they don’t provide much information about other participants in the session . When people work together in a face - to - face setting , a wide variety of perceptual cues help them keep track of what others are doing . This awareness of others in the workspace is workspace awareness , the up – to – the – moment understanding of another person’s interaction with the shared space [ 7 , 8 ] . At a simple level , it involves knowledge of who is present , where they are working , and what they are doing . Workspace awareness is used in collaboration to coordinate activity , to simplify verbal communication , to provide appropriate assistance , and to manage movement between individual and shared work . Current groupware systems provide only a fraction of the information needed to maintain workspace awareness . They lack many of the natural affordances that exist in face - to - face settings , and they rarely provide artificial support . We believe that increased support for workspace awareness will improve the usability of groupware . A previous study provided qualitative evidence that awareness support is valuable [ 5 ] . It also showed that workspace miniatures — miniature representations of the entire workspace—are useful vehicles for this information . In this experiment we are interested in the quantitative effects of awareness support on groupware usability . We compare two groupware interfaces that provide different amounts of awareness information through their workspace miniatures . In particular , we compare a basic miniature to one that adds three kinds of information : • the location of others’ viewports in the workspace ; • the location and motion of people’s cursors ; and • the motion of workspace objects as they are moved . The awareness - enhanced version of the miniature is called the radar view [ 6 ] . The experiment measures three aspects of groupware usability : how well groups perform with each interface , the efficiency of their collaboration , and the group’s satisfaction with the system . The adaptability and resourcefulness of groups makes groupware difficult to evaluate [ 4 , 10 ] . Nevertheless , we believe that support for awareness will make substantial differences to usability , because of the importance of the workspace in collaborative interaction . The workspace is an external representation of a joint activity , and a stage on which the collaboration is acted out . Previous investigations have recognized that a shared workspace and the artifacts in it change the way people communicate through actions , speech , and gesture [ 1 , 3 , 14 , 15 ] . Workspace awareness is one of the keys that allows people to interact in and through the shared workspace . This study takes initial steps towards an empirical understanding of the role played by workspace awareness , and how to support it in groupware . METHODS AND PROCEDURE The study’s basic question asks whether information about another person’s location and activity in the visual workspace will help groups complete tasks . In particular , we compared people’s performance , perception of effort , and verbal efficiency for two interfaces that provided different levels of awareness support . Both interfaces used workspace miniatures , but the basic overview only showed information about the local participant , whereas the enhanced radar view added information about the location and activity of others in the workspace . Groups completed three kinds of tasks to give us a broad perspective on awareness in collaborative situations . Groups also worked with both interfaces , and were asked which they preferred . Groupware System and Interface Conditions A direct - manipulation groupware application was built for the experiment , using the GroupKit groupware toolkit [ 11 ] . The application is a pipeline construction kit that allows the assembly and manipulation of simple pipeline networks in a shared two - dimensional workspace ( Figure 1 ) . Users can create , move , and rotate sections of pipe , and can join or split sections using a welding tool . The workspace is rectangular , and four times larger than the computer screen in each direction . Users scroll around the workspace by dragging their cursor past the window border . Partially - completed pipelines Welding tool Radar view Welds Remotetelepointer Main view Storehouses Figure 1 . The pipeline system ( radar view version ) The pipeline system’s interface consists of two windows . The main view takes up most of the screen and shows objects in full size and detail . The main view allows users to manipulate objects and to scroll to other areas of the workspace . People create pipelines by dragging pipe sections from storehouses in the corners of the workspace , aligning the sections , and then welding them together by dropping a diamond - shaped welding tool onto the joint . Welds are marked by a yellow square , and once pieces are welded , they move as a unit . The second window is one of two miniature views , the radar view or the overview . This view is inset into the top left corner of the main view , and shows the entire workspace in miniature . The radar view and the overview differed in three ways , as compared in Figure 2 . 1 . The radar showed workspace objects as they moved ; the overview was only updated after the move was complete . 2 . The radar showed people’s viewports ( the area of the workspace visible in each person’s main view ) and the overview showed only the local user’s viewport . 3 . The radar showed miniature telepointers for both users , and the overview did not show any telepointers . Telepointers Viewports Local viewport Figure 2 . Radar view ( left ) and Overview ( right ) . In sum , the two conditions differed only in the awareness information presented in the miniature . The overview only showed information about the local user , and the radar showed where the other person was located , showed their pointer , and showed moves as they occurred . Tasks Participants completed three kinds of tasks . Tasks were designed to mimic episodes and activities that we observed in face - to - face collaboration , but were constrained to meet three criteria . First , we wanted tasks that required people to move independently around the workspace . Second , we wanted tasks that used location or activity information . Third , we wanted realistic tasks that were likely to occur in a wide variety of workspace activities . Division of responsibility in the tasks was similar to Chapanis’ communication studies , where the source has information that the seeker needs to do their part of the task [ 2 ] . The follow task asked participants to make ten specific welds on an existing pipe network . One person , the joiner , was given a paper map showing the locations to be welded , and had to prepare the pipe sections at each place . The other person was the welder , and would follow the joiner to each location and weld the pipe . Since the welder had no map , the joiner was also responsible for ensuring that the welder went to the correct location . The copy task asked participants to construct two identical structures from two existing stockpiles of pipe sections . The stockpiles were located at opposite ends of the workspace . One person , the leader , had a paper picture of what was to be built , and used this to find the next piece in their stockpile . The other person , the copier , did not have the picture , and so had to copy the leader’s actions . The leader was responsible for making sure that the copier knew which piece to take next and where to place it . The direct task asked one participant to verbally guide the other through adding six specific pipe sections to an existing network . The director had a map showing which pieces were to be added , and where they were to be added , but was not allowed to move around in the workspace . The actor did the work , following the director’s instructions . The director did not see their main view during this task , so the only visual feedback that they received of the actor’s progress was from the miniature view . Study Design The study combines two independent variables in a two - way mixed factorial design : View is a between - subjects factor ; Task is a repeated - measures factor . Our hypothesis is that additional awareness information will improve people’s speed , efficiency , and satisfaction with a groupware system . The hypothesis is tested by looking for effects of View in interaction with Task . Differences between tasks are expected , since the different task types are not related . Three dependent variables—completion time , perceived effort , and communication efficiency—are measured within each cell of the diagram in Table 1 . Task : Follow Copy Direct View : Radar view G 1 - 10 G 1 - 10 G 1 - 10 Overview G 11 - 20 G 11 - 20 G 11 - 20 Table 1 . Diagram of study design ( G = Group ) . In addition to the between - subjects comparison , we wanted to gather preference data ; therefore , participants used both the radar and overview interfaces . After finishing the first three tasks , groups were asked to complete a second set of tasks using the other interface . They then chose which interface they preferred . The same three measures were taken for the second set of tasks , so that exploratory within - subjects analyses could be carried out as well . Participants Undergraduate and graduate students experienced with mouse - and - window - based applications were recruited from the University of Calgary , and were paid $ 10 for taking part . Forty people participated in the study , 30 men and 10 women . Participants were assigned a partner for the study , either choosing one themselves or by random assignment . Sex pairings were equalized across the two conditions . Procedure The experiment was carried out in several stages . Participants were first asked to sign consent forms and fill out a short demographic questionnaire , and then were introduced to the situation and the system’s functions using standardized instructions . Pairs were randomly assigned to either the radar or the overview condition , and the specifics of their miniature view were explained . Participants were then allowed to practice with the system until they could each perform a basic set of simple operations such as scrolling , drag - scrolling , welding , and unwelding . They then completed a practice task . Pairs then completed six test tasks : three with one kind of view ( radar or overview ) , and then three with the other . The order of the tasks was counterbalanced across groups . For each task , the experimenter gave standard instructions , then started the pair on the task . After each task , the pair filled out a questionnaire . At the end of the session , participants were asked which system they preferred . A short interview was then conducted to follow up episodes observed during the session or particular questionnaire responses . Physical setup Participants worked at two workstations , angled so that they could not see each others’ screens , but so that they could see and talk to one another . The experimenter sat at a recording station at the back of the room . The actions of both participants were transmitted to a third computer that showed a composite of the workspace . This computer’s screen and both voices were recorded on videotape . RESULTS Completion Time Our hypothesis predicts that people will be able to complete tasks more quickly with more awareness information . Completion times for the first three tasks are summarized in Figure 4 ; error bars represent standard deviation . We compared the independent variables Task and View using two - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) . There was 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Follow Copy Direct Radar Overview ( significant ) ( significant ) Figure 4 . Mean completion times for tasks 1 - 3 ( in minutes ) Participants Experimenter Video camera Figure 3 . Experiment room setup an interaction between Task and View ( F = 7 . 772 , p < 0 . 05 ) . Posthoc comparisons of radar and overview completion times were carried out for each task type using one - tailed t - tests . To maintain alpha below 0 . 05 , only those effects with p < 0 . 0167 were considered significant . Of the three tasks , differences in Follow ( t = 2 . 48 , p < 0 . 0167 ) and Direct ( t = 3 . 05 , p < 0 . 0167 ) were significant . Communication Efficiency Verbal interaction was recorded and transcribed . Communication efficiency was measured by counting the number of words used to give directions to the other person ( in the Follow and Direct tasks ) , and the number of words used to indicate pieces ( in the Copy task ) . Two assistants each coded half the transcripts and counted the direction and indication words . On a test set of four transcripts , inter - rater agreement between the two coder’s counts ( using Pearson’s r ) was above 80 % for all three tasks . 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 Follow Copy Direct Radar Overview ( significant ) Figure 5 . Mean verbal efficiency ( in number of words ) Posthoc t - tests showed a significant difference for the Follow task ( t = 4 . 34 , p < 0 . 0167 ) ; no differences were found for the Copy or Direct tasks . Perceived Effort Perception of effort was measured by a repeated questionnaire given after each task . The questionnaire looked at four aspects of how hard a task was : ( 1 ) overall difficulty , ( 2 ) effort required , ( 3 ) concentration required , and ( 4 ) difficulty discussing the task . Questions used five - point scales with semantic anchors . Responses were translated to interval scores , using 1 to represent least effort and 5 to represent most effort . Figure 6 summarizes mean responses for each question in each task . Lines connecting the points are intended only to visually differentiate the two conditions , not to imply connections between questions . Posthoc one - tailed t - tests were used to compare radar to overview on each question , this time dividing alpha of 0 . 05 between the 12 tests . None of the analyses showed significant differences . Within - Subjects Exploratory Results Completion times and questionnaire results were also gathered for the second trio of tasks , those completed with the group’s alternate interface . These measures allowed us to consider the question of what happens when a group moves from one view type to the other . We assume that all groups will perform better in the second set of tasks because of practice , but we wondered whether the improvement would be greater when going from the radar view to the overview , or when going from the overview to the radar view . Figure 7 shows changes in completion time between the first and second attempts at each task . For all task types , groups were faster if they used the overview and then the radar ; if they used the radar and then the overview , only the Copy task was faster in the second attempt . 0 1 2 3 4 5 View 1 View 2 View 1 View 2 View 1 View 2 Follow Direct Copy Task and View C o m p l e t i on T i m e ( m i n ) Overview - Radar Radar - Overview R O R R R R R O O O O O Figure 7 . Mean changes in completion time between first and second attempts at a task . A similar analysis was done with questionnaire responses . Figure 8 shows differentials in perceived effort—that is , the second response to a question minus the first response . When groups used the radar and then the overview , they felt that the second task was more difficult than the first ; when they used the overview and then the radar , they felt that the 1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 P e r c e i v ed E ff o r t Radar Overview Task and Question Copy Direct Follow Figure 6 . Mean questionnaire responses for Tasks 1 - 3 - 2 - 1 0 1 2 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 D i ff e r en t i a l i n P e r c e i v ed E ff o r t Overview - Radar Radar - Overview Task and Question Copy Direct Follow E a s i e r H a r de r Figure 8 . Perceived effort differentials between first and second attempts at a task . Points below the line indicate that the second task was perceived to be easier than the first . second task was easier . Again , the lines in Figure 8 are intended only to differentiate the two conditions . Overall Preference After all tasks were completed and pairs had used both interfaces , participants were asked three questions about which system they preferred . The questions asked which system better supported collaborative work , which system was easier to use for group tasks , and which system the participant preferred overall . Almost all of the participants who responded chose the radar view , as shown in Table 2 . Which system : Radar Overview 1 . …better supported collaboration 35 3 2 . …was easier for group work 38 0 3 . …did you prefer overall 38 0 Table 2 . Number of participants preferring each interface Chi - square analysis showed in each case that the number of participants choosing the radar view was significantly higher than the expected number : for question 1 , c 2 = 26 . 95 , p < 0 . 0167 ; for question 2 , c 2 = 38 . 0 , p < 0 . 0167 ; for question 3 , c 2 = 38 . 0 , p < 0 . 0167 . Summary of Results A variety of results were obtained , some showing improvement when there was additional awareness information , and some showing no difference between the two displays . When using the radar view , groups finished the Follow and Direct tasks significantly faster , and used significantly fewer words in the Follow task . The within - subjects measures appear to reinforce these findings , and participants overwhelmingly preferred the radar view when they had seen both interfaces . However , no differences were found in perceived effort for any of the tasks , and no differences were found on any measure for the Copy task . DISCUSSION The two versions of the interface differed only in that the radar view provided visual indications of the other person’s location , the location of their cursor , and the motion of objects that they moved . The significant differences between these two very similar interfaces clearly suggests that the additional awareness information helped people complete some tasks more quickly and more efficiently . We interpret and explain our findings below . First , we consider two reasons why the additions to the radar view were successful : that they allow visual communication , and that they provide continuous feedback . Second , we examine the measures of perceived effort , and consider why the Copy task was not affected by the view type . Visual vs . Verbal Communication Visual indication of the other person’s location and activity in the radar view helped people to complete the Weld and Direct tasks more quickly . One way that it did so was by allowing people to use different and more effective strategies to carry out the task . Although we did not specifically analyze strategy , the video record clearly shows that different strategies were prevalent in each condition . In the Follow task , there were two main strategies used . When pairs used the overview , they generally used a “describe” strategy . The joiner ( the person with the map ) had to describe the workspace location to the welder ( who had no map ) and verbally guide them to the right place . Since the structures in the workspace were not particularly easy to describe , the joiner had to be careful in planning and delivering her utterances . Even so , the descriptions were often fairly complicated : J : The second weld is near the bottom in the middle section , there’s two pieces of pipe , ok , there’s two longer pieces of pipe , ok , there’s , umm , right in the middle , right on top of the lowermost piece of pipe , in the middle there , there’s two welds that need to be done . F : Uh , ok… With the radar view , people could use a “follow - me” strategy : the welder could find the right location simply by following the joiner’s view rectangle . The visual indication of the joiner’s location transformed the task from a series of complicated verbal exchanges to a relatively simple perceptual task of aligning rectangles on the screen . This transformation also explains why groups used fewer words in the Follow task when they used the radar view . Groups using the “follow - me” strategy had the necessary location information available in the radar , and so they did not need to communicate locations verbally . Joiners would often make general statements about the location of the next weld , but they would let the radar supply the specifics : J : ok , we’re going over to the left…that’s getting welded J : OK , now , way over here…ok , that needs to be welded J : OK , and just over left , same height , weld this together… The overview did actually show the other person’s location whenever they dropped a piece of pipe or the welding tool , and so did allow a limited kind of visual communication ( the “here - I - am” strategy ) . However , this technique was hard to detect in the overview and clumsy for the welder , and only a few groups were able to use it effectively . In the Direct task , the director was not active in the workspace , so radar users could not employ the “follow - me” strategy . Even though the director in both conditions had to provide verbal descriptions of location , the information in the radar view allowed them to use different kinds of descriptions . With the overview , directors had to describe a specific destination to the actor , and like the Follow task , these descriptions were not easy to construct : D : ok , near the very bottom you’ll notice that there’s a vertical line right in the middle in the bottom of the pipeline , ok there is a T , a T , under that corner piece… With the radar view , however , directors could see where the actor was located , and could give them relative directions ( up , down , right , left ) that were much easier to construct and much less prone to misinterpretation . For example : D : ok , move to the left , stop , stop . Move up , move straight up , move straight up , stop . Go a little bit to the left , stop , stop . Ok , now you see there are two T sections… The use of descriptive or relative directions can also partly explain why the radar did not lead to fewer words spoken in the Direct task ( see Figure 5 ) . Even though these two methods of giving directions differ greatly , nothing about giving relative directions implies that fewer words will be needed . For example , the first of the two utterances above might be harder to plan and to understand , but the utterances contain the same number of words . Therefore , word counts may be an insufficient measure of verbal efficiency ; other metrics like utterance length or vocabulary size may have been more appropriate . In summary , the location information presented in the radar view allowed people to communicate required information visually in the Follow and Direct tasks . The visual information allowed different strategies for carrying out the tasks , and allowed simplification of verbal utterances . Continuous Feedback The radar view provided continuous feedback about location and piece position , feedback that allowed groups to complete the Follow and Direct tasks more quickly . In particular , this feedback gave people visual evidence of understanding [ 1 ] , which was more effective and less error - prone than verbal evidence . In the Direct task , the director guides the actor’s movement by giving her an instruction . With each instruction , the director requires evidence that he has succeeded in conveying the correct meaning to the actor , and that the actor has successfully moved where she is supposed to go . In addition , the director cannot give the next instruction until he knows that the actor has successfully completed the current one . The information differences between the radar view and the overview provide different kinds of evidence , and afford different means for establishing that instructions have been understood and carried out . The overview lets the actor give evidence in two ways : verbal acknowledgment ( e . g . “ok , I’m there” ) or the “here - I - am” strategy of dropping an object to indicate their location ( e . g . “ok , can you see my piece ? ” ) . In both of these methods , the evidence is given at the end of an action : that is , the director gives the instruction , and the actor carries it out to the best of their ability before acknowledging . The problem with this form of interaction is that the director may give poor descriptions and the actor may go the wrong way . Providing evidence only at the end of the action means that time is wasted when the actor makes a mistake : D : …go up to that part that’s jetting across the middle… A : < moves > A : < drops piece > this part right here ? D : Uh , on the left side actually , on the left side… In addition , both the verbal and the “here - I - am” methods of acknowledgment have other drawbacks . If the actor believes that they have followed the instruction correctly , but really haven’t , they will mislead the director with their acknowledgment . The director has little chance to detect the error , and so may continue , piling error upon error . The “here - I - am” strategy at least gives the director concrete information about the actor’s location , but this information can be out of date . We observed actors drop objects , then pick them up and keep moving . The director , however , saw only the out - of - date picture of the dropped piece . If they assumed that the location of the piece was also the location of the actor , errors could ensue . The awareness information in the radar provided different kinds of evidence . Verbal acknowledgment was still possible , but the radar also showed up - to - date object movement and viewport location . In the Direct task , these representations could be used as immediate visual evidence of the actor’s understanding and intentions . If the actor started moving the wrong way , the director would see the misunderstanding immediately : D : ok , just above where you were working before… A : < begins moving > D : oh , not too far…yep , right…nope , up , up , up , higher , yeah , right there . The availability of continuous evidence also made it possible for people to give continuous instructions . This is a strategy with far fewer verbal turns , and where the actor acknowledges implicitly through their actions . Clark summarizes the difference between verbal and visual acknowledgment for on - going “installment” utterances like instructions : “in installment utterances , speakers seek acknowledgments of understanding ( e . g . ‘yeah’ ) after each installment and formulate the next installment contingent on that acknowledgment . With visual evidence , [ the speaker ] gets confirmation or disconfirmation while he is producing the current installment” ( [ 3 ] , p . 326 ) . Evidence of understanding and action in the radar was accurate , easy to get , and timely . The director was able to determine more quickly whether the instruction was going to succeed , and could reduce the cost of errors . Perceived Effort Measures of perceived effort in the between - subjects analysis showed no differences between the two conditions for any task . This runs contrary to both our expectations and our observations . We observed groups having more difficulty discussing the task , and making more errors , when they used the overview . It is possible that the questionnaire was a poor measure of effort . The main problem was that people had nothing to compare their experience to , and may have been unable to accurately indicate their effort on the scales given . This problem seems more likely considering that once participants had seen both interfaces , questionnaire responses showed greater differences ( see Figure 8 ) . The overwhelming preference for the interface with the added awareness information ( see Table 2 ) also suggests that there were real differences in the experience of using the system , but that our measures were insensitive to these differences . Explaining the Copy Task The Copy task showed no effects of View on any measure . There are several reasons why the additional awareness information did not improve performance or efficiency , and the most important of these again concerns strategy . Participants typically used one of two strategies to indicate the next piece to their partners : they could describe the piece verbally ( describe - piece ) , or they could show it to them through the radar by dragging it ( show - by - drag ) or through the overview by dropping it ( show - by - drop ) . Describing pieces was certainly the wordier strategy and was also slower . One underlying reason for the lack of effect is that there were equivalent strategies in both the radar and overview conditions . The show - by - drag and show - by - drop strategies provide almost the same information to the person doing the copying . However , since show - by - drop is a less obvious strategy than show - by - drag , we had expected describe strategies to be more prevalent in the overview condition . However , this was not the case . Even though the radar view allowed people to point out pieces quite easily , the video record suggests that more groups used the describe - piece strategy in the radar condition than in the overview condition . In a few cases , choosing to describe rather than show pieces seemed to be the result of inexperience : during one session , the leader said “oh right—I keep forgetting that we can both see the same radar view , ” whereupon she switched from a describe to a show strategy . The combination of an equivalent strategy in the overview condition and a greater use of description in the radar condition account for the lack of speed or efficiency differences between the two conditions for the Copy task . LESSONS FOR GROUPWARE DESIGNERS There are several lessons that groupware designers can take from this study . First , the findings reiterate the value of workspace miniatures , as suggested in our previous study [ 5 ] . In the present experiment , we regularly observed people using both the radar and the overview to orient themselves in the workspace , to navigate , to keep track of the current global state of the activity , and to carry out individual work that did not fit inside the main view . All shared - workspace groupware systems will benefit from a workspace miniature . Second , the main finding of the study is that adding workspace awareness information to the miniature—visual indications of viewport location , cursor movement , and object movement—can significantly improve speed , efficiency , and satisfaction . These awareness components should be included in shared - workspace applications . The tasks we examined are common to many kinds of collaboration , and we believe that support for workspace awareness will also benefit more realistic tasks . Specifically , in tasks where information about locations and activities is used , and where that information is difficult to provide verbally , the radar view will have a positive effect . However , the size of the effect on real - world tasks depends upon what portion of the task can benefit from visual information and continuous feedback . In Follow and Direct , the radar condition was faster by about 25 % , a substantial margin . However , these controlled tasks constrained the activity . More realistic tasks will likely include a mix of different activities , some that will benefit from the awareness information , and some that will not . Although the information will still be useful for part of the task , differences will be harder to measure . Third , the experience of the Copy task provides a cautionary note , and suggests that the benefits of the radar view do not automatically improve performance . Potential improvements are dependent upon the information requirements of the activity and on the ways that groups choose to carry out the task . Designers should carefully consider what information is available and consider the strategies that will be used to carry out the task . CONCLUSION In this paper , we considered the problem of groupware usability , and the hypothesis that interface support for workspace awareness can improve usability . We carried out an experiment to look at the effects of showing viewports , cursors , and object motion in a workspace miniature . For tasks that use information about location and activity , and where constructing verbal descriptions is difficult , the workspace awareness information in the radar can reduce completion time , improve communicative efficiency , and increase satisfaction . The study adds quantitative evidence to the qualitative findings of the prior study [ 5 ] , and begins to put intuitions about awareness onto an empirical footing . Our further research in this area will move in two directions . First , we will continue work on quantitative evaluations of groupware usability . Some of the questions that we were unable to explore in this experiment include the effects of awareness support in other kinds of tasks such as organization or creation , and how well the radar view works when there are more than two people in the group . Second , we want to look more closely at the links between shared workspaces , communication , and collaborative interaction . Work in this direction will look more carefully at naturalistic situations and use methods like conversation analysis and interaction analysis [ 13 ] . We believe that the connection between communication and the environment can tell us a great deal about groupware usability and about the information requirements of the next generation of groupware systems . Appendix : Measuring Groupware Usability One of our broader research goals is to find effective methods and measures for evaluating groupware usability . Groupware systems are difficult to evaluate because groups are more variable and adaptable than individuals . Performance measures are particularly problematic . Several previous studies have manipulated the interaction facilities available to a distributed group ( e . g . [ 3 , 10 ] ) . These studies show that performance measures are “only sensitive to gross changes in the facilities available for communication” ( [ 10 ] , p . 125 ) . The present study showed that awareness information can be one of these major changes . However , to detect differences between the conditions we still had to carefully constrain the tasks . Questionnaire and transcript measures are less affected by adaptability , but have other problems . Questionnaires , as discussed earlier , may be more appropriate in situations where people are comparing interfaces or experiences rather than making absolute judgments . The transcript measures were extremely useful in showing us some of the subtleties of interaction during the tasks . However , transcribing and coding conversations is time - consuming and difficult . The fragmentary nature of dialogue in a shared workspace often makes categorization problematic . Furthermore , counting words is too broad a metric to detect some aspects of communicative complexity and efficiency . Finally , our decision to explore multiple tasks and take multiple measures considerably enriched the study , although it complicated the analysis . Our intention was to look at the hypothesis from several different angles , and offset the drawbacks of individual methods [ 9 ] . Although this approach requires careful planning , it is a valuable way to look at the complex interactions in shared workspaces . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Thanks to Krista McIntosh and Jase Chugh for assistance in running the study and analyzing the results ; to Ted O’Grady , Donald Cox , and Mark Roseman for comments ; and to NSERC and Intel Corporation for financial support . Software Availability GroupKit and the pipeline system used in the study are freely available at www . cpsc . ucalgary . ca / projects / grouplab . REFERENCES 1 . Brennan , S . Seeking and Providing Evidence for Mutual Understanding , Unpublished Ph . D . thesis , Stanford University , Stanford , CA , 1990 . 2 . Chapanis , A . Interactive Human Communication , Scientific American , 232 , 1975 , 36 - 42 . 3 . Clark , H . Using Language . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1996 . 4 . Grudin , J . Groupware and Cooperative Work : Problems and Prospects , in The Art of Human - Computer Interface Design , B . Laurel ed . , Addison - Wesley , Reading , Mass . , 1990 , 171 - 185 . 5 . Gutwin , C . , Roseman , M . , and Greenberg , S . A Usability Study of Awareness Widgets in a Shared Workspace Groupware System . Proceedings of the Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW’96 ) , Boston , 1996 , 258 - 267 . 6 . Gutwin , C . and Greenberg , S . Workspace Awareness Support with Radar Views . Conference companion of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI’96 ) , Vancouver , 1996 , 210 - 211 . 7 . Gutwin , C . and Greenberg , S . Workspace Awareness for Groupware . Conference companion of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI’96 ) , Vancouver , 1996 , 208 - 209 . 8 . Gutwin , C . Workspace Awareness in Real - Time Distributed Groupware . Unpublished Ph . D . dissertation , University of Calgary , Calgary , AB , 1997 . Available at : www . cpsc . ucalgary . ca / ~ gutwin / dissertation / 9 . McGrath , J . Methodology Matters : Doing Research in the Behavioral and Social Sciences . Reprinted in R . Baecker , J . Grudin , W . Buxton , and S . Greenberg ( eds . ) , Human - Computer Interaction : Towards the Year 2000 , San Francisco , Morgan Kaufmann , 1995 , 152 - 169 . 10 . Monk , A . , J . McCarthy , L . Watts , and O . Daly - Jones . Measures of Process , in CSCW Requirements and Evaluation , P . Thomas ed . , Springer - Verlag , London , 1996 , 125 - 139 . 11 . Roseman , M . and Greenberg , S . ( 1996 ) . Building Real Time Groupware with GroupKit , A Groupware Toolkit . Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , 3 ( 1 ) , 66 - 106 . 12 . Stefik , M . , D . Bobrow , G . Foster , S . Lanning , and D . Tatar , WYSIWIS Revised : Early Experiences with Multiuser Interfaces , ACM Transactions on Office Information Systems , 5 ( 2 ) , 147 - 167 , 1987 . 13 . Suchman , L . , and Trigg , R . Understanding Practice : Video as a Medium for Reflection and Design . In J Greenbaum and M . Kyng ( eds . ) , Design at Work : Cooperative Design of Computer Systems , Hillsdale NJ , Lawrence Erlbaum , 1991 , 65 - 89 . 14 . Tang , J . Findings from Observational Studies of Collaborative Work , International Journal of Man - Machine Studies , 34 ( 2 ) , 1991 , 143 - 160 . 15 . Tatar , D . , G . Foster , and D . Bobrow . Design for Conversation : Lessons from Cognoter , International Journal of Man - Machine Studies , 34 ( 2 ) , 1991 , 185 - 210 .