Biomed Pap Med Fac Univ Palacky Olomouc Czech Repub . 2014 ; 158 : XX . 1 The effects of separating inferior alveolar neurovascular bundles on osteogenesis of tissue - engineered bone and vascularization Lin Feng # , Lingling E # , Hongchen Liu Aim . To evaluate the effects of autologous blood vessels and nerves on vascularization . Methods . A dog model of tissue - engineered bone vascularization was established by constructing inferior alveolar neurovascular bundles through the mandibular canal . Sixteen 12 - month - old healthy beagles were randomly divided into two groups ( n = 8 ) . Group A retained inferior alveolar neurovascular bundles , and Group B retained inferior al - veolar nerves . Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells were injected into β - tricalcium phosphate to prepare internal tissue - engineered bone scaffold . A personalized titanium mesh was then prepared by rapid prototyping and fixed by external titanium scaffold . Two dogs in each group were sacrificed on the 30th , 45th , 60th and 90th postoperative days respectively . The bone was visually examined , scanned by CT , and subjected to HE staining , immunohistochemical staining , vascular casting and PCR to detect the changes in osteogenesis and vascularization . Results . The two groups had similar outcomes in regard to osteogenesis and vascularization ( P > 0 . 05 ) : both showed remarkable regenerative capacities . Conclusions . The model of tissue - engineered bone vascularization is potentially applicable in clinical practice to allow satisfactory osteogenesis and vascularization . Key words : inferior alveolar neurovascular bundle , osteogenesis , tissue - engineered bone , vascularization Received : February 6 , 2014 ; Accepted : September 16 , 2014 ; Available online : October 29 , 2014 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 5507 / bp . 2014 . 050 Department of Stomatology , Chinese PLA General Hospital , Beijing 100853 , P . R . China # The authors contributed equally to this work Corresponding author : Hongchen Liu , e - mail : liuhongchen3011 @ gmail . com INTRODUCTION Speed and quality are equally important in studies re - garding tissue - engineered bones . Therefore , it is impera - tive to repair large bone defects in clinical practice with satisfactory postoperative appearance and functional recovery 1 . Since the revascularization of large tissue - engineered bones , which depends on the ingrowth of peripheral blood vessels , is time - consuming , material - complexed osteo - blasts may have died before the reestablishment of normal blood circulation . Hence , blood supply should be restored as soon as possible to retain the osteogenic activity of complex materials 2 . Sahota et al . 3 mainly ascribed the fail - ure of tissue - engineered implants to slow vascularization . Besides , it is impossible to provide favorable conditions , such as constant temperature , pH , and continuous supply of nutrients and oxygen , for the growth of seed cells inside large scaffold materials . Accordingly , tissue - engineered materials can only be thin and small before building neu - rovascular tissue - engineered bones by combining effec - tive vascular bundles with sensory nerve bundles . Under normal conditions , only the cells 20∼200 μm away from the capillaries in vivo can be nourished through diffusion 4 , whereas those in vitro ( 100∼200 µm ) cannot be sufficient - ly supplied with nutrients and oxygen 5 . In other words , the nutrients and oxygen content decrease gradiently with enlarging scaffold material . Under the same growth conditions , the seed cells inoculated in scaffold materials continuously reproduce and differentiate inward , leading to the death of central cells owing to hypoxia 6 . Given that a functional vascular network is dispensable in bone healing , the vascularization of scaffold materials predominantly controls the construction of high - quality tissue - engineered bones 7 . In the field of tissue engineering , standardized animal models bridge experimental studies and clinical use as the scientific basis 8 . The capacity of a tissue - engineered bone candidate ' s regenerating bone defects can be evaluated by being implanted in different types of animal models . Commonly , large ( e . g . sheep , goat , dog and pig ) and small ( e . g . rat , mouse and rabbit ) animal models are used 9 . In this study , a dog model of tissue - engineered bone vascularization was established by constructing inferior alveolar neurovascular bundles through the mandibular canal . MATERIALS AND METHODS Experimental animals Sixteen 12 - month - old healthy beagles were provided by the Laboratory Animal Center , Chinese PLA General Hospital without gender limitation . All experiments were in compliance with protocols and policies approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of Chinese PLA Biomed Pap Med Fac Univ Palacky Olomouc Czech Repub . 2014 ; 158 : XX . 2 General Hospital . They were randomly divided into two groups ( n = 8 ) , i . e . Group A that retained inferior alveolar neurovascular bundles , and Group B that retained inferior alveolar nerves . In vitro preparation of tissue - engineered bones Each beagle was anesthetized by being intramuscu - larly injected with a mixture of sumianxin , ketamine and atropine . Red bone marrow was collected from bilater - al iliac bones ( 5 mL in total , containing bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells ) . Then the cells were prepared into osteoblasts ( 10 6 / mL ) after primary culture , subcul - ture and induced differentiation , and were inoculated in β - tricalcium phosphate ( β - TCP ) to prepare the tissue - engineered bones . Preparation of internal and external tissue - engineered bone scaffolds The mandibles were scanned by high - resolution spiral CT , based on which a defect model was designed and sent to a factory via email for rapid prototyping . Then personalized titanium mesh , external titanium scaffold and β - TCP internal tissue - engineered bone scaffold were prepared . Mandible reconstruction surgery Unilateral teeth were extracted after anesthesia accord - ing to a previously designed method . Mucoperiosteum was separated through an incision 15 mm below the extra - oral mandibular edge , and 15 mm above the lower edge of the mandible was incised by a piezotome . Square defect areas ( lengths : about 20 - 33 mm ) were prepared along the premolars and molars on one side of the mandible while protecting the inferior alveolar neurovascular bundle . After hemostasis , the inferior alveolar artery in Group A was truncated ( 1 cm long ) , and the inferior alveolar nerve in Group B was truncated ( 1 cm long ) . Subsequently , the truncated residues and the inferior alveolar neurovascular bundle membrane were sutured , and hemorrhaging was stopped . External and internal scaffolds were installed , and soft tissues were sutured and embedded before hemo - stasis . The surgical wounds were rinsed by normal saline , sutured layeredly , and bandaged . The beagles were then intramuscularly injected with 400000 U penicillin daily after surgery for three consecutive days ( qd ) . Finally , the two groups were CT - scanned on the 60th and 90th post - operative days to observe the histological changes ( Fig . 1 ) . Table 1 . Primers used for real - time quantitative PCR and RT - PCR . Gene Primer sequence Product size ( bp ) ALP F : 5’ - TCC CAC GTT TTC ACG TTT - 3’ 140 R : 5’ - GAG ACG TTC TCC CGT TCA C - 3’ OCN F : 5’ - TGA GGA CCC TCT CTC TGC TC - 3’ 150 R : 5’ - AGG TAG CGC CGG AGT CTA TT - 3’ COL F : 5’ - CTA CAG CAC GCT TGT GGA TG - 3’ 192 R : 5’ - ATT GGG ATG GAG GGA GTT TA - 3’ β - Actin F : 5’ - CCC ATC TAT GAG GGT TAC CC - 3’ 150 R : 5’ - TTT AAT GTC ACG CAC GAT TTC - 3’ Fig . 1 . Mandible reconstruction surgery outcomes : surgical installation of external and internal scaffolds . Real - time quantitative PCR and RT - PCR Real - time PCR and RT - PCR were used to quantify the levels of transcript - encoding factors in the two groups . To isolate total RNA for reverse transcription - polymerase chain reaction ( RT - PCR ) , the BMSCs were seeded on β - TCP at 1×10 5 cells / cm 2 graft for 24 h to allow attach - ment in ordinary media . The cells were starved using a serum - free medium containing 2 % bovine serum albumin , 100 U / Ml penicillin , and 100 mg / L streptomycin for 24 h . After 14 days of culture , the BMSCs were crushed in lysis buffer ( Roche ) with an RNase - free piston ( Pellet ) , vor - texed , and spun . The clear cell lysate was transferred to QiaShredder ( Qiagen , Inc . ) columns for RNA purifica - tion . RNase - Free DNase ( Roche ) was used to eliminate DNA contamination of RNA samples . Purified RNA was dissolved in RNase - free water and its concentration was assessed by reading at 260 nm . RNA quality was checked on a 2 % agarose gel with 1 mg / mL ethidium bromide . Samples were stored at 808 °C until use . Complementary DNA ( cDNA ) was synthesized from 2 mg of total RNA with the first - strand cDNA synthesis kit for RT - PCR ( AMV ; Roche ) . Eight microliters of cDNA mixture di - luted 1 : 20 in water was subjected to real - time PCR using SYBR Green I dye ( Lightcycler faststart DNA master SYBR green I ; Roche ) . Reactions were performed in 20 mL PCR mixture containing 4 μL 5× Master Mix ( dNTP mixture with dUTP instead of dTTP , MgCl 2 , SYBR Green I dye , Taq DNA Polymerase , and reaction buffer ) and 2 mL of 10 mM primers . β - Actin real - time PCR was run as a control to monitor RNA integrity and to be used for nor - Biomed Pap Med Fac Univ Palacky Olomouc Czech Repub . 2014 ; 158 : XX . 3 malization . Specificity of each primer pair was confirmed by melting curve analysis ( Table 1 ) . RESULTS General information of animals On the 1st postoperative day , all beagles were fatigued and not interested in eating or moving . The limbs receiv - ing surgery were obviously lame , with normal peripheral skin temperature and blood circulation . They were more inclined to eat and move actively 3 days later . One dog that succumbed to local infection was treated by replacing the scaffold material . All dogs were free of mandibular fracture . Preliminary observation Bony callus increased till the 60th day and gradually connected as the bone defect area , and the material was basically ossified on the 90th day . Fig . 2 . A : CT scanning image of No . 1 beagle in Group A be - fore surgery ; B : scanning image of No . 2 beagle in Group A on the 90th postoperative day ; C : scanning image of No . 2 beagle in Group B on the 90th postoperative day ; D - F : local scanning images of No . 2 beagle in Group A on the 90th postoperative day ; G : naked - eye observation of No . 3 beagle in Group A on the 90th postoperative day . Fig . 3 . CD31 immunohistochemical staining results of Group A ( A ) and Group B ( B ) on the 90th day . Bar , 50 μm . Fig . 4 . Real - time quantitative PCR and RT - PCR results . CT observation CT scanning on the 30th postoperative day disclosed that the bone defect was healed by being connected with the 3D reconstructed material , accompanied by increased bony calli and material absorption . On the 90th day , there was density increase in the bone defect area , while the ab - sorption was not evident . Both groups experienced signifi - cantly enhanced osteogenesis on the 90th day compared with those on the 30th day ( P < 0 . 05 ) . This aside , similar bones formed in the two groups ( Fig . 2 ) . Histological and morphometric analyses Immunohistochemical staining showed that numer - ous vascular structures appeared on the 90th day , and the two groups were of similar amounts of neovascular tissues ( Fig . 3 ) . Vascular casting results - vascularization after implantation . The implants were extracted on the 30th , 45th , 60th and 90th postoperative days , and prepared into sections that were subjected to CD31 staining to observe the num - ber of new blood vessels ( Table 2 ) . The number of new blood vessels in Group A was similar to that of Group B . Microvessels were clearly vis - ible , and blood vessels reticulated along Haversian and Volkmann ' s canals . Meanwhile , nutrient vessels grew into endostea and periostea . There were Haversian canals in the middle as well as in internal and external lamel - Biomed Pap Med Fac Univ Palacky Olomouc Czech Repub . 2014 ; 158 : XX . 4 lae , with blood vessels reticulating along Haversian and Volkmann ' s canals . The real - time quantitative PCR and RT - PCR results are presented in Fig . 4 . The similar ALP activity , OCN content , and mineral formation of BMSCs indicated that Group A and B provided the same environment for the osteogenic differentiation of BMSCs . DISCUSSION Significance of constructing model of tissue - engineered bone vascularization Constructing tissue - engineered bone is the optimum strategy for repairing large bone defects . Since tissue en - gineering is intrinsically bionic , it is necessary to establish a vascular network that dominates in the formation of bone tissues and the healing of bone fracture for in vitro construction of tissue - engineered bone . Schmid et al . 10 repaired a rabbit model of skull defects with resorbable polymer films and fibers . In the 4th postoperative week , the formations of new bones and blood vessels were relat - ed temporally and spatially . Currently , tissue - engineered bones are mainly vascularized by using materials , seed cells , cytokines , as well as microsurgical implantations of fascia - wrapping materials and vascular bundles with blood supply 11 . Stein et al . 12 found that the ingrowth of microvessels in the regions receiving tissue - engineered bone , i . e . vas - cularization , could carry considerable osteoblast precur - sor cells , related signaling molecules , nutrients , and other cells participating in bone formation and repair in the tar - get local environment , and thereafter could eliminate the products of vigorous metabolism . Nomi et al . 13 introduced protocols concerning complexation of engineered tissues with vascular factors , and vascularization pretreatment before implanting endothelial cells and matrix materials . Pei 14 emphasized the importance of tissue - engineered bone vascularization , advocated the reconstruction of blood circulation with different methods , as well as evalu - ated the significances of microsurgical vascular bundle im - plantation , fascial flap wrapped surgery and in situ vessel preconstruction . Hokugo et al . 15 conducted a heterotopic ossification assay to wrap saphenous vascular bundles with bioabsorbable membrane that was complexed with autogenous cancellous bone particles . Numerous nerve fibers are distributed in bone tis - sues , especially in the periosteum 16 . Besides , small my - elinated and unmyelinated fibers are distributed in bones with nourishing blood vessels . Konttinen et al . 17 found that there were abundant sensory and autonomic nerve fibers in normal bone tissues . Peptidergic nerve fibers that contained various neuropeptides were distributed depending on the states of bones ( e . g . normal bone re - modeling , fracture healing , bone connection ) . Moreover , the nervous system predominantly controls the forma - tion , development , regeneration and functions of other systems . Similarly , it is indispensable in the formation , repair and reconstruction of bones . Peptidergic nerve fibers are dominant in bone tissues , mainly including calcitonin gene - related peptide ( CGRP ) , neuropeptide Y ( NPY ) , substance P ( SP ) and vasoactive intestinal pep - tide ( VIP ) , of which SP and CGRP peptidergic nerves originate from sensory nerves while VIP and NPY ones stem from autonomic nerves . It is well - established that the effects of the nervous system on bone tissues are mediated by nerve growth factor ( NGF ) and various neuropeptides . Eppley et al . 18 treated rabbit mandibular nerve injury by NGF , and they accidentally observed that the osteogen - esis surrounding axons was enhanced after being stimu - lated . Zhang et al . 19 constructed tissue - engineered bone by implanting nerves and verified that sensory nerves were able to remarkably promote bone formation with a in vivo animal model . Hence , vascularization and neuralization are equivalently important for tissue - engineered bones . Selection and analysis of animal model Beagles are model animals suitable for repeated experi - ments due to moderate body form , mild temper and easy feeding . Jin reported that the mandibular alveolar artery originated from the maxillary artery concomitant with the inferior alveolar nerve and nourished inferior teeth by its branches 20 . Li et al . reported that in the mandibular canal , inferior alveolar nerve and the concomitant blood vessels were wrapped into a neurovascular bundle by a layer of capsule . Blood vessels were continuously located at above nerves , with small branches wrapping them 21 . Yin et al . reported that the mandibular alveolar artery entered the mandible through the mandibular foramen and passed through the mandibular canal . Its branches nourished the body of the mandible and the ascending branch below the mandibular foramen 22 . Notably , inferior alveolar neurovascular bundles across the bone are easily separable in clinical practice , which is rare in human anatomy . Meanwhile , the bundles mainly provide blood for the mandible and regulate the sensory nerves . In addition , the mandibular periosteal vascular network also functions . They are both conducive to the Table 2 . Numbers of microvessels at each time point . n 30th day 1 45th day 2 60th day 3 90th day 4 Group A 8 5 . 76±1 . 03 20 . 23±3 . 79 34 . 75±8 . 23 47 . 89±9 . 84 Group B 8 5 . 20±0 . 67 19 . 87±2 . 27 33 . 22±6 . 76 47 . 30±7 . 64 t 2 . 635 1 . 727 2 . 271 1 . 582 P 0 . 9782 1 0 . 9836 2 0 . 9442 3 0 . 9628 4 P 1 , P 2 , P 3 , P 4 > 0 . 05 , without statistical significances . Biomed Pap Med Fac Univ Palacky Olomouc Czech Repub . 2014 ; 158 : XX . 5 vascularization of tissue - engineered bones . The findings herein provide preliminary evidence for relevant studies . However , the feasibility of the animal model needs further verification by adding more control groups , establishing larger defects ( > 30 mm ) , and carrying out neuralization assays . The model established here was successful as we ex - pected , as evidenced by the CT scanning and histological results . Therefore , the beagle model of tissue - engineered bone vascularization was eligible because of high avail - ability and successful rate as well as facile preparation pro - cess . Particularly , inferior alveolar neurovascular bundle is , as an autologous tissue , convenient for unraveling the mystery of human body . In summary , the model in this study integrated blood supply in the construction of tissue - engineered bone , which offers an effective paradigm to investigate in vivo bone microenvironment , relationships between vascular - ization and neuralization factors , and dose - effect relation - ships for osteogenesis . ACKNOWLEDGEMENT This paper was founded by “China postdoctoral sci - ence foundation” , grant No . 2014M552645 . Authorship contributions : LF , LR : data collection , data analysis and manuscript revision ; HL : study design and manuscript drafting . Conflict of interest statement : None declared . REFERENCES 1 . Orban JM , Marra KG , Hollinger JO . Composition options for tissue - engineered bone . Tissue Eng 2002 ; 8 : 529 - 39 . 2 . Jin D , Pei GX , Chen B , Qin Y . Angiogenesis and neuralization study of bone tissue engineering . Modern Rehabil 2001 ; 8 : 18 - 9 . 3 . Sahota PS , Bunr JL , Brown NJ , MacNeil S . Approaches to improve angiogenesis in tissue - engineered Skin . Wound Repair Regen 2004 ; 12 : 635 - 42 . 4 . Muschler GF , Nakamoto C , Griffith LG . Engineering principles of clinical cell - based tissue engineering . J Bone Joint Surg Am 2004 ; 86 - A : 1541 - 58 . 5 . McClelland RE , Coger RN . Use of micropathways to improve oxygen transport in a hepatic system . J Biomech Eng 2000 ; 122 : 268 - 73 . 6 . Volkmer E , Drosse I , Otto S , Stangelmayer A , Stengele M , Kallukalam BC , Mutschler W , Schieker M . Hypoxia in Static and Dynamic 3D Culture Systems for Tissue Engineering of Bone . Tissue Eng Part A 2008 ; 14 : 1331 - 40 . 7 . Will J , Melcher R , Treul C , Travitzky N , Kneser U , Polykandriotis E , Horch R , Greil P . Porous ceramic bone scaffolds for vascularized bone tissue regeneration . J Mater Sci Mater Med 2008 ; 19 : 2781 - 90 . 8 . Cancedda R , Giannoni P , Mastrogiacomo M . A tissue engineering ap - proach to bone repair in large animal models and in clinical practice . Biomaterials 2007 ; 28 : 4240 - 50 . 9 . Drosse I , Volkmer E , Capanna R , De Biase P , Mutschler W , Schieker M . Tissue engineering for bone defect healing : An update on a multi - component approach . Injury 2008 ; 39 Suppl 2 : S9 - S20 . 10 . Schmid J , Wallkamm B , Hämmerle CH , Gogolewski S , Lang NP . The significance of angiogenesis in guided bone regeneration : a case report of a rabbit experiment . Clin Oral Implants Res 1997 ; 8 : 244 - 8 . 11 . Wu YC . [ Development of vascularization of tissue engineering bone ] . Intern J Biomed Eng 2003 ; 26 : 125 - 8 . 12 . Stein H , Perren SM , Cordey J , Kenwright J , Mosheiff R , Francis MJ . The muscle bed - a crucial factor for fracture healing : a Physiological concept . Orthopedics 2002 ; 25 : 1379 - 83 . 13 . Nomi M , Atala A , Coppi PD , Soker S . Principals of neovascularization of tissue - engineering . Mol Aspects Med 2002 ; 23 : 463 - 83 . 14 . Pei GX . The status quo and tendency of bone tissue engineering research . Med J Chin PLA 2002 ; 27 : 471 - 4 . 15 . Hokugo A , Kubo Y , Takahashi Y , Fukuda A , Horiuchi K , Mushimoto K , Morita S , Tabata Y . Prefabrication of vascularized bone graft using guided bone regeneration . Tissue Eng 2004 ; 10 : 978 - 86 . 16 . Nör JE , Peters MC , Christensen JB , Sutorik MM , Linn S , Khan MK , Addison CL , Mooney DJ , Polverini PJ . Engineering and characteriza - tion of functional human microvessels in immunodeficient mice . Lab Invest 2001 ; 81 : 453 - 63 . 17 . Konttinen Y , Imai S , Suda A . Neuropeptides and the puzzle of bone remodeling . State of the art . Acta Orthop Scand 2006 ; 67 : 632 - 9 . 18 . Eppley BL , Snyders RV , Winkelmann TM , Roufa DG . Efficacy of nerve growth factor in regeneration of the mandibular nerve : a preliminary report . J Oral Maxillofac Surg 1991 ; 49 : 61 - 8 . 19 . Zhang YP , Cui JX , Pei GX , Wang YG , Jin D , Qin Y , Chen B , Wei KH . [ A pri - mary study on reconstruction of neuralization of tissue engineered bone ] . Chin J Orthop Trauma 2005 ; 7 : 60 - 5 . 20 . Jin SQ . Practical Anatomy for Surgeons . Xi’an : Shaanxi Science and Technology Press ; 2002 . p . 194 - 5 . 21 . Li NY , Zhao BD , Yang XC , Tan CX , Gong DL . Intramandibular course and anatomic structure of the inferior alveolar nerve canal . Chin J Stomatol 2001 ; 36 : 446 - 7 . 22 . Yin XM , Dai JX , Wang XH , Xu DC , Zhong SZ . Observation of Blood Supplies System to Mandible in Transparent Specimen . Shanghai J Stomatol 2003 ; 12 : 266 - 8 .