INEQUALITY AND COMMUNICATIVE STRUGGLES IN DIGITAL TIMES : a Global Report on Communication for Social Progress CARGC PRESS Coordinating Lead Authors : Nick Couldry , Clemencia Rodriguez Lead Authors : Göran Bolin , Julie Cohen , Gerard Goggin , Marwan Kraidy , Koichi Iwabuchi , Kwang - Suk Lee , Jack Qiu , Ingrid Volkmer , Herman Wasserman , Yuezhi Zhao Contributing Authors : Olessia Koltsova , Inaya Rakhmani , Omar Rincón , Claudia Magallanes - Blanco , Pradip Thomasw Dear friends , It is a distinct pleasure to introduce INEQUALITY AND COMMUNICATIVE STRUGGLES IN DIGITAL TIMES : A GLOBAL REPORT ON COMMUNICATION FOR SOCIAL PROGRESS . Originally the “Media and Communication” chapter of the International Panel on Social Progress , published by Cambridge University Press , we hope this version as a CARGC Press book will expand the reach of the authors’ vision of communication for social progress . CARGC Press is the in - house publisher at the Center for Advanced Research in Global Communication at the University of Pennsyl - vania , Philadelphia , USA . This book coincides with the fifth anniversary of CARGC and CARGC Press , and ar - ticulates several core CARGC research themes , drawn directly from our mission to be “an institute for advanced study dedicated to global media studies” where scholars “re - visit enduring questions and engage pressing matters in geopolitics and communica - tion . ” These are Geopolitics of Media and Culture ; Theory and History in Global Media Studies ; Communicating Radicalism , Radicalizing Communication ; and Knowledge Production and Dissemination / CARGC Press . INEQUALITY AND COMMUNICATIVE STRUGGLES IN DIGITAL TIMES : A GLOBAL REPORT ON COMMUNICATION FOR SOCIAL PROGRESS exemplifies truly international colloboration , with authors hailing from the four corners of the world , housed in several disciplines , and with different approaches to communication . What unites us is a deeply held belief that communication strategies and practices must be deployed in the service of global social progress , a belief that animates every page of the book . This book echoes CARGC’s mission to advocate for a truly inclusive field of global me - dia and communication studies that recognizes plurality and inequality in our world , and engages with some of the most consequential issues of our era . We are very proud of our partnership with the International Panel on Social Progress , and hope you find this publication useful . All the best , Marwan M . Kraidy Anthony Shadid Chair in Global Media , Politics and Culture Director , Center for Advanced Research in Global Communication Annenberg School for Communication Andrew Carnegie Fellow 1 Summary Developments in digital technologies over the last thirty years have expanded massively human beings’ capacity to communicate across time and space ( Section 1 ) . Media infrastructures have si - multaneously acquired huge complexity . By “me - dia” we mean technologies for the production , dissemination , and reception of communication , but also the contents distributed through those technologies and the institutions associated with their production , dissemination , and reception . The relations between media , communications , and social progress are complex . More peo - ple can now make meaning and be connected through media , providing an important resource for new movements for justice and social prog - ress . Meanwhile the uneven distribution of op - portunities to access and use media is itself a di - mension of social justice . Media infrastructures , and media access , have spread unevenly ( Section 2 ) , and media’s con - sequences for social progress cannot be deter - mined at a general level . Traditional and digital media have developed according to distinctive histories across the world ( 2 . 1 ) , with varying marketization and state control ( case studies on Inequality and Communicative Struggles in Digital Times : a Global Report on Communication for Social Progress1 Coordinating Lead Authors : 2 Nick Couldry , Clemencia Rodriguez Lead Authors : 3 Göran Bolin , Julie Cohen , Gerard Goggin , Marwan Kraidy , Koichi Iwabuchi , Kwang - Suk Lee , Jack Qiu , Ingrid Volkmer , Herman Wasserman , Yuezhi Zhao Contributing Authors : 4 Olessia Koltsova , Inaya Rakhmani , Omar Rincón , Claudia Magallanes - Blanco , Pradip Thomas 1 This was originally published as Chapter 13 , “Media and Communications , ” of International Panel on Social Progress : Rethinking Society for the 21st Century , Cambridge University Press , 2018 . The authors of chapter 13 would like to thank the following : Miriam Rahali , doctoral researcher at the London School of Economics , for her huge support in managing the drafting process and bringing together the final version ( with her skill and professionalism , the task would have been impossible ! ) ; Guy Berger of UNESCO and Anita Gurumurthy of ITforChange for their excellent comments on an earlier draft , as well as all those who contributed through IPSP’s public comments process ; and Emma Christina Montaña for her excellent work on the Spanish translation of the chapter . 2 Affiliations : The London School of Economics and Political Science , U . K . ; Temple University , USA 3 Affiliations : Södertörn University , Sweden ; Georgetown University , USA ; University of Sydney , Australia ; University of Pennsylvania , USA ; Monash University , Australia ; Seoul National University of Science and Technology , South Korea ; The Chinese University , Hong Kong ; University of Melbourne , Australia ; University of Cape Town , South Africa ; Simon Fraser University , Canada 4 Affiliations : National Research University , Russia ; University of Indonesia , Indonesia ; C3 – Fundación Friedrich Ebert , Colombia ; Universidad Iberoamericana Puebla , Mexico ; University of Queensland , Australia 2 China , Russia , Sweden , South Africa , Indonesia , and Mexico : 2 . 2 ) . Inequalities of access to media infrastructures ( 2 . 3 ) are stark , between and with - in regions and inside countries , with implications for the Sustainable Development Goals ( SDGs ) . Cultural flows through media vary greatly within and between regions ( 2 . 4 ) . Meanwhile ( 2 . 5 ) people’s increasing dependence on an online infrastructure that mediates daily life increases the importance of the corporations , which provide that infrastructure . This has trans - formed the governance of media infrastructures ( Section 3 ) , with a shift from formal to infor - mal governance and the growing importance of transnational governance institutions and prac - tices , whereby corporations , not states , exercise predominant influence ( 3 . 2 ) , including through the operations of algorithms , with ambiguous implications for corporate power and individual rights , for the public sphere and for social prog - ress ( 3 . 3 ) . Journalism has for centuries been a key institu - tional form for disseminating public knowledge , and so contributing to social progress ( Section 4 ) . While digital technologies have expanded who can do journalism ( see 4 . 5 on citizens’ me - dia ) , other aspects of digitization have under - mined the economics of public journalism ( 4 . 3 ) , with new threats to journalists from growing political instability ( 4 . 4 ) . Even so , there are new voices within global journalism ( 4 . 6 on TeleSUR and Al - Jazeera ) . The increasing networking of communications changes citizenship too , as citizens find infor - mation , develop imaginative loyalties and make practical connections beyond national borders , not only within the Global North ( Section 5 ) and with particular implications for global youth ( 5 . 2 ) . A more “connected” life is however not simply “better” ( see 5 . 3’s case study of life in a Chinese heritage village and 5 . 4 on the me - dia - based oppression and resistance of precari - ous workers in East Asia ) . Struggles for social justice through the democ - ratization of media ( Section 6 ) have acquired new prominence , echoing previous struggles ( 6 . 1 ) and foregrounding the transparency and accountability of media infrastructures , and data flows in particular , ( 6 . 2 ) , with implications for the SDGs and Social Progress Index ( SPI ) . Con - cerns include net neutrality , Internet freedom , algorithms’ discriminatory operations , and the automated surveillance on which most online businesses now rely . There are implications for state and corporate power ( 6 . 5 ) which civil soci - ety has challenged ( 6 . 4 on India and Facebook’s Free Basics ) . A bold new model of Internet gov - ernance has emerged in Brazil ( 6 . 6 on Marco Civil ) . Yet media remain the channel through which many struggles for social progress are pursued ( Section 7 ) . An important example of innovative media use for social progress was the Zapatis - tas in Mexico ( 7 . 1 ) , but social movements’ uses of media technologies have taken many forms across the world , exposing important constraints ( 7 . 2 ) . Since old media generally do not disappear but are linked up in new ways through digital media , it is overall ecologies of media resource on which movements that struggle for social progress have drawn ( 7 . 3 ) , with struggles against the injustices faced by disabled people being an example of the creative use of media resources ( 7 . 4 ) . Effective access to media is a necessary compo - nent of social justice ( Section 8 ) . But media’s consequences for social progress are complicated by uneven media access , the plurality of spaces 3 where people connect through media , and the multiple uses of communication resources ( hate speech is enabled by the Internet too ) . The SPI should measure the distribution of opportunities for effective media access and use , and address communication rights . Media infrastructures are a common good whose governance should be open to democratic participation . Concerns about automated surveillance and the environ - mental costs of digital waste must also be ad - dressed . Our action plan and toolkit list various measures to these ends . Media’s role in social change , and potentially so - cial progress , is often assumed , rather than fully investigated . “Media” are inherently complex , in themselves and in their consequences . By “me - dia” we mean primarily technologies for the pro - duction , dissemination and reception of commu - nications , but ( in accordance with the common usage of the word “media” and its equivalents in many languages ) we include also contents dis - tributed through those technologies and the in - stitutions associated with their production , dis - semination , and reception . By “social progress , ” we refer to the development of societies towards the progressive enablement of human beings to fulfil their needs and capabilities ( Sen 1999 ; Sti - glitz , Sen , and Fitoussi 2009 ; compare the Social Progress Index [ Porter and Stern 2015 ] , especial - ly “Access to information and communication” ) . The consequences of media for social progress can be approached from many angles . Our main emphasis will be on media as providers of con - tent and infrastructures of connection , since these are media’s most important aspects for so - cial progress . 1 . 1 Media as infrastructures of connection Developments in media technologies over the past three decades have expanded massively the capacity of human beings and automated systems to create , use , disseminate , and store information and content of all types across time and space . This has happened through the emergence of the Internet , the digitization of previously analogue content , and the development of new platforms and devices . Changes have come so fast that it is easy to forget the much longer history of media’s role in the formation of modern societies , pol - ities , and economies . In this chapter we seek to recognize that longer history , while also reflect - ing upon the dramatic nature of media’s transfor - mations over the past three decades . Media inherently involve the production , shar - ing and interpretation of meanings , and so me - dia processes are always contestable and open to further interpretation . Yet media remain at the same time infrastructure : networks of inter - dependencies that enable social , political , and economic action , but also encode both cultural and technological constraints . This double role of media , as both meaning and infrastructure ( Sewell 2005 ; Boczkowski and Siles 2014 ) , re - quires investigating both media cultures – what users and audiences do with the media , their “media - related practices” ( Couldry 2012 ) – and media affordances : how media infrastructures shape the range of possible uses available to ev - eryday users and audiences . 1 . Introduction : media infrastructures and communication flows 4 1 . 2 Media as enablers of increasing cultural complexity Media infrastructures have acquired a particular complexity and reach in the past three decades due to the global but uneven spread of the In - ternet and social media platforms . Globalization has distributed flows of meaning more transna - tionally than before . Mundane exposure to me - dia images and messages that flow from other parts of the world encourages people to become more reflexively open to the meanings produced in other places . This has generated unprecedent - ed cross - border connection , dialogue , and soli - darity . However the basic patterns underlying contem - porary media flows have much earlier origins . From the birth of the press through the devel - opment of postal , telephone , radio , and televi - sion networks , media flows and infrastructures have been crucial to successive modern forms of citizenship , providing information about governments and markets , connecting national populations and economies , providing forums for citizen practice and underpinning national identity ( Anderson 1983 ) . Media flows and in - frastructures have also played central roles in projects of political and economic domination , providing the information necessary to govern empires , manage enterprises , and control popu - lations . But media’s spread across the world has been uneven , as Section 2 explains . Despite increasing convergence of platforms for media delivery , proliferating media flows and infrastructures have produced cultural complex - ity and increased the possibilities for cultural contestation , within and across national bor - ders ( Hannerz 1992 ; Iwabuchi 2002 ) . Imagined communities , sustained by media , now prolifer - ate involving for example marginalized people , diasporic communities , and political activists . Digital media have also enabled more people to become active producers and disseminators of images and meanings . This expanded productiv - ity of meaning through media has itself become a practical precondition for new movements for social progress . 1 . 3 The social justice issues raised by media and communications Through media , individuals and groups have more cultural resources with which to interpret and challenge cultural forms . Such access enrich - es the modalities of political action and protest , with consequences for social change and social progress ( relevant SPI indicators are “Person - al rights” and “Personal freedom and choice” ) . 5 The political struggles against slavery in the nineteenth century and for the civil rights of all ethnic groups in the late twentieth century were also cultural struggles that drew on contempo - rary media resources . But because media im - pact is always contestable , the consequences of media practice and media innovations for social progress cannot be determined at a general level . Media globalization has both engendered indif - ference and disparity of attention and promoted dialogue and solidarity . Media and communi - cations’ contribution to social progress must al - ways be considered at more specific levels . Nonetheless , since connection is important to people’s possibilities of action , the uneven distri - bution of opportunities to access media and use them effectively is a dimension of social justice in its own right . Improved “access to information 5 The SPI report is found in Porter and Stern 2015 . 5 and communications technology , ” including “universal affordable access to the Internet” by 2020 , is rightly a Sustainable Development Goal ( SDG 9 . c ) , 6 but it raises fundamental social jus - tice issues too . First , media are a key resource that enables the “reality” of particular social and political territories to be framed one way rather than another ; as a result , media , through their operations , can perpetrate specific “injustices [ in ] framing” ( Fraser 2005 : 79 ) the social world . Second , because media have the symbolic power to construct general realities , media institutions comprise a resource whose long - term distribu - tion can be unjust . Some battles for social prog - ress contest particular media representations ; others challenge media institutions’ general control over symbolic power . In still other cases , media provide a forum for challenging injustices unconnected with media . The relations between media , communications , and social progress are therefore inherently complex . Measures of social progress ( such as the SPI ) require considerable adjustment if they are to fully take account of media’s contribution to social progress : measures of technological ac - cess alone are insufficient . Nor ( see Section 2 ) is there a common pattern to how media institu - tions “work” in societies across the world . Even so , media and communications have important potential to contribute to particular struggles for social justice . 1 . 4 Media , communications and the longer global struggle for media reform Now is not the first time that the implications of media flows and infrastructures for social prog - ress have been considered on a global scale . Such questions were central to the MacBride Report prepared for UNESCO in 1980 ( Many Voices , One World ) , which followed two decades of con - tested debate about “development” . The report proposed a New World Information and Com - munication Order ( “NWICO” ) and challenged the assumption that a global media infrastructure dominated by “the West” was good for democra - cy , social order and human rights . But the Mac - Bride Report’s proposals were not implemented , and a recent attempt to revive their broad agenda ( the World Summit on the Information Society in 2003 ) has also achieved only limited success . 7 The history of “media reform” on a global scale is an interrupted one ( MacBride and Roach 1989 ) , which we discuss more fully in Section 6 . Mean - while , the relations between media and capitalist accumulation ( Schiller 1999 ; Jin 2015 ) become ever more complex , and new market - based me - dia infrastructures – for example , social media platforms and the vast infrastructures of data ex - traction on which they rely – pose increasingly urgent questions for social life and democratic practice . 6 The SDGs are found in United Nations 2015 . 7 For a reassessment , see Vincent and Nordenstreng ( 2015 ) . 6 This section introduces the diversity and uneven - ness of media infrastructures , media access , and media’s cultural dynamics across the world . As such , it provides the reference point for later dis - cussions of contemporary forms of communica - tion inequality and opportunities for , or threats to , public knowledge ( Sections 3 and 4 ) and the emergence of new spaces for citizenship ( Section 5 ) and the long history of struggles for “democra - tization of media” and “democratization through media” ( Zhao and Hackett 2005 ) ( Sections 6 and 7 ) . 2 . 1 Traditional media and the Internet as infrastructures of connection Policy discourses about media have been dom - inated by the histories of how “modern” media ( newspapers , radio , television , film ) developed in Western Europe and North America . While scholarship on the complex regional flows of media has challenged the dominance of Western history ( Schiller 1969 ; Boyd - Barrett 1977 ; Iwa - buchi 2007 ; Sinclair and Jacka 1996 ) , the same geographical skewing has been repeated in re - cent accounts of the rise of the Internet ( Chan 2013 ) . We will argue against this simplified view . No universal history of media is possible on a global scale . Today’s uneven global media land - scape reflects many diverse histories : the con - trasting reliance on public service versus com - mercial models of broadcasting in European and North American media systems ; major lin - guistic and institutional diversity in Australasia and the Pacific ; the contrasting roles played by state and market in India versus China ; the su - per - fast growth of online connectivity in North - East Asian economies dominated by Chaebols ( family - owned multinationals in South Korea ) ; the contrasting legacies of colonialism in media development in Africa and Latin America ; the distinctive role played by Gulf petro - monarchies in the Arab region’s media . There are many pos - sible relations between media , state , market , and society , each shaped differently by geopolitical forces , which rule out a universal narrative of “media and 10 social progress” . In what follows we present case studies from different regions to underscore not only media’s diversity at a na - tional level , but also how variously media and communication systems intersect to generate re - sources for social progress . Further case studies are added in later Sections ( 4 and 6 ) . 2 . 2 Case Studies Country case study one : China / Russia 8 Today , Russia and China have large media sys - tems which are highly distinctive in that , while incorporating various market features , they trace their historical origins to twentieth centu - ry state - controlled noncommercial media sys - tems , whose organization had intellectual roots in Marxist - Leninist critiques of capitalist and imperialist control of the media in the West . As such , both systems share the legacy of today’s “social movement media , ” but are also internally complex and marked by nationalistic and secto - rial struggles . Indeed , the Chinese system had distinctive differences from the Soviet model and by the early 1960s , the Soviet and Chinese me - dia systems were in serious ideological conflict . 2 . Media industries from print to the Internet 8 Material on Russia in this case study written by Olessia Koltsova . 7 By the late 1960s , the Chinese media system was destabilized in the onset of the Cultural Revolu - tion . Nevertheless , what these historical systems had in common was their communist visions of achieving social progress through ideological mobilization and cultural enfranchisement . This vision provided many Third World postcolonial states with alternative models for media organi - zation from those in the West while also provid - ing inspiration for social struggles in the West , including U . S . civil rights struggles ( Dudziak 2000 ; Frazier 2015 ) . However , bureaucratic ossi - fication , and other forms of political , social , and cultural repression , as well as the influence of Western media , contributed to the transforma - tions of China’s and Russia’s media systems from the early 1980s . The collapse of the Soviet Union left Russia with a television - centered noncommercial media sys - tem . Liberalization , fractionalization of the post - communist political elite , and economic difficul - ties led to privatization of state TV channels in the mid - 1990s . Newly founded private television channels emerged as the economic situation im - proved , bringing more diversity into the media landscape . However , the early years of the twen - ty - first century have seen a gradual renational - ization of most leading TV channels , outside the entertainment sector . The Russian government inherited from its Soviet predecessor direct con - trol over transmission networks and appoint - ment of the top television management . While the 1990s saw media wars between different tele - vision channels representing various political groups , the 2000s were marked by emergence of an identical pro - Kremlin picture on most TV channels . Social and media development is , however , very uneven across Russian provinc - es , varying from near subsistence farmers ( with access to just 2 - 3 analogue TV channels and no Internet ) to highly networked and cosmopolitan major cities . The government’s television - based policy of media control is more effective in poor - er , less connected regions . While the authorities have allowed a few oppositional media outlets ( TV Dojd’ [ Rain ] on the Internet ; RBC [ Ros - BusinessConsulting ] on cable and satellite ; Ekho Moskvy [ Echo of Moscow ] on the radio ) , they have very little influence on public opinion . On a global scale , given the denial for two decades to Russian television of broadcasting frequencies in most post - Soviet countries , the government launched Russia Today as a news provider , which is rapidly emerging as a major transnational sat - ellite channel . Against the trend of most other Russian indus - tries , the Russian Internet industry has been very successful . Russia is the only country where lo - cal Internet businesses have beaten global giants without any protective barriers , with Yandex search engine more popular in Russia than Goo - gle , while Vkontakte and Odnoklassniki social networking sites are attracting much larger local audiences than Facebook . Nevertheless , the Rus - sian government is facing a challenging choice with regard to Internet management . It has been eager to make the Internet a “locomotive” for the rest of the Russian economy , but this risk weakens disrupting the vision promoted by the government’s continued control of Russian tele - vision , since government control of the Internet is weaker . Attempts to increase Internet control through progovernment ownership of Russian social media sites such as LiveJournal and VKon - takte might drive a key segment of the news reading Internet audience to foreign competitors such as Facebook . The Russian government has developed three main tactics : gaining ownership over online media ; producing its own “user gen - erated content” ; and blocking websites . The re - sult has been a dramatic polarization of Russian audiences between a loyal majority and a criti - 8 cal minority both online and offline . This policy coupled with state support of Internet - based cre - ativity , has encouraged the Russian IT sector to move away from politically sensitive issues . China’s post - 1980 media system has developed very differently from the Russian system . Chi - na’s media system retains its overall Leninist structure and core organizational principles , yet through post - Mao China’s economic growth and rapid industrial expansion , China’s print and broadcasting media industries are both larger and more highly developed , and more tightly integrated and centrally controlled than Russia’s . By mid - 2015 , China had over 2 , 000 newspaper titles , nearly 10 , 000 periodicals , more than 300 television stations with nearly 3 , 000 channels , with an audience reach of 1 . 35 billion . However , following nearly four decades of state - directed commercialization , market consolidation , glob - al integration , and digital convergence , China’s media also bear the hallmarks of market - driven systems familiar in other parts of the world . At the core of China’s media and communica - tions infrastructure are state - controlled media and communications conglomerations organized at national and provincial levels , including Xin - hua News Agency , People’s Daily Group , CCTV , China National Radio and China Radio Inter - national , and state - owned telecommunication providers such as China Mobile , China Telecom , and China Unicom . Regional media conglomer - ates such as Shanghai Media and Entertainment Group , Guangdong Nanfang Media Group , and Hunan Satellite Television have also been highly influential in spearheading institutional reform , operational innovations , and content diversifica - tion . While state control , political direction , and censorship remain an enduring issue for China’s media professional strata and citizens , particu - larly in relation to social media platforms , some outlets such as CCTV’s well - known prime time investigative show Focus Interviews have played a significant role in spearheading social reforms . Since the late 1990s , the Chinese state has sys - tematically aimed to build the size and strength of its media and communication operations . Targeted national initiatives such as the “con - necting every village” project have significantly improved access in China’s remote areas , mak - ing China’s media and communication infra - structure one of the most advanced in the Global South . At the same time , as part of the Chinese state’s effort to address long - standing imbalances in global communication and promote its own vision of “globalization , ” it has systematically ex - panded the reach of its media and communica - tion industries , with CCTV establishing branch - es in North America and Africa , and China Telecom and China Mobile expanding globally . The Chinese state’s persistent effort to control the “commanding heights” of converging media and communication industries , regulate global me - dia and communication flows , manage private and foreign capital investments , and pursue the latest technological innovations , has had a huge impact on the system’s evolving structure and values ( Hong 2017 ) . China’s framework for developing its media and communications infrastructure does not therefore fit with the dominant Western liberal framework that treats press freedom ( and “Inter - net freedom” ) , defined always as freedom from government control , as the precondition of so - cial progress . Each framework is explained by its distinctive historical and geopolitical context : accordingly , the more the Chinese media system evolves , the more the Communist Party of China seeks to emphasize its Leninist founding princi - ples . 9 Since the early 1990s , the Chinese state has mounted an all - out effort for information tech - nology development through various “golden projects” to integrate network applications with Chinese politics , economy , and society . In the af - termath of the 2008 global economic crisis , the Chinese state elevated the media , communica - tion , Internet , and cultural industries as a driver of economic restructuring ( Hong 2017 ) . In early 2015 , Premier Li Keqiang unveiled the Chinese state’s “Internet Plus Action Plan” to stimulate economic growth by integrating mobile Internet , cloud computing , big data and the “Internet of things” with modern manufacturing . No other issue has received as much strategic emphasis by consecutive Chinese leaderships in the past three decades . By the time China - based Internet firm Alibaba made a record - setting stock market de - but in New York in 2014 , China had established itself as the world’s largest Internet market in terms of the number of users , and in December 2015 China’s Internet population was 688 mil - lion – just over half of the national population ( China Internet Network Information Center 2016 ) . Yet in this project of making China into “a cyber power , ” the Chinese state treats citizen ac - cess and government control as not opposed , but indissolubly linked ( Xinhua 2014 ) . Meanwhile , various sectors of Chinese society have enthu - siastically embraced the Internet ( as less tightly controlled than the traditional media ) , turning it into a new terrain of discursive struggles over China’s future . These developments challenge any simplistic “state versus civil society” reading of how the Internet contributes to social progress : both the Chinese state and Chinese society have been em - powered through the Internet ( Zhang and Zheng 2012 ) , with outcomes significantly different from the parallel history of media in Russia . Country case study two : Sweden In contrast to government - controlled media regimes , Sweden’s media is shaped by a welfare state system and characterized by a distinctive re - lation between media and state , market and civil society . Traditionally , Sweden has had high voter turnout , and high levels of media and informa - tion literacy , not least due to the national subsidy system for print newspapers , which have result - ed in a plurality of local newspapers with high readership . Typically , the subsidy system pro - vided for a plurality of political positions , with at least two local or regional newspapers repre - senting two political viewpoints . Like other Eu - ropean countries , Sweden has had a strong pub - lic service broadcaster for radio and TV , which since the late 1980s has faced strong competition from commercial broadcasters . The communi - cations infrastructure has been well developed , with high penetrations of landline phones , mo - bile phones , and computers . The development of Sweden’s news media has followed a similar pattern as other north Europe - an countries , with weakening public service me - dia ( due to audiences migrating to commercial channels ) , and a drift within the press from a fo - cus on opinion formation to a closer tracking of market demand ( Weibull 2016 ) . Newspapers are today facing dramatic declines in readership , and advertising has migrated to the Internet . News consumption has also migrated from traditional press to social media such as Facebook and Twit - ter . This shift has challenged Sweden’s distinctive relations between media and wider society . Since the late 1990s Sweden has witnessed a tight horizontal integration of the media sector , with companies formerly working within one me - dia developing tie - ins or purchasing companies in other markets : Sweden’s largest media house 10 Bonnier , a book publisher in the nineteenth cen - tury , moved early into publishing newspapers and weekly / monthly magazines , and today owns television , cinemas , advertising , and social mar - keting outlets . The development of “media hous - es , ” with particular regions’ media being largely controlled by local or regional media houses , has also undermined the press subsidy system , un - dermining political variety in spite of continued state subsidy ( Nygren and Zuiderveld 2011 ) . The digitization of media contents in particular has changed the power dynamics within the me - dia industries , with the telecommunications in - dustries acquiring increased importance because of their centrality to Wi - Fi and broadband net - works . This infrastructural power was highlight - ed in 2016 , when TeliaSonera closed an exclu - sive deal with Facebook for free surfing through their networks , perceived as unfair competition by Swedish news publishers in print and broad - casting and contrary to the EU regulation on net neutrality ( compare Section 6 . 4 on Facebook In - dia ) . 9 Because of its well - developed infrastructure for high - speed Internet , Sweden is also known as a safe - haven for Internet piracy , with The Pirate Bay party – its most prominent symbol ( Larsson 2013 ; Andersson Schwarz 2013 ) – acting as a fo - cus for debates on media governance issues . Country case study three : South Africa South African media are arguably the most tech - nologically advanced on the African continent , offering a wide range of content across print , broadcast , and digital platforms . Its media land - scape involves a three - tiered model of public , commercial , and community media . South Af - rica became a democracy in 1994 , with its early period postindependence from Britain ( 1961 ) better seen as the continuation of colonialism in internal form ( the apartheid system ) ( Visser 1997 ) . But in many ways the country’s media show similarities with those elsewhere on the continent , where colonialism , the postcolonial transition , and globalization have shaped media systems . The changes that South African public broad - casting has undergone illustrate some of these shifts . As in other African countries under mil - itary or one - party state rule , the South Afri - can Broadcasting Corporation ( SABC ) under apartheid acted as a state broadcaster . In 1991 , the Windhoek Declaration , which was put to - gether by independent African journalists and endorsed by UNESCO , initiated a move to great - er freedom , pluralism , and independence as re - gards print media . This was followed ten years later by the African Charter on Broadcasting which created momentum for private , public , and community broadcasting . The Windhoek Declaration signalled a move towards greater in - dependence of broadcasting continentwide , even if in some countries like Zimbabwe there has been a deterioration in recent years ( Kupe 2016 ) . The Windhoek Declaration coincided with the period of negotiated transition in South Africa , which saw the SABC adopting a public service mandate and media freedom entrenched in the new Constitution . The SABC has however never been fully publicly funded , and is largely depen - dent on commercial funding ( Kupe 2014 : 29 ) . As in other African countries , the SABC has recent - ly seen a “push - back” from government ( Kupe 2016 ) : some argue its editorial independence has 9 SVT Opinion , 2 May 2016 . http : / / www . svt . se / opinion / telias - uppgorelse - med - facebook - ett - slag - mot - svenska - medieforetag . 11 eroded under pressure from an ANC govern - ment increasingly intolerant of media criticism . Other negative signs have been the proposal of a statutory Media Appeals Tribunal which would impose harsher sanctions on offending journal - ists and the Protection of State Information Bill which could criminalize whistleblowers , investi - gative journalists , and civil society activists who access information classified by government as secret ( R2K 2015 ) . South Africa led the way in newspaper develop - ment in Anglophone Africa , with the publica - tion of the Cape Town Gazette in 1800 ( Karikari 2007 : 13 ) , and a centuries - old private commercial press . Under apartheid , mainstream newspapers either supported the regime ( the Afrikaans - lan - guage press ) or provided a limited critique ( the English press ) , while an alternative , under - ground press engaged in a more radical critique of apartheid and faced harassment , censure , and closures . Democratization largely eliminated the parallelism between language and political ori - entation , and most South African newspapers adopted a watchdog approach to the government and reflected a liberal , commercial consensus . Meanwhile , South African media have been af - fected by global investment processes . The South African press was a major capitalist venture from its inception . For example , the South African media company Naspers has become a global - ized conglomerate , while the Irish Indepen - dent group bought the largest English - language newspaper group in 1994 , selling it in 2013 to the Sekunjalo consortium , in which Chinese busi - ness interests have a major stake . Widely seen as a vehicle for soft power in Africa , several state - owned Chinese media houses have offices on the continent ( Kenya as well as South Africa ) , in - cluding the news agency Xinhua , the newspaper China Daily , China Central Television , and Chi - na Radio International . China has also funded Africa’s media and communications infrastruc - ture ( Wu 2012 ) . The influence of the Chinese media presence and investments in African me - dia on journalistic norms and practices has been controversial , and challenges any simple regional or Western - dominated model of media diversity . During the transition to democracy , a particu - lar attempt was made to strengthen the commu - nity media sector through the establishment of the Media Development and Diversity Agency ( MDDA ) to fund media owned and controlled by the community they serve , especially to en - able more Black ownership of media ( Banda 2006 ) . Another important development has been the rise of popular tabloid newspapers which , although commercially owned , provide perspectives from the poor , mostly Black , work - ing class rarely found in mainstream print media ( Wasserman 2010 ) . Some of the most interesting alternatives to the mainstream print media in South Africa have been online ( the Daily Mav - erick , The Con and Groundup ) . Such publications have provided critical analysis and investigative reporting often surpassing the mainstream press in South Africa in diversity and depth . Despite the obstacles in terms of access and reach , dig - ital media platforms are increasingly reshaping social relationships and public spheres in Africa ( Mabweazara 2015 : 2 ) . Meanwhile , the mobile phone has had a massive impact as a platform for Internet access , for reconstituting traditional modes of sociality ( Mabweazara 2015 : 2 - 3 ) , and , via social media platforms , providing spaces for citizens to engage in political debate and mobi - lize for social change . Country case study four : Indonesia 10 An important case of a diverse media system is Indonesia , the largest economy in Southeast Asia 12 with a population of 240 million , and the fourth largest democracy in the world . The establish - ment of Indonesia’s modern media system owes greatly to the legacies of President Soeharto’s five - year economic development plans , which centralized capital and inhabitants in Java . For decades the authoritarian state held strong con - trol over media infrastructure and content , from the press , radio , film , satellite , to television . The media system was built to support state develop - mentalism , limiting civilians to accessing infor - mation provided by the state . During the 1960s - 1980s , Indonesia had a sin - gle , state broadcasting system , Television of the Republic of Indonesia . Although designed as a network system , television infrastructure and production relied heavily on central funding and programming ( Sen and Hill 2000 ) . The state - con - trolled television system shifted to an open , pri - vatized , and more liberal system in the late 1980s as a consequence of the government’s open mar - ket and open sky policy . These policies allowed foreign content via satellite television and cable networks ( Hollander et al . 2009 ) , which catered to the needs of the expanding urban middle class . By the early 1990s , dozens of private tele - vision stations had been founded , owned by the President’s close allies . This gave precedence to market demand over commercial news , and gradually weakened state control over informa - tion . Around the same time , the Internet came to Indonesia , providing an alternative source of information to a small elite in Java ( Sen and Hill 2000 ; Lim 2003 ) . Media liberalization and com - mercialization of information paved way for the growth of a civil society ( Hollander et al . 2009 ; Hill and Sen 2005 ) , which was the prelude to In - donesia’s transition towards democracy . The authoritarian regime finally broke under the weight of the Asian economic crisis of 1997 , in the face of increasing public pressure and con - flicting interests within the ruling elite , starting a social transformation among an expanding middle class amid conditions of unprecedented economic growth ( Basri 2012 ) . While market demand over commercial news had helped the push for democratic transition , since the ear - ly 2000s the development of the news media in Indonesia have relied more on market responses rather than having an independent democratic agenda ( see Lim 2011 ) . Television is Indonesia’s most popular media with a penetration rate of 97 % ( Nielsen 2014 ) , and it continues to attract the dominant share of advertising income . Second to television , the Internet has the high - est penetration rate of 34 . 9 % in 2014 ( APJII 2015 ) or 88 million users to 51 . 8 % in 2016 ( AP - JII 2016 ) . Nielsen ( 2011 ) estimated that 48 % of mobile phone owners use their phones to access the Internet . This has caused the closing of print versions of newspapers , while digital news has seen a steady rise . Over two decades , Indonesia’s media have seen a convergence whereby estab - lished media companies , initially specialized in one form of media – print , television , or online – are expanding into other media , forming larger , multiplatform converged conglomerates ( Tapsell 2015 ) . Indonesia experienced the largest num - ber of mergers and acquisitions in the history of its media system in 2011 ( Nugroho et al . 2012 ) , establishing four large media conglomerates , namely MNC Group , Jawa Pos Group , Kom - pas Gramedia Group , and Mahaka Group ( Lim 2012 ) . There has emerged a set of interconnect - ed relationships between politicians and media proprietors , with various political leaders own - ing media companies . The CEO of MNC Group , 10 Case study written by Inaya Rakhmani . 13 Hary Tanoesoedibjo , founded and heads the po - litical party Perindo , and ran for vice president of Indonesia in 2015 . MNC Group owns three terrestrial television stations , one pay television station with 60 % of market share , 14 local tele - vision stations , one newspaper , one online news portal , and several franchise magazines . This has allowed media conglomerates to republish the same news content on multiple platforms . Significantly , the Internet infrastructure and ser - vice provision remain dominated by state enter - prises Telkom and Indosat , which caters mostly to urban users in large cities . Media markets and conglomeration are concentrated in Jakarta and Java more broadly , monetizing the activities of Internet users in large cities while excluding us - ers in rural areas and small cities . Only 20 % of women in Indonesia have Internet access ( World Wide Web Foundation 2016 ) , which calls for new ways for inclusive approaches that are gen - der - informed ( see Triastuti 2014 ) . International forces are important too : in 2015 , 70 % of digi - tal advertising revenue in Indonesia ( USD 560 million ) went directly to Google and Facebook , rather than national companies . Consequently , media systems in Indonesia today still reflect the centralization model that was established since the 1960s , while also registering the power of global digital platforms . Country case study five : Mexico 11 The media system in Mexico is highly concen - trated and deeply marketized . Its core is com - mercial broadcasting , owned by private corpo - rations controlled by a handful of individuals . The power of those media corporations was built from alliances between powerful econom - ic groups aligned with government interests that have benefited from discretionary grants , televi - sion and radio concessions , lucrative contracts for governmental advertising in print media , and ad hoc legislation ( or lack of it ) in favor of the sector’s economic interests . After the Mexican Revolution ( 1910 - 1920 ) the country adopted a capitalist economic model and initiated a corporatization of the Mexican State . From 1929 to 2000 all presidents were members of the Partido Revolucionario Institucional ( PRI ) . Lack of regulation and communication policies led to a concentration of media in a few families . In the early twentieth century , well - established industrial families ( railways , mining , and bank - ing ) invested in radio broadcasting . After WWI , U . S . capital replaced European investments in Mexico , with large investments in the radio in - dustry ( radio stations , manufacture and sales of radio devices , records , phonographs ) . Today there are 1 , 600 radio stations , but 80 % of them are owned by thirteen commercial families . In 1950 the Mexican television industry started , modeled on the U . S . commercial system . The families who owned radio stations became , in turn , the owners of television stations , for exam - ple , the Azcárraga family which , from its original concession of Channel 2 , grew through mergers to create the now better - known Televisa ( Tele - visión Vía Satélite ) . From 1972 to 1993 Televisa was Mexico’s only private television company , competing with three public television channels . From its origins , Televisa had a close link with the ruling party PRI . Televisa subsequently be - came the most influential global producer and distributer of Spanish - language audiovisual con - tents , and currently owns free - to - air television channels , restricted television systems ( satellite and cable ) , a leading Spanish editorial house , 11 Case study written by Claudia Magallanes - Blanco . 14 radio stations , entertainment companies , soc - cer teams and stadiums , music recording com - panies , and cinema distribution companies . In the early 1990s the public television channels 7 and 13 were privatized . The Salinas Pliego family ( owners of departmental stores and previously radio manufacturers ) bought both channels and created Televisión Azteca offering contents sim - ilar to those of Televisa and aligning itself with the government . The early 1990s also saw the privatization of tele - communications , generating another monopoly ( Telmex - Telcel ) in the hands of just one individ - ual , Carlos Slim . Slim’s monopoly started with landline telephone services ( Telmex has 65 % of the national market ) and moved on to mobile te - lephony ( Telcel has 65 % of subscribers ) and In - ternet services ( 75 % of subscribers ) . The govern - ment justified the sale of the nation’s telephone company to a single owner by arguing that a monopoly would scale economies , lower costs , and increase the number of landlines . However , Mexico’s mobile phone and Internet service costs are actually in the middle of international rank - ings ( International Telecommunications Union 2014 ) , and , although , since the early 2000s , In - ternet home users have grown from 5 % to 61 % of the population , the digital divide between urban and rural areas has widened . Political reforms have continuously supported deregulation and privatization , and changes in legislation have meant more power and influence for media monopolies , generating a mediacracy , where members of senate and congress have di - rect links with the media industry . In 2012 the PRI party regained the presidency of Mexico , with Enrique Peña Nieto elected with the full support of the media industry , mainly Televisa . In 2013 Peña Nieto promoted a historic constitu - tional reform in telecommunications and broad - casting with the aim to increase competition in the sector . The new legislation enabled Televisa to enter the telecommunications market by of - fering triple play services ( cable television , land - line telephone services , and Internet ) . Televisa now controls the market of restricted television ( cable and satellite ) with 60 % of subscribers and in 2014 and 2015 purchased two new cable com - panies . The new legislation punishes Telmex by imposing strict restrictions on telephone carriers ( cancellation of long distance fees ; a prohibition on charging for interconnection services ) . There are also positive aspects to this new legis - lation . While public services are still offered by private entities through concessions regimes that distinguish between commercial , public , and so - cial media ( indigenous and cultural ) , with the latter not allowed to sell advertisements ( previ - ously community and indigenous media were not recognized , and so operated outside any le - gal framework ) , telecommunications and broad - casting have now been defined as fundamental human rights and public services ( compare SDG 9 . c ) . As for telecommunications , the new leg - islation reserves a portion of the spectrum for social concessions , reflecting the work done by the community cellular network in creating a network of mobile phone services for indigenous communities previously denied mobile phone services by the major telecommunication com - panies . Civil society activism in Mexico has be - gun slowly to correct for some of the excesses of previous marketization . * * * * * The section has introduced the diversity of the world’s media systems and their organization : state , market , and civil society may work in iso - lation or together in multiple combinations , with varying consequences for how media and com - 15 munications outputs provide a context for social progress and struggles for social justice . 2 . 3 Unevenness of access The stark differences in access to media between population sectors may have consequences for social progress . It is significant that basic levels of mobile phone subscriptions and Internet ac - cess are included as items in the SPI , alongside concerns about state control of media registered in the press freedom index ( compare SDG 9 . c ) . Effective media access depends on the interrela - tionship between media and other closely related factors : literacy , language , and education ( SDG 4 ) . This is the central lesson from the “digital divide” debate : that simple availability of tech - nology is not sufficient for development or so - cial progress . Empowerment of people through Media and Information Literacy is an important prerequisite for fostering equitable access to in - formation and knowledge and promoting free , independent and pluralistic media and informa - tion systems ( UNESCO 2013 ) . Adequate levels of media use require training and education , dem - ocratic participation , accessibility of formats and technology for people with disabilities and other distinctive needs , diverse content in appropriate languages , freedom of expression , and opportu - nities for community and citizen - produced me - dia . The 2005 Tunis Agenda for The Information Society acknowledged these factors , and they have since been the focus of international efforts ( WSIS 2005 ) . The multifaceted nature of “access” is crucial to understanding media’s integral role in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals , and broader social progress ( International Tele - communications Union 2016 ) ( SPI “Access to in - formation and communications” ) . Globally , there has been progress on access to Internet and mobile phones in the past twenty years ( SPI “Access to information and commu - nications” ; “Mobile telephone subscriptions” ) . However , what such broad indicators of “ac - cess” mean on - the - ground is poorly understood : much depends on what kinds of media , Internet , and mobile content people can affordably access . What media access do people need as the min - imum for a “universal” service ? Without closer attention to these questions , today’s push to ev - er - greater digital connectivity only risks deepen - ing digital exclusion . There are regions with highly uneven media ac - cess . Asia , for instance , includes countries such as South Korea and Japan , both pioneers in digi - tal media , as well as emerging powerhouses ( In - dia , China ) . India has gone from fewer than 1 % of individuals using the Internet ( in 2000 - 2001 ) to 18 % in 2014 ; China has moved from 1 . 78 % in 2000 to 49 . 3 % in 2014 . Yet other Asian countries have poor media infrastructure , including Ban - gladesh ( 9 . 6 % Internet users ) and Laos ( 14 . 26 % ) ( International Telecommunications Union 2015 ) . In Latin America , the mobile phone land - scape is not homogenous , but the rapid spread of mobile phones is in part explained by the previ - ous lack of landlines . In a number of countries , total figures for mobile phone subscriptions are high – for instance , Chile , Argentina , and Méx - ico ( International Telecommunications Union 2016 ) . However , on closer inspection , there is a significant proportion of the population in these and other countries without adequate access to mobile communication – either through not owning a phone or through restricted use of ser - vices due to affordability ( Donner 2015 ) . Within countries , there are also striking dispar - ities in access ( SDG 9 . c ) , especially in rural and remote areas , among different sociodemograph - 16 ics , cultural , ethnic , and racial groups , and groups with reduced or uncertain legal or citizenship status ( for example migrants and internally dis - placed persons ) . Upon closer inspection , many cities with apparent “good infrastructure” dis - play great differences between the media “have - less” and “have - mores” . Yet other countries have seen extraordinary large - scale growth . Among China’s 688 million Internet users ( 2015 ) , the vast majority ( 620 million ) use social media ap - plications such as Weibo and Tencent’s Wechat ; around 90 % of China’s Internet - using popula - tion access the Internet through mobile phones , while Internet use for online payments , access to online education and medical services , has be - come widespread among the middle classes . We must however note the continuing lack of gender equity in access to and use of media . Significantly fewer women are connected to the Internet than men . In twenty - four of twen - ty - nine European countries between 2008 and 2010 , men outnumbered women users of Inter - net . For the same time period in non - European countries , men outnumbered women users in thirty - six of thirty - nine countries ( comprising OECD and non - OECD countries ) . The “global Internet user gender gap” widened from 11 % in 2013 to 12 % in 2016 . In the poorest countries , the gap is large : 31 % in the least developed countries . On a regional level , there is significant dispari - ty in the gender gap : 23 % in Africa compared to the Americas . In many countries , gender often intersects with other factors ( e . g . location , age ) to create even deeper inequalities . Only a few countries report higher Internet use by women compared to men ( International Telecommuni - cations Union 2016 ) . Such figures give just a partial insight into a com - plex situation of inequality . Profound changes in media technologies are typically accompanied by promises to improve gender inequalities yet such technologies are often unaffordable for many groups of women , and gender is often neglect - ed in design , education , and resource processes crucial to ensuring communication rights . The emergence of new technologies may generate new kinds of injustice and exclusion : misogyny and oppressive gender relations have taken dis - turbing forms on social media platforms . Such gendered aspects of media and ICTs significant - ly hinder social progress , as noted in the agenda laid out by UNESCO’s Global Alliance on Gen - der and Media . Media’s contribution to social progress cannot therefore be understood without grasping both the distribution and differentiation of media ac - cess , and how they shape possibilities for politi - cal and social agency . 2 . 4 Cultural flows of media within regions Putting the complexities of media infrastruc - ture to one side , media’s cultural forms and con - sequences also vary significantly from region to region . Western colonial powers such as the United Kingdom , France and the United States dominated global information flows during and after the colonial period . Those media culture flows were unevenly shaped by the long - standing centrality of the United States , with which even the United Kingdom and France could not com - pete . Some Western countries ( such as France ) developed media regulation to contest U . S . cul - tural dominance and foster “national culture” . In a globalized world , however , more complex flows of media culture have evolved . Cultural globalization does not simply homogenize the world , but instead reorganizes the production of cultural diversity ( Hannerz 1996 ) . By cre - 17 atively localizing and indigenizing U . S . cultural influences , some non - Western countries such as Brazil , Mexico , Nigeria , Japan , South Korea and India have achieved high levels of media produc - tion capacity , especially in the last two decades . The media outputs of those countries circulate transnationally and are favorably received within and beyond their regions , generating important counterflows to U . S . dominance . In Latin America , the predominant mainstream cultural flow is telenovelas , or “soap opera” TV drama series , which have been exported globally . Export formats have evolved from selling pro - gram series to selling only the show’s central idea or main character ( Biltereyst and Meers 2000 ; La Pastina and Straubhaar 2005 ) . 12 Mexican , Brazil - ian , and Colombian television content has shift - ed what Latin Americans watch on their screens . If 1970s and 1980s generations grew up watch - ing mainly U . S . - produced imports , today’s Latin American audiences are exposed to the customs , life - styles , and social fabric of Latin American communities themselves . And , although Latin American media content still privileges the vis - ibility of upper class and predominantly White groups , some content does depict the experi - ences of working class and non - White Latin Americans . Additionally , free trade agreements and the growing number of migrants from Latin American countries to North America have gen - erated new North - South media content flows ; since 1994 , Spanish - language media has grown exponentially in the United States , and Univisión ( owned by Hallmark ) and Telemundo ( owned by Sony ) are the two main Spanish - language cable television networks . Univisión benefits from an agreement with Mexico’s Televisa , including a pipeline of Spanish - language content . Other less - er players in the global field of Spanish - language media include CNN , BBC , MTV , and Fox , with news and sports channels entirely in Spanish . 13 But overall the unevenness of mainstream au - diences’ daily media fare has not changed much since the mid - 1990s : Latin American media in - clude mostly Latin American and U . S . content ( music , films , TV ) , plus a trickle of Japanese an - ime and European media content ( mainly BBC ) . Flows from other regions of the world ( Africa , South and Southeast Asia ) are still scarce . The impact of globalization on African media has also shifted the flows and contraflows of media content and capital . After the long dominance of ex - colonial powers , many countries have recently developed media production capacities . A prom - inent example is the growth of the Nigerian film industry “Nollywood , ” which exports to a glob - al audience ( Krings and Onookome 2013 ; Lar - kin 2008 ) . It has become the third largest glob - al producer of feature films , next to Hollywood ( United States ) and Bollywood ( India ) , relying increasingly on coproduction and distribution with the Ghanaian film industry . Also notable are the growing African and global footprint of the South African media giant Naspers , and significant foreign investment in African media firms , especially from China ( Xinhua news agen - cy , China Central Television : see Section 2 . 1 ) . In Asia , India , Hong Kong , and Japan have devel - oped local film and TV industries and their out - puts have circulated within the region for many years . However , circulation outside the region has jumped sharply in the last two decades . The global diffusion of Bollywood films has become 12 The best example is the Colombian Ugly Betty , which has a Mexican and a U . S . adaptation , each completely different from the Colombian source , apart from the main character ( Miller 2010 ) . 13 http : / / palabraclave . unisabana . edu . co / index . php / palabraclave / article / viewFile / 4669 / pdf 18 much more prominent ( Kavoori and Punath - ambekar 2008 ; Gopal and Moorti 2008 ) . In East Asia , cultural products such as manga , anima - tion , video games , and TV dramas produced in Japan have generated a regional and global me - dia culture since the 1990s ( Iwabuchi 2002 ) . Even more notable is the so - called “Korean Wave” ( or Halryu , a term first coined by Chinese reporters in 1999 ) , whereby Korean cultural products such as films , television dramas , fashion , and popu - lar music ( K - pop ) have penetrated other Asian markets ( Chua and Iwabuchi 2008 ; Kim 2013 ) , Europe , and Latin America . The Korean Wave offers an intriguing example of how national cul - tural policy can be used as a form of soft power , bolstering local production capacity and pro - moting the export of media culture by “creative industries” . South Korea’s interventionist cultural policies position the Korean cultural industry as a “sub - empire” of the Hollywood system in Asia . The “Korean Wave” thus signifies the Korean culture industry’s ambiguous position as both a counterflow against the Hollywood system and a subflow co - opted by Hollywood . This complexity characterizes counterflows in other regions too . The more counterflows to American media culture advance , the more mar - ket - driven governance encompasses them . Even though relatively independent from the cultur - al dominance of the “Hollywood empire , ” the rise of media culture flows in non - Western re - gions has given rise to new intraregional asym - metries . American media culture maintains a pivotal presence , yet in a way that goes beyond a straightforward understanding of American cultural hegemony . Hollywood itself has striv - en to incorporate capital , talent , and narratives from many parts of the world and develop out - sourcing of postproduction labor on a global scale ( Miller et al . 2004 ) . The rise of non - West - ern media cultures forms part of a market - driven recentralization in which diverse players across the world collaborate to penetrate transnational markets , engendering a new kind of governance via marketing , coproduction , distribution , and copyright monopoly . Section 3 will discuss the emergence of global governance infrastructures for the regulation of information and data . This is not to underestimate the newly emerg - ing landscape of media globalization . Togeth - er with the progress of digital communication technologies , the acceleration of human mobil - ities from and among non - Western regions ( by migrants , expatriates , students ) has complicated the cross - border circulation and consumption of media cultures . Meanwhile cultural counter - flows between diverse regions and countries cul - tivate cross - border exchange and dialogue , with important implications for social progress . Re - gional circulation of diverse media cultures has enabled new kinds of cross - border connection , mutual understanding , and self - reflexivity by people about their own society and culture . The mutual consumption of media cultures , for exam - ple of entertainment genres popular with women audiences such as soap operas , has enabled mu - tual understanding of societies and cultures , for example in regions such as East Asia . However , as it is predominantly market - oriented forces that have advanced cross - border media circulation , it is the commercially and ideologically dominant elements of each country’s media culture that tend to travel , under - representing marginalized voices ( Iwabuchi 2002 ; 2015 ) . Crucial questions thus remain : whose voices and concerns are ex - cluded , what perceptions of self - other relation - ships are typically promoted , and which issues are under - represented , as the marketization of media culture flows advances ? Section 5 consid - ers the ambivalent consequences for practices of global citizenship that such media connections may foster . 19 2 . 5 Digital disruptions and transforma - tions ( technological , geo - political ) Even before 2005 , the global media landscape was highly uneven , and its implications for so - cial progress correspondingly complex . Some key developments since the middle of the cen - tury’s first decade ( when Facebook , the world’s current most successful social media platform , was launched ) have increased this complexity considerably . Of course there is not today “one” Internet – much of the Internet is inaccessible in language to large sections of the world’s popula - tion – but some key patterns are clear . The key technological development has been the shift from so - called “web 1 . 0” – a system of media infrastructure based on discrete web - sites , connected by hypertext links , with access obtained from desktop or laptop computers – to “web 2 . 0” characterized by increasing use of interactive online platforms , in particular social media platforms . Today , both platforms and websites are increasingly accessed from phones and other mobile devices , and the applications ( or “apps” ) embedded within them . This change from a “read only” to a “read / write” interface has intensified Internet use and its embedding in dai - ly life , heightening institutional attention to how audiences can be reached online and stimulating the rise of a vast commercial infrastructure of online data collection and data processing . This shift in media as “infrastructure” has involved also a significant cultural shift , as patterns of use have changed ( a shift in media as “meaning” ) . This double shift has multiple consequences . First , the increasing dependence in daily life on a complex , distributed online infrastructure for mediating daily life changes the power dynam - ics within the media industries , leading to the increased importance of the telecommunica - tions industries which provide infrastructures of connection ( Wi - Fi and broadband networks ) . Market convergence means that telecommuni - cations providers have the power of control “in the last instance” over the communication sys - tems on which all content distribution depends ( Bolin 2011 ) . Consider the vast scale of some new media infrastructure companies : Google’s annual revenue in 2015 was 74 . 5 billion USD , Facebook’s 17 . 9 billion USD , and Amazon’s 107 billion USD . 14 But the global balance is no longer one of simple U . S . dominance . By the end of 2014 , of the top ten Internet companies in the world , six are U . S . and four are Chinese . Indeed , the growing pow - er of China’s Internet market , with its distinc - tive Chinese platforms ( Sina’s Weibo , Tencent’s Wechat ) is such that Shi ( 2015 ) has argued that cyberspace now has two camps , GAFA ( Goo - gle , Amazon , Facebook and Apple ) and BATJ ( Baidu , Alibaba , Tencent , Jingdong ) . As a result , “the material foundation for U . S . - China co - gov - ernance of the Internet is in shape” ( Shi 2015 ) . This observation was made at the 2015 World Internet Conference Wuzhen Summit at which the Chinese state’s effort promoted its goal of shaping the future of global Internet governance , a strategy with profound implications not only for China , but also for global communication politics . Second , such developing power concentrations have implications for evermore sectors of every - day life from government to health ( SDG 3 ) . Take also education ( SDG 4 ) : concerns are developing regarding school learning materials increasing - ly provided not by the state but by commercial 14 http : / / www . statista . com / 20 media companies such as Apple and Google through initiatives such as Apple Education and Google for Education . Weaker welfare and pub - lic service systems are creating opportunities for market advances in areas such as education that were not previously much commercially exploit - ed ( Forsman 2014 ; Selwyn 2014 ) . Third , none of these developments would be possible without a huge double development in media’s “infrastructures of connection” : the vast infrastructure of data collection and process - ing which drives the activities of search engines and all sorts of digital platforms and , underpin - ning them , the default infrastructure of “cloud computing” ( Mosco 2014 ) which provides the capacity necessary for such data collection and processing , and for the general expansion of com - puter - based information processing in everyday life ( for example , the “Internet of Things” ) . Both developments expand what we mean by “media” and create new challenges for governance ( see Section 3 ) . At the same time , deep inequalities of access re - main , as noted in Section 2 . 2 . The African con - tinent , for example , remains characterized by widespread poverty , huge socioeconomic in - equalities , and highly differentiated patterns of media access and use , with the central parts of the continent most deprived ( Porter and Stern 2015 : 17 , 50 ) . Such inequalities have important implications for citizens’ ability to participate in any mediated public sphere ( see Sections 4 and 5 ) . We cannot therefore say that the “whole world” is being transformed by media at the same time and in the same way . Yet the overall direction of these large - scale transformations is changing how we think about media’s potential contribu - tion to social progress . 3 . The governance of media infrastructures As we showed in Section 2 , the global media landscape is complex and uneven , reflecting many diverse histories . The often opaque struc - tures of media governance that have emerged in the digital era are another factor that complicates media and communications’ contribution to so - cial progress . 3 . 1 The evolving relations between media infrastructures and government regulation of information flows Governments worldwide have expressed inter - ests in regulating media infrastructures . In some cases , such interests take the form of laws direct - ly prescribing the conditions of information ac - cess and exchange or the technical capabilities of media infrastructures . In others , legal incentives for the takedown of certain kinds of information produce regulatory effects . Legal regimes in many countries protect free - dom of expression , but all governments prohibit the publication and exchange of certain types of information . Additionally , “ [ m ] any democra - cies now deploy national - level filtering systems through which all ISPs ( or in some cases most major ones ) are compelled to block designat - ed lists of websites to address public concerns about … illegal activities conducted on the In - ternet” ( MacKinnon 2012 : 95 ) . Typical subjects of legal prohibitions include child pornography , speech offering material assistance to terrorists , 21 15 Digital Millennium Copyright Act of 1998 , Pub . L . No . 105 - 304 , Title II : Online Liability Limitation , 112 Stat . 2860 , codified as amended at 17 USC . § 512 . 16 Google Spain SL v . Agencia Española de Protección de Datos and Mario Costeja Gonzalez , No . C - 131 / 12 , 13 May 2014 . 17 Constitutional Court Decision 2010Hun - Ma47 , 23 August 2012 . speech that infringes intellectual property rights , and speech ruled to be defamatory . Additional - ly , some countries prohibit the dissemination of hate speech , and many set limits on the collec - tion , dissemination , and processing of personal information , although data protection regimes vary considerably from country to country . There are good reasons for all these prohibitions , but each involves governments in decisions about what is or is not prohibited , and therefore raises the possibility of overbroad interpretation lead - ing to censorship of other , nominally protected expression . Such decisions necessarily have im - plications for the quality of social life and the possibilities for social progress . In some situations , legal rules incentivize me - dia infrastructure companies to create no - tice - and - takedown mechanisms for removal of prohibited information . To create an additional , more consistent set of incentives for removal , many countries have enacted legislation that pro - vides safe harbour from copyright infringement liability if procedures are followed for removal of unauthorized copyright - protected materials from publicly available websites and / or exclusion of such materials from search results . The first copyright safe harbour legislation was enacted by the United States as part of the Digital Millen - nium Copyright Act of 1998 . 15 Similar provisions have been enacted in many other countries , often following inclusion of such obligations in bilater - al or multilateral free trade agreements negotiat - ed by the United States ( Fink and Reichenmiller 2006 ; see also Valdes and McCann 2014 ) . More recently , European legal instruments regarding privacy and data protection have been inter - preted to afford enforceable rights to deindex - ing and erasure of information made available online . 16 Those rulings have prompted some on - line information providers , including most no - tably Google , to develop notice - and - takedown mechanisms patterned after the copyright model ( Powles and Chaparro 2015 ) . Such legal struc - tures play important roles in shaping the “rules of the game” regarding information flow in daily life . Meanwhile , governments in some regions have invested heavily in the development of technol - ogies for regulating citizens’ informational activ - ities more directly and on highly granular levels . South Korea , for example , for several years en - forced a “real - name system” for Internet access that prevented anonymous expression online . In 2012 , the Constitutional Court of Korea struck down the real - name requirements , ruling that they violated Internet users’ freedom of speech . 17 Automated content filtering of information sup - plied via media infrastructures is pervasive . Such filtering is often justified by asserted needs that parallel the reasons offered for direct speech pro - hibitions ( e . g . , protection against pornography , copyright infringement , and / or defamation and harassment ) ; in operation , however , it also seeks to police and deny access to content for political reasons ( MacKinnon 2012 ) . On another level , not just governments but cor - porations ( from Europe , North America , and Asia ) are heavily involved in the building of me - dia infrastructures for example through the ex - port of technologies to the Global South . Such infrastructures often include built - in capacities 22 for censorship and surveillance . Chinese com - panies export technologies similar to those de - veloped to Communist Party specifications for domestic use ( MacKinnon 2012 ) . When the Zimbabwean government jammed shortwave broadcasts in the run - up to the 2005 elections , it was believed to have done so by using jamming equipment provided by China ( Wu 2012 ) . But North American and European companies such as Cisco also export information technologies built to customer specification to enable infor - mational control , and global platform companies have acceded to demands for censorship to gain access to local markets ( Wu 2012 ; Stirland 2008 ) . 3 . 2 The shift from formal to informal gov - ernance and the rise of new global / transna - tional governance institutions Direct government mandates , prohibitions , and procurements are the most obvious mechanisms through which media infrastructures are gov - erned , but other mechanisms are equally import - ant . The emergence of a networked information economy and the globalization of mediated in - formation flows have catalyzed two significant shifts in the nature and quality of governance . The first is a shift away from formal government regulation toward informal and often highly cor - poratized governance mechanisms . The second is a shift away from state - based governance ( and global governance institutions organized around state membership ) toward transnational gover - nance institutions more directly responsive to the asserted needs of private entities , often also corporations , that are those institutions’ “stake - holders” . Both trends , if they continue unabated , may result in a serious imbalance inconsistent with SDG 16 , which calls for the building of “ef - fective , accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels” . Particularly in the Global North but also the Global South , the information networks and communication protocols that underlie media infrastructures are designed and operated by private , corporate entities . Direct technical au - thority over networks and protocols gives those entities an authority that is inherently regulato - ry . Global platform companies such as Google , Twitter , Facebook , Microsoft , and Apple , each of which occupies a dominant market position globally , enjoy correspondingly stronger and more pervasive regulatory power . The regulatory effects of technology take a va - riety of forms and produce a variety of effects , some beneficial and others less so . For example , security measures designed to prevent unautho - rized access to networks , servers , and accounts protect private , personal information and im - portant corporate and government information from prying eyes and malicious actors . Flawed or poorly implemented security measures can introduce vulnerabilities into the network , ex - posing individuals to identity theft , surveillance , censorship , and political persecution . Likewise , flawed or poorly implemented security mea - sures can expose corporations , governments , and key power and communications infrastruc - tures to espionage and cyberattack . But techni - cal protections applied to media infrastructures and content flows can also have direct impacts on important aspects of social life : for example , affecting the information access necessary for education , self - development , cultural participa - tion , informed voting , and open and democratic government ( Citron 2008 ; Cohen 2012 ) . Gover - nance processes in relation to media infrastruc - tures are therefore much more than a “technical” concern . There are other examples of how media gover - nance affects social life . Many platform compa - 23 nies ( e . g . , Google / YouTube , Facebook , Twitter ) employ filtering algorithms to remove or de - list content that infringes copyright and related rights . Such automated mechanisms for content removal tend to be overinclusive , removing both material that is clearly infringing and material that would be covered by the various limitations and exceptions to copyright ( Quilter and Urban 2005 ; see also United Nations 2011 ) . In addition , many platform companies employ predictive algorithms to determine what infor - mation to display to their users . In networked digital media and particularly for mobile appli - cations , access to information is comprehensive - ly mediated by such algorithms , which process data collected from users , often in combination with data purchased from other information collectors and aggregators , and rely on what is known or inferred about users to generate cor - relations and predictions ( Turow 2011 ; Bolin 2011 ) . National security services engage in simi - lar data collection and process , often sharing the results with one another and helping each other circumvent the restrictions that might apply to data collection and processing conducted with - in territorial boundaries ( Privacy International 2013 ) . Like the filtering algorithms used for con - tent monitoring , the predictive algorithms used in commercial contexts are maintained as pro - prietary trade secrets , while their counterparts on the intelligence side are maintained as state secrets . In both cases , secrecy frustrates efforts to document and understand the effects of such filtering processes on the flow of daily life and on everyday freedoms ( Cohen 2012 ; Pasquale 2015 ) . The relationships between governments and the corporate entities that exercise alternative forms of governance over media infrastructures are complex and often contested . For governments seeking greater regulatory authority over media infrastructures , the control exercised by corpo - rate entities presents an obvious target for reg - ulatory intervention ( Birnhack and Elkin - Koren 2006 ; MacKinnon 2012 ; United Nations 2011 ) . In China , for example , the coordination between state and private governance is relatively tight , fuelled by close ties between the state / commu - nist party and IT conglomerates . In North America and Europe , by contrast , the interplay of state and private governance mech - anisms is more complicated . There are powerful pressures to comply with government demands for access to information for law enforcement and national security purposes , as the Snowden revelations showed . In the wake of those revela - tions , however , some companies , including most notably Apple , have redesigned their products and services to offer users greater privacy for their communications with each other ( though , as we discuss in Section 3 . 3 , they have contin - ued to collect other data streams for predictive targeting ) and have more aggressively resisted government demands for access ( Yadron 2016 ; Powles and Chaparro 2016 ) . Outside the law enforcement context , dynam - ics tend to be somewhat different , and reflect a greater perceived alignment of state and private interests . For example , U . S . companies that en - gage in collection and processing of personal information often count government entities among their customers ( Hoofnagle 2004 ) , and have looked to the U . S . government to protect their economic interests in relation to claims for stronger privacy and data protection regulation . European information companies , for their part , value cross - border trade but also look to the Eu - ropean Union for protection against U . S . - based rivals . With regard to private economic rights in information , copyright safe harbour legislation 24 effectively positions corporate information busi - nesses as the regulators of first resort . So far , how - ever , efforts to impose in law parallel takedown obligations on payment providers and domain name system registrars have not succeeded . The second shift described in this section – from state - based to transnational governance – in - volves two types of transnational governance institutions : trade dispute resolution bodies and technical standards bodies , in both of which the relative regulatory influence of corporations is growing . The global trade system has become a key mechanism through which both nation states and powerful corporate actors pursue their interests in regulating media infrastructures and controlling information flows . Many completed global , regional , and bilateral trade agreements – and many others currently under negotiation – contain key provisions dealing with recognition and enforcement of intellectual property rights and with flows of data and information services across borders ( Calabrese and Briziarelli 2011 ; Freedman 2003 ) . Although trade agreements typically contain provisions exempting protec - tions for public health , environmental protec - tion , and privacy rights from designation as non - tariff barriers , 18 the extent of those exemptions is unclear and their scope contested ( Public Citizen 2015a ) . Arbitral proceedings alleging violations of trade agreements therefore may work at cross purposes with efforts by domestic legislatures and courts and international human rights tri - bunals to set appropriate limits on right - holder control of information and on the collection , processing , and use of personal information to sort and categorize individuals and communi - ties . Meanwhile , technical standards bodies have at - tained increasing prominence and power . Net - worked digital communications operate via information transfer protocols . Such protocols determine the resources to which individuals and communities have access and , depending on their design , may enable particular types of surveillance or afford bottlenecks at which state or corporate regulatory authority can be brought to bear ( DeNardis 2014 ; MacKinnon 2012 ) . Those protocols are the responsibility of an in - terlocking network of global standards bodies , including the International Telecommunications Union ( ITU ) , the Internet Corporation for As - signed Names and Numbers ( ICANN ) , and the Internet Engineering Task Force ( IETF ) . These bodies have different charges and varying de - grees of connection to more traditional gover - nance institutions . For example , the ITU , which oversees standard - ization and implementation of a variety of pro - tocols for telecommunication , broadcasting , and data transfer , is overseen by the United Nations and representation is state - based , whereas the ICANN , which oversees the Internet naming and addressing protocols and maintains a dispute resolution system for resolving trademark - relat - ed domain name disputes , is a standalone corpo - rate body chartered under the laws of California , with policies set by an elected board of directors . In these multiple ways , the ability of national governments , and indirectly national civil so - cieties , to influence the workings of media in 18 See , for example , General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade , art . XX : General Exceptions , https : / / www . wto . org / english / docs _ e / legal _ e / gatt47 _ 02 _ e . htm # articleXX ; General Agreement on Trade in Services , art . XIV : General Exceptions , https : / / www . wto . org / english / res _ e / booksp _ e / analytic _ index _ e / gats _ 02 _ e . htm # article14 . 25 everyday life ( through governance structures ) has been challenged by the cross - cutting abil - ity of corporate interests to impose governance through other means . In considering the poten - tial implications of media for social progress we need therefore to take into account this underly - ing shift in regulatory power . 3 . 3 The ambiguous implications of me - dia - based governance for social progress For citizens , networked digital media infrastruc - tures may lower the costs of access to knowl - edge and enable new forms of participation in social , cultural , and economic life ( see Section 5 ) . At the same time , however , citizens’ access to many important informational and cultural re - sources is subject to control by neo - authoritarian states and by information intermediaries of var - ious sorts , including Internet access providers , search engines , mobile applications developers , and designers of proprietary media ecosystems . Such control often materially affects the level and quality of access . The implications for social progress are clearest when particular materials are blocked or removed , but mediated access also produces a range of other effects , which may or may not be consistent with SDG 9 concern - ing the construction of “resilient infrastructures” and the promotion of “inclusive and sustainable industrialization” . The increasingly global regime for intellectual property protection both incentivizes worldwide distribution of informational and cultural re - sources and creates additional barriers for those seeking access to such resources . As already sug - gested in Section 2 . 5 , licensing requirements for access to educational , professional , and technical materials can be onerous and the need to pay re - curring fees for continued access to digitalized resources ( rather than , for example , purchasing hard copies to which one may enjoy permanent access ) disproportionately burdens public insti - tutions and lower - resourced communities . In the Global South , the costs of access to copy - righted materials can render access infeasible even for educational institutions and libraries ( Chon 2007 ; Okediji 2004 , 2006 ) . In addition , a 1967 Berne Convention protocol governing translation rights is not widely used because its protections are difficult for developing countries to invoke . Among other things , the protocol re - quires that a compulsory licensing system be fully implemented in domestic law and does not make adequate provision for minority languag - es . 19 The Global South has adopted a variety of ad hoc solutions , but the lack of a clear framework often stymies efforts to make informational and cultural works available to global audiences that are linguistically and culturally diverse ( Cerda Silva 2012 ) . In many parts of the world and for large parts of the population , everyday life routinely involves online access to a wide variety of purveyors of news , information , and popular culture , as well as search engines , social networking platforms , and other content aggregators that seek to help users find , organize , and make sense of it all . Access to these resources may be offered at no financial cost to users on an advertiser - support - ed basis , but often such access has a price , in the form of the automated collection of information about personal reading , viewing , and listening habits ( Hoofnagle and Whittington 2014 ) . Such information can be used both to target advertis - 19 Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works , Appendix art . II , http : / / www . wipo . int / treaties / en / text . jsp ? file _ id = 283698 # P421 _ 79913 . 26 ing and to suggest content more likely to appeal to each user . Such predictive targeting of information access has a number of troubling economic and polit - ical implications . Algorithms for predictive tar - geting based on data about personal habits and preferences necessarily enable the identification of population segments sorted by , for example , race / nationality , cultural background , religious affiliation , socioeconomic status , and political preferences . Commercially , targeting based on such indicators raises the prospect of invidious discrimination in the distribution of goods and services , in decisions about employment and credit , and in myriad other ways ( Barocas and Selbst 2016 ; Robinson and Yu 2014 ) . The ability to conduct relatively granular price discrimina - tion over those goods and services , in ways that deprive ordinary individuals of choice and cor - responding marketplace leverage , sits in tension with free - market ideologies and raises profound distributive justice questions ( Cohen 2015 ) . Turning to politics , microtargeting of media con - tent and political appeals that align with ( infer - ences about ) recipients’ preexisting inclinations creates the prospect of an “echo chamber” or “fil - ter bubble” effect , through which preexisting in - clinations become reinforced and public opinion about political and cultural issues becomes cor - respondingly polarized ( Sunstein 2009 ; Pariser 2011 ) . 20 Individuals themselves can come to rely on filtering processes to simplify the information environment and reduce information overload ( Andrejevic 2013 ) . In an era in which descrip - tions of policy problems increasingly are subject to expert mediation – as with climate change or the global financial crisis – the filter bubble ef - fect can work to entrench beliefs in ways that are highly resistant to scientific challenge or debunk - ing ( Andrejevic 2013 : 12 - 18 , 42 - 61 , 113 - 32 ) . This can undermine efforts to mobilize popular and political support for action toward social prog - ress on various fronts ( environmental sustain - ability , financial accountability , and so on ) . A final set of ambiguities concerns the newly prominent transnational governance institutions described in Section 3 . 2 . Governance of media infrastructures and information flows via trade and technical standards bodies provides har - monization that many argue is essential in an increasingly interconnected world . But the new transnational governance institutions are ac - countable neither to national governments nor to traditional international governance institutions , and many lack robust democratic traditions of their own . Participation in such institutions may be perceived as offering opportunities for power - ful national and / or commercial interests to avoid roadblocks interposed by domestic regulation , by the international human rights framework , and by civil society groups ( Benvenisti 2015 ) . Within the global trade system , both negotia - tion and dispute resolution processes are highly responsive to corporate interests yet much less responsive to other interests . Trade dispute res - olution panels convened by the World Trade Or - ganisation have , to date , ruled against states as - serting protective regulation in all but one of the cases in which domestic protective regulations have been challenged ( Public Citizen 2015a ) . In recent rounds of negotiation over high - pro - file multilateral agreements such as the Trans Pacific Partnership and the Transatlantic Trade 20 In the United States , practices of political microtargeting are becoming widespread . See Lois Beckett , “How Companies Have Assembled Political Profiles for Millions of Internet Users , ” ProPublica , Oct . 22 , 2012 , https : / / www . propublica . org / article / how - companies - have - assembled - political - profiles - for - millions - of - Internet - us . 27 and Investment Partnership , trade associations representing corporate interests have enjoyed privileged access to country - level negotiators and working drafts , while civil society groups and interested members of the public have been allowed only brief glimpses of later - stage docu - ments , and only on condition of confidentiality . 21 Technical standards bodies , meanwhile , are only gradually coming to terms with their own role as governance bodies ( DeNardis 2009 ; DeNardis 2014 ; MacKinnon 2012 : 203 - 19 ) . The result is a landscape of everyday media con - sumption configured by forces that are increas - ingly in tension with shared flows of information and open , inclusive development . The multiple overlapping processes for governing media’s un - derlying infrastructures are ever more secretive and resistant to civil society influence . This is the complex starting - point for thinking about two important potential contributions of me - dia and communications to social progress : the role of journalism in the production of public knowledge ( Section 4 ) and the role of networked communications in enabling new forms of citi - zenship ( Section 5 ) . 4 . Journalism and public knowledge 21 See , for example , Howard Schneider , “Trade Deals a Closely Held Secret , Shared by More than 500 Advisers , ” Washing - ton Post , 28 Feb . 2014 , https : / / www . washingtonpost . com / business / economy / trade - deals - a - closely - held - secret - shared - by - more - than - 500 - advisers / 2014 / 02 / 28 / 7daa65ec - 9d99 - 11e3 - a050 - dc3322a94fa7 _ story . html ; Phillip Inman , “MPs Can View TTIP Files—But Take Only Pencil and Paper with Them , ” The Guardian , 18 Feb . 2016 , https : / / www . theguardian . com / business / 2016 / feb / 18 / mps - can - view - ttip - files - but - take - only - pencil - and - paper - with - them . One key way in which media can contribute to social progress over the long - term is through the provision of public knowledge ( Sen 1999 ) . The term “public knowledge” refers to the resources that citizens have for forming informed opin - ions about matters of public and general interest . Journalism has for centuries been a key institu - tional form for disseminating such knowledge . 4 . 1 Public knowledge for democracy and social progress Digital media infrastructures create new oppor - tunities for the dissemination of public knowl - edge . Although the decline in civic participation in established democratic societies has been widely lamented ( Putnam 2000 ) , other observers ( Lewis , Inthorn and Wahl - Jorgensen 2005 ; Dahl - gren 2009 ) have pointed to the growth of new communities online and the growth in quantity and diversity in communication platforms out - side of the traditional news media , where citi - zens can exchange information and participate in political debate . Additionally , whereas pub - lic knowledge traditionally was disseminated through news and information in the press , ra - dio , and television , social networking platforms are becoming a major news source for citizens . A recent survey conducted in the United States found that 44 % of respondents get their daily news from social media ( IPSP 2017 ) . The ques - tion of citizenship is complex , and cannot be dealt with at length here : we note however that large parts of the world’s population live with - out citizenship , and citizenship in a nation - state 28 does not protect citizens from rights - affecting actions controlled by institutions outside of the nation - state . Early research on public knowledge overempha - sized news distribution and correspondingly undervalued other sources of information , such as popular culture and entertainment ( Corner 1991 ) . Both sources of information can contrib - ute to the formation of public knowledge and to social progress , as can be appreciated when we consider the political and cultural aspects of cit - izenship . Where political citizenship deals with issues related to the formal rights ( and duties ) of citizens , and is most often mediated by tra - ditional categories of news about current affairs and politics , cultural citizenship deals with ques - tions of recognition , identity , and the cultural rights ( and duties ) of citizens , and is mediated by various sorts of information that circulate in the cultural public sphere . The distinction between political and cultural citizenship may become more blurred when the convergence of entertainment media and politi - cal citizenship is taken seriously ( Hermes 2005 ; Van Zoonen 2005 ; Williams and Delli Carpini 2011 ) . The rise of bots and algorithmic manage - ment of information introduces additional dis - tortions of public deliberation ( Tambini 2017 ) . But none of this potential to create public knowl - edge matters if media content produced by an elite “professional” class of journalists does not resonate with audiences’ everyday lived experi - ence . Today various factors point in that direc - tion , both in forms of propaganda and destabi - lizing communicative practices and in problems within systems of education , where much of the socializing of citizens take place ( SPI “Access to basic knowledge” ) . In this section we outline , first , the special roles that journalism plays in public knowledge , and so why journalism is important for democracy and social progress . We will then give examples of the various “soft” and “hard” threats that we identify as detrimental to public knowledge , in - cluding both changes in business models , news reception , and new forms of “information man - agement , ” and , more directly , various physical threats against news production , and journal - ists in conflict areas and unstable democracies . Thirdly , we will point to areas where there are opportunities for countering this negative pic - ture , for example the rise of citizen journalism and alternative media . We end this section with a double case study of organized attempts to con - struct alternative journalistic narratives in Latin America and the Middle East . 4 . 2 The special functions of journalism and journalistic practice Journalism is still associated , especially in the established democracies of the Global North , with the institutions and practices of democracy ( Fenton 2010 : 3 ) . There are many examples , both historical and current , of how journalism has contributed to public knowledge for social prog - ress ( SDG 16 ) . These include , for example : the antislavery campaigns that benefited from press assistance with the formation of abolitionist or - ganizations ( King and Haveman 2008 ) , samizdat publications in the former Soviet Union ( Feld - brugge 1975 ) , information about environmental disasters such as the 2011 Fukushima nuclear ac - cident that was spread not only by mainstream journalists but also by citizens on blogging and social media platforms ( Friedman 2011 ) or the role of the underground press in the struggle against apartheid ( Switzer and Adhikari 2000 ) . For these reasons the contribution of journalism to public knowledge remains an important refer - 29 ence point in the broader context of global social progress . The emergence of digital media infrastructures has had profound implications for traditional conceptions of news and journalism . These in - clude a proliferation of the channels through which journalism is produced and consumed , and a blurring of the lines between news and en - tertainment through the rise of formats such as the “mockumentary , ” “docudrama , ” and satirical news . The participatory potential of digital tech - nologies , aided by the widespread accessibility of technologies such as the mobile phone , has chal - lenged previous claims by professional journal - ists to exclusivity in the purveying of news . Addi - tionally , the business models for journalism have undergone a fundamental transformation in re - cent years , even as new opportunities have arisen for the creation of public knowledge and citizen participation in the construction of knowledge and public debate . Against the background of rapid change , how - ever , the expectation that news journalism will contribute to public knowledge , the monitoring of power and the facilitation of public debate remains an ideal against which communication practices continue to be measured . The mere fact that information is publicly disseminated and available does not automatically result in an informed public . Additionally , in the context of changing frameworks of reception , citizens’ abil - ity to orientate themselves in today’s increasingly complex media landscape , drawing perhaps on the skills provided by education , are ever more important . 4 . 3 Threats to public knowledge 1 : system pressures The digitization and marketization of media ( discussed in Section 2 ) have affected the insti - tutional conditions for journalistic production . New economic conditions have led the news industries into a downward spiral where it has become ever difficult to charge for content . In a recent survey conducted by the IPSP in the Unit - ed States , 57 % of respondents do not like to pay for news , and believe news should be freely ac - cessible to all ( IPSP 2017 ) . Shrinking readership makes advertisers abandon print media to the benefit of online search and social networking . The old business models of journalism are col - lapsing , and news producers have had to rethink their relation to audiences , leading in turn to changes in journalistic practice . New forms of “click - bait journalism , ” robot journalism , and algorithmically steered news production are in - creasingly common . These follow different logics from traditional journalism , and in their most extreme forms may produce echo chambers or filter bubbles ( see Section 3 ) that in the long run fragment public debate and the public sphere more generally . The automated search for audi - ences through data processing also may further marginalize those audiences who are already on the margins of the public sphere . In countries where access to the digital public sphere mir - rors huge social and economic equalities – for instance South Africa , India , China , and Brazil – these new practices could exacerbate such in - equalities . The reorganization of media production into large - scale media corporations with interests also in nonjournalistic media production has meant that even financially successful journalis - tic and public knowledge operations cannot al - 30 ways reinvest their profits into news production , but instead have their profits reinvested in other activities . This lack of economic control makes it difficult to sustain long - term strategies of news production . While there has always been a ten - sion between editorial and management teams within news organizations , large - scale media corporations shift economic decision - making farther away from news production environ - ments , resulting in managerial decisions that di - rect journalistic practice from the outside . There are also regulative threats to independent news media production , for example the non - commercial and license fee funded public ser - vice media . In Europe , the traditional freedom of public service broadcasters to choose their policy orientations has come under attack by newly powerful private broadcasters ( SPI “Press freedom” ) . One result is the public value test in - stigated by the European Commission , which emerged from private broadcasters’ intense lob - bying efforts in relation to the European Com - mission ( Donders and Moe 2011 ) . While online ( including mobile ) media have cre - ated new platforms for social agency and public participation , both in the creation of “user - gen - erated content” ( UGC ) for mainstream media and in providing outlets for alternative news and views , the Internet has also become a space where reactionary views , racist representations and hate speech can thrive . Social media like Facebook and Twitter contribute to the prolifer - ation of this kind of communication . Misunder - standings of complex matters and online “lynch mobs” illustrate the volatility of networked dig - ital media environments and offer testimony to the limits of social media for public debate . On a more fundamental level , well - meaning educa - tional initiatives to foster “digital literacy” might produce relativistic approaches to scientific and social truths ( Boyd 2017 ) , and the journalis - tic ideals of balance of opinion might privilege a blurring of the distinction between facts and opinions , and where “truth” becomes more of an affective mood . 4 . 4 Threats to public knowledge 2 : coercive force Meanwhile , journalists can face harder forms of threat , whether through legal frameworks ( press freedom or its opposite ) or informal threats ( through damage to journalists’ physical and psychological security ) : these threats may exist separately or in combination . In many parts of the world , growing political in - stability has affected journalism’s ability to fulfil its broader public knowledge goals because of direct threats to press freedom ( see SPI “Press Freedom” ) . For example , in some parts of Eastern Europe , political polarization has arisen as some post - Soviet states have sought closer ties with the EU . The Ukraine - Russia conflict is one , widely reported , outgrowth of this polarization , but the phenomenon is also visible in other post - Soviet countries ( Richter 2015 ) . Information warfare is on the rise , not only in the region itself , but also in international news media ( for example , via TV channels such as Russia Today and Ukraine Today ( Miazhevich 2014 ) ) . Initiatives for disin - formation and propaganda / counterpropaganda , including so - called “troll - factories” maintained in Russia ( and elsewhere ) , 22 make efforts to en - hance public knowledge increasingly difficult . 22 See http : / / www . theguardian . com / world / 2015 / aug / 18 / trolls - putin - russia - savchuk or http : / / www . theguardian . com / world / 2015 / apr / 02 / putin - kremlin - inside - russian - troll - house 31 The sheer amount of seemingly contradictory information circulating puts high pressure on audiences’ critical abilities ( the much discussed phenomenon of “fake news” ) . A recent example of this from the Ukraine - Russia conflict is the overload of contradictory information that sur - rounded the shooting down of Malaysian flight MH17 over eastern Ukraine in 2014 , and the sharply divergent accounts that circulated on the Internet both before and after the Dutch Safety Board published their report of the crash . 23 Sim - ilar dynamics have emerged in the Middle East , leading to an increasingly polarized and pro - paganda - dominated public sphere ( see Section 4 . 6 ) . In many African countries also , journalism for public knowledge remains an ideal rather than a practical reality . In the Windhoek Declaration on Promoting an Independent and Pluralistic African Press ( UNESCO 1991 ) , African jour - nalists invoked the Universal Declaration of Hu - man Rights as a motivation for the promotion of press freedom . At the same time , however , Af - rican resistance to colonialism and rejection of cultural imperialism engendered an insistence on “African values” in journalism , couched in the discourse of development but often implying uncritical and loyalist media support of postco - lonial states . An example of an appeal to “African values” is Francis Kasoma’s ( 1994 , 1996 ) notion of “Afriethics , ” which rejects Western normative frameworks and counterposes an African value system that privileges communalism and an ori - entation towards the family and clan over indi - vidualism . Appeals to “African values” have often been criticized for their tendency to essentialize African culture and identity , without acknowl - edging the interpenetration of African and West - ern values in a globalized context ( Banda 2009 ; Skjerdal 2012 ) . Additionally , such appeals have served to justify repression of media freedom in many African countries ( see Bourgault 1995 ; Karikari 2007 ) . Lastly , against the background of political in - stability , propaganda wars , and state repression , violence against journalists has also increased . Some examples include : Egypt clamping down on journalists , activists , and civil society ; the consolidation of electoral autocracy and tempo - rary closure of digital platforms in Turkey ; and repressive measures from verbal threats to physi - cal assaults and imprisonment in various African countries . In Poland , a new legal regime has cir - cumscribed the freedom for journalists , making critical and investigative journalism more diffi - cult and precarious . 24 4 . 5 Opportunities for public knowledge : new forms of journalism and citizens’ me - dia Meanwhile , digital media infrastructures have enabled the growth of new forms of citizen - cre - ated media for the production of public knowl - edge . In many African contexts where legacy media like newspapers and radio stations are owned and controlled by the state , digital media platforms have served as alternative outlets for the dissemination of news , political debate and critique ( Paterson 2013 ) . In Zimbabwe , Face - book has provided users with more freedom to engage in political satire and offer alternative accounts of political developments ( Mare 2014 ) . The widespread penetration and use of mobile media in Africa have also provided users with 23 See ( http : / / www . onderzoeksraad . nl / ) 24 See http : / / www . bbc . com / news / world - europe - 35257105 . 32 a tool to engage more actively with mainstream news agendas . An example of this was the mobile phone footage of police brutality against a Mo - zambican immigrant , Mido Macia , in Daveyton , South Africa . The footage of police dragging Ma - cia , cuffed to a police vehicle , was captured by a bystander and sent to the tabloid the Daily Sun , who posted the video online and reported on it . The video went viral and made headlines in - ternationally after Macia died in police custody , and led to the arrest and conviction of the police officers . This integration of citizen journalism , legacy media ( especially tabloids ) , and online platforms such as Youtube or Facebook , has pro - vided journalists and news consumers with new ways of creating public knowledge and serving the public interest . In South Korea , citizen journalists have used digital networks for producing alternative civic discourses and for mobilizing enormous rallies of citizens to speak out on socially sensitive is - sues . More recently , social media have given rise to new alternative media such as Newstapa ( “Re - building Investigative Journalism” ) launched in January 2012 . Due to the government’s control over public broadcasting , some former employ - ees of the major TV networks and other small - sized production team members have come to - gether to produce an investigative news program about social issues . Newstapa uses a variety of on - line outlets such as its own webpage views , You - Tube clips , and podcast episodes , and the young - er generations download and watch its weekly episodes using their smartphones . Social media also play a key role in spreading the news pro - gram’s schedule and in enabling public fundrais - ing to support production . Newstapa has gained a reputation as an influential news provider and as illustrating how , through regular practices of collaboration , citizens can build alternative para - digms of social justice against mainstream media and power elites . Meanwhile , during the political turmoil and vi - olence following the ousting of former President Yanukovich in Ukraine , faculty and students from the Mohyla School of Journalism in Kyiv created StopFake ( stopfake . org ) , an organization aimed at debunking Russian propaganda and the distorted news produced by troll - factories . An - other civic initiative formed during the political turmoil was The Ukraine Crisis Media Centre , which is a platform for information management that arranges press briefings with representatives of the Ukrainian military and government ( Bolin et al . 2016 ) . * * * * * There are therefore many overlapping factors shaping media’s possible contribution to public knowledge in different parts of the world today . In the next part of this section , we offer a double case study from Latin America and the Middle East that considers the possibilities of building new infrastructures for journalism that can offer alternative voices to counter perceived dominant narratives . 4 . 6 Double case study : TeleSUR and Al - Ja - zeera : Alternative voices in global news The Venezuelan channel TeleSUR and the Qatari channel Al - Jazeera are often hailed as models of media with global reach that have challenged the North Atlantic domination of global news flows and reference - points . These two channels have much in common : they were both made possible by the large political ambitions of their founders ; both faced indifference or hostility in the world’s power centers ; and both evolved from single channels into multiplatform networks . This sec - 33 tion explores what can be learned from their contrasting achievements . TeleSUR Sponsored by the left - leaning government of Hugo Chávez in Venezuela ( 1999 – 2013 ) , Tele - SUR was formed in 2005 as a regional television network with the goal of broadcasting “from the South to the South” ( Da Silva Mendes 2012 ) . Te - leSUR’s achievements can only be understood against the history of media concentration and economic exploitation achieved by elites in Latin America since the eighteenth century . From the inception of electronic media , upper classes have controlled the media and used them to advance their own political and financial interests , at the exclusion of the interests of working class major - ities . Through control of commercial and pub - lic media , political and economic elites secured ideological control over , and the opportunity to profit , from mass audiences . Former Venezuelan president Hugo Chávez cre - ated TeleSUR as a television network that would prioritize the information and communication needs of the oppressed majorities in the region and disseminate an autonomous Latin American perspective . Drawing explicitly from the lan - guage of the NWICO , TeleSUR defines itself as “a Latin American multimedia initiative dedicat - ed to promoting unity among the peoples of the South ; a space and a voice for the development of a new communication order” ( www . teleSURtv . net ) . It defines “the South” as a “geopolitical concept that promotes the people’s struggle for peace and self - determination and respect for hu - man rights and social justice” . TeleSUR has had two different goals : to offer an alternative to U . S . and European news media , ( e . g . , BBC or CNN ) ; and to shape a unified Latin American public sphere ( Cañizalez and Lugo 2007 ) . It is not a co - incidence that TeleSUR emerged in 2005 at the same time that the region shifted to the left . Its slogan – “Nuestro norte es el Sur” ( Our North is the South ) – embodies this shift in perspective , and is evidenced by its coverage of key historical events such as the bombardment of Colombian FARC guerrilla camps by the military , or the de - mise of Gaddafi’s government in Libya . TeleSUR is cofinanced by various governments in Latin America ( Da Silva Mendes 2012 ) . Some Latin American analysts suggest that TeleSUR is more the loudspeaker of “Chavismo” ( the polit - ical platform of late Venezuelan president Hugo Chávez ) than a pan - Latin American voice ( Mo - raes 2011 ) , but TeleSUR makes an important contribution to public knowledge : information and news make up 80 % of TeleSUR’s program - ming and the rest centers on renowned Latin American personalities ( Da Silva Mendes 2012 ; Rincón in press ) . In 2009 TeleSUR grew into a multimedia platform with a strong presence on - line and its own distribution system . TeleSUR currently has five satellites covering parts of Europe and the Americas , as well as the Middle East and North Africa . Al - Jazeera Al - Jazeera , the original Arabic - language chan - nel , was formed in late 1996 , following the break - up of BBC Arabic . It was founded by Hamad bin - Khalifa Al Thani to free Qatar from the in - fluence of its larger neighbor , Saudi Arabia , and give the country a regional and global influence disproportionate to its small size . Al - Jazeera’s unbridled news coverage quickly offended Arab leaders accustomed to deference and Western powers unused to having their nar - ratives of global affairs challenged . By early 2004 , the government of Qatar had received more than 34 500 complaints from Arab governments focus - ing on Al - Jazeera ( Lamloum 2004 : 20 ) . Original - ly hailed as a beacon of free speech by the West , Al - Jazeera became vilified as the loudspeaker of Al - Qaeda following the September 11 , 2001 at - tacks . The channel became a global household name in the wake of the Anglo - American inva - sions of Afghanistan and Iraq in 2001 and 2003 , when its deep coverage was reused by Western news organizations . In the following years , Al - Jazeera grew from a single channel to a network of multiple channels , including Al - Jazeera English , a training cen - ter , and online platforms . The Arabic - language Al - Jazeera’s editorial line was sympathetic to the centrist Islamism of the Muslim Brotherhood , to the Palestinian cause , and to the Global South . Some of these issues carried over into Al - Jazeera English , whose editorial line has significant over - lap with TeleSUR’s . Al - Jazeera English became a major global news player , with broadcast bureaus in Doha , London , New York and Kuala Lumpur , and dozens of offices and correspondents world - wide . Al - Jazeera however faced problems from its inception regarding repeated political pres - sure to restrain its editorial line , internal fric - tions ( Zahreddin 2011 ) , and a conflict between two factions – one secular and Arab nationalist , the other Islamist and sympathetic to the Mus - lim Brotherhood ( Kraidy and Khalil 2009 ; Talon 2011 ) . Al - Jazeera shifted its editorial line with the onset of the Arab uprisings in 2010 . In Egypt , the chan - nel supported the Muslim Brotherhood against Mubarak . In Syria , it also sided with the rebels against Assad . Although Al - Jazeera and Qatar gained some ground as a supporter of the Mus - lim Brotherhood , ensuing political shifts , driv - en by rapprochement between Qatar and Saudi Arabia , undermined Al - Jazeera’s status as a news outlet that challenged dominant news agendas . * * * * * The contrasting cases of TeleSUR and Al - Jazeera illustrate both the opportunities for and the po - tential vulnerabilities of attempts to create pub - lic knowledge outlets from outside the Global North that have influence on a global scale . Such outlets can be established and have significant success , provided strong initial funding and sup - port exists , but they remain vulnerable to the wider political influences that may lie behind their funding . That vulnerability however should not be seen in isolation from the vulnerabilities to political influence that commercially - funded media outlets also face in many other parts of the world . 35 We have argued in Section 4 that media’s poten - tial contribution to social progress through pub - lic knowledge faces significant threats but , in a digital age characterized by an increasingly glob - al media infrastructure , brings important op - portunities too . In this section , we consider how citizens make use of the informational and imag - inative materials that media provide to them . 5 . 1 Relations between media and spaces of citizenship Today’s new density of global communication not only enables continuous interaction across world regions , but also is beginning to shape new spheres of civic communication on every scale . Communication interfaces ( from WhatsApp to WeChat ) offer a new architecture of civic dis - course that is no longer merely national or in - ternational : the resulting spaces where citizens interact are shaped not by the media spheres of particular territories but by individuals’ choic - es of what to follow online . Furthermore , these networked spheres of civil communication are no longer accessible only in the Global North but engage citizens – with Internet access – from all types of societies , including so - called failed states . Through this , media become involved in opening up new spaces of citizenship ( SDG 16 . 7 ) . Although citizenship is national and the bound - edness of state territory continues , communi - cation is shaping a new form of civic identity , which is increasingly embedded in a globalized digital space . Rather than globalization operat - ing outside and against the national , “the nation is the site of globalization” ( Sassen 2007 : 80 , add - ed emphasis ) . Today this merging of national and global takes different shapes in different so - cieties . Even secluded states such as North Korea and failed states such as Syria , Somalia and Af - ghanistan have their own modes of nation - based globalization . However , the point is particularly important in relation to public civic communi - cation where national and global public spheres merge , and public deliberations , legitimacy , and accountability no longer develop solely through national debates . Rather , in contexts of climate change , governments are held accountable based on broader global discourses . As with the history of media ( Section 2 ) , these developments are still mainly considered from the perspective of nations in the Global North , with narratives often not looking beyond West - ern communications theory and research ( Fari - var 2011 ) . Similarly , accounts of diaspora’s use of media often ignore political connectivity between expatriates of the Global South that link back to civic discourse in their countries of origin . The roles of nongovernmental actors in failed states and civic communications in postconflict reso - lution constitute other examples of new forms of connection between citizens across borders . Cit - izens of the Global South such as forced migrants are communicating outside national media terri - tories ( Witteborn 2015 ) . Networks of activism , deliberation , and mobilization , not possible in the past , are emerging whereby media provide new infrastructures of citizenship as part of what the MacBride report called the “many voices” of “one world” . Section 2 discussed the historical dominance of communication flows from the Global North , linked to colonial communication infrastruc - tures and extended by satellite communication infrastructures emerging in the 1970s for the delivery of broadcasting content and , since the 5 . Networked communications : possibilities for citizenship 36 1990s , for individual media reception . For most of the twentieth century , the globalized “stretch - ing” of human interactions through media – the “intensification of worldwide social relations which link distant localities in such a way that local happenings are shaped by events occurring many miles away and vice versa” ( Giddens 1990 : 64 ) – was , in its framing , dominated by news channels from the Global North , such as BBC , CNN , and Deutsche Welle , with few opportuni - ties to contest it . This situation has changed significantly since the second half of the 1990s due to three interrelated processes : the emergence of digital satellite plat - forms enabling the delivery of no longer just a few but hundreds of channels , the reduction of uplink costs for broadcasters , and the availability of cheap direct - to - home roof - top dishes . Fur - thermore , and most importantly , new regional media players have challenged the monopoly of political “breaking news” in times of world con - flict . Such news is often delivered “live” world - wide and has influenced national foreign policy imperatives in various countries ( Volkmer 1999 ; Robinson 2005 ) , contesting the framing of world events by media corporations from the Glob - al North ( see also Section 4 . 6 ) . Whereas CNN produced the only narrative of the first Gulf War ( 1990 - 1991 ) for a world audience , now there are hundreds of satellite news channels from the wider Arabic region , from Sudan , Pakistan , Tanzania , and at least fifty channels dedicated to news from India , South Korea , China , Mexico , and Brazil . In addition , some regionwide news channels , such as Channel News Asia and Africa 24 , are available in several languages and target neighboring regions . The resulting digital ecology for civic participa - tion has two additional key characteristics . The first is the increasingly complex flow of media and information organized not just by media organizations , but by citizens’ own efforts to up - load or recirculate what interests them . It is a transnational public space , which enables a new density of communication between citizens . The results of such dense peer - to - peer civic com - munication may include attempts to influence individuals through hate speech ( Phillips 2015 ) , fake news and “bots” ( see IPSP Chapter 10 ; IPSP Chapter 13 Toolkit “Knowledge as Commons” Column 2 ) . At the same time , new forms of “re - flective interdependence” ( Volkmer 2014 ) may emerge whereby , through the sharing of refer - ence - points across borders , citizens acquire a new basis for shared political debate or activism on topics ranging from climate change , human rights violations and crisis communication to political campaigns such as the “Occupy” move - ment . Under these new conditions , civic engage - ment no longer occurs in one “place , ” but across a network of places . Although only a minority of the population is engaged in these new global networks , “their contribution to democracy cannot be underes - timated” ( Frere and Kiyindou 2009 : 77 , 79 ) . In many countries , state monopolies on the inflow of foreign news are no longer possible . For exam - ple , it can be argued that African governments have “hardly any grip on the choices of the Inter - net user - consumer , who can freely choose the in - formation that is interesting or useful and decide to join a particular ‘virtual community’” ( Frere and Kiyindou 2009 : 78 ) . This flexibility in the re - sources available through online media , includ - ing information and deliberation accessed across borders ( Bohman 2007 ) , changes potentially cit - izens’ horizons of civic engagement . 37 5 . 2 New forms of communicative citizen - ship : the case of global youth As an example of these emerging trends , young citizens in many countries are engaging with each other in unprecedented ways , in peer - to - peer interaction within and across borders . In order to assess the implications of these new dig - ital ecologies for civic identity , we need to con - sider the interaction between local and global media practices and information flows . The density of these interactions is revealed in an international comparative study on “Global Youth and Media , Notions of Cosmopolitanism in the Global Public Space” ( discussed in Volk - mer 2014 ) . The study included more than 6 , 000 14 - 17 year olds in nine countries on five conti - nents . The study asked how these young people use media , how they construct globalization and perceive civic identity . The distinctive uses of local , national and global media by particular generations have been little researched . While national television is the general population’s preferred medium for political news , young peo - ple find news in parallel ways through Google news , MSN , and Yahoo . Across all society types , this younger generation mixes local and global information flows in a distinctive way that en - titles them to the label of “in - betweeners” . As a result , they consider themselves between scepti - cism and trust , between a realistic appreciation of global risks ( indeed a strong sense of world insecurity ) and the need for leadership . When asked if they feel that the world today has become more insecure since their parents were young , 80 % agree . Yet more than half consider interna - tional political events more important than na - tional and so seem to live out their citizenship on two connected scales , national and global . They distrust politicians and engage in global political spheres characterized by global themes such as “environment , ” “human rights , ” and “economy , wealth , and poverty” . A Mexican sociologist describes in the context of Central America the implications of such an engagement for local citizenship : “the protest movements with a global reach , and the pres - ence of leadership of young people in them , bring to mind the emergence of a new political cosmopolitanism among youth . Its native land is the world , and its strength lies in its ( seeming ) absence of structure , its intermittence and the multiple nodes in which its utopia is anchored” ( Reguillo 2009 : 34 ) . In this analysis Central America’s young generation is both “disconnect - ed and unequal” and “well situated , connected , and globalized” and increasingly engaged in national and transnational youth publics ( Re - guillo 2009 : 23 ) . Other regions provide further evidence of youth agency converging around local networks of publicity in Cairo ( Arvizu 2009 : 387 ) , Tanzania ( Tufte and Enghel 2009 ) , and Chile ( Munoz - Navarro 2009 ) . In Kenya and other parts of the Global South , media provide platforms for youth to interact and participate in political debates worldwide , leading one analyst to comment that , for the Kenyan diaspora , social media is an “integral aspect [ of ] Kenya’s social and political dynamics” ( Mukhongo 2014 ) . However , the implications of these emerging forms of public engagement in regional media cultures require more attention . For example , in Central Asia , urban youth are drawing increas - ingly on global sources of information and so “are increasingly judging the worldviews and be - haviours of parents , teachers , political elites and other traditional authority figures against that global context … they are suddenly able to com - pare themselves with anyone , anywhere” ( Ibold 2010 : 532 ) . As anticipated by Joshua Meyrowitz three decades ago ( Meyrowitz 1985 ) , but now 38 on a global , not national , scale , media flows can work to challenge knowledge barriers and desta - bilize relations between generations , so forging new bases for civic identity and action . 5 . 3 Case study : Connectivity and social progress in a Chinese heritage village The world’s rural population is at its largest ever today , even though the world’s urban popula - tion is ( slightly ) larger . An understanding of ru - ral connectivity and its relation to social prog - ress is therefore indispensable . Located in the mountainous interior region of China’s coastal Zhejiang Province , Heyang has a population of 3 , 670 and more than 1 , 100 years of history . It is a quintessential embodiment of China’s agrarian civilization . Its well - preserved Ming - Qing era traditional architecture earned it a place in 2013 in the Chinese State Council’s list of key sites of national cultural relics . However , this is also a modernized and globalized village : with part of its economy integrated into global circuits of production and more than half of its labor force now working outside the village ( most of whom only return briefly to reunite with family during festival periods ) . Village communications also cut across the tra - ditional and the modern . The oral tradition re - mains strong : the village’s Senior Center and pop - ular street corners serve as sites of information and gossip exchange . Public announcements are posted at centrally located information boards and walls at different village corners . However , the village’s lineage book , started more than 600 years ago by a Ming - Dynasty official from the village , issued its sixteenth edition in December 2016 with a grand ceremony . The book contains biographies of notable individuals and registers the names of all male descendants ( female de - scendants were first recorded in its fifteenth edi - tion , compiled in 1995 ) . Wired radio and communal film projection were the most popular forms of mediated commu - nication and entertainment during the 1970s and early 1980s . Along with village assemblies , these low - tech forms of communication played pivotal roles in Mao - era political mobilization and cultural integration . Their embeddedness in communal life was instrumental to their success in linking villagers to the outside world and sus - taining village cohesion . Starting however from the late 1980s , information reception and enter - tainment have become privatized and personal - ized . As villagers are exposed to wider and more diverse media flows , many feel more isolated from each other . Social stratification and income polarization , following the dismantling of the collective economy , have engendered a further sense of social dislocation and community dis - integration . The 1990s saw the village’s further leap into the digital age : automated direct dial telephone start - ed in 1990 ; cable television and analogue mobile telephony arrived in 1994 and by 1997 , digital mobile telephony . Today , Heyang is among the 150 , 000 Chinese villages with broadband access ( in 2015 China’s State Council promised a 98 % village broadband access rate by 2020 ) . While desktop computers are rare , telephones , especial - ly mobile phones , are widely used , but only the young and economically better - off have smart - phones to connect themselves to the Internet . In between lies a wide spectrum of communi - cation patterns and circuits of connectivity that have made Heyang a small - scale model of Chi - na’s highly stratified society . Square dancers in the village , for example , have used their smart - phones to download videos of the latest dancing 39 styles , in this way imagining themselves as part of a larger national dance community . A small minority , like their urban middle - class counter - parts , engage in online stock trade . Wechat , the most popular Chinese social media platform , is popular among village elites , the young and the economically well - off . One member of the Village Council has more than a dozen Wechat friend circles , with relatives , businessmen orig - inally from the village , government officials , and students of Heyang’s culture . However , with inclusion also comes exclusion : such Wechat friend circles are limited to this member’s own professional and interpersonal networks , and so exclude the majority of villagers . Moreover , her Wechat communications are mostly external - ly - directed , aiming at promoting Heyang as a tourist site , rather than at fellow villagers . Mean - while , with the higher cost of a digital cable sub - scription , some poorer villagers have given up on cable television service altogether to opt for satel - lite television , which only requires the one - time purchasing cost of a satellite receiving dish . But such satellite television services do not include local municipal and county television channels . Consequently , these households end up with no access to local television news . As a result , many local residents , especially those in the lower social strata , complain about their lack of communication with village leaders , lack of effective participation in village affairs , and a general sense of powerlessness in shaping the vil - lage’s future . Caught in a complex web of local governance , land appropriation , village renova - tion , and tourist development , villagers resort to protests and blockages of village construc - tion projects to communicate their demands and frustrations . In one case , in an attempt to make their voices heard , some residents refused to allow a CCTV crew to film their residential courtyard for the 2015 Spring Festival Gala ; oth - ers have tried to derail the village’s lineage book compilation project . A few villagers have also ex - pressed a desire for the return of a village wired radio system and Mao - era face - to - face meetings of the village community as a whole . But China’s “great digital leap forward” has not created upwardly mobile opportunities for all . X . Zhu , a 24 - year - old Heyang village youth , grew up in a well - off family with postsecondary edu - cation , but did not live to see a future in Heyang . He arranged his own suicide through the Inter - net in early 2010 . Another 24 - year - old netizen came all the way from Yunan Province in south - western China to commit suicide together with Zhu . Theirs is one of the saddest stories of digital connectivity in the Network Age . 5 . 4 Networked communications among East Asian precarious workers Networked communications offer opportunities in many countries for new forms of political and social connection , which may be especially im - portant in spreading public knowledge where public broadcasting systems are under threat ( see Section 4 ) . But this opportunity may occur in the context of social conditions , particularly labor markets , where ICTs are intensifying the deterio - ration of working conditions and sustaining new structures of precarious labor ( SDG 8 . 8 ) . The re - sulting balance for social progress may therefore be highly ambiguous , and Northeast Asia offers an important example of these tensions . The mobile phone has become deeply entangled with the precarious labor culture in Northeast Asia . Mobile communication technology has intersected with the emergence of increasingly insecure working conditions , particularly those of young Northeast Asian workers , who are sit - 40 uated within the “institutionalized precarious - ness” of a dual economy made up of a large re - serve army “with no employment prospects , no future , [ and ] no plans” ( Bourdieu 1998 : 30f ) , alongside a small privileged minority of secure workers with a regular wage . A “mobile precari - at” ( precarious workers who use mobile phones to sustain their living within an always - on - call working culture ) 25 suffers from chronically inse - cure job positions as temporary staff or contract workers : they are trapped at the bottom of the pay scale , yet at the same time remain connect - ed through media to the workplace ( Qiu 2009 ) . This mobile precariat is disadvantaged not only through the labor exploitation they endure , but also when it comes to seeking remedies for these injustices ( see Shaviro 2002 ; Seo and Kim 2009 for important studies ) . Employers’ attitudes vary to mobile phone use among their precarious workers . Whereas in Ja - pan and Taiwan , workers must leave their phones behind , beyond their reach , when they start work , in South Korea , where the conditions for workers are extremely insecure with the second longest working hours among OECD countries ( 2 , 124 hours / year as of 2014 ) , 26 mobile phones are allowed at work . However , in all countries , possessing a mobile phone renders precarious workers vulnerable to a wider culture of surveil - lance . Many employers monitor their workers’ lives outside of formal working hours by using mobile instant messaging services ( KakaoTalk in Korea ; WeChat in China ; Line in Japan and Taiwan ) . Transgressing the normal boundaries of work , employers use phones to issue orders to their precarious workers on matters such as cleanliness , service management , and the em - ployee code of conduct . The outcomes are however unstable . In South Korea , young precarious workers have attempt - ed to stir public opinion against unjust business practices , by posting images and chat messages on social media platforms . They , in turn , have been disciplined through remote monitoring on live surveillance mobile apps and mobile instant messaging . In Japan , there have been on - and offline protests against “black companies , ” no - torious for exploiting precarious workers , with workers using the Internet and social media to disclose their unfair treatment in the workplace and share it with others . Given the collapse of the public broadcasting system in Japan , online cit - izen journalism and alternative journalism have also offered platforms for building alternative understandings of social justice in the workplace that go beyond the agendas of mainstream me - dia . In summary , Northeast Asia offers a clear exam - ple of how the mobile phone as an infrastructure of connection has become a new technique for regulating labor in an always - on - call culture , yet continues to offer opportunities for movements for social justice and social progress . 25 Also known as Alba [ 알바 ] in South Korea , [ xin gong ren 新工人 ] in China , and Freeter [ furita フリーター ] in Japan . 26 OECD . StatExtract , 2016 41 Having in Sections 4 and 5 considered how the outputs of media contribute variously to new forms of social connection and environments of public knowledge – two preconditions for action towards social progress – we turn in this section to the new social issues raised by the increasing - ly complex governance structures for media and communications outlined in Section 3 . We first place those issues within the context of a lon - ger - term struggle for media reform . 6 . 1 The longer history of democratizing media The expansion of media infrastructures into ever wider areas of life through digital platforms has generated new types of media activism ( Milan 2016 ) . Across the Global South and the Glob - al North , today’s media activists fight struggles on diverse fronts . However , popular attempts to shape media infrastructures into more dem - ocratic and inclusive social institutions did not begin with the media activists of the twenty - first century . Just as media infrastructures have developed dif - ferently in each nation and region of the world ( see Section 2 ) , so efforts to reshape and reform the media are varied . Before the consolidation of the advertising - supported commercial press , radical working class publications in the United Kingdom , United States and Canada emerged to challenge the dominant press order ( Hack - ett and Zhao 1998 ) . With the rise of electron - ic communication , U . S . media activists in the 1920s and 1930s demanded public ownership of the telegraph and noncommercial radio ( Mc - Chesney 1993 ; Stein 2009 ) . In Russia and Chi - na , communist and nationalist revolutionaries established alternative media systems as part of their attempts to seek social progress through anticapitalistic and nationalistic struggles ; the resulting media structures , however , degenerat - ed into ossified state - controlled systems . Never - theless , antiestablishment communication forms ( underground tabloids and samizdat in Russia ; the big - character posters on China’s Democracy Wall ) testified to the radical democratic commu - nication impulse of these postrevolutionary so - cieties . In the 1960s and 1970s , civil rights movements in the United States and Canada responded to poor media coverage of their struggles for social justice by demanding more access to the main - stream media , and developing their own media ( Stein 2009 ) . The battle around cable television regulation in these countries was one of the most salient victories of media reform movements , as cable companies are now mandated to estab - lish community and educational channels free of charge ( Halleck 2001 ) ( SPI “Access to basic knowledge” ) . In Latin America , in response to the brutal dictatorships of the 1970s and 1980s , grassroots groups developed their own under - ground communication networks in a long bat - tle to pressure states to democratize the media ( Rodríguez and Murphy 1997 ) . Meanwhile , in several European countries , pirate radio was the precursor of later struggles for media regulation that guarantees space for public and community media ( Jankowski , Prehn , and Stappers 1992 ) . In 1976 , in one of the earliest global efforts to de - mocratize the media , Amadou Mathar M’Bow , Director of UNESCO , appointed a commission of sixteen experts to examine global commu - nication problems . The commission’s final re - port , known as the MacBride Report , described 6 . Struggles for social justice through the democratization of media 42 shocking information inequalities between First and Third World countries ( UNESCO 1980 ) . The report documented high levels of media concen - tration in a few transnational media corporations mostly located in rich , industrialized countries . Such concentration had many damaging conse - quences including highly unequal information flows between rich and poor countries ; a lack of diversity among the voices and sources of infor - mation and communication ; and a flow of media content from the North to the South that threat - ened the latter’s local cultures . The MacBride Re - port argued that a New World Information and Communication Order was urgently necessary . Efforts towards a NWICO , including recom - mendations for national communication poli - cies , reduced media concentration , more South - to - South communication channels , and a mass media code of ethics , embroiled UNESCO in a high - profile dispute with the United States , who interpreted the report’s recommendations as a threat to “freedom of the press , ” defined with - in the liberal framework as freedom from gov - ernment control . In 2003 , the Communication Rights for the Information Society Campaign ( CRIS ) emerged as a new moment of global media reform . The CRIS Campaign , which still continues , encompasses four pillars of communi - cation rights : the right to participate in the pub - lic sphere ; the right to knowledge ; civil rights in communication ; and cultural rights in commu - nication ( Siochrú 2005 ) . The first two decades of the twenty - first century have been marked by UNESCO’s efforts to protect journalists and defend freedom of expression . The UN Human Rights Council’s “Resolution on the Safety of Journalists” ( 2016 ) is welcome , but does not yet extend to Russia and China . In 2015 , Member States endorsed the concept of “Internet Universality” which includes four principles for Internet governance : human rights , openness , accessibility and multistakeholder participation ( UNESCO 2015 ) . Looking back over the past four decades , inter - national governmental organizations and me - dia activists have broadened their platforms and struggles to include communications as an im - portant dimension of social progress . As Laura Stein notes : “communication policy activism spans the gamut from representational concerns with the end products of communication to the deep - seated political , economic , regulatory , and infrastructural issues that shape the larger cul - tural environment” ( Stein 2009 : 2 - 3 ) . At stake in this continued battle is a foundational change in the governance of media and communications infrastructures no less profound than that called for urban governance in Chapter 5 . We turn for the rest of this section to specific struggles that target the underlying communications infra - structure of the digital age and its increasingly complex needs for governance . 6 . 2 Transparency and accountability of media infrastructures and mediated data flows The last decade has seen the emergence of in - creasing global concern about the transparency and accountability of media infrastructures and the data flows that they carry ( SDG 9 ; SPI “Access to information and communications” ) . In some cases , those concerns have prompted popular protests and engendered new forms and sites of resistance . One important category of concern about transparency and accountability relates to the conditions of access to information online . Populations worldwide have begun to pay atten - tion to the effects of private agreements for pref - erential treatment that , behind the scenes , struc - 43 ture the universe of information they see ( IPSP 2017 ) . Initially , struggles over preferential treatment took the form of efforts to secure formal enact - ment of the principle of “network neutrality” . Proponents of network neutrality argued that In - ternet access providers should treat all content , sites , and services equally without 73 discriminating among different sources , ser - vices , or providers , while Internet access pro - viders sought greater leeway to experiment with differential quality of service . For the most part , countries around the world have resolved this debate in favor of network neutrality , although European regulations create a preferential ex - emption for certain specialized , high - bandwidth services . 27 Since there is no reason to believe that unregulated markets by themselves will preserve anything like network neutrality , this issue is likely to remain important for media’s positive contribution to public knowledge . Formal regulatory adoption of network neutral - ity mandates , however , has not resolved disputes about preferential access , but has simply shifted the terrain . Worldwide , regulatory implementa - tion of network nondiscrimination mandates has often been followed by so - called “zero - rating” initiatives . Zero - rating refers to an arrangement by which an Internet access provider or mobile services provider agrees to exempt a particular content service from the data caps otherwise imposed on its users . Such agreements may be made in return for flat payments or in return for access to data about the behavior of users as they use the zero - rated service . Zero - rating agree - ments tend to drive traffic toward exempted data services , to the advantage of those providing them , so indirectly challenging the net neutrality principle . A second important category of transparency and accountability issues relates to targeted re - moval of online information . Such removal may be mandated or initiated by an information in - termediary ( for example , a platform company ) . It may also involve the threatened ( or feared ) as - sertion of intellectual property rights , a request for removal or de - indexing in connection with rights afforded under data protection regula - tion , enforcement of privately - defined accept - able - content policies , or direct state censorship . Because the failure to remove some types of in - formation can itself raise justice issues , targeted removal may sometimes be appropriate . Very of - ten , however , such content filtering mechanisms remain secretive and unaccountable . Concerns about secret and unaccountable content filtering have sparked protests around the world , result - ing in a new model of activism that takes digi - tal media simultaneously as a site and target of protest activity . Such activity has achieved polit - ical gains , but arguably also accelerated the shift toward corporatized governance ( described in Section 3 . 2 ) . In the United States , a protest movement that originated domestically and then spread global - ly defeated proposed legislation tried to impose content filtering obligations on domain name reg - istrars and payment providers ( Herman 2013 ) . Subsequently , however , major U . S . payment pro - viders have acceded to a set of voluntary “best 27 For the U . S . regulation , see “Protecting and Promoting the Open Internet , ” 80 Fed . Reg . 19 , 737 ( Apr . 13 , 2015 ) . For the European Union regulation , see Regulation 2015 / 2120 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2015 laying down measures concerning open Internet access and amending Directive 2002 / 22 / EC on universal service and users’ rights relating to electronic communications networks and services and Regulation ( EU ) No 531 / 2012 on roaming on public mobile communications networks within the Union , L 301 / 1 . 44 practices” that involves them more actively in private intellectual property enforcement ( Bridy 2015 ) . In Australia , a popular protest movement opposed a government proposal that would have required Internet service providers to perform mandatory content filtering ; the government eventually withdrew the proposal after politi - cal opposition proved firm , and after the major Australian ISPs voluntarily agreed to block 1 , 400 sites previously identified as child pornography purveyors . 28 In China , where state involvement in filtering and suppression of dissident or other - wise disfavored expression is more direct , protest movements have taken correspondingly more indirect forms that involve the use of seemingly innocuous code words to discuss forbidden top - ics ( Link and Xiao 2013 ) . Anticensorship and “Internet freedom” activists have developed new , crowd - sourced methods of discovering and documenting content remov - al efforts and actions , producing web sites such as chillingeffects . org , a U . S . - based site that cat - alogues copyright takedown notices , and on - linecensorship . org , a project by the Electronic Frontier Foundation that catalogues content re - movals by social media sites . Some global plat - form companies , such as Twitter and Google , have begun to disseminate information about various types of targeted removals ( e . g . , Google’s “transparency report” ) , although they have been much less forthcoming about their own accept - able - content protocols . A final set of concerns about transparency and ac - countability relates to processes of automated , al - gorithmically - processed mediation and filtering . Many dominant market providers – Google and Baidu in search , Facebook in social networking , Twitter in microblogging – use predictive algo - rithms to structure the universe of information that users see , and network neutrality mandates do not address those practices . Such algorithms operate invisibly to create displays to users that are tailored to what is known or inferred about that user . To individual users , however , the dis - plays may appear universal and neutral . As we noted in Section 3 . 3 , there are important , unre - solved issues concerning the accountability of such automated filtering . 6 . 3 New concentrations of power via media infrastructures and mediated data flows The new concentrations of power exerted via media infrastructures and mediated data flows have themselves generated rising levels of con - cern , prompting activism by civil society groups and sometimes more widespread protests and struggles ( SDG 9 ) . One important cluster of issues involves propri - etary claims to information networks and re - sources . Even as digital media activists and civil society groups have pushed for greater legal free - dom to store , share , and modify content online , law enforcement authorities around the world have pushed to make outlaws of individuals and businesses who facilitate file - sharing . Enforce - ment has proceeded both via highly - publicized litigation and by off - the - record efforts to seize or block access to Internet domains ( McCourt and Burkart 2003 ; Palmer and Warren 2013 ; see also 28 A . Ramadge , “Get Up ! Organizes Advertising Blitz to Protest Internet Filter , ” 4 Dec . 2008 , http : / / web . archive . org / web / 20090215191458 / http : / / www . news . com . au : 80 / story / 0 , , 24750766 - 2 , 00 . html ; R . N . Charette , “Australian Govern - ment Gives Up on Filtering the Internet , ” IEEE Spectrum , 12 Nov . 2012 , http : / / spectrum . ieee . org / riskfactor / comput - ing / it / australian - government - gives - up - on - filtering - the - Internet . 45 Bridy 2015 ) . In addition , as discussed in Section 3 . 2 , both nation states and powerful corporate actors have sought enhanced intellectual prop - erty protection through trade agreements . In Europe , popular opposition to the prospect of stepped - up intellectual property enforcement defeated ratification of the Anti - Counterfeiting Trade Agreement , which had been negotiated with the United States , Japan , and other coun - tries . However , many provisions for enhanced enforcement have appeared in a different agree - ment , the Trans - Pacific Partnership ( which was signed in 2016 but has not entered into force ) ( Public Citizen 2015b ) . Less is known about an - other agreement , the Trans - Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership , now under negotiation between the United States and Europe . Another set of issues relating to power exerted through today’s fast - changing media infrastruc - tures involves the surveillance conducted by pow - erful third parties , such as nation - states ( IPSP 2017 ) . In the wake of the revelations by Edward Snowden about the extent of the U . S . National Security Administration’s surveillance of glob - al electronic communications , both ordinary citizens and governments worldwide protested NSA’s lawless and seemingly unconstrained be - havior . The Snowden revelations , however , also showed that national security services in multi - ple jurisdictions – including some of those now protesting most loudly – cooperated with the NSA and with each other , helping to form a net - work for evading existing domestic procedures for oversight ( Privacy International 2013 ) . 29 Resistance to those efforts has taken varied forms . Some experts in computer security have formed ventures to develop and market secure “black phones” and online tools , while others have helped activists and civil society groups to explore , understand , and expose the full range of lawful and unlawful government surveillance activity . 30 As described in Section 3 , some large information companies also have actively resist - ed the expansion of government surveillance . One country , Iceland , has resolved to develop comprehensive legislation establishing itself as a safe harbor for whistleblowers and investigative journalists . 31 Civil society organizations and , more recently , frustrated legislators , have put sustained pressure on trade negotiators to make treaty processes more transparent and democratically account - able . 32 New political movements and parties have formed around platforms for access to informa - tion and free culture ( Beyer 2014 ) , and the free / libre / open source software ( FLOSS ) movement has worked to foster the development and adop - tion of open systems that may be freely used and adapted ( Coleman 2013 ; Gamalielsson and Lun - 29 E . MacAskill and J . Ball , “Portrait of the NSA : No Detail Too Small in Quest for Total Surveillance , ” The Guardian , 2 Nov . 2013 , http : / / www . theguardian . com / world / 2013 / nov / 02 / nsa - portrait - total - surveillance . 30 B . Schneier , K . Seidel , and Saranja Vijayakumar , “Worldwide Encryption Products Survey , ” Version 1 . 0 , Feb . 11 , 2016 . Available : Schneier on Security , https : / / www . schneier . com / academic / paperfiles / worldwide - survey - of - encryption - prod - ucts . pdf ; S . Laskow , “Is Communications Security for Reporters Improving ? , ” Columbia Journalism Review , Aug . 11 , 2014 , http : / / www . cjr . org / behind _ the _ news / is _ communications _ security _ for . php ; A . Rinehart , “Encryption Becomes a Part of Journalists’ Toolkit , ” HuffPost Media , Apr . 10 , 2015 , http : / / www . huffingtonpost . com / the - groundtruth - project / encryption - becomes - a - part _ b _ 7041278 . html . 31 International Modern Media Institute , “IMMI Resolution , ” https : / / en . immi . is / immi - resolution / . 32 Perhaps as a result , some provisions of the Trans - Pacific Partnership’s intellectual property chapter are less draconian than they had been in earlier , leaked versions of the proposed text . See K . Cox , “Analysis of the Final TPP ( Leaked ) Text on Intellectual Property : Mixed Results , ” InfoJustice . org , 15 Oct . 2015 , http : / / infojustice . org / archives / 35159 . 46 dell 2014 ) . A third cluster of struggles involves efforts by privacy activists and researchers to mobilize civil society groups and the public against commer - cial information power . This struggle needs to be understood within a wider diagnosis of contem - porary media infrastructures’ central role in the emergence of a new form of surveillance capital - ism , whereby populations worldwide comprise a source of raw materials for new practices of sur - plus extraction ( Cohen 2015 ; Zuboff 2015 ) . Disputes over these questions are as widely var - ied as the contexts and population groups in - volved . In the United States and Europe , com - mercial surveillance practices have engendered legal struggles over behavioral credit monitor - ing , drawing attention to the role of predictive profiling in the high - risk lending practices that contributed to the global financial crisis of 2008 ( Pasquale 2015 ) . Meanwhile , in an effort to en - list users themselves in both frustrating and ex - posing the practices of surveillance capitalism , teams of researchers have worked to design new privacy tools , such as ad blockers and tracker visualization tools ( Eaglehardt and Narayanan 2016 ; Kennedy 2016 ) . In the Global South , struggles over the spread of surveillance capitalism have involved challenges to public - private partnerships for the delivery of services . In India , debates concerning the possi - ble uses of a new national identification number have proved sharply divisive . In 2015 , the Indian government launched the Digital India Initiative , which is based on the use of the Aadhar Unique Identity ( UID ) scheme for biometric authentica - tion of recipients of government benefits and ser - vices . The Aadhar scheme , which is the world’s largest biometrics - based database initiative , was developed by corporate technology partners , and critics charge that too little is known about its ca - pabilities and potential future uses ( see also the India case study in Section 6 . 4 ) . 33 In Sub - Saha - ran Africa , questions have been raised about the undisclosed uses of data collected via privately funded mobile telephony and banking initiatives ( Hosein and Nyst 2013 ; Taylor 2015 , 2016a ) . More generally , in the international development context , attention to data protection questions has highlighted how routine practices of data collection and sharing can put local populations at risk ( Taylor 2016b ) ( SPI “Private rights” ) . There is a deep , if rarely noticed , continuity between these recent debates about control of networked information flows and the struggles of indigenous peoples against broadcasters for many decades . For example , Australia’s Aborig - inal communities have developed protocols that regulate how media makers – both individu - al media producers and media industries – can proceed on Aboriginal lands and among Aborig - inal communities ( Janke 1999 ; West 2014 ) . Any individual producer or media industry intending to operate among Aboriginal communities must gain clearances from Aboriginal custodians be - 33 Manan Kakkar , “Companies , Processes and Technology behind India’s UID Project , Aadhaar , ” Oct . 1 , 2010 , http : / / www . zdnet . com / article / companies - processes - and - technology - behind - indias - uid - project - aadhaar / ; Shweta Punj , “A Number of Changes , ” Business Today , Mar . 4 , 2012 , http : / / businesstoday . intoday . in / story / uid - project - nan - dan - nilekani - future - unique - identification / 1 / 22288 . html ; Silvia Masiero , “UID / Aadhar and the PDS : What New Technologies Mean for India’s Food Security System” , India at LSE , May 5 , 2014 , http : / / blogs . lse . ac . uk / indiaat - lse / 2014 / 05 / 12 / uidaadhar - and - the - pds - what - new - technologies - mean - for - indias - food - security - system / ; Jean Dreze , “Unique Identity Dilemma , ” The Indian Express , Mar . 19 , 2015 , http : / / indianexpress . com / article / opinion / columns / unique - identity - dilemma / . See section 6 . 3 . 47 fore capturing , disseminating , reproducing , or archiving data about the land or the people . By defining a framework of respect , integrity , au - thenticity , and consultation with Aboriginal au - thorities and custodians , Aboriginal protocols have sought to ensure media accountability . Far from seeing such protocols as part of a “local culture” that unhelpfully resists “progress” ( com - pare IPSP Chapter 15 ) , we need to look to them as precursors of the fundamental changes need - ed in the governance of data flows . But no such protocols have yet been developed to govern data flows in the wider development context . 6 . 4 Case Study : Civil Society Activism in India : Facebook Free Basics 34 Recent events in India offer an example of the ability of civil society activism to challenge the power of global digital platforms . We will focus here particularly on Facebook’s proposed intro - duction of its “Free Basics” platform for Internet access , but will situate the struggle over Free Ba - sics in the broader context of other disputes over information rights in India in recent years . Facebook’s Free Basics platform is a joint pri - vate - public partnership ostensibly committed to expanding Internet access for first - time users of the Internet in select countries in Asia , Lat - in America , and Africa . Facebook’s CEO , Mark Zuckerberg , launched the initiative in 2013 ( originally branded as Internet . org ) in partner - ship with Samsung , Ericsson , MediaTek , Opera Software , Nokia , and Qualcomm . It was based on an “app” that enables smartphone users lim - ited , free access to certain sites and services on the Internet , and that is designed to function on less robust 2G networks , potentially encourag - ing users to subscribe to mobile access packages ( Hemple 2016 ) . From the Indian government’s perspective , Free Basics represented an opportunity to expand its digital footprint into the daily lives of Indian cit - izens , by integrating Free Basics within its flag - ship Digital India initiative ( discussed in Section 6 . 2 ) . The Indian PM Narendra Modi’s attempts to use social media including Twitter , Facebook , Youtube , Instagram , and other platforms for po - litical purposes are well known ( Pal , Chandra and Vydiswaran 2016 ) . In September 2015 , he met Mark Zuckerberg in Silicon Valley , Califor - nia ( Mukherjee 2015 ) . For Facebook , signing India to Free Basics would have given Facebook unrivalled access to the members of its second largest market ( 125 million users ) . The deal was celebrated on Facebook with both Modi’s and Zuckerberg’s profile pictures wrapped in the green , orange , and white of the Indian flag , lead - ing millions of users to update their profiles with the tri - color . Civil society activists however viewed Free Ba - sics as an attempt by a commercial vendor to tether users to its product and monopolize the terms of access to the wider Internet , so com - promising the tenets of network neutrality ( dis - cussed in Section 6 . 2 ) . While civil society groups in India had previously advocated specific re - forms such as banning software patents and sup - port for free and open source software ( FOSS ) , a new “Save The Internet” campaign mobilized millions of users to petition the Telecom Regu - latory Authority of India ( TRAI ) to uphold the broad principle of network neutrality . Facebook was completely caught off guard by the extent of the mobilization of Indian civil society in India against Free Basics . 34 Case study written by Pradip Thomas . 48 In February 2016 , the TRAI acted to uphold the principle of network neutrality . TRAI’s regula - tion , titled “Prohibition of Discriminatory Tariffs for Data Services Regulation” provides that “no service provider shall offer or charge discrim - inatory tariffs for data services on the basis of content” . TRAI’s response was surprising given its previous support for industry interests over those of civil society ( Abraham 2016 ) . Addition - ally , while trade bodies such as the Cellular Op - erators Association of India ( COAI ) supported “differential pricing , ” others such as the National Association for Software and Services Compa - nies ( NASSCOM ) opposed it . This episode , which illustrates both the poten - tial for cozy , mutually beneficial relationships between global platform companies and na - tion - state governments and the ability of civil society to challenge such relationships , needs to be put in the broader context of grassroots strug - gle for information rights in India in recent years ( SPI “Access to information and communica - tions” ) . Campaigns spearheaded by individuals such as Aruna Roy and Nikhil Dey and organi - zations such as the National Campaign for Peo - ple’s Right to Information led to the Indian gov - ernment enacting the Right to Information Act in 2005 . Such campaigns , along with a variety of social movements for information rights , created a broader recognition of the need for knowledge of entitlements and rights , facilitated access to information , and transparency and accountabili - ty in the disbursement of public funds . This broad Right to Information movement laid the foundations for the subsequent struggles not only against Facebook’s Free Basics initiative but also against the Aadhar Unique Identity ( UID ) scheme ( discussed in Section 6 . 2 ) . A number of the organizations that contested Free Basics also contest the Aadhar initiative . They have consis - tently highlighted shortfalls in the collection of biometric data , the security and authentication issues that surround a centralized database on citizens , the potential for misuse of private in - formation and for mass surveillance of citizens , and the absence of privacy laws . While the gov - ernment has defended the scheme as a means to combat benefit fraud and protect national secu - rity , critics highlighted successfully the threat to basic freedoms from this expansion of the digital infrastructure . 6 . 5 Normative implications of media infra - structures and mediated data flows The developments discussed in this section raise three broad sets of normative implications : for autonomy , economic justice , and political self - determination . First and most basically , new and unaccount - able concentrations of power exerted via media infrastructures and mediated data flows have implications for individual autonomy . As media infrastructures become more pervasive in every - day life , they increasingly mediate the human ex - perience of the self , the other , and the world . As they connect individuals and communities , they also structure the universe of information and personalize informational exposure . The dynam - ics of continual , feedback - driven personalization invest information intermediaries with enor - mous power over processes of individual self - de - termination , which in a less intensively mediated world have been much more open - textured and amenable to serendipity ( Cohen 2012 ) . Since in - dividual autonomy is a necessary element of any form of social progress , it is essential to consider the implications of such large - scale media - based developments for the ongoing goal of social progress . 49 Second , as described in Section 3 . 3 , the emer - gence of new economic models based on sur - veillance , social sorting , and predictive profiling has implications for economic justice ( SDG 9 ) . The necessary frameworks for protective regu - lation against such forms of data extraction are incompletely developed and unevenly imple - mented . Moreover , as privacy activists and civil society organizations worldwide have worked to raise public awareness of surveillance and its threats to privacy , they have struggled against an antiregulatory discourse that aims to defeat pro - tective regulation by linking surveillance tightly with a generalized innovation imperative ( Co - hen 2016 ) . Finally , commercial and government practic - es of surveillance , social sorting , and predictive profiling have profound implications for politi - cal self - determination . The basic possibilities for political self - determination are important not just for political processes themselves , but also for wider processes of human development , rich - ly understood ( Sen 1999 ) . Yet there is mounting evidence that predictive algorithms can be used to alter user behavior , in ways that implicate val - ues of democratic self - governance and the rule of law . Facebook has publicly acknowledged con - ducting experiments on how personalization of the content in newsfeeds can affect users’ moods and other experiments reminding users to go to the polls and vote ( Grimmelmann 2015 ) . There is no guarantee that future experiments would be disclosed , nor is Facebook subject to ethical guidelines similar to those that constrain hu - man - subject experimentation in other contexts . Google’s chief economist similarly has charac - terized Google’s user base as subjects for experi - mentation ( Varian 2014 ) . The prospect that large information intermedi - aries may enjoy wholly unaccountable power to manipulate the flows of social and public knowl - edge is alarming . More generally , the continu - ous , immanent , and highly granular regulatory processes by which such privately controlled in - termediaries exert power via media infrastruc - tures ( and the new discourse of human devel - opment through the exploitation of “big data” which helps legitimate such power ) exist in ten - sion with broadly shared commitments to due process and the rule of law ( Hildebrandt 2015 ) . We end this section with an important case where the broad social justice issues raised by the governance of media and communications infrastructures entered the political domain : the civil - society based NETmundial initiative which emerged in Brazil in the wake of the Snowden revelations . 6 . 6 Case study : Brazil’s Marco Civil on Internet governance After the Snowden scandal of 2013 revealed mass electronic surveillance and espionage by U . S . intelligence agencies , diverse global ini - tiatives to defend the freedom of the Internet emerged from civil society . At the time of writ - ing , the most progressive regulatory framework for the Internet is Marco Civil da Internet ( Civil Rights Framework for the Internet ) , an initiative developed jointly by Brazil’s civil society and the former government of Dilma Rousseff . Unlike authoritarian states who show greater concern over the implications of the Internet for regime stability than for freedom , and unlike liberal de - mocracies in North America and Europe – who fear increased state control and often defer to private , corporatized governance of media infra - structures – Brazil supports universal free Inter - net , while being also critical of the international governance structures that guide it ( Trinkunas 50 and Wallace 2015 : 2 ) . The Marco Civil is an ex - emplar of alternative ways of thinking about In - ternet governance and its relation to wider social justice , without claiming that , by itself , a regu - latory framework can create a different type of Internet infrastructure , let alone address all the issues of power to which any communications infrastructure gives rise . The Marco Civil sought to rethink what freedom and citizenship mean when it comes to the Inter - net . Adopted on April 23 , 2014 , the Civil Rights Framework is intended as a prototype for Inter - net regulation globally . The Marco Civil emerged from NETmundial , a conference convened by Brazil’s national Internet steering committee and organized as a multistakeholder dialogue between government , industry , and civil society . The framework that became the Marco Civil was developed through a series of online and offline deliberations that invited Brazilian citizens to shape a legal framework for Internet regulation . It is significant not only as an initiative born from civil society in dialogue with government and private sectors , but also as a proposal emerging from the Global South , framed by social move - ments committed to the idea of communication rights . The Marco Civil has the potential to act as a balance to the global power of the United States on Internet governance issues . The Brazilian Civil Rights Framework for the In - ternet advances the commitment to respect for civil rights as an important component of Inter - net regulation and governance . Recognizing the vulnerability of users , the Marco Civil emphasiz - es the Internet’s social goals , protects the rights of Internet users , and proposes the adoption of open source technologies that allow free access to information , knowledge , and culture . In the eyes of civil society activists ( Gutiérrez 2014 ) , the most important achievements of Brazil’s Marco Civil include protection of freedom and privacy , open governance , universal inclusion , cultural diversity , and network neutrality . The Marco Civil considers access to the Inter - net fundamental to democracy , as it is essential for participation in political life and cultural production , and part of the right to education and freedom of expression . It therefore advo - cates reducing inequalities in access to digital technologies and promotes the development of competencies to use digital platforms effectively . It proposes universal Internet service with con - trolled rates and sufficient connection speed and also promotes education on the rights of con - sumers , ethical consumerism , and protection against misleading advertising and deceptive business methods ( Compare SPI “Access to basic knowledge” ) . The Marco Civil stipulates that , while Internet providers are free to compete , they are also re - sponsible for guaranteeing freedom of speech , freedom of access to information , net neutrality , and protection of privacy . The Marco Civil for - bids any type of discrimination based on disabil - ity , sexual orientation , or political or religious affiliations . It also provides for the protection of users’ data and reputation and the right to the free development of personality , 35 and guaran - tees the right to access information and the right to rectification ( SPI “Access to information and communications” ) . The Marco Civil states that citizens should be encouraged to move from be - ing mere consumers of information , knowledge , and culture to becoming content creators . The 35 Compare the similar ‘right to free development of [ the ] personality’ recognized in German law : Article 2 of the Grund - gesetz . 51 framework calls for the development of appro - priate digital tools to facilitate the creation of information , knowledge , and culture by citizens , and states that the Internet should promote the production and circulation of such local content . Not surprisingly therefore movements that de - fend the freedom of knowledge strongly support this new code , to which Brazil’s free software community was a principal contributor ( Gutiér - rez 2014 ) . As initially proposed , the Marco Civil also mandated that all information and content about Brazil should be archived in Brazil , but that restriction was removed following lobby - ing by transnational Internet corporations . Ul - timately , the Marco Civil provided that all Bra - zilian Internet content or content about Brazil is considered “Brazilian” and can be the object of observation . The Marco Civil eliminates criminal copyright penalties for content usage by citizens . It however recognizes civil copyright laws that limit access to digital content and hinder collab - orative creation , in tension with the goal of an entirely free digital culture . The Brazilian Civil Rights Framework for the In - ternet mandates network neutrality ( discussed in Section 6 . 2 ) , and prohibits discriminatory ac - tion against any type of content or user , either by changing the speed of transmission or restrict - ing content . Network neutrality ensures that all data travels at the same speed and without any restrictions based on the nature of the content or the nature of the user . Brazil’s Marco Civil forbids blocking , monitoring , filtering , or analyzing con - tent for commercial , political , moral , religious , or ideological reasons . The principle of network neutrality is here affirmed as essential to a collab - orative and democratic digital culture . The Brazilian Civil Rights Framework propos - es a model of governance through multistake - holder , transparent , collaborative , and demo - cratic mechanisms . The creators of the Marco Civil hoped to inspire activists and civil society organizations in other countries to demand sim - ilar laws ( Gutierrez 2014 ) , proposing “a global Internet that promotes freedom , inclusion , and diversity” ( Trinkunas and Wallace 2015 : 37 ) . The code’s provisions were in many cases opposed by global platform companies and sometimes defeated . It remains too early to determine the long - term influence of the model proposed , but its significance as an alternative to standard models of governance remains . 7 . Struggles for social justice through media We come in this final main section of the chapter to consider the distinctive role that media and communications play in struggles for social jus - tice and those struggles’ overall contribution to social progress . The transformation of media in - frastructures in the final decades of the twentieth century gave rise to new communication ecolo - gies , which enabled divergent worldviews and political interests to draw on a multitude of me - dia resources in their struggles for social justice . 7 . 1 Appropriating the Digital Individuals and communities around the world have learned to appropriate media , especial - ly digital communications infrastructures . The most notable late twentieth century case of ap - propriating media for social justice was provided by the Zapatistas in Mexico . In 1994 , just as Mexico was preparing to sign 52 the North American Free Trade Agreement ( NAFTA ) with the United States and Canada , the Ejército Zapatista de Liberación Nacional ( EZLN ) ( Zapatista Army of National Liberation ) , an indigenous guerrilla organization , abrupt - ly came to national attention by seizing towns in the region of Chiapas and demanding land , work , food , housing , education , independence , freedom , justice , and peace for Mexico’s indig - enous communities . The Mexican government attempted to annihilate the EZLN before news of the group reached the global public sphere but did not succeed . The EZLN’s resistance has been analyzed from many perspectives , but in this chapter its importance lies not in its general repertoire of activism , but more as an exemplar of how , in the late twentieth century , media and culture came to be appropriated in new ways by social justice movements . Using diverse media technologies and strate - gies , the Zapatistas activated a communication network that linked Mexican indigenous com - munities with social justice activists worldwide . In terms of media technology , Zapatista videos recorded on VHS tapes were carried out of the Lacandon jungle to the nearest urban centers and then on to Mexico City , where U . S . activists picked them up and took them to Austin , Tex - as to be digitized and uploaded on computer listservs ; meanwhile Zapatista audio recordings and texts were translated into multiple languag - es and disseminated via then - emerging digital platforms . In terms of cultural message , Sub - comandante Marcos , the main spokesperson of the Zapatistas at the time , used these practical means to issue statements that framed the local struggles of marginalized Mexican indigenous communities as aligned with other social justice and identity struggles in the Global North and Global South ( Rodríguez , Kidd and Stein 2010 ) , proposing himself as standing in for “every un - tolerated , oppressed , exploited minority that is . . . now beginning to speak” ( Subcomandante Marcos 1994 ) . Through their distinctive use of communications ( both technological and cultural ) the Zapatistas served to link social justice collectives and indi - viduals worldwide into a wave of international solidarity in the global public sphere , alerting the Mexican government and its army that the whole world was monitoring human rights abus - es against indigenous communities in southern Mexico ( Pianta and Marchetti 2007 ) . Social jus - tice activists in many countries worldwide came to adopt Zapatista language , goals , and commu - nication strategies . “Zapatismo” came for many to represent a new type of social justice activ - ism , based less on formal institutional structures and more on “participation and deliberation , collective autonomy , and decentralized power structures” ( Ferron 2012 : 157 ) . Marcos’ specific manifesto for the “construction of a world where many worlds fit” ( EZLN 1996 ) became exempla - ry for linking social justice to questions of cul - ture ( voice and diversity in public spheres ) and questions of media ( the need for inclusive media infrastructures ) . The influence of this exemplar was shown in De - cember 1999 by the actions of a wide coalition of protesters who met in Seattle to disrupt a World Trade Organization ( WTO ) summit . Because the Seattle protests originated a series of demon - strations against the dominant model of neolib - eral globalization , the movement is sometimes labelled the “anti - globalization movement , ” but they refused that label , as they were not op - posed to globalization , but to specific economic models that spread inequity worldwide . Learn - ing from the EZLN , this movement insisted on producing their own media rather than allowing mainstream media to shape the narrative about 53 their actions . The Seattle protest organizers set up the first Independent Media Center ( Indyme - dia ) , and enabled protesters to produce and edit their own coverage of the protests by uploading to Indymedia’s web page which , in turn , incor - porated Open Publishing software made avail - able by media activist Matthew Arnison from Sydney’s Community Activist Technology group ( Arnison 2001 ; Kidd 2004 ) . This model was rep - licated during the first decade of the twenty - first century in hundreds of cities worldwide under the motto “Don’t hate the media , be the media” . Even in a world of corporate - owned digital plat - forms , these visions from the Lacandon jungle and Seattle still resonate through alternative models of how social justice activists can appro - priate and redesign media technologies to meet their distinctive information and communica - tion needs ( Rodríguez 2001 ; in press ) . 7 . 2 Affordances and constraints : From the mobile phone to social media and beyond If the circumstances of the Zapatistas’ innova - tions were exceptional , broader changes in ac - cess to media technologies have been important too . With the introduction of prepaid accounts , low - cost handsets and relatively easy connec - tivity , mobile phone usage has spread across all social groups , including poor and marginalized populations . Despite stark inequalities in ac - cess , use , literacy , and resources ( Donner 2015 ; Qiu 2014 ) , much social innovation and activism with mobile phones has emerged , enabling col - lective action of all sorts , whether progressive or not . At the same time , the migration of activism to new digital platforms has encountered new constraints . We must always remember that the very same communication resources that benefit movements for social justice and social progress are also benefiting the movements that oppose them , including forces of right - wing extremism and authoritarian populism . Before discussing activism in more detail , it is important to note also that the affordances of mobile technologies and social networking platforms enable new kinds of everyday solidarity in contexts outside of politics . The use of mobile phones , Internet , and social media has been important among migrants and their dispersed family , cultural , and political networks ( Fortunati , Pertierra , and Vincent 2012 ) . Filipino workers and other do - mestic workers ( generally women ) who spend years away from their families and communities use mobile phones and social media to maintain bonds and connection with friends and families ( Madianou and Miller 2012 ) . Chinese migrants who leave rural areas to find work in cities ( Chu et al . 2012 ) also rely on mobile phones to create a new “modern” identity , spanning urban and rural settings ( Wallis 2013 ) . Outside the con - text of migration , diverse communities use mo - bile phones to redraw the boundaries between the private and personal and create “intimate publics” ( Hjorth , King , and Kataoka 2014 ) , for example to mourn or grieve ( Cann 2014 ; Cum - insky and Hjorth 2016 ) . In the wake of the earth - quake and tsunami disaster of March 11 , 2011 social media and mobile phones provided new channels for citizens to witness solidarity and contribute to disaster responses in Japan ( Hjorth and Kim 2011 ) . One of the earliest places where uses of social media and mobile phones entered politics was Africa , where mobiles have been used for shar - ing information on health ( SDG 3 ) , “witnessing” human rights violations ( through the incorpora - tion of cameras into mobile phones ) , and citizen journalism , including election monitoring ( Ek - ine 2010 ) . An instructive case is Ushahidi ( mean - ing “testimony” in Swahili ) , a mobile - based plat - 54 form developed to share information and create maps to report on postelection violence in Kenya in 2008 . In the South African elections of 2009 , political groups and their supporters used differ - ent kinds of mobile software , combining instant messaging and chat functions to enhance com - munication ( SDG 10 ) . Labor struggles in Africa have also adopted the Internet and especially the mobile phone , alongside traditional media , for purposes of mobilization , coordination , and sol - idarity , for example the Marikana mine workers in South Africa ( Walton 2014 ) and the El - Mahal - la textile workers in Egypt . Section 5 . 4 discussed parallel developments in Northeast Asia . Another important affordance of ICTs for social justice struggles is the ease with which they en - able textual and multimedia commentary , pro - test , and dissent ( SDG 16 ) . Building on the early history of dial - up Bulletin Board Systems ( BBS ) from the late 1980s to late 1990s ( Goggin and McLelland 2016 ) , the growth of the World Wide Web in the 1990s saw the emergence of blogs as a flexible and powerful architecture of connec - tion and commentary ( Bruns and Jacobs 2006 ) . In many countries , blogs enabled writers and ac - tivists , audiences and publics to engage and con - nect . Although this first attracted attention in the United States , it quickly became influential among social movements elsewhere , for example in the Middle East , especially Egypt ( el - Nawaway and Khamis 2015 ) and Iran ( Sreberny and Khia - bany 2010 ) . Blogs provide a way for religious , cultural , political , and linguistic communities to connect across territorial boundaries around re - ligion ( the various Muslim blogospheres : Russell and Echchaibi 2009 ) , gender rights ( Guta and Karolak 2015 ) , health issues , and diasporic and sexual identities . But the implications of information and com - munications technologies for achieving social justice and democracy are often ambiguous for several reasons . First , patterns of access and use remain very unequal . An example from the early 2000s comes from two postapartheid South Af - rican social movements , the Treatment Action Campaign ( TAC ) and the Anti - Privatization Forum ( APF ) : although they used websites and email to disseminate information , they needed to limit their mobile phone use to communica - tions within their organizations . The use more recently of smartphones to communicate elec - tion messaging does not necessarily transform the public sphere overall or citizens’ opportuni - ties within it ( Walton and Donner 2009 ) . The use of different media for different functions may channel politics and related activity into partic - ular elite domains ( policy discussion by experts , for instance ) , rather than broadly - based public spheres in which wider populations can partic - ipate ( Wasserman 2007 ) . Second , debate continues about the role of social media platforms in creating new forms of soli - darity and transnational mobilization . Facebook has been associated with various social and po - litical movements , especially the “Arab Spring” uprisings of 2011 , as well as the recent “Women’s March” – a worldwide protest held in January 2017 to protect legislation and policies regarding human rights and environmental issues . Mean - while , Twitter - relatively simple in its design , and without the cross - media integration of Face - book – has nonetheless helped incubate various initiatives based on “hashtag publics” ( Weller et al . 2013 ) , for example around Iran’s 2009 election ( Mottahedeh 2015 ) , # BlackLivesMatter in the United States and the # RhodesMustFall protests in South Africa . At the same time , however , the infrastructure of social media and digital platforms remains tightly controlled by their corporate owners and 55 managers ( Andrejevic 2013 ) , rather than by ac - tivists . Technological affordances that are key to solidarity – for example the hashtag function in Twitter – can be changed overnight by the parent corporation without consultation or participa - tion of users . It remains very difficult for users or activists to have systematic input into the de - sign and governance of commercial social media platforms ( Mansell 2012 ) . Social movements and social justice activists have learned that the po - tential of digital platforms to enhance their com - munication capabilities goes hand in hand with increased surveillance of their actions ( Treré 2015 ) . Finally , it is important to remember that the very same communication resources that benefit movements for social justice and social progress are also benefiting the movements that oppose them . We need therefore in reviewing the potential of new media technologies to acknowl - edge both affordances and constraints , and how they interact in specific contexts . 7 . 3 One planet , many struggles , many me - dia Contemporary protest movements tend to draw on an “enlarged media ecology” ( Qiu 2008 ) of old and new media , where traditional commu - nication channels are mixed with new digital tools of activism . A variety of media ecologies have proved important in the context of different struggles for social justice across the world . The interplay among traditional and digital me - dia reached new heights as the Arab uprisings of 2010 and 2011 spawned a vibrant scene of dis - sident media and culture . The rise of political stand - up comedy was a hallmark of the upris - ing : in Bahrain , Syria , and Tunisia digital vid - eos bore witness to atrocities , mocked dictators , and showcased a variety of animation , dance , theatre , and song . The media of artists and ac - tivists , often produced and disseminated under extremely risky conditions , is an important form of “creative insurgency” ( Kraidy 2016 ) . Mean - while , media - based activism for gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls is also growing worldwide . Through creative media strategies , advocacy groups have from the 1990s onwards made remarkable progress in the realm of gender equality from universal suffrage for women to rights for sexual minorities . As another example , in the struggle against ISIS , activists have been running clandestine festivals of short films , shot on mobile phones , thereby defying local political censorship and moral pro - hibitions . The group “Raqqa is Being Slaughtered Silently” has documented the atrocities of daily life under the Islamic State , propagating these on social media and connecting with mainstream journalists worldwide . As these examples also illustrate , care is needed to contextualize the role of digital platforms in social movements . Digital technologies and so - cial media platforms rarely drive political actions and protest in themselves . Social movements’ communication strategies may involve not only digital technologies but also a wide range of nondigital media . In the 2013 - 2016 Gezi Square protests in Turkey , solidarity was built through a mix of media that combined photocopied zines and street performance with content shared via social media platforms ( Saybaşılı 2014 ) . A significant new direction in media activism is as a space for political agency outside the sectar - ianism that dominates mainstream media and politics in polarized societies . In Lebanon , ac - tivists have mobilized around issues of environ - mental justice and the provision of utilities ; the 2015 “You Stink” Movement , which used digital 56 media to mobilize activism about inadequate removal services for municipal waste , was a key example of this trend . Anticorruption campaigning has also harnessed diverse media capabilities . The most dramatic ex - ample of using the Internet as an infrastructure of connection to challenge not just corruption , but state and corporate power more generally , is the work of the activist group Anonymous with its “denial of service” and other attacks ( Coleman 2014 ) and the whistleblower platform WikiLeaks ( Brevini , Hintz and McCurdy 2013 ) . One of the largest civil society campaigns in recent years is the 2011 Indian anticorruption movement trig - gered by Anna Hazare’s hunger strike in New Delhi . In conclusion , all social justice and social prog - ress initiatives depend on complex media ecol - ogies that offer resources while simultaneously imposing risks and constraints . Activist individ - uals and communities , not technologies , drive social progress , by meeting the specific commu - nication and information needs of each social justice context . 7 . 4 . Creative affordances : The case of dis - ability movements An excellent case study of the role that the new affordances of digital media technology can play is disability . According to the landmark WHO 2011 World Report on Disability , more than one billion people in the world experience disability ( 15 % of world’s population ) , of whom 110 - 190 million experience very significant disabilities ( SDG 3 ) . Disability involves a wide range of impairment types from sensory disabilities to cognitive dis - abilities and psychosocial conditions . Prevalence of disability is growing due to population ageing and global increase in chronic health conditions . Disability is highly correlated with disadvantage but not “all people with disabilities are equally disadvantaged” ( WHO 2011 ) . A roadmap for putting disability at the heart of the vision for social progress was proposed in 2006 by the UN Convention on Rights of Per - sons with Disabilities ( CRPD ) . The CRPD has many provisions , which involve communication and technology rights , since media is pivotal for achieving human rights in relation to disabili - ty . People with disabilities generally experience inferior access to and affordability of media in - frastructures , technologies , content , and partic - ipation , especially in the Global South . At the same time , disability becomes a paradigm case for rethinking both media and media’s potential contribution to social progress . Disability is a key part of wider understandings of cultural and media diversity , but is of particular interest be - cause of disability struggles’ strong focus on dig - ital technologies and their affordances . Since the 1970s , the role of media in communi - cating negative attitudes , stereotypes and myths about disability has been critiqued , commencing with the role of advertising in “charity” discours - es of disability and a push towards affirmative images of disability . Although still very much in the minority , people with disabilities appear as characters of TV shows , increasingly reported in news , or , on occasion , as media workers , broad - casters , journalists , and celebrities themselves . However there remains a hierarchy of what is newsworthy , entertaining , and shareable , even in digital platforms . Mainstream media industries generally lag behind in offering work opportu - nities to people with disabilities ( SDG 8 ) . Dis - ability still occupies a marginal place on media 57 professionals’ agendas . However , in various countries , people with dis - abilities and their allies are using digital plat - forms in distinctive ways : for example , U . S . Deaf protests in the Gaudallet “Deaf President” cam - paign ; the use of video , photography , and social media by Bolivian disability activists in March 2016 to demand better social support ( Goggin 2016 ) ; and British disability movement protests from 2012 against welfare cuts , using blogs , Face - book , and Twitter . Through social media , blogs , and websites a wide variety of disability publics have emerged . People with disabilities have also developed their own disability media : dedicated blogs ( Ouch ! established by BBC in U . K . ) , dis - ability comedy - chatshow news genres ( The Last Leg , Channel 4 in Britain ) , disability web - based programs ( Gimpgirl ) , and crowd - funding plat - forms used to fund investigative journalism or entertainment . Issues of accessibility to media infrastructures , as well as the potential affordances of these plat - forms , are particularly salient for people with disabilities , for example , captioning on TV and radio for the print handicapped . Despite their long histories , disability media such as Braille formats and sign language communication are still given little recognition in wider society , al - though there have been concerted international efforts on some aspects of digital technology ( ac - cessible computers and software , web accessibil - ity , mobile phone accessibility , “apps” for people with disabilities ) . Yet even in areas with the most concentrated effort , such as web accessibility , the situation re - mains inequitable : most government websites across the world have low levels of accessibility compliance , despite “digital first” government service , welfare , and e - government policies . The implementation of the CRPD requires wide - spread accessibility , especially across design of digital technologies , but national legislatures and media corporations have been slow to act . The lack of social progress on disability and me - dia is a central issue for wider social progress . It constrains the possibilities for social and cultur - al participation of people with disabilities ( SPI “Health and wellness” ) . Yet disability has much to teach us about how communication occurs across the world’s population : communica - tion among , with , and by people with disabili - ties foregrounds issues of voice ( Couldry 2010 ) and listening ( MacNamara 2015 ) : people with disabilities need access to public spheres where we can all listen not least governments , corpora - tions , civil society , and a wide range of other or - ganizations and agents ( Goggin 2009 ) . Without that the much - vaunted promises of new digital technologies are hollow . 58 8 . 1 – This chapter has told two stories . On the one hand , the vast and varied media landscape we have depicted offers a complex set of resourc - es for daily life and social movements . On the other , this landscape is marked by processes of power both old and radically new : new power processes include an emerging logic of data ex - traction tied to an imperative of data stimulation via increased message circulation ( Sections 3 and 6 ) . Through this transformation , unfamiliar forms of domination and exclusion are emerg - ing , while public discourse and practices of gov - ernment are subject to surprising new pressures . The long history of communications , and specif - ically media technologies , is now joining up with capitalism’s development in striking new ways . The resulting global information environment requires urgent attention , if our understanding of social progress’ dynamics is not to be danger - ously oversimplified . 8 . 2 – Media are an important resource for move - ments that promote social progress , and effective access to media is a necessary component of so - cial justice ( and a too - little recognized compo - nent of social progress itself ) . By “effective access” we mean that all individuals and communities should be able to use media infrastructures to produce content , access information and knowl - edge , and be active participants in the realms of politics , culture , and governance . Three major factors complicate the picture considerably . First , the distribution of media resources ( in - cluding traditional media and digital platforms ) is skewed towards the rich and powerful , and away from the majority of the world’s popula - tion , especially poor , marginalized , and excluded groups . This basic fact is ignored by the recur - rent “social imaginary” ( Taylor 2003 ) that sees media infrastructures as automatically progres - sive and socially transformative ( for critique , see Herman , Hadlaw , and Swiss 2014 ; Mansell 2012 ; Mosco 2004 ) . Although people rely on media platforms for connection and communication , they generally have very little influence over their design and pricing , or the conditions of access , use , or content production and distribution . Sec - ond , there is not one single space of connection enabled by media , but many such spaces , and the relations between them are highly uneven : ques - tions of language and culture , unequal influence over Internet governance , software localization and technical design , all make the Internet , in particular , a highly uneven playing field for di - verse groups , especially cultural and linguistic minorities . Third , even with access and more even distribution of opportunities for effective use , it may not be solidarity and dialogue that are facilitated when people come together via media ( online abuse is also on the rise ) : the In - ternet’s capacity , in principle , to enable multiple producers of content is not therefore sufficient . A central issue remains : how to design and sus - tain online spaces that encourage dialogue , free speech , respectful cultural exchange , and action for social progress ? The governance of Internet infrastructures is crucial in all of this , but itself highly contested and uneven . 8 . 3 – In response to these challenges , we recom - mend that the key measure of “social progress” in the global policy community ( the SPI ) be ad - justed to recognize effective media access as a new core component of social progress : 8 . 3 . 1 – While it is important that the SPI un - der “foundations of wellbeing” includes “access to information and communications” ( defined in terms of numbers of Internet users , mobile 8 . Summary and recommendations 59 phone subscriptions , and a Press Freedom In - dex ) , this is insufficient : additional measures are needed for the distribution of opportuni - ties for effective access and use . Such measures would concern not only access to the tech - nological means to receive information and content , but also to appropriate pertinent and affordable technologies . The design of media infrastructures and digital platforms needs to be pertinent to diverse language communities , individuals with different ability levels , learn - ing styles , and financial resources . 8 . 3 . 2 – While it is important that the SPI under “Opportunity” includes “personal rights” and “tolerance and exclusion , ” this is insufficient : communication rights must be added to the basket of personal rights , taking into account the direct relation between lack of participa - tion and diversity in the design and governance of media infrastructures and lack of inclusion and tolerance at a more general cultural level . 8 . 3 . 3 – The right to privacy should also be add - ed , including appropriate regulatory frame - works to protect against surveillance and data extraction . 8 . 3 . 4 – In addition , references to “tolerance” elsewhere in the SPI need to be interpreted to include tolerance in the media ( that is , the ab - sence of hate speech against the LGBTIQ com - munity , women and girls , ethnic minorities , etc . ) 8 . 4 – In addition , we make the following broader recommendations : 8 . 4 . 1 – Media and communications infra - structures should be regarded as a common good , in the same way as other infrastructures ( roads , railways , etc . ) . The recent wave of pri - vatization and concentration in the media and information industries should be reviewed by regulators for its effects on the quality of me - dia , its diversity , and its ability to meet peo - ple’s needs . The encouragement of subsidy and spaces for nonprofit media should become an essential component of struggles for social progress and social justice . If progress is to be made towards these wider goals , major ef - forts are needed by civil society , governments , and international organizations to promote and sustain media that exist outside of market forces , and to secure noncommercial financial models for their existence ( e . g . , license fees ) . 8 . 4 . 2 – Internet governance should not be in the hands of organizations who make deci - sions , implement policy , and design online architectures behind closed doors . Popular participation and transparency should be the guiding principles that frame Internet gover - nance , policy , and regulatory frameworks . 8 . 4 . 3 – Equally , processes for the design of digital platforms and other means of accessing the Internet should recognize and effectively include representation from the full range of human communities . 8 . 4 . 4 – Media infrastructures need to work more effectively to facilitate the content cre - ation by diverse communities . Access to me - dia infrastructures as consumers , receivers or audiences of content and information is not enough ; individuals and communities need access as content creators ; issues of language , affordability , user competencies , and technol - ogy design are fundamental . 8 . 4 . 5 – Core aspects of society such as health care , social services , and financial services will be increasingly provided over the Internet in 60 the future , access to digital systems needs to be equally distributed among populations , and such access should come free of commercial tracking and surveillance . 8 . 4 . 6 – With increased state and corporate sur - veillance , censorship , and data gathering need to become the focus of extensive civic debate and regulatory attention . 8 . 4 . 7 – Sound , independent journalism , espe - cially investigative journalism , is essential to democratic life . Citizens need curated , credi - ble , verified , and contextualized information to be able to make reasonable decisions in political , cultural , and social arenas . Alterna - tive forms of funding investigative journalism therefore need to compensate for the threat to the commercial newspaper business model . 8 . 4 . 8 – Serious attention is needed also to the impact on environmental sustainability of the waste generated by today’s communication de - vices and the vast data - processing infrastruc - ture that supports their use . This point has not emerged earlier in this chapter , but it is an un - intended long - term side - effect of intensified connection through media ( Maxwell and Mill - er 2012 ) . 8 . 5 – In all these and many other respects media and communications flows and infrastructures are not mere background to social struggles , but themselves a site of struggle . We must acknowl - edge the overall lack of progress in media reform over the past forty years . Since 1980 when the NWICO’s MacBride Report was presented by UNESCO , numerous initiatives have attempt - ed to reform media infrastructures , including the World Summit of the Information Society ( WSIS ) , the Free Press movement in the United States , and the net neutrality and free software international movements . However interna - tional organizations have not generally pursued such concerns . The international organizations responsible for proposing media policy ( Inter - national Telecommunication Union ( ITU ) ; the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers ( ICANN ) ) have limited their scope to technical matters discussed with little input from civil society or social movements . A renewed and more inclusive debate on media reform must be launched . Action plan 1 . To add effective media access ( as defined in Section 8 . 2 ) as a new core component of social progress in the SPI , to “ensure affordable , reli - able , sustainable , and effective access to com - munication infrastructure , ” while acknowledg - ing the long - term environmental waste from IT devices and data processing infrastructures . This means positioning communication rights as central to official definitions of Social Prog - ress . Communication rights include the right to be a content creator ; the right to free expres - sion ; the right to knowledge and information ; and the right to privacy . 2 . To open a public discussion in which matters of inclusion , affordability , and diversity in me - dia take center stage over markets and profit . 3 . To pressure international and national regula - tory bodies and policy - makers to design and implement processes for civil society partici - pation in Internet and media infrastructures governance and policy . Media infrastructures should be governed by multistakeholder , transparent , and open bodies . 4 . To pressure governments , the private sector , 61 and universities to be accountable for design - ing media platforms that are accessible to in - put from diverse individuals and communities – especially marginalized communities such as communities of color , gender minorities , LGBTIQ communities , disabled communities , and communities in the Global South . 5 . To push for media and Internet regulation that protects users from state and / or corporate surveillance and data extraction for control or marketing purposes . 6 . To promote media and Internet regulatory re - gimes that forbid any type of censorship or dis - crimination based on disability , gender , sexual orientation , or political , religious , or ethnic af - filiations . 7 . To promote the notion that “access” also in - cludes opportunities for content creation and not the mere technological access to platforms for media consumption . Media and informa - tion literacy , technical competencies , linguistic diversity , and capacity building are fundamen - tal elements of access . 8 . To re - establish independent , sound journal - ism as an essential element of democracy , and for this purpose to explore alternative funding models besides the commercial ( innovative forms of public - private partnership , license fees , etc . ) . 9 . To promote free access to software and free knowledge , as the commons of humankind . 62 Toolkit 36 36 Note : we have allocated the tasks in the toolkit matrix to the actor who should have the main responsibility for each task , however various tasks should be developed by multistakeholder bodies Goals / Values Policy Makers International Orgs Corporate media and tech sector NGOs Citizens Effective access to communication infrastructures Develop regula - tory regimes that guarantee afford - ability , cultural inclusion , and lin - guistic diversity of media and digital platforms Develop regula - tion that allocates a significant proportion of communication resources ( fre - quencies , budgets , R & D ) to citizens’ media initiatives Develop regulato - ry systems to deal in environmen - tally friendly way with waste from IT products and their use Promote net neu - trality in national regulations Promote the notion that “Effective access to media infrastructures” includes using technologies to create and disseminate content Monitor media and digital con - tent for diversity , inclusivity , and access Sanction corpo - rate media and technology cor - porations if they fail to comply Produce toler - ant , inclusive , and diverse me - dia and digital content Design media and digital plat - forms that can be used by citi - zens to produce and disseminate their own con - tent Adopt net neu - trality Promote and support citi - zens’ media Promote me - dia production and software design pro - grams in schools Promote train - ing in media and informa - tion literacy and writing code Develop and support cit - izens’ media ( produced by local com - munities for local com - munities ) Develop and support school media Implement citizen - run media and information literacy pro - grams Demand tolerant , inclusive , and diverse media and digital con - tent from the private and public media sectors Defend net neutrality 63 Transparency and accountability of media and digital platforms Communication Rights : * right to be a con - tent creator * right to free ex - pression * right to knowl - edge and informa - tion * right to privacy Incorporate transparency and accountability in international and national legisla - tion / regulation on media and Inter - net Include commu - nication rights as a fundamental human right in na - tional legislations Develop the nec - essary regulatory frameworks for the implementa - tion , regulation , and vigilance of communication rights Organize mul - tistakeholder in - ternational and regional forums to discuss the future of media and digital plat - forms Include commu - nication rights in SDGs , SPI , and any other similar global blueprint to assess progress , wellbeing , and sustainable de - velopment Help subsidize nonprofit media and digital plat - forms Review and adjust business models for consistency with communications rights Advocate poli - cies , regulations , and treaties that advance communication rights Produce and disseminate con - tent that informs audiences about communication rights Mobilize civil society to participate in global and local discus - sion about the future of me - dia and digital platforms Raise aware - ness around communi - cation rights among social justice orga - nizations and social move - ments Demand inclusion and voice in glob - al and local discussions about the fu - ture of media and digital communica - tion Demand communi - cation rights from national governments , the private sector and international organizations 64 Participatory gov - ernance of media infrastructures and digital platforms Design media and digital platforms regulatory regimes that include effec - tive civil society participation , and in particular participation by representatives of Indigenous people and people with disabilities Establish a glob - al international body responsible for monitoring and assessing access , inclusion , diversity , and communication rights in media infrastructures Promote the notion that civil society input is essential in the governance of media and digi - tal platforms Implement educational programs for cit - izens about me - dia and Internet regulation and governance Include civil society partic - ipation in all aspects of media and Internet governance ( e . g . , ICANN , WAN - Ifra ) Promote the notion that civil society participation in media and Internet gover - nance is a right Implement media and Internet reg - ulation and governance Demand inclusion and voice in glob - al and local discussions a Demand the opportunity to participate in media and Internet governance Implement citizen - run educational programs about media and Internet regulation and gover - nance 65 Participation of civil society in the design of media infrastructures and digital platforms Budget public funds for inclusive citizen - led re - search and design of digital platforms and software , where “inclusive” means includ - ing for example women and girls , indigenous com - munities , disabled communities , and linguistic minori - ties Monitor and as - sess the cultural appropriateness and inclusivity of media , digital platforms , and software for diverse commu - nities Promote inclu - sive civil society participation and input in the research and design of communication technologies Establish the necessary chan - nels to incor - porate inclusive citizen input into research and design of communication technologies , especially Indig - enous commu - nities , disabled communities , and linguistic minorities Promote research and design of com - munication technologies in schools Promote de - sign of com - munication technologies and software driven by the needs of disadvantaged communities and specifical - ly ( a ) women and girls ( b ) Indigenous peoples and ( c ) disabled people Develop and fund initiatives for sharing knowledge , know - how , technical expertise , and content between disadvantaged communities Implement inclusive citi - zen - run , local initiatives of communica - tion technol - ogy research and design Demand participation in corporate and public communica - tion technol - ogy research and design Promote the use of open access soft - ware 66 Protection from surveillance and data extraction Design and im - plement regula - tion that protects citizens from surveillance and data extraction by media and Inter - net corporations , governments , and security organiza - tions Regulate the use of algorithms for marketing or sur - veillance purposes Promote mul - tistakeholder regional and international fo - rums to address surveillance and data extraction Re - position civil society organi - zations as key participants in regulating the consequences of surveillance and data extraction Lead a public conversation about filtering and predictive algorithms Review and adjust business models for consistency with rights of privacy and data protec - tion Advocate poli - cies , regulations , and treaties that advance rights of privacy and data protection Develop trans - parent and accessible conventions for disclosing sponsorship , and describing the use of predictive algorithms Promote a public conver - sation on sur - veillance and data extraction as threats to privacy Expose un - lawful govern - ment surveil - lance activities Support the design and dis - tribution of ad blockers and tracker visual - ization tools Demand the right to privacy and protection against data extraction by corporate or government entities Demand transparency and account - ability of data collection , filtering and the use of predictive algorithms Media infrastruc - tures and digital platforms free from censorship Develop regula - tory regimes that demand transpar - ency and account - ability of content filtering mecha - nisms Develop legisla - tion that protects whistleblowers and investigative journalists Include the social responsibility of media and digital platforms as a key element of inter - national and na - tional media and Internet legislation Monitor the transparency of content filtering mechanisms used by corpo - rate and govern - ment media and digital platforms Promote the need for inves - tigative journal - ism as an essen - tial component of democratic life Commit to supporting inde - pendent inves - tigative journal - ism as the social responsibility of media and digi - tal platforms Fund civil so - ciety initiatives to monitor and catalogue con - tent removal in digital platforms and social media Support independent investigative journalism initiatives ( in universities , foundations , or govern - ment - spon - sored organi - zations ) Demand access to knowledge and informa - tion Support investigative journalism as an essential element of democratic societies 67 Linguistic diversity Media and informa - tion literacy Implement poli - cies that mandate subtitles and translation Design regu - latory regimes that mandate the production of media content and software for linguistic minori - ties and disabled communities Include Indig - enous people and people with disabilities in the formulation of media and In - ternet regulatory regimes Promote the inclusion of media and information literacy as a core element in educa - tional curricula Coordinate and support local initiatives for linguistic diver - sity Enable global visibility of lin - guistic diversity In collaboration with NGOs , civil society , and cit - izens’ media , im - plement media and information literacy initia - tives at the local level , especially targeting chil - dren and youth , disabled com - munities , ethnic minorities , and other vulnerable populations Produce content in various lan - guages , includ - ing Indigenous languages Design com - munication technologies and software appropriate and accessible to diverse linguistic communities and disabled communities Develop free and accessible media and infor - mation literacy initiatives in collaboration with NGOs and citizens Promote alliances and collaboration between media and digital communica - tion NGOs and Indige - nous NGOs and social movements Mobilize civil society and social movements to demand linguistic plu - rality in media infrastructures Fund / spon - sor media and informa - tion literacy initiatives developed by international orgs , NGOs , civil society and citizens’ media Promote pub - lic conversa - tion about the improvement of media and information literacy Demand me - dia content available in local lan - guages Demand me - dia content and digital platforms tailored to disabled communities Develop local initiatives of media and information literacy – linked e . g . , to schools , universities , community organiza - tions , and local citizens’ media 68 Human knowl - edge as commons , instead of commod - ities Balance intellectu - al property rights with notions of information and knowledge as the commons of humankind , and the value of com - munication and dialogue Pressure trade agreement negotiations to balance intel - lectual property protections with the rights to free knowledge and information Promote free culture and free / libre / open source software Recognize the limits to propri - etary claims over information , expression , and innovation Acknowledge the impor - tance for social progress of the availability of nonproprietary information , expression , and innovation Advocate poli - cies , regulations , and treaties that advance a global knowledge com - mons Pressure schools to embrace free / libre / open source soft - ware in the classroom Demand access to knowledge and infor - mation as a right , not a privilege 69 References Abraham , S . 2016 . “Facebook’s fall from grace : Arab Spring to Indian winter” , Tech 2 , Available at : http : / / tech . firstpost . com / news - analysis / facebooks - fall - from - grace - arab - spring - to - indian - win - ter - 298412 . html . Accessed : 9 February 2016 . Anderson , B . 1983 . Imagined Communities . London : Verso . Andersson Schwarz , J . 2013 . Online file sharing . New York : Routledge . Andrejevic , M . 2013 . Infoglut . New York : Routledge . APJII . 2015 . “Profil Pengguna Internet Indonesia ( Profile of Indonesia Internet Users ) ” . Jakarta : Aso - siasi Penyelenggara Jasa Internet Indonesia ( The Indonesian Association for Internet Service Providers ) . APJII . 2016 . “Penetrasi dan Perilaku Pengguna Internet Indonesia ( Penetration and Behaviour of Indonesian Internet Users ) ” . Jakarta : Asosiasi Penyelenggara Jasa Internet Indonesia ( The Indo - nesian Association for Internet Service Providers ) . Arnison , M . 2001 . “Decisions and diversity : Sydney Indymedia volunteer , ” Version 0 . 2 , Available at : http : / / purplebark . net / maffew / catk / decisions . html . Accessed : 17 April 2016 . Arvizu , S . 2009 . “Creating alternative visions of Arab society : emerging youth publics in Cairo , ” Me - dia , Culture and Society 31 ( 3 ) : 385 - 407 . Banda , F . 2006 . “Negotiating Distant Influences : Globalization and Broadcasting Policy Reforms in Zambia and South Africa , ” Canadian Journal of Communication 31 ( 2 ) : 459 - 467 . Banda , F . 2009 . ”Kasoma’s Afriethics : A reappraisal , ” International Communication Gazette 71 ( 4 ) : 227 - 242 . Barocas , S . and Selbst , A . 2016 . “Big Data’s Disparate Impact , ” California Law Review 104 : 1 - 62 . Basri , M . C . 2012 . “Indonesia Role in the World Economy : Sitting on the fence , ” in A . Reids ( ed . ) Indonesia Rising . Singapore : Institute for Southeast Asian Studies . Benvenisti , E . 2015 . “Democracy Captured : The Mega - Regional Agreements and the Future of Glob - al Public Law , ” GlobalTrust Working Paper Series , August 2015 , Available at : http : / / papers . ssrn . com / sol3 / papers . cfm ? abstract _ id = 2646882 . Beyer , J . L . 2014 . “The Emergence of a Freedom of Information Movement : Anonymous , Wikileaks , the Pirate Party , and Iceland , ” Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication 19 : 141 - 154 . Biltereyst , D . and Meers , P . 2000 . “The international telenovela debate and the contra - flow argument : 70 a reappraisal , ” Media Culture Society 22 ( 4 ) : 393 - 413 . Birnhack , M . D . and Elkin - Koren , N . 2006 . “The Invisible Handshake : The Reemergence of the State in the Digital Environment , ” Virginia Journal of Law and Technology 8 : 1 - 57 . Boczkowski , P . J . and Siles , I . 2014 . “Steps Toward Cosmopolitanism in the Study of Media Technol - ogies : Integrating Scholarship on Production , Consumption , Materiality , and Content , ” in T . Gillespie , et al . ( eds . ) Media Technologies . Cambridge : MIT Press , 53 - 76 . Bohman , J . 2007 . Democracy across Borders . Cambridge : MIT Press . Bolin , G . 2011 . Value and the Media . Farnham : Ashgate . Bolin , G . , Jordan , P . and Ståhlberg , P . 2016 . “From nation branding to information warfare , ” in M . Pantti ( ed . ) Media and the Ukraine Crisis . New York : Peter Lang . Bolter , J . D . and Grusin , R . 2000 . Remediation . Cambridge : MIT Press . Bourdieu , P . 1998 . Acts of Resistance . New York : The New Press . Bourgault , L . M . 1995 . Mass Media in Sub - Saharan Africa . Bloomington : Indiana University Press . Boyd , D . 2017 . “Did Media Literacy Backfire ? ” . Points 5 January . points . datasociety . net / did - me - dia - literacy - backfire - 7418c084d88d # . m76u6f177 . Accessed : 27 January 2017 . Boyd - Barrett , O . 1977 . “Media Imperialism , ” in J . Curran et al . , ( eds . ) Mass Communications and Society . London : Open University Press . Brevini , B . , Hintz , A . and McCurdy , P . 2013 . Beyond Wikileaks . London : Palgrave Macmillan . Bridy , A . 2015 . “Internet Payment Blockades , ” Florida Law Review 67 : 1523 - 1568 . Bruns , A . and Jacobs , J . 2006 . Uses of Blogs . New York : Peter Lang . Calabrese , A . and Briziarelli , M . 2011 . “Policy Imperialism : Bilateral Trade Agreements as Instru - ments of Media Governance , ” in R . Mansell and M . Raboy ( eds . ) The Handbook of Global Media and Communications Policy . Oxford : Blackwell . Cañizalez , A . and Lugo , J . 2007 . “Telesur : Estrategia geopolítica con fines integracionistas , ” Confines 3 ( 6 ) : 53 - 64 . Cann , C . K . 2014 . Virtual Afterlives . Lexington : University of Kentucky Press . Cerda Silva , A . J . 2012 . “Beyond the Unrealistic Solution for Development Provided by the Appendix of the Berne Convention on Copyright , ” Journal of the Copyright Society of the USA . 60 : 581 - 633 . Chan , A . 2013 . Networking Peripheries . Cambridge : MIT Press . 71 China Internet Network Information Center . 2016 . “Zhongguo hulianwangluo fazhan zhuangkuang tongjibaogao , ” China Internet Network Development State , Jan . 2016 , Available at : http : / / www . cnnic . net . cn / hlwfzyj / hlwxzbg / 201601 / P020160122469130059846 . pdf . Chon , M . 2007 . “Intellectual Property ‘From Below’ : Copyright and Capability for Education , ” U . C . Davis Law Review 40 : 803 - 854 . Chu , R . W - C . , Fortunati , L . , Law , P - L . and Yang , S . 2012 . Mobile Communication and Greater China . London : Routledge . Chua , B . H . and Iwabuchi , K . 2008 . East Asian Pop Culture . Hong Kong : Hong Kong University Press . Citron , D . K . 2008 . “Technological Due Process , ” Washington University Law Review 85 : 1249 - 1313 . Cohen , J . E . 2012 . Configuring the Networked Self . New Haven : Yale University Press . Cohen , J . E . 2015 . “The Biopolitical Public Domain , ” Available at : http : / / papers . ssrn . com / sol3 / papers . cfm ? abstract _ id = 2666570 . Accessed : 28 September 2015 . Cohen , J . E . 2016 . “The Surveillance - Innovation Complex : The Irony of the Participatory Turn , ” in D . Barney , et al . , ( eds . ) The Participatory Condition , Minneapolis : University of Minnesota Press . Coleman , E . G . 2013 . Coding freedom . Princeton : Princeton University Press . Coleman , G . 2014 . Hacker , Hoaxer , Whistleblower , Spy . London : Verso . Corner , J . 1991 . ”Meaning genre and context : The problematics of ’public knowledge’ in the New au - dience studies , ” in J . Curran and M . Gurevitch ( eds . ) Mass media and society , London : Edward Arnold , 267 - 284 . Couldry , N . 2010 . Why Voice Matters . London : Sage . Couldry , N . 2012 . Media Society World . Cambridge : Polity . Cuminskey , K . and Hjorth , L . 2016 . Haunting Hands . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Da Silva Mendes , G . 2012 . “The ( in ) visibility of Telesur in Argentina under the communication poli - cies of Nestor Kirchner , ” Comunicación y Sociedad 21 : 269 - 293 . Dahlgren , P . 2009 . Media and Political Engagement . Cambridge : Polity . DeNardis , L . 2009 . Protocol Politics . Cambridge : MIT Press . DeNardis , L . 2014 . The Global War for Internet Governance . New Haven : Yale University Press . Donders , K . and Moe , H . 2011 . Exporting the Public Value Test . Göteborg : Nordicom . Donner , J . 2015 . After Access . Cambridge : MIT Press . 72 Dudziak , M . L . 2000 . Cold War Civil Rights . Princeton : Princeton University Press . Eaglehardt , S . and Narayanan , A . 2016 . “Online Tracking : A 1 - Million Site Measurement and Anal - ysis , ” Available at : http : / / randomwalker . info / publications / OpenWPM _ 1 _ million _ site _ track - ing _ measurement . pdf . Accessed : 18 May 2016 . Ekine , S . 2010 . SMS Uprising . Cape Town : Pambazuka Press . El - Nawaway , M and Khamis , S . 2015 . Egyptian Revolution 2 . 0 . Basingstoke : Palgrave . EZLN ( Ejército Zapatista de Liberación Nacional ) . 1996 . Crónicas Intergalácticas . Primer Encuentro Intercontinental por la Humanidad y Contra el Neoliberalismo . Chiapas , Mexico : Planeta Tierra . Farivar , C . 2011 . The Internet of elsewhere . New Brunswick : Rutgers University Press . Feldbrugge , F . J - M . 1975 . Samizdat and Political Dissent in the Soviet Union . Leyden : F . J . A . Sijthoff . Fenton , N . 2010 . “Drowning or Waving ? New Media , Journalism and Democracy , ” in N . Fenton ( ed . ) New Media , Old News . London : Sage . Ferron , B . 2012 . “Les Répertoires Médiatiques del Mobilisations Altermondialistes . Contributions à une analyse de la Société Transnationale , ” unpublished doctoral thesis , Université de Rennes , France . Fink , C . and Reichenmiller , P . 2006 . “Tightening TRIPS , ” in R . Newfarmer ( ed . ) Trade , Doha , and Development , 285 - 200 . Washington , DC : World Bank . Available at : http : / / documents . world - bank . org / curated / en / 2006 / 01 / 7564325 / trade - doha - development - window - issues . Forsman , M . 2014 . Media and information literacy in Sweden . Stockholm : Statens Medieråd . Fortunati , L . , Pertierra , R . and Vincent , J . 2012 . Migrations , Diaspora and Information Technology in Global Societies . New York : Routledge . Fraser , N . 2005 . “Reframing Global Justice , ” New Left Review 36 : 69 - 90 . Frazier , R . T . 2015 . The East is Black . Durham : Duke University Press . Freedman , D . 2003 . “Cultural policy - making in the free trade era : An evaluation of the impact of current World Trade Organization negotiations on audio - visual industries , ” International Jour - nal of Cultural Policy 9 ( 3 ) : 285 - 298 . Frere , M - S . and Kiyindou , A . 2009 . “Democractic Process , civic consciousness , and the Internet in francophone Africa , ” in M . Fred , T . Wisdom and B . Fackson ( eds . ) African Media and the Digi - tal Public Sphere . New York : Palgrave - Macmillan , 73 - 88 . Friedman , S . 2011 . “Three Mile Island , Chernobyl and Fukushima : An analysis of traditional and 73 new media coverage of nuclear accidents and radiation , ” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 67 ( 5 ) : 55 - 65 . Gamalielsson , J . and Lundell , B . 2014 . “Sustainability of Open Source software communities beyond a fork : How and why has the LibreOffice project evolved ? , ” Journal of Systems and Software 89 : 128 - 145 . Giddens , A . 1990 . Modernity and Self - Identity in the Late Modern Age . Cambridge : Polity . Goggin , G . 2009 . “Disability and the Ethics of Listening : New Models for Democracy and Media , ” Continuum : Journal of Media and Cultural Studies 23 ( 4 ) : 489 - 502 . Goggin , G . 2016 . “Reimagining Digital Citizenship via Disability , ” in A . McCosker , S . Vivienne , and A . Johns ( eds . ) Rethinking Digital Citizenship . Lanham : Rowman and Littefield . Goggin , G . and McLelland , M . 2016 . Routledge Companion to Global Internet Histories . New York : Routledge . Gopal , S . and Moorti , S . 2008 . Global Bollywood . Minneapolis : University of Minne - sota Press . Grimmelmann , J . 2015 . “The Law and Ethics of Experiments on Social Media Users , ” Colorado Tech - nology Law Journal 13 : 219 - 271 . Guta , H . and Karolak , M . 2015 . “Veiling and Blogging : Social Media as Sites of Identity Negotiation and Expression among Saudi Women , ” Journal of International Women’s Studies 16 ( 2 ) : 115 - 127 . Gutiérrez , B . 2014 . “Brasil aprueba el Marco Civil de Internet , modelo para la Carta Magna de la Red , ” El Diario . Available at : http : / / www . eldiario . es / turing / Brasil - marca - ritmo - neutralidad - In - ternet _ 0 _ 243925947 . html . Accessed : 19 February 2016 . Hackett , R . A . and Zhao , Y . 1998 . Sustaining Democracy ? Toronto : Garamond Press . Halleck , D . D . 2001 . Hand Held Visions . New York : Fordham University Press . Hannerz , U . 1992 . Cultural Complexity . New York : Columbia University Press . Hannerz , U . 1996 . Transnational Connections . London : Routledge . Hemple , J . 2016 . “Inside Facebook’s ambitious plan to connect the whole world , ” Wired , Available at : file : / / / Users / uqpthom4 / Desktop / Inside % 20Facebook’s % 20Ambitious % 20Plan % 20to % 20Con - nect % 20the % 20Whole % 20World % 20 % 7C % 20WIRED . webarchive . Accessed : 19 January 2016 . Herman , A . , Hadlaw , J . and Swiss , T . 2014 . Theories of the Mobile Internet . London : Routledge . Herman , B . D . 2013 . The Fight Over Digital Rights . New York : Cambridge University Press . Hermes , J . 2005 . Re - reading Popular Culture . Malden : Blackwell . 74 Hildebrandt , M . 2015 . Smart Technologies and the End ( s ) of Law , Cheltenham : Edward Elgar . Hill , D . T . and Sen , K . 2005 . The Internet in Indonesia’s New Democracy . London : Routledge . Hjorth , L . and Kim , K - H . Y . 2011 . “The Mourning After : A Case Study of Social Media in the 3 . 11 Earthquake Disaster in Japan , ” Television and New Media 12 : 552 - 559 . Hjorth , L . King , N . and Kataoka , M . 2014 . Art in Asia - Pacific . New York : Routledge . Hollander , E . , d’Haenens , L . and Bardoel , J . 2009 . “Television performance in Indonesia : steering between civil society , state and market , ” Asian Journal of Communication 19 ( 1 ) : 39 - 58 . Hong , Y . 2017 . Networking China . Urbana : University of Illinois Press . Hoofnagle , C . J . 2004 . “Big Brother’s Little Helpers : How ChoicePoint and Other Commercial Data Brokers Collect and Package Your Data for Law Enforcement , ” North Carolina Journal of Inter - national Law and Commercial Regulation 29 : 595 - 637 . Hoofnagle , C . J . and Whittington , J . 2014 . “Free : Accounting for the Costs of the Internet’s Most Pop - ular Price , ” UCLA Law Review 61 : 606 - 670 . Hosein , G . and Nyst , C . 2013 . “Aiding Surveillance : An Exploration of How Development and Hu - manitarian Aid Initiatives Are Enabling Surveillance in Developing Countries , ” Available at : https : / / www . privacyinternational . org / sites / default / files / Aiding % 20Surveillance . pdf . Ibold , H . 2010 . “Disjuncture 2 . 0 : Youth , Internet Use , and Cultural Identity in Bishkek , ” Central Asian Survey 29 ( 4 ) : 521 - 535 . International Telecommunications Union . 2014 . “Measuring Information Society , ” Available at : http : / / www . itu . int / en / ITU - D / Statistics / Documents / publications / mis2014 / MIS2014 _ without _ Annex _ 4 . pdf . International Telecommunications Union . 2014 . “Time Series by Country ( until 2014 ) for : Percent - age of Individuals Using the Internet and Mobile - Cellular Subscriptions , ” Available at : http : / / www . itu . int / en / ITU - D / Statistics / Pages / stat / default . aspx . International Telecommunications Union . 2015 . “ITU releases 2015 ICT figures . Statistics confirm ICT revolution of the past 15 years , ” Available at : https : / / www . itu . int / net / pressoffice / press _ re - leases / 2015 / 17 . aspx . International Telecommunications Union . 2016 . “Report on the WSIS Stocktaking , ” Available at : https : / / www . itu . int / dms _ pub / itu - s / opb / pol / S - POL - WSIS . REP - 2016 - PDF - E . pdf . Iwabuchi , K . 2002 . Recentering globalization . Durham : Duke University Press . 75 Iwabuchi , K . 2007 . “Contra - flows or the cultural logic of uneven globalization ? Japanese media in the global agora , ” in D . Thussu ( ed . ) Media On the Move . London : Routledge , 67 - 83 . Iwabuchi , K . 2015 . Resilient Borders and Cultural Diversity . Lanham : Lexington Books . Janke , T . 1999 . Our Culture : Our Future – Report on Australian Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual Property Rights . Sydney : Michael Frankel and Company . Jankowski , N . , Prehn , O . and Stappers , J . 1992 . The People’s Voice . London : John Libbey and Compa - ny Ltd . Jin , D . L . 2015 . Digital Platforms , Imperialism and Political Culture . London : Routledge . Karikari , K . 2007 . “African media since Ghana’s independence , ” in : E . Barratt and G . Berger ( eds . ) 50 years of Journalism . Johannesburg : The African Editors’ Forum , 10 - 20 . Kasoma , F . P . 1994 . Journalism Ethics in Africa . Nairobi : ACCE . Kasoma , F . P . 1996 . “The foundations of African ethics ( Afriethics ) and the professional practice of journalism : The case for society - centred media morality , ” Africa Media Review 10 ( 3 ) : 93 - 116 . Kavoori , A . P . and Punathambekar , A . 2008 . Global Bollywood , New York : NYU Press . Kennedy , H . 2016 . Post , Mine , Repeat . London : Palgrave Macmillan . Kidd , D . 2004 . “From carnival to commons : The global IMC network , ” in E . Yuen , D . Burton Rose and G . Katsiaficas ( eds . ) Confronting Capitalism . New York : Softskull Press . Kim , Y . 2013 . The Korean Wave . London : Routledge . King , M . D . and Haveman , H . A . 2008 . “Antislavery in America : The Press , The Pulpit , and the Rise of Antislavery Societies , ” Administrative Science Quarterly 53 ( 3 ) : 492 - 528 . Kraidy , M . M . 2016 . The Naked Blogger of Cairo . Cambridge : Harvard University Press . Kraidy , M M . and Khalil , J . F . 2009 . Arab Industries . London : BFI / Macmillan . Krings , M . M . and Onookome , O . 2013 . Global Nollywood . Bloomington : Indiana University Press . Kupe , T . 2014 . “Media Diversity , ” in U . Seery ( ed . ) Media Landscape 2014 : Celebrating 20 Years of South Africa’s Media . Pretoria : Department of Communications , 28 - 37 . Kupe , T . 2016 . “Media freedom has come a long way in Africa , but it’s still precarious , ” The Conver - sation Available at : https : / / theconversation . com / media - freedom - has - come - a - long - way - in - afri - ca - but - its - still - precarious - 58604 . Accessed : 29 April 2016 . Lamloum , O . 2004 . Al - Jazira , miroir rebelled et ambigu du monde arabe . Paris : La Decouverte . La Pastina , A . C . and Straubhaar , J . D . 2005 . “Multiple Proximities between Television Genres and 76 Audiences : The Schism between Telenovelas’ Global Distribution and Local Consumption , ” International Communication Gazette 67 ( 3 ) : 271 - 288 . Larkin , B . 2008 . Signal and Noise : Media , Infrastructure and Urban Culture in Nigeria . Durham : Duke University Press . Larsson , S . 2013 . “Metaphors , Law and Digital Phenomena : The Swedish Pirate Bay Court Case , ” International Journal of Law and Information Technology 21 ( 4 ) : 354 - 379 . Lewis , J . , Inthorn , S . and Wahl - Jorgensen , K . 2005 . Citizens or Consumers ? Maidenhead : Open Uni - versity Press . Lim , M . 2003 . “The Internet , social networks , and reform in Indonesia , ” in N . Couldry and J . Curran ( eds . ) Contesting Media Power . Boulder : Rowman and Littlefield , 273 - 288 . Lim , M . 2011 . “ @ Crossroads : Democratization and Corporatization of Media in Indonesia” . Jakarta : Ford Foundation and Tempe , Arizona : Participatory Media Lab at Arizona State University . Lim , M . 2012 . “The league of thirteen : Media concentration in Indonesia” . Jakarta : Ford Foundation and Tempe , Arizona : Participatory Media Lab at Arizona State University . Link , P . and Xiao , Q . 2013 . “From “fart people” to citizens , ” Journal of Democracy 24 ( 1 ) : 79 - 85 . Mabweazara , H . 2015 . “Mainstreaming African digital cultures , practices and emerging forms of citizen engagement , ” African Journalism Studies 36 ( 4 ) : 1 - 11 . MacBride , S . and Roach , C . 1989 . “The New International Information Order , ” in E . Barnouw ( ed . ) International Encyclopedia of Communications . Oxford : Oxford University Press , 3 - 10 . MacKinnon , R . 2012 . Consent of the Networked . New York : Basic Books . MacNamara , J . 2015 . Organizational Listening . New York : Peter Lang . Madianou , M . and Miller , D . 2012 . Migration and new media . London , UK : Routledge . Mansell , R . 2012 . Imagining the Internet . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Mare , A . 2014 . “Social Media : The New Protest Drums in Southern Africa ? , ” in B . Patrut and M . Patrut ( eds . ) Social Media in Politics . Berlin : Springer , 315 - 335 . Maxwell , R . and Miller , T . 2012 . Greening the Media . New York : Oxford University Press . McChesney , R . W . 1993 . Telecommunication , Mass Media and Democracy . New York : Oxford Uni - versity Press . McCourt , T . and Burkart , P . 2003 . “When Creators , Corporations and Consumers Collide : Napster and the Development of On - line Music Distribution , ” Media , Culture and Society 25 ( 3 ) : 333 - 77 350 . Mediavision . 2016 . “Facebook allt viktigare som nyhetsplattform för svenskarna , ” Press release 03 May 2016 . Available at : www . mediavision . se . Meyrowitz , J . 1985 . No Sense of Place . New York : Oxford University Press . Miazhevich , G . 2014 . “Russia Today’s coverage of Euromaidan , ” Russian Journal of Communication 6 ( 2 ) : 186 - 191 . Milan , S . 2016 . “Stealing the Fire . Lessons from the Margins of Cyberspace . ” in O . Hemer and T . Tufte ( eds . ) Voice and Matter Communication , Development and the Cultural Return . Sweden : NORDICOM , University of Göteborg . Miller , J . L . 2010 . “Ugly Betty goes global ; Global networks of localized content in the telenovela industry , ” Global Media and Communication 6 ( 2 ) : 198 - 217 . Miller , T . , Govil , N . , McMurria , J . , Maxwell , R . and Wang , T . 2004 . Global Hollywood : No . 2 . London : BFI . Moraes , D . 2011 . Vozes abertas da América Latina . Río de Janeiro : Mauad X / Faperj . Mosco , V . 2004 . Digital Sublime . Cambridge : MIT Press . Mosco , V . 2014 . To the Cloud . New York : Routledge . Mottahedeh , N . 2015 . # iranelection : Hashtag solidarity and the transformation of online life . Palo Alto : Stanford University Press . Mukherjee , A . 2015 . “How to win friends FB style , ” Outlook . Available at : http : / / www . outlookindia . com / magazine / story / how - to - win - friends - fb - style / 295492 . Accessed : 12 October 2015 . Mukhongo , L . L . 2014 . “Negotiating the New Media Platforms : Youth and Political Images in Ken - ya , ” Triple C Journal for a Global Sustainable Information Society , 12 ( 1 ) : 328 - 341 . Munoz - Navarro , A . 2009 . “Youth and Human Rights in Chile . Otherness , Political Identity and Social Change , ” in T . Tufte and F . Enghel ( eds . ) Youth Engaging with the World . Gothenburg , Sweden : Nordicom , 43 - 60 . Nielsen . 2014 . “Nielsen : Konsumsi Media Lebih Tinggi di Luar Jawa ( Nielsen : Higher Media Con - sumption Outside of Java ) ” . Available at : http : / / www . nielsen . com / id / en / press - room / 2014 / niel - sen - konsumsi - media - lebih - tinggi - di - luar - jawa . html . Accessed : 24 January 2017 . Nugroho , Y . , Putri , D . A . and Laksmi , S . 2012 . “Mapping the Landscape of the Media Industry in Contemporary Indonesia , ” Report Series . Engaging Media , Empowering Society - Assessing Me - 78 dia Policy and Governance in Indonesia through the Lens of Citizens’ Rights : CIPG and HIVOS , Jakarta . Nygren , G . and Zuiderveld , M . 2011 . En himla många kanaler . Göteborg : Nordicom . Okediji , R . L . 2004 . “Africa and the Global Intellectual Property System : Beyond the Agency Model , ” African Yearbook of International Law 12 : 207 - 251 . Okediji , R . L . 2006 . The International Copyright System : Limitations , Exceptions and Public Interest Considerations for Developing Countries , UNCTAD - ICTSD Project on IPRs and Sustainable Development : Issue Paper No . 15 , Available at : http : / / www . iprsonline . org / unctadictsd / docs / ruth % 202405 . pdf . Pal , J . , Chandra , P . and Vydiswaran , V . G . V . 2016 . “Twitter and the rebranding of Narendara Modi , ” Economic and Political Weekly 51 ( 8 ) : 52 - 60 . Palmer , D . and Warren , I . J . 2013 . “Global policing and the case of Kim Dotcom , ” International Jour - nal for Crime , Justice and Social Democracy 2 ( 3 ) : 105 - 119 . Pariser , E . 2011 . The Filter Bubble . New York : Penguin Press . Pasquale , F . 2015 . Black Box Society . Cambridge : Harvard University Press . Paterson , C . 2013 . “Journalism and social media in the African context , ” Ecquid Novi : African Jour - nalism Studies ( special issue ) , 34 ( 1 ) : 1 - 6 . Pew Research Center . 2015 . “Cell phones in Africa : Communication Lifeline , ” Pew Global , Available at : http : / / www . pewglobal . org / 2015 / 04 / 15 / cell - phones - in - africa - communication - lifeline / . Phillips , W . 2015 . This is Why we Can’t Have Nice Things . Cambridge : MIT Press Pianta , M . and Marchetti , R . 2007 . “The Global Justice Movements : The Transnational Dimension , ” in D . della Porta ( ed . ) The Global Justice Movement . Boulder , CO : Paradigm , 29 - 51 . Porter , M . E . and Stern , S . ( with Green , M . ) 2015 . Social Progress Index 2015 . Available at : http : / / www . socialprogressimperative . org / wp - content / uploads / 2016 / 05 / 2015 - SOCIAL - PROG - RESS - INDEX _ FINAL . pdf . Accessed : 29 January 2017 . Powles , J . and Chaparro , E . 2015 . “How Google Determined Our Right to Be Forgotten , ” The Guard - ian , Available at : http : / / www . theguardian . com / technology / 2015 / feb / 18 / the - right - be - forgotten - google - search . Accessed : 18 February 2015 . Powles , J . and Chaparro , E . 2016 . “In the Wake of Apple v FBI , We Need to Address Some Uncom - fortable Truths , ” The Guardian , Available at : https : / / www . theguardian . com / technology / 2016 / 79 mar / 29 / apple - fbi - encryption - san - bernardino - uncomfortable - truths . Accessed : 29 March 2016 . Privacy International . 2013 . “Eyes Wide Open : Special Report , Version 1 . 0 , ” Available at : https : / / www . privacyinternational . org / sites / default / files / Eyes % 20Wide % 20Open % 20v1 . pdf . Public Citizen . 2015a . “Only One of 44 Attempts to Use the GATT Article XX / GATS Article XIV ‘General Exception’ Has Ever Succeeded : Replicating the WTO Exception Construct Will Not Provide for an Effective TPP General Exception , ” Available at : https : / / www . citizen . org / docu - ments / general - exception . pdf . Public Citizen . 2015b . “Secret TPP Text Unveiled : It’s Worse Than We Thought , ” Available at : http : / / www . citizen . org / documents / analysis - tpp - text - november - 2015 . pdf . Putnam , R . 2000 . Bowling Alone . New York : Touchstone . Qiu , J . L . 2008 . “Mobile Civil Society in Asia : A Comparative Study of the People Power II and Nosa - mo Movement , ” Javnost – – The Public 15 ( 3 ) : 39 - 58 . Qiu , J . L . 2009 . Working - Class Network Society . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Qiu , J . L . 2014 . “’Power to the People ! ’ : Mobiles , Migrants , and Social Movements in Asia , ” Interna - tional Journal of Communication 8 : 376 - 391 . Quilter , L . and Urban , J . 2005 . “Efficient Process or ‘Chilling Effects’ ? Takedown Notices under Sec - tion 512 of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act , ” Santa Clara Computer and High Technology Law Journal 22 : 621 - 693 . R2K ( Right to Know Campaign ) . 2015 . “R2K condemns the return of the Secrecy Bill ! , ” Avaialble at : http : / / www . r2k . org . za / 2015 / 05 / 12 / secrecy - bill - returns / . Reguillo , R . 2009 . “The Warrior’s Code ? Youth , Communication and Social Change , ” in T . Tufte and F . Enghel ( eds . ) Youth Engaging with the World . Gothenburg , Sweden : Nordicom , 21 - 42 . Richter , A . G . 2015 . ”Legal response and propaganda broadcasts related to crises in and around Ukraine 2014 - 2015 , ” International Journal of Communication 9 : 3125 – 3145 . Rincón , O . In press . Hacia el periodismo - experiencia en las figuras del Dj y el militante . Quito : Ciespal . Robinson , P . 2005 . The CNN effect . London : Routledge . Robinson and Yu . 2014 . “Knowing the Score : New Data , Underwriting , and Marketing in the Con - sumer Credit Marketplace : A Guide for Financial Inclusion Stakeholders , ” Available at : https : / / www . teamupturn . com / static / files / Knowing _ the _ Score _ Oct _ 2014 _ v1 _ 1 . pdf . 80 Rodríguez , C . 2001 . Fissures in the mediascape . An international study of citizens’ media . Cresskill : Hampton Press . Rodríguez , C . In press . “Citizens’ and Movements’ Uses and Appropriations of Media Technologies , ” in V . Pickard and G . Yang ( eds . ) Media Activism . New York : Routledge . Rodríguez , C . , Kidd , D . and Stein , L . 2010 . Making our Media ( Creating New Communication Spac - es ) . Cresskill : Hampton Press . Rodríguez , C . and Murphy , P . 1997 . “The Study of Communication and Culture in Latin America : From Laggards and the Oppressed to Resistance and Hybrid Cultures , ” The Journal of Interna - tional Communication 4 ( 2 ) : 24 - 45 . Russell , A . and Echchaibi , N . 2009 . International Blogging . New York : Peter Lang . Sassen , S . 2007 . “The Places and Spaces of the Global : An Expanded Analytic Terrain , ” in Held , D . and McGrew , A . ( eds . ) Globalization Theory . Cambridge : Polity , 79 - 105 . Saybaşılı , N . 2014 . “The Magnetic Remanences : Voice and Sound in Digital Art and Media , ” in A . Downey ( ed . ) Uncommon Grounds . London : I . B . Tauris , 201 - 214 . Schiller , D . 1999 . Digital Capitalism . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Schiller , H . 1969 . Mass Communications and American Empire . Boulder : Westview Press . Selwyn , N . 2014 . Distrusting Educational Technology . London : Routledge . Sen , A . 1999 . Development as Freedom . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Sen , K . and Hill , D . T . 2000 . Media , Culture and Politics in Indonesia . Melbourne : Oxford University Press . Seo , E . - K . and Kim , J . - H . 2009 . “Young South Koreans become the ‘880 , 000 Won Generation , ” Reuters , Available at : www . taipeitimes . com / News / bizfocus / archives / 2009 / 04 / 12 / 2003440846 . Accessed : 25 May 2015 . Sewell , W . 2005 . Logics of History . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Shaviro , S . 2002 . “Capitalist monsters , ” Historical Materialism 10 ( 4 ) : 281 – 290 . Shi , A . 2015 . “Approaching New Internet Information and Communication Order : The Role of Chi - nese Media , ” Speech at the World Internet Conference , Wuzhen Summit . Wuzhen , China . 17 December 2015 . Sinclair , J . and Jacka , E . 1996 . New Patterns in Global Television . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Siochrú , S . 2005 . CRIS Campaign : Assessing Communication Rights . A Handbook . Available at : 81 http : / / cdn . agilitycms . com / centre - for - communication - rights / Images / Articles / pdf / cris - manu - al - en . pdf . Skjerdal , T . 2012 . “The three alternative journalisms of Africa , ” The International Communication Gazette 74 ( 7 ) : 636 - 654 . Sreberny , A . and Khiabany , G . 2010 . Blogostan . London : I . B . Tauris . Sreberny - Mohammadi , A . and Mohammadi , A . 1994 . Small Media , Big Revolution . Minneapolis : University of Minnesota Press . Stein , L . 2009 . “Introduction , ” in L . Stein , D . Kidd and C . Rodríguez ( eds . ) National and Glob - al Movements for Democratic Communication , Volume II of “Making Our Media , ” Euricom Monographs . Cresskill : Hampton Press , 1 - 22 . Stiglitz , J . , Sen , A . , and Fitoussi , J . 2009 . Report of the Commission on the Measurement of Eco - nomic Performance and Social Progress . Available at : http : / / library . bsl . org . au / jspui / bit - stream / 1 / 1267 / 1 / Measurement _ of _ economic _ performance _ and _ social _ progress . pdf . Ac - cessed : 29 January 2017 . Stirland , S . 2008 . “Cisco leak : ‘Great firewall’ of China was a chance to sell more routers , ” Wired , Available at : https : / / www . wired . com / 2008 / 05 / leaked - cisco - do . Accessed : 20 May 2008 . Subcomandante Marcos . 1994 . Comuniqué . Available at : http : / / www . spunk . org / texts / places / mexico / sp000655 . txt . Sunstein , C . R . 2009 . Republic . com 2 . 0 . Princeton : Princeton University Press . Switzer , L . and Adhikari , M . 2000 . South Africa’s Resistance Press . Athens : Ohio University Center for International Studies . Tambini , D . 2017 . “Brexit : Triumph of Robopolitics ? Vanguardia Dossier , No . 63 : 135 - 137 . Talon , C . - G . 2011 . Al - Jazeera : Liberté d’expression et petromonarchie . Paris : Presses Universitaires de France . Tapsell , R . 2015 . “Platform convergence in Indonesia Challenges and opportunities for media free - dom , ” Convergence 21 . 2 ( 2015 ) : 182 - 197 . Taylor , C . 2003 . Modern Social Imaginaries . Durham , NC : Duke University Press . Taylor , L . 2016a . “Data Subjects or Data Citizens ? Addressing the Global Regulatory Challenge of Big Data , ” in M . Hildebrandt and B . van den Burg ( eds . ) Freedom and Property of Information , New York : Routledge . 82 Taylor , L . 2016b . “Safety in Numbers ? Group Privacy and Big Data Analytics in the Developing World , ” in L . Taylor , B . van der Sloot and L . Floridi ( eds . ) Group Privacy . London : Springer . Taylor , L . and Broeders , D . 2015 . “In the Name of Development : Power , Profit and the Datafication of the Global South , ” Geoforum 64 : 229 - 237 . Telecoms Regulatory Authority of India . 2016 . “Prohibition of Discriminatory Tariffs for Data Ser - vices Regulation , ” Available at : http : / / www . trai . gov . in / WriteReadData / WhatsNew / Documents / Regulation _ Data _ Service . pdf . Treré , E . 2015 . “The Struggle Within , ” in L . Dencik and O . Leistert ( eds . ) Critical Perspectives on Social Media and Protest . Boulder , CO : Rowman and Littlefied . Triastuti , E . 2014 . “Indonesian women’s blog formats from Tanah Betawi to Serambi Mekah : Women blogger’s choices of technical features , ” International Communication Gazette 76 ( 4 - 5 ) : 407 - 424 . Trinkunas , H . and Wallace , I . 2015 . Converging on the Future of Global Internet Governance . The United States and Brazil . Foreign Policy at Brookings . The Brookings Institution . Available at : http : / / www . brookings . edu / ~ / media / research / files / reports / 2015 / 07 / InternetInternet - gover - nance - brazil - us / usbrazil - global - InternetInternet - governance - web - final . pdf . Tufte , T . and Enghel , F . 2009 . “Youth Engaging with Media and Communication . Different , Unequal and Disconnected , ” in T . Tufte and F . Enghel ( eds . ) Youth Engaging with the World . Gothen - burg : Nordicom . Turow , J . 2011 . The Daily You . New Haven : Yale University Press . Uldam , J . and Vestergaard , A . 2015 . Civic Engagement and Social Media . Basingstoke : Palgrave Mac - millan . UNESCO . 1980 . Many Voices , One World . Report by the International Commission for the Study of Communication Problems , Paris . UNESCO . 1991 . Declaration of Windhoek . Available at : http : / / www . unesco . org / webworld / fed / temp / communication _ democracy / windhoek . htm . Accessed : 16 February 2016 . UNESCO . 2013 . Global Media and Information Literacy : Assessment Framework . Available at : http : / / www . uis . unesco . org / Communication / Documents / media - and - information - literacy - assess - ment - framework . pdf . UNESCO . 2015 . Internet Universality . Available at : http : / / www . unesco . org / new / en / communica - tion - and - information / crosscutting - priorities / unesco - internet - study / internet - universality / . 83 United Nations . 2011 . Report of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression . A / HRC / 17 / 27 . 16 May 2011 . United Nations . 2015 . “Transforming Our World : The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development” ( UNGA Resolution A / RES / 70 / 1 ) . Available at : https : / / sustainabledevelopment . un . org / content / documents / 21252030 % 20Agenda % 20for % 20Sustainable % 20Development % 20web . pdf . Valdes , R . and McCann , M . 2014 . Intellectual Property Provisions in Regional Trade Agreements : Revision and Update . World Trade Organization Staff Working Paper . ERSD - 2014 - 14 . Available at : https : / / www . wto . org / english / res _ e / reser _ e / ersd201414 _ e . pdf . Van Zoonen , L . 2005 . Entertaining the Citizen . Lanham : Rowman and Littlefield . Varian , H . R . 2014 . “Beyond Big Data , ” Business Economics 49 : 27 - 31 . Visser , N . 1997 . “Postcoloniality of a Special Type : Theory and its Appropriations in South Africa , ” The Yearbook of English Studies 27 : 79 - 94 . Volkmer , I . 1999 . News in the global sphere . Luton : University of Luton Press . Volkmer , I . 2014 . The Global Public Sphere . Cambridge : Polity . Wallis , C . 2013 . Technomobility in China . New York : New York University Press . Walton , M . 2014 . “Pavement Internet : Mobile Media Economies and Ecologies in South Africa , ” in G . Goggin and L . Hjorth ( eds . ) The Routledge Companion to Mobile Media . London : Routledge , 450 - 461 . Walton , M . and Donner , J . 2009 . “Read - Write - Erase : Mobile - mediated publics in South Africa’s 2009 elections , ” in J . E . Katz ( ed . ) Mobile Communication : Dimensions of Social Policy . New Bruns - wick : Transaction Publishers , 117 - 132 . Wasserman , H . 2007 . “Is a New Worldwide Web Possible ? An Explorative Comparison of ICTs by Two South African Social Movements , ” African Studies Review 50 ( 1 ) : 109 - 131 . Wasserman , H . 2010 . Tabloid Journalism in South Africa . Bloomington : Indiana University Press Weibull , L . 2016 . “Medieämnets etablering i Sverige , ” in M . Hyvönen , P . Snickars and P . Westerlund ( eds . ) Massmedieproblem . Stockholm : Mediehistoriskt arkiv , 125 - 164 . Weller , K . , Bruns , A . , Burgess , J . , Mahrt , M . and Puschmann , C . 2013 . Twitter and Society . New York : Peter Lang . West , D . 2014 . “Participation in digital media culture : curating community in Australia , ” Paper pre - sented at 10th OURMedia Conference on Diverse Communities , Diverse Media . Goroka , Papua 84 New Guinea . Williams , B . and Delli Carpini , M . 2011 . After Broadcast News . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Witteborn , S . 2015 . “Becoming ( Im ) Perceptible : Forced Migrants and Virtual Practice , ” Journal of Refugee Studies 28 ( 3 ) : 350 - 367 . World Health Organization . 2011 . World Report on Disability . Available at : http : / / www . who . int / dis - abilities / world _ report / 2011 / en / . World Summit on the Information Society . 2005 . Tunis Agenda on the Information Society , WSIS - 05 / TUNIS / DOC / 6 ( Rev . 1 ) - E , 18 November , Available at : http : / / www . itu . int / net / wsis / docs2 / tunis / off / 6rev1 . html . Word Wide Web Foundation . 2016 . Women’s Rights Online Report Card Indonesia : Measuring Prog - ress , Driving Action . Wu , Y . - S . 2012 . “The rise of China’s state - led media dynasty in Africa” , SAIIA Occasional Paper , 117 . Johannesburg : South African Institute of International Affairs . Xinhua . 2014 . “Xi Jinping Leads Internet Security Group , ” Available at : http : / / news . xinhuanet . com / english / china / 2014 - 02 / 27 / c _ 133148273 . htm . Yadron , D . “San Bernardino iPhone : US Ends Apple Case after Accessing Data without Assistance , ” The Guardian , Available at : https : / / www . theguardian . com / technology / 2016 / mar / 28 / apple - fbi - case - dropped - san - bernardino - iphone . Accessed : 29 March 2016 . Zahreddin , L . 2011 . Al - Jazeera … is not the End of the Journey . Beirut : Bissan . Zhang , X . and Zheng , Y . 2012 . China’s Information and Communications Technology Revolution . London : Routledge . Zhao , Y . and Hackett , R . A . 2005 . “Media Globalization , Media Democratization : Challenges , Issues and Paradoxes , ” in R . A . Hackett and Y . Zhao ( eds . ) Democratizing Global Media . Lanham : Rowman and Littlefield . Zuboff , S . 2015 . “Big Other : Surveillance Capitalism and the Prospects of an Information Civiliza - tion , ” Journal of Information Technology 30 : 75 - 89 . CARGC Briefs ISIS Media , Summer / Fall 2017 In collaboration with Global - e Journal , this series was launched by the CARGC research group on Jihadi Networks of Communication and CultureS ( JINCS ) . CARGC Paper 1 , Spring 2014 In the Shadow of Official Ambition : National Media Policy Confronts Global Media Capital Michael Curtin CARGC Paper 2 , Fall 2014 Making Real - Time Drama : The Political Economy of Cultural Production in Syria’s Uprising Donatella Della Ratta CARGC Paper 3 , Spring 2015 Media Oversight in Non - Democratic Regimes : The Perspectives of Officials and Journalists in China Maria Repnikova CARGC Paper 4 , Spring 2016 The Academic Digital Divide and Uneven Global Development Arjun Appadurai CARGC Paper 5 , Fall 2016 On the Maintenance of Humanity : Learning from Refugee Mobile Practices Mimi Sheller CARGC Paper 6 , Spring 2017 Emergent Voices and Evolving Agendas : Writing Realities in Cuba’s New Media Landscape Mariela Morales - Suárez CARGC Paper 7 , Winter 2018 Thoughts on a Critical Theory of Rural Communication Christopher Ali CARGC PRESS CARGC Special Issues The Revolutionary Public Sphere : The Case of the Arab Uprisings Communication and the Public Volume 2 , Issue 2 , June 2017 Convergence and Disjuncture in Global Digital Culture International Journal of Communication Volume 11 , 2017 A Lone Wolf in the Hypertext : Radicalization Online Brian Hughes Hijacking Heads & Hashtags Katerina Girginova The Islamic State’s Passport Paradox William Lafi Youmans Daesh’s Image - Weaponry in the Battle for Mosul Kareem El Damanhoury Fatal Attraction : The Islamic State’s Politics of Sentimentality Yara Damaj Mongol Hordes , the Khmer Rouge , and the Islamic State : Non - Modern Conceptions of Space and Time John Vilanova Where Media Meets Statecraft : Daesh Promotion of Governmental Competence through its Media Michael Degerald Terrorism and World Risk Society : Resilience , Resentment , and Spectacle Rowan Howard - Williams Obsessive Regulation and ‘Biological Minimum’ in ISIS Biopolitics Mohammed A . Salih CARGC Papers CARGC PRESS CARGC Book Talks August 31 st The Media Commons : Globaliza(cid:13)on and Environmental Discourses Patrick Murphy , Temple University September 11 th An Unlikely Audience : Al Jazeera ' s Struggle in America William Youmans , The George Washington University September 25 th Media Poli(cid:13)cs in China : Improvising Power under Authoritarianism Maria Repnikova , Georgia State University , CARGC Alumna ( book wri(cid:31)en during Postdoctoral Fellowship at CARGC ) February 19 th Futures of Black Radicalism Gaye Theresa Johnson , University of California at Los Angeles Alex Lubin , University of New Mexico March 15 th Vietnamese Popular Television and Post - Reform Na(cid:13)onal Belonging Nguyen Thu Giang , Vietnam Na(cid:30)onal University in Hanoi March 19 th Hollywood Made in China Aynne Kokas , University of Virginia April 5 th & 6 th Media(cid:31)ng Islamic State CARGC Symposium CARGC Colloquia and Panels September 14 th “Filming and Viewing Transna(cid:30)onal Surrogacy in India : Documentary Film and Assisted Reproduc(cid:30)ve Technologies” Nadja - Chris(cid:30)na Schneider , Humboldt University of Berlin October 5 th “Media and Communica(cid:30)ons” Chapter Launch , Interna(cid:30)onal Panel on Social ProgressNick Couldry , London School of Economics and Poli(cid:30)cal Science Clemencia Rodriguez , Temple University Marwan M . Kraidy , CARGC Director November 2 nd “Revamping Gender : Nostalgia and Aﬀect in Beirut ' s Musical Cabarets” Rayya El Zein , CARGC Postdoctoral Fellow , Annenberg School for Communica(cid:30)on January 18 th “Geopoli(cid:30)cs & Media in the Gulf” Hebah Bukhari , San Diego State University Lina Kha(cid:30)b , Chatham House Marc Lynch , George Washington University February 1 st “Media(cid:30)ng Possibility a(cid:28)er Suﬀering : Meaning Making of the Micro - poli(cid:30)cal through Digital Media” Samira Rajabi , CARGC Postdoctoral Fellow , Annenberg School for Communica(cid:30)on March 1 st “Contextualizing Hack(cid:30)vism : The Criminaliza(cid:30)on of RedHack” Bulay Dogan , CARGC Research Fellow , Annenberg School for Communica(cid:30)on March 15 th “Street Art at the Border : Exploring An(cid:30) - Trump Graﬃ(cid:30) and Artwork at the US - Mexico Border” Julia Becker , CARGC Undergraduate Fellow October 17 th with Saskia Sassen , Columbia University CARGC Dis(cid:31)nguished Lecture in Global Communica(cid:31)on & Master Class Center for Advanced Research in Global Communica(cid:30)on Inaugural Year Events Center for Advanced Research in Global Communication University of Pennsylvania 3901 Walnut Street , 6th Floor Philadelphia , PA 19104 ( 215 ) 573 - 8901 cargc @ asc . upenn . edu The Center for Advanced Research in Global Communication at the Annenberg School for Communication at the University of Penn - sylvania produces and promotes scholarly research on global com - munication and public life . As an institute for advanced study ded - icated to global media studies , we revisit enduring questions and engage pressing matters in geopolitics and communication . Our vi - sion of “inclusive globalization” recognizes plurality and inequality in global media , politics , and culture . Our translocal approach fuses multidisciplinary regional knowledge with theory and methodology in the humanities and social sciences . This synthesis of deep exper - tise and interdisciplinary inquiry stimulates critical conversations about entrenched and emerging communicative structures , prac - tices , flows , and struggles . We explore new ways of understanding and explaining the world , including public scholarship , algorithmic culture , the arts , multi - modal scholarship , and digital archives . With a core commitment to the development of early career scholars worldwide , CARGC hosts postdoctoral , doctoral , undergraduate , and faculty fellows who collaborate in research groups , author CARGC Press publications , and organize talks , lectures , symposia , conferences , and summer institutes . @ AnnenbergCARGC # CARGC1718 facebook . com / AnnenbergCARGC www . asc . upenn . edu / cargc