MeMa : Designing the Memory Machine Dominic Price University of Nottingham Nottingham , NG7 2TU , UK dominic . price @ → nottingham . ac . uk Dimitrios Darzentas Elvira Perez Vallejos Neil Chadborn Sarah Martindale University of Nottingham Nottingham , NG7 2TU , UK dimitrios . darzentas @ → nottingham . ac . uk elvira . perez @ → nottingham . ac . uk neil . chadborn @ → nottingham . ac . uk sarah . martindale @ → nottingham . ac . uk Rachel Jacobs Active Ingredient Nottingham , NG7 1NU , UK rachel @ i - am - ai . net Lachlan Urquhart University of Edinburgh Edinburgh , EH8 9YL , UK lachlan . urquhart @ ed . ac . uk Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . DIS ’19 Companion , June 24 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA . Copyright is held by the author / owner ( s ) . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 6270 - 2 / 19 / 06 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3301019 . 3323882 Abstract The Memory Machine is an ambitious project that aims to develop a device to capture people’s memories to create a blend of personal and factual data that builds identities , and contextualizes personal recollections . The Memory Ma - chine has been guided by co - production and user - centred design principles to ensure users’ input has a critical role in the development of the technology . Through a series of creative workshops , we facilitated participants to discuss and represent their perceptions of memory making and recollection , towards the design of the Memory Machine . This paper investigates how a creative , participatory pro - cess enabled technical topics to be explored together , as well as enabling the participants to address more challeng - ing issues of memory ; such as painful memories , memory loss , and memories at end - of - life , with a particular focus on dementia , to inform the future design of the Memory Ma - chine . Author Keywords co - design ; interface design ; health ; well - being ; dementia ; togetherness ; memories ; recollection CCS Concepts • Human - centered computing ! Interaction design pro - cess and methods ; User interface design ; User centered design ; Provocations and Work - in - Progress DIS ’19 Companion , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 271 Background With digital footprints now beginning in the womb our entire lives can be chronicled through our interaction , both explic - itly and implicitly , with digital technologies . These digital footprints are becoming a key way to access and revisit our memories [ 10 , 2 , 12 , 5 ] . The Memory Machine ( MeMa ) project explores how these technologies might interface between our real , subjective visceral and sensory experiences , and our perception of memory . The following description of this work in progress investigates the ways we perceive and interact with mem - ory , how this impacts on our health , relationships and well - being , and if and how digital applications can play a part in supporting our health and wellbeing through memory cap - ture , interaction , and recollection . Figure 1 : Design from Workshop 1 : A book as a Memory Machine with a hidden layer for intimate memories Figure 2 : Design from Workshop 1 : A suit for full sensory stimulus and recall of memories This paper describes the creative and technical process led by an interdisciplinary research team from human - computer interaction ( HCI ) , IT law , and psychology , supported by an artist / researcher to explore how participants in a series of workshops perceived memory making ( capturing memories , storing memories , dealing with challenging memories , and the loss of memory ) in order to explore how a future digital system / artefact ( the MeMa ) might be designed to help us keep , maintain and share our memories in the future [ 11 , 6 ] . Approach The MeMa project has to date conducted a series of four workshops , each with a different theme relating to the con - cept of memory . The workshops were led by an artist / researcher and facilitators drawn from the research team . The work - shop themes were selected by the team based on their indi - vidual expertises and highlighted as important to explore for the construction of a MeMa . The creative approach to the workshops has been devel - oped by the artist / researcher who has a background in data driven artworks , and representations of data in response to complex social and environmental challenges . This process is based on participatory and social engagement strategies , combined with co - production and participatory design tech - niques [ 7 , 8 , 4 ] . The workshops involved the use of arts and craft materials to encourage the participants to explore and enact together symbolic and metaphorical representations of their perceptions of memory in response to the themes set by the research team . Participants in the workshops included self - selecting older adults , people with early symptoms of dementia , health and social care professionals , historians , and care partners . In total there were 38 unique participants , 3 who attended all four workshops , 3 who attended three , and 16 who at - tended two . Ethnographic methods for capturing their re - sponses to the process included observation , photography of created materials , and audio recordings . The MeMa Workshops Workshop 1 - Memory and Identity Participants were asked to choose a memory or keepsake to bring along and during the workshop they were asked to show and describe why this keepsake was important to them . Discussions explored how participants felt about recalling speciﬁc memories and how recollection affects their wellbeing . In groups , participants were invited to start to design a dig - ital MeMa in reﬂection of these discussions using art and craft materials . Two of these designs can be seen in ﬁgures 1 and 2 . A key theme that emerged from the group discus - sions was that memories are contextual and personal , that when memories are recalled and or / shared in different ways Provocations and Work - in - Progress DIS ’19 Companion , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 272 they can be remembered differently . Another key discussion centered on how people collect keepsakes in different ways but with the same effect of evoking a memory or experience of nostalgia . Workshop 2 - Memory , Privacy , Consent , and Ethics For the second workshop , participants were asked to bring along photographs or other representations of some of im - portant memories from key parts of their lives . At the be - ginning of the workshop , participants were introduced to the concepts of privacy , consent , and ethics , and how these might relate to memories . Figure 3 : Design from Workshop 2 : A timeline represented as a tree Figure 4 : Design from Workshop 2 : A timeline represented as layers , with a selectable ’privacy’ dial Participants were then asked to design a simple timeline of a ’life’ using any of the materials provided . They were then asked to introduce spaces or symbols for the different phases in their life such as birth and adulthood . One group chose to represent their timeline as a tree ( as in ﬁgure 3 ) with the trunk representing childhood and branches repre - senting other aspects of life such as career and education . Another group represented their timeline as layers or slices ( see ﬁgure 4 ) with axes to represent ranges from individual to collective , freedom to responsibility , and cared for to car - ing for , then placed life stages such as childhood on these axes . The participants were then asked to discuss the memory representations that they had brought with them , and posi - tion them on their timelines . They were then asked to dis - cuss who else might have access to their timeline , how they might manage access , how to hide things , or any other con - trol mechanisms that they could think of . Privacy and ethics ideation cards [ 9 , 1 ] were used as a prompt towards poten - tial issues for the participants to consider . Figure 4 shows the design of one access control mechanism where a dial can be used to lock items on a timeline for speciﬁc people , purposes , or times . The discussion in the groups centered on the recollection of the memories evoked by the artefacts brought along by the participants . In particular participants were keen to share their memories . Reminiscence appeared to build re - lationships within the groups . For example while there were many shared recollections of living within the locality , other memories of growing up or living in different countries were also valued and seemed to strengthen personal identity . One of the key ﬁndings of this workshop was that memo - ries , and the items that evoke memories , could be effective ways to build relationships and strengthen identity through shared memories and prompting further recall of personal memories . Workshop 3 - Memory , Wellbeing , and Place For the third workshop , participants were invited to join the facilitators on a walk around the local area ( see ﬁgure 5 ) in order to prompt a discussion on how memory relates to place . Due to inclement weather this walk was curtailed , however this created a discussion around memory , weather , and place and how the latter two can affect the former . Participants were then invited , in groups , to design a ver - sion of the MeMa that incorporated the concept of place . Two of the groups came up with designs that could be sit - uated in a public place along the lines of a digital listening post that could be used by visitors to record local memories that could then be shared with other visitors . This listening post could be used multiple times and alone or in groups so as to build up many layers of memories . The group also dis - cussed how these memories could be saved to a personal MeMa to be taken away and recalled later . One strand of discussion looked at the utility of being able to relate a memory to a place but being able to recall that memory in a different place , in particular for when a place no longer ex - ists or access is no longer possible . Participants who were Provocations and Work - in - Progress DIS ’19 Companion , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 273 health or social care practitioners in particular were inter - ested in the beneﬁt of being able relate memory to place when not in a care setting . Another strand of discussion focussed on how place can sometimes prompt negative or painful memories . It was discussed how it could be im - portant not to ignore , or ’forget’ , those memories but how any design for a MeMa would need to be sensitive towards these memories . Workshop 4 - Memory , Media , and Archives The fourth workshop examined how media and archives of media ( e . g . , newspapers , television programs , music ) in - ﬂuence and evoke memories . Participants were asked to come prepared with an example of a piece of media that evoked a particularly strong memory for them . The work - shop began with a discussion in groups about the media and their memories . Participants were asked as part of this process to see if they could categorize the types of media . Figure 5 : Workshop 3 - on a walk around the local area looking at situated memorials Figure 6 : Workshop 4 - Creating an archive from paper cuttings Groups were then provided with a selection of weekend newspapers . Participants were asked to make cuttings ( as in ﬁgure 6 ) of anything of interest or value to them and that they would like to keep a record of into the future . Participants were then prompted to relate the archive from the second part with the media and types from the ﬁrst part of the workshop , and to discuss how a MeMa might incor - porate memories from different sources including those pro - duced by the user and those produced in the media such as television and newspapers . Participants discussed how memories are made up from individual experience but also group or cultural experience and how a MeMa could work towards recording and recalling both kinds of memories , or assist in merging them together . Discussion and Future Work Two distinct themes emerged from the workshops that have a bearing on the development of the MeMa , and of future co - design on the MeMa . The ﬁrst theme is that of recollection and reminiscence . Participants were strongly inclined to reminiscence in the groups and to share their memories with other participants . In particular this reminiscence took place as part of a di - alogue . This strongly suggests that a MeMa designed for capturing memories would beneﬁt from maintaining a con - versation with its users . The second theme is that of togetherness [ 13 ] . By engaging in creative activities as part of a group , the participants be - come part of an unfolding enacted narrative towards the co - creation of a MeMa . Further , enacting togetherness within the co - design process promoting a sense of togetherness that can stimulate and add value to discussions and shared personal reﬂections with the potential for improved well - being amongst the participants . The designs and concepts produced and the ﬁndings of the workshops , to be analysed using thematic analysis tech - niques [ 3 ] , will be used to inform the development of a proto - type MeMa . In particular , the responses by the participants to the workshop themes will be important in developing fea - tures to support identity , privacy , place , and media . This prototype will then be evaluated with the workshop partici - pants as a continuation of the co - design process . Acknowledgments This work was supported by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council [ grant number EP / M02315X / 1 ] . Elvira Perez acknowledges the ﬁnancial support of the NIHR Nottingham Biomedical Research Centre . Provocations and Work - in - Progress DIS ’19 Companion , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 274 References [ 1 ] 2018 . The Moral - IT & Legal - IT Decks Lachlan’s Research . ( 17 July 2018 ) . Retrieved 2019 - 02 - 08 from https : / / lachlansresearch . com / the - moral - it - legal - it - decks / [ 2 ] Richard Banks . 2011 . The Future of Looking Back ( Microsoft Research ) . Microsoft Press , Redmond , WA , USA . [ 3 ] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke . 2012 . Thematic analysis . In APA handbook of research methods in psychology , Vol 2 : Research designs : Quantitative , qualitative , neuropsychological , and biological . American Psychological Association , Washington , DC , US , 57 – 71 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 13620 - 004 [ 4 ] Carl DiSalvo , Illah Nourbakhsh , David Holstius , Ayça Akin , and Marti Louw . 2008 . The Neighborhood Networks Project : A Case Study of Critical Engagement and Creative Expression Through Participatory Design . In Proceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design 2008 ( PDC ’08 ) . Indiana University , Indianapolis , IN , USA , 41 – 50 . http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 1795234 . 1795241 [ 5 ] Chris Elsden , David S . Kirk , and Abigail C . Durrant . 2016 . A Quantiﬁed Past : Toward Design for Remembering With Personal Informatics . HumanComputer Interaction 31 , 6 ( 2016 ) , 518 – 557 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 07370024 . 2015 . 1093422 [ 6 ] Daniel Herron , Nazanin Andalibi , Oliver Haimson , Wendy Moncur , and Elise van den Hoven . 2016 . HCI and Sensitive Life Experiences . In Proceedings of the 9th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction ( NordiCHI ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Article 134 , 3 pages . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2971485 . 2987673 [ 7 ] Rachel Jacobs , Steve Benford , and Ewa Luger . 2015 . Behind The Scenes at HCI’s Turn to the Arts . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 567 – 578 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702613 . 2732513 [ 8 ] Jonathan Lazar , Jinjuan Heidi Feng , and Harry Hochheiser . 2010 . Research Methods in Human - Computer Interaction . Wiley Publishing . [ 9 ] Ewa Luger , Lachlan Urquhart , Tom Rodden , and Michael Golembewski . 2015 . Playing the Legal Card : Using Ideation Cards to Raise Data Protection Issues Within the Design Process . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 457 – 466 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702142 [ 10 ] VIKTOR MAYER - SCHÖNBERGER . 2009 . Delete : The Virtue of Forgetting in the Digital Age . Princeton University Press . http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / j . ctt7t09g [ 11 ] Ine Mols , Elise van den Hoven , and Berry Eggen . 2014 . Making Memories : A Cultural Probe Study into the Remembering of Everyday Life . In Proceedings of the 8th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Fun , Fast , Foundational ( NordiCHI ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 256 – 265 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2639189 . 2639209 Provocations and Work - in - Progress DIS ’19 Companion , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 275 [ 12 ] Wendy Moncur . 2016 . Living Digitally . Palgrave Macmillan UK , London , 108 – 112 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1057 / 9781137520586 _ 13 [ 13 ] Anneli Nyman , Staffan Josephsson , and Gunilla Isaksson . 2012 . Being part of an enacted togetherness : narratives of elderly people with depression . Journal of aging studies 26 , 4 ( dec 2012 ) , 410 – 418 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jaging . 2012 . 05 . 003 Provocations and Work - in - Progress DIS ’19 Companion , June 23 – 28 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 276