Integration of optical manipulation , microfluidic and deep learning for experimental mechanobiology Nicolas Inacio 1 , Edison Gerena 1 , Ferhat Sadak 1 , 2 and Sinan Haliyo 1 Abstract —In recent years , the field of mechanobiology has seen significant advancements through the application of microfluidics and optical trapping techniques . Microfluidics enables precise control of chamber and channel content on a micrometer scale , while optical tweezers allow for trap - ping microscopic objects within an ’optical trap . ’ Combining these disciplines under the name ’optofluidics’ offers new opportunities for studying biological phenomena with reduced scale experiments . However , challenges remain in coordinating microfluidics with optical tweezers within confined spaces . To address these limitations , an integrated approach is proposed , using 3D optical manipulation setup , microfluidics and deep learning image recognition to estimate forces experienced by optically trapped objects . By analyzing the bead’s displacement within the flow , forces are quantified using a deep learning algorithm . Experimental results demonstrate force variations based on the position within the chip , revealing the potential for improved understanding of biological mechanisms . This study facilitates the establishment of a dialogue between microfluidics and optical trapping manipulations , paving the way for future explorations in mechanobiology . Keywords : Mechanobiology , Microfluidics , Optical tweezers , Optofluidics , Deep learning , Force estimation , Microscopic manipulation . I . INTRODUCTION For the past few years , there has been rapid progress in the field of mechanobiology . Studying certain biological pro - cesses through the lens of mechanics has led to advancements in the understanding of these mechanisms [ 1 ] [ 2 ] , something nearly impossible with conventional experiments that require analysis on large samples at the scale of a cell population , for instance . Some of these studies have employed microfluidics to address their challenges [ 2 ] . Thanks to this technology , it is possible to create chips consisting of channels and chambers , where the content is controlled by modifying the internal flow using a pressure controller . Consequently , it becomes feasible to alter the medium within the chip , to pass microparticles through the channels , and even to allow cells to pass through if the width permits . Overall , this offers the possibility of miniaturizing certain classical experiments on a micrometer scale platform [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] . In recent years , optics has also been a highly coveted research field for biology . The work of Arthur Ashkin in * This work was supported by French National Research Agency Project Optobots ( ANR - 21 - CE33 - 0003 ) , Ile - de - France Region DIM ELICIT Projet 3BIOT , and CNRS Innovation program BIOPTIQ 1 Nicolas Inacio , Edison Gerena , Ferhat Sadak and Sinan Haliyo are with Sorbonne Université , CNRS , Institut des Systemes Intelligents et de Robo - tique ( ISIR ) , Paris , France ( email : sinan . haliyo @ sorbonne - universite . fr ) 2 Ferhat Sadak is also with Bartin University , Department of Mechanical Engineering , Turkey ( fsadak @ bartin . edu . tr ) 1986 led to the formulation of the principle of optical tweezers , and to the obtention of a Nobel Prize in 2019 [ 6 ] [ 7 ] . By using the radiation pressure applied by a laser beam , microparticles , microscopic objects , or cells can be trapped in an ’optical trap’ [ 8 ] [ 9 ] , even micro - robots [ 10 ] . Optical tweezers have demonstrated their relevance in an - alyzing behaviors in the microscopic world , particularly in the microbiological realm [ 2 ] [ 9 ] . Furthermore , optical forces on trapped spherical objects can be modelled linearly , as the restoring optical force is proportional to the distance from its equilibrium position [ 11 ] . This particularity has led to the use of optical trapping also for quantitative force measurements [ 12 ] , such as the strength of inter - molecular bonds [ 13 ] or the stiffness of a cell membrane [ 14 ] , and to the development of optical tweezers with haptique feedback [ 15 ] [ 16 ] . Microfluidics and optics can be combined under the name of optofluidics , which involves the optical manipulation of microparticles within a microfluidic chip . Through this , it becomes possible to replicate biological experiments on a reduced scale , with the ability to sort , select , or differen - tiate microscopic objects , as these methods would surpass the actual limitations posed by manual experimentation [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 1 ] [ 19 ] . It is now possible to have access to a con - fined microscopic space for studying biological phenomena using tools such as optical tweezers . For instance , there is an experiment that enables the sorting of cells based on their fluorescence response to mechanical stress [ 20 ] , proposing an approach to cellular biomechanics using optofluidics . However , [ 21 ] indicates that one limitation of these ex - periments lies in the coordination between microfluidics and optical tweezers . For instance , some applications involve au - tomating the movement of the optical trap along a predefined trajectory [ 22 ] . Conversely , the measurement of flow force on a biological object in microfluidics has been observed [ 1 ] , but the optical trap remains stationary , and cells are passed in front of the trap using the flow in the chip . Another limitation in the field of optofluidics , as men - tioned by Zhu et . al - 2023 [ 21 ] , is the freedom of move - ment in three dimensions . Especially in biology , numerous mechanisms are governed by the structure of the biological elements involved [ 23 ] . The possibility of interacting with these elements with non - static optical tweezers in different spatial conformations would undoubtedly bring new in - sights for mechanobiology . Optical manipulation has already demonstrate 3D manipulation capabilities [ 24 ] [ 25 ] . The aim is to enhance the dialogue between microfluidics and optical trapping manipulations , with a better understand - ing of the forces involved in manipulating microscopic ele - 979 - 8 - 3503 - 3039 - 7 ©2023 IEEE Proceedings of MARSS - International Conference on Manipulation , Automation and Robotics at Small Scales Abu Dhabi , UAE , 2023 2023 I n t e r n a t i o n a l C o n f e r e n c e o n M a n i pu l a t i o n , A u t o m a t i o n a nd R o b o t i c s a t S m a ll S c a l e s ( M A R SS ) | 979 - 8 - 3503 - 3039 - 7 / 23 / $ 31 . 00 © 2023 I EEE | D O I : 10 . 1109 / M A R SS 58567 . 2023 . 10294160 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . ments within a microfluidic chip . For this purpose , optoflu - idics and deep learning will be combined to analyze the behavior of microspheres within a microfluidic channel flow . A custom made optical trapping system enables us to move microscopic objects in three dimensions within a sample [ 10 ] . Consequently , a polystyrene bead can be manipulated between different chambers within a microfluidic chip . The flow imposed by a circulating medium within a microfluidic chip is significantly constraint by the walls and the chip design . The focus here is to investigate how the displacement of a polystyrene bead varies based on its position in the microfluidic chip . A series of experiments that allows to measure the drag force at different pressures will be performed . The displacement of this sphere around the origin point of the laser will be monitored within the microfluidic flow , and associated to a force thanks to the deep learning to show how it is possible to measure the flow force locally . The objective of this study is , by estimating the force experienced by optically captured objects , to prove the relevance of an optofluidic trapping device with image recognition based in deep learning to characterize the mechanical flow inside the chip , and path the way for more complex mechano - biology experiments . II . METHODOLOGY A . Optical tweezers system To conduct the experiments , a customized optical path system is set up to trigger the optical tweezers within a Petri dish containing the sample . At the beginning of this path , there is an infrared laser ( 1064 nm , minimum power : 100mW , maximum power : 10W , typical power : 300 mW ) that generates the optical trapping phenomenon . The laser beam then passes through a series of lenses and mirrors , including a galvanometer , to control the final focus point’s position in three dimensions . Finally , the beam passes through an oil - immersion microscope objective ( Olympus UPlanFLN , 40x magnification ) to deliver the laser beam into the sample . The image formed within the sample is captured by a CMOS camera ( 640 × 640 pixels ) with a total magnification of x4000 , positioned parallel to the first optical path . The images are processed using custom - coded software designed for this system [ 10 ] . The activation and movement of the optical tweezers are achieved through teleoperation using a joystick . This allows for movements in six degrees of freedom ( three translations and three rotations ) in a three - dimensional space to control one or several focal points of the optical tweezers , enabling the manipulation of spheres or even more complex structures within a region of 100 µm width . B . Microfluidic environment For the microfluidic part , various products from Elve - flow® company are used , in particular the microfluidic flow controller OB1 MK4 . The software provided allows us to manage the different pressures applied by the pressure controller . In this setup , two pressure channels are used , from the controller—one for the input and the other for the output of the microfluidic chip , which consists of a simple straight - line path . The pressure in the main channel of the chip is calculated based on the difference from the pressure where the flow is static in the channel . At the input of the chip , an Eppendorf is placed containing a solution of 3 µ m polystyrene beads , which will be manipulated by the optical tweezers . At the output , another Eppendorf serves as a waste collection container for the medium passing through the microfluidic chip . The microfluidic chips were designed using Polydimethyl - siloxane ( PDMS ) through molding with silicon wafers . Mi - crofluidic patterns has 40 µ m width channels . The PDMS compound was prepared by mixing 30g of PDMS with 3g of cross - linking agent for each wafer . Any potential bubbles were removed using a vacuum pump . Once the PDMS was in contact with the wafer , it was placed in an oven at 65°C for 4 hours . After removing the PDMS from the mold , the desired microfluidic patterns were cut , and holes were created at the input and output points . Subsequently , the area of interest was bonded to a thin glass slide using a plasma cleaner for 2 minutes , following a thorough wash with isopropanol . The structure was then subjected to an oven at 90°C for 20 minutes . Microfluidic connections were established using fine tubing directed towards the Eppendorfs and the pressure controller . C . Manipulations experiments Five differents experiments have been conducted , captur - ing the behavior of a polystyrene bead within the microfluidic flow . Each experiment corresponds to a different pressure or laser power setting , which determines the strength of the optical trap on the sphere . The input and output pressures were initially set to 300 mbar . Then , the input pressure is ajusted to reach a point where the flow in the channel becomes static , which is identified by the immobility of the spheres that previously moved within the channel . For each experiment , the input pressure is then modified from this static flow value to sequentially reach several pressure levels : 0 . 30 mbar , 0 . 80 mbar , and 1 . 80 mbar difference between the static flow and the measurement flow . Laser CMOS camera Fluorescence light source 3D Nanostage Illuminationsource Micro ﬂ uidique sample Stearing mirors Fig . 1 . Image of the optical trapping system with a close - up photograph of the microfluidic set - up . Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . Fig . 2 . Performance evaluation of YOLOv7 model for 100 epochs based on : ( a ) mAP @ 0 . 5 ( b ) mAP @ 0 . 5 : 0 . 95 ( c ) Training and validation loss for YOLOv7 Before each measurement , the optical tweezers are ac - tivated to capture one of the spheres passing through the channel . With the flow activated by the pressure difference , 8 different positions are used to stop the bead , starting from the wall and moving towards the chamber as show in 4 . ( f ) . Each position is spaced by 10 µ m , achieved by displacing the platform supporting the sample , controlled by the optical tweezers software . The speed at which the bead is moved between each of these points is 10 µ m / s . The stop at each position lasts for 30 seconds — except for 4 . ( c ) where the first position is at 15 seconds . The laser power will be adjusted to 0 . 95 W or 0 . 75 W depending on the experiment . The experiments were recorded at 64 frames per second ( fps ) to optimize image recognition . D . Particule tracking using Deep Learning In this study , the YOLOv7 algorithm is employed to de - velop and evaluate a micro - bead displacement measurement technique [ 26 ] . In order to achieve this , a dataset of 500 micro - bead images is used , divided into training , validation , and testing sets . The images were resized to 640 × 640 pixels before algorithm training . The resolution of the micro - bead tracking algorithm is 100 nanometer which allow us to precisely track the micro - bead displacement to measure the force required . In this section , a brief description of the YOLOv7 architecture will be provided . YOLOv7 is composed of the following parts : Cross - Batch Stabilization ( CBS ) , E - ELAN , and MaxPool - 1 ( MP1 ) . Convolutional operations , batch normalization , and SiLU activation functions are all included in the CBS component , allowing for effective feature extraction . While keeping the ELAN structure , the E - ELAN module improves learning capabilities by directing various computing units in charge of feature extraction to learn a wider range of features , maintaining the initial gradient path . The MP1 structure integrates pooling and convolution , two different down - sampling techniques , allowing the network to automatically choose the best down - sampling approach given the context . The YOLOv7 model’s head , which is built using the Feature Pyramid Network ( FPN ) architecture with PANet integration , plays a crucial role . It incorporates multiple Con - volutional , Batch Normalization , and SiLU activation ( CBS ) blocks . The head also includes an E - ELAN , a MaxPool - 2 ( MP2 ) , and a Spatial Pyramid Pooling and Convolutional Spatial Pyramid Pooling ( Sppcspc ) structure . By merging the Spatial Pyramid Pooling ( SPP ) structure and the Con - volutional Spatial Pyramid ( CSP ) structure , the Sppcspc structure efficiently improves the network’s perceptual field . The MP2 block , which accomplishes downsampling and feature extraction simultaneously , closely matches the MP1 block with the exception of a few small changes to the output channel count . The prediction network , which comprises the head , is where the final predictions are derived . Fig . 3 . Localization performance evaluation of YOLOv7 model for 100 epochs in the test set at various IoU thresholds Measures are made of box loss , objectness loss , and clas - sification loss over 100 epochs to evaluate the performance of YOLOv7 toward micro - bead center location . Equation ( 1 ) shows how the combined YOLOv7 loss was used as a metric to measure the difference between the model’s predicted results and the actual data . Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . loss = l bbox + l object + l classification ( 1 ) The box loss metric assesses how well the technique locates the object’s center and fits the object with a predicted bounding box . Objectness quantifies the likelihood that an object will be identified in a particular area of interest . The classification loss , on the other hand , assesses how well the algorithm predicted the appropriate classifying label for the identified object . Furthermore , ( mAP 0 . 5 ) and ( mAP 0 . 5 : 0 . 95 ) evaluate the mean Average Precision ( mAP ) over various Intersection over Union ( IoU ) criteria ranging from 0 . 5 to 0 . 95 . As a result , the parameters true positive ( TP ) , false positive ( FP ) , true negative ( TN ) , and false negative ( FN ) are used to determine Precision and Recall . Equation ( 2 ) demonstrates that precision is a measure of the percentage of positive identifications that were actually correct . Precision = TP TP + FP ( 2 ) Recall is a measure of how many of the actual positive instances were correctly identified by the algorithm as in Equation ( 3 ) . Recall = TP TP + FN ( 3 ) To calculate mAP , the area of the precision - recall curve , as shown in Equation ( 4 ) , is used to calculate the average precision of each class . mAP = 1 c Σ ci = 1 AP i ( 4 ) As demonstrated in Equation ( 5 ) , IoU measures how well the predicted bounding box overlaps with the ground - truth bounding box . IoU = Area of Overlap Area of Union ( 5 ) Finally , YOLOv7 was employed as the base model for micro - bead detection and its output format was utilized which pro - vides bounding box information in the form of ( x , y , w , h ) , where x and y represent the center position of the detected bounding box , and w and h represent the width and height of the bounding box , respectively . In the experimental setup , when collecting experiments in various environmental con - ditions , the micro - bead exhibited no motion at the end of the last frames of the experiment . This information is then used to determine the positional displacement of the micro - bead in the x and y axes , where the center location of the micro - bead is subtracted in these immobile frames . A low - pass filter is then applied on the data to keep the information of interest . The force that affects the micro - bead is then predicted using a precise positional displacement measurement of the micro - beads , regardless of its location within the microfluidic chip . The trap force is then obtained using the optical force model [ 27 ] . F flow = K ∗ ( X laser − X probe ) ( 6 ) where X laser − X probe represent the displacement between the origin position of the bead , corresponding to the laser position , and the actual bead position , as calculated from the deep learning method . K is the stiffness of the trap . The stiffness for each power laser is obtained through Drag force method [ 28 ] in a regular Petri dish and are presented in Table I . TABLE I S TIFFNESS OF THE OPTICAL TRAP Laser power X Y 0 . 75 W 54 . 3 pN / µ m 52 . 4 pN / µ m 0 . 95 W 67 . 2 pN / µ m 65 . 4 pN / µ m III . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION A . Training and Test results for micro - bead tracking Training results are primarily evaluated using the mAP @ 0 . 5 , mAP @ 0 . 5 : 0 . 95 , and training and validation loss over 100 epochs , as shown in Figure 2 . The training has been made on similar experiments where the polystyrene bead is static in the microfluidic chamber . The validation loss demonstrates how well the model generalizes to new data , whereas the training loss demonstrates how well it learns from training data . As a result , the YOLOv7 model’s training and validation losses exhibited a good fit for both the training and validation datasets . The model provided ∼ 100 % mAP @ 0 . 5 and ∼ 87 % mAP @ 0 . 5 : 0 . 95 accuracy for the detection of micro - bead for 100 epochs . To demonstrate the generalization ability of the YOLOv7 model toward micro - bead detection , 100 independent images of micro - bead are used for testing . To demonstrate the feasibility of the model to be used for precise displacement measurement of the micro - bead , the model has been analysed at different IoU thresholds for accuracy . The aim here is to show the suitability of the model to be used toward force measurement at the piconewton level . Hence , the test set was analyzed at 0 . 65 , 0 , 75 , 0 . 85 , 0 . 95 , and 1 . 00 IoU thresholds . As shown in Figure 3 , the model demonstrated almost 100 % localization accuracy at 0 . 65 , 0 . 75 , 0 . 85 and 0 . 95 thresholds . On the other hand , there is a 2 . 4 % accuracy decrease at 1 . 00 threshold . This error is also including the human error in ground truth data . Overall , Figure 3 confirms the suitability of the model’s localization accuracy as a base model for force measurement to provide the displacement measurement of the micro - bead at 100 - nanometer resolution . B . Experiments Analysis The bead position on the optical traps varies depending on the location : near a wall , at the entrance of a chamber , inside a chamber , in the middle of a channel , etc . This behavior is due to the heterogeneity of the current velocity at these different locations , which alters the force applied by the flow on the trapped object , depending on the operational point . The measured force refers here to the force applied to the sphere at its location , representing the impact of the Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . ( e ) ( d ) ( c ) ( f ) ( a ) ( b ) 10 µm Flow direction Y X Fig . 4 . Measured forces on the sphere for each experiment . ( inset figures : displacement of the bead expressed in µ m and seconds ) . Each step on the curves represents one of the 8 positions with a thirty seconds stop , as indicated in ( f ) . The experiments in graphs ( a ) , ( b ) , and ( c ) were recorded at 0 . 95 W . The experiments in graphs ( d ) and ( e ) were recorded at 0 . 75 W . ( a ) . 0 . 95W et 0 . 30 mbar . ( b ) . 0 . 95W et 0 . 80mbar . ( c ) . 0 . 95W et 1 . 80mbar . ( d ) . 0 . 75W et 0 . 30mbar . ( e ) . 0 . 75W et 0 . 80mbar . ( f ) . Representation of force vectors on the different measure spots along the channel , corresponding to the parameters set in ( e ) . flow velocity on the particle . Moreover , it is here well demonstrated that this force varies with the position . General observations indicate that when positioned inside the channel where there is no flow ( i . e . , at the last position ) , the force is indeed close to 0 pN . Regardless of the applied general force , the shape of the plateaus remains consistent between the graphics . Under varying the pressure at the same laser power , it is observed that the maximum force applied to the sphere changes from 40 pN ( fig . 4 . a ) to 60 pN ( fig . 4 . b ) and then 80 pN ( fig . 4 . c ) , indicating a significant difference in the velocity flow with increasing the pressure in the microfluidic chip , as expected . Notably , the force in the Y - direction is non - zero when close to the walls , while the force in the X - direction is weaker than in the main channel , due to the boundary effects . At 0 . 30 mbar , the pushing force in the Y - direction even surpasses that in the X - direction , demonstrating the wall’s ability to influence the sphere’s movement within the current . Furthermore , when keeping the pressure constant but varying the laser power from 0 . 95 W to 0 . 75W ( fig . 4 . a & d and fig . 4 . b & e ) , a small difference in force is observed , remaining below ten pN . The impact of laser power , it is expected to , do not have an influence in the force measurement value , but only in the resolution and the range of the measurement . High laser power , high stiffness , and less displacement of the bead . Low laser power , low stiffness , and higher displacement of the bead . This contradicts the expected behavior , but such small inconsistent differences may be attributed to issues with the stiffness calibration of the optical tweezers and boundary effects in the beads . Below 0 . 75W , the sphere is no longer trapped and is lost in the flow . Above 0 . 95W , the sphere remains nearly stationary , pre - venting accurate force determination . Maintaining laser power around 1W suffices to retain the sphere within the trap for the investigated pressures , and in the near future , will allow us to applied controlled pressure and forces up to 80 pN to characterize cellular behaviors . IV . CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS The presented system effectively allows the measurement of the force applied to a sphere in a microfluidic chip , like an in situ force probe . By manually displacing the sphere within the sample , the measurement location can be precisely selected . This capability opens numerous possibilities for exploring a microscopic environment within a microfluidic chip . Microfluidics with optical tweezers and Deep Learning have been successfully integrated to establish an exploratory method for measuring local pushing forces within a mi - crofluidic chip , using a polystyrene bead as a probe in this environment . This novel approach to analysis opens new avenues for future experiments aimed at understanding mechanobiology . The method employed here involves data recording and Deep Learning processing of experiments after the manipu - lation . However , it is also possible to extend to real - time quantitative measurement of forces . This is only limited Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . by the camera acquisition bandwidth ( 64 Hz ) , as the deep learning algorithm process time is more than 90 Hz . In addition , new types of images sensor can be combined with deep learning algorithm to increase the bandwidth ac - quisition of force measurements , like the use of event - based cameras [ 15 ] . Such a camera captures only pixels containing motion in the field of view , enabling easy detection of displacements and identification of locally applied forces at very high rates . The event - based camera can be coupled with a haptic interface or utilized within a robotic control loop , similar to what has been done in Gerena et . al 2020 - [ 16 ] . Furthermore , we have the capability to manipulate more complex structures , thanks to micro - robots . This enhance - ment opens up new possibilities for applications using this system , coupling microfluidics with optical tweezers to comprehend biological mechanisms [ 21 ] . This integrated approach holds great promise in advancing the understanding of cellular and microscopic behavior and paves the way for exciting research prospects in mechanobiology . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] Z . Yao , C . C . Kwan , and A . W . Poon , “An optofluidic “tweeze - and - drag” cell stretcher in a microfluidic channel , ” Lab on a Chip , vol . 20 , no . 3 , pp . 601 – 613 , 2020 . [ 2 ] S . Hu , J . - y . Ye , Y . Zhao , and C . - l . Zhu , “Advanced optical tweezers on cell manipulation and analysis , ” The European Physical Journal Plus , vol . 137 , no . 9 , p . 1024 , Sept . 2022 . [ 3 ] J . Zhu , X . Zhu , Y . Zuo , X . Hu , Y . Shi , L . Liang , and Y . Yang , “Optofluidics : The interaction between light and flowing liquids in integrated devices , ” Opto - Electronic Advances , vol . 2 , no . 11 , pp . 190007 – 10 , Wed Nov 20 16 : 39 : 06 CST 2019 . [ 4 ] X . Fan and I . M . White , “Optofluidic microsystems for chemical and biological analysis , ” Nature Photonics , vol . 5 , no . 10 , pp . 591 – 597 , Oct . 2011 . [ 5 ] D . Psaltis , S . R . Quake , and C . Yang , “Developing optofluidic tech - nology through the fusion of microfluidics and optics , ” Nature , vol . 442 , no . 7101 , pp . 381 – 386 , July 2006 . [ 6 ] M . C . Asplund , J . A . Johnson , and J . E . Patterson , “The 2018 Nobel Prize in Physics : Optical tweezers and chirped pulse amplification , ” Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry , vol . 411 , no . 20 , pp . 5001 – 5005 , Aug . 2019 . [ 7 ] A . Ashkin and J . M . Dziedzic , “Optical Trapping and Manipulation of Viruses and Bacteria , ” Science , vol . 235 , no . 4795 , pp . 1517 – 1520 , Mar . 1987 . [ 8 ] A . N . Grigorenko , N . W . Roberts , M . R . Dickinson , and Y . Zhang , “Nanometric optical tweezers based on nanostructured substrates , ” Nature Photonics , vol . 2 , no . 6 , pp . 365 – 370 , June 2008 . [ 9 ] K . Dholakia and T . ˇCižmár , “Shaping the future of manipulation , ” Nature Photonics , vol . 5 , no . 6 , pp . 335 – 342 , June 2011 . [ 10 ] E . Gerena , F . Legendre , A . Molawade , Y . Vitry , S . Régnier , and S . Haliyo , “Tele – robotic platform for dexterous optical single - cell manipulation , ” Micromachines , vol . 10 , no . 10 , p . 677 , 2019 . [ 11 ] A . Ashkin , “Forces of a single - beam gradient laser trap on a dielectric sphere in the ray optics regime , ” Biophysical journal , vol . 61 , no . 2 , p . 569 , 1992 . [ 12 ] H . Zhang and K . - K . Liu , “Optical tweezers for single cells , ” Journal of The Royal Society Interface , vol . 5 , no . 24 , pp . 671 – 690 , 2008 . [ 13 ] A . L . Stout , “Detection and characterization of individual intermolec - ular bonds using optical tweezers , ” Biophysical journal , vol . 80 , no . 6 , pp . 2976 – 2986 , 2001 . [ 14 ] D . Raucher and M . P . Sheetz , “Characteristics of a membrane reservoir buffering membrane tension , ” Biophysical journal , vol . 77 , no . 4 , pp . 1992 – 2002 , 1999 . [ 15 ] M . Yin , E . Gerena , C . Pacoret , S . Haliyo , and S . Régnier , “High - bandwidth 3d force feedback optical tweezers for interactive bio - manipulation , ” in 2017 IEEE / RSJ International Conference on Intel - ligent Robots and Systems ( IROS ) . IEEE , 2017 , pp . 1889 – 1894 . [ 16 ] E . Gerena , F . Legendre , Y . Vitry , S . Regnier , and S . Haliyo , “Improving optical micromanipulation with force - feedback bilateral coupling , ” in 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation ( ICRA ) . IEEE , 2020 , pp . 10292 – 10298 . [ 17 ] W . Wu , X . Zhu , Y . Zuo , L . Liang , S . Zhang , X . Zhang , and Y . Yang , “Precise Sorting of Gold Nanoparticles in a Flowing System , ” ACS Photonics , vol . 3 , no . 12 , pp . 2497 – 2504 , Dec . 2016 . [ 18 ] E . Lasnoy , O . Wagner , E . Edri , and H . Shpaisman , “Drag controlled formation of polymeric colloids with optical traps , ” Lab on a Chip , vol . 19 , no . 20 , pp . 3543 – 3551 , Oct . 2019 . [ 19 ] L . C . Geonzon , M . Kobayashi , T . Sugimoto , and Y . Adachi , “Adsorp - tion kinetics of polyacrylamide - based polyelectrolyte onto a single sil - ica particle studied using microfluidics and optical tweezers , ” Journal of Colloid and Interface Science , vol . 630 , pp . 846 – 854 , Jan . 2023 . [ 20 ] M . M . Wang , E . Tu , D . E . Raymond , J . M . Yang , H . Zhang , N . Hagen , B . Dees , E . M . Mercer , A . H . Forster , I . Kariv , P . J . Marchand , and W . F . Butler , “Microfluidic sorting of mammalian cells by optical force switching , ” Nature Biotechnology , vol . 23 , no . 1 , pp . 83 – 87 , Jan . 2005 . [ 21 ] Y . Zhu , M . You , Y . Shi , H . Huang , Z . Wei , T . He , S . Xiong , Z . Wang , and X . Cheng , “Optofluidic Tweezers : Efficient and Versatile Micro / Nano - Manipulation Tools , ” Micromachines , vol . 14 , no . 7 , p . 1326 , June 2023 . [ 22 ] S . Chowdhury , P . Svec , C . Wang , K . T . Seale , J . P . Wikswo , W . Losert , and S . K . Gupta , “Automated Cell Transport in Optical Tweezers - Assisted Microfluidic Chambers , ” IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering , vol . 10 , no . 4 , pp . 980 – 989 , Oct . 2013 . [ 23 ] N . Boodhun , “Seeing is believing : Structures and functions of bio - logical molecules , ” BioTechniques , vol . 64 , no . 4 , pp . 143 – 146 , Apr . 2018 . [ 24 ] J . E . Curtis , B . A . Koss , and D . G . Grier , “Dynamic holographic optical tweezers , ” Optics communications , vol . 207 , no . 1 - 6 , pp . 169 – 175 , 2002 . [ 25 ] E . Gerena , S . Régnier , and S . Haliyo , “High - bandwidth 3 - d multitrap actuation technique for 6 - dof real - time control of optical robots , ” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol . 4 , no . 2 , pp . 647 – 654 , 2019 . [ 26 ] C . - Y . Wang , A . Bochkovskiy , and H . - Y . M . Liao , “YOLOv7 : Trainable bag - of - freebies sets new state - of - the - art for real - time object detectors , ” arXiv preprint arXiv : 2207 . 02696 , 2022 . [ 27 ] A . Ashkin , “Forces of a single - beam gradient laser trap on a dielectric sphere in the ray optics regime , ” Biophysical Journal , vol . 61 , no . 2 , pp . 569 – 582 , Feb . 1992 . [ 28 ] R . M . Simmons , J . T . Finer , S . Chu , and J . A . Spudich , “Quantitative measurements of force and displacement using an optical trap , ” Biophysical journal , vol . 70 , no . 4 , pp . 1813 – 1822 , 1996 . Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply .