Passion and grit : An exploration of the pathways leading to venture success Brandon A . Mueller a , ⁎ , Marcus T . Wolfe b , Imran Syed c a Oklahoma State University , Spears School of Business , Stillwater , OK 74078 , United States b University of Oklahoma , Price College of Business , Norman , OK 73019 , United States c Ball State University , Miller College of Business , Muncie , IN 47306 , United States a r t i c l e i n f o a b s t r a c t Article history : Received 23 February 2016 Received in revised form 5 February 2017 Accepted 14 February 2017 Available online xxxx Entrepreneurial passion has been proposed as a central characteristic of entrepreneurs , theo - rized to in ﬂ uence a host of entrepreneurial behaviors as well as ﬁ rm performance . The current study explores one set of pathways leading from developer passion to performance , identifying self - regulatory mode ( locomotion and assessment ) and grit as signi ﬁ cant conduits of this rela - tionship . In this study , we use multi - source survey data , with 1 year lagged performance data , to empirically examine relationships between developer passion , self - regulatory mode , grit , and performance . Using path analysis modeling , we ﬁ nd that the relationship between devel - oper passion and grit is mediated by both locomotion and assessment , with results indicating a positive relationship between locomotion and grit and a negative relationship between as - sessment and grit . Our results also reveal a positive relationship between grit and venture per - formance . Implications of these ﬁ ndings to research and practice are then discussed . © 2017 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Keywords : Passion Perseverance Grit Self - regulation Entrepreneur Executive summary Entrepreneurs often expend considerable effort and overcome extreme hardship in establishing and developing their new ﬁ rms ( Foo et al . , 2009 ) . In fact , entrepreneurs commonly face not just momentary dif ﬁ culties , but continual struggles over the many years it takes to build a business ( Nambisan and Baron , 2013 ) . Prior research suggests that entrepreneurial passion may help to explain why some entrepreneurs persist in the face of dif ﬁ culties and setbacks ( Cardon et al . , 2009 ; Utsch and Rauch , 2000 ) . In this study we highlight the importance of grit — an individual ' s perseverance toward long - term goals — in explaining how entrepreneurial passion positively in ﬂ uences new venture performance . Complementing previous efforts to clarify the path - ways by which entrepreneurial passion in ﬂ uences entrepreneurial behavior and ﬁ rm - level outcomes ( e . g . , Drnovsek et al . , 2016 ; Stenholm and Renko , 2016 ) , our research highlights the essential role of self - regulatory mechanisms in channeling passion into sustained goal pursuit and heightened ﬁ rm performance . Self - regulation theory has been identi ﬁ ed as the overarching conceptual framework detailing how passion aids in motivating coherent and coordinated goal pursuit through the mediating effects of goal - related cognitions ( Cardon et al . , 2009 ) . We propose that self - regulatory mode — an individual ' s orientation toward either immediately acting to pursue goals ( i . e . , locomotion ) or ap - praising options for goal pursuit ( i . e . , assessment ) — is in ﬂ uenced by passion and plays a central mediating role in determining how goals are pursued and , thus , the degree to which entrepreneurs exhibit grit in attempting to grow their ﬁ rms . Journal of Business Venturing xxx ( 2017 ) xxx – xxx ⁎ Corresponding author . E - mail addresses : brandon . mueller @ okstate . edu ( B . A . Mueller ) , mtwolfe @ ou . edu ( M . T . Wolfe ) , aisyed @ bsu . edu ( I . Syed ) . JBV - 05806 ; No of Pages 20 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2017 . 02 . 001 0883 - 9026 / © 2017 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of Business Venturing Please cite this article as : Mueller , B . A . , et al . , Passion and grit : An exploration of the pathways leading to venture success , J . Bus . Venturing ( 2017 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2017 . 02 . 001 Our empirical study draws on data from a sample of 204 entrepreneurs engaged in the developmental phase of their busi - nesses , as well as from a separate executive - level employee at each ﬁ rm to report on ﬁ nancial results . Results suggest that the effects of passion on entrepreneurial grit are mediated by self - regulatory mode , with locomotion positively in ﬂ uencing grit and assessment negatively in ﬂ uencing grit . In addition , grit was found to hold a positive relationship with venture performance . Our study contributes to the emerging stream of research on entrepreneurial passion by identifying one of the pathways by which passion in ﬂ uences entrepreneurial grit and , ultimately , ﬁ rm performance . Passionate entrepreneurs are more strongly in - clined to act ( locomote ) , rather than assess options , in pursuing their goals for ﬁ rm development , leading to sustained persever - ance and heightened ﬁ rm performance . This study adds another piece to a growing body of research that provides important con ﬁ rmation of entrepreneurial passion ' s role in in ﬂ uencing entrepreneurial behavior and ﬁ rm performance ( Cardon et al . , 2009 ) while also clarifying the pathways of in ﬂ uence . 1 . Introduction “ I ' m convinced that about half ofwhat separates the successful entrepreneurs from the non - successful ones is pure perseverance . It is so hard . You put so much of your life into this thing … Unless you have a lot of passion about this , you ' re not going to survive . You ' re going to give it up . ” [ – Steve Jobs ] Much of human behavior is goal - directed ( Locke and Latham , 2013 ) . An avowed and determined commitment to reach one ' s goals is necessary ( albeit not suf ﬁ cient ) to attaining them . Grit — broadly de ﬁ ned as perseverance toward long - term goals — is an emerging construct of interest in the psychology and leadership domains . Grit has been found to predict achievement across ac - ademic , vocational , and extracurricular domains ( Duckworth et al . , 2007 ; Duckworth and Quinn , 2009 ; Duckworth et al . , 2009 ) . Furthermore , this link is believed to be particularly strong in contexts characterized by high levels of adversity , such as the envi - ronment commonly faced by entrepreneurs ( Westphal et al . , 2008 ) . Entrepreneurs regularly expend considerable effort and overcome signi ﬁ cant hardship in successfully starting a new venture ( Foo et al . , 2009 ) . For instance , entrepreneurs commonly negotiate treacherous environments characterized by extreme uncertain - ty ( lack of information ; novel products , markets , and organizations ) , resource scarcity ( in the form of limited ﬁ nances , knowledge , assets , and legitimacy ) , rapid change , and unpredictable surprises ( Baum and Locke , 2004 ) . Thus , the degree to which individuals demonstrate grit may be especially crucial in entrepreneurial settings ( Baron and Shane , 2004 ; Markman et al . , 2005 ) . Indeed , en - trepreneurship researchers have long sought to understand the factors driving entrepreneurs to pursue venture success over time and through hardship ( Cardon et al . , 2013 ) . Entrepreneurial passion has recently been proposed as the “ ﬁ re of desire ” that motivates entrepreneurs to overcome hardship on the arduous road to new venture success ( Cardon et al . , 2009 : 515 ) . Scholars have proposed that , beyond other types of motivation such as need forachievement ( Collins et al . , 2004 ) , locusofcontrol ( Rotter , 1966 ) , oradesirefor independence ( Aldridge , 1997 ) , entrepreneurial passion is a central and powerful motivation fueling entrepreneurial efforts ( Baum et al . , 2001 ; Chen et al . , 2009 ) . A growing interest in entrepreneurialpassionhasresultedinanumberofconceptualstudiesexploringpassionanditsin ﬂ uenceintheentrepreneurialdomain ; however , given passion ' s proposed importance in explaining entrepreneurial behavior and performance ( Cardon et al . , 2009 ) , empirical work is vital to con ﬁ rming the nature of passion and its various effects ( Murnieks et al . , 2014 ) . Scholars are beginning to empirically examine a few of the proposed relationships between passion and various entrepreneur - ial behaviors ( e . g . , Cardon and Kirk , 2015 ; Murnieks et al . , 2014 ) and ﬁ rm - related outcomes ( e . g . , Baum and Locke , 2004 ; Baum et al . , 2001 ) . While this research has begun to shed light on if , and to what degree , passion in ﬂ uences entrepreneurial behavior , there remain sizable theoretical and empirical gaps that limit our understanding of the pathways through which passion impacts behavior and , ultimately , ﬁ rm - level outcomes ( Murnieks et al . , 2014 ) . Several recent studies ( e . g . , Drnovsek et al . , 2016 ; Stenholm and Renko , 2016 ) have started to investigate some of these pathways of in ﬂ uence , however , this work is still in its infancy . Build - ing on previous work that links entrepreneurial passion and grit - related constructs ( Cardon et al . , 2009 ; Cardon and Kirk , 2015 ; Murnieks et al . , 2016 ) , this study addresses a theoretical and empirical gap in the literature by examining how exactly passion in ﬂ uences grit and , ultimately , heightens performance . Self - regulation theory has been identi ﬁ ed as the overarching conceptual framework detailing how passion aids in motivating coherent and coordinated goal pursuit through the mediating effects of goal - related cognitions ( Cardon et al . , 2009 ) . In accor - dance with this , we develop a comprehensive model exploring the self - regulatory mechanisms by which entrepreneurial passion — speci ﬁ cally developer passion — leads to grit , and ultimately to venture performance . Drawing on the affect ( e . g . , Forgas , 2000 ; Fredrickson , 2001 ) and self - regulation ( e . g . , Carver and Scheier , 1998 ; Kanfer , 1990 , 1992 ) literatures , we propose that self - regulatory mode — an individual ' s orientation toward either immediately acting ( i . e . , locomotion ) or appraising options for action ( i . e . , assessment ) — plays a central mediating role in determining how goals are pursued and , thus , the degree to which entrepreneurs exhibit grit . We test these hypotheses using a sample of 204 ventures in the developmental phase of their business . By doing so , we hope to make a number of contributions . First , despite a growing body of empirical work ( e . g . , Huyghe et al . , 2016 ; Murnieks et al . , 2016 ) , there remain several unan - swered theoretical and empirical gaps regarding the role of passion in the entrepreneurial process ( Drnovsek et al . , 2016 ) . More speci ﬁ cally , there is limited understanding of the mechanisms by which passion in ﬂ uences important entrepreneurial behaviors 2 B . A . Mueller et al . / Journal of Business Venturing xxx ( 2017 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Mueller , B . A . , et al . , Passion and grit : An exploration of the pathways leading to venture success , J . Bus . Venturing ( 2017 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2017 . 02 . 001