" We’re Not Decorators " : Fostering Interdisciplinary Exchange in STEM – Artist Collaborations Dashiel Carrera Gitanjali Bhattacharjee Robert Soden dcarrera @ dgp . toronto . edu Independent Researcher soden @ cs . toronto . edu University of Toronto United States University of Toronto Canada Canada ABSTRACT In recent years , there has been a growing interest in the relation - ship between art and HCI . New HCI research draws on artistic practices as a source of design inspiration , turns to the arts for assistance in solving wicked problems , or uses design research to understand artistic collaboration . Despite the widely noted poten - tial of art - HCI research , the relationship between the two felds remains poorly understood , and precise descriptions of what makes art - HCI collaboration successful remain elusive . In this paper , we look at artist - in - residence ( AiR ) programs within STEM organi - zations as a way of learning about these collaborations . Drawing on interviews with individuals with recent involvement in these programs , we identify a series of design considerations for these res - idencies and note recurring concerns . Finally , we argue that many challenges in these programs arise from the instrumentalization of art , and recommend ways to foster more meaningful relations through AiR programs . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Human computer inter - action ( HCI ) ; HCI theory , concepts and models ; Empirical studies in HCI . KEYWORDS design , artist - in - residency , art - science collaboration ACM Reference Format : Dashiel Carrera , Gitanjali Bhattacharjee , and Robert Soden . 2023 . " We’re Not Decorators " : Fostering Interdisciplinary Exchange in STEM – Artist Collaborations . In Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ’23 ) , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pittsburgh , PA , USA . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 13 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3563657 . 3595973 1 INTRODUCTION Over the past decade , more and more artists have spent time in the ofces of STEM organizations like Google , Autodesk , or university labs as " artists - in - residence " ( AiR ) . Whether these residencies are hosted by academia , non - profts , or large tech companies , AiR pro - grams invite artists into STEM organizations with the intention of Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the frst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specifc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pittsburgh , PA , USA © 2023 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9893 - 0 / 23 / 07 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3563657 . 3595973 helping to change the way these organizations operate and inspire new approaches to research and design [ 11 , 34 ] . Host organizations seek creative inspiration , branding , or other benefts , while artists receive access to fnancial , material , and intellectual resources that enable them to create art they may not otherwise . Recent examples of works produced through AiR programs include two - story sculp - tures that change dynamically based on the facial expressions of viewers , [ 44 ] , algorithmically modifed short stories [ 8 ] , and dance routines with radio controlled moving platforms [ 38 ] . While artist - in - residency programs are a longstanding practice , the recent rise of these residencies has coincided with a wave of interest in the relationship between the arts and HCI research . Though this relationship dates back to the feld’s inception , HCI has more recently turned to the arts to help solve so - called " wicked " problems [ 26 , 53 ] , and to spur more innovative design research [ 7 , 10 ] . Art is believed to prompt researchers to reconsider how people experience the world , or spark paradigm shifts in how researchers think about HCI [ 50 ] . In other cases , art is thought to be capable of rendering data , fgures , and other scientifc facts in a way which is emotionally afecting or spurs a call to action [ 53 ] . Despite the oft - touted potentials of collaborations between the arts and STEM , the precise mechanisms of how such collaborations work remains poorly understood , and as our results and others show , its purported benefts are often difcult to achieve in practice [ 50 ] . In this study , we investigated AiR programs as a way of learning about the challenges with and potential of art - HCI collaboration . We interviewed 25 artists who participated in at least one AiR program in the past three years to better understand the design and facilitation of art – STEM collaboration . In contrast to much of the prior work on residency programs , which is often conducted from the perspective of a single host organization [ 11 , 34 ] , in this study we focused on artists’ experiences across many programs . As a means of understanding the conditions that enable meaning - ful art – STEM collaboration , our interviews centered on questions about the daily life and work of an artist - in - residence , relationships between the artists and host organizations , motivations behind these collaborations , and the long - term impacts of artists’ experi - ence in the residency on their work and careers . We fnd that while many AiR programs leave both STEM orga - nizations and artists satisfed , impactful interdisciplinary exchange that lives up to the ambitious goals of changing paradigms or spark - ing truly novel insights often remains elusive . Instead , many AiR programs maintain rather transactional relationship with residents in which the ideologies and paradigms of STEM and the arts tem - porarily share physical space but exit without one meaningfully impacting the other . While these residencies do sometimes yield interesting outcomes , they also often led to disappointment , super - fcial or instrumental engagement , and unclear long - term impacts . 1398 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Carrera , Bhatacharjee , and Soden ( a ) Dancers perform “Solo” interacting with eight radio - controlled moving platforms in collaboration with Nokia Bell Labs . ©Nokia Bella Labs 1966 . ( b ) Rendering of Ada , designed and built by Jenny Sabin Studio for Microsoft Research Artist in Residence Program 2018 - 2019 . The frst architectural pavilion project to in - corporate AI , Ada is a lightweight knitted pavilion structure composed of digitally knit responsive and data - driven tubular and cellular components held in contin - uous tension via a 3D printed semi - rigid exoskeleton shell . ( c ) Algorithmically modifed stories created for Ginko Bioworks Residency . ©Ayana Cotton 2021 . Figure 1 : Examples of art created at AiR programs This paper ofers several contributions . In Section 4 . 1 , we outline the diferent considerations involved in designing an AiR program in order to illustrate some of the key decisions program design - ers must make . These include the tradeofs involved in diferent amounts of artist compensation , lengths of the residencies , and frequency of interactions with the host . In Section 4 . 2 , we raise a number of broad considerations for the design and facilitation of these AiR programs identifed in our interviews , including em - phasis on process over product and the challenge of aligning the motivations of organization and artist . In Section 5 . 1 , we draw on these fndings to discuss transactional or instrumental relationships in art - STEM collaborations , and discuss how these relationships can work to undermine many of the possible benefts of these collabo - rations . Finally , in Section 5 . 2 , we ofer recommendations for the design of AiR programs that enable more productive and rewarding encounters between the arts and STEM . 2 BACKGROUND 2 . 1 Artist - in - Residence Programs for Art - STEM Collaborations Several historical factors set the conditions for early art - STEM collaborations including the growth of computer art in the 1950s and 1960s , the convergence of the conceptual art and the art and technology movement , and the Fluxus community of artists in the 1960s and 1970s [ 50 ] . The Fluxus were particularly important because they hosted one of the frst art - STEM collaborations . A community of artists heavily infuenced by Dadism and avant - garde notions of performance—particularly those popularized by John Cale of Velvet Underground fame—the Fluxus staged events called " happenings " [ 60 ] which often began with a tape that shifted between white noise and a sine signal . This tape was created by composer James Tenney while taking part in one of the frst AiR progams at Bell Labs [ 64 ] . Bell Laboratories would go on to host the frst formal Art and Technology Program : Experiments in Art and Technology ( E . A . T . ) [ 50 ] . Another soon followed at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art in 1967 . While the 1970s saw a relative dearth of interest in art - STEM collaborations [ 50 ] , the frst AiR program that coincides with the rise of third - wave HCI appeared in 1993 , at Xerox Palo Alto Research Center [ 22 ] . This AiR program was intended as a step toward creating an interdisciplinary lab with artists and used shared knowledge between artists and scientists as a starting point for collaborative exploration . Relatively fewer similar programs of this like were in existence until the past decade , which saw an explosion of art - STEM programs : Swiss Artists - in - Labs program , SymbioticA at University of Western Australia , Art | Sci Center at UCLA , and many others . These programs have drawn increasing attention from researchers in the feld of organization studies . One recent study , An Organiza - tional Perspective on ArtScience Collaboration : Opportunities and Challenges of Platforms to Collaborate with Artists [ 51 ] presents the numerous benefts that these artist residencies can have on STEM organizations . These collaborations often recontextualize work in host organizations , spurring scientists and community members to think diferently . They also encourage other forms of knowledge , including embodied knowledge or new ways of think - ing about materials . Within HCI , one previous paper has been published about artist residencies : a refective case study about an AiR program conducted at the University of Colorado , Boulder [ 12 ] . In this paper , a craftsperson was invited to work with engineers and HCI researchers for a six week experimental weaving residency . 1399 " We’re Not Decorators " : Fostering Interdisciplinary Exchange in STEM – Artist Collaborations DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Together , the craftsperson , HCI researchers , and engineers , col - laborated to discover new tech interfaces , learn new pathways of inquiry , and glean new insight into weaving and weaving materials . Despite these potential benefts , the value of these collaborations is often intangible and difcult to measure . Some argue that by shifting focus from the outcome of the residency to the process of collaboration , the depth of the contribution to the organization becomes more clear . The head of the artist residency at CERN notes that the artistic outcome of a residency is “neither comprehensive nor the fully representative contribution” [ 34 ] . Others argue that the main beneft of these residencies is to foster an open - minded company culture , and help the organization maintain an innovative mindset as they approach a fast - changing world which requires fexibility and a willingness to think beyond legacy methods [ 61 ] . Others still argue the main beneft of these residencies is that they foster an organizational culture that keeps staf of the organization happy , engaged , and innovative . Our research explores how the design and facilitation of AiR programs shape residents’ experience and the extent to which these potential benefts were achieved . As is true with collaborations between the arts and any other discipline , AiR programs run the risk of instrumentalizing the arts . Previous work has remarked on the dangers of policy attachment , in which a weak sector with little political clout attaches itself to another policy sector that " appears more worthy " [ 58 ] . Current emphases on the utility of the arts have been so extreme its left little room for other interpretations in the feld . While contemporary art is able to produce critical refection on political and social issues , only using the arts for this purpose destroys the characteristics that make art valuable [ 62 ] . Maggs and Robinson have noted that walking the line between creating social art with a productive social impact and instrumentalizing art is difcult but crucial because instrumentalizing art undermines the reason art is powerful : it stops mechanistic instinct and " exploitive relationships with self , world , and other , [ that foster ] reductive habits of mind " [ 42 ] . One major tech company has previously been accused of instrumentalizing art by creating a " bohemia for proft " which capitalizes on the narrative of the idealogically driven and creative artist to legitimate a process of surveillance capitalism [ 59 ] . 2 . 2 HCI and the Arts HCI has a long relationship to the arts . In the early 2000s , as digital media and tools became a staple of not only the workplace but the home , HCI researchers searched for new approaches to design and evaluate digital systems [ 7 ] . This shift spurred HCI’s third wave , which incorporated new research methods and ideas from a variety of felds , including the arts [ 23 ] . Unlike previous waves of HCI , however , in the third wave of HCI the arts are recognized as a distinct feld with its own methodologies , cultural standards , and means of evaluating work [ 15 ] . Our literature review found that third wave art - HCI work generally takes one of two forms : ( 1 ) case studies of particular projects , hackathons , or artist residencies ; or ( 2 ) workshop and position papers refecting on HCI’s position in the arts . This research builds upon and extends these approaches in 2 ways . First , we ofer a survey of AiR programs at a variety of diferent STEM organizations . Second , through empirical methods we describe AiR programs at STEM organizations that were not designed by the research team , but were found in the wild . Arts – HCI collaborations are believed to be impactful because they advance the " leading edge of design research " [ 7 ] . The prob - lems addressed by third - wave HCI are often wicked , ambiguous , and ill - defned and may require outside - the - box solutions which challenge traditional HCI values like the expectation for novelty , linear progress , and broad impact [ 10 ] . Researchers believe that by encouraging divergent thinking and challenging convention , the arts can help HCI researchers develop a more fexible and nu - anced knowledge base that helps us better approach these difcult problems [ 18 , 27 ] . For example , researchers in sustainable HCI have shown great interest in the arts because climate change is a wicked problem . In this feld , the arts have the potential to reframe questions of sustainability [ 29 ] , challenge technical understandings of sustainability in favor of new epistemologies [ 53 ] , encourage debate around sustainability [ 16 ] , and encourage frameworks of thinking that change expectations and modes of approach to HCI problems [ 13 ] . The arts also help approach wicked problems by help - ing reimagine what counts as HCI knowledge [ 6 , 12 , 17 , 27 , 31 , 63 ] , and helping us devise thoughtful solutions to problems by celebrat - ing tension between collaborators and diversity of thought [ 45 ] . Example of new modes of thinking explored by HCI research into the arts include dialogic thinking [ 6 ] and improvisation [ 33 ] . Additionally , the arts devise new modes of interaction and en - gagement which have been imported into HCI [ 6 , 15 , 30 ] . As HCI continues to design more provocative cultural and social experi - ences to engage the public [ 28 ] , the arts help spawn new sensory experience by emphasizing material aesthetics and embodiment , performativity , and temporality . For example , previous work in sustainable HCI has shown how the arts can make scientifc data feel intimate and manage people’s uncertainties with science [ 29 ] . Works like this encourage new interaction paradigms which focus on issues of presence and perception [ 14 , 52 ] . The arts have also been able to provide HCI with expert skills crucial to the development of diferent HCI systems including exper - tise in animation , fabrication , narrative , and music [ 52 ] . Previous research conducted with craftspeople has helped HCI practioners rethink their approach to weaving and fabrication [ 12 ] . Other work has demonstrated how digital tools efect the world of digital mak - ers [ 5 ] . As a result of all these interactions , HCI researchers are more aware of embodied forms of knowledge , in which " constant fow of senses and actions that occur within the experiences of each individual " [ 56 ] are valued as knowledge just as other more abstract forms which live in one’s head . Art - STEM collaborations have not come without confict and tension . Past work notes the challenges involved when the arts are evaluated according to an HCI value system with unambigu - ous metrics and quantitative methods [ 47 ] . Such evaluations runs the risk of instrumentalizing the arts and neglecting the feld’s unique capacity to interrogate the underlying axiomatic and invis - ible assumptions of a given research feld [ 42 ] . Additionally , past research has charged some HCI research with appropriating the arts [ 39 ] . These appropriations stemmed from a fundamental mis - understanding of the the arts ; while artists create their work within particular communal , socio - political , or aesthetic context , many HCI researchers were obtuse to these contexts . 1400 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Carrera , Bhatacharjee , and Soden 3 METHODS This study is part of an ongoing investigation into the design and facilitation of art – HCI collaboration . For this work , we conducted 25 semi - structured interviews , split between the three authors . As our goal was to understand the experience of AiR programs from artists’ perspectives , 20 of these interviews were conducted with artists who had participated in a residency program hosted by a STEM organization within the past 3 years . We completed 5 ad - ditional interviews with managers or designers of AiR programs to gain additional insights into dynamics and contextual factors within host organizations that shape residency programs . Inter - views lasted between 30 and 60 minutes and took place on Zoom over a seven - month period between September 2021 and March 2022 . Given participants’ varied experiences and perspectives , in - terviews ranged widely but sought to cover artists’ motivations to participate , their - day to - day experience of the residency , inter - actions with the host organization , the types of artwork or other outputs produced , and the impact of the residency on their subse - quent work and career . We recruited participants through several means . First , we relied on personal connections from our own experience and prior re - search in this area [ 53 ] . Second , recruitment materials were shared on social media and relevant email lists . Finally , we used snowball sampling and asked each interview participant for recommenda - tions for or introductions to other potential interviewees . Many of the artists we spoke to were in the California Bay Area , where , as we have noted , there has been a surge of interest in AiR programs in recent years . Most of these residencies revolve around the tech industry in Silicon Valley ; it is this cultural milieu with which we were primarily concerned in this research . This geographical and cultural focus may limit the generalizability of these results . How - ever , we also spoke to a number of individuals from other parts of North America , Europe , and Asia . In addition to speaking with artists who had completed residencies at tech companies , we also spoke to artists who had been in residence at university research labs , non - proft organizations , and the public sector . Many artists had participated in multiple residencies and in some cases , some of the same residencies as other interviewees . This created valuable opportunities to triangulate within and across the experiences of our participants . All three authors collaborated to code the results using refexive thematic analysis , as developed by Braun and Clarke [ 4 ] . Braun and Clarke identify 6 phases of thematic analysis : ( 1 ) Data familiar - ization , ( 2 ) Qualitative code generation ( 3 ) Theme search ( 4 ) Theme review ( 5 ) Theme defnition and naming and ( 6 ) Report production . We proceeded by frst individually reading the interview transcripts in order to familiarize ourselves with the data . We then individually did one round of coding . Following this , our team met several times to discuss potential themes , refne , and consolidate our coding strat - egy . We then divided the initial themes between us and drafted descriptive narratives , akin to what Grounded Theory researchers refer to as “thematic memos” [ 9 ] . After several rounds of revision , reorganization , and discussion , we settled on the themes discussed in the Results section . In the following section , we briefy charac - terize the many design considerations available to AiR program organizers . Having established this context , we then discuss four recurring concerns that are less apparent in the structure of AiR programs , but which nevertheless shaped collaborations between artists and STEM professionals . 4 RESULTS 4 . 1 Design Considerations for Artist - in - Residence Programs In this section we analyze our interview data to provide a brief outline of some of the many choices that comprise the design space of artist - in - residence ( AiR ) programs in STEM organizations . The structure and facilitation of these programs shape who seeks to participate , the interactions between resident artists and members of the host institution , and , ultimately , the degree and character of art - STEM collaboration that occurs . While social chemistry be - tween artist and host emerged as an important factor in a number of interviews , it can be difcult if not impossible to design for . How - ever , many aspects of a residency program—starting from before artists arrive and continuing throughout their tenure—do fall under the purview of the host organization and thus can be approached in an intentional manner . We outline these aspects most commonly raised during our interviews below . 4 . 1 . 1 Before the Residency : Artist Selection Process . Generally , artists apply to be a part of AiR programs . The formality and transparency of the selection process for AiR programs ranges from publicly avail - able applications to program directors inviting individual artists to participate . If the selection process includes an application , its demands will also afect who can aford to apply : time spent on ap - plications , which may include detailed site or organization - specifc proposals , is typically unpaid . In some cases artists were required to propose a specifc project to work on during their residency . Programs that require detailed application materials may there - fore be less accessible or attractive to broader groups of artists . Some residencies chose to target emerging artists or artists from underrepresented backgrounds as part of commitments to equity . 4 . 1 . 2 Ofering the Residency : Artist Compensation . Once they are accepted , AiR programs ofer diferent types and amounts of com - pensation to resident artists . While some programs provide artists a stipend and / or a materials budget , few compensate them at the same rate as salaried staf members . Few on - site programs provide housing , and only some provide studio space to resident artists . Lack of accommodations and lack of salary may create signifcant logistical challenges for artists . Remote residencies or shorter resi - dencies may be advantageous in that they do not require the artist to spend money on additional housing to stay at the program . Some AiR programs provide access to specialized tools , like waterjet cut - ters or 3D printers , archival materials , like old maps or historical records , or other resources specifc to the hosting organization . The presence of other artists - in - residence may also be attractive to prospective participants : for some artists , being part of a cohort provides an uncommon opportunity to build or expand their net - work , learn new skills from peers , and gain access to people who can ofer informed critiques of their work . For others , being the sole artist - in - residence and therefore a focus for the host organization may be more appealing . 1401 " We’re Not Decorators " : Fostering Interdisciplinary Exchange in STEM – Artist Collaborations DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Table 1 : Table of Participants Participant ID Role Host Organization ( s ) P1 Artist in residence University P2 Artist in residence Software company , Waste Management Company P3 Artist in residence Software Company P4 Artist in residence Software Company P5 Artist in residence Geodata Company P6 Artist in residence University P7 Artist in residence University P8 Artist in residence Data Management Company P9 Artist in residence Tech Industry Research Lab P10 Artist in residence Non - proft P11 Artist in residence Biotech Research Firm P12 Artist in residence Software Company , Big Five Tech Company P13 Researcher N / A P14 Principal Artist Big Five Tech Company P15 Residency Creator N / A P16 Artist in residence Non - proft P17 Residency Designer N / A P18 Artist in residence Tech Industry Research Lab P19 Artist in residence Software Company P20 Artist in residence Biotech frm P21 Residency Creator Software company P22 Artist in residence Big Five Tech Company P23 Artist in residence Software Company , Big Five Tech Company P24 Artist in residence Big Five Tech Company P25 Artist in residence Art - Science Residency Organization Figure 2 : Artist’s process through the AiR program 4 . 1 . 3 Beginning the Residency : Artist Orientation . AiR programs 4 . 1 . 4 During the Residency : Structure . After the initial meeting often begin with an orientation meetings for artists . Artists may or orientation session , the structures of these residency programs be provided with ID badges that grants access to the appropriate varies widely . Residencies can be done in person or remotely . In buildings , a parking pass , library privileges , or a company email person residencies facilitate immersion in the host organization , address . Introducing artists to members of the host organization , as do longer residencies . Residency lengths can vary from a few often by having artists give talks on their work , is another common months to over a year . Some organizations schedule regular oppor - component of orientation . Beyond this , facilitators can also help to tunities for knowledge exchange with the host or other artists in bridge gaps between artists and a host organization by connecting the form of seminars , workshops , talks , or studio tours . To incen - artists to members of the organization with relevant interests or ex - tivize attendance , these events are sometimes scheduled to intersect pertise , arranging access to tools , space , or materials , and assisting with meal times . Other organizations put the onus on the artist to artists in navigating the culture of the organization . forge connections with members of the host institution . However , 1402 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Carrera , Bhatacharjee , and Soden as newcomers to the organization , artists may fnd forging con - nections difcult . A facilitator can help artists connect with other staf members in addition to providing other forms of assistance requested during regular check - ins . Some organizations create op - portunities for artists to work on joint projects with staf , but most artists work independently on their own projects . AiR programs may require artists to host studio open hours , run workshops , or give classes during the residency as a means of connecting with the organization . 4 . 1 . 5 End of the Residency : Deliverables . As part of AiR programs , artists are often required to produce some form out output and / or share what they learned from the collaboration with the host insti - tution . Some programs require artists to host a fnal gallery show or give a talk describing their experience at the program . Such requirements are often dictated by the terms of grants used to fund AiR programs . In some cases , artists will continue to work with the organization beyond the end of their residency . 4 . 2 Recurring Concerns In this section , we perform a thematic analysis of our interview data in order to highlight a number of recurring concerns about the design of these AiR programs . These concerns highlight the various ways in which artists and host organizations may fnd themselves in unproductive confict or tension with one another , and the ways in which these tensions can be avoided . In identifying these concerns we aim to pave the way for better designed and meaningful interdisciplinary interaction in future AiR programs within STEM organizations . 4 . 2 . 1 Aligning Motivations . Artists expressed a wide range of mo - tivations for participating in residencies . In some cases , these mo - tivations seemed to align with the goals of the host organization and the design of the residency . In others , misalignments sparked frustration between artists and hosts . For some artists , access to specialized tools or resources of the host organization was attrac - tive . Others mentioned advantages such as prestige , a paycheck , material budgets , and networking opportunities . These tangible benefts seemed especially important for emerging artists . For ex - ample , one artist , who participated in a particularly well - funded and competitive residency told us : They had a budget for materials , they had a per diem for living expenses , that sort of thing . It was a wonderful deal . I got exposure to the local art scene and I got to produce work while I was there . They had a little show at the end of it as well that had media coverage . - P5 For other artists , residencies provided dedicated time to dive deep on a particular topic or otherwise focus on their work . The residency provided the space to just let your ideas develop and grow . The reality is if you’re doing something else with your time , it’s very hard to focus on one project and bring it to full fruition . I think residencies can really , really help artists expand and develop their work , and also give the space to let their ideas be louder . - P9 The opportunity to collaborate with scientists on a topic related to their work was another incentive for a number of our intervie - wees . Here , access to particular forms of expertise seemed to ofer rare opportunities to advance artists’ ideas or novel settings to do their work . So the residency program I did was to work with biotechnologists , which is something quite special for artists . You don’t really get access to these type of places on an everyday basis , or to work with cutting edge researchers and scientists . - P20 In some cases , these ambitions of meaningful collaboration and shared learning did align with what the hosts intended with resi - dency programs . Artists mentioned some organizations provided opportunities to work with staf and researchers at host organi - zations to think through hard problems , provide feedback on the organization’s products or activities , or work to foster a sense of creativity and experimentation in technical and scientifc practice . One residency organizer explained that the program helped build and strengthen the community of people working in the shop . At the end of the day , it was 15 people in an ofce . We had all these amazing tools , and it just became really clear that the goal should be to share this with our community as much as we could . That was really the impetus to step up the program . - P21 For many residencies , however , the host organizations’ priorities seemed to be more geared towards marketing outcomes . There’s a marketing component there , which is that the amount of PR that came out of the artist in residence program dwarfed anything that the company had ever done . In terms of paid content , the cost of the residency program is far less than the dollar amount they spend on paid content or advertising . - P21 In some cases , the audience for the marketing may be aimed at professional staf with the aim of infuencing internal corporate culture ( see also [ 59 ] ) . There was a massive narrative structure in place there that that company was the coolest place in the world you could possibly be working . If you were working there , you were an awesome person . It was an awesome company , and they were changing the world for the better . And everything was provided for you in a fairly in - fantile environment . Food everywhere , a bike shop , a dentist , a spa , a dry cleaner , free trans - portation , bikes . It’s like a corporate environ - ment mixed with a college campus mixed with a playground . Having artists come in and do fun stuf on the walls was surely in the service of that narrative . - P22 This focus on marketing outcomes demonstrates a possible mis - alignment between the motivations of artists and that of the host organizations . While using an artist’s work to generate PR for a host 1403 " We’re Not Decorators " : Fostering Interdisciplinary Exchange in STEM – Artist Collaborations DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA organization may in turn generate PR for the artist themselves , cen - tering these residency programs around marketing outcomes runs the risk of valuing the artist’s contribution soley insofar as it is able to help the host market other goods and services sold by their orga - nization . In some cases , this led to disconnect tension or feelings of misgivings on the part of artists , who felt either exploited , misun - derstood , or unappreciated by their hosts . In one instance , an artist felt compelled to leave their residency early . Aligning incentives between artists and their hosts , or at least ensuring transparency and shared understanding around the diferent goals that each may have for a given residency , may help to avoid such conficts . 4 . 2 . 2 Finding Points of Connection . Despite spending time at the host organization during their residencies , many of the artists we spoke with noted limited opportunities to meaningfully connect with the activities , staf , and mission of their host . Though artists were often invited into these residencies with the intention of form - ing meaningful connections with these organizations , how and when these connections occurred varied signifcantly . For example , many of the meaningful social connections noted by artists during interviews resulted from serendipitous interactions in which the residents weren’t intending to connect with anyone in particular but by virtue of a chance encounter , ended up connecting with a member of the host organization . In this section of the paper , we discuss some of the factors that seemed to facilitate such connec - tions . First , a number of artists noted the importance of shared spaces in order to connect with staf of the host organization . Artists noted the importance of fnding these locations , likening them to water - coolers , the copier , kitchens , or other places in which people tended to congregate and engage in casual or spontaneous interactions . For example , one artist noted an experience in which they were able to make engineers connect with their work by placing it in a convenient location : I did not do my exhibition in a gallery . I did it in an engineering building with a bunch of engineers because I wanted the engineers to see what I was doing . I did an interface of the building using cardiovascular respiratory sys - tems on a screen . People came in , and they saw the screen in the elevator , the building living and breathing , and thought about it a little bit . People asked questions about it . - P7 By placing these works in locations which are interstitial—places where workers are moving between two locations , whether that be a location in which they are taking a break , or a hallway between two places in which they have scheduled meetings—AiR programs allow the opportunity for serendipitous engagement with artists’ work . In other locations , like in ofces or conference rooms , workers may be too preoccupied to engage with something unexpected . As another artist put it : Some people congregate around the cofee , some people congregate around the keg , some peo - ple congregate around the fax machine or the watercooler—people often congregate around the artists and residence in practice , because it’s something to watch and think about and absorb . - P14 In another example , one of the moments of connection described during the interviews came from an artist who was inspecting the work left behind by scientists around the workspace . At night , I walked around and traced writings that I found fascinating on the whiteboard . One evening a scientist happened to be behind me when I was tracing and said , ‘Oh , you’re steal - ing my ideas again . ’ Then we had a really in - teresting conversation and I incorporated his writings in my 10 foot long drawing . - P11 In these examples , the artists’ examination of the work environ - ment allowed them to connect with people in a new way . By using a shared artifact built into the architecture of the environment , the artist and researcher were able to engage and exchange information in a spontaneous or informal manner . The importance of place is highlighted by the fact that a number of artists we interviewed noted that they had established connec - tions with the shopmakers or custodians at their host organization more so than the administrators who ran the residency or the knowledge workers at the host organization . This seemed due to the fact that they were frequently sharing space with these workers , while they often only saw administrators around once a week . In contrast , one told us : I interacted with the janitors a lot . They came every morning , every evening . They’re such a part of the architecture of the place . - P9 Another important point of connection were recurring events that brought together artists and staf of host organizations . Inter - estingly , shared meals fgured prominently here . In our interviews , residents frequently mentioned how they often connected with other residents and members of the host organization when they were eating together . One said : The only way , in my experience , to foster com - munity is to meet people where they’re at and people are eating three times a day . - P2 In these instances , food gave people something to congregate around without added pressure and forcing community ( in contrast to some of the forced or awkward community building exercises one of the artists – in – residence noted ) . As such , both artists and hosts may be more open to connect during meals . Finally , in some cases , specialized tools or resources such as data and software developed by the host organization served as points of connection for artists . For example , several residencies hosted by software companies encouraged AiR participants to use their tools in experimental ways , pushing the tool beyond its initially designed purpose . Tools ranged from software for designing AR experience to hardware like waterjet cutters . In other examples , access to unique data or archives created or managed by the host organization served as inspiration or materials for artists to work with . In some cases , artists and STEM workers began to draw parallels between their respective practices . For example , one artist we interviewed , who sufered from severe vision impairment , started to draw parallels between painting and audio engineering : 1404 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Carrera , Bhatacharjee , and Soden When I’m painting , I mix colors , I put paint down , I put other paint over top of it , I scrub them out , I put them together to form a com - position . That’s what he was doing with the soundtracks . It was just the creative process : me as a painter and him as an audio engineer . - P24 After recognizing the parallels , the visual artist realized he could continue to make art despite his visual impairment through sound design . This served as a starting point for rich discussions and interaction between the artist and their host organization . 4 . 2 . 3 Art as Practice . One recurring challenge that came up in our interviews were competing understandings between artists and host organizations about the aim of AiR programs . Many artists indicated that they expected AiR programs to help develop their artistic practice rather than focus on a particular deliverable at the end of the program . " Practice , " for these artists , indicates a personal process of artistic development which follows the arc of their career . Artists often described their artworks as artifacts of this process rather than fnal products . This notion of practice has clear analo - gies to work in HCI theory which distinguishes between ‘practice’ and ‘interaction’ paradigms in HCI research [ 36 ] . In the practice paradigm , " historical processes , performances , and longer term - actions which persist over time " are emphasized over " momentary and ahistorical situations that are not crucially connected to a par - ticular time and space . " In accordance with this paradigm , artists we spoke to often joined residencies with the aim of developing their long - term artistic practice , hoping the opportunity would allow them to conduct research , broaden their scope of knowledge and infuences , and collaborate with experts at particular program sites . A residency should be set up in such a way that you can go there and whatever preconceived ideas you have about what you were going to do don’t really matter because you’re responding to the site , or the people or the tools . The whole point of being in residence is to have an expe - rience that changes the way you think about what you do . That results in some new vein of your work that is infuenced by the space . - P12 In contrast , STEM organizations often designed and facilitated AiR programs with more discrete outputs in mind , focusing on short - term deliverables and requiring artists to produce fnished pieces of work during or shortly after the conclusion of a residency . Some artists viewed deliverables as a concession to the host institution : a number noted that in a corporate environment , program managers may be obliged to demonstrate a quantifable return on investment . Artists were typically understanding of other requirements—e . g . , to create workshops , talks , or other public engagement activities—that often arose from the stipulations of grant - giving organizations funding AiR programs . As an artist , I love seeing process . It’s nice when it doesn’t need to be polished and fnished be - cause it takes some of the pressure of . But I can see why an organization might say ‘we want to have a show at the end . ’ It can also kind of be nice to have a deadline . - P12 However , the timeline of an AiR program and the expectation of a fnished artwork at its conclusion may not align with how artists work . One told us : Art doesn’t work that way . It’s not necessarily like , ’I did this research , I made this artwork’—it can take a long time for things to percolate in your mind and turn into something interesting , rather than obvious . - P6 Another said : I see residencies as a time and moment of focus on a particular research ideation , because the type of artists that work especially in the art - STEM space are looking at a trajectory of mul - tiple years on the project . They’re not looking at six months beginning to end , like a painting or sculpture . It’s a lot about research , a lot of it is about process . - P7 The pressure to produce a deliverable may also afect how much latitude artists feel they have to experiment . For artists who may be creating or applying emerging tools in cutting - edge ways , that pressure may hinder exploration . When we applied to the residency neural net stuf was relatively new to the art world . We came up with this technique that kind of mir - rored rock collecting techniques . I wasn’t sure if it would be able to spit out rocks or anything that looks remotely like rocks for the frst cou - ple months . But it felt like I had to produce something for the show because it was this public facing thing at the end . I couldn’t stop working on the project , which I think happens more often than not for artistic work . It’s a lot about experimentation . - P3 Many artists felt that host organizations’ focus on producing fnished artwork belied artists’ potential to challenge and broaden the perceptions of the host organizations . One artist , who had a dif - ferent experience as part of a residency at a nonproft organization working on water issues , described this potential : A fnal artistic rendering wasn’t a requisite of this process . It wasn’t as if they said , ’Come in . We want you to make a song that’s going to be a part of your residency , like a jingle about water . ’ Instead it was , ’We value your artistic process , we value your thinking , your experience , your knowing . ’ I love that because I do believe artists have an analysis . That analysis may be very diferent than someone in a diferent feld . But our discipline is diferent . I think residencies are a way to really challenge the valuation of art in our society . Art has been relegated to this very , very weird place where it’s often just topical . - P16 1405 " We’re Not Decorators " : Fostering Interdisciplinary Exchange in STEM – Artist Collaborations DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA How these diferent points of view on artists’ roles are manifested in the design of AiR programs afects the likelihood of meaningful interactions between artists and members of the host organization . I think there needs to be space in the application process for focusing on the questions asked , rather than the answers that they’re trying to seek . I also think there should be less demands that the artist produces work . Understanding diferent people’s processes would really go a long way in building the resources around those processes , rather than thinking that you need to have a gallery show at the end . - P3 Understanding the diferent processes of artists may in turn help hosts understand how the role of artists can best be defned within AiR programs in order to avoid confict . As one artist noted : We’re not decorators , we’re people who are looking at things from a new angle that you haven’t seen before , you know ? - P7 4 . 2 . 4 Fostering Organizational Engagement . Finally , it became clear through our interviews that organizations engaged with artists in a variety of ways during residencies . A number of artists expressed that though they had been invited into the workspace of their host , they were otherwise mostly ignored once they got there . As a result , while the artists’ projects were often informed by the mission , work , materials , or resources of the host organization , it was less common for artists and members of the host organization to work in an integrated or collaborative way on a shared project . One said : If you’re encouraging people to come into your program and be creative , I think there should be just as much efort exerted on selecting the artists that come into the program as there is selecting people in the program on the other side who are supposed to be interacting with them . - P21 In these cases , the responsibility for creating interactions be - tween artists and staf of the host organization seemed to reside with the artists . This proved challenging to many artists because they were newcomers to the organizations . Hosts that did create struc - tured opportunities for residents to engage with staf approached this in a number of ways . Perhaps the simplest and most common approach was to schedule regular check - ins or meetings with a facilitator on staf at the host organization during which artists could request assistance , share updates , solicit feedback on their work , or bring up roadblocks that might be hindering their progress . Beyond this , some organizations scheduled regular opportunities for knowledge exchange in the form of seminars , workshops , talks , or studio tours . To incentivize attendance , these events were often scheduled to intersect with meal or cofee - break times . Some host organizations even supported these intersections monetarily by allowing staf to bill the time they spend working with an artist . A related fnding is that facilitators can bridge gaps between the artist and host organization . Many artists valued the presence of a facilitator for the residency . Facilitators can connect the artist with members of the host community whose interests or exper - tise are relevant to their own , arrange access to tools , specialized equipment , space , and materials , and help develop shared projects with members of the host organization . They can also assist the artists in navigating the culture , norms , and expectations of the host organization . One artist , who reported having deep engagement with the technical work conducted by the host , noted the value of host leadeers setting the tone for collaboration : When I would go into one of these meetings , I had the most success when I was not afraid to say what I didn’t know or propose what I think is possible . I was encouraged by the heads of both the teams to help people think about the broader implications of what they’re making . - P18 In this case , the leadership in the residency helped the artist understand how they could appropriately integrate with and re - frame the existing work of the organization . This helped foster a more comfortable environment for the artist . The importance of strong and supportive leadership also arose in discussions about the longevity of these AiR programs . In discussing the cancellation of one program , an artist told us : The CEO retired , and there were a bunch of ac - tivist investors that got on the board . This pro - gram was very expensive to them . They were investing at least a million dollars a year in pay - ing all these staf running the AiR program , the stipends , the material fees , etc . . I think they re - alized the return on investment wasn’t quite what they expected . Artists don’t always pro - duce a product , sometimes it’s just research or we’re discovering things . - P23 5 DISCUSSION 5 . 1 Instrumental Relationships to Art and their Alternatives Many of the tensions and failures that came up during our in - terviews seemed to come from AiR programs in which the host organization harbored an instrumental view of art . In such a view , art is considered a tool intended to fulfll a particular and often narrow purpose , evaluated largely on its immediate utility rather than broader social or aesthetic contributions [ 62 ] . In a number of interviews , artists reported that host organizations prioritized artist contributions over corporate marketing or used their pres - ence to signal a creative , hip , or vaguely counter - cultural corporate ethos to current or potential staf . Relatedly , in a study of one large tech company’s appropriation of the arts , Turner argues that the company’s AiR program helps to create an internal atmosphere of openness and transgression in a corporation that is notoriously secretive and closed of from the public [ 59 ] . In these situations , artists are not valued for the particular intellectual or aesthetic contributions they might make to a STEM organization , but instead the signals that their presence , or that of their work , sends to the social milieu in which the organization operates . There is a broad range of debate about the instrumentalization of art . A " pragmatic " theory of art argues that art ought to be valued for its social contributions and is sometimes contrasted with an 1406 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Carrera , Bhatacharjee , and Soden aesthetic value system [ 1 ] . A tradeof is often said to exist between making " art for art’s sake " and giving up artistic freedom in order to make art [ 3 , 19 ] . In other cases , the distinction is said to be ambiguous ; proponents of this position argue that social impact has aesthetic value , and that therefore aesthetic and pragmatic means of evaluating art are not quite so distinct . This debate demonstrates the complexity and ambiguity of art’s role in society , in which it is difcult to make sharp distinctions around when art is autonomous and whether it is being instrumentalized [ 3 ] . In this analysis , we focus our attention on relatively clear forms of instrumentalization in an efort to articulate the missed opportunity for many AiR programs to facilitate more robust engagement . This study demonstrates that even genuine eforts to bring art and STEM together risk reductionist formulations of art and artistic practice . As we’ve highlighted , AiR programs may overemphasize the output of fnished artworks , favoring work with tightly - scoped and pre - defned problem framings , and otherwise narrowly cir - cumscribing the breadth of relations or forms of contributions that artists may make to collaborations . Such actions contribute to a transactional relationship between organization and resident . Maggs and Robinson , working in the area of environmental sus - tainability , argue that art has the potential to subvert mechanistic instincts that promote exploitative relationships and step beyond " objectifcation , atomization , rationalization , industrialization , and commercialization " in Western thought [ 42 ] . It is this very potential , so often cited by scholars who argue that art - STEM collaboration is necessary to address wicked societal problems like disasters and climate change [ 26 , 55 ] , that is undermined by reductive or instru - mental approaches to designing art - STEM collaboration . For many of our interviewees , these challenges were tied to broader issues to the relationship between art and society . Indeed , a number of scholars have linked the instrumentalization of art to the recent rise of neoliberalism as the prominent political and economic idealogy for organizations [ 46 , 58 ] . As part of this rise , government support for public programming in the arts has been reduced ; where such support exists , it is programmed towards relatively narrow and prescriptive engagement [ 42 ] such as 1 ) a major export earner and stimulant to tourism ; 2 ) a catalyst for urban renewal ; or 3 ) a business asset for a region and a cost efective means of employ - ment promoting " social cohesion and community empowerment , " " reduc [ ed ] prison populations and improv [ ed ] health , " and " social stability and renewal of civil society " [ 2 ] . Artists themselves have been forced to become increasingly entrepreneurial , fnding ways to mold their work into these categories [ 62 ] . Some scholars have suggested that the contemporary shift to valuing the arts for these forms of utility has been so extreme it’s spurred an epistemic shift that undermines all non - utilitarian viewpoints [ 58 ] . Given the prevailing social forces at work , it would be perhaps unsurprising if art - STEM collaboration designed and facilitated by HCI researchers adopted a similarly instrumental approach . However , both our interviews as well as recent HCI research has demonstrated that this is not necessarily the case [ 11 , 24 , 33 , 53 ] . In these examples , designers and facilitators have had to strike a balance between overly constrained or regimented programs and , at the other extreme , fully unstructured settings that ofer no scaf - folding upon which substantive relationships between artists and hosts can be built . Kang and Jackson highlight this tension , writing that “interactions between the intuitive freedoms of art practice and the discipline of research structure may produce forms of emotional and intellectual tension , both welcome and unwelcome , that in turn invoke risk but also the possibility of learning and discovery for both artists and researchers [ 32 ] . " Navigating this situation thought - fully would seem to require , at minimum , an orientation toward the design and facilitation of AiR programs that treat art as a robust , dynamic , and heterogeneous area of expertise and practice , rather than a tool which can be easily and reliably deployed to meet the goals of STEM organizations . But these tensions can be difcult to reconcile . There are often diferent and quite distinct motivations behind artistic production and contemporary tendencies to view relationships through the lens of commodity exchange [ 25 ] . In particular , Lewis Hyde argues that artists are often motivated by the desire to participate in , and contribute to , broader networks of " cultural exchange " in addition to the usual challenges of making ends meet and navigating chal - lenging career paths . As we show in Section 4 . 2 . 1 , aligning these motivations is often a challenge for AiR programs . Here , treating art - STEM collaboration as a form of cultural exchange rather than a solutionist tool may help residency designers create opportunities for art to have a positive social impact while still being accepted on its own terms . Art can serve to connect people and build new rela - tionships [ 57 ] even as it helps interrogate underlying assumptions about how we approach HCI practice , scientifc practice , and the world around us [ 42 ] . In the section that follows , we draw on our fndings to ofer several recommendations for staging art - STEM collaborations to foster interdisciplinary exchange . 5 . 2 Avoiding Instrumentalization of the Arts in Art - STEM Collaborations 5 . 2 . 1 Mutual Benefit and Respect . As we have shown , aligning motivations of the artists with those of the host organization is a challenging but important component of building AiR programs . Artists often participate in these residencies not only for the pres - tige and paycheck , but for the opportunity to collaborate with other scientists . This opportunity may be wasted when organizations in - stead focus on how the residency will lead to marketing outcomes or help service an internal corporate narrative that an organiza - tion is creative and fun . The artists we interviewed in this study frequently felt that programs’ priorities conficted with their own . As Devendorf et al have argued , AiR programs are most impactful when they are designed around " structural foundations for mutual beneft , " such as reasonable compensation on par with similarly ranked positions from other backgrounds in the organization , hu - mility and respect across disciplinary boundaries , inclusion of other artists in the design and oversight of the residency , and a signifcant budget of time to carefully create and guide these programs [ 11 ] . Many early career artists rely on AiR programs to grow their CV and professional network , and programs which are not designed to help foster this growth may butt heads with these artists [ 53 ] . As Claudia Schnugg has pointed out , AiR programs are capable of fostering openness and exposing disciplinary blindness , but only if artists are treated with mutual respect in the frst place [ 50 ] . With - out this respect in place , scientists may dismiss artists’ questions or views as ignorant rather than thoughtfully rooted in a discipline 1407 " We’re Not Decorators " : Fostering Interdisciplinary Exchange in STEM – Artist Collaborations DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA distinct from their own . When motivations are successfully aligned , artists and organizations can meet each other’s needs and pave the way for stronger and more equitable collaboration . 5 . 2 . 2 Developing Personal Relationships . Just as aligning motiva - tions can help foster mutual respect between host organizations and artists , socialization helps collaborations fnd common ground , build the necessary trust to try unfamiliar approaches , and establish necessary chemistry and rapport for the collaboration [ 35 ] . Prior work in participatory design has underscored the importance of establishing a shared understanding of the work at hand in order to make the collaboration successful [ 49 ] . This research suggests that socializing between designers and users facilitates collaboration [ 49 ] . Our fndings similarly afrm the importance of fnding points of connection between artists and STEM organizations in order to make the collaboration a success , and suggest ways that AiR design - ers can help foster a culture that is supportive of such relationships . One artist reported voluntarily hanging out in the kitchen in hopes that they would get the opportunity to talk to scientists and other staf of the host organization ; another mentioned the importance of joint meals to foster connection , noting that " meeting people where they’re at " is key . Our fndings and others demonstrate that in order for an AiR program to thrive , artists must be " integrated into the working lives of the scientists themselves " [ 34 ] . Such an integration can only happen when artists and STEM practitioners are given the opportunity to regularly connect with one another—whether that be in a common area , around shared tools , or socializing over meals . 5 . 2 . 3 Atending to Power Dynamics . If not staged carefully , art - STEM collaborations risk an unbalanced power dynamic in which the scientists or technologists have more infuence [ 48 ] . Broad , pre - existing social bias which favors STEM expertise over humanities expertise contributes to this imbalance of power [ 42 ] , as does the relative precariousness of artists’ livelihoods compared to those of STEM professionals [ 53 ] . Other studies in HCI have suggested that the knowledge of artists is often not respected as a form of technical knowledge [ 12 ] . Despite notable grievances with AiR programs , almost all participants in this study expressed that they were glad they had participated in an AiR program , noting that they were provided fnancial resources to materials or tools to which they would not otherwise have access . Because many artists are in need of fnancial and material resources , having these needs met may eclipse any disappointments artists have with the residency . STEM organizations must therefore acknowledge their relative power over participants in the AiR program and work actively to maintain an equal power dynamic even if artists appear satisfed . As an area of research and practice in HCI , participatory design similarly involves bringing together groups with potentially dif - ferent levels of expertise and social status [ 43 ] into collaboration and thus may provide useful insights for navigating the imbalanced power dynamics of art - STEM collaborations . In participatory de - sign , designers consciously elevate the voices of participants and value their expertise even though they may not come from a tech - nical background [ 21 ] . Making similar eforts or applying other techniques from participatory design may therefore be useful in attending to the power dynamic between residency and artist . An - other technique that may be useful , used in a previous HCI project , involved having both artists and scientists give " teaching talks " at the outset of their residency in order to establish both parties re - spective expertise [ 53 ] . Regardless of what approach is used , STEM organizations should take care to attend to and redress the potential imbalances of power in AiR programs . 5 . 2 . 4 Facilitation . Our fndings also suggest the value of having dedicated facilitators who are tasked with supporting efective col - laboration between the artists and host organization . These facilita - tors are responsible for advocating for artists within organizations and for articulating the value of artist residencies to STEM organiza - tions in terms they will understand . In discussing the Arts at CERN residency , one curator noted AiR programs often have a limited administrative window before a crucial facilitator leaves or another member of the organization decides to cut the program [ 34 ] . One of the participants in our study noted a similar phenomenon in which a change in CEO at a large AiR program led to questions about " return on investment " from new staf , leading to the program’s ultimate demise . In order to stage an art - STEM collaboration efec - tively , a facilitator should consider how to articulate the value of diferent forms of knowledge that are brought into the organization by these artists , like embodied and intuitive knowledge . Our interviews found that facilitators supported artists by help - ing them understand the goals of the organizations , highlighting resources available to them throughout the residency , and connect - ing them to staf with relevant interests or expertise . As with partic - ipatory design , it is likely that such facilitation is a skilled practice which can be developed and honed through time and experience [ 40 ] . Devendorf et al suggest that individuals with a background in , or understanding of , artistic practice and ties to the arts community may be best prepared to fll this role [ 11 ] . 5 . 2 . 5 Balancing Process vs Outcome . AiR designers should also think clearly about what outcomes may be appropriate to expect from an art - STEM collaboration . Our fndings suggest that artists were sometimes frustrated by residencies’ demands for specifc , pre - defned deliverables at the end of residencies , arguing that time - lines were not always realistic and the expectation of a particular outcome limited their freedom to experiment and engage fully with host organizations . In contrast , other artists we spoke with reported that having a concrete deliverable , and the associated deadlines helpful for organizing their time and scoping their projects . Prior research has suggested that choosing a particular form of output for art - STEM collaborations—whether a fnished work of art , a range of proposals , or a shared technology or research deliverable—acts as important framing devices these collaborations and can be varied depending on the goals of the residency [ 53 ] . Practice theory , as commonly adopted in HCI and CSCW re - search , may ofer insights into how to approach non - instrumental understandings of artistic endeavors . Though a wide - ranging area of work , practice theory in general advances as 1 ) a process and performative view on social life 2 ) the critical role of materiality and 3 ) knowledge as a capability to act [ 37 ] . From this perspective , all outputs , no matter how polished , are intermediate and embed valuable insights and knowledge of the artist [ 37 ] . Careful attention to process , unfnished work , discarded or abandoned concepts may thus be more generative than exhibition - ready work . In a similar vein , research from the Arts at CERN residency has suggested that 1408 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Carrera , Bhatacharjee , and Soden " giving artists and scientists the time and space simply to explore and discover with no requirement for output " is operative to a suc - cessful residency [ 34 ] . Over - emphasizing specifc outputs may risk misdirecting attention from what is often the purported beneft of these collaborations : to infuence the creative process of STEM organizations [ 50 ] . Host organizations should thus be open to the idea that collaboration with the arts may yield insights or process changes for scientists that impacts their work in the long run , rather than a particular artwork . 5 . 2 . 6 Evaluating Art - STEM Collaboration . Part of the difculty involved with evaluating the product of art - STEM AiR programs is that they often produce hybrid outcomes which stand at the margin of multiple disciplines and cannot easily be evaluated according to the value systems of either [ 50 ] . While it can be tempting to evaluate the success of these collaborations according to the value systems of STEM , this can be dangerous and prevent us from understanding the arts capacity to foster " new models of understanding " and provoke " paradigm shifts " [ 47 , 50 , 52 ] . Many of our interviews suggest that AiR program outcomes should be evaluated according to diferent scales depending on the audience . For some STEM organizations , art’s contribution to corporate marketing was important while for others , the contribution of new ideas or insights to scientifc or technical challenges seemed more important . In many situations , however , appropriate methods for evaluating the fnal results of these collaborations prove elusive . Belfore has noted this " evaluation dilemma " for the social impact of the arts [ 46 ] . Advocates thus need to be measured about the claims they make when discussing the benefts of AiR programs , and acknowledge that it is “unlikely that robust evidence for whether and how the arts have life - transforming powers could ever be achieved through a ‘quick , one - size - fts - all’ evaluation toolkit” [ 2 ] . Both the STEM and arts communities will likely have diferent perspectives on the value of AiR programs , neither of which may fully capture the potential impact of these collaborations . Even scientists who have positive experiences with AiR programs may be concerned that their participation in the program will stunt their productivity as a scientist [ 50 ] . Artists , likewise , may be unsure if a product - oriented residency will help them develop their practice or advance their career goals . Building strong organizational commitment for AiR programs , while retaining fexibility around their specifc outcomes thus appears to be an important , though challenging to adopt , ap - proach . 6 CONCLUSION Art and STEM , broadly construed , are fundamental categories of human knowledge and experience . HCI has , for many years now , sought to disturb , trouble , or destabilize the boundary between the two as a way of generating novel insights or perspectives into chal - lenging problems . Here , as with other forms of interdisciplinary collaboration , diference is viewed as a source of creative or novel approaches to solving some of the world’s most vexing challenges [ 54 ] . Yet , as Maggs and Robinson note somewhat ironically , it is difcult to express the value , importance , and possibility of collab - oration between these ways of knowing without instrumentalizing art , and in doing so losing out on some of that potential [ 42 ] . Cer - tainly any efort to bring together diferent areas of knowledge risks some form of reduction . However , what this research , and other HCI studies like it [ 11 , 53 ] show is that there are opportunities to do so in a more skillful and considered manner . Developing a capacity for navigating , or indeed thriving , in the ambiguities , uncertainties , and transgressions inherent to such an endeavor is undoubtedly part of such a program [ 20 , 41 ] . It is in these liminal spaces that the benefts of art - STEM collaboration reside . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank the artists and others involved in AiR programs who contributed their time to help out with this paper . We would also like to thank Book Sadprasid for creating the artist residency process comic . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Meyer Howard Abrams . 1971 . The mirror and the lamp : Romantic theory and the critical tradition . Vol . 360 . New York : Oxford University Press . [ 2 ] Eleonora Belfore and Oliver Bennett . 2008 . The social impact of the arts . Hamp - shire : Palgrave Macmillan ( 2008 ) . [ 3 ] Eleonora Belfore , Oliver Bennett , Eleonora Belfore , and Oliver Bennett . 2008 . Autonomy of the Arts and Rejection of Instrumentality . The Social Impact of the Arts : An Intellectual History ( 2008 ) , 176 – 190 . [ 4 ] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke . 2006 . Using thematic analysis in psychology . Qualitative research in psychology 3 , 2 ( 2006 ) , 77 – 101 . [ 5 ] Amy Cheatle and Steven J Jackson . 2015 . Digital entanglements : Craft , computa - tion and collaboration in fne art furniture production . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing . 958 – 968 . [ 6 ] Rachel Elizabeth Clarke , Jo Briggs , Ann Light , Sara Heitlinger , and Clara Crivel - laro . 2014 . Socially engaged arts practice in HCI . In CHI’14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 69 – 74 . [ 7 ] Gilbert Cockton , Shaowen Bardzell , Mark Blythe , and Jefrey Bardzell . 2010 . Can we all stand under our umbrella : the arts and design research in HCI . In CHI’10 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 3163 – 3166 . [ 8 ] Ayana Cotton . 2022 . 2021 Creative Residency : The Stories We Tell : Blackness As Biotechnology , Collective Imagination , and Study - Ginkgo Bioworks . https : / / www . ginkgobioworks . com / 2022 / 03 / 22 / 2021 - creative - residency - the - stories - we - tell - blackness - as - biotechnology - collective - imagination - and - study / [ 9 ] Nicole M Deterding and Mary C Waters . 2021 . Flexible coding of in - depth interviews : A twenty - frst - century approach . Sociological methods & research 50 , 2 ( 2021 ) , 708 – 739 . [ 10 ] Laura Devendorf , Kristina Andersen , Daniela K Rosner , Ron Wakkary , and James Pierce . 2019 . From HCI to HCI - amusement : Strategies for engaging what new technology makes old . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 12 . [ 11 ] Laura Devendorf , Katya Arquilla , Sandra Wirtanen , Allison Anderson , and Steven Frost . 2020 . Craftspeople as Technical Collaborators : Lessons Learned through an Experimental Weaving Residency . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 13 . [ 12 ] Laura Devendorf , Katya Arquilla , Sandra Wirtanen , Allison Anderson , and Steven Frost . 2020 . Craftspeople as Technical Collaborators : Lessons Learned through an Experimental Weaving Residency . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Honolulu , HI , USA ) ( CHI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376820 [ 13 ] Carl DiSalvo , Kirsten Boehner , Nicholas A Knouf , and Phoebe Sengers . 2009 . Nourishing the ground for sustainable HCI : considerations from ecologically en - gaged art . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 385 – 394 . [ 14 ] Paul Dourish , Janet Finlay , Phoebe Sengers , and Peter Wright . 2004 . Refective HCI : Towards a critical technical practice . In CHI’04 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems . 1727 – 1728 . [ 15 ] Emanuel Felipe Duarte , Luiz Ernesto Merkle , and M Cecília C Baranauskas . 2019 . The interface between Interactive Art and Human - Computer Interaction : Exploring dialogue genres and evaluative practices . Journal on Interactive Systems 10 , 2 ( 2019 ) , 20 – 34 . [ 16 ] Anthony Dunne . 2008 . Hertzian tales : Electronic products , aesthetic experience , and critical design . MIT press . [ 17 ] David Edwards . 2008 . Artscience : Creativity in the post - Google generation . Harvard University Press . [ 18 ] Jill Fantauzzacofn , Joanna Berzowska , Ernest Edmonds , Ken Goldberg , D Fox Harrell , and Brian Smith . 2012 . The arts , HCI , and innovation policy discourse : 1409 " We’re Not Decorators " : Fostering Interdisciplinary Exchange in STEM – Artist Collaborations DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Invited panel . In CHI’12 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1111 – 1114 . [ 19 ] Simon Faulkner , Adam Leaver , Farida Vis , and Karel Williams . 2008 . Art for art’s sake or selling up ? European Journal of Communication 23 , 3 ( 2008 ) , 295 – 317 . [ 20 ] Donna J Haraway . 2016 . Staying with the trouble : Making kin in the Chthulucene . Duke University Press . [ 21 ] Christina Harrington , Sheena Erete , and Anne Marie Piper . 2019 . Deconstructing Community - Based Collaborative Design : Towards More Equitable Participatory Design Engagements . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 3 , CSCW , Article 216 ( nov 2019 ) , 25 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359318 [ 22 ] Craig Harris . 1999 . Art and innovation : the Xerox PARC Artist - in - Residence program . Mit Press . [ 23 ] Steve Harrison , Deborah Tatar , and Phoebe Sengers . 2007 . The three paradigms of HCI . In Alt . Chi . Session at the SIGCHI Conference on human factors in computing systems San Jose , California , USA . 1 – 18 . [ 24 ] Noura Howell , Shawn Protz , Jasmyn Byrd , Miguel Castellanos , Alexis Elkins , Jessica Hall , Micah Holdsworth , Lalith Mallikeshwaran Rajagopal Sambasivan , Chris Noel , Oluwarotimi Osiberu , et al . 2022 . Feeling Air : Exploring Aesthetic and Material Qualities of Architectural Infatables . In Adjunct Proceedings of the 2022 Nordic Human - Computer Interaction Conference . 1 – 6 . [ 25 ] Lewis Hyde . 2009 . The gift : Creativity and the artist in the modern world . Vintage . [ 26 ] Frank P Incropera . 2016 . Climate change : a wicked problem : complexity and uncertainty at the intersection of science , economics , politics , and human behavior . Cambridge University Press . [ 27 ] Steven J Jackson and Laewoo Kang . 2014 . Breakdown , obsolescence and reuse : HCI and the art of repair . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 449 – 458 . [ 28 ] Rachel Jacobs , Steve Benford , and Ewa Luger . 2015 . Behind the scenes at HCI’s turn to the arts . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 567 – 578 . [ 29 ] Rachel Jacobs , Steve Benford , Ewa Luger , and Candice Howarth . 2016 . The prediction machine : Performing scientifc and artistic process . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems . 497 – 508 . [ 30 ] Rachel Jacobs , Steve Benford , Mark Selby , Michael Golembewski , Dominic Price , and Gabriella Giannachi . 2013 . A conversation between trees : what data feels like in the forest . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 129 – 138 . [ 31 ] Pamela Jennings , Elisa Giaccardi , and Magda Wesolkowska . 2006 . About face interface : Creative engagement in the new media arts and HCI . In CHI’06 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1663 – 1666 . [ 32 ] Laewoo Kang and Steven Jackson . 2018 . Collaborative art practice as HCI research . Interactions 25 , 2 ( 2018 ) , 78 – 81 . [ 33 ] Laewoo Kang , Steven J Jackson , and Phoebe Sengers . 2018 . Intermodulation : improvisation and collaborative art practice for hci . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1 – 13 . [ 34 ] Ariane Koek . 2017 . In / visible : the inside story of the making of Arts at CERN . Interdisciplinary Science Reviews 42 , 4 ( 2017 ) , 345 – 358 . [ 35 ] Diana Kusunoki and Aleksandra Sarcevic . 2012 . Applying Participatory Design Theory to Designing Evaluation Methods . In CHI ’12 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Austin , Texas , USA ) ( CHI EA ’12 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1895 – 1900 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2212776 . 2223725 [ 36 ] Kari Kuutti and Liam J Bannon . 2014 . The turn to practice in HCI : towards a research agenda . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 3543 – 3552 . [ 37 ] Kari Kuutti and Liam J . Bannon . 2014 . The Turn to Practice in HCI : Towards a Research Agenda . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Toronto , Ontario , Canada ) ( CHI ’14 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 3543 – 3552 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557111 [ 38 ] Nokia Bell Labs . 2020 . The genesis of E . A . T . https : / / www . bell - labs . com / about / history / innovation - stories / genesis - eat / [ 39 ] Lucian Leahu , Jennifer Thom - Santelli , Claudia Pederson , and Phoebe Sengers . 2008 . Taming the situationist beast . In Proceedings of the 7th ACM Conference on Designing interactive Systems . 203 – 211 . [ 40 ] Ann Light and Jos Boys . 2017 . Learning at / with / from the edges . In Participatory Design for Learning . Routledge , 157 – 174 . [ 41 ] Natalie Loveless . 2019 . How to make art at the end of the world : A manifesto for research - creation . Duke University Press . [ 42 ] David Maggs and John Robinson . 2020 . Sustainability in an imaginary world : art and the question of agency . Routledge . [ 43 ] Martin Maguire . 2001 . Methods to support human - centred design . International journal of human - computer studies 55 , 4 ( 2001 ) , 587 – 634 . [ 44 ] Microsoft . 2021 . Ada . https : / / www . microsoft . com / en - us / research / project / ada / [ 45 ] Peter N Miller . 2017 . Is “design thinking” the new liberal arts ? In The evolution of liberal arts in the global age . Routledge , 167 – 173 . [ 46 ] Munira Mirza . 2006 . Culture vultures : Is UK arts policy damaging the arts ? ( 2006 ) . [ 47 ] Eric Paulos . 2007 . HCI Cannot be used to Evaluate Art . ( 2007 ) . [ 48 ] Jennifer Pierre , Roderic Crooks , Morgan Currie , Britt Paris , and Irene Pasquetto . 2021 . Getting Ourselves Together : Data - Centered Participatory Design Research & Epistemic Burden . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Yokohama , Japan ) ( CHI ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 406 , 11 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445103 [ 49 ] Cristiele A Scariot , Adriano Heemann , and Stephania Padovani . 2012 . Under - standing the collaborative - participatory design . Work 41 , Supplement 1 ( 2012 ) , 2701 – 2705 . [ 50 ] Claudia Schnugg . 2019 . Creating ArtScience collaboration : bringing value to orga - nizations . Springer . [ 51 ] Claudia Schnugg and BeiBei Song . 2020 . An organizational perspective on ArtScience collaboration : Opportunities and challenges of platforms to collabo - rate with artists . Journal of Open Innovation : Technology , Market , and Complexity 6 , 1 ( 2020 ) , 6 . [ 52 ] Phoebe Sengers and Chris Csikszentmihályi . 2003 . HCI and the arts : A conficted convergence ? . In CHI’03 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems . 876 – 877 . [ 53 ] Robert Soden , Perrine Hamel , David Lallemant , and James Pierce . 2020 . The Disaster and Climate Change Artathon : Staging art / science collaborations in crisis informatics . In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference . 1273 – 1286 . [ 54 ] Robert Soden , David Lallemant , Perrine Hamel , and Karen Barns . 2021 . Becoming interdisciplinary : Fostering critical engagement with disaster data . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 5 , CSCW1 ( 2021 ) , 1 – 27 . [ 55 ] Robert Soden and Leysia Palen . 2018 . Informating crisis : Expanding critical perspectives in crisis informatics . Proceedings of the ACM on human - computer interaction 2 , CSCW ( 2018 ) , 1 – 22 . [ 56 ] Mimi Sodhi . 2008 . Embodied knowing : An experiential , contextual , and refective process . ( 2008 ) . [ 57 ] Ekaterina R Stepanova , John Desnoyers - Stewart , Kristina Höök , and Bernhard E Riecke . 2022 . Strategies for Fostering a Genuine Feeling of Connection in Tech - nologically Mediated Systems . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 26 . [ 58 ] Polly Stupples . 2014 . Creative contributions : The role of the arts and the cultural sector in development . Progress in development studies 14 , 2 ( 2014 ) , 115 – 130 . [ 59 ] Fred Turner . 2018 . The arts at Facebook : An aesthetic infrastructure for surveil - lance capitalism . Poetics 67 ( 2018 ) , 53 – 62 . [ 60 ] Lisa Wainwright . Invalid Date . Fluxus . Encyclopedia Britannica ( Invalid Date ) . https : / / www . britannica . com / art / Fluxus [ 61 ] Tony Wall , Eva Österlind , and Julia Fries . 2019 . Arts - based approaches for sustainability . Encyclopedia of Sustainability in Higher Education ( 2019 ) , 50 – 56 . [ 62 ] Matthew Webber . 2020 . The Instrumentalization of Contemporary Art in Bosnia - Herzegovina , 2013 – 2018 . Ph . D . Dissertation . UCL ( University College London ) . [ 63 ] Viveka Weiley and Ernest Edmonds . 2011 . The HCI researcher as artist and designer : approaches to creativity and distance . In Proceedings of the 8th ACM conference on Creativity and cognition . 233 – 238 . [ 64 ] Gillian Young . 2011 . The Score : How Does Fluxus Perform ? PAJ : A Journal of Performance and Art 34 , 2 ( 2011 ) , 38 – 45 . 1410