Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11192 - 022 - 04368 - 9 1 3 Exploring the antecedents of interdisciplinarity at the European Research Council : a topic modeling approach Andrea Bonaccorsi 1 · Nicola Melluso 1 · Francesco Alessandro Massucci 2 Received : 3 November 2021 / Accepted : 28 March 2022 / Published online : 27 April 2022 © Akadémiai Kiadó , Budapest , Hungary 2022 Abstract The paper applies topic modeling to the collection of ERC - funded proposals , interim reports and related publications , with the aim of measuring in a novel way the degree of interdisciplinarity . This approach helps to address several open research questions about the epistemic , institutional and individual conditions that may favour the blossoming of interdisciplinarity . We present several interesting descriptive data and suggest possible lines of investigation about the antecedents of interdisciplinarity . Keywords Interdisciplinarity · European research council · Text mining · Topic modeling Introduction According to a largely quoted definition proposed by the US National Academies , inter - disciplinarity is “a mode of research by teams or individuals that integrates information , data , techniques , tools , perspectives , concepts and / or theories from two or more disciplines or bodies of specialized knowledge to advance fundamental understanding or to solve problems whose solutions are beyond the scope of a single discipline or area of research practice” ( National Academy of Sciences , National Academy of Engineering , Institute of Medicine , 2005 , 26 ) . In contrast , multidisciplinary research is considered “the coopera - tion of researchers from several different disciplines , but each working in their own context with little cross fertilization among disciplines , primarily sharing information and results at the end of their research to support the overall combined findings” ( Lawrence et al . , 2022 ) . While the definitional work is not without disagreement in the literature ( Wagner et al . , 2011 ) , it is accepted that interdisciplinarity involves a systematic effort of integration . The issue of interdisciplinarity ( henceforth , ID ) is again on top of the table for deci - sion makers , funding agencies , and researchers as well . As an example , a recent report * Nicola Melluso nicolamelluso @ gmail . com 1 Department of Energy , Process and System Engineering , School of Engineering , University of Pisa , Pisa , Italy 2 SIRIS Lab , Research Division of SIRIS Academic , 08003 Barcelona , Spain 6962 Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 1 3 from Science Europe , the European organization of research funders and Public Research Organizations ( PROs ) and several university associations has called for more support to interdisciplinary research , since “this kind of research is needed to tackle societal chal - lenges but lacks funding” . 1 And , again and again , the issue remains open and problematic . It has been repeatedly suggested that ID is subject to a paradox : it is advocated and sup - ported in policy making and high level discussions on the societal role of science , but it is sacrified in the daily practice of research funding and assessment ( Weingart , 2000 ; Woelert & Millar , 2013 ) . Why is ID , at the same time , so requested and appreciated by society , and so difficult to adopt , implement , recognize , and prize by funding agencies , research institu - tions , and researchers ? In this paper we offer two contributions to the large and growing literature that has examined the issue and the associated paradox . We first contribute a technical advance - ment in the measurement of ID and , second , we show a number of empirical findings that increase our understanding of ID , addressing some of the most controversial research questions . On the technical side we experiment the use of advanced text mining techniques , namely optimal topic modeling , to describe and measure ID of research ( henceforth , IDR ) . This follows from a recognition of the literature that emphasizes the limitations of previ - ous efforts to measure ID with the help of metadata of publications , such as classification schemes of journals ( Subject Categories ) and citations . Topic modeling has been applied to ID in a few papers in recent years , with promising results . We extend this line of investiga - tion using a novel and large dataset on one of the most important funding agencies in the world , the European Research Council ( ERC ) . On the substantive side , on the other hand , we aim at addressing a number of research questions that are at the core of the debate on ID . They can be summarized along three dimensions ( epistemic , institutional and individual ) : ( a ) To what extent does IDR depend on epistemic factors , such as scientific disciplines , rate of growth of scientific fields , or age of references ? ( b ) Is the propensity to undertake IDR influenced by organizational factors , such as the institutional affiliation ( universities vs Public Research Organizations , henceforth PROs ) or the age of the affiliation ? ( c ) Is the propensity to undertake IDR dependent , in a recognizable way , on the life cycle of researchers ? Are young , or mid - career , or aged researchers more inclined to submit proposals with higher levels of ID ? These questions are clearly crucial in policy making : if decision makers want to pro - mote IDR , for example to address complex societal challenges , they must know under which conditions IDR is likely to flourish . To tackle the above questions , we examine the research projects funded by one of the world largest funding agencies , the European Research Council ( ERC ) . From the open archive of ERC we extract the abstract of the funded research projects in the period 2007 – 2018 and integrate them with interim reports that funded projects must submit dur - ing the support period as well as with the abstract of the scientific publications produced by each project and indexed either in the open repository OpenAire or in the bibliometric 1 https : / / www . scien ceeur ope . org / what - s - going - on / ? types = media Cover age . 6963 Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 1 3 database Scopus . For this documentation we extract the words that describe the research project ( full text of the abstract ) and the list of publications cited by each scholarly work linked to each project . We build a novel dataset by reconstructing the biographic informa - tion of Principal Investigators ( age , country , affiliation ) and his / her list of publications ( in particular , date of first publication ) . The European Research Council is an interesting empirical setting for the study of IDR , for various reasons . Its mission is to fund excellent investigator - driven research called “frontier research” , without consideration of disciplinary or country allocation . Although IDR per se is not the main mission , ERC explicitly encourages application from research - ers that have published in multidisciplinary journals . 2 ERC has gained large prestige for the rigour of peer review process and has established a standard ( Luukkonen , 2014 ) . Appli - cants self - select according to high standards of publication ( Neufeld et al . , 2013 ) ; they come with higher probability from universities characterized by research intensity , large number of highly cited papers and good global ranking positions ( Piro et al . , 2020 ) . Given its mandate to select top level research , it is the ideal empirical setting to examine the ten - sion , identified since the foundation ( Nowotny , 2006 ) , between disciplinary excellence and interdisciplinarity . According to a critical view , this tension could not be addressed appropriately , that is , without sacrificing ID ( Laredo , 2015 ) . According to Hõrlsberger et al . ( 2013 ; 2014 ) , successful ERC applications are strongly correlated to the similarity to frontier research but negatively to ID , somewhat in contradiction with the institutional mission . We are in a position to examine this tension in detail , by exploiting an additional convenient feature of the ERC : that is , the structure of the funding instrument into discipli - nary panels . Because researchers themselves choose the most appropriate panel to evaluate the main discipline associated with their research , this enables us to define IDR as research exploring topics scattered across the structure of the ERC panels . We deliberately maintain an exploratory and descriptive attitude . There is a large need to understand data qualitatively and with simple quantitative analysis , before entering into modeling exercises . We clearly have two limitations : due to institutional policies we can observe only winning projects ( so we are not in the position to run a counterfactual exer - cise or to replicate the findings of Hõrlsberger et al . 2013 ) , and submission to the ERC are not representative of the average research landscape but rather of the frontier , excellent research at the European scale . The interest of the findings , however , will make justice of the proposed approach . Definition and measurement of ID . A topic modeling approach In this section we examine the large stream of studies that try to define and measure ID and propose a methodology based on text mining . Open issues in the definition and measurement of ID ID has a complex meaning that goes deeply into epistemological and sociological debates ( Boon & Van Baalen , 2019 ; Choi & Park , 2006 ; Huutoniemi et al . , 2010 ; Klein , 2008 ; Lattuca , 2001 , 2003 ) . We do not enter here on these debates but follow the literature in 2 http : / / erc . europa . eu / fundi ng - and - grants / fundi ng - schem es / start ing - grants . 6964 Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 1 3 assuming that ID is a multidimensional construct . Given the importance of the issue , there have been several efforts to identify , define and measure new indicators that might approxi - mate the multidimensionality of the construct ( Porter et al . , 2006 ; Wagner et al . , 2011 ) , fol - lowing a cognitive approach based on information or knowledge flows between disciplines ( Glänzel & Debackere , 2021 ) . According to a classical conceptualization diversity can be defined in terms of ( i ) variety ( number of disciplines ) ; ( ii ) balance ( distribution of discipli - nary contributions ) ; and ( iii ) disparity ( distance or degree of difference between contribut - ing disciplines ) ( Rao , 1982 ; Stirling , 1997 ) . These definitions may lead to remarkably dif - ferent measures of ID ( Wang et al . , 2015 ) . The pioneering studies on the boundaries of disciplines and the emergence of IDR used a lexical approach . They studied words and their co - occurrence in titles and abstract of papers as the main input , building up semantic maps ( Callon , 1983 ) and examining the passage of words across disciplines ( Small , 1999 ; see the discussion in Börner et al . , 2003 ) . Over time , a consistent literature has defined ID by applying measures of diversity to the distribution of articles and citations by Subject Category ( Carley et al . , 2017 ; Leydesdorff et al . , 2013 ; Morillo et al . , 2001 ) . According to this approach , the journals cited in the ref - erence list of articles are classified by Subject Category and a citing - cited matrix is gener - ated . After defining the metric of diversity it is possible to reduce the dimensionality of the resulting matrix and to project the disciplinary profiles on a map ( Carley & Porter , 2012 ; Carley et al . , 2017 ; Cassi et al . , 2017 ; Rafols et al . , 2010 ) . Following yet another approach , the diversity of disciplines is defined by the co - citation of articles in journals in different Subject Categories ( Leydesdorff & Rafols , 2009 ; Moya - Anegón et al . , 2004 , 2007 ; Porter et al . , 2019 ) . Once defined the indicators , the next logical step is to define a measure of diversity , so that research spanning diverse disciplines can be identified . The most common definitions of diversity are the Rao - Stirling measures ( Rao , 1982 ; Stirling , 1997 ) , the Zhang et al . true diversity ( Zhang et al . , 2016 ) , in addition to the standard measures of cosine distance ( Por - ter et al . , 2007 , 2008 ) and Jaccard distance . Different measures of diversity place different emphasis to its dimensions and have different statistical properties , which are the object of critical examination . Klavans and Boyack ( 2009 ) have compared systematically the diver - sity measures and the resulting maps and support the use of cosine distance ( see also Boy - ack et al . , 2005 ; Leydesdorff and Rafols , 2012 ) . Ciotti et al . ( 2016 ) criticize the use of Jaccard measure as it is not independent on the size of the discipline . Fontana et al . ( 2018 ) support this view ( i . e . the probability of integration between disciplines depends on the absolute and relative size of disciplines ) and add a dynamic dimension ( i . e . the probability of integration depends on the growth of disciplines ) . These contributions make it clear that the adoption of alternative definitions of ID and of diversity measures may lead to very different outcomes . As Leydesdorff and Rafols ( 2011 ) put it , “different indicators may cap - ture different understandings of multifaceted concepts” ( see also more recently Thijs et al . , 2021 and Glänzel & Debackere , 2021 ) . The Topic Modeling approach to ID Partially in response to the limitations of the literature based on the structure of citations , a recent stream of literature has been exploring the potential of Text mining techniques , applied to the words appearing in titles , abstract , or keywords of articles , less frequently on the full text of articles . By using a variety of algorithms ( in particular , Latent Dir - ichlet Allocation , LDA : Blei et al . , 2003 ) and clustering procedures ( Topic modeling ) it is 6965 Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 1 3 possible to represent the content of scientific papers ( Gerrish & Blei , 2010 ; Lu & Wolfram , 2012 ; Nichols , 2014 ; Rosen - Zvi et al . , 2004 ; Wang et al . , 2011 ) . In this case there is no need for ex ante classification , as in the Subject Category case , so that all limitations of the classification are removed ( Shu et al . , 2019 ) . ID can be defined directly on the maps of topics . The idea behind topic modeling as a technique for measuring ID has been taken on board by the National Science Foundation ( henceforth , NSF ) in the USA . According to NSF , the advantage of the topic model approach on measuring ID is that its algorithm uses data drawn from the research itself , rather than from institutional structures through which the research was produced ( Nichols , 2014 ) . Lu and Wolfram ( 2012 ) compare citation - based and word - based methods with topic - based techniques . By using LDA it is possible to uncover relationships between topics that would remain otherwise hidden due to terminological classifications . Also peripheral authors with few citations might be found central in terms of new topics . At the same time they call attention to the limits of topic modeling : there is no optimal rule for the deter - mination of the number of topics , the label of the topic is assigned by convenience by the researcher , and the units of observation are single words and not more complex and long semantic units . By combining the advantages of citation - based methods and topic - based techniques , Janssens et al . ( 2009 ) advocate a hybrid approach , using hybrid clustering . A recent policy - oriented report from Digital Science makes a similar point : there is a need for multiple indicators , not simplistic indexes ( Adams et al . , 2016 ) . The literature on IDR has not yet fully taken on board the potential of text - based tech - niques , however . Much work should be done in order to compare the findings from these techniques from those obtained through traditional methods . We contribute to this effort , by using an array of optimal clustering methods together with text mining techniques , in order to obtain a reliable measure . We emphasize that the methodological debate is not just of technical interest , but is crucial also for the hot debate on ID that takes place at epistemological level , as well as in research assessment and policy making . If measures of IDR are flawed , they deliver wrong messages to decision makers . There is therefore a keen interest in contributing to the methodology . Searching for antecedents of ID . An exploratory analysis of ERC data By developing a measurement based on topic modeling we are able to capture those hid - den dimensions of ID that would not be necessarily identified by using journal keywords , citations or journal classifications . This measure will be an indicator of the degree of ID associated with the proposal , interim reports and publications produced by each Principal Investigator . Remember that the ERC deliberately aims to support “frontier research” , that is , crea - tive and risky research at the boundaries of established research trajectories . It is likely that some pattern of interdisciplinarity would not be captured , for example , by classification of journals or by reference lists of articles . Using this novel approach to the measurement of ID , we are in a position to explore some of its antecedents and estimate the sign and magnitude of the relation . They are : ( a ) epistemic effects ; ( b ) institutional effects ; ( c ) individual , career - related effects . 6966 Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 1 3 Epistemic effects There are general , high level obstacles to ID , which have been examined intensively in philosophy and sociology of science . Broadly speaking , the epistemic organization of sci - ence in paradigms ( Abbott , 2001 ; Lenoir , 1997 ) and the social organization in communities around specialized languages and laboratory practices ( Dupré , 1983 , 1993 ; Whitley , 1984 ; Gallison and Stump , 1996 ) make it difficult for scientists to engage into research that cuts across established boundaries . While there are several definitions of disciplines , there is also some agreement on the pragmatic notion that disciplines represent “stable systemic communities within which researchers concentrate their experience into a particular world - view” ( Bruce et al . , 2004 , 458 ) . This creates a tension between the existence of boundaries and the dynamics of science in emerging fields that cut across boundaries ( Liu et al . , 2012 ; Rafols & Meyer , 2010 ) , a situation sometimes described as a dissonance ( Rafols et al . , 2010 ) . Huutoniemi et al . ( 2010 ) make the important distinction between addressing ID from an instrumental and pragmatic perspective ( e . g . mobilizing various disciplines to tackle large societal challenges such as climatic change ) or from a more conceptual , cognitive and epis - temological perspective ( Boon & van Baalen , 2019 ) . We propose to explore the epistemic effects according to three dimensions : ( i ) variabil - ity of ID across disciplines ; ( ii ) rate of growth of scientific field ; ( iii ) distribution of age of references . Variability across disciplines From this perspective it must be admitted that we do not have a full scale theory of the intensity in which ID is practiced in different disciplines and a complete understanding of the underlying reasons . Several authors offered important insights , but no general results . For example Silva et al . ( 2013 ) document high levels of IDR in chemistry , physics and biology , but not in computer science , Morillo et al . ( 2003 ) in medicine and technology , while Qin et al . ( 1997 ) and Bellotti et al . ( 2016 ) report high ID in biology , medicine , chem - istry , physics and engineering . With respect to Social Sciences and Humanities ( SSH ) we know even less . Morillo et al . ( 2003 ) and Bellotti et al . ( 2016 ) report low levels of ID in SSH , but also some internal vari - ability . Garnier et al . , ( 2013 , 2014 ) evaluate a NSF program ( Human and Social Dynam - ics ) explicitly aimed at promoting ID within SSH and STEM ( labeled cross - disciplinarity ) . They find a change in an integration measure before and after the program ( 2004 – 2008 ) and argue that without a specific program it would not have taken place spontaneously . They therefore recommend the adoption of targeted funding and specific requirements in grant calls ( see also Spelt et al . , 2009 ; van Rijnsoever & Hessels , 2011 ) . On the other hand , researchers in SSH tend to cite contributions from STEM in an increasing way . Liu et al ( 2017 ) document a sharp increase in STEM citations in SSH papers in China but warn that there is an inverse U - shaped relation between the extent of interdisciplinary citations and the scientific impact . As a matter of fact , within STEM we include a discipline with a strong instrumental and pragmatic orientation , such as Engineering , that , according to Boon and Van Baalen ( 2019 ) , might be mobilized for ID programs of large impact . Furthermore , while in hard sciences such as chemistry , physics or mathematics scientists do follow paradigmatic 6967 Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 1 3 diversity and idiosyncratic laboratory practices ( Dupré , 1983 ; Knorr Cetina , 1999 ) , they nevertheless share several general principles ( Ziman , 1999 ) and are trained to speak a com - mon mathematical language . As a consequence , scientists might find less tension , or less dissonance , in working with other disciplines within STEM than outside ( Fischer et al . , 2011 ) . As suggested by Aboelela et al . ( 2007 ) STEM disciplines share an approach to ID based on scientific hypotheses ( hypothesis - driven ) . On the contrary , one would have a difficult time to identify general principles and prac - tices in SSH . The philosophical reconstruction of common methodologies in SSH , due to authors such as John Dewey or Max Weber , did not become a largely accepted standard . For reasons we cannot discuss here , Social sciences are subject to extreme paradigmatic pluralism , while Humanities are currently a collection of highly specialized disciplines with quite separate epistemologies . According to Aboelela et al . ( 2007 ) SSH researchers share a critical and constructivist approach to IDR . In addition , scholars in SSH tend to work and publish individually ( although with some variability within SSH disciplines ) , making IDR more difficult to achieve . For example , Leahey and Reikowsky ( 2008 ) report that collaboration in sociology is seldom genuinely interdisciplinary . We then explore the hypothesis that scholars in SSH find more difficult to engage into IDR . Summing up , we do not have a full scale theory . From fragmented pieces of related work we however suggest a preliminary hypothesis , as follows . H1 The degree of ID is larger in STEM than in SSH disciplines . Rate of growth Scientific fields are characterized by different rates of growth of scientific production . While in the long run it may be observed an average rate of growth of aggregate production in the order of 2 % , emerging fields may grow at double digit for several years . Accord - ing to Gupta ( 1997 ) and Hörlesberger et al . ( 2013 ) researchers in fast growing fields are most likely to use more recent science . The relationship between rate of growth and ID is not straightforward , however . On the one hand , it might be argued , looking at the his - tory of science in the XX century , that fast moving fields have been often characterized by high ID , as in the case of bioinformatics , nanoscience , or environmental sciences more recently ( Bonaccorsi , 2010 ) . Fast growing fields do not have a crystallized disciplinary structure and may nurture several niches of exploration of interdisciplinary opportunities . On the other hand , a counterintuitive argument has been recently proposed by Chu and Evans ( 2021 ) . By examining the aggregate scientific production they argue that the growth in the rate of publication is associated with an increase in “canonization” , or the tendency of authors to work on issues that are already established , cite already cited papers and to remain within narrow disciplinary boundaries . We test the niche hypothesis as opposed to the canonization hypothesis . H2 The degree of ID increases with the rate of growth of scientific production in the field . Age distribution of citations The literature on ID agrees on the notion that fields of research that cut across established disciplines need a period of time before being recognized and institutionalized . As an 6968 Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 1 3 example , Brown et al . ( 2015 ) report that it took at least five years before their interdiscipli - nary works in environmental sciences get published by top journals . The studies on measurement of ID have introduced the notion of diffusion to examine the time window for a new combination of knowledge to be accepted by scientific commu - nities and spread in the literature . Much less is known on the reverse phenomenon - how old is the knowledge utilized by those researchers that engage into IDR . Are ideas about IDR originated suddenly , on the basis of very recent discoveries ? or are they originated following a longer incubation period , in which researchers first absorb knowledge from various fields , and then mature a truly interdisciplinary research program ? If this is the case , how long is the incubation period ? This issue has been extensively examined in general in bibliometrics and scientomet - rics , after the pioneering observations of De Solla Price ( Egghe et al . 1992 ; 1995 ; Glänzel et al . 1995 ; 1995 1999 ; 2003 ) . Zhang and Glänzel ( 2017a , 2017b ) found that in general the median age of references increased slightly between 1992 and 2014 , from 5 – 6 references to 6 – 7 , More recently Roth et al . ( 2012 ) and Bornmann et al . ( 2019 ) showed that large part of citations refer to papers of age between 3 and 5 years . Papers that are not cited within this short time window have negligible probability to become highly cited ( Ponomarev et al . , 2014 ; Garner et al . 2014 ) . Gupta ( 1997 ) showed that in fast growing scientific fields refer - ences are younger . At the same time the literature on novelty in scientific production has raised the propo - sition that highly novel contributions may be characterized by a cumulative large num - ber of citations , but delayed several years after publication ( Azoulay et al . , 2011 ; Heinze et al . , 2020 ; Uzzi et al . , 2013 ; Wang et al . , 2017 ; Zhang et al . , 2021 ) . While the way in which novelty is measured may be in some cases controversial ( Bornmann et al . , 2019 ) , this notion is clearly relevant for our discussion , since it sheds light on the cognitive and epistemic antecedents of IDR . While there is no complete overlapping between novelty and interdisciplinarity , IDR is , at least initially , a form of novel research . From this perspective we may then ask which is the process which leads to the formula - tion of research projects characterized by high ID . We cannot observe directly the thought process of scientists , but we can derive indirect indicators . One such indicator is the age distribution of articles cited by ERC grantees . We are able to extract all references in ERC documents and examine the year in which they were published . Based on the epistemic discussion above , we suggest that there is a need for a long incubation process , during which ideas that come from other disciplines are progressively absorbed and elaborated ( Kwon et al . , 2017 ) . Following several authors ( Lee et al . , 2015 ; Mollas Gallart et al . 2016 ) it is useful to refer to concepts originated in the management literature , such as cognitive distance , which is used to define the degree of diversification of markets and technologies ( Nooteboom et al . , 2007 ) or intellectual distance ( Boudreau et al . , 2016 ) . The larger the cognitive distance , or the lower the proximity , the longer the time needed to recognize the value of external knowledge , adopt the language and tech - niques to utilize it , and absorb it in one’s own activity . We suggest that purely disciplinary research utilizes more recent discoveries , because their meaning is perfectly clear within established directions and their relevance is immediately recognized by peers ( Uzzi et al . , 2013 ) . On the contrary , IDR requires a longer incubation period . Knowledge integration , as shown by Rousseau et al . ( 2018 ) , requires time . A somewhat related concept has been suggested for IDR . For example , Lariviére and Gingras ( 2010 ) show that there is not a general pattern of correlation between ID and citations . Given that recognizing the value of IDR requires traveling a cognitive distance 6969 Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 1 3 between one’s own field and others , the authors suggest that there is an optimal level of interdisciplinarity , a notion that is close to the one of optimal cognitive distance . This is also supported by the findings of Levitt and Thelwall ( 2008a , 2008b ) and Liu et al . ( 2017 ) , according to which there is an inverse U - shaped relation between citations received and the share of citations between STEM and SSH , and by Yegros - Yegros et al . ( 2015 ) , who intro - duced the distinction between proximal and distal ID . We therefore suggest the following hypothesis . H3 The more interdisciplinary the research , the older the average age of publications cited . Institutional effects The literature has raised a number of concerns on the relation between institutional features of science systems and ID . Let us distinguish between funding institutions ( government , funding agencies ) and performing institutions ( universities , PROs ) . With respect to fund - ing , several authors have shown that IDR has consistently lower funding success ( Metzger & Zare , 1999 ; Bromham et al . 2016 ; Kwon et al . , 2017 ) , while Bellotti et al . ( 2016 ) show an opposite pro - IDR pattern in Italy . According to Brown et al . ( 2015 ) “interdisciplinary research is still at the margins” ( Brown et al . , 2015 , 317 ) . Various explanations can be offered : panel of reviewers have less experience , the matching between projects and asses - sor expertise is more difficult , and it is easier to justify and explain the funding of con - ventional projects . Metzger and Zare ( 1999 ) strongly suggested the adoption of targeted funding programs . An indirect support to this line of studies is offered by Seeber et al . ( 2022 ) , who find that ID research projects are not penalized in ex ante selection within the European COST programme . The reason , they explain , is that COST does not organize the project selection by disciplinary panels , but by variable and flexible composition of the panels , following thematic orientations . With respect to performing institutions , however , much less is known . Universities may be at advantage since they have large variety of disciplines . In principle , social interac - tion among colleagues of different background may be facilitated ( Cummings and Kiesler , 2005 ) . Some studies have compared universities with a broad coverage ( generalist univer - sities ) with dedicated or specialist universities ( mainly in applied fields ) . Bonaccorsi and Secondi ( 2017 ) find that generalist universities outperform specialist ones in research pro - ductivity across all European countries ( Bonaccorsi et al . , 2021a , b ) . In any case , these studies do not measure ID but overall productivity . On the other hand , when IDR requires prolonged interaction over time , PROs may be more flexible in arranging dedicated struc - tures , relaxing researchers from the constraint of teaching . According to Fischer et al . ( 2011 ) the institutional context of the research is one of the most important facilitating fac - tor , but we do not have systematic insights on whether some types of institutions ( e . g . uni - versities vs . PROs ) are more conducive to IDR . From a policy advocacy point of view , we see no significant difference between universities and PROs in supporting IDR in Europe . For example , the European University Association ( EUA ) has called for “recognising inter - disciplinary engagement in academic assessment and reward schemes” ( EUA , 2017 ) , while Science Europe , the organization of reserch funding agencies and PROs has repeatedly called for more ID in research funding and organization ( Science Europe , 2019 ) . While empirical studies and policy documents on this issue are scarce and not conclu - sive , we find in the literature a strong argument that predicts that the traditional academic organization is detrimental to IDR . According an influential sociological literature , in fact , 6970 Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 1 3 academic research in the disciplinary tradition , called Mode 1 , has increasingly been chal - lenged by a new form of organization , which is more inspired by societal challenges ( as opposed to curiosity - driven motives ) , is less constrained by disciplinary boundaries , and is not attached to traditional universities ( Gibbons et al . , 1994 ; Nowotny et al . , 2001 , 2003 ) . This new form of organization , called Mode 2 , is most often found outside academic insti - tutions . There has been significant debate on the empirical validation of Mode 2 ( see for example Hessels & van Lente , 2008 ; Frodeman , 2016 ) and to the best of our knowledge the specific institutional details are not spelled out . Nevertheless , it is clear that according to the authors supporting Mode 2 , traditional academic departments are not the optimal environment for IDR . Similarly , the main claim of Mode 2 was that the changes in the way in which scientific research is carried out are already in place under new initiatives , such as new research centers , laboratories or institutes , sometimes labeled “hybrid fora” ( Hemlin & Rasmussen , 2006 ) . It implicitly suggests that new institutions ( e . g . newly created universities , or PROs ) may be more open to IDR than old and established ones . According to Hellstrom et al . ( 2018 ) , in fact , IDR “is not easily accommodated in departments and faculties” . One strong reason is that universities must manage educational activities alongside research and cur - ricula are usually disciplinary based and slow to change . To manage IDR universities often create a layered organization ( Biancani et al . , 2018 ) that preserves traditional disciplinarity in departments . Several studies of IDR emphasize the resilience of disciplinary organiza - tion and discuss several strategies by which academicians engage into IDR but preserve a disciplinary orientation ( Donina et al . , 2017 ; Lattuca , 2003 ; Swan et al . , 2010 ; Woiwode & Froese , 2020 ) . Again , this literature does not offer clear guidelines on how this proposition could be validated . We therefore suggest our own way to operationalize the concepts and advance two exploratory hypotheses , as follows . H4 The degree of ID is larger within PROs than within universities . H5 The degree of ID is larger in younger institutions . Age and career effects An intriguing issue is the relation between the propensity of scientists to engage into IDR ( either individually or within interdisciplinary teams ) and their research career . The cogni - tive or epistemic issue is inextricably linked to the problem of incentives . Is IDR good or evil for early stage researchers ? Is the academic career enhanced or damaged by IDR ? In other words , given that career systems often give a prize to citations received , do papers with more IR receive more or less citations than comparable papers ? ( Chakrabarty et al . , 2015 ; Sayama & Akaishi , 2012 ) . In a recent paper , Okamura ( 2019 ) has shown that , in the population of highly cited papers ( top 1 % annual citation counts ) increasing by one the number of disciplines leads to 20 % increase in field normalized citations . This finding , confirming a similar result by Chen et al . ( 2015 ) refers to a tiny proportion of all scientific works . Taking into account the entire distribution , on the contrary , the issue in the literature is controversial , but negative arguments prevail . Here the dominant literature has been fairly sharp in proposing that the institutional systems based on publish or perish place penalties on IDR , mainly by delaying the recognition of contributions ( Sans - Menéndez et al . 2001 ; Levitt & Thelwall , 2008a , 6971 Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 1 3 2008b ; Rafols et al . , 2012 ; Chen et al . , 2015 ; Wang et al . , 2017 ; Chen & Wang , 2021 ) . In other words , while several authors show that ID papers get eventually largely cited ( Rinia et al . , 2001 , 2002 ; Rafols & Meyer , 2010 ; Kwon et al . , 2019 , 2021 ; Zhang et al . , 2021 ) and researchers oriented towards IDR eventually find an academic position ( Millar , 2013 ) , they also suggest that engaging into IDR at an early stage of career may be risky ( Leahey et al . , 2017 ) . Authors that contribute to the core of a discipline are initially more recognized than authors that cross the boundaries . This is also because researchers engaged in ID “have to meet standards emanating from more than one discipline” ( Lamont et al . , 2006 ; see also Lamont . , 2009 ) . This means that quality criteria for each of the disciplines involved must be satisfied ( Boix Mansilla et al . , 2006 ) , making the ID enterprise more difficult . Within expert panels members tend to delegate to others the decisions for which they are not per - sonally experts , making the evaluation on IDR biased negatively ( Langfeldt , 2004 , 2006 ) . When evaluators are experts in a field , they tend to select against highly novel research projects ( Boudreau et al . , 2016 ) . As vividly illustrated by Feller , senior officials and uni - versity leaders may publicly praise IDR , but “review panels , program managers , deans , department heads and faculty may ( and do ) continue to march to disciplinary drummers” ( Feller , 2006 , 8 ) . This is also crystallized in rankings of journals , in which strictly discipli - nary boundaries are embedded , penalizing journals that publish contributions from differ - ent fields ( Jacobs & Frickel , 2009 ; Rafols et al . , 2012 ) . Consequently , according to Carayol and Thi ( 2005 ) , “younger researchers might dis - like interdisciplinary research agendas because they are likely to be more risky and their reputational rewards are likely to be delayed ( even if they may be spread over a longer period of time ) ” ( Carayol & Thi , 2005 , 8 ) . According to other studies , younger researchers are personally more inclined to IDR , but feel that this may damage their academic career ( Rhoten & Parker , 2004 ; Merkx and van den Besselaar , 2008 ; Hein et al . , 2018 ) . According to Leahey et al . ( 2017 ) IDR is a high risk - high reward enterprise . There might be another factor that militates against the engagement into IDR at an early stage of the career . Bonaventura et al . ( 2017 ) have introduced the distinction between back - ground and social ID . The former refers to the accumulation of knowledge from several disciplines in the mind of individual researchers , the latter derives from the exposure to diverse sources of knowledge from collaborators ( see also Sosa , 2011 ) . They show that only social ID contributes to scientific performance : “Lone scientists toiling away at extending their competence into new research areas tend to be less successful than those who instead leverage on social networking to extract new knowledge from collaborators” ( Bonaventura et al . , 2017 , 7 ) . We might derive from this interesting insight the implica - tion that a necessary condition for “extract ( ing ) new knowledge from collaborators” is to achieve a minimum level of career stability and seniority . In their survey of surgery , Heller and Michelassi ( 2012 ) found that scholars with longer chair tenure experienced less barri - ers to IDR . If this is true , there are clearly weak incentives for embarking into an ambitious ID pro - ject at an early stage of career . A safer career path would be based on gaining first recogni - tion within one’s own established discipline , and then , if researchers do have genuine new ideas that cut across boundaries , engage into more IDR after becoming established in aca - demia . We are able to measure the academic age of ERC applicants , defined as the number of years between their first indexed publication ( as reconstructed manually from bibliomet - ric sources ) and the year of ERC application . Combining the epistemic issue discussed above ( i . e . there is a need for ideas that come from distant disciplines to be absorbed during an adequate incubation period ) with the 6972 Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 1 3 incentive issue ( i . e . for young researchers the risk of engaging into IDR maybe too high compared with a traditional disciplinary path ) we obtain the following hypothesis . H6 The degree of ID increases with the academic age of researchers . Data and methodology Data The analysis of this study is conducted on the abstracts of the ERC scientific production . In particular , we focused on analysing the projects funded by the program from 2007 to 2018 and the publications in which the project is cited among the acknowledgements . Since the funding scheme of ERC is conceived within an open access framework , we integrated the data with the following open platforms : UNiCS , CORDIS , OpenAire and ETER . These platforms give us the possibility to gather data about ( i ) the projects funded , ( ii ) the publi - cations published thanks to the funding project , ( iii ) the principal investigators of the pro - jects and ( iv ) the hosting institution of the project . Moreover , we gathered additional data at the level of publication , researchers and institutions . For what concerns publications , we extracted : the average reference age ( namely the average distance between the publication year of a document and the publication year of the references cited in the document ) and the subject areas assigned by Scopus . For what concerns researchers , we collected their academic biographies ( using Scopus ) and we measured the distance ( in year ) from the win - ning year of the project to the year of their first publication ( as PhD ) . Finally , for what con - cerns institutions , we gathered the foundation year ( using ETER ) . From topic models to interdisciplinarity The measure of interdisciplinarity relies on the definition of an interdisciplinarity index calculated from the results of the topic modelling applied on the ERC scientific corpus . In particular , after removing the stop - words and stemming the texts , we used the LDA method to extract the topic models . As well as other unsupervised algorithms , LDA required a careful assessment of the reliability of the model resulting from the computation . In this case , we performed a concurrent analysis with the following 4 metrics to choose the best number of topics ( K , henceforth ) : – CaoJuan 2009 ( Cao et al . , 2009 ) : minimization of the average cosine distance between every pair of topics . The best topic number K has a minimal final distance between top - ics in Latent Dirichlet Allocation . – Arun2010 ( Arun et al . , 2010 ) : minimization of the symmetric KL - Divergence of the salient distribution that is derived from the matrices of factors . These matrices are the re - projections of the documents on the topics and of the topics on the tokens . The diver - gence values are higher for non - optimal K values . – Griffiths2004 ( Griffiths & Steyvers , 2004 ) : maximization of the likelihood of the data given the model built considering K topics . This is a problem of model selection using Bayesian statistics . 6973 Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 1 3 – Deveaud2014 ( Deveaud et al . , 2014 ) : maximization of the information divergence between all pairs of topics . The optimal value k is the value for which LDA modelled the most scattered topics . The choice of the optimal number of topics differs according to the metrics employed . In this study we approach the problem by choosing the number of topics K that maxi - mizes the CaoJuan2009 and Arun2010 metrics and that minimizes the Griffiths2004 and Deveaud2014 . In LDA the topic distribution is assumed to have a sparse Dirichlet prior distribution ( Blei et al . , 2003 ) . Considering the goal of the present paper , given a set of D documents and a chosen number of T topics , the main output of the LDA is a matrix of probability dis - tribution ( β dt ) that quantifies the probability β of a document d of belonging to the topic t . We thus consider the panel structure of the ERC program as the main reference point to calculate an index that explains the interdisciplinarity of a topic . When a principal inves - tigator submits a project , he chooses a panel to which the contribution of the research belongs . The European Research Council conceives a hierarchical panel structure that covers all the fields of science . In particular , its structure is based on three main domains : ( i ) “Physics and Engineering” ( PE ) , ( ii ) “Social Sciences and Humanities” ( SH ) and ( iii ) “Life Sci - ence” ( LS ) . These domains are then divided into subpanels at two more levels of detail . In this study we used the panel structure in place until 2019 3 ( see Appendix A for the com - plete list of panels ) . Given the Dirichlet distribution resulted from the topic models , we follow the assump - tions of Leydesorff ( 2011 ) : we determine the diversity of topics measuring how they are distributed among the three main panels . Thus , the Interdisciplinarity Index of a topic S t is calculated as follows : H ( t ) is the Shannon Entropy calculated among the probabilities that topic t belongs to the panels . Note that we implement this measure on the three main panels only . In other words , our measure of interdisciplinarity shows the flows of information between the main fields of science . In principle , it could be computed on sub - panels , showing the flows at a more granular level . This is left to future research . Given the interdisciplinarity of a topic , it is possible to employ the document - topic probability matrix β dt to calculate the interdisciplinarity of documents , researchers , institu - tions and disciplinary fields as follows : S r measures the interdisciplinarity of a document d . S r measures the interdisciplinarity of a researcher , where n r is the total number of documents produced by the researcher r . S i measures the interdisciplinarity of an institution , where n i is the total number of documents S t = H ( t ) log 3 = − ( 𝛾 PE , t log ( 𝛾 PE , t ) + 𝛾 SH , t log ( 𝛾 SH , t ) + 𝛾 LS , t log ( 𝛾 LS , t ) ) log 3 S d = T ∑ t = 1 S t 𝛽 dt ; S r = 1 n r n r ∑ d = 1 S d ; S i = 1 n i n i ∑ d = 1 S d ; S s = 1 n s n s ∑ d = 1 S d 3 https : / / erc . europa . eu / sites / defau lt / files / docum ent / file / ERC _ Panel _ struc ture _ 2019 . pdf . 6974 Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 1 3 produced by the institution i . S s measures the interdisciplinarity of the disciplinary field , where n s the number of subject areas that Scopus attributes to the document . Note that S r and S i are calculated considering only the abstracts of the projects , while S s is calculated considering only the publications . Main findings Descriptive statistics We gathered a total sample of 41 , 379 abstracts ( 9365 projects and 32 , 014 publications ) and data about 1062 institutions and 7056 researchers . After performing the LDA algorithm , we evaluate the results identifying the best number of topics according to the assessment of state - of - the - art metrics ( see crf . “ From topic models to interdisciplinarity” ) . From the plot in Fig . 1 , we conclude that the optimal number of topics is in the range 150 – 250 . While the Deveaud2014 metrics is not informative in this situation , we can see that minimum values of Arun2010 and CaoJuan2009 and the maximum values of Griffiths2004 are in a range that leads us to choose 200 as the optimal number of topics . Table 1 and Fig . 2 show a sample of results from the topic modeling . Both Table 1 and Fig . 2 show the top 10 topics sorted by their interdisciplinary degree ( S t for topic t ) and their distribution across the three domains . Each topic is represented by its top 15 terms that describe what the topic is about . While Table 1 reports that St for each topic , Fig . 2 shows a heatmap of topic distribution among the three domains . The variation ( or inten - sity ) in color represents the topic probability ( calculated from the probability distribu - tion β dt resulted from the LDA ) of being in the domain , or vice versa , the probability of a domain containing terms connected to the topic . The darker the color the higher is the probability . Fig . 1 Measures of the quality of Topic Models when varying the number of topics . The x - axis represents the number of topics and the y - axis represents the normalized values of the chosen metrics 6975 Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 1 3 Among the topics characterized by high ID we find in Table 1 , not surprisingly , sev - eral methodological groups . This confirms , from an epistemic point of view , the role of methodologies and tools in supporting the flows of knowledge across disciplines . We also Table 1 Top 10 topics ranged by interdisciplinarity value St . For each topic the top 15 representative terms are shown Topic St Database , web , software , library , query , code , datasets , file , online , open - source , service , digital , workflow , visualization , entity 1 . 1834 Statistical , bayesian , inference , statistic , markov , likelihood , probabilistic , datasets , sampling , posterior , confidence , gaussian , causal , stochastic , latent 1 . 1231 Learning , machine , training , recognition , neural , dataset , segmentation , classifier , label , convolu - tional , machine - learning , descriptor , vision , unsupervised 1 . 1123 Imaging , x - ray , tomography , microscopy , high - resolution , microscope , optoacoustic , three - dimen - sional , illumination , acquisition , ultrasound , specimen , beam , photoacoustic , transmission 1 . 0824 Imaging , mri , brain , resonance , pet , acquisition , registration , segmentation , anatomical , scan , coil , white , longitudinal , prostate , modality 1 . 0545 Climate , ice , sea , ocean , atmospheric , circulation , precipitation , north , southern , atlantic , forcing , water , summer , climate - change , northern 1 . 0497 Carbon , emission , flux , biomass , climate , gas , soil , dioxide , ecosystem , fire , atmospheric , terres - trial , fuel , greenhouse , water 1 . 0125 Video , camera , scene , visual , vision , real - time , pose , digital , animation , people , virtual , corre - spondence , tracking , graphic , capture 0 . 9983 Mortality , blood , exposure , cohort , woman , cardiovascular , death , bmi , pressure , incidence , regres - sion , hazard , cancer , confidence , prospective 0 . 9724 Estimator , regression , variance , asymptotic , square , nonparametric , likelihood , conditional , para - metric , forecast , statistic , instrumental , quantile , covariance , inference 0 . 9592 Fig . 2 Distribution of the top 10 topics among the three domains according to the St values 6976 Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 1 3 find emergent fields , such as those associated to climate change ( e . g . “climate , ice , sea , ocean…” or “carbon , emission , flux , biomass…” ) . The topic modeling approach shows dimensions of ID that would be hidden under more traditional methods based on journal classifications . The projects funded by the ERC and their related publications have an average degree of interdisciplinarity at around 0 . 45 . The average degree grows over time . Figure 3 shows that the average degree is between 0 . 43 and 0 . 44 in 2008 – 2010 and 0 . 46 in 2018 . We have no comparison with other institutions and / or periods , given the novelty of the indicator adopted . Nevertheless , the data show a slight increase in the decade . Epistemic effects First , there are large differences across disciplines in the degree of interdisciplinarity . The largest values are found in Physical and Engineering sciences ( PE ) in PE6 and PE10 . On average , the degree of interdisciplinarity of PE fields is comparable to Life Sciences ( LS ) . Interestingly the lowest values are found in Social Sciences and Humanities ( SH ) . The least interdisciplinary projects are found in SH2 , SH5 and SH6 , with SH1 at short distance . This finding supports H1 ( Fig . 4 ) . Second , there is a positive , although moderate , relation between the rate of growth of scientific disciplines and the degree of interdisciplinarity ( ρ = 0 . 56 ) ( see Fig . 5 ) , sup - porting H2 . Formally , we test the hypothesis H2 by fitting a linear regression model with S s and CAGR respectively as the dependent and independent variable . The summary of the model estimates a small proportion of the variance ( R - squared = 0 . 311 ; adjusted R - squared = 0 . 309 ) . The resulting p - value ( = 0 . 0315 ) stresses that the fitted model weakly supports the null hypothesis . We can interpret this finding in various ways . Fast growing disciplines may offer more opportunities for exploring the intersections and boundaries with other disciplines . Or , rather , they may result from the merge or convergence between previously established dis - ciplines ( as in the classical case of nanoscience ) , so that they maintain a close dialogue Fig . 3 Dynamics of the interdisciplinarity degree . Year 2008 – 2018 6977 Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 1 3 with the originating fields . Or there is a demographic factor in place : fast growing fields may attract young researchers who are more oriented towards interdisciplinarity . For the time being , we cannot disentangle these effects . Third , we have a sharp result with respect to the structure of citations of other papers that the winners of ERC projects place in their documents . The list of publications cited in the abstract of the project can be considered a knowledge tree that makes explicit the ori - gins of the research idea , as well as the state of the art that the applicants aim at innovating . Fig . 4 Degree of interdisciplinarity across disciplinary areas in the ERC panel ( see Appendix A for panel descriptions ) Fig . 5 Scatter plot and fitted regression of the relation between the rate of growth of publications ( Com - pounded Annual Growth Rate 2008 – 2018 ) in the main field of the research project and the degree of inter - disciplinarity 6978 Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 1 3 What we find is that the projects with the largest degree of interdisciplinarity cite papers that are 10 – 12 year old ( Fig . 6 ) . In other words , more interdisciplinary projects do not cite very old papers , but also do not cite very young papers . As we can see from Fig . 6 , we can test the hypothesis H3 by fitting a quadratic regres - sion model that rejects our null hypothesis of no relationship between the dependent and independent variable with R - squared and adjusted R - squared that equals respectively to 0 . 664 and 0 . 640 . With a p - value of the model that equals zero , we have the following coefficients : 0 . 3887 for the constant , 0 . 0091 for linear value and − 0 . 0003 for the quadratic value . As we know from the literature , the average and median age of references in SSH are larger than in STEM . We therefore control whether the aggregate result in Fig . 6 depends on the ERC grantees in SSH . Figure 7 shows that projects in SH panels do have a higher average reference age , but also shows that among the oldest we find PE1 ( Mathematics ) and PE10 ( Earth systems science ) . Given the low level of ID in SSH it is unlikely that the inverted U - shaped relation of Fig . 6 depends mainly on SSH . We further examine the disciplinary variability of the age of references ( Appendix B ) . By inspecting several indi - cators we find confirmation that the average and median values of the entire collection of ERC projects is similar to the distribution reported in the general literature : approximately 5 – 6 years in Life Science , 6 – 7 in Physics and Engineering ( with the interesting exceptions of Mathematics and Earth sciences ) , 8 – 10 years in Social Sciences and Humanities . What is striking is that the peak of ID is achieved when the median age of reference is 12 years , well beyond the values reported in the literature . That researchers with high ID do not use predominantly recent science is an interesting finding , supporting our hypothe - sis but with a nonlinear shape . Successful researchers that operate at the frontier do not use it in their proposals and in the interim reports the very last papers . Is this in contradiction with the notion of frontier research ? We offer an epistemic interpretation , as follows . ERC applicants do know they will be evaluated by top scientists in all disciplines and know that very young results need to be validated . The initial validation is likely to be done within Fig . 6 Relation between the median age of the papers cited in the ERC projects and the degree of interdis - ciplinarity 6979 Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 1 3 disciplinary boundaries . There seems to be a gestation period , in which young results are progressively validated by their own discipline and become known outside the discipline . Remember that we compute the average age of the cited papers . The list of references may well include very young papers , but they are embedded into a knowledge structure which is relatively mature . In future research it would be interesting to disaggregate the results by type of grant , in order to understand the relation between age of references and career stage . Institutional effects It is perhaps true that PROs claim they support more interdisciplinary research than tra - ditional universities . The plain truth is that there is almost no difference between the two types of affiliation ( Fig . 8 ) . We test the hypothesis H4 this assumption with ANOVA that accepts the null hypothesis ( p - value = 0 . 278197 ) and then there is no difference between the two samples . In the absence of a robust theory that establishes a linkage between the institutional type ( university vs PRO ) and the propensity to engage into interdisciplinary research , we leave this result to open discussion . Another moderate evidence of weak institutional effects is given by Fig . 9 . There is a weak relationship between the degree of interdisciplinarity and foundation year of the insti - tutions . This is confirmed by testing the hypothesis H5 fitting a linear regression model with S i and the foundation year respectively as the dependent and independent variable . The summary of the model estimates a small proportion of the variance ( R - squared = 0 . 177 ; adjusted R - squared = 0 . 175 ) . The resulting p - value ( = 0 . 2146 ) stresses that our model fails to reject the null hypothesis . With few exceptions , a high average degree of interdisciplinarity , as well as a larger variance across projects , is found in institutions established in the last two centuries ( Fig . 9 ) . We might be tempted to conclude that younger institutions try to differentiate Fig . 7 Average age of references by panel 6980 Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 1 3 from established institutions by adopting and nurturing a more interdisciplinary approach . But to the extent that younger institutions are smaller , it might be that a small number of researchers more inclined to IR make the difference . The evidence however is only suggestive : conclusions are premature . Fig . 8 Average degree of interdisciplinarity by type of affiliation of ERC applicant Fig . 9 Relation between the age of the affiliation ( foundation year of the institution ) of ERC applicants and degree of interdisciplinarity 6981 Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 1 3 Age and career effects As stated above , we have collected the biographies of the ERC winners and created a variable that measures the distance ( in year ) from the year of the PhD . This is an impor - tant information , since it dictates formally the eligibility of candidates to different ERC schemes . In particular , Starting Grants are dedicated to young researchers whose PhD degree has not been awarded more than years before , while Advanced Grants do not place any constraint on the age of Principal Investigator . As it can be seen in Fig . 10 the distribution of age of applicants has a modal value at 17 years after the PhD , while the bulk of the distribution is in the 10 – 17 years after the PhD . Researchers applying for Advanced Grants are not young post - doc , but rather young established scholars . Having such a large range in the distribution of academic age of ERC winners it is interesting to investigate whether more interdisciplinary projects are proposed by younger or older researchers . What we find is again striking : the peak of interdiscipli - narity is achieved in projects in which the PI is 25 year older than the PhD , that is , is found in his / her ‘50 s . Figure 11 suggests a U - shaped relationship between the academic age of research - ers and the average degree of interdisciplinarity of their research products . The fit of a quadratic regression model with the academic age of researchers as dependent variable and S r as independent variable rejects the hypothesis H5 . The R - squared ( = 0 . 873 ) , the adjusted R - squared ( = 0 . 864 ) and the p - value of the model ( = 0 ) confirms that it is pos - sible to predict with small errors the interdisciplinarity of a researcher given its age and following the formula of the fitted model ( with coefficients that equal 0 . 1933 for the constant , 0 . 0259 for the linear variable and - 0 . 0005 for the quadratic variable ) . Fig . 10 Distribution of ERC winners by academic age ( number of years after the PhD ) 6982 Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 1 3 Discussion and conclusions Several findings contribute to the debate on IDR and , more generally , to the research in economics of science and science policy . First , we find that the age of citations used by ERC researchers working on more ID pro - jects is in the range 10 – 12 years . This is not only found in SSH , in which the median age of citations is notoriously larger because scholars in Humanities cite several old or dead authors , but also in several STEM fields . This is in contrast with the evidence found in sev - eral studies on ageing and obsolescence of citations ( Egghe et al . 1992 ; 1995 ; Glänzel et al . 1995 ; 1995 ; 1999 ; 2003 ; Gupta , 1997 ; Radicchi et al . , 2008 ) . While the median age of ref - erences has increased between 1992 and 2014 , Zhang and Glänzel ( 2017a , 2017b ) still find a value in the range 6 – 7 years . Other authors find a range between 3 and 5 years ( Born - mann et al . , 2019 ; Roth et al . , 2012 ) and show that papers that are not cited within this short window after publication have low probability to become highly cited ( Ponomarev et al . , 2014 ; Garner et al . 2014 ) . We find that creative researchers working at the frontier and crossing disciplinary boundaries make use of knowledge produced on a longer time horizon . Second , we find that more ID researchers are not in the early days of their career , but in the path towards middle career . Top ID researchers are found in what appears from the data , roughly after 24 years from their PhD , that is , orientatively , in their ‘50 s . This is another striking finding , suggesting that IDR needs a relatively long incubation period , during which brilliant researchers generate ideas for future projects but , most probably , build up their reputation in a disciplinary way . This finding opens a new direction for research , i . e . the investigation of the relation between the life cycle of scientists and their propensity to engage into IDR . This issue is , to our knowledge , largely ignored . As an example , the influential literature on nov - elty in science has discussed the obstacles that novel ideas , many of which may be truly interdisciplinary , find in their recognition from academic communities , as witnessed Fig . 11 Distribution of the academic age of ERC applicants ( number of years since PhD ) by degree of interdisciplinarity 6983 Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 1 3 by cumulative citations ( Wang et al . , 2017 ) . In this literature , in addition to the defi - nitional problems discussed by several authors ( Bornmann et al . , 2019 ; Fontana et al . , 2018 ) , the issue of the age , or career stage , of authors , is not addressed . We believe this issue is very important and has several implications . Should universities encourage young researchers to engage into IDR since the beginning of their career ? Should aca - demic careers recognize IDR contributions separately from disciplinary ones ? Or rather they should ask junior researchers to gain first a recognition in their discipline and then move , in their maturity , to more IDR ? In order to address these issues we would like to have a theory of how scientists develop their ID ideas , a fascinating issue which is largely unexplored . Are more ID scientists born ID ? or did they learn to become ID dur - ing their career ? On the basis of our data , the notion that interdisciplinary research arises from young research and from young researchers is not supported . Young researchers must first dem - onstrate their contribution to their own discipline , focusing on internal topics , and react to the career and incentive systems . It seems that successful scientists that engage into highly interdisciplinary projects have already established their academic excellence . Whether this excellence has been gained with purely or interdisciplinary projects is not observable with our data and must be kept open . However , if interdisciplinarity would be an attribute of researchers , or a personal attitude , then we would see it at any age in the selected proposal . On the contrary , the degree of interdisciplinarity grows very little in the interval between 10 and 15 year of academic age . An alternative conceptualization might be a life - cycle theory of individual propensity to interdisciplinarity . This conceptualization combines insights on the age of researchers and the age of cited literature . It goes as follows . All researchers are born disciplinary . Some of them may cultivate in their mind very audacious research questions that require out - of - the - box research approaches that cut across disciplinary boundaries . But they do not take the risk of making them the core of their scientific production at the initial stages of the career . They know they are evaluated by senior colleagues on the basis of their contribu - tion to the discipline . If they are successful they gain reputation and recognition . By going deeper and deeper into scientific problems they may come to appreciate contributions from other disciplines . They devote more time to reading journals that are rarely cited by their colleagues but promising . They engage more freely into discussions without disciplinary boundaries . At some point in time they understand that entering into other fields , or col - laborating actively with researchers from other fields , is promising , intellectually reward - ing , creative , and original . They understand that the disciplinary recognition of this work will be delayed , because most of their colleagues will not accept or appreciate the break of boundaries . Nevertheless , they are no longer under the threat of delivering contributions that are immediately recognized by colleagues . They are established . Maybe their reputa - tion may be at stake , not their tenure or salary . An intriguing question is how to verify whether researchers with a strong interdisciplinary orientation had this approach since their early years - but they did not show it in projects and publications . This would require addi - tional research effort . Third , we have found large internal differences between disciplines in their level of ID , with remarkably low levels in SSH . This finding is consistent with the literature that has found lower levels of ID in SSH than in STEM disciplines ( Bellotti et al . , 2016 ; Morillo et al . , 2003 ) . It must be admitted , however , that the empirical findings are scattered and the theory underlying the reported differences is poor . An interesting avenue for future research is to explore the structure of topics in SSH and STEM , respectively , using topic modeling and adopting semantic similarity measures . 6984 Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 1 3 Finally , we find weak support for the role of institutional setting in promoting IDR : there is no difference between being affiliated to a university or a PROs and there is neg - ligible advantage in being affiliated to a younger institution . This finding is in sharp con - trast with the claim , supported by the Mode 2 literature , that the academic organization is a major impediment to the adoption of interdisciplinary , problem - solving oriented type of research ( Gibbons et al . , 1994 ; Nowotny et al . , 2001 , 2003 ) . By looking exclusively at research funded by the European Research Council , we do not find any evidence support - ing this claim . Universities , with their disciplinary organization , are home to researchers that engage into frontier research of interdisciplinary type . It is well known that the argu - ments of the Mode 2 studies have been criticized both conceptually ( Weingart , 1997 ) and empirically ( Frodeman , 2016 ; Hessels & van Lente , 2008 ) . We believe our findings add strong arguments to this line of critique . In this paper we have shown how using a topic modeling approach to ID it is possible to identify the content of research projects and , at the same time , build a measure that allows the testing of several hypotheses on epistemic , institutional and individual effects . We have taken a descriptive approach by showing single bivariate covariations . The evidence is rich and contributes to the substantive debate . Appendix See Tables 2 and 3 . Table 2 ERC Panel List Panel Id Domain Panel name LS1 Life sciences Molecular biology , Biochemistry , Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics LS2 Genetics , ’Omics’ , Bioinformatics and Systems Biology LS3 Cellular and Developmental Biology LS4 Physiology , Pathophysiology and Endocrinology LS5 Neurosciences and Neural Disorders LS6 Immunity and Infection LS7 Applied Medical Technologies , Diagnostics , Therapies and Public Health LS8 Ecology , Evolution and Environmental Biology LS9 Applied Life Sciences , Biotechnology and Molecular and Biosystems Engineering SH1 Social sciences and humanities Individuals , Markets and Organisations SH2 Institutions , Values , Environment and Space SH3 The Social World , Diversity , Population SH4 The Human Mind and its Complexity SH5 Cultures and Cultural Production SH6 The Study of the Human Past 6985 Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 1 3 Panel Id Domain Panel name PE1 Physical sciences and engineering Mathematics PE2 Fundamental Constituents of Matter PE3 Condensed Matter Physics PE4 Physical and Analytical Chemical Sciences PE5 Synthetic Chemistry and Materials PE6 Computer Science and Informatics PE7 Systems and Communication Engineering PE8 Products and Processes Engineering PE9 Universe Sciences PE10 Earth System Science Table 3 Analysis of IDR value on panels Panel Id Reference AgeMean Refer - ence Age Standard Devia - tion Reference AgeMedian % young Reference Age % old Reference Age IDRmean IDR meanyoung IDR meanold LS1 5930 2537 5 0 . 191 0 . 513 0 . 445 0 . 395 0 . 466 LS2 5581 2551 5 0 . 228 0 . 383 0 . 441 0 . 394 0 . 453 LS3 6713 2548 6 0 . 296 0 . 408 0 . 448 0 . 408 0 . 455 LS4 6400 2827 6 0 . 292 0 . 299 0 . 447 0 . 397 0 . 452 LS5 7055 3017 7 0 . 259 0 . 424 0 . 449 0 . 398 0 . 453 LS6 5574 2328 5 0 . 158 0 . 397 0 . 446 0 . 403 0 . 449 LS7 6093 2745 6 0 . 137 0 . 346 0 . 441 0 . 386 0 . 444 LS8 7760 3341 7 0 . 192 0 . 384 0 . 450 0 . 413 0 . 442 LS9 6710 3020 6 0 . 287 0 . 327 0 . 446 0 . 402 0 . 441 PE1 11 , 681 6212 10 0 . 213 0 . 387 0 . 441 0 . 432 0 . 412 PE10 8267 3430 8 0 . 338 0 . 465 0 . 458 0 . 430 0 . 438 PE2 7242 4642 6 0 . 305 0 . 381 0 . 436 0 . 395 0 . 436 PE3 6701 3529 6 0 . 227 0 . 463 0 . 441 0 . 382 0 . 453 PE4 7059 3473 7 0 . 392 0 . 364 0 . 447 0 . 421 0 . 438 PE5 6311 3514 5 0 . 227 0 . 294 0 . 443 0 . 399 0 . 447 PE6 7334 4171 6 0 . 171 0 . 299 0 . 446 0 . 397 0 . 439 PE7 6830 4026 6 0 . 282 0 . 244 0 . 441 0 . 392 0 . 426 PE8 7791 3662 7 0 . 254 0 . 452 0 . 448 0 . 395 0 . 453 PE9 6668 3090 6 0 . 461 0 . 441 0 . 445 0 . 409 0 . 458 SH1 10 . 299 4949 11 0 . 145 0 . 184 0 . 451 0 . 420 0 . 413 SH2 8171 3680 8 0 . 097 0 . 230 0 . 455 0 . 388 0 . 449 SH3 7984 3422 8 0 . 394 0 . 437 0 . 445 0 . 403 0 . 456 SH4 9020 4134 8 0 . 322 0 . 408 0 . 450 0 . 440 0 . 428 SH5 12 . 008 6564 10 0 . 095 0 . 333 0 . 451 0 . 419 0 . 397 SH6 9811 3884 9 0 . 273 0 . 318 0 . 453 0 . 424 0 . 430 6986 Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 1 3 Acknowledgements This paper is a substantially extended version of the publication presented at the 18th International Conference on Scientometrics and Informetrics ( ISSI2021 ) ( Bonaccorsi et al . , 2021 ) . We thank Ronald Rousseau , Wolfgang Glänzel , and Cassidy R . Sugimoto for this dedicated issue of Scientometrics . References Abbott , A . ( 2001 ) . Chaos of Disciplines . University of Chicago Press . Aboelela , S . W . , Larson , E . , & Bakken , s . , Carrasquillo , O . , Formicola , A , Glied , S . A . , Haas , J . , Gebbie , K . M . ( 2007 ) . Defining interdisciplinary research : Conclusions from a critical review of the litera - ture . HSR . Health Services Research , 42 ( 1 ) , 329 – 346 . Academy , N . , & of Sciences , National Academy of Engineering , Institute of Medicine , . ( 2005 ) . Facili - tating Interdisciplinary Research . National Academies Press . Adams , J . , Loach , T . , & Szomszor , M . ( 2016 ) . Interdisciplinary research : Methodologies for identifica - tion and assessment . London , England : Digital Science , Research Councils Arun , R . , Suresh , V . , Madhavan , C . V . and Murthy , M . N . ( 2010 ) , “On finding the natural number of top - ics with latent dirichlet allocation : Some observations” , In Pacific - Asia conference on knowledge discovery and data mining , ( pp . 391 – 402 ) , Springer , Berlin , Heidelberg Azoulay , P . , Graff Zivin , J . S . , & Manso , G . ( 2011 ) . Incentives and creativity Evidence from the aca - demic life sciences . Rand Journal of Economics , 42 ( 3 ) , 527 – 554 . Bellotti , E . , Kronegger , L . , & Guadalupi , L . ( 2016 ) . The evolution of research collaboration within and across disciplines in Italian academia . Scientometrics , 109 , 783 – 811 . Biancani , S . , Dahlander , L . , McFarland , D . A . , & Smith , S . ( 2018 ) . Superstars in the making ? The broad effects of interdisciplinary centers . Research Policy , 47 , 543 – 557 . Blei , D . M . , Ng , A . Y . , & Jordan , M . I . ( 2003 ) . Latent Dirichlet Allocation . Journal of Machine Learn - ing Research , 3 , 993 – 1022 . Boix Mansilla , V . , Feller , I . , & Gardner , H . ( 2006 ) . Quality assessment in interdisciplinary research and education . Research Evaluation , 15 ( 1 ) , 69 – 74 . Bonaccorsi , A . ( 2010 ) . New forms of complementarity in science . Minerva , 48 ( 4 ) , 355 – 387 . Bonaccorsi , A . , & Secondi , L . ( 2017 ) . The determinants of research performance in European universi - ties : A large scale multilevel analysis . Scientometrics , 112 ( 3 ) , 1147 – 1178 . Bonaccorsi , A . , Belingheri , P . , & Secondi , L . ( 2021a ) . The research productivity of universities A multi - level and multidisciplinary analysis on European institutions . Journal of Informetrics , 15 , 101129 . Bonaccorsi , A . , Melluso , N . , & Massucci , F . A . ( 2021b ) . Detecting interdisciplinarity in top - class research using topic modeling . In 18th International Conference on Scientometrics and Infor - metrics Conference , ISSI 2021b ( pp . 169 – 180 ) . International Society for Scientometrics and Informetrics . Bonaventura , M . , Latora , V . , Nicosia , V . , Panzarasa , P . ( 2017 ) The advantage of interdisciplinarity in mod - ern science . arXiv : 1712 . 07910v1 . Boon , M . , & van Baalen , S . ( 2019 ) . Epistemology for IDR . Shifting philosophical paradigms of science . European Journal for Philosophy of Science , 9 , 16 . Bornmann , L . , Tekles , A . , Zhang , H . H . , & Ye , F . Y . ( 2019 ) . Do we measure novelty when we analyze unu - sual combinations of cited references ? A validation study of bibliometric novelty indicators based on F1000 Prime data . Journal of Informetrics , 13 , 100979 . Boudreau , K . J . , Guinon , E . C . , Lakhani , K . R . , & Riedl , C . ( 2016 ) . Looking across and looking beyond the knowledge frontier : Intellectual distance , novelty , and resource allocation in science . Management Science , 62 ( 10 ) , 2765 – 2783 . Boyack , K . W . , Klavans , R . , & Börner , K . ( 2005 ) . Mapping the backbone of science . Scientometrics , 64 , 351 – 374 . Bromlsam , L . , Dinnage , R . , & Hua , X . ( 2016 ) . IDR has consistently lower funding success . Nature , 534 , 684 – 687 . Brown , R . R . , Deletic , A . , & Wong , T . H . F . ( 2015 ) . How to catalyze collaboration . Nature , 525 , 315 – 317 . Bruce , A . , Lyall , C . , Tait , J . , & Williams , R . ( 2004 ) . Interdisciplinary integration in Europe : The case of the fifth framework programme . Futures , 36 ( 4 ) , 457 – 470 . Börner , K . , Chen , C . , & Boyack , K . W . ( 2003 ) . Visualizing knowledge domains . Annual Review of Informa - tion Science and Technology , 37 , 179 – 255 . Callon , M . ( 1983 ) . From translations to problematic networks : An introduction to co - word analysis . Social Science Information , 22 ( 2 ) , 191 – 235 . 6987 Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 1 3 Cao , J . , Xia , T . , Li , J . , Zhang , Y . , & Tang , S . ( 2009 ) . A density - based method for adaptive LDA model selection . Neurocomputing , 72 ( 7 – 9 ) , 1775 – 1781 . Carayol , N . , & Thi , T . U . N . ( 2005 ) . Why do academic scientists engage in interdisciplinary research ? Research Evaluation , 14 ( 1 ) , 70 – 79 . Carley , S . , & Porter , A . L . ( 2012 ) . A forward diversity index . Scientometrics , 90 ( 2 ) , 407 – 427 . Carley , S . , Porter , A . L . , Rafols , I . , & Laydesdorff , L . ( 2017 ) . Visualization of disciplinary profiles . Enhanced science overlay maps . Journal of Data and Information Science , 2 ( 3 ) , 68 – 111 . Cassi , L . , Champelmont , R . , Mescheba , W . , & de Turckheim , E . ( 2017 ) . Analysing institution ID by extensive use of Rao - Stirling diversity index . PLoS ONE , 12 ( 1 ) , e0170296 . Chakrabarty , T . , Tammenab , V . , Gangulya , N . , & Mulkherjeeat , A . ( 2015 ) . Understanding and modeling diverse scientific careers of researchers . Journal of Informetrics , 9 ( 1 ) , 69 – 78 . Chen , S . , Arsenault , C . , & Lariviére , V . ( 2015 ) . Are top - cited papers more interdisciplinary ? Journal of Informetrics , 9 ( 4 ) , 1034 – 1046 . Chen , A . , & Wang , X . ( 2021 ) . The effect of facilitating interdisciplinary cooperation on the research productivity of university research teams . The moderating role of government assistance . Research Evaluation , 30 ( 1 ) , 13 – 25 . Choi , B . C . K . , & Park , A . W . P . ( 2006 ) . Multidisciplinarity , interdisciplinarity and transdisciplinarity in health research , services , education and policy . 1 Definition , objectives , and evidence of effective - ness . Clinical and Investigative Medicine , 29 ( 6 ) , 351 – 364 . Chu , J . S . G . , & Evans , J . A . ( 2021 ) . Slowed canonical progress in large fields of science . PNAS , 118 ( 41 ) , e636116 . Ciotti , V . , Bonaventura , M . , Nicosia , V . , Panzarasa , P . , & Latora , V . ( 2016 ) . Homophily and missing links in citation networks . EPJ Data Science , 5 , 7 . Cummings , J . N . , & Kiesler , S . ( 2005 ) . Collaborative research across disciplinary and organizational boundaries . Social Studies of Science , 35 ( 5 ) , 703 – 722 . Deveaud , R . , SanJuan , E . , & Bellot , P . ( 2014 ) . Accurate and effective latent concept modeling for ad hoc information retrieval . Document Numérique , 17 ( 1 ) , 61 – 84 . Donina , D . , Seeber , M . , & Paleari , S . ( 2017 ) . Inconsistencies in the governance of interdisciplinarity : The case of the Italian higher education system . Science and Public Policy , 44 ( 6 ) , 865 – 875 . Dupré , J . ( 1983 ) . The disunity of science . Mind , 92 ( 367 ) , 321 – 346 . Dupré , J . ( 1993 ) . The disorder of things . metaphysical foundations of the disunity of science . Cam - bridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Egghe , L . , Rao , I . K . R . , & Rousseau , R . ( 1995 ) . On the influence of production on utilization functions : Obsolescence or increased use ? Scientometrics , 34 ( 2 ) , 285 – 315 . Egghe , L . , & Rao , I . K . R . ( 1992 ) . Citation age data and the obsolescence function : Fits and explanations . Information Processing and Management , 28 ( 2 ) , 201 – 217 . Feller , I . ( 2006 ) . Multiple actors , multiple settings , multiple criteria : Issues in assessing interdisciplinary research . Research Evaluation , 15 ( 1 ) , 5 – 15 . Fischer , A . R . H . , Tobi , H . , & Ronteltap , A . ( 2011 ) . When natural met social . A review of collaboration between the natural and social sciences . Interdisciplinary Science Reviews , 36 ( 4 ) , 341 – 358 . Fontana , M . , Iori , M . , Montobbio , F . , Sinatra ( 2018 ) A bridge over troubled water . Interdisciplinarity , novelty and impact . Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore , Dipartimento di Politica Economica , working paper 2018 / 2 . Frodeman , R . ( 2016 ) . Interdisciplinarity , grand challenges , and the future of knowledge . Studies in His - tory and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences , 56 , 108 – 110 . Galison , P . , & Stump , D . J . ( Eds . ) . ( 1996 ) . The disunity of science : Boundaries , context and power . Stan - ford University Press . Garnier , J . , Porter , A . L . , Borrego , M . , Trau , E . , & Tentonico , R . ( 2013 ) . Facilitating social and natural science cross - disciplinarity Assessing the human and social dynamics program . Research Evalua - tion , 22 ( 2 ) , 134 – 144 . Garnier , J . , Porter , A . L . , & Newman , N . C . ( 2014 ) . Distance and velocity measures . Using citations to determine breadth and speed of research impact . Scientometrics , 100 , 687 – 703 . Gerrish , S . M . , Blei , D . M . ( 2010 ) A language - based approach to measuring scholary impact . ICML’10 : Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Machine Learning . June , 375 – 382 . Gibbons , M . , Limoges , C . , Nowotny , H . , Schwartzman , S . , Scott , P . , & Trow , M . ( 1994 ) . The new pro - duction of knowledge : The dynamics of science and research in contemporary societies . Sage Publications . Glänzel , W . , & Debackere , K . ( 2021 ) . Various aspects of interdisciplinarity in research and how to quan - tify and measure those . Scientometrics . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11192 - 021 - 04133 - 4 6988 Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 1 3 Glänzel , W . , Schlemmer , B . , & Thijs , B . ( 2003 ) . Better late than never ? On the chance to become highly cited only beyond the standard bibliometric time horizon . Scientometrics , 58 ( 3 ) , 571 – 586 . Glänzel , W . , & Schoepflin , U . ( 1995 ) . A bibliometric study on ageing and reception processes of scien - tific literature . Journal of Information Science , 21 ( 1 ) , 37 – 53 . Glänzel , W . , & Schoepflin , U . ( 1999 ) . A bibliometric study of reference literature in the sciences and social sciences . Information Processing and Management , 35 ( 1 ) , 31 – 44 . Glänzel , W . , & Schubert , A . ( 1995 ) . Predictive aspects of a stochastic model of citation processes . Infor - mation Processing and Management , 31 ( 1 ) , 69 – 80 . Griffiths , T . L . , & Steyvers , M . ( 2004 ) . Finding scientific topics . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 101 ( 1 ) , 5228 – 5235 . Gupta , B . M . ( 1997 ) . Analysis of distribution of the age of citations in theoretical population genetics . Sci - entometrics , 40 ( 1 ) , 139 – 162 . Hein , C . J . , Ten Hoeve , J . , Gopalakrishnan , S . ( 2018 ) Overcoming early career barriers to interdisciplinary climate change research . Virginia Institute of Marine Science , VIMS 1598 . Heinze , T . , van der Heyden , M . , & Pithan , D . ( 2020 ) . Institutional environments and breakthroughs in sci - ence . Comparison of France , Germany , the United Kingdom , and the United States . PLoS ONE , 15 ( 9 ) , 9805 . Heller , C . A . , & Michelassi , F . ( 2012 ) . Forging successful interdisciplinary research collaborations . A nationwide survey of departments of surgery . Surgery , 151 ( 4 ) , 502 – 509 . Hellström , E . , & Jabrane , L . ( 2018 ) . Governing interdisciplinary cooperation in centers of excellence . Stud - ies in Higher Education , 43 ( 10 ) , 1763 – 1777 . Hemlin , S . , & Rasmussen , S . B . ( 2006 ) . The shift in academic quality control . Science , Technology and Human Values , 31 ( 2 ) , 173 – 198 . Hessels , L . K . , & van Lente , H . ( 2008 ) . Re - thinking new knowledge production : A literature review and a research agenda . Research Policy , 37 , 740 – 760 . Huutoniemi , K . , Klein , J . T . , Bruun , H . , & Hukkinen , J . ( 2010 ) . Analyzing ID Typology and Indicators . Research Policy , 39 , 79 – 88 . Hörlesberger , M . , Roche , I . , Besagni , D . , Scherngell , T . , Francois , C . , Cuxac , P . , Schiebel , E . , Zitt , M . , & Holste , D . ( 2013 ) . A concept for inferring “frontier research” in grant proposals . Scientometrics , 97 , 129 – 148 . Jacobs , J . A . , & Frickel , S . ( 2009 ) . Interdisciplinarity : A critical assessment . Annual Reviews of Sociology , 35 , 43 – 65 . Janssens , F . , Zhang , L . , Moore , B . D . , & Glänzel , W . ( 2009 ) . Hybrid clustering for validation and improve - ment of subject - classification schemes . Information Processing and Management , 45 ( 6 ) , 683 – 702 . Klavans , R . , & Boyack , K . W . ( 2009 ) . Toward a consensus map of science . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 60 ( 3 ) , 455 – 476 . Klein , J . T . ( 2008 ) . Evaluation of interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary research : A literature review . Amer - ican Journal of Preventive Medicine , 35 , S116 – S123 . Knorr - Cetina , K . ( 1999 ) . Epistemic cultures : How the sciences make knowledge . Harvard University Press . Kwon , S . , Liu , X . , Porter , A . L . , & Youtie , J . ( 2019 ) . Research addressing emerging technological ideas has greater scientific impact . Research Policy , 48 , 103834 . Kwon , S . , Solomon , G . E . A . , Youtie , J . , & Porter , A . L . ( 2017 ) . A measure of knowledge flow between spe - cific fields Implications of ID for impact and funding . PLoS ONE , 12 ( 10 ) , e0185583 . Kwon , S . , Youtie , J . , & Porter , A . L . ( 2021 ) . Interdisciplinary knowledge combination and emerging tech - nological topics : Implications for reducing uncertainties in research evaluation . Research Evaluation , 30 ( 1 ) , 127 – 140 . Lamont , M . ( 2009 ) . How professors think : Inside the curious world of academic judgment . Harvard Univer - sity Press . Lamont , M . , Mallard , G . , & Guetzkow , J . ( 2006 ) . Beyond blind faith : Overcoming the obstacles to interdis - ciplinary evaluation . Research Evaluation , 15 ( 1 ) , 43 – 55 . Langfeldt , L . ( 2004 ) . Expert panels evaluating research : Decision - making and sources of bias . Research Evaluation , 13 ( 1 ) , 52 – 62 . Langfeldt , L . ( 2006 ) . The policy challenges of peer review : Managing bias , conflict of interests and interdis - ciplinary assessments . Research Evaluation , 15 ( 1 ) , 31 – 41 . Laredo , P . ( 2015 ) . Supporting frontier research , which institutions and which processes . In D . Jansen & I . Pruisken ( Eds . ) , The changing governance of higher education and research . Cham Springer . Lariviére , V . , & Gingras , Y . ( 2010 ) . On the relationship between ID and scientific impact . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 61 ( 1 ) , 126 – 131 . Lattuca , L . R . ( 2001 ) . Creating interdisciplinarity : Interdisciplinary research and teaching among college and university faculty . Vanderbilt University Press . 6989 Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 1 3 Lattuca , L . R . ( 2003 ) . Creating interdisciplinarity . Grounded definitions from college and university faculty . History of Intellectual Culture , 3 ( 1 ) , 1 – 20 . Lawrence , M . , Williams , S . , Nanz , P . , & Renn , O . ( 2022 ) . Characteristics , potentials , and challenges of transdisciplinary research . One Earth , 5 ( 1 ) , 44 – 61 . Leahey , E . , Beckman , C . M . , & Stanko , T . L . ( 2017 ) . Prominent but less productive . Administrative Science Quarterly , 62 ( 1 ) , 105 – 139 . Leahey , E . , & Reikowsky , R . C . ( 2008 ) . Research specialization and collaboration patterns in sociology . Social Studies of Science , 38 ( 3 ) , 425 – 440 . Lee , Y . N . , Walsh , J . P . , & Wang , J . ( 2015 ) . Creativity in scientific teams unpacking novelty and Impact . Research Policy , 44 , 684 – 697 . Lenoir , T . ( 1997 ) . Instituting science . The cultural production of scientific disciplines . Stanford Univer - sity Press . Levitt , J . M . , & Thelwall , M . ( 2008a ) . Is multidisciplinary research more highly cited ? A mac - rolevel study . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 59 ( 12 ) , 1973 – 1984 . Levitt , J . M . , & Thelwall , M . ( 2008b ) . Is multidisciplinary research more highly cited ? A macrolevel study . Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology , 59 ( 12 ) , 1973 – 1984 . Leydesdorff , L . , Carley , S . , & Rafols , I . ( 2013 ) . Global maps of science based on the new Web - of - Sci - ence categories . Scientometrics , 94 , 589 – 593 . Leydesdorff , L . , & Rafols , I . ( 2009 ) . A global map of science based on the ISI subject categories . Jour - nal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 60 ( 2 ) , 348 – 362 . Leydesdorff , L . , & Rafols , I . ( 2011 ) . Indicators of the ID of journals . Diversity , centrality , and citations . Journal of Informetrics , 5 , 87 – 100 . Leydesorff , L . , & Rafols , I . ( 2012 ) . Interactive overlays . A new method for generating global journal maps from Web of Science data . Journal of Informetrics , 6 , 318 – 332 . Liu , Y . X . , Rafols , I . , & Rousseau , R . ( 2012 ) . A framework for knowledge integration and diffusion . Journal of Documentation , 68 ( 1 ) , 31 – 44 . Liu , M . , Shi , D . , & Li , J . ( 2017 ) . Double - edged sword of interdisciplinary knowledge flow from hard sci - ences to humanities and social sciences Evidence from China . PLoS ONE , 12 ( 9 ) , e0184977 . Lu , K . , & Wolfram , D . ( 2012 ) . Measuring author research relatedness A comparison of word - based , topic - based and author cocitation approaches . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 63 ( 10 ) , 1973 – 1986 . Luukkonen , T . ( 2014 ) . The European Research Council and the European research funding landscape . Science and Public Policy , 41 , 29 – 43 . Merkx , F . , & van den Besselaar , P . ( 2008 ) . Positioning indicators for cross - disciplinary challenges The Dutch coastal defense research case . Research Evaluation , 17 ( 1 ) , 4 – 16 . Metzger , N . , & Zare , R . N . ( 1999 ) . IDR . From belief to reality . Science , 283 ( 5402 ) , 642 – 643 . Millar , M . M . ( 2013 ) . Interdisciplinary research and the early career : The effect of interdisciplinary dis - sertation research on career placement and publication productivity of doctoral graduates in the sciences . Research Policy , 42 , 1152 – 1164 . Molas - Gallart , J . , D’Este , P . , Leopis , O . , & Rafols , I . ( 2016 ) . Towards an alternative framework for the evaluation of translational research initiatives . Research Evaluation , 25 ( 3 ) , 235 – 243 . Morillo , F . , Bordons , M . , & Gómez , I . ( 2001 ) . An approach to ID through bibliometric indicators . Scien - tometrics , 51 ( 1 ) , 203 – 222 . Morillo , F . , Bordons , M . , & Gómez , I . ( 2003 ) . Interdisciplinarity in science : A tentative typology of disciplines and research areas . Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology , 54 ( 13 ) , 1237 – 1249 . Mosca , A . , Roda , F . , & Rull , G . ( 2018 ) . UNiCS - The Ontology for Research and Innovation Policy Mak - ing . Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications , 306 , 200 – 207 . Moya - Anegón , F . , Vargas - Quesada , B . , Chinchilla - Rodriguez , Z . , Corera - Álvarez , E . , Munoz - Fernán - dez , F . J . , & Herrero - Solana , V . ( 2007 ) . Visualizing the marrow of science . Journal of the Ameri - can Society for Information Science and Technology , 58 ( 14 ) , 2167 – 2179 . Moya - Anegón , F . , Vargas - Quesada , B . , Herrero - Solana , V . , Chinchilla - Rodriguez , Z . , Corera - Álva - rez , E . , & Munoz - Fernández , F . J . ( 2004 ) . A new technique for building maps of large scientific domains based on the cocitation of classes and categories . Scientometrics , 61 ( 1 ) , 129 – 145 . Neufeld , J . , Huber , N . , & Wegner , A . ( 2013 ) . Peer review - based selection decisions in individual researh funding , applicants’ publication strategies and performance : The case of the ERC starting grants . Research Evaluation , 22 , 237 – 247 . Nichols , L . G . ( 2014 ) . A topic model approach to measuring ID at the National Science Foundation . Scientometrics , 100 , 741 – 754 . 6990 Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 1 3 Nooteboom , B . , Van Haverbeke , W . , Duysters , G . , Gilsing , V . , & van den Oord , A . ( 2007 ) . Optimal cog - nitive distance and absorptive capacity . Research Policy . , 36 , 1016 – 1034 . Nowotny , H . ( 2006 ) . Real science is excellent science : How to interpret post - academic science , Mode 2 and the ERC . Journal of Science Communication , 5 ( 4 ) , 1 – 3 . Nowotny , H . , Scott , P . , & Gibbons , M . ( 2001 ) . Re - thinking science . Knowledge and the public in an age of uncertainty . Nowotny , H . , Scott , P . , & Gibbons , M . ( 2003 ) . Introduction “Mode 2” revisited The new production of knowledge . Minerva , 41 ( 3 ) , 179 – 194 . Okamura , K . ( 2019 ) . Interdisciplinarity revisited Evidence for research impact and dynamism . Palgrave Communications , 5 , 141 . Omodei , E . , De Domenico , M . , & Arenas , A . ( 2016 ) . Evaluating the impact of interdisciplinary research A multilayer network approach . Network Science , 5 , 235 – 246 . Piro , N . , Børing , P . , Scordato , L . , & Aksnes , D . W . ( 2020 ) . University characteristics and probabilities for funding of proposals in the European Framework Programs . Science and Public Policy , 47 ( 4 ) , 581 – 593 . Ponomarev , I . , Williams , D . E . , Hackett , C . J . , Schnell , J . D . , & Laak , L . I . ( 2014 ) . Predicting highly cited papers : A method for early detection of candidate breakthroughs . Technological Forecasting and Social Change , 81 , 49 – 55 . Porter , A . L . , Carley , S . , Cassidy , C . N . , Youtie , J . , Schoeneck , D . J . , Kwon , S . , & Salomon , G . E . A . ( 2019 ) . Measuring IDR categories and knowledge transfer A case study of connections between cognitive sci - ence and education . Perspectives on Science , 27 ( 4 ) , 582 – 618 . Porter , A . L . , Cohen , A . S . , Roessner , J . D . , & Perreault , M . ( 2007 ) . Measuring researcher ID . Scientomet - rics , 72 ( 1 ) , 117 – 147 . Porter , A . L . , & Rafols , I . ( 2009 ) . Is science becoming more interdisciplinary ? Measuring and mapping six research fields over time . Scientometrics , 81 ( 3 ) , 719 – 745 . Porter , A . L . , Roessner , J . D . , Cohen , A . S . , & Perreault , M . ( 2006 ) . IDR : Meaning , metrics and nurture . Research Evaluation , 15 ( 3 ) , 187 – 195 . Porter , A . L . , Roessner , J . D . , & Heberger , A . E . ( 2008 ) . How interdisciplinary is a given body of research ? Research Evaluation , 17 ( 4 ) , 273 – 282 . Qin , J . , Lancaster , F . W . , & Allen , B . ( 1997 ) . Types and levels of collaboration in interdisciplinary research in the sciences . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 48 ( 10 ) , 893 – 916 . Radicchi , F . , Santo , F . , & Castellano , C . ( 2008 ) . ( 2008 ) Universality of citation distributions : Toward an objective measure of scientific impact . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 105 ( 45 ) , 17268 – 17272 . Rafols , I . , Leydesdorff , L . , O’Hare , A . , Nightingale , P . , & Stirling , A . ( 2012 ) . How journal rankings can suppress IDR . A comparison between innovation studies and Business & Management . Research Policy , 41 , 1262 – 1282 . Rafols , I . , & Meyer , M . ( 2010 ) . Diversity and network coherence as indicators of interdisciplinarity : Case studies in bionanoscience . Scientometrics , 82 ( 2 ) , 263 – 287 . Rafols , I . , Porter , A . L . , & Leydesdorff , L . ( 2010 ) . Science overlay maps . A new tool for research policy and library management . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 61 ( 9 ) , 1871 – 1887 . Rao , C . R . ( 1982 ) . Diversity Its measurement , decomposition , apportionment and analysis . Sankhya : the Indian Journal of Statistics , 44 ( 1 ) , 1 – 22 . Rhoten , D . , & Parker , A . ( 2004 ) . Risks and rewards of interdisciplinary research path . Science , 306 , 2046 . Rinia , E . J . , van Leeuwen , T . N . , & van Raan , F . ( 2002 ) . Impact measures of interdisciplinary research in physics . Scientometrics , 53 ( 2 ) , 241 – 248 . Rinia , E . J . , Van Leeuwen , T . N . , Van Vuren , H . G . , & Van Raan , A . F . J . ( 2001 ) . Influence of interdiscipli - narity on peer - review and bibliometric evaluations in physics research . Research Policy , 30 , 357 – 361 . Rosen - Zvi , M . , Griffiths , T . , Steyvers , M . , Smith , P . ( 2004 ) . The Author - topic model for authors and docu - ments . Proceedings of the UAAI Conference , 487 – 494 . Roth , C . , Wu , J . , & Lozano , S . ( 2012 ) . Assessing impact and quality from local dynamics of citation net - works . Journal of Informetrics , 6 , 111 – 120 . Rousseau , R . , Zhang , L . , Hu , X . J . ( 2018 ) Knowledge integration : its meaning and measurement . In W . Glän - zel , U . Schmoch , M . Thelwall ( eds , ) Springer Handbook of Science and Technology Indicators . Cham Springer . Sanz - Menéndez , L . , Bordons , M . , & Zulueta , M . A . ( 2001 ) . Interdisciplinarity as a multidimensional con - cept : Its measure in three different research areas . Research Evaluation , 10 ( 1 ) , 47 – 58 . 6991 Scientometrics ( 2022 ) 127 : 6961 – 6991 1 3 Sayama , H . , & Akaishi , J . ( 2012 ) . Characterizing interdisciplinarity of researchers and research topics using web search engines . PLoS ONE , 7 ( 6 ) , e3874 . Science Europe ( 2019 ) Simposyium on interdisciplinarity . Brussels , Science Europe . https : / / www . scien ceeur ope . org / our - resou rces / scien ce - europe - sympo sium - on - inter disci plina rity / Seeber , M . , Vlegels , J . , & Cattaneo , M . ( 2022 ) . Conditions that do or do not disadvantage interdisciplinary research proposals in project evaluation . Journal of the Association for Information Science and Tech - nology . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / asi . 24617 Shu , F . , Zhang , L . , Larivière , V . , Julien , C . A . , & Zhang , J . ( 2019 ) . Comparing journal and paper level clas - sification of science . Journal of Informetrics , 13 ( 1 ) , 202 – 225 . Silva , F . N . , Rodriguez , F . A . , Oliveira , O . N . , & da Costa , L . ( 2013 ) . Quantifying the ID of scientific jour - nals and fields . Journal of Informetrics , 7 , 469 – 477 . Small , H . ( 1999 ) . Visualizing science by citation mapping . Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 50 ( 9 ) , 799 – 813 . Sosa , M . ( 2011 ) . Where do creative interactions come from ? The role of tie content and social networks . Organization Science , 22 ( 1 ) , 1 – 21 . Spelt , E . J . H . , Biemans , H . J . A . , Tobi , H . , Luning , P . A . , Mulder , M . ( 2009 ) Teaching and learning in interdis - ciplinary higher education . A systematic review . Educational Psychology Review , 1 – 14 . Stirling , A . ( 1997 ) On the economics and the analysis of diversity . SPRU Working Paper , no . 28 . Swan , J . , Bresnen , M . , Robertson , M . , Newell , S . , & Dopson , S . ( 2010 ) . When policy meets practice Col - liding logics and the challenges of ‘Mode 2’ initiatives in the translation of academic knowledge . Organization Studies , 31 ( 9 – 10 ) , 1311 – 1340 . Thijs , B . , Huang , Y . , Glänzel , W . ( 2021 ) Comparing different implementations of similarity for disparity measures in studies of interdisciplinarity . KULeuven MSI Uzzi , B . , Mukherjee , S . , Stringer , M . , & Jones , B . ( 2013 ) . Atypical combinations and scientific impact . Sci - ence , 342 , 468 – 472 . van Rijnsoever , F . J . , & Hessels , L . K . ( 2011 ) . Factors associated with disciplinary and interdisciplinary research collaboration . Research Policy , 40 ( 3 ) , 463 – 472 . Wagner , C . , Roessner , J . , Bobb , K . , Klein , J . , Boyack , K . , Keyton , J . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Approaches to under - standing and measuring interdisciplinary scientific research ( IDR ) : A review of the literature . Journal of Informetrics , 165 , 14 – 26 . Wang , H . , Ding , Y . , Tang , J . , Dong , X . , He , B . , Qiu , J . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Finding complex biological relation - ships in recent PubMed articles using Bio - LDA . PLoS ONE , 6 ( 3 ) , 1 – 14 . Wang , J . , Thijs , B . , & Glänzel , W . ( 2015 ) . Interdisciplinarity and impact : Distinct effects of variety , balance , and disparity . PLoS ONE , 10 ( 5 ) , e0127298 . Wang , J . , Veugelers , R . , & Stephan , P . ( 2017 ) . Bias against novelty in science . A cautionary tale for users of bibliometric indicators . Research Policy , 46 , 1416 – 1436 . Weingart , P . ( 1997 ) . From “Finalization” to “Mode2” : Old wine in new bottles ? Social Science Information , 36 ( 4 ) , 591 – 613 . Weingart , P . ( 2000 ) . Interdisciplinarity : The paradoxical discourse . In P . Weingart & N . Stehr ( Eds . ) , Prac - tising Interdisciplinarity ( pp . 25 – 41 ) . University of Toronto Press . Whitley , R . ( 1984 ) . The intellectual and social organization of the sciences . Clarendon . Woelert , P . , & Millar , V . ( 2013 ) . The ‘paradox of interdisciplinarity’ in Australian research governance . Higher Education , 66 ( 6 ) , 755 – 767 . Woiwode , H . , & Froese , A . ( 2020 ) . Two hearts beating in a research center’s chest : How scholars in interdis - ciplinary research settings cope with monodisciplinary deep structures . Studies in Higher Education . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 03075 079 . 2020 . 17163 21 Yegros - Yegros , A . , Rafols , I . , & D’Este , P . ( 2015 ) . Does Interdisciplinary Research Lead to Higher Citation Impact ? TheDifferent Effect of Proximal and Distal Interdisciplinarity . PLoS ONE , 10 ( 8 ) , e0135095 . Zhang , L . , & Glänzel , W . ( 2017a ) . A citation . based cross - disciplinary study on literature ageing : Part I - the sinchronous aspects . Scientometrics , 111 , 1573 – 1589 . Zhang , L . , & Glänzel , W . ( 2017b ) . A citation . based cross - disciplinary study on literature ageing : Part II - diachronous aspects . Scientometrics , 111 , 1559 – 1572 . Zhang , L . , Rousseau , R . , Glänzel , W . ( 2016 ) Diversity of references as an indicator for ID of journals . Tak - ing similarity between subject fields into account . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 67 ( 5 ) : 1257 – 1265 . Zhang , L . , Sun , B . , Jiang , L . , Huang , Y . ( 2021 ) On the relationship between interdisciplinarity and impact . Distinct effects on academic and broader impact . Research Evaluation , 1 – 13 . Ziman , J . ( 1999 ) . Real science . Cambridge , Cambridge University Press .