Running Head : COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS Modeling a Cognitive Transition at the Origin of Cultural Evolution using Autocatalytic Networks Liane Gabora Department of Psychology , University of British Columbia Mike Steel Biomathematics Research Centre , University of Canterbury This is a pre - publication draft . There may be minor diﬀerences from the version accepted for publication in Cognitive Science . Corresponding Author : Liane Gabora Department of Psychology , University of British Columbia Okanagan Campus , Kelowna BC , Canada Email : liane . gabora @ ubc . ca LG acknowledges funding from Grant 62R06523 from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada . We thank Russell Gray for drawing our attention to the paper by Stout et al . that inspired this one . We thank Claes Andersson and anonymous reviewers for comments , and thank Conner Gibbs for assistance with the manuscript . a r X i v : 2 0 07 . 06442v1 [ phy s i c s . s o c - ph ] 3 J u l 2020 COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 2 Abstract Autocatalytic networks have been used to model the emergence of self - organizing structure capable of sustaining life and undergoing biological evolution . Here , we model the emergence of cognitive structure capable of undergoing cultural evolution . Mental representations of knowledge and experiences play the role of catalytic molecules , and interactions amongst them ( e . g . , the forging of new associations ) play the role of reactions , and result in representational redescription . The approach tags mental representations with their source , i . e . , whether they were acquired through social learning , individual learning ( of pre - existing information ) , or creative thought ( resulting in the generation of new information ) . This makes it possible to model how cognitive structure emerges , and to trace lineages of cumulative culture step by step . We develop a formal representation of the cultural transition from Oldowan to Acheulean tool technology using Reﬂexively Autocatalytifc and Food set generated ( RAF ) networks . Unlike more primitive Oldowan stone tools , the Acheulean hand axe required not only the capacity to envision and bring into being something that did not yet exist , but hierarchically structured thought and action , and the generation of new mental representations : the concepts EDGING , THINNING , SHAPING , and a meta - concept , HAND AXE . We show how this constituted a key transition towards the emergence of semantic networks that were self - organizing , self - sustaining , and autocatalytic , and discuss how such networks replicated through social interaction . The model provides a promising approach to unraveling one of the greatest anthropological mysteries : that of why development of the Acheulean hand axe was followed by over a million years of cultural stasis . Keywords : Achuelean hand axe , autocatalytic network , cognitive transition , cultural evolution , origin of culture , Reﬂexively Autocatalytic Food set generated network ( RAF ) , representational redescription , semantic network COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 3 1 Introduction The question of how biological evolution arose—i . e . , the origin of life ( OOL ) problem—is one of the biggest unsolved questions of science . Since cultural change is widely viewed as a second evolutionary process , the question of how cultural evolution arose—i . e . , the origin of culture ( OOC ) problem—presents another unsolved problem . By culture , we mean extrasomatic adaptations , including behavior and artifacts , that are socially rather than genetically transmitted . Although cultural transmission —in which one individual acquires elements of culture from another—is observed in many species , cultural evolution is much rarer ( and perhaps , unique to our species ) . 1 By evolution , we mean change that is cumulative ( later innovations build on earlier ones ) , adaptive new innovations that yield some beneﬁt for their bearers tend to predominate ) , and open - ended ( the space of possible innovations is not ﬁnite , since each innovation can give rise to spin - oﬀs ) . The literature on cultural evolution , including mathematical and computational models , is vast , ﬂourishing , and interdisciplinary ( Bentley , Hahn , & Shennan , 2004 ; Boyd & Richerson , 1988 ; Cavalli - Sforza & Feldman , 1981 ; Enquist , Ghirlanda , & Eriksson , 2011 ; Gabora , 2013 ; Holden & Mace , 2003 ; Mesoudi & Laland , 2006 ; Powell , Shennan , & Thomas , 2009 ) with increasing recognition paid to the cognitive processes and abilities ( e . g . , problem solving , analogy , and so forth ) underlying the generation of cultural novelty ( Fogarty , Creanza , & Feldman , 2018 ; Gabora , 2019 ; Henley & Kardas , 2020 ; Heyes , 2018 ; Overmann & Coolidge , 2019 ) . However , although cognitive science has made considerable progress in understanding how such processes are carried out , little eﬀort has been devoted to the question of how hominids acquired the capacity for an integrated conceptual framework that guides how and when these processes are applied . This paper addresses what kind of structure minds must possess to be capable of cumulative , open - ended cultural evolution , and how hominid minds acquired this kind of structure . We propose a network - based model that tags mental representations with their 1 The term ‘cultural evolution’ is occasionally used in a less restricted sense to refer to novelty generation and transmission without the requirement of cumulative , adaptive , open - ended change , e . g . , ( Whiten , 2019 ) . COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 4 source , i . e . , whether they were acquired through individual learning , social learning , or creative reﬂection . This makes it possible to model how a semantic network emerges , and to trace cumulative change in cultural lineages step by step . The approach is demonstrated using a formal representation of one of the earliest and most well - studied transitions in human cultural history : the transition from Oldowan to Acheulean tool technology approximately 1 . 76 million years ago ( mya ) . Although evolutionary theory is widely applied to culture , natural selection cannot shed light on the origins of an evolutionary process ( as Darwin himself noted ) ; it can only explain how , once self - sustaining , self - reproducing entities have come into existence , they evolve . 2 However , although natural selection does not address the ‘origins’ question , another theory , the theory of autocatalytic networks , does . This theory grew out of studies of the statistical properties of random graphs consisting of nodes randomly connected by edges ( Erdös & Rényi , 1960 ) . As the ratio of edges to nodes increases , the size of the largest cluster increases , and the probability of a phase transition resulting in a single giant connected cluster also increases . The recognition that connected graphs exhibit phase transitions led to their application to eﬀorts to develop a formal model of the OOL , namely , of how abiogenic catalytic molecules crossed the threshold to the kind of collectively self - sustaining , self - replicating , evolving structure we call ‘alive’ ( Kauﬀman , 1993 , 1986 ) . In the application of graph theory to the OOL , nodes represent catalytic molecules , and edges represent reactions . It is exceedingly improbable that any catalytic molecule present in the primordial soup of Earth’s early atmosphere catalyzed its own formation . However , reactions generate new molecules that catalyze new reactions , and as the variety of molecules increases , the variety of reactions increases faster . As the ratio of reactions to molecules increases , the probability increases that they will undergo a phase transition . When , for each molecule , there is a catalytic pathway to its formation , they are said to be collectively autocatalytic , and the process by which this state is achieved has 2 Research on epigenetics and the origin of life has shown that natural selection is but one ( albeit impor - tant ) component of evolution ( Gabora , 2006 ; Kauﬀman , 1993 ; Koonin , 2009 ; Segre , 2000 ; Vetsigian , Woese , & Goldenfeld , 2006 ; Woese , 2002 ) . COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 5 been referred to as autocatalytic closure ( Kauﬀman , 1993 ) . The molecules thereby become a self - sustaining , self - replicating structure ( i . e . , a living protocell ( Hordijk & Steel , 2015 ) ) . Thus , the theory of autocatalytic networks has provided a promising avenue for modeling the OOL and thereby understanding how biological evolution began ( Xavier , Hordijk , Kauﬀman , M . , & Martin , 2020 ) . Autocatalytic networks have been developed mathematically in the theory of Reﬂexively Autocatalytic and Food set generated ( RAF ) networks ( Hordijk & Steel , 2016 ; Steel , Hordijk , & Xavier , 2019 ) . The term reﬂexively is used here in its mathematical sense , meaning that every element is related to the whole . The term food set refers to the reactants that are initially present , as opposed to those that are the products of catalytic reactions . It has been demonstrated ( both in theory and in simulation studies ) that RAFs can evolve ( through selection and drift acting on possible subRAFs of the maxRAF ) ( Hordijk & Steel , 2016 ; Vasas , Fernando , Santos , Kauﬀman , & Szathmáry , 2012 ) . It has been proposed that autocatalytic networks hold the key to understanding the origins of any evolutionary process , including the OOC ( Gabora , 1998 , 2000 , 2013 ; Gabora & Aerts , 2009 ; Gabora & Steel , 2017 ) . 3 This kind of evolution has been referred to as Self - Other Reorganization ( SOR ) because it interleaves internal self - organization with external interactions with other self - organizing networks ( Gabora , 2019 ) . In application to the OOC , the products and reactants are not catalytic molecules but mental representations 4 ( MRs ) of experiences , ideas , and chunks of knowledge , as well as more complex mental structures such as schemas and scripts ( Tables 1 and 2 ) . MRs are composed of one or more concepts : mental constructs such as ISLAND or BEAUTY that enable us to interpret new situations in terms of similar previous ones . The rationale for treating MRs as catalysts comes from the literature on concept combination , which provides extensive evidence that when concepts act as contexts for 3 For related approaches , see ( Andersson & Törnberg , 2019 ; Cabell & Valsiner , 2013 ; Muthukrishna , Doebeli , Chudek , & Henrich , 2018 ) . 4 Although we use the term ‘mental representation , ’ our model is consistent with the view ( common amongst ecological psychologists and in the situated cognition and quantum cognition communities ) that what we call mental representations do not ‘represent , ’ but rather , act as contextually elicited bridges between mind and world . COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 6 other concepts , their meanings change in ways that are often nontrivial and that defy classical logic ( Aerts , Broekaert , Gabora , & Sozzo , 2016 ; Aerts , Gabora , & Sozzo , 2013 ; Hampton , 1988 ; Osherson & Smith , 1981 ) . The extent to which one MR modiﬁes the meaning of another is referred to here as its reactivity . A MR’s reactivity varies in a context - sensitive manner . For example , in a study of the inﬂuence of context and mode of thought on the perceived meanings of concepts ( as measured by property applicabilities and exemplar typicalities ) , the concept PYLON was rated low as an exemplar of HAT , but in the context FUNNY ( as in ‘worn to be funny’ ) it was rated high as an exemplar of HAT ( Veloz , Gabora , Eyjolfson , & Aerts , 2011 ) . Thus , the degree to which PYLON qualiﬁed as an instance of a HAT changed dramatically depending on the context . The context FUNNY had an even greater eﬀect on the rating of MEDICINE HAT ( as in the name of the Canadian town ) as an instance of HAT . We say that the reactivity was high here because the context exerted a dramatic inﬂuence on the perceived meaning . Each interaction between two or more MRs alters ( however slightly ) the network of association strengths in memory ( Brockmeier , 2010 ; McClelland , 2011 ) . Eventually , for each MR , there is an associative pathway to its formation , i . e . , any given concept can be explained using other concepts , and new ideas can be reframed in terms of existing ones . Table 1 Application of graph theoretic concepts to the origin of life ( OOL ) and origin of culture ( OOC ) . Graph Theory Origin of Life ( OOL ) Origin of Culture ( OOC ) node catalytic molecule mental representation ( MR ) edge reaction pathway association cluster molecules connected via reactions MRs connected via associations connected graph autocatalytic closure ( Kauﬀman , 1986 , 1993 ) conceptual closure 5 ( Gabora , 1998 ) In previous work , we used the RAF framework to model an initial transition toward COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 7 Table 2 Abbreviated terms used throughout this paper . Abbreviation Meaning OOL Origin of Life OOC Origin of Culture MR Mental Representation sMR simple Mental Representation cMR complex Mental Representation RR Representational Redescription RAF Reﬂexively Autocatalytic and Food set generated ( F - generated ) CCP Cognitive Catalytic Process the kind of cognitive organization capable of evolving culture ( Gabora & Steel , 2017 ) . Our model followed up on the proposal that the increased complexity of Homo erectus culture compared with other species such as Homo habilis reﬂected the onset of representational redescription ( RR ) , in which the contents of working memory were recursively restructured by drawing upon similar or related ideas ( Corballis , 2011 ; Donald , 1991 ; Gabora & Smith , 2018 ; Hauser , Chomsky , & Fitch , 2002 ; Penn , Holyoak , & Povinelli , 2008 ) . We showed how the capacity for RR would have enabled the forging of associations between MRs , thereby constituting a key step toward an essentially ‘autocatalytic’ structure ( Gabora & Steel , 2017 ) . The present paper elaborates on the approach , showing how RR enabled the emergence of hierarchically structured concepts , making it possible to shift between levels of abstraction as needed to carry out tasks composed of multiple subgoals . To address how the mind as a whole acquired autocatalytic structure , the model presented here is , by necessity , abstract . This paper does not distinguish between semantic memory ( memory of words , concepts , propositions , and world knowledge ) and episodic memory ( personal experiences ) ; indeed , we are sympathetic to the view that COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 8 these are not as distinct as once thought ( Kwantes , 2005 ) . Nor does it address how MRs are obtained ( i . e . , whether through Hebbian learning versus probabilistic inference ) . Although MRs are represented simply as points in an N – dimensional space ( where N is the number of distinguishable diﬀerences , i . e . , ways in which MRs could diﬀer ) , our model is consistent with models that use convolution ( Jones & Mewhort , 2007 ) , random indexing ( Kanerva , 2009 ) , or other methods of representing MRs . We assume that associations form between MRs but we do not address whether these associations are due to similarity or co - occurrence , and whether they are learned through Bayesian inference ( Griﬃths , Steyvers , & Tenenbaum , 2007 ) or other means . We view associations as probabilistic ; thus when we say that a new association has been forged between two concepts we mean a spike in the probability of one MR evoking another , which we refer to here as the ‘catalysis’ of one MR by the other . We view context as anything that inﬂuences the instantiation of a MR in working memory ( for example , the properties it possesses , or the exemplars it instantiates ) . Context in our model can be either external ( e . g . , an object or person ) or internal ( e . g . , other MRs ) . Although our approach is inﬂuenced by how context is modeled in quantum approaches to concepts ( Aerts et al . , 2013 , 2016 ) , it is not committed to any formal approach to modeling context . 2 Autocatalytic networks We now summarize the key concepts of RAF theory . A catalytic reaction system ( CRS ) is a tuple Q = ( X , R , C , F ) consisting of a set X of molecule types , a set R of reactions , a catalysis set C indicating which molecule types catalyze which reactions , and a subset F of X called the food set . A Reﬂexively Autocatalytic and F - generated set—i . e . , a RAF—is a non - empty subset R 0 ⊆ R of reactions that satisﬁes the following two properties : 1 . Reﬂexively autocatalytic : each reaction r ∈ R 0 is catalyzed by at least one molecule type that is either produced by R 0 or is present in the food set F ; and COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 9 2 . F - generated : all reactants in R 0 can be generated from the food set F by using a series of reactions only from R 0 itself . A set of reactions that forms a RAF is simultaneously self - sustaining ( by the F - generated condition ) and ( collectively ) autocatalytic ( by the RA condition ) because each of its reactions is catalyzed by a molecule associated with the RAF . A CRS need not have a RAF , but when it does there is a unique maximal one . Moreover , a CRS , may contain many possible RAFs , and it is this feature that allows RAFs to evolve ( as described in Section 6 of ( Hordijk & Steel , 2016 ) ; see also ( Vasas et al . , 2012 ) ) . In the OOL context , a RAF emerges in systems of polymers ( molecules consisting of repeated units called monomers ) when the complexity of these polymers ( as measured by maximum length ) reaches a certain threshold ( Kauﬀman , 1993 ; Mossel & Steel , 2005 ) . The phase transition from no RAF to a RAF incorporating most or all of the molecules depends on ( 1 ) the probability of any one polymer catalyzing the reaction by which a given other polymer was formed , and ( 2 ) the maximum length ( number of monomers ) of polymers in the system . This transition has been formalized and analyzed ( mathematically , and using simulations ) , and applied to real biochemical systems ( Hordijk , Hein , & Steel , 2010 ; Hordijk , Kauﬀman , & Steel , 2011 ; Hordijk & Steel , 2004 , 2016 ; Mossel & Steel , 2005 ) and ecologies ( Cazzolla Gatti , Fath , Hordijk , Kauﬀman , & Ulanowicz , 2018 ) . RAF theory has proven useful for identifying how phase transitions might occur , and at what parameter values . In this application of RAFs to the OOC , we ﬁrst summarize the archaeological evidence for a cognitive transition approximately 1 . 7 mya , limiting the discussion to aspects that either were not addressed elsewhere ( Gabora & Steel , 2017 ) or that are essential in order to follow the arguments presented here . We then discuss cognitive mechanisms underlying the invention of the Acheulean hand axe , and present the RAF model of this . We conclude with a discussion of the implications of this new approach and ideas for further developments . COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 10 3 Evidence for a cognitive transition The large cranial capacity of Homo erectus ( approximately 1000 cc , 25 % larger than that of Homo habilis ( Aiello , 1996 ) ) is believed to have played a role in a cultural transition to signiﬁcantly more complex tools , as epitomized by the Acheulean hand axe 1 . 76 mya , shown in Fig . 1 ( Edwards , 2001 ) . Like its predecessor the Oldowan stone ﬂake , the Acheulean hand axe was a multi - use implement , but whereas the former simply requires repeated percussive action , the latter is notoriously diﬃcult to make ( Pargeter , Khreisheh , & Stout , 2019 ; Stout , Toth , Schick , & Chaminade , 2008 ) . It requires a skilled , multi - step process involving multiple diﬀerent hierarchically organized actions , as shown in Fig . 2 . 6 The Acheulean hand axe is the most tangible evidence of a cognition transition characterized by a suite of related abilities . This transition is thought to have involved the onset of autocuing : the capacity to voluntarily retrieve a speciﬁc memory item in the absence of environmental cues ( Donald , 1991 ) . Encephalization likely played a role in the onset of autocuing by enabling memories to be encoded in suﬃcient detail to evoke one another based on relevant ( i . e . , situation - speciﬁc ) similarities ( Gabora & Smith , 2018 ) . Autocuing paved the way for mental time travel : the capacity to escape the immediate present by remembering past episodes or imagining events taking place at other locations , or in the future ( Corballis , 2011 ) . Autocuing and mental time travel enabled individuals to engage in imaginative thought , and to reﬂect upon and update ( i . e . , elaborate , modify , restructure , and / or perform mental operations upon ) the contents of working memory , drawing upon relevant knowledge or experience , as needed . This kind of recoding of information has been referred to as representational redescription ( RR ) ( Karmiloﬀ - Smith , 1992 ) . In this paper , the term RR refers to any internally - generated modiﬁcation to a MR’s network of associations , whether it be the result of a sudden ﬂash of insight , or a new perspective on , or application for , an old idea . The capacity for autocuing , mental 6 Detailed comparison of the making of Oldowan ( Homo habilis ) versus Acheulean ( Homo erectus ) tools , including the brain regions involved , can be found in ( Stout et al . , 2008 ) . COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 11 Figure 1 . Change in Early Stone Age technology and cranial capacity . From ( Stout , 2008 ) . COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 12 time travel , and RR culminated in a suite of related abilities that include the rehearsal and reﬁnement of skills and the miming of past or possible future events ( Corballis , 2011 ; Donald , 1991 ) . The recursive application of RR , such that the output of one redescription serves as the input to the next , we refer to as abstract thought . It may be accompanied by behavioral action that modiﬁes the environment , and thereby tracks or externally manifests this internal process . It is hypothesized that such MRs consisted of not just sensory representations of raw materials and the tools of which they are made , but also of their aﬀordances with respect to the body , i . e . , their capacity to be altered , used , or manipulated . ( See ( Overmann & Coolidge , 2019 ) for further discussion of the content of primitive toolmakers’ MRs ) . Summarizing an argument developed in detail elsewhere ( including discussions of the relationship of RR to the concept of ‘merge’ ( Gabora & Smith , 2018 ) , and to the psychological literature on concept combination ( Gabora & Aerts , 2009 ; Gabora & Kitto , 2013 ; Gabora & Steel , 2017 ) , we propose that RR was made possible because the larger Homo erectus brain enabled a ﬁner - grained associative memory such that episodic and semantic knowledge could be encoded in greater detail , as illustrated in Fig . 3 . This meant that , once an individual had lived lived long enough to accumulate a suﬃciently rich repository of experience , there was more overlap in his or her distributed representations . This in turn meant that there were more routes by which these MRs could evoke one another , and more ways for the individual to generate novel cultural contributions . RR enabled Homo erectus to combine MRs and chain them into streams of thought or sequences of action , and mime past or possible future event sequences to others ( since it is generally believed that complex language was not yet established ) . 7 7 Although the evolution of language is stubbornly resistant to empirical inquiry ( Hauser et al . , 2014 ; Perreault & Mathew , 2012 ) , it is thought that language as we know it , with syntax and grammar , came substantially after the Oldowan to Achuelian transition modeled here ( Klein , 2009 ; Lieberman , 2007 ; Mithen , 2006 ) , most likely preceded by ‘protolanguage’ ( Bickerton , 2007 ) , and the use of gesture and mime ( Corballis , 2011 , 2013 ; Donald , 1991 ) . In this way , the content of experience could become detached from the immediate sensory perceptions of the ‘here and now’ ( in what has been called ‘mental time travel’ ( Corballis , 2011 ) ) . Since RR forges new associations between MRs , the onset of the capacity for RR could , through spreading COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 13 Figure 2 . Left : initial ( top ) , intermediate ( middle ) , and ﬁnal ( bottom ) stages in the making of an Acheulean hand axe . Right : Physical processes required to bring the tool from initial to intermediate stage ( top ) , and from the intermediate to the ﬁnal stage ( bottom ) . From ( Stout , 2008 ) . COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 14 Figure 3 . Schematic illustration of the proposed changes set into motion through the evolution of ﬁner grained memory , culminating in an individual’s capacity to become a creative contributor to cultural evolution . Note that , for this sequence of events to unfold in a given individual , not only must that individual’s representations be suﬃciently distributed ( due to the biologically evolved changes depicted on the upper left ) but they must also be suﬃciently plentiful ( due to the developmental changes depicted on the upper right ) . COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 15 3 . 1 Cognitive processes in Oldowan versus Acheulean toolmaking We now delve more deeply into the cognitive mechanisms underlying onset of the capacity for Acheulean toolmaking , arguably the earliest signiﬁcant transition in the archaeological record . We cannot know exactly how the ﬁrst Oldowan tool was invented , and there are diﬀerent scenarios by which it could have come about . One scenario is that the inventor of this tool imagined the impact of percussive action on a stone , and creatively redescribed the transformation of a stone into a tool . In this scenario , the new concept TOOL was not imported from the external world ; rather , using RR , the toolmaker generated a mental image of something that did not currently exist . The hominin developed a complex MR ( cMR ) composed of the simple MRs ( sMRs ) STONE , TOOL , and PERCUSSIVE ACTION . This cMR can be understood as : in the context of the catalyst percussive action , STONE may become a TOOL . However , there are other scenarios by which this cMR could have come about , through individual learning . Individual learning refers to learning from the environment by nonsocial means through direct perception . Note that in much of the cultural evolution literature , abstract thought and creativity , if mentioned at all , are equated with individual learning , which is thought to mean ‘learning for oneself’ ( e . g . , ( Henrich & Boyd , 2002 ; Mesoudi & Laland , 2006 ; Rogers , 1988 ) . However , individual learning is distinctly diﬀerent from abstract thought . In individual learning ( obtaining pre - existing information from the environment through non - social means ) , the information does not change form just because the individual now knows it . Going into a forest and learning for oneself to distinguish diﬀerent kinds of insects is an example of individual learning . In contrast , in activation , aﬀect other MRs , thereby facilitating categorization , generalization , and property induction . RR facilitated the formation of abstract concepts , including complex and sometimes spontaneously - generated ad hoc concepts ( Barsalou , 1983 ) . Abstraction may be facilitated by dimensional reduction , ensuring that concepts contain no more detail than necessary . The MR of an object could be redescribed as aﬀording diﬀerent actions and uses , so as to alternate between diﬀerent subgoals , as needed , to reach an ultimate goal . Note that unlike purely social hypotheses regarding this transition , RR would facilitate not just the ability to make tools but the ability to demonstrate the process step - by - step to others ; thus it could be put to use in social settings as well as technical tasks . The fact that PET imaging studies indicate that toolmaking and language share overlapping neural circuity ( Stout et al . , 2008 ) suggests that RR may have contributed to the evolution of language . We note that the model proposed in this paper does not rely on a precise timeline for language origins . COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 16 abstract thought ( reiterative processing of internally sourced mental contents ) , the information is in ﬂux ( Barsalou , 2005 ) , and when this incremental honing process results in the generation of new and useful or pleasing ideas , behavior , or artifacts , it is said to be creative ( Basadur , 1995 ; Chan & Schunn , 2015 ; Feinstein , 2006 ; Gabora , 2017 ) . Since in individual learning , the information retains the form in which it was originally perceived , it does not involve RR . For example , upon seeing boulders fall from a cliﬀ and splinter a stone ﬂake below into something that could be used as a tool , a hominid could have then imitated the percussive action of the falling boulders to create the ﬁrst intentionally manufactured tool . The distinction between individual learning and RR is not black and white ; it is possible that a certain amount of redescription was required to realize that one could intentionally mimic the action of the boulder on the rock . However , applying Occam’s razor , we will model the simple possibility that the initial idea for the cMR of using percussion to make a stone tool emerged through imitation of some kind of accidental breakage of a stone ﬂake , and RR was not required . Note that even in this simple scenario , the toolmaking process was far from trivial ; it required careful deliberate action ( Toth & Schick , 2009 , 2018 ) . In any case , this not only resulted in a new concept ( e . g . , PERCUSSION ) but also modiﬁed the aﬀordances ( in the sense of ( Gibson , 1997 ) ) of STONE ( i . e . , stone was now something that could be fractured through percussive action ) . Although there may have been some degree of convergent evolution , Oldowan technology was transmitted through social learning processes such as imitation or guided instruction , from one generation to the next , and Acheulean technology built on this pre - existing technology , as indicated in Fig . 4 . To make an Acheulean hand axe required ( 1 ) skillful coordination of perception and motor skills involving recursive modiﬁcation of an action according to the outcome of the previous action , and ( 2 ) shifting between hierarchically organized ( short - term ) sub - goals at diﬀerent spatiotemporal scales to achieve the desired ( long - term ) outcome ( Stout et al . , 2008 ; Inizan , Reduron - Ballinger , Roche , & Tixier , 1999 ) . The toolmaker had to bear in mind not just the current and desired ﬁnal states of the tool but also the multiple procedural actions—edging , thinning , COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 17 Figure 4 . Hierarchical organization of tasks in Acheulean toolmaking . From Stout , 2008 . and shaping—required to achieve the ﬁnal state . Since these actions were not yet observable in the environment , the concepts EDGING , THINNING , and SHAPING had to be generated from scratch . Given the cumulative increase in the sophistication of the Acheulean hand axe over time ( see Fig . ? ? ) , it appears not to have been the handiwork of one individual , but rather invented collectively , with the intentional scaﬀolding of each new improvement ( e . g . , edging , thinning , and shaping ) , potentially separated by generations . Note that not only do EDGING , THINNING , and SHAPING constitute new MRs but , collectively , they constitute a cMR , that of how to make an Acheulean hand axe . Moreover , each new concept further modiﬁed the perceived aﬀordances of STONE ( i . e . , stone was no longer just something that could be fractured with percussive action , but something that could also be edged ) . Although ( as mentioned previously ) it is generally believed that complex language was not yet possible , social learning processes involving demonstration and / or imitation of the ﬁnished product would have enabled spatiotemporal diﬀusion of these COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 18 ‘partial solutions . ’ 8 4 RAF model of the invention of the Acheulean hand axe We now introduce the mathematical framework and terminology that will be used to model the invention of the Oldowan and Acheulean tool technologies . 4 . 1 Terminology All mental representations ( MRs ) in a given individual i are denoted X i , and a particular MR x i in X i is denoted by writing x ∈ X i . As in an OOL RAF , we have a food set ; for individual i , denoted F i . In the OOC context , F i encompasses MRs for individual i that are either innate , or that result from direct experience in the world , including natural , artiﬁcial , and social stimuli . F i includes everything in the long - term memory of individual i that was not the direct result of individual i engaging in RR . This includes information obtained through social learning from someone else who may have obtained it by way of RR . For example , if individual i learns from individual j how to edge a blank ﬂake through percussive action , this is an instance of social learning , and the concept EDGING is therefore a member of F i . F i also includes existing information obtained by i through individual learning ( which , as stated earlier , involves learning from the environment by nonsocial means ) , so long as this information retains the form in which it was originally perceived ( and does not undergo redescription or restructuring through abstract thought ) . The crucial distinction between food set and non - food set items is not whether another person was involved , nor whether the MR was originally obtained through abstract thought ( by someone ) , but whether the abstract thought process originated in the mind of the individual i in question . Thus , F i has two components : 1 . S i denotes the set of MRs arising through direct stimulus experience that have been encoded in individual i ’s memory . It includes MRs obtained through social learning 8 Non - verbal transmission of stone - tool technologies and its relationship to language evolution is discussed further in ( Morgan et al . , 2015 ; Ohnumma , Aoki , & Akazawa , 1997 ) . COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 19 from the communication of an MR x j by another individual j , denoted S i [ x j ] , and MRs obtained through individual learning , denoted S i [ l ] , as well as contents of memory arising through direct perception that do not involve learning , denoted S i [ p ] . 2 . I i denotes any innate knowledge with which individual i is born . A particular catalytic event ( i . e . , a single instance of RR ) in a stream of abstract thought in individual i is referred to as a reaction , and denoted r ∈ R i . A stream of abstract thought , involving the generation of representations that go beyond what has been directly observed , is modeled as a sequence of catalytic events . Following ( Gabora & Steel , 2017 ) , we refer to this as a cognitive catalytic process ( CCP ) . The set of reactions that can be catalyzed by a given MR x in individual i is denoted C i [ x ] . The entire set of MRs either undergoing or resulting from r is written A or B , respectively , and a member of the set of MRs undergoing or resulting from reaction r is denoted a ∈ A or b ∈ B . The term food set derived , denoted ¬ F i , refers to mental contents that are not part of F i , i . e . , the products of any reactions derived from F i and encoded in individual i ’s memory . Its contents come about through mental operations by the individual in question on the food set ; in other words , food set derived items are the direct product of RR . Thus , ¬ F i includes everything in long - term memory that was the result of one’s own CCPs . It may include a MR in which social learning played a role , so long as the most recent modiﬁcation to this MR was a catalytic event ( i . e . , it involved RR ) . 9 ¬ F i consists of all the products b ∈ B of all reactions r ∈ R i . The set of all possible reactions in individual i is denoted R i . The mental contents of the mind , including all MRs and all RR events is denoted X i ⊕ R i . This includes F i and ¬ F i . Recall that the set of all MRs in individual i , including both the food set and elements derived from that food set , is denoted X i . R i and C i are not prescribed in advance ; because C i includes remindings and associations on the basis of one or more 9 This distinction between food set and food set derived may not be so black and white but for simplicity we avoid that subtlety for now . COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 20 shared property , diﬀerent CCPs can occur through interactions amongst MRs . Nevertheless , it makes perfect mathematical sense to talk about R i and C i as sets . Table 3 summarizes the terminology and correspondences between the OOL and the OOC . Table 3 Terminology and correspondences between the Origin of Life ( OOL ) and the Origin of Cul - ture ( OOC ) . Term Origin of Life ( OOL ) Origin of Culture ( OOC ) X i all molecule types in protocell i all mental representations ( MRs ) in individual i x ∈ X i a molecule in X i a MR in X i F i food set for protocell i innate or directly experienced MRs by i r ∈ R i a particular reaction in i a particular representational redescription ( RR ) in i C i [ x ] reactions catalyzed by x in i RR events ‘catalyzed’ by x in i ( x , r ) ∈ C x catalyzes r x ‘catalyzes’ redescription of r a ∈ A member of set of reactants in r member of set of MRs undergoing r b ∈ B member of set of products of r member of set of MRs resulting from r ¬ F i non food set for i ; ( i . e . , all B of R i ) MRs resulting from R i ; ( i . e . , all B of R i ) Our model includes elements of cognition that have no obvious parallel in the OOL . We denoted the subject of attention at time t as ˚ w t . It may be an external stimulus , or a MR retrieved from memory . Any other contents of X i ⊕ R i that are accessible to working memory , such as close associates of ˚ w t , or recently attended MRs , were denoted W t , with W t constituting a very small subset of X i ⊕ R i . In the present paper , the focus is not on these OOC - speciﬁc components of the model in order to tackle the question of how non - food set derived MRs ( i . e . , a non - empty ¬ F ) came about , because these non - food set derived MRs are essential to the emergence of a semantic network that is self - organizing and autocatalytic . Now that the mathematical framework has been introduced , let us compare the COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 21 Figure 5 . Left : Sources of simple and complex mental representations ( sMRs and cMRs ) and symbols used here to depict them . Right : cMRs and the sMRs of which they are composed , involved in the invention of the Oldowan tool ( top row ) and the Acheulean hand axe ( lower rows ) . For each tool , only one scenario discussed in the text is portrayed here . Each instance of social learning ( Column 4 ) must be preceded by a relevant instance of individual learning ( Column 2 ) or representational redescription ( RR ) / abstract thought ( Column 3 ) . cognitive processes involved in the invention of Oldowan versus Acheulean tools from the perspective of RAFs using an autocatalytic framework . This is illustrated in Fig . 5 and Fig . 6 . 4 . 2 Oldowan We begin by modeling the invention of an Oldowan tool by individual learning and imitation of the possible eﬀect of percussive action on stone , arising through observation of accidental breakage ( as discussed above ) . The invention involves noticing that percussive action increases the capacity of a rock to be used as a tool . It involves the formation of an association between the concepts ROCK and TOOL , and results in a cMR COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 22 Figure 6 . Left : Key showing the depiction of complex MRs arising through individual learning , social learning , representational redescription ( RR ) or abstract thought , or a com - inbation of these . Right : Schematic representation of possible events culminating in the invention of Oldowan ( top ) and Acheulean ( bottom ) tools . Top right : Individual i obtains an understanding of percussion through individual learning by watching falling rocks splin - ter the stone below . Individual i imitates the action of the falling rock on a piece of stone , thereby creating a tool . Individual j obtains the toolmaking technique from individual i through social learning . Bottom right : Individuals i and j both acquire the concept of PERCUSSION through social learning from their parents , but only in i does it undergo catalysis to generate the concept of EDGING , which i shares with j through social learn - ing . Similarly , j invents the concept THINNING and shares it with i , and i invents the concept SHAPING and shares it with j . At this point , they both possess the entire skill set to make an Acheulean hand axe . Note that although for simplicity this sequence is portrayed here with only two individuals , in reality the multiple stages in the invention of this tool likely involved numerous individuals spanning generations . As in Fig . 5 , only one of the scenarios discussed in the text is portrayed here . COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 23 that relates stone , percussive action , and tool . Note that the inventor’s thought process involves recursion , in the sense that the output of a previous percussive action serves as the input to the decision of whether to continue , and recursive processing continues until the task is complete . However , since no non food set MRs are derived , there is no ‘internally catalyzed reaction’ as we are deﬁning it . Therefore , from a RAF perspective , the mind of an early hominid that relied on Oldowan technology can be described as one for which all mental contents are members of the food set of innate or directly experienced MRs . Thus , the set of non food set MRs is empty . In terms of the formalism we are using , Q = ( X , F ) ; in other words , we need not consider R and C . For individual k ( k = i , j ) , let P k be the complex MR that combines the sMRs STONE , PERCUSSION , and TOOL . Thus , in the Oldowan setting illustrated in Fig . 6 , the generation of a tool through either individual learning ( in i ) or social learning ( in j ) amounts to adding P k to the food set of individual k . Formally , we can write this as : F i 7→ F i ∪ { P i } , where P i ∈ S i ( l ) , and F j 7→ F j ∪ { P j } , where P j ∈ S j ( P i ) . Thus , the ﬁrst cMR results from individual learning , whereas the second arises from social learning by individual j of the concept P i from individual i . Note that although the sMRs STONE , PERCUSSION , and TOOL are connected by associations , these associations were not obtained through abstract thought , but through observations of cause and eﬀect in the external world . Since invention of the Oldowan tool required only one cMR ( the CMR of how to make an Oldowan tool ) , there would have been no back - and - forth social exchange of partial solutions involved in its invention , and there are no higher - level cMRs . COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 24 4 . 3 Acheulean Acheulean tools were the culmination of several ( perhaps spatiotemporally separated ) steps that intertwined individual learning , social learning , and creative thinking , as illustrated in Fig . 6 . To model the cultural transition from Oldowan to Acheulean technology , we begin with social transmission of the cMR for the process of making an Oldowan tool . In the mind of each individual that acquired this cMR through social learning , the food set was enlarged , as described above . Social transmission of this cMR continued for generations before it was elaborated . Elaboration entailed three insights into new ways of processing the basic Oldwowan tool to make it more useful . These insights are represented as ‘catalysis events’ because they resulted in the generation of something new : a new MR . Each catalysis event came about through a CCP and resulted in a new non food set item . Catalyzed reactions transform an element of F k into an element of ¬ F k . For an individual k ( where k = i , j ) , we write a k b k −→ c k to denote the reaction that transforms one MR ( a k ) to a resulting MR c k ( in ¬ F k ) by catalyst b k . The ﬁrst catalysis event was provoked by the context : need to sharpen periphery . This context was internally represented as a thought , or MR . It caused modiﬁcation of the reactant , PERCUSSION , to generate a product : the new concept EDGING . Since EDGING is connected through association to ROCK , this event expands the aﬀordances of ROCK ( i . e . , it is now perceived as something that can be edged ) . Aﬀordances are a kind of association and , as such , they increase the connectivity of the conceptual network . We represent this by a catalyzed reaction ( and the associated individual learning ) as follows : P i p i −→ E i , F i 7→ F i ∪ { E i } , ( 1 ) where p i is the catalyst MR need to sharpen periphery , and E i ∈ S ( l ) is the resulting cMR . The speciﬁcs of the situation that inspired the invention—what we are modeling as the context that ‘catalyzed’ this event—need not be socially transmitted . Thus , what was COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 25 invented is not necessarily identical to what is socially transmitted . It is the new aﬀordance of ROCK and its association with the new concept of EDGING that are socially transmitted . We represent this transmission event as follows : F j 7→ F j ∪ { E j } , E j ∈ S j ( E i ) . ( 2 ) In the second catalysis event , the context was need to thin the center . The reactant EDGING was modiﬁed to generate another product , the new concept of THINNING . This can be represented as follows : E j t j −→ T j , F j 7→ F j ∪ { T j } , ( 3 ) where t i is the catalyst MR ‘need to thin centre’ and T j ∈ S j ( l ) is the resulting cMR . Similarly , in the context , need to create symmetrical shape , the reactant—the concept THINNING—was modiﬁed to generate another product , the concept of SHAPING . The formal description of these two catalytic processes is analogous to that of the formation of the EDGING cMR . To summarize , the cultural evolution of Acheulean technology depicted in Fig . 6 is described formally in the following sequence of six processes , where steps ( i ) to ( iii ) correspond to equations ( 1 ) to ( 3 ) above . Again , although for simplicity we consider only two individuals , the steps described as catalyzed reaction were likely contributed by individuals separated across generations . Catalyzed reactions take place in steps ( i ) , ( iii ) and ( v ) . For example , in step ( v ) , the catalyst is the MR of ‘need symmetrical shape’ , denoted s i . S i and S j are the resulting complex MRs in individuals i and j , respectively . COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 26 ( i ) [ RR leading to E by i ] P i p i −→ E i , F i 7→ F i ∪ { E i } ; ( ii ) [ social learning of E from i by j ] F j 7→ F j ∪ { E j } , E j ∈ S j ( E i ) ; ( iii ) [ RR leading to T by j ] E j t j −→ T j , F j 7→ F j ∪ { T j } ; ( iv ) [ social learning of T from j by i ] F i 7→ F i ∪ { T i } , T i ∈ S i ( T j ) ; ( v ) [ RR leading to S by i ] T i s i −→ S i , F i 7→ F i ∪ { S i } ; ( vi ) [ social learning of S from i by j ] F j 7→ F j ∪ { S j } , S j ∈ S j ( S i ) . The formation of abstract concepts such as SHAPING was essential for the emergence of more extensive autocatalytic structure because abstract concepts tend to become more densely connected through associations than superﬁcial concepts . As extreme examples , the concepts DEPTH and OPPOSITE are relevant to almost every knowledge domain . The concepts that arose in the invention of the hand axe may be less widely applicable than concepts such as OPPOSITE , but they could potentially be applied to other domains ( such as food preparation ) . Abstract concepts create new aﬀordances for existing concepts ( e . g . , the concept SHAPING could have create aﬀordances for ANIMAL SKIN that enabled it to be turned into clothing ) . This then further increased the density of associations . The Acheulean hand axe required not just the invention of the three cMRs associated with each phase of the toolmaking process , but also recursive RR on them so as to generate an even more complex MR : the representation of the entire process of making a hand axe . If we denote this complex meta - RR ( capturing the entire process of making a hand axe ) in individual i by H i , then we can describe the generation of H i by the ( catalysed ) reaction : E i + T i + S i c i −→ H i , ( 4 ) where the catalyst c i is the realization by individual i that combining E , S , and T will COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 27 E i E j T j T i H i H j S i S j t j s i p i c i c j catalyzing MR in individual * MR for reactions in individual * reaction pathway RR ( reaction ) catalysis c ⇤ , p ⇤ , s ⇤ , t ⇤ P ⇤ , E ⇤ , S ⇤ , T ⇤ , H ⇤ P i social learning Figure 7 . Part of the RAF structure involved in the invention of the Acheulean hand axe . Again , although for simplicity we have only individuals i and j , these steps were likely spread out spatiotemporally . The ﬁgure depicts the processes labeled ( i ) – ( vi ) in the text , as well as the process of combining the three steps EDGING , THINNING , and SHAPING , into the ﬁnal mental representation in each of the two individuals of how to make an Acheulean hand axe , Hi and Hj . lead to the desired tool . 10 The recognition ( on the part of both individual i and individual j ) that the entire series of steps can be clumped together as ‘how to make an eﬀective tool’ constitutes yet another catalyzed reaction , as indicated in Fig . 7 . The invention of the Acheulean hand axe corresponds to the emergence of RAF sets of MRs that are close associates , and accessible to one another . In particular , RR enables the content of working memory to be updated through abstract thought or reﬂection drawing on content from long - term memory , 11 with or without an environmental stimulus 10 Although successful completion of a task may result in neural signals that reinforce the eliciting behavior , that happens after the action has taken place ; it is not the catalyst . The catalyst acts before the action has taken place . It is the thought that prompts the action to take place . 11 Creative insights ( i . e . , those that make signiﬁcant contributions to culture ) often arise subconsciously ; COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 28 acting as a reminder or cue . We describe this more formally as follows , following ( Gabora & Steel , 2017 ) . We denote each MR in a RR reﬂection process as m ∈ M t . We say that ˚ w ∈ W t is catalyzed by an item m ∈ M t . This ‘reaction’ updates the subject of thought , which is now denoted ˚ w 0 ∈ W t + δ . A single step RR ( referred to in ( Gabora & Steel , 2017 ) as cognitive updating ) is denoted : ˚ w m −→ ˚ w 0 , and ˚ w 7→ w . A sequence of recursive RR events , which , as mentioned above , is referred to as a CCP , is described as : C = ˚ w t ( 1 ) , ˚ w t ( 2 ) , . . . , ˚ w t ( k ) , ( where ˚ w t ( i ) ∈ W t ( i ) and where t ( i ) values are increasing ) , such that each MR ˚ w t ( i ) is the reactant catalyzed by an environmental stimulus or MR from memory to generate a new MR , the product of that reaction . Thus , the CCP that connected EDGING , THINNING , and SHAPING resulted in a meta - cMR composed of three hierarchically structured cMRs , which were themselves composed of simple MRs . This constituted an important step toward a self - organizing , autocatalytic structure , not just because the CCPs forged associations between items in memory but because ( as discussed above ) the abstract concepts EDGING , THINNING , and SHAPING could potentially be applied to other domains , creating still more associations . 4 . 4 Cognitive RAFs We now ask : does the Acheulean mind as described above contain a genuine RAF ? To answer this question , we must consider the mean rate at which RR reactions are taking place , denoted λ , and whether or not this exceeds a certain threshold . We can describe i . e . , they arise from just beyond the conﬁnes of working memory ( Bowers , Farvolden , & Mermigis , 1995 ) . COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 29 this more precisely as follows ( from ( Gabora & Steel , 2017 ) , where a proof is provided ) . 12 Proposition 1 . Q contains a RAF that increases in size with time t ( namely the set of RR reactions that actually occur between time 0 and t ) . Moreover , while λ is below a critical threshold , CCPs in this RAF are short and few in number , but when λ exceeds this threshold , CCPs become more frequent , persistent and complex . The RAF described in Proposition 1 has the additional feature of being a ‘constructively autocatalytic F - generated set’ , as deﬁned in ( Mossel & Steel , 2005 ) . Such a RAF has the property of being self - organising , and able to self - replicate and evolve ( albeit in an ineﬃcient manner , without a self - assembly code ) . In the current cultural context , we refer to such a RAF as a persistent cognitive RAF , or simply , a cognitive RAF . In our cultural context , λ is expected to vary positively with the complexity of the existing network structure ( more ways to reﬂect on something new ) and negatively with the degree to which one’s internal model already appears to faithfully capture the content of one’s environment ( nothing left to think through ) . Returning to the question with which we began this section , although the mind of the Acheulean toolmaker did not achieve a cognitive RAF , it achieved what could be called a transient RAF because it contains the cognitive equivalent of catalyzed reactions ( as discussed above ) , and it appears , for an instant , like a RAF . A transient RAF is not self - organizing , and therefore it cannot generate open - ended cultural novelty . However , compared to the mind of the Oldowan toolmaker , in which ( as far as we know from the archaeological evidence ) there were no catalyzed reactions , it marks the crossing of a signiﬁcant hurdle toward the achievement of genuine , persistent RAF structure . The next question is : once hominids were capable of recursive , hierarchically structured thought and creative problem solving , why was the invention of the Acheulean hand axe followed by approximately one million years of cultural stasis ( Tattersall , 1998 ) ? This is an open and much - pondered question in the archaeological literature , and the 12 It is assumed that t is suﬃciently large that RR reactions have commenced , and that the rate at which new environmental stimuli appear is bounded . COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 30 autocatalytic approach to culture developed here suggests a tentative answer . Speciﬁcally , our model suggests that this was because λ ( the mean rate at which RR reactions occur ) did not rise above a critical threshold to generate self - sustained cognitive reorganization , meaning that any CCPs that arose were short and few in number . 4 . 5 Self - replication of transient cognitive RAF Although in the mind of the Acheulean toolmaker the RAF was only transient , and did not self - organize and evolve in an open - ended manner , it yielded an ongoing dynamical process nonetheless , by way of its inﬂuence on other individuals . As mentioned earlier , based on current thinking , the above model assumes that although early hominids that did not yet possess complex language , the results of creative thought—modelled here as CCPs—could extend beyond a single individual through social learning and pedagogy ( Tehrani & Riede , 2008 ) . This means that a social group can be described as a higher - level transient RAF that follows the same processes as described earlier . We model this as follows . Given a social group G composed of individuals i , j , . . . , the collection M of all MRs in the social group is the disjoint union of the MRs in each individual mind . The union is disjoint because m i and m j refer to MRs in diﬀerent individuals ( i and j ) . When the MRs m i and m j in two individuals concern the same feature of the world , we say that m i and m j are homologous , denoted by writing m i ∼ m j . If individual j provides the context that triggers a RR event or creative insight in another individual i , the process of cognitive change extends across two individuals . More precisely , if a reaction ˚ w i s −→ ˚ w 0 i in individual i is catalyzed by a MR s ∈ S ( w j ) then we can ( formally ) regard this as the catalyzed reaction ˚ w i w j −→ ˚ w 0 i . ( 5 ) Note that the MRs involved in this reaction as reactant and product are in the mind of one individual ( i ) , whereas the catalyst is in the mind of another ( j ) . Therefore , we obtain an equivalence ( ≡ ) between social learning and a cognitive reaction ( involving a COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 31 catalyst in a diﬀerent mind ) . This leads to the notion of a RAF that consists of reactions and CCPs within and between the items in the collective minds of the social group . Social learning processes enable a MR ( such as the procedure used to produce a hand axe ) to become established as homologous MRs across individuals , and spread amongst group members in G , as illustrated in Fig . 7 . Thus , the transient RAF replicates across individuals of a social group . The size of the resulting CCPs in the group as a whole is inﬂuenced by two parameters . The ﬁrst is the structure of the digraph ( directed graph ) D with vertex set G and an arc from i to j if individual i is able to communicate concepts to individual j . Note that D depends on time ; for example , new groups of individuals form and split over time . The connectedness of D could vary from a single individual with arcs to and from all others ( a political leader , celebrity , or ‘guru’ ) , to a network in which each individual has an arc to every other individual . A second parameter , denoted ρ , scales the rate at which catalysis events of the type described in Reaction ( 5 ) above occur when ( j , i ) is an arc of D . Thus , when ρ = 0 , it is never the case that one individual provides the context that triggers RR in another . In reality , the rate of catalysis for the arc ( j , i ) may depend more ﬁnely on i and j , so ρ is treated as an overall scaling factor . The response of CCPs in the social group to increasing ρ ( presumably related to the emergence of increasingly sophisticated communication ) is summarized in the following result ( an analogue of Proposition 1 but at the level of the social group ) . Recall that any digraph has a unique composition into strongly connected components . The following result follows from a simple percolation argument on directed graphs ( see Appendix ) . Proposition 2 . For small values of ρ , most CCPs occur within individuals , and homologous items tend to occur only between closely linked individuals ( in D ) . As ρ increases , CCPs grow in size and involve longer chains of catalyzation events , leading to homologous items spreading throughout each strongly connected component of D . COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 32 5 Discussion and conclusions To understand how cultural evolution got started , we must ask what kind of semantic structure would be capable of initiating and sustaining open - ended cultural change , and examine how such structure came about in the minds of our ancestors . Building on earlier work ( Gabora , 1998 ; Gabora & Steel , 2017 ; Gabora , Leijnen , Veloz , & Lipo , 2011 ; Veloz , Tempkin , & Gabora , 2012 ) , this paper examines early Homo cognition through a particular lens : the emergence of semantic structure that is self - organizing , self - reproducing , and autocatalytic . Of course , minds are part of living organisms , which have these properties , but we are interested in the emergence of a second - order level of self - organizing structure that pertains not to cellular or organismal processes but to the webs of associations by which hominids weave together an understanding of their world . We suspect that these properties were as important to cultural evolution as they were to biological evolution . Since autocatalytic networks possess these properties and have been useful in modeling the origin of life , we used an autocatalytic RAF framework to model what is arguably the earliest signiﬁcant transition in the archaeological record : the transition from Oldowan to Acheulean tool technology . We hope that future research will build on this direction by comparing the cultural RAF approach developed here with other standard semantic network approaches ( Beaty , Benedek , Silvia , & Schacter , 2016 ; Baronchelli , Ferrer - i - Cancho , Pastor - Satorras , Chater , & Christiansen , 2013 ) . Although these standard semantic networks suﬃce for modeling semantic structure in individuals , we believe that the RAF approach will turn out to be superior for modeling lineages of cumulative cultural change , because it distinguishes semantic structure arising through social or individual learning ( modeled as food set items ) from semantic structure derived from this pre - existing material ( modeled as non food set items generated through abstract thought processes that play the role of catalyzed reactions ) . This makes it feasible to model how cognitive structure emerges , and to trace lineages of cumulative cultural change step by step . It also frames this project within the overarching scientiﬁc enterprise of understanding how evolutionary processes COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 33 ( be they biological or cultural ) begin , and unfold over time . Data for comparing cultural RAFs against other semantic networks could come not just from existing archaeological data sets and analyses of social learning and pedagogy in stone toolmaking ( Tehrani & Riede , 2008 ) , but from neuroscience , building on neuroscientiﬁc studies of brain activation during toolmaking by modern - day novice and expert Oldowan and Acheulean toolmakers ( Stout et al . , 2008 ) . We note that there now exist established methods for developing semantic networks using neuroscientiﬁc data ( Betzel & Bassett , 2017 ; Karuza , Thompson - Schill , & Bassett , 2016 ; Medaglia , Lynall , & Bassett , 2015 ) . To our knowledge these methods have not yet been used in the study of cultural lineages but we see no reason why they couldn’t be . The model as it stands has limitations ; it is highly simpliﬁed , and we do not precisely know the context in which the cognitive events modelled here took place . Future versions could incorporate a more sophisticated representation of interactions amongst MRs ( Aerts et al . , 2016 , 2013 ) and a dynamic representation of context ( Howard & Kahana , 2002 ; Veloz et al . , 2011 ) . There is also more work to be done on the implications of cognitive RAF theory for the evolution of cooperation ( see ( Voorhees , Read , & Gabora , 2020 ) ) , and the evolutionary pressures shaping cognitive RAFs ( a promising eﬀort in this direction is ( Andersson & Törnberg , 2019 ) ) . Since there are multiple ways that a given set of MRs can be networked together into a viable cognitive RAF , this model may also provide a new approach to understanding the origins of psychological diﬀerences at the individual ( Sackett , Lievens , Van Iddekinge , & Kuncel , 2017 ) and cultural ( Sng , Neuberg , Varnum , & Kenrick , 2018 ) levels . The question arises as to how the inventors of new concepts ( such as EDGING ) diﬀered from their less creative kin may be due to individual diﬀerences in two parameters of our model : ( 1 ) reactivity ( the extent to which the meaning of a MR is perceived to be altered in an interaction—or ‘reaction’—with another MR ) , and ( 2 ) λ ( the rate at which reactions occur ) . For example , what is referred to as cognitive rigidity may be a matter of low λ , resulting in a semantic network that is subcritical , whereas creative thinking may COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 34 be a matter of high λ , resulting in a semantic network that is supracritical . Which of these two regimes a particular individual falls into may also depend on variables associated with the ‘food set’ MRs , including the degree of detail in which these MRs were encoded , and their diversity . For example , the food set MRs will be more diverse for individuals that have experienced diﬀerent climates , environments , or cultures . Although the invention of the Acheulean hand axe modeled here resulted in genuine albeit transient autocatalytic structure , as mentioned earlier , archaeological evidence suggests that over a million years passed before the emergence of a persistent cognitive RAF . In another paper ( in progress ) , we propose that rapid cultural change in the Middle - Upper Paleolithic between 100 , 000 and 50 , 000 years ago required the ability to , not just recursively redescribe the contents of thought , but reﬂect on ideas from widely varying perspectives , at diﬀerent levels of abstraction , and that this in turn required the capacity to tailor the reactivity of thought to the current situation . This resulted in a second cognitive transition culminating in the crossing of a percolation threshold yielding a self - organizing autocatalytic semantic network that extended across diﬀerent knowledge domains , and routinely integrated new information by reframing it in terms of current understandings . The proposal is consistent with there being a genetic basis to cognitive modernity ( Corballis , 2004 ) , except that onset of the capacity for variable reactivity would have underwritten , not just complex language , but also other cultural innovations of this period , such as the ability to adapt tools to widely diﬀering task - speciﬁc uses , and generate art that served utilitarian , decorative , and possibly religious purposes . Thus , the model developed here can be extended beyond the Oldowan - Acheulean transition and applied to other periods of cultural change such as the Middle - Upper Paleolithic , and potentially also , the explosion of cultural novelty we are witnessing currently . There are formal models of many aspects of human cognition , such as learning , memory , planning , and concept combination , but little in the way of formal models of how they came to function together as an integrated whole , and how such wholes aﬀect one another over the course of human history . The structure of a modern human mind serves COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 35 as a scaﬀold for the interpretation of both external and internally generated MRs , which perpetually reinforce and revise that structure . It generates a unique stream of thought and experience , which expresses itself through its contribution—through a smile , a turn of phrase , or a world - changing innovation—to cultural evolution . The RAF approach taken here provides a means of addressing how this kind of semantic network came about , and how it evolves over time . COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 36 6 References Aerts , D . , Broekaert , J . , Gabora , L . , & Sozzo , S . ( 2016 ) . Generalizing prototype theory : A formal quantum framework . Frontiers in Psychology ( Cognition ) , 7 , 418 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2016 . 00418 Aerts , D . , Gabora , L . , & Sozzo , S . ( 2013 ) . Concepts and their dynamics : A quantum theoretical model . Topics in Cognitive Science , 5 , 737 – 772 . doi : 10 . 1111 / tops . 12042 Aiello , L . C . ( 1996 ) . Hominine pre - adaptations for language and cognition . In P . Mellars & K . Gibson ( Eds . ) , Modeling the early human mind ( pp . 89 – 99 ) . Cambridge , UK : McDonald Institute Monographs . Andersson , C . , & Törnberg , P . ( 2019 ) . Toward a macroevolutionary theory of human evolution : The social protocell . Biological Theory , 14 , 86 – 102 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s13752 - 018 - 0313 - y Baronchelli , A . , Ferrer - i - Cancho , R . , Pastor - Satorras , R . , Chater , N . , & Christiansen , M . H . ( 2013 ) . Networks in cognitive science . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 17 , 348 – 360 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tics . 2013 . 04 . 010 Barsalou , L . W . ( 1983 ) . Ad hoc categories . Mem . Cognition , 11 , 211 – 227 . doi : 10 . 3758 / BF03196968 Barsalou , L . W . ( 2005 ) . Abstraction as dynamic interpretation in perceptual symbol systems . In L . Gershkoﬀ - Stowe & D . Rakison ( Eds . ) , Building object categories in developmental time ( pp . 89 – 99 , 389 – 431 ) . Psychology Press : Earlbaum : Carnegie Symposium Series . Basadur , M . ( 1995 ) . The power of innovation : How to make innovation a way of life and put creative solutions to work . London , U . K : Pitman Professional Publishing . Beaty , R . E . , Benedek , M . , Silvia , P . J . , & Schacter , D . L . ( 2016 ) . Creative cognition and brain network dynamics . Trends in Cognitive Science , 20 , 87 – 95 . Bentley , R . A . , Hahn , M . W . , & Shennan , S . J . ( 2004 ) . Random drift and culture change . Proceedings of the Royal Society of London . Series B : Biological Sciences , 271 , COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 37 1443 – 1450 . doi : 10 . 1098 / rspb . 2004 . 2746 Betzel , R . F . , & Bassett , D . S . ( 2017 ) . Generative models for network neuroscience : Prospects and promise . Journal of The Royal Society Interface , 14 , 20170623 . Bickerton , D . ( 2007 ) . Language evolution : A brief guide for linguists . Lingua , 117 , 510 – 526 . Bowers , K . S . , Farvolden , P . , & Mermigis , L . ( 1995 ) . Intuitive antecedents of insight . In S . Ward & R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , The creative cognition approach ( pp . 27 – 51 ) . Cambridge , US : MIT Press . Boyd , R . , & Richerson , P . ( Eds . ) . ( 1988 ) . Culture and the evolutionary process . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Brockmeier , J . ( 2010 ) . After the archive : Remapping memory . Culture and Psychology , 16 , 5 – 35 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 1354067X09353212 Cabell , K . R . , & Valsiner , J . ( 2013 ) . The catalyzing mind : Beyond models of causality ( annals of theoretical psychology , volume 11 ) . Berlin : Springer . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4614 - 8821 - 7 Cavalli - Sforza , L . L . , & Feldman , M . W . ( Eds . ) . ( 1981 ) . Cultural transmission and evolution : A quantitative approach . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Cazzolla Gatti , R . , Fath , B . , Hordijk , W . , Kauﬀman , S . , & Ulanowicz , R . ( 2018 ) . Niche emergence as an autocatalytic process in the evolution of ecosystems . Journal of Theoretical Biology , 454 , 110 – 117 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jtbi . 2018 . 05 . 038 Chan , J . , & Schunn , C . ( 2015 ) . The impact of analogies on creative concept generation : Lessons from an in vivo study in engineering design . Cognitive Science , 39 , 126 – 155 . doi : 10 . 1111 / cogs . 12127 Corballis , M . ( 2004 ) . The origins of modernity : Was autonomous speech the critical factor ? Psychological Review , 111 , 543 – 552 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 295X . 111 . 2 . 543 Corballis , M . ( 2011 ) . The recursive mind : The origins of human language , thought and civilization . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . doi : 10 . 2307 / j . ctt6wpzjd Corballis , M . ( 2013 ) . The origins of language in manual gesture . In R . K . Gibson & COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 38 M . Tallerman ( Eds . ) , The oxford handbook of language evolution . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Donald , M . ( 1991 ) . Origins of the modern mind : Three stages in the evolution of culture and cognition . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Edwards , S . W . ( 2001 ) . A modern knapper’s assessment of the technical skills of the late acheulean biface workers at kalambo falls . In J . D . Clark ( Ed . ) , Kalambo falls prehistoric site ( volume 3 ) : The earlier cultures : Middle and earlier stone age ( pp . 605 – 611 ) . Cambridge University Press . Enquist , M . , Ghirlanda , S . , & Eriksson , K . ( 2011 ) . Modelling the evolution and diversity of cumulative culture . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B : Biological Sciences , 366 , 412 – 423 . doi : 10 . 1098 / rstb . 2010 . 0132 Erdös , P . , & Rényi , A . ( 1960 ) . On the evolution of random graphs . Publication of the Mathematical Institute of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences , 5 , 17 - 61 . Feinstein , J . S . ( 2006 ) . The nature of creative development . Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press . Fogarty , L . , Creanza , N . , & Feldman , M . W . ( 2018 ) . Cultural evolutionary perspectives on creativity and human innovation . Trends in Ecology & Evolution , 30 , 736 – 754 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tree . 2015 . 10 . 004 Gabora , L . ( 1998 ) . Autocatalytic closure in a cognitive system : A tentative scenario for the origin of culture . Psycoloquy , 9 ( 67 ) , [ adap - org / 9901002 ] . Gabora , L . ( 2000 ) . Conceptual closure : How memories are woven into an interconnected worldview . In G . Van de Vijver & J . Chandler ( Eds . ) , Closure : Emergent organizations and their dynamics ( pp . 42 – 53 ) . Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1749 - 6632 . 2000 . tb06264 . x Gabora , L . ( 2006 ) . Self - other organization : Why early life did not evolve through natural selection . Journal of Theoretical Biology , 241 , 443 – 450 . Gabora , L . ( 2013 ) . An evolutionary framework for culture : Selectionism versus communal exchange . Physics of Life Reviews , 10 , 117 – 145 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . plrev . 2013 . 03 . 006 COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 39 Gabora , L . ( 2017 ) . Honing theory : A complex systems framework for creativity . Nonlinear Dynamics , Psychology , and Life Sciences , 21 , 35 – 88 . Gabora , L . ( 2019 ) . Creativity : linchpin in the quest for a viable theory of cultural evolution . Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences , 27 , 77 – 83 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cobeha . 2018 . 09 . 013 Gabora , L . , & Aerts , D . ( 2009 ) . A model of the emergence and evolution of integrated worldviews . Journal of Mathematical Psychology , 53 , 434 – 451 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmp . 2009 . 06 . 004 Gabora , L . , & Kitto , K . ( 2013 ) . Concept combination and the origins of complex cognition . In E . Swan ( Ed . ) , Origins of mind : Biosemiotics series , volume 8 ( pp . 361 – 381 ) . Dordrecht : Springer . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 94 - 007 - 5419 - 5 _ 19 Gabora , L . , Leijnen , S . , Veloz , T . , & Lipo , C . ( 2011 ) . A non - phylogenetic conceptual network architecture for organizing classes of material artifacts into cultural lineages . In L . Carlson , C . Holscher , & T . F . Shipley ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the 33rd annual meeting of the cognitive science society ( pp . 2923 – 2928 ) . Austin TX : Cognitive Science Society . Gabora , L . , & Smith , C . ( 2018 ) . Two cognitive transitions underlying the capacity for cultural evolution . Journal of Anthropological Science , 96 , 27 – 52 . doi : 10 . 4436 / jass . 96008 Gabora , L . , & Steel , M . ( 2017 ) . Autocatalytic networks in cognition and the origin of culture . Journal of Theoretical Biology , 431 , 87 – 95 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jtbi . 2017 . 07 . 022 Gibson , J . J . ( 1997 ) . The theory of aﬀordances . In R . Shaw & J . Bransford ( Eds . ) , Perceiving , acting , and knowing : Towards an ecological psychology ( pp . 67 – 82 ) . Hillsdale , New Jersey : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . doi : 10 . 4324 / 9781315467931 Griﬃths , T . L . , Steyvers , M . , & Tenenbaum , J . B . ( 2007 ) . Topics in semantic representation . Psychological Review , 114 , 211 – 244 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 295X . 114 . 2 . 211 Hampton , J . A . ( 1988 ) . Disjunction of natural concepts . Memory and Cognition , 16 , COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 40 579 – 591 . doi : 10 . 3758 / BF03197059 Hauser , M . D . , Chomsky , N . , & Fitch , W . T . ( 2002 ) . The faculty of language : What is it , who has it and how did it evolve ? Science , 298 , 1569 - 1579 . Hauser , M . D . , Yang , C . , Berwick , R . C . , Tattersall , I . , Ryan , M . J . , Watumull , J . , . . . Lewontin , R . C . ( 2014 ) . The mystery of language evolution . Frontiers in Psychology , 5 , 401 . Henley , T . , & Kardas , M . , E . ans Rossano ( Eds . ) . ( 2020 ) . Handbook of cognitive archaeology : A psychological framework . Abingdon , UK : Routledge / Taylor and Francis . doi : 10 . 4324 / 9780429488818 Henrich , J . , & Boyd , R . ( 2002 ) . On modeling cognition and culture : Why replicators are not necessary for cultural evolution . Journal of Cognition and Culture , 2 , 87 – 112 . doi : 10 . 1163 / 156853702320281836 Heyes , C . ( 2018 ) . Enquire within : Cultural evolution and cognitive science . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B : Biological Sciences , 373 , 20170051 . doi : 10 . 1098 / rstb . 2017 . 0051 Holden , C . J . , & Mace , R . ( 2003 ) . Spread of cattle led to the loss of matrilineal descent in africa : a coevolutionary analysis . Proceedings of the Royal Society of London . Series B : Biological Sciences , 270 , 2425 – 2433 . doi : 10 . 1098 / rspb . 2003 . 2535 Hordijk , W . , Hein , J . , & Steel , M . ( 2010 ) . Autocatalytic sets and the origin of life . Entropy , 12 ( 7 ) , 1733 – 1742 . doi : 10 . 3390 / e12071733 Hordijk , W . , Kauﬀman , S . A . , & Steel , M . ( 2011 ) . Required levels of catalysis for emergence of autocatalytic sets in models of chemical reaction systems . International Journal of Molecular Science , 12 ( 5 ) , 3085 – 3101 . doi : 10 . 3390 / ijms12053085 Hordijk , W . , & Steel , M . ( 2004 ) . Detecting autocatalytic , self - sustaining sets in chemical reaction systems . Journal of Theoretical Biology , 227 ( 4 ) , 451 - 461 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jtbi . 2003 . 11 . 020 Hordijk , W . , & Steel , M . ( 2015 ) . Autocatalytic sets and boundaries . J . Syst . Chem . , 6 ( 1 ) . Hordijk , W . , & Steel , M . ( 2016 ) . Chasing the tail : The emergence of autocatalytic COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 41 networks . Biosystems , 152 , 1 – 10 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . biosystems . 2016 . 12 . 002 Howard , M . W . , & Kahana , M . J . ( 2002 ) . A distributed representation of temporal context . Journal of Mathematical Psychology , 46 , 269 – 299 . doi : 10 . 1006 / jmps . 2001 . 1388 Inizan , M . - L . , Reduron - Ballinger , M . , Roche , H . , & Tixier , J . ( 1999 ) . Technology and terminology of knapped stone . Nanterre , France : C . R . E . P . Jones , M . N . , & Mewhort , D . J . K . ( 2007 ) . Representing word meaning and order information in a composite holographic lexicon . Psychological Review , 114 , 1 – 37 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 295X . 114 . 1 . 1 Kanerva , P . ( 2009 ) . Hyperdimensional computing : An introduction to computing in distributed representations with high - dimensional random vectors . Cognitive Computation , 1 , 139 – 159 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s12559 - 009 - 9009 - 8 Karmiloﬀ - Smith , A . ( 1992 ) . Beyond modularity : A developmental perspective on cognitive science . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Karuza , E . A . , Thompson - Schill , S . L . , & Bassett , D . S . ( 2016 ) . Local patterns to global architectures : inﬂuences of network topology on human learning . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 20 , 629 – 640 . Kauﬀman , S . A . ( 1986 ) . Autocatalytic sets of proteins . Journal of Theoretical Biology , 119 , 1 – 24 . doi : 10 . 3390 / ijms12053085 Kauﬀman , S . A . ( 1993 ) . The origins of order . Oxford University Press . Klein , R . G . ( 2009 ) . The human career ( third edition ) . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Koonin , E . ( 2009 ) . Darwinian evolution in the light of genomics . Nucleic Acids Research , 37 , 1011 – 1034 . Kwantes , P . J . ( 2005 ) . Using context to build semantics . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 12 , 703 – 710 . doi : 10 . 3758 / BF03196761 Lieberman , P . ( 2007 ) . The evolution of human speech . Current Anthropology , 48 , 39 – 46 . McClelland , J . M . ( 2011 ) . Memory as a constructive process : The parallel distributed COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 42 processing approach . In S . Nalbantian , P . M . Matthews , & J . L . McClelland ( Eds . ) , The memory process : Neuroscientiﬁc and humanistic perspectives ( pp . 129 – 155 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Medaglia , J . D . , Lynall , M . E . , & Bassett , D . S . ( 2015 ) . Cognitive network neuroscience . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 27 , 1471 – 1491 . Mesoudi , A . , A . Whiten , & Laland , K . N . ( 2006 ) . Towards a uniﬁed science of cultural evolution . Behavioral and Brain Science , 29 , 329 – 347 . doi : 10 . 1017 / S0140525X06009083 Mithen , S . ( 2006 ) . Ethnobiology and the evolution of the human mind . Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute , 12 , S45 – S61 . Morgan , T . J . H . , Uomini , N . T . , Rendell , L . E . , Chouinard - Thuly , L . , Street , S . E . , Lewis , H . M . , . . . Laland , K . N . ( 2015 ) . Experimental evidence for the co - evolution of hominin tool - making teaching and language . Nature Communications , 6 , 6029 EP . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms7029 Mossel , E . , & Steel , M . ( 2005 ) . Random biochemical networks and the probability of self - sustaining autocatalysis . Journal of Theoretical Biology , 233 , 327 – 336 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jtbi . 2004 . 10 . 011 Muthukrishna , M . , Doebeli , M . , Chudek , M . , & Henrich , J . ( 2018 ) . The cultural brain hypothesis : How culture drives brain expansion , sociality , and life history . PLoS Computational Biology , 14 , e1006504 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1006504 Ohnumma , K . , Aoki , K . , & Akazawa , T . ( 1997 ) . Transmission of tool - making through verbal and non - verbal communication : Preliminary experiments in lavallois ﬂake production . Anthropological Science , 105 , 159 – 168 . doi : 10 . 1537 / ase . 105 . 159 Osherson , D . N . , & Smith , E . E . ( 1981 ) . On the adequacy of prototype theory as a theory of concepts . Cognition , 9 , 35 – 58 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0010 - 0277 ( 81 ) 90013 - 5 Overmann , K . A . , & Coolidge , F . L . ( 2019 ) . Squeezing minds from stones : Cognitive archaeology and the evolution of the human mind . New York , NY : Oxford University Press . doi : 10 . 1093 / oso / 9780190854614 . 001 . 0001 COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 43 Pargeter , J . , Khreisheh , N . , & Stout , D . ( 2019 ) . Understanding stone tool - making skill acquisition : Experimental methods and evolutionary implications . Journal of Human Evolution , 133 , 146 – 166 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jhevol . 2019 . 05 . 010 Penn , D . C . , Holyoak , K . J . , & Povinelli , D . J . ( 2008 ) . Darwin’s mistake : Explaining the discontinuity between human and nonhuman minds . Behavioral and Brain Science , 31 , 109 – 178 . doi : 10 . 1017 / S0140525X08003543 Perreault , C . , & Mathew , S . ( 2012 ) . Dating the origin of language using phonemic diversity . PLoS One , 7 , e35289 . Powell , A . , Shennan , S . , & Thomas , M . G . ( 2009 ) . Late pleistocene demography and the appearance of modern human behavior . Science , 324 , 1298 – 1301 . Rogers , A . R . ( 1988 ) . Does biology constrain culture ? American Anthropologist , 90 , 819 – 831 . Sackett , P . R . , Lievens , F . , Van Iddekinge , C . H . , & Kuncel , N . R . ( 2017 ) . Individual diﬀerences and their measurement : A review of 100 years of research . Journal of Applied Psychology , 102 , 254 – 273 . doi : 10 . 1037 / apl0000151 Segre , D . ( 2000 ) . Compositional genomes : Prebiotic information transfer in mutually catalytic noncovalent assemblies . P . Natl . A . Science USA , 97 , 4112 – 4117 . Sng , O . , Neuberg , S . L . , Varnum , M . E . , & Kenrick , D . T . ( 2018 ) . The behavioral ecology of cultural psychological variation . Psychological Review , 125 , 714 – 743 . doi : 10 . 1037 / rev0000104 Steel , M . , Hordijk , W . , & Xavier , J . C . ( 2019 ) . Autocatalytic networks in biology : structural theory and algorithms . Journal of the Royal Society Interface , 16 , rsif . 2018 . 0808 . doi : 10 . 1098 / rsif . 2018 . 0808 Stout , D . , Toth , N . , Schick , K . , & Chaminade , T . ( 2008 ) . Neural correlates of early stone age toolmaking : technology , language and cognition in human evolution . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B : Biological Sciences , 363 , 1939 – 1949 . doi : 10 . 1098 / rstb . 2008 . 0001 Tattersall , I . ( 1998 ) . The origin of the human capacity . American Museum of Natural COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 44 History . Tehrani , J . J . , & Riede , F . ( 2008 ) . Towards an archaeology of pedagogy : learning , teaching and the generation of material culture traditions . World Archaeology , 40 , 316 – 331 . Toth , N . , & Schick , K . ( 2009 ) . The Oldowan : The tool making of early hominins and chimpanzees compared . Annual Review of Anthropology , 38 , 289 – 305 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev - anthro - 091908 / 164521 Toth , N . , & Schick , K . ( 2018 ) . An overview of the cognitive implications of the Oldowan industrial complex . Azania : Archaeological Research in Africa , 53 , 3 – 39 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 0067270X . 2018 . 1439558 Vasas , V . , Fernando , C . , Santos , M . , Kauﬀman , S . , & Szathmáry , E . ( 2012 ) . Evolution before genes . Biol . Direct , 7 ( 1 ) . Veloz , T . , Gabora , L . , Eyjolfson , M . , & Aerts , D . ( 2011 ) . Toward a formal model of the shifting relationship between concepts and contexts during associative thought . In D . Song , M . Melucci , I . Frommholz , P . Zhang , L . Wang , & S . Arafat ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the ﬁfth international symposium on quantum interaction ( pp . 25 – 34 ) . Cognitive Science Society : Springer . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 24971 - 6 _ 4 Veloz , T . , Tempkin , I . , & Gabora , L . ( 2012 ) . A conceptual network - based approach to inferring cultural phylogenies . In N . Miyake , D . Peebles , & R . P . Cooper ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the 34th annual meeting of the cognitive science society ( pp . 2487 – 2492 ) . Austin TX : Cognitive Science Society . Vetsigian , K . , Woese , C . , & Goldenfeld , N . ( 2006 ) . Collective evolution and the genetic code . P . Natl . A . Science USA , 103 , 10696 – 10701 . Voorhees , B . , Read , D . , & Gabora , L . ( 2020 ) . Identity , kinship , and the evolution of cooperation . Current Anthropology , 61 , 194 – 218 . Whiten , A . ( 2019 ) . Cultural evolution in animals . Annual Review of Ecology , Evolution , and Systematics , 50 , 1 – 22 . Woese , C . R . ( 2002 ) . On the evolution of cells . Proceedings of the National Academy Science , 99 , 8742 – 8747 . COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 45 Xavier , J . C . , Hordijk , W . , Kauﬀman , S . , M . , S . , & Martin , W . F . ( 2020 ) . Autocatalytic chemical networks at the origin of metabolism . Proceedings of the Royal Society of London . Series B : Biological Sciences , 287 , 20192377 . COGNITIVE TRANSITION CULTURE AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORKS 46 7 Appendix Proof of Proposition 2 : If we treat the transfer of CCPs between individuals ( under the process described by Expression ( 5 ) ) as a stationary Markov process on the directed graph D = ( V , A ) , the probability P that no such events occur in the time interval [ 0 , T ] is given by : P = Y v ∈ V [ exp ( − cρT ) ] o ( v ) = exp ( − cρT | A | ) , ( 6 ) where o ( v ) is the out - degree of v , and c > 0 is a constant ( note that P v ∈ V o ( v ) = | A | ) . It follows from Eqn . ( 6 ) that P converges to 1 as ρ → 0 . On the other hand , suppose that v lies in a strongly connected component C of D and let d denote the smallest integer for which , for every vertex w in C , there is a directed path from v to w of length at most d ( d is well - deﬁned , since v and w lie in the same strongly connected component of D ) . Then , for any other individual w in C , the probability that at least one CCP percolates from v to w in the time interval [ 0 , T ] ( either directly or via a chain of other individuals in C ) is at least : (cid:18) 1 − exp (cid:18) − c 0 ρTd (cid:19)(cid:19) d , ( 7 ) and this quantity clearly converges to 1 as ρ grows ( here , c 0 > 0 is a constant ) . To justify the claim that Expression ( 7 ) is indeed a lower bound on the stated probability , observe that if v = v 0 , v 1 , v 2 , . . . , v k is any path in C of length k ≤ d , then the probability that a given CCP percolates from v i to v i + 1 ( where 0 ≤ i < k ) in the time interval [ iT / d , ( i + 1 ) T / d ] ( which has duration T / d ) is 1 − exp ( − c 0 ρT / d ) . Thus , by the Markov property , the probability of a percolation along this path of length k is at least the product of these terms .