C YBER P SYCHOLOGY & B EHAVIOR Volume 4 , Number 2 , 2001 Mary Ann Liebert , Inc . Research on Presence in Virtual Reality : A Survey MARTIJN J . SCHUEMIE , M . Sc . , 1 PETER VAN DER STRAATEN , 1 MEREL KRIJN , M . Sc . , 2 and CHARLES A . P . G . VAN DER MAST , Ph . D . 1 ABSTRACT Virtual Reality ( VR ) is starting to be used in psychological therapy around the world . How - ever , a thorough understanding of the reason why VR is effective and what effect it has on the human psyche is still missing . Most research on this subject is related to the concept of presence . This paper gives an up - to - date overview of research in this diverse field . It starts with the most prevailing definitions and theories on presence , most of which attribute spe - cial roles for the mental process of attention and for mental models of the virtual space . A re - view of the phenomena thought to be effected by presence shows that there is still a strong need for research on this subject because little conclusive evidence exists regarding the rela - tionship between presence and phenoma such as emotional responses to virtual stimuli . An investigation shows there has been substantial research for developing methods for measur - ing presence and research regarding factors that contribute to presence . Knowledge of these contributing factors can play a vital role in development of new VR applications , but key knowledge elements in this area are still missing . 183 INTRODUCTION V IRTUAL REALITY ( VR ) IS QUICKLY becoming a serious tool for psychiatrists and thera - pists . However , even though research has shown VR to be effective in psychological ther - apy there is still much uncertainty about the reasons behind all this . For this , we need an un - derstanding of the effect VR has on the human psyche . Current research on this subject is fo - cussed primarily on the concept of presence . The main goal of this paper is to investigate the current knowledge on presence to gain an understanding of the psychological mechanism underlying an experience in VR . This under - standing is necessary for determining those as - pects of the VR - system and the context in which it is used that contribute to an effective and efficient treatment . Another goal of this article is to make a clear distinction between theory and empirical find - ings . Whenever possible , a description is made of the experiments supporting certain findings . The number of participants mentioned are those whose responses have been included in the statistical analysis underlying the findings . About statistical relationships between vari - ables , the fact whether these are significant is reported , and a measure of the correlation is provided when it is available and independent of the used unit of measure . After reviewing the most common defini - tions of presence and theories on the nature of presence this article will describe those phe - 1 Department of Information Systems and Software Engineering , Faculty of Information Technology and Systems , Delft University of Technology , Delft , The Netherlands . 2 Department of Clinical Psychology , Faculty of Psychology , University of Amsterdam , The Netherlands . nomena that are thought to be explained by presence . These “results of presence” are fol - lowed by a description of the various methods for measuring presence . To bridge the gap be - tween presence and system and user charac - teristics , the research on factors that can cause presence is then reviewed . VR is a technology that typically provides in - teraction and immerses the user’s senses . This sets it apart from other technologies such as television or books . This paper deals primarily with presence in VR , even though this concept is also applied to nonimmersive and noninter - active media . ON THE NATURE OF PRESENCE In presence research several definitions and theories have been proposed ; the prominent ones will be described here . Definitions The term “presence” is related to a wide field of research . Lombard and Ditton 1 identified six different explications of presence that have been used in the literature : presence as (cid:149) social richness , the extent to which the medium is perceived as sociable , warm , sensitive , or personal when it is used to in - teract with other people ; (cid:149) realism , the extent to which a medium can seem perceptual and / or socially realistic ; (cid:149) transportation , the sensations of “you are there , ” “it is here , ” and / or “we are to - gether” ; (cid:149) immersion , the extent to which the senses are engaged by the mediated environ - ment ; (cid:149) social actor within medium , the extent to which the user responds socially to a rep - resentation of a person through a medium ; and (cid:149) medium as social actor , the extent to which the medium itself is perceived as a social actor ( e . g . , treating computers as social en - tities 2 ) . However , presence as discussed in literature related to immersive VR can most often be characterized by the concept of presence as transportation : people are usually considered “present” in an immersive VR when they re - port a sensation of being in the virtual world ( “you are there” ) . The term co - presence or so - cial presence is often reserved for the sense of being together in a virtual world ( “we are to - gether” ) . Sheridan 3 makes another distinction . He em - phasizes the difference between presence , that is the sense of being in a computer - generated world , and telepresence , the sense of being at a real remote location . Heeter 4 distinguishes between three differ - ent types of presence : (cid:149) personal presence , a measure of the extent to which the person feels like he or she is part of the virtual environment ( VE ) ; (cid:149) social presence , refers to the extent to which other beings ( living or synthetic ) also ex - ist in the VE ; and (cid:149) environmental presence , refers to the extent to which the environment itself acknowl - edges and reacts to the person in the VE . Schloerb 5 distinguishes two types of presence : (cid:149) subjective presence , the likelihood that the person judges himself to be physically present in the remote or virtual environ - ment ; and (cid:149) objective presence , the likelihood of suc - cessfully completing a task . Schloerb’s definitions of subjective and objec - tive presence are completely empirical . Schloerb questions the value of subjective presence , be - cause objective presence , the ability to work , should be the most important criteria for a VE . An important distinction proposed by Slater and Wilbur 6 is that between “presence” and “immersion” : (cid:149) immersion : an objective description of as - pects of the system such as field of view and display resolution . (cid:149) presence : a subjective phenomenon such as the sensation of being in a VE . A less often used but often cited taxonomy is that of Zeltzer 7 who argues that a VR system can be characterized by its : SCHUEMIE ET AL . 184 (cid:149) autonomy , or the extent to which the VE is more than just passive geometry ; (cid:149) interaction , the degree to which VE param - eters can be modified at runtime ; and (cid:149) presence , the measure for the number and fidelity of available sensory input and output channels . Here , Zeltzer 7 uses the term “presence” in a way that closely resembles the term “immer - sion” defined by Slater . 6 Unfortunately , the word “immersion” is sometimes also used in a way closely resembling the subjective definition of presence ( e . g . , Bangay and Preston 8 and Witmer and Singer 9 ) . In this article Slater and Wilbur’s 6 definitions of the terms “immersion” and “pres - ence” will be used , unless stated otherwise . Theories In the literature , several theories on the na - ture of presence in immersive VR have been proposed . These will be described below . Presence as non - mediation . In a discussion on the Presence - L Listserv during the spring of 2000 a general explication of presence was de - fined , which is still being refined today . The lat - est version to date ( Sept . 2000 ) is : Presence ( a shortened version of the term “telepresence” ) is a psychological state or sub - jective perception in which even though part or all of an individual’s current experience is generated by and / or filtered through human - made technology , part or all of the individual’s perception fails to accurately acknowledge the role of the technology in the experience . Ex - cept in the most extreme cases , the individual can indicate correctly that s / he is using the technology , but at * some level * and to * some degree , * her / his perceptions overlook that knowledge and objects , events , entities , and environments are perceived as if the technol - ogy was not involved in the experience . 10 ( Experience is defined as a person’s observa - tion of and / or interaction with objects , entities , and / or events in her or his environment ; per - ception , the result of perceiving , is defined as a meaningful interpretation of experience . ) This explication emphasizes a dualism : part of the perception acknowledges that the expe - rience is mediated by technology , while an - other part does not . This is rarely explicitly stated in presence literature even though it is an essential aspect of the concept . People al - ways know the experience is mediated , and , given the current state of technology , can al - ways distinguish between mediated and direct stimuli . Nevertheless , at some level , the illusion of nonmediation can be perceived . Exclusive presence . Slater et al . 11 stress the participant’s sense of “being there” in the vir - tual environment , and point out that a high sense of presence in a VE requires a simulta - neous low level of presence in the real world and vice versa . Biocca 12 states that “at one point in time , users can be said to feel as if they are physically present in only one of three places : the physical environment , the virtual environ - ment , or the imaginal environment . Presence oscillates among these three poles . ” The level of presence experienced during an interval is dependent on the relative amount of time be - ing present in the virtual world . 13 Presence by involvement . Witmer and Singer 9 relate presence in part to the concept of atten - tion : “presence may vary across a range of val - ues that depends in part on the allocation of at - tentional resources . ” (cid:149) Involvement , a psychological state experi - enced as a consequence of focusing one’s attention on a coherent set of stimuli or re - lated activities and events . (cid:149) Immersion , defined as a psychological state characterized by perceiving oneself to be enveloped by , included in , and interacting with a VE . ( This definition of immersion should not be confused with the often - used definition of immersion as an objec - tive measure as used in this article . ) Both involvement and immersion are thought to be necessary for experiencing pres - ence . The authors state that by focusing atten - tion a person will get more involved and will as a consequence experience a higher sense of presence . They call presence similar to the con - cept of selective attention , which “refers to the tendency to focus on selected information that PRESENCE IN VR 185 is meaningful and of particular interest to the individual . ” 9 Ecological view . Another view of presence is based on the ecological theory of percep - tion . 14 – 16 Basic concepts of this approach are : (cid:149) The environment offers situated affordances . The term affordance was coined by Gib - son 17 and is meant to describe the possi - bilities or opportunities that the environ - ment ( i . e . , surroundings ) of an animal , offers or affords the animal . For example , for a human , the ground affords walking , a chasm affords falling and hurting , an ap - ple might afford eating , and a tiger affords being eaten . A particular affordance is de - pendent on both environment and animal . The surface of water in a ditch does not af - ford support or walking for humans , but it does for water bugs . (cid:149) Perception - action coupling . An organism perceives its environment in terms of its affordances , making perception depen - dent on possible action . (cid:149) Tools become “ready - to - hand . ” According to Heidegger 16a using a tool precludes the user from possessing a stable representation of the tool . The user is no longer aware of the tool itself but only of the usefulness the tool has in whatever task is performed . 16 Applying the concept of perception - action coupling to VR , one can conclude that the user will perceive the VR equipment in terms of what can be done with it ( i . e . , interacting in the VE ) . The mediating technology itself will eventually become “ready - to - hand , ” invisible to the user . Zahorik and Jenison 16 state that successfully supported actions in an environment will lead one to perceive oneself as existing in that en - vironment , to a sense of presence . An action is said to be successfully supported when the re - sult of that action is considered lawful : re - sponses from the environment must be similar to those in the real - world environment in which our perceptual system evolved . Social / cultural view . Other researchers agree with the key role of perceived possible inter - actions in presence but stress that “action is es - sentially social . ” 18 Experiencing presence de - pends on whether the VE behaves and is con - structed according to our cultural expectations and whether the VE is perceived and inter - preted the same by others in the VE . 19 Estimation theory . Sheridan 20 in an attempt to combine the ecological perspective and the tra - ditional rationalistic view , proposes the esti - mation theory . This theory supports the dis - tinction between objective and subjective reality of the rationalistic approach , but states that we can never truly know objective reality , but are continuously making and refining a mental model which estimates reality , based on our senses and interaction with that reality . Embodied presence . In a similar vein , Schubert et al . 21 propose the embodied cognition frame - work by Glenberg as a means for explaining presence . A mental representation of the envi - ronment is made in terms of patterns of possi - ble actions , based on perception and memory : “Presence is experienced when these actions in - clude the perceived possibility to navigate and move the own body in the VE . ” In predicting the outcome of actions , humans have the ability to suppress contributions of the current environment to conceptualization , thus explaining why we can experience presence in a VE despite sensing conflicting features of the real environment . Conclusions on the nature of presence The previous paragraph listed several defi - nitions and theories on the nature of presence that do not necessarily contradict each other , although they can have different implications . To refine the concept of presence , better in - struments for measuring presence are needed . Unfortunately , the way presence is measured depends on the theory used . Prothero et al . 22 suggest that one way to escape this circularity is to use a converging approach : based on a simple theory , a measure can be developed which can be used to improve the theory , and so on . Already several research groups have at - tempted such an approach , as will be shown in the section on measures . Kalawsky 23 warns that “presence is a multi - SCHUEMIE ET AL . 186 dimensional parameter that is arguably an um - brella term for many inter - related perceptual and psychological factors . ” Most theories men - tioned above attempt to explain presence in terms of several underlying factors . One com - mon factor is that of attention . Also , most scholars relate presence to a mental model of the virtual reality with the ( virtual ) body in it . In fact , Prothero et al . 22 claim that “‘Presence’ and ‘situation awareness’ are overlapping con - structs . ” Lackner and DiZio 24 supply anecdo - tal evidence that when people have difficulty forming a mental model of a real ( but nonter - restrial ) space , they also report a loss of sense of presence . RESULTS OF PRESENCE For the concept of presence to be useful and applicable in practical situations it is important to understand the results or consequences of presence . This section will review the theories and empirical studies on the usefulness of pres - ence , and thus its relationship to other con - structs . Subjective sensation Almost every theory on presence refers to the subjective sensation of “being there” experi - enced and reported during immersion in a VE , and this sensation is in fact part of most defi - nitions of presence . However , for instance , the explication statement from the Presence - L List - serv does not exclude a state where one does not have an explicit sensation of “being there” but still could be said to experience some form of presence . This subjective sensation can apply to the en - vironment currently being experienced , or to memories of past experiences . As Slater et al . 25 note , a key result of presence is that a person remembers the VE as a place rather than a set of pictures . Task performance As Welch 26 stated , “there is a pervasive be - lief that presence is causally related to perfor - mance . . . Despite the popularity of this notion , however , there is no solid evidence to support it . ” Welch continues by quoting Witmer in a personal communication about the review of several research projects : “significant correla - tion between presence and performance were the exception rather than the rule . ” Ellis 27 even argues that for some tasks less presence might lead to better performance , for instance when a more abstract view of an environment is more helpful for completing the task . Mania and Chalmers 28 confirm that presence need not be related to task performance in an empirical study with three conditions : lectures were given on a specific topic in the real world , in a virtual classroom , and an auditory - only en - vironment . In a between - subject design , 18 sub - jects were assigned to each condition . A pre - liminary analysis of the data was done by using a comparison of means and standard devia - tions and by applying the ANOVA method . Presence was found not to be correlated with the task performance of acquiring knowledge during the lecture . Kim and Biocca 29 however , in a study in - volving 96 subjects being exposed to an in - fomercial on TV , did find a weak but signifi - cant correlation between the part of their presence questionnaire labeled “departure” and both factual memory and average recog - nition speed for recognizing stills from the in - fomercial . Slater et al . 30 and Steed et al . 31 found a rela - tionship between immersion and leadership . In a between - subject design with 30 subjects and 3 conditions ( HMD and 2 types of desktop - VR systems ) , where subjects had to solve a riddle together , those in the more immersive condi - tions tended to evolve as the leaders of the group . However , no relationship between im - mersion and presence was found in this study . Responses and emotions Perhaps one of the most important conse - quences of presence is that a virtual experience can evoke the same reactions and emotions as a real experience . Hodges et al . 32 in a between - subject experi - ment with 10 subjects on a wait - list and 10 sub - jects being treated for fear of heights in VR , showed that the subjects , who were all acro - phobic , did show increased subjectively re - PRESENCE IN VR 187 ported anxiety when confronted with height in the VE . They further showed that treatment in VR reduces acrophobia when compared to the waiting list . Later experiments around the world confirmed their findings , also for other phobias . Regenbrecht et al . 33 investigated the rela - tionship between presence and fear of heights , both measured by questionnaires . In an exper - iment with 37 nonphobic subjects they did not find a significant correlation ( r 5 0 . 251 , p . 0 . 10 ) between presence and fear . A regression analysis did show that presence was the best predictor of fear . Schuemie et al . , 34 in an ex - plorative study with 10 subjects being treated for fear of heights , did find a significant corre - lation between fear and presence reported on questionnaires ( r 5 0 . 4461 ) , but no significant correlation ( r 5 2 0 . 325 ) between presence and reduction of acrophobia ( also measured through questionnaires ) . North et al . 35 found that people can show signs of fear of public speaking when con - fronted with a virtual audience . Slater et al . 25 in a between - subject study with 10 subjects and 2 conditions ( positive and negative audience ) showed that , in a regression analysis , presence tended to amplify the subject’s response to the audience . In other words , people experiencing a higher level of presence were prone to report more negative reactions to a negative audience and more positive reactions to a positive audi - ence . When confronted with visual cues suggest - ing motion , a person will tend to correct for the perceived motion by adjusting their body pos - ture . Freeman et al . , 36 in an experiment with 24 subjects , investigated the relationship between reported presence and postural responses . No significant correlation ( r 5 0 . 025 ) was found , however . Simulator sickness One problem associated with using VR is that it can cause nausea and dizziness , a phe - nomenon known as “simulator sickness . ” Wit - mer and Singer 9 found a significant negative correlation between simulator sickness re - ported on the Simulator Sickness Question - naire and presence measured using the Witmer and Singer questionnaire ( r 5 2 0 . 426 , p , 0 . 001 ) . In contradiction , Slater et al . 37 found a posi - tive correlation between simulator sickness and presence . Conclusions on results of presence Based on the current status of presence re - search , much uncertainty remains as to the use - fulness of presence . Presence , when defined as a subjective sensation , can be a goal in itself for certain applications such as games and movies . Whether presence can contribute to better task performance is controversial based on the re - ported findings . And although the usefulness of presence for emotional responses and phobia treatment seems to have more empiric evidence , this too is inconclusive . One problem here is that only weak evidence for a relationship between pres - ence and emotional responses such as fear has been found , but no study has yet addressed the causality of this relationship . In other words , it is still unclear whether higher measured pres - ence causes stronger emotional responses in a VE or the other way around . MEASURING PRESENCE Measures for presence are often based on the expected results of presence . A distinction can be made between subjective measures , requir - ing introspection by the subjects , and objective measures . Objective measures can further be divided into behavioral and physiological mea - sures . These types of measurement will be re - viewed below . Subjective measures : Questionnaires The most commonly used measures in pres - ence research are based on subjective ratings through questionnaires . These will now be de - scribed in more detail , as well as some other subjective rating methods . This section will also present some of the components of pres - ence and immersion that have been found through the use of these questionnaires com - SCHUEMIE ET AL . 188 bined with factor and cluster analysis meth - ods . As Witmer and Singer 9 rightly stress , any measure of presence should be both reliable ( i . e . , only dependent on the characteristics under consideration ) , and valid ( i . e . , measuring what it intends to measure and measuring it well ) . More specifically , the authors emphasize that a measure or scale can have content validity , or “the coverage of the measured behavioral do - main by the scale items” and construct validity , “the extent to which it can be said to measure a theoretical construct or trait . ” If available , these characteristics of the measurements will be mentioned here as well . An advantage of questionnaires is that not only subjective sensations during the experi - ence in a VE can be measured . Subjects can also be asked to describe the VE and their own physiological and behavioral responses , al - though these observations are of course less re - liable because of their subjective nature . Sometimes these questionnaires consist of a single question , for example , “I feel a sense of actually being in the same room with others when I am connected to a MOO . ” 38 To make the measure more reliable , often several ques - tions are used . 39 , 40 However , recently a more or less systematic approach has been taken to establish reliable and validated question - naires . The most prominent ones will be de - scribed here . Slater and colleagues . The questionnaire de - veloped by Slater and colleagues is developed over a number of studies , 41 and has received much attention in presence research . It is based on several questions , which are all variations on three themes : 42 (cid:149) the subjects sense of “being there” ; (cid:149) the extent to which the VE becomes more “real or present” than everyday reality ; and (cid:149) the “locality , ” the extent to which the VE is thought of as a “place” that was visited rather than just a set of images . These themes are directly derived from the research group’s theory on the nature of pres - ence and are all strictly related to results of presence . The presence score is taken as the number of answers that have a high score . Witmer and Singer . Based on their theory of involvement and immersion , and on previous empirical and theoretical research , Witmer and Singer 9 determined several factors that are thought to contribute to a sense of presence : (cid:149) Control factors , the amount of control the user had on events in the VE . (cid:149) Sensory factors , the quality , number and consistency of displays . (cid:149) Distraction factors , the degree of distraction by objects and events in the real world . (cid:149) Realism factors , the degree of realism of the portrayed VE . On their Presence Questionnaire ( PQ ) , users can rate their experience in the VE according to these factors on questions with a 7 - point Lik - ert scale . The presence score is the sum of these ratings . To validate this questionnaire , 152 subjects were asked to answer the questions after using a VE . The correlation between single items and the total score was investigated and most items showed a strong correlation . Items showing no significant correlation were deleted . However , as Slater 43 pointed out , no correction was made for the fact that the item score already would be correlated with the total because the item it - self is included in the sum . It is also interesting to note that the PQ is attempting to measure presence by measuring its causes , as evaluated by the user , and not its results . The PQ was reduced by dropping items that did not contribute to its reliability . From a clus - ter analysis on data from this reduced PQ scale Witmer and Singer 9 found three factors , which did not perfectly match the original factors , mentioned above . These factors , which re - grouped items from the original factors , were labeled : (cid:149) Involved / Control —the control and respon - siveness of a VE , and how involving a VE is . (cid:149) Natural —the naturalness of interactions PRESENCE IN VR 189 and control of locomotion , and the consis - tency of a VE . (cid:149) Interface Quality —the amount of interfer - ence or distraction from task performance , and the participant’s ability to concentrate on the tasks . Calculations over multiple experiments in - dicated the reliability of the PQ to be 0 . 88 ( Cronbach’s a , n 5 152 ) . On the subject of con - tent validity , the authors state that the PQ items were based on a review of the presence litera - ture and “tap both aspects of presence : in - volvement and immersion . ” Witmer and Singer 9 did a preliminary construct validation by checking the association with other vari - ables and constructs such as simulator sickness , task performance , natural modes of interaction , spatial ability tests and relation to their Im - mersive Tendency Questionnaire measuring the tendency to become involved or immersed . The results of this validation were positive . Igroup Presence Questionnaire ( IPQ ) . Schubert et al . 44 constructed their IPQ by combining pre - vious published questionnaires , among which were those of Witmer and Singer 9 and Slater and colleagues , 41 , 42 with a questionnaire from earlier research 33 and some newly developed questions on technological and context vari - ables . The resulting 75 - item questionnaire was submitted to 246 volunteers , most of whom were male desktop - based - VR users . It should be noted that most entries were from game - based VR systems , and only a small minority involved an HMD or a CAVE system . From a factor analysis eight factors were extracted ; three of these were found to be concerned with presence itself , and five were identified as im - mersion factors . The presence factors , which entailed only subjective reports of how users experienced the VE , were : (cid:149) spatial presence ( SP ) , the relation between the VE as a space and the own body ; (cid:149) involvement ( INV ) , the awareness devoted to the VE ; and (cid:149) realness ( REAL ) , the sense of reality attrib - uted to the VE . The immersion factors , the factors concerned with descriptions of the interaction of the user with the VE or with descriptions of the tech - nological side of the VE , were : (cid:149) quality of immersion ( QI ) , the sensory qual - ity for richness and consistency of the mul - timodal presentation ; (cid:149) drama ( DRAMA ) , the perception of dra - matic content and structures ; (cid:149) interface awareness ( IA ) , the awareness of interfaces that distract from the VE expe - rience ; (cid:149) exploration of VE ( EXPL ) , the possibility to explore and actively search the VE ; and (cid:149) predictability ( PRED ) , the ability to predict and anticipate what will happen next . The authors contend that the factor analysis provides supporting evidence for a distinction between reports on subjective experiences—the presence factors—and reported evaluations of the technology—the immersion factors . Fur - thermore , the two factors spatial presence ( SP ) and involvement ( INV ) support the distinction between a spatial - constructive and an attention component . This distinction was postulated earlier by Witmer and Singer 9 and was also de - rived by the authors from the Embodied Pres - ence Model . Finally , Schubert et al . 44 state that the two factors SP and INV together load on a first second - order factor , which thus might be a general presence factor . Though not pre - dicted by the model , and to the authors’ sur - prise , a third factor ( “realness” ) also loaded on this general presence factor . Schubert and col - leagues 44 calculated the internal consistency of IPQ over two studies to be 0 . 85 and 0 . 87 ( Cron - bach’s a ; n 5 264 , n 5 296 ) . Kim and Biocca . Kim and Biocca 29 constructed a questionnaire with eight items based on the - ory and questionnaires by other authors . Ninety - six subjects filled in the questions after having been exposed to an infomercial on TV . A factor analysis found two factors , which were labeled using a metaphor of transportation : (cid:149) arrival , being present in the mediated en - vironment ; and (cid:149) departure , not being present in the un - mediated environment . The arrival factor included items related to feeling one had arrived in another world than SCHUEMIE ET AL . 190 the real one ( the world of the infomercial ) ; the departure factor included items relating to the feeling one had never left the real world . ITC Sense Of Presence Inventory ( ITC - SOPI ) . The questionnaires mentioned so far were de - signed with certain media in mind , such as immersive VR . Lessiter et al . 45 attempted to create a measure that should apply across a range of media ; for example , also to televi - sion and cinema . For their ITC - SOPI ques - tionnaire 63 items were generated which were thought to have relevance to the con - cept of presence . All items had a 5 - point Lik - ert scale . The questionnaire was administered to 604 people following their experience of a mediated environment . Factor analysis found four factors : (cid:149) Physical Space : for example , “I had a sense of being in the scenes displayed , ” “I felt I was visiting the places in the displayed en - vironment , ” “I felt that the characters and / or objects could almost touch me . ” (cid:149) Engagement ; for example , “I felt involved ( in the displayed environment ) , ” “I en - joyed myself , ” “My experience was in - tense . ” (cid:149) Naturalness ; for example , “The content seemed believable to me , ” “I had a strong sense that the characters and objects were solid , ” “The displayed environment seemed natural . ” (cid:149) Negative effects ; for example , “I felt dizzy , ” “I felt disorientated , ” “I felt nauseous . ” Eventually 44 items were retained , which loaded on one of these factors . The similarity between the first three factors and the factors found by Schubert et al . 44 is , as noted by the authors , striking . Lessiter and colleagues 45 cal - culated the internal consistency coefficients for each of the four factors and found alphas rang - ing from 0 . 94 ( Physical Space ) to 0 . 76 ( Natu - ralness ) . The authors did a preliminary valida - tion of their questionnaire by comparing its results to results they obtained by using com - parable ( but not identical ) questions from the Slater et al . questionnaire . The results showed that both questionnaires load onto the same factors and can discriminate between different media . Further studies are planned to directly compare the ITC - SOPI with Slater et al . ’s 42 questions . The authors also computed scale scores for each factor for the different media across which data were collected . They found that the scores for the factors were correlated to the media format in a predictable way . For instance , the factor Physical Space showed sen - sitivity to media format . Lombard and Ditton . Lombard and Ditton 2 are also creating a cross - media presence ques - tionnaire . Participants were assigned to one of two conditions : high or low presence . The high presence condition involved a 3D IMAX movie , the low presence condition a 12 - inch black and white television . A 103 - item questionnaire was developed based on items used by other au - thors . So far , 307 subjects completed the high presence condition . The experiment is still on - going . In a factor analysis of the preliminary results the following factors are found : (cid:149) immersion relates to the sense of immer - sion , involvement and engagement in the mediated environment ; (cid:149) parasocial interaction relates to interacting with other people in real time in the me - diated environment ; (cid:149) parasocial relationships concern feelings of friendship , etc . , toward people in the VE ; (cid:149) physiological response concerns , amongst others , simulator sickness ; (cid:149) social reality relates to how likely the events are to occur in reality ; (cid:149) interpersonal social richness relates to how well the user could observe interpersonal communication cues ; and (cid:149) general social richness relates to items such as unemotional / emotional , unresponsive / responsive , impersonal / personal . Conclusions on questionnaires . Presence ques - tionnaires are all originally developed from certain theoretical views on the concept of pres - ence . This basis determines the scope of the questionnaires as well as the relevant applica - tion domain , such as immersive VR or TV . In turn , the measures are used to refine the theories on which they are based . Techniques such as factor analysis show that there are sev - eral major components in reported subjective sensations on presence , and that these compo - PRESENCE IN VR 191 nents are related . However , the relationships between these components and the concept of presence may not be assumed as given , and de - pends in part on the definition of presence used . Also , the components found depend very much on the original scope of the study and its related questionnaire . This is obvious for in - stance in the noninteractive design of Lom - bard’s experiment . 2 Another example is the Kim and Biocca questionnaire 29 with its limited number and diversity of questions , which therefore was limited in the number and di - versity of factors found . Subjective measures can be prone to errors . For instance , prior experience in rating stimuli on other aspects such as interest and 3D - ness affected the subsequent rating of presence in a study involving 72 subjects . 46 Similar results were found by Welch et al . 47 in a preliminary study , where the order in which the VEs were presented was found to have a main effect on the relative presence ratings of these VEs when compared to each other . Usoh et al . 41 subjected two questionnaires to a reality - test in a between - subject design ; 10 subjects completed a search task in reality , 10 completed the task in a VE . If the question - naires measured correctly , subjects should re - port a greater sense of presence in reality than in the VE . However , subjects did not report sig - nificantly different presence ratings on the Wit - mer and Singer PQ for the two conditions . 9 The questionnaire by Slater and colleagues did find a marginal but significant difference . Interest - ingly , Mania and Chalmers 28 when using the latter questionnaire , did find presence to be “much higher and significantly different” for a real situation compared to two virtual ones ( 18 subjects in the real condition , 18 subjects in an immersive VE , and 18 subjects in an audio - only VE ) . Other subjective measures Continuous measure . Instead of administer - ing a questionnaire only after a virtual experi - ence , IJsselstein and de Ridder 48 proposed a continuous measure of presence during the ex - perience . In a study involving 24 subjects , a hand - operated slider could be used to indicate the level of presence experienced at that mo - ment . Analysis showed that rated presence in - creased with the addition of stereoscopy and of motion cues . Presence counter . Based on their theory that individuals are , at one moment in time , either completely present in the real or in the virtual world , Slater and Steed 13 proposed a presence counter which measures the number of transi - tions in presence . Because the action of report - ing such a transition requires a person to feel present in the real world , only transitions from the virtual to the real world can be recorded . Based on a simple Markov Chain model , this counter is used to estimate the relative time the person was present in the virtual world . In a between - subject study with 18 participants sig - nificant correlations were found between body movement and presence ( r 2 5 0 . 38 ) and be - tween presence measured through the pres - ence counter and through a traditional ques - tionnaire ( r 2 5 0 . 32 ) . Focus group exploration . To gain more quali - tative insight into the concept of presence , Freeman and Avons 49 used Focus Group Ex - ploration . This method requires small groups to discuss a topic , in this case people’s experi - ence while watching stereoscopic TV . Results show that non - experts describe sensations of presence , and are relating presence to involve - ment , realism , and naturalness . Heeter 4 ap - plied a similar approach , questioning users af - ter they had used immersive VEs . Objective measures : Behavioral As mentioned in the section on results of presence , people tend to respond to mediated stimuli as if it were unmediated when they ex - perience a high level of presence . Examining people’s reaction to mediated stimuli could provide an objective measure of presence . Sheridan 50 proposes measuring reflex re - sponses , such as automatically trying to catch a ball or trying to avoid a rapidly approaching object . As mentioned before , Freeman et al . 36 attempted to use postural response as a mea - sure for presence but found no significant cor - relation between this measure and reported presence . SCHUEMIE ET AL . 192 Prothero et al . 22 propose so - called “class A” measures of presence , which measure subjects’ responses to virtual cues when subjects are also presented with conflicting real cues . Slater et al . 42 used such a method : subjects were shown a radio in reality and then had to put on an HMD that showed a VE with a radio at the same location as the real one . During the ex - periment , the real radio was moved and turned on . The subject was required to point at the ra - dio when this happened . A high degree of pres - ence would lead to the subject pointing at the virtual radio rather than the real one . In the study , involving eight subjects , a significant correlation was found between this objective measure and a presence questionnaire . O’Brien et al . 19 used an ethnographic ap - proach to study users’ behavior , analyzing hu - man to human interaction in multi - user VEs . This led to more qualitative insight in the na - ture of presence , linking presence to the con - cept of intersubjectivity ( i . e . , the things people know in common ) . Objective measures : Physiological Sheridan 3 warns that “‘Presence’ is a subjec - tive sensation , much like ‘mental workload’ and ‘mental model’—it is a mental manifesta - tion , not so amenable to objective physiologi - cal definition and measurement . ” Meehan , 51 however , attempted to measure presence using heart rate , skin temperature , and skin conduc - tance in an experiment where 10 subjects were exposed to a virtual height situation in a so - phisticated immersive VE . Although results re - garding heart rate and skin temperature were inconclusive due to noise in the heart rate mea - surement and slow change in skin temperature , a correlation was found between skin conduc - tance and presence as measured using the questionnaire by Slater and colleagues . These results tend to be supported by the findings of Wiederhold et al . , 52 who performed a within - subject experiment with five subjects , one di - agnosed as having fear of flying . During expo - sure to an airplane simulator on either a screen or using an HMD , skin conductance was found to be significantly higher for the HMD condi - tion , which also generated the highest presence ratings on a presence questionnaire . It is important to note that skin conductance , like most physiological measures , is related to arousal and not directly to presence . In the two experiments mentioned above , higher presence was related to a decrease in skin conductance level , indicating increased arousal . For illustra - tion : Wilson and Sasse 53 report that at lower video frame rates skin conductance is lower , in - dicating stress and arousal . Lower frame rates are , however , associated with lower presence as described in the section on causes of presence . Conclusions on measures Measuring presence is done almost exclu - sively via questionnaires , using them to refine the theories on presence and , surprisingly , to validate objective measures . A reason for this is the fact that presence theory is still being de - veloped , and questionnaires offer rich feedback required to aid in the understanding of the phe - nomenon being measured . CAUSES OF PRESENCE Much research has been devoted to finding factors that contribute to presence . Several re - searchers constructed different categorizations of these factors . 1 . Slater and Usoh 54 : (cid:149) High quality , high resolution information . (cid:149) Consistency across all displays . (cid:149) Interaction with environment . (cid:149) Virtual body , the representation of the user’s body in the VE . (cid:149) Effect of action should be anticipated . 2 . Witmer and Singer 9 : (cid:149) Control factors , the control the users has . (cid:149) Sensory factors , the richness of the dis - played information and consistency across displays . (cid:149) Distraction factors , how much the user is distracted from the VE . (cid:149) Realism factors , pictorial and social realism of the VE . 3 . Sheridan 3 : (cid:149) Extent of sensory information . PRESENCE IN VR 193 (cid:149) Control of relation of sensors to environ - ment . (cid:149) Ability to modify physical environment . 4 . Lombard and Ditton 1 : (cid:149) The form in which the information is pre - sented . (cid:149) The content of the information . (cid:149) User characteristics . 5 . Steuer 55 : (cid:149) Vividness refers to the ability of a technol - ogy 55 to produce a sensorially rich medi - ated environment . (cid:149) Interactivity refers to the degree to which users of a medium can influence the form or content of the mediated environment . (cid:149) User characteristics refers to the individual differences in users . In the following paragraphs an overview is provided of the empirical research concerning these factors . For this , a categorization is used closely resembling that of Steuer . 55 This choice was made based on the following argument : first of all it is important to make a distinction between characteristics of the system and of the user , since the former are in control of the de - signer while the latter must be accepted as given . Furthermore , as described in the section on presence theory , several authors ascribe a unique role to interaction as a key element of presence , arguing for paying special attention to interactivity factors . Vividness According to Steuer , 55 vividness refers to the ability of a technology to produce a sensorially rich mediated environment . In this article , this category has a broader meaning than Steuer originally intended and also includes factors related to the content of a VE , since these can be closely related to sensory fidelity of the dis - play used for showing this content . Several empirical studies have found a rela - tionship between aspects of VE vividness and presence . The results of these studies have been summarized in Table 1 and are further elabo - rated in the following paragraphs . Axelsson et al . 56 found subjects to have a sig - nificantly higher sense of presence in a CAVE when compared to desktop VR ; 44 subjects were required to solve a three - dimensional puzzle together in VR , half of them using a CAVE - system while the other half used desk - top VR . Presence was measured using a single question . Barfield et al . 57 reported a significant effect for update rate in a study involving eight sub - jects in a within - subject design . The six condi - tions were based on combinations of two vari - ables : type of input device and update rates of 10 , 15 , and 20 Hz . Presence was measured mainly through one question . Prothero and Hoffman 58 found a weak but significant effect for Field Of View ( FOV ) . The study involved 38 subjects in a within - subject design with 2 conditions : 60° FOV and 105° FOV . Presence was measured using a 5 - item questionnaire . Kim and Biocca , 29 however , did not find any effect for FOV in an experiment involving 96 subjects , exposing them to an infomercial on TV in a between - subject experiment with 6 con - ditions based on 2 variables : FOV and illumi - nation of the real environment . FOVs were cho - sen of 9 . 8° , 21 . 5° , and 33 . 7° . Presence was measured using the Kim and Biocca 29 ques - tionnaire . Illuminating the real environment , making it more distracting , also had no signif - icant effect on presence . Prothero et al . 59 reported a significant effect for foreground / background manipulations : the screen was masked either near the eye or near the computer screen . In this within - sub - ject experiment 39 subjects participated with the two conditions of foreground or back - ground masking . Participants reported higher presence for the eye masking on a 5 - item ques - tionnaire . Hendrix and Barfield 40 found significant ef - fects for Geometric Field Of View ( GFOV , the view - angle represented on the screen , which can be independent of the screen size or regu - lar FOV ) and stereoscopy in a study with a within - subject design involving 12 subjects . Subjects participated in three consecutive ex - periments in which one of three variables was manipulated : stereoscopy , head tracking , and GFOV of 10° , 50° , or 90° . Presence was mea - sured using a 2 - item questionnaire . SCHUEMIE ET AL . 194 PRESENCE IN VR 195 T A BLE 1 . O V E R V I E W O F E M P I R I C A L S T U D I E S O N V I V I D N E SS F A C T O R S C AU S I N G P R E S E N C E E xp er i m e n t d es i g n F i n d i n g F a c t o r P rese n c e m e a s u re ( se 5 s i g n ifi c a n t e ff e c t ) c D es i g n n C A V E v s . d e s k t o p 56 1 q u e s t i o n s e : F 5 62 . 60 2 b e t w ee n s u b j e c t 44 U p d a t e r a t e 57 1 q u e s t i o n s e 2 3 3 w i t h i n s u b j e c t 8 F i e l d o f v i e w 58 5 i t e m q u e s t i o n n a i r e s e 2 w i t h i n s u b j e c t 38 F i e l d o f v i e w 29 K i m a n d B i o cc a q u e s t i o nn a i r e n o s e 2 3 3 b e t w ee n s u b j e c t 96 I ll u m i n a t . r e a l e n v . 29 K i m a n d B i o cc a q u e s t i o nn a i r e n o s e 2 3 3 b e t w ee n s u b j e c t 96 F o r e - / b a c kg r n d 59 5 i t e m q u e s t i o n n a i r e s e 2 w i t h i n s u b j e c t 39 G e o m e t r i c F o V 40 2 i t e m q u e s t i o n n a i r e s e 2 w i t h i n s u b j e c t 12 S t e r e o s c o p y 40 2 i t e m q u e s t i o n n a i r e s e 2 w i t h i n s u b j e c t 12 S t e r e o s c o p y 36 S i n g l e a n a l o g u e r a t i n g s e : F 5 17 . 025 2 3 2 w i t h i n s u b j e c t 24 V i d e o m o t i o n 36 S i n g l e a n a l o g u e r a t i n g s e : F 5 29 . 041 2 3 2 w i t h i n s u b j e c t 24 A n i m a t i o n 60 I g r o u p P r e s e n c e Q u e s t i o nn a i r e n o s e 2 3 2 b e t w ee n s u b j e c t 56 P i c t o r i a l r e a li s m 4 7 1 q u e s t i o n , p a i r e d c o m p a r i s o n s e : F 5 35 . 66 2 3 2 3 2 w i t h i n s u b j e c t 20 P i c t o r i a l r e a li s m 4 7 1 q u e s t i o n , p a i r e d c o m p a r i s o n s e : F 5 4 . 52 2 3 2 3 2 w i t h i n s u b j e c t 20 D y n a m i c s h a d o w s 42 S l a t e r e t a l . q u e s t i o nn a i r e 1 s e o n l y f o r v i s u a ll y 2 w i t h i n s u b j e c t 8 b e h a v i o r a l m e a s u r e d o m i n a n t p e o p l e S p a t i a li z e d s o u n d 62 2 i t e m q u e s t i o n n a i r e s e 2 w i t h i n s u b j e c t 16 T a c t il e a u g m e n t 63 1 q u e s t i o n s e 2 w i t h i n s u b j e c t 14 V i s u a l d e t a il 39 14 i t e m q u e s t i o nn a i r e n o s e 2 3 2 3 2 3 2 b e t w ee n s u b j e c t 322 O l f a c t o r y c u e s 39 14 i t e m q u e s t i o nn a i r e n o s e : F 5 2 . 401 2 3 2 3 2 3 2 b e t w ee n s u b j e c t 322 A u d i t o r y c u e s 39 14 i t e m q u e s t i o nn a i r e s e : F 5 36 . 66 2 3 2 3 2 3 2 b e t w ee n s u b j e c t 322 T a c t il e c u e s 39 14 i t e m q u e s t i o nn a i r e s e : F 5 18 . 30 2 3 2 3 2 3 2 b e t w ee n s u b j e c t 322 M e a n i n g i n V E 66 4 i t e m q u e s t i o n n a i r e s e 2 w i t h i n s u b j e c t 33 R e g a r d i n g t h e d e s i g n , t h e n u m b e r o f c o n d i t i o n s ( c ) i s m e n t i o n e d , d i v i d e d i n t o t h e d i ff e r e n t f a c t o r s m a n i p u l a t e d i n t h e s t u d y , a s w e ll a s t h e o v e r a ll d e s i g n ( w i t h i n o r b e t w ee n s u b j e c t ) a n d t h e t o t a l n u m b e r o f s u b j e c t s ( n ) . T h e c o n d i t i o n s m a n i p u l a t i n g t h e f a c t o r m e n t i o n e d i n t h e r o w a r e m a r k e d i n b o l d a n d u n d e r li n e d . Freeman et al . 36 also found a significant cor - relation between stereoscopy and presence , as well as between presence and video motion ; 24 subjects in a within - subject design were ex - posed to 4 conditions based on 2 variables : stereoscopy and moving or still images . Pres - ence was measured using an analogue rating scale . Subjects were required to mark their level of presence with a dot . The distance between the dot and the bottom line was taken as a mea - sure for presence . Schubert et al . 60 found no significant effect for animation in the form of doors opening and comic - strip - like shoes walking in and out . The between - subject study involved 56 subjects and 4 conditions based on 2 variables : animation and self - movement . Presence was measured using the IPQ . Welch et al . 47 reported a significant effect for pictorial realism . In a study with 20 subjects and 8 conditions in a within - subject design the method of paired comparison was used , a pro - cedure where the subjects are exposed to two VEs and are required to indicate which gener - ated a higher sense of presence . Combinations of three variables determined the conditions : pictorial realism , interactivity , and the order in which the 2 VEs were presented . Presence was measured using a single question . A second al - most similar study confirmed these findings . The conditions for this experiment were deter - mined by pictorial realism , feedback delay , and order . Slater et al . 42 reported on the effect of dy - namic shadows ( i . e . , shadows that change in real time when the scene changes ) . In a within - subject study eight participants were exposed to VEs with or without dynamic shadows . Pres - ence was measured using the Slater and col - league’s questionnaire 42 and a behavioral test as described in the section on measures . In gen - eral , the shadows did not have a significant ef - fect on presence , unless the person was visu - ally dominant ( see the section on user characteristics ) . Note however , that this sub - group has an even smaller population than the already small sample in the entire study , and that including the dynamic shadows reduced the speed of the VE dramatically , possibly cre - ating artifacts in the measurements . Based on reports from suddenly deafened adults , Gilkey and Weisenberger 61 conclude that “hearing may play a special role in per - ception , which strengthens the coupling be - tween the observer and the environment , and enhances the sense of presence . ” Hendrix and Barfield 62 reported a significant effect of spatialized sound when compared to no sound or even to nonspatialized sound ; 16 subjects were used in 2 within - subject experi - ments . The first experiment compared no sound with spatialized sound , the second com - pared spatialized sound with non - spatialized sound . Presence was measured using two ques - tions . Hoffman et al . 63 reported a strong significant effect for tactile augmentation ; 14 subjects par - ticipated in a within - subject design with 2 con - ditions . In one condition the subjects could see a ball ; in the second condition they could also touch it because a real ball was placed in ex - actly the same position as the virtual one . Pres - ence was measured using one question . Dinh et al . 39 performed an extensive study with 322 participants in a between - subject de - sign . There were 16 conditions , based on com - binations of 4 variables : high or low visual de - tail , olfactory cues , auditory cues , and tactile cues . Presence was measured using a 14 - item questionnaire . An ANOVA showed significant main effects for auditory and tactile cues . Ol - factory cues and higher visual detail did not have a significant effect on presence . No inter - actions were found between the variables , sug - gesting additional sensory cues work in a sim - ple additive fashion on one’s sense of presence . Hoffman et al . 66 found that when chess pieces in a VE were positioned in a meaning - ful way , this contributed to a significantly higher sense of presence for experienced chess players in an experiment involving 33 subjects of 4 categories : nonchess players , weak play - ers , strong players , and tournament - level chess players . Interactivity Steuer 55 defines interactivity as “the extent to which users can participate in modifying the form and content of a mediated environment in real time . ” The ecological theories especially place a large emphasis on the role of interac - SCHUEMIE ET AL . 196 tion in creating presence . The results of studies relating interactivity to presence have been summarized in Table 2 . Further details are pro - vided in the following paragraphs . Welch et al . 47 reported a significant positive effect for interaction in general and a negative effect for feedback delay in the two experi - ments already described in the previous sec - tion on vividness . Interaction was manipulated by either letting the subject drive a car or be a passive observer . Feedback delay , the delay be - tween a user action and the response of the dis - play to that action , was set at either the mini - mum possible with the equipment ( which was 200 – 220 msec ) or at an additional 1 . 5 sec . Barfield et al . 57 did not find a significant ef - fect for type of input device when comparing a 3 Degrees - Of - Freedom ( DOF ) joystick with a 3 DOF space mouse in the study already de - scribed in the section on vividness . Slater et al . 64 found a positive significant ef - fect for body movement ; 20 subjects were used in a between - subject design with 4 conditions . The VE portrayed an area with plants , some of which had leaves with discolored undersides . All subjects were given the task of counting the diseased plants . For half the subjects , the plants were of similar height and could easily be in - spected while looking at eye height in stand - ing position ; for the other half there was greater variance in the height of the plants and the sub - jects had to move their bodies to see the un - dersides of the leaves . Half of the subjects were given the extra task of also remembering the location of the diseased trees . Hendrix and Barfield 40 reported a highly sig - nificant effect for head tracking in an experi - ment already described in the section on vivid - ness . Schubert et al . 60 performed two studies . The first was already described in the section on vividness and also showed a significant effect for head tracking . The second experiment , with 26 subjects in a between - subject design , had 2 conditions : either the participants were told that the animations in the VE were indepen - dent of their actions or they were told the ani - mations responded to the user’s actions ( it was not said in which way ) . This illusory interac - tion did not have a significant effect on overall presence . It did however have a small but sig - nificant effect on Spatial Presence ( see the IPQ ) . A special case of interaction in VEs is inter - action between users . A distinction is made be - tween presence and social presence or co - pres - ence : the sense of being together in the virtual world . Social presence is thought to be a part of overall presence . This is supported by at least two studies . Slater et al . 30 found a signif - icant positive correlation between presence and co - presence in an experiment with 30 subjects . Similarly , Thie and van Wijk 65 found a signifi - cant relationship between presence and co - presence ( r 5 0 . 458 ) in an empirical study with 48 subjects using desktop VR . In this experi - ment , social cues , however , were found to have no significant effect on either social presence or presence . Social cues in one condition were lim - ited because users could not pick their own Avatar or nickname , nor could they make ges - PRESENCE IN VR 197 T ABLE 2 . O VERVIEW OF E MPIRICAL S TUDIES ON I NTERACTION F ACTORS C AUSING P RESENCE Experiment design Finding ( se 5 Factor Presence measure significant effect ) c Design n Interaction 47 1 question , paired comparison se : F 5 14 . 00 2 3 2 3 2 within subject 20 Feedback delay 47 1 question , paired comparison se : F 5 30 . 94 2 3 2 3 2 within subject 20 Input device type 57 1 question no se 2 3 3 within subject 8 Body movement 64 Slater et al . questionnaire se 2 3 2 between subject 20 Head tracking 40 2 item questionnaire se 2 within subject 12 Head tracking 60 Igroup Presence Questionnaire se 2 3 2 between subject 56 Illusory interaction 60 Igroup Presence Questionnaire se only on SP 2 between subject 26 Social cues 65 Questionnaires no se 2 between subject 48 Regarding the design , the number of conditions ( c ) is mentioned , divided into the different factors manipulated in the study , as well as the overall design ( within or between subject ) and the total number of subjects ( n ) . The condi - tions manipulating the factor mentioned in the row are marked in bold and underlined . tures . In the second condition this was made possible . However , in the study by Axelsson et al . 56 described in the section on vividness , presence and social presence were not found to be re - lated . Subjects reported higher presence in the CAVE system , but not higher social presence . User characteristics Different individuals when being confronted with the same VE can still experience different levels of presence because of individual differ - ences . Steuer 55 mentions the willingness to sus - pend disbelief which is necessary for experi - encing presence . Witmer and Singer 9 have constructed the Immersive Tendencies Ques - tionnaire ( ITQ ) . Cluster analysis of data filled in by 152 subjects revealed three subscales : (cid:149) involvement , or the propensity of subjects to get involved passively in some activity , such as reading a book ; (cid:149) focus , or the ability to concentrate on enjoy - able activities and block out distraction ; and (cid:149) games , or the frequency with which the subject plays games and the level of in - volvement in these games . Out of four experiments , only two found a sig - nificant correlation between the ITQ and the PQ . Combining the data across experiments showed a significant correlation between ITQ and PQ . Slater and Usoh 54 use the therapeutic tech - nique known as NeuroLinguistic Program - ming ( NLP ) to characterize the user’s psycho - logical perceptual system . The NLP model claims that subjective experience is encoded in terms of three main representation systems : vi - sual ( V ) , auditory ( A ) , and kinesthetic ( K ) , and that people have a tendency to prefer one sys - tem over the others . Furthermore , when a per - son represents a memory they tend to choose one of three perspectives : first , second ( from another person’s view ) , or third ( from an ab - stract , nonpersonal view ) person . Determining someone’s preferred representational system and perspective can be done by analyzing their choice of words . A between - subject study with 17 subjects and 2 conditions ( with or without a virtual body ) was performed . A regression model showed positive significant correlation between presence and use of the visual repre - sentation system as measured by counting the relative number of visual predicates the sub - jects used in a small description of their expe - rience in the VE . This could be explained by the fact that the VE was mainly visual . A higher proportion of auditory predicates , indicating a preference for the auditory representation sys - tem , resulted in significantly lower presence . Use of the kinesthetic representation system showed a positive significant correlation with presence when a virtual body was used and a negative significant correlation when no virtual body was used . The level of presence also in - creased with the first perceptual position . To determine whether preference of predicates de - termined presence or the other way around , a second experiment was performed with six subjects where the subject had to write a report before they entered the VE . The regression model based on these results did not success - fully predict presence . Slater et al . 11 performed another experiment with 24 subjects where the representation system and perceptual position preferences were measured using a Likert - scale questionnaire filled in by the subjects prior to immersion in the VE . The level of presence was positively significantly associated with V and K ( a virtual body was included in the VE ) , and negatively associated with A . Slater et al . , 42 in a later study already de - scribed in the section on vividness , found that including dynamic shadows only increased presence when the subject had a preference for the visual representation system as measured by an updated version of the questionnaire used in the previous experiment . Bangay and Preston 8 measured presence at a public VR ride . Two age groups were repre - sented in greater number : between ages 10 and 20 and between ages 35 and 45 . The older age group “tends to provide lower scores for im - mersion and excitement consistently . ” Conclusions on causes of presence The empirical research on the causes of pres - ence , although sometimes not consistent , has SCHUEMIE ET AL . 198 provided more insight into which factors are important for creating presence . On all three types of causes , vividness , interactivity , and user characteristics , empirical evidence has been found for the influence of several causes . The construct presence however was often op - erationalized by questionnaires , which were not proven reliable or valid . Conclusions on the causes of presence therefore have to be taken with some precaution . For further research the use of valid and reliable presence question - naires like the IPQ or ITC - SOPI , is recom - mended . Other important questions on the causes of presence remain as well , the most prominent ones being perhaps on the interac - tion between the different causes , and which factors have the biggest influence . Knowledge of the causes of presence is valuable for effective and efficient design of VEs . However , especially on the subject of in - teraction and interactivity , more research is needed . DISCUSSION There are still major gaps in the knowledge related to presence . One important shortcom - ing for therapeutic applications is the lack of conclusive research on the relationship be - tween presence , often only measured using questionnaires , and emotional responses such as fear . On top of this the questionnaires used to measure presence are often not reliable nor validated . Furthermore , there is still not sufficient in - formation on which aspects of the VR system contribute to presence to support the design process of therapeutic applications . The role of aspects of the human – computer interaction is especially unclear . In general the research reviewed in this pa - per has been found to be insufficient to deter - mine the effect of VE parameters on the effec - tiveness of VR as a tool in psychological therapy . Probably the concept of presence alone will not be sufficient to bridge this gap , arguing for the identification of other con - structs that play a role in VR experiences . There is more to VR than presence . REFERENCES 1 . Lombard , M . , & Ditton , T . ( 1997 ) . At the heart of it all : The concept of presence . Journal of Computer - Me - diated Communication , 3 ( 2 ) . 2 . Lombard , M . , & Ditton , T . ( 2000 ) . Measuring pres - ence : A literature - based approach to the development of a standardized paper - and - pencil instrument . Paper presented at the Presence 2000 Workshop , March 27 – 28 , Delft . 3 . Sheridan , T . B . ( 1992 ) . Musings on telepresence and virtual presence . Presence , 1 : 120 – 126 . 4 . Heeter , C . ( 1992 ) . Being there : The subjective experi - ence of presence . Presence , 1 : 262 – 271 . 5 . Schloerb , D . W . ( 1995 ) . A quantitative measure of telepresence . Presence , 4 : 64 – 80 . 6 . Slater , M . , & Wilbur , S . ( 1997 ) . A framework for im - mersive virtual environments ( FIVE ) : Speculations on the role of presence in virtual environments . Presence , 6 : 603 – 616 . 7 . Zeltzer , D . ( 1992 ) . Autonomy , interaction , and pres - ence . Presence , 1 : 127 – 13 . 8 . Bangay , S . , & Preston , L . ( 1998 ) . An investigation into factors influencing immersion in interactive virtual environments . In : Riva , G . , Wiederhold , B . K . , Moli - nari , E . , ( eds . ) Virtual environments in clinical psychol - ogy and neuroscience . Amsterdam : Ios Press . 9 . Witmer , B . G . , & Singer , M . J . ( 1998 ) . Measuring pres - ence in virtual environments : A presence question - naire . Presence , 7 : 225 – 240 . 10 . Lombard , M . ( 2000 , September ) . Resources for the study of presence : Presence explication . Retrieved September 3 , 2000 from the World Wide Web : http : / / nimbus . temple . edu / , mlombard / Presence / explicat . htm . 11 . Slater , M . , Usoh , M . , & Steed , A . ( 1994 ) . Depth of pres - ence in virtual environments . Presence , 3 : 130 – 144 . 12 . Biocca , F . ( 1997 ) . The Cyborg’s dilemma : Progressive embodiment in virtual environments . Journal of Com - puter - Mediated Communication , 3 ( 2 ) . 13 . Slater , M . , & Steed , A . ( 2000 ) . A virtual presence counter . Presence , 9 : 413 – 434 . 14 . Flach , J . M . , & Holden , J . G . ( 1998 ) . The reality of ex - perience : Gibson’s way . Presence , 7 : 90 – 95 . 15 . Schuemie , M . J . , & van der Mast , C . A . P . G . ( 1999 ) . Pres - ence : Interacting in virtual reality ? Proceedings of the Twentieth Workshop on Language Technology 15 , May 19 – 21 , 1999 , Enschede , Netherlands . 16 . Zahorik , P . , & Jenison , R . L . ( 1998 ) . Presence as being - in - the - world . Presence , 7 : 78 – 89 . 16a . Heidigger , M . ( 1962 ) . Being and time ( Macquarie J , Robinson E , transl . ) San Francisco : HarperCollins . 17 . Gibson , J . J . ( 1979 ) . The ecological approach to visual per - ception . Boston : Houghton Mifflin Co . 18 . Mantovani , G . , & Riva , G . ( 1999 ) . “Real” presence : How different ontologies generate different criteria for presence , telepresence , and virtual presence . Pres - ence , 8 : 540 – 550 . 19 . O’Brien , J . Büscher , M . , Rodden , T . , & Trevor , J . ( 1998 ) . PRESENCE IN VR 199 “Red is behind you” : The experience of presence in shared virtual environments . Paper presented at the Workshop on Presence in Shared Virtual Environments . 20 . Sheridan , T . B . ( 1999 ) . Descartes , Heidegger , Gibson , and God : Towards an eclectic ontology of presence . Presence , 8 : 551 – 559 . 21 . Schubert , T . W . , Friedman , F . , & Regenbrecht , H . T . ( 1999 ) . Embodied presence in virtual environments . In : Paton R , Neilson I ( Eds . ) . Visual representations and interpretations . Springer - Verlag , London , pp . 268 – 278 . 22 . Prothero , J . D . , Parker , D . E . , & Furness , T . , III . ( 1995 ) . Towards a robust , quantitative measure for presence . Proceedings of the Conference on Experimental Analysis and Measurement of Situation Awareness , pp . 359 – 366 . 23 . Kalawsky , R . ( 2000 ) . The validity of presence as a re - liable human performance metric in immersive envi - ronments . Paper presented at the Presence 2000 Work - shop . 24 . Lackner , J . R . , & DiZio , P . ( 1998 ) . Spatial orientation as a component of presence : Insights gained form nonterrestrial environments . Presence , 7 : 108 – 115 . 25 . Slater , M . , Pertaub , D . , & Steed , A . ( 1999 ) . Public speak - ing in virtual reality : Facing an audience of avatars . IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications , 19 : 6 – 9 . 26 . Welch , R . B . ( 1999 ) . How can we determine if the sense of presence affects task performance ? Presence , 8 : 574 – 577 . 27 . Ellis , S . R . ( 1996 ) . Presence of mind : A reaction to Thomas Sheridan’s “Further musing on the psy - chophysics of presence . ” Presence , 5 : 247 – 259 . 28 . Mania , K . , & Chalmers , A . ( 2000 ) . A user - centered methodology for investigating presence and task per - formance . Paper presented at the Presence 2000 Work - shop , March 27 – 28 , Delft . 29 . Kim , T . , & Biocca , F . ( 1997 ) . Telepresence via televi - sion : Two dimensions of telepresence may have dif - ferent connections to memory and persuasion . Jour - nal of Computer - Mediated Communication , 3 ( 2 ) . 30 . Slater , M . , Sagadic , A . , Usoh , M . , & Schroeder , R . ( 1998 ) . Small group behaviour in a virtual and real environment : A comparative study . BT Presence Work - shop , Martlesham Heath , UK , June 11 – 12 . 31 . Steed , A . , Slater , M . , & Sadagic , A . ( 1999 ) . Leadership and collaboration in shared virtual environments . Proceedings of the IEEE Virtual Reality 1999 conference , Houston , March 1999 , pp . 112 – 115 . 32 . Hodges , L . , Rothbaum , B . O . , Kooper , R . , Opdyke , D . , Meyer , T . , de Graaf , J . J . , & Williford , J . S . ( 1994 ) . Pres - ence as the defining factor in a VR application . Tech - nical Report GIT - GVU - 94 - 5 , Georgia Institute of Tech - nology . 33 . Regenbrecht , H . T . , Schubert , T . W . , & Friedman , F . ( 1998 ) . Measuring the sense of presence and its rela - tion to fear of heights in virtual environments . Inter - national Journal of Human - Computer Interaction . 10 : 233 – 249 . 34 . Schuemie , M . J . , Bruynzeel , M . , Drost , L . , Brinckman , M . , de Haan , G . , Emmelkamp , P . M . G . , & van der Mast , C . A . P . G . ( 2000 ) . Treatment of acrophobia in vir - tual reality : A pilot study . In : Broeckx , F . , Pauwels , L . ( eds . ) Conference Proceedings Euromedia 2000 . May 8 – 10 , Antwerp , Belgium , pp . 271 – 275 . 35 . North , M . M . , North , S . M . , & Coble , J . R . ( 1998 ) . Vir - tual reality therapy : An effective treatment for pho - bias . Virtual Environments in Clinical Psychology and Neuroscience . Amsterdam : IOS Press . 36 . Freeman , J . , Avons , S . E . , Meddis , R . , Pearson , D . , & IJsselsteijn , W . ( 2000 ) . Using behavioral realism to es - timate presence : A study of the utility of postural re - sponses to motion stimuli . Presence , 9 : 149 – 164 . 37 . Slater , M . , Steed , A . , & Usoh , M . ( 1993 ) . The virtual treadmill : A naturalistic metaphor for navigation in immersive virtual environments . In : Goebel , M . ( ed . ) , First Eurographics Workshop on Virtual Reality Environ - ments , Polytechnical University of Catalonia , Sept . 7 , 1993 , pp . 71 – 83 . 38 . Towell , J . , & Towell , E . ( 1997 ) . Presence in text - based networked virtual environments or “MUDS . ” Pres - ence , 6 : 590 – 595 . 39 . Dinh , H . Q . , Walker , N . , & Hodges , L . ( 1999 ) . Evalu - ating the importance of multi - sensory input on mem - ory and the sense of presence in virtual environments . Proceedings of the IEEE Virtual Reality 1999 Conference , Houston , March 1999 , pp . 222 – 228 . 40 . Hendrix , C . , & Barfield , W . ( 1996 ) . Presence within virtual environments as a function of visual display parameters . Presence , 4 : 274 – 289 . 41 . Usoh , M . , Catena , E . , Arman , S . , & Slater , M . ( 2000 ) . Using presence questionnaires in reality . Presence , in press . 42 . Slater , M . , Usoh , M . , & Chrysanthou , Y . ( 1995 ) . The influence of dynamic shadows on presence in im - mersive virtual environments . Virtual Environments 95 , 8 – 21 . 43 . Slater , M . ( 1999 ) . Measuring presence : A response to the Witmer and Singer Presence Questionnaire . Pres - ence , 8 : 560 – 565 . 44 . Schubert , T . W . , Friedmann , F . , & Regenbrecht , H . T . ( 1999 ) . Decomposing the sense of presence : Factor an - alytic insights . Presented at the 2nd International Work - shop on Presence , University of Essex , UK , 6 – 7 April 1999 . 45 . Lessiter , J . , Freeman , J . , Keogh , E . , & Davidoff , J . ( 2000 ) . Development of a new cross - media presence questionnaire : The ITC - Sense of presence . Paper pre - sented at the Presence 2000 Workshop , March 27 – 28 , Delft . 46 . Freeman , J . , Avons , S . E . , Pearson , D . , & IJsselsteijn , W . ( 1999 ) . Effects of sensory information and prior ex - perience on direct subjective ratings of presence . Pres - ence , 8 : 1 – 13 . 47 . Welch , R . B . , Blackmon , T . T . , Liu , A . , Mellers , B . , & Stark , L . W . ( 1996 ) . The effects of pictoral realism , de - lay of visual feedback , and observer interactivity on the subjective sense of presence . Presence , 5 : 263 – 273 . 48 . IJsselsteijn , W . A . , & de Ridder , H . ( 1998 ) . Measuring temporal variations in presence . Paper presented at the Presence in Shared Virtual Environments Workshop , University College , London , 10 – 11 June , 1998 . 49 . Freeman , J . , & Avons , S . E . ( 2000 ) . Focus group ex - ploration of presence through advanced broadcast SCHUEMIE ET AL . 200 services . Proc . of the SPIE , Human Vision and Electronic Imaging , pp . 3959 – 3976 . 50 . Sheridan , T . B . ( 1996 ) . Further musings on the psy - chophysics of presence . Presence , 5 : 241 – 246 . 51 . Meehan , M . ( 2000 ) . An objective surrogate for pres - ence : Physiological response . Paper presented at the Presence 2000 Workshop , March 27 – 28 , Delft . 52 . Wiederhold , B . K . , Davis , R . , & Wiederhold , M . D . ( 1998 ) . The effect of immersiveness on physiology . Virtual Environments in Clinical Psychology and Neuro - science . Amsterdam : IOS Press . 53 . Wilson , G . , & Sasse , M . A . ( 2000 ) . The head or the heart ? Measuring the impact of media quality . Ex - tended Abstracts of CHI 2000 , April 1 – 6 , The Hague , The Netherlands , pp . 117 – 118 . 54 . Slater , M . , & Usoh , M . ( 1993 ) . Representation systems , perceptual positions , and presence in immersive vir - tual environments . Presence , 2 : 221 – 233 . 55 . Steuer , J . ( 1992 ) . Defining virtual reality : Dimensions determining telepresence . Journal of Communication , 42 ( 4 ) : 72 – 93 . 56 . Axelsson , A . , Abelin , A . , Heldal , I . , Schroeder , R . , & Wideström , J . ( 2000 ) . Cubes in the cube ; A compari - son of collaboration in virtual and real environments . Paper presented at the Presence 2000 Workshop , March 27 – 28 , Delft . 57 . Barfield , W . , Baird , K . M . , & Bjorneseth , O . J . ( 1998 ) . Presence in virtual environments as a function of type of input device and display update rate . Displays , 19 : 91 – 98 . 58 . Prothero , J . D . , & Hoffman , H . G . ( 1995 ) . Widening the field of view increases the sense of presence in im - mersive virtual environments . Technical Report TR - 95 - 2 , Human Interface Technology Lab . 59 . Prothero , J . D . , Hoffman , H . G . , Parker , D . E . , Furness , T . A . , III , & Wells , M . J . ( 1995 ) . Foreground / back - ground manipulations affect presence . Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 39th Annual Meeting . 60 . Schubert , T . W . , Regenbrecht , H . T . , & Friedman , F . ( 2000 ) . Real and illusory interaction enhance presence in virtual environments . Paper presented at the Pres - ence 2000 Workshop , March 27 – 28 , Delft . 61 . Gilkey , R . H . , & Weisenberger , J . M . ( 1995 ) . The sense of presence for the suddenly deafened adult . Presence , 4 : 357 – 361 . 62 . Hendrix , C . , & Barfield , W . ( 1996 ) . The sense of pres - ence within auditory virtual environments . Presence , 5 : 290 – 301 . 63 . Hoffman , H . , Groen , J . , Rousseau , S . , Hollander , A . , Winn , W . , Wells , M . , & Furness , T . ( 1996 ) . Tactile aug - mentation : Enhancing presence in virtual reality with tactile feedback from real objects . Paper presented at the meeting of the American Psychological Society , San Francisco , CA . 64 . Slater , M . , Steed , A . , McCarthy , J . , & Maringelli , F . , ( 1998 ) . The influence of body movement on subjec - tive presence in virtual environments . Human Factors , 40 : 469 – 477 . 65 . Thie , S . , & van Wijk , J . ( 1998 ) . A general theory on presence : Experimental evaluation of social virtual presence in a decision making task . Paper presented at the Presence in Shared Virtual Environments Work - shop . University College London , 10 – 11 June 1998 . 66 . Hoffman , H . , Prothero , J . , Wells , M . , & Groen , J . ( 1998 ) . Virtual chess : Meaning enhances users’ sense of presence in virtual environments . International Jour - nal of Human - Computer Interaction , 10 ( 3 ) : 251 – 263 . Address reprint requests to : Martijn J . Schuemie M . Sc . Department of Information Systems and Software Engineering Faculty of Information Technology and Systems Delft University of Technology Zuidplantsoen 4 2628 BZ , Delft , The Netherlands E - mail : m . j . schuemie @ its . tudelft . nl PRESENCE IN VR 201