New tools to study the interaction between integrins and latent TGF β 1 Michael Bachmann , Jérémy Kessler , Elisa Burri , Bernhard Wehrle - Haller Department of Cell Physiology and Metabolism , University of Geneva , Centre Médical Universitaire , Geneva , Switzerland Correspondence to : michael . bachmann @ unige . ch or bernhard . wehrle - haller @ unige . ch Abstract Transforming growth factor beta ( TGF β ) 1 regulates cell differentiation and proliferation in different physiological settings , but is also involved in fibrotic progression and protects tumors from the immune system . Integrin α V β 6 has been shown to activate latent TGF β 1 by applying mechanical forces onto the latency - associated peptide ( LAP ) . While the extracellular binding between α V β 6 and LAP1 is well characterized , less is known about the cytoplasmic adaptations that enable α V β 6 to apply such forces . Here , we generated new tools to facilitate the analysis of this interaction . We combined the integrin - binding part of LAP1 with a GFP and the Fc chain of human IgG . This chimeric protein , sLAP1 , revealed a mechanical rearrangement of immobilized sLAP1 by α V β 6 integrin . This unique interaction was not observed between sLAP1 and other integrins . We also analyzed α V β 6 integrin binding to LAP2 and LAP3 by creating respective sLAPs . Compared to sLAP1 , integrin α V β 6 showed less binding to sLAP3 and no rearrangement . These observations indicate differences in the binding of α V β 6 to LAP1 and LAP3 that have not been appreciated so far . Finally , α V β 6 - sLAP1 interaction was maintained even at strongly reduced cellular contractility , highlighting the special mechanical connection between α V β 6 integrin and latent TGF β 1 . Introduction Transforming growth factor beta ( TGF β ) 1 is an intensively studied cytokine of the TGF β family with important functions in regulating the immune system and vascularization ( Shull et al . , 1992 ; Dickson et al . , 1995 ) . At the same time , excessive TGF β 1 signaling is associated with fibrotic tissue stiffening , for which therapeutic options are still limited ( Kim , Sheppard and Chapman , 2018 ; Akhurst , 2017 ) . TGF β s , in contrast to other members of the TGF β family , are secreted in a latent state and require activation before they can bind their receptors ( Robertson and Rifkin , 2016 ) . The latent TGF β complex consists of a dimeric TGF β cytokine and a dimeric prodomain , called latency associated peptide ( LAP ) . LAP 1 contains an RGD peptide that allows binding of cell adhesion receptors of the integrin family . Replacing this RGD peptide with RGE in knock - in mice prevents integrin binding to LAP1 and causes a phenotype similar to a Tgfb1 knockout ( Yang et al . , 2007 ) . This demonstrates , at the same time , the need for TGF β 1 activation and the relevance of integrin - LAP1 binding for this activation . One of the most established mechanisms for integrin - dependent TGF β 1 activation is mechanical pull via α V β 6 integrin ( Munger et al . , 1999 ; Dong et al . , 2017 ) . Such mechanical activation is potentially supported by the high affinity between LAP1 and α V β 6 integrin that allows to withstand the mechanical pull on the ligand - integrin - actin axis ( Dong et al . , 2014 ) . While the ligand - integrin interface on this axis is well characterized on structural and biochemical level , much less is known about adaptations of the cytoplasmic integrin β 6 tail . Special adaptations of the β 6 tail compared to the tails of other integrins might be needed in order to transmit forces from the actin cytoskeleton onto LAP1 in order to enable TGF β 1 activation . Integrin tails are short compared to their extracellular part ( human β 6 : around 40 vs . 690 ) and recruit a plethora of adapters that are necessary for integrins to fulfill their functions ( Bachmann et al . , 2019 ) . For integrin activation , binding to both talin and kindlin has emerged as a crucial factor ( Pinon et al . , 2014 ; Theodosiou et al . , 2016 ; Fischer et al . , 2021 ; Orré et al . , 2021 ) . Studies in keratinocytes have shown that the β 6 tail only recruits kindlin1 , but not kindlin2 ( Bandyopadhyay et al . , 2012 ) . At the same time , binding of a β 6 - peptide to surface immobilized talin1 showed stronger binding compared to β 3 - peptide binding to talin1 ( Kukkurainen et al . , 2014 ) . These observations support the possibility of particular adaptations of α V β 6 compared to other integrins . However , the relevance of such adaptations for LAP1 binding and TGF β 1 activation remains to be tested . Given the complex interactions between integrin adapters and their vast numbers , it might be particularly important to perform such experiments in a cellular context . Studying the interaction between latent TGF β 1 and α V β 6 integrin in cell biological experiments is complicated due to the structural organization of the LAP1 / TGF β 1 complex . Labeling at the N - terminus interferes with the extracellular anchorage of the latent complex and the C - terminus is buried within the TGF β cytokine . However , the TGF β 1 cytokine is not necessarily needed to study the interaction between LAP1 and integrins . Based on structural analysis , we identified a shorter part of LAP1 that contains the integrin - binding RGD peptide of LAP1 and grafted it onto a chimeric construct of a GFP and the Fc - region of human IgG . Additionally , we identified the analogous sequences of LAP2 and LAP3 and created such short LAP - GFP - IgG ( sLAP ) constructs for all LAPs . These tools allowed us to study the interaction of different integrins with all sLAPs . We demonstrate a unique interaction between α V β 6 and sLAP1 , based on a mechanical rearrangement of immobilized sLAP1 by α V β 6 integrin . Additional experiments emphasized the need of kindlin , but not talin , for sLAP1 binding and mechanical perturbations revealed a remarkable robustness of the α V β 6 - sLAP1 interaction . Results Developing new tools for studying integrin - LAP interaction In order to study latent TGF β – integrin interaction in more detail , we decided to develop new tools that facilitate this analysis . Structural analysis of available latent TGF β 1 structures ( PDB : 3RJR , 5FFO , 6GFF ) showed that a part of LAP1 ( amino acids 105 - 263 ) is not in direct contact with the TGF β 1 cytokine . Instead , this part contains the RGD peptide and the cysteines involved in dimerization of latent TGF β s . Moreover , this region of LAP1 consists of a series of secondary structures that form a coordinated , stabilized globular fold that promises to fold without need of additional chaperones . We decided to use this reduced , smaller sequence of LAP1 and to combine it with a construct combining a GFP , the Fc region of human IgG , and a signaling peptide for secretion ( Fig . 1A ) . Our lab established similar constructs in the past to study the binding between the tyrosine kinase c - Kit and its ligand ( Tabone - Eglinger et al . , 2014 ) . Additionally , based on sequence alignment and structural modeling ( SFig . 1B ) , we identified the equivalent parts of LAP2 and LAP3 and created sLAP2 and sLAP3 constructs ( sequence as shown in SFig . 1A ) . Next , we transfected cells with the different sLAP constructs and harvested the supernatant . Western blotting of this supernatant showed the dimerized chimeric proteins of the small LAPs combined with GFP - IgG ( sLAP ) at the expected molecular weight ( Fig . 1B ) . Moreover , structural prediction of sLAP1 and comparison to a crystal structure of latent TGF β 1 ( PDB : 6GFF ) supported the potential of sLAP1 to mimic the structural arrangement of latent TGF β 1 ( root mean square deviation ( RMSD ) of atomic position : 0 . 701 Angstroms ; Fig . 1C ) . Next , we used sLAP1 for coating glass coverslips for cell biological experiments . To ensure specific substrate coating we coated coverslips with protein A and passivated remaining , uncoated areas with albumin . Finally , these substrates were covered with sLAP1 that is recruited via the high - affinity interaction between the coated protein A and IgG in sLAP1 . This procedure will also ensure that sLAP1 is immobilized on the substrate in a reproducible topological orientation , allowing integrin - sLAP1 binding . Next , we used NIH 3T3 fibroblasts and transfected them to express different integrins of the α V family that were discussed to activate TGF β 1 ( Robertson and Rifkin , 2016 ) . These fibroblasts express low levels of α V β 3 integrin ( Bachmann et al . , 2020 ) and showed no cell spreading and low cell attachment on sLAP1 coated substrates ( SFig . 1C ) , ensuring that binding and spreading of transfected cells is due to the exogenously expressed integrin and not due to endogenous cell adhesion receptors . Culturing these transfected cells on sLAP1 coated coverslips and analysis with TIRF microscopy showed a lack of α V β 1 - clustering on sLAP1 , while α V β 3 , α V β 5 , and α V β 6 integrin all showed clustering ( Fig . 1D ) . Integrin α V β 5 expressing cells showed a lack of cell spreading compared to cells expressing α V β 3 and α V β 6 . This is probably explained by the special set of integrin adapters recruited by α V β 5 integrin ( Baschieri et al . , 2018 ; Lock et al . , 2018 ; Zuidema et al . , 2018 ) , specifically by the lack of paxillin recruitment ( Soto - Ribeiro et al . , 2019 ) . Quantitative analysis of the area of clustered integrins confirmed the impression that α V β 3 , α V β 5 , and α V β 6 are able to bind to sLAP1 and to cluster on this substrate while α V β 1 integrin under these experimental conditions was less able interact with sLAP1 ( Fig . 1E ) . While this clustering analysis indicated a similar potential of α V β 3 , α V β 5 , and α V β 6 integrin for sLAP1 binding , analysis of the sLAP1 coating revealed a remarkable difference . The sLAP1 coating was frequently remodeled underneath α V β 6 expressing cells , but not under cells expressing other integrins . The spatial appearance of the remodeled sLAP1 suggested a mechanical pulling of cells on the substrate . Such a mechanical explanation for the sLAP1 rearrangement is reminiscent of the model of α V β 6 - mediated TGF β 1 activation by mechanical forces on the LAP / TGF β 1 - α V β 6 integrin - actin axis ( Dong et al . , 2017 ; Munger et al . , 1999 ) . Fig . 01 : Chimeric sLAP - GFP - IgG as a tool to study integrin - LAP interactions . ( A ) Visualization of the organization of full - length TGF β 1 and of sLAP1 - GFP - IgG proteins . ( B ) Non - reducing western blot of secreted chimeric sLAP - GFP - IgG proteins from cell culture medium . Two biological replicates per LAP are shown . ( C ) Structural alignment of a predicted Alphafold2 model of sLAP1 ( shown in salmon ) with protein structure of latent TGF β 1 ( PDB : 6GFF ; LAP1 in gray , cytokine in white ) shows high overlap ( RMSD : 0 . 701 angstroms ) . ( D ) NIH 3T3 fibroblasts were transfected with indicated plasmids ( β 1 : β 1 - Scarlet , β 3 : β 3 - Scarlet , β 5 : β 5 - mCherry , β 6 : β 6 - Scarlet ) and cultured for 2 hrs on glass coverslips , coated with sLAP1 . Fixed cells were imaged with TIRF microscopy . Scale bar : 10 µm . ( E ) Analysis of area of clustered integrins for experiments performed as shown in ( D ) . Small symbols stand for single measurements , big symbols for mean average from independent experiments . Middle bar is mean average from all experiments , upper and lower bar are standard deviation . Integrin α V β 6 rearranges exclusively sLAP1 coating The consistent rearrangement of sLAP1 by α V β 6 , but not by other integrins , motivated us to analyze the interaction of α V β 6 integrin with sLAPs in more detail . Specifically , we wondered if α V β 6 rearranges also other immobilized sLAPs . LAP1 and LAP3 share an RGD - Lxx ( I / L ) peptide with an unusual high affinity for α V β 6 integrin , while the SGD peptide in LAP2 does not favor strong α V β 6 binding ( ( Dong et al . , 2014 ) ; see also SFig . 1A ) . The same RGD / SGD - peptides are present in our chimeric sLAP proteins . The interaction of integrins with these RGD / SGD peptides is often studied with short , synthesized peptides . In contrast , our sLAP proteins present the RGD / SGD peptides in their normal structural environment , similar to full - length LAPs . We used sLAP1 - 3 and coated glass substrates as we did before and cultured α V β 6 integrin expressing cells on these substrates ( Fig . 2A ) . Cells showed reduced adhesion and spreading on sLAP2 compared to sLAP1 and sLAP3 , indicating the relevance of the RGD - α V β 6 interaction for these processes . At the same time , only sLAP1 was rearranged by α V β 6 integrin ( Fig . 2A , B ) . This difference between sLAP1 and sLAP3 was rather surprising given their similar integrin - binding RGD peptides . However , experiments with sLAP1 - RGELATI and sLAP1 - RGDGATG confirmed the necessity of the established high - affinity RGD - Lxx ( I / L ) peptide for substrate rearrangement of sLAP1 by α V β 6 integrin ( SFig . 2B , C ) . However , the lack of sLAP3 rearrangement implies that this peptide is not sufficient for causing α V β 6 - mediated rearrangement . Potentially , regions up - or downstream of the RGD - Lxx ( I / L ) peptide that differ between LAP1 and LAP3 are responsible for these different phenotypes ( see discussion ) . To characterize differences between binding of sLAPs to α V β 6 integrin in more detail , we performed a flow - cytometry based ligand binding experiment with α V β 6 - expressing NIH3T3 cells , incubated with soluble sLAPs at different concentrations . Detection of surface - bound sLAPs with phycoerythrin ( PE ) labeled antibodies showed no binding of sLAP2 at any concentration , while sLAP1 and sLAP3 both bound strongly to α V β 6 expressing cells ( Fig . 2c ) . However , sLAP1 showed higher binding capacity to α V β 6 integrin , potentially reflecting a higher affinity for α V β 6 integrin compared to sLAP3 . Finally , we wanted to confirm that the rearrangement of sLAP1 is not limited to cells overexpressing exogenous α V β 6 integrin . Therefore , we used the ASZ001 murine cell line , a model for invasive basal cell carcinoma ( Kuonen et al . , 2018 ) that expresses α V β 6 integrin endogenously ( SFig . 2A ) , and cultured them on substrates coated with the different sLAPs . Here again , we observed a consistent rearrangement of sLAP1 , but not of either sLAP2 or sLAP3 ( Fig . 2D ) . Fig . 02 : Integrin α V β 6 rearranges immobilized sLAP1 , but not sLAP2 or sLAP3 . ( A ) NIH3T3 cells expressing β 6 - Scarlet were cultured on substrates coated with indicated sLAPs and imaged with TIRF microscopy . Please note the rearranged sLAP1 coating underneath the cells , but the lack of rearrangement for sLAP2 and sLAP3 . ( B ) Quantification of loss in fluorescence underneath cells compared to the intact substrate coating . Small symbols stand for single measurements , big symbols for mean average from independent experiments . Middle bar is mean average from all experiments , upper and lower bar are standard deviation . ( C ) Binding of β 6 - GFP expressing NIH3T3 cells to different concentrations of indicated sLAPs was quantified with flow cytometry ( 0 . 78 , 4 . 67 , 9 . 33 , and 15 . 56 µg / ml ) . Average from 3 independent experiments with bars indicating standard deviation . ( D ) ASZ001 cells expressing α V β 6 integrin endogenously were cultured on coverslips coated with indicated sLAPs and imaged with TIRF microscopy ( actin stained with phalloidin Alexa 647 ) . Outline of cells are shown with green lines in images of sLAPs coating . Please note the removed sLAP1 underneath the cell in contrast to sLAP2 and sLAP3 coated conditions . Dynamic and regulation of α V β 6 - sLAP1 binding Given the unique rearrangement of immobilized sLAP1 by α V β 6 integrin and the analogy of this process to the mechanical activation mechanism of TGF β 1 by α V β 6 integrin , we set out to analyze this process in more detail . We cultured NIH3T3 fibroblasts expressing β 6 - Scarlet on sLAP1 coated substrates and imaged them with live - cell TIRF microscopy starting 2 hrs after cell seeding ( Fig . 3A ) . Similar to fixed samples , sLAP1 substrates underneath cells were already extensively rearranged at this time point . During the observation period , α V β 6 integrin clustered on areas of intact sLAP1 substrate coating and started to rearrange these regions . Compared to classical focal adhesions , α V β 6 was more dispersed in the membrane and formed clusters that were more irregular ( Fig . 3A and SFig . 3A ) . At the same time , we observed that α V β 6 integrin clustering did not necessarily lead to sLAP1 rearrangement ( see for example t = 45 min , sLAP1 compared to cell outline ) . This lack of correlation between active , clustered α V β 6 integrin and sLAP1 rearrangement could imply a potential regulation of α V β 6 integrin downstream of integrin activation . As a first test for this hypothesis , we transfected NIH3T3 cells with mutants of β 6 - integrin that affect either talin or kindlin binding . Mutating Tyr to Ala in the NxxY motifs of cytoplasmic β - integrin tails ( see also Fig . 3B and SFig . 3C ) is an established method to reduce binding of either talin ( proximal NPxY ) or kindlin ( distal NxxY ) ( Saltel et al . , 2009 ; Moser et al . , 2008 ) . At the same time , mutating Tyr to Phe in the proximal NPxY motif preserves aromatic interaction between the β - integrin tail and the talin F3 - domain but prevents Tyr phosphorylation - induced binding of Dab2 ( Yu et al . , 2015 ) . Dab2 binding to the phosphorylated integrin tail competes with talin and leads to inactivation and recycling of the integrin . Accordingly , we transfected cells with β 6 - Y762A to reduce talin binding , β 6 - Y762F to improve talin binding , and β 6 - Y774A to reduce kindlin binding and tested the ability of these mutants to bind sLAP1 in a flow cytometry - based ligand binding assay . After normalizing the amount of cell - bound sLAP1 to the surface levels of the respective α V β 6 integrin mutants , we observed no differences in sLAP1 binding for mutants affecting talin binding ( Y762A and Y762F ) , but a consistent reduction for Y774A ( Fig . 3C ) . Thus , kindlin but not talin seems to regulate binding of sLAP1 in this sLAP1 binding assay . Based on these experiments , it appears that kindlin and / or downstream targets of kindlin are regulators of sLAP1 binding . Future experiments with talin and kindlin knockout ( KO ) cells will establish if this finding also applies to the rearrangement of immobilized sLAP1 . Fig . 03 : Dynamic regulation of α V β 6 - sLAP1 rearrangement . ( A ) NIH3T3 cells expressing β 6 - Scarlet were cultured on sLAP1 coated substrates and imaged with TIRF microscopy starting 2 hrs after cell seeding ( 1 image / 5 minutes ) . White boxes in overview images indicate zoom - in regions shown in the lower rows . White dashed lines in zoom - in views indicate cell outline . Please note the clustered α V β 6 integrin at 45 min in the cell periphery without rearrangement of the underlying sLAP1 substrate . ( B ) Sequence alignment of cytoplasmic tail of β 3 - and β 6 - integrin . NxxY motifs are highlighted in bold , important talin - binding residues in orange and kindlin - binding residues in red ( see also SFig . 3A ) . ( C ) NIH3T3 cells were transfected with mutants of β 6 - integrin affecting talin ( β 6 - Y762A / F ) or kindlin binding ( Y774A ) and incubated with sLAP1 . Cell surface - bound sLAP1 was labeled with PE and measured with flow cytometry . Fluorescent intensity was normalized to β 6 surface levels and β 6 - wt condition . Small symbols stand for single measurements , big symbols for mean average from independent experiments . Middle bar is mean average from all experiments , upper and lower bar are standard deviation . sLAP1 - α V β 6 integrin binding is not affected by mechanical perturbations The mechanical activation model of TGF β 1 via α V β 6 integrin implies strong mechanical pull on the LAP1 - α V β 6 axis . The rearrangement of sLAP1 by α V β 6 seems reminiscent of the mechanical pull involved in this TGF β 1 activation model . Therefore , we tested the relevance of actin contractility for sLAP1 rearrangement . We cultured β 6 - Scarlet expressing NIH3T3 cells on sLAP1 coated substrates , either in presence of the myosin inhibitor blebbistatin or the ROCK pathway inhibitor Y27632 . After 2 hrs , we fixed the cells and visualized the actin cytoskeleton . Both drugs had a strong effect on cell shape and the actin cytoskeleton compared to the untreated control ( Fig . 4A ) . The untreated control also highlighted a strong rearrangement of sLAP1 in α V β 6 integrin expressing cells as observed before in figure 1 - 3 . This rearrangement was characterized by a removal of sLAP1 from the substrate visible by the loss of GFP fluorescence underneath and next to the cells . Such a removal of sLAP1 was not easily detectable for blebbistatin and Y27632 treated cells . At the same time , cells treated with these inhibitors showed a strong accumulation of sLAP1 underneath the cells that was not observed to such a degree for untreated cells . This could imply that α V β 6 integrin is able to bind and to accumulate sLAP1 even when contractility is reduced , but that clearance of sLAP1 from the cell surface ( for example by endocytosis and / or integrin inactivation and subsequent ligand unbinding ) is perturbed due to the contractility inhibition . This hypothesis will be tested in more detail in future . To further characterize the interaction of α V β 6 integrin and sLAP1 under conditions with reduced cell contractility and less mechanical forces on ligand - integrin bonds , we cultured α V β 6 expressing cells on elastic substrates coated with sLAP1 . We used substrates with stiffnesses at 1 . 5 kPa , 15 kPa , and 28 kPa to cover a wide range of physiological stiffnesses compared to our experiments performed before on unphysiologically stiff glass substrates . On all substrates , we observed a strong rearrangement of sLAP1 , irrespective of the substrate stiffness . This result was unexpected given that substrates with a stiffness below 5 kPa typically cause a strong reduction in cell spreading and adhesion ( Elosegui - Artola et al . , 2016 ; Bachmann et al . , 2020 ) . At the same time , these results go in line with the ability of α V β 6 to bind and accumulate sLAP1 even when actin contractility is strongly reduced ( Fig . 4A ) . And finally , α V β 6 is needed to activate TGF β 1 at physiological stiffnesses at 1 . 5 kPa and below . The ability of α V β 6 to bind and rearrange sLAP1 at 1 . 5 kPa as observed here could reflect this ability of α V β 6 to apply strong mechanical pull on ligands even in soft tissue environments . Fig . 04 : sLAP1 accumulation beneath cells is independent of actin contractility and substrate stiffness . ( A ) β 6 - Scarlet transfected NIH3T3 cells were cultured on sLAP1 coated substrates in presence of 50 µM of blebbistatin or of Y27632 where indicated . After fixation , actin cytoskeleton was visualized with phalloidin Alexa Fluor 647 . ( B ) Elastic substrates ( polydimethylsiloxane , PDMS ) with indicated Young modulus were coated with sLAP1 and NIH3T3 cells expressing β 6 - Scarlet were cultured on them for 4 hrs before fixation and imaging with widefield fluorescence microscopy . Please note the similarities in cell spreading and rearrangement irrespective of the substrate stiffness . Discussion We introduced new tools for studying the interaction between integrins and LAPs . These sLAPs proteins are easy to produce in cell culture and are versatile tools for different cell biological experiments . Using these tools , we made a number of unexpected observations with important consequences for TGF β activation and signaling . Regulation of α V β 6 - sLAP1 binding There are reasons to argue that α V β 6 mainly evolved to activate TGF β 1 and that this is a major physiological function of this integrin . The affinity of α V β 6 integrin is around 200x higher for a LAP1 - RGD peptide compared to a fibronectin - RGD peptide ( Dong et al . , 2014 ) . Moreover , KO mice for Itgb6 and for Tgfb1 share an increased tendency for inflammation and a protection from fibrosis ( Meecham and Marshall , 2020 ) . However , fully mimicking the Tgfb1 KO mice requires the simultaneous KO and / or inhibition of α V β 6 and α V β 8 integrin ( Aluwihare et al . , 2009 ) . The special nature of the LAP1 - RGDLATI peptide with the additional binding of Leu and Iso into hydrophobic pockets in β 6 integrin is potentially a structural / biochemical example for a possible co - evolution of α V β 6 integrin and the LAP / TGF β complex . However , whether the cytoplasmic β 6 tail also evolved special adaptations to allow TGF β 1 activation remains to be tested . Using sLAP1 as a new tool , we started to address this question . We could show a unique rearrangement of immobilized sLAP1 via α V β 6 integrin that can serve as a readout for mechanical interactions between this ligand and integrin . For now , we could confirm the relevance of both RGD and LATI binding to α V β 6 integrin for rearrangement of immobilized sLAP1 ( SFig . 2B , C ) . Live - cell imaging showed the rearrangement of immobilized sLAP1 in the cell periphery . However , not every α V β 6 cluster led to sLAP1 rearrangement , possibly indicating that this ability of α V β 6 is regulated downstream of integrin activation and clustering . We tested β 6 mutants affecting talin or kindlin binding and observed a need for kindlin binding ( based on β 6 - Y774A mutation ) to ensure sLAP1 binding . In future , we will use talin and kindlin KO cells to confirm this observation and to test the relevance of these adapters for the rearrangement of immobilized sLAP1 . In addition , we will analyze downstream targets of talin and / or kindlin for their involvement in sLAP1 rearrangement , specifically paxillin , FAK , and vinculin . Paxillin has been shown to be recruited to integrins via kindlin ( Theodosiou et al . , 2016 ) and talin ( Pinon et al . , 2014 ) , and talin - dependent paxillin recruitment is necessary to stabilize integrin adhesions ( Ripamonti et al . , 2021 ) . At the same time , paxillin interacts closely with FAK and their interaction regulates integrin dynamics ( Bachmann et al . , 2022 ; Zaidel - Bar et al . , 2007 ; Ballestrem et al . , 2006 ) . Vinculin supports force transmission between the integrin - talin - actin axis ( Elosegui - Artola et al . , 2016 ; Humphries et al . , 2007 ; Thievessen et al . , 2013 ) and could be expected to facilitate α V β 6 - mediated mechanical TGF β 1 activation . The relevance of these adapters will be tested for sLAP1 rearrangement , as well as for TGF β 1 activation by using TGF β reporter cell lines ( Tesseur et al . , 2006 ) . Another indication for a special mechanical LAP1 - α V β 6 interaction stems from our observation that sLAP1 rearrangement is not affected by substrates stiffness . Experiments using different ligands and integrins have shown that a substrate stiffnesses below 5 kPa cause a drastic decrease in cell spreading and adhesion force ( Elosegui - Artola et al . , 2016 ; Bachmann et al . , 2020 ) , even when studying α V β 6 - expressing cells on fibronectin ( Elosegui - Artola et al . , 2014 ) . In contrast , we observed cell spreading and strong sLAP1 rearrangement at 1 . 5 kPa , again emphasizing the special nature of the LAP1 - α V β 6 interaction . Studying the relevance of β 6 adapters as mentioned above will also shine light on the mechanism allowing α V β 6 to withstand such mechanical perturbations . α V β 6 rearrangement of sLAP1 but not sLAP3 LAP1 and LAP3 share similar RGD peptides that bind with high affinity to α V β 6 integrin ( Dong et al . , 2014 ) and α V β 8 integrin ( Ozawa et al . , 2016 ) . While the RGD peptide is also found in other ligands , LAP1 and LAP3 have an RGD that is followed by a Lxx ( L / I ) sequence ( LAP1 : LATI , LAP3 : LGRL ) . The Leu / Iso residues bind into hydrophobic pockets of the respective β subunit and support the high affinity interaction ( Dong et al . , 2014 ) . Based on these structural and biochemical insights , and supported by experimental data ( Annes , Rifkin and Munger , 2002 ) , it is widely assumed that TGF β 3 is activated similarly to TGF β 1 . Therefore , we were quite surprised to observe differences between α V β 6 - sLAP1 and α V β 6 - sLAP3 interaction . These differences included the mechanical rearrangement of immobilized sLAP1 but not sLAP3 , and a reduced binding capacity of soluble sLAP3 compared to sLAP1 in a flow cytometric ligand binding assay . Interestingly , some experiments demonstrating similarities of α V β 6 binding to either the LAP1 - RGD or the LAP3 - RGD sequence used short peptides that comprised not much more but the RGD - Lxx ( L / I ) sequence ( Dong et al . , 2014 ) . In contrast , our sLAP constructs present the respective RGD peptides integrated into the bigger LAP complex similar to the full - length protein . Interestingly , the sequence surrounding LAP1 - RGD is rather hydrophobic , while LAP3 - RGD is surrounded by charged , hydrophilic residues ( see also SFig . 1A ) . These different environments up - and downstream of the respective RGD peptides could modulate their binding to integrins , in particular when mechanical forces are applied to the integrin - RGD bond . In this regard , it might be worth noting that the specificity - determining loop 2 ( SDL2 ) of β 6 integrin contacts LAP1 and is rather hydrophobic ( Dong et al . , 2017 ) . This hydrophobic signature of the β 6 SDL2 might interfere with binding to the more hydrophilic nature of the LAP3 - RGD peptide and explain the reduced binding and lack of α V β 6 - mediated sLAP3 rearrangement . At the same time , the hydrophilic environment of the LAP3 - RGD peptide might facilitate binding to other integrins with a more hydrophilic SDL2 . Integrin - sLAP1 binding beyond α V β 6 Integrin α V β 6 and α V β 8 are established as activators of TGF β 1 in both cell culture assays using luciferase reporter cell lines ( Dong et al . , 2014 ) , as well as in mouse experiments ( Aluwihare et al . , 2009 ) . These studies imply that other integrins have no role in activating TGF β 1 . At the same time , there is compelling data in mouse models for different fibrotic diseases that TGF β 1 activation by other integrins is crucial for TGF β 1 activation and subsequent fibrotic progression ( Reed et al . , 2015 ; Henderson et al . , 2013 ; Noskovicova et al . , 2021 ) . Here , we observed a unique ability of α V β 6 integrin to rearrange immobilized sLAP1 . However , while no other integrin was able to achieve such a rearrangement , both α V β 3 and α V β 5 showed prominent clustering on immobilized sLAP1 . This observation raises the possibility that these integrins might also be able to activate TGF β 1 under certain conditions , in particular in fibrotic tissue . Fibrotic tissue is characterized by ECM stiffening , but also an increased activity of ECM - degrading proteases ( Menou , Duitman and Crestani , 2018 ) . Proteolytic cleavage of LAP1 leading to TGF β 1 release is the established mode for α V β 8 integrin mediated TGF β 1 activation ( Mu et al . , 2002 ) . Increased proteolytic activity in a fibrotic environment might make this mechanism of TGF β activation more accessible for other integrins . In parallel , ECM stiffening and increased cellular contractility could modulate the LAP1 - binding capacity of integrins like α V β 3 and α V β 5 and , thereby , increase their ability for TGF β 1 activation . We showed recently that the ligand binding capacity of α V β 3 integrin is increased by cellular contractility and mechanical pull on the integrin - ligand bond ( Bachmann et al . , 2020 ) . Force - induced LAP1 binding by integrins like α V β 1 , α V β 3 , and α V β 5 could explain the conflicting data about their ability for TGF β 1 activation mentioned above . It is noteworthy that these integrins have not been observed to activate TGF β 1 in experiments using low - contractile HEK cells ( Dong et al . , 2014 ) or in mice without fibrotic challenge ( Aluwihare et al . , 2009 ) while data for their relevance for TGF β 1 activation stems from fibrotic settings ( Reed et al . , 2015 ; Henderson et al . , 2013 ) . Testing the ability of cells of different contractility to interact with sLAP1 might offer a way to test this hypothesis . Methods Cell culture , constructs , and transfection NIH3T3 cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium ( DMEM , Pan - Biotech , Germany ) supplemented with 10 % fetal calf serum ( FCS , HyClone , USA ) , glutamine , and 1 % penicillin / streptomycine at 10 % CO2 and 37°C . The NIH3T3 clone expressing low amounts of endogenous α V β 3 integrin was described recently ( Pinon et al . , 2014 ) . ASZ001 cells were a gift from François Kuonen ( University of Lausanne , Switzerland ) . ASZ001 cells were cultured in 154CF medium ( ThermoFisher ) , supplemented with 2 % chelated FCS ( Chelex 100 molecular biology grade resin , BioRad , USA ) , 1 % penicillin / streptomycin , and 0 . 060 mM CaCl 2 . Transfections were carried out with JetPEI ( Polyplus Transfection ) according to the manual . The plasmid for expressing β 5 - mCherry was a gift from Guillaume Montagnac and Francesco Baschieri ( Gustave Roussy , France , ( Baschieri et al . , 2018 ) ) . Scarlet - I was obtained via PCR from pmScarlet - i _ C1 deposited by Dorus Gadella ( addgene # 85044 , ( Bindels et al . , 2017 ) ) . β 1 - Scarlet and β 3 - Scarlet were created by replacing GFP from the SapMar - β 1 - GFP construct described previously ( Soto - Ribeiro et al . , 2019 ; Egervari et al . , 2016 ) and the pcDNA3 - β 3 - GFP construct described previously ( Ballestrem et al . , 2001 ) . A SapMar - β 6 - Scarlet plasmid was created by replacing β 1 in the SapMar - β 1 - Scarlet plasmid by β 6 obtained by a PCR from the integrin beta6 EGFP - N3 plasmid deposited by Dean Sheppard ( addgene # 13593 ) and a SapMar - β 6 - GFP plasmid was created analogously by replacing β 1 in SapMar - β 1 - GFP . For creating chimeric sLAP proteins , we introduced a NotI and a XhoI site between the signaling peptide and the GFP of GFP - IgG constructs that were described previously ( Tabone - Eglinger et al . , 2014 ) . LAP domains for creating sLAP1 - 3 were obtained from plasmids for the respective full - length human TGF β s , deposited by Gavin Wright ( TGF Β 1 , addgene # 52185 , ( Sun et al . , 2015 ) ) , F . Xavier Gomis - Ruth ( TGF Β 2 , addgene # 128500 , ( Marino - Puertas et al . , 2019 ) ) , and Charles Gersbach ( TGF Β 3 , addgene # 52580 , ( Brunger et al . , 2014 ) ) . The shorter , reduced LAP fragments for creating sLAPs ( bold letters in SFig . 1A ) were obtained via PCR from the TGF β constructs mentioned above and were inserted via NotI - XhoI digest into the NotI - XhoI - GFP - IgG construct created before . Mutations of sLAP1 and of β 6 in SapMar - β 6 - GFP were created by site - directed mutagenesis and digestion and ligation using unique restriction sites . The sequences of all constructs were verified by sequencing . Antibodies and reagents Inhibition experiments were performed with blebbistatin ( Sigma - Aldrich , USA ) or with the ROCK inhibitor Y27632 ( Sigma - Aldrich , USA ) at concentrations as indicated . Cells were fixed with 2 % paraformaldehyde ( Sigma - Aldrich , USA ) in PBS . Actin cytoskeleton was visualized with phalloidin - Alexa Fluor 647 ( ThermoFisher , USA ) . For flow cytometry , integrin β 6 was stained as described previously with an antibody developed by the antibody facility at the University of Geneva ( Kessler et al . , 2022 ) . Integrin α V was stained with a commercial antibody ( ThermoFisher , USA , clone RMV - 7 , 1 : 1000 diluted ) . Labeling of primary antibodies was visualized with anti - mouse PE and anti - rat PE ( both Southern Biotech , USA , 1 : 1000 diluted ) . Actin in living cells was visualized with SiR actin ( Spirochrome , Switzerland ) . Producing chimeric sLAP proteins , coating substrates , and cell seeding HEK - 293T cells ( obtained from ATCC , # CRL - 3216 ) were transfected with the calcium - phosphate method according to established protocols . Specifically , 1 . 5x10 ^ 6 cells were seeded in 10 cm dishes in DMEM + 10 % FCS . The next day , 10 µg DNA was combined with 125 µl of 2 M CaCl 2 and filled up with ddH 2 0 to a volume of 1 ml . This volume was slowly combined with 1 ml of 2x Hepes Buffered Saline pH 7 . 0 ( ThermoFisher , USA ) on a shaker to ensure rapid mixture of the solutions . After 15 min incubation , the DNA solution was added to the cultured HEK cells , together with 25 µl of 10 mM hydroxychloroquine - sulfat ( SigmaAldrich , USA ) . The following day , cells were washed with PBS , followed by incubation in Opti - MEM Reduced Serum Medium ( ThermoFisher , USA ) . After 5 days , medium was collected and centrifuged to pellet floating cells . Supernatant was filtrated for sterilization . The presence of the sLAP proteins was verified by western blotting according to standard protocols and by staining with anti - human HRP antibodies ( Southern Biotech , USA ) . Concentration of sLAP proteins was quantified by dot blotting and using purified human Fc - IgG ( SigmaAldrich , USA ) as concentration standard . For coating of substrates with sLAP proteins , glass coverslips were cleaned with ethanol and incubated with 20 µg / ml of protein A ( BioVision , USA ) for 1 hr at room temperature or 4°C over night . After washing , coverslips were incubated with 0 . 5 % w / v of human serum albumin ( SigmaAldrich , USA ) for 30 min at room temperature , followed by another washing step . Afterwards , coverslips were incubated for 30 min at room temperate with supernatant of the respective sLAP proteins . Coverslips were washed a final time and used for experiments . For cell seeding on these substrates , cells were detached with trypsin / EDTA solution ( ThermoFisher , USA ) and collected by centrifugation . Cells were washed twice with PBS to remove trypsin / EDTA as well as FCS . Afterwards , cells were seeded onto sLAP coated substrates in DMEM without serum and cultured for 2 hrs before fixation . Elastic substrates ( ibidi , Germany ) were coated as described above and cell seeding was also performed as described with the exception that cells were cultured for 4 hrs . Flow cytometry For detection of surface levels of integrins , 1x10 5 cells were kept in solution and on ice and were incubated with the respective antibodies for 30 min . Cells were pelleted and washed and incubated with secondary antibodies again for 30 min on ice . Antibodies were diluted in DMEM supplemented with 1 % w / v of bovine serum albumin ( AppliChem , Germany ) . After the secondary antibody incubation , cells were again pelleted and washed and were analyzed with an AttuneNxT flow cytometer ( ThermoFisher , USA ) . Cells were gated based on forward and side scatter to detect living cells and for singlet cells . For experiments with transfected cells , cells were additionally gated based on GFP expression to analyze only transfected cells . Ligand binding assays were performed in the same way but the incubation with the primary antibody was replaced by incubation with the respective sLAP supernatant at the indicated concentrations ; incubation was performed at 37°C for 30 min . Surface - bound sLAP was detected with anti - human PE antibodies that bound directly to the Fc - IgG part of the chimeric sLAP proteins ( SouthernBiotech , USA ) . PE signals were analyzed with FlowJo software ( BD Biosciences , USA ) . For Fig . 3C , sLAP binding and α V β 6 integrin surface levels were measured for the same condition . sLAP binding was normalized by the amount of surface expressed α V β 6 for the different conditions . Finally , all conditions were normalized to the level of sLAP binding in β 6 - GFP wt transfected condition . Microscopy and image analysis All imaging was performed on a Nikon Eclipse Ti with perfect focus system , 100x / 1 . 49 NA oil objective and an Andor - EMCDD iXon897 camera . Imaging was either performed with TIRF illumination or in widefield mode . Live - cell imaging was performed in a heated chamber at 37°C and 5 % CO2 and with cells cultured in glass - bottom dishes . Cells were cultured in DMEM + 10 % FCS for 2 hr before imaging . For imaging , medium was changed to F12 buffer ( ThermoFisher , USA ) with 10 % FCS . Images were prepared and analyzed using the Fiji software package ( Schindelin et al . , 2015 ) and custom - written macro codes ( available from https : / / github . com / Mitchzw ) . Statistics and software Plots were prepared with SuperPlotsOfData ( Goedhart , 2021 ) or with Prism ( GraphPad , USA ) in case of Fig . 2C . Error bars always indicate standard deviation based on averages from at least 3 independent experiments . Structural models of sLAP1 - 3 were created with Alphafold2 and ColabFold ( Jumper et al . , 2021 ; Mirdita et al . , 2022 ) . Visualization of structural models and protein structures was done in ChimeraX ( Pettersen et al . , 2021 ; Goddard et al . , 2018 ) . Acknowledgements We are grateful to Monica Julio Barreto for help with molecular cloning . We thank the Bioimaging Core Facility , the Flow Cytometry Facility , and the Antibody Facility of the University of Geneva for their support and help . We acknowledge UCSF ChimeraX , developed by the Resource for Biocomputing , Visualization , and Informatics at the University of California , San Francisco , with support from National Institutes of Health ( R01 - GM129325 ) and the Office of Cyber Infrastructure and Computational Biology , National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases . Competing interests The authors declare no competing or financial interests . Funding M . B . acknowledges funding by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft ( DFG , German Research Foundation ; BA 6471 / 1 - 1 ) and by the Fondation Suisse de Recherche sur les Maladies Musculaires . The work of B . W . - H . is supported by the Schweizerischer Nationalfonds zur Förderung der Wissenschaftlichen Forschung ( Swiss National Science Foundation , grant 310030 _ 185261 and 310030L _ 170112 ) . Data availability All data that is part of this manuscript will be made available before final publication via Yareta , the archive repository of the University of Geneva . Supplementary Material Supplementary Figure 01 : ( A ) Sequence alignment of LAP parts of human TGF β 1 - 3 . Cysteines are highlighted in yellow , regions used for sLAPs in bold , and RGD / SGD peptides in red . Numbering of secondary structures is based on 6GFF ( Liénart et al . , 2018 ) ; their color coding is according to sLAP1 shown in ( B ) . ( B ) Alphafold2 predictions of sLAP1 , sLAP2 , and sLAP3 . Secondary structures are rainbow colored with N - terminus in blue and C - terminus in red . Please note the dimerization of the LAP proteins via cysteines following β 7 ( “bowtie region” ) , the presence of the RGD / SGD peptides in a flexible loop , and the availability of both N - and C - terminus for adding molecular tags . ( C ) Mock - transfected NIH3T3 cells were cultured on sLAP1 coated substrates and were stained against endogenous paxillin . Please note the presence of cells in the field of view as indicated by the epifluorescent image of paxillin ( middle panel ) , while these cells neither rearrange sLAP1 nor establish prominent focal adhesions . Supplementary Figure 02 : ( A ) Flow cytometric analysis of surface expression of α V integrins and of β 6 integrin . ( B , C ) β 6 - Scarlet expressing NIH3T3 cells cultured on sLAP1 substrates where the high - affinity RGD - LATI peptide was mutated to ( B ) RGE - LATI or ( C ) RGD - GATG . Supplementary Figure 03 : ( A ) β 6 - Scarlet expressing NIH3T3 cells were cultured on sLAP1 coated substrate , fixed , and stained for actin with phalloidin 647 . White box is shown as zoom - in in the lower row . ( B ) ASZ001 cells were incubated with 1 µM of SiR actin to visualize the actin cytoskeleton in living cells . Cells were imaged for 45 min every 2 . 5 min . Outline of cell at respective time points is shown as white dashed line . Please note the reduced sLAP1 fluorescence in areas occupied by the cell during the time lapse imaging ( red arrow ) . Scale bar : 10 µm . ( C ) Structural analysis of integrin β 3 tail ( bright blue ) binding to F3 - domains of kindlin2 ( PDB : 5XQ1 , orange ) or of talin1 ( PDB : 6VGU , red ; F2 in green , F1 in yellow ) . Please note the binding of the Tyr of the proximal and distal NxxY motifs to respective pockets in talin and kindlin . Also highlighted are S752 and T753 that are involved in forming a β - sheet with kindlin ( see also Fig . 3B ) and that have been shown to be important for integrin binding to kindlin ( Soto - Ribeiro et al . , 2019 ) . References Akhurst , R . J . ( 2017 ) ' Targeting TGF - β Signaling for Therapeutic Gain ' , Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol , 9 ( 10 ) . Aluwihare , P . , Mu , Z . , Zhao , Z . , Yu , D . , Weinreb , P . H . , Horan , G . S . , Violette , S . M . and Munger , J . S . ( 2009 ) ' Mice that lack activity of alphavbeta6 - and alphavbeta8 - integrins reproduce the abnormalities of Tgfb1 - and Tgfb3 - null mice ' , J Cell Sci , 122 ( Pt 2 ) , pp . 227 - 32 . Annes , J . P . , Rifkin , D . B . and Munger , J . S . ( 2002 ) ' The integrin alphaVbeta6 binds and activates latent TGFbeta3 ' , FEBS Lett , 511 ( 1 - 3 ) , pp . 65 - 8 . Bachmann , M . , Kukkurainen , S . , Hytönen , V . P . and Wehrle - Haller , B . ( 2019 ) ' Cell Adhesion by Integrins ' , Physiol Rev , 99 ( 4 ) , pp . 1655 - 1699 . Bachmann , M . , Schäfer , M . , Mykuliak , V . V . , Ripamonti , M . , Heiser , L . , Weißenbruch , K . , Krübel , S . , Franz , C . M . , Hytönen , V . P . , Wehrle - Haller , B . and Bastmeyer , M . ( 2020 ) ' Induction of ligand promiscuity of αVβ3 integrin by mechanical force ' , J Cell Sci . Bachmann , M . , Skripka , A . , Weißenbruch , K . , Wehrle - Haller , B . and Bastmeyer , M . ( 2022 ) ' Phosphorylated paxillin and phosphorylated FAK constitute subregions within focal adhesions ' , J Cell Sci . Ballestrem , C . , Erez , N . , Kirchner , J . , Kam , Z . , Bershadsky , A . and Geiger , B . ( 2006 ) ' Molecular mapping of tyrosine - phosphorylated proteins in focal adhesions using fluorescence resonance energy transfer ' , J Cell Sci , 119 ( Pt 5 ) , pp . 866 - 75 . Ballestrem , C . , Hinz , B . , Imhof , B . A . and Wehrle - Haller , B . ( 2001 ) ' Marching at the front and dragging behind : differential alphaVbeta3 - integrin turnover regulates focal adhesion behavior ' , J Cell Biol , 155 ( 7 ) , pp . 1319 - 32 . Bandyopadhyay , A . , Rothschild , G . , Kim , S . , Calderwood , D . A . and Raghavan , S . ( 2012 ) ' Functional differences between kindlin - 1 and kindlin - 2 in keratinocytes ' , J Cell Sci , 125 ( Pt 9 ) , pp . 2172 - 84 . Baschieri , F . , Dayot , S . , Elkhatib , N . , Ly , N . , Capmany , A . , Schauer , K . , Betz , T . , Vignjevic , D . M . , Poincloux , R . and Montagnac , G . ( 2018 ) ' Frustrated endocytosis controls contractility - independent mechanotransduction at clathrin - coated structures ' , Nat Commun , 9 ( 1 ) , pp . 3825 . Bindels , D . S . , Haarbosch , L . , van Weeren , L . , Postma , M . , Wiese , K . E . , Mastop , M . , Aumonier , S . , Gotthard , G . , Royant , A . , Hink , M . A . and Gadella , T . W . ( 2017 ) ' mScarlet : a bright monomeric red fluorescent protein for cellular imaging ' , Nat Methods , 14 ( 1 ) , pp . 53 - 56 . Brunger , J . M . , Huynh , N . P . , Guenther , C . M . , Perez - Pinera , P . , Moutos , F . T . , Sanchez - Adams , J . , Gersbach , C . A . and Guilak , F . ( 2014 ) ' Scaffold - mediated lentiviral transduction for functional tissue engineering of cartilage ' , Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 111 ( 9 ) , pp . E798 - 806 . Dickson , M . C . , Martin , J . S . , Cousins , F . M . , Kulkarni , A . B . , Karlsson , S . and Akhurst , R . J . ( 1995 ) ' Defective haematopoiesis and vasculogenesis in transforming growth factor - beta 1 knock out mice ' , Development , 121 ( 6 ) , pp . 1845 - 54 . Dong , X . , Hudson , N . E . , Lu , C . and Springer , T . A . ( 2014 ) ' Structural determinants of integrin β - subunit specificity for latent TGF - β ' , Nat Struct Mol Biol , 21 ( 12 ) , pp . 1091 - 6 . Dong , X . , Zhao , B . , Iacob , R . E . , Zhu , J . , Koksal , A . C . , Lu , C . , Engen , J . R . and Springer , T . A . ( 2017 ) ' Force interacts with macromolecular structure in activation of TGF - beta ' , Nature , 542 ( 7639 ) , pp . 55 - 59 . Egervari , K . , Potter , G . , Guzman - Hernandez , M . L . , Salmon , P . , Soto - Ribeiro , M . , Kastberger , B . , Balla , T . , Wehrle - Haller , B . and Kiss , J . Z . ( 2016 ) ' Astrocytes spatially restrict VEGF signaling by polarized secretion and incorporation of VEGF into the actively assembling extracellular matrix ' , Glia , 64 ( 3 ) , pp . 440 - 56 . Elosegui - Artola , A . , Bazellières , E . , Allen , M . D . , Andreu , I . , Oria , R . , Sunyer , R . , Gomm , J . J . , Marshall , J . F . , Jones , J . L . , Trepat , X . and Roca - Cusachs , P . ( 2014 ) ' Rigidity sensing and adaptation through regulation of integrin types ' , Nat Mater , 13 ( 6 ) , pp . 631 - 7 . Elosegui - Artola , A . , Oria , R . , Chen , Y . , Kosmalska , A . , Perez - Gonzalez , C . , Castro , N . , Zhu , C . , Trepat , X . and Roca - Cusachs , P . ( 2016 ) ' Mechanical regulation of a molecular clutch defines force transmission and transduction in response to matrix rigidity ' , Nat Cell Biol , 18 ( 5 ) , pp . 540 - 8 . Fischer , L . S . , Klingner , C . , Schlichthaerle , T . , Strauss , M . T . , Böttcher , R . , Fässler , R . , Jungmann , R . and Grashoff , C . ( 2021 ) ' Quantitative single - protein imaging reveals molecular complex formation of integrin , talin , and kindlin during cell adhesion ' , Nat Commun , 12 ( 1 ) , pp . 919 . Goddard , T . D . , Huang , C . C . , Meng , E . C . , Pettersen , E . F . , Couch , G . S . , Morris , J . H . and Ferrin , T . E . ( 2018 ) ' UCSF ChimeraX : Meeting modern challenges in visualization and analysis ' , Protein Sci , 27 ( 1 ) , pp . 14 - 25 . Goedhart , J . ( 2021 ) ' SuperPlotsOfData - a web app for the transparent display and quantitative comparison of continuous data from different conditions ' , Mol Biol Cell , 32 ( 6 ) , pp . 470 - 474 . Henderson , N . C . , Arnold , T . D . , Katamura , Y . , Giacomini , M . M . , Rodriguez , J . D . , McCarty , J . H . , Pellicoro , A . , Raschperger , E . , Betsholtz , C . , Ruminski , P . G . , Griggs , D . W . , Prinsen , M . J . , Maher , J . J . , Iredale , J . P . , Lacy - Hulbert , A . , Adams , R . H . and Sheppard , D . ( 2013 ) ' Targeting of alphav integrin identifies a core molecular pathway that regulates fibrosis in several organs ' , Nat Med , 19 ( 12 ) , pp . 1617 - 24 . Humphries , J . D . , Wang , P . , Streuli , C . , Geiger , B . , Humphries , M . J . and Ballestrem , C . ( 2007 ) ' Vinculin controls focal adhesion formation by direct interactions with talin and actin ' , J Cell Biol , 179 ( 5 ) , pp . 1043 - 57 . Jumper , J . , Evans , R . , Pritzel , A . , Green , T . , Figurnov , M . , Ronneberger , O . , Tunyasuvunakool , K . , Bates , R . , Žídek , A . , Potapenko , A . , Bridgland , A . , Meyer , C . , Kohl , S . A . A . , Ballard , A . J . , Cowie , A . , Romera - Paredes , B . , Nikolov , S . , Jain , R . , Adler , J . , Back , T . , Petersen , S . , Reiman , D . , Clancy , E . , Zielinski , M . , Steinegger , M . , Pacholska , M . , Berghammer , T . , Bodenstein , S . , Silver , D . , Vinyals , O . , Senior , A . W . , Kavukcuoglu , K . , Kohli , P . and Hassabis , D . ( 2021 ) ' Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold ' , Nature , 596 ( 7873 ) , pp . 583 - 589 . Kessler , J . , Bachmann , M . and Wehrle - Haller , B . ( 2022 ) “The AW519 antibody specifically detects αvβ6 integrin by flow cytometry” , Antibody Reports , 5 ( 2 ) , p . e857 . doi : 10 . 24450 / journals / abrep . 2022 . e857 . Kim , K . K . , Sheppard , D . and Chapman , H . A . ( 2018 ) ' TGF - β1 Signaling and Tissue Fibrosis ' , Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol , 10 ( 4 ) . Kukkurainen , S . , Määttä , J . A . , Saeger , J . , Valjakka , J . , Vogel , V . and Hytönen , V . P . ( 2014 ) ' The talin - integrin interface under mechanical stress ' , Mol Biosyst , 10 ( 12 ) , pp . 3217 - 28 . Kuonen , F . , Surbeck , I . , Sarin , K . Y . , Dontenwill , M . , Rüegg , C . , Gilliet , M . , Oro , A . E . and Gaide , O . ( 2018 ) ' TGFβ , Fibronectin and Integrin α5β1 Promote Invasion in Basal Cell Carcinoma ' , J Invest Dermatol , 138 ( 11 ) , pp . 2432 - 2442 . Liénart , S . , Merceron , R . , Vanderaa , C . , Lambert , F . , Colau , D . , Stockis , J . , van der Woning , B . , De Haard , H . , Saunders , M . , Coulie , P . G . , Savvides , S . N . and Lucas , S . ( 2018 ) ' Structural basis of latent TGF - β1 presentation and activation by GARP on human regulatory T cells ' , Science , 362 ( 6417 ) , pp . 952 - 956 . Lock , J . G . , Jones , M . C . , Askari , J . A . , Gong , X . , Oddone , A . , Olofsson , H . , Göransson , S . , Lakadamyali , M . , Humphries , M . J . and Strömblad , S . ( 2018 ) ' Reticular adhesions are a distinct class of cell - matrix adhesions that mediate attachment during mitosis ' , Nat Cell Biol , 20 ( 11 ) , pp . 1290 - 1302 . Marino - Puertas , L . , Del Amo - Maestro , L . , Taulés , M . , Gomis - Rüth , F . X . and Goulas , T . ( 2019 ) ' Recombinant production of human α ' , Sci Rep , 9 ( 1 ) , pp . 9186 . Meecham , A . and Marshall , J . F . ( 2020 ) ' The ITGB6 gene : its role in experimental and clinical biology ' , Gene , 763S , pp . 100023 . Menou , A . , Duitman , J . and Crestani , B . ( 2018 ) ' The impaired proteases and anti - proteases balance in Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis ' , Matrix Biol , 68 - 69 , pp . 382 - 403 . Mirdita , M . , Schütze , K . , Moriwaki , Y . , Heo , L . , Ovchinnikov , S . and Steinegger , M . ( 2022 ) ' ColabFold : making protein folding accessible to all ' , Nat Methods , 19 ( 6 ) , pp . 679 - 682 . Moser , M . , Nieswandt , B . , Ussar , S . , Pozgajova , M . and Fässler , R . ( 2008 ) ' Kindlin - 3 is essential for integrin activation and platelet aggregation ' , Nat Med , 14 ( 3 ) , pp . 325 - 30 . Mu , D . , Cambier , S . , Fjellbirkeland , L . , Baron , J . L . , Munger , J . S . , Kawakatsu , H . , Sheppard , D . , Broaddus , V . C . and Nishimura , S . L . ( 2002 ) ' The integrin alpha ( v ) beta8 mediates epithelial homeostasis through MT1 - MMP - dependent activation of TGF - beta1 ' , J Cell Biol , 157 ( 3 ) , pp . 493 - 507 . Munger , J . S . , Huang , X . , Kawakatsu , H . , Griffiths , M . J . , Dalton , S . L . , Wu , J . , Pittet , J . F . , Kaminski , N . , Garat , C . , Matthay , M . A . , Rifkin , D . B . and Sheppard , D . ( 1999 ) ' The integrin alpha v beta 6 binds and activates latent TGF beta 1 : a mechanism for regulating pulmonary inflammation and fibrosis ' , Cell , 96 ( 3 ) , pp . 319 - 28 . Noskovicova , N . , Schuster , R . , van Putten , S . , Ezzo , M . , Koehler , A . , Boo , S . , Coelho , N . M . , Griggs , D . , Ruminski , P . , McCulloch , C . A . and Hinz , B . ( 2021 ) ' Suppression of the fibrotic encapsulation of silicone implants by inhibiting the mechanical activation of pro - fibrotic TGF - β ' , Nat Biomed Eng , 5 ( 12 ) , pp . 1437 - 1456 . Orré , T . , Joly , A . , Karatas , Z . , Kastberger , B . , Cabriel , C . , Böttcher , R . T . , Lévêque - Fort , S . , Sibarita , J . B . , Fässler , R . , Wehrle - Haller , B . , Rossier , O . and Giannone , G . ( 2021 ) ' Molecular motion and tridimensional nanoscale localization of kindlin control integrin activation in focal adhesions ' , Nat Commun , 12 ( 1 ) , pp . 3104 . Ozawa , A . , Sato , Y . , Imabayashi , T . , Uemura , T . , Takagi , J . and Sekiguchi , K . ( 2016 ) ' Molecular Basis of the Ligand Binding Specificity of αvβ8 Integrin ' , J Biol Chem , 291 ( 22 ) , pp . 11551 - 65 . Pettersen , E . F . , Goddard , T . D . , Huang , C . C . , Meng , E . C . , Couch , G . S . , Croll , T . I . , Morris , J . H . and Ferrin , T . E . ( 2021 ) ' UCSF ChimeraX : Structure visualization for researchers , educators , and developers ' , Protein Sci , 30 ( 1 ) , pp . 70 - 82 . Pinon , P . , Pärssinen , J . , Vazquez , P . , Bachmann , M . , Rahikainen , R . , Jacquier , M . C . , Azizi , L . , Määttä , J . A . , Bastmeyer , M . , Hytönen , V . P . and Wehrle - Haller , B . ( 2014 ) ' Talin - bound NPLY motif recruits integrin - signaling adapters to regulate cell spreading and mechanosensing ' , J Cell Biol , 205 ( 2 ) , pp . 265 - 81 . Reed , N . I . , Jo , H . , Chen , C . , Tsujino , K . , Arnold , T . D . , DeGrado , W . F . and Sheppard , D . ( 2015 ) ' The alphavbeta1 integrin plays a critical in vivo role in tissue fibrosis ' , Sci Transl Med , 7 ( 288 ) , pp . 288ra79 . Ripamonti , M . , Liaudet , N . , Azizi , L . , Bouvard , D . , Hytönen , V . P . and Wehrle - Haller , B . ( 2021 ) ' Structural and functional analysis of LIM domain - dependent recruitment of paxillin to αvβ3 integrin - positive focal adhesions ' , Commun Biol , 4 ( 1 ) , pp . 380 . Robertson , I . B . and Rifkin , D . B . ( 2016 ) ' Regulation of the Bioavailability of TGF - β and TGF - β - Related Proteins ' , Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol , 8 ( 6 ) . Saltel , F . , Mortier , E . , Hytönen , V . P . , Jacquier , M . C . , Zimmermann , P . , Vogel , V . , Liu , W . and Wehrle - Haller , B . ( 2009 ) ' New PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 - and membrane proximal integrin - binding motifs in the talin head control beta3 - integrin clustering ' , J Cell Biol , 187 ( 5 ) , pp . 715 - 31 . Schindelin , J . , Rueden , C . T . , Hiner , M . C . and Eliceiri , K . W . ( 2015 ) ' The ImageJ ecosystem : An open platform for biomedical image analysis ' , Mol Reprod Dev , 82 ( 7 - 8 ) , pp . 518 - 29 . Shull , M . M . , Ormsby , I . , Kier , A . B . , Pawlowski , S . , Diebold , R . J . , Yin , M . , Allen , R . , Sidman , C . , Proetzel , G . and Calvin , D . ( 1992 ) ' Targeted disruption of the mouse transforming growth factor - beta 1 gene results in multifocal inflammatory disease ' , Nature , 359 ( 6397 ) , pp . 693 - 9 . Soto - Ribeiro , M . , Kastberger , B . , Bachmann , M . , Azizi , L . , Fouad , K . , Jacquier , M . C . , Boettiger , D . , Bouvard , D . , Bastmeyer , M . , Hytönen , V . P . and Wehrle - Haller , B . ( 2019 ) ' β1D integrin splice variant stabilizes integrin dynamics and reduces integrin signaling by limiting paxillin recruitment ' , J Cell Sci , 132 ( 8 ) . Sun , Y . , Vandenbriele , C . , Kauskot , A . , Verhamme , P . , Hoylaerts , M . F . and Wright , G . J . ( 2015 ) ' A Human Platelet Receptor Protein Microarray Identifies the High Affinity Immunoglobulin E Receptor Subunit α ( FcεR1α ) as an Activating Platelet Endothelium Aggregation Receptor 1 ( PEAR1 ) Ligand ' , Mol Cell Proteomics , 14 ( 5 ) , pp . 1265 - 74 . Tabone - Eglinger , S . , Calderin - Sollet , Z . , Pinon , P . , Aebischer , N . , Wehrle - Haller , M . , Jacquier , M . C . , Boettiger , D . and Wehrle - Haller , B . ( 2014 ) ' Niche anchorage and signaling through membrane - bound Kit - ligand / c - kit receptor are kinase independent and imatinib insensitive ' , FASEB J , 28 ( 10 ) , pp . 4441 - 56 . Tesseur , I . , Zou , K . , Berber , E . , Zhang , H . and Wyss - Coray , T . ( 2006 ) ' Highly sensitive and specific bioassay for measuring bioactive TGF - beta ' , BMC Cell Biol , 7 , pp . 15 . Theodosiou , M . , Widmaier , M . , Böttcher , R . T . , Rognoni , E . , Veelders , M . , Bharadwaj , M . , Lambacher , A . , Austen , K . , Müller , D . J . , Zent , R . and Fässler , R . ( 2016 ) ' Kindlin - 2 cooperates with talin to activate integrins and induces cell spreading by directly binding paxillin ' , Elife , 5 , pp . e10130 . Thievessen , I . , Thompson , P . M . , Berlemont , S . , Plevock , K . M . , Plotnikov , S . V . , Zemljic - Harpf , A . , Ross , R . S . , Davidson , M . W . , Danuser , G . , Campbell , S . L . and Waterman , C . M . ( 2013 ) ' Vinculin - actin interaction couples actin retrograde flow to focal adhesions , but is dispensable for focal adhesion growth ' , J Cell Biol , 202 ( 1 ) , pp . 163 - 77 . Yang , Z . , Mu , Z . , Dabovic , B . , Jurukovski , V . , Yu , D . , Sung , J . , Xiong , X . and Munger , J . S . ( 2007 ) ' Absence of integrin - mediated TGFbeta1 activation in vivo recapitulates the phenotype of TGFbeta1 - null mice ' , J Cell Biol , 176 ( 6 ) , pp . 787 - 93 . Yu , C . H . , Rafiq , N . B . , Cao , F . , Zhou , Y . , Krishnasamy , A . , Biswas , K . H . , Ravasio , A . , Chen , Z . , Wang , Y . H . , Kawauchi , K . , Jones , G . E . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2015 ) ' Integrin - beta3 clusters recruit clathrin - mediated endocytic machinery in the absence of traction force ' , Nat Commun , 6 , pp . 8672 . Zaidel - Bar , R . , Milo , R . , Kam , Z . and Geiger , B . ( 2007 ) ' A paxillin tyrosine phosphorylation switch regulates the assembly and form of cell - matrix adhesions ' , J Cell Sci , 120 ( Pt 1 ) , pp . 137 - 48 . Zuidema , A . , Wang , W . , Kreft , M . , Te Molder , L . , Hoekman , L . , Bleijerveld , O . B . , Nahidiazar , L . , Janssen , H . and Sonnenberg , A . ( 2018 ) ' Mechanisms of integrin αVβ5 clustering in flat clathrin lattices ' , J Cell Sci , 131 ( 21 ) .