Advocacy Through Design : Partnering to Improve Online Communications and Connections in a Life Plan Community Barsa Tandukar School of Informatics and Computing , Indiana University - Purdue University Indianapolis btanduka @ iu . edu Pooja Vazirani School of Informatics and Computing , Indiana University - Purdue University Indianapolis pvaziran @ iu . edu Aqueasha Martin - Hammond School of Informatics and Computing , Indiana University - Purdue University Indianapolis aqumarti @ iupui . edu ABSTRACT Despite longstanding interests to understand user involvement in participatory , community - based research , we are still learning how including different users can influence the design process . In this paper , we share what we learned examining older adults’ partici - pation in formative studies conducted to redesign a resident - led , internal website at a Life Plan Community in a partnership with residents and staff . We administered questionnaires followed by fo - cus groups and interviews to understand residents’ experiences and concerns with the website ; however , we found early in our process that several non - users participated advocating for changes outside the scope of our initial project goals . We reflect on how participation by different users , particularly non - users , helped us uncover design tensions related to underlying socio - technical concerns about the website . Our work builds on work promoting critical reflection in HCI . We extend work on participation , non - use , and advocacy in design and share practical examples of adapting our approach to prepare for design activities . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered Computing → Human computer interaction ( HCI ) ; Empirical studies in HCI ; • Social and professional topics → User characteristics ; Age ; Seniors . KEYWORDS User participation , Participatory community - based research , Non - use , Advocacy in Design , Older adults , Independent Living , Reflex - ive practice ACM Reference Format : Barsa Tandukar , Pooja Vazirani , and Aqueasha Martin - Hammond . 2021 . Advocacy Through Design : Partnering to Improve Online Communications and Connections in a Life Plan Community . In Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2021 ( DIS ’21 ) , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 15 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3461778 . 3462009 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , topostonserversortoredistributetolists , requirespriorspecificpermission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA © 2021 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 8476 - 6 / 21 / 06 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3461778 . 3462009 1 INTRODUCTION Over the years , there have been significant efforts to better under - stand participation ( i . e . , user involvement ) in community - based , participatory research . Designers conducting participatory work collaborate with users throughout the design process , interpret and translate findings to respond to concerns , and share those findings with the communities involved [ 8 , 27 ] . Thus , understanding differ - ent ways users can be involved ( i . e . , forms of participation ) and contribute to the design process , and the influence this participa - tion might have , can be key in community - based , participatory research . While participatory research often alludes to participa - tory design , we acknowledge that definitions of what constitutes participatory research are varied [ 24 ] . By definition , at its core , participatory research practices emphasize the democratization of design by involving end - users to provide them with more decision - making control in the design process and any resulting artifact ( s ) [ 12 , 53 ] . However , at the community level , participatory efforts can also require social negotiations among various organizational partners and stakeholders , which can be vital to the project’s ac - ceptance and sustainability [ 8 ] . Thus , during participatory research processes , designers not only learn user perspectives but also about the communities and the “socio - technical systems in which the technologies are embedded” [ 8 , 27 ] . In HCI , however , we are still learning how participation can shape design , the design process , and our understanding of communities [ 8 , 27 , 29 , 34 ] , especially those less represented in design [ 25 , 26 , 33 ] . Further , research on non - use suggests that examining non - participation can be equally important for reflecting on design [ 3 , 5 , 49 , 50 ] and forming an understanding of intended users and use [ 3 , 4 , 54 ] . In this paper , we share our experiences partnering with residents at a Life Plan Community ( LPC ) to improve an internal , resident - managed website . The website supports online communications and connections among residents and staff in the independent liv - ing community . As a part of the initial stages of the design process , we engaged residents in a two - phase study guided by the MUST method for participatory design [ 30 ] to understand their current experiences and challenges , and to inform future design directions . Our formative studies included remote questionnaires followed by seven onsite focus groups and three interviews with older adults residing in the LPC . Formative studies were later followed by it - erative design sessions with staff and residents . However , for this paper’s purpose , we focus on our formative studies , which were pivotal to understanding residents’ experiences with the website but also their concerns regarding the integration of the website into the community . 1695 DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA Barsa Tandukar et al . We present insights into the types of users who participated , the kinds of changes they advocated , and the design tensions that emerged in the process . Our formative studies brought to question our assumptions about “who” we were designing for and the role of design as a place of advocacy , including not only for active users but those that felt disenfranchised , disinterested , or displaced [ 48 ] . Drawing on prior literature on participation and non - use in HCI , we reflect on how the different types of participants , particularly non - users , and their contributions to the formative stages of the design process helped us understand our user base , the underlying socio - technical concerns surrounding our design efforts , and to tease out design tensions that informed our approach for working with residents and staff within the organizational context of the LPC . Our work builds on longstanding efforts in HCI to encourage critical reflective practice in design [ 6 , 49 , 50 , 55 ] and in design with older adults [ 31 , 32 , 54 ] . We add our experiences of partnering with older adults for design within an organizational context . We build on research on non - use , sharing how our partnership provided a platform for differing voices , and helped us better communicate and demarcate the boundaries of design to become better advocates in the process . The experiences shared in this paper provides further evidence of the value of examining non - participation in the design process as a mechanism for advocating for change [ 26 , 36 , 45 ] more broadly . However , we also contribute insights for planning future design partnerships with older adults within community - based organizations . 2 RELATED WORK In this section , we discuss efforts to understand participation in de - sign , older adults’ reasons for participation and non - participation , and the role of community - based , participatory research in advo - cating for change . 2 . 1 Characterizing and Defining Participation Within Human - Computer Interaction ( HCI ) , there have been many efforts to define and understand participation in design [ 12 , 33 , 44 , 53 ] . While views of what constitutes participation varies , Vines suggests that in the HCI community , the term ini - tially emerged from participatory design ( PD ) , which emphasizes the involvement of users and other stakeholders in the design pro - cess [ 53 ] . Participatory design as an approach that originated to democratize design and thus has a longstanding history within HCI [ 29 , 53 ] , especially in community contexts [ 8 , 25 , 27 , 41 ] . There - fore , although participatory research practices exist outside PD , a significant amount of research on participation has investigated PD as an approach to democratizing and sharing control of design decisions with the users , organizations , and communities involved [ 27 , 53 ] . Vines and collages suggest that at a time , much of the focus on participation in HCI emphasized configuring participation or matching people with technology [ 53 ] . Hence , participation often focused on designing around notions of “use” , those most likely to benefit from technology , and the quality of their involvement [ 53 ] . However , this view of participation has been found problematic for recognizing different forms of participation , who initiates and benefits from participation , and how control is shared in the design process [ 53 ] . For example , Galleguillos and Coskun in exploring PD practice with marginalized participants found that both stage of involvement ( e . g . , needs findings , ideation , vs . validation ) and method of involvement ( e . g . , workshops vs . informal discussion sessions ) can influence participation among different user types in different phases of the design process [ 33 ] . Thus , over time investigations into user involvement in the design process have broadened [ 12 , 53 ] , including examining non - participation by those that discontinue use or choose not to participate [ 3 , 4 , 44 , 52 , 54 ] . 2 . 2 Examining Older Adults’ Participation and Non - Participation in Design Because of the diverse abilities , experiences , and needs of older adults regarding technology , some suggest that it can be challenging to motivate representative users’ participation in design [ 21 ] . How - ever , traditionally PD approaches have been useful for motivating and engaging older adults in user research [ 14 , 15 , 23 , 26 , 37 , 40 , 54 ] . A considerable amount of research uses participatory approaches to engage different groups of older adults in the design process [ 14 , 26 , 37 , 54 ] and understand older adults’ roles in participatory research [ 15 , 40 , 46 ] . For example , Fischer and colleagues found that participation by representative users helps designers learn about older adults’ life experiences , needs , and potential design changes , but it can also help older participants learn and feel more involved in the process and with other participants in the study [ 16 ] . Studying non - use or non - participation also enhances critical reflective practice in design [ 3 , 5 , 19 , 48 , 54 ] and help designers understand diverse perspectives [ 3 , 4 , 31 , 32 ] , including among older adult users [ 1 , 22 , 31 , 32 , 39 , 52 , 54 ] . Research on technology non - use actively examines reasons why users limit or actively re - frain from using technology [ 5 ] and provides various definitions for characterizing non - users [ 3 , 48 ] . Similarly , non - participation examines why users do not participate in a technology intervention [ 32 , 52 , 54 ] or study [ 44 ] . Studying non - use can also help designers better understand the communities in which the design is or will be adopted [ 8 ] . Therefore , researchers have also investigated non - use and non - participation by older adults to extend knowledge of the reasons why they do not participate in design . Waycott and col - leagues examined the experiences of older adult participants who choose to disengage from a social isolation intervention project for which they volunteered [ 54 ] . Based on their findings of why older adults disengaged from the project , they raise participation as an issue of concern in the HCI community emphasizing the need for understanding the social - technical contexts in which technologies are integrated and how these impacts older adults’ acceptance of technology [ 54 ] . Knowles and Hanson suggest that this type of critical reflection can be beneficial for helping designers challenge traditional views of aging and technology to better understand older users’ experiences [ 32 ] . For instance , studies have uncovered older adults’ motivations for non - participation in design and technology interventions [ 1 , 3 , 22 , 54 ] and hindrances to adoption [ 39 , 52 ] . Our investigation lies at the intersection of understanding non - use and the role of design for bringing diverse voices to the process . 1696 Advocacy Through Design : Partnering to Improve Online Communications and Connections in a Life Plan Community DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA 2 . 3 Community - Based Participatory Research and Advocacy The study of the relationships between community - based design , technology , and advocacy is not new within HCI . For example , a significant body of work examines how technology supports ad - vocacy and digital civics such as [ 2 , 10 ] . However , in this section , aligned with this paper’s goals , we intentionally focus on related literature that examines participatory methods as a means of advo - cacy ( championing change ) for and by users in community - based design partnerships . In community - based research , democratiza - tion and sharing control of design decisions often extends past the design and design process to the broader socio - technical system [ 8 , 34 , 42 ] . Carroll suggests that because of community comput - ing complexities , the need for participatory methods is reinforced [ 8 ] . For example , it can be challenging to anticipate user needs in community settings or assess the community’s technical infras - tructure without direct involvement from community stakeholders [ 8 ] . Haynes echoes the importance of collaborative research when engaging in participatory action research ( PAR ) in HCI [ 27 ] . Be - cause PAR focuses on research with people that are experiencing real problems , research efforts should be democratic and inclusive and extend past collection and analysis to communicating research findings [ 27 ] . Thus , participatory research efforts often lead to a better understanding of users , and a technology’s integration into the organizations and communities in which it currently or will exist . There have been several efforts to understand participatory de - sign as a mechanism for user advocacy [ 18 , 26 , 33 , 36 , 44 , 45 ] . Harrington and colleagues found in their conversations with low - income African Americans about health , PD sessions often centered around addressing broader community health issues [ 26 ] . As such , they contend that PD workshops can be a platform for community activism and suggest further examination of ways participants can take action through design [ 26 ] . Mambrey and colleagues argue that designers’ technical orientation can limit user participation even in participatory design [ 36 ] . They , therefore , examined how the intentional inclusion of designers acting as user advocates in the PD process might support a better understanding of user needs and more equitable interactions with users [ 36 ] . Rose examined the idea of human - centered design as an opportunity to advocate for vulnerable populations [ 45 ] . Rose’s arguments are guided partially by Salvo’s assertions about dialogical ethics in usability practices , which suggests that as designers and researchers , our goal is not only to learn but also to communicate user discomfort back to other stakeholders [ 47 ] . Therefore , in their work with homeless individu - als , Rose argues for intentionally including vulnerable populations affected by the research in the design process [ 45 ] . We build on this prior work by exploring older adults’ reasons for contributing to participatory research in an independent living community , the types of advocacy that emerged in the process , and the feedback between different types of users including non - users that led to design tensions regarding the broader socio - technical concerns related to the website . 3 METHODS We conducted questionnaires , focus groups and interviews 1 in part - nership with residents and staff at an LPC . This two - phase study represented formative studies in a larger ongoing design effort guided by the MUST method for participatory design [ 30 ] . MUST prioritizes formative work ( i . e . , early - stage design activities ) as essential for building sustainable technologies that fit into orga - nizational work practices [ 30 ] . MUST considers not only design but also management and other parties that might influence its sustainability in an organization over time [ 30 ] . Therefore , MUST centers design activities on analysis of needs , possibilities , and future visions of change , as well as planning for technical and or - ganizational implementation [ 30 ] . Actual implementation occurs in partnership with those parties responsible for sustaining the technology after the researchers depart . The website in this study was being redesigned through a partnership between researchers , staff , and residents , but was ultimately managed within an organi - zational context . The MUST process matched our needs for study design . Our main goal for this study was to better understand residents’ experiences and needs regarding a resident - led , internal website that was actively being used by some residents in the LPC . We examined ways to improve the website as a tool for supporting online communications and connections between residents and staff at the LPC . At the time , the website was one of the main online forms of communications at the LPC , so question topics focused on what residents liked and disliked about the website , what was problematic , and what was useful for them . We additionally aimed to obtain feedback on the website’s design to inform a set of subsequent design activities and provide design guidance to residents involved in the website’s management . Our study was reviewed and approved by the Institutional Review Board at Indiana University . All participants were volunteers . Early in our study , we observed that several participants joined our study to advocate for reasons other than to share feedback on the website’s design . In this paper , we investigate the types of participants that contributed ( e . g . , forms of participation ) , why they contributed to our formative studies , the changes they advocated , and the insights their participation provided about our targeted users and underlying concerns related to the website’s design and integration . We address the following research questions : • What were the characteristics of those residents that partici - pated in our formative studies ? • For those participants that choose to engage in the research , what contributed to their participation ? • What design tensions emerged due to the involvement of different types of users ? 3 . 1 The Partnership and Our Participatory Research Approach Our approach to partnership was informed by action research [ 27 ] . Although we had a longstanding collaboration with the LPC , our efforts on this project were new and therefore we were not familiar with the website or its challenges . Our goals as “friendly outsiders” 1 S denotes questionnaire , P denotes focus group , and I denotes an interview response . 1697 DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA Barsa Tandukar et al . Figure 1 : Stakeholders’ roles and responsibilities . coming into this project was to open the lines of communication between different stakeholders invested in the project , to design solutions with them , and communicate and facilitate those solutions among them . We outline our partnership using Frauenberger and colleague’s conceptual framework for critical inquiry of PD work to describe the stakeholders involved and the power dynamics [ 17 ] . Stakeholders included technical staff , a resident committee charged with overseeing the redesign of the website , the center’s residents , and our research team ( See Figure 1 ) . Technical staff included individuals who managed the broader technical operations at the center . Technical staff had the power to approve any suggested changes to the website at the LPC level and to request and approve those changes with the vendor . The resident committee was responsible for making specific recommendations for redesign based on our recommendations to the technical staff and the vendor on behalf of the larger resident body . The resident committee involved a small group of residents that had taken on responsibility for leading and coordinating the redesign efforts . Their responsibilities included gathering resident concerns about suggested changes , addressing new issues with the website , and coordinating with researchers and the technical staff to request and prioritize changes . The residents included individuals living in the community that used the website and some individuals responsible for managing its content . While the community provided technical support to host the website , the management of website and its content were mainly the responsibility of the residents . Therefore , in addition to the residents serving on the resident committee there were other residents that were responsible for uploading and managing most of the content shared with the larger resident body . Our research team acted as a neutral voice and our goal was to objectively examine the website and residents’ opinions to provide a set of recommendations to the resident committee , technical staff and residents based on our findings . In accordance with the practice of action research in HCI [ 27 ] , our objective was in partnership with the stakeholders involved to “understand the specific situation and develop localized solutions . ” The final stakeholder involved was the vendor . The vendor was responsible for implementing any requested changes to the design that resulted from the design activities . However , for the formative studies the vendor was not directly involved apart from addressing “quick fix” technical issues uncovered in our studies . 3 . 2 The Resident Website and Its Current Uses The website examined in this study is an internal website that provides residents of the independent living community in the Life Plan Community ( LPC ) with access to a set of LPC services , information about staff and residents , the LPC , and the surrounding local community . Residents in the independent living community live on their own in apartments or houses but benefit from shared , optional amenities available to them through the LPC community ( e . g . , dining , maintenance , activities ) . Our initial content analysis of the website revealed that it supports three main tasks : finding information , making transactions , and sharing information . We also learned through informal interactions with residents that one of the website’s main uses is to support offline and online social interactions among residents , learn about other residents , and to find and share resources in the surrounding community ( outside the LPC ) . Questionnaire and focus group data confirmed our prior findings suggesting participants used the website most often to facilitate transactional , informational , and social tasks . Residents conceptualized and managed the website’s content . Although some staff were involved in updating certain information on the website , such as announcements and dining menus , it was not part of their primary job roles . Therefore , resident volunteers primarily led efforts to generate and manage the content on the website . Volunteers included those who worked with the vendor , staff , and residents to request changes , those that volunteered time to help other residents with problems , and specific committees tasked with updating specific areas of the website . Therefore , many residents viewed the website as a key source of information and a place to connect and share information with other residents . 3 . 3 Questionnaires Questionnaires were collected anonymously , and a participant could complete them at a time of their choosing . Each question - naire informed participants about the study , potential risks , the 1698 Advocacy Through Design : Partnering to Improve Online Communications and Connections in a Life Plan Community DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA study’s voluntary nature , and contact information to ask questions and report concerns . We captured demographic data through the closed - ended questions and residents’ experiences with the website through open - ended questions . The survey asked questions about residents’ use of the website , barriers , and challenges to use , and improvements they would like to see . Therefore , much of our data was qualitative , and participants had the choice to respond or not . We elected for online questionnaires instead of interviews initially due to practical considerations related to scheduling logistics for potential participants . We learned that some residents preferred anonymous feedback and more time to respond to our questions through early encounters . We also wanted to obtain data from a large group of residents to gain a broader understanding of resident experiences . Thus , we used online methods to provide the types of space requested by our participants for responding in qualitative research [ 28 ] . The questionnaire was piloted for one - week with a small group of residents to test language , understandability , and time commitment . After including changes from the pilot , we released the question - naire for one - month . To accommodate potential participants who may not have access to a computer , we provided participants with access to an online and paper questionnaire that was made available at the front desk in partnership with staff . Our partner organization distributed questionnaires to residents due to Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act ( HIPPA ) requirements . Recruit - ment included email blasts with our email recruitment script to all residents in independent living with a note that physical copies of paper surveys were also available . Online surveys were collected di - rectly by researchers using Qualtrics . Paper surveys were collected during the on - site visit to conduct focus groups . We received 126 total responses to our questionnaire . Responses included 89 complete responses ( > 90 % item response rate ) to our questionnaire and 37 partial responses ( > = 50 % item response rate or indicated non - use ) . Partial responses were mainly from infre - quent ( n = 28 ) and non - users ( n = 9 ) of the website , and therefore , they skipped many questions related to likes or experiences with the website . Forty - eight percent ( n = 61 ) of questionnaire respon - dents were between 75 - 84 years of age , thirty - seven percent of participants ( n = 46 ) were over age 85 , and fifteen percent ( n = 19 ) were 65 - 85 years of age . Sixty - nine percent ( n = 87 ) of respondents were female , and thirty - one percent ( n = 39 ) were male . Most par - ticipants were married ( n = 64 ) or widowed ( n = 53 ) , and most had at least a graduate degree ( n = 67 ) . Twelve participants reported a disability , including auditory ( n = 4 ) , visual ( n = 1 ) , physical ( n = 1 ) , and two or more ( n = 6 ) . Fifty - one percent ( n = 65 ) of participants reported using the website at least 3 - times a week , thirty - three percent ( n = 42 ) used the website 1 - 2 times a week , and fourteen percent ( n = 18 ) did not use the website at all . One participant did not report use . 3 . 4 Focus Groups One month following the surveys , we conducted seven on - site focus groups and three interviews . Onsite visits occurred before COVID restrictions were in place . At the beginning of the study , participants signed an informed consent form that provided in - formation about the study , potential risks , the study’s voluntary nature , and contact information to ask questions and report con - cerns . Participants also completed a Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act ( HIPPA ) authorization form for non - medical record access because of the organizations’ status as a HIPPA com - pliant institution . In total , 43 residents participated in seven focus group sessions , and three residents participated in interviews . We recruited in partnership with the organization who posted flyers , sent emails , and placed information about the focus groups in resi - dents’ mailboxes . The focus groups’ purpose was to complement and triangulate [ 13 ] findings from survey data to gain a deeper understanding of residents’ experiences with using the website for information and social purposes . We asked participants about their website use , benefit , and barriers to using the website and what they would like to see improved . We also shared the current website on a large projector screen during the focus groups . Using the live website , participants shared specific examples of what they liked and disliked about the website , their experiences , and changes they would like to see . Focus group and interview questions were identical ; however , we offered interviews to provide an opportunity for residents that preferred to meet one - on - one or that could not meet during the scheduled focus group times . Forty - one percent ( n = 19 ) of focus group and interview partic - ipants were 75 - 84 years of age , thirty - seven percent ( n = 17 ) were over age 85 , and twenty - two percent were 65 - 75 years of age . Sixty - seven percent ( n = 31 ) of participants were female , and thirty - three ( n = 33 ) percent were male . Most participants were married ( n = 27 ) or widowed ( n = 16 ) and had at least a graduate degree ( n = 35 ) . All but three participants were retired . Eleven participants reported a disability , including auditory ( n = 5 ) , visual ( n = 1 ) , physical ( n = 1 ) , and two or more ( n = 5 ) . 3 . 5 Data Analysis Our analysis involved three researchers , two of which were in - volved in data collection . However , all researchers were familiar with the organization , participants , and website . For demographic data , we performed basic descriptive statistics to understand par - ticipant characteristics . For qualitative data , we used a grounded theory approach [ 13 ] inductively analyzing data from question - naires , focus groups , and interviews . Paper questionnaires were digitized and merged with online questionnaires . Open - ended ques - tionnaire responses and focus group and interview transcripts were combined to form the qualitative dataset . Data included transcripts from 10 hours of focus group and interview audio recordings and 126 open - ended questionnaires . In our initial phase of analysis , two researchers independently reviewed a subset of the survey and focus group dataset . The subset included ten survey responses , two focus group transcripts , and one interview that were purposefully chosen based on the frequency of website use and length of time at the LPC . Each researcher took mar - ginal notes representing codes that categorized the feedback based on type . After the initial round of review , the researchers met to discuss , reconcile codes , and agree on an initial set of feedback cate - gories [ 38 ] . Themes about feedback type represented key concepts participants discussed . Examples of feedback codes include issues with website features , building technical familiarity / experience , accessibility , disinterest , and benefits / perceived benefits ( See Figure 1699 DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA Barsa Tandukar et al . Figure 2 : Relationships that emerged among Types of User , Types of User Feedback , and Advocacy Types . 2 ) . Three researchers deductively applied consolidated codes in the second round of analysis . We also classified participants based on use to compare feedback between groups . Questionnaire partici - pants self - reported their use using pre - determined categories ( 1 - 2 days a week , 3 - 4 days a week , five or more days a week , or I do not use the website ) . Focus group participants were categorized based on descriptions of website use they provided during focus groups . Because feedback included comments from several infrequent and non - users , in a third round of analysis , we also examined the relationships between user type and type of feedback to understand what contributed to participation of different types of users ( i . e . , what kind of feedback did they share ) . We used axial coding [ 13 ] to draw out relationships between the type of users and the type of feedback they provided to develop three high - level themes related to advocacy and reasons for becoming involved in the study ( See Figure 2 ) . 4 FINDINGS We describe the types of participants that volunteered for the study based on their self - reported use , and the types of feedback they provided in advocating for different kinds of changes with the website . We also highlighting design tensions [ 51 ] that emerged between the different types of users , which eventually led us to rethink our responsibilities and approaches as designers advocating for and with users . 4 . 1 Types of Participants Involved in the Study In total , our study included 96 frequent users , 52 infrequent users , and 23 non - users ( See Figure 3 ) . Most of the residents that partici - pated in our research fit into the categories of active or frequent users ( n = 96 ) . In both surveys and focus groups / interviews , active and frequent users accounted for more than 50 % of the respondents . Active users tended to find some value in the current website and shared that they used it more than 3 - 4 days a week even if they disliked it . For example , I2 , shared , “My background is as I told you , a federal webmaster , content manager and I use it [ the website ] every day mostly to see what’s for dinner . I think that’s what most people use it for because frankly I don’t think there’s a lot of other useful information on it for me , other than what’s happening to - day and what’s been canceled and then the announcements . ” Most participants felt that the website needed some improvement , so participants categorized as active users tended to provide two types of feedback . Some participants enjoyed or were apathetic about the website’s design , felt it was convenient , and shared potential design improvements . Other participants did not enjoy using the website but thought it was at least suitable for completing transactions with the LPC ( e . g . , maintenance request , dining reservations ) , finding information , and connecting with others and used it frequently for those purposes . Several participants also fit into categories of infrequent users . Most infrequent users shared that they occasionally used the web - site , found it extremely difficult , and therefore , purposefully limited use . Participants in this category tended to share that they felt the website could be valuable , but overall , it was too complicated . Thus , they opted out of using it much of the time . S88 shared that “If it served my needs now , I would use it more often . ” P21 shared , “I think the system is too slow , and therefore , I don’t use it very often . It just takes a long time to get stuff out . ” For these users , the value of the website did not outweigh the challenges . Several participants also indicated they did not use the web - site . These participants provided two types of feedback . One group discussed that they would like to use the website but felt disenfran - chised because it did not accommodate their needs . This group of participants included residents that did not find the website accessi - ble and those with limited or no digital literacy skills who felt there was not enough support to help them learn to use it . Another group did not care to use the website , feeling it was nonessential for their daily activities . S92 shared when asked what she did not like about the website , “Everything - I prefer phone [ or ] written - Dislike it all” . Both S59 and S69 shared that they did not use the website because their spouse informed them about what was going on in the com - munity . Both shared that they might use it “if necessary” or “if they 1700 Advocacy Through Design : Partnering to Improve Online Communications and Connections in a Life Plan Community DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA Figure 3 : Distribution of Participants by Study and Frequency of Website Use . One participation did not report use . were alone ( widowed ) ” suggesting that their communications with their spouse addressed their information needs . Therefore , they did not see the website as a necessary tool for them . 4 . 2 Types of Advocacy : For those that participated , what contributed to their participation ? We noticed early on when analyzing survey data that the feedback provided went beyond experiences and improvements to the web - site’s design to advocating for other considerations and changes at the organizational level . Therefore , we also examined what con - tributed to the participation of different types of users . We discussed previously that our research partnership was between researchers , staff , a resident committee , and the residents involved in project . Here we specifically focus on feedback residents provided in sur - veys and interviews to understand what contributed to their par - ticipation in the study . Three types of advocacy emerged from our data which we present as personas ( advocates ) that represent the feedback different types of participants shared about the changes they would like to see for the website and within the organization ( See Figure 4 ) . We note that these personas are not meant to con - vey “neat” categories of participants , but instead represent general themes that emerged during our analysis . 4 . 2 . 1 Innovators : Improving the Current Design . The first type of advocate we observed was what we define as Innovators . These participants tended to find some value in the current website and their feedback focused on advocating for improvements . Innovators accounted for most participants ( n = 138 ) in our study and were often frequent users ( n = 96 ) utilizing the website three or more times a week . Innovators included participants that both liked and disliked using the website but shared the common view that it was valuable enough to use . Feedback from participants in the innovator category therefore revolved around improving the website’s current features or suggesting new features not currently available . For example , S33 used the website five or more days of a week but shared , “I don’t like using the website but try to use it for events calendar , dining reservations , staff information , travel notice , service requests , etc . ” She later shared in the questionnaire that her main challenge was that the website is out - of - date , and she would use it more if this issue was addressed . Another participant , P7 from the focus groups , shared their main concern with the website was a missing feature , “The thing I’m most interested in is that the bios , that we’re so concerned about , are very useful especially with all the new people coming in . We want to know about them , they want to know about us . ”Some participants in this category also shared a vested interest in seeing the website succeed . For example , P1 shared , “This website , when it was being developed , I was a member of the IT committee here , so I was heavily involved in the conceptual and logical data structure architecture modeling part . I’m not a technical person . Anyway , the vendors who are responsible for the technical develop - ment of the product . We were supposed to be interfacing with them without problems . ” Similarly , other participants shared that they were involved in community work that required them to interact more often with the website . P42 shared , “I’ve lived here five years . For a while , I was on the committee that did some work on the Health Care section of the website . So , I’m only familiar with the workings of how that operates . I’ve worked on other websites or information things in connection with my job , but I’m not an IT person . ” Therefore , although fewer in number , some residents were responsible for managing content on the website and therefore were motivated by the opportunity to make potential improvements to the website to support their civic duties . 4 . 2 . 2 Disruptors : Adding Diverse Voices to the Design Process . The second type of advocate we observed was what we define as Disrup - tors . These participants were either infrequent users that limited website interactions because they found it difficult ( n = 6 ) or disen - franchised users ( n = 12 ) who did not use the website because the current design did not account for their needs . Thus , participants in the Disruptors category had some overlapping characteristics with Innovators and Protestors but also had distinct challenges related to access and accessibility that influenced the type of feedback they provided . P2 for instance shared concerns about the ability for users with mobility impairments to navigate the website , “If you can’t move a mouse , this [ website ] becomes a very difficult process . There are real accessibility problems , I think . ” Like Innovators , Disruptors 1701 DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA Barsa Tandukar et al . Figure 4 : High - level personas representing the types of advocates identified through questionnaire and focus groups / interviews . Each type relates to a type of advocacy that emerged from our data analysis . saw some value in using the website ; however , they often described the value as perceived because they were limiting or not using the website due to access and accessibility challenges . One participant noted that it was “not a convenient website , ” another pointed out that the website was “too complex . ” Another participant stated that it was “less user - friendly than I would like , ” therefore shared that they limited their use to essential use . S88 shared that “If it served my needs now , I would use it more often . ” Like protestors , some participants were non - users ; however , they tended to be disenfran - chised because of access barriers . I3 shared that she is blind and has limited vision and therefore , “I can’t use the website . . . I have to come down and somebody reads them [ menus ] to me . Reservations , I can do by telephone or in person . . . if you’re going to have the website , it seems to me it [ accessibility features ] would be a com - panion to that . Just like any news broadcast . I think just along with anything you print you would have an audio component . ” I3 later mentioned that she joined the study because she would like to use the website , but currently cannot because of the lack of accessibility features for those with visual disabilities . The feedback provided by users in this category centered on bringing awareness to their desire to be included and belief that addressing their needs would require a different approach that may go beyond design . Some of these participants felt that the current approach to managing the website did not consider accessibility or low digital literacy . Participants were also aware that most of the website’s management fell on resident volunteers , who may have limited governance over changing its entire design . However , their feedback suggested that they felt it important that as we moved into this new partnership that we consider the diversity among resi - dents and their unique needs , including the importance of including different voices when thinking of technology integration efforts that potentially impact their access to information and resources at the LPC . 4 . 2 . 3 Protestors : Sharing Alternative and Opposing Perspectives . The last type of advocate we observed we define is Protestor . Par - ticipants in this category did not use the website and did not see value in using it . Eleven participants across the questionnaires and focus groups fit into this category . As self - described non - users , their feedback focused on sharing that they were non - users while bringing awareness to the potential barriers that technology inte - gration might bring for residents who intentionally resisted using the website for their information or communication needs . They provided feedback to oppose the abandonment of alternative com - munication mechanisms ( e . g . , paper newsletters ) they preferred , and relied on for information . Therefore , participants in this cate - gory did not provide direct feedback on the website’s design but instead appealed for a listening ear of the consequences a full tran - sition to digital communications might have . Protestors tended to prefer non - digital approaches and did not see any value in adopting the digital content on the website at the time . Therefore , unlike disruptors , their non - use was intentional . S23 shared , “ [ I have ] no time . [ I ] work full time . All required info is available through other means - flyers , [ newsletter ] , ledge handouts , flyers” . He later shared that he did not see much value in using the website , stating , “not much [ value ] unless [ it is the ] only way to access info . [ I ] find websites impersonal . ” Like S23 , several participants shared that they simply did not want to use the website . Therefore , protesters tended to provide feedback explaining reasons for actively resisting use of the website . 4 . 3 Design Tensions : What did we learn from the participation of different types of users ? Throughout this study , we found that most participants were open to hearing others’ opinions and eager to work on problems . Over - all , in its current form , residents faced several challenges when attempting to use the website and hoped that their participation would lead to improvements . However , in this section , we share de - sign tensions [ 51 ] that emerged from the participation of different users . Tatar defines these project tensions as places in the project that “ ( a ) directly or indirectly fall within the designers’ scope of influence but ( b ) where means , ways , and values come into conflict” . 1702 Advocacy Through Design : Partnering to Improve Online Communications and Connections in a Life Plan Community DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA We discuss how these tensions introduced broader questions about “what is and ought - to - be” when thinking of the website and its role within the organization . 4 . 3 . 1 Improving the Current Website vs . Addressing Broader Access Challenges . The first set of tensions we encountered emerged due to the varied opinions between users and non - users on improving access to information and resources at the LPC . Some users felt that bringing more non - users to the website would improve information dissemination efficiency and reduce some of the frustrations they had experienced helping those users find information offline . S18 commented , “Whatever can be done to encourage more residents to use the website would be a huge boon to the rest of us . When we have to research something , they could be doing themselves , frus - tration abounds on both sides” . On the other hand , several residents that self - described as non - users of the website voiced concerns about what they felt were plans to eventually replace paper - based communications ( e . g . , newsletters , announcements ) with digital content housed on the website . They expressed that overall , they felt that introducing the website threatened to displace the com - munication mediums they valued . Their feedback highlighted that not everyone used or wanted to use the website as their main in - formational channel . P34 shared , “I don’t like reading [ online ] . . . I read the [ local newspaper ] on paper , and I do a lot of things on paper , and that’s the way I’m used to and want to continue doing that . I find it easier than my iPad or my phone . There’s a failure to recognize that people have different ways of communicating , and different preferences on doing that . So , they’re very happy to say , ‘Oh , well , we’ll put everything online . It’ll be easy . ’ Well , for those that don’t have it , then we’ll get them a paper copy on their shelf . ” Several participants provided similar feedback underscoring that there were indeed residents who were not interested or actively resisting the transition to online communications simply because they preferred other ways of finding information and connecting with others . Even participants that used the website regularly had concerns about moving all content online . S49 used the website frequently but actively resisted the thought that the website would be a requirement for finding information and connecting in the LPC . She urged , “Don’t let it be the only way people in their senior years can obtain information . Some people do not or cannot use a com - puter and shouldn’t be forced to learn something like that in their old age . ” Another participant , S39 shared and posed the question of how to encourage more use , “I’m concerned that some residents can’t / won’t / don’t use the website , and I wish there were some way to help them . I realize some may not even have a computer , and that’s a big hurdle to overcome . But there’s so much great info on the website it would be great if more / all residents could access it . How and where are the big challenges , though ? ” Therefore , those who used the website envisioned that more residents actively use it but were aware that some residents did not use it or did not know how . Several participants advocated that questions regarding non - use and lack of access needed to be a more salient part of residents’ investigations into the website’s redesign ; else , there was the risk of disenfranchising certain groups of residents . P35 shared , “My wife , like her husband , does not use the internet . She doesn’t even know how to use a computer . I can’t even get her to use the cell phone . She is totally without that , so anything that you do that eliminates people who can’t use it is going to be a disaster for her . ” S59 , who had a disability shared that she did not use the website because she “wants better alternatives” . Therefore , some residents actively advocated for moving investigations beyond improving the current website to addressing broader access challenges at the LPC . S90 shared , “Don’t shut out people here who have never used it . Offer an easy teacher to help or if they have no computer . Do not prohibit a table in the library or admin office where they can pop in someone there can help them secure info . Also add one or two places where we have a resident directory with a photo number for each . Have a directory with faces of people which cannot be removed from the place it is on . . . inside the library ( attach to furniture ) or a relatively resident area with a sign” . These tensions introduced new considerations of how to support residents that valued the website without displacing or further disfranchising those who needed information but did not or could not use the website . 4 . 3 . 2 Supporting Autonomy vs . Accountability . We also observed tensions between those that managed the website and those that used it . While the website was supported by the larger organization by supplying technical assistance and resources , because the idea for creating an internal website emerged from the resident body , overtime it remained the responsibility of the residents . For example , I3 played a pivotal role in the website’s management and in helping other residents with website issues . She shared that originally the goal was for residents who volunteered to work on the website to only provide and manage content and submit any requested changes to the website’s structure to the vendor . However , overtime the website grew to become a more essential tool for facilitating information and connections at the LPC leading to new challenges . Those residents who managed the websites’ content attempted to work with the vendor in the past to address residents’ challenges but , the responsibility for championing modifications and assisting other residents had become more difficult . I3 shared , “Somehow I fell into working on this . I’m not really sure how , but . . . a number of years ago when the website was first suggested [ by residents ] , the staff person [ at that time ] didn’t really have that much time to work on it . So somehow , I got included and the web vendor , he had a model of a website that they said , ‘This is our product , and we can tailor it to your needs . ’ So , I saw it and I thought , well sure , I can fill in the blanks . That was a bit how it started , but we had a lot more requests for how the blanks were filled in than what the original sample had . . . I don’t want to go into the whole history , but that was being managed by volunteers and I started helping out . ” Another participant , P1 , shared a similar experience , “This web - site when it was being developed , I was a member of the IT com - mittee here , so I was heavily involved in the conceptual and logical data structure architecture modeling part . I’m not a technical per - son . Anyway , the vendors who are responsible for the technical development of the product . We were supposed to be interfacing with them without problems . We had a good methodology doing it but . . . some of the problems that we found at the time still exist . ” 1703 DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA Barsa Tandukar et al . From these residents we learned that updating the website’s content and structure itself was quite restrictive and time - consuming . For example , only certain residents had permission to upload content . The content was often limited to editing existing webpages pro - vided by the vendor or uploading PDF ( Portable Document Format ) documents . Any changes to the website’s organizational structure had to be submitted to the vendor , which led to lengthy delays when addressing some requests as the vendor served more than one client . Yet , despite limitations and challenges of managing the website because residents oversaw managing the website , they were able to maintain autonomy in deciding and developing the content pre - sented on the website . For example , other residents shared that they interfaced with the website due to their committee work and were tasked with creating content ( e . g . , reports , newsletters , resident pro - files ) to distribute to other residents in the community . P39 shared , “I’ve been here about 15 months altogether . I don’t use the website very often . I have one or two minor concerns , but I’m co - chair of a committee here , and we want to get ourselves more prominent on the webpage , so I’m here more to learn than to advise . ” Another participant , P9 , was also responsible for managing a specific part of the website , she stated , “I don’t have actual direct relationship , but I’m on the dining committee and I have leave for reviewing the website , just the dining part of the website , so I’m a little more with that . ” Like those that conceptualized and managed the website , residents that created content to the website were also volunteers and performed these activities as part of their civic participation in the LPC community and found it useful to be able to coordinate with other residents to ensure the content was added to the website . Most residents acknowledged and appreciated volunteers’ ef - forts , however there were some residents that felt that many of the website’s challenges originated from the fact that there was no dedicated person responsible for the website . As discussed previ - ously , the website was conceptualized and managed by residents as part of their civic duty to their community and therefore the responsibility of managing the website remained with the resident body . P11 shared that they felt that many issues with the website were partly due to lack of ownership , “It also occurred to me too , that there is no webmaster . There is nobody in charge of all this , which is how the out - of - date information just ends up sitting there for a long time . ” S49 shared , “Have an IT person on the staff to help with simple computer and website problems . Volunteers are great but overburdened with many other volunteer activities . ” The lack of personnel was especially problematic for those residents that encountered accessibility challenges and felt disenfranchised from using the website . I2 , who had limited vision and at the point of the interview had not been able to access the website , stated , “I feel strongly that it’s [ the website ] a good thing , but it doesn’t go far enough , and I’m hoping that you’ll be able to work that out . I realize it means additional personnel , but if you’re going to do it - you should do it right . ” In her comment , she referred to pre - vious feedback that she would like to use the website but could not ; therefore , she believed that there should be greater emphasis on ensuring that online content was accessible to all at the LPC . Even among those who could access the website , some felt that to get more acceptance and even implement the designs from our upcoming sessions , dedicated personnel would need to be involved . I3 , shared , “I say all this because I think you’re going to have some really good ideas for redesign , but I’m really skeptical about when and how they can be implemented . I think somebody with some knowledge , a webmaster type , somebody needs to think about the requests and kind of rank them as to their doability , like what things can be done ? Is it worth doing the simpler things first to clean it up and then doing the more structural things or do you tackle it all at once ? You what I’m saying ? ” Yet still some felt that it was important that residents continue to have a voice and significant active role in crafting an online presence that reflected the things essential for them . Therefore , question of accountability and ownership of the website and its content was a frequent discussion throughout the study . For exam - ple , several residents discussed who should be involved in managing the website : “P33 : Some of the problem is that this [ website ] is a significantly volunteer activity . . . so you do it when you have the time or the committee . . . volunteer projects on something like this can be complicated . P32 : I guess there’s a real question , should we have a paid webmaster ? Or should web mastering be a volunteer activity ? . . . P31 : Well , it’s a question of how you want to use and dedicate your money and what your objective is . What we’re concerned about here , at least from my perspective is what’s best for the resident ? . . . P32 : Now that they’ve hired [ the LPC Employee 1 ] . . . they now have a person to do administrative tasks . . . Maybe that’s where the web mastering should be I don’t know , but it’s something to look at . . . but for instance the question is , is this a staff management function or does this belong to the residents ? Because to a large extent resident volunteers have been shap - ing this thing , and it’s obviously beyond that scope now . But do we want to turn it over completely to management ? ” Residents’ questions of accountability and ownership generated questions for the research team of how to balance the autonomy residents desired in crafting their online presence with the account - ability some residents felt would improve overall interactions with the website . 4 . 3 . 3 Tribal Knowledge vs . Consistency and Standards . Residents also had varying opinions about defining their online presence and concerns about whether the current website reflected their values . Therefore , a common discussion revolved around how to make the website content welcoming and useful to new residents joining the LPC . One challenge discussed frequently was how to welcome new users of the website through the homepage . The website’s homepage acted as a dashboard for obtaining frequent and key information such as announcements , daily calendars , and events . However , some , especially newer residents felt that the homepage did not do a good job of enticing people to want to use it and learn more thus making it a less effective onboarding tool . P2 explained , “About that picture [ older image from the LPC ] up on the top , that’s a marketing requirement ? Let marketing have their 1704 Advocacy Through Design : Partnering to Improve Online Communications and Connections in a Life Plan Community DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA own website because honestly this is not a good advertisement . This does not attract somebody in their 60’s who is used to using efficient websites . This is not an efficient website I’m turned off by this website and I’m not in my 60’s . The question is how do you make it work better ? . . . A homepage is the first shot [ to attract people ] ” . Others , too , felt the homepage did not meet its purposes of welcoming newer residents . P4 shared , “It’s not ‘over seeable’ enough . It should be right there [ the information ] . When you go to the homepage , everything you want should be right there visually in front of you . ” P2 shared that when attempting to make changes to the website’s broader design , “We have the responsibility but not the authority . ” Thus , there were several discussions of whether marketing or a vendor should influence what is presented on the homepage that residents felt could affect first impressions of those joining the community . Another common design tension that emerged was related to the different naming conventions used on the website . Recently the LPC had expanded and welcomed new residents to a new building . However , we learned that many decisions regarding the language and naming conventions used on the website had not changed since being decided previously , leaving some of the newer residents confused . P2 suggested , “I would also rename the categories [ top navigation menu ] . A lot of things wound up in forms [ one category in the top navigation ] because they didn’t know where else to put it . I think things should be organized functionally . There should be something for dining ; there should be something for cultural art events . The resident away form . Make a category that’s descriptive . It’s very hard to find functionally what you need to do . ” S61 who had been at the LPC for less than 6 months shared similar concerns , they shared , “The major menu headings [ for example ] ‘Resident Engagement’ are not descriptive of the information under those headings . Subheadings , such as ‘Digital Calendars’ under ‘Events’ are frequently uninformative . ” On the other hand , P1 who was involved in the initial conceptualization of the website shared that most residents that had been there for longer periods of time were familiar with the conventions and despite the quirks had developed a way of working with the website so a change might make things difficult for those residents . She shared the alternative opinion that , “I think the backbone of this website is pretty solid because the standardized vocabulary we are using is consistent with the terminology in the conversation we have among ourselves . The words , the meanings , the concepts , they’re all good , but the cycle of establishing a particular transaction and coming back from it and reestablishing it is totally messed up . ” These design tensions are highlighted in the following interactions between newer and older residents that lived in two different communities at the LPC , two of which were familiar with the existing naming conventions and their origins and one who was not . “P4 : [ Community 1 ] has a different set of problems than [ Community 2 ] . P2 Right and your demographic is different in [ Com - munity 2 ] . P4 Yeah . Definitely . . . as I say , ‘resident engagement’ as a title of a category , I don’t get it . It doesn’t mean anything . . . P1 That’s the terminology that at that time - P4 That’s fine , but it doesn’t communicate anything . P1 If you give a definition behind it when you click on it saying this is what this means . P4 Iwould neverclick on it . The only way Iwould click on it is if I rolled over it and there was a popup . . . ” Despite broad optimism that improving the website would im - prove access and engagement at the LPC , both newer and older residents voiced the need to address the specific concerns about the website’s design that impact not only the larger community of LPC residents but also the different communities . The tensions that emerged over language and online presence brought to question how to balance the use of tribal knowledge or commonly known information that many residents were familiar and become accus - tomed and newer residents needs for consistency and standards that both reflected their understanding and inclusion at the LPC . 5 DISCUSSION Our findings highlight different types of participation in the design process and user advocacy that emerged in the redesign efforts of a resident website at an LPC . In addition , our findings highlight different design tensions that emerged due to the participation of different users and how it helped us understand the role of the website for different residents and for the LPC organization . This work builds on broader HCI research examining the forms partic - ipation ( i . e . , user involvement ) in the design process , and in HCI research [ 12 , 53 ] and how participation by different types of users can influence the design process . We discuss how our work builds on existing literature related to examining participation in design more broadly as well as among older adults . We additionally discuss how our findings extend work examining forms of advocacy in the design process . In the tradition of engaging in critical reflective practice in HCI [ 3 , 5 , 19 , 48 – 50 , 54 ] , we augment discussions of prior work with our lesson learned ( practical implications ) that helped to inform our design partnership moving forward into de - sign activities . We discuss how our study provided a platform for differing voices that helped us to later better advocate for users when sharing and documenting experiences and when managing user expectations in our partnerships with older adults and the organization . 5 . 1 Providing a Platform for Differing Voices Our initial study goals were to identify challenges users encoun - tered using an internal website to inform our approach to iterative participatory design . While we did uncover challenges with the website , which helped shape the design process moving forward , our studies also opened broader conversations about participation in design and technology non - use . We believe opening our sessions to all that were interested instead of inviting only those users who were website users may have led to the unexpectedly high par - ticipation from residents that felt disenfranchised , disinterested , disenchanted , and displaced [ 48 ] . Researchers acknowledge that often it may not be possible for those affected to participate in the PD process fully , but we as designers must carefully consider who is included [ 12 , 29 ] . As we reflect on our approach , we also found the need to consider “who is included” was key to shaping our partnership moving forward . In some ways , our study became a 1705 DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA Barsa Tandukar et al . platform for these differing voices to share their experiences and desires as non - users . The inclusion of diverse types of users helped us uncover design tensions [ 51 ] at the organizational level that we needed to consider . Tartar discusses that to reflection is key to uncovering design tensions as it reveals competition within a framework or project [ 51 ] . We found through our work there were several values in competition with one another and others that were aligned . Reflecting on these tensions we believe helped us become better partners . Research on community - based partnerships in HCI emphasizes the essential need to understand the underlying socio - technical environment when implementing a technology design intervention in a community setting , noting a moral and pragmatic obligation to the users [ 8 ] . Carroll suggests that in PD , morally , those that are most affected by design should have a say in the outcome , and pragmatically those that will need to adopt or adapt the outcome of a design should be included in the design process [ 8 ] . Because of the participation of non - users and their advocacy on behalf of themselves and others , through our formative studies , we able to learn much more about broader constraints and concerns about online communications at the LPC . Our findings thus emphasize the importance of understanding how a technology intervention can morally and pragmatically impact potential users and non - users and how the representation of different user types might influence this understanding in early - stage design . Like other studies with older adults , we found that examining non - participation in HCI research even in the early stages of de - sign helped democratize design in the latter stages of our design process [ 25 , 35 ] . By examining why different residents volunteered to share their voice and become involved in the research , we un - derstood user perspectives more broadly and how participants saw the current intervention as both potentially beneficial and disad - vantageous to their day - to - day lives . Like Robinson and colleagues who examined participation through substitution and refusal of technology , we found non - use as an action equally as “informative about participation” [ 44 ] . Opening these discussions led our design goals away from just partnering with residents to “fix” what was already there to partnering with residents to envision the future of online communication and connection at the LPC , apart from the website . In partnership with residents and with support from the technical staff , in the design sessions that occurred after these initial studies concluded , we continue to work with residents and staff to explore different ways to address the needs of both users and non - users including making progress on the website and discussing alternatives for those that did not use it . 5 . 2 Using Design to Advocate on Behalf of Users Our findings build on prior work examining advocacy in design providing additional examples of the ways the design process can be leveraged to advocate on users’ behalf . Understanding ways of advocating for users in the design process is a core tenant of partic - ipatory HCI work [ 7 , 36 , 45 , 47 ] . Salvo , for example , suggests that one of the responsibilities for reporting participatory research is to share users’ discomfort , frustrations , and discontent with those that produce the technology [ 47 ] and thus researchers must actively find ways to advocate for users [ 36 , 45 ] . While we did not anticipate that some users that had no interest in using the website would contribute their voices to our study , they did . From their participa - tion , we learned about their grievances and concerns concerning what they perceived integration of a website means for disrupt - ing communications and connections they value at the LPC . The concerns broadly aligned with Satchell and Dourish’s definitions of active resistance of technology [ 48 ] . While our initial goal was to rethink and provide recommendations on the website’s design , as a way of advocating for non - users , we purposefully chose to include ( un ) design implications [ 6 ] in our design documentation , re - ports , and presentations shared with residents and staff at the LPC . Like Baumer and colleagues , we did not make recommendations to not design the website , but instead documented and presented user experiences to further amplify their perspectives that these non - technical issues should be considered [ 6 ] . From document - ing the experiences of different participants , we feel that we were able to better advocate on their behalf . For example , we included data regarding access issues which led to a more focused effort on improving the accessibility of the website and the inclusion of additional resources by technical staff to ensure that the website is accessible . For those that felt displaced by the website , documenting experiences help us to brainstorm solutions and approaches for those participants that did not value web - based communications . We were also able to brainstorm non - technical solutions such as ways to support those residents who were interested but had low or no digital literacy skills . Our work also contributes additional examples of how older adults can leverage design spaces to advocate for themselves . Prior work that focuses on understanding advocacy in the design pro - cess , has mostly focused on ways designers can advocate for users [ 18 , 36 , 44 ] , however our work provides an example of ways users can use the design process as a place of advocacy . Our findings align with other work that suggests that participatory research can be a mechanism for users to advocate for themselves and their com - munities [ 25 , 33 , 45 ] . We extend this prior work by contributing an example of how non - users leveraged our study to garner empathy and provide alterative voices regarding how technology integration might impact them . We believe that our approach was a welcome environment for bringing up these issues . When designing the study protocol , we wanted to provide an open opportunity for all to share good and bad experiences with the website , so we included a question about experiences and why people do not use the website . We feel that this approach in the exploratory and formative stages of design may have led to more participation of those non - users that simply wanted to voice their opinion about parallel issues ( which was not the intent of the study ) . Others have noted that participa - tion by users in different modes and stages can encourage different voices in design [ 33 , 43 ] . Once we noticed that participation varied , we adapted our approach for focus groups , which also allowed us to collect richer data about their experiences and better plan so that non - users would continue to feel welcome . Some of the strategies we employed were to emphasize at the beginning of focus groups that all feedback is welcome good or bad , as well as to provide alternative options ( interviews ) not only for those with scheduling conflicts but also those that may not be comfortable sharing in a group setting . In addition , because we acted as “friendly outsiders” 1706 Advocacy Through Design : Partnering to Improve Online Communications and Connections in a Life Plan Community DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA [ 27 ] we emphasized that our goal was not to critique or judge their feedback but to listen which we believe led to open conversations about our role in the study , how we would share our findings , and our plans to advocate on their behalf . 5 . 3 Demarcating Boundaries of Design and Managing Expectations In our formative work , we uncovered several design tensions that were not related to design or that required buy - in from other stake - holders not directly involved in the creation of the website . For example , some of the challenges around technical issues and orga - nization of the website content arose because of how a 3rd party chose to implement the website or because a portion of the web - site used an application programming interface ( API ) to provide additional functionality . Because participants felt some of the chal - lenges were imperative to fix , we also had to develop strategies for demarcating the boundaries of design and expectations of what we could offer in the partnership . Waycott and colleagues pose the question , “How do designers / researchers manage expectations and values that diverge from the aims of the project ? ” [ 54 ] . Though we were not designing in a sensitive setting , this is a question that we had to ask ourselves as we uncovered tensions and issues that were slightly out of scope of our initial project goals . Coming into the design partnership we were briefed about the website and the need to rethink its design ; however , we were not aware of the socio - technical factors that might influence the design apart from the need to consider sustainability within the orga - nization . At the same time , HCI literature notes that a designer’s ability to manage and support expectations can be essential to build - ing trust in participatory relationships especially in community - engaged work [ 9 , 11 , 20 ] . For example , Corbett and La Dantec describe how speed of progress shaped community expectations in their digital civics work [ 11 ] . In this project , they identified strate - gies to mitigate negative perceptions such as shaping expectations of the public through visualization , and continued engagement through ongoing conversations to manage expectations [ 11 ] . Clarke and colleagues discuss that even prior engagements with an institu - tion can influence participants expectations in an engagement [ 9 ] . They give the example of a participant that based on negative prior experiences with an institution , had initially negative expectations for the current work which they were able to change through an open co - design process [ 9 ] . In our case , to manage expectations , we selected the MUST approach to PD specifically because it took into consideration the realities of designing within organizational contexts and emphasized sustainability of design [ 30 ] . Thus , we were prepared and acknowledged that our initial efforts would be key to understanding our limitations in the website’s design and for planning the generative design activities that would follow . How - ever , we found that because of the complex broader socio - technical system surrounding the website , we also had to reflect critically on what could and could be addressed through design , where we could provide recommendations , and where we could not . For ex - ample , there were some areas of the website where we could make recommendations , but ultimately it was up to a 3 rd party to im - plement those changes . We approached some of these challenges during studies . Some participants openly asked if we could “fix” certain technical problems . In these cases , we devised strategies that acknowledged participant concerns but also followed with an explanation of where we fit in the partnership and how we would pass any technical issues to those responsible for them ( vendor or technical staff ) . For some challenges discussed that related to the organization such as out - of - date information that relied on staff , we documented concerns but , noted that this would require changes to organizational processes . We attempted to address boundaries and limitations in several ways . For example , close relationships and allyship with technical staff who were more familiar with residents and had developed a trusted relationship was key . Active support by staff for accommodating our recommendations and working with the vendor helped us better communicate to residents what was possible and what was not . Similarly , inclusion and close allyship with of a smaller group of residents that focused specifically on pro - viding input and prioritizing the focus of the design demonstrated to residents that were attempting to address their needs but also allowed us to manage expectations about timeline and providing an immediate comprehensive solution to all the issues we uncovered . 6 LIMITATIONS While our participants were diverse regarding age and technology experiences , our study is in some ways limited by our participant demographics . Most participants residing at the LPC with were highly educated ( at least a bachelor’s degree ) and benefited from technology support mechanisms provided within the community . This may have impacted the distribution of responses we received regarding use and non - use as some participants likely benefited from community resources that impact their access to technology . In addition , like other community - based research studies in HCI [ 8 , 27 , 41 ] our findings are very much contextualized to the community of older adults that participated in the study . While we hope to provide a rich description of our work to aid with transferability , like other qualitative work , our results are likely not generalizable [ 13 ] . 7 CONCLUSION In this paper , we share our experiences partnering with residents at a Life Plan Community ( LPC ) to improve an internal website con - ceptualized and managed by residents . User participation , including non - users in our formative studies brought to question our assump - tions about “who” we were designing for and the role of design as a place of advocacy . We report insights into the types of users who participated , the kinds of changes they advocated , and the design tensions that emerged in the process . We discuss how our examina - tion of participation in our studies helped us to better understand our user base , the underlying socio - technical concerns surrounding our design efforts , and to tease out design tensions surrounding the website that helped inform our approach for working with resi - dents and staff within the organizational context of the LPC as we moved into design activities . We contribute a critical reflection of our experiences of partnering with older adults for design within an organizational context to advocate for change . We additionally provide insights for planning future design partnerships with older adults within community - based organizations . 1707 DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA Barsa Tandukar et al . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank the participants , resident committee , and staff at our partnering organization for sharing their experiences and feedback . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Afsaneh Abrilahij and Thomas Boll . 2019 . A qualitative metasynthesis of reasons fortheuseornonuseofassistivetechnologiesintheagingpopulation . GeroPsych : The Journal of Gerontopsychology and Geriatric Psychiatry 32 , 2 : 79 – 92 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1024 / 1662 - 9647 / a000203 [ 2 ] Mariam Asad and Christopher A . Le Dantec . 2017 . Tap the “Make This Public” Button : A Design - Based Inquiry into Issue Advocacy and Digital Civics . In Pro - ceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’17 ) , 6304 – 6316 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3026034 [ 3 ] Eric P . S . Baumer . 2015 . Usees . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’15 ) , 3295 – 3298 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702147 [ 4 ] Eric P . S . Baumer , Phil Adams , Vera D . Khovanskaya , Tony C . Liao , Madeline E . Smith , Victoria Schwanda Sosik , and Kaiton Williams . 2013 . Limiting , Leaving , and ( Re ) Lapsing : An Exploration of Facebook Non - use Practices and Experiences . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’13 ) , 3257 – 3266 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2466446 [ 5 ] Eric P . S . Baumer , Morgan G . Ames , Jed R . Brubaker , Jenna Burrell , and Paul Dourish . 2014 . Refusing , Limiting , Departing : Why We Should Study Technology Non - use . In CHI ’14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’14 ) , 65 – 68 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2559206 . 2559224 [ 6 ] Eric P . S . Baumer and M . Six Silberman . 2011 . When the implication is not to design ( technology ) . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in ComputingSystems ( CHI’11 ) , 2271 – 2274 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979275 [ 7 ] Susanne Bødker . 1996 . Creating conditions for participation : conflicts and re - sources in systems development . Human - Computer Interaction 11 , 3 : 215 – 236 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15327051hci1103 _ 2 [ 8 ] John M . Carroll and Mary Beth Rosson . 2007 . Participatory design in community informatics . Design Studies 28 , 3 : 243 – 261 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2007 . 02 . 007 [ 9 ] Rachel Elizabeth Clarke , Jo Briggs , Andrea Armstrong , Alistair MacDonald , John Vines , Emma Flynn , and Karen Salt . 2019 . Socio - materiality of trust : co - design with a resource limited community organisation . CoDesign : 1 – 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2019 . 1631349 [ 10 ] Eric Corbett and Christopher A . Le Dantec . 2018 . The Problem of Community Engagement : Disentangling the Practices of Municipal Government . In Proceed - ings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174148 [ 11 ] Eric Corbett and Christopher A . Le Dantec . 2018 . Exploring Trust in Digital Civics . In Proceedings of the 2018 Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ’18 ) , 9 – 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3196709 . 3196715 [ 12 ] Terry Costantino . 2014 . Issues of Participation : A Framework for Choices and Compromises . International Journal of Sociotechnology and Knowl - edge Development ( IJSKD ) . Retrieved September 9 , 2020 from www . igi - global . com / article / issues - of - participation / 129536 [ 13 ] John W . Creswell and Cheryl N . Poth . 2016 . Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design : Choosing Among Five Approaches . SAGE Publications . Retrieved from https : / / books . google . com / books ? id = DLbBDQAAQBAJ [ 14 ] Jennifer L . Davidson and Carlos Jensen . 2013 . Participatory Design with Older Adults : AnAnalysisofCreativityintheDesignofMobileHealthcareApplications . In Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Creativity & Cognition ( C & C ’13 ) , 114 – 123 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2466627 . 2466652 [ 15 ] Ezequiel Duque , Guilherme Fonseca , Heitor Vieira , Gustavo Gontijo , and Lu - cila Ishitani . 2019 . A systematic literature review on user centered design and participatory design with older people . In Proceedings of the 18th Brazilian Symposium on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( IHC ’19 ) , 1 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3357155 . 3358471 [ 16 ] Björn Fischer , Alexander Peine , and Britt Östlund . 2019 . The Importance of User Involvement : A Systematic Review of Involving Older Users in Technology Design . The Gerontologist : gnz163 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / geront / gnz163 [ 17 ] Christopher Frauenberger , Judith Good , Geraldine Fitzpatrick , and Ole Sejer Iversen . 2015 . In pursuit of rigour and accountability in participatory design . International journal of human - computer studies 74 : 93 – 106 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2014 . 09 . 004 [ 18 ] Julia A . Garde and Mascha C . van der Voort . 2014 . Participants’ view on personal gains and PD process . In Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Industry Cases , Workshop Descriptions , Doctoral Consortium papers , andKeynoteabstracts - Volume2 ( PDC’14 ) , 79 – 82 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2662155 . 2662194 [ 19 ] William Gaver , John Bowers , Tobie Kerridge , Andy Boucher , and Nadine Jarvis . 2009 . Anatomyofafailure : howweknewwhenourdesignwentwrong , andwhat we learned from it . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in ComputingSystems ( CHI’09 ) , 2213 – 2222 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1519040 [ 20 ] Stephen Glackin and Maria Rita Dionisio . 2016 . ‘Deep engagement’ and urban regeneration : tea , trust , and the quest for co - design at precinct scale . Land use policy 52 : 363 – 373 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . landusepol . 2016 . 01 . 001 [ 21 ] Miriam G . Grates , Ann - Christin Heming , Marina Vukoman , Peter Schabsky , and Jonas Sorgalla . 2019 . New Perspectives on User Participation in Technology Design Processes : An Interdisciplinary Approach . The Gerontologist 59 , 1 : 45 – 57 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / geront / gny112 [ 22 ] Trisha Greenhalgh , Joe Wherton , Paul Sugarhood , Sue Hinder , Rob Procter , and Rob Stones . 2013 . What matters to older people with assisted living needs ? A phenomenological analysis of the use and non - use of telehealth and telecare . Social science & medicine 93 : 86 – 94 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . socscimed . 2013 . 05 . 036 [ 23 ] Lilit Hakobyan , Jo Lumsden , and Dympna O’Sullivan . 2015 . Participatory Design : How to Engage Older Adults in Participatory Design Activities . International Journal of Mobile Human Computer Interaction ( IJMHCI ) 7 , 3 : 78 – 92 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4018 / ijmhci . 2015070106 [ 24 ] Kim Halskov and Nicolai Brodersen Hansen . 2015 . The diversity of participatory design research practice at PDC 2002 – 2012 . International journal of human - computer studies 74 , C : 81 – 92 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2014 . 09 . 003 [ 25 ] Christina Harrington , Sheena Erete , and Anne Marie Piper . 2019 . Deconstructing Community - Based Collaborative Design : Towards More Equitable Participatory Design Engagements . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW : 216 : 1 – 216 : 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359318 [ 26 ] Christina N . Harrington , Katya Borgos - Rodriguez , and Anne Marie Piper . 2019 . Engaging Low - Income African American Older Adults in Health Discussions through Community - based Design Workshops . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’19 ( CHI ’19 ) , 1 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300823 [ 27 ] Gillian R . Hayes . 2011 . The relationship of action research to human - computer interaction . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 18 , 3 : 15 : 1 – 15 : 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1993060 . 1993065 [ 28 ] Nalita James . 2016 . Using email interviews in qualitative educational research : creating space to think and time to talk . International journal of qualitative studies in education : QSE 29 , 2 : 150 – 163 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09518398 . 2015 . 1017848 [ 29 ] Finn Kensing and Jeanette Blomberg . 1998 . Participatory Design : Issues and Concerns . Computer supported cooperative work : CSCW : an international journal 7 , 3 : 167 – 185 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1023 / A : 1008689307411 [ 30 ] Finn Kensing , Jesper Simonsen , and Keld Bodker . 1998 . MUST : A Method for Participatory Design . Human – Computer Interaction 13 , 2 : 167 – 198 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15327051hci1302 _ 3 [ 31 ] Bran Knowles , Christopher N . Bull , Nigel Davies , Will Simm , Oliver Bates , and Niall Hayes . 2019 . Examining Interdependencies and Constraints in Co - Creation . In Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ’19 ) , 291 – 302 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3322276 . 3322317 [ 32 ] Bran Knowles and Vicki L . Hanson . 2018 . The wisdom of older technology ( non ) users . Communications of the ACM 61 , 3 : 72 – 77 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3179995 [ 33 ] María Laura Ramírez Galleguillos and Aykut Coşkun . 2020 . How Do I matter ? A Review of the Participatory Design Practice with Less Privileged Participants . In Proceedings of the 16th Participatory Design Conference 2020 - Participation ( s ) Otherwise - Volume1 ( PDC’20 ) , 137 – 147 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3385010 . 3385018 [ 34 ] Christopher A . Le Dantec and Sarah Fox . 2015 . Strangers at the Gate : Gaining Access , Building Rapport , and Co - Constructing Community - Based Research . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’15 ) , 1348 – 1358 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675147 [ 35 ] Ann Light . 2011 . Democratising technology : making transformation using de - signing , performance and props . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’11 ) , 2239 – 2242 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979269 [ 36 ] Peter Mambrey , Gloria Mark , and Uta Pankoke - Babatz . 1998 . User Advocacy in Participatory Design : Designers’ Experiences with a New Communication Channel . Computer supported cooperative work : CSCW : an international journal 7 , 3 : 291 – 313 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1023 / A : 1008687122083 [ 37 ] Aqueasha Martin - Hammond , Sravani Vemireddy , and Kartik Rao . 2018 . Engaging Older Adults in the Participatory Design of Intelligent Health Search Tools . In Proceedings of the 12th EAI International Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare ( PervasiveHealth ’18 ) , 280 – 284 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3240925 . 3240972 [ 38 ] Nora McDonald , Sarita Schoenebeck , and Andrea Forte . 2019 . Reliability and Inter - rater Reliability in Qualitative Research : Norms and Guidelines for CSCW and HCI Practice . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 3 , CSCW : 72 : 1 – 72 : 23 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359174 [ 39 ] Barbara Barbosa Neves , Fausto Amaro , and Jaime R . S . Fonseca . 2013 . Coming of ( Old ) Age in the Digital Age : ICT Usage and Non - Usage among Older Adults . 1708 Advocacy Through Design : Partnering to Improve Online Communications and Connections in a Life Plan Community DIS ’21 , June 28 – July 02 , 2021 , Virtual Event , USA Sociological Research Online 18 , 2 : 22 – 35 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5153 / sro . 2998 [ 40 ] Alan Newell , John Arnott , Alex Carmichael , and Maggie Morgan . 2007 . Method - ologies for Involving Older Adults in the Design Process . In Universal Acess in Human Computer Interaction . Coping with Diversity ( Lecture Notes in Computer Science ) , 982 – 989 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 540 - 73279 - 2 _ 110 [ 41 ] Emily Pilloton . 2010 . Depth over breadth : designing for impact locally , and for the long haul . Interactions 17 , 3 : 48 – 51 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1744161 . 1744173 [ 42 ] Robert Racadio , Emma J . Rose , and Beth E . Kolko . 2014 . Research at the margin : participatory design and community based participatory research . In Proceedings ofthe13thParticipatoryDesignConference : ShortPapers , IndustryCases , Workshop Descriptions , Doctoral Consortium papers , and Keynote abstracts - Volume 2 ( PDC ’14 ) , 49 – 52 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2662155 . 2662188 [ 43 ] Jay Rainey , Juan Carlos Alvarez de la Vega , Dan Richardson , Daniel Lambton - Howard , SaraArmouch , TomBartindale , ShaunHazeldine , PamelaBriggs , Patrick Olivier , andKyleMontague . 2020 . TalkFutures : SupportingQualitativePracticesin Distributed Community Engagements . In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing InteractiveSystemsConference ( DIS’20 ) , 771 – 784 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3357236 . 3395531 [ 44 ] SarahRobinson , NicolaJ . Bidwell , LauraMaye , NadiaPantidi , andConorLinehan . 2020 . Participation through substituting and refusing . In Proceedings of the 16th Participatory Design Conference 2020 - Participation ( s ) Otherwise - Volume 2 ( PDC ’20 ) , 143 – 147 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3384772 . 3385148 [ 45 ] Emma J . Rose . 2016 . Design as Advocacy : Using a Human - Centered Approach to Investigate the Needs of Vulnerable Populations . Journal of Technical Writing and Communication 46 , 4 : 427 – 445 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0047281616653494 [ 46 ] SelmaŠabanović , Wan - LingChang , CaseyC . Bennett , JenniferA . Piatt , andDavid Hakken . 2015 . A Robot of My Own : Participatory Design of Socially Assistive Robots for Independently Living Older Adults Diagnosed with Depression . In Human Aspects of IT for the Aged Population . Design for Aging ( Lecture Notes in Computer Science ) , 104 – 114 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 20892 - 3 _ 11 [ 47 ] Michael J . Salvo . 2001 . Ethics of Engagement : User - Centered Design and Rhetori - cal Methodology . Technical Communication Quarterly 10 , 3 : 273 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15427625tcq1003 _ 3 [ 48 ] Christine Satchell and Paul Dourish . 2009 . Beyond the User : Use and Non - use in HCI . In Proceedings of the 21st Annual Conference of the Australian Computer - Human Interaction Special Interest Group on Design : Open 24 / 7 - OZCHI ’09 ( OZCHI ’09 ) , 9 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1738826 . 1738829 [ 49 ] Phoebe Sengers , Kirsten Boehner , Shay David , and Joseph “jofish”Kaye . 2005 . Reflectivedesign . In Proceedingsofthe4thdecennialconferenceonCriticalcomput - ing : between sense and sensibility ( CC ’05 ) , 49 – 58 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1094562 . 1094569 [ 50 ] Phoebe Sengers , John McCarthy , and Paul Dourish . 2006 . Reflective HCI : articu - lating an agenda for critical practice . In CHI ’06 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’06 ) , 1683 – 1686 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1125451 . 1125762 [ 51 ] Deborah Tatar . 2007 . The Design Tensions Framework . Human – Computer Inter - action 22 , 4 : 413 – 451 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 07370020701638814 [ 52 ] Milka Trajkova and Aqueasha Martin - Hammond . 2020 . “Alexa is a Toy” : Ex - ploring Older Adults’ Reasons for Using , Limiting , and Abandoning Echo . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’20 ) , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376760 [ 53 ] JohnVines , RachelClarke , PeterWright , JohnMcCarthy , andPatrickOlivier . 2013 . Configuring participation : on how we involve people in design . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’13 ) , 429 – 438 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2470716 [ 54 ] JennyWaycott , FrankVetere , SonjaPedell , AmeeMorgans , ElizabethOzanne , and LarsKulik . 2016 . NotForMe : OlderAdultsChoosingNottoParticipateinaSocial IsolationIntervention . In Proceedingsofthe2016CHIConferenceonHumanFactors inComputingSystems ( CHI’16 ) , 745 – 757 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858458 [ 55 ] Stephanie Wilson , Mathilde Bekker , Peter Johnson , and Hilary Johnson . 1997 . Helping and hindering user involvement — a tale of everyday design . In Proceed - ings of the ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human factors in computing systems ( CHI ’97 ) , 178 – 185 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 258549 . 258699 1709