Information Retrieval in Medicine : The SAPHIRE Experience William R . Hersh Biomedical information Communication Center , Oregon Health Sciences University , 3 781 S . W . Sam Jackson Park Rd . , Portland , OR 97201 . Phone : 503 - 494 - 4563 ; Fax : 503 - 494 - 4551 ; E - mail : hersh @ ohsu . edu David Hickam VA Medical Center , Health Services Research and Development ( 152 ) , P . O . Box 1034 , Portland , OR 97207 . Phone : 503 - 273 - 5305 ; Fax : 503 - 273 - 5367 ; E - mail : hickam & hsrd . gov Information retrieval systems are being used increasingly in biomedical settings , but many problems still exist in in - dexing , retrieval , and evaluation . The SAPHIRE Project was undertaken to seek solutions for these problems . This article summarizes the evaluation studies that have been done with SAPHIRE , highlighting the lessons learned and laying out the challenges ahead to all medical information retrieval efforts . Once confined mainly to medical libraries and com - puter pioneers with modems , medical information re - trieval ( IR ) systems have become widespread . Few med - ical schools or large medical centers lack access to MED - LINE , which is often subsidized for students and staff . Other IR databases in areas such as nursing and drug in - formation are also widely available , and there is increas - ing access to multimedia materials and the Internet . Despite their prevalence , however , many impedi - ments to effective use of medical IR systems remain . It is still not known , for example , how to index databases most effectively . Likewise , there are disagreements over the best way to phrase search statements , whether with traditional Boolean operators , “natural language” input , or more complex representations . Finally , there are problems with evaluation approaches that evolved in li - brary settings but are less suitable for the end - user envi - ronment . For the past 5 years , the SAPHIRE ( Semantic and Probabilistic Heuristic Information Retrieval Environ - ment ) Project has been devoted to identifying the opti - mal approaches to indexing , retrieval , and evaluation of IR resources in the biomedical domain . The scope of the research project has gone beyond just the development and testing of the SAPHIRE software itself . The purpose of this article is to review the evaluation studies of the project , which provide insight into the problems that ex - 0 1995 John Wiley & Sons , Inc . ist in all IR systems and how they may guide future re - search . We begin by describing the basic issues t . hat mo - tivate the SAPHIRE Project , followed by a summary of six evaluation studies . We then summarize the conclu - sions drawn from this work and lay out the challenges ahead . IR Problems and SAPHIRE Solutions IR databases are generally of two types : bibliographic and full - text . The former typically consist of references to the original medical literature , while the latter contain the complete text of documents from journals , text - books , and other print sources . Bibliographic databases usually contain indexing terms assigned by a human in - dexer from a controlled vocabulary , although the other content words in the reference ( e . g . , those from the title and abstract ) are usually searchable . In contrast , full - text databases are usually indexed based on the words present in the entire document . Although human indexing of bibliographic databases is considered state - of - the - art , it is still unclear how much benefit this indexing provides . While humans are good at discerning the focus of a document , manual indexing is known to be inconsistent ( Funk & Reid , 1983 ) , and the vocabulary terms can be difficult for novices to mas - ter ( Kirby & Miller , 1986 ) . The usual alternative to hu - man indexing is to index all words in the document . But this too presents problems . For example , medical lan - guage is known to have much synonymy ( different words meaning the same thing ) and polysemy ( the same words meaning different things ) . Furthermore , extract - ing single words for indexing removes the context in which they occur ( i . e . , the phrase high bloodpressure has a different meaning from any of the three words used individually ) . Computational linguistic approaches to discerning concepts and relationships have been advo - cated , but constructing knowledge resources to recognize these elements has been difficult ( Salton , Buckley , & Smith , 1990 ) . On the retrieval side , search terms combined by the Boolean operators AND and OR have been used in most systems , but they have been shown to be difficult for nov - ices ( Sewell & Teitelbaum , 1986 ) and their benefit is also unknown . Another retrieval problem is that most sys - tems return documents in arbitrary order . A potential solution is to rank documents based on the frequency of terms similar to the query and document , called rele - vance ranking ( Salton , 199 1 ) . The only way to determine which methods of index - ing and retrieval work best has been to evaluate them empirically . There is a large literature on IR system eval - uation , and much has been learned about the perfor - mance of various techniques . However , there is also dis - agreement over the value of the measures used to assess performance and how to apply them in different settings ( Hersh , 1994 ) . The SAPHIRE Project was implemented to address the problems in current IR systems . SAPHIRE provides potential solutions to the problems of inconsistent hu - man indexing , clinician difficulty with controlled vocab - ularies and Boolean searching , and the rich synonymy of medical language . The details of the system have been described elsewhere ( Hersh , 199 1 ) ) but the basic ap - proach is to extend word - based automated methods by indexing on concepts found in text instead of individual words . The vocabulary for identifying concepts and their synonyms is based on the Metathesaurus from the Na - tional Library of Medicine’s ( NLM ) Unified Medical Language System ( UMLS ) Project ( Lindberg , Hum - phreys , & McCray , 1993 ) . In order to compare SAPH - IRE with existing approaches to IR , two additional sys - tems have been implemented : One combining word - based indexing with Boolean searching ( BOOLEAN ) , and another combining word - based indexing with natu - ral language searching ( SWORD , Statistical Word - Ori - ented Retrieval from Databases ) ( Hersh & Hickam , 1995 ) . Evaluation Studies Over the past 4 years , there have been six evaluation studies in the SAPHIRE Project . Each of these studies has provided incremental information about the benefits and limitations of SAPHIRE as well as adding to general knowledge about the indexing , retrieval , and evaluation of IR systems in the biomedical setting . All of these stud - ies used the measures of relative recall ( proportion of known relevant references retrieved from the database , hereafter referred to as recall ) and precision ( proportion of relevant references retrieved by the search ) . These measures are often considered the gold standard of re - trieval system evaluation , yet have limitations in mea - suring the true effectiveness of retrieval systems . SAPHIRE vs . Human Inde . x - ing ofAIDSLINE Documents ( Hersh & Hickam , 1992 ) The first evaluation study of SAPHIRE used a 200 - document subset from the AIDSLINE database , along with 12 queries generated by library users at the NLM and Oregon Health Sciences University ( OHSU ) . The initial component of the study was to compare SAPH - IRE indexing with both human indexing of MEDLINE and simple word - based indexing of the title and abstract fields in a command - line searching environment . SAPH - IRE performed inferiorly as an indexing replacement in this environment . An unexpected finding was that the search results of librarians were as good using text words only as with the full MEDLINE feature set , while physi - cians actually had better results with text words . Because SAPHIRE was not designed to run in a com - mand - line Boolean searching environment , another component of the study looked at SAPHIRE’s perfor - mance by entering the free - text query statement directly in the natural language interface . SAPHIRE performed better in this latter mode , and , in fact , achieved better recall and precision than physicians using Boolean search statements , though not as good as librarians . This study also looked at the frequency and type of concept matching errors made by SAPHIRE . An average of 2 . 7 ( out of an average of 18 ) inappropriate indexing assignments per abstract were made , with problems aris - ing due to syntax ( the verb lead matched as the chemical element , a noun ) , abbreviations ( PCP meant P . car & ii pneumonia in this domain but matched to the drug phencyc / idine ) , and stemming ( the state Maine was stemmed to the word main ) . SAPHIRE vs . Conventional MEDLINE Searching of MEDLINE Documents ( Her . & Hickam , Haynes , & McKibbon , 1994 ~ ) The second study of SAPHIRE used previously searched topics and judgments of relevance from a clini - cal evaluation of Grateful Med at McMaster University ( Haynes et al . , 1990 ) . A test collection of 2 , 344 MED - LINE references was created , consisting of all references that were retrieved ( and contained abstracts ) for 75 que - ries generated by clinicians . In this study , SAPHIRE’s recall and precision appeared intermediate between ex - pert and novice clinician searchers , although none of the differences among the groups was statistically significant . A failure analysis identified some recurring patterns for false - negative and false - positive retrievals . The most common causes of relevant documents failing to be re - trieved were the presence of synonyms not recognized by SAPHIRE ( i . e . , the form in the document was not in the Metathesaurus ) or terms being present but at a different level of granularity ( i . e . , the query might have had the term antibiotic while the document contained the actual antibiotic name ) . The most common reason for retrieval of nonrelevant documents was the presence of most or all query terms in the document , but with a different fo - cus or relationship between the terms . SAPHIRE vs . Word - Based Boolean Searching of Yearbook Series Extended Abstracts ( Hersh & Hickam , 1993 ) One problem with the first two studies was the lack of interactive searching by real users . The next study cor - rected that problem by using a group of I6 senior medi - cal students to search on 10 questions generated on med - ical rounds at the University of Pittsburgh . The database used was six volumes from the Yearbook Series , a publi - cation which provides abstracts and commentaries for all the major articles in a given field published each year . For indexing and retreival purposes , each document consists of the title and text . Each student searched half of the questions with SAPHIRE and the other half with BOOLEAN . No statistically significant difference in re - call or precision was found between the two systems . SAPHIRE vs . Word - Based Natural Language Searching ofAIDSLINE , MEDLINE , and Yearbook Series Documents ( Hersh , Hickam , dt Leone , 1992 ) The next study took advantage of the existence of the test collections from the previous three studies to assess various approaches to word - based and concept - based automated systems . Like the first two studies , this study was conducted in a non - interactive setting , with queries entered in batch mode . This study compared SAPHIRE with SWORD alone , SWORD and SAPHIRE com - bined , and a version of SAPHIRE with a different con - cept - matching algorithm . The latter eliminated the exact word order requirement of SAPHIRE’s original concept - matching algorithm and instead only required that words in a concept be adjacent . It also allowed partial matching as long as more than half of the words were present , aiming to overcome the problem of synonyms not matching the exact form in the Metathesaurus . The results showed that SWORD had the best overall perfor - mance . The combination of SWORD and SAPHIRE ( weighting both individual words from SWORD and concepts from SAPHIRE ) performed intermediately be - tween the two programs alone , while the version of SAPHIRE with the new concept - matching algorithm performed worst , due to excess inappropriate concept matching . This study also assessed a simple form of relevance feedback for SAPHIRE and SWORD , using the entire top - ranking relevant document to replace the original query . This enhanced performance for both systems , al - though SWORD still outperformed SAPHIRE . SAPHIRE vs . Word - Based Boolean Searching and Word - Based Natural Language Searching of Scientific American Medicine ( Hersh & Hickam , in press ) This study compared SAPHIRE , SWORD , and BOOLEAN using a different type of database , which was the internal medicine textbook , Scientific American Medicine ( SAM ) . The textbook was subdivided into 6 , 623 “documents . ” In the study , 2 1 senior medical stu - dents searched on 18 queries each , half with one of the three systems and half with another . These queries were generated by the internal medicine faculty and the house staff in the OHSU General Medicine Clinic . Each query was searched using each of the three systems . As with the Yearbook Series study above , there was no statistically significant difference in recall or precision among the three systems . Boolean vs . Free - Text Searching in MEDLINE ( Hersh & Hickam , 1994 ) A final study did not involve the SAPHIRE software , but rather compared the commercial product Knowl - edge Finder ( KF ) ( Aries Systems , Inc . , North Andover , MA ) , which uses word - based natural language searching similar to SWORD , with conventional command - line use of MEDLINE on the NLM’s ELHILL system . In this study , KF was placed on a Macintosh workstation in the OHSU General Medicine Clinic . Before each search , us - ers entered a brief statement about their patient and in - formation need . These statements were used by librari - ans and experienced clinician searchers to replicate the searches . Each search was repeated by two librarians and two clinicians , with one librarian and one clinician using the full MEDLINE feature set , and the other librarian and clinician using Boolean combinations of text words . ( On ELHILL , text words are defined as all words that appear in the title , abstract , and MeSH fields . ) The results of this study showed that the KF searchers had significantly higher recall and lower precision than all of the other searchers . Thus they found many more relevant references but also many more nonrelevant ones . This was due to the much larger retrieval sets that they obtained , an average of 88 references for the KF group and 15 for the others . KF ( and word - based natural language systems in general ) tend to have larger retrieval sets , since they retrieve and rank all of the documents that contain as little as one word from the query . How - ever , their relevance ranking techniques lead to relevant documents tending to be ranked nearer the top of the retrieval set . In an attempt to control for the larger re - trieval set size , additional recall and precision values were calculated for KF with the default retrieval size set at 15 ( the average size of the non - KF retrieval set ) . With the reduced KF set , the KF searching results were very close to those of the other searchers . This study showed that word - based natural language searching in the hands of clinicians was as effective as searching by index term . This study also verified the ob - servation from the AIDSLINE study above that simple text word searching is just as effective as using all of the advanced MEDLINE techniques , especially for non - li - brarians . In fact , while librarians obtained statistically significant improvement in recall over clinicians using the full MEDLINE feature set , they did not obtain sig - nificant improvement over clinicians using just text words , suggesting that advanced MEDLINE features are beneficial mainly to librarians . Conclusions The various experiments performed in the SAPHIRE Project have provided insight into the performance of a number of different indexing and retrieval techniques with a wide variety of resources ( bibliographic databases , extended abstract collections , and textbooks ) . A number ofconclusions can be drawn from these studies , although the results also serve to show the limitations of current evaluation methods and the need for better ones . Indexing The project has addressed two questions in indexing . First , for bibliographic databases . do human - assigned in - dexing terms offer benefit over machine - assigned words or concepts ? Our studies suggest that the incremental benefit of human indexing as measured by retrieval per - formance is small . A follow - up on the KF study above using the SMART system found that the presence of the words in the MeSH term field conferred about a 10 % per - formance benefit ( Hersh , Buckley , Leone , & Hickam , 1994a ) . The second question is whether concept - based auto - mated indexing offers any benefit over the use of single words . In the aggregate , it appears it does not . Salton , the foremost advocate of word - based automated indexing . has argued that no methods of automated indexing have improved upon the use of words alone ( Salton , 199 1 ) . Nonetheless , in the failure analysis of SAPHIRE , in - stances occurred when the synonyms present in the Metathesaurus led to superior retrieval performance ( Hersh et al . , 1994 ~ ) . It is possible that more complex systems that utilize computational linguistic approaches ( i . e . , CLARIT [ Evans , Hersh , Monarch , Lefferts , & Handerson , 19911 ) may show a benefit for concept - based indexing , but such studies have not yet been pub - lished . Retrieval Three issues have been assessed in retrieval . The first is whether searching with MeSH terms offers a benefit over the use of text words alone , which may include the words of those terms . In the KF study , the benefit of us - ing MeSH terms was seen mainly for librarians , who are well - trained in the use of those terms . Clinicians are less experienced in using MeSH terms , and as such do not show improved searching performance . The second question is the comparison of natural lan - guage vs . Boolean searching . In studies using both types of approaches , comparable results were achieved . In the SAM and Yearbook Series studies using SAPHIRE , SWORD , and / or BOOLEAN , there were minimal differences in recall or precision . Likewise , for physicians in the KF study , there was little difference between KF and Boolean searching with either the full MEDLINE feature set or text words alone . The third issue is the benefit of relevance feedback . With small databases , relevance feedback was definitely seen to offer benefit , while in a follow - on to the KF study , the gains were minimal ( Hersh et al . , 1994a ) . As with SAPHIRE’s situation - specific benefit of synonyms , there may be only intermittent benefit for relevance feedback as well . Evaluation Our research has also provided insight into IR evalu - ation measures themselves . Although the measures of re - call and precision have enhanced our understanding of IR systems in general and allowed assessment of individ - ual features within and across different systems , they do not provide all of the insight we might like to have in assessing the use ofthese systems . While few would argue against retrieving more relevant and fewer nonrelevant documents , it has not been shown that the quantity of relevant documents necessarily correlates with the over - all quality of a search . Even if recall and precision did correlate with value of information obtained , there is another problem that arises when comparing systems , which is : What consti - tutes a significant difference ? With a large enough sample size we can , of course , show that a difference in recall or precision is statistically significant . But it is less clear what a “clinically” significant difference would be . For example , while we know that a drop in diastolic blood pressure from 110 to 90 mm Hg would lead to signifi - cantly different medical outcomes in a patient popula - tion , it is less certain what level of difference in recall and / or precision is necessary to show that a given index - ing or retrieval method is superior to another ( i . e . , would achieve a better quality search ) . An additional problem in the use of recall and precision is how to define a relevant document . It has been argued that the relevance of a document to an in - formation need cannot be assigned objectively , espe - cially by a third party , and that the user and his / her sit - uation must be taken into account ( Schamber , Eisen - berg , & Nilan , 1990 ) . There is no data to support or re - fute that statement . It has also been argued that relevance judgments are unreliable . The level of interobserver vari - ability in our relevance judgments for the test collections we built were moderate , with kappa scores on duplicated relevance judgments ranging from 0 . 35 to 0 . 59 . Future Challenges Like many research efforts , the SAPHIRE Project has answered some questions but uncovered many new ones . This work has shown clearly that easy - to - use sys - tems featuring automated indexing , natural language queries , and relevance ranking perform comparably to traditional Boolean systems . Whether more sophisti - cated indexing procedures - such as the concept map - ping and synonym substitution used in SAPHIRE - are of benefit is less clear . It is certain , however , that better measures of evaluat - ing systems are needed . Recall and precision may not be adequate for comparing the benefit of systems . Not only must better measures of evaluation be developed , but they must also be applied in realistic settings . System as - sessment via batch input of queries may provide useful preliminary information , but evaluation of searches by real users with realistic databases ( even if in a simulated setting ) is necessary . Our research has begun to address these issues . We are currently porting our systems to run as client - server applications on the World Wide Web , making them available in numerous clinical sites ( as well as a labora - tory for simulation ) . We are also assembling a suite of realistic databases that would likely benefit clinicians . Fi - nally , we have also begun to experiment with new mea - sures of performance , including those that measure in - formation obtained and not just number of relevant doc - uments ( Hersh et al . , 1994b ) . Acknowledgment The majority of the SAPHIRE Project has been funded by grant LM 05307 of the NLM . Additional funding has been provided by Contract 467 - MZ - 00 1022 of the NLM and Grant 9040 of the Medical Research Foundation of Oregon . References Evans . D . . Hersh . W . , Monarch , 1 . . Lefferts . R . , & Handerson , S . ( I99 I ) . Automatic indexing of abstracts via natural language pro - cessing using a simple thesaurus . hfdit ~ al Decision Making , II , Slog - S115 . Funk , M . , & Reid , C . ( 1983 ) . Indexing consistency in MEDLINE . Bztl - kin g / ‘l’rhr Medical Lihrap A . swciation , 71 , I Xi - 183 . Haynes . R . , McKibbon . K . . Walker . C . , Ryan , N . . Fitzgerald , D . . & Ramsden . M . ( 1990 ) . Online access to MEDLINE in clinical set - tings . Annds o / Inrc , rnal Medicrtw , 112 , 78 - 84 . Hersh , W . ( 199 I ) . Evaluation of Meta - I for a concept - based approach to the automated indexing and retrieval of bibliographic and full - text databases . Medical Dwi . tion Muking , I I , S 120 - S 124 . Hersh , W . ( 1994 ) . Relevance and retrieval evaluation : Perspectives from medicine . Jortrnd r ~ ffheilmcritun Socic’ty . / br Ir $ ~ rmutron Sci - once . 45 , 20 I - 206 . Hersh . W . , Buckley , C . . Leone , T . , & Hickam . D . ( 1994a ) . OH - SUMED : An interactive retrieval evaluation and new large test col - lection for research . Procwdin , y . s of the 17th Annual Inirrnaliona ~ AChI Special 1nlcw . s ~ Grozfp in Ir7fi ) rmation RetriCvuf ( pp . l92 - 201 ) . Hersh , W . . Elliot , D . . Hickam , D . . Wolf . S . . Molnar , A . . & Leich - tenstein , C . ( 1994b ) . Towards new measures of information re - trieval evaluation . Procrd / ngs of rhc 18th Annlrul S ~ wpo . sium an C‘omp ~ rtc ~ rA / 7p / ica / ion . s in hfdical c‘aw ( pp . 895 - 899 ) . Hersh , W . , & Hickam , D . ( 1992 ) . A comparison ofretrieval effective - ness for three methods of indexing medical literature . Americun Jownal o $ lhc ! 2lrdical Scicwrs , 303 . 292 - 300 . Hersh . W . , & Hickam , D . ( 1993 ) . A comparison of two methods for indexing and retrieval from a full - text medical database . hfdica / De - crsion Making . 13 . 220 - 226 . Henh . W . , & Hickam . D . ( 1994 ) . The use ofa multi - application com - puterworkstation in a clinical setting . & r / / c / in oj’ ~ h ~ Mcdicul Library Assoc ~ iation , 8 - 7 . 382 - 389 . Hersh . W . , & Hickam . D . ( 1995 ) . An evaluation ofinteractive Boolean and natural language searching with an on - line medical textbook . Journal cf / hc American Socim ~ ~ , fi ) r In / i ) rmation Science , 46 . 478 - 489 . Hersh , W . , Hickam , D . . Haynes , R . . & McKibbon . K . ( 1994 ~ ) . A per - formance and failure analysis of SAPHIRE with a MEDLINE test collection . Journal of’ [ lwAm ~ rivic . an h ~ c ~ ~ lit ~ alInformatic . . s Asxociation , I . 51 - 60 . Hersh . W . . Hickam . D . . & Leone . T . ( 1992 ) . Word , concepts , or both : Optimal indexing units for automated information retrieval . Pro - ceedings o / Ihc 16th dnnrral . S ) wpo . silrm on C‘o / npzrier Applications in MdicaI ( hro ( pp . 644 - 648 ) . Baltimore : McGraw - Hill . Kirby , M . , & Miller , N . ( 1986 ) . MEDLINE searching on Colleague : Reasons for failure or success of untrained users . Medieval R & rencc Scwkes Qzfar ! er / j : 5 . 17 - 34 . Lindberg . D . . Humphreys , B . . & McCray . A . ( 1993 ) . The unified med - ical language system project . Merhods o / ‘lfl / iwmufion in Medicine , 32 . 281 - 291 . Salton , G . ( I99 I ) . Developments in automatic text retrieval . Scienw , 253 . 974 - 980 . Salton , G . , Buckley , C . . & Smith , M . ( 1990 ) . On the application of syntactic methodologies in automatic text analysis . I & wnurion Pro - ccwing and Managemcw . 26 , 73 - 92 . Schamber . L . , Eisenberg . M . . & Nilan , M . ( 1990 ) . A re - examination of relevance : Toward a dynamic , situational definition . Infiwmafion ProcewinR and Mana ~ ~ mcnt . 26 , 755 - 776 . Sewell . W . , & Teitelbaum , S . ( 1986 ) . Observations ofend - user online searching behavior over eleven years . Jownal of’thc Amrrican Soci - c’i ~ ~ { ix Irzfiwmafron Sciencr , 37 , 234 - 245 .