Volume 26 January 1 , 2015 55 MBoC | ARTICLE WAVE binds Ena / VASP for enhanced Arp2 / 3 complex – based actin assembly Svitlana Havrylenko a , b , c , * , Philippe Noguera a , b , c , * , Majdouline Abou - Ghali a , b , c , John Manzi a , b , c , Fahima Faqir a , b , c , Audrey Lamora a , b , c , Christophe Guérin d , Laurent Blanchoin d , and Julie Plastino a , b , c a Institut Curie , Centre de Recherche , b Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique , Unité Mixte de Recherche 168 , and c Université Pierre et Marie Curie , Paris F - 75248 , France ; d Laboratoire de Physiologie Cellulaire et Végétale , Institut de Recherches en Technologies et Sciences pour le Vivant , CNRS / CEA / INRA / UJF , Grenoble 38054 , France ABSTRACT The WAVE complex is the main activator of the Arp2 / 3 complex for actin fila - ment nucleation and assembly in the lamellipodia of moving cells . Other important players in lamellipodial protrusion are Ena / VASP proteins , which enhance actin filament elongation . Here we examine the molecular coordination between the nucleating activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex and the elongating activity of Ena / VASP proteins for the formation of actin net - works . Using an in vitro bead motility assay , we show that WAVE directly binds VASP , result - ing in an increase in Arp2 / 3 complex – based actin assembly . We show that this interaction is important in vivo as well , for the formation of lamellipodia during the ventral enclosure event of Caenorhabditis elegans embryogenesis . Ena / VASP’s ability to bind F - actin and profilin - complexed G - actin are important for its effect , whereas Ena / VASP tetramerization is not necessary . Our data are consistent with the idea that binding of Ena / VASP to WAVE potenti - ates Arp2 / 3 complex activity and lamellipodial actin assembly . INTRODUCTION The assembly of branched actin networks , nucleated by the Arp2 / 3 complex , is the driving force behind the protrusion of lamellipodia structures at the leading edge of many types of moving cells ( Blanchoin et al . , 2014 ) . In lamellipodia , the Arp2 / 3 complex is acti - vated by the WAVE regulatory complex ( WRC ) downstream of activa - tion by Rac GTPase and acidic phospholipids , whereas the WASP family of Arp2 / 3 complex activators is implicated in the formation of filopodia and invadopodia downstream of activation by Cdc42 ( Yamaguchi et al . , 2005 ; Sarmiento et al . , 2008 ; Derivery et al . , 2009 ; Lebensohn and Kirschner , 2009 ; Campellone and Welch , 2010 ) . Another important player in actin dynamics and cell migration is Ena / VASP ( Krause et al . , 2003 ) . Ena / VASP proteins are correlated with increased actin assembly and lamellipodia - based motility in vivo ( Grevengoed et al . , 2001 , 2003 ; Gates et al . , 2007 ; Kwiatkowski et al . , 2007 ; Tucker et al . , 2011 ) and increased leading edge protrusion of cells in culture ( Rottner et al . , 1999 ; Bear et al . , 2002 ; Lacayo et al . , 2007 ) . In keeping with this , the various members of the family ( Mena , VASP , and EVL ) are part of the invasive signature of human cancers , including those of breast and lung , as well as being associated with other pathologies ( Dertsiz et al . , 2005 ; Hu et al . , 2008 ; Philippar et al . , 2008 ; Pula and Krause , 2008 ) . However , these proteins are not actin polymerization nucleators / activators at physiological salt concentra - tions but instead have anticapping and barbed - end elongation en - hancement activity ( Barzik et al . , 2005 ; Breitsprecher et al . , 2008 , 2011 ; Hansen and Mullins , 2010 ; Winkleman et al . , 2014 ) . It is not entirely clear how Ena / VASP exercises its effect on actin assembly . In addition to an N - terminal EVH1 domain that binds proline - rich repeats , Ena / VASP proteins possess a central polypro - line domain that binds profilin and a C - terminal EVH2 domain that harbors G - and F - actin binding sites and a tetramerization domain ( Krause et al . , 2003 ) . Several studies of various developmental pro - cesses in Drosophila and Caenorhabditis elegans indicated that re - moval of the tetramerization domain reduced but did not eliminate activity , whereas mutations in the EVH1 domain interfered with lo - calization and gave reduced activity ( Shakir et al . , 2006 ; Gates et al . , 2007 , 2009 ; Homem and Peifer , 2009 ; Fleming et al . , 2010 ) . On the Monitoring Editor Thomas D . Pollard Yale University Received : Jul 10 , 2014 Revised : Sep 22 , 2014 Accepted : Oct 21 , 2014 This article was published online ahead of print in MBoC in Press ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E14 - 07 - 1200 ) on October 29 , 2014 . * These authors contributed equally to this work and are listed in alphabetical order . Address correspondence to : Julie Plastino ( julie . plastino @ curie . fr ) . © 2015 Havrylenko , Noguera , et al . This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell Biology under license from the author ( s ) . Two months after publi - cation it is available to the public under an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported Creative Commons License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 ) . “ASCB ® , ” “The American Society for Cell Biology ® , ” and “Molecular Biology of the Cell ® ” are registered trademarks of The American Society for Cell Biology . Abbreviations used : FAB , F - actin binding domain ; GAB , G - actin binding domain ; GFP , green fluorescent protein ; LC , leader cell ; LCT , leader cell touch ; PC , pocket cell ; PP , profilin binding domain ; PRD , proline - rich domain ; RNAi , RNA interfer - ence ; TET , tetramerization domain ; WRC , WAVE regulatory complex . 56 | S . Havrylenko , P . Noguera , et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell Arp2 / 3 complex and VASP together for cooperative enhancement of actin assembly . RESULTS Ena / VASP interacts with the proline - rich domain of WAVE to enhance actin - based motility in vitro We first looked for a direct WAVE - VASP interaction using pure pro - teins , since the previous studies mentioned in the Introduction were done with cell extracts . We coated polystyrene beads with PRD - VCA - WAVE , a form of WAVE comprising both the proline - rich do - main and the VCA domain , which is the part that activates the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Figure 1a ) . When these beads were incubated in purified VASP ( Supplemental Figure S1 ) and then immunostained for VASP , they showed bright staining ( Figure 1b ) . As a positive con - trol for VASP binding , we coated beads with the PRD - VCA construct of human WASP , previously shown to bind VASP ( Castellano et al . , 2001 ) . These beads showed bright staining , comparable to PRD - VCA - WAVE beads . On the other hand , VCA - coated beads showed dim VASP staining , comparable to that observed when all three types of beads were incubated in Δ EVH1 - VASP , a form of VASP lack - ing the capacity to bind proline - rich domains ( Figure 1b ) . Overall this experiment showed that there was a direct interaction between the EVH1 domain of VASP and the PRD of WAVE . We next sought to determine whether and how this interaction affected WAVE - based motility . To evaluate this , we turned to the actin comet assay . Beads were coated with PRD - VCA - WAVE and incubated in a reconstituted motility mix containing the Arp2 / 3 complex , capping protein , and profilin / G - actin ( Achard et al . , 2010 ) . This mix mimicked the high concentration of monomeric actin com - plexed with profilin in cellular cytosol and also minimized F - actin formation in the bulk solution , targeting actin assembly to the bead surface . Addition of VASP to the motility mix containing PRD - VCA - WAVE – coated beads gave bead displacement that was 1 . 7 - fold that pro - duced in the presence of Δ EVH1 - VASP or with no addition , indicat - ing that surface recruitment of VASP by WAVE had an enhancing effect on motility ( Figure 1c ) . In fact , adding Δ EVH1 - VASP gave identical speeds to the control , no - addition case , meaning that VASP in the bulk had no effect on PRD - VCA - WAVE bead motility . As an additional negative control , we prepared VCA - WAVE – coated beads , but they did not form comets , probably due to low Arp2 / 3 complex activation in the profilin – actin motility mix without the PRD to recruit profilin – actin . Overall these results suggested that VASP was exercising its enhancing effect on motility via direct binding to the PRD domain of WAVE . Assessing WAVE and Ena / VASP interaction in vivo Our tests on beads were done with the recombinant WAVE poly - peptide in isolation , not taking into account the fact that this poly - peptide is part of the WRC in vivo , regulated by Rac GTPase , phospholipids , and phosphorylation . Indeed , although the native WRC has been successfully recruited to membrane - coated glass beads to form actin comets in cell extract , this approach is not adaptable to our pure - protein mix conditions ( Koronakis et al . , 2011 ) . However , the PRD of WAVE is a disordered domain that is exposed on the surface of the WAVE complex , so access of VASP to this site should not be hampered in vivo ( Chen et al . , 2010 ) . Given this , we turned to a cell motility event that was known to depend on the WAVE complex—ventral enclosure during C . ele - gans embryogenesis—and tested whether the PRD of WAVE in the WRC interacted with VASP and increased actin dynamics in vivo as we saw on beads . other hand , removal of the entire EVH2 domain was equivalent to complete lack of protein . However , the EVH2 domain has not been dissected in vivo in model organisms to evaluate the relative contri - butions of the F - and G - actin binding domains and the importance of the profilin - binding site to Ena / VASP activity . In cells in culture , a study of cell protrusion and Listeria motility in the presence of differ - ent VASP deletion mutants gave conflicting results . For example , the form of VASP lacking its F - actin binding site impeded cell pro - trusion , whereas it enhanced Listeria motility ( Geese et al . , 2002 ; Loureiro et al . , 2002 ) . It is also not known how Ena / VASP activity is coordinated with that of the bona fide actin polymerization nucleator , the Arp2 / 3 complex , at the leading edge of moving cells . Speaking to this point , two Arp2 / 3 complex activators , ActA protein from the Listeria bacte - ria and human WASP , bind Ena / VASP’s EVH1 domain , leading to enhanced motility ( Niebuhr et al . , 1997 ; Castellano et al . , 2001 ; Lin et al . , 2010 ) . Regarding WAVE , several studies point to possible in - teractions between the WAVE complex and Ena / VASP proteins ( Tani et al . , 2003 ; Hirao et al . , 2006 ; Dittrich et al . , 2010 ; Maruoka et al . , 2012 ; Okada et al . , 2012 ) . Most of these studies identify the Abi subunit of the complex as the site of interaction between Ena / VASP and the WAVE complex , including one recent work that defines the exact amino acids involved in the Abi - Ena / VASP interaction ( Chen et al . , 2014 ) . However , another study shows that a proline - rich do - main ( PRD ) from the WAVE polypeptide itself pulls down Ena / VASP from cell extracts ( Okada et al . , 2012 ) . A WAVE - Ena / VASP interac - tion might explain how Ena / VASP is targeted to the leading edge of moving cells . Lamellipodin was previously believed to fill this role , but in a recent study , removing lamellipodin’s Ena / VASP - binding sites did not affect lamellipodia formation ( Law et al . , 2013 ) . Here we investigate the idea that there is a conserved mecha - nism by which Arp2 / 3 complex activators additionally bind Ena / VASP to maximize actin assembly . We show that this is true for WAVE and test the functional significance of the Ena / VASP - WAVE poly - peptide interaction . We further define what functional domains of Ena / VASP proteins are necessary for its effect on WAVE - based actin polymerization . For this study , we use a dual in vitro bead system / in vivo embryogenesis approach . In the in vitro system , cellular actin polymerization is reproduced on the surface of a bead in the form of an actin comet tail capable of propelling the bead forward , similar to the pushing out of the plasma membrane at the front of a moving cell ( Wiesner et al . , 2002 ; Plastino and Sykes , 2005 ) . By changing what form of WAVE we absorb to the bead surface and what form of VASP we add to the motility mix , we address the functional conse - quences of the putative WAVE - VASP interaction and , in addition , which domains of VASP are required for its activity . In parallel , we ask the same questions in the ventral enclosure event of the devel - oping C . elegans embryo . Enclosure involves the formation of actin - filled protrusions by the ventral epidermal cells and their migration to the ventral midline of the embryo to seal the epithelial monolayer ( Williams - Masson et al . , 1997 ) . As for lamellipodium formation in mammalian cells , WAVE and VASP ( WVE - 1 and UNC - 34 , respec - tively , in C . elegans vocabulary ) are major players in ventral enclo - sure , with WAVE being the essential factor : when WAVE is removed , enclosure fails due to lack of migration of the epidermal cells ( Patel et al . , 2008 ) . In both the C . elegans embryo and using the comet assay , we show evidence for a direct interaction between WAVE and VASP , observe that VASP reinforces Arp2 / 3 complex – based actin assem - bly when recruited by WAVE , and determine that the G - and F - actin and profilin - binding domains are critical for VASP function but not its tetramerization domain . We propose that WAVE brings the Volume 26 January 1 , 2015 WAVE binds Ena / VASP | 57 Supplemental Video S2 ; Sheffield et al . , 2007 ) . Somewhat counter - intuitively , we observed that the pocket area at the moment of con - tact of the leader cells in the VASP - null worms was half that of wild type , largely due to the fact that the VASP - null pocket was smaller along its vertical axis , as evidenced by a larger aspect ratio ( Figure 2 , a and b ) . To understand this difference in pocket area , we quantified the speeds of leader cells as compared with pocket cells for wild - type and VASP - null embryos using kymograph analysis . The leader cells in the wild - type embryos migrated almost 1 . 7 - fold faster than those of the VASP - null embryo , whereas the speeds of pocket cell move - ment were identical ( Figure 2c ) . The difference in pocket area upon leader cell contact in the VASP - null mutant versus the wild type therefore seemed to result from the fact that leader cells and pocket cells moved with similar slow speeds in the VASP - null case , whereas in the wild - type case , leader cells were more dynamic and ran ahead of the sheet . Pocket area at the moment of leader cell touch pro - vided a robust visual readout of the dynamics of the leader cells , and we therefore use this measurement , along with cell migration speeds , to quantify the effects of our different mutants . Mimicking what we had done on beads , we removed the puta - tive Ena / VASP binding site , the PRD of WAVE . This deletion form of WAVE had been studied in vitro and shown to be correctly incorpo - rated into the mammalian and Drosophila WAVE complex ( Ismail et al . , 2009 ) . We introduced Δ PRD - WAVE and wild - type WAVE as a positive control into a WAVE - null , Lifeact - GFP – positive background , and filmed ventral enclosure events . We observed that reintroduced wild - type WAVE restored leader cell speeds and pocket areas to normal levels , whereas Δ PRD - WAVE gave results that were identical to the VASP - null case shown in Figure 2 , even though wild - type VASP was still present in these embryos ( Figure 3 , a – c , and Supple - mental Videos S3 and S4 ) . Other ligands for the PRD domain of WAVE in C . elegans are not known . In vertebrates , the PRD of WAVE2 strongly binds IRSp53 , a protein implicated in enhancing WAVE activity ( Miki et al . , 2000 ) . However C . elegans WAVE is a WAVE1 - type protein , and vertebrate WAVE1 proteins have been shown to have a very weak interaction with IRSp53 ( Miki et al . , 2000 ; Kurisu and Takenawa , 2009 ) . We also performed the converse experiment , removing the pu - tative WAVE binding site , the EVH1 domain , of C . elegans VASP . This Δ EVH1 - VASP construct was introduced as a GFP fusion into a VASP - null background , and a wild - type , GFP - tagged VASP trans - genic was also prepared as a control . Wild - type VASP - GFP and Δ EVH1 - VASP - GFP were localized at cell borders , although cytoplas - mic diffuse staining was present for Δ EVH1 - VASP - GFP ( Supplemen - tal Figure S2a ) . The bright puncta throughout the cells may have resulted from GFP labeling , since these were not apparent for native VASP observed by immunostaining ( Sheffield et al . , 2007 ) . Puncta had also been observed upon GFP - Ena expression during dorsal closure in Drosophila , so this seemed to be a general observation for Ena / VASP - GFP overexpression in vivo and did not appear to dis - rupt cell function ( Gates et al . , 2007 ) . The GFP - tagged strains were additionally crossed with a Lifeact - mCherry strain in order to visualize leader cell dynamics and pocket morphology . The double labeling made it clear that VASP was very faint at the leading edge of leader cells , although bright at cell – cell borders , as also observed in Drosophila dorsal closure ( Gates et al . , 2007 ; Supplemental Video S5 ) . It seemed probable that the lamel - lipodia were too thin and dynamic to reliably observe VASP at the leading edge of leader cells . However , observation of F - actin dy - namics in the red channel for reintroduced WT - VASP - GFP and Δ EVH1 - VASP - GFP embryos revealed blunted leader cells with To evaluate actin dynamics during ventral closure , we expressed Lifeact – green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) under an epidermal - specific promoter . We observed the presence of dynamic F - actin structures at the protruding edge of the epidermal cells , especially in the an - teriormost “leader cells” ( Figure 2 , a and b , and Supplemental Video S1 ) , as previously reported using a fluorescently tagged actin - binding domain from VAB - 10 ( Patel et al . , 2008 ; Gally et al . , 2009 ; Bernadskaya et al . , 2012 ) . Also as previously observed , in a VASP - null strain , ventral enclosure still occurred , but the lamellipodia of the leader cells were blunted and less dynamic ( Figure 2a and FIGURE 1 : WAVE binds Ena / VASP for increased motility in vitro . ( a ) Scheme of general Ena / VASP and WAVE domain organization , with the putative interaction between the two marked by a double arrow . ( b ) Immunolabeling of beads coated with different PRD - VCA and VCA constructs incubated in either full - length VASP or Δ EVH1 - VASP ( lacking the putative site for interaction with WAVE ) . Only beads carrying the PRD domain light up and only when incubated in VASP possessing its EVH1 domain ; p < 0 . 0001 . PRD - VCA - WAVE and PRD - VCA - WASP beads in VASP are also significantly higher than VCA in VASP , p < 0 . 0001 , not marked on the graph for clarity . Left , fluorescence intensity measurements ; right , representative images . From 20 to 50 beads were analyzed per condition . Epifluorescence microscopy . ( c ) Comets on PRD - VCA - WAVE beads in the presence of wild - type VASP and Δ EVH1 - VASP and with no addition . Actin comets appear as darker streaks behind the beads , which appear white . All pictures were taken at ∼ 10 - to 15 - min reaction time . In the graph , speeds for PRD - VCA - WAVE beads are represented normalized to wild - type VASP addition to account for day - to - day variations . No addition and addition of Δ EVH1 - VASP give speeds that are 60 % that of wild type , p = 0 . 004 and 0 . 003 , respectively . PRD - VCA - WAVE beads moved at speeds of 0 . 3 – 1 . 4 μm / min , depending on the day and the additive . Phase contrast microscopy . All data are represented as averages ± SD . p values calculated with the Student’s t test . Bars , 1 μm . 58 | S . Havrylenko , P . Noguera , et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell VASP embryonic lethal due to ventral enclosure failure ( Withee et al . , 2004 ; Sheffield et al . , 2007 ) , even though WASP removal on its own has no effect on ventral enclosure ( Supplemental Figure S3 and Sup - plemental Video S7 ) . In the following , we use WASP RNAi as a tool to expose deficiencies in VASP activity . The advantage of using this assay is the ability to evaluate hundreds of embryos by a high - throughput visual assessment of embryonic survival . We first reproduced previous results showing ∼ 0 % survival upon RNAi against WASP in a VASP - null scenario ( Figure 3d ) . reduced protrusion speeds and reduced pocket areas in the latter case , meaning that this form of VASP was unable to rescue leader cell dynamics ( Figure 3 , a – c , and Supplemental Videos S5 and S6 ) . Taken together these results showed that interfering with do - mains that ensure the WAVE - VASP interaction gave ventral enclosure events that resembled the VASP - null case . To confirm this result for a whole population of worms , we turned to a synthetic lethal assay consisting of RNA interference ( RNAi ) against WASP ( WSP - 1 ) . WASP knockdown is known to sensitize the embryo , making the absence of FIGURE 2 : VASP affects lamellipodial actin dynamics during ventral enclosure . ( a ) Imaging of Lifeact - GFP expressed exclusively in epidermal cells during ventral enclosure for wild - type embryos and for embryos lacking VASP . Times are indicated in minutes in relation to leader cell touch ( LCT ) . The lamellipodia of the lower leader cells are indicated by arrows , and zooms of the boxed red area are shown on the right . In the absence of VASP , leader cell protrusions are blunted and only slightly in advance of adjacent pocket cells . z - stack projections over several micrometers . Spinning disk fluorescence microscopy ; ventral view , anterior is to the left . See also Supplemental Videos S1 and S2 . ( b ) Cartoon of the embryo and measurement of the size of the ventral pocket at the moment of leader cell touching . Pocket sizes are represented as percentages : area of pocket / total area of embryo visible by fluorescence . The pocket in the VASP null case is significantly smaller than in the wild - type case ( left , p < 0 . 0001 ) . This is largely due to the fact that the height ( h ) of the VASP - null pocket is smaller , whereas pocket widths ( w ) are identical for wild - type and VASP - null embryos , giving a higher pocket aspect ratio for VASP - null embryos ( right , p < 0 . 001 ) . Between 5 and 10 embryos / condition . ( c ) Migration speeds of leader cells and pocket cells during ventral enclosure . Kymographs are taken as indicated ( left ) to measure the speed of the first leader cell ( LC ) and the first pocket cell ( PC ) . Middle , representative kymographs of wild - type and VASP - null embryos ( slopes of kymograph in blue ; lower cells only for clarity ; for PC speeds , only the first , fast phase of enclosure was quantified ) . Right , LC and PC speeds from several kymographs ( 6 – 14 ) . VASP - null leader cells move significantly more slowly than wild type ( p = 0 . 0006 ) . The first LCs in VASP - null embryos move essentially at the same speed as pocket cells in both wild - type and VASP - null conditions . All data are represented as averages ± SD . p values calculated with the Student’s t test . Bars , ( a ) 15 μm , zoom 7 . 5 μm ; ( c ) 15 μm ; kymographs : horizontal bars , 10 min ; vertical bar , 15 μm . Volume 26 January 1 , 2015 WAVE binds Ena / VASP | 59 Overall these results taken together indicated that when Ena / VASP was present in the cells but not recruited by WAVE , it was inac - tive to enhance motility , which is what we had also observed with pure proteins in vitro . Ena / VASP’s binding to F - actin and profilin / G - actin are important for its function in vivo We next wanted to define which domain ( s ) of VASP , in addition to its WAVE - binding site , were essential to its function of increasing WAVE - based actin dynamics . Into the VASP - null background , we introduced GFP - tagged C . elegans VASP constructs lacking indi - vidually the F - actin binding site , the G - actin binding site , the te - tramerization site , and the profilin - binding region , Δ FAB - VASP , Δ GAB - VASP , Δ TET - VASP , and Δ PP - VASP , respectively ( Figure 1a ) . We also introduced a mutant composed of just the EVH1 domain and thus lacking both the PP and EVH2 regions , called EVH1 - VASP . The GAB site is ill defined in C . elegans VASP , but by sequence Reintroduced wild - type VASP increased survival to 74 % , < 100 % , perhaps due to less efficient expression from extrachromosomal arrays ( Stinchcomb et al . , 1985 ) . On the other hand , reintroduced Δ EVH1 - VASP rescued embryo survival to only 29 % , confirming what we had observed concerning leader cell dynamics , that this mutant was much attenuated in its ability to play the role of VASP in ventral enclosure . Its residual activity ( not 0 % survival like VASP null ) indicated that Δ EVH1 - VASP was still performing some of its functions . Similarly , we subjected Δ PRD - WAVE transgenic worms to WASP RNAi . As a positive control , we did the same experiment with worms carrying reintroduced wild - type WAVE . Embryonic sur - vival was 25 % in the positive control , again perhaps due to ineffi - cient expression from extrachromosomal arrays . However , when Δ PRD - WAVE worms were treated with RNAi against WASP , survival was a solid 0 % , phenocopying a Ena / VASP - null phenotype and confirming what we had observed concerning leader cell dynam - ics and pocket morphology . FIGURE 3 : WAVE recruits VASP for enhanced actin - based motility in vivo . ( a ) Lifeact - GFP imaging ( WT WAVE and Δ PRD - WAVE ) or Lifeact - mCherry imaging ( Δ EVH1 - VASP ) of ventral enclosure in embryos with reintroduced wild - type WAVE or with mutant WAVE and VASP lacking putative interaction sites . Going from left to right , images are shown just before , at the moment of , and just after leader cell touch . Right , zooms of the boxed red areas . Reintroduced wild - type WAVE looks normal ( see Figure 2 ) , but introduction of either of the mutants gives leader cell protrusions that are blunted and only slightly in advance of adjacent pocket cells , as if VASP is not present ( Figure 2 ) . z - stack projections over several micrometers . Spinning disk fluorescence microscopy ; ventral view , anterior is to the left . See also Supplemental Videos S3 , S4 , and S6 . These differences are confirmed by pocket area measurements ( b ) and leader cell speed measurements ( c ) . Δ PRD - WAVE and Δ EVH1 - VASP have significantly smaller pocket sizes than reintroduced wild - type ( p < 0 . 0001 and p = 0 . 049 , respectively ) and slower leader cell motility ( p = 0 . 0015 and 0 . 01 , respectively ) , although pocket cell speeds are unchanged with respect to wild type . ( d ) Synthetic lethal assay with embryonic survival represented as percentage of total eggs laid . On RNAi against WASP , most VASP - null embryos do not survive . Δ EVH1 - VASP and Δ PRD - WAVE have much reduced survival compared with reintroduced wild - type proteins ( p < 0 . 0001 for both ) , although both mutants are about as viable as reintroduced wild - type in absence of RNAi treatment ( unpublished data ) . All data are represented as averages ± SD . p values calculated with the Student’s t test . Bar , 15 μm ; zoom , 7 . 5 μm . 60 | S . Havrylenko , P . Noguera , et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell the moment of leader cell touch were re - duced for Δ PP - VASP and Δ FAB - VASP , iden - tical to that of VASP - null embryos shown earlier , indicating that VASP required its F - actin and profilin - binding sites to exert its function in vivo ( Figure 4 , a and b , and Sup - plemental Video S8 ) . On the other hand , Δ TET - VASP and Δ GAB - VASP embryos had dynamic leader cell lamellipodia and re - sembled the wild - type situation , with pocket areas similar to wild type , indicating that these domains were not essential for VASP function in vivo ( Figure 4 , a and b , and Supplemental Video S9 ) . In all mutants , pocket cell speeds were identical to each other , so differences in pocket area resulted from differences in leader cell dynamics only ( Supplemental Figure S4 ) . However , the synthetic lethality assay of these mutants revealed a slight difference between Δ TET - VASP and Δ GAB - VASP . In - deed , when the Δ TET - VASP worms were subjected to WASP RNAi , the lethality was low , identical to wild type shown in Figure 3d , whereas Δ GAB - VASP was mid way be - tween wild type and Δ FAB - VASP ( Figure 4c ) . We performed the synthetic lethality assay on two additional constructs—EVH1 - VASP as a negative control , lacking all VASP func - tional domains for interaction with actin , and Δ PP - VASP . Embryonic lethality of 50 – 70 % was observed in worms carrying Δ PP - VASP , statistically identical to Δ FAB - VASP and to the negative control EVH1 - VASP ( Figure 4c ) . We concluded from this that the necessary domains for VASP function in vivo were the F - actin and profilin - binding domains , whereas the tetramerization domain was dispensable . In addition , it appeared that we had correctly identified the G - actin bind - ing domain , and although its removal was not blatantly deleterious to leader cell dy - namics , it did appear to play a minor role , as evidenced by the enhanced mortality ob - served in the RNAi assay . Ena / VASP’s binding to F - actin and profilin / G - actin is important for its function in vitro In parallel with the ventral enclosure study of the VASP mutants , we used the bead as - say to determine which VASP domains were essential for its en - hancement of WAVE - based movement in vitro . We applied the dif - ferent mutants to PRD - VCA - WAVE – coated beads . Addition of VASP lacking the F - actin binding site ( Δ FAB - VASP ) gave speeds that were 60 % that of wild - type protein addition and identical to no addition ( Figure 4d ) . The addition of monomeric VASP ( Δ TET - VASP ) , on the other hand , gave speeds identical to wild type ( Figure 4d ) . Addition of VASP mutants lacking the capacity to interact with G - actin and G - actin / profilin complexes ( Δ GAB - VASP and Δ PP - VASP ) decreased bead motility , giving split and deformed comets that propelled beads at reduced speeds as compared with no addition ( Figure 4d ) . alignments , we identified a site that contained a Leu residue adja - cent to basic amino acids , which we mutated to acidic amino acids to make our Δ GAB - VASP construct as per Walders - Harbeck et al . ( 2002 ) and Barzik et al . ( 2005 ) . All constructs localized to cell borders as observed for wild type , whereas Δ TET - VASP displayed additional cytoplasmic staining , and EVH1 - VASP was also present in the cyto - plasm and the nucleus as previously observed in fibroblasts for EVH1 - EGFP of Mena ( Bear et al . , 2000 ; Supplemental Figure S2b ) . Δ PP - VASP , Δ FAB - VASP , Δ GAB - VASP , and Δ TET - VASP GFP - tagged mutant strains were crossed with a Lifeact - mCherry strain , and we observed that leader cell dynamics and the pocket area at FIGURE 4 : VASP’s F - actin and profilin / G - actin binding activities are important for its effect on WAVE - based motility . ( a ) Lifeact - mCherry imaging of ventral enclosure in embryos carrying GFP - tagged VASP proteins mutant for profilin binding , F - and G - actin binding , and tetramerization ( Δ PP , Δ FAB , Δ GAB , and Δ TET , respectively ) . Left image is just before leader cell touch , and right image is at the moment of contact . The leader cell protrusion is rounded and less in advance of the adjacent pocket cells in the Δ PP and Δ FAB cases as compared with the two others . ( b ) This gives correspondingly smaller pocket areas for Δ PP and Δ FAB ( p = 0 . 016 ) , whereas Δ GAB and Δ TET are identical to reintroduced wild - type protein ( unpublished data ; p = 0 . 79 and 0 . 87 , respectively ) . See also Supplemental Videos S8 and S9 . ( c ) Embryonic survival of mutant VASP embryos subjected to the synthetic lethal RNAi treatment . Δ TET had a level of survival like wild - type ( Figure 3d ) , whereas Δ GAB was reduced ( p = 0 . 04 as compared with reintroduced wild type ) , although not as much as Δ FAB and Δ PP , which were identical to the negative control EVH1 ( p = 0 . 97 and 0 . 12 , respectively ) . ( d ) PRD - VCA - WAVE – coated beads incubated in the motility mix with different forms of VASP . Left , representative comets at 10 - to 15 - min reaction time . See Figure 1 for pictures of wild - type , Δ EVH1 - VASP , and no - addition comets . Phase contrast microscopy . Right , bead speeds normalized to the wild - type speed for each day , which was on average ∼ 0 . 8 μm / min . Two to four independent experiments were averaged for each condition . Wild type and no addition are replotted from Figure 1c for comparison . Δ TET - VASP addition is the same as wild type ( p = 0 . 3 ) , whereas Δ FAB - VASP gives identical speeds to no addition ( p = 0 . 12 ) . Δ GAB - VASP and Δ PP - VASP inhibit motility . All data are represented as averages ± SD . p values calculated with the Student’s t test . Bars , 15 μm ( a ) , 1 μm ( d ) . Volume 26 January 1 , 2015 WAVE binds Ena / VASP | 61 ing site to the barbed end ( Chereau and Dominguez , 2006 ; Ferron et al . , 2007 ; Breitsprecher et al . , 2008 , 2011 ; Hansen and Mullins , 2010 ) . The lesser effect observed in vivo for the G - actin binding site deletion may reflect the fact that at in vivo salt con - centrations , the main polymerization entity is profilin – actin . This has been shown by in vitro measurements of single filament elon - gation , where it was hypothesized that the mainly electrostatic interaction of the G - ac - tin binding site with G - actin is not favorable under physiological conditions , whereas the hydrophobic interaction of profilin – actin to proline - rich domains is favored ( Hansen and Mullins , 2010 ) . Our results are consistent with a team - work mechanism between two different ac - tin polymerization machineries , the Arp2 / 3 complex and VASP , facilitated by mutual binding to WAVE ( Figure 5 ) . The WAVE - acti - vated Arp2 / 3 complex creates a new branch on the side of an existing filament , and this branch is handed off directly to a molecule of VASP , localized at the bead or membrane surface by its association with the proline - rich domain of WAVE . This point is particu - larly important in light of recent results showing that Arp2 / 3 complex activators must dissociate from the Arp2 / 3 complex in order to allow the new branch to grow ( Smith et al . , 2013 ) . Another candidate for barbed - end capturing at the surface is the WH2 domain of WASP / WAVE , which binds barbed ends ( Co et al . , 2007 ) . However , this interaction depends on an intervening molecule of monomeric actin , and WH2 domains are not able to bind profilin – actin ( Ferron et al . , 2007 ) , so the relevance of this barbed - end capture mechanism is not clear in the high - profi - lin conditions of in vivo polymerization . We propose therefore that WAVE - bound VASP may act as the link between the surface and the actin network at the same time that it enhances barbed - end growth via the profilin – actin loading mechanism . Together this would en - hance polymerization at the surface , which not only would increase protrusion on its own , but also provide more filament primers for further Arp2 / 3 branching events ( Figure 5 ; Achard et al . , 2010 ) . In the bead system , eliminating VASP’s ability to interact with either G - actin or profilin / G - actin inhibits bead motility : movement is slower than with no addition . This implies that when VASP is lo - calized at the barbed end via its FAB domain but unable to add actin monomers via its G - actin or profilin - actin binding sites , it slows barbed - end elongation . This result is surprising because for single filaments , interfering with VASP’s G - actin binding or with the VASP - profilin / G - actin interaction does not reduce polymerization below that observed for virgin filaments , although it does decrease VASP’s capacity to enhance barbed - end elongation ( Breitsprecher et al . , 2008 ; Hansen and Mullins , 2010 ) . However , in single - filament assays , VASP does not continue to localize to the barbed end when G - actin binding is abrogated ( Hansen and Mullins , 2010 ) . Our observation of motility inhibition may be a reflection of the more complex dynamics of actin network growth confined at a surface where components do not diffuse away as they do from a single filament . These results confirmed our in vivo results showing that monomeric VASP was active for motility enhancement and the importance of F - actin and profilin – actin binding . The bead assay further confirmed that the G - actin binding site was important , although it was less es - sential in vivo . DISCUSSION Taken together , our in vivo and in vitro results indicate that the pro - line - rich domain of WAVE in both C . elegans and human protein interacts with VASP and that this association leads to enhanced actin assembly dynamics and increased motility . When VASP is present in the cytosol / in solution but not recruited to the leading edge / bead surface because WAVE is lacking the proline - rich domain or because VASP lacks its EVH1 domain , actin dynamics resembles that of the no - VASP case . Motility enhancement is only observed when VASP is recruited by WAVE to the membrane or bead surface where Arp2 / 3 complex branches are being formed . In both embryo and bead systems , monomeric VASP is just as effective in increasing motility as tetrameric ( wild - type ) protein , so tetramerization appears to be dispensable for lamellipodial - type actin - based protrusion . Tetramerization may be important for other situations , such as in filopodia formation , where bundling is required ( Applewhite et al . , 2007 ) . On the other hand , interfering with VASP’s F - actin or profilin / G - actin binding abolishes the enhancing effect on actin assembly . This result extends to actin networks in vivo and on beads what has already been observed in single filament in vitro assays : Ena / VASP protein binds filaments via its F - actin binding site and delivers monomers from the G - actin and / or profilin - actin bind - FIGURE 5 : Teamwork between the Arp2 / 3 complex and VASP via mutual binding to WAVE . Membrane / bead - bound WAVE activates the Arp2 / 3 complex with its VCA domain , which then dissociates from the activated Arp2 / 3 complex to allow the new branch to grow , giving the scenario at the top , where the nascent branch could diffuse away from the surface . When WAVE recruits VASP in addition to binding and activating the Arp2 / 3 complex , a hand - off of the nascent branch could happen ( bottom ) . VASP provides the link between the surface and the network at the same time that it enhances growth of new barbed ends . This could not only increase surface - directed polymerization on its own , but it could also contribute to providing new filament primers for subsequent rounds of Arp2 / 3 complex – based branching ( bottom , right vignette ) . 62 | S . Havrylenko , P . Noguera , et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3 – 195 ) , Δ FAB - VASP ( lacking residues 301 – 318 ) , Δ TET - VASP ( lacking residues 415 – 468 ) mutants of VASP , or its EVH1 domain ( first 195 residues only ) were prepared by Splicing by Overlapping Extension PCR ( SOEing ) using oligonucleotides 1 – 15 ( see Supplemental Tables S2 and S3 for details ) , followed by digestion / ligation into Kas I - Bst Z17I fragment of pAW5 . Constructs coding for Δ EVH1 - VASP and Δ GAB - VASP ( K273E , R275E ; primers 16 – 19 ) were prepared similarly , except that Sgr AI – Not I or Kas I – Not I sites were used for religation , respectively . The wve - 1 rescuing fragment was prepared as described previ - ously ( Patel et al . , 2008 ) . Briefly , the wve - 1 gene was amplified from genomic DNA using attB - tailed oligonucleotides 20 and 21 and re - combined with pDONR201 via Gateway BP reaction ( Invitrogen ) , giving pENTR201 / wve - 1 . The Δ PRD mutant ( lacking amino acids 201 – 390 ) was prepared by SOEing mutagenesis using primers 20 – 25 and religation after Bgl II / Eco RI double digestion into pENTR201 / wve - 1 . As for previous studies ( Ismail et al . , 2009 ; Chen et al . , 2010 ) , a ( Gly - Gly - Ser ) 6 linker was inserted in place of the PRD to link the N - and C - terminal parts of the molecule . Sequence for Lifeact and linker was taken as in Riedl et al . ( 2008 ) but with C . elegans codon usage and used to amplify GFP from the vector pID3 . 01B ( gift of Geraldine Seydoux , Johns Hopkins Univer - sity , Baltimore , MD ) with attB - tailed oligonucleotides 26 and 27 . The product was recombined into pDONR221 and then fused with lin - 26 promoter sequence ( from pAW5 ) and the unc - 54 3 ′ UTR ( gift of G . Seydoux ; Addgene plasmid 17253 : pCM5 . 37 ) in the destination vector pCFJ210 ( gift of Erik Jorgensen ; Addgene plasmid 30538 ) using the Multisite Gateway System ( Invitrogen ) . pCFJ210 / Plin - 26 : : Lifeact : : mCherry : : unc54 3 ′ UTR was prepared in the same way , except that Lifeact : : mCherry was prepared by amplifying mCherry from pGH8 ( gift of Erik Jorgensen ; Addgene plasmid 19359 ) and fusing it by PCR to the Lifeact sequence of pENTR [ 1 , 2 ] Lifeact - GFP to avoid integrating the long Lifeact sequence on a single oligo ( primers 28 – 33 ) . Human WAVE - 2 cDNA was a gift of Alexis Gautreau ( Laboratoire d’Enzymologie et Biochimie Structurales , Gif - sur - Yvette , France ) . The PRD - VCA domain of WAVE - 2 , Lys195 – Asp498 ( full - length protein numbering ) , was equipped with an N - terminal glutathione S - transferase tag by inserting it between the Bam HI and Not I sites of pGEX - 4T1 ( GE Healthcare ) . A C - terminal Gly linker and octahisti - dine tag were added before the stop codon . The VCA domain was prepared in the same way and consisted of Thr424 – Asp498 . All mouse VASP constructs were from Dorothy Schafer ( University of Virginia , Charlottesville , VA ) and carried an N - terminal hexahistidine tag ( Barzik et al . , 2005 ) . Protein purification The Arp2 / 3 complex was purified from bovine thymus using the method described for human leukocytes ( Higgs et al . , 1999 ) . Bovine brain Arp2 / 3 complex purchased from Cytoskeleton was not used , as it was found to give very fast PRD - VCA - WAVE bead motility ( 2 – 3 μm / min ) as compared with home - made Arp2 / 3 complex , and VASP addition in this situation gave motility inhibition ( speeds < 1 μm / min ) . VCA protein ( from human N - WASP ) and rabbit muscle actin were purchased from Cytoskeleton . The mouse α 1 β 2 capping pro - tein construct was a gift of D . Schafer and was purified as in Palmgren et al . ( 2001 ) . Untagged human profilin was expressed in Escherichia coli strain Rosetta 2 ( DE3 ) pLysS ( Novagen ) and purified as in Carvalho et al . ( 2013 ) . Mouse VASP protein and mutants were puri - fied as previously described ( Barzik et al . , 2005 ) . VASP proteins were further purified via fast protein liquid chromatography using a Superdex 200 10 / 300GL column ( GE Healthcare ) . Mouse VASP Overall our in vivo and in vitro results allow us to propose a team - work - type mechanism between the Arp2 / 3 complex and VASP that leads to enhanced protrusion and motility probably as a result of localized barbed - end elongation enhancement and / or anticapping activity via VASP’s capacity to bind profilin , G - actin , and F - actin . Our results ride the wave of similar studies that have brought to light the collaboration of other actin machineries that were previously consid - ered as distinct and independent—for example , the Arp2 / 3 com - plex and the formin FMNL2 , and the nucleator APC and the formin mDia1 ( Block et al . , 2012 ; Breitsprecher et al . , 2012 ) . In the light of recent results concerning the direct interaction of the WAVE com - plex subunit Abi and Ena / VASP proteins ( Chen et al . , 2014 ) , it seems probable that WAVE coordinates this molecular collaboration be - tween the Arp2 / 3 complex and Ena / VASP via multiple , perhaps complementary interactions . This mechanism explains why VASP is present in dynamic WAVE - based protrusions in moving cells and gives a first characterization of how VASP activity synergizes with Arp2 / 3 complex nucleation . MATERIALS AND METHODS Worm strains and handling Worms were maintained and handled using standard techniques ( Brenner , 1974 ) . The VASP - null strain unc - 34 ( gm104 ) was isolated from PE159 strain [ unc - 34 ( gm104 ) hmp - 1 ( fe4 ) / mIs10 V ] ( a gift of Jonathon Pettitt , University of Aberdeen , Aberdeen , United Kingdom ) . OX308 strain carrying wve - 1 ( ne350 ) I / hT2 [ bli - 4 ( e937 ) let - ? ( q782 ) qIs48 ] ( I ; III ) was a gift of Martha Soto ( Rutgers University , Piscataway , NJ ) . NG324 wsp - 1 ( gm324 ) and DP38 unc119 ( ed3 ) were from the Caenorhabditis Genetics Center ( University of Minnesota , Minneapolis , MN ) . The following strains were generated in the pres - ent study : JUP30 unc119 ( ed3 ) ; Is [ Plin - 26 : : Lifeact : : GFP : : unc54 3 ′ UTR ; Cb - unc119 ] , JUP38 unc119 ( ed3 ) ; Is [ Plin - 26 : : Lifeact : : mCherry : : unc54 3 ′ UTR ; Cb - unc119 ] , JUP22 unc34 ( gm104 ) ; Ex [ Plin - 26 : : unc - 34 ( WT ( full - length cDNA ) ) : : GFP : : unc54 3 ′ UTR ; pRF4 ; pCFJ90 ] , JUP24 unc34 ( gm104 ) ; Ex [ Plin - 26 : : unc - 34 ( Δ TET ( Δ 415 - 468aa ) ) : : GFP : : unc54 3 ′ UTR ; pRF4 ; pCFJ90 ] , JUP26 unc34 ( gm104 ) ; Ex [ Plin - 26 : : unc - 34 ( Δ FAB ( Δ 301 - 318aa ) ) : : GFP : : unc54 3 ′ UTR ; pRF4 ; pCFJ90 ] , JUP29 unc34 ( gm104 ) ; Ex [ Plin - 26 : : unc - 34 ( Δ PP ( Δ 196 - 256aa ) ) : : GFP : : unc54 3 ′ UTR ; pRF4 ; pCFJ90 ] , JUP32 unc34 ( gm104 ) ; Ex [ Plin - 26 : : unc - 34 ( Δ EVH1 ( Δ 3 - 195aa ) ) : : GFP : : unc54 3 ′ UTR ; pRF4 ; pCFJ90 ] , JUP34 unc34 ( gm104 ) ; Ex [ Plin - 26 : : unc - 34 ( Δ GAB ( LK 273 MR 275 - > LEME ) ) ) : : GFP : : unc54 3 ′ UTR ; pRF4 ; pCFJ90 ] , JUP36 unc34 ( gm104 ) ; Ex [ Plin - 26 : : unc - 34 ( EVH1 ( 1 - 195aa ) ) : : GFP : : unc54 3 ′ UTR ; pRF4 ; pCFJ90 ] , JUP40 wve - 1 ( ne350 ) ; Ex [ wve - 1 ; pRF4 ; pCFJ90 ] , JUP44 wve - 1 ( ne350 ) ; Ex [ wve - 1 ( Δ PRD ( Δ 200 - 390aa ) ) ; pRF4 ; pCFJ90 ] . pRF4 encodes the dominant rol - 6 ( su1006 ) cotransformation marker . pCFJ90 encodes Pmyo - 2 : : mCherry cotransformation marker . Crossing of JUP30 with unc34 ( gm104 ) and NG324 gave JUP46 and JUP47 , respectively . JUP48 – JUP53 were issued from crossing of JUP38 with JUP22 , JUP24 , JUP26 , JUP29 , JUP32 , and JUP34 , respectively . JUP54 and JUP55 were is - sued from crossing of JUP30 with JUP40 and JUP44 , respectively . Constructions C . elegans expression vectors generated in this study and primers used for their construction are summarized in Supplemental Tables S1 and S2 . The pAW5 plasmid , carrying nucleotide sequences for C . elegans lin - 26 promoter , unc - 34 cDNA ( VASP ) , and unc - 54 3 ′ UTR , was a gift of J . Pettitt ( Sheffield et al . , 2007 ) . Domain boundaries for C . elegans VASP ( UNC - 34 ) were predicted by alignment with human and mouse VASP . Constructs coding for Δ PP - VASP ( lacking residues 196 – 256 , inclusive numbering ) , Δ EVH1 - VASP ( lacking residues Volume 26 January 1 , 2015 WAVE binds Ena / VASP | 63 on the spinning disk . Owing to low signal , Lifeact - mCherry single - channel images were denoised with the program Safir ( Boulanger et al . , 2010 ) . C . elegans RNAi and analysis Standard RNAi feeding techniques were used ( Kamath and Ahringer , 2003 ) . To create wsp - 1 RNAi feeding vector , a full - length wsp - 1a cDNA was PCR amplified from yk184g1 cDNA clone ( gift of Yuji Kohara , National Institute of Genetics , Mishima , Japan ) using 5 ′ - GGGCCATGGATGTCGGTATATCCTCCCACG CCGAC and 5 ′ - GGGCTCGAGCTAATCTGACCATTCATTTTTGTCA oligonucle - otides and cloned into Xho I – Nco I sites of L4440 plasmid . C . elegans animals were synchronized by hypochlorite treatment . Feeding was carried out at 20°C . A triplicate of Pmyo - 2 : : mCherry ( + ) embryos issued from 10 – 20 Pmyo - 2 : : mCherry ( + ) adult hermaphrodites / con - dition was assayed for ability to complete embryonic development . Embryos unable to hatch 24 h postlaying were scored as dead . In case of transgenic lines , only mCherry ( + ) progeny were taken into account . Data are the average of two experiments . Bead preparation Carboxylated polystyrene beads of both 1 - and 4 . 5 - μm diameter ( Polysciences ) were coated in Xb ( 10 mM 4 - ( 2 - hydroxyethyl ) - 1 - pip - erazineethanesulfonic acid [ HEPES ] , pH 7 . 5 , 0 . 1 M KCl , 1 mM MgCl 2 , and 0 . 1 mM CaCl 2 ) with 4 . 5 μM coating protein at 20 min in a ther - momixer ( Eppendorf ) at 18°C , 1000 rpm . The amount of beads in 40 μl of protein solution was adjusted to a total surface area of 3 cm 2 . After coating , the beads were washed twice in 1 % bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) / Xb , resuspended in 120 μl 1 % BSA / Xb , and stored on ice for 1 d for bead motility assays . Immunolabeling of beads A 0 . 2 - μl amount of coated beads was mixed with 4 μl of 500 nM VASP or Δ EVH1 - VASP in Xb / 1 % BSA , and the reaction was sand - wiched between two 12 - mm - round coverslips separated by a Para - film spacer . The reactions were incubated 1 h in a moist chamber at room temperature , and then the sandwiches were floated apart and simultaneously fixed by submersion in a 2 % glutaraldehyde / phos - phate - buffered saline ( PBS ) solution . Fixation was continued for 1 h at room temperature , and then the coverslips were neutralized for 10 min in 2 mg / ml NaBH 4 in PBS . Coverslips were labeled with a VASP antibody that recognized the C - terminus to detect both wild - type and Δ EVH1 - VASP protein ( Thermo Scientific ) and counter - stained with a secondary antibody ( goat anti - rabbit ) coupled to Alexa 488 ( Invitrogen ) . Motility assay The motility medium contained 95 nM Arp2 / 3 complex , 50 nM cap - ping protein , 5 . 5 μM profilin , and 5 . 5 μM G - actin . Actin was diluted to 23 μM in G - buffer ( 2 mM Tris , 0 . 2 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM DTT , pH 8 . 0 ) and allowed to depolymerize at 4°C for at least 2 d and used for several weeks . Proteins were diluted in MB13 ( 10 mM HEPES , 1 . 5 mM ATP , 3 mM DTT , 1 . 5 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM ethylene glycol tet - raacetic acid [ EGTA ] , 1 % BSA , and 50 mM KCl , pH 7 . 5 , with 0 . 1 – 0 . 2 % methylcellulose [ M0512 , 4000 cP ; Sigma - Aldrich ] ) . We added 150 nM VASP proteins ( calculated using the tetramer molecular weight , even for the Δ TET mutant ) or the equivalent in VASP buffer ( 20 mM imidazole , 200 mM KCl , 1 mM EGTA , 2 mM MgCl 2 , and 1 mM DTT , pH 7 . 0 ) . The final KCl concentration was brought up to 86 mM by addition of KCl in MB13 . Owing to dilution by VASP buffer and G - actin solution , final reaction conditions were ∼ 1 mM ATP , 2 mM DTT , 0 . 7 mM EGTA , 0 . 6 % BSA , and 0 . 6 – 1 . 2 % methylcellulose . constructs were the following : Δ EVH1 - VASP , lacking residues 1 – 114 ; Δ PP - VASP , lacking residues 156 – 207 ; Δ GAB - VASP double point mu - tation R232E , K233E ; Δ FAB - VASP , lacking residues 255 – 273 ; and Δ TET - VASP , lacking residues 331 – 375 . PRD - VCA - WAVE was expressed in BL21 - CodonPlus ( DE3 ) - RIPL ( Stratagene ) overnight at 30°C with 1 mM isopropyl - β - d - thiogalactoside ( IPTG ) in 2YT medium containing 50 μg / μl ampicillin and 17 μg / μl chloramphenicol . Cells were lysed in 20 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 200 mM NaCl , 1 mM ETDA , 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 , and 1 mM dithiothreitol ( DTT ) supplemented with complete EDTA - free pro - tease inhibitor cocktail ( Roche ) then purified using glutathione Sep - harose ( GE Healthcare ) . Proteins were eluted with 20 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 200 mM NaCl , 1 mM ETDA , 1 mM DTT , and 25 mM reduced glutathione and then supplemented to 20 mM imidazole . Proteins were then bound to Ni Sepharose High Performance column ( GE Healthcare ) and eluted in 20 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 200 mM NaCl , 1 mM DTT , and 300 mM imidazole . Proteins were further purified over the Superdex 200 10 / 300GL column ( GE Healthcare ) in 20 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 200 mM NaCl , 0 . 5 mM ETDA , and 1 mM DTT . Protein was dia - lyzed into 20 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 200 mM NaCl , 0 . 5 mM ETDA , 1 mM DTT , and 5 % glycerol and stored at − 80°C . VCA - WAVE was purified essentially in the same way , except that Rosetta 2 ( DE3 ) pLysS ( Nova - gen ) were used and the Superdex step was omitted . The PRD - VCA - WASP protein was likewise expressed in Rosetta 2 ( DE3 ) pLysS but with an overnight expression at 20°C instead of 30°C with 1 mM IPTG . In addition , eluate from the glutathione Sepharose was sup - plemented to 40 mM imidazole instead of 20 mM before applica - tion to the Ni column . C . elegans transgenesis and imaging To create wve - 1 transgenics , wve - 1 ( ne350 ) I / hT2 [ bli - 4 ( e937 ) let - ? ( q782 ) qIs48 ] ( I ; III ) heterozygous animals were injected with DNA coding for either wild - type or Δ PRD mutant versions of wve - 1 and the injection markers pRF4 ( Mello et al . , 1991 ) and pCFJ90 ( Pmyo - 2 : : mCherry ; Frokjaer - Jensen et al . , 2008 ) . Noninjected homozygous wve - 1 animals show Egl ( egg - laying defective ) and Mel ( maternal embryonic lethal ) phenotypes . Homozygous wve - 1 animals from es - tablished transgenic lines , identified as GFP ( - ) mCherry ( + ) rollers , were assayed for rescue of these phenotypes . Wild - type ( WT ) and Δ PRD mutants of wve - 1 effectively restored laying of eggs ( brood size 278 ± 19 for WT vs . 210 ± 26 for Δ PRD ) and abated embryonic lethal - ity of their progeny ( 72 and 82 % eggs dead for WT vs . Δ PRD ) . The assay was done in triplicate , and 12 animals / strain were assayed . Lifeact - GFP and Lifeact - mCherry animals were generated by mi - croparticle bombardment ( Bio - Rad ) as described previously ( Praitis et al . , 2001 ) . To create VASP transgenic animals , VASP - null hermaph - rodites were injected with pAW5 ( coding for WT - VASP - GFP ) or de - rived plasmids ( coding for GFP - tagged forms of Δ EVH1 - VASP , Δ FAB - VASP , Δ GAB - VASP , Δ TET - VASP , Δ PP - VASP , or EVH1 domain ) along with pCFJ90 ( Pmyo - 2 : : mCherry ) and pRF4 injection markers . For ventral enclosure imaging , embryos were extruded from trans - genic adults by cutting them in a drop of M9 solution and mounted on a 2 % agarose pad . Image acquisition was performed at 22°C . Spinning disk confocal fluorescence images were acquired at a Nikon Eclipse TE2000 - E microscope equipped with an oil immersion objective , 100 × / 1 . 40 numerical aperture , a piezo stage ( Nanoscan Prior ) , a Yokogawa CSU22 confocal head , a HQ2 charge - coupled device camera ( Roper Scientific ) , and a 491 - nm diode laser con - trolled by MetaMorph software 7 . 5 ( Molecular Devices ) . The 10 - to 20 - μm z - stacks were acquired with 0 . 5 - μm distance between planes . For time - lapse imaging of Lifeact - GFP and Lifeact - mCherry during ventral enclosure , z - stacks were acquired at 60 - to 90 - s intervals 64 | S . Havrylenko , P . Noguera , et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell For a final reaction volume of 8 . 4 μl , 0 . 2 μl of coated beads was added , and the entire volume was placed between a glass slide and coverslip ( 18 × 18 mm ) and sealed with Vaseline / lanolin / paraffin ( 1 : 1 : 1 ) . Bead observation and data processing Phase contrast ( for motility assay ) and epifluorescence ( for immunola - beling ) microscopy were performed on an Olympus BX51 upright microscope or an Olympus IX70 inverted microscope with a 100 × oil - immersion objective and CoolSnap charge - coupled device camera ( Photometrics ) . Phase contrast and fluorescence quantification was done using MetaMorph software ( Universal Imaging ) . Bead velocities were calculated by measuring lengths of the whole population of comets ( pictures taken at random over the entire sample ) over time . The slope of comet length versus time gave the average velocity of the entire population . This approach meant that at least 50 comets went into each measurement . The measurement was repeated on different days , and reported speeds are the average 2 – 4 different days , representing the measurement of hundreds of comets . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Jean - Louis Bessereau for use of his worm injection setup for initial experiments and Vincent Galy and Marie - Anne Felix for use of their microparticle bombardment equipment . For micro - scope use and support , we acknowledge the imaging facility PICT - IBiSA , Institut Curie , Paris , France , a member of the France BioIm - aging national research infrastructure . We thank Dorothy Schafer and Kevin Carvalho for discussions and Cécile Sykes and Renaud Legouis for discussions and reading of the manuscript . This work was funded by a Fondation Pierre - Gilles de Gennes grant to S . H . , a Human Frontiers Science Program Organization Young Investiga - tor’s Grant to J . P . , and the Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale ( Grant DEQ20120323737 ) to J . P . , Cécile Sykes , and Timo Betz . Some strains were provided by the CGC , which is funded by the National Institutes of Health Office of Research Infrastructure Pro - grams ( P40 OD010440 ) . REFERENCES Achard V , Martiel J - L , Michelot A , Guérin C , Reymann A - C , Blanchoin L , Boujemaa - Paterski R ( 2010 ) . A “primer” - based mechanism underlies branched actin filament network formation and motility . Curr Biol 20 , 423 – 428 . Applewhite DA , Barzik M , Kojima S - i , Svitkina TM , Gertler FB , Borisy GG ( 2007 ) . Ena / VASP proteins have an anti - capping independent function in filopodia formation . Mol Biol Cell 18 , 2579 – 2591 . Barzik M , Kotova TI , Higgs HN , Hazelwood L , Hanein D , Gertler FB , Schafer DA ( 2005 ) . Ena / VASP proteins enhance actin polymerization in the pres - ence of barbed end capping proteins . J Biol Chem 280 , 28653 – 28662 . Bear JE , Loureiro JJ , Libova I , Fässler R , Wehland J , Gertler FB ( 2000 ) . Negative regulation of fibroblast motility by Ena / VASP proteins . Cell 101 , 717 – 728 . Bear JE , Svitkina TM , Krause M , Schafer DA , Loureiro JJ , Strasser GA , Maly IV , Chaga OY , Cooper JA , Borisy GG , Gertler FB ( 2002 ) . Antagonism between Ena / VASP proteins and actin filament capping regulates fibro - blast motility . Cell 109 , 509 – 521 . Bernadskaya YY , Wallace A , Nguyen J , Mohler WA , Soto MC ( 2012 ) . UNC - 40 / DCC , SAX - 3 / Robo , and VAB - 1 / Eph polarize F - actin during em - bryonic morphogenesis by regulating the WAVE / SCAR actin nucleation complex . PLoS Genet 8 , e1002863 . Blanchoin L , Boujemaa - Paterski R , Sykes C , Plastino J ( 2014 ) . Actin dynam - ics , architecture and mechanics in cell motility . Physiol Rev 94 , 235 – 263 . Block J , Breitsprecher D , Kühn S , Winterhoff M , Kage F , Geffers R , Duwe P , Rohn JL , Baum B , Brakebusch C , et al . ( 2012 ) . FMNL2 drives actin - based protrusion and migration downstream of Cdc42 . Curr Biol 22 , 1005 – 1012 . Boulanger J , Kervrann C , Bouthemy P , Elbau P , Sibarita JB , Salamero J ( 2010 ) . Patch - based nonlocal functional for denoising fluorescence microscopy image sequences . IEEE Trans Med Imaging 29 , 442 – 454 . Breitsprecher D , Jaiswal R , Bombardier JP , Gould CJ , Gelles J , Goode BL ( 2012 ) . Rocket launcher mechanism of collaborative actin assembly defined by single - molecule imaging . Science 336 , 1164 – 1168 . Breitsprecher D , Kiesewetter AK , Linkner J , Urbanke C , Resch GP , Small JV , Faix J ( 2008 ) . Clustering of VASP actively drives processive , WH2 domain - mediated actin filament elongation . EMBO J 27 , 2943 – 2954 . Breitsprecher D , Kiesewetter AK , Linkner J , Vinzenz M , Stradal T , Small JV , Curth U , Dickinson RB , Faix J ( 2011 ) . Molecular mechanism of Ena / VASP - mediated actin - filament elongation . EMBO J 30 , 456 – 467 . Brenner S ( 1974 ) . The genetics of Caenorhabditis elegans . Genetics 77 , 71 – 94 . Campellone KG , Welch MD ( 2010 ) . A nucleator arms race : cellular control of actin assembly . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11 , 237 – 251 . Carvalho K , Lemière J , Faqir F , Manzi J , Blanchoin L , Plastino J , Betz T , Sykes C ( 2013 ) . Actin polymerization or myosin contraction : two ways to build up cortical tension for symmetry breaking . Philos Trans R Soc B 368 , 20130005 . Castellano F , Le Clainche C , Patin D , Carlier M - F , Chavrier P ( 2001 ) . A WASP - VASP complex regulates actin polymerization at the plasma membrane . EMBO J 20 , 5603 – 5614 . Chen XJ , Squarr AJ , Stephan R , Chen B , Higgins TE , Barry DJ , Martin MC , Rosen MK , Bogdan S , Way M ( 2014 ) . Ena / VASP proteins cooperate with the WAVE complex to regulate the actin cytoskeleton . Dev Cell 30 , 569 – 584 . Chen Z , Borek D , Padrick SB , Gomez TS , Metlagel Z , Ismail AM , Umetani J , Billadeau DD , Otwinowski Z , Rosen MK ( 2010 ) . Structure and control of the actin regulatory WAVE complex . Nature 468 , 533 – 538 . Chereau D , Dominguez R ( 2006 ) . Understanding the role of the G - actin - binding domain of Ena / VASP in actin assembly . J Struct Biol 155 , 195 . Co C , Wong DT , Gierke S , Change V , Taunton J ( 2007 ) . Mechanism of actin network attachment to moving membranes : barbed end capture by N - WASP WH2 domains . Cell 128 , 901 – 913 . Derivery E , Lombard B , Loew D , Gautreau A ( 2009 ) . The Wave complex is intrinsically inactive . Cell Motil Cytoskel 66 , 777 – 790 . Dertsiz L , Ozbilim G , Kayisli Y , Gokhan GA , Demircan A , Kayisli UA ( 2005 ) . Differential expression of VASP in normal lung tissue and lung adenocar - cinomas . Thorax 60 , 576 – 581 . Dittrich M , Strassberger V , Fackler M , Tas P , Lewandrowski U , Sickmann A , Walter U , Dandekar T , Birschmann I ( 2010 ) . Characterization of a novel interaction between vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein and Abelson Interactor 1 in human platelets : a concerted computational and experimental approach . Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 30 , 843 – 850 . Ferron F , Rebowski G , Lee SH , Dominguez R ( 2007 ) . Structural basis for the recruitment of profilin - actin complexes during filament elongation by Ena / VASP . EMBO J 26 , 4597 – 4606 . Fleming T , Chien S - C , Vanderzalm PJ , Dell M , Gavin MK , Forrester WC , Garriga G ( 2010 ) . The role of C . elegans Ena / VASP homolog UNC - 34 in neuronal polarity and motility . Dev Biol 344 , 94 – 106 . Frokjaer - Jensen C , Davis MW , Hopkins CE , Newman BJ , Thummel JM , Olesen S - P , Grunnet M , Jorgensen EM ( 2008 ) . Single - copy insertion of transgenes in Caenorhabditis elegans . Nat Genet 40 , 1375 – 1383 . Gally C , Wissler F , Zahreddine H , Quintin S , Landmann F , Labouesse M ( 2009 ) . Myosin II regulation during C . elegans embryonic elongation : LET - 502 / ROCK , MRCK - 1 and PAK - 1 , three kinases with different roles . Development 136 , 3109 – 3119 . Gates J , Mahaffey JP , Rogers SL , Emerson M , Rogers EM , Sottile SL , Van Vactor D , Gertler FB , Peifer M ( 2007 ) . Enabled plays key roles in embryonic epithelial morphogenesis in Drosophila . Development 134 , 2027 – 2039 . Gates J , Nowotarski SH , Yin H , Mahaffey JP , Bridges T , Herrera C , Homem CCF , Janody F , Montell DJ , Peifer M ( 2009 ) . Enabled and Capping protein play important roles in shaping cell behavior during Drosophila oogenesis . Dev Biol 333 , 90 – 107 . Geese M , Loureiro JJ , Bear JE , Wehland J , Gertler FB , Sechi AS ( 2002 ) . Contribution of Ena / VASP proteins to intracellular motility of Listeria requires phosphorylation and proline - rich core but not F - actin binding or multimerization . Mol Biol Cell 13 , 2383 – 2396 . Grevengoed EE , Fox DT , Gates J , Peifer M ( 2003 ) . Balancing different types of actin polymerization at distinct sites : roles for Abelson kinase and Enabled . J Cell Biol 163 , 1267 – 1279 . Grevengoed EE , Loureiro JJ , Jesse TL , Peifer M ( 2001 ) . Abelson kinase regulates epithelial morphogenesis in Drosophila . J Cell Biol 155 , 1185 – 1197 . Hansen SD , Mullins RD ( 2010 ) . VASP is a processive actin polymerase that requires monomeric actin for barbed end association . J Cell Biol 191 , 571 – 584 . Volume 26 January 1 , 2015 WAVE binds Ena / VASP | 65 Palmgren S , Ojala PJ , Wear MA , Cooper JA , Lappalainen P ( 2001 ) . Interactions with PIP 2 , ADP - actin monomers , and capping protein regulate the activity and localization of yeast twinfilin . J Cell Biol 155 , 251 – 260 . Patel FB , Bernadskaya YY , Chen E , Jobanputra A , Pooladi Z , Freeman KL , Gally C , Mohler WA , Soto MC ( 2008 ) . The WAVE / SCAR complex promotes polarized cell movements and actin enrichment in epithelia during C . elegans embryogenesis . Dev Biol 324 , 297 – 309 . Philippar U , Roussos ET , Oser M , Yamaguchi H , Kim H - D , Giampieri S , Wang Y , Goswami S , Wyckoff JB , Lauffenburger DA , et al . ( 2008 ) . A Mena invasion isoform potentiates EGF - induced carcinoma cell invasion and metastasis . Dev Cell 15 , 813 – 828 . Plastino J , Sykes C ( 2005 ) . The actin slingshot . Curr Opin Cell Biol 17 , 62 – 66 . Praitis V , Casey E , Collar D , Austin J ( 2001 ) . Creation of low - copy integrated transgenic lines in Caenorhabditis elegans . Genetics 157 , 1217 – 1226 . Pula G , Krause M ( 2008 ) . Role of Ena / VASP proteins in homeostasis and disease . Handb Exp Pharmacol 186 , 39 – 65 . Riedl J , Crevenna AH , Kessenbrock K , Yu JH , Neukirchen D , Bista M , Bradke F , Jenne D , Holak TA , Werb Z , et al . ( 2008 ) . Lifeact : a versatile marker to visualize F - actin . Nat Methods 5 , 605 . Rottner K , Behrendt B , Small JV , Wehland J ( 1999 ) . VASP dynamics during lamellipodia protrusion . Nat Cell Biol 1 , 321 – 322 . Sarmiento C , Wang W , Dovas A , Yamaguchi H , Sidani M , El - Sibai M , DesMarais V , Holman HA , Kitchen S , Backer JM , et al . ( 2008 ) . WASP family members and formin proteins coordinate regulation of cell protrusions in carcinoma cells . J Cell Biol 180 , 1245 – 1260 . Shakir MA , Gill JS , Lundquist EA ( 2006 ) . Interactions of UNC - 34 Enabled with Rac GTPases and the NIK Kinase MIG - 15 in Caenorhabditis elegans axon pathfinding and neuronal migration . Genetics 172 , 893 – 913 . Sheffield M , Loveless T , Hardin J , Pettitt J ( 2007 ) . C . elegans enabled exhib - its novel interactions with N - WASP , Abl and cell - cell junctions . Curr Biol 17 , 1791 – 1796 . Smith BA , Padrick SB , Doolittle LK , Daugherty - Clarke K , Correa IR , Xu M - Q , Goode BL , Rosen MK , Gelles J ( 2013 ) . Three - color single molecule imaging shows WASP detachment from Arp2 / 3 complex triggers actin filament branch formation . eLife 2 , e01008 . Stinchcomb DT , Shaw JE , Carr SH , Hirsh D ( 1985 ) . Extrachromosomal DNA transformation of Caenorhabditis elegans . Mol Cell Biol 5 , 3484 – 3496 . Tani K , Sato S , Sukezane T , Kojima H , Hirose H , Hanafusa H , Shishido T ( 2003 ) . Abl Interactor 1 promotes tyrosine 296 phosphorylation of mam - malian Enabled ( Mena ) by c - Abl kinase . J Biol Chem 278 , 21685 – 21692 . Tucker PK , Evans IR , Wood W ( 2011 ) . Ena drives invasive macrophage migration in Drosophila embryos . Dis Model Mech 4 , 126 – 134 . Walders - Harbeck B , Khaitlina SY , Hinssen H , Jockusch BM , Illenberger S ( 2002 ) . The vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein promotes actin polymerisation through direct binding to monomeric actin . FEBS Lett 529 , 275 – 280 . Wiesner S , Boujemaa - Paterski R , Carlier M - F ( 2002 ) . Actin - based motility of Listeria monocytogenes and Shigella flexneri . Methods Microbiol 31 , 245 – 262 . Williams - Masson EM , Malik AN , Hardin J ( 1997 ) . An actin - mediated two - step mechanism is required for ventral enclosure of the C . elegans hypo - dermis . Development 124 , 2889 – 2901 . Winkleman JD , Bilancia CG , Peifer M , Kovar DR ( 2014 ) . Ena / VASP Enabled is a highly processive actin polymerase tailored to self - assemble parallel - bundled F - actin networks with Fascin . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111 , 4121 – 4126 . Withee J , Galligan B , Hawkins N , Garriga G ( 2004 ) . Caenorhabditis elegans WASP and Ena / VASP proteins play compensatory roles in morphogen - esis and neuronal cell migration . Genetics 167 , 1165 – 1176 . Yamaguchi H , Lorenz M , Kempiak S , Sarmiento C , Coniglio S , Symons M , Segall J , Eddy R , Miki H , Takenawa T , Condeelis J ( 2005 ) . Molecular mechanisms of invadopodium formation : the role of the N - WASP – Arp2 / 3 complex pathway and cofilin . J Cell Biol 168 , 441 – 452 . Higgs HN , Blanchoin L , Pollard TD ( 1999 ) . Influence of the C terminus of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASp ) and the Arp2 / 3 complex on actin polymerization . Biochemistry 38 , 15212 – 15222 . Hirao N , Sato S , Gotoh T , Maruoka M , Suzuki J , Matsuda S , Shishido T , Tani K ( 2006 ) . NESH ( Abi - 3 ) is present in the Abi / WAVE complex but does not promote c - Abl - mediated phosphorylation . FEBS Lett 580 , 6464 – 6470 . Homem CCF , Peifer M ( 2009 ) . Exploring the roles of Diaphanous and En - abled activity in shaping the balance between filopodia and lamellipo - dia . Mol Biol Cell 20 , 5138 – 5155 . Hu L - D , Zou H - F , Zhan S - X , Cao K - M ( 2008 ) . EVL ( Ena / VASP - like ) expression is up - regulated in human breast cancer and its relative expression level is correlated with clinical stages . Oncol Rep 19 , 1015 – 1020 . Ismail AM , Padrick SB , Chen B , Umetani J , Rosen MK ( 2009 ) . The WAVE regulatory complex is inhibited . Nat Struct Mol Biol 16 , 561 – 563 . Kamath RS , Ahringer J ( 2003 ) . Genome - wide RNAi screening in Caenorhab - ditis elegans . Methods 30 , 313 – 321 . Koronakis V , Hume PJ , Humphreys D , Liu T , Horning O , Jensen ON , McGhie EJ ( 2011 ) . WAVE regulatory complex activation by cooperating GTPases Arf and Rac1 . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108 , 14449 – 14454 . Krause M , Dent EW , Bear JE , Loureiro JJ , Gertler FB ( 2003 ) . Ena / VASP proteins : regulators of the actin cytoskeleton and cell migration . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 19 , 541 – 564 . Kurisu S , Takenawa T ( 2009 ) . The WASP and WAVE family proteins . Genome Biol 10 , 226 . Kwiatkowski AV , Rubinson DA , Dent EW , van Veen JE , Leslie JD , Zhang J , Mebane LM , Philippar U , Pinheiro EM , Burds AA , et al . ( 2007 ) . Ena / VASP is required for neuritogenesis in the developing cortex . Neuron 56 , 441 – 455 . Lacayo CI , Pincus Z , VanDuijn MM , Wilson CA , Fletcher DA , Gertler FB , Mogilner A , Theriot JA ( 2007 ) . Emergence of large - scale cell morphol - ogy and movement from local actin filament growth dynamics . PLoS Biol 5 , 2035 – 2052 . Law A - L , Vehlow A , Kotini M , Dodgson L , Soong D , Theveneau E , Bodo C , Taylor E , Navarro C , Perera U , et al . ( 2013 ) . Lamellipodin and the Scar / WAVE complex cooperate to promote cell migration in vivo . J Cell Biol 203 , 673 – 689 . Lebensohn AM , Kirschner MW ( 2009 ) . Activation of the WAVE complex by coincident signals controls actin assembly . Mol Cell 36 , 512 – 524 . Lin W - H , Nelson SE , Hollingsworth RJ , Chung CY ( 2010 ) . Functional roles of VASP phosphorylation in the regulation of chemotaxis and osmotic stress response . Cytoskeleton 67 , 259 – 271 . Loureiro JJ , Rubinson DA , Bear JE , Baltus GA , Kwiatkowski AV , Gertler FB ( 2002 ) . Critical roles of phosphorylation and actin binding motifs , but not the central proline - rich region , for Ena / Vasodilator - stimulated Phosphoprotein ( VASP ) function during cell migration . Mol Biol Cell 13 , 2533 – 2546 . Maruoka M , Sato M , Yuan Y , Ichiba M , Fuji R , Ogawa T , Ishida - Kitagawa N , Takeya T , Watanabe N ( 2012 ) . Abi - 1 - bridged tyrosine phosphorylation of VASP by Abelson kinase impairs association of VASP to focal adhesions and regulates leukaemic cell adhesion . Biochem J 441 , 889 – 899 . Mello CC , Kramer JM , Stinchcomb D , Ambros V ( 1991 ) . Efficient gene transfer in C . elegans : extrachromosomal maintenance and integration of transforming sequences . EMBO J 10 , 3959 – 3970 . Miki H , Yamaguchi H , Suetsugu S , Takenawa T ( 2000 ) . IRSp53 is an essential intermediate between Rac and WAVE in the regulation of membrane ruffling . Nature 408 , 732 – 735 . Niebuhr K , Ebel F , Frank R , Reinhard M , Domann E , Carl UD , Walter U , Gertler FB , Wehland J , Chakraborty T ( 1997 ) . A novel proline - rich motif present in ActA of Listeria monocytogenes and cytoskeletal proteins is the ligand for the EVH1 domain , a protein module present in the Ena / VASP family . EMBO J 16 , 5433 – 5444 . Okada H , Uezu A , Soderblom EJ , Moseley III MA , Gertler FB , Soderling SH ( 2012 ) . Peptide Array X - linking ( PAX ) : a new peptide - protein identifica - tion approach . PLoS One 7 , e37035 .