THE NEW PRODUCTION OF KNOWLEDGE The Dynamics of Science and Research in Contemporary Societies Michael Gibbons . Camille Limoges , Helga Nowotny , Simon Schwartzman , Peter Seot ( and Martin Trow SAGE Publications London . Thousand Oab • New Delhi © FonkJl \ ng ~ TMdiimnden ( FRN ) 1994 Bm 6710 S· 11385 Stodhohn Sweden First publ ished 1994 Rcprinlc < l 1995 . 1996 . 1997 . 1999 . 2 ( XlO . 2002 A 11 right ~ reser \ ' ~ d . No pan of lh ! ~ publication may he reproduced . ~ ( ( ) red ill a rcmev ~ 1 , y , ' 1em . transmitted or uli ! i7ed in any form ClT hy : my lllean ~ . electroni . : , mech ~ ni ( . ' al . photocopying . re . : onilng or otherwi . ' c . without pcrmi " ion In writing from lhe Pubh . hcl ' l ' . SAGE Publicalion , Lt , 1 I ' i Boohi IJ Strt ! el Lnnaon EC2A ~ PU SAGE Publicalions Jn ~ 2 ~ ) 5 Tellcr Road Thousand Oah . CaMornia 9U20 SAGE Publicaliom India Pvt Lld 32 . M - RlrlCk Market Greater Kailash - I New Delhi 110 048 Brili ~ h Librar ) ' Cataloguing in Puhlication \ ) at9 G ; bboo ~ . Michael i ' iew Pnxlucliotl of Knowk . ' < lgc : : Dynamics of Scit ' nce and Rc ~ cJrch in Contemporary Socielics l . Title . 10 ] . 483 ISFlN O - R039 - 7793 - X IS B N O - 1l039 - 7794 - 8 ~ phI . \ Library or Congres . ~ clltalog cllrd number \ / 4 - C ) 66859 Typesel by M Rule ~ Primed and bound in Great Britain by Biddlc : ~ Lld lI ' ww , biddlt ' I , ( ' { ) . IIk Preface Introduction Contents Some Attributes of Knowledge Production in Mode 2 The Coherence of Mode 2 Some Implications of Mode 2 1 Evolution of Knowledge Production Summary On the Phenomenology of the New Mode of Knowledge Production The Dynamics of Mode 2 Knowledge Production Reference . . 2 The Marketability and Commercialisation of Knowledge Summary Scale and Scope in Knowledge Production Dynamic Competition and Knowledge Production The Commercialisation of Resei1rch The New Economics of Production Configurations of Knowledge New Dilllensions of Quality Control Scale . Scope and Ihe New Mode of Knowledge Produclion References 3 Massification of Research and Education Summary Patterns of Massification in Higher Education ColJegiality . Managerialism and Ihe Fragmentation of Knowledge Tr < ll1sitioll to the Knowledge Industries The Changing Nature of Technology Transfer Reference VII I 3 & II 17 17 27 34 45 46 46 51 55 59 61 63 65 68 69 70 70 76 8 ] 84 86 89 • I i I l ( I I r ( . I . f r I Introduction This volume is devoted to exploring changes in the mode of knowledge production in contemporary society . lis scope is broad , concerned with the social sciences and the humanities as well as with science and technology , though fewer pages are given to the fonner than to the laller . A number of atlributes have been identified which suggest that the way in which knowledge is being produced is beginning to change . To the extent that these attributes occur acro . ~ s a wide range of scientific and scholarly activ ity . and persist through time they may be said to constitute trends in the way knowledge is produced . No judgement is made as lO the value of these trends - thllt is , whether they arc good and to be encouraged , or bad and resisted - but it does appear that they occur most frequently in those areas which currently define the frontier and among those who are regarded as leaders in their various fields . Insofar as the evidem . : e seems 10 say Ihat most of Ihe advances in science have been made by 5 per cent of the population of practising scientists . these trends , because they seem to involve the intellectual leaders . probably ought not to be ignored . It is the thesis of this book Ihat these trend ~ do amount , not singly but in their interaction and combination . 10 a transformation in the mode of knowledge production . The nature of this transfonnation is elaborated for science , in Chapter I ; for technology in Chapler 2 ; in Chapter 4 for tbe humanities ; and for the soci < ll sciences throughout the lext . The transfor mation is describe { ) in lenns of the emergence alongside lTaditional modes of knowle < lge production that we will call Mode 2 . By conlTa ~ t with lIa ditional knowledge , which we will call Mode 1 . generated within a disciplinary . primarily cognitive . context , Mode 2 knowledge is created in broader , transdisciplinary social and economic contexts . The aim of intro ducing the two modes is essentially heuristic in that tJley clarify the similarities and differences between the attributes of each and help us understand and explain trends that can be observed in all modern societies . The emergence of Mode 2 . we believe , is profound and calls into question the adequacy of familillI knowledge producing institutions . whether uni versities . government research establishments . or corporate laboratories . Before discussing the allributes of Mode 2 and how they differ from Mode ) , it is necessary to call attention to a difficulty that is inherent in any attempt to de . - ; cribe a new mode of knowledge production . To the extent that a particular way of producing knowledge is dominant . all 2 The Ne . " . . Production of Knowled ! ? C ' other claims will be judgcd with reference ! O it . In the extreme case , nothing re . cognisable as knowledge can be produced outside of the socially dominant fonn . This was the situation that confronted the early praclilioners of the ' new ' science when they confronted the Aristotelian Peripatetics at the beginning of the Scientific Revolution . It seems to be a recurrent historical pattern that intelleclUal innovations are first described as misguided by those whose ideas are dominant , then ignored and . finally . laken over by original adversaries as their own invention . Pan of the explanation of this phenomenon derives from the fact that it is necessary to begin by describing the charncteristi ( ; s of the new in terms of the old . A further difficulty may be expected when the new mode is growing out of the existing one as i ~ the case here . While it is always desirable to be clear about the terms being used , it is not pOSSIble at this early stage when so mu ( ; h is in flux to distinguish the two modes unequiv o ( ; ally . This is not a serious weakness , however . for if the new mode became a pennanent feature on the social landscape a new vocahulary would emerge ( 0 handle the situarion . And . of course , afterwards one may wonder what all the fuss was about . Hopefully , a more felicitous term will eventually be found to describe Mode 2 , but it is important to keep in mind that a new name has been chosen bccau ~ e conventional terms - such as applied science . technological rc ~ earch . or research and development . are inadequate . The problem of language is particularly difficult when trying to describe the nature of Mode 2 in areas where natural science is involved . In Western cultures . parlicularly . the term ~ science and knowledge are often u , ed interchangeably or comhincd to form scientific knowledge . In the early phases of { he scientific revolutions it was important to distin guish scientific from non - scientific forms of knowledge . A history of knowledge production since the seventeenth century could be written in terms of the efforts of the proponents of previously non - scientific fonns of knowledge production to gain recognition as scientific . In Western cul tures to be involved in nOIl - scientific knowledge production is CO place oneself hcyond the pale , so that there is . today , a distinct sense of social isolation associated with participation in a nOli - scientific activity . But , the term scientific in this comex ( already implies a distinct fonn of knowl edge production . Its ideal is Newlonian empirical and mathematical physics . In ! . his essay . the term Mode 1 refers to a fonn of knowledge produc tion - a complex of ideas . methods . vallles , nonns - that has grown up 10 control the diffusion of rhe New ( ollian mode ! to more and more fields of enquiry and ensure its compliance with what is considered sound scien tific practice . Mode ! is meant to summarise in a single phrase the cognitive and social norms which must be followed in the production . legitimation and diffusion of knowledge of this kind . For many . Mode I 1 t 1 f r t I ( I InJroduc ! ion 3 is idenlical with what is meant by science . Its cognitive and social norms determine what shall count as significant problems . who shall be allowed to pracrise science and what constitutes good science . Fomls of p { " actice which adhere to these rules are by definition scientific while those that violate them arc not . Tt is panly for these reasons that whereas in Mode I it is conventional to speak of science and scient . ists it has been necessary to use the more general terms knowledge and practitioners when describ ing Mode 2 . This is intended merely to highlight differences not to suggest that practitioners of Mode 2 are not behaving according to the norms of scientific method . It is our contention that there is sufficient empirical evi dence to indicate that a distinct set of cognitive and social practices is beginning to emerge and these practices are different from those that gov ern Mode l . The only question may be whcther they are sufficiently different 10 require a new label or whelher they can be regarded simply as developments that can be accommodated within existing praclice ~ . The final answer to this question depends partly on acquiring more data and panly on how Mode I adapts to changing conditions in the economic and political environment . Changes in praclice provide the empirical starling point of this enquiry . These changes appear in the natural and social sciences but also in ( he humanities . They can be described in tenns of a number of attributes which when taken together have sufficient coherence to suggest the emer gence of a new mode of knowledge produ ( ; lion . Analytically the set of attributes is used to allow the differences between Mode I and Mode 2 to be specified with some clarity . To summarise using tenns which will be explored more fully below : in Mode I problems are set and ! > olved in a context governed by the , largely academic . interests of a specific com munity . By contrast . Mode 2 knowledge is carried out in a context of application . Mode I i ~ disciplinary while Mode 2 is transdisciplinary . Mode I is characterised by homogeneity . Mode 2 by heterogeneity . Organisationally . Mode I is hierarchical and tends to preserve its form . while Mode 2 is more heterarchical and transient . Each employs a differ ent type of quality COIlUOI . In comparison with Mode J . Mode 2 is more socially accountable and reflexive . It includes a wider . more temporary and heterogeneous set of praclitioners , collaborafing on a problem defined in a specific and localised context . Some Attributes of Knowledge Production in Mode 2 Knowledge Produced in rhe Context of ApplicaIioll The relevant contrast here is between problem solving which is carried out following the codes of pracfice relevant 10 a panicular di5cipli . ne and prob lem solving which is organised around a particular application . In the fonner , the context is defined in relation to tht : cognitive and social norms that govern ba . ~ ic research or academic science . Lanerly , this has tended to imply knowledge production carried out in the absence of some practical goal . In Mode 2 . by contrdst . knowledge resulls from a broader range of considerations . Such knowledge is intended to be useful to someone whether in industry or governmenl , or society more generally and this imperalive is present from rhe beginning . Knowledge is always produced under an aspect of continuous negotiation and it will not be produced unless and until the interests of the various actors are included . Such is ! he context of application . Application , in this sense is not product develop ment caITied out for industry and the processes or markets ! hat operate to determine what knowledge is produced are much broader than is normally implied when one speaks abouI Laking ideas 10 the marketplace . None the less . knowledge production in Mode 2 is the outcome of a process in which supply and demand factors can be said to operate . but the sources of sup ply are increasingly diverse , as are the demands for diffcrentiated forms of specialist knowledge . Such processes or markeL < ; specify what we mean by the conrext of application . Because they include much more than com mercial considerations _ it might be said that in Mode 2 science ha ' i gone beyond the market ! Knowledge production becomes diffused throughout society . This is why we also speak of socially distributed knowledge . Research carried out in the context of application might be said to char acterise a numher of disciplines in the applied sciences and engineering - for example . chemical engineering . aeronautical engineering or , more recently . computer science . Historically these sciences became estab lished in universities but , strictly speaking , they cannot be called applied sciences , because it was precisely the lack of the relevant science that called them into being . They were genuinely new fonns of knowledge though not necessarily of knowledge production because , they lOO , soon became the siles of disciplinary - based knowledge prOduction in the style of Mode I . These applied disciplines share with Mode 2 some aspects of Ihe attribute of knowledge produced in the context of application . BUI , in Mode 2 the context is more complex . Tt is shaped by a more diverse set of intelJectual and social demands than wa ~ the case in many applied sci ences while it may give rise to genuine basic research . T ransdiscip / i liar ; I ) ' Mode 2 does more than assemble a diverse range of specialists 10 work in teams on problems in a complex applications oriellted environment . To qualify as a ~ pecific fonn of knowledge production it is essential that enquiry be guided by specifiable conscnsm as to appropriate cognitive and social practice . In Mode 2 , the consensus is conditioned hy the con text of appl icatioll and evolves with il . The determinants of a potent ial solution involve the integration of different skills in a framework of action t 1 but the consensus may be only temporary depending on how well it con forms to the requirements set by Ihe specific context of application . In Mode 2 the shape of the final solution will normally be beyond that of any single contributing discipline . It will be transdisciplinary . Transdisciplinarity has four distinct features , First , it develops a dis tinct but evolving framework to guide problem solving effom . This is generated and sustained in the context of application and not developed ftrst and then applied to Ihat conlext later by a different group of practi tioners . The solution does not arise solely , or even mainly , from the application of knowledge that already exists . Although elements of exisl ing knowledge must have entered inlO il . genuine creativity is involved and the theoretical consensus , once attained cannot easily be reduced to disciplinary parts . Second . because the solution comprises both empirical and theoretical componenL ~ it i ~ undeoiably a contribution to knuwledge . though not nec essarily disciplinary knowledge . Though it has emerged from a particular context of application , transdisciplinary knowledge develops its own dis tincltheoreticaI structures , re ~ earch methods and modes of practice . though they may 1I0t be located on the prevailing disciplinary map . The effon is cumulative . though the direction of accumulation may travel in a number of different directions after a major problem has been solved . Third , unlike Mode I where results are conununicated through institu tional < ; hannels , the results are communicated to those who have panicipated in the course of that panicipation and so , in a sense , the dif fusion of the results is initially accomplished in the process of their production . Subsequent diffusion occurs primcu - ily a . , the original practi tioners move to new problem contexts rather than through reponing results in professional journals or at conferences . Even though problem contexts are transient , and problem solvers highly mobile . communication networks tend to persist and rhe knowledge contained in them is available to enter into funher configurations . Founh , transdisciplinarity is dynamic . It is problem solving capability on the move . A panicular solution can become the cognitive site from which further advances can be made . but where this knowledge will be usCil next and how it will develop are as difficult 10 predict as are the pos sible applicaLions that mighl arise from discipline - based research . Mode 2 is marked e . . < ; pecially but not exclusively by the ever closer interaction of knowledge production with a succession of problem L ' Ontexts . As with dis coveries in Mode lone discovery may build upon another but in Mode 2 . the di ~ covcries lie outside the confines of any particular discipline and practitioners need not retum 10 it for validation . New knowledge pro duced in this way may not fit easily into anyone of the disciplines that eontribulcd to the solution . Nor may it be easily referred to particular disciplinary institutions or recorded as disciplinary contributions . In Mode 2 . communications in eve ( new configurations are cruciaJ . Communi cation links are maintained partly through formal and partly through infonnal channels . HeteroIlelleilY and Organisational Diversity Mode 2 knowledge production is heterogeneous in terms of the skills and experience people bring to it . The composition of a problem solving team changes over time as requirements evolve . This is not planned or coordi nated by any cenlTal body . As wilh Mode I . challenging problems emerge . if not randomly . then in a way which makes their anticipation very diffi cult . Accordingly . it is marked by : An increase in the numhcr of potential sites where knowledge can be created ; no longer only univcrsitie ~ and colleges . but non - university instirures . research centres . government agencies . industrial laborato ~ ries , think . ·tanks . consultancies . in their interaction . 2 The linking together of sites in a variety of ways - electronically . orgtmis3tionally . socially . informally - through functioning networh of communication . 3 The simultaneous differentiation . at these sites . of fields and areas of study into finer and finer specialities . The recombination and reCOJl figurdtion of these subfields fonn the bases for new fonns of useful knowledge . Over time , knowledge production moves increasingly away from traditional di ~ ciplinary activity into new societal contexts . In Mode 2 . flexibility and response time are the crucial factors and because of this the type ! ; of organisations used to tackle the ~ e problems may vary greatly . New forms of organi ~ ation have emerged to accom modate the changing and transitory n ( tlure of the problem , ~ Mode 2 addresses . CharacteristicaJly . in Mode 2 research groups are less finnly institutionalised : people come together in temporary work teams and net works which dissolve when a problem is solved or redefineJ . Members may then reassemble in different groups involving different people , often in different loci . awund different problems . The experience gathered in this process creates a competence which becomes highly valued and which is transferred to new contexts . Th . ough problems may be transient and groups short - lived . the organisation and communication pattern per sisrs as a matrix . from which funher groups and networks . dedicated to different problems . will be fonTled . Mode 2 knowledge is thus created in a great variety of orgamsations and institutions . including multinational finns . network firms , small hi - tech firms based on a particular technol ogy . government institutions . research universities . laboratories and institutes as well as nalional and international research programmcs , In such environments the patterns of funding exhibit 11 ~ imjJar diversity , being assembled from a variety of organisations with a diverse range of requirements and expectations which . in turn . enter into the context of application . Social Accoulltahility and Reflexivity Tn recent years , growing public concern about issues to do with the envi· ronment , health . communications . privacy and procreation , and so forth . have had the effect of stimulating the growth of knowledge production in Mode 2 . Growing awarene ~ s about the variety of ways in which advances in science and rechnology can affect the public interest has increased the number of groups that wish to influence the outcome of the research process . This is reflected in me varied composition ofthe research teams . Social scientists work alongside natural scientists . engineers , lawyers and businesspeoplc because the nature of the problems requires it . Social accountability permeates me whole knowledge production process . It is reflected not onJy in interpretation and diffusion of results but also in the definition of the problem and me selling of research priorities . An expand ing number of interest , and ! io - called concerned . groups are demanding represenration in the setting of the policy agenda as well as in tbe subse quent decision making process . In Mode 2 sensitivity to the impact of the research is built in from { he start . [ t fonns part of the context of applica tion . Contrary to what one might expect . working in the context of applica tion increases the sensitivity of scientists and technologists to the broader implications of what they are doing . Operating in Mode 2 makes all par ticipants more reflexive . This is because rhe issue on which research is based cannot be answered in scientific and technical terms alone . The research towards the resolution of these types of problem has to incorpo· rate options fo ( the implementation of the solutions and these are bound to touch the values and preferenl : es of di fferent individuals and groups that have been seen as tradilionally outside of the scientific and technOlogical system . TIley can now become active agents in the definition and solution of probJems as well as in the evaluation of perfomlance . This is expressed panly in tetms of the need for greater social accountability , but it also means that the individuals themselves cannot function effectively without reflecting - trying 10 operate from rhe standpoint of - all the actors involved . The deepening of understanding that this brings . in turn . has an effect on what is considered wonhwhile doing and . hence , on the structure of the research itself . Reflection of the values implied in human aspira tions and projects has been a traditional concern of the humanities . As ret1exi vity within the research process spreads . the humanitles too are experiencing an increase in demand for the sons of knowJedge they have to offer . Tradirionally , this has been the function of the humanities , but over the years the supply side - departments of philosophy , anthropology , history 8 The New Prodllction of Knowledge of such reflexivity has become disconnected from the demand side - that is from businesspeople , engi . neers , doctors , regulatory agencies and the larger pUblic who need practical or ethical guidance on a vast range of issues ( for ex . ample , pressures on the traditional humanities for culturally sensitive scenarios . and on legal studies for an empirically grounded ethics . the construction of ethnic histories , and the analysis of gender issues ) . Quality Control Criteria 10 assess the quality of the work and the teams that carry oul research in Mode 2 differ from those of more ITIIdirionai , disciplinary science . Quality in Mode 1 is determined essentially through the peer review judgements about the contributions made by individuals . Control is maintained by careful selection of those judged comperent to act as peers which is in part determined by their previous contributions to their discipline . So , the peer review process is one in which quality and control mutually re - enforce one another . It has both cognitive and social dimen sions , in that there is professional control over what problems and teChniques are deemed impOl1anl to work on as well as who is qualified ro pursue their solution . In disciplinary I \ cience , peer revjew operates to channel individuals to work 011 problems judged to be central to the advance of tbe discipline . These problems are defined largely in terms of criteria which reflect the intellectual interests and preoccupations of the discipline and its gatekeepers . In Mode 2 additional criteria are added through the context of applica tion which now incorpOT " dleS a diverse range of intellectual interests as well as other social . economic or pol itical one ~ . To the criterion of intel lectual interest and its interaction , further questions are posed , such as ' Will the solution . if found , be competitive in the market ? ' ' Will it be cost effcClivc ? ' , ' Will il be socially acceptable ? ' Quality is determined by a wider I \ ct of criteria which reflects the broadening social composition of the review system . This implies that ' good science ' is more difficult to determine . Since it is no longer limited strictly to the judgements of dis ciplinary peers . the fear is that control will be weaker and result in lower quality work . Although the quality control process in Mode 2 is more broadly based , it does not follow that because a wider range of expenise is brought to bear on a problem that it will necessarily be of lower qual ity . It is of a more composite , multidimensional kind . The Coherence of Mode 2 These allribuces . while not present in every instance or Mode 2 . do when they appear together have a coherence which gives recognisable cognitive and organisational stability to the mode of production . Just as in Moue I IlIlroduc I ion 9 { ; ognitive and social nO ( TTlS are adjusted 10 one another and produce dis ciplinary knowledge , so in Mode 2 new norms are emerging that are appropriate 10 transdiscipJinary knowledge . In all kinds of knowledge production , individual and collective creativity find themselves in a vary ing relationship of tension and balance . In Mode 1 individual creativity is emphasised as the driving force of development and quality control oper ating through disciplinary structures organised to ideotify and enhance it , while the collective side . including its control aspects , is hidden under the consensual jigure of the scientitic community . In Mode 2 creativity is mainly manifest as a group phenomenon . with the individual ' s contTibu tion seemin . gly subsumed as pan of the process and quality control being exercised a . . ~ a socially extcnde . d process which accommodates many inter ests in a given application process . lust as in Mode I knowledge was accWl ' lulated through the profcssionalisation of specialisation largely insti tutionalised in universities , so in Mode 2 knowledge is accumulated through the repeated configuration of human resources III Oexible . essen tiall y transient forms of organisation . The loop from the conrex t of a ppl iea t ion I h roug h t ransdisc ipl i lIari ty . hetero gene i ty , organ i sat ional diversity is closed by new adapti ve and contextual forms of quality con trol . The result is a more socially accoulltable and reOexive mode of science . Many example ~ of these phenomena could be drawn from Iht : biomedical and environmental sciences . Although Mode I and Mode 2 are distinct modes of production , they interact with one another . Specialists trained in the disciplinary sciences do enter Mode 2 knowledge production . While some may return to their original disciplinary base others will choose to follow a trail of complex solvi ng problems that are set by a sequence of application contexts . Conversely , some outputs of transdisciplinary knowledge production . par licularly new instruments may enter into and fertilise any number of disciplinary sciences . Because of such interactions , there may be a temp larion to reduce the new fonn to more familiar one5 , to collapse Mode 2 into Mode I . and thereby to minimise the significance of tbe changes outlined above . Thougb Mode 2 knowledge production interacts with Mode I it is different from it . Terms in common usage such a . . ~ pre - com petitive research , strategic I \ " : scarcn , mission - oriented research . applied research or industrial rescarch and development still carry many of the social preconceptions of the function of disciplinary science ; in panicular . the idea that disciplinary science provides the inexhaustible well for future applications . The deeply held bel ief that if the disciplines do not flourish then fundamental insig . ht ~ will be missed . or that foundational theoretical knowledge cannol be produced and sustained outside of disciplinary Sl1 " UC tures may account for the persistence of the linear model of innovation in policy debates . Yet . it is increasingly the case in computer , materials . biomedical and environmental sciences that theories are developed in the 10 The New ProduClirm oJ KlIowledRe context of application and that these continue to fenilise lines of intellec tual advance that lie outside disciplinary frameworks . In Mode 2 things are done differently and when enough thing ~ arc done differently une i ~ entitled 10 say that a new fonn has emerged . The reasons why this new mode of production has emerged at the pre sent time are not hard to find . In the first place , Mode I has been eminently wccessful . Scientists long ago discO ' o ' ered that the most effec tive way to achieve this was through a process of specialisalion in the cognitive realm , of professionalis3tion in the social realm and institution alisation of the political realm . This pattern has governed the diffusion of science from onc area of activity to another and it has tended to treat harshly those who tried to circumvent its comrols . The disciplinary struc ture of knowledge reflects the successful operation of this pallem of coenitive and social control . But over tht : years the number of graduates gr ; unded in the ethos of research together with some specialist skill have been too large for them all to be absorbed within the disciplinary structure . Some of them have gone inlo government laboratories . others into indus try . while others have established their own laboratories , think - tanks and consultancies . As a consequence . the number uf sites where competent research can be carried out has increased . These constitute the intellectual resources for . and social underpinnings of . Mode 2 . Seen from another perspective . one might also say that the creation of many new sites is an unintended result of the process of massification of education and research . The development of rapid transport ' ation . as well as information and communication technologies have created a capability which allows these sites to interact . Mode 2 is critically dependent upon the emerging COIll puter and telecommunication technologies and wjll favour those who can afford them . The inleractions among these sites of knowJedge have set the stage for an explosion in the number of interconnections and possible configurations of knowledge and skill . The outcome can be described as a socially distributed knowledge production system . In this system com munication increasingly takes place across existing institutional boundaries . The outcome is a web whose nodes are now strung out across the globe and whose connectiviry grows daily . Not surprisingly when tra ditional scientists begin to panicipate in ! . his they are perceived to weaken disciplinary loyally and institutional control . But contexts of application are often the sites of challenging intellectual problems and involvement in Mode 2 allows access to these and promises close collaboration with expens from a wide range of backgrounds . For many this can be a very stimulating work environment . Mode 2 shows no particular inclination to become institutionalised ill the conventional pat ! ern . The established structure of science can be expected tn be concerned about this and about how quality control will be assured in a socially distributed knowledge IlItroduction 11 production system but it is now a fact of life . Mode 2 is a response to the needs of both science and society . It is irreversible . The problem is how ( 0 understand and manage it . Some Implications of Mode 2 Onc aim of Ihis book is to draw attention to [ he existence of a number of attributes associated with the new kind of production of knowledge . and to show that these anributes possess sufficient coherence to be caIled a new mode of production . We argue that as Mode 1 has become the mode of production cha . racterislic of disciplinary research institutionalised largely in universities . so Mode 2 is characterised by transdisciplinarity and institutionalised in a more heterogeneous and flexible socially dis tributed system . Having outlined its main features we are now in a position 10 consider ! . he implications of this development . The massification of higher education and the appropriation , after the Second World War . by the universiries of a distinct research function have produced increasing numbers of people familiar with the methods of research . many of whom arc equipped with specialised knowledge and skiJls of various kinds . Massifjcation is now a strongly entrenched phe nomenon . il is international in scope and is unlikely ever to be reversed . On the supply side . the numbers of potential knowledge producers flow ing out of higher education tS incre < lsing and will continue to do so . However . rhis expansion of higher education has an implication that has so far been little examined . Not only are increasingly more people fanlil iar wi ! . h science and competent in its meth . ods , but also many of ! hc ~ e are engaged in activiries which have a research dimension . They have hrought their knowledge and skills to bear on a wide range of problems in contexts and situations often vrry rt : mote from the universities where they were originally trained . Scientific and technological knowledge production are now pursued not only in universities bur also in industry and government laborarories . in think - tanks . research instirulions and consultancies . etc . The expansion of higher education . internarionally . has meant that the numbers of potential sites where recognisably competent research is being perfonned have increased . The implication . not yet fully grasped , is ! . hat to the extent that universities continue to produce quality graduates . they underm . ine their monopoly as knowledge producers . Many graduates have subsequently become competent to pass judgement on university research and belong to organisations which might do the job just as well . Universities are coming to recognise that they are now only one type of player . albeit sti II a major one . in a vastly expanded k , nowledge production process . In pardllel with this vast expansion in supply has been the expansion of the demand for specialist knowledge of all kinds . The intera ( ; tion of 12 The New Producrir > n of Knowled ! ( e supply and demand for specialist knowledge has many characteristics of a market , but there are some crucial differences . The function of a market is to bring supply and demand into balance and establish the terms of exchange . Traditionally , markets are understood to establish the prices at wh . ich the supply and demand of particular commodities will be in equi librium . A market is a mechanism for allocating resources - labour and capital - to the production of commodities . It works most effectively in cases for which there is already a clearly specified demand and for which the factors of production are available . But markets also have a dynamic component . They can call forth new commodities the demand for which barely exists or , conversely , they can stimulate demand for commodities who ! > C features are as yet unclear . In dynamic markets supply and demand mutually articulate one another . Knowledge plays a crucial role in many dynamic markets . I ! is an important source of created comparative advantage for both its producers and user ~ of all kinds and not only in industry . In some of these markets the terms of trade are more complex than may be indicated by compara tive levels of costs and prices , and the Hledium of exchange more subtle than money . For example , in those markets which articulate the supply and demand for knowledge about the envirorunent , there are many dif ferent kinds of exchanges among the many participants but the medium is a more complex blend of individual and social values than could be cap tured by monetary values alone . Because comparative advantage cannot be reduced to economic criteria such markets may be described rather as social than commercial markets but they are market ~ none the less . Within such markets , the SOurces of demand are manifold . They come from soci ety in the form of public enquiries of various kinds , from governments in regard to a wide range of issues such as the adverse consequences of high risk technologies , and from a whole spectrum of institutions . interest groups and individuals who need to know more about particular matters . This complex set of actors form hybrid fora which provide stimuli for both the supply and demand of specialised knowledge . Both theoretical and practical knowledge are generated in these fora . The requirement of industry for knowledge . particularly for the results of scientific and technnlogical research . is widely appreciated . The expan sion of demand for a ! low of specialist knowledge among firms is perhaps less well understood . Specialist knowledge is often a key factor in deter mining a finn ' s comparati ve advantage . As the pressures of international competition increase firms have tried to meet the challenges presented through the introduction of new technologies . New technology is a nec essary bllt not sufficient condition for successful innovative perfonnance and increasingly . technological innovation depends upon using specialised knowledge to develop technologies in directions dictated by competitive pressures . Specialist knowledge is used partly because it provides a Introduction IJ constantly replenishable source of created comparative advantage and partly because it can be difficult to imitate , particularly by firms whose national culLure does not yet suppon a well articulated ~ cience and tech nology infrastructure . Since . in many sectors these finns represent the spearhead of international competition . specialised knowledge is at a pre mium but its acquisition is difficult and often too expemive for individual firms 10 replicale entirely io - house . To meet this exigency firms have become involved in a complex array of collaborative arrangements involving universities , governments and other firms . sometimes from withm £he same sector . In each case supply and demand lire mediated by a market mechanism . but , again , it is 110t . or need not be , a narrowly com mercial one . In these markets knowledge itself may be sought continuously , but more oftcn tnan not it is not readily available to be bought or sokl , off the shelf , I ike other commodities . It is increasingly generatl : d in the market nexus itself . In producing specialised knowledge markets operate ro CO { l figure human alld physical resources in a particular contexl of application . As a consequence of intensifying competition . the number of these con text . s is expanding but the contexts are also transient . Markets are dynamic . They set new problems more or less continuously and the sites of knowledge production and their associated nelworks of communication move on . Knowledge is produced by configuring human capital . However , unlike physical capital . human capital is potentially morc mal leable . Human resources can be con figured again and again to generate new forms of specialised knowledge . The ability 10 do thi ~ lies at the hean of many economies of scope which are currently regarded as crucial to survival in the marketplace . The core of our thesis is that the paralld expansion in the number of potentia ! knowledge producers on the supply side and the expansion of ( he requirement of specialist knowledge on the demand side are creating the condilions for the emergence of a new mode of knowledge production . The new mode has implications for all the institulions whether universi ties , government reseMch estahlishments , or industrial laboratories that have a slake in the production of knOWledge . The emergence of markets for specialised knowledge means that for each set of institl . 1lions the game is changing thnugh not necessarily in the same way or at ( he same speed . There is no imperative for aB institutions to adoplthe norm ~ and values of lhe new mode of knowledge production . Some firms and universities are already a long way along the path of change and this is manifested in the type ~ of staff they recruit and in the complex range of collabomtive agree mcnt ~ that they elller . However . the institutional goals to be achieved . the rules governing professional development and the social and technical detem1inants of competence will all need to be modi lied to the extent that me new mode of production becomes established . The new mode - Mode 2 is emerging along $ ide the ttaditional di ~ ci­ plinary structure of science and technology - Mode l . Indeed . it is an outgrowth of it . In order to make clear what is involved in the new mode of production . the attributes of Mode 2 have been conrrasted with those of Mode l . From this analysis it will be clear ( hat Mode 2 is not supplanting but rather is supplementing Mode I . Mode 2 constirutes a distinct mode with its own set of cognitive and social norms . Some of these contra . ~ t sharply with deeply held heliefs about how reliable tbeoretical and prac tical knowledge should be generated but they should not for that reason be regarded as either superior or inferior to those operating in Mode I . They are simply different . To some extent . however , the way in which Mode 2 becomes established in a particular context will be determined by the degree to which Mode I institutions wish to adapt t . hemselves to the new siOlafion . The emergence of a socially distributed knowledge production system means that this type of knowledge is both supplied by and distributed to individuals and groups across the social spectrum . Communications at institutional levels tend to be bypassed because of the need for rapid . tlexible responses to problems . Although one may expect variery in the extent that Mode 2 becomes dominant . it is a correlate to the socially dis tributed knowledge production system which is now emerging . To the extent that institutions become penneahlc . then Mode 2 can operate . The degree to which current knowledge producing institutions become more permeable will not alter the fundamental fact that knowledge production is becoming more widely distributed ; that is . it takes place in many more rypes of social settjngs ; that it is no longer concentrated in a relatively few institutions . and involves many different types of individuals and organi sations in a vast array of different relationships . Such behaviour will simply cause other linkages to become established which in the end may leave them scientifically and technically isolated from some intellectual developments . Socially distributed knowledge production is tending towards tIle form of a global web whose numbers of inter - connections are being continu ously expanded by the creation of new sites of production . As a consequence . in Mode 2 communications arc crucial . AI present this is maintained panly Ihrough formal collaborative agreements and strategic alliances and panly through informal networks backed up by rapid frans ponation and elecrronic communications . But this is only the tip of the iceberg . To funcrion the new mode needs to be supported by the latest that telecommunications and computer technologies have to offer . Mode 2 . then . is both a cause and a consumer of innovations which enhance the now and transformation of information . It is one of the imperatives of Mode 2 that exploitation of knowledge requires participation in its generation . In socially distributed knowledge production Ihe organisation of that participation becomes the crucial fac lor . The goals of participation are no longer simply to secure some natjonal advantage . commercial or otherwise . Indeed . the very nOlion of whal constitutes an economic benefit . and for whom . is at the root of many debates not only in environmental sdence but in biolechnology and the medical sciences as well . For example , the current push towards ' clean ' technologies is about more than just economic benefit . It is also about sl3bilising collapsing ecological systems . the health and well being of populations as well as commercial gain . This is to say that although Mooe 2 is exemplified in this book only in relation to knowledge produc tion . it has co - evolutionary effects in other areas . for example in economics , the prevailing division of labour . and the sense of community . The appearance of Mode 2 is creating new chal \ eogc ~ for governments . National institutions need to be de - centred - to be made more permeable and governments through their policies can promote change in this direc tion . These policies will be more effective if , concurrently , they become more proactive brokers in a knowledge production game which includes . in addition to the interests and ambitions of other nations . the policies of supntnational institutions . such as the European Union ( Ell ) . The effec tiveness of governments ' brokering abilities now underlies the competitiveness of their national innovation system ~ . This will be reflected both in their ability to panicipate in knowledge production that may be taking place anywhere in the world but also in their ingenuity in appropriating that knowledge with their innovation system . Ingenuity is required because sooner or later collaboration must turn into competition . This is in the nature of the wealth creating process as it is presently constituted . Simply to monitor the interface between compe tition and collaboration would be a difficult enough task . To manage it to national advantage is a challenge that govemments will neglect to their cost . As with scientists and technologists . governments . too . need to learn to operate in the context of application . and increasingly this involves supranational in ~ titutions . These have political . social and economic dimensions in the case of the EU in Western Europe , bUI more narrowly economic aims in the cases of the Nonh American Free Trade Agreement ( NAFT A ) and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GA TT ) . Key questions are whether supranalional institution . . . can a . , , ~ ist in this and how nations ought to position themselves relative to these larger systems . It is perhaps ironic that it should fall to governments to punch holes in the very institutions that in an earlier day wcre established to maintain its science and technology capability . But along with many other apparently fixed notions . the purpose and function of these institutions need to be re thought in the light of the emergence of Mode 2 . This will reveal the need for a different approach to policy . particularly for the integration of edu cation . science and technology and competition policy inlO a 16 The New Production of Knowledge comprehensive innovation policy that is sensirive to the facl rh at knowl edge production is socially distributed . In Europe . panicularly . national policies that will enhance the potential of national institutions need to be developed in concert with those of the EU . The developing Countries . too , need to take Slack . For many of Ihem . access will continue 10 be a problem not only hecause capability is lacking but also because govern ments there still model their scientific and technological institutions on assumptions that no longer apply to the kinds of scienlific and technolog ical activities on which their aspirations depend .