Self - polarization and directional motility of cytoplasm Alexander B . Verkhovsky , Tatyana M . Svitkina and Gary G . Borisy Background : Directional cell motility implies the presence of a steering mechanism and a functional asymmetry between the front and rear of the cell . How this functional asymmetry arises and is maintained during cell locomotion is , however , unclear . Lamellar fragments of fish epidermal keratocytes , which lack nuclei , microtubules and most organelles , present a simplified , perhaps minimal , system for analyzing this problem because they consist of little other than the motile machinery enclosed by a membrane and yet can move with remarkable speed and persistence . Results : We have produced two types of cellular fragments : discoid stationary fragments and polarized fragments undergoing locomotion . The organization and dynamics of the actin – myosin II system were isotropic in stationary fragments and anisotropic in the moving fragments . To investigate whether the creation of asymmetry could result in locomotion , a transient mechanical stimulus was applied to stationary fragments . The stimulus induced localized contraction and the formation of an actin – myosin II bundle at one edge of the fragment . Remarkably , stimulated fragments started to undergo locomotion and the locomotion and associated anisotropic organization of the actin – myosin II system were sustained after withdrawal of the stimulus . Conclusions : We propose a model in which lamellar cytoplasm is considered a dynamically bistable system capable of existing in a non - polarized or polarized state and interconvertible by mechanical stimulus . The model explains how the anisotropic organization of the lamellum is maintained in the process of locomotion . Polarized locomotion is sustained through a positive - feedback loop intrinsic to the actin – myosin II machinery : anisotropic organization of the machinery drives translocation , which then reinforces the asymmetry of the machinery , favoring further translocation . Background Directional cell locomotion is one of many biological processes that depend on the development and mainte - nance of functional asymmetry ( polarization ) between parts of a system that were initially equivalent . In the case of crawling motility , the asymmetry is developed between the two opposite edges of the cell , one of which becomes the cell’s front , exhibiting mostly protrusion , and the other becomes the rear , undergoing retraction . The devel - opment of front – rear polarity may be controlled by exter - nal directional signals , although animal cells also show limited directional motility in the absence of environmen - tal cues [ 1 ] , suggesting the existence of an internal polar - ization mechanism and memory . Microtubules are thought to be a part of this mechanism because they are necessary for the polarization and directional locomotion of fibroblasts [ 2 ] . Other cells , such as fish epidermal kera - tocytes , however , display remarkable morphological polar - ization and rapid , persistent locomotion [ 3 ] in the absence of both external stimuli and microtubules [ 4 ] , suggesting other sources of polarity . The mechanism of keratocyte locomotion , as in most animal cells , is dependent on the actin – myosin II system . Consequently , front – rear polarization is related to the dif - ferential behavior of this system . The lamellipodium at the front of the cell protrudes as a result of elongation of actin filaments , which incorporate new subunits at their forward - facing barbed ends while remaining stationary with respect to the substratum [ 5 – 7 ] . Withdrawal of the rear and translocation of the cell body is proposed to occur by contraction at the rear of the lamellipodium involving actin and myosin II [ 3 , 8 – 11 ] . Thus , the front of the cell protrudes but does not contract , while the rear contracts but exhibits no protrusion . Remarkably , front – rear polarity is not only manifested at the level of the intact cell , but seems to be a local feature of the motile cytoplasm . Lamellar fragments of kerato - cytes , which lack nuclei , microtubules and most organelles , retain the property of directional motility , sug - gesting the existence of a ‘molecular autopilot’ in the lamellum [ 4 ] . Although not all cytoplasts are capable of Address : Laboratory of Molecular Biology , University of Wisconsin , Madison , Wisconsin 53706 , USA . Correspondence : Alexander B . Verkhovsky E - mail : abverkho @ facstaff . wisc . edu Received : 10 August 1998 Revised : 30 October 1998 Accepted : 19 November 1998 Published : 17 December 1998 Current Biology 1999 , 9 : 11 – 20 http : / / biomednet . com / elecref / 0960982200900011 © Elsevier Science Ltd ISSN 0960 - 9822 Research Paper 11 autonomous locomotion [ 12 ] , keratocyte fragments are not unique and similar properties are also exhibited by lamel - lar fragments of polymorphonuclear leukocytes [ 13 ] . These observations suggest that the ability to polarize and maintain a direction of locomotion resides with the same system that is responsible for motility itself , namely the actin – myosin II machinery of the lamellum , although this machinery could be further controlled by microtubules and external signals . To date , it remains a mystery as to how the locomotory machinery chooses and maintains direction . Clearly , study of the reorganization of the actin – myosin II system during polarization is required and polarizing cytoplasmic frag - ments seem an ideal model for this study . Here , we describe a means to produce both polarized and non - polar - ized fragments of fish epidermal keratocytes and analyze the organization and dynamics of the actin – myosin II machinery in both types of fragments . We experimentally induce the polarization of non - polarized fragments , examine the reorganization of the locomotory machinery in the process of polarization and propose a model to explain how functional asymmetry arises and is maintained . Results and discussion Production of both locomotory and stationary fragments Locomoting keratocytes rarely generate cytoplasmic frag - ments spontaneously in culture . Rather , protrusion of the lamellum at the front and translocation of the cell body at the rear seem to be highly coordinated . If these processes are indeed driven by actin polymerization and myosin II - based contraction , respectively , we reasoned that attenuation of myosin II activity might imbalance the two processes and allow the lamellum to ‘run away’ from the cell body , thus producing lamellar fragments . In fact , we found that fragment formation could be induced in almost every cell by treatment with the protein kinase inhibitor staurosporine ( 100 nM ) , or with the myosin light chain kinase inhibitor KT5926 ( 20 m M ) . Both drugs were found to induce fragments of similar morphology ( see below ) , but staurosporine was selected for subsequent detailed study of the fragments . Upon inhibitor addition , keratocyte lamellipodia elongated and fragmented ( Figure 1b ) , and the resulting pieces traveled away from the cell body , being initially connected to it through long , thin stalks ( Figure 1c ) . These stalks frequently broke , resulting in a loss of connection ( Figure 1d ) . The majority of the resulting fragments were polarized in a crescent - shape and underwent locomotion at 2 – 10 m m per minute . Thus , although inhibitor treatment resulted in a loss of front – rear coordination at the level of the cell , this coordi - nation was still manifested at the smaller scale of the frag - ments . Approximately 15 – 30 % of the fragments at any given time ( 40 minutes to 3 hours after staurosporine addi - tion ) were non - polarized , had a symmetric discoid shape and were stationary , however ( Figure 1d ) . Non - polarized stationary fragments were not quiescent but exhibited pseudopodial activity along their entire circular edge . The two types of fragments were interconvertible ; conver - sions both from locomotion to stationary state and from stationary state to locomotion were observed ( Figure 1e ) , generally upon collisions between fragments . In the absence of collisions , both locomotory and stationary states generally persisted throughout the period of obser - vation ( up to 1 hour ) . On rare occasions , spontaneous tran - sitions also occurred . Within 10 minutes of removing staurosporine , the velocity of motile fragments increased approximately 1 . 7 - fold and about 50 % of stationary frag - ments switched to locomotion , reflecting an increased fre - quency of collisions as well as an increase in spontaneous polarization . Fragments that experienced no encounters frequently remained stationary for up to 40 minutes , however . These observations suggest that both locomo - tory and stationary states are relatively stable , that transi - tions between the states can occur spontaneously with low probability and that transitions can be precipitated by col - lisions between fragments . 12 Current Biology , Vol 9 No 1 Figure 1 Morphology and motility of keratocyte cytoplasmic fragments . ( a ) Representative images of intact cells . ( b ) Induction of fragment formation after the addition of staurosporine ( 100 nM ) . Low magnification views of developing lamellar fragments ( arrows ) are shown ; time is shown in min : sec . ( c ) Fragments with stalks connecting them to the cell body and ( d ) fragments disconnected from the cell body . A polarized locomoting fragment is present at the bottom of the image and a non - polarized stationary one is present at the top ( observed in the continuous presence of 100 nM staurosporine ) . ( e ) Fragment motility plots showing the stability and interconvertibility of polarized and non - polarized forms . One fragment ( open circles ) was polarized ( p ) and moved smoothly for 40 min ; another polarized fragment ( filled circles ) stopped and became non - polarized ( np ) but then repolarized after collision with a different locomoting fragment . The bar in ( a ) represents 10 m m in ( a , c , d ) and the bar in ( b ) represents 50 m m . 0 10 20 Time ( min ) Current Biology p Collision p np p 30 40 0 50 100 D i s t a nce ( µ m ) 150 200 ( a ) ( b ) 0 : 00 10 : 00 64 : 00 ( c ) ( d ) ( e ) Analysis of the actin – myosin II system of the fragments To examine the basis of polarized and non - polarized behaviors , we analyzed the cytoskeletal organization of both types of fragments by light and electron microscopy . Typical locomoting fragments are shown in Figure 2a – d . Each fragment exhibited a fine crisscross actin network which had a brush - like zone at the front and the density of which sharply decreased from the front edge of the frag - ment ( Figure 2a – c ) . At the concave rear edge of each frag - ment , filaments in the network were condensed and realigned to form distinct arc - shaped bundle ( s ) ( Figure 2a , d ) . Myosin II was distributed in distinct spots ( seen as clusters of bipolar minifilaments by electron microscopy ) mostly in the rear of each fragment and co - localized with actin in the arc - shaped bundle ( s ) . Thus , locomoting fragments exhibited an anisotropic distribution of actin and myosin II similar to that described previously to be present in the lamellum of intact cells [ 9 , 10 ] . The rear edge of the fragments shown in Figure 2a – d each coin - cided with an arc - shaped bundle similar to the one that delineated the lamellipodial – cell - body boundary in intact cells . Thus , the whole fragment was equivalent to the lamellar domain of the intact keratocyte . One can also draw an analogy between a keratocyte fragment and the periph - eral domain of a fibroblast . The rear edge of a fragment may be considered to be equivalent to the zone behind the leading edge of a locomoting fibroblast , where the highest concentration of cytoskeletal myosin II is detected [ 14 ] . The accumulation of actin at the front of a keratocyte frag - ment is consistent with protrusion , and the accumulation of myosin II at the back is consistent with retraction . In contrast , stationary fragments lacked arc - shaped bundles and , except for a rim of greater intensity of actin at the perimeter , exhibited an essentially isotropic distrib - ution of actin and myosin II ; a typical stationary fragment is shown in Figure 2e – g . A brush - like actin organization was detected by electron microscopy over most of the fragment’s perimeter , suggesting that actin assembly occurred uniformly along the cell’s edge . The zone of dense actin network at the perimeter of stationary frag - ments was significantly more narrow than that at the front of locomoting fragments , however . Similar to naturally occurring fragments [ 4 ] , the fragments induced by staurosporine treatment were mostly devoid of microtubules ( Figure 2h ) . The depolymerization of remaining microtubules with nocodazole ( 2 m M ) had no effect on either the formation or the motility of the frag - ments ( data not shown ) . Thus , as suggested earlier [ 4 ] , microtubules played no apparent role in the polarity and locomotion of these cells . The dynamics and anisotropy of the actin and myosin II components of the contractile machinery were analyzed kinetically by time - lapse digital fluorescence microscopy of living cells . Because the actin in the lamellum does not form distinct features that can be followed in time - lapse sequences , actin dynamics were studied using the speck - ling method of Watermann - Storer and Salmon [ 15 ] . Injec - tion of a low concentration of rhodamine - labeled actin into cells produced stochastic fluctuations in the intensity of label , resulting in brighter features ( speckles ) against a darker background . In locomoting fragments , actin speck - les ( small irregularly spaced spots of variable intensity ) first appeared at the leading edge and then remained stationary with respect to the substratum , while their intensity rapidly decreased with increasing distance from the leading edge ( Figure 3 ) . Consequently , most of the speckles disappeared in the middle portion of the lamellum within Research Paper Directional motility of cytoplasm Verkhovsky et al . 13 Figure 2 Cytoskeletal organization of ( a – d ) a keratocyte fragment undergoing locomotion and ( e – g ) a stationary keratocyte fragment . The distribution of myosin II ( red ) , as revealed by antibody staining , and that of actin ( cyan ) , as revealed by staining with tetramethylrhodamine – phalloidin , is shown ( a , e ) . ( b – d , f , g ) Electron microscopy of platinum replicas . ( b ) An overview and ( c , d ) regions of the moving fragment reveal a crisscross actin network at the leading edge ( c ) and a bundle at the trailing edge ( d ) . A cluster of myosin II minifilaments revealed after the extraction of actin from the cytoskeleton of a similar fragment is shown in the inset in ( d ) at an approximate position that it would occupy in the intact cytoskeleton . ( f ) An overview and ( g ) a region of a stationary fragment reveals a narrow actin brush ( indicated with brackets ) at the edge of the fragment . ( h ) Triple staining for actin ( cyan ) , myosin ( red ) and tubulin ( yellow ) in several fragments reveals the presence of few or no microtubules in the fragments . Bars represent 2 m m in ( a , b , h ) and 200 nm in ( c ) . 20 – 30 seconds after their formation at the leading edge , although some of them persisted longer , reaching the rear margin of the fragment and accumulating there . At the rear margin , speckles were aligned in rows parallel to the edge , suggesting the presence of actin bundles . In fragments injected with higher levels of labeled actin , the bundles at the rear were usually labeled in a continuous manner and clearly seen ( data not shown ) . Unlike features in the front , speckles within the bundles at the rear moved forward with the rear edge ( Figure 3 ) and also showed irregular lateral motility and changes in intensity . Thus , the motility of the actin speckles suggested that the actin cytoskeleton within the front portion of a locomoting fragment was stationary with respect to the substratum , which is similar to what was previously established for intact cells [ 5 ] . Actin bundles at the rear moved forward with the fragment in a manner similar to bundles in intact cells , which were observed pre - viously by following their myosin II component [ 10 ] . Actin dynamics , together with the data of fluorescence and electron microscopy of fixed cells , suggested that actin turnover in locomoting fragments was polarized . Because actin in the lamellum was stationary with respect to the substratum , the high density of the actin network at the leading edge and the decrease in density away from the edge indicated that the actin network arose at the leading edge and then underwent a gradual net disassembly in the middle portion of the lamellum . The formation of bright actin speckles at the edge and their subsequent disappear - ance away from the edge gave further support to this con - clusion . The requirements of steady state implied that actin disassembly also continued within the bundle at the rear edge . If this were not the case then the bundle would continuously increase in density as a result of the accumu - lation of residual actin filaments from the lamellum . Thus , in accordance with the bulk of previous evidence about actin turnover [ 5 – 7 , 16 ] , actin assembly in locomoting kera - tocyte fragments was localized to the leading edge , while the disassembly process occurred in a distributed manner throughout the rest of the cell . Polarized assembly resulted in an anisotropic distribution of actin along the axis of locomotion . In stationary keratocyte fragments , actin speckles arose ( albeit at a lower frequency than in locomoting fragments ) along the entire circular edge and then exhibited irregular motion with the overall tendency to drift slowly ( at about 1 m m per minute ) towards the center of the fragment ( data not shown ) . Speckles frequently changed in intensity and in mutual position , making it difficult to follow an individ - ual speckle for more then several tens of seconds . Centri - petal motion of the speckles , in combination with increased density of actin at the periphery , suggested that actin assembly was distributed uniformly along the entire edge of stationary fragments , although the assembly apparently proceeded at a lower rate compared to loco - moting fragments . Myosin dynamics in fragments were studied by injecting rhodamine - labeled myosin II and following naturally occur - ring distinct myosin features . The dynamics of myosin II in locomoting fragments was similar to that previously described for intact keratocytes . Myosin spots ( clusters of myosin minifilaments [ 10 , 17 ] ) arose primarily towards ( but not at ) the leading edge and grew in size and brightness over time while remaining stationary with respect to the substratum ( Figure 4a ) . At the extreme rear , myosin spots exhibited forward displacement , indicative of retraction , and condensed into an arc - shaped bundle which moved forward with the rear edge . The formation and growth of myosin spots and contraction were observed in fragments both in the presence and absence of staurosporine , indicat - ing that , although staurosporine might be expected to inhibit kinases that phosphorylate myosin light chain , myosin assembly and activity were not completely blocked . The motility of the fragments suggested either that the phosphorylation of myosin light chain was not fully inhib - ited by staurosporine or KT5926 , or that dephosphorylated myosin II was also capable of assembly and contraction . These kinetic data suggested that myosin II turnover in locomoting fragments was polarized . The growth of myosin II spots indicated a net assembly process that was distributed throughout most of the lamellum . Myosin spots did not disappear until they merged with the bundle at the rear , suggesting that their disassembly occurred within the bundle , which otherwise would have accumu - lated all of the cell’s myosin . In previously studied intact cells , it was not possible to distinguish whether myosin disassembly occurred within the bundle at the lamelli - podial – cell - body boundary , or within the cell body . 14 Current Biology , Vol 9 No 1 Figure 3 Dynamics of a microinjected actin analog in a locomoting keratocyte fragment . Overview of the fragment at time 0 and sequential images of a selected region at the times indicated in min : sec are shown . Dotted lines indicate positions fixed with respect to the substratum . At the leading edge , actin speckles ( indicated by arrows ) are stationary with respect to the substratum and gradually decrease in brightness . At the rear , actin speckles ( indicated by arrowheads ) move forward with the rear edge . Bar represents 2 m m . 0 : 00 0 : 00 0 : 09 0 : 18 0 : 27 0 : 36 Current Biology Because lamellar fragments contain no cell body , it was possible to more precisely localize the site of myosin disas - sembly in this system as occurring within the bundle at the rear . This domain is equivalent to the lamellipodial – cell - body transition zone in the intact cell . Thus , myosin II assembled throughout the locomoting fragments and dis - assembled in a polarized manner at the rear edge . Polarized myosin turnover allows us to explain how the anisotropic distribution of myosin II along the front – rear axis becomes established . The simplest interpretation is that myosin II becomes distributed anisotropically because the cell is translocating while myosin spots are stationary and growing throughout most of the cell ; the front contains less myosin because it represents the youngest region of the cell , containing myosin II spots that were only recently initiated ; in contrast , the oldest region of the cell , the rear , contains fully grown myosin spots and , consequently , more myosin polymer . This translocation - mediated accumulation of myosin at the rear could be expected to favor retraction at the rear and , therefore , continuous translocation in the same direction . In stationary fragments , the formation and growth , as well as the reduction and disappearance , of individual myosin spots was observed throughout a broad annulus ( Figure 4b ) . Myosin spots exhibited irregular movements with an overall tendency to drift slowly ( at about 1 m m per minute ) towards the center . Thus , stationary fragments exhibited almost isotropic patterns of both organization and turnover of the actin – myosin machinery , while locomoting fragments were characterized by asymmetry in both the organization and dynamics of the actin – myosin system . Possible mechanisms of asymmetric assembly – disassembly of actin and myosin II Our results indicate that the modes of polarized turnover of actin and myosin II in locomoting keratocyte fragments are distinct : whereas actin is characterized by a localized assembly at the front and distributed disassembly , myosin II exhibits distributed assembly and localized dis - assembly at the rear . The complementary turnover behav - ior of these two key components of the motile machinery suggests two pathways of control , although ultimately they must be interrelated . The mechanism of localized actin assembly at the leading edge has been the subject of numerous experimental and theoretical studies [ 5 – 7 , 16 ] . For the purposes of our discus - sion , we will mention only the simplest hypothesis , which is the treadmilling model [ 6 ] . In this model , actin filaments elongate at their barbed ends , which face the cell’s edge , and simultaneously disassemble at their pointed ends , which are distributed throughout the lamellum . Barbed Research Paper Directional motility of cytoplasm Verkhovsky et al . 15 Figure 4 Dynamics of a microinjected myosin II analog in ( a ) locomoting and ( b ) stationary fragments . Overviews of the fragments at time 0 and sequential images of selected regions at the times indicated in min : sec are shown . Dotted lines fixed with respect to the substratum are drawn to highlight the fact that myosin spots ( several representative spots are indicated ) intensify in brightness and remain stationary with respect to the substratum throughout most of the lamellum of the locomoting fragment ( a ) but move forward in the vicinity of its rear edge . In the stationary fragment ( b ) , myosin spots exhibit irregular changes in intensity while moving slowly to the center . ( c ) Quantification of the dynamics of individual spots in a locomoting fragment . The average brightness of a spot above the brightness of local background ( open circles ) and the position of a spot along the axis of locomotion in a substrate coordinate system ( filled circles ) are plotted ( in arbitrary units ) versus time . Corresponding images of the spot for each time point are shown above the plot . The brightness of the spot increases and reaches a plateau , but then increases again as the rear approaches and the spot starts to move forward . ( d ) The change in spot brightness in sequential images ( in arbitrary units ) is plotted versus spot brightness for six individual spots in the same fragment . Only the data points before the onset of retraction are used for this plot to reflect changes in brightness due to assembly – disassembly as opposed to contraction . The plot is fitted by a kinetic equation for the myosin polymer association – dissociation reaction , n m (cid:219) p , k + / k – = p / m n , in which D p is the change in polymer concentration ( change in spot brightness ) , D t , time interval , k + , association rate constant , m , concentration of soluble myosin molecules ( assumed to be nearly uniform across the fragment ) , n , order of the reaction , k – , dissociation rate constant , and p , local polymer concentration ( spot brightness ) . The dissociation rate constant estimated from the slope of the plot equals 0 . 05 – 0 . 02 sec – 1 ( mean – standard error ) . Bars represent 2 m m in ( a , b ) and 1 m m in ( c ) . 0 40Time ( sec ) Current Biology Spot brightness ( p ) 80 0 10 20 30 40 50 - 20 – 10 0 10 20 0 10 20 30 40 50 – 20 0 : 00 0 : 16 0 : 32 0 : 48 1 : 04 1 : 20 1 : 36 0 : 00 0 : 14 0 : 00 0 : 28 0 : 42 0 : 56 1 : 10 1 : 24 1 : 38 ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) 0 10 C h a n g e i n s p o t (cid:13) b r i g h t ne ss ( ∆ p ) ∆ p / ∆ t = k + m n – k – p k – ∆ t = 0 . 4 ∆ t = 8 sec k – = 0 . 05 sec – 1 ends could be targeted to the edge by some specific factors . But even in the absence of such factors , one could expect that the barbed ends would co - localize with the leading edge during steady - state locomotion , simply because the position of the edge itself is determined by fil - ament ends pushing the edge forward . Thus , locomotion may contribute to the establishment of the ‘correct’ orien - tation of actin filaments — with barbed ends forward — and thus provide conditions for further locomotion in the same direction . What could be the mechanism driving the polarized turnover of myosin II ? Because myosin assembly – dis - assembly is controlled by the phosphorylation and dephos - phorylation of a regulatory light chain [ 18 ] , one of the possibilities is that regulatory factors are somehow distrib - uted non - uniformly along the front – rear axis of the fragment [ 19 ] . Our study of myosin II dynamics , however , allows us to propose a novel hypothesis suggesting that myosin disas - sembly could be localized to the rear , even if regulatory factors are distributed uniformly throughout the cell . Analysis of the myosin II assembly – disassembly cycle was carried out by quantitative evaluation of spot intensity . Correlative light and electron microscopy of myosin II clusters within the cell [ 17 ] suggested that the fluores - cence intensity of an individual myosin spot is propor - tional to the number of myosin minifilaments contained within the spot . Consequently , we interpret the fluores - cence intensity per unit area of a spot above the immedi - ate background as a measure of the local concentration of myosin polymer . Analysis of individual spots over time showed that in the front and middle portions of the lamel - lum , where there was no contraction ( the spots were sta - tionary with respect to substratum ) , the fluorescence intensity ( polymer concentration ) within the spot initially increased and then reached a plateau level ( Figure 4c ) . At the contracting rear portion of the cell , where spots exhib - ited forward translocation and condensation into the arc - shaped bundle , the fluorescence intensity increased above the previously reached plateau ( Figure 4c ) . The changes of polymer concentration in the non - contracting region could be attributed solely to an assembly – disassembly reaction , whereas in the contracting region , myosin polymer could also be concentrated by contraction . Conse - quently , we interpret the plateau fluorescence intensity attained in the non - contracting region as reflecting the polymer concentration when in equilibrium with the soluble myosin pool , and the increase above this value at the rear to be due to contraction . We propose a mechanism of myosin II turnover based on the above observations and the presumption that the assembly of myosin II minifilaments , unlike the conden - sation - polymerization of long actin filaments [ 20 ] , is char - acterized by an apparent monomer – polymer equilibrium , but not by a monomer critical concentration . An apparent equilibrium character of myosin assembly – disassembly is consistent with simple assumptions about the underlying chemistry . One of the possibilities is that phosphorylation of the regulatory light chain is the rate - limiting step in myosin assembly , whereas dephosphorylation is rate - limit - ing in myosin disassembly . The apparent assembly – dis - assembly equilibrium would then reflect a steady state of phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of myosin II . Alternatively , the assembly of myosin II minifilaments can be characterized as a true equilibrium , because it can be considered to be a simple association reaction proceeding through sequential dimerization steps [ 21 ] . For an equilibrium – association reaction , an increase in the concentration of the product above the equilibrium value should , by the mass - action principle , result in net dissocia - tion . Thus , a contraction - mediated increase in myosin polymer concentration at the rear would be expected to result in a localized net disassembly at the rear . Note that this mechanism would drive only a partial disassembly of myosin II polymer ( until its concentration reaches the equilibrium value ) . This feature is consistent with the experimental observation that the rear of a locomoting fragment is characterized by a high concentration of myosin II polymer despite its net disassembly . The mass - action hypothesis offers a solution to the long - standing question of how contraction is coupled to the disassembly of actin – myosin structures [ 22 ] . For polymeric myosin dis - assembly driven by a mass - action mechanism , the site of disassembly would coincide with the site of contraction . The next question was whether disassembly by such a mechanism could be sufficiently fast to account for myosin II turnover within the cell . We estimated the rate constant of disassembly from the decrease in growth rate of myosin spots as they approached plateau levels of brightness prior to contraction ( Figure 4d ) . Measurements in five cells yielded values of 0 . 03 – 0 . 01 sec – 1 to 0 . 05 – 0 . 02 sec – 1 , suggesting that 2 – 7 % of polymeric myosin is disassembled in each cell every second , and thus , all polymeric myosin would be turned over in less than 1 minute . Given that myosin spots are stationary , a cell would have to recycle most of its myosin in the time it takes to travel one body length , which at 10 m m per minute takes about 1 minute . Thus , the estimated rate of disassembly is sufficient to explain the observed rate of myosin recycling . The soluble myosin II produced by net disassembly at the rear is predicted to diffuse forward and provide for net assembly in the nascent lamellipodium where the concen - tration of polymer is below the equilibrium value simply because this region of the cell is new . The backward flow ( with respect to the cell ) of myosin polymer due to loco - motion would be balanced by the forward flow of soluble 16 Current Biology , Vol 9 No 1 myosin due to diffusion . Thus , our results are consistent with the possibility that the chemical factors regulating myosin assembly and disassembly are distributed uni - formly throughout the cell and do not determine the front – rear axis . Rather , we emphasize the contribution of mechanical interactions [ 23 ] and suggest that spatial infor - mation is derived primarily from the mechanical proper - ties of the system . Contraction at the rear induces disassembly in this region and provides for assembly throughout the rest of the cell . The above analysis suggests that the polarized distribu - tion of the contractile machinery , the polarized turnover of actin and myosin II and locomotion itself are elements of a positive - feedback loop characteristic of the locomotory state . Polymerization of actin at the front drives the pro - trusion and results in anisotropic actin organization , favor - ing further protrusion . Contraction at the rear contributes to translocation of the cell and , at the same time , to the anisotropic turnover of myosin II ( disassembly at the rear and assembly throughout the cell ) . Polarized turnover and translocation result in accumulation of myosin II at the rear , favoring further contraction and , consequently , further translocation . The mechanism of polarization We then asked how the transition from a non - polarized stationary to a polarized locomotory state is achieved . The idea that the polarized state is propagated by means of a positive - feedback loop allows one to predict that , if an asymmetry is somehow introduced into a stationary cell , the asymmetric organization would be propagated and the cell would switch to locomotion . The transition from sta - tionary state to locomotion observed during collisions between fragments could then be explained by the unbal - ancing of a symmetrical state upon mechanical impact . To test this idea experimentally , we induced a transition from the stationary state to locomotion using a controlled mechanical stimulus . A stream of culture medium expelled from a micropipette positioned near the edge of a stationary fragment was used as the stimulus . The stream stimulus induced detachment and retraction of one edge of the fragment , resulting in a crescent - like shape characteristic of the locomotory state . The opposite edge usually exhibited extensive ruffling and started to protrude during or immediately after the stimula - tion . This observation may be related to observations made in the fibroblast system , in which detachment of the tail coincided with vigorous protrusion at the front [ 24 ] . This phenomenon could be due to the release of latent protru - sive capacity after membrane tension is relieved by the retraction of the detached edge . Remarkably , most frag - ments that were ‘pushed’ by the stream stimulus started to translocate in the direction of the applied force and contin - ued to translocate after withdrawal of the stimulus ( Figure 5 ) . Of 26 stimulated fragments , 15 translocated for the period of subsequent observation ( 4 – 28 minutes ) and traveled distances equal to 2 – 7 diameters of the initial discoid fragments , 3 translocated the length of one diame - ter and then developed split lamella and stopped , 3 were damaged during stimulation , 2 re - spread to their initial discoid shape and failed to undergo locomotion , and 3 failed to be deformed . Mechanical induction of locomotion was achieved both in the presence and absence of stau - rosporine and not only by a stream stimulus but also by pulling on residual stalks with a glass needle , although the latter method was not as consistent as the stream stimulus . These results indicate that , consistent with the idea of self - propagation of polarization , induction of asymmetry by a transient stimulus is sufficient to produce persistent polar - ization and initiate directional motility . To analyze how the asymmetric organization of the actin – myosin II machinery arises upon mechanical stimu - lation , the fragments in the process of polarization were analyzed by fluorescence cytochemistry , electron microscopy and monitoring of myosin II dynamics . Frag - ments that were mechanically stimulated , extracted and fixed before the onset of locomotion exhibited a slight accumulation of actin and myosin II along the arc - shaped Research Paper Directional motility of cytoplasm Verkhovsky et al . 17 Figure 5 Induction of fragment motility by mechanical stimulation . A stream stimulus ( see text ) was applied transiently ( the duration is indicated by the gray bar ) to a stationary non - polarized fragment . Images of the fragment before , during ( with blunt micropipette tip next to it ) and after stimulation are shown ( insets ) and the times at which the images were taken is indicated . The position of opposite edges of the non - polarized fragment which became leading and trailing edges after stimulation are plotted against time . Note that the stimulus displaced the prospective trailing edge more than the leading edge but that after stimulation , the two edges moved in concert . 0 500 1000 Time ( sec ) Current Biology 1500 Leading edge Push Trailing edge 0 20 40 D i s t a nce ( µ m ) 60 80 deformed edge and bright actin ruffles at the opposite edge , although they retained the uniform distribution of actin and myosin II spots in the rest of the fragment ( Figure 6a ) . Electron microscopy demonstrated that the arc - shaped accumulation was due to alignment of fila - ments into a bundle along the edge ( Figure 6b , c ) , whereas actin ruffles at the opposite edge contained a zone com - prising a dense crisscross network of actin filaments ( Figure 6b , d ) . This crisscross zone was typically wider than the one found in stationary fragments but narrower than the one found in locomoting keratocytes and fragments , suggesting an intermediate state . Most of the fragment interior contained a network of non - aligned filaments similar to that found in stationary fragments . After the stimulated fragments traveled at least one body length , the distribution of actin and myosin II became that of a typical locomoting fragment with most of the myosin II spots con - fined to the rear ( Figure 6e ) . Electron microscopy revealed the features typical of locomoting fragments : an extensive crisscross actin network at the leading edge and a gradual realignment of filaments into bundles along the trailing edge ( Figure 6f – h ) . Kinetic observations showed that , in the process of polarization , myosin was concentrated at the contracting edge while protrusions at the opposite edge were initially free of myosin II spots ( Figure 7 ) . Concomi - tant with the initiation of translocation , myosin spots started to grow in newly protruded regions of a fragment and , by the time the fragment travelled the length of its body , the isotropic myosin distribution was replaced by a graded distribution characteristic of the polarized state ( Figure 7 ) . Thus , mechanical stimulation initially resulted in detachment and contraction of one edge , producing an alignment of filaments into a concave bundle along this edge . This was sufficient to unbalance the fragment and start the locomotion , supporting the critical role of break - ing of symmetry in inducing motility . The detachment of the edge and alignment of filaments into a bundle could contribute to the induction of locomo - tion in several ways . First , the created bundle may func - tion as a seed for further contraction of the actin – myosin II network in its vicinity and stimulate further retraction of the edge . The initial alignment of actin filaments into a bundle may direct and facilitate further alignment , in con - trast to the isotropic state in which local contractile forces may act in various directions and consequently be non - productive . Second , formation of the bundle may locally inhibit actin protrusion because actin filaments would be aligned parallel to the edge [ 25 ] and their elongation 18 Current Biology , Vol 9 No 1 Figure 6 Cytoskeletal rearrangement in keratocyte fragments during polarization . ( a – d ) Stationary fragments that were mechanically stimulated but had not yet started to move . ( e – h ) Mechanically stimulated fragments that were initially stationary but which subsequently translocated a distance exceeding one body length . Fragments were analyzed by ( a , e ) double - fluorescence staining for actin ( cyan ) and myosin II ( red ) and ( b – d , f – h ) electron microscopy of platinum replicas . ( b , f ) Overviews and regions of ( c , g ) trailing and ( d , h ) leading edges demonstrate alignment of filaments into bundles along the trailing edge and development of a crisscross actin network at the leading edge . The initial positions of the stationary fragments are indicated by dashed lines . Note that the width of the crisscross actin network at the front , indicated by brackets in ( d , h ) , is greater in ( h ) than in ( d ) and that myosin II , which is found throughout the fragment in ( a ) , became concentrated at the rear after the fragment travelled one body length ( e ) . Bars represent 2 m m in ( a , b ) and 200 nm in ( c ) . Figure 7 Myosin dynamics in a fragment during polarization . An initially stationary fragment ( a ) became polarized and started to move after pulling at the stalk and breaking it ( b , c ) . The initial position of the fragment is indicated by a dashed line in ( b , c ) . The concentration of myosin II at the trailing edge and the formation of a myosin - free protrusion at the leading edge ( b ) are followed by the development of a graded myosin distribution ( c ) . Time is shown in min : sec . Bar represents 2 m m . Current Biology ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) 0 : 00 11 : 40 16 : 54 would not produce edge expansion . Even if any protrusive activity is retained , overall retraction of the edge may prevent new protrusions from forming substrate attach - ments and render them unstable . Consequently , protru - sion will be inhibited at one edge and will proceed unbalanced at the opposite edge , resulting in the onset of translocation . The polarization of the actin – myosin II machinery became fully developed after the onset of loco - motion , supporting the idea of a positive - feedback loop between polarized organization and locomotion . Conclusions Based on our study of keratocyte fragments , we propose the following model of polarization and directional loco - motion of cytoplasm , also shown in Figure 8 . In the non - polarized state of the actin – myosin II network , clusters of myosin II minifilaments ( spots ) are distributed uniformly and actin - filament alignment is absent . Protrusion takes place all over the cell periphery due to the polymerization of actin filaments at the edge , but it is balanced by mem - brane tension and by uniform contraction of the actin – myosin II network , resulting in a radial centripetal flow . The rate of actin polymerization at the edge is low because of downregulation by the opposing tension . This state may be relatively stable because local contractions would balance each other and small non - uniformities in the distributions of actin and myosin II would be trans - ported by the flow to the center of the cell , restoring the symmetric state . Suppression of overall contractility ( for example , by treatment with staurosporine or myosin light chain kinase inhibitor ) may increase the stability of a stationary state . Perturbation by local stimulation ( mechanical or other ) beyond a threshold level unbalances the non - polarized state by inducing detachments and local compression of the actin – myosin network in a concave bundle parallel to the edge . Consequently , contraction becomes favored at this edge , whereas protrusion is locally inhibited and proceeds unbalanced at the opposite edge , resulting in the onset of locomotion . The locomotory state is maintained through a positive - feedback loop — contraction at the rear relieves membrane tension and facilitates protrusion at the opposite edge with the result of net translocation . Contraction also promotes the anisotropic turnover of myosin II , which , in combination with translocation , leads to a relative accumu - lation of myosin II at the rear , favoring further contraction and continued translocation . One could also envisage that if a locomoting cytoplast encounters a mechanical obstacle and is prevented from translocating for a sufficiently long period of time , its myosin II distribution would become uniform , the cyto - plast would lose polarity , resume protrusion along the entire periphery and switch to a stationary state . Thus , the contractile machinery may exist as a dynamically bistable system , that is , both locomotory and stationary states are relatively stable but interconvertible , with transitions resulting from fluctuations in mechanical balance . Numer - ous intracellular and extracellular factors may provide additional levels of control over polarization and locomo - tion , but the salient point of this study is that a self - propa - gating mechanism of polarization intrinsic to the actin – myosin II network itself may be functional at a basal level in all crawling cells . Materials and methods Light and electron microscopic techniques The culturing of black tetra keratocytes , fluorescence - staining for actin , myosin II and tubulin , electron microscopy and imaging of microin - jected tetramethylrhodamine – myosin II have been described previously [ 10 , 17 ] . For the observation of actin dynamics using the speckling method [ 15 ] , rabbit muscle actin labeled with 5 - or 6 - carboxytetram - ethylrhodamine succinimidyl ester [ 26 , 27 ] was used for microinjection at a needle concentration of 0 . 2 mg / ml . Staurosporine was added to keratocyte cultures from a 50 m M solution in DMSO . To examine actin and myosin II dynamics , keratocytes that started developing elongated lamella ( at 10 – 30 min after staurosporine addition ) were injected with tetramethylrhodamine – myosin II into the cell bodies and the lamellar fragments that subsequently developed were analyzed . Research Paper Directional motility of cytoplasm Verkhovsky et al . 19 Figure 8 Model for the polarization and propagation of directional locomotion . A discoid , non - polarized cytoplast is pushed at one side , which results in the accumulation of actin filaments ( long blue lines ) and clusters of myosin filaments ( short red lines ) into a bundle along the deformed edge . Protrusion of the deformed edge is inhibited , but proceeds at the opposite edge ( protrusion ) , while the relative accumulation of myosin filaments and the alignment of actin filaments at the deformed edge favors further retraction , reinforcing functional asymmetry . Protrusion and retraction occur simultaneously at opposite edges in the steady state . The turnover of myosin II results in the formation of new myosin clusters in the newly protruded lamellum , permitting subsequent contraction in the rear ( see text for a more detailed model ) . Current Biology Steady state (cid:13) Retraction Protrusion Push Mechanical stimulation of the fragments To mechanically stimulate a stationary fragment , a stream of medium from the same dish in which the cells were cultured was applied at a pressure of 15 – 20 kPa through a micropipette tip ( 2 – 5 m m diameter ) , positioned next to the edge of the fragment . The stream velocity , as estimated by the rate of movement of small particles within the stream , was approximately 1 mm / sec . When the edge started to deform , the micropipette was moved to follow the deformation . After the extent of deformation reached a third to a half of the diameter of the fragment ( typically within 20 – 80 sec ) , the micropipette was withdrawn . Supplementary material Movie sequences for Figures 1 , 3 – 5 and 7 are published with this paper on the internet . Acknowledgements We thank John Peloquin for preparation of tetramethylrhodamine – myosin II , Steve Limbach for excellent maintenance of electron microscopy equipment and Alex Mogilner and Alexander Bershadsky for critical reading of the man - uscript and helpful suggestions . This work was supported by grants ACS CB - 95 and NIH GM 25062 ( to G . G . B . ) . References 1 . Bray D : Cell Movements . New York : Garland Publishing ; 1992 . 2 . Bershadsky AD , Vasiliev JM : Mechanisms of regulation of pseudopodial activity by the microtubule system . Symp Soc Exp Biol 1993 , 47 : 353 - 373 . 3 . Lee J , Ishihara A , Jacobson K : The fish epidermal keratocyte as a model system for the study of cell locomotion . Symp Soc Exp Biol 1993 , 47 : 73 - 89 . 4 . Euteneuer U , Schliwa M : Persistent , directional motility of cells and cytoplasmic fragments in the absence of microtubules . Nature 1984 , 310 : 58 - 61 . 5 . Theriot JA , Mitchison TJ : Actin microfilament dynamics in locomoting cells . Nature 1991 , 352 : 126 - 131 . 6 . Small JV , Herzog M , Anderson K : Actin filament organization in fish keratocyte lamellipodium . J Cell Biol 1995 , 129 : 1275 - 1286 . 7 . Mogilner A , Oster G : Cell motility driven by actin polymerization . Biophys J 1996 , 71 : 3030 - 3045 . 8 . Lee J , Ishihara A , Theriot JA , Jacobson K : Principles of locomotion for simple shaped cells . Nature 1993 , 362 : 167 - 171 . 9 . Anderson KI , Wang Y - L , Small JV : Coordination of protrusion and translocation of the keratocyte involves rolling of the cell body . J Cell Biol 1996 , 134 : 1209 - 1218 . 10 . Svitkina TM , Verkhovsky AB , McQuade KM , Borisy GG : Analysis of the actin – myosin II system in fish epidermal keratocytes : mechanism of cell body translocation . J Cell Biol 1997 , 139 : 397 - 415 . 11 . Galbraith CG , Sheetz MP : A micromachined device provides a new bend on fibroblast traction forces . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997 , 94 : 9114 - 9118 . 12 . Albrecht - Buehler G : Autonomous movement of cytoplasmic fragments . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1980 , 77 : 6639 - 6643 . 13 . Malawista SE , De Boisfleury Chevance A : The cytokinetoplast : purified , stable , and functional motile machinery from human blood polymorphonuclear leukocytes . J Cell Biol 1982 , 95 : 960 - 973 . 14 . Kolega J , Taylor DL : Gradients in the concentration and assembly of myosin II in living fibroblasts during locomotion and fiber transport . Mol Biol Cell 1993 , 4 : 819 - 836 . 15 . Waterman - Storer CM , Salmon ED : How microtubules get fluorescent speckles . Biophys J 1998 , 75 : 2059 - 2069 . 16 . Carlier MF , Pantaloni D : Control of actin dynamics in cell motility . J Mol Biol 1997 , 269 : 459 - 467 . 17 . Verkhovsky AB , Svitkina TM , Borisy GG : Myosin II filament assemblies in the active lamella of fibroblasts : their morphogenesis and role in the formation of actin filament bundles . J Cell Biol 1995 , 131 : 989 - 1002 . 18 . Trybus KM : Assembly of cytoplasmic and smooth muscle myosins . Curr Opin Cell Biol 1991 , 3 : 105 - 111 . 19 . Post PL , DeBiasio RL , Taylor DL : A fluorescent protein biosensor of myosin II regulatory light chain phosphorylation reports a gradient of phosphorylated myosin II in migrating cells . Mol Biol Cell 1995 , 6 : 1755 - 1768 . 20 . Oosawa F , Asakura S : Thermodynamics of the Polymerization of Protein . London : Academic Press ; 1975 . 21 . Sinard JH , Stafford WF , Pollard TD : The mechanism of assembly of Acanthamoeba myosin II minifilaments : minifilaments assemble by three successive dimerization steps . J Cell Biol 1989 , 109 : 1537 - 1547 . 22 . DeBiasio RL , LaRocca GM , Post PL , Taylor DL : Myosin II transport , organization , and phosphorylation : evidence for cortical flow / solation - contraction coupling during cytokinesis and cell locomotion . Mol Biol Cell 1996 , 7 : 1259 - 1282 . 23 . Ingber DE : Cellular tensegrity : defining new roles of biological design that govern the cytoskeleton . J Cell Sci 1993 , 104 : 613 - 627 . 24 . Brown AF , Dunn GA : Microinterferometry of the movement of dry matter in fibroblasts . J Cell Sci 1989 , 92 : 379 - 389 . 25 . Kolega J : Effect of mechanical tension on protrusive activity and microfilament and intermediate filament organization in an epidermal epithelium moving in culture . J Cell Biol 1986 , 102 : 1400 - 1411 . 26 . Verkhovsky AB , Svitkina TM , Borisy GG : Polarity sorting of actin filaments in cytochalasin - treated fibroblasts . J Cell Sci 1997 , 110 : 1693 - 1704 . 27 . Isambert H , Venier P , Maggs AC , Fattoum A , Kassab R , Pantaloni D , Carlier M - F : Flexibility of actin filaments derived from thermal fluctuations . Effect of bound nucleotide , phalloidin , and muscle regulatory proteins . J Biol Chem 1995 , 270 : 11437 - 11444 . 20 Current Biology , Vol 9 No 1 Because Current Biology operates a ‘Continuous Publication System’ for Research Papers , this paper has been published on the internet before being printed . The paper can be accessed from http : / / biomednet . com / cbiology / cub — for further information , see the explanation on the contents page . Self - polarization and directional motility of cytoplasm Alexander B . Verkhovsky , Tatyana M . Svitkina and Gary G . Borisy Current Biology 17 December 1998 , 9 : 11 – 20 S1 Figure S1 ( corresponding to Figure 1b in main article ) Low magnification view of a field containing both freely locomoting keratocytes and the edge of an epithelioid keratocyte colony . After the addition of staurosporine ( indicated ) , keratocytes develop numerous lamellar fragments , most of which are still connected to the main cell bodies by long stalks . Figure S2 ( corresponding to Figure 3 in main article ) The dynamics of a microinjected fluorescent actin analog in a locomoting keratocyte fragment . At the leading edge , actin speckles are stationary with respect to the substratum and gradually decrease in brightness . At the rear , actin speckles move forward with the rear edge . Figure S3 ( corresponding to Figure 4a in main article ) The dynamics of a microinjected myosin II analog in a locomoting keratocyte fragment . Myosin spots appear and increase in intensity in the lamellum , while remaining stationary with respect to the substratum . In the vicinity of the rear edge , myosin spots move forward and condense into a bundle , suggesting a contraction of the actin – myosin II network . As the fragment travels several lengths of its body , myosin spots continuously appear in the lamellum , indicating a rapid turnover of myosin II polymer . Figure S4 ( corresponding to Figure 4b in main article ) The dynamics of a microinjected myosin II analog in a stationary keratocyte fragment . Myosin spots move mostly centripetally but also exhibit some irregular motion and random changes in intensity . Figure S5 ( corresponding to Figure 5 in main article ) A stationary keratocyte fragment was stimulated by a stream of culture medium expelled from a blunt micropipette . As a result of the stimulus , the fragment polarizes and starts to move . Motility was persistent after the withdrawal of stimulus . Figure S6 ( corresponding to Figure 7 in main article ) The myosin II dynamics in an initially stationary keratocyte fragment which polarized after its stalk was cut with a glass microneedle ( just before the start of the sequence ) . Contraction of one edge of the fragment is accompanied by an accumulation of myosin II , whereas the protrusion at the opposite edge is initially free of myosin II spots . Supplementary material