1 Forty Years of Clathrin - coated Vesicles Margaret S . Robinson University of Cambridge , Cambridge Institute for Medical Research , Cambridge , UK e - mail msr12 @ cam . ac . uk Running title : Forty years of clathrin - coated vesicles Key words : adaptin , adaptor , endocytosis , trans - Golgi network , dynamin , sorting signals . 2 Abstract The purification of coated vesicles and the discovery of clathrin by Barbara Pearse in 1975 was a landmark in cell biology . Over the past 40 years , work from many labs has uncovered the molecular details of clathrin and its associated proteins , including how they assemble into a coated vesicle and how they select cargo . Unexpected connections have been found with signalling , development , neuronal transmission , infection , immunity , and genetic disorders . But there are still a number of unanswered questions , including how clathrin - mediated trafficking is regulated and how the machinery evolved . 3 Introduction In 1975 , a young postdoc at the MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology published a paper in the Journal of Molecular Biology , entitled “Coated vesicles from pig brain : purification and biochemical characterization” ( 1 ) . For the postdoc , Barbara Pearse , this was the culmination of two years’ work , which had started off as an attempt to purify tubulin ( 2 ) . The classical method for purifying tubulin is to allow brain extracts to go through two cycles of microtubule assembly followed by disassembly , but this only works on very fresh tissue . What Barbara didn’t realise was that the brains she got from the local slaughterhouse were already a day old . So when she looked at her prep in the electron microscope , she didn’t see any microtubules , but she did see intriguing structures that looked to her like sliced tomatoes ( Figure 1a ) . When she showed the images to colleagues , they recognised the structures as the “vesicles in a basket” that had been described by Toku Kanaseki and Ken Kadota some five years earlier ( 3 ) . So in the end , Barbara decided to purify coated vesicles instead of tubulin , captivated not only by their tomato - like appearance but also by several reports in the literature about their possible role in endocytosis , although that word was not yet in common use . When she analysed her purest fraction by SDS PAGE , she found that it was dominated by a single protein with a molecular weight of ~ 180K ( Figure 1b ) . In the final paragraph of her paper , reproduced below , she made a number of points that would set the scene for thousands of papers in the years to come . “Coated vesicles of brain are believed to be derived by micropinocytosis of synaptic membrane ( Heuser & Reese , 1973 ) . Whether the same protein is associated with the coated vesicles described in other tissues is unknown . In any event , the 180 , 000 molecular weight protein is likely to be an important example of a class of proteins involved in membrane movement , and I propose that it be called ‘clathrin’ . ‘Clathrin’ itself may be able 4 to pinch off a vesicle through interactions between its subunits and the membrane phospholipids . The coat may also be able to interact with other molecules , to ensure formation of vesicles at particular sites on the membrane and for their transport to specific cellular locations . Traces of other proteins are visible on the SDS - gel patterns of the final preparation . These may represent slight impurities , or minor proteins associated with the vesicles and involved in such specific functions . ” ( 1 ) The phrases “coated pit” and “coated vesicle” had actually been coined more than ten years earlier , in another classic paper by Tom Roth and Keith Porter , to describe the structures they saw in electron micrographs of mosquito oocytes taking up yolk proteins ( 4 ) . Like Pearse , Roth and Porter were extraordinarily prescient when they came to speculate about the significance of their findings . They proposed that the coat might have a mechanical function , and / or that it might have something to do with “the specificity of materials adsorbed” - i . e . , a selective role in the uptake of yolk . Another key study ( referred to in the final paragraph of the Pearse paper ) was the work by John Heuser and Tom Reese implicating coated vesicles in the recycling of synaptic vesicle membrane ( 5 ) , although the exact contribution of coated vesicles to this pathway remains hotly debated even up until the present day ( 6 - 9 ) . While Barbara Pearse was working out how to purify coated vesicles , Mike Brown and Joe Goldstein were investigating the binding and uptake of low density lipoproteins ( LDL ) by fibroblasts from normal individuals and from patients with familial hypercholesterolemia ( FH ) . This is a devastating disorder , where people who are homozygous for the mutant gene can have heart attacks as early as age 5 . Brown and Goldstein found that normal cells incubated with radioiodinated LDL bound the LDL with high affinity , took it up very rapidly , and eventually degraded it in lysosomes , indicating that the cells had receptors for 5 LDL , which were efficiently endocytosed . However , this didn’t happen in cells from homozygous FH patients , suggesting that the causative mutation was in the LDL receptor gene ( 10 ) . In most cases , the FH cells were unable to bind any LDL at all , but there was one patient , J . D . , whose cells could bind LDL but not internalise it ( 11 ) . Together with Dick Anderson , Brown and Goldstein investigated how the LDL got inside the cell , by incubating fibroblasts with LDL coupled to ferritin , an electron - dense tag . Their electron micrographs showed that in normal cells , membrane - bound LDL was highly concentrated in coated pits and vesicles , while in J . D . ’s cells , the membrane - bound LDL was excluded from coated pits and vesicles ( 12 ) . Thus , by the end of the 1970s , both of the functions of the coat proposed by Roth and Porter had been shown to be correct . Pearse’s discovery of clathrin , followed by her high - resolution analyses of purified clathrin - coated vesicles in collaboration with Tony Crowther and John Finch , demonstrated that the coat is a cage - like structure consisting of 12 pentagons and a variable number of hexagons , “the most economical covering of a sphere or closed surface” ( 13 ) . Together with the earlier work of Kanaseki and Kadota , these findings immediately suggested how the coat could play a mechanical role , by forming a cage while attached to a membrane and thereby converting a flat sheet into a vesicle . At the same time , the discovery by Brown , Goldstein , and Anderson that coated pits and vesicles are sites of receptor - mediated endocytosis ( their terminology ) , where some membrane proteins are concentrated and others excluded , confirmed the idea that the coat plays a selective role as well . The clathrin field was now well on its way . Clathrin structure Probably the most remarkable thing about clathrin is the way it can assemble into a lattice of hexagons and pentagons . The aesthetic appeal of clathrin has enticed countless 6 researchers into the field ( including myself ) , and in fact , people have been fascinated by this type of structure for over 2 , 000 years , beginning with Archimedes and including Leonardo da Vinci ( Figure 2 ) . But clathrin is not unique in its ability to assemble into structures made out of hexagons and pentagons ; similar types of structures can be found elsewhere in nature , ranging from buckminsterfullerene , which is > 100 times smaller than a clathrin coat , to pollen grains and the skeletons of certain protozoans , which are ~ 1 , 000 times larger ( Figure 2 ) . However , when Roth and Porter first observed the vesicle coat , they weren’t able to discern its geometry , partly because of how they fixed the cells ( with osmium tetroxide only ) , and partly because it is difficult to appreciate that the coat is actually a lattice when looking at a two - dimensional thin section . Thus , Roth and Porter described the coat as a layer of bristles , and when they proposed that it might have a mechanical role in “giving . . . the spherical form to the base of the pit and the pit - vesicles” , they suggested that this could be due to “a natural repulsion of the outer ends of the bristles” ( 4 ) . It was Kanaseki and Kadota who first realised that the coat is in fact a “basketwork” composed of hexagons and pentagons . This was because they looked at isolated coated vesicles , so the structure of the coat was not obscured by other proteins in the cytoplasm , and also because they used both negative staining ( where the stain fills the crevices of the coat , as in Figure 1a ) and thin sections of specimens that had been fixed with glutaraldehyde as well as osmium . Kanaseki and Kadota proposed that the coat starts off as a network of hexagons , some of which are then transformed into pentagons , leading to “the formation of a beautiful sphere containing the vesicle” , which they illustrated using a soccer ball as a model ( 3 ) . This “beautiful sphere” and the hexagonal networks that precede it are probably best appreciated in the spectacular images of John Heuser , first unveiled in 1980 ( 14 ) , in which 7 he used his method of “unroofing” cells in order to look down on the inside of the plasma membrane ( Figure 3a ) . Because Pearse’s 1975 paper had shown clathrin to be by far the most abundant component of the coat , it was generally assumed that the hexagons and pentagons must be made out of clathrin . This was formally demonstrated in 1979 by Jim Keen , who extracted the vesicle coats with high concentrations of Tris buffer and then fractionated the extracts by gel filtration . Clathrin eluted first from the column , behaving as a very high molecular weight oligomer , followed by a second fraction that contained a 100 - 110 kD protein or proteins ( 15 ) . Keen found that it was possible to assemble baskets using the clathrin - containing fraction alone , but that assembly occurred much more readily when he added the second fraction , which he subsequently dubbed “assembly polypeptides” or “APs” ( 16 ) . Negative staining of the first fraction , containing non - assembled clathrin , showed “linear protein aggregates” with no well - defined structure ( 15 ) . However , rotary shadowing studies carried out two years later by Ernst Ungewickell and Dan Branton revealed that native non - assembled clathrin exists as a three - legged structure called a triskelion ( Figure 3b ) . Ungewickell and Branton proposed that each triskelion is made out of three copies of clathrin together with three copies of a much smaller protein ( 17 ) . The smaller protein is now known as clathrin light chain , while the orginal 180 kD protein discovered by Pearse is now known as clathrin heavy chain ( Figure 3c ) . During this time , repeated attempts were made to solve the structure of clathrin by X - ray crystallography . The problem was not getting enough protein ( 12 bovine brains routinely yield > 100 mg of purified clathrin ) , but getting the protein to crystallise . Finally Tommy Kirchhausen’s lab tried using recombinant clathrin heavy chain , which they had cloned and sequenced in 1987 ( 18 ) , and succeeded in crystallising the first 494 residues , which 8 comprise the foot and part of the ankle of a single triskelion leg ( 19 ) . Unexpectedly , because this was not predicted from the sequence , residues 1 - 330 were found to form a seven - bladed β - propeller , followed by ten short α helices stacked against each other to form a zigzag ( Figure 3d ) . The following year , Joel Ybe and Frances Brodsky solved the structure of residues 1 , 210 - 1 , 516 , comprising most of the thigh , and discovered that it consisted entirely of stacked hairpins of α - helices ( Figure 3e ) . By looking at the sequence , they were able to predict that the entire leg adopts a stacked hairpin structure , with a ~ 145 - residue motif consisting of five hairpins repeated seven times . This clathrin heavy chain repeat ( CHR ) motif can be found in several other proteins as well , including machinery for trafficking to lysosomes ( 20 ) . In addition to X - ray crystallography , structural biologists have investigated clathrin - coated vesicles ( CCVs ) and reassembled clathrin coats using cryo - electron microscopy , starting with a study in 1986 by Guy Vigers , Tony Crowther , and Barbara Pearse ( 21 ) . Over the years , Corinne Smith , Tommy Kirchhausen , and Steve Harrison have managed to improve the resolution by an order of magnitude ( 22 - 26 ) , so it is now possible to obtain cryo - EM structures at ~ 8 Å resolution , where the individual triskelions can be seen to intertwine ( Figure 3f ) . The crystal structures and homology models can be fitted into the electron density maps , and by comparing structures that differ by the presence or absence of a binding partner , such as clathrin light chain , the location of the interaction and the shape of the partner can be determined ( Figure 3g ) . Thus , at long last we have a detailed molecular understanding of how clathrin is able to assemble into a vesicle coat . One of the suggestions Pearse made in her 1975 paper was that clathrin might be able to interact with membrane phospholipids and pinch off vesicles ( 1 ) . We now know that clathrin cannot interact directly with phospholipids , and that the pinching - off process is mediated by 9 a different protein , dynamin . Nevertheless , Philip Dannhauser and Ernst Ungewickell showed in 2012 that if purified clathrin is anchored to an artificial liposome by an intrinsically disordered polypeptide containing clathrin binding sites , it is capable of generating spherical buds that progress all the way to the narrow neck stage ( Figure 3h ) . Adding dynamin enables the necks to be severed and free CCVs to be generated ( 27 ) . This experiment suggests that clathrin assembly alone may be sufficient to drive membrane curvature , at least in vitro . Clathrin function When Anderson , Goldstein , and Brown published their 1977 paper demonstrating that LDL receptors in J . D . ’s cells are unable to enter clathrin - coated pits , they proposed that the cytoplasmic domain of the wild - type LDL receptor contains an amino acid sequence , the “internalisation site” , which binds to a component of the coat , possibly clathrin ( Figure 4a ) ( 12 ) . This generated a lot of excitement at the time , because the “sorting problem” - how proteins get to the right part of the cell - was just starting to be recognised as one of the major paradoxes in cell biology ( 28 ) . The idea that the cell could pick and choose what it put into a vesicle , instead of just packaging a random assortment of proteins , was very attractive , because it got around the problem of membrane compartments getting all mixed up by indiscriminate trafficking from one to another . Moreover , structures near the Golgi apparatus that looked very similar to the structures that bud from the plasma membrane had been described in 1967 by Holtzman , Novikoff , and Villaverde ( 29 ) , and by Friend and Farquhar ( 30 ) , suggesting that CCVs might sort cargo not only at the plasma membrane , but also at other locations ( Figure 4b ) . This idea gained strong support in 1980 , when Jim Rothman and Dick Fine published two papers reporting that CCVs transport newly synthesised membrane proteins from the ER to 10 the Golgi , and from the Golgi to the plasma membrane ( 28 , 31 ) . Their strategy was to infect cells with vesicular stomatitis virus ( VSV ) , and then to pulse - label the cells and isolate CCVs after chasing for various lengths of time . The CCV fractions were found to be enriched in radiolabelled VSV G protein , the viral membrane glycoprotein . Depending on how long they chased the cells , the VSV - G was either in its high - mannose form , indicating that it had recently left the ER , or in its trimmed form , indicating that it had moved at least partway through the Golgi apparatus . Largely as a consequence of this work , the first edition of Molecular Biology of the Cell ( Alberts et al . , 1983 ) described coated vesicles as “miniature sorting machines” , and proposed that they “could be the principal means by which cells execute their sorting decisions” ( 32 ) . It was also in 1980 that Peter Novick and Randy Schekman first published their identification of 23 different yeast genes encoding components of the secretory pathway ( 33 ) . It would take over a decade for all of these genes to be cloned by complementation , but gratifyingly , some of them turned out to be homologues of machinery identified in mammalian cells by the Rothman lab ( 34 ) . As an alternative approach ( and perhaps a shortcut ) , Greg Payne and Randy Schekman decided to test the involvement of a candidate protein , clathrin heavy chain . They assumed - as did the rest of the world - that cells would be dead without clathrin , so they disrupted only one of the two alleles in a diploid strain . Astonishingly , when the cells were allowed to sporulate , all four of the haploid spores were viable ( 35 ) . The two clathrin - null spores gave rise to much smaller colonies than the two wild - type spores , and in a similar study carried out independently by Sandy Lemmon and Beth Jones , the clathrin - null cells rarely grew at all ( 36 ) . Nevertheless , both labs found that under certain conditions , yeast cells could survive without clathrin . Not surprisingly , there were effects on endocytosis ( 37 ) . There was also mislocalisation of proteins normally resident in the late Golgi ( 38 ) . In addition , a temperature - sensitive clathrin heavy chain 11 mutant generated a few years later had a block in receptor - mediated trafficking of hydrolases to the vacuole , the yeast equivalent of the mammalian lysosome , although with time the cells were able to adjust ( 39 ) . However , in both the null mutant and the temperature - sensitive mutant , the kinetics of invertase secretion were nearly normal , arguing against an essential role for clathrin in the secretory pathway . Although yeast was the first organism in which clathrin function was tested using a genetic approach , there are now many more examples . In animals , clathrin appears to be necessary for survival ( 40 ) , but some cultured animal cells are able to get by without clathrin ( 41 ) . Similarly , clathrin - null Dictyostelium cells are viable ( 42 ) . However , RNAi - mediated knockdown of clathrin is lethal in trypanosomes , the unicellular parasites that cause sleeping sickness ( 43 ) ; and clathrin is also essential in the plant Arabidopsis ( 44 ) . The loss - of - clathrin phenotype is always severe , whether or not it leads to death , with profound effects on both endocytosis and intracellular trafficking , in particular to lysosomes . So far , every eukaryote whose genome has been sequenced ( > 100 organisms ) has been found to have a clathrin heavy chain gene , with one exception : microsporidians , which are parasitic fungi that have lost many of the genes found in all other eukaryotes ( 45 ) . These observations indicate that clathrin is an ancient protein , which must have been present in the last eukaryotic common ancestor ( LECA ) ~ 1 . 5 billion years ago , and that there is normally a strong selective pressure against losing the clathrin heavy chain gene . But in spite of clathrin’s importance , it does not appear to be required for constitutive secretion in any of the organisms where its function has been tested . So how to reconcile Rothman’s data with all the subsequent studies arguing against a role for clathrin in the secretory pathway ? In retrospect , it seems likely that the VSV - G protein - containing transport intermediates isolated by Rothman were not clathrin - coated , but had 12 similar fractionation properties . In fact , a year after the yeast clathrin knockout paper came out , the Rothman lab published a paper on “a new type of coated vesicular carrier that appears not to contain clathrin” ( 46 ) , which were subsequently purified , leading to the discovery of the COPI coat ( 47 ) ( Figure 5a ) . Then in 1994 , the Schekman lab discovered another type of non - clathrin coat , the COPII coat ( 48 ) ( Figure 5b ) . Hundreds of studies have now been carried out on COPs I and II , demonstrating that COPII is the coat used for ER - to - Golgi traffic , while COPI facilitates Golgi - to - ER traffic and probably other pathways as well ( 49 ) . Both COPI and COPII contain proteins with a similar architecture to clathrin heavy chain , consisting of one or two seven - bladed β - propellers followed by stacked α - helical hairpins , although whether these proteins are true homologues or the result of convergent evolution is unclear ( 50 ) . In addition , part of the COPII coat assembles into a polyhedral cage , although the geometry is different from that of the clathrin cage ( 51 ) . Thus , although we now know that clathrin is not the only type of coat used in membrane traffic , it remains the best understood , and in many ways it has been a paradigm for shaping our understanding of other types of coats . Cargo recognition But clathrin never acts alone . Even in 1975 , Pearse pointed out that “traces of other proteins are visible on the SDS - gel patterns of the final preparation” ( 1 ) . These proteins include the 100 - 110 kD bands that Keen found in his clathrin assembly - promoting fraction ( 15 ) , and in 1981 Unanue , Ungewickell , and Branton provided evidence that the same proteins might also attach clathrin to the membrane ( 52 ) . This meant that there was a good chance that the proteins could be involved in what John Heuser called “the critical exciting issue of how the coat ‘recognizes’ receptor - rich regions of the donor membrane compartment and selects them from the rest” ( 53 ) . So in 1982 , I took up a postdoctoral position with Barbara Pearse to try to purify and characterize the 100 - 110 kD proteins 13 ( intending to stay in Cambridge for two years although I never left ) . It turned out that there were two distinct protein complexes in the clathrin assembly - promoting fraction , both of which contained 100 - 110 kD proteins . We were able to separate these two complexes by hydroxylapatite chromatography , so we called them HA - I and HA - II ( 54 ) . Using a different column chromatography - based method , Jim Keen purified the same two complexes , which he called AP - 1 and AP - 2 for assembly polypeptides 1 and 2 ( 55 ) , and this is the name that has stuck , because conveniently it can also stand for adaptor proteins 1 and 2 . Both AP - 1 and AP - 2 are heterotetramers , consisting of two large subunits corresponding to the 100 - 110 kD gel bands , which are sometimes called adaptins ( β - adaptin and γ - or α - adaptin ) , together with a medium - sized ( µ ) subunit of ~ 50 kD and a small ( σ ) subunit of ~ 20 kD ( Figure 6a ) . After several years of trying to raise antisera against the large subunits , eventually we succeeded in making polyclonal and then monoclonal antibodies that were specific for the subunits of AP - 2 ( 56 , 57 ) . One year later , Ernst Ungewickell’s lab made a monoclonal antibody against AP - 1 ( 58 ) . Together , our immunofluorescence images showed that AP - 2 is associated with the plasma membrane , and AP - 1 with intracellular membranes ( Figure 6b ) . These were exciting findings , because if it was true that the APs were involved in cargo recognition , then the differential localization of AP - 1 and AP - 2 would “help to explain how different membrane proteins can be sorted into coated vesicles in different parts of the cell” ( 57 ) . But it was still many years before the APs were shown definitively to select cargo . In the meantime , a number of sorting signals for clathrin - mediated endocytosis were identified ( Figure 6c ) . The first of these was the “internalization site” of the LDL receptor , discovered in 1986 by the Brown and Goldstein lab when they compared the sequences of the wild - type receptor and the internalization - deficient receptor from J . D . They found that the J . D . 14 receptor had a single point mutation in its cytoplasmic tail , converting a tyrosine to a cysteine ( 59 ) . Then in 1988 , Mike Roth’s lab took a membrane protein that is normally not taken up by clathrin - mediated endocytosis , influenza hemagglutinin , and mutated three different residues in its cytoplasmic tail to tyrosines . One of these changes converted the hemagglutinin into a CCV cargo protein ( 60 ) . Two other CCV cargo proteins were investigated in 1989 - 1990 , the cation - independent mannose 6 - phosphate receptor ( CIMPR ) ( 61 ) and the transferrin receptor ( TfR ) ( 62 ) , and in both cases mutating a key tyrosine residue strongly inhibited the receptor’s ability to be endocytosed . All of these studies pointed a finger at tyrosine residues , and yet most transmembrane proteins have tyrosines in their cytoplasmic tails but are not picked up as coated vesicle cargo . This suggested that the tyrosine needed to be in a particular context to work , but it was difficult to find any common features in all of the cargo proteins , other than the presence of a tyrosine residue . However , when some of the neighbouring residues were mutated , patterns began to emerge . For instance , Mike Roth’s lab showed that endocytosis of hemagglutin was four times more efficient if , in addition to mutating the first cysteine to a tyrosine , they also mutated the second cysteine to a phenylalanine or leucine ( 63 ) . Conversely , when the valine or phenylalanine downstream from the tyrosine in the CIMPR or the TfR was mutated to another bulky hydrophobic residue , the proteins were still internalised , but any other residue caused them to remain on the cell surface ( 64 , 65 ) . These studies and others led to the proposal that the consensus sequence for clathrin - mediated endocytosis is YXX Φ , where Φ is a bulky hydrophobic residue ( 65 ) . The odd one out was the LDL receptor : not only did it not fit the consensus sequence , but mutagenesis studies indicated that it was the residues upstream of the tyrosine , not downstream , that were important ( 66 ) . 15 But how were the sorting signals recognized ? Although there was a lot of enthusiasm for the idea that they bind to AP complexes , there was very little evidence for this , not for want of trying . So in 1995 , Hiroshi Ohno and Juan Bonifacino decided to use an unbiased approach to find cargo recognition machinery , whatever it might be . They made a “bait” construct containing three copies of a YXX Φ motif , and they used it to screen a yeast two - hybrid library . Out of 2 . 5 x 10 6 independent recombinants , they found exactly two that specifically recognised the sorting signal . When they sequenced the two clones , they found that both encoded the C - terminal portion of the medium ( µ ) subunit of AP - 2 . They went on to show that the µ subunit of AP - 1 could also bind YXX Φ motifs , but with slightly different preferences ( 67 ) . By this time , another clathrin - dependent sorting signal had been identified : the dileucine motif , discovered in 1992 by François Letourneur and Rick Klausner ( 68 ) . Again , the Bonifacino lab was able to demonstrate an interaction with AP complexes , although in this case they needed to co - express the small ( σ ) subunit and one of the large subunits , using the yeast three - hybrid system , before they could detect binding ( 69 ) . However , neither YXX Φ motifs nor dileucine motifs were able to bind robustly to the entire AP heterotetramer , only to pieces of it . Yet the four subunits of an AP complex are tightly attached to each other and do not normally exist as single proteins or partial complexes . This paradox was finally explained when David Owen and colleagues solved the structures of various AP components by X - ray crystallography . Their first structure was the C - terminal domain of the AP - 2 µ subunit with a bound YXX Φ peptide , which showed how the two key amino acids , the tyrosine and the bulky hydrophobic residue , slot into compatible pockets ( 70 ) . They went on to solve the structure of the entire AP - 2 core , which demonstrated that AP - 2 is normally in a “closed” conformation with its cargo binding sites obscured ( 71 ) ( Figure 6d ) . Eventually , after seven years , the Owen lab managed to solve the structure of 16 the complete AP - 2 core containing two bound peptides , a YXX Φ and a dileucine . The inclusion of the dileucine was unintentional ; one of the subunits carried a myc tag for ease of purification , and the LI sequence of the myc tag conveniently slotted into the dileucine binding pockets of the σ subunit . As a consequence , the complex was propped open ( Figure 6d ) , allowing the first glimpse of what an AP complex might look like when it is actively engaged in cargo recognition ( 72 ) . Presumably , the complex remains closed in the cytosol to prevent promiscuous binding to all of the other proteins in the cell that have YXX Φ or dileucine sequences . But it is not just the cargo binding sites that are inaccessible when AP - 2 is in the cytosol ; the Owen lab recently showed that the “clathrin box” ( the clathrin binding site on the long flexible linker of the large β subunit ) is buried in the core of the complex when it is in its closed conformation ( 73 ) . Thus , when free in the cytoplasm , AP - 2 and AP - 1 keep their binding sites well shielded . However , when they are recruited onto the appropriate membrane , the initial binding event is thought to trigger a conformational change , which enables the complex to interact with both cargo proteins and clathrin , and so kick - starts the process of CCV formation . Additional adaptors In the early 1990s , subunits of the COPI coat began to be cloned and sequenced . The Rothman lab had already noted the similarities in size between the components of the COPI and clathrin coats ( 47 , 74 ) , and four of the seven COPI subunits turned out to be distantly related to the subunits of AP - 1 and AP - 2 ( 75 , 76 ) . This made us wonder whether there might be other heterotetrameric complexes that could be involved in the formation of other types of vesicles . By this time , the human genome project was well underway , so we took advantage of all the sequences that were available in the public database and began to carry out BLAST searches of expressed sequence tags ( short stretches of random 17 cDNAs ) to try to find new homologues of the COPI and AP subunits . Juan Bonifacino and Esteban Dell’Angelica had exactly the same idea at exactly the same time , so for several years there was intense competition between our two labs , as we identified the subunits of a third and then a fourth AP complex . Fortunately , we managed to publish more or less simultaneously ( 77 - 82 ) , and to remain on good terms . The reason AP - 3 and AP - 4 hadn’t been found earlier was that they were not detectable in purified CCVs , suggesting that they didn’t act together with clathrin . The Kirchhausen lab had recently mapped the clathrin binding sites on AP - 1 and AP - 2 to the flexible linker regions of their large β subunits ( 83 ) , so Dell’Angelica and Bonifacino used the comparable region of the AP - 3 β subunit in a pulldown assay , to find out whether it might bind to some other type of scaffolding protein that could be taking the place of clathrin . They isolated a prominent 180 kD protein , which they sequenced . Surprisingly , this protein turned out to be clathrin heavy chain itself . Narrowing down the binding site for clathrin led to the discovery of the clathrin box , which has the sequence LLDLD in the β subunit of AP - 3 , and LLNLD in the β subunits of APs 1 and 2 ( 84 ) . So does AP - 3 interact with clathrin after all ? In mammalian cells , the two show some colocalisation , although it is never as complete as the colocalisation between clathrin and AP - 1 or AP - 2 ( 85 , 86 ) . In yeast , however , where the AP - 3 β subunit lacks a clathrin box , clathrin and AP - 3 are thought to act completely independently , based on their non - overlapping mutant phenotypes ( 87 ) . The availability of a mouse mutant lacking the AP - 3 β subunit enabled us to test whether the clathrin interaction was essential for function , by transfecting fibroblasts with either wild - type AP - 3 β or a mutant lacking the clathrin box . Both constructs were able to rescue the mutant phenotype , but the rescue was never quite 18 as good with the clathrin box mutant , and we also couldn’t rule out the possibility that the AP - 3 complex might have additional clathrin binding sites ( 88 ) . Thus , the final verdict seems to be that AP - 3 can use clathrin in some organisms , but it doesn’t absolutely have to . However , AP - 4 doesn’t appear to bind clathrin at all , even though all four AP complexes are able to recognise YXX Φ motifs on cargo proteins ( 89 ) . The completion of the human genome project , and the sequencing of other genomes from a wide range of eukaryotes , revealed that all four AP complexes are widespread and ancient , dating back to pre - LECA times ( 90 ) ( Figure 7b ) . BLAST searches didn’t pull out any likely candidates for additional AP subunits , so for over ten years we all thought that the inventory was complete ( 91 , 92 ) . However , through the use of structure - based searching combined with wet work , we recently managed to identify a fifth AP complex ( 93 ) and a more distant relative called TSET ( 94 ) . Although both are even more ancient than APs 1 - 4 ( Figure 7b ) , they have been lost from many organisms . For instance , animals like ourselves have retained only a small fragment of the original TSET complex . Interestingly , this fragment gave rise the muniscin family of proteins , which contribute to clathrin - mediated endocytosis , although their precise role is in some dispute ( 95 - 100 ) . The TSET complex has been most extensively characterised by Daniël Van Damme and colleagues ( 101 - 103 ) , who showed that it is essential for clathrin - mediated endocytosis in Arabidopsis , unlike the AP - 2 complex , which is dispensable . In addition to the heterotetrameric AP / AP - like like complexes , which can be either clathrin - dependent or clathrin - independent , there are a number of alternative adaptors , generally monomeric , which contribute to clathrin - mediated trafficking by increasing the repertoire of cargo proteins in a CCV ( Figure 8a ) . The mystery of how the LDL receptor gets into coated 19 vesicles was finally solved when its FXNPXY sorting signal was shown to bind to proteins with PTB ( phosphotyrosine - binding ) domains , like Dab2 and ARH ( 104 - 106 ) . The “PTB” acronym is actually a misnomer , because both Dab2 and ARH preferentially bind to non - phosphorylated tyrosines . Linton Traub’s lab demonstrated that both of these proteins also have binding sites for clathrin and AP - 2 , and act as cargo - selective adaptors for the LDL receptor and related proteins ( 107 , 108 ) . Two other families of monomeric adaptors , the GGAs and the stonins , were originally identified as proteins with domains that are homologous to those of AP subunits ( 91 , 109 - 112 ) . The GGAs have a C - terminal domain derived from the γ subunit of AP - 1 , while the stonins have a C - terminal domain derived one of the medium subunits ( either µ 1 or µ 2 ) . In mammals , GGAs bind to cargo proteins with a DXXLL motif , including the mannose 6 - phosphate receptors and sortilin , all of which function as hydrolase receptors ( 113 ) . Stonin - 2 ( the better characterised of the two stonin isoforms in mammals ) has so far been found to have only one cargo , synaptotagmin - 1 ( 112 , 114 ) . All of these cargo proteins can also bind to AP complexes , raising the question of why GGAs and stonins are needed as well . In Drosophila , null mutations in stonin ( Stoned - B ) are embryonic lethal ( 115 ) , indicating a non - redundant function . However , the single GGA gene in flies is dispensable ( 116 ) . In yeast , there is some functional redundancy between GGAs and AP - 1 : knocking out either one on its own causes at most a mild defect in endosomal sorting , but knocking out both severely compromises cell viability ( 117 , 118 ) . PTB domain - containing adaptors , GGAs , and stonins are relatively recent innovations , found only in metazoans or , in the case of GGAs , metazoans and fungi ( i . e . , opisthokonts ) ( 119 , 120 ) . Two other families of alternative adaptors are found in nearly all eukaryotes : the epsinR / epsin family and the CALM / AP180 family ( 121 ) , which have ENTH ( epsin N - 20 terminal homology ) and ANTH ( AP180 N - terminal homology ) domains respectively . In animal cells , both epsinR and CALM recognise SNAREs as cargo proteins ( 122 - 124 ) . There is a huge body of work , stemming from a classic paper published by Jim Rothman’s lab in 1993 ( 125 ) , showing that SNAREs are required for vesicles to fuse with the appropriate target membrane . This means that SNAREs are essential CCV cargo proteins , because without them the vesicles would be “all dressed up with nowhere to go” , i . e . , non - fusogenic . Structures of the ENTH and ANTH domains with SNAREs bound to them , solved by David Owen’s lab in 2007 ( 126 ) and 2011 ( 127 ) , have revealed a completely different type of cargo recognition from the short linear motifs that can exist on multiple proteins ( e . g . , humans have 2 , 154 predicted transmembrane proteins with YXX Φ motifs in their cytoplasmic tails ( 128 ) ) . When the cargo protein is a SNARE , the interaction surface is extensive , involving a folded domain with multiple residues in contact with the adaptor . Because the SNAREs don’t have to compete with “ordinary” cargo proteins for binding sites on epsinR and CALM , they can be guaranteed “reserved seating” in the vesicle . In fact , this is exactly the type of situation envisioned by Pearse in 1975 , when she suggested that the coat might interact with other molecules “to ensure . . . transport [ of vesicles ] to specific cellular locations” ( 1 ) . Other machinery With recent advances in mass spectrometry , many additional components of the coat have been identified ( 129 - 138 ) ( Figure 8b ) . Some of these were found in preparations of purified CCVs , others were found as binding partners for the appendage or “ear” domains of the large subunits of AP - 1 and AP - 2 , and many ( including all of the known alternative adaptors ) were found using both approaches . We now know that intracellular CCVs contain at least 100 different proteins , with cargo and coat components split approximately 50 : 50 ( 135 , 139 , 140 ) , and the situation is likely to be similar for endocytic CCVs ( 135 ) . Some of the 21 uncharacterised coat components may be other types of adaptors ; some may play regulatory roles ; and some may have more than one function . For instance , the CALM and epsin family proteins act as cargo adaptors , but they have also been implicated in membrane deformation ( 141 , 142 ) , so they may work together with clathrin to shape the vesicle and control its size . But although proteomic analyses can provide a list of proteins associated with budded - off CCVs , there are other proteins that contribute to CCV formation that might be missed , because they act too early or too late . One way of finding such proteins is to carry out screens for mutants that are deficient in clathrin - mediated trafficking , similar to the approach adopted by the Schekman lab for the secretory pathway . In the mid - 1980s , Howard Riezman’s lab began screening yeast cells for defects in endocytosis , and discovered among other things a role for the actin cytoskeleton ( 143 , 144 ) and a new internalisation signal , ubiquitin ( 145 ) . Fifteen years later , Barth Grant and colleagues looked for genes in C . elegans by monitoring the uptake of yolk proteins in oocytes ( the same pathway that Roth and Porter described in mosquitoes some 35 years earlier ) . The machinery they identified includes the worm yolk protein receptor ( 146 ) , which is a member of the LDL receptor family , and a nucleotide exchange factor for the small GTPase rab5 ( 147 ) . With the advent of siRNA libraries , this approach has become feasible in mammalian cells . High throughput screens have revealed that a number of protein kinases contribute to clathrin - mediated endocytosis in mammals ( 148 , 149 ) , as well as other machinery whose function may be indirect , such as the vacuolar ATPase ( V - ATPase ) ( 150 ) , which is needed to maintain sufficient levels of cholesterol in the plasma membrane ( 151 , 152 ) . Another very powerful approach for analysing clathrin - associated machinery is live cell imaging . Jim Keen’s lab was the first to visualise the dynamic behaviour of clathrin in 1999 22 ( 153 ) , and since then many papers have been published using increasingly sophisticated technology . One particularly elegant system was devised by Christien Merrifield and colleagues , who transfected cells with transferrin receptor coupled to superecliptic pHluorin , a highly pH - sensitive derivative of GFP . By cycling the pH of the medium between 7 . 4 and 5 . 5 every second , they were able to determine precisely when a clathrin - coated pit pinched off as a vesicle , because the transferrin receptor suddenly became visible at pH 5 . 5 ( 154 , 155 ) . Co - transfection with various mCherry - tagged coat components enabled them to monitor the behaviour of each protein relative to the scission event , to obtain its “recruitment signature” ( 155 ) . For a comprehensive analysis of coated vesicle dynamics , Sandy Schmid’s lab , together with Gaudenz Danuser , used automated particle - tracking software to image tens of thousands of clathrin - coated structures . After carrying out mathematical modelling to identify kinetically distinct populations , they then depleted or overexpressed particular proteins and repeated their analyses to look for changes in the relative amounts of the different populations ( 156 ) . The Kirchhausen lab managed to image single molecules as they were being recruited onto the plasma membrane , and then used their images to reconstruct “the first five seconds in the life of a clathrin - coated pit” ( 157 ) . These complementary approaches have led to conclusions that are largely in agreement with each other . Together , they provide strong support for the “coincidence detection” model of coat protein recruitment , where multiple low affinity interactions combine to get the right machinery to the right place at the right time ( or as Pearse proposed , “to ensure formation of vesicles at particular sites on the membrane” ( 1 ) ) . For endocytic CCVs , a particularly important interaction is with phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PIP2 ) ( 158 - 160 ) . Because PIP2 is primarily generated at the plasma membrane , this interaction helps to target AP - 2 and associated proteins to the right compartment . Most of the initial AP - 2 recruitment events are non - productive , with lots of rapid cycling on and off the plasma 23 membrane ( 157 ) ( Figure 9a ) . However , electrostatic interactions between PIP2 and the µ subunit may open up the complex and expose its multiple binding sites ( 72 ) ( Figure 9b ) . The open conformation is further stabilised by binding to cargo and clathrin ( 156 , 157 ) ( Figure 9c - d ) , committing the coated pit to go on to become a coated vesicle . Once the formation of the coated pit is underway , other machinery is added on . Recruitment of the GTPase dynamin peaks just 2 - 4 seconds before scission ( 155 ) ( Figure 9g ) , although low levels of dynamin are associated with the coated pit at earlier stages ( 155 , 156 ) . Dynamin is a particularly important component of the machinery , because it severs the neck of the coated pit to give rise to a coated vesicle . In 1995 , Jenny Hinshaw and Sandy Schmid showed that dynamin can self - assemble into rings ( 161 ) , while Pietro De Camilli and colleagues discovered that in isolated nerve terminals , the non - hydrolysable GTP analogue GTP γ S caused the plasma membrane to form long tubular invaginations , decorated with closely spaced rings of dynamin and often capped with a clathrin - coated bud ( 162 ) . These studies immediately suggested a mechanism for constricting the collar of the coated pit , although precisely how constriction leads to fission is less clear ( 163 ) . Another enigma is how dynamin is recruited at exactly the time when it is needed . An actin - dependent feedback loop has been suggested ( 164 ) , but studies with inhibitors like latrunculin indicate that unlike yeast , many mammalian cells do not require actin for endocytosis ( 165 ) . Another possibility , suggested by Volker Haucke and colleagues , is that recruitment of SNX9 ( which itself may be facilitated by production of PI ( 3 , 4 ) P2 via the PI 3 - kinase PI ( 3 ) K C2 α ) in turn facilitates the recruitment of dynamin ( 166 ) . However , there is a discrepancy between the Merrifield and Haucke labs about which is recruited first , SNX9 or dynamin , with the Merrifield lab reporting that SNX9 recruitment peaks after scission , not before ( 155 ) . 24 In any case , immediately after scission , there is recruitment of uncoating machinery like auxilin / GAK and OCRL1 ( 155 ) ( Figure 9h ) . Again , it is not clear how these events are timed so precisely . Auxilin , which is a cofactor for the “uncoating ATPase” Hsc70 , preferentially binds to PI4P over PIP2 , so one suggestion is that its recruitment coincides with changes in the phosphoinositide composition of the vesicle just it dissociates from the plasma membrane ( 167 ) . This is consistent with the observation that the PIP2 5 - phosphatase synaptojanin has a similar recruitment signature to dynamin , peaking just before scission ( 155 ) ; however , OCRL1 is also a PIP2 5 - phosphatase , and yet it has exactly the same recruitment signature as auxilin ( 155 ) . So there is still a lot that we don’t understand about how the recruitment of so many different molecules is orchestrated . Probably the best way to visualise the order of events in CCV formation is to look at the beautiful computer - generated animation ( complete with orchestration ) made by Janet Iwasa and Tommy Kirchhausen ( www . youtube . com / watch ? v = o _ EUHu4OJus ) . To what extent can we extend the observations on clathrin - mediated endocytosis to clathrin - mediated intracellular trafficking ? Endocytosis is much easier to visualise , not only because it can be followed using probes added to the outside of the cell , but also because it is amenable to TIRF ( total internal reflection fluorescence ) imaging . However , studies from the Kirchhausen lab , making use of a 3D tracking method , have revealed that AP - 1 - containing clathrin carriers are somewhat shorter - lived than those that contain AP - 2 ( 45 ± 16 sec vs . 53 ± 18 s ) and appear to be dynamin - independent ( 86 ) . Perhaps the major difference is that the intracellular pathway does not make use of the plasma membrane - specific phosphoinositide PIP2 . A different phosphoinositide , phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate ( PI4P ) , has been implicated in AP - 1 recruitment ( 168 ) , but probably the most important interaction is with the small GTPase Arf1 . The Bonifacino and Hurley labs showed that adding GTP - bound Arf1 to the AP - 1 core enabled cargo binding in vitro , and 25 the crystal structure of AP - 1 in complex with ARF1 - GTP revealed that the AP - 1 had adopted an open conformation ( 169 ) . However , Arf1 also facilitates the recruitment of AP - 3 , AP - 4 , and COPI , but onto different membranes , so once again recruitment must be by coincidence detection rather than by a single interaction . In the case of AP - 1 , there are several studies showing that cargo plays an important role ( 170 - 173 ) . Multiple pathways The archetypal clathrin - mediated pathway is endocytosis . However , clathrin - independent endocytic pathways also exist , although they are much less well understood ( 174 ) . In some cell types , clathrin - dependent endocytosis appears to be the dominant pathway ( 175 , 176 ) , but other pathways can be upregulated to compensate if the clathrin pathway is switched off . For instance , in 1995 the Schmid lab expressed a temperature - sensitive dynamin mutant in HeLa cells . They found that immediately after shifting to the non - permissive temperature , endocytosis was reduced by ~ 50 % . However , after an hour there was actually an increase in endocytosis , and after 12 hours , endocytosis was exactly the same as in control cells ( 177 ) . This indicates that cells are able to sense whether there is too much or too little plasma membrane and to respond accordingly , although without clathrin and adaptors , uptake of cargo is likely to be non - selective . A wide range of cargo proteins can be accommodated in endocytic CCVs , including receptors for growth factors ( 178 ) . Unlike “housekeeping” proteins such as the receptors for transferrin and LDL , which are endocytosed constitutively , growth factor receptors are only endocytosed when they are activated by ligand binding . Their sorting signals can be much more complex than those in other cargo proteins . In 2010 , Sasha Sorkin and colleagues carried out a heroic study on the EGF receptor , in which they mutated 21 lysines to arginines ( interestingly , some of these are substrates for acetylation rather than 26 ubiquitylation ) , and also got rid of both a YXX Φ motif and a dileucine motif , but found that they still hadn’t quite abolished the receptor’s ability to be internalised into CCVs ( 179 ) . Initially everybody assumed that endocytosis of activated growth factor receptors was a way of preventing too much signalling ( 180 ) , and there is no question that this is part of the story . However , endocytosis can also be used to bring signalling molecules into contact with new substrates ( 181 ) . For instance , SARA ( SMAD anchor for receptor activation ) is recruited to PI3P - containing endosomes via its FYVE domain , where it meets up with TGF - β receptors that have been internalised by clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( 182 ) . Eventually , through a signalling cascade involving several downstream effectors , this interaction leads to changes in gene expression . Because of the links between endocytosis and signalling , it is not surprising that there are also links with embryonic development ( 183 ) . Several components of the endocytic machinery , including the PTB domain - containing adaptors Numb and Disabled , were originally identified in Drosophila screens for developmental mutants ( 184 , 185 ) . Dynamin also made its first appearance in Drosophila , in a 1973 screen by David Suzuki’s lab for temperature - sensitive mutations causing paralysis ( 186 ) , where one of the genes , shibire , turned out to encode dynamin ( 187 , 188 ) . A follow - up study showed that brief heat pulses applied at various stages during embryogenesis “caused a broad spectrum of phenotypically distinct defects” ( 189 ) , and the temperature - sensitive shibire fly has been a useful tool for developmental biologists ever since . Two widely researched signalling pathways that make use of endocytosis ( although there is still some controversy as to how ) are the Notch pathway and the Wingless pathway , both of which were first found in Drosophila screens for odd - looking mutants ( 190 , 191 ) but are now of clinical interest because they are often dysregulated in cancer ( 192 , 193 ) . There are also examples of cells 27 using clathrin - mediated endocytosis for specialised functions , such as synaptic vesicle recycling in neurons ( 5 ) and MHC class II presentation in cells of the immune system ( 194 - 196 ) . The AP - 1 pathway has been harder to dissect than the AP - 2 pathway , in part because the “donor” compartment is difficult to define . Do the vesicles bud from the TGN , some type of endosome , or both ? And to what extent is the TGN also some type of endosome ( 197 ) ? Moreover , where do the vesicles go ? As Werner Franke pointed out in a 1974 paper , coated vesicles “do not come with small arrows that tell us unequivocally in what direction they are going " ( 198 ) . Knockdowns and knockouts have confirmed that AP - 1 facilitates the trafficking of newly synthesized lysosomal hydrolases bound to mannose 6 - phosphate receptors ( 199 , 200 ) , a pathway worked out by Stuart Kornfeld’s lab in the 1980s ( 201 ) . If AP - 1 is depleted or deleted , the hydrolases get secreted instead of delivered to lysosomes . Yet in other respects the knockdown and knockout phenotypes have been surprisingly mild ( 139 ) . But is this a true reflection of the AP - 1 pathway ? We know from studies on temperature - sensitive clathrin and dynamin mutants that cells can often adjust to the gradual loss of an important protein ( 39 , 177 ) . To investigate what happens if AP - 1 is lost quickly , we developed the “knocksideways” system , which rapidly diminishes the available pool by using a small molecule to reroute it to mitochondria ( 202 ) . This produced a much stronger phenotype , with nearly 100 coat and cargo proteins depleted two - fold or more from isolated CCVs ( 139 ) . Interestingly , all of the well - characterised transmembrane cargo proteins turned out to be itinerants : proteins that move about between different post - Golgi compartments , rather than proteins that reside at a fixed address . These data , together with earlier studies ( 203 , 204 ) , support a role for AP - 1 , and for clathrin - mediated intracellular trafficking in general , in a bidirectional cycling route between the TGN and endosomes . In contrast , knocking the GGAs sideways only depleted lysosomal hydrolases and their 28 receptors from the CCV fraction , supporting a role for GGAs as cargo - selective adaptors for the TGN - to - endosome leg of the AP - 1 pathway ( 139 ) . But AP - 1 and clathrin can also be used for polarized trafficking of proteins to the plasma membrane . Vertebrates have an epithelial cell - specific isoform of the AP - 1 µ subunit , which contributes to basolateral sorting ( 205 - 207 ) , and the Bonifacino lab showed that several basolateral membrane proteins preferentially bind to this isoform ( 208 ) . In addition , AP - 1 ( without a special subunit ) and clathrin contribute to polarity in neurons , in both worms ( 209 ) and mice ( 210 ) , by directing proteins to the somatodendritic plasma membrane . It is difficult to reconcile these findings with everything else we know about the role of AP - 1 in trafficking away from the plasma membrane . How could AP - 1 also be involved in trafficking to the plasma membrane ? One possibility is that AP - 1 acts at a post - Golgi compartment to traffic proteins away from the wrong part of the plasma membrane ( i . e . , apical or axonal ) , after which some other type of ( non - clathrin ) machinery can ensure that the proteins get to the right part of the plasma membrane ( i . e . , basolateral or somatodendritic ) ( 211 ) . Two other pathways that make use of clathrin are regulated secretion and multivesicular body ( MVB ) formation . It has been known since the mid - 1980s that immature secretory granules often have partial clathrin coats associated with them ( 212 , 213 ) , and Sharon Tooze’s lab showed that these coats are also positive for AP - 1 ( 214 ) . Initially it was assumed that the function of the clathrin was to facilitate the packaging of granule proteins . However , subsequent studies making use of immunogold EM revealed that the clathrin patches contain AP - 1 cargo proteins , which normally cycle between the TGN and endosomes ( 215 , 216 ) . These findings indicate that the immature granule should be viewed as more of an outpost of the TGN , and that AP - 1 and clathrin facilitate the removal of non - 29 granule proteins . In other words , the role of clathrin and AP - 1 in regulated secretory cells is not all that different from their role in other types of cells . However , the role of clathrin in MVB formation appears to be very different from its all other roles . Electron - dense plaques were first observed on the limiting membrane of MVBs nearly 50 years ago , when Marilyn Farquhar pointed them out ( 217 ) , but their composition was unknown until the late 1990s , when Judith Klumperman and colleagues showed that they could be labelled with anti - clathrin antibodies ( 218 , 219 ) . As Klumperman wrote in a 2002 paper , “unlike clathrin coats at other sites in the cell , the endosomal coat consists of two layers , a thin and highly electron - dense layer closely opposed to the limiting membrane of the endosomal vacuole , and a second , more fuzzy and less electron dense layer facing the cytoplasm” ( 220 ) . In fact , the coats on MVBs look so different from other coats that it is possible that the clathrin doesn’t even form a typical polyhedral lattice . Harald Stenmark’s lab showed that clathrin is recruited to the MVB by Hrs ( 221 , 222 ) , a component of the ESCRT - 0 ( endosomal sorting complex required for transport - 0 ) complex . ESCRTs package ubiquitylated membrane proteins into intralumenal vesicles , which have the opposite topology to CCVs in that they bud away from the cytoplasm rather than towards it . Thus , the current view is that the function of MVB - associated clathrin is not to shape the membrane , but rather to form a patch that sequesters ubiquitylated proteins , which can then be handed over to other components of the ESCRT machinery ( 223 ) . Disease There are several examples of genetic disorders in humans caused by mutations in clathrin - dependent cargo proteins . Familial hypercholesterolemia , caused by mutations in the LDL receptor , is probably the most famous of these . Others include Menkes disease and Wilson disease , caused by mutations in the copper - transporting ATPases ATP7A and 30 ATP7B , respectively ( 139 , 224 , 225 ) . Both ATP7A and ATP7B have dileucine - containing sorting signals , which bind to AP - 1 and help to localise them to the TGN and endosomes , where they provide copper as a cofactor for various enzymes ( 226 , 227 ) . However , high copper concentrations cause the transporters to be translocated to the plasma membrane , where they detoxify the cell by pumping out excess copper . This is concomitant with the transporters no longer being packaged into CCVs , suggesting that their dileucine motifs somehow become masked ( 139 ) . Another protein reported to be trafficked by clathrin is amyloid precursor protein ( APP ) , the progenitor of the amyloid plaques found in the brains of Alzheimer’s patients ( 228 - 230 ) . There is no doubt that alterations in the cell’s trafficking machinery can increase the frequency of the proteolytic event that makes the protein amyloidogenic ( 231 ) , and a genome - wide association study identified the clathrin adaptor CALM as a susceptibility locus for Alzheimer’s disease ( 232 ) . However , the situation is complicated by the involvement of other proteins that are also trafficked in a clathrin - dependent manner , such the APP sorting receptor SORL1 ( 233 , 234 ) , and the β - secretases , which cleave APP ( 234 - 236 ) . A further complication is that clathrin - mediated trafficking can also be used to clear away the amyloidogenic peptide , and thus prevent the build - up of plaques ( 237 ) , Mutations in coat proteins tend to be less common than mutations in cargo proteins . Experiments on animals indicate that null mutations in single copy genes encoding components of clathrin , AP - 1 , or AP - 2 are likely to be lethal ( 40 , 199 , 238 , 239 ) . However , in some cases there are two or more genes encoding different isoforms of a particular subunit , and null mutants are viable . Patients have now been identified with mutations in all three of the closely related genes encoding the AP - 1 small subunit , AP1S1 , AP1S2 , and AP1S3 ( 240 - 242 ) . Mutations in both AP1S1 and AP1S2 result in severe intellectual 31 disability , and mutations in both AP1S1 and AP1S3 affect the skin , but for the most part the three phenotypes are different . It has been proposed that these differences are due to differential sorting of particular cargo proteins , such as ATP7A / ATP7B and sortilin , both of which have dileucine motifs ( 243 , 244 ) . However , there is at present no evidence that these dileucines preferentially interact with one isoform over the other , so another possibility is that the different phenotypes are due to the relative expression levels of the three isoforms in various tissues . Vertebrates have two genes encoding different isoforms of clathrin heavy chain , CLTC and CLTCL1 ( 245 ) . In humans , these genes are located on chromosomes 17 and 22 respectively , so the proteins are called CHC17 and CHC22 . Most human tissues express more CLTC than CLTCL1 , sometimes by as much as two orders of magnitute , but in skeletal muscle the two are expressed at comparable levels ( www . proteinatlas . org ) . CHC22 has been implicated in the trafficking of the insulin - responsive glucose transporter GLUT4 ( 246 ) ; however , patients have recently been identified with a probable loss - of - function mutation in CLTCL1 who have normal glucose tolerance but severe intellectual disability and an inability to feel pain ( 247 ) . The molecular basis for this phenotype is still unknown , nor is it clear why some animals , including mice and pigs , have lost the CLTCL1 gene entirely , with no apparent phenotype . Unlike AP - 1 and AP - 2 , APs 3 , 4 , and 5 are not essential for viability in animals . There are naturally occurring mutations in AP - 3 in Drosophila ( 80 , 248 - 250 ) and mice ( 251 , 252 ) , as well as in humans with Hermansky Pudlak syndrome ( 253 ) , a disorder mainly affecting lysosome - related organelles . There are also patients with mutations in AP - 4 or AP - 5 , both of which cause hereditary spastic paraplegia . It is not clear precisely why , because we still don’t know for sure what AP - 4 and AP - 5 actually do , although AP - 4 has been implicated in 32 polarised sorting and AP - 5 in lysosome maintenance ( 211 , 254 - 258 ) ( Figure 7a ) . So far , there is only one example of a genetic disorder involving an alternative adaptor . Autosomal Recessive Hypercholesterolemia is caused by mutations in the cargo - selective adaptor ARH , which recognises the LDL receptor ( 105 , 108 ) , resulting in a very similar clinical phenotype to that of FH , caused by mutations in the receptor itself . In addition to genetic disorders , there are links between clathrin - mediated trafficking and infectious diseases . The first of these was described in 1980 , when Ari Helenius and colleagues showed that Semliki Forest virus hijacks clathrin - coated pits to gain entry into the host cell ( 259 ) . Since then , many other viruses and even bacteria have been shown to exploit clathrin for infectivity ( 260 , 261 ) . But there are other links as well . For instance , two proteins encoded by all strains of human and simian immunodeficiency virus ( HIV and SIV ) , Nef and Vpu , contribute to the pathogenesis of the virus by modifying the surface of infected cells . Proteins that are downregulated include MHC class I ( 262 ) , the viral co - receptor CD4 ( 263 ) , and tetherin , a protein that prevents the release of viral particles by keeping them attached to the plasma membrane ( 264 ) . In all three cases , clathrin and AP complexes have been shown to be involved ( 265 - 268 ) . The next forty years We’ve come a long way since Barbara Pearse first identified clathin 40 years ago , but there are still many open questions . For instance , we know very little about how all the clathrin - mediated events are regulated and coordinated . How does the cell “know” how much endocytosis or intracellular trafficking it needs , so as to maintain each compartment at a steady state ? How are the fundamental pathways adapted in different cell types , and how are they coupled to all the other events taking place in the cell and organism ? 33 Even at the nuts - and - bolts level , where the most progress has been made , there is still a lot we don’t know . For instance , how does the clathrin coat assemble ? Does it first makes a flat lattice of hexagons , which then rearranges itself into a curved one as hexagons convert into pentagons ( as proposed by Kanaseki and Kadota in 1969 ( 3 ) ) , or is curvature built into the lattice from the start ? There is no question that flat lattices exist ( see Figure 3a ) , but are they precursors of coated vesicles , or are they artefacts , produced when a cell is tightly stuck to a glass cover slip ( 269 ) ? Because of the extensive interactions between the clathrin legs , with four triskelia contributing to each edge ( Figure 3f ) , converting hexagons into pentagons is not trivial ; in fact , the entire lattice would have to be taken apart and put back together again ( 270 ) . However , a very recent correlative light and electron microscopy study from the labs of Marko Kaksonen and John Briggs suggests that this is in fact what happens . Using fluorescence recovery after photobleaching , Briggs and Kaksonen showed that there is rapid exchange of clathrin throughout the lifetime of a coated pit , right up until the burst of dynamin recruitment ( Figure 9g ) ( 271 ) . Another ongoing debate is whether clathrin is really what curves the membrane in vivo . Is it strong enough to be the driving force ( 272 - 274 ) , or does it mould itself around a membrane that is being reshaped by some other mechanism ? Clathrin’s ability to form a cage while attached to a lipid bilayer may be sufficient to bend the membrane of an artificial liposome ( Figure 3h ( 27 ) ) . However , even in this minimal in vitro system , the clathrin - binding linker proteins attached to the liposome probably contribute as well , by crowding together and creating steric pressure ( 275 , 276 ) . ( This is somewhat akin to the “natural repulsion of the outer ends of the bristles” proposed by Roth and Porter over 50 years ago ( 4 ) , except that the proteins aren’t bristles but disordered polypeptides with large hydrodynamic radii ( 276 ) . ) And in a living cell , the other side of the membrane is normally densely packed with cargo , driving the curvature in the opposite direction ( 276 , 277 ) . Increasing the rigidity of the 34 scaffold may help , and this is one of the roles that has been attributed to the clathrin light chains ( 277 - 279 ) . The right lipid environment is also important : depleting cholesterol from the plasma membrane prevents coated pits from curving more than 180° ( 150 - 152 ) . Other membrane bending mechanisms have been invoked , including driving a “wedge” into the membrane ( e . g . , the amphipathic helix of epsin ( 141 ) ) and attaching an inherently curved protein ( e . g . , BAR domain - containing proteins like the muniscins ( 96 ) ) . And of course , there is no reason why all of these mechanisms couldn’t contribute to vesicle formation in vivo ( 280 ) . There are also questions about how certain types of cargo are sorted . For instance , intracellular CCVs contain a lot of SNAREs that don’t seem to be able to bind to epsinR or CALM ( 139 ) , so are there other SNARE - adaptor interactions we don’t know about ? And how many of the pieces of the core machinery have additional functions ( 281 ) ? Clathrin heavy chain can “moonlight” as a component of the mitotic spindle ( 282 ) , while some of the other coat components , like epsin and CALM , can get inside the nucleus ( 283 ) . What are they doing there ? An even more fundamental question is , where did all this machinery come from ? Phylogenetic analyses indicate that TSET predates the five AP complexes , and that the last AP complexes to emerge were AP - 1 and AP - 2 , the two that are clathrin - dependent ( 94 ) ( Figure 7b ) . TSET can also act together with clathrin , at least in plants ( 103 ) , but in some respects it is more similar to COPI than to an AP complex , and its core heterotetramer is tightly associated with two additional proteins , which have the β - propeller plus stacked α - helical hairpin architecture , and are most closely related to the two largest subunits of COPI ( 94 ) . So if TSET has its own associated scaffold , does it really need clathrin as well ? One possibility is that TSET started off as a very early clathrin - independent coat , but then 35 clathrin arrived on the scene as a “Johnny - come - lately” . Clathrin may have been so good at its job that TSET was rendered redundant in a number of lineages , including the one that gave rise to humans , while in other organisms TSET may have evolved ways of cooperating with clathrin . Of course , these ideas are very speculative because they are based on attempts to reconstruct events that occurred some two billion years ago . However , the recent exciting discovery of a phylum of archaea “that bridge the gap between prokaryotes and eukaryotes” , and the tantalising suggestion that that there may be “even closer relatives of eukaryotes” , raise the possibility that in a few years we may be able to find out a lot more about the evolution of coat components ( 284 ) . This in turn may tell us about how intracellular membrane compartments were first generated , during the prokaryote - to - eukaryote transition ( 50 ) . Thus , one short paper in 1975 spawned an entire field . As of August 2015 , over 8 , 000 papers on clathrin have been published , with the number per year going up and up ( Figure 10 ) . Authors of these papers include Nobel laureates like Brown , Goldstein , Rothman , and Schekman ; and the field has taken off into all sorts of unexpected directions , including medical ones . But Barbara Pearse didn’t start working on coated vesicles because she thought they would lead to benefits in health and wealth . She was driven entirely by curiosity . She wanted to know what coated vesicles were made out of , what they did , and how they worked . Yet like much of basic science , her work and the work that followed has turned out to have clinical relevance , impacting on diseases as diverse as atherosclerosis , cancer , dementia , influenza , and AIDS . There are likely to be more medical implications to come . For instance , there is a lot of interest in the use of nanoparticles to deliver therapeutic agents to the right target ( 285 ) . However , in order to get these agents to work , we will need to know as much as we can about the cell’s gatekeepers , and this can only 36 come about through an even deeper understanding of clathrin and its associated machinery . Happy anniversary , clathrin , and many happy returns ! 37 References 1 . Pearse BMF . Coated vesicles from pig brain : purification and biochemical characterization . J Mol Biol 1975 ; 97 : 93 - 98 . 2 . Pearse BMF . The EMBO Medal Review : Clathrin and coated vesicles . EMBO J 1987 ; 6 : 2507 - 2512 . 3 . Kanaseki T , Kadota K . The " vesicle in a basket " . A morphological study of the coated vesicle isolated from the nerve endings of the guinea pig brain , with special reference to the mechanism of membrane movements . J Cell Biol 1969 ; 42 : 202 - 220 . 4 . Roth TF , Porter KR . Yolk protein uptake in the oocyte of the mosquito Aedes aegypti . J Cell Biol 1964 ; 20 : 313 - 332 . 5 . Heuser JE , Reese TS . Evidence for recycling of synaptic vesicle membrane during transmitter release at the frog neuromuscular junction . J Cell Biol 1973 ; 57 : 315 - 344 . 6 . Llobet A , Gallop JL , Burden JJ , Camdere G , Chandra P , Vallis Y , Hopkins CR , Lagnado L , McMahon HT . Endophilin drives the fast mode of vesicle retrieval in a ribbon synapse . J Neurosci 2011 ; 31 : 8512 - 8519 . 7 . Wu Y , O ' Toole ET , Girard M , Ritter B , Messa M , Liu X , McPherson PS , Ferguson SM , De Camilli P . A dynamin 1 - , dynamin 3 - and clathrin - independent pathway of synaptic vesicle recycling mediated by bulk endocytosis . eLife 2014 ; 3 : e01621 . 8 . Watanabe S , Trimbuch T , Camacho - Pérez M , Rost BR , Brokowski B , Söhl - Kielczynski B , Felies A , Davis MW , Rosenmund C , Jorgensen EM . Clathrin regenerates synaptic vesicles from endosomes . Nature 2014 ; 515 : 228 - 233 . 9 . Kononenko NL , Puchkov D , Classen GA , Walter AM , Pechstein A , Sawade L , Kaempf N , Trimbuch T , Lorenz D , Rosenmund C , Maritzen T , Haucke V . Clathrin / AP - 2 mediate synaptic vesicle reformation from endosome - like vacuoles but are not essential for membrane retrieval at central synapses . Neuron 2014 ; 82 : 981 - 988 . 10 . Goldstein JL , Brown MS . History of discovery : the LDL receptor . Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2009 ; 29 : 431 - 438 . 11 . Brown MS , Goldstein JL . Analysis of a mutant strain of human fibroblasts with a defect in the internalization of receptor - bound low density lipoprotein . Cell 1976 ; 9 : 663 - 674 . 12 . Anderson RGW , Goldstein JL , Brown MS . A mutation that impairs the ability of lipoprotein receptors to localise in coated pits on the cell surface of human fibroblasts . Nature 1977 ; 270 : 695 - 699 . 13 . Crowther RA , Finch JT , Pearse BMF . On the structure of coated vesicles . J Mol Biol 1976 ; 103 : 785 - 798 . 14 . Heuser J . Three - dimensional visualization of coated vesicle formation in fibroblasts . J Cell Biol 1980 ; 84 : 560 - 583 . 15 . Keen JH , Willingham MC , Pastan IH . Clathrin - coated vesicles : isolation , dissociation and factor - dependent reassociation of clathrin baskets . Cell 1979 ; 16 : 303 - 312 . 16 . Zaremba S , Keen JH . Assembly polypeptides from coated vesicles mediate reassembly of unique clathrin coats . J Cell Biol 1983 ; 97 : 1339 - 1347 . 17 . Ungewickell E , Branton D . Assembly units of clathrin coats . Nature 1981 ; 289 : 420 - 422 . 18 . Kirchhausen T , Harrison SC , Chow EP , Mattaliano RJ , Ramachandran KL , Smart J , Brosius J . Clathrin heavy chain : molecular cloning and complete primary structure . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1987 ; 84 : 8805 - 8809 . 19 . ter Haar E , Musacchio A , Harrison SC , Kirchhausen T . Atomic structure of 38 clathrin : a beta propeller terminal domain joins an alpha zigzag linker . Cell 1998 ; 95 : 563 - 573 . 20 . Ybe JA , Brodsky FM , Hofmann K , Lin K , Liu SH , Chen LC , Earnest TN , Fletterick RJ , Hwang PK . Clathrin self - assembly is mediated by a tandemly repeated superhelix . Nature 1999 ; 399 : 371 - 375 . 21 . Vigers GP , Crowther RA , Pearse BMF . Three - dimensional structure of clathrin cages in ice . EMBO J 1986 ; 5 : 529 - 534 . 22 . Smith CJ , Grigorieff N , Pearse BMF . Clathrin coats at 21 A resolution : a cellular assembly designed to recycle multiple membrane receptors . EMBO J 1998 ; 17 : 4943 - 4953 . 23 . Musacchio A , Smith CJ , Roseman AM , Harrison SC , Kirchhausen T , Pearse BMF . Functional organization of clathrin in coats : combining electron cryomicroscopy and X - ray crystallography . Mol Cell 1999 ; 3 : 761 - 770 . 24 . Smith CJ , Dafforn TR , Kent HM , Sims CA , Khubchandani - Aswani K , Zhang L , Saibil HR , Pearse BMF . Location of auxilin within a clathrin cage . J Mol Biol 2004 ; 336 : 461 - 471 . 25 . Fotin A , Cheng Y , Sliz P , Grigorieff N , Harrison SC , Kirchhausen T , Walz T . Molecular model for a complete clathrin lattice from electron cryomicroscopy . Nature 2004 ; 432 : 573 - 579 . 26 . Xing Y , Böcking T , Wolf M , Grigorieff N , Kirchhausen T , Harrison SC . Structure of clathrin coat with bound Hsc70 and auxilin : mechanism of Hsc70 - facilitated disassembly . EMBO J 2010 ; 29 : 655 - 665 . 27 . Dannhauser PN , Ungewickell EJ . Reconstitution of clathrin - coated bud and vesicle formation with minimal components . Nat Cell Biol 2012 ; 14 : 634 - 639 . 28 . Rothman JE , Fine RE . Coated vesicles transport newly synthesized membrane glycoproteins from endoplasmic reticulum to plasma membrane in two successive stages . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1980 ; 77 : 780 - 784 . 29 . Holtzman E , Novikoff AB , Villaverde H . Lysosomes and GERL in normal and chromatolytic neurons of the rat ganglion nodosum . J Cell Biol 1967 ; 33 : 419 - 435 . 30 . Friend DS , Farquhar MG . Functions of coated vesicles during protein absorption in the rat vas deferens . J Cell Biol 1967 ; 35 : 357 - 376 . 31 . Rothman JE , Bursztyn - Pettegrew H , Fine RE . Transport of the membrane glycoprotein of vesicular stomatitis virus to the cell surface in two stages by clathrin - coated vesicles . J Cell Biol 1980 ; 86 : 162 - 171 . 32 . Alberts B , Bray D , Lewis J , Raff M , Roberts K , Watson JD . Molecular Biology of the Cell . New York : Garland Publishing , Inc . ; 1983 . 33 . Novick P , Field C , Schekman R . Identification of 23 complementation groups required for post - translational events in the yeast secretory pathway . Cell 1980 ; 21 : 205 - 215 . 34 . Mellman I , Emr SD . A Nobel Prize for membrane traffic : vesicles find their journey ' s end . J Cell Biol 2013 ; 203 : 559 - 561 . 35 . Payne GS , Schekman R . A test of clathrin function in protein secretion and cell growth . Science 1985 ; 230 : 1009 - 1014 . 36 . Lemmon SK , Jones EW . Clathrin requirement for normal growth of yeast . Science 1987 ; 238 : 504 - 509 . 37 . Payne GS , Baker D , Van Tuinen E , Schekman R . Protein transport to the vacuole and receptor - mediated endocytosis in clathrin heavy chain - deficient yeast . J Cell Biol 1988 ; 106 : 1453 - 1461 . 38 . Payne GS , Schekman R . Clathrin : a role in the intracellular retention of a Golgi membrane protein . Science 1989 ; 245 : 1358 - 1365 . 39 . Seeger M , Payne GS . A role for clathrin in the sorting of vacuolar proteins in the 39 Golgi complex of yeast . EMBO J 1992 ; 11 : 2811 - 2818 . 40 . Bazinet C , Katzen AL , Morgan M , Mahowald AP , Lemmon SK . The Drosophila clathrin heavy chain gene : clathrin function is essential in a multicellular organism . Genetics 1993 ; 134 : 1119 - 1134 . 41 . Wettey FR , Hawkins SF , Stewart A , Luzio JP , Howard JC , Jackson AP . Controlled elimination of clathrin heavy - chain expression in DT40 lymphocytes . Science 2002 ; 297 : 1521 - 1525 . 42 . Ruscetti T , Cardelli JA , Niswonger ML , O ' Halloran TJ . Clathrin heavy chain functions in sorting and secretion of lysosomal enzymes in Dictyostelium discoideum . J Cell Biol 1994 ; 126 : 343 - 352 . 43 . Allen CL , Goulding D , Field MC . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis is essential in Trypanosoma brucei . EMBO J 2003 ; 22 : 4991 - 5002 . 44 . Kitakura S , Vanneste S , Robert S , Löfke C , Teichmann T , Tanaka H , Friml J . Clathrin mediates endocytosis and polar distribution of PIN auxin transporters in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 2011 ; 23 ( 1920 - 1931 ) . 45 . Barlow LD , Dacks JB , Wideman JG . From all to ( nearly ) none : Tracing adaptin evolution in Fungi . Cell Logist 2014 ; 4 : e28114 . 46 . Orci L , Glick BS , Rothman JE . A new type of coated vesicular carrier that appears not to contain clathrin : its possible role in protein transport within the Golgi stack . Cell 1986 ; 46 : 171 - 184 . 47 . Malhotra V , Serafini T , Orci L , Shepherd JC , Rothman JE . Purification of a novel class of coated vesicles mediating biosynthetic protein transport through the Golgi stack . Cell 1989 ; 58 : 329 - 336 . 48 . Barlowe C , Orci L , Yeung T , Hosobuchi M , Hamamoto S , Salama N , Rexach MF , Ravazzola M , Amherdt M , Schekman R . COPII : a membrane coat formed by sec proteins that drive vesicle budding from the endoplasmic reticulum . Cell 1994 ; 77 : 895 - 907 . 49 . Lee MC , Miller EA , Goldberg J , Orci L , Schekman R . Bi - directional protein transport between the ER and Golgi . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2004 ; 20 : 87 - 123 . 50 . Devos D , Dokudovskaya S , Alber F , Williams R , Chait BT , Sali A , Rout MP . Components of coated vesicles and nuclear pore complexes share a common molecular architecture . PLoS Biol 2004 ; 2 : e380 . 51 . Gürkan C , Stagg SM , Lapointe P , Balch WE . The COPII cage : unifying principles of vesicle coat assembly . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2006 ; 7 : 727 - 738 . 52 . Unanue ER , Ungewickell E , Branton D . The binding of clathrin triskelions to membranes from coated vesicles . Cell 1981 ; 26 : 439 - 446 . 53 . Heuser JE . A budding field in cell biology . Cell 1980 ; 22 : 634 - 636 . 54 . Pearse BMF , Robinson MS . Purification and properties of 100 - kd proteins from coated vesicles and their reconstitution with clathrin . EMBO J 1984 ; 3 : 1951 - 1957 . 55 . Keen JH . Clathrin assembly proteins : affinity purification and a model for coat assembly . J Cell Biol 1987 ; 105 : 1989 - 1998 . 56 . Robinson MS , Pearse BMF . Immunofluorescent localization of 100K coated vesicle proteins . J Cell Biol 1986 ; 102 : 48 - 54 . 57 . Robinson MS . 100 - kD coated vesicle proteins : molecular heterogeneity and intracellular distribution studied with monoclonal antibodies . J Cell Biol 1987 ; 104 : 887 - 895 . 58 . Ahle S , Mann A , Eichelsbacher U , Ungewickell E . Structural relationships between clathrin assembly proteins from the Golgi and the plasma membrane . EMBO J 1988 ; 4 : 919 - 929 . 59 . Davis CG , Lehrman MA , Russell DW , Anderson RGW , Brown MS , Goldstein JL . The J . D . mutation in familial hypercholesterolemia : amino acid substitution in 40 cytoplasmic domain impedes internalization of LDL receptors . Cell 1998 ; 45 : 15 - 24 . 60 . Lazarovits J , Roth M . A single amino acid change in the cytoplasmic domain allows the influenza virus hemagglutinin to be endocytosed through coated pits . Cell 1988 ; 53 : 743 - 752 . 61 . Lobel P , Fujimoto K , Ye RD , Griffiths G , Kornfeld S . Mutations in the cytoplasmic domain of the 275 kd mannose 6 - phosphate receptor differentially alter lysosomal enzyme sorting and endocytosis . Cell 1989 ; 57 : 787 - 796 . 62 . Jing SQ , Spencer T , Miller K , Hopkins C , Trowbridge IS . Role of the human transferrin receptor cytoplasmic domain in endocytosis : localization of a specific signal sequence for internalization . J Cell Biol 1990 ; 110 : 283 - 294 . 63 . Naim HY , Roth MG . Characteristics of the internalization signal in the Y543 influenza virus hemagglutinin suggest a model for recognition of internalization signals containing tyrosine . J Biol Chem 1994 ; 269 : 3928 - 3933 . 64 . Jadot M , Canfield WM , Gregory W , Kornfeld S . Characterization of the signal for rapid internalization of the bovine mannose 6 - phosphate / insulin - like growth factor - II receptor . J Biol Chem 1992 ; 267 : 11069 - 11077 . 65 . Trowbridge IS , Collawn JF , Hopkins CR . Signal - dependent membrane protein trafficking in the endocytic pathway . Annu Rev Cell Biol 1993 ; 9 : 129 - 161 . 66 . Chen WJ , Goldstein JL , Brown MS . NPXY , a sequence often found in cytoplasmic tails , is required for coated pit - mediated internalization of the low density lipoprotein receptor . J Biol Chem 1990 ; 265 : 31163123 . 67 . Ohno H , Stewart J , Fournier MC , Bosshart H , Rhee I , Miyatake S , Saito T , Gallusser A , Kirchhausen T , Bonifacino JS . Interaction of tyrosine - based sorting signals with clathrin - associated proteins . Science 1995 ; 269 : 1872 - 1875 . 68 . Letourneur F , Klausner RD . A novel di - leucine motif and a tyrosine - based motif independently mediate lysosomal targeting and endocytosis of CD3 chains . Cell 1992 ; 69 : 1143 - 1157 . 69 . Janvier K , Kato Y , Boehm M , Rose JR , Martina JA , Kim BY , Venkatesan S , Bonifacino JS . Recognition of dileucine - based sorting signals from HIV - 1 Nef and LIMP II by the AP - 1 gamma - sigma1 and AP - 3 delta - sigma3 hemicomplexes . J Cell Biol 2003 ; 163 : 1281 - 1290 . 70 . Owen DJ , Evans PR . A structural explanation for the recognition of tyrosine - based endocytic signals . Science 1998 ; 282 : 1327 - 1332 . 71 . Collins BM , McCoy AJ , Kent HM , Evans PR , Owen DJ . Molecular architecture and functional model of the endocytic AP2 complex . Cell 2002 ; 109 : 523 - 535 . 72 . Jackson LP , Kelly BT , McCoy AJ , Gaffry T , James LC , Collins BM , Höning S , Evans PR , Owen DJ . A large - scale conformational change couples membrane recruitment to cargo binding in the AP2 clathrin adaptor complex . Cell 2010 ; 141 : 1220 - 1229 . 73 . Kelly BT , Graham SC , Liska N , Dannhauser PN , Höning S , Ungewickell EJ , Owen DJ . Clathrin adaptors . AP2 controls clathrin polymerization with a membrane - activated switch . Science 2014 ; 345 : 459 - 463 . 74 . Waters MG , Serafini T , Rothman JE . ' Coatomer ' : a cytosolic protein complex containing subunits of non - clathrin - coated Golgi transport vesicles . Nature 1991 ; 349 : 248 - 251 . 75 . Duden R , Griffiths G , Frank R , Argos P , Kreis TE . b - COP , a 100 kD protein associated with non - clathrin - coated vesicles and the Golgi complex , shows homology to b - adaptin . Cell 1991 ; 64 : 649 - 665 . 76 . Kreis TE , Lowe M , Pepperkok R . COPs regulating membrane traffic . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 1995 ; 11 : 677 - 706 . 77 . Simpson F , Bright NA , West MA , Newman LS , Darnell RB , Robinson MS . A 41 novel adaptor - related protein complex . J Cell Biol 1996 ; 133 : 749 - 760 . 78 . Dell ' Angelica EC , Ohno H , Ooi CE , Rabinovich E , Roche KW , Bonifacino JS . An adaptor - like protein complex with ubiquitous expression . EMBO J 1997 ; 16 : 917 - 928 . 79 . Dell ' Angelica EC , Ooi CE , Bonifacino JS . Beta3A - adaptin , a subunit of the adaptor - like complex AP - 3 . J Biol Chem 1997 ; 272 : 15078 - 15084 . 80 . Simpson F , Peden AA , Christopoulou L , Robinson MS . Characterisation of the adaptor - related protein complex , AP - 3 . J Cell Biol 1997 ; 137 : 835 - 845 . 81 . Dell ' Angelica EC , Mullins C , Bonifacino JS . AP - 4 , a novel protein complex related to clathrin adaptors . J Biol Chem 1999 ; 274 : 7278 - 7285 . 82 . Hirst J , Bright NA , Rous B , Robinson MS . Characterization of a fourth adaptor - related protein complex . Mol Biol Cell 1999 ; 10 : 2787 - 2802 . 83 . Shih W , Gallusser A , Kirchhausen T . A clathrin binding site in the hinge of the b2 chain of mammalian AP - 2 complexes . J Biol Chem 1995 ; 270 : 31083 - 31090 . 84 . Dell ' Angelica EC , Klumperman J , Stoorvogel W , Bonifacino JS . Association of the AP - 3 complex with clathrin . Science 1998 ; 280 : 431 - 434 . 85 . Peden AA , Ooeschot V , Hesser BA , Austin CD , Scheller RH , Klumperman J . Localization of the AP - 3 adaptor complex defines a novel endosomal exit site for lysosomal membrane proteins . J Cell Biol 2003 ; 164 : 1065 - 1076 . 86 . Kural C , Tacheva - Grigorova SK , Boulant S , Cocucci E , Baust T , Duarte D , Kirchhausen T . Dynamics of intracellular clathrin / AP1 - and clathrin / AP3 - containing carriers . Cell Rep 2012 ; 2 : 1111 - 1119 . 87 . Cowles CR , Odorizzi G , Payne GS , Emr SD . The AP - 3 adaptor complex is essential for cargo - selective transport to the yeast vacuole . Cell 1997 ; 91 : 109 - 118 . 88 . Peden AA , Rudge RE , Lui WW , Robinson MS . Assembly and function of AP - 3 complexes in cells expressing mutant subunits . J Cell Biol 2002 ; 156 : 327 - 336 . 89 . Aguilar RC , Boehm M , Gorshkova I , Crouch RJ , Tomita K , Saito T , Ohno H , Bonifacino JS . Signal - binding specificity of the mu4 subunit of the adaptor protein complex AP - 4 . J Biol Chem 2001 ; 276 : 13145 - 13152 . 90 . Field MC , Dacks JB . First and last ancestors : reconstructing evolution of the endomembrane system with ESCRTs , vesicle coat proteins , and nuclear pore complexes . Curr Opin Cell Biol 2009 ; 21 : 4 - 13 . 91 . Boehm M , Bonifacino JS . Adaptins : the final recount . Mol Biol Cell 2001 ; 12 : 2907 - 2920 . 92 . Robinson MS . Adaptable adaptors for coated vesicles . Trends Cell Biol 2004 ; 12 : 695 - 704 . 93 . Hirst J , Barlow LD , Francisco GC , Sahlender DA , Seaman MNJ , Dacks JB , Robinson MS . The fifth adaptor protein complex . PLoS Biol 2011 ; 9 : e1001170 . 94 . Hirst J , Schlacht A , Norcott JP , Traynor D , Bloomfield G , Antrobus R , Kay RR , Dacks JB , Robinson MS . Characterization of TSET , an ancient and widespread membrane trafficking complex . eLife 2014 ; 3 : e02866 . 95 . Reider A , Barker SL , Mishra SK , Im YJ , Maldonado - Baez L , Hurley JH , Traub LM , Wendland B . Syp1 is a conserved endocytic adaptor that contains domains involved in cargo selection and membrane tubulation . EMBO J 2009 ; 28 : 3103 - 3116 . 96 . Henne WM , Boucrot E , Meinecke M , Evergren E , Vallis Y , Mittal R , McMahon HT . FCHO proteins are nucleators of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Science 2010 ; 328 : 1281 - 1284 . 97 . Umasankar PK , Sanker S , Thieman JR , Chakraborty S , Wendland B , Tsang M , Traub LM . Distinct and separable activities of the endocytic clathrin - coat components Fcho1 / 2 and AP - 2 in developmental patterning . Nat Cell Biol 2012 ; 14 : 488 - 501 . 98 . Mayers JR , Wang L , Pramanik J , Johnson A , Sarkeshik A , Wang Y , Saengsawang W , Yates JRr , Audhya A . Regulation of ubiquitin - dependent cargo sorting 42 by multiple endocytic adaptors at the plasma membrane . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2013 ; 110 : 11875 - 11862 . 99 . Umasankar PK , Ma L , Thieman JR , Jha A , Doray B , Watkins SC , Traub LM . A clathrin coat assembly role for the muniscin protein central linker revealed by TALEN - mediated gene editing . eLife 2014 ; 3 : e04137 . 100 . Hollopeter G , Lange JJ , Zhang Y , Vu TN , Gu M , Ailion M , Lambie EJ , Slaughter BD , Unruh JR , Florens L , Jorgensen EM . The membrane - associated proteins FCHo and SGIP are allosteric activators of the AP2 clathrin adaptor complex . eLife 2014 ; 3 : e03648 . 101 . Van Damme D , Coutuer S , De Rycke R , Bouget FY , Inzé D , Geelen D . Somatic cytokinesis and pollen maturation in Arabidopsis depend on TPLATE , which has domains similar to coat proteins . Plant Cell 2006 ; 18 : 3502 - 3518 . 102 . Van Damme D , Gadeyne A , Vanstraelen M , Inzé D , Van Montagu MC , De Jaeger G , Russinova E , Geelen D . Adaptin - like protein TPLATE and clathrin recruitment during plant somatic cytokinesis occurs via two distinct pathways . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011 ; 108 : 615 - 620 . 103 . Gadeyne A , Sanchez - Rodriguez C , Vanneste S , Di Rubbo S , Zauber H , Vanneste K , Van Leene J , De Winne N , Eeckhout D , Persiau G , Van De Slijke E , Cannoot B , Vercruysse L , Mayers JR , Adamowski M , et al . The TPLATE adaptor complex drives clathrin - mediated endocytosis in plants . Cell 2014 ; 156 : 691 - 704 . 104 . Morris SM , Cooper JA . Disabled - 2 colocalizes with the LDLR in clathrin - coated pits and interacts with AP - 2 . Traffic 2001 ; 2 : 111 - 123 . 105 . Garcia CK , Wilund K , Arca M , Zuliani G , Fellin R , Maioli M , Calandra S , Bertolini S , Cossu F , Grishin N , Barnes R , Cohen JC , Hobbs HH . Autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia caused by mutations in a putative LDL receptor adaptor protein . Science 2001 ; 292 : 1394 - 1398 . 106 . He G , Gupta S , Yi M , Michaely P , Hobbs HH , Cohen JC . ARH is a modular adaptor protein that interacts with the LDL receptor , clathrin , and AP - 2 . J Biol Chem 2002 ; 277 : 44044 - 44049 . 107 . Mishra SK , Keyel PA , Hawryluk MJ , Agostinelli NR , Watkins SC , Traub LM . Disabled - 2 exhibits the properties of a cargo - selective endocytic clathrin adaptor . EMBO J 2002 ; 21 : 4915 - 4926 . 108 . Mishra SK , Watkins SC , Traub LM . The autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia ( ARH ) protein interfaces directly with the clathrin - coat machinery . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002 ; 99 : 16099 - 16104 . 109 . Andrews J , Smith M , Merakovsky J , Coulson M , Hannan F , Kelly LE . The stoned locus of Drosophila melanogaster produces a dicistronic transcript and encodes two distinct polypeptides . Genetics 1996 ; 143 : 1699 - 1711 . 110 . Hirst J , Lui WWY , Bright NA , Totty N , Seaman MNJ , Robinson MS . A family of proteins with g - adaptin and VHS domains that facilitate trafficking between the TGN and the vacuole / lysosome . J Cell Biol 2000 ; 149 : 67 - 79 . 111 . Dell ' Angelica EC , Puertollano R , Mullins C , Aguilar RC , Vargas JD , Hartnell LM , Bonifacino JS . GGAs : a family of ADP ribosylation factor - binding proteins related to adaptors and associated with the Golgi complex . J Cell Biol 2000 ; 149 : 81 - 93 . 112 . Martina JA , Bonangelino CJ , Aguilar RC , Bonifacino JS . Stonin2 : an adaptor - like protein that interacts with components of the endocytic machinery . J Cell Biol 2001 ; 153 : 1111 - 1120 . 113 . Misra S , Puertollano R , Kato Y , Bonifacino JS , Hurley JH . Structural basis for acidic - cluster - dileucine sorting - signal recognition by VHS domains . Nature 2002 ; 21 : 933 - 937 . 114 . Walther K , Diril MK , Jung N , Haucke V . Functional dissection of the interactions of stonin 2 with the adaptor complex AP - 2 and synaptotagmin . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 43 2004 ; 101 : 964 - 969 . 115 . Phillips AM , Ramaswami M , Kelly LE . Stoned . Traffic 2010 ; 11 : 16 - 24 . 116 . Luan S , Ilvarsonn AM , Eissenberg JC . The unique GGA clathrin adaptor of Drosophila melanogaster is not essential . PLoS One 2012 ; 7 : e45163 . 117 . Costaguta C , Stefan CJ , Bensen ES , Emr SD , Payne GS . Yeast Gga proteins function with clathrin in Golgi to endosome transport . Mol Biol Cell 2001 ; 12 : 1885 - 1896 . 118 . Hirst J , Lindsay M , Robinson MS . GGAs : Roles of the different domains and comparison with AP - 1 and clathrin . Mol Biol Cell 2001 ; 12 : 3573 - 3588 . 119 . Field MC , Gabernet - Castello C , Dacks JB . Reconstructing the evolution of the endocytic system : insights from genomics and molecular cell biology . Adv Exp Med Biol 2007 ; 607 : 84 - 96 . 120 . Wideman JG , Leung KF , Field MC , Dacks JB . The cell biology of the endocytic system from an evolutionary perspective . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016998 . 121 . Manna PT , Gadelha C , Puttick AE , Field MC . ENTH and ANTH domain proteins participate in AP2 - independent clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J Cell Sci 2015 ; 128 : 2130 - 2142 . 122 . Chidambaram S , Mullers N , Wiederhold K , Haucke V , von Mollard GF . Specific interaction between SNAREs and epsin N - terminal homology ( ENTH ) domains of epsin - related proteins in trans - Golgi network to endosome transport . J Biol Chem 2004 ; 279 : 4175 - 4179 . 123 . Hirst J , Miller SE , Taylor MJ , von Mollard GF , Robinson MS . EpsinR is an adaptor for the SNARE protein vti1b . Mol Biol Cell 2004 ; 15 : 5593 - 5602 . 124 . Nonet ML , Holgado AM , Brewer F , Serpe CJ , Norbeck BA , Holleran J , Wei L , Hartwieg E , Jorgensen EM , Alfonso A . UNC - 11 , a Caenorhabditis elegans AP180 homologue , regulates the size and protein composition of synaptic vesicles . Mol Biol Cell 1999 ; 10 : 2343 - 2360 . 125 . Sollner T , Whiteheart SW , Brunner M , Erdjument - Bromage H , Geromanos S , Tempst P , Rothman JE . SNAP receptors implicated in vesicle targeting and fusion . Nature 1993 ; 362 : 318 - 324 . 126 . Miller SE , Collins BM , McCoy AJ , Robinson MS , Owen DJ . A SNARE - adaptor interaction is a new mode of cargo recognition in clathrin - coated vesicles . Nature 2007 ; 450 : 570 - 574 . 127 . Miller SE , Sahlender DA , Graham SC , Höning S , Robinson MS , Peden AA , Owen DJ . The molecular basis for the endocytosis of small R - SNAREs by the clathrin adaptor CALM . Cell 2011 ; 147 : 1118 - 1131 . 128 . Kozik P , Francis RW , Seaman MNJ , Robinson MS . A screen for endocytic motifs . Traffic 2010 ; 11 : 843 - 855 . 129 . Wasiak S , Legendre - Guillemin V , Puertollano R , Blondeau F , Girard M , de Heuvel E , Boismenu D , Bell AW , Bonifacino JS , McPherson PS . Enthoprotin : a novel clathrin - associated protein identified through subcellular proteomics . J Cell Biol 2002 ; 158 : 855 - 862 . 130 . Lui W , Y , , Collins BM , Hirst J , Motley A , Millar C , Schu P , Owen DM , Robinson MS . Binding partners for the COOH - terminal appendage domains of the GGAs and gamma - adaptin . Mol Biol Cell 2003 ; 14 : 2385 - 2398 . 131 . Blondeau F , Ritter B , Allaire PD , Wasiak S , Girard M , Hussain NK , Angers A , Legendre - Guillemin V , Roy L , Boismenu D , Kearney RE , Bell AW , Bergeron JJ , McPherson PS . Tandem MS analysis of brain clathrin - coated vesicles reveals their critical involvement in synaptic vesicle recycling . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004 ; 101 : 3833 - 3838 . 132 . Mattera R , Ritter B , Sidhu SS , McPherson PS , Bonifacino JS . Definition of the 44 consensus motif recognized by gamma - adaptin ear domains . J Biol Chem 2004 ; 279 : 8018 - 8028 . 133 . Praefcke GJ , Ford MG , Schmid EM , Olesen LE , Gallop JL , Peak - Chew SY , Vallis Y , Babu MM , Mills IG , McMahon HT . Evolving nature of the AP2 alpha - appendage hub during clathrin - coated vesicle endocytosis . EMBO J 2004 ; 23 : 4371 - 4383 . 134 . Girard M , Allaire PD , McPherson PS , Blondeau F . Non - stoichiometric relationship between clathrin heavy and light chains revealed by quantitative comparative proteomics of clathrin - coated vesicles from brain and liver . Mol Cell Proteomics 2005 ; 4 : 1145 - 1154 . 135 . Borner GHH , Antrobus R , Hirst J , Bhumbra GS , Kozik P , Jackson LP , Sahlender DA , Robinson MS . Multivariate proteomic profiling identifies novel accessory proteins of coated vesicles . J Cell Biol 2012 ; 197 : 141 - 160 . 136 . Borner GHH , Harbour M , Hester S , Lilley KS , Robinson MS . Comparative proteomics of clathrin - coated vesicles . J Cell Biol 2006 ; 175 : 571 - 578 . 137 . Schmid EM , Ford MG , Burtey A , Praefcke GJ , Peak - Chew SY , Mills IG , Benmerah A , McMahon HT . Role of the AP2 beta - appendage hub in recruiting partners for clathrin - coated vesicle assembly . PLoS Biol 2006 ; 4 : e262 . 138 . Borner GHH , Hirst J , Hein MY , Edgar J , Mann M , Robinson MS . Fractionation profiling : a fast and versatile approach for mapping vesicle proteomes and protein - protein interactions . Mol Biol Cell 2014 ; In press . 139 . Hirst J , Borner GHH , Antrobus R , Peden AA , Hodson NA , Sahlender DA , Robinson MS . Distinct and overlapping roles for AP - 1 and GGAs revealed by the " knocksideways " system . Curr Biol 2012 ; 22 : 1711 - 1716 . 140 . Hirst J , Edgar JE , Borner GHH , Li S , Sahlender DA , Antrobus R , Robinson MS . Contributions of epsinR and gadkin to clathrin - mediated intracellular trafficking . Mol Biol Cell 2015 ; In press . 141 . Ford MG , Mills IG , Peter BJ , Vallis Y , Praefcke GJ , Evans PR , McMahon HT . Curvature of clathrin - coated pits driven by epsin . Nature 2002 ; 419 : 361 - 366 . 142 . Miller SE , Mathiasen S , Bright NA , Pierre F , Kelly BT , Kladt N , Schauss A , Merrifield CJ , Stamou D , Höning S , Owen DJ . CALM Regulates Clathrin - Coated Vesicle Size and Maturation by Directly Sensing and Driving Membrane Curvature . Dev Cell 2015 ; 33 : 163 - 175 . 143 . Kübler E , Riezman H . Actin and fimbrin are required for the internalization step of endocytosis in yeast . EMBO J 1993 ; 12 : 2855 - 2862 . 144 . Benedetti H , Raths S , Crausaz F , Riezman H . The END3 gene encodes a protein that is required for the internalization step of endocytosis and for actin cytoskeleton organization in yeast . Mol Biol Cell 1994 ; 5 : 1023 - 1037 . 145 . Hicke L , Riezman H . Ubiquitination of a yeast plasma membrane receptor signals its ligand - stimulated endocytosis . Cell 1996 ; 84 : 277 - 287 . 146 . Grant BD , Hirsh D . Receptor - mediated endocytosis in the Caenorhabditis elegans oocyte . Mol Biol Cell 1999 ; 10 : 4311 - 4326 . 147 . Sato M , Sato K , Fonarev P , Huang CJ , Liou W , Grant BD . Caenorhabditis elegans RME - 6 is a novel regulator of RAB - 5 at the clathrin - coated pit . Nat Cell Biol 2005 ; 7 : 559 - 569 . 148 . Pelkmans L , Fava E , Grabner H , Hannus M , Habermann B , Krausz E , Zerial M . Genome - wide analysis of human kinases in clathrin - and caveolae / raft - mediated endocytosis . Nature 2005 ; 436 : 78 - 86 . 149 . Collinet C , Stöter M , Bradshaw CR , Samusik N , Rink JC , Kenski D , Habermann B , Buchholz F , Henschel R , Mueller MS , Nagel WE , Fava E , Kalaidzidis Y , Zerial M . Systems survey of endocytosis by multiparametric image analysis . Nature 2010 ; 464 : 243 - 249 . 45 150 . Kozik P , Hodson NA , Sahlender DA , Simecek N , Soromani C , Wu J , Collinson LM , Robinson MS . A human genome - wide screen for regulators of clathrin - coated vesicle formation reveals an unexpected role for the V - ATPase . Nat Cell Biol 2013 ; 15 : 50 - 60 . 151 . Rodal SK , Skretting G , Garred O , Vilhardt F , van Deurs B , Sandvig K . Extraction of cholesterol with methyl - beta - cyclodextrin perturbs formation of clathrin - coated endocytic vesicles . Mol Biol Cell 1999 ; 10 : 961 - 974 . 152 . Subtil A , Gaidarov I , Kobylarz K , Lampson MA , Keen JH , McGraw TE . Acute cholesterol depletion inhibits clathrin - coated pit budding . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999 ; 96 : 6775 - 6780 . 153 . Gaidarov I , Santini F , Warret RA , Keen JH . Spatial control of coated - pit dynamics in living cells . Nature Cell Biol 1999 ; 1 : 1 - 7 . 154 . Merrifield CJ , Perrais D , Zenisek D . Coupling between clathrin - coated - pit invagination , cortactin recruitment , and membrane scission observed in live cells . Cell 2005 ; 1212 : 593 - 606 . 155 . Taylor MJ , Perrais D , Merrifield CJ . A high precision survey of the molecular dynamics of mammalian clathrin - mediated endocytosis . PLoS Biol 2011 ; e1000604 . 156 . Loerke D , Mettlen M , Yarar D , Jaqaman K , Jaqaman H , Danuser G , Schmid SL . Cargo and dynamin regulate clathrin - coated pit maturation . PLoS Biol 2009 ; 7 : e57 . 157 . Cocucci E , Aguet F , Boulant S , Kirchhausen T . The first five seconds in the life of a clathrin - coated pit . Cell 2012 ; 150 : 495 - 507 . 158 . Beck KA , Keen JH . Interaction of phosphoinositide cycle intermediates with the plasma membrane - associated clathrin assembly protein AP - 2 . J Biol Chem 1991 ; 266 : 4442 - 4447 . 159 . Cremona O , Di Paolo G , Wenk MR , Luthi A , Kim WT , Takei K , Daniell L , Nemoto Y , Shears SB , Flavell RA , McCormick DA , De Camilli P . Essential role of phosphoinositide metabolism in synaptic vesicle recycling . Cell 1999 ; 99 : 179 - 188 . 160 . Honing S , Ricotta D , Krauss M , Spate K , Spolaore B , Motley A , Robinson M , Robinson C , Haucke V , Owen DJ . Phosphatidylinositol - ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate regulates sorting signal recognition by the clathrin - associated adaptor complex AP2 . Mol Cell 2005 ; 18 : 519 - 531 . 161 . Hinshaw JE , Schmid SL . Dynamin self - assembles into rings suggesting a mechanism for coated vesicle budding . Nature 1995 ; 374 : 190 - 192 . 162 . Takei K , McPherson PS , Schmid SL , De Camilli P . Tubular membrane invaginations coated by dynamin rings are induced by GTP - gamma S in nerve terminals . Nature 1995 ; 37 : 186 - 190 . 163 . Ferguson SM , De Camilli P . Dynamin , a membrane - remodelling GTPase . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2012 ; 13 : 75 - 88 . 164 . Taylor MJ , Lampe M , Merrifield CJ . A feedback loop between dynamin and actin recruitment during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . PLoS Biol 2012 ; 10 : e1001302 . 165 . Fujimoto LM , Roth R , Heuser JE , Schmid SL . Actin assembly plays a variable , but not obligatory role in receptor - mediated endocytosis in mammalian cells . Traffic 2000 ; 1 : 161 - 171 . 166 . Posor Y , Eichhorn - Gruenig M , Puchkov D , Schöneberg J , Ullrich A , Lampe A , Müller R , Zarbakhsh S , Gulluni F , Hirsch E , Krauss M , Schultz C , Schmoranzer J , Noé F , Haucke V . Spatiotemporal control of endocytosis by phosphatidylinositol - 3 , 4 - bisphosphate . Nature 2013 ; 499 : 233 - 237 . 167 . Guan R , Dai H , Harrison SC , Kirchhausen T . Structure of the PTEN - like region of auxilin , a detector of clathrin - coated vesicle budding . Structure 2010 ; 18 : 1191 - 1198 . 168 . Wang YJ , Wang J , Sun HQ , Martinez M , Sun YX , Macia E , Kirchhausen T , Albanesi JP , Roth MG , Yin HL . Phosphatidylinositol 4 phosphate regulates targeting of 46 clathrin adaptor AP - 1 complexes to the Golgi . Cell 2003 ; 114 : 299 - 310 . 169 . Ren X , Farías GG , Canagarajah BJ , Bonifacino JS , Hurley JH . Structural basis for recruitment and activation of the AP - 1 clathrin adaptor complex by Arf1 . Cell 2013 ; 152 : 755 - 767 . 170 . Le Borgne R , Griffiths G , Hoflack B . Mannose 6 - phosphate receptors and ADP - ribosylation factors cooperate for high affinity interaction of the AP - 1 Golgi assembly proteins with membranes . J Biol Chem 1996 ; 271 : 2162 - 2170 . 171 . Crottet P , Meyer DM , Rohrer J , Spiess M . ARF1 . GTP , tyrosine - based signals , and phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate constitute a minimal machinery to recruit the AP - 1 clathrin adaptor to membranes . Mol Biol Cell 2002 ; 13 : 3672 - 3682 . 172 . Lee I , Doray B , Govero J , Kornfeld S . Binding of cargo sorting signals to AP - 1 enhances its association with ADP ribosylation factor 1 - GTP . J Cell Biol 2008 ; 180 : 467 – 472 . 173 . Lee I , Drake MT , Traub LM , Kornfeld S . Cargo - sorting signals promote polymerization of adaptor protein - 1 in an Arf - 1 . GTP - independent manner . Arch Biochem Biophys 2008 ; 479 : 63 – 68 . 174 . Mayor S , Parton RG , Donaldson JG . Clathrin - independent pathways of endocytosis . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016758 . 175 . Marsh M , Helenius A . Adsorptive endocytosis of Semliki Forest virus . J Mol Biol 1980 ; 142 : 439 - 454 . 176 . Bitsikas V , Corrêa IRJ , Nichols BJ . Clathrin - independent pathways do not contribute significantly to endocytic flux . eLife 2014 ; 3 : e03970 . 177 . Damke H , Baba T , van der Bliek AM , Schmid SL . Clathrin - independent pinocytosis is induced in cells overexpressing a temperature - sensitive mutant of dynamin . J Cell Biol 1995 ; 131 : 69 - 80 . 178 . Carpenter G , Cohen S . 125I - labeled human epidermal growth factor . Binding , internalization , and degradation in human fibroblasts . J Cell Biol 1976 ; 71 : 159 - 171 . 179 . Goh LK , Huang F , Kim W , Gygi S , Sorkin A . Multiple mechanisms collectively regulate clathrin - mediated endocytosis of the epidermal growth factor receptor . J Cell Biol 2010 ; 189 : 871 - 883 . 180 . Stoscheck CM , Carpenter G . Down regulation of epidermal growth factor receptors : direct demonstration of receptor degradation in human fibroblasts . J Cell Biol 1984 ; 98 : 1048 - 1053 . 181 . Vieira AV , Lamaze C , Schmid SL . Control of EGF receptor signaling by clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Science 1996 ; 274 : 2086 - 2089 . 182 . Hayes S , Chawla A , Corvera S . TGF beta receptor internalization into EEA1 - enriched early endosomes : role in signaling to Smad2 . J Cell Biol 2002 ; 158 : 1239 - 1249 . 183 . Seto ES , Bellen HJ , Lloyd TE . When cell biology meets development : endocytic regulation of signaling pathways . Genes Dev 2002 ; 16 : 1314 - 1336 . 184 . Uemura T , Shepherd S , Ackerman L , Jan LY , Jan YN . numb , a gene required in determination of cell fate during sensory organ formation in Drosophila embryos . Cell 1989 ; 58 : 349 - 360 . 185 . Gertler FB , Bennett RL , Clark MJ , Hoffmann FM . Drosophila abl tyrosine kinase in embryonic CNS axons : a role in axonogenesis is revealed through dosage - sensitive interactions with disabled . Cell 1989 ; 58 : 103 - 113 . 186 . Grigliatti TA , Hall L , Rosenbluth R , Suzuki DT . Temperature - sensitive mutations in Drosophila melanogaster . XIV . A selection of immobile adults . Mol Gen Genet 1973 ; 120 : 107 - 114 . 187 . Van der Bliek AM , Meyerowitz EM . Dynamin - like protein encoded by the Drosophila shibire gene associated with vesicular traffic . Nature 1991 ; 351 : 411 - 414 . 188 . Chen MS , Obar RA , Schroeder CC , Austin TW , Poodry CA , Wadsworth SA , 47 Vallee RB . Multiple forms of dynamin are encoded by shibire , a Drosophila gene involved in endocytosis . Nature 1991 ; 351 : 583 - 586 . 189 . Poodry CA , Hall L , Suzuki DT . Developmental properties of Shibire : a pleiotropic mutation affecting larval and adult locomotion and development . Dev Biol 1973 ; 32 : 373 - 386 . 190 . Morgan TH , Bridges CB . Sex - linked inheritance in Drosophila . Publs Carnegie Instn 1916 ; 237 : 1 - 88 . 191 . Sharma RP , Chopra VL . Effect of the Wingless ( wg1 ) mutation on wing and haltere development in Drosophila melanogaster . Dev Biol 1976 ; 48 : 461 - 465 . 192 . Lobry C , Oh P , Aifantis I . Oncogenic and tumor suppressor functions of Notch in cancer : it ' s NOTCH what you think . J Exp Med 2011 ; 208 : 1931 - 1935 . 193 . Polakis P . Wnt signaling in cancer . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2012 ; 4 : a008052 . 194 . Liu SH , Marks MS , Brodsky FM . A dominant - negative clathrin mutant differentially affects trafficking of molecules with distinct sorting motifs in the class II major histocompatibility complex ( MHC ) pathway . J Cell Biol 1998 ; 140 : 1023 - 1037 . 195 . McCormick PJ , Martina JA , Bonifacino JS . Involvement of clathrin and AP - 2 in the trafficking of MHC class II molecules to antigen - processing compartments . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005 ; 102 : 7910 - 7915 . 196 . Dugast M , Toussaint H , Dousset C , Benaroch P . AP2 clathrin adaptor complex , but not AP1 , controls the access of the major histocompatibility complex ( MHC ) class II to endosomes . J Biol Chem 2005 ; 280 : 19656 - 19664 . 197 . Kang BH , Nielsen E , Preuss ML , Mastronarde D , Staehelin LA . Electron tomography of RabA4b - and PI - 4K β 1 - labeled trans Golgi network compartments in Arabidopsis . Traffic 2011 ; 12 : 313 - 329 . 198 . Franke WW , Herth W . Morphological evidence for de novo formation of plasma membrane from coated vesicles in exponentially growing cultured plant cells . Exp Cell Res 1974 ; 89 : 447 - 451 . 199 . Meyer C , Zizioli D , Lausmann S , Eskelinen EL , Hamann J , Saftig P , von Figura K , Schu P . mu1A - adaptin - deficient mice : lethality , loss of AP - 1 binding and rerouting of mannose 6 - phsophate receptors . EMBO J 2000 ; 19 : 2193 - 2203 . 200 . Hirst J , Motley A , Harasaki K , Peak Chew SY , Robinson MS . EpsinR : an ENTH Domain - containing protein that interacts with AP - 1 . Mol Biol Cell 2003 ; 14 : 625 - 641 . 201 . Kornfeld S . Lysosomal enzyme targeting . Biochem Soc Trans 1990 ; 18 : 367 - 374 . 202 . Robinson MS , Sahlender DA , Foster SD . Rapid inactivation of proteins by rapamycin - induced rerouting to mitochondria . Dev Cell 2010 ; 18 : 324 - 331 . 203 . Foote C , Nothwehr SF . The clathrin adaptor complex 1 directly binds to a sorting signal in Ste13p to reduce the rate of its trafficking to the late endosome of yeast . J Cell Biol 2006 ; 173 : 615 - 626 . 204 . Canuel M , Lefrancois S , Zeng J , Morales CR . AP - 1 and retromer play opposite roles in the trafficking of sortilin between the Golgi apparatus and the lysosomes . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2008 ; 366 : 724 - 730 . 205 . Ohno H , Tomemori T , Nakatsu F , Okazaki Y , Aguilar RC , Foelsch H , Mellman I , Saito T , Shirasawa T , Bonifacino JS . Mu1B , a novel adaptor medium chain expressed in polarized epithelial cells . FEBS Lett 1999 ; 449 : 215 - 220 . 206 . Folsch H , Ohno H , Bonifacino JS , Mellman I . A novel clathrin adaptor complex mediates basolateral targeting in polarized epithelial cells . Cell 1999 ; 99 : 189 - 198 . 207 . Gravotta D , Carvajal - Gonzalez JM , Mattera R , Deborde S , Banfelder JR , Bonifacino JS , Rodriguez - Boulan E . The clathrin adaptor AP - 1A mediates basolateral polarity . Dev Cell 2012 ; 22 : 811 - 823 . 48 208 . Guo X , Mattera R , Ren X , Chen Y , Retamal C , González A , Bonifacino JS . The adaptor protein - 1 µ1B subunit expands the repertoire of basolateral sorting signal recognition in epithelial cells . Dev Cell 2013 ; 27 . 209 . Margeta MA , Wang GJ , Shen K . Clathrin adaptor AP - 1 complex excludes multiple postsynaptic receptors from axons in C . elegans . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009 ; 106 : 1632 - 1637 . 210 . Farías GG , Cuitino L , Guo X , Ren X , Jarnik M , Mattera R , Bonifacino JS . Signal - mediated , AP - 1 / clathrin - dependent sorting of transmembrane receptors to the somatodendritic domain of hippocampal neurons . Neuron 2012 ; 75 : 810 - 823 . 211 . Bonifacino JS . Adaptor proteins involved in polarized sorting . J Cell Biol 2014 ; 204 : 7 - 17 . 212 . Orci L , Ravazzola M , Amherdt M , Louvard D , Perrelet A . Clathrin - immunoreactive sites in the Golgi apparatus are concentrated at the trans pole in polypeptide hormone - secreting cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1985 ; 82 : 5385 - 5389 . 213 . Tooze J , Tooze SA . Clathrin - coated vesicular transport of secretory proteins during the formation of ACTH - containing secretory granules in AtT20 cells . J Cell Biol 1986 ; 103 : 839 - 850 . 214 . Dittie AS , Hajibagheri N , Tooze SA . The AP - 1 adaptor complex binds to immature secretory granules from PC12 cells , and is regulated by ADP - ribosylation factor . J Cell Biol 1996 ; 1996 : 523 - 536 . 215 . Klumperman J , Kuliawat R , Griffith JM , Geuze HJ , Arvan P . Mannose 6 - phosphate receptors are sorted from immature secretory granules via adaptor protein AP - 1 , clathrin , and syntaxin 6 - positive vesicles . J Cell Biol 1998 ; 141 : 359 - 371 . 216 . Dittié AS , Klumperman J , Tooze SA . Differential distribution of mannose - 6 - phosphate receptors and furin in immature secretory granules . J Cell Sci 1999 ; 112 : 3955 - 3966 . 217 . Smith RE , Farquhar MG . Lysosome function in the regulation of the secretory process in cells of the anterior pituitary gland . J Cell Biol 1966 ; 31 : 319 - 347 . 218 . Prekeris R , Klumperman J , Chen YA , Scheller RH . Syntaxin 13 mediates cycling of plasma membrane proteins via tubulovesicular recycling endosomes . J Cell Biol 1998 ; 143 : 957 - 971 . 219 . Prekeris R , Yang B , Oorschot V , Klumperman J , Scheller RH . Differential roles of syntaxin 7 and syntaxin 8 in endosomal trafficking . Mol Biol Cell 1999 ; 10 : 3891 - 3908 . 220 . Sachse M , Urbé S , Oorschot V , Strous GJ , Klumperman J . Bilayered clathrin coats on endosomal vacuoles are involved in protein sorting toward lysosomes . Mol Biol Cell 2002 ; 13 : 1313 - 1328 . 221 . Raiborg C , Bache KG , Mehlum A , Stang E , Stenmark H . Hrs recruits clathrin to early endosomes . EMBO J 2001 ; 20 : 5008 - 5021 . 222 . Raiborg C , Bache KG , Gillooly DJ , Madshus IH , Stang E , Stenmark H . Hrs sorts ubiquitinated proteins into clathrin - coated microdomains of early endosomes . Nat Cell Biol 2002 ; 4 : 394 - 398 . 223 . Williams RL , Urbé S . The emerging shape of the ESCRT machinery . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2007 ; 8 : 355 - 368 . 224 . Jain S , Farías GG , Bonifacino JS . Polarized sorting of the copper transporter ATP7B in neurons mediated by recognition of a dileucine signal by AP - 1 . Mol Biol Cell 2015 ; 26 : 218 - 228 . 225 . Yi L , Kaler SG . Direct interactions of adaptor protein complexes 1 and 2 with the copper transporter ATP7A mediate its anterograde and retrograde trafficking . Hum Mol Genet 2015 ; 24 : 2411 - 2425 . 226 . Petris MJ , Camakaris J , Greenough M , LaFontaine S , Mercer JF . A C - terminal di - leucine is required for localization of the Menkes protein in the trans - Golgi network . 49 Hum Mol Genet 1998 ; 7 : 2063 - 2071 . 227 . Francis MJ , Jones EE , Levy ER , Martin RL , Ponnambalam S , Monaco AP . Identification of a di - leucine motif within the C terminus domain of the Menkes disease protein that mediates endocytosis from the plasma membrane . J Cell Sci 1999 ; 112 : 1721 - 1732 . 228 . Nordstedt C , Caporaso GL , Thyberg J , Gandy SE , Greengard P . Identification of the Alzheimer beta / A4 amyloid precursor protein in clathrin - coated vesicles purified from PC12 cells . J Biol Chem 1993 ; 268 : 608 - 612 . 229 . Cossec JC , Simon A , Marquer C , Moldrich RX , Leterrier C , Rossier J , Duyckaerts C , Lenkei Z , Potier MC . Clathrin - dependent APP endocytosis and Abeta secretion are highly sensitive to the level of plasma membrane cholesterol . Biochim Biophys Acta 2010 ; 180 : 846 - 852 . 230 . Icking A , Amaddii M , Ruonala M , Höning S , Tikkanen R . Polarized transport of Alzheimer amyloid precursor protein is mediated by adaptor protein complex AP1 - 1B . Traffic 2007 ; 8 : 285 - 296 . 231 . Haass C , Kaether C , Thinakaran G , Sisodia S . Trafficking and proteolytic processing of APP . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2012 ; 2 : a006270 . 232 . Harold D , Abraham R , Hollingworth P , Sims R , Gerrish A , Hamshere ML , Pahwa JS , Moskvina V , Dowzell K , Williams A , Jones N , Thomas C , Stretton A , Morgan AR , Lovestone S , et al . Genome - wide association study identifies variants at CLU and PICALM associated with Alzheimer ' s disease . Nat Genet 2009 ; 41 : 1088 - 1093 . 233 . Nielsen MS , Gustafsen C , Madsen P , Nyengaard JR , Hermey G , Bakke O , Mari M , Schu P , Pohlmann R , Dennes A , Petersen CM . Sorting by the cytoplasmic domain of the amyloid precursor protein binding receptor SorLA . Mol Cell Biol 2007 ; 27 : 6842 - 6851 . 234 . Herskowitz JH , Offe K , Deshpande A , Kahn RA , Levey AI , Lah JJ . GGA1 - mediated endocytic traffic of LR11 / SorLA alters APP intracellular distribution and amyloid - β production . Mol Biol Cell 2012 ; 23 : 2645 - 2657 . 235 . He X , Li F , Chang WP , Tang J . GGA proteins mediate the recycling pathway of memapsin 2 ( BACE ) . J Biol Chem 2005 ; 280 : 11696 - 11703 . 236 . Chia PZ , Toh WH , Sharples R , Gasnereau I , Hill AF , Gleeson PA . Intracellular itinerary of internalised β - secretase , BACE1 , and its potential impact on β - amyloid peptide biogenesis . Traffic 2013 ; 14 : 997 - 1013 . 237 . Zhao Z , Sagare AP , Ma Q , Halliday MR , Kong P , Kisler K , Winkler EA , Ramanathan A , Kanekiyo T , Bu G , Owens NC , Rege SV , Si G , Ahuja A , Zhu D , et al . Central role for PICALM in amyloid - β blood - brain barrier transcytosis and clearance . Nat Neurosci 2015 ; 10 : 1038 / nn . 4025 . 238 . Zizioli D , Meyer C , Guhde G , Saftig P , von Figura K , Schu P . Early embryonic death of mice deficient in g - adaptin . J Biol Chem 1999 ; 274 : 5385 - 5390 . 239 . Mitsunari T , Nakatsu F , Shioda N , Love PE , Grinberg A , Bonifacino JS , Ohno H . Clathrin adaptor AP - 2 is essential for early embryonal development . Mol Cell Biol 2005 ; 25 : 9328 - 9323 . 240 . Tarpey PS , Stevens C , Teague J , Edkins S , O ' Meara S , Avis T , Barthorpe S , Buck G , Butler A , Cole J , Dicks E , Gray K , Halliday K , Harrison R , Hills K , et al . Mutations in the gene encoding the Sigma 2 subunit of the adaptor protein 1 complex , AP1S2 , cause X - linked mental retardation . Am J Hum Genet 2006 ; 79 : 1119 - 1124 . 241 . Montpetit A , Côté S , Brustein E , Drouin CA , Lapointe L , Boudreau M , Meloche C , Drouin R , Hudson TJ , Drapeau P , Cossette P . Disruption of AP1S1 , causing a novel neurocutaneous syndrome , perturbs development of the skin and spinal cord . PLoS Genet 2008 ; 4 : e1000296 . 242 . Setta - Kaffetzi N , Simpson MA , Navarini AA , Patel VM , Lu HC , Allen MH , Duckworth M , Bachelez H , Burden AD , Choon SE , Griffiths CE , Kirby B , Kolios A , 50 Seyger MM , Prins C , et al . AP1S3 mutations are associated with pustular psoriasis and impaired Toll - like receptor 3 trafficking . Am J Hum Genet 2014 ; 94 ( 790 - 797 ) . 243 . Martinelli D , Travaglini L , Drouin CA , Ceballos - Picot I , Rizza T , Bertini E , Carrozzo R , Petrini S , de Lonlay P , El Hachem M , Hubert L , Montpetit A , Torre G , Dionisi - Vici C . MEDNIK syndrome : a novel defect of copper metabolism treatable by zinc acetate therapy . Brain 2013 ; 136 : 872 - 881 . 244 . Baltes J , Larsen JV , Radhakrishnan K , Geumann C , Kratzke M , Petersen CM , Schu P . σ 1B adaptin regulates adipogenesis by mediating the sorting of sortilin in adipose tissue . J Cell Sci 2014 ; 127 : 3477 - 3487 . 245 . Wakeham DE , Abi - Rached L , Towler MC , Wilbur JD , Parham P , Brodsky FM . Clathrin heavy and light chain isoforms originated by independent mechanisms of gene duplication during chordate evolution . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005 ; 102 : 7209 - 7214 . 246 . Vassilopoulos S , Esk C , Hoshino S , Funke BH , Chen CY , Plocik AM , Wright WE , Kucherlapati R , Brodsky FM . A role for the CHC22 clathrin heavy - chain isoform in human glucose metabolism . Science 2009 ; 324 : 1192 - 1196 . 247 . Nahorski M , Al - Gazali L , Hertecant J , Owen DJ , Borner GHH , Chen Y , Carvalho OP , Shaikh S , Phelan A , Robinson MS , Royle SJ , Woods CG . Clathrin heavy chain 22 ( CHC22 ) is essential for human pain and touch development . Brain 2015 ; In press . 248 . Ooi CE , Moreira JE , Dell ' Angelica EC , Poy G , Wassarman DA , Bonifacino JS . Altered expression of a novel adaptin leads to defective pigment granule biogenesis in the Drosophila eye color mutant garnet . EMBO J 1997 ; 16 : 4508 - 4518 . 249 . Mullins C , Hartnell LM , Wassarman DA , Bonifacino JS . Defective expression of the mu3 subunit of the AP - 3 adaptor complex in the Drosophila pigmentation mutant carmine . Mol Gen Genet 1999 ; 262 : 401 - 412 . 250 . Mullins C , Hartnell LM , Bonifacino JS . Distinct requirements for the AP - 3 adaptor complex in pigment granule and synaptic vesicle biogenesis in Drosophila melanogaster . Mol Gen Genet 2000 ; 263 : 1003 - 1014 . 251 . Kantheti P , Qiao X , Diaz ME , Peden AA , Meyer GE , Carskadon SL , Kapfhamer D , Sufalko D , Robinson MS , Noebels JL , Burmeister M . Mutation in AP - 3 in the mocha mouse links endosomal transport to storage deficiency in platelets , melanosomes , and synaptic vesicles . Neuron 1998 ; 21 : 111 - 122 . 252 . Feng L , Seymour AB , Jiang S , To A , Peden AA , Novak EK , Zhen L , Rusiniak ME , Eicher EM , Robinson MS , Gorin MB , Swank RT . The beta3A subunit gene ( Ap3b1 ) of the AP - 3 adaptor complex is altered in the mouse hypopigmentation mutant pearl , a model for Hermansky - Pudlak syndrome and night blindness . Hum Mol Genet 1999 ; 8 : 323 - 330 . 253 . Dell ' Angelica EC , Shotelersuk V , Aguilar RC , Gahl WA , Bonifacino JS . Altered trafficking of lysosomal proteins in Hermansky - Pudlak syndrome due to mutations in the beta 3A subunit of the AP - 3 adaptor . Mol Cell 1999 ; 3 : 11 - 21 . 254 . Simmen T , Höning S , Icking A , Tikkanen R , Hunziker W . AP - 4 binds basolateral signals and participates in basolateral sorting in epithelial MDCK cells . Nat Cell Biol 2002 ; 4 : 154 - 159 . 255 . Matsuda S , Miura E , Matsuda K , Kakegawa W , Kohda K , Watanabe M , Yuzaki M . Accumulation of AMPA receptors in autophagosomes in neuronal axons lacking adaptor protein AP - 4 . Neuron 2008 ; 57 : 730 - 745 . 256 . Burgos PV , Mardones GA , Rojas AL , daSilva LL , Prabhu Y , Hurley JH , Bonifacino JS . Sorting of the Alzheimer ' s disease amyloid precursor protein mediated by the AP - 4 complex . Dev Cell 2010 ; 18 : 425 - 436 . 257 . Hirst J , Irving C , Borner GHH . Adaptor protein complexes AP - 4 and AP - 5 : new players in endosomal trafficking and progressive spastic paraplegia . Traffic 2013 ; 14 : 153 - 164 . 51 258 . Hirst J , Edgar JR , Esteves T , Darios F , Madeo M , Chang J , Roda RH , Dürr A , Anheim M , Gellera C , Li J , Züchner S , Mariotti C , Stevanin G , Blackstone C , et al . Loss of AP - 5 results in accumulation of aberrant endolysosomes : defining a new type of lysosomal storage disease . Hum Mol Genet 2015 ; 24 : 4984 - 4896 . 259 . Helenius A , Kartenbeck J , Simons K , Fries E . On the entry of Semliki forest virus into BHK - 21 cells . J Cell Biol 1980 ; 84 : 404 - 420 . 260 . Mercer J , Schelhaas M , Helenius A . Virus entry by endocytosis . Annu Rev Biochem 2010 ; 79 : 803 - 833 . 261 . Veiga E , Cossart P . Listeria hijacks the clathrin - dependent endocytic machinery to invade mammalian cells . Nat Cell Biol 2005 ; 7 : 894 - 900 . 262 . Collins KL , Chen BK , Kalams SA , Walker BD , Baltimore D . HIV - 1 Nef protein protects infected primary cells against killing by cytotoxic T lymphocytes . Nature 1998 ; 391 : 397 - 401 . 263 . Garcia JV , Miller AD . Serine phosphorylation - independent downregulation of cell - surface CD4 by nef . Nature 1991 ; 350 : 508 - 511 . 264 . Neil SJ , Zang T , Bieniasz PD . Tetherin inhibits retrovirus release and is antagonized by HIV - 1 Vpu . Nature 2008 ; 451 : 425 - 430 . 265 . Roeth JF , Williams M , Kasper MR , Filzen TM , Collins KL . HIV - 1 Nef disrupts MHC - I trafficking by recruiting AP - 1 to the MHC - I cytoplasmic tail . J Cell Biol 2004 ; 167 : 903 - 913 . 266 . Lubben NB , Sahlender DA , Motley AM , Lehner PJ , Benaroch P , Robinson MS . HIV - 1 Nef - induced down - regulation of MHC class I requires AP - 1 and clathrin but not PACS - 1 and is impeded by AP - 2 . Mol Biol Cell 2007 ; 18 : 3351 - 3365 . 267 . Chaudhuri R , Lindwasser OW , Smith WJ , Hurley JH , Bonifacino JS . Downregulation of CD4 by human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Nef is dependent on clathrin and involves direct interaction of Nef with the AP2 clathrin adaptor . J Virol 2007 ; 81 : 3877 - 3890 . 268 . Jia X , Weber E , Tokarev A , Lewinski M , Rizk M , Suarez M , Guatelli J , Xiong Y . Structural basis of HIV - 1 Vpu - mediated BST2 antagonism via hijacking of the clathrin adaptor protein complex 1 . eLife 2014 ; 3 : e02362 . 269 . Ehrlich M , Boll W , Van Oijen A , Hariharan R , Chandran K , Nibert ML , Kirchhausen T . Endocytosis by random initiation and stabilization of clathrin - coated pits . Cell 2004 ; 118 : 591 - 605 . 270 . Kirchhausen T . Coated pits and coated vesicles - sorting it all out . Curr Opin Struct Biol 1993 ; 3 : 182 - 188 . 271 . Avinoam O , Schorb M , Beese CJ , Briggs JA , Kaksonen M . Endocytic sites mature by continuous bending and remodeling of the clathrin coat . Science 2015 ; 348 : 1369 - 1372 . 272 . Jin AJ , Nossal R . Rigidity of triskelion arms and clathrin nets . Biophys J 2000 ; 78 : 1183 - 1194 . 273 . den Otter WK , Briels WJ . The generation of curved clathrin coats from flat plaques . Traffic 2011 ; 12 . 274 . Saleem M , Morlot S , Hohendahl A , Manzi J , Lenz M , Roux A . A balance between membrane elasticity and polymerization energy sets the shape of spherical clathrin coats . Nat Commun 2015 ; 6 : 6249 . 275 . Stachowiak JC , Schmid EM , Ryan CJ , Ann HS , D . Y . S , Sherman MB , Geissler PL , Fletcher DA , Hayden CC . Membrane bending by protein - protein crowding . Nat Cell Biol 2012 ; 14 : 944 - 949 . 276 . Busch DJ , Houser JR , Hayden CC , Sherman MB , Lafer EM , Stachowiak JC . Intrinsically disordered proteins drive membrane curvature . Nat Commun 2015 ; 6 : 7875 . 277 . Stachowiak JC , Brodsky FM , Miller EA . A cost - benefit analysis of the physical 52 mechanisms of membrane curvature . Nat Cell Biol 2013 ; 15 : 1019 - 1027 . 278 . Ferreira F , Foley M , Cooke A , Cunningham M , Smith G , Woolley R , Henderson G , Kelly E , Mundell S , Smythe E . Endocytosis of G protein - coupled receptors is regulated by clathrin light chain phosphorylation . Curr Biol 2012 ; 22 : 1361 - 1370 . 279 . Dannhauser PN , Platen M , Böning H , Ungewickell H , Schaap IA , Ungewickell EJ . Effect of clathrin light chains on the stiffness of clathrin lattices and membrane budding . Traffic 2015 ; 16 : 519 - 533 . 280 . Kirchhausen T . Bending membranes . Nat Cell Biol 2012 ; 14 : 906 - 908 . 281 . Brodsky FM , Sosa RT , Ybe JA , O ' Halloran TJ . Unconventional functions for clathrin , ESCRTs , and other endocytic regulators in the cytoskeleton , cell cycle , nucleus , and beyond : links to human disease . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a017004 . 282 . Royle SJ , Bright NA , Lagnado L . Clathrin is required for the function of the mitotic spindle . Nature 2005 ; 434 : 1152 - 1157 . 283 . Vecchi M , Polo S , Poupon V , van de Loo JW , Benmerah A , Di Fiore PP . Nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of endocytic proteins . J Cell Biol 2001 ; 153 : 1511 - 1517 . 284 . Spang A , Saw JH , Jørgensen SL , Zaremba - Niedzwiedzka K , Martijn J , Lind AE , van Eijk R , Schleper C , Guy L , Ettema TJ . Complex archaea that bridge the gap between prokaryotes and eukaryotes . Nature 2015 ; 521 : 173 - 179 . 285 . Davis ME , Chen ZG , Shin DM . Nanoparticle therapeutics : an emerging treatment modality for cancer . Nat Rev Drug Discov 2008 ; 7 : 771 - 782 . 286 . Wilbur JD , Hwang PK , Ybe JA , Lane M , Sellers BD , Jacobson MP , Fletterick RJ , Brodsky FM . Conformation switching of clathrin light chain regulates clathrin lattice assembly . Dev Cell 2010 ; 18 : 841 - 841 . 287 . Bednarek SY , Ravazzola M , Hosobuchi M , Amherdt M , Perrelet A , Schekman R , Orci L . COPI - and COPII - coated vesicles bud directly from the endoplasmic reticulum in yeast . Cell 1995 ; 83 : 1183 - 1196 .