Using Computer - Generated Examples to Support Idea Generation Yi - Jheng Huang Dept . of Information Communication Yuan Ze University Taoyuan , Taiwan yjhuang @ saturn . yzu . edu . tw Wen - Chieh Lin Dept . of Computer Science National Chiao Tung University Hsinchu , Taiwan wclin @ cs . nctu . edu . tw Suiang - Shyan Lee R & D Department e - SOFT Corp . Taipei , Taiwan sean . lee @ e - soft . com . tw Xun - Yi Huang Dept . of Computer Science National Chiao Tung University Hsinchu , Taiwan k820720k @ gmail . com Abstract —We present ComposIt , a creativity support tool that assists designers in ﬁnding inspiration by providing many computer - generated examples . These examples may be beyond humans’ imagination and thus are helpful to inspire users to create new ideas . To automatically produce examples , our system adopts the deconstruction and construction strategies that are commonly used in the creative industries . Given a 3D model , the model deconstruction module analyzes the model and divides it into several elements . Then the model construction module synthesizes examples by composing the elements from different models . To evaluate the effectiveness of our system , we conducted a user study , in which artists were invited to design using our system . The results conclude that our system is able to inspire artists in their design process . The artists also shared their usage experience of our system in various aspects . Index Terms —computer - aided design system , idea generation I . I NTRODUCTION Seeking ideas is one of the key challenges when people do creative works . Previous studies have suggested several methods to help people generate new ideas [ 1 ] . Among them , browsing examples is a useful and widely adopted technique [ 2 ] . The sources of examples can come from various mediums , including magazines , books , the internet , and physical prod - uct libraries [ 2 ] . Recently , some computer - based tools have also been proposed to help designers explore examples [ 3 ] . These examples , which usually have wide varieties , not only stimulate artists in various aspects but also facilitate them to clarify their design direction . However , the examples provided by the current computer - aided design tools are usually created by humans . These examples , though may look beautiful , still fall into the imagination space of humans . They may limit the creativity of artists . To tackle this problem , we propose ComposIt , a system for assisting designers to gain inspiration by providing computer - generated examples on a speciﬁc topic . The prototype system demonstrated in this paper focuses on 3D objects . Our system adopts the conceptual combination strategy [ 4 ] to generate examples . This strategy is commonly seen in idea generation : individuals utilize a ﬁnite set of existing elements to construct This research was supported in part by the Ministry of Science and Technology ( contracts MOST - 107 - 2218 - E - 155 - 008 - MY3 , MOST - 108 - 2221 - E - 009 - 089 - , MOST - 109 - 2221 - E - 009 - 123 - MY3 and MOST - 109 - 2221 - E - 009 - 119 - MY3 ) , Taiwan . new objects . Koestler even deﬁned the act of creation as “the bringing together of two previously unrelated planes of thought” [ 4 ] . The conceptual combination strategy can also be applied to product and character design . Designers combine different types of components to enhance the interestingness or aesthetic design of products and characters , e . g . , a Mickey Mouse cup and a centaur . In this paper , we exploit the con - ceptual combination strategy to deconstruct and construct 3D models . The current system only supports the deconstruction and construction of two models ; however , our approach can be easily extended to handle multiple models . A user study was conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of our system . Sixteen artists were invited to draw designs based on given tasks with and without using ComposIt . According to their feedback to the questionnaires , the artists highly agreed that our system could inspire them in their design process and the interface is satisfactory . They also gave comments about how ComposIt assists them in the design procedure . The contributions of this paper are proposing : ( 1 ) A prototype system to explore the possibility of assisting artists’ creation process with an example generator ; ( 2 ) An approach for deconstructing and constructing 3D models ; ( 3 ) A ranking and clustering technique used to sort and arrange 3D models ; ( 4 ) A user study and a detailed interview report which discusses our system from different aspects . II . R ELATED W ORK Design is inherently a creative process , which consists of three stages : problem preparation , idea generation , and idea evaluation [ 5 ] . We will only introduce the closely related work on idea generation in this section . For a detailed review on the creative process , we refer the readers to a great survey by Gonc¸alves et al . [ 6 ] . Idea generation methods range from informal activities , e . g . , actively and passively searching examples [ 2 ] , collaborating [ 7 ] , and socializing [ 8 ] , to formal procedures like brainstorming [ 9 ] . Smith [ 1 ] also summarized 172 techniques for ﬁnding inspiration and Herring et al . [ 8 ] narrowed down to 19 techniques which are commonly used in design practice . Based on the aforementioned idea generation methods , several creative supporting tools were proposed to facilitate the creative process . One direction is aiding designers through social activities . skWiki [ 10 ] is a platform on which users can create digital multimedia with other people online . Liu and Inoue [ 22 ] built a listening agent so that users can organize their ideas when describing them to someone else . On the other hand , because the quality and diversity of designs would be improved if designers can create multiple alternatives in parallel [ 11 ] , several tools [ 12 ] were proposed to assist the creative process by allowing designers to explore possible parameters in parallel . A more common type of creative supporting tools is to stimulate designers by providing various examples . Designers can actively query desired materials by inputting keywords . Several approaches have been proposed to retrieve different types of materials , including images [ 13 ] , websites [ 14 ] , and 3D models [ 15 ] . Instead of presenting examples in a gallery , some systems dynamically suggest examples subject to the users’ input . ShadowDraw [ 16 ] is a guided drawing system which updates different shadow images according to input strokes . The modeling system presented by Chaudhuri et al . [ 17 ] suggests diverse parts based on a user’s inputs . However , the examples provided by the above systems are usually created by humans , so the design concepts of the examples still fall into the imagination space of humans . Different from these systems , our system automatically synthesizes many examples and thus allows users to explore the possibility of designs beyond their imagination . The concept of automatically creating examples has indeed been mentioned in prior work [ 18 ] , [ 19 ] . It is usually used to provide alternatives to expand the design space . Parallel Pies [ 18 ] added diverse variations to show several versions of an image at a time . Juxtapose [ 19 ] allowed programmers to synchronously edit and run an application with multiple alternatives . Kumar et al . [ 20 ] mixed the content and style of two web pages . The aforementioned systems , which focused on 2D graphic and interface design . The proposed prototype is a 3D system that is more suitable for product and character designers . III . S YSTEM In our implementation , ComposIt takes two 3D models as inputs and outputs multiple 3D models . Each output model carries the features of both input models . The basic idea of our system is decomposing input models into a few segments then reassembling them into new models . The system ﬂow is inspired by the morphological analysis ( MA ) [ 21 ] . It is a systematic process for idea development . Note that not all solutions from MA are feasible . Figure 1 exhibits the concept of our method where we divide our system ﬂow into two stages : model deconstruction and model construction . The model deconstruction module extracts meaningful computa - tional elements ( i . e . , parts ) by considering the symmetry and connection properties of input models . A part can be composed by one or multiple segments . Note that our algorithm detects not only the symmetry between two segments but also among multiple segments , which we call multi - symmetric relation . It allows the system to extract all possible symmetrical parts in an overlapped situation . After model analysis , the model construction module synthesizes new models based on the parts produced in the previous stage . Figure 2 shows several pairs of input models and their composed models . Fig . 1 : System overview . There are two stages in our system . The ﬁrst one deconstruct two input models into several parts . Then , the second stage composes new models for each pair of parts . ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) ( e ) ( f ) Fig . 2 : Six models generated by our system . In each sub - ﬁgure , the upper models are input models and the lower one is the composed model . Our system does not restrict the input models to be the same type . They can be any combination of tools or characters . ( a - c ) One input model is a tool and the other is a character . ( d - f ) Both input models are characters . Figure 3 shows the interface of our system which comprises three components : ( a ) a viewer , ( b ) a hierarchical gallery , and ( c ) an interactive ﬁlter . As our system intends to inspire designers , it may not be appropriate to ﬁltering out results actively . Hence , we use a hierarchical gallery to arrange output models and provide the users an interactive ﬁlter so that they can efﬁciently retrieve the models they want . Fig . 3 : The interface of our system : ( a ) Viewer ; ( b ) Hierarchi - cal gallery ; ( c ) Interactive ﬁlter . Viewer contains three sub - windows . The two upper sub - windows show two input models ( A and B ) and the lower sub - window displays one output model . Users can rotate or zoom the camera to view these models by pressing and holding the left or the right button of the mouse , respectively . Hierarchical gallery allows users to browse all models composed by our system . Since there may be many composed models and some models could be very similar , a mechanism for ﬁltering out similar models is necessary . To avoid excessive ﬁltering , a two - level browser is designed . The ﬁrst level presents the diversity of output models . Users can adjust the number of the models in the ﬁrst level by moving the slider bar on the upper right side . This allows users to rapidly scan the variety of the composed models . In addition , if the user is interested in a particular model in the ﬁrst level , they can see more similar models in the second level by clicking the button beside the model . Interactive ﬁlter allows users to specify the feature seg - ments of input models that they want to preserve in the composed models . All composed models that do not contain the speciﬁed feature segments will be ﬁltered out . Users can specify the feature segments ( marked with red wireframe cubes ) by clicking the feature segment of the model in the upper sub - windows of the viewer . IV . U SER S TUDY To understand if and how artists would beneﬁt from our system , we conducted a within - subjects user study which com - pared the users’ design process with and without ComposIt . Sixteen artists with background in visual communication , industrial design , or animation , were invited to test our system . Their age ranged from 22 to 33 years old . Eight of them were graduate students of art schools and ﬁve of them had more than ﬁve years of experiences in the design or art ﬁeld . Six of them are males . A . Experiment Design All artists had to complete two design tasks : one with the assistance of ComposIt and the other without . In each task , we gave artists two models and artists needed to design works that have the features from two given models . Two sets of models were used in the design tasks . In Set 1 , the two models were { Pikachu , Teapot } and in Set 2 , the two models were { Evil - bat , Pen } as shown in Figure 4 . We chose the two sets that are in a similar level of design difﬁculty . We divided the artists into four groups to avoid the inﬂuence of designing order and task difﬁculty . Group one ﬁrst performed the design task without using ComposIt on Set 1 , then with ComposIt on Set 2 . Group two ﬁrst performed the design task with ComposIt on Set 2 , then without ComposIt on Set 1 . Similarly , group three ﬁrst did the design task without using ComposIt on Set 2 , then with ComposIt on Set 1 . Group four ﬁrst performed the design task with ComposIt on Set 1 , then without ComposIt on Set 2 . In this way , each artist would only design on a set once , either with or without using ComposIt . Also , each set had an equal probability to be ﬁrstly designed with and without ComposIt . This eliminated the bias of designing order . To avoid the bias of creation tools and different working backgrounds , all artists designed their works by drawing pictures . In our pilot study , the artists also conﬁrmed that drawing is the most intuitive and popular way to create art works in the idea generation stage . ( a ) Pikachu ( b ) Teapot ( c ) Evil - bat ( d ) Pen Fig . 4 : Models used in the design experiment participated by artists : ( a - b ) Set 1 ; ( c - d ) Set 2 B . Procedures The experiment was conducted in a laboratory environment . Artists sat in front of a desk and were provided with a pen , an eraser , some paper , and a computer which can be freely used . Before artists performed the design tasks with ComposIt , we demonstrated them how to use it . This took about ﬁve minutes . We asked them to create designs in their usual way . The artists were given the following instruction , “You can freely browse websites as you used to do . ComposIt is an auxiliary design system . You do not need to refer to the examples provided by ComposIt” . On the other hand , when artists did design tasks without ComposIt , Maya was provided to display testing models . To make the evaluation fair , all artists drew their design with the same type of pen and eraser . Each design was sketched on an A5 size paper and numbered in the order of drawing . Moreover , the completion time and the number of designs were controlled to be the same . Each artist had to draw six designs within 30 minutes for each set of models . The 30 - minute limit was suggested by an artist in the pilot study as 30 minutes are usually appropriate for most artists to sketch their initial ideas . After completing the experiment , each artist was asked to rate ComposIt in different aspects with a 5 - point Likert scale questionnaire and answer some survey questions about their experience of using ComposIt . The length of each experiment was usually about 90 minutes . V . R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION According to the questionnaire , we summarize the artists’ responses in three aspects : inﬂuence to design process , assis - tance and interference , and satisfactions with user interface . We discuss each aspect and compare the differences between the design processes with and without using ComposIt in the following paragraphs . A . Inﬂuence to Design Process We discuss how ComposIt inﬂuences artists’ design process and what circumstance artists will use our system in this section . Overall , the artists highly agreed that ComposIt is able to generate interesting examples that they never thought ( M = 4 . 71 , SD = 0 . 46 ) and is helpful to their design process ( M = 4 . 38 , SD = 0 . 48 ) . Eleven of the sixteen artists stated that ComposIt is suitable for assisting idea generation in their design process . P7 and P11 said : “I am willing to use your system when I don’t have good ideas and expect that ComposIt can deconstruct input models to some elements that I couldn’t realize . ” , “I usually search online or in other ways when I am looking for ideas . I think ComposIt can be combined with my current approach for idea generation . ” Three artists stated that ComposIt is particularly helpful when they need to create a large number of diversiﬁed designs in limited time . We also observed an interesting phenomenon : whether the artists are willing to use ComposIt depends on their attitude toward their designs . Artists are more willing to utilize ComposIt if they are under time pressure or required to design for a speciﬁed topic . On the other hand , if they want to do their own original designs , they prefer to design by themselves and avoid referring to any other sources . P5 and P9 responded : “It reminds me of a previous course assignment that asked us to draw 50 different ladybugs . I think your system would be very helpful in that case . ” , “If it’s a job case , I will ﬁrstly refer to some relevant designs ; however , if it is my own design , I do not survey the designs until I decide my direction . ” Another context for using composIt , which was mentioned by another two artists , is that when a group of artists discuss their ideas , the composed models can help them correctly convey their ideas . P3 said : “We usually have to prepare some reference designs because it’s difﬁcult to discuss without any - thing . . . The models generated by your system help us quickly and correctly convey our concepts , so we can communicate with others more easily . It saves us time . ” B . Assistance and Interference Most artists agreed that ComposIt can assist them in four aspects : getting inspiration ( M = 4 . 36 , SD = 0 . 5 ) , discussing with their co - workers easily ( M = 4 . 07 , SD = 0 . 6 ) , obtaining various sketches ( M = 4 . 36 , SD = 0 . 5 ) , and breaking through the creative bottleneck ( M = 4 . 5 , SD = 0 . 5 ) . However , the artists have more diverse answers on the rest two items in this question . One is easily communicating with customers . Eight of the sixteen artists had a positive opinion as they think ComposIt assisted them in clarifying customer preferences . “ [ Customers ] can think with us . It can be more quickly to know the customers’ preference . Sometimes we design work in a style , but customers don’t like it , so we have to do it again . ( P16 ) ” On the other hand , three of the other eight artists did not think it is appropri - ate to show the ComposIt’s results to their customers because “It might damage our professionalism because customers may think the designs are simply generated by a computer , not me . ( P5 ) ” We are also interested in how the artists acquired ideas from ComposIt . Their feedback is summarized as follows . First , nine of the artists mentioned that they captured ideas by making association with the shapes of the composed models . Figure 5 ( a ) shows an example that an artist referred the Bat - Pen to a pair of compasses . P11 and P6 said : “ [ I ] observed the shape of a model and imagined what the model would look like in reality . ” , “I reviewed the models and browsed if there were some shapes I preferred , and then I adjusted the details of the shapes [ of my sketch ] . ” Second , four artists pointed out that ComposIt reduced their blind spots . One example is an unusual tiny bat generated by ComposIt as shown in Figure 5 ( b ) . Artists usually do not shrink a bat to such a small scale . They commented : “Your models are generated by a computer which usually has no habitual pattern , but human thoughts do , so your system helps eliminate my blind spots . ( P3 ) ” , “Until I saw a pen with a single wing , I realized that a pair of wings is not necessary . ( P5 ) ” Finally , one of the artists totally relied on our system and simply duplicated the examples given by ComposIt in her designs . In fact , there are 38 % of designs in the without condition matched the synthesized designs produced by our system . This indicates the utility of the examples generated by our system . Artists agreed that ComposIt can also increase artists’ productivity in terms of the quantity of design ( M = 4 . 57 , SD = 0 . 48 ) ; however , they do not think our system can strongly improve the quality of design ( M = 3 . 14 , SD = 0 . 63 ) . Based on the interview and the observation of their works after the tasks , the possible explanations might be : ( 1 ) ComposIt is an assisting system rather than a complete design tool ; ( 2 ) Individual artist’s capability might also inﬂuence the quality of a creative activity . P3 explained : “I don’t think your system is developed for quality . I think your system is designed for helping artists communicate and develop sketches . The quality is more related to ﬁnalizations . In short , your system is for the early stage , but the quality is more inﬂuenced by the practice in the later stage . ” C . Satisfactions with User Interface All of the sixteen artists agreed that ComposIt is easy to use ( M = 4 . 5 , SD = 0 . 5 ) . Fourteen of them were satisﬁed with the viewer ( M = 4 . 14 , SD = 0 . 63 ) and the interactive ﬁlter ( M = 4 . 07 , SD = 0 . 78 ) . Two of the artists stated the interactive ﬁlter is really useful for browsing a bunch of examples in the database . “I think the interactive ﬁlter is good to use because there are too many results and it helps me locate what I want quickly . ( P4 ) ” In addition , one of the artists , who designs embroidery , usually needs to mix various elements to form a pattern . She appreciated the function of moving camera in the 3D ( a ) ( b ) Fig . 5 : Two examples demonstrates how artists generated ideas using ComposIt . ( a ) Making association with the shape . ( b ) Eliminating the blind spots – the idea of a tiny bat is hard to imagine . viewer . Examining models from arbitrary views assists her in discovering a proportionate shape of an image . “Sometimes 2D images are just weird no matter how I modify the elements , but your system is 3D and I can see a model from different views . It becomes easier to ﬁnd a way to blend elements harmoniously by rotating the camera . ( P4 ) ” On the other hand , three of the artists reported that they did not use the second level in the hierarchical gallery ; instead , they preferred to set the number of ﬁrst level as max , and only browse examples in the ﬁrst level panel . D . Comparison of Differences With and Without ComposIt We compare how the artists get inspiration with and without ComposIt based on the interview after the experiment . Gen - erally , there are two types of tactics that the artists use to get inspirations without using our system . One type , which was mentioned by thirteen of the artists , is more passive and irrelevant to design topics : the artists accumulate their creative thoughts and let ideas come to them . For example , they can “Browse the Internet casually . I usually visit CGHUB to watch other people’s work . ( P3 ) ” and “Spend a lot of time . Being in a trance , thinking , relaxing , sleeping , doing other things . . . ( P11 ) ” The second type , which is closer to ComposIt , is more active and relevant to the design topics . The artists would search and collect related information through different sources , e . g . , “Take pictures related to the topic by myself . ( P4 ) ” , “Discuss with others . ( P8 ) ” , and “Find photos related to the topic online . ( P14 ) ” Although ComposIt is closer to the active type of tactic , there are still some differences . The ﬁrst difference is the function of visualization that has been appreciated by four of the artists . As it is sometimes hard to imagine how the designs would look like , ComposIt is very helpful for the preview of the designs in the early stage of the designing process . P4 and P15 stated : “It can do some hypothetical predictions by browsing the results your system yields , after that , I decide which one is better and how to manipulate it . ” , “It can ﬁrstly draw something , and shows what the things exactly looks like . Sometimes I imagine some designs , but they ( a ) Designs on Set 1 with ComposIt ( b ) Designs on Set 2 with ComposIt ( c ) Designs on Set 1 without ComposIt ( d ) Designs on Set 2 without ComposIt Fig . 6 : Some designs created by the artists . The designs created with ComposIt demonstrate more variations . look different in reality . ” Second , three of the artists made a comparison between our system and a search engine , which is mentioned by thirteen of the artists in the interview . They found that ComposIt generates examples through varying the shape of input models while search engines deliver results via speciﬁc keywords : “Searching data online is usually based on keywords . Although the searched results are more related to the meaning of the keywords , they may still contain much unrelated information . Instead , ComposIt is based on the variety of shapes and I can effectively focus on the diversity of composed models . ( P11 ) ” Furthermore , one of the artists mentioned that the function of model deconstruction also helps her examine the input models from different perspectives . In particular , the parts inspired her to decompose and compose the models in a more diversiﬁed way . Figure 6 shows some artists’ works in the designing experiment . We also asked the artists if they had any difﬁculties while Fig . 7 : A series of designs created by the same artist on Set 1 without using ComposIt . The artist drew very similar designs based on the same concept in this case . doing the design tasks with and without ComposIt . The most common difﬁculty they encountered in the task without ComspoIt is idea exhaustion . For example , two of the artists indicated that they had difﬁculty to come up with the sixth sketch . One of the artists stated she fell into a similar thinking pattern and resulted in authoring very similar designs . Figure 7 shows the artist drew a series of Picachu - Pot with a very similar concept and the artist P8 stated : “The difﬁculty is that I could get stuck on the same idea very easily . As the shapes of Pikachu and the teapot are similar and looks chubby , it is more likely to get stuck on a chubby design . ” Drawing sketches with ComposIt could also have some difﬁculties . One artist expressed that it is hard to examine all examples and decide which one is better . VI . C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE WORK This paper presents a prototype of a computer - aided design system which intends to provide examples for assisting artists’ idea generation . The prototype , ComposIt , applies the tech - niques of model deconstruction and reconstruction to generate a variety of examples . Clustering and ranking techniques are proposed to arrange the results so that users can easily browse them . In the user study participated by sixteen artists , most of the artists agreed that ComposIt is really helpful to stimulate their ideas on designs . According to the feedback of the artists participating in the user study , there are several opportunities to strengthen the system . One is further increasing the diversity of outputs . This can be achieved by adding more operations or applying various techniques , such as texture mapping and deformation . Another is generating plausible models more intelligently , e . g . , efﬁciently ﬁltering out implausible results , sophisticatedly analyzing 3D objects and constructing plausible models . The other is blending with other materials , such as images , music , and logos . We hope that our work can serve as a basis for further study in idea inspiration . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] G . F . Smith , “Idea - generation techniques : A formulary of active ingre - dients , ” The Journal of Creative Behavior , vol . 32 , pp . 107 – 134 , 1998 . [ 2 ] S . R . Herring , C . C . Chang , J . Krantzler , and B . P . Bailey , “Getting inspired ! Understanding how and why examples are used in creative design practice , ” in Proc . of the SIGCHI Conf . on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2009 , pp . 87 – 96 . [ 3 ] A . W . Smeulders , M . Worring , S . Santini , A . Gupta , and R . Jain , “Content - based image retrieval at the end of the early years , ” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , vol . 22 , pp . 1349 – 1380 , 2000 . [ 4 ] A . Koestler , The act of creation . Woodstock , NY : Macmillan , 1964 . [ 5 ] A . Warr and E . O’Neill , “Understanding design as a social creative process , ” in Proc . of the 5th Conf . on Creativity & Cognition , 2005 , pp . 118 – 127 . [ 6 ] M . Gonc¸alves , C . Cardoso , and P . Badke - Schaub , “What inspires design - ers ? Preferences on inspirational approaches during idea generation , ” Design Studies , vol . 35 , pp . 29 – 53 , 2014 . [ 7 ] K . R . Lakhani and J . A . Panetta , “The principles of distributed innova - tion , ” Innovations : Technology , Governance , Globalization , vol . 2 , pp . 97 – 112 , 2007 . [ 8 ] S . R . Herring , B . R . Jones , and B . P . Bailey , “Idea generation techniques among creative professionals , ” in 42nd Hawaii International Conf . on System Sciences , 2009 , pp . 1 – 10 . [ 9 ] M . S . Allen , Morphological creativity : The miracle of your hidden brain power : A practical guide to the utilization of your creative potential : Prentice – Hall , 1962 . [ 10 ] Z . Zhao , S . K . Badam , S . Chandrasegaran , D . G . Park , N . L . Elmqvist , L . Kisselburgh , et al . , “skWiki : A multimedia sketching system for collaborative creativity , ” in Proc . of the SIGCHI Conf . on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2014 , pp . 1235 – 1244 . [ 11 ] S . P . Dow , A . Glassco , J . Kass , M . Schwarz , D . L . Schwartz , and S . R . Klemmer , “Parallel prototyping leads to better design results , more divergence , and increased self - efﬁcacy , ” ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) , vol . 17 , pp . 1 – 24 , 2010 . [ 12 ] P . O’Donovan , A . Agarwala , and A . Hertzmann , “Designscape : Design with interactive layout suggestions , ” in Proc . of the 33rd Annual ACM Conf . on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2015 , pp . 1221 – 1224 . [ 13 ] V . Lofthouse , “Ecodesign tools for designers : Deﬁning the require - ments , ” Journal of Cleaner Production , vol . 14 , pp . 1386 – 1395 , 2006 . [ 14 ] D . Ritchie , A . A . Kejriwal , and S . R . Klemmer , “D . Tour : Style - based exploration of design example galleries , ” in Proc . of the 24th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology , 2011 , pp . 165 – 174 . [ 15 ] D . Y . Chen , X . P . Tian , Y . T . Shen , and M . Ouhyoung , “On visual similarity based 3d model retrieval , ” Computer Graphics Forum , vol . 22 , pp . 223 – 232 . [ 16 ] Y . J . Lee , C . L . Zitnick , and M . F . Cohen , “Shadowdraw : Real - time user guidance for freehand drawing , ” ACM Transactions on Graphics , vol . 30 , pp . 1 – 10 , 2011 . [ 17 ] S . Chaudhuri , E . Kalogerakis , L . Guibas , and V . Koltun , “Probabilistic reasoning for assembly - based 3d modeling , ” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2011 papers , ed , 2011 , pp . 1 – 10 . [ 18 ] M . Terry , E . D . Mynatt , K . Nakakoji , and Y . Yamamoto , “Variation in element and action : Supporting simultaneous development of alternative solutions , ” in Proc . of the SIGCHI Conf . on Human Factors in Com - puting Systems , 2004 , pp . 711 – 718 . [ 19 ] B . Hartmann , L . Yu , A . Allison , Y . Yang , and S . R . Klemmer , “Design as exploration : Creating interface alternatives through parallel authoring and runtime tuning , ” in Proc . of the 21st Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology , 2008 , pp . 91 – 100 . [ 20 ] R . Kumar , J . O . Talton , S . Ahmad , and S . R . Klemmer , “Bricolage : Example - based retargeting for web design , ” in Proc . of the SIGCHI Conf . on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2011 , pp . 2197 – 2206 . [ 21 ] F . Zwicky and A . G . Wilson , New methods of thought and procedure : Contributions to the symposium on methodologies : Springer Science & Business Media , 2012 . [ 22 ] R . Liu and T . Inoue , “Application of an anthropomorphic dining agent to idea generation , ” in Proc . of the 2014 ACM International Joint Conf . on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing : Adjunct Publication , 2014 , pp . 607 – 612 .