Molecular Biology of the Cell Vol . 14 , 3254 – 3265 , August 2003 Selective Caveolin - 1 – dependent Endocytosis of Glycosphingolipids Raman Deep Singh , * Vishwajeet Puri , * Jacob T . Valiyaveettil , † David L . Marks , * Robert Bittman , † and Richard E . Pagano * ‡ * Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Mayo Clinic and Foundation , Rochester , Minnesota 55905 ; and † Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry , Queens College , The City University of New York , Flushing , New York 11367 Submitted December 11 , 2002 ; Revised March 14 , 2003 ; Accepted April 11 , 2003 Monitoring Editor : Vivek Malhotra We studied the endocytosis of ﬂuorescent glycosphingolipid ( GSL ) analogs in various cell types using pathway - speciﬁc inhibitors and colocalization studies with endocytic markers and DsRed caveolin - 1 ( cav - 1 ) . Based on inhibitor studies , all GSLs tested were internalized predominantly ( (cid:1) 80 % ) by a clathrin - independent , caveolar - related mechanism , regardless of cell type . In addi - tion , ﬂuorescent lactosylceramide ( LacCer ) colocalized with DsRed - cav - 1 in vesicular structures upon endocytosis in rat ﬁbroblasts . The internalization mechanism for GSLs was unaffected by varying the carbohydrate headgroup or sphingosine backbone chain length ; however , a ﬂuores - cent phosphatidylcholine analog was not internalized via caveolae , suggesting that the GSL ceramide core may be important for caveolar uptake . Internalization of ﬂuorescent LacCer was reduced 80 – 90 % in cell types with low cav - 1 , but was dramatically stimulated by cav - 1 overex - pression . However , even in cells with low levels of cav - 1 , residual LacCer internalization was clathrin independent . In contrast , cholera toxin B subunit ( CtxB ) , which binds endogenous GM 1 , was internalized via clathrin - independent endocytosis in cells with high cav - 1 expression , whereas signiﬁcant clathrin - dependent uptake occurred in cells with low cav - 1 . Fluorescent GM 1 , normally internalized by clathrin - independent endocytosis in HeLa cells with low cav - 1 , was induced to partially internalize via the clathrin pathway in the presence of CtxB . These results suggest that GSL analogs are selectively internalized via a caveolar - related mechanism in most cell types , whereas CtxB may undergo “pathway switching” when cav - 1 levels are low . INTRODUCTION There is currently a great deal of interest in the study of caveolar - mediated endocytosis because this pathway ap - pears to be important for cell entry and intracellular delivery of some bacterial toxins , viruses , and bacteria as well as some growth factors and other circulating proteins ( Schnitzer et al . , 1994 ; Gleizes et al . , 1996 ; Anderson , 1998 ; Lobie et al . , 1999 ; Okamoto et al . , 2000 ; Shin et al . , 2000 ; Pelkmans et al . , 2001 ; Shubert et al . , 2001 ; Marjomaki et al . , 2002 ) . Caveolar endocytosis is a clathrin - independent , dy - namin - dependent process ( Henley et al . , 1998 ; Oh et al . , 1998 ) ; however , the molecular machinery that differentiates caveolar endocytosis from other forms of clathrin - indepen - dent endocytosis is not yet fully deﬁned . Seminal studies by Orlandi and Fishman ( 1998 ) demonstrated that the cholera toxin B subunit ( CtxB ) , which binds to GM 1 at the plasma membrane ( PM ) , is internalized by caveolae in several cell types . However , more recent studies have shown that CtxB can be signiﬁcantly internalized by clathrin - dependent en - docytosis in some cell types ( Shogomori and Futerman , 2001 ; Torgersen et al . , 2001 ) . Another potential marker for caveolar uptake is labeled albumin , which is reported to be internalized primarily by caveolae ( Schnitzer et al . , 1994 ; Shubert et al . , 2001 ) . One well - characterized marker for caveolar internaliza - tion is SV40 virus that colocalizes with GFP - tagged caveo - Article published online ahead of print . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 . 1091 / mbc . E02 – 12 – 0809 . Article and publication date are available at www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E02 – 12 – 0809 . ‡ Corresponding author . E - mail address : pagano . richard @ mayo . edu . Abbreviations used : AF , AlexaFluor ; BODIPY , boron dipyr - romethenediﬂuoride ; Cav - 1 , caveolin - 1 ; CPZ , chlorpromazine ; CtxB , cholera toxin , B - subunit ; DF - BSA , defatted BSA ; Eps15 , EGFR pathway substrate clone 15 ; GalCer , galactosylceramide ; GM 1 , ganglioside GM 1 ; GSL , glycosphingolipid ; HMEM , 10 mM HEPES - buffered minimal essential medium ( pH 7 . 4 ) ; HMEM - G (cid:2) I , HMEM without glucose containing 5 mM NaN 3 and 50 mM 2 - deoxyglucose ; HSFs , human skin ﬁbroblasts ; LacCer , lac - tosylceramide ; MalCer , maltosylceramide ; NBD , 7 - nitrobenz - 2 - oxa - 1 , 3 - diazol - 4 - yl ; PC , phosphatidylcholine ; PM , plasma mem - brane ; RFs , rat ﬁbroblasts ; SL , sphingolipid ; SM , sphingomyelin ; So , sphingosine ; Tfn , transferrin . 3254 © 2003 by The American Society for Cell Biology lin - 1 ( cav - 1 ) during endocytosis ( Pelkmans et al . , 2001 ) ; how - ever , the intracellular itinerary and slow rate of transport of SV40 virus differs from that of some other cargo internalized via caveolae ( Gleizes et al . , 1996 ; Orlandi and Fishman , 1998 ; Lobie et al . , 1999 ; Sharma et al . , 2003 ) . These and other observations suggest the possibility that several forms of caveolar endocytosis may exist ( Mineo and Anderson , 2001 ; Le and Nabi , 2003 ) . We previously showed that ﬂuorescent ( BODIPY - labeled ) glycosphingolipid ( GSL ) analogs ( lactosylceramide [ LacCer ] and globoside ) are selectively internalized by a dynamin - dependent , clathrin - independent mechanism in human skin ﬁbroblasts ( HSFs ) and on the basis of multiple criteria sug - gested that these lipids were internalized by a “caveolar - related” process ( Puri et al . , 2001 ) . This study raised several important questions concerning caveolar endocytosis . First , is selective endocytosis via caveolae a property of other GSLs with different carbohydrate headgroups ? Second , what are the biological or biophysical mechanisms ( Ander - son and Jacobson , 2002 ; Brown and London , 2000 ; Edidin , 2003 ) involved in the selective entry of GSLs into caveolar - derived smooth vesicles but not clathrin - coated vesicles ? Finally , does selective caveolar endocytosis of GSLs only occur in some cell types ( e . g . , HSFs ) or is it a widely occur - ring process in mammalian cells ? The mechanism for CtxB internalization has been reported to be variable ( i . e . , clath - rin - independent and / or - dependent ) depending on cell type and cav - 1 expression levels ( Shogomori and Futerman , 2001 ; Torgersen et al . , 2001 ; Sandvig and van Deurs , 2002 ) . This raises the possibility that some GSLs ( e . g . , GM 1 ) are not internalized primarily via caveolae in some cell types , or alternatively that CtxB perturbs the internalization mecha - nism of endogenous GM 1 , and that ﬂuorescent GSL analogs may better reﬂect the movement of endogenous GSLs . In the present article we sought to resolve these uncertainties by carrying out a detailed study of GSL analog internalization in multiple cell types and by comparing those results to parallel studies using ﬂuorescent CtxB . Our data provide strong evidence that ﬂuorescent GSL analogs of widely varying structure are internalized primarily by a clathrin - independent , cav - 1 – dependent process . We further show that the mechanism of ﬂuorescent GM 1 internalization is altered when bound by CtxB in HeLa cells where cav - 1 expression is low . These data suggest that caveolar endocy - tosis plays a signiﬁcant role in plasma membrane GSL in - ternalization in multiple cell types . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cells and Cell Culture Normal HSFs were from the Coriell Institute ( Camden , NJ ) . Rat ﬁbroblasts ( RFs ) , HeLa , CHO - K1 , Calu - 1 , and Calu - 6 cells were from the American Type Culture Collection ( Rockville , MD ) . MDCK cells were a generous gift from Dr . J . C . Lieske ( Mayo Clinic , Roch - ester , MN ) . All experiments were performed using monolayer cul - tures grown to (cid:3) 30 – 50 % conﬂuency on acid - etched glass or grid - ded coverslips for microscopy or in 60 - mm dishes for biochemical experiments . Fluorescent Lipids , Toxins , and Other Reagents The structures of the various ﬂuorescent lipid analogs are shown in Figure 1 . BODIPY - maltosylceramide ( MalCer ) was synthesized by boron triﬂuoride mediated glycosylation of d - erythro - 2 - azido - 3 - ben - zoylsphingosine ( prepared from d - erythro - C 18 - sphingosine ; Ma - treya , Pleasant Gap , PA ) with per - O - acetylmaltosyl trichloro - acetimidate in dichloromethane in the presence of molecular sieves . Hepta - O - acetylmaltosyl trichloroacetimidate was prepared from octa - O - acetylmaltose ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) in two steps : 1 ) treatment with hydrazine acetate in dimethylformamide , and 2 ) treatment with trichloroacetonitrile and sodium in dichlorometh - ane . After deprotection of the hepta - O - acetylated GSL with sodium methoxide and reduction of the azide with triphenylphosphine in aqueous tetrahydrofuran , the ﬁnal product was obtained by N - Figure 1 . Structures of ﬂuorescent lipid analogs used in the present study . ( A ) Various headgroups ( R ) were attached to BODIPY - ceramide , resulting in BODIPY - GalCer , - LacCer , - MalCer , - globoside , - sulfatide , or - GM 1 . BODIPY - LacCer analogs were also synthesized using various chain length ( C 12 , C 16 , C 18 , or C 20 ) sphin - gosines or BODIPY - fatty acids ( C 3 vs . C 5 spacer ) . Fluorescent Lac - Cer bearing an NBD - fatty acid ( see B ) in place of the BODIPY - fatty acid was also synthesized . ( B ) Structure of the d - isomer of NBD - labeled PC , a glycerolipid . Caveolar Endocytosis of GSL Analogs Vol . 14 , August 2003 3255 acylation with the N - hydroxysuccinimidoyl ( NHS ) ester of 4 , 4 - di - ﬂuoro - 5 , 7 - dimethyl - 4 - bora - 3a , 4a - diaza - s - indacene - 3 - pentanoic acid ( BODIPY - FL - C 5 , SE ; Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) and puriﬁed by column chromatography on silica gel ( elution with chloroform / methanol / water 65 : 35 : 4 vol / vol / vol ) , followed by preparative TLC ( elution with chloroform / methanol / water 65 : 25 : 4 vol / vol / vol ) . Suspended silica gel was removed by ﬁltration through a Cameo ﬁlter ( Fisher Scientiﬁc , Pittsburgh , PA ) . C 3 - BODIPY - LacCer was synthesized as described ( Martin and Pagano , 1994 ) , using lyso - LacCer ( Matreya ) and the NHS ester of 4 , 4 - diﬂuoro - 5 , 7 - dimethyl - 4 - bora - 3a , 4a - diaza - s - indacene - 3 - propi - onic acid ( BODIPY - FL , SE ; Molecular Probes ) . C 5 - BODIPY - LacCer analogs having shorter ( C 12 or C 16 ) or longer ( C 20 ) sphingoid back - bones than C 3 - BODIPY - LacCer ( C 18 ) were synthesized from d - erythro - 2 - azido - 3 - benzoylsphingosine analogs as described above for BODIPY - MalCer using C 12 , C 16 , or C 20 D - erythro - sphingosines , custom synthesized by Matreya and BODIPY - FL - C 5 , SE ( Molecular Probes ) . C 5 - BODIPY - fatty acid labeled analogs of galactosylceramide ( Gal - Cer ) , LacCer , globoside , GM 1 , and sulfatide , and 6 - [ ( 7 - nitro - benz - 2 - oxa - 1 , 3 - diazol - 4 - yl ) amino ] caproic acid labeled - LacCer ( NBD - Lac - Cer ) were synthesized and puriﬁed as described ( Martin and Pagano , 1994 ; Watanabe et al . , 1999 ; Puri et al . , 2001 ) . The d - isomer of NBD - phosphatidylcholine ( NBD - d - PC ) was prepared as de - scribed ( Martin and Pagano , 1987 ) . The concentrations of the lipid analogs were determined by mea - surements of ﬂuorescence intensity relative to known standards . Complexes of the ﬂuorescent lipids with defatted bovine serum albumin ( DF - BSA ; Sigma - Aldrich ) were prepared as described ( Martin and Pagano , 1994 ) and diluted to a ﬁnal working concen - tration using 10 mM HEPES - buffered minimal essential medium ( pH 7 . 4 ) ( HMEM ) . AlexaFluor 488 and 594 ( AF488 and AF594 ) - labeled CtxB , transferrin ( Tfn ) , and albumin , and Cascade blue dextran ( MW 10 kDa ) were from Molecular Probes . Other reagents were from Sigma - Aldrich unless otherwise noted . Incubation of Cells with Fluorescent Lipids and Various Markers Cell cultures were washed with ice - cold HMEM ( 10 mM HEPES - buffered MEM ) , transferred to a water bath at 10°C , and then incubated with ﬂuorescent lipid / DF - BSA for 30 min to label the PM ( Chen et al . , 1997 ) . ( In one series of experiments , a 0 . 5 mM ethanolic stock solution of BODIPY - LacCer was prepared , diluted to 2 (cid:1) M in HMEM , and incubated with the cells as above . ) The cells were then washed with cold HMEM and warmed to 37°C for various times to induce endocytosis . After this incubation , the medium was replaced with ice - cold HMEM without glucose containing the inhibitors , 5 mM NaN 3 and 50 mM 2 - deoxyglucose ( HMEM - G (cid:2) I ) and the cul - ture dishes were transferred to a 10°C bath . Fluorescent lipid present at the cell surface was removed by incubating the cells ( six times , 10 min each ) with 5 % DF - BSA in HMEM - G (cid:2) I at 10°C ( Martin and Pagano , 1994 ; Chen et al . , 1997 ) . For CtxB labeling , cells were incubated with 7 . 5 (cid:1) g / ml AF594 CtxB for 45 min at 10°C , washed , and further incubated at 37°C for the indicated times . For Tfn labeling , cultures were preincubated in serum - free culture medium for 2 h at 37°C to upregulate the Tfn receptor . Samples were then washed , incubated with 30 (cid:1) g / ml AF594 Tfn for 45 min at 10°C , washed , and further incubated at 37°C for the indicated times . Excess CtxB or Tfn at the cell surface was removed by acid stripping ( 30 s at 10°C with HMEM , pH 3 . 5 ) . Pharmacological Inhibitors of Endocytosis Cells were treated with various inhibitors to differentiate clathrin - dependent from clathrin - independent endocytosis as described ( Puri et al . , 2001 ) . For inhibition of clathrin - dependent endocytosis , samples were pretreated with 8 (cid:1) g / ml chlorpromazine ( CPZ ; Gustavsson et al . , 1999 ; Okamoto et al . , 2000 ) or were potassium depleted ( Larkin et al . , 1983 ; Hansen et al . , 1993 ) ; for disruption of caveolar endocytosis , cells were pretreated with 25 (cid:1) g / ml nystatin ( Rothberg et al . , 1992 ) or 200 (cid:1) M genistein ( Aoki et al . , 1999 ; Chen and Norkin , 1999 ; Liu and Anderson , 1999 ) . The speciﬁcity of each inhibitor treatment was evaluated by monitoring the internalization of ﬂuorescent CtxB , albumin , and Tfn as endocytic markers ( see Results ) . Cell viability was (cid:1) 90 % for each inhibitor treatment as judged by trypan blue staining . Transfection Studies GFP constructs of Eps15 ( D3 (cid:4) 2 [ control ] and the EH21 mutant E (cid:4) 95 / 295 [ dominant negative Eps15 ] ) were from Drs . A . Benmerah and A . Dautry - Varsat ( Inserm ; Paris ) ; GFP constructs of dynamin 2 ( Dyn2ab [ control ] and Dyn2ab K44A [ dominant negative ] ) were from Dr . M . McNiven ( Mayo Clinic ) . DsRed1 - cav - 1 was generated from cav - 1 - GFP ( a generous gift from Dr . A . Helenius , Swiss Federal Institute of Technology , Zurich ) by removing a Bam H1 - Hin dIII frag - ment containing the cav - 1 gene from the cav - 1 - GFP construct and inserting it into a pDsRed1 - C1 expression vector ( BD Biosciences Clontech , Palo Alto , CA ) . Cells were treated with FuGENE 6 trans - fection reagent ( Roche Applied Science , Indianapolis , IN ) and 2 (cid:1) g / ml DNA using the manufacturer’s protocol . After a 4 – 6 - h treat - ment , the cells were washed and subsequently cultured for 24 – 48 h in DMEM containing 10 % FBS before treatment with the ﬂuorescent lipids or toxins as above . Transfected cells were detected by GFP - or DsRed ﬂuorescence and the effect on lipid internalization was eval - uated as described ( Puri et al . , 2001 ; Choudhury et al . , 2002 ) . Colocalization Studies BODIPY - LacCer with Fluorescent Albumin or Dextran . RFs were incubated for 30 min at 10°C with 2 (cid:1) M BODIPY - LacCer to label the PM . Cells were then washed and incubated for 2 or 5 min at 37°C in the presence of 30 (cid:1) g / ml AF594 albumin or 1 mg / ml Cascade blue Dextran . Cells were then washed , back - exchanged , and observed under the ﬂuorescence microscope . In control experiments using cells in which only AF594 albumin ( or Cascade blue dextran ) was present , no ﬂuorescence was detected in the green microscope chan - nel used to visualize BODIPY - ﬂuorescence . DsRed - cav - 1 with BODIPY - LacCer , Fluorescent Albumin , or Tfn . RFs were transfected with the DsRed - cav - 1 construct and 48 h later were pulse - labeled with BODIPY - LacCer , AF488 albumin , or AF488 Tfn as above . Transfected cells were identiﬁed by DsRed ﬂuores - cence . In control experiments using singly labeled specimens , no overlap between DsRed and either LacCer or AF488 ﬂuorescence was detected under the experimental conditions used . Colocalization values were calculated using Metamorph image processing software ( v4 . 6 ; Universal Imaging Corp . , Dowingtown , PA ) and are based on the overlapping area of green puncta ( BODIPY - LacCer , AF488 albumin , or AF488 Tfn ) with red puncta ( DsRed - cav - 1 ) in doubly labeled specimens . BODIPY - GM 1 Internalization with and without CtxB HeLa cells were pretreated with nystatin ( 25 (cid:1) g / ml ) or CPZ ( 8 (cid:1) g / ml ) in HMEM for 30 min at 37°C . Cells were then washed with ice - cold HMEM , incubated with 1 (cid:1) M BODIPY - GM 1 for 35 min at 10°C , washed , and further incubated for 1 h at 10°C in HMEM with or without 1 (cid:1) g / ml AF594 CtxB . The cells were then washed , incubated for 5 min at 37°C , acid stripped ( see above ) , and back - exchanged with 5 % DF - BSA in HMEM - G (cid:2) I ( 2 (cid:5) 2 min at 37°C , followed by 4 (cid:5) 10 min at 10°C ) . Samples were then observed under the ﬂuorescence microscope . In control experiments using cells in which only AF594 CtxB was present , no ﬂuorescence was detected with the “green” microscope ﬁlters under the same exposure con - ditions used to visualize BODIPY - ﬂuorescence . R . D . Singh et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3256 Other Procedures Fluorescence microscopy using an Olympus IX70 ﬂuorescence mi - croscope and quantitative image analysis were performed as de - scribed ( Puri et al . , 2001 ; Choudhury et al . , 2002 ) . For Western blotting , aliquots of cell lysates were solubilized in sample buffer , run on 15 % SDS - PAGE gels , and transferred to polyvinylidene diﬂuoride membranes in transfer buffer with 20 % methanol . Blots were probed with monoclonal anticav - 1 antibody ( BD Biosciences PharMingen , San Diego , CA ) followed by antimouse horseradish peroxidase secondary antibody ( Amersham Life Sciences , Piscat - away , NJ ) . RESULTS Endocytosis of Multiple GSL Analogs in Rat Fibroblasts Our previous studies demonstrated that the GSL analogs LacCer and globoside were internalized predominantly via a clathrin - independent caveolar - related mechanism in HSFs ( Puri et al . , 2001 ) . Thus , it was of interest to further study the internalization of GSL analogs to learn if this was a general phenomenon . We ﬁrst extensively studied LacCer internal - ization in RFs . The uptake of BODIPY - LacCer was compared with that of ﬂuorescent Tfn and CtxB , which are selective endocytic markers for clathrin - dependent vs . caveolar endo - cytosis , respectively . Using a series of pathway - speciﬁc pharmacological inhibitors and a DN construct of Eps15 , we demonstrated that LacCer internalization in RFs was inhib - ited (cid:3) 80 % by nystatin and genistein , but only (cid:3) 10 % by CPZ , K (cid:2) - depletion , or DN Eps15 expression , similar to the behavior of CtxB ( Figure 2A ) . In contrast , internalization of ﬂuorescent Tfn was inhibited by CPZ , K (cid:2) depletion , or expression of DN Eps15 , but was not signiﬁcantly affected by nystatin or genistein ( Figure 2A ) . Examples of the selec - tive inhibition of Tfn uptake by DN Eps15 and LacCer internalization by nystatin are shown in Figures 2 , B and C , respectively . In addition , we found that internalization of Tfn , CtxB , and LacCer were each inhibited by (cid:3) 90 % in RFs transfected with a DN construct of dynamin ( McNiven et al . , 2000 ; Figure 2A ) . Together , these results demonstrate that in RFs , LacCer internalization occurred by a clathrin - indepen - dent mechanism , consistent with our previous studies in HSFs ( Puri et al . , 2001 ) . To further characterize the endocytosis of LacCer , we carried out colocalization experiments using labeled albu - min , which internalizes via caveolae in some cell types ( Shu - bert et al . , 2001 ) . In preliminary studies , we found that internalization ( 5 min at 37°C ) of ﬂuorescent albumin was inhibited by 88 . 9 (cid:6) 6 . 8 % in cells pretreated with nystatin , similar to that seen using LacCer and CtxB ( Figure 2A ) , but was inhibited by only 7 . 2 (cid:6) 1 . 7 % following pretreatment with CPZ . Extensive overlap ( (cid:1) 93 % ) of BODIPY - LacCer and ﬂuorescent albumin was seen after 3 min of internalization at 37°C ( Figure 3 ) . We then carried out a parallel experiment using BODIPY - LacCer and ﬂuorescent dextran , which at low concentrations ( 1 mg / ml ) acts as a marker for cdc42 - dependent pinocytosis ( Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ) . In prelim - inary studies we found that dextran internalization was virtually unaffected by pretreatment of cells with CPZ ( (cid:2) 2 % inhibition ) or nystatin ( (cid:2) 5 % inhibition ) , demonstrating that dextran internalization occurred by a mechanism which was distinct from those utilized for endocytosis of Tfn or CtxB . In Figure 2 . Differential internalization of endocytic markers and ﬂuores - cent lipid analogs in rat ﬁbroblasts . ( A ) RFs were pretreated with the indicated pharmacological inhibitor or transfected with DN Eps15 or Dyn2 constructs and the internalization ( 5 min at 37°C ) of ﬂuorescent CtxB , Tfn , or BODIPY - LacCer , relative to untreated control samples was quantiﬁed by image analysis . Note the similarity of LacCer to CtxB inter - nalization in response to the various treatments . Representative ﬂuores - cence micrographs showing the differential internalization ( 5 min at 37°C ) of LacCer vs . Tfn are given in B for RFs transfected with DN Eps15 ( white outlines indicate transfected cells ) or in C for RFs pretreated with nystatin ( white outlines indicate position of cells observed by phase microscopy ) . Insets show LacCer or Tfn internalization in untreated control cells . Bars , 10 (cid:1) m . Caveolar Endocytosis of GSL Analogs Vol . 14 , August 2003 3257 double - label experiments there was (cid:7) 10 % colocalization of LacCer with ﬂuorescent dextran after 5 min of internaliza - tion ( Figure 3 ) . We also pretreated cells with Clostridium difﬁcile toxin B , an inhibitor of the Rho family GTPases ( Ak - tories et al . , 2000 ) , and found that this treatment blocked dextran uptake but had no effect on LacCer internalization ( unpublished data ) . Finally , we carried out colocalization studies in RFs trans - fected with the DsRed - cav - 1 construct . BODIPY - LacCer was internalized for 2 min at 37°C , and images of DsRed - cav - 1 ( red ) and LacCer ( green ) were acquired . Punctate LacCer ﬂuorescence ( green ) extensively overlapped with DsRed - cav - 1 puncta as seen in Figure 4 , A and B . Importantly , in adjacent nontransfected cells no red ﬂuorescence from Lac - Cer was detected at these exposure settings . Furthermore , in control samples expressing DsRed - cav - 1 but not incubated with BODIPY - LacCer , no ﬂuorescence was detected at green wavelengths ( Figure 4A , bottom right panel ) . Similarly , en - docytosed AF488 albumin extensively colocalized with DsRed - cav - 1 ( Figure 4C ) , whereas no overlap of DsRed - cav - 1 was seen in cells incubated with AF488 Tfn . Together the results in Figures 2 – 4 provide strong evi - dence that LacCer was internalized via caveolae in RFs , rather than by pinocytosis or other Rho - dependent , non - clathrin endocytic mechanisms . To investigate the structural determinants of GSLs that result in selective internalization via caveolae , we systemat - ically varied the structure of the ﬂuorescent GSL analogs ( see Figure 1 ) and examined the effect of these variations on the mechanism of analog internalization . To examine the signiﬁcance of the carbohydrate head group , we used ﬂuores - cent analogs of GalCer , globoside , GM 1 , LacCer , MalCer , and sulfatide . ( Fluorescent glucosylceramide was not used because this lipid is internalized from the PM by a combi - nation of endocytic and nonendocytic mechanisms ; Martin and Pagano , 1994 . ) For each of these ﬂuorescent GSL ana - logs , the ﬂuorescent fatty acid and sphingosine base were identical ( n (cid:8) (cid:9) 3 , n (cid:9) 7 ; Figure 1A ) . RFs were incubated with each analog in the presence or absence of various inhibitors to differentiate clathrin - dependent from clathrin - indepen - dent endocytosis as in Figure 2 , and the amount of internal - ization ( at 5 min ) was quantiﬁed by image analysis . The internalization of each GSL analog ( GalCer , MalCer , globo - side , sulfatide , and GM 1 ) was substantially inhibited by nystatin ( but not by CPZ ) , similar to BODIPY - LacCer ( Table 1 ) , indicating that the speciﬁc carbohydrate headgroup structure or the stereochemistry of the glycosidic linkage in the disaccharide moiety of the GSL does not play a signiﬁ - cant role in selective internalization of these GSLs by the clathrin - independent , caveolar mechanism . Finally , we carried out a control experiment exactly as above , except that BODIPY - LacCer was introduced into cells from an ethanolic solution rather than from a BSA complex ( see MATERIALS AND METHODS ) . As seen in Table 1 , virtually identical results were obtained when the LacCer analog was delivered to RFs using BSA vs . ethanol injection , indicating that the BSA carrier did not inﬂuence the LacCer uptake mechanism . We also examined the importance of hydrophobicity on the mechanism of GSL endocytosis . For these studies , we used BODIPY - LacCer analogs in which the chain length of the sphingosine base ( C 12 to C 20 ) , or fatty acid ( C 3 vs . C 5 spacer ) was varied ( n (cid:9) 1 , 5 , 7 , or 9 ; n (cid:8) (cid:9) 1 or 3 ; Figure 1A ) . Endo - cytosis of the series of LacCer analogs was studied in RFs as above , but surprisingly none of the modiﬁcations in chain length affected the mechanism of LacCer internalization ( Ta - ble 2 ) . To investigate the possible inﬂuence of the BODIPY ﬂuorophore , we studied the internalization of NBD - labeled LacCer and found that its internalization was nystatin - in - hibitable and CPZ - insensitive ( Table 1 ) , similar to our ﬁnd - ings for BODIPY - LacCer ( and other BODIPY - GSLs ) . This demonstrated that the ﬂuorophore ( NBD vs . BODIPY ) had no apparent inﬂuence on the internalization mechanism . Finally , we compared NBD - LacCer with NBD - d - PC to study the possible inﬂuence of the lipid backbone ( ceramide vs . glycerol ) on the internalization mechanism . For these studies , it was necessary to use the nonhydrolyzable d - stereoisomer of NBD - PC , because the natural l - isomer is rapidly degraded by cells ( Sleight and Pagano , 1984 ) , pre - Figure 3 . Colocalization of BODIPY - LacCer with ﬂuorescent albu - min vs . dextran in rat ﬁbroblasts . RFs were incubated with BODIPY - LacCer for 30 min at 4°C , washed , and further incubated for 3 min at 37°C with 30 (cid:1) g / ml AF594 - conjugated albumin or 5 min at 37°C with 1 mg / ml Cascade blue dextran . After back - exchange at 10°C to remove any LacCer remaining at the PM ( see MATERIALS AND METHODS ) , the samples were observed under the ﬂuorescence microscope , and separate images were acquired for each ﬂuoro - phore . Images were rendered in pseudocolor and are presented as overlays : LacCer , green ; albumin , red ; dextran , red . Note the exten - sive colocalization of LacCer with albumin but not with dextran . Boxed areas are shown at higher magniﬁcation in the corresponding bottom panels . Bar , 10 (cid:1) m . R . D . Singh et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3258 Figure 4 . DsRed - cav - 1 colocalization with BODIPY - LacCer and ﬂuorescent albumin . RFs were transfected with DsRed - cav - 1 and 48 h later the distribution of ( A and B ) BODIPY - LacCer or ( C ) AF488 albumin after 2 min of internalization at 37°C was examined . Top panels in A show the same ﬁeld for cav - 1 ( red ) or LacCer ( green ) . Note that in an adjacent nontransfected cell outlined in white , there was no spillover of LacCer ﬂuorescence into the DsRed channel . Bottom panels in ( A ) show a control experiment using transfected cells without LacCer labeling . Note that no DsRed ﬂuorescence appeared in the green channel at the exposure setting used for LacCer in the doubly labeled specimen . The boxed regions in A are shown at higher magniﬁcation in B . Note the similar patterns of punctate ﬂuorescence ( e . g . , at arrows ) for LacCer and cav - 1 . Quantitative analysis indicated that at least (cid:3) 90 % of the green puncta colocalized with DsRed - cav - 1 . However , not all DsRed - cav - 1 puncta were positive for LacCer ( e . g . , see (cid:2) s ) . ( C ) Fluorescence micrographs of a cell expressing DsRed - cav - 1 and labeled with AF488 albumin . More than 95 % of the AF488 puncta colocalized with DsRed - cav - 1 . Bars , 10 (cid:1) m . Caveolar Endocytosis of GSL Analogs Vol . 14 , August 2003 3259 cluding its use in our endocytosis studies . As shown in Table 1 , the endocytosis of NBD - d - PC was found to be predomi - nantly CPZ - inhibitable , suggesting that unlike LacCer , its uptake occurred largely by clathrin - dependent endocytosis . In summary , these structural studies suggest that GSL up - take via caveolae is not selective for a speciﬁc carbohydrate headgroup , acyl chain hydrophobicity , or ﬂuorophore sub - stitution ; however , comparison with the uptake of NBD - d - PC suggests that the ceramide core of GSLs may play an important role in caveolar endocytosis of GSLs . LacCer Internalization in Other Cell Types We next extended our studies of BODIPY - LacCer endocyto - sis to six other cell types in addition to RFs : HSFs , CHO , MDCK , Calu - 1 , Calu - 6 , and HeLa cells . In preliminary ex - periments we incubated each cell type with various concen - trations ( 1 – 3 (cid:1) M ) of BODIPY - LacCer at 4°C , washed the cells , and quantiﬁed the PM ﬂuorescence . This allowed us to adjust the incubation conditions such that the initial labeling of the PM was nearly identical ( (cid:6) 10 % ) for each cell type ( e . g . , see Figure 5 ) . Cells were then warmed for 5 min at 37°C , and the amount of LacCer internalization from the PM was quantiﬁed . Approximately 30 – 40 % of the lipid analog was internalized from the PM in each cell type except in HeLa and Calu - 6 cells , where internalization was only Table 1 . Inhibition of lipid analog endocytosis by different biochemical treatments in rat ﬁbroblasts Fluorescent lipid analog Clathrin - independent internalization Clathrin - dependent internalization Nystatin a Genistein a Chlorpromazine a K (cid:2) - depletion a % % % % BODIPY - GalCer 71 . 9 (cid:6) 9 . 5 ND 10 . 5 (cid:6) 2 . 8 ND BODIPY - LacCer 75 . 1 (cid:6) 6 . 8 ( 73 . 9 (cid:6) 8 . 7 ) b 73 . 9 (cid:6) 4 . 1 9 . 3 (cid:6) 1 . 7 ( 8 . 6 (cid:6) 1 . 6 ) b 10 . 4 (cid:6) 1 . 3 BODIPY - MalCer 76 . 7 (cid:6) 8 . 2 ND 9 . 2 (cid:6) 1 . 9 ND BODIPY - Globoside 82 . 6 (cid:6) 10 . 5 82 . 0 (cid:6) 4 . 5 0 . 7 (cid:6) 0 . 1 7 . 0 (cid:6) 0 . 8 BODIPY - Sulfatide 78 . 2 (cid:6) 7 . 6 73 . 6 (cid:6) 9 . 7 9 . 1 (cid:6) 2 . 2 ND BODIPY - GM 1 74 . 7 (cid:6) 8 . 2 69 . 9 (cid:6) 8 . 9 8 . 8 (cid:6) 1 . 2 11 . 6 (cid:6) 2 . 1 NBD - LacCer 75 . 6 (cid:6) 6 . 7 ND 15 . 1 (cid:6) 2 . 4 ND NBD - D - PC 20 . 4 (cid:6) 4 . 4 ND 71 . 3 (cid:6) 8 . 5 ND a Cells were pretreated with or without the indicated inhibitor ( see MATERIALS AND METHODS ) and subsequently incubated with a BSA complex of the indicated lipid analog for 30 min at 10°C to label the PM . The samples were then washed , warmed for 5 min at 37°C to allow endocytosis to occur , and then back - exchanged to remove ﬂuorescent lipid remaining at the PM . Specimens were then observed under the ﬂuorescence microscope and the percent inhibition of internalization of the lipid analog was determined by image analysis of the ﬂuorescently labeled cells . Values are mean (cid:6) SD of at least 10 cells in each of the three independent experiments . ND , not determined . b Experiment was performed as in footnote a , except that an ethanolic solution of BODIPY - LacCer was used in place of the BSA complex ( see text ) . Table 2 . Inhibition of various chain length BODIPY - LacCer analogs in rat ﬁbroblasts BODIPY - SL analogs % Inhibition Nystatin CPZ C 12 So , C 5 - BODIPY - LacCer 78 . 7 (cid:6) 11 . 2 9 . 8 (cid:6) 0 . 9 C 16 So , C 5 - BODIPY - LacCer 80 . 8 (cid:6) 10 . 2 10 . 3 (cid:6) 1 . 1 C 18 So , C 5 - BODIPY - LacCer 75 . 2 (cid:6) 8 . 9 9 . 3 (cid:6) 1 . 2 C 20 So , C 5 - BODIPY - LacCer 75 . 9 (cid:6) 6 . 8 8 . 2 (cid:6) 1 . 2 C 18 So , C 3 - BODIPY - LacCer 84 . 3 (cid:6) 9 . 4 5 . 4 (cid:6) 0 . 3 Cells were pretreated with or without the indicated inhibitor ( see MATERIALS AND METHODS ) and subsequently incubated with the indicated BODIPY - SL ( see Figure 1 for structures ) as described in Table 1 . Values are mean (cid:6) SD of at least 10 cells in each of the three independent experiments . So , sphingosine . Figure 5 . BODIPY - LacCer internalization in RFs vs . HeLa cells . Cells were incubated with 2 (cid:1) M BODIPY - LacCer for 30 min at 10°C , washed and observed immediately ( top panels ) or warmed for 5 min at 37°C before back - exchange and microscopy ( bottom panels ) . All images were exposed and printed identically . Note that al - though the PM labeling ( 0 min ) was similar for both cell types , the amount of internalization was greatly reduced in HeLa cells . Bar , 10 (cid:1) m . R . D . Singh et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3260 (cid:3) 5 – 6 % of the initial lipid present at the PM ( Figure 6C ) . An example of this reduced internalization is shown in Figure 5 for HeLa cells vs . RFs . Although the amount of LacCer internalization varied among the different cell types , its in - ternalization was sensitive to nystatin but not to CPZ in each case ( Figure 6A ) , suggesting that LacCer endocytosis was clathrin independent for all the cell types studied . In addi - tion , we carried out colocalization experiments using BODIPY - LacCer and ﬂuorescent albumin , analogous to the experiment shown in Figure 3 . Extensive colocalization of the lipid analog and ﬂuorescent albumin was found in all the cell types tested after 3 min of internalization . These experiments were not carried out using HeLa or Calu - 6 cells because internalization of LacCer was very low in those cell types . Previous studies have demonstrated that Calu - 6 and HeLa cells have low levels of cav - 1 mRNA or cav - 1 expression relative to other cell types ( Racine et al . , 1999 ; Skretting et al . , 1999 ) . In the present study we examined cav - 1 expression and found that of the seven cell types used , only Calu - 6 and HeLa cells had low levels of cav - 1 , suggesting that the extent of LacCer internalization correlates with cav - 1 expression ( Figure 6 , B and C ) . To extend this study , Calu - 6 and HeLa cells were transfected for 48 h with a construct for DsRed - cav - 1 . The effect on LacCer internalization was then evalu - ated . Cav - 1 – transfected cells exhibited dramatically en - hanced uptake of LacCer ( 5 min internalization at 37°C ) relative to adjacent nontransfected cells for both HeLa ( Fig - ure 7 ) and Calu - 6 cells . In parallel experiments , electron microscopy of DsRed - cav - 1 – transfected HeLa cells showed numerous uncoated invaginations at the PM and uncoated vesicles in the cytoplasm , whereas almost no such structures were seen in nontransfected cells ( unpublished data ) . These results demonstrate that cav - 1 overexpression in HeLa cells stimulates LacCer internalization and promotes the forma - tion of uncoated vesicles . Mechanism of CtxB Internalization Varies with Cell Type We used similar techniques to those described for LacCer to examine the internalization mechanism of CtxB in the cell types used above . ( CHO cells were not used because they lack GM 1 , which is required for CtxB binding . ) Cells were incubated with ﬂuorescent CtxB at 4°C to bind endogenous GM 1 at the PM , warmed for 5 min at 37°C , washed , acid stripped , and viewed under the ﬂuorescence microscope . Internalization was quantiﬁed by image analysis . Nystatin and CPZ pretreatments were used to evaluate , respectively , the relative contributions of clathrin - independent and clath - rin - dependent endocytosis to the uptake of CtxB . As shown in Figure 6D , inhibition of CtxB uptake by nystatin or CPZ was variable . Nystatin ( but not CPZ ) pretreatment signiﬁ - Figure 6 . LacCer and CtxB internalization compared with cav - 1 expression in multiple cell types . ( A ) Cells were pretreated with nystatin or CPZ and the internalization of BODIPY - LacCer was quantiﬁed after 5 min at 37°C ( see MATERIALS AND METHODS ) . Values are expressed as percent inhibition relative to untreated control samples . In control experiments ( unpublished data ) , the initial labeling of the PM before internalization was shown to be approximately the same for each cell type . ( B ) Western blot for Cav - 1 in cell lysates prepared from various cell types . The amount of total cell protein was the same ( 10 (cid:1) g ) for each lane . Low but detectable levels of cav - 1 were seen in Calu - 6 and HeLa cell extracts using longer exposures . ( C ) Extent of LacCer internalization ( 5 min at 37°C ) expressed as a percentage of initial PM labeling compared with cav - 1 expression levels ( relative to HSFs ) determined by quan - titation of Western blots as in B . ( D ) Cells were pretreated as in A and then incubated with 7 . 5 (cid:1) g / ml AF594 - CtxB for 45 min at 10°C , washed , and warmed to 37°C for 5 min . Samples were then washed and acid - stripped , and internalization was quantiﬁed as in A . Val - ues in A and D are expressed as percentage of untreated control samples and are mean (cid:6) SD of at least 10 cells in each of three independent experiments . Caveolar Endocytosis of GSL Analogs Vol . 14 , August 2003 3261 cantly inhibited CtxB internalization in RFs , HSFs , MDCK , and Calu - 1 cells , whereas CPZ had a signiﬁcant inhibitory effect in HeLa and Calu - 6 cells . This result for CtxB is in striking contrast to that obtained using LacCer whose inter - nalization was inhibited by nystatin ( but not CPZ ) , regard - less of the cell type ( Figure 6A ) . Thus , in cell types with low cav - 1 expression , CtxB internalization occurred predomi - nantly via clathrin - dependent endocytosis , whereas LacCer internalization remained clathrin independent . CtxB Alters the Internalization Mechanism of BODIPY - GM 1 Finally , we tested the possibility that CtxB binding might alter the mechanism of internalization of exogenously added GM 1 . HeLa cells were incubated with BODIPY - GM 1 at 10°C to label the PM , washed , and further incubated for 1 h at 10°C with or without AF594 - CtxB . Samples were then warmed at 37°C for 5 min , and the amount of internalization was assessed after acid stripping and back exchange ( see MATERIALS AND METH - ODS ) . In the absence of bound CtxB , internalization of BODIPY - GM 1 was signiﬁcantly inhibited by pretreatment with nystatin , whereas CPZ treatment had little effect ( Figure 8A , top panels , and C ) . In the presence of bound CtxB , however , two effects were seen . First , the amount of BODIPY - GM 1 inter - nalized during 5 min at 37°C was signiﬁcantly increased over that seen in the absence of CtxB ( Figure 8 , A and C ) . In this experiment , the presence of bound CtxB was conﬁrmed by visualization of AF594 ﬂuorescence which was seen to colocal - ize with the BODIPY - ﬂuorescence ( Figure 8B ) . Second , in the presence of bound CtxB , the relative amount of GM 1 uptake which was inhibited by nystatin decreased from 79 to 40 % , whereas the fraction which was inhibited by CPZ increased from 18 to 64 % ( Figure 8C ) . These results suggest that in HeLa cells , CtxB stimulated the internalization of BODIPY - GM 1 mainly by increasing the extent of its uptake via clathrin - dependent endocytosis . DISCUSSION In the current study we examined the mechanism of internal - ization of a series of ﬂuorescent GSL analogs and , using mul - tiple criteria , showed that they were endocytosed almost ex - clusively through a caveolar - related , cav - 1 – dependent mechanism in RFs and other cell types . The internalization mechanism for these GSLs was unaffected by varying the car - bohydrate headgroup or sphingosine backbone chain length , and additional evidence suggested that the ceramide core of the GSLs may be important for caveolar uptake . Although the uptake of the GSL analogs occurred by a nystatin - inhibitable process in cells with both high and low cav - 1 expression , this was not the case for ﬂuorescent CtxB used to monitor endog - enous GM 1 internalization . Rather , its internalization shifted from a clathrin - independent to a clathrin - dependent mecha - nism in cells with low levels of cav - 1 . These results suggest that GSLs are selectively internalized through caveolae in many cell types and demonstrate that the ﬂuorescent GSL analogs can be used to reliably monitor caveolar endocytosis . These major points are discussed below . BODIPY - LacCer Is Internalized by Caveolae Several pieces of evidence indicate that the BODIPY - LacCer analog was endocytosed through caveolae in RFs . First , we demonstrated that LacCer internalization occurred by a clath - rin - independent mechanism using multiple pathway - speciﬁc inhibitors as well as a DN construct of Eps15 that blocks clathrin - dependent endocytosis ( Figure 2 ) , consistent with our previous results in HSFs ( Puri et al . , 2001 ) . Second , we showed that the ﬂuorescent LacCer analog colocalized with ﬂuores - cently labeled albumin ( Figure 3 ) , which is reported to be internalized via caveolae in other cell types ( Shubert et al . , 2001 ) . Furthermore , both the LacCer analog and ﬂuorescent albumin extensively colocalized with DsRed - cav - 1 in RFs at an early stage ( 2 min ) of internalization ( Figure 4 ) . Third , the internalized LacCer did not colocalize with ﬂuorescent dextran ( Figure 3 ) , a marker for cdc42 - dependent pinocytosis . In addi - tion , unlike LacCer uptake , dextran uptake was not inhibitable by nystatin . We also found that C . difﬁcile toxin B , an inhibitor of rho - dependent endocytic mechanisms including the cdc42 pathway ( Aktories et al . , 2000 ; Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ) , had no effect on LacCer internalization . In addition , recent studies by Mayor and colleagues have shown that dextran uptake occurs Figure 7 . Caveolin - 1 overexpression stimulates LacCer internaliza - tion . HeLa cells were transfected with DsRed - cav - 1 for 48 h . Cells were then pulse - labeled with BODIPY - LacCer as in Figure 4 . ( A ) Fluores - cence micrograph showing two transfected cells ( identiﬁed by DsRed ﬂuorescence ) and a nontransfected cell in the same ﬁeld . LacCer was observed at green wavelengths ( see MATERIALS AND METHODS ) . Note the stimulation of LacCer internalization in the transfected cell , relative to the neighboring nontransfected cell outlined in white . Bar , 10 (cid:1) m . ( B ) Quantitation of LacCer internalization in transfected vs . nontransfected cells by image analysis . Values are the mean (cid:6) SD of at least 10 cells in each of three independent experiments . R . D . Singh et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3262 by a dynamin - independent mechanism ( Sabharanjak et al . , 2002 ) , in contrast to LacCer internalization which was dynamin dependent ( Figure 2A ) . Taken together , our results provide strong evidence that internalization of GSL analogs in RFs occurs via caveolar endocytosis rather than another clathrin - independent endocytic mechanism . In addition to our studies with RFs , we examined LacCer internalization in HSFs , HeLa , CHO , MDCK , Calu - 1 , and Calu - 6 cells . In each case , LacCer internalization appeared to occur by a similar mechanism to that found for RFs when we examined the effects of biochemical inhibitors ( i . e . , nystatin vs . CPZ ; Figure 6A ) or colocalization with labeled albumin . Thus , it seems reasonable to suggest that the mechanism of LacCer internalization does not vary among these cell types and was predominantly via caveolae in each case . However , the amount of LacCer internalization was dramatically reduced in cell types with low levels of cav - 1 ( HeLa and Calu - 6 ) and could be stimulated in those cell types by overexpression of this protein . These results strongly suggest that the extent of LacCer inter - nalization is closely related to the expression of cav - 1 in mul - tiple cell types . Our results are in apparent contrast to those of Nabi and coworkers who found that the overexpression of cav - 1 negatively regulates the caveolar - mediated endocytosis of the autocrine motility factor receptor in NIH - 3T3 cells ( Le et al . , 2002 ) . One possible explanation is that there are distinct caveolar - mediated endocytic pathways with different charac - teristics ( Le and Nabi , 2003 ) . In this context , we recently found that BODIPY - LacCer internalized via caveolar - related endocy - tosis in HSFs is rapidly delivered to early endosomes where it merges with Tfn , a marker for the clathrin pathway ( Sharma et al . , 2003 ) . In contrast , SV40 virus internalized via caveolae is reported to be transported intracellularly by a slow process that does not include passage through early endosomes ( Pelk - mans et al . , 2001 ) . Figure 8 . Effect of CtxB on the internalization of ﬂuorescent GM 1 in HeLa cells . ( A ) Cells were untreated or pretreated with nystatin or CPZ , washed , and incubated with 1 (cid:1) M BODIPY - GM 1 at 10°C to label the PM . Samples were washed and further incubated in HMEM without ( (cid:10) CtxB ) or with AF594 - CtxB ( (cid:2) CtxB ) for 1 h at 10°C . The intensity of BODIPY - ﬂuorescence at the PM was the same ( (cid:6) 10 % ) with or without bound CtxB ( unpublished data ) . The samples were then washed , warmed to 37°C for 5 min , washed , acid - stripped , and back - exchanged to remove CtxB and ﬂuorescent lipid from the PM , and observed under the ﬂuorescence microscope ( see MATERIALS AND METHODS ) . Note that the presence of bound toxin ( (cid:2) CtxB panels ) dramatically altered the relative inhibition by nystatin vs . CPZ of BODIPY - GM 1 internalization which was viewed at green wavelengths . ( B ) Colocalization of BODIPY - GM 1 with AF594 - CtxB after coincubation in the absence of inhibitors as in A . ( C ) Quantitation of experiment shown in A . Values are mean (cid:6) SD of at least 10 cells in each of the three independent experiments . Bars , 10 (cid:1) m . Caveolar Endocytosis of GSL Analogs Vol . 14 , August 2003 3263 Structural Requirements for GSL Internalization We also attempted to deﬁne the molecular features of GSL analogs that result in their selective internalization by caveo - lae in RFs . To do so , we systematically varied the structure of the ﬂuorescent lipid by modifying its carbohydrate head - group , chain length of the sphingosine base , or chain length of the ﬂuorescent fatty acid and examined their initial inter - nalization and sensitivity to inhibitor treatments . Fluores - cent GalCer , LacCer , MalCer , globoside , GM 1 , and sulfatide were internalized identically to BODIPY - LacCer ( Table 1 ) . Each of these molecules had an identical BODIPY - ceramide backbone and differed only in the saccharide moieties present in the polar headgroup . Of particular interest is the ﬁnding that BODIPY - MalCer , whose headgroup is Glc ( (cid:3) 1 3 4 ) Glc , and LacCer , whose headgroup is Gal ( (cid:4) 1 3 4 ) Glc , behaved identically despite their different conformations in the vicinity of the carbohydrate / sphingo - lipid interface , suggesting that the presence of galactose is not required for caveolar endocytosis of the various GSL analogs . To evaluate the possibility that the hydrophobicity of the analog might inﬂuence its internalization , we used a series of BODIPY - LacCer analogs in which the chain length of the sphingosine base or ﬂuorescent fatty acid was varied ( refer to Figure 1 ) . Alterations in lipid chain length are presumed to affect the hydrophobicity of the analogs ( e . g . , C 12 vs . C 20 sphingosine ) ; however , there was no effect on the LacCer internalization mechanism ( Table 2 ) . These results suggest that the hydrophobicity of the GSL analogs is not a major determinant for their selective internalization via caveolae . We also compared the internalization of NBD - vs . BODIPY - labeled LacCer and found that replacing the BODIPY - ﬂuoro - phore with NBD did not inﬂuence the caveolar internalization of the LacCer analogs ( Table 1 ) . Finally , we compared the internalization of NBD - LacCer with NBD - d - PC . Unlike the GSL analogs , NBD - d - PC was internalized primarily via clath - rin - dependent endocytosis ( Table 1 ) . Taken together , these studies suggest that GSL analogs are internalized mainly via caveolae with no speciﬁcity toward particular carbohydrate headgroups . However , the sphingoid backbone of the GSLs appeared to be important for selective caveolar endocytosis because the glycerophospholipid , NBD - d - PC , was not internal - ized by this mechanism . Interestingly , BODIPY - sphingomye - lin , which has both a ceramide core ( as in GSLs ) and a phos - phocholine headgroup ( as in PC ) , is internalized approximately equally by both caveolar - and clathrin - medi - ated endocytosis ( Puri et al . , 2001 ) . CtxB ( but not LacCer ) Internalization Mechanism Varies with Cell Type We compared the mechanism of internalization of CtxB and LacCer in six different cell types ( Figure 6 ) and found that although LacCer was internalized by a clathrin - independent mechanism in each case , both clathrin - independent ( nysta - tin - sensitive ) and clathrin - dependent ( CPZ - sensitive ) mech - anisms could contribute to CtxB uptake to varying extents depending on the cell type . One possible explanation for this is that the internalization mechanism of ﬂuorescent LacCer mimics that of endogenous PM GM 1 and that binding of CtxB to GM 1 alters its internalization . Alternatively , the presence of the BODIPY - ( or NBD - ) ﬂuorophore on LacCer could bias its mechanism of internalization as cell type is varied . To test these possibilities , we compared the internal - ization of BODIPY - GM 1 in HeLa cells , with and without bound CtxB ( Figure 8 ) . In the absence of bound CtxB , inter - nalization of BODIPY - GM 1 was largely nystatin - sensitive ( i . e . , clathrin - independent and caveolar - related ) , whereas CPZ ( which inhibits clathrin - dependent internalization ) had little effect . In contrast , when the same experiment was performed after binding CtxB to the PM , the fraction of GM 1 uptake that was inhibited by nystatin decreased , whereas the fraction that was inhibited by CPZ increased ( Figure 8 ) . Furthermore , CtxB treatment also increased the total amount of BODIPY - GM 1 internalization about fourfold . These re - sults demonstrate that the internalization of the ﬂuorescent GM 1 analog was perturbed by CtxB binding , and raise the possibility that internalization of endogenous GM 1 might also be affected by the bound toxin in some cell types . We speculate that this perturbation occurs because CtxB binding ( ﬁve molecules of GM 1 bound per molecule of CtxB ; Lencer et al . , 1999 ) disrupts the normal interactions of GM 1 with neighboring lipids , proteins , and cholesterol that are re - quired for clathrin - independent internalization . CONCLUSIONS In summary , the current study demonstrates that ﬂuorescent GSL analogs were internalized via caveolae in multiple cell types and this selective internalization was not affected by simple modiﬁcations of the saccharide units making up the GSL headgroup , or by modiﬁcation of the lipid hydropho - bicity . However , evidence was presented that the ceramide core of the GSLs may be an important determinant for their selective caveolar endocytosis . In addition , we show that unlike CtxB , the GSL analogs were internalized via caveolar endocytosis even in cells with low levels of cav - 1 expression . These studies suggest that caveolar endocytosis is the major mechanism for the endocytosis of PM GSLs , leading us to speculate that this process may play an important role in the maintenance of PM lipid composition and microdomain structure . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grant GM22942 to R . E . P . and grant HL16660 to R . B . V . P . was supported by a fellowship from the American Heart Association . REFERENCES Aktories , K . , Schmidt , G . , and Just , I . ( 2000 ) . Rho GTPases as targets of bacterial protein toxins . Biol . Chem . 381 , 421 – 426 . Anderson , R . G . ( 1998 ) . The caveolae membrane system . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 67 , 199 – 225 . Anderson , R . G . , and Jacobson , K . ( 2002 ) . A role for lipid shells in targeting proteins to caveolae , rafts , and other lipid domains . Science 296 , 1821 – 1825 . Aoki , T . , Nomura , R . , and Fujimoto , T . ( 1999 ) . Tyrosine phosphoryla - tion of Caveolin - 1 in the endothelium . Exp . Cell Res . 253 , 629 – 636 . Brown , D . A . , and London , E . ( 2000 ) . Structure and function of sphin - golipid - and cholesterol - rich membrane rafts . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 17221 – 17224 . R . D . Singh et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 3264 Chen , C . S . , Martin , O . C . , and Pagano , R . E . ( 1997 ) . Changes in the spectral properties of a plasma membrane lipid analog during the ﬁrst seconds of endocytosis in living cells . Biophys . J . 72 , 37 – 50 . Chen , Y . , and Norkin , L . C . ( 1999 ) . Extracellular Simian Virus 40 trans - mits a signal that promotes virus enclosure within caveolae . Exp . Cell Res . 246 , 83 – 90 . Choudhury , A . , Dominguez , M . , Puri , V . , Sharma , D . K . , Narita , K . , Wheatley , C . W . , Marks , D . L . , and Pagano , R . E . ( 2002 ) . Rab proteins mediate Golgi transport of caveola - internalized glycosphingolipids and correct lipid trafﬁcking in Niemann - Pick C cells . J . Clin . Invest . 109 , 1541 – 1550 . Edidin , M . ( 2003 ) . The state of lipids rafts : from model membranes to cells . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomolec . Struct . 257 – 283 . Gleizes , P . E . , Noaillac - Depeyre , J . , Dupont , M . A . , and Gas , N . ( 1996 ) . Basic ﬁbroblast growth factor ( FGF - 2 ) is addressed to caveolae after binding to the plasma membrane of BHK cells . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 71 , 144 – 153 . Gustavsson , J . et al . ( 1999 ) . Localization of the insulin receptor in caveolae of adipocyte plasma membrane . FASEB J . 13 , 1961 – 1971 . Hansen , S . H . , Sandvig , K . , and van Deurs , B . ( 1993 ) . Clathrin and HA2 adapters : effects of potassium depletion , hypertonic medium , and cy - tosol acidiﬁcation . J . Cell Biol . 121 , 61 – 72 . Henley , J . R . , Krueger , E . W . , Oswald , B . J . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 1998 ) . Dynamin - mediated internalization of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 85 – 99 . Larkin , J . M . , Brown , M . S . , Goldstein , J . L . , and Anderson , R . G . W . ( 1983 ) . Depletion of intracellular potassium arrests coated pit formation and receptor - mediated endocytosis in ﬁbroblasts . Cell 33 , 273 – 285 . Le , P . U . , Guay , G . , Altschuler , Y . , and Nabi , I . R . ( 2002 ) . Caveolin - 1 is a negative regulator of caveolae - mediated endocytosis to the endoplas - mic reticulum . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 3371 – 3379 . Le , P . U . , and Nabi , I . R . ( 2003 ) . Distinct caveolae - mediated endocytic pathways target the Golgi apparatus and the endoplasmic reticulum . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 1059 – 1071 . Lencer , W . I . , Hirst , T . R . , andHolmes , R . K . ( 1999 ) . Membranetrafﬁcand the cellular uptake of cholera toxin . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1450 , 177 – 190 . Liu , P . , and Anderson , R . G . ( 1999 ) . Spatial organization of EGF recep - tor transmodulation by PDGF . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 261 , 695 – 700 . Lobie , P . E . , Sadir , R . , Graichen , R . , Mertani , H . C . , and Morel , G . ( 1999 ) . Caveolar internalization of growth hormone . Exp . Cell Res . 246 , 47 – 55 . Marjomaki , V . et al . ( 2002 ) . Internalization of echovirus 1 in caveolae . J . Virol . 76 , 1856 – 1865 . Martin , O . C . , and Pagano , R . E . ( 1987 ) . Transbilayer movement of ﬂu - orescent analogs of phosphatidylserine and phosphatidylethanolamine at the plasma membrane of cultured cells : evidence for a protein - mediated and ATP - dependent process ( es ) . J . Biol . Chem . 262 , 5890 – 5898 . Martin , O . C . , and Pagano , R . E . ( 1994 ) . Internalization and sorting of a ﬂuorescent analog of glucosylceramide to the Golgi apparatus of hu - man skin ﬁbroblasts : utilization of endocytic and nonendocytic trans - port mechanisms . J . Cell Biol . 125 , 769 – 781 . McNiven , M . A . , Cao , H . , Pitts , K . R . , and Yoon , Y . ( 2000 ) . The dynamin family of mechanoenzymes : pinching in new places . Trends Biochem . Sci . 25 , 115 – 120 . Mineo , C . , and Anderson , G . W . ( 2001 ) . Potocytosis . Histochem . Cell Biol . 116 , 109 – 118 . Oh , P . , McIntosh , D . P . , and Schnitzer , J . E . ( 1998 ) . Dynamin at the neck of cavolae mediates their budding to form transport vesicles by GTP - driven ﬁssion from the plasma membrane of endothelium . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 101 – 104 . Okamoto , Y . , Ninomiya , H . , Miwa , S . , and Masaki , T . ( 2000 ) . Choles - terol oxidation switches the internalization pathway of endothelin receptor type A from caveolae to clathrin - coated pits in Chinese ham - ster ovary cells . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 6439 – 6446 . Orlandi , P . A . , and Fishman , P . H . ( 1998 ) . Filipin - dependent inhibition of cholera toxin : evidence for toxin internalization and activation through caveolae - like domains . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 905 – 915 . Pelkmans , L . , Kartenbeck , J . , and Helenius , A . ( 2001 ) . Caveolar endo - cytosis of simian virus 40 reveals a new two - step vesicular - transport pathway to the ER . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 473 – 483 . Puri , V . , Watanabe , R . , Singh , R . D . , Dominguez , M . , Brown , J . C . , Wheatley , C . L . , Marks , D . L . , and Pagano , R . E . ( 2001 ) . Clathrin - depen - dent and - independent internalization of plasma membrane sphingo - lipids initiates two Golgi targeting pathways . J . Cell Biol . 154 , 535 – 547 . Racine , C . , Belanger , M . , Hirabayashi , H . , Boucher , M . , Chakir , J . , and Couet , J . ( 1999 ) . Reduction of caveolin 1 gene expression in lung carcinoma cell lines . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 255 , 580 – 586 . Rothberg , K . G . , Heuser , J . E . , Donzell , W . C . , Ying , Y . - S . , Glenney , J . R . , and Anderson , R . G . W . ( 1992 ) . Caveolin , a protein component of caveo - lae membrane coats . Cell 68 , 673 – 682 . Sabharanjak , S . , Sharma , P . , Parton , R . G . , and Mayor , S . ( 2002 ) . GPI - anchored proteins are delivered to recycling endosomes via a distinct cdc42 - regulated , clathrin - independent pinocytic pathway . Develop . Cell 2 , 411 – 423 . Sandvig , K . , and van Deurs , B . ( 2002 ) . Membrane trafﬁc exploited by protein toxins . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 18 , 1 – 24 . Schnitzer , J . E . , Oh , P . , Pinney , E . , and Allard , J . ( 1994 ) . Filipin - sensitive caveolae - mediated transport in endothelium : reduced transcytosis , scavenger endocytosis , and capillary permeability of select macromol - ecules . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 1217 – 1232 . Sharma , D . K . , Choudhury , A . , Singh , R . D . , Wheatley , C . L . , Marks , D . L . , and Pagano , R . E . ( 2003 ) . Glycosphingolipids internalized via caveolar - related endocytosis rapidly merge with the clathrin pathway in early endosomes and form microdomains for recycling . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 7564 – 7572 . Shin , J . - S . , Gao , Z . , and Abraham , N . ( 2000 ) . Involvement of cellular caveolae in bacterial entry into mast cells . Science 289 , 785 – 788 . Shogomori , H . , and Futerman , A . H . ( 2001 ) . Cholera toxin is found in detergent - insoluble rafts / domains at the cell surface of hippocampal neurons but is internalized via a raft - independent mechanism . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 9182 – 9188 . Shubert , W . , Frank , P . G . , Razani , B . , Park , D . S . , Chow , C . - W . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 2001 ) . Caveolae - deﬁcient endothelial cells show defects in the uptake and transport of albumin in vivo . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 48619 – 48622 . Skretting , G . , Torgersen , M . L . , van Deurs , B . , and Sandvig , K . ( 1999 ) . Endocytic mechanisms responsible for uptake of GPI - linked diphtheria toxin receptor . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 3899 – 3909 . Sleight , R . G . , and Pagano , R . E . ( 1984 ) . Transport of a ﬂuorescent phos - phatidylcholine analog from the plasma membrane to the Golgi appa - ratus . J . Cell Biol . 99 , 742 – 751 . Torgersen , M . L . , Skretting , G . , van Deurs , B . , and Sandvig , K . ( 2001 ) . Internalization of cholera toxin by different endocytic mechanisms . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 3737 – 3742 . Watanabe , R . , Asakura , K . , Rodriguez , M . , and Pagano , R . E . ( 1999 ) . Internalization and sorting of plasma membrane sphingolipid ana - logues in differentiating oligodendrocytes . J . Neurochem . 73 , 1375 – 1383 . Caveolar Endocytosis of GSL Analogs Vol . 14 , August 2003 3265