CELLULAR & MOLECULAR BIOLOGY LETTERS http : / / www . cmbl . org . pl Received : 20 June 2012 Volume 18 ( 2013 ) pp 1 - 10 Final form accepted : 12 October 2012 DOI : 10 . 2478 / s11658 - 012 - 0035 - 2 Published online : 17 October 2012 © 2012 by the University of Wroc ł aw , Poland § These authors contributed equally to this study * Author for correspondence . e - mail : marchansen @ byu . edu , tel : ( 801 ) 422 - 4998 , fax : ( 801 ) 422 - 0700 Abbreviation used : VASP – vasodilator stimulated phosphoprotein Short communication ZYXIN - VASP INTERACTIONS ALTER ACTIN REGULATORY ACTIVITY IN ZYXIN - VASP COMPLEXES JACOB GRANGE § , JAMES D . MOODY § , MARC P . A . ASCIONE and MARC D . H . HANSEN * Physiology and Developmental Biology , Brigham Young University , 574 WIDB Provo , UT 84602 , USA Abstract : Cell - cell and cell - substrate adhesions are sites of dramatic actin rearrangements and where actin - membrane connections are tightly regulated . Zyxin - VASP complexes localize to sites of cell - cell and cell - substrate adhesion and function to regulate actin dynamics and actin - membrane connections at these sites . To accomplish these functions , zyxin recruits VASP to cellular sites via proline - rich binding sites near zyxin’s amino terminus . While the prevailing thought has been that zyxin simply acts as a scaffold protein for VASP binding , the identification of a LIM domain - VASP interaction could complicate this view . Here we assess how zyxin - VASP binding through both the proline rich motifs and the LIM domains alters specific VASP functions . We find that neither individual interaction alters VASP’s actin regulatory activities . In contrast , however , we find that full - length zyxin dramatically reduces VASP - mediated actin bundling and actin assembly . Taken together , these results suggest a model where zyxin - VASP complexes occur in complex organizations with suppressed actin regulatory activity . Key words : Actin , VASP , Zyxin , Adhesion , Migration , Cytoskeleton Vol . 18 . No . 1 . 2013 CELL . MOL . BIOL . LETT . 2 INTRODUCTION Actin reorganization events are fundamental to migration and cell adhesion . At focal adhesions , actin is organized into a thick cable that abuts the membrane [ 1 - 2 ] . Though actin at mature cell - cell contacts is organized differently than at focal adhesions , structures similar to focal adhesions are transiently observed as cell - cell junctions are assembled [ 3 - 5 ] . The interface between actin cables and adhesion sites contains zyxin and VASP [ 6 - 7 ] . Zyxin binds VASP through a series of four proline - rich ( FPPPPP ) motifs [ 7 - 9 ] , as well as through the LIM domain region [ 10 ] . Cells lacking zyxin no longer localize VASP to focal adhesions [ 11 ] , an effect that also results from zyxin mislocalization [ 12 ] , suggesting that zyxin localizes VASP to adhesion sites . It has been suggested that zyxin - VASP complexes regulate local actin dynamics and mediate actin connections to adhesion systems . Consistent with this , defects in stress fiber reinforcement following stretch stimuli are also observed in cells lacking zyxin [ 13 ] , highlighting a critical role for VASP in organizing actin at focal adhesions . Only fragments of zyxin containing VASP binding sites initiate actin assembly when expressed in cells [ 14 ] . Further , zyxin function in driving accelerated cell - cell junction formation and resistance to epithelial scattering depends on proline - rich VASP binding sites [ 4 , 15 ] . How zyxin and VASP activity at adhesion sites is regulated is less clear , though zyxin LIM domains have been implicated here . Access of binding partners , including VASP , to zyxin is regulated by a LIM domain - mediated head - tail interaction within the zyxin molecule [ 10 ] . Since zyxin can bind VASP through either the FPPPPP motifs or the LIM domains , it is possible that zyxin - VASP complexes might link to actin in different ways . Alternately , it is possible that different zyxin - VASP interactions alter the biochemical activities of zyxin - VASP complexes . In vitro biochemical assays are employed here to assess VASP’s actin regulatory activities in the presence or absence of LIM domain - and proline - rich repeat - mediated zyxin interactions . We find that full - length zyxin , which can bind to VASP via two domains simultaneously , inhibits VASP’s actin regulatory functions . However , neither interaction alone alters VASP’s actin regulatory properties . Based on the results presented , a model for regulation of VASP availability at adhesion sites is proposed . MATERIALS AND METHODS Protein purification Proteins used here were purified from bacteria and dialyzed into Buffer A ( 100 mM NaCl , 20 mM Tris , 0 . 5 % ( v / v ) Triton X - 100 , 10 μ g / ml antipain , 10 μ g / ml leupeptin , 10 μ g / ml pepstatin A , 1 mM PMSF , 1 mM DTT , pH 7 . 4 ) and their concentration determined by Bradford method [ 16 ] . CELLULAR & MOLECULAR BIOLOGY LETTERS 3 Actin polymerization assays Pyrene actin assays were performed as described by Mullins and Machesky [ 17 ] . Fluorescence of a 9 : 1 actin : pyrene - actin mixture ( Cytoskeleton ) was monitored in a fluorometer cuvette following initiation of polymerization by addition of Mg 2 + ions . Critical concentration assays were performed as described by Mullins and Machesky [ 17 ] . A 5 μ M 9 : 1 actin : pyrene - actin mixture was allowed to polymerize for 2 hours at room temperature . The resulting actin filaments were supplemented , as indicated , with 250 nM VASP and / or 500 nM GST - zyxin LIM region fusion protein . The mixture was then diluted into F - or G - actin conditions , and incubated overnight at room temperature and in the dark , and fluorescence measured for each concentration of each sample . In these experiments , each data point was generated in quadruplicate . Intersection of linear fits to the averaged data points for each condition , using Microsoft Excel , revealed the critical concentration for actin under each condition . Actin sedimentation assays Actin ( Cytoskeleton ) was diluted into to a final concentration of 1 μ M in buffer containing 100 mM NaCl , 5 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM ATP , and 1 mM DTT . Additional proteins were added and actin was allowed to polymerize at room temperature for 1 hour . VASP was added in increasing amounts to a final concentration that reached as high as 500 nM . Zyxin fusion proteins were added to a final concentration of 500 nM . Actin bundles were obtained by differential centrifugation at 10 , 000 x g for 7 . 5 minutes . Actin filaments were subsequently isolated by differential centrifugation at 100 , 000 x g for 7 . 5 minutes . Fractions were separated in SDS - polyacrylamide gels and proteins visualized with GelCode Blue ( Pierce ) . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Since zyxin binds VASP through multiple motifs , zyxin could modulate the actin regulatory functions of VASP in unpredictable ways . We sought to define how zyxin might alter VASP function using biochemical assays that measure VASP’s specific actin regulatory functions . Since VASP is an obligate tetramer , VASP has intrinsic actin filament bundling activity [ 18 ] . We reasoned that a single zyxin molecular could crosslink multiple VASP molecules together , thus increasing actin bundling . To assess this , we examined VASP - mediated actin bundle formation in the presence and absence of full - length GST - zyxin fusion protein . Actin can be separated by differential centrifugation into monomeric G - actin , individual filaments in a high speed pellet , and bundles of actin filaments in a low speed pellet . When actin polymerizes in the absence of VASP , forming individual filaments , actin is not observed in the low speed pellet fraction , only in the high speed pellet fraction ( Fig . 1A ) . When VASP is present and actin bundles are formed , actin and VASP are mainly observed in the low speed pellet fraction . To detect changes in VASP’s actin bundling Vol . 18 . No . 1 . 2013 CELL . MOL . BIOL . LETT . 4 activity , actin filaments were incubated with increasing concentrations of VASP and the actin bundle fraction isolated by low speed differential centrifugation . If VASP activity in actin bundling were altered by zyxin binding , we would expect to see VASP appear in the low speed pellet fraction at lower or higher concentrations . As expected , a concentration dependent effect on actin bundle formation is observed ( Fig . 1B ) . Surprisingly , the presence of GST - zyxin dramatically reduces VASP’s actin bundling activity compared to VASP alone ; less actin and VASP is observed in pellet fractions derived from samples containing zyxin than in samples that lacked zyxin . This shows that the presence of zyxin reduces actin bundling by VASP and suggests that a zyxin - VASP Fig . 1 . Inhibition of VASP availability by full - length zyxin . A – Actin filaments , incubated with or without VASP , were separated into low speed pellet ( P1 ) , a high speed pellet ( P2 ) , and supernatant ( S ) fractions by differential centrifugation . Fractions were separated in SDS - polyacrylamide gels and proteins visualized with GelCode Blue . B – Low speed pellet fractions were generated following incubation of actin filaments with or without GST - zyxin and increasing amounts of VASP . Fractions were separated in SDS - polyacrylamide gels and proteins visualized with GelCode Blue . C – Pyrene actin assays containing actin alone ( grey ) , actin and VASP ( dotted grey ) , actin and GST - zyxin ( black ) , and actin with both VASP and GST - zyxin ( dotted black ) were performed . VASP concentration was 500 nM and that of GST - zyxin 1µM . CELLULAR & MOLECULAR BIOLOGY LETTERS 5 interaction prevents VASP from participating in actin dynamics . To confirm this unexpected result , we measured the effect of full - length zyxin on VASP activity using pyrene actin assays ( Fig . 1C ) , which measures actin nucleation and polymerization . Under the conditions used , VASP dramatically increases actin assembly above that observed for actin alone . GST - zyxin alone has minimal effect on actin assembly above actin alone . However , when GST - zyxin is added to assays containing VASP , actin assembly is comparable to the amount seen in assays containing actin alone and is significantly reduced from the amount seen when VASP is present without zyxin . Clearly , VASP availability in contributing to actin bundling and assembly in vitro is inhibited by the presence of full - length zyxin . Zyxin is thought to recruit VASP to specific cellular sites and allow VASP to direct actin rearrangements there . Consistent with this , expression of zyxin or zyxin fragments containing the proline rich repeats stimulate local actin assembly [ 14 ] . Since we see a reduction in VASP participation in actin dynamics in the presence of full - length zyxin , we wondered whether zyxin LIM domain - VASP binding might reduce VASP activity . This might explain why expression of zyxin LIM domains in cells did not result in local actin assembly [ 14 ] . We therefore sought to determine whether zyxin LIM domain altered the behavior of VASP in pyrene actin assays ( Fig . 2A ) . GST - zyxin LIM region protein alone does not alter actin assembly at any concentration tested . Addition of VASP to pyrene actin assays greatly increases the rate of actin assembly compared to that of actin alone ; the maximal rate of assembly is achieved essentially immediately . However , unlike as was observed for full - length zyxin , addition of GST - zyxin LIM region protein did not alter actin assembly in the presence of VASP ( Fig . 2B ) . Thus , the zyxin LIM - VASP interaction has no effect on VASP’s activity in regulating actin assembly . We sought to further examine the effect of LIM domain binding on VASP’s activity at barbed ends . VASP binds to actin barbed ends , allowing continued actin polymerization in the presence of capping protein [ 19 - 20 ] . In order to examine the effect of LIM domain binding on this activity , the critical concentration of actin polymerization was measured in the presence of purified proteins . The direct effects of VASP or zyxin LIM domains are negligible ( Fig . 2C , E ) . In our hands , the critical concentration of actin alone is 0 . 208 μ M , similar to an expected result of around 0 . 1 μ M [ 17 ] . In the presence of VASP it is 0 . 146 μ M and in the presence of GST - zyxin LIMs 1 - 3 it is 0 . 255 μ M , values that are within experimental variation . Although a significant increase in the critical concentration would be expected for a barbed end binding protein such as VASP [ 21 ] , our results are consistent with those already reported that also show no effect of VASP on actin depolymerization from barbed ends , despite barbed end binding [ 17 ] . In a separate experiment , we measured the critical concentration in the presence of both VASP and GST - zyxin LIMs 1 - 3 ( 0 . 060 µM ) to be nearly identical to that of actin alone ( 0 . 055 µM , Fig . 2D , F ) . Clearly , actin barbed ends are not affected by VASP molecules participating in an interaction with zyxin LIM domains . Vol . 18 . No . 1 . 2013 CELL . MOL . BIOL . LETT . 6 Fig . 2 . Zyxin LIM domain binding permits VASP activity . A - B – Pyrene actin assays containing the indicated proteins were performed . For B , VASP and GST - zyxin LIMs 1 - 3 concentrations were 500 nM and 2 µM , respectively . C - F – Line fits ( C - D ) and scatter plots ( E - F ) of critical concentration of actin measurements in the presence of purified protein . Solid lines represent fits to measurement in polymerizing conditions , dotted lines represent fits to measurements in non - polymerizing conditions . The intersect of solid and dotted lines is the critical concentration of actin polymerization for the relevant condition . For the scatter plots , open and closed markers indicate taken for F - actin and G - actin conditions and the marker denotes the proteins present : squares , actin alone ; triangles , actin and VASP ; diamonds , actin , VASP , and GST - zyxin LIMs 1 - 3 ; circles , actin and GST - zyxin LIMs 1 - 3 . G – Low speed pellet fractions were generated following incubation of actin filaments with or without zyxin LIM domain fusion protein and increasing amounts of VASP . Fractions were separated in SDS - polyacrylamide gels and proteins visualized with GelCode Blue . CELLULAR & MOLECULAR BIOLOGY LETTERS 7 We finally sought to determine whether zyxin LIM domain binding would alter actin bundling by VASP . We isolated bundles of actin filaments from samples where the VASP concentrations was increased , resulting in the increased detection of VASP and actin in those fractions ( Fig . 2G ) . When precisely the same experiment was performed in the presence of GST - zyxin LIM region protein , actin bundling is observed with precisely the same VASP concentration dependence . This indicates that zyxin LIM binding does not alter the actin bundling activity of VASP . Clearly LIM domain binding does not increase VASP - mediated actin bundling . And while one might conclude that VASP binding to actin and LIM domains in a mutually exclusive , the VASP - LIM interaction would still be expected to alter bundling activity ; competitive binding by the LIM domain protein would reduce the level of VASP available to bind F - actin when the LIM domain fusion protein is present . Not only would this be expected to reduce VASP - mediated actin bundling , but it would be expected to reduce the effect of VASP on actin assembly in pyrene actin assays in Fig . 2B also . Since neither of these effects is observed , we must conclude that VASP - LIM binding allows VASP - actin interactions , without affecting the result of those interactions . Since the zyxin LIM domain interaction does not alter VASP activity in vitro , we next sought to determine if a zyxin fragment containing proline - rich motifs could alter VASP’s actin bundling activity . The presence of a GST zyxin fusion protein containing proline rich domains and lacking LIM domains ( zyxin Δ LIM - GST ) did not alter the concentration dependence of actin bundle formation ( Fig . 3 ) . Fig . 3 . Binding by zyxin FPPPPP motifs does not alter VASP - dependent actin bundling . Low speed pellet fractions were generated following incubation of actin filaments with or without a zyxin fusion protein lacking LIM domains ( GST - zyxin Δ LIM ) and increasing amounts of VASP . Fractions were separated in SDS - polyacrylamide gels and proteins visualized with GelCode Blue . Zyxin Δ LIM - GST was also detected in the bundle fraction , showing that VASP can simultaneously bind actin filaments and zyxin FPPPPP motifs . Clearly zyxin binding via the FPPPPP motif does not prevent VASP - actin binding and allows a different complex architecture for linking zyxin to actin filaments . Vol . 18 . No . 1 . 2013 CELL . MOL . BIOL . LETT . 8 That neither the LIM domain region nor the FPPPPP motif interaction can alter VASP - mediated actin bundling alone , while the presence of both interactions in full - length zyxin blocks VASP activity in this process , suggests that both interaction must act together when full - length zyxin reduces VASP participation in actin dynamics . That full - length zyxin is observed to drive actin assembly in cells [ 14 ] indicates that the suppression of VASP function in actin related processes can be relieved , possibly by breaking one zyxin - VASP interaction within zyxin - VASP complexes . The occurrence of active and inactive zyxin - VASP complexes could allow for rapid control of VASP activity at cellular sites , a level of cellular control that would extend beyond zyxin’s widely accepted mechanism of controlling VASP’s ability to participate in local actin dynamics by simple recruitment alone . One possible mechanism for releasing VASP activity is VASP phosphorylation , which specifically blocks LIM - mediated zyxin - VASP interactions [ 10 ] . Phosphorylation of zyxin could also alter organization within zyxin - VASP complexes . Zyxin phosphorylation at serine 142 by AKT does allow LIM domain interactions with acinus S [ 22 ] . Further , expression of a phosphomimetic zyxin S142 mutant generates identical phenotypes as those observed with expression of a zyxin mutant lacking LIM domains [ 23 ] . However zyxin - VASP complexes are regulated , zyxin appears to be capable of doing more than passively recruiting VASP to cellular sites where it is needed for actin reorganization . Acknowledgements . J . G . was supported by a BYU Cancer Center summer undergraduate research internship . Thanks to Dorothy Schafer , who provided VASP expression constructs . REFERENCES 1 . Critchley , D . R . Focal adhesions - the cytoskeletal connection . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 ( 2000 ) 133 - 139 . 2 . Wiesner , S . , Legate , K . R . and Fassler , R . Integrin - actin interactions . Cell Mol . Life Sci . 62 ( 2005 ) 1081 - 1099 . 3 . Adams , C . L . , Nelson , W . J . and Smith , S . J . Quantitative analysis of cadherin - catenin - actin reorganization during development of cell - cell adhesion . J . Cell Biol . 135 ( 1996 ) 1899 - 1911 . 4 . Hansen , M . D . and Beckerle , M . C . Opposing roles of zyxin / LPP ACTA repeats and the LIM domain region in cell - cell adhesion . J . Biol . Chem . 281 ( 2006 ) 16178 - 16188 . 5 . Vasioukhin , V . , Bauer , C . , Yin , M . and Fuchs , E . Directed actin polymerization is the driving force for epithelial cell - cell adhesion . Cell 100 ( 2000 ) 209 - 219 . 6 . Crawford , A . W . and Beckerle , M . C . Purification and characterization of zyxin , an 82 , 000 - dalton component of adherens junctions . J . Biol . Chem . 266 ( 1991 ) 5847 - 5853 . CELLULAR & MOLECULAR BIOLOGY LETTERS 9 7 . Reinhard , M . , Rudiger , M . , Jockusch , B . M . and Walter , U . VASP interaction with vinculin : a recurring theme of interactions with proline - rich motifs . FEBS Lett . 399 ( 1996 ) 103 - 107 . 8 . Drees , B . , Friederich , E . , Fradelizi , J . , Louvard , D . , Beckerle , M . C . and Golsteyn , R . M . Characterization of the interaction between zyxin and members of the Ena / vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein family of proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 275 ( 2000 ) 22503 - 22511 . 9 . Niebuhr , K . , Ebel , F . , Frank , R . , Reinhard , M . , Domann , E . , Carl , U . D . , Walter , U . , Gertler , F . B . , Wehland , J . and Chakraborty , T . A novel proline - rich motif present in ActA of Listeria monocytogenes and cytoskeletal proteins is the ligand for the EVH1 domain , a protein module present in the Ena / VASP family . EMBO J . 16 ( 1997 ) 5433 - 5444 . 10 . Moody , J . D . , Grange , J . , Ascione , M . P . , Boothe , D . , Bushnell , E . and Hansen , M . D . A zyxin head - tail interaction regulates zyxin - VASP complex formation . Biochem . Biophys . Res Commun . 378 ( 2009 ) 625 - 628 . 11 . Hoffman , L . M . , Jensen , C . C . , Kloeker , S . , Wang , C . L . , Yoshigi , M . and Beckerle , M . C . Genetic ablation of zyxin causes Mena / VASP mislocalization , increased motility , and deficits in actin remodeling . J . Cell Biol . 172 ( 2006 ) 771 - 782 . 12 . Drees , B . E . , Andrews , K . M . and Beckerle , M . C . Molecular dissection of zyxin function reveals its involvement in cell motility . J . Cell Biol . 147 ( 1999 ) 1549 - 1560 . 13 . Yoshigi , M . , Hoffman , L . M . , Jensen , C . C . , Yost , H . J . and Beckerle , M . C . Mechanical force mobilizes zyxin from focal adhesions to actin filaments and regulates cytoskeletal reinforcement . J . Cell Biol . 171 ( 2005 ) 209 - 215 . 14 . Fradelizi , J . , Noireaux , V . , Plastino , J . , Menichi , B . , Louvard , D . , Sykes , C . , Golsteyn , R . M . and Friederich , E . ActA and human zyxin harbour Arp2 / 3 - independent actin - polymerization activity . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 ( 2001 ) 699 - 707 . 15 . Sperry , R . B . , Bishop , N . H . , Bramwell , J . J . , Brodeur , M . N . , Carter , M . J . , Fowler , B . T . , Lewis , Z . B . Maxfield , S . D . , Staley , D . M . , Vellinga , R . M . and Hansen , M . D . Zyxin controls migration in epithelial - mesenchymal transition by mediating actin - membrane linkages at cell - cell junctions . J . Cell Physiol . 222 ( 2010 ) 612 - 624 . 16 . Bradford , M . M . A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein - dye binding . Anal . Biochem . 72 ( 1976 ) 248 - 254 . 17 . Mullins , R . D . and Machesky , L . M . Actin assembly mediated by Arp2 / 3 complex and WASP family proteins . Methods Enzymol . 325 ( 2000 ) 214 - 237 . 18 . Bachmann , C . , Fischer , L . , Walter , U . and Reinhard , M . The EVH2 domain of the vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein mediates tetramerization , F - actin binding , and actin bundle formation . J . Biol . Chem . 274 ( 1999 ) 23549 - 23557 . 19 . Barzik , M . , Kotova , T . I . , Higgs , H . N . , Hazelwood , L . , Hanein , D . , Gertler , F . B . and Schafer , D . A . Ena / VASP proteins enhance actin polymerization in the Vol . 18 . No . 1 . 2013 CELL . MOL . BIOL . LETT . 10 presence of barbed end capping proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 280 ( 2005 ) 28653 - 28662 . 20 . Bear , J . E . , Svitkina , T . M . , Krause , M . , Schafer , D . A . , Loureiro , J . J . , Strasser , G . A . , Maly , I . V . , Chaga , O . Y . , Cooper , J . A . , Borisy , G . G . and Gertler , F . B . Antagonism between Ena / VASP proteins and actin filament capping regulates fibroblast motility . Cell 109 ( 2002 ) 509 - 521 . 21 . Huttelmaier , S . , Harbeck , B . , Steffens , O . , Messerschmidt , T . , Illenberger , S . and Jockusch , B . M . Characterization of the actin binding properties of the vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein VASP . FEBS Lett . 451 ( 1999 ) 68 - 74 . 22 . Chan , C . B . , Liu , X . Tang , X . , Fu , H . and Ye , K . Akt phosphorylation of zyxin mediates its interaction with acinus - S and prevents acinus - triggered chromatin condensation . Cell Death Differ . 14 ( 2007 ) 1688 - 1699 . 23 . Call , G . S . , Chung , J . Y . , Davis , J . A . , Price , B . D . , Primavera , T . S . , Thomson , N . C . , Wagner , M . V . and Hansen , M . D . Zyxin phosphorylation at serine 142 modulates the zyxin head - tail interaction to alter cell - cell adhesion . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 404 ( 2011 ) 780 - 784 .