Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 103 ( 2007 ) 104 – 120 www . elsevier . com / locate / obhdp 0749 - 5978 / $ - see front matter © 2006 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . obhdp . 2006 . 05 . 006 Using advice from multiple sources to revise and improve judgments (cid:2) Ilan Yaniv ¤ , Maxim Milyavsky Department of Psychology , Hebrew University , Mt . Scopus , Jerusalem 91905 , Israel Received 21 July 2005 Available online 28 July 2006 Abstract How might people revise their opinions on the basis of multiple pieces of advice ? What sort of gains could be obtained from rules for using advice ? In the present studies judges W rst provided their initial estimates for a series of questions ; next they were presented with several ( 2 , 4 , or 8 ) opinions from an ecological pool of advisory estimates ( Experiment 1 ) , or with arti W cial advice ( Experiment 2 ) ; W nally they provided their revised estimates . Descriptive analyses of their revision process revealed that they egocentrically trimmed the opinion sets such that opinions distant from their own were greatly discounted . Normative analyses suggest that they gained substantially from the use of advice , though not optimally , due to their self - centered utilization of the advice . The results are discussed in connection with theories of belief revision and attitude change , with an emphasis on decision - makers’ strategies for cop - ing with con X icting opinions and the appropriateness of discounting distant or dissenting opinions . Prescriptive implications for the utilization of advice are also considered . © 2006 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Keywords : Judgment under uncertainty ; Combining opinions ; Utilizing advice ; Decision making ; Egocentric judgment Introduction It is common practice to solicit other people’s opin - ions prior to making a decision . An editor solicits two or three quali W ed reviewers for their opinions on a manu - script ; a patient seeks a second opinion regarding a med - ical condition ; a consumer considers the “word of mouth” of a dozen people for guidance in the purchase of an expensive product . All these situations involve decision - makers in the task of combining multiple opin - ions to revise their own ( Sniezek & Buckley , 1995 ) . The rationale for soliciting advice is straightforward . Real - life decisions are often not self contained—the range of possible options for choice and their descriptions are often not fully speci W ed . Decision - makers solicit advice to gain information , help them frame their decisions , re W ne their preferences , and create options beyond those available to them at the moment . At times , people may seek advice for other reasons , such as self - a Y rmation or for sharing responsibility due to concerns about accountability to others ( Kennedy , Kleinmuntz , & Pee - cher , 1997 ) . Such social reasons are also rooted in the belief that getting advice should ultimately be bene W cial to the decision process . We explore the following paradigmatic situation here . A decision - maker W rst forms an initial opinion about some issue . Then she receives multiple advice ( e . g . , two to eight opinions generated by other judges ) on the basis of which she revises her initial opinion . We investigate two fundamental issues— W rst , the in X uence of advice on decision - makers’ W nal opinions and the revision rules they employ in combining the opinions ; and second , the bene W ts of using advice , speci W cally , both the potential (cid:2) This research was supported by Grants Nos . 822 / 00 and 344 / 05 from the Israel Science Foundation to the W rst author . * Corresponding author . E - mail address : ilan . yaniv @ huji . ac . il ( I . Yaniv ) .