Reﬂecting on Three Offerings of a Community - Centric MOOC for K - 6 Computer Science Teachers Katrina Falkner , Rebecca Vivian & Nickolas Falkner School of Computer Science University of Adelaide Adelaide , Australia ﬁrst . last @ adelaide . edu . au Sally - Ann Williams Google Australia Sydney , Australia sallyann @ google . com ABSTRACT A number of institutions and organisations provide online or face - to - face professional learning as part of outreach ini - tiatives to increase skill levels and support for teachers in K - 12 Computing education . With a number of countries introducing new K - 12 Computer Science curricula around the globe , this provides a prime opportunity for the Com - puter Science education community to transform and de - velop models of teacher professional learning that address teachers’ needs at - scale . This paper explores the theoretical underpinnings of a community - based professional learning MOOC for Australian teachers for K - 6 Computer Science . This paper reﬂects on data collected from three oﬀerings of the MOOC , presented in light of the theory and design considerations . This paper provides valuable insights of the design of community - centric MOOCs , and acts as a guide for the construction of online professional learning opportu - nities for Computer Science educators . 1 . INTRODUCTION The learning and teaching of K - 12 Computer Science ( CS ) education has undergone signiﬁcant change in recent decades [ 12 , 26 ] . New primary school CS curricula have been im - plemented in a number of locations , such England , Aus - tralia and other European nations [ 3 ] , to extend teaching beyond digital literacy and toward the introduction of com - putational thinking , programming and CS content from the ﬁrst year of school . Challenges faced by the adoption of new curricula are ex - tensive and previous reforms have found that teachers feel “left alone” to struggle with implementation [ 21 ] , an issue compounded for a new learning area . In the context of this paper , Digital Technologies is a new CS learning area for Australian primary teachers , with CS , up until now , having been primarily taught from senior secondary school levels [ 9 ] . 85 % of Australian primary teachers are ‘generalist’ teachers , Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , topostonserversortoredistributetolists , requirespriorspeciﬁcpermission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . SIGCSE ’17 , March 08 - 11 , 2017 , Seattle , WA , USA c (cid:13) 2017 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4698 - 6 / 17 / 03 . . . $ 15 . 00 DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3017680 . 3017712 teaching across various learning areas [ 19 ] , however , the new learning area will be the ﬁrst time most encounter the CS discipline . Further , less than 4 % of teachers are appointed as Computing specialist in schools [ 19 ] . It is estimated that there are 123 , 600 primary teachers in Australia , with around 80 % teaching in classrooms [ 1 ] . This paper describes the experiences , across 2 years , with 3 , 879 participants , of 3 oﬀerings of a K - 6 Computer Sci - ence Massively Open Online Course ( MOOC ) targeted at Australian teachers as a means to deliver professional learn - ing . Our MOOC is designed to support teachers in building technical content knowledge , awareness of appropriate ped - agogy , and conﬁdence associated with the implementation of the Digital Technologies learning area . We explore the theoretical model that underpins the design of our MOOC , building on theories of professional learning , identifying spe - ciﬁc characteristics required for eﬀective learning and com - munity formation within the MOOC context . By sharing MOOC designs and outcomes , we can learn how to design eﬀective models to support teachers through this transition and in their ongoing implementation of CS education . We discuss our participants’ experiences , and their adoption of the MOOC as a community - centric , ongoing and sustainable professional learning environment . 2 . BACKGROUND CS departments have developed considerable resources to support teachers to implement CS curriculum into schools , such as workshops by faculty supported by Google’s ‘CS4HS’ ( Computer Science For High Schools ) program . Many have expanded programs and initiatives to include primary teach - ers to support recent K - 12 CS developments . To increase reach , some CS faculty have transitioned their content online and some have ventured into the use of MOOCs to deliver CS content to K - 12 teachers ; examples include the Teach IT MOOC [ 25 ] and the Introduction to Programming with Scratch MOOC [ 27 ] . Although initial MOOCs attracted massive enrolments , recent analysis has shown that MOOC enrolments are shrink - ing , with increased opportunities for specialised MOOC of - ferings with smaller , but potentially more engaged , target markets [ 15 ] . The literature on MOOCs so far suggests that the majority of registrants are professionals enrolling in the MOOCs for professional learning [ 4 , 8 , 10 ] . While MOOCs for teacher professional learning are rel - atively new , early research identiﬁes concerns with MOOC , ACM 195 design approaches . Milligan and Littlejohn [ 20 ] explore stu - dent experiences within a professional learning MOOC for the healthcare context ( 22 , 000 learners ) . While they identify that MOOCs do provide valuable access to networked pro - fessional communities , participants typically constrain their course activity to the completion of set tasks and they found little evidence of participants connecting course content to their professional roles . The Friday Institute’s MOOC - Ed initiative [ 11 ] for teach - ers , are founded on principles of eﬀective teacher professional learning , and driven by design principles focused on self - directed learning , peer - supported learning , authentic project - based learning , and “anytime , anywhere” learning [ 11 ] . An - other innovative teacher professional learning community ex - ample is ScratchED [ 14 ] : a community supporting teach - ers by placing educators at the centre of resource creation and as co - designers of their professional learning experiences [ 6 ] . Despite initial research on teachers as co - designers of their learning and the use of online communities to foster knowledge - sharing and practice [ 6 , 11 ] , more research is re - quired to develop eﬀective strategies and pedagogies [ 5 ] . 3 . PROFESSIONAL LEARNING MODELS Despite signiﬁcant changes in education due to emerging technologies and the exploratory use of MOOCs for teach - ers , online teacher professional learning models have not necessarily adapted to such innovations [ 7 ] . In a review of teacher professional learning , teachers expressed that pro - grammes were typically insuﬃcient and too short to deal with many aspects of curriculum reform ; resulting in au - thors advising that professional learning needs to be sys - tematic , on - going and developmental rather than one - oﬀ ses - sions [ 21 ] . Research has found that teachers become most engaged with online professional learning when strong con - nections are made between the curriculum , student learn - ing and teaching approaches [ 7 ] . Lloyd and Cochrane [ 18 ] introduce a model of teacher professional learning within Computer Science , grounded in face - to - face environments , providing a framework for understanding key principles of professional learning . Their model ( Figure 1 ) , deﬁnes sev - eral characteristics for successful professional learning : C1 Context : Learning must be associated with a context immediately relevant to that of the learner , be au - thentic and practical in application ( i . e . not requiring translation ) . C2 Time ( Sustained and Timely ) : Learning must be ava - ilable just - in - time , while also being available over an extended period of time . C3 Community : Learning must be supported by an au - thentic , professional community . C4 Personal growth : Learning must add to personal knowl - edge , take into account the current knowledge and skill of the learner , and support reﬂection . Lloyd and Cochrane’s model is designed as dynamic , with iterative interactions driven by community as a pivot . For example , professional communities assist with the embed - ding of reﬂective opportunities , which aid personal growth . In this model , and observed more widely , community is a critical aspect of professional learning success [ 29 ] . Figure 1 : Lloyd and Cochrane’s model for teachers’ professional learning [ 18 ] MOOCs oﬀer one mechanism to deliver education at - scale to individuals with a computer and Internet access . It has been argued that the diﬀerence between online learning and MOOC environments are the ( 1 ) combination of teaching approaches uses , ( 2 ) massive levels of participation and ( 3 ) open participation [ 13 ] . Technologies and approaches se - lected for MOOCs need to accommodate the openness and scale of the MOOC audience [ 13 ] . Learning strategies within the MOOC context are inﬂuenced by the structure of the course , the MOOC environment itself , as well as learner con - texts , motivations and conﬁdence [ 17 ] . In recognising a need to scaﬀold the application of pro - fessional learning to practice , we identify a need to develop explicit opportunities for reﬂection and direct engagement with teachers’ practice . Further , we observe that the ex - plicit application of new knowledge or practice is critical to community formation . Communities of Practice [ 29 ] model eﬀective learning communities through the grouping of in - dividuals to pursue collective learning in a shared , personal or professional , domain . Studies of eﬀective Communities of Practice [ 29 ] identify that they develop their practice through a range of activities , including shared knowledge bases formed through sharing case studies , stories and ex - amples of practice . We posit a new model of professional learning , building upon that of Lloyd and Cochrane that emphasises character - istics speciﬁc to professional learning in the MOOC context . We extend Lloyd and Cochrane’s model to move further than the provision of contextualisation , which encourages practi - cal application , with the addition of : C5 ( New ) Application : Learning must embed explicit op - portunities for direct application within the profes - sional learning context . The self - paced nature of MOOCs , and their openness , pro - vides great ﬂexibility in learning due to the opportunity for learning to occur at the time and location suiting the in - dividual . However , this ﬂexibility presents a potential con - ﬂict in obtaining eﬀective community engagement and the sharing of applied practice . Participants reportedly struggle with the overwhelming abundance of content available , and report diﬃculties in self - directed learning in such environ - ments [ 17 ] . In order for self - directed learning to be eﬀective , the lear - 196 ner must be able to navigate and locate resources that are personally meaningful , and to be able to form a learning community that shares their purpose . Learners must be sup - ported in the development of a meaningful social presence . The ability to deﬁne themselves as a real person , with indi - vidual motivations and goals , has been shown to be impor - tant to eﬀective learning in online environments [ 23 ] . Within a MOOC environment , this is more complex as learners may join the course at any time , and may have a learning goal that matches only part of the course context [ 15 ] , making it diﬃcult for an individual to identify a cohort with a common interest amongst the thousands of students . CS6 ( New ) Personalisation : Learning must be immedi - ate to the speciﬁc needs and background of the learner , and support the creation of learning communities arou - nd this context . Online learning environments diﬀer greatly from physi - cal environments in the focus on presence . In online learn - ing environments , if an individual is not actively engaged in community formation , i . e . engaged in online discussions or sharing practice , then it is as if they are not there at all ; their impact is not seen in the community . Analysis of participant behaviour in MOOCs identiﬁes three classiﬁcations of learners [ 20 ] : ( 1 ) the active partici - pant , who embraces the online model , actively engages with content and community , and adopts additional social media models for further community formation ; ( 2 ) the lurker , who actively follows activity in the course and community , re - views course materials , but does not themselves contribute ; and ( 3 ) the passive participant , who may be viewed as a dis - satisﬁed lurker , not engaging actively , but who has a desire to do so . This is reﬂective of the range of participation seen in learning communities more broadly [ 29 ] . This variation in purpose , along with the self - paced nature of MOOC en - vironments , raises a need for a wider variety of mechanisms for engaging ( actively and passively ) with course materials , enabling learners to search , review and access examples of practice , over time and just - in - time . C7 ( New ) Sustainability : Learning is supported through both active and passive models of engagement , with sustained and searchable access to community contri - butions : case studies , experiences and discussion . Our model of MOOC - supported professional learning ado - pts and adapts the learning model of Lloyd and Cochrane , contributing new elements to support professionally relevant active learning , personalisation , and sustainability . 4 . COURSE DESIGN Our MOOCs are built around a joint context of course content and community , following our model adapted from Lloyd and Cochrane . Course content is provided through a traditional MOOC structure of individual teaching units , supported through an open source MOOC development plat - form ( CourseBuilder ) . Our F - 6 ( K - 6 ) MOOC was designed around 7 core units that covered key concepts and content descriptors in the Australian Curriculum : Digital Technolo - gies [ 2 ] . The subject area encourages students to develop various CS knowledge and skills , and provides opportunities for the creation of digital solutions through programming experiences and the development of computational thinking , logic and problem - solving capabilities [ 9 ] . Our MOOC community is provided through a separate medium ( Google + ) to assist in sustained community en - gagement , and is in contrast with media more typically used , such as discussion forums . There are explicit activities within the formal course structure designed to establish this joint context and the community is linked on the course home - page and when participants are asked to complete their ac - tivity . Within each teaching unit , participants are asked to complete and share a task , typically the development of a class activity or resource for their own learning context . Participants are encouraged to share other non - task obser - vations , including community events , and study resources , forming an informal learning portfolio . Participants wanting full course certiﬁcation develop formal learning portfolios , including lesson plans and learning reﬂections . Contextualisation : Our course design is explicitly situ - ated in the context of primary school teaching , with all ex - amples , explanations and case studies developed within this context . All examples and materials are mapped to the Aus - tralian Curriculum and are available as open source content to support direct usage within the professional environment without the need for translation or adaptation . Time : The MOOC structure is primarily self - paced , en - abling participants to access course and community resources as needed . Participants can elect which units they wish to explore , and whether they wish to engage with the course as a structured course ( with certiﬁcation ) , or as a Commu - nity of Practice . All resources , including the community , are accessible outside of oﬃcial course cohort oﬀerings . Community : The MOOC community is formed from course participants , with a common professional goal of es - tablishing and building knowledge of Digital Technologies within the Australian education context . Personal Growth : Course participants complete a num - ber of tasks associated with each teaching unit , shared within the community . Each task is constructed and situated within the speciﬁc learning context of the individual , and is de - signed to incrementally build on their existing knowledge . Summarising and sharing their tasks aids their reﬂection , as does observation of other shared tasks [ 30 ] . Application : Participants are asked to apply what they have learned . Participants are to take the concepts and ex - amples from the course structure and develop either a profes - sional learning activity for their peers or a classroom activity for their teaching context . Our task development model has been inﬂuenced by that of Salmon [ 24 ] , through the adoption of scaﬀolded task development , moving from navigational tasks , through to active thinking tasks , and the application of new concepts in their professional environment . Personalisation : Our self - paced and task - based struc - ture supports participants in engaging as they wish with course content , while developing application in an area and at a level of challenge that suits their needs . Although spe - ciﬁc in terms of the unit topic , tasks are openly deﬁned in relation to teaching context and structure . Initial tasks involve welcoming activities [ 24 ] , where participants are en - couraged to form their social presence and identity in the community , towards the construction of an informal learn - ing portfolio . Sustainability : We adopt a repository - based commu - nity that supports discussion , searchability , and the creation 197 Table 1 : Course oﬀerings and completion rates Reg . IntendtoCom - plete Comp . Rate % 1 1 , 643 136 84 61 . 8 % 2 1 , 442 128 85 66 . 4 % 3 794 104 89 85 . 6 % of searchable sub - community structures based around topic or task . Discussion is directly associated with individual repository items , enabling both active and passive partic - ipants to review and access material . This contrasts with the commonly - adopted discussion forum model , where dis - cussion is often separated from assessment and contribution . 5 . METHOD We draw on data collected from participants’ voluntary pre - and post - surveys , course Google Analytics , course met - rics and Google + community data . Survey data across co - horts were merged for analysis . The surveys included open - ended questions , inviting teachers to reﬂect on their experi - ence in the course . Answers to open - ended questions were exported to NVivo10 for content analysis to identify topic frequencies [ 22 ] , along with Google + community data . This paper reports across three oﬀerings of the K - 6 MOOC with 3 , 879 registrations in total as of the 1st of November 2015 . This included participants who enrolled to formally complete the course , those who browsed resources and those who wanted to participate in selected units without certi - ﬁcation . 368 completed the opening pre - survey and self - identiﬁed as intending to fully complete the course . Of those intending to complete , 258 submitted their ﬁnal portfolio for a certiﬁcate . On average , we have seen a 70 % completion rate based on intention to complete , whereas previous stud - ies of MOOCs average of 24 % of those intending to complete achieving certiﬁcation [ 15 ] . The courses initially attracted a great deal of interest , however , now attracts lower enrol - ments with higher completion rates ( Table 1 ) . Across the three oﬀerings , 149 participants responded to a post - course survey , about their experiences in the MOOC . However , a limitation of both survey data is that partici - pants who responded were primarily those who had intended to complete or who had completed the course , missing pas - sive or lurking participants . 6 . RESULTS 6 . 1 MOOC Participants We report on MOOC pre - survey ( n = 293 ) and Google An - alytics ( n = 26 , 651 sessions ) data to describe our MOOC au - dience . 80 % of survey participants identiﬁed as female ; 13 . 5 % male , reﬂecting the broader Google Analytics data ( Figure 2 ) . The gender and age of our participants re - ﬂects the Australian teaching population [ 28 ] . Most teach - ers reported having over 10 years experience in education ( n = 166 ) , with 22 . 8 % ( n = 65 ) having ﬁve or less and 14 . 4 % ( n = 41 ) having six to nine . 79 . 7 % had never studied any CS - related course . 38 . 5 % participants identiﬁed living in metropolitan areas ; 16 . 7 % in outer suburbs ; and 41 . 3 % in rural , remote or country areas . A signiﬁcant number of Figure 2 : Google Analytics demographic data teachers reported no prior experience in teaching comput - ing ( n = 117 ) . Although some teachers had some exposure to CS education , such as through general - purpose program - ming ( n = 106 ) , visual programming ( n = 101 ) and robotics ( n = 70 ) , these teachers felt their CS knowledge ( content and tools ) was out - dated or that they lacked an understanding of the Australian Curriculum : Digital Technologies . 6 . 2 Course Participation and Engagement A common measure of engagement within MOOCs is the rate of explorers , those that complete half or more of the course [ 16 ] . Previous MOOC studies have identiﬁed an av - erage explorer rate of 17 % of initial registrations ( includ - ing repeated courses with higher typical explorer rates ) [ 15 ] . Our explorer rate is , on average across all cohorts , 20 . 2 % , with an increase from cohort 1 ( 17 . 1 % ) , to cohort 2 ( 19 . 0 % ) and cohort 3 ( 29 . 2 % ) . Google analytics reveal that , across all three oﬀerings , the course has had 26 , 651 total course sessions and 114 , 109 page views . Participants spend an average of 8 : 20 minutes per session and view an average of 4 . 28 pages per session . We can see a high return rate of 56 % . In the last 30 days of the course there were 655 active users , 82 . 4 % of the ﬁnal cohort . In comparison , previous MOOC studies have on average 50 % of participants undertake their last activity within the ﬁrst course week , with ∼ 25 % active in the last 30 days [ 16 ] . In the ﬁnal oﬀering , the community had 1 , 671 members and 3 , 530 posts . A common MOOC engagement measure is participation in community forums , with engagement rang - ing from 6 . 5 to 25 . 7 % , and an average of 7 . 9 % [ 16 ] . As our community represents a sustainable resource , all cohorts form a single community . Our community engagement rate is considerably higher than other MOOCs , with 43 % . Fig - ure 3 presents the total Google + community posts per unit across three oﬀerings . Figure 3 presents the posts for each of the unit topic threads across each oﬀering . We can see lower post frequencies , aligning with lower enrolments . In alignment with participation typical of most MOOCs , there is a high starting post frequency ( unit 1 ) , with a drop - oﬀ . Participants had to complete speciﬁed core units and one other unit of their choice for certiﬁcation . Figure 4 shows the number of individuals who chose not to complete particular units across all oﬀerings . In the ﬁrst oﬀering , most partic - ipants were willingly completing all units , however , in the following oﬀerings , participants were more selective . One reason could be due to the fact that we made it clearer in the course introduction that participants had choice over the modules that they could complete . Topic content analysis revealed teachers made references 198 Figure 3 : Frequency of posts made to the Google + Community , per unit Figure 4 : Number of participants who chose not to complete optional modules to a breadth of Year levels across K - 6 , with 235 posts for K - 2 , 137 posts for years 3 - 4 and 246 posts for years 5 - 6 . Teachers also discussed year levels beyond the scope of the course ( K - 6 ) , including Years 7 - 8 ( 98 posts ) and Years 9 - 10 ( 21 posts ) . Content analysis revealed that teachers made connections between Digital Technologies and other learning areas , such as English , Mathematics and Science . For exam - ple , teachers contextualised Digital Technology within the English curriculum , by referring to the development of al - gorithms and Computational Thinking ( decomposition and sequencing ) within the scope of students’ text production , such as procedural writing and narratives . 6 . 3 Discussion We see the authentic nature of the course community as supportive of higher engagement , and an encouragement to apply course content within their professional setting . Our demographics , both in terms of our surveys and our broader analytics data are a close match to our target professional community ; the high percentage of enrolment recommenda - tions from colleagues further support this . We observe several features that support the successful implementation of our professional learning model , and our goal to construct an eﬀective community centric MOOC en - vironment . Levels of engagement , particularly community engagement , in this MOOC design are considerably higher than those typically seen in other courses . We view this as indicative of the eﬀectiveness of our scaﬀolded approach to course content application and community engagement , helping to aid potentially passive participants to instead be active participants . A shift to self - paced learning also lent itself to a greater focus on personalisation as teachers were able to spend more time on content and topics that suited their professional needs . “I liked that I could go at my own pace and explore ideas / concepts that I needed to know more about while simply revising ones that I already knew about . I also liked the ‘sharing’ aspect where I could read what others were doing which often gave me ideas for my own practice” . While self - paced and personalised approaches may sup - port unique learning experiences , the de - centralisation of the instructor and self - paced mode challenged participant support , if participants did not directly seek assistance from instructors or the community . From the second oﬀering , we selected 5 mentors who completed the ﬁrst round to support new community members . This increased peer presence in the community and community interaction . “Google com - munity - such a great community of colleagues . I learned so much from others , and was inspired , refuelled and felt less ‘alone’ as a specialist teacher in a Primary setting” . The ability to revisit course content and community re - sources anytime outside of the course oﬀering , as well ongo - ing membership in the community was valued by teachers and contributed to a sustained community . Teachers could revisit topics at a later date due to the accessibility of the course . As one participant commented : “I’m going to take up the opportunity to continue with the course and complete all modules . Particularly watch all videos as they were in - formative and I learnt much from the ones I watched” . Critical to the success of any professional learning con - text is the impact on professional practice . Our analysis demonstrates that course participants routinely engaged in application of course content in their professional contexts , through the sharing of lesson designs or implemented ac - tivities . Further , teachers frequently made connections with other learning areas in their shared activities ; this represents the context of generalist classrooms . “It has given me many ideas that I have been able to use immediately in my teach - ing . Easily adapted ideas and the sharing from the whole community has provided even more ideas and resources” . 7 . CONCLUSION In this paper , we present a model for professional learning as an adaptation of earlier work by Lloyd and Cochrane [ 18 ] . We build upon existing learning community and professional learning theory to propose a new professional learning model designed to support community - driven professional learning that is open , accessible and at - scale . We describe our model and the design of the MOOC to provide CS professional learning addressing the new Australian Digital Technologies learning area ( K - 6 ) . We illustrate one possible implementa - tion of our model , and describe our experiences with 3 co - horts of MOOC participants . We illustrate how our MOOC design has supported the creation of a sustainable , open community engaged in learning and supporting each other in their mastery of new curriculum and associated pedagogy . 8 . REFERENCES 8 . REFERENCES 199 [ 1 ] Australian Bureau of Statistics ( ABS ) . Schools . Available at : http : / / www . abs . gov . au , 2011 . [ 2 ] Australian Curriculum , Assessment and Reporting Authority ( ACARA ) . Australian Curriculum : Digital Technologies . http : / / www . australiancurriculum . edu . au / , 2015 . [ 3 ] A . Balanskat and K . Engelhardt . Computer programming and coding : Priorities , school curricula and initiatives across Europe , European Schoolnet . http : / / www . afinef . net / wp − content / uploads / 2016 / 02 / Computing − our − future f inal . pdf , 2015 . [ 4 ] Y . Belenger and J . Thornton . Bioelectrity : a quantitative approach - Duke University’s ﬁrst MOOC . http : / / dukespace . lib . duke . edu / dspace / handle / 10161 / 6216 , 2013 . [ 5 ] S . Booth . Cultivating knowledge sharing and trust in online communities for educators . Journal of Educational Computing Research , 47 ( 1 ) : 1 – 31 , 2012 . [ 6 ] Brennan . ScratchED : Developing support for educators as designers . In Designing with Teachers : Participatory Approaches to Professional Development in Education , 2012 . [ 7 ] C . Brooks and S . Gibson . Professional learning in a digital age . Canadian Journal of Learning and Technology , 38 ( 2 ) : 1 – 17 , 2012 . [ 8 ] J . Evans - Cowley . Update on Spring 2013 MOOC enrollment , participant data for TechniCity . http : / / vt - uap . blogspot . com . au / 2013 / 01 / update - on - spring - 2013 - mooc - enrollment . html , 2013 . [ 9 ] K . Falkner , R . Vivian , and N . Falkner . The Australian Digital Technologies Curriculum : Challenge and opportunity . In Proceedings of the Australasian Computing Education Conference , Auckland , New Zealand , January 2014 . [ 10 ] A . Fini . The technological dimension of a Massive Open Online Course : the case of the CCK08 course tools . The International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning , 10 ( 5 ) , 2009 . [ 11 ] S . B . Freeman and S . Branon . What’s the Value of a Learning Diﬀerences MOOC - Ed ? Raleigh , NC . Friday Institute for Educational Innovation at the NC State University College of Education , 2016 . [ 12 ] W . Gander , A . Petit , G . Berry , B . Demo , J . Vahrenhold , A . McGettrick , R . Boyle , M . Dreschsler , A . Mendelson , C . Stephenson , C . Ghezzi , and B . Meyer . Informatics education : Europe cannot aﬀord to miss the boat . ACM , http : / / europe . acm . org / iereport / ie . html . [ 13 ] D . Glance , M . Forsey , and M . Riley . The pedagogical foundations of massive open online courses . First Monday , 18 ( 5 - 6 ) , 2013 . [ 14 ] Harvard . ScratchEd . http : / / scratched . gse . harvard . edu / , 2015 . [ 15 ] A . D . Ho , I . Chuang , J . Reich , C . A . Coleman , J . Whitehill , C . G . Northcutt , J . J . Williams , J . D . Hansen , G . Lopez , and R . Petersen . HarvardX and MITx : Two years of Open Online Courses Fall 2012 - Summer 2014 . 2015 . [ 16 ] A . D . Ho , J . Reich , S . O . Nesterko , D . T . Seaton , T . Mullaney , J . Waldo , and I . Chuang . HarvardX and MITx : The ﬁrst year of Open Online Courses , Fall 2012 - Summer 2013 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2139 / ssrn . 2381263 , 2014 . [ 17 ] R . Kop . The challenges to connectivist learning on open online networks : learning experiences during a Massive Open Online Course . The International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning , 12 ( 3 ) : 19 – 38 , 2011 . [ 18 ] M . Lloyd and J . Cochrane . Celtic knots : Interweaving the elements of eﬀective teacher professional development in ICT . Australian Educational Computing , 21 ( 2 ) : 16 – 19 , 2006 . [ 19 ] P . McKenzie , P . Weldon , G . Rowley , M . Murphy , and J . McMillan . Staﬀ in Australia’s schools . [ 20 ] C . Milligan and A . Littlejohn . Supporting professional learning in a Massive Open Online Course . The International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning , 15 ( 5 ) , November 2014 . [ 21 ] M . Park and Y . - K . Sung . Teachers’ perceptions of the recent curriculum reforms and their implementation : what can we learn from the case of Korean elementary teachers ? Asia Paciﬁc Journal of Education , 33 ( 1 ) : 15 – 33 , 2013 . [ 22 ] L . Richards . Handling Qualitative Data : A Practical Guide , 3rd Edition . London , UK : SAGE Publications , Inc . , 2015 . [ 23 ] A . P . Rovai and K . T . Barnum . On - line course eﬀectiveness : An analysis of student interactions and perceptions of learning . Journal of Distance Learning , 18 ( 1 ) : 57 – 73 , 2003 . [ 24 ] G . Salmon . E - tivities : The key to active online learning . Kogan - Page Limited , 2002 . [ 25 ] The College of Scholastica . CS4HS TeachIT course . Retrieved December 10 , 2015 , from https : / / css - cs4hs . appspot . com / course , 2015 . [ 26 ] The Royal Society . Shut down or restart ? The way forward for computing in UK schools . https : / / royalsociety . org / / media / Royal S ociety C ontent / education / policy / computing − in − schools / 2012 − 01 − 12 − Computing − in − Schools . pdf , 2012 . [ 27 ] University of Northern Iowa . Introduction to programming with Scratch in education course . Retrieved December 10 , 2015 , from http : / / uni - cs4hs - scratch . appspot . com / , 2015 . [ 28 ] P . Weldon . The teacher workforce in Australia : supply , demand and data issues , Policy Insights . Australian Council for Educational Research , 2015 . [ 29 ] E . Wenger , B . Trayner , and M . de Laat . Promoting and assessing value creation in communities and networks : a conceptual framework . Rapport 18 , Ruud de Moor Centrum , Open University of the Netherlands , 2011 . [ 30 ] B . Zimmerman . Becoming a self - regulated learner : An overview . Theory into Practice , 41 ( 2 ) : 64 – 70 , 2002 . 8 . REFERENCES 200