374 | JUNE 2014 | VOLUME 10 www . nature . com / nrrheum Introduction Pain is currently categorized into noci­ ceptive ( often inflammatory ) pain result­ ing from tissue damage ; neuropathic pain , involving nerve damage ; and idiopathic pain , which has no identified cause . These distinctions are important because they are the basis of treatment . In this Perspec tives article , we discuss the diagnostic cri teria for pain to be classified as neuropathic . We then systematically assess the applica­ bility of these criteria to the symp toms , signs and pathology of osteo arthritis ( OA ) . A sizeable literature describing sen sory abnor malities that accompany OA pain now exists . In many cases , the nature of these abnormalities is consistent with a neuro pathic cause . Furthermore , we dis­ cuss whether articular nerve lesions can induce central sensitization ( consult Box 1 for a glossary of neuroscience terminol­ ogy ) . Finally , we evaluate how the preclini­ cal development of analgesics and current manage ment of OA pain is affected by the recog nition of patients with OA pain with neuro pathic features . Many analgesics that seemed ineffective in clinical trials might be more effective if used selectively in patients with neuropathic OA pain . Classifying OA pain Correctly identifying when chronic pain can be classified as neuropathic is impor­ tant because neuropathic pain is poorly con trolled by common analgesics , such as NSAIDs . Patients with neuropathic pain are more likely to respond to non­ stan dard analge sia ( including tricyclic anti depressants , 5­hydroxytryptamine – noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors or gaba pentinoids ) than to NSAIDs . To diag­ nose neuropathic pain , a clinician must first iden tify it as a direct consequence of a lesion or disease affecting the somato­ sensory system . 1 This conclusion requires an evaluation of the aetiology and pathology associated with the pain , as well as the signs and symptoms ( Figure 1 ) . Identi fication of a plausible neuroanatomical distribution of the pain , such as a region correspond­ ing to a peripheral innervation territory , is important . Recognition by the clinician of a temporal correlation between onset of pain and the course of any relevant disease or historical lesion is also required . Clinicians should test for the presence of positive ( enhanced or aberrant sensations ) and nega­ tive ( reduced sensations ) neurological signs that are concordant with the distribution of pain . ‘Positive’ signs include mechanical and thermal allodynia and hyperalgesia , par­ oxysmal pain and dysaesthesias . ‘Negative’ signs include numbness , loss of vibration and pinprick sensitivity . These symptoms are likely to involve changes in the electro­ physiology of sensory neurons . Neurological examination and patient history can be sup­ plemented with laboratory tests to uncover subclinical abnormalities , for example , reduced density of intraepidermal nerve fibres , changes in nerve conduction or laser­evoked potentials for a specific nerve­ fibre class . The logic of this system of clas­ sifying neuropathic pain is that it evaluates both the aetiology and pathology associated with the pain , as well as the signs and symp­ toms exhibited by the patient . In clinical neuropathic pain research , a battery of quantitative sensory testing ( QST ) across a range of sensory modalities can be used to investigate the nature and extent of a patient’s loss or gain of sensory function and to identify subgroups of patients defined by their somato sensory profile . These tech­ niques are now starting to be applied to patients with OA pain . Nerve lesions To be classed as neuropathic , pain must be associated with a lesion or disease of the somatosensory system . Are peripheral somatosensory nerves , therefore , damaged in OA ? The sodium monoiodoacetate rat model of rapidly progressing OA has fea­ tures that are consistent with neuropathy , including upregulation of the neuronal damage marker , cAMP­dependent tran­ scription factor ATF­3 ( Atf3 ) , in periph­ eral nerves that innervate intra­articular OPINION Osteoarthritis pain : nociceptive or neuropathic ? Matthew Thakur , Anthony H . Dickenson and Ralf Baron Abstract | In this article , we present the case for the existence of a subgroup of patients with osteoarthritis ( OA ) who experience pain with neuropathic features . Recognizing these patients as a distinct subgroup will allow clinicians to improve the management of their symptoms . We discuss the diagnostic criteria for pain to be classed as neuropathic , then systematically examine the applicability of these criteria to the symptoms , signs and pathology of OA . What are the implications for the preclinical development and clinical use of analgesics for OA ? How should existing treatment options be reassessed ? Differences in the aetiology of OA and the pharmacological sensitivity of patients with OA pain with neuropathic features , compared with other patients with OA , might explain the frequent negative findings of clinical trials of treatments for symptomatic OA . If the global prevalence of OA pain with neuropathic features is accurately represented by reports from small experimental groups of patients , then a substantial unmet need to tailor diagnosis and therapy for these individuals exists . Thakur , M . et al . Nat . Rev . Rheumatol . 10 , 374 – 380 ( 2014 ) ; published online 1 April 2014 ; doi : 10 . 1038 / nrrheum . 2014 . 47 Competing interests R . B . declares associations with the following companies and organizations : Abbvie , Allergan , Astellas , AstraZeneca , Bayer - Schering , Biogenidec , Boehringer Ingelheim , Bristol - Myers Squibb , Desitin , Eisai , Genzyme , the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research ( BMBF ) , the German Research Foundation ( DFG ) , Grünenthal , Lilly , Medtronic , Merck , MSD , Mundipharma , Novartis , Pfizer , Sanofi Pasteur , Teva Pharma , and UCB Pharma . A . H . D . declares associations with the following companies and organizations : Astellas , Grünenthal , Lilly , and Pfizer . See the article online for full details of the relationships . M . T . declares no competing interests . P E R S P E C T I V E S © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved NATURE REVIEWS | RHEUMATOLOGY VOLUME 10 | JUNE 2014 | 375 structures , and morphological and prolifera­ tive changes in spinal cord neuroimmune cells . 2 How ever , upregulation of markers of neuro pathy occurs only in the more severe variant of the model in which a high dose of sodium monoiodoacetate is used , suggest­ ing a link between nerve damage and the progression or severity of OA . Some studies have directly evaluated the presence of articular somatosensory lesions . Samples obtained during knee replace­ ment surgery of patients with OA indicate that , compared with healthy joints , there is an infiltration of immune cells , increased angiogenesis and increased growth factor expression in osteochondral junctions . 3 These alterations possibly contribute to the sympathetic and sensory neuro vascular infiltration into what is , in healthy indivi­ duals , a minimally innervated and avascu lar structure . This ectopic innervation seemed to arise from the subchondral bone . 3 In a similar study , osteochondral junc tion samples from patients with OA had higher vascularization and expression of the neuro­ peptide calcitonin gene­related peptide ( CGRP ) than in healthy patients . 4 The degree of synovitis detected by MRI , especially in the infrapatellar fat pad and peripatellar region , correlates highly with the presence of knee pain , even in patients without radiographic signs of OA . 5 , 6 The syn­ ovium is one of the most highly innervated intra­articular structures . A considerable body of evidence characterizes inflamma­ tory mediators , including those released by neurons , and their role in sensitizing pain processes in OA . 7 Structural MRI of the knee is not yet sensitive enough to identify nerve fibre lesions , but samples of synovium taken from patients undergoing total knee replace­ ment allow direct observation of alterations in innervation using immunohisto chemistry . Interestingly , in tissue with synovitis , but not in tissue without synovitis , a substantial decrease in innervation in the synovial lining layer is present , whereas deeper innervation remains intact . This loss of nerve terminals leaves large areas of synovial vasculature abnormally innervated . 8 The simultaneous loss of innervation in synovial lining together with increased innervation of cartilage and the osteo­ chondral junction amply demonstrate that plasticity occurs in intra­articular somato­ sensory structures during the course of OA . 3 , 4 , 8 The first direct evidence for loss of innervation in the synovium is intrigu ing , and , if confirmed by other studies , would be recognized as an important event in OA pathogenesis . The mechanisms linking synovitis with loss of synovial innervation are unknown . As the mechanistic evidence accumulates , whether these changes should continue to be referred to only as plastic­ ity of intra­articular nerve fibres or also as lesions will become clear . Distribution of pain The diagnostic criteria for neuropathic pain ( Figure 1 ) require that pain is perceived in a neuroanatomically plausible distribution . In OA , many , if not all , sensory nerves that project to the affected joint are likely in some way to be altered by the disease—joint pain is Box 1 | Glossary of neuroscience terminology ■ Allodynia : pain produced by a normally innocuous stimulus ■ Central sensitization : an increase in the excitability of neurons within the central nervous system , so that normal inputs begin to produce abnormal responses . Can be triggered by persistent activity in nociceptors ■ Descending controls : serotonergic and noradrenergic fibres projecting from the brain to the spinal cord . Changes in descending control of spinal cord electrophysiological events can determine the extent of pain signal that ascends to conscious perception ■ Dysaesthesia : an unpleasant , abnormal sense of touch ■ Enriched enrolment clinical trial : a trial involving a priori exclusion of nonresponders or selective inclusion of responders or potential responders ■ Hyperalgesia : increased perceived intensity of painful sensations ■ Neuropathic pain : persistent pain following injury to the nervous system ■ Nociceptor : pain sensing primary afferent nerve fibre ■ Paraesthesia : tingling , pricking , ‘pins and needles’ sensation ■ Paroxysmal pain : bursts of pain not linked to a stimulus , but occurring spontaneously in damaged nerves ■ Peripheral sensitization : reduction in threshold and increase in responsiveness of the peripheral ends of nociceptors . Can be triggered by inflammatory chemicals or mediators present in damaged or inflamed tissue ■ Proprioception : sense of relative position of body parts and strength of effort employed in movement ■ Quantitative sensory testing : a range of stimuli covering many sensory modalities systematically applied in a clinical research setting to investigate the nature and extent of a patient’s loss or gain of sensory function ■ Referred pain : persistent pain in an area remote from that affected by pathology . Thought to be a product of primary afferent sensory nerve fibres from the areas in question converging on common projection neurons in the spinal cord ■ Temporal summation : the phenomenon whereby a given defined painful stimulus presented repeatedly is perceived as increasingly painful No Yes Unlikely to be neuropathic pain Unconfirmed as neuropathic pain Neither Both One Definite neuropathic pain Probable neuropathic pain Examination Confirmatory tests ■ Negative or positive sensory signs , confined to innervation territory of the lesioned nervous system ■ Diagnostic test confirming lesion or disease explaining neuropathic pain Working hypothesis Possible neuropathic pain History Pain distribution neuroanatomically plausible and history suggests relevant lesion or disease Leading complaint Pain Figure 1 | Diagnostic algorithm for neuropathic pain . Similar to other neurological diseases , the algorithm defines five levels of certainty for neuropathic pain ( unlikely , possible , probable , definite and unconfirmed ; red boxes ) . Permission obtained from Wolters Kluwer Health , Treede et al . 1 Neurology 70 , 1630 – 1635 ( 2008 ) . PERSPECTIVES © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 376 | JUNE 2014 | VOLUME 10 www . nature . com / nrrheum a neuroanatomically plausible sign that the pain is neuropathic . Neuropathic pain syndromes , which affect cutaneous or mixed somatic nerves with a skin­defined innervation territory , are easily assessed for negative and positive neurological signs . However , if peripheral nerves innervating deep somatic tissues are affected , clinically assessing the corres­ ponding innervation territories will be nearly impossible . An exception might be the assessment of proprioception . Numerous studies have shown impaired joint proprioception ( a negative neurologi­ cal sign ) in patients with knee OA . 9 , 10 The loss of the ability to match contra lateral knee flexion angle with the OA knee is strongly correlated with the presence of pain , but not with radiographic changes . 11 Patients with knee OA also have wide­ spread loss of cutaneous vibration sensi­ tivity . This loss correlates with the extent of joint overloading ( proprioceptive dys­ function ) and radiographic degeneration , but does not correlate with the degree of pain . In 20 – 33 % of patients with OA , hypo­ aesthesia to punctate mechanical , pin prick and thermal stimuli have been described near the affected knee . 12 Paradoxically , mec hanical allodynia is also often present after stimulation reaches the threshold level . How ever , loss of vibratory sensitivity and punctate hypoaesthesia can also occur in the forehead or forearm , suggesting that the loss of function might be a centrally medi­ ated effect , rather than a sign of peripheral nerve dysfunction . 12 – 16 Genomic studies of OA pain are consistent with these findings . None of the genes that most influence OA pain risk ( GLT8D1 , ASTN2 , CHST11 , TP63 and MCF2L ) are peripherally restricted—all of these genes have some degree of central nervous system ( CNS ) expression . By con­ trast , the evidence that genes expressed pre­ dominantly in peripheral nerves ( TRPV1 , SCN9A ) contribute to OA pain risk is less convincing . 17 The extent to which the threshold to mechanical stimulation near the joint is modulated by ongoing pain has not been characterized . Pain referral and sensitization Many patients with OA describe pain in areas of their body and skin that do not match the innervation territories of periph­ eral nerves or nerve roots . Pain arising from facet joint OA , for example , frequently radiates into the buttocks and down the legs . Primary hip OA typically radiates to the knee , thigh or buttocks , whereas knee OA pain is usually felt in and around the knee and on the upper tibia . 18 , 19 This diffuse , radiating pain is called somatic referred pain . The distribution of the referred pain is likely to reflect convergent inputs to spinal cord neurons receiving inputs from primary afferent nerves of the affected joint as well as remote tissues . 7 In some patients , sensory abnormalities can be found in the area of pain referral , including pressure­induced pain and cuta­ neous mechanical hyperalgesia and allo­ dynia . 20 , 21 The mechanical hyper sensitivity in the referral zone involves central sen­ sitization within the spinal cord . Central sensitization of second­order nociceptive neurons is initiated by ongoing afferent input from the affected joint and ampli­ fies convergent afferent inputs from the remote tissue ( Figure 2 ) . This phe nome­ non is detected in rat models of OA pain . 2 , 22 How ever , central sensitization alone is not diagnostic for neuropathic pain and can be experimentally induced in healthy volun teers with a chemical stimulus , such as capsaicin . 23 In principle , referral of pain and central sensitization can be driven by sensitized primary afferent nerves , which can be acti­ vated in the affected joint without neuronal damage occurring . However , activation of intact , sensitized nociceptors is usually movement­dependent and leads to fluctua­ tions of central sensitization , depending on the level of ongoing pain . In patients with OA , cutaneous hyper sensitivity in the refer­ ral zone is , however , a stable sensory phe­ nomenon , as shown by repetitive sensory measurements . 12 There fore , nociceptors , continuously firing ( ectopically ) in and around the affected joint , are likely to be the source of sustained pain referral and central sensitization . Central sensitization of painful hip OA has been characterized using functional MRI . 21 In this study , patients with OA des­ cribed pain and sensory symptoms using the PainDETECT questionnaire . Patients with high scores , indicative of more neuro­ pathic elements to their pain , had lower thresholds to painful mechanical punctate stimulation of an area of referred pain on the thigh . These patients also had greater evoked midbrain periaqueductal grey ( PAG ) functional MRI blood­oxygen­level­ dependent ( BOLD ) signalling than patients with a low PainDETECT score , 21 suggest­ ing that dysfunction in the CNS can distin­ guish a subset of patients with prominent central sensitization . The PAG is a central + – PAG Thalamus Projectionneuron Interneuron Dorsal root ganglion Referredpain Descendingcontrols + Figure 2 | Referred pain . Schematic showing how persistent activation of peripheral inputs from one site ( red ) can lead to the establishment of a referred pain area at a distant site ( blue ) when central sensitization occurs in second - order processes in the spinal cord ( yellow ) . Ascending sensory messages pass onwards to the thalamus . This process is modulated by excitatory ( green ) and inhibitory ( pink ) descending controls projecting to the spinal cord from the periaqueductal grey . PERSPECTIVES © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved NATURE REVIEWS | RHEUMATOLOGY VOLUME 10 | JUNE 2014 | 377 modulator of descending controls , con­ necting limbic structures and the spinal cord . Neurons in limbic areas not only have diffuse receptive fields over the whole body , but are also located in areas where mood and sleep are modulated . Changes in these systems might also contribute to the spread of pain . Descending controls act along­ side spinal mechanisms of sensitization to facilita te pain processing . 24 In another study of knee OA , patients with a PainDETECT score of ≥12 were six times more likely to show signs of central sensitization than patients who scored < 12 . 16 Results from the MOST study , a lon­ gitudinal , multicentre study of patients who already have , or are at risk of developing , knee OA , indicate that greater severity and duration of OA are both associated with central sensitization . 25 One prominent sensory sign in OA is an alteration in pressure pain threshold ( PPT ) near the affected joint . Reduced PPT corre­ lates with the intensity of day­to­day pain and the extent of functional disability . 26 , 27 The most extensive QST study of patients with OA showed a significantly reduced PPT at the knee in 34 % of respondents . 12 Pressure­induced pain can be caused by sensitized nociceptors at the site of local­ ized inflammation , but several observations indicate that central sensitization is also involved . Pain evoked by repetitive pressure stimuli ( temporal summation of pain ) is greater in patients with knee OA compared with healthy volunteers , and is a centrally , not peripherally , mediated sign . 14 , 26 Studies of patients with knee OA and lowered PPTs at various sites remote from the knee also point toward central , rather than peripheral , somatosensory changes . 14 , 27 Following reso­ lution of OA pain , PPT is restored to levels similar to the levels in healthy volunteers . 28 , 29 The existence of CNS alterations in patients with OA who experience pain is further underpinned by the finding that , after total knee replacement , 44 % of patients experience persistent pain , and 13 % of that group ( 6 % total ) experience pain with neuro pathic features . 30 The most important risk factors for pain persisting after knee replacement were the existence of co incident pain at other sites and comorbid major depression . 30 The latter finding underlines the biopsychosocial aspects of chronic OA pain . Reduced social or physical activity and low mood can be both risk factors and out­ comes of OA pain . In one longitudinal study ( n = 51 ) of total knee replacement , patients showing signs of central sensitization to painful stimuli applied to the forearm before surgery were more likely to experience pain 1 year after replacement of the joint than patients without central sensitization . 31 By contrast , a study ( n = 33 ) examining the pre­ dictive value of synovial hyperplasia ( a con­ sequence of inflammation ) detected during partial menisctectomy could not predict pain status 2 years after surgery . 32 Spontaneous activity in damaged pri mary afferent nerves in affected joints is likely to drive central sensitization , pain referral and the development of neuropathic symp toms . Central sensitization manifests as mecha­ nical hyperalgesia and allodynia in the referred skin area and exaggerated pressure pain in remote body areas . The presence of central sensitization is associated with a poor treatment outcome , even if the articu­ lar nerve fibres that induced se nsitization are removed . 30 Identification of neuropathic OA Neuropathic pain syndromes , such as posther petic neuralgia and diabetic neuro­ pathy , are associated with characteristic somatosensory symptoms and pain quali­ ties , including burning pain , paraesthesias , pins and needles , mechanical and thermal hyperalgesia , allodynia , paroxysmal pain and numbness . These features can be used in clinical assessment to distinguish neuro­ pathic pain from chronic nociceptive pain . A number of screening tools and question­ naires are now available that use patient descriptions of the location , intensity , fre­ quency and quality of pain to indicate how likely it is to be neuropathic . Screening questionnaires , such as PainDETECT 33 and DN4 , 34 are designed to aid in diagnosis , but could also provide a means of assessing changes in pain quality over time or after pharmacological intervention , although this use has not yet been validated . Studies using PainDETECT have esti­ mated 5 – 50 % prevalence of neuropathic pain in patients with OA . 16 , 35 – 37 The large range in these estimates reflects the great heterogeneity encountered in patients with OA , as well as differences between studies carried out in community and clinical set­ tings . In one cohort of patients with knee OA , 34 % reported signs of neuropathy , including burning , tingling or numbness . These patients reported higher pain inten­ sity , more referred pain , pain at more sites and longer OA duration than patients with OA pain but no neuropathic signs . 16 These findings resemble the rat OA model data , in which greater pain behaviours were obser ved in the variant of the model where markers of nerve damage are upregu lated , compared with the less severe variant , where nerve damage is absent . 2 Whether dif ferent joints ( knee , hip , or facet ) and aetio logies of OA ( post­traumatic , idio pathic , meta­ bolic , or rapidly progressing ) have different risks of producing neuropathic­pain­like sy mptoms has not yet been investigated . In clinical neuropathic pain research , the German Research Network on Neuro pathic Pain ( DFNS ) has identified subgroups of phenotypically ( as opposed to aetio­ logically ) distinct patient groups defined by their somatosensory loss or gain of function . The DFNS use a range of QST to identify patients with similar sensory pro­ files . Selective evaluation of treatments is , therefore , possible in these defined pheno­ typic subpopulations . 38 The comprehensive QST protocol consists of 13 parameters encompassing thermal and mechanical nociceptive and non­nociceptive tests . 39 Most of these parameters are indicative of changes in perception of stimulation of skin or superfi cial tissue . Changes in deep com­ partments , such as muscles or OA­affected joints , are detected only by a subset of these tests . QST in OA , therefore , uses a limited selection of stimuli , making direct com pari­ son between QST profiles from neuro pathic pain and those from OA pain diffi cult . 12 , 16 The available data show that similar pro­ portions of patients with OA ( 70 % ) and patients with neuropathic pain ( 92 % ) report some somato sensory abnormality . 37 In indivi duals with OA , the most common abnor mality is a reduced PPT . 37 The most thorough QST data in OA are from small experi mental groups that mostly suggest a link between sensory profile , disease history and comorbidities . 12 , 16 Studies using QST have not been used to assign larger scale groups for pharmacological intervention or to assess outcomes in OA pain trials . Therapies Tricyclic antidepressants and gabapenti noids are effective only in the treatment of pain that is neuropathic . 40 In the sodium mono­ iodoacetate rat model of OA pain , gabapen­ tin ( a ligand of the α2δ Ca 2 + ­channel sub unit ) and lacosamide ( a Na + ­channel modu­ lator ) reduced behavioural hypersensiti­ vity . 41 , 42 Similarly to human experimental pain models after central sensitization , the sodium mono iodoacetate model also fea­ tures de novo sensitivity to ondansetron and pregabalin analgesic effects . 2 , 22 , 43 Pregabalin­ induced reduction of electrophysiological PERSPECTIVES © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 378 | JUNE 2014 | VOLUME 10 www . nature . com / nrrheum measures of pain was seen only in a variant of the OA model in which a high degree of nerve damage occurs . 2 Negative results in clinical trials of gaba­ penti noids 44 could be caused by hetero­ geneity in the study group of patients with OA , rather than the ineffectiveness of the drug . If they were tested in trials enriched for patients with OA and neuropathic somato­ sensory abnormalities , the true effi cacy of gabapentinoids , tricyclic antidepressants and 5­hydroxytryptamine – noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors for OA pain might be greater than that indicated by existing clinic al trials . 44 , 45 In a small clinical study of patients with knee OA , one­third of whom had high PainDETECT scores , those taking a combi­ nation of an NSAID and pregabalin reported significantly greater pain relief than those taking an NSAID or pregabalin mono­ therapy . 46 Combination therapy might , there­ fore , be a promising option for the treatment of patients with OA pain with neuropathic features . Another approach is peri operative pregabalin , which , according to patient reports , reduces neuropathic signs after total­ knee arthroplasty . 47 Alternatively , a mono­ therapy with dual mechanisms of action might have the same effect as combination therapy with NSAID and pregabalin . Efficacy of such a dual­action monotherapy has been confirmed in the treatment of severe , chronic OA pain—the novel μ­opioid­receptor agonist and n oradrenaline­ reuptake inhibi­ tor , tapentadol , reduced the number of pain attacks and the duration of spontaneous pain . 48 The dual­action monotherapy was also better tolerated and more effective than other opioids . 49 Five completed studies ( 4 by Grünenthal GmbH and 1 by Merck , Sharp and Dohme ) on the ClinicalTrials . gov website measured the change in painDETECT score as a secon­ dary end point , while five more are currently recruiting . One study by Grünenthal GmbH found that a 12­week course of tapentadol reduced painDETECT scores by approxi­ mately 50 % in patients experiencing lower back pain with a ‘positive neuropathic com­ ponent’ ( defined as a painDETECT score of ≥18 at the start of the study ) . 50 The use of neuropathic cri teria to inform treatment is summarized in Figure 3 . Conclusions A combination of comprehensive QST , neuropathic symptom questionnaires and enriched enrolment trials , similar to those currently being used in neuropathic pain 2 3 4 5 OA and neuropathic pain Central sensitization Persistent firing in joint fibres sensitizes spinal cord Mid brain activity Gain of function Loss of function PainDETECT Pressure pain threshold Knee joint proprioceptionLight touch perception SpontaneouspainPain on movement Vibrationdetectionthreshold Tailor treatment to neuropathic pain Tricyclic antidepressantsand SNRIs Gabapentinoids Dual - action therapy e . g . Tapentadol Combination therapy e . g . Gabapentinoids + NSAID OA synovium Deep layer fibres spared Lining layer fibres lost Healthy synovium Lining layer nerve fibres Deep layer nerve fibres Q Patient’s description of pain OA Healthy 1 Healthy cartilage sparsely innervated and vascularized OA cartilage undergoes neurovascular invasion PAG Articular nociceptors activated Pressurepainsummation Punctuatepainsummation Pain referred to adjacent areas Figure 3 | Development of neuropathic pain in an OA knee . The normally innervated joint ( 1 ) undergoes disruption of innervation and activation of articular pain - sensing fibres in OA ( 2 ) . 3 , 8 This can lead to central sensitization of spinal and supraspinal CNS areas in susceptible individuals ( 3 ) . 12 , 17 , 21 , 25 Combined with nerve disruption , this produces OA pain with neuropathic features in a subset of patients ( 4 ) . 12 , 16 , 35 Preliminary studies indicate that treating these individuals with the non - standard analgesics used to manage neuropathic pain may be more effective than conventional management ( 5 ) . 45 – 48 , 51 Abbreviations : CNS , central nervous system ; OA , osteoarthritis . PERSPECTIVES © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved NATURE REVIEWS | RHEUMATOLOGY VOLUME 10 | JUNE 2014 | 379 research , is the only feasible way to iden­ tify the clinical relevance of OA pain with neuropathic features . If the aetiology and pharmaco logical sensitivity of patients with OA pain with neuropathic features differs from that of other patients with OA , it might explain the frequent negative results of clinical trials for OA analgesics . It will be especially interesting to ascertain whether currently accepted subgroups of OA patients , such as those with rapidly progressing OA , have a greater incidence of neuropathic signs and symptoms . The popularization of QST in OA research should stimulate further studies to determine the clinical prevalence of gain and loss of function , neuropathic signs and symptoms , and referred pain . If the prevalence is as high as that reported in small experimental groups , the potential for tailor­ ing treatment for patients with pain with neuropathic features should be evaluated . A distinct treatment regimen suitable for these patients could substantially improve the management of OA . McMahon Neurorestoration Lab , Wolfson CARD , School of Biomedical Sciences , King’s College London , London SE1 1UL , UK ( M . T . ) . Department of Neuroscience , Physiology and Pharmacology , University College London , London WC1E 6BT , UK ( A . H . D . ) . Division of Neurological Pain Research and Therapy , Department of Neurology , Universitätsklinikum Schleswig - Holstein , Arnold - Heller - Strasse 3 , Kiel 24105 , Germany ( R . B . ) . Correspondence to : M . T . matthew . thakur @ kcl . ac . uk 1 . Treede , R . D . et al . Neuropathic pain : redefinition and a grading system for clinical and research purposes . Neurology 70 , 1630 – 1635 ( 2008 ) . 2 . Thakur , M . , Rahman , W . , Hobbs , C . , Dickenson , A . & Bennett , D . Characterisation of a peripheral neuropathic component of the rat monoiodoacetate model of osteoarthritis . PLoS ONE 7 , e33730 ( 2012 ) . 3 . Suri , S . et al . Neurovascular invasion at the osteochondral junction and in osteophytes in osteoarthritis . Ann . Rheum . Dis . 66 , 1423 – 1428 ( 2007 ) . 4 . Walsh , D . A . et al . Angiogenesis and nerve growth factor at the osteochondral junction in rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis . Rheumatology ( Oxford ) 42 , 1852 – 1861 ( 2010 ) . 5 . Baker , K . et al . Relation of synovitis to knee pain using contrast - enhanced MRIs . Ann . Rheum . Dis . 69 , 1779 – 1783 ( 2010 ) . 6 . Hill , C . L . et al . Synovitis detected on magnetic resonance imaging and its relation to pain and cartilage loss in knee osteoarthritis . Ann . Rheum . Dis . 66 , 1599 – 1603 ( 2007 ) . 7 . Schaible , H . Mechanisms of pain in arthritis . Arthritis Res . Ther . 6 , 1 – 2 ( 2004 ) . 8 . Eitner , A . , Pester , J . , Nietzsche , S . , Hofmann , G . O . & Schaible , H . G . The innervation of synovium of human osteoarthritic joints in comparison with normal rat and sheep synovium . Osteoarthritis Cartilage 21 , 1383 – 1391 ( 2013 ) . 9 . Hurley , M . V . , Scott , D . L . , Rees , J . & Newham , D . J . Sensorimotor changes and functional performance in patients with knee osteoarthritis . Ann . Rheum . Dis . 56 , 641 – 648 ( 1997 ) . 10 . Sharma , L . , Pai , Y . C . , Holtkamp , K . & Rymer , W . Z . Is knee joint proprioception worse in the arthritic knee versus the unaffected knee in unilateral knee osteoarthritis ? Arthritis Rheum . 40 , 1518 – 1525 ( 1997 ) . 11 . Felson , D . T . et al . The effects of impaired joint position sense on the development and progression of pain and structural damage in knee osteoarthritis . Arthritis Rheum . 61 , 1070 – 1076 ( 2009 ) . 12 . Wylde , V . , Palmer , S . , Learmonth , I . D . & Dieppe , P . Somatosensory abnormalities in knee OA . Rheumatology ( Oxford ) 51 , 535 – 543 ( 2012 ) . 13 . Shakoor , N . et al . The relationship of vibratory perception with dynamic joint loading , radiographic severity , and pain in knee osteoarthritis . Arthritis Rheum . 64 , 181 – 186 ( 2011 ) . 14 . Harden , R . N . et al . The osteoarthritis knee model : psychophysical characteristics and putative outcomes . J . Pain 14 , 281 – 289 ( 2013 ) . 15 . Hendiani , J . A . et al . Mechanical sensation and pain thresholds in patients with chronic arthropathies . J . Pain 4 , 203 – 211 ( 2003 ) . 16 . Hochman , J . R . , Davis , A . M . , Elkayam , J . , Gagliese , L . & Hawker , G . A . Neuropathic pain symptoms on the modified painDETECT correlate with signs of central sensitization in knee osteoarthritis . Osteoarthritis Cartilage 21 , 1236 – 1242 ( 2013 ) . 17 . Thakur , M . , Dawes , J . M . & McMahon , S . B . Genomics of pain in osteoarthritis . Osteoarthritis Cartilage 21 , 1374 – 1382 ( 2013 ) . 18 . Street , J . , Lenehan , B . , Flavin , R . , Beale , E . & Murray , P . Do pain referral patterns determine patient outcome after total hip arthroplasty ? Acta Orthop . Belg . 71 , 540 – 547 ( 2005 ) . 19 . Lesher , J . M . , Dreyfuss , P . , Hager , N . , Kaplan , M . & Furman , M . Hip joint pain referral patterns : a descriptive study . Pain Med . 9 , 22 – 25 ( 2008 ) . 20 . Farrell , M . , Gibson , S . , McMeeken , J . & Helme , R . Pain and hyperalgesia in osteoarthritis of the hands . J . Rheumatol . 27 , 441 – 447 ( 2000 ) . 21 . Gwilym , S . E . et al . Psychophysical and functional imaging evidence supporting the presence of central sensitization in a cohort of osteoarthritis patients . Arthritis Rheum . 61 , 1226 – 1234 ( 2009 ) . 22 . Rahman , W . et al . Descending serotonergic facilitation and the antinociceptive effects of pregabalin in a rat model of osteoarthritic pain . Mol . Pain 5 , 45 ( 2009 ) . 23 . O’Neill , J . et al . Unravelling the mystery of capsaicin : a tool to understand and treat pain . Pharmacol . Rev . 64 , 939 – 971 ( 2012 ) . 24 . Baron , R . , Hans , G . & Dickenson , A . Peripheral input and its importance for central sensitization . Ann . Neurol . 74 , 630 – 636 ( 2013 ) . 25 . Neogi , T . et al . Central sensitization in knee OA : preliminary results from the MOST study . Osteoarthritis and Cartilage 18 ( Suppl . 2 ) , S34 ( 2010 ) . 26 . Arendt - Nielsen , L . et al . Sensitization in patients with painful knee osteoarthritis . Pain 149 , 573 – 581 ( 2010 ) . 27 . Imamura , M . et al . Impact of nervous system hyperalgesia on pain , disability , and quality of life in patients with knee osteoarthritis : A controlled analysis . Arthritis Rheum . 59 , 1424 – 1431 ( 2008 ) . 28 . Graven - Nielsen , T . , Wodehouse , T . , Langford , R . M . , Arendt - Nielsen , L . & Kidd , B . L . Normalisation of widespread hyperesthesia and facilitated spatial summation of deep - tissue pain in knee osteoarthritis patients after knee replacement . Arthritis Rheum . 64 , 2907 – 2916 ( 2012 ) . 29 . Kosek , E . & Ordeberg , G . Abnormalities of somatosensory perception in patients with painful osteoarthritis normalize following successful treatment . Eur . J . Pain 4 , 229 – 238 ( 2000 ) . 30 . Wylde , V . , Hewlett , S . , Learmonth , I . D . & Dieppe , P . Persistent pain after joint replacement : Prevalence , sensory qualities , and postoperative determinants . Pain 152 , 566 – 572 ( 2011 ) . 31 . Wylde , V . , Palmer , S . , Learmonth , I . D . & Dieppe , P . The association between pre - operative pain sensitisation and chronic pain after knee replacement : an exploratory study . Osteoarthritis Cartilage 21 , 1253 – 1256 ( 2013 ) . 32 . Scanzello , C . R . et al . The influence of synovial inflammation and hyperplasia on symptomatic outcomes up to 2 years post - operatively in patients undergoing partial meniscectomy . Osteoarthritis Cartilage 21 , 1392 – 1399 ( 2013 ) . 33 . Freynhagen , R . , Baron , R . , Gockel , U . & Tölle , T . R . painDETECT : a new screening questionnaire to identify neuropathic components in patients with back pain . Curr . Res . Med . Opin . 22 , 1911 – 1920 ( 2006 ) . 34 . Bouhassira , D . , Lanteri - Minet , M . , Attal , N . , Laurent , B . & Touboul , C . Prevalence of chronic pain with neuropathic characteristics in the general population . Pain 136 , 380 – 387 ( 2008 ) . 35 . Ohtori , S . et al . Existence of a neuropathic pain component in patients with osteoarthritis of the knee . Yonsei Med . J . 53 , 801 ( 2012 ) . 36 . Soni , A . et al . Neuropathic features of joint pain : a community - based study . Arthritis Rheum . 65 , 1942 – 1949 ( 2013 ) . 37 . Suokas , A . K . et al . Quantitative sensory testing in painful osteoarthritis : a systematic review and meta - analysis . Osteoarthritis Cartilage 20 , 1075 – 1085 ( 2012 ) . 38 . Maier , C . et al . Quantitative sensory testing in the German Research Network on Neuropathic Pain ( DFNS ) : somatosensory abnormalities in 1236 patients with different neuropathic pain syndromes . Pain 150 , 439 – 450 ( 2010 ) . 39 . Rolke , R . et al . Quantitative sensory testing in the German Research Network on Neuropathic Pain ( DFNS ) : standardized protocol and reference values . Pain 123 , 231 – 243 ( 2006 ) . 40 . Finnerup , N . B . , Sindrup , S . H . & Jensen , T . S . The evidence for pharmacological treatment of neuropathic pain . Pain 150 , 573 – 581 ( 2010 ) . 41 . Vonsy , J . , Ghandehari , J . & Dickenson , A . Differential analgesic effects of morphine and gabapentin on behavioural measures of pain and disability in a model of osteoarthritis pain in rats . Eur . J . Pain 13 , 786 – 793 ( 2009 ) . 42 . Beyreuther , B . , Callizot , N . & Stohr , T . Antinociceptive efficacy of lacosamide in the monosodium iodoacetate rat model for osteoarthritis pain . Arthritis Res . Ther . 9 , R14 ( 2007 ) . 43 . Iannetti , G . D . et al . Pharmacological modulation of pain - related brain activity during normal and central sensitization states in humans . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 18195 – 18200 ( 2005 ) . PERSPECTIVES © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 380 | JUNE 2014 | VOLUME 10 www . nature . com / nrrheum 44 . Vedula , S . S . , Bero , L . , Scherer , R . W . & Dickersin , K . Outcome reporting in industry - sponsored trials of gabapentin for off - label use . N . Engl . J . Med . 361 , 1963 – 1971 ( 2009 ) . 45 . Chappell , A . S . et al . Duloxetine , a centrally acting analgesic , in the treatment of patients with osteoarthritis knee pain : a 13 - week , randomized , placebo - controlled trial . Pain 146 , 253 – 260 ( 2009 ) . 46 . Ohtori , S . et al . Efficacy of combination of meloxicam and pregabalin for pain in knee osteoarthritis . Yonsei Med . J . 54 , 1253 – 1258 ( 2013 ) . 47 . Buvanendran , A . et al . Perioperative oral pregabalin reduces chronic pain after total knee arthroplasty : a prospective , randomized , controlled trial . Anesth . Analg . 110 , 199 – 207 ( 2010 ) . 48 . Steigerwald , I . et al . Effectiveness and tolerability of tapentadol prolonged release compared with prior opioid therapy for the management of severe , chronic osteoarthritis pain . Clin . Drug Investig . 33 , 607 – 619 ( 2013 ) . 49 . Hartrick , C . , Van Hove , I . , Stegmann , J . U . , Oh , C . & Upmalis , D . Efficacy and tolerability of tapentadol immediate release and oxycodone HCl immediate release in patients awaiting primary joint replacement surgery for end - stage joint disease : a 10 - day , phase III , randomized , double - blind , active - and placebo - controlled study . Clin . Ther . 31 , 260 – 271 ( 2009 ) . 50 . Steigerwald , I . et al . Effectiveness and safety of tapentadol prolonged release for severe , chronic low back pain with or without a neuropathic pain component : results of an open - label , phase 3b study . Curr . Med . Res . Opin . 28 , 911 – 936 ( 2012 ) 51 . Morlion , B . Pharmacotherapy of low back pain : targeting nociceptive and neuropathic pain components . Curr . Med . Res . Opin . 27 , 11 – 33 ( 2011 ) . Acknowledgements A . H . D . is funded by the Wellcome Trust , London Pain Consortium and Arthritis Research UK . M . T . is funded by the Wellcome Trust . R . B . is funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research ( BMBF , NoPain ) and Grünenthal GmbH . Author contributions M . T . wrote the article . M . T . , R . B . and A . H . D . researched data for the article , substantially contributed to discussion of the content , and reviewed and edited the manuscript before submission . PERSPECTIVES © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved