Repertory Hypergrids : An Application to Clinical Practice Guidelines David MadiganlU , C . Richard Chapman12 , Jonathan Gavrin12 , Ole Villumsen13 , John Boose2 lUniversity of Washington , 2Fred Hutchinson Cancer Reseamh Center , 3Aarhus University 4Department of Statistics , GN - 22 University of Washington Seattle , WA 98195 fax : ( 20 @ 685 - 7419 e - maih { madigan , crc , jgavrin ] @ u . Washington . edu , ovillumsen @ laimi . aau . dk , jboose @ pock . fhcrc , org ABSTRACT Creation and maintenance of links in large hypermedia documents is difficult . Motivated by art application to a federal clinical practice guideline for cancer pain management , we have developed and evaluated a repertory grid - based linking scheme we call repertory hypergrids . Harnessing established knowledge acquisition techniques , the repertory hypergrid assigns each “knowledge chunk” a location in “context space” . A chunk links to another chunk if they are both close in context space . To evaluate the scheme , we conducted a protocol analysis . Six users of the guideline addressing typical cancer pain management tasks made 30 explicit links . The repertory hypergrid using a neighborhood size of 16 captures 24 of these links . With optimization , the repertory hypergrid captures 27 of the links with a neighborhood size of 13 . KEY WORDS : Implicit linking , repertory grid , clinical practice guidelines , link maintenance , evaluation . 1 INTRODUCTION We are developing Talarial , a hypermedia training and reference tool for healthcare providers managing patients with cancer pain . The clinical practice guideline on cancer pain relief , just released by the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research ( AHCPR ) , formally defines much of ll % e Talaria were the winged sandals of Mercury , messenger to the Gods Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage , the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear , and notice is given that copyright is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery . To copy otherwise , or to republish , requires a fee snd / Or specific permission . @ 1994 ACM 0 - 89791 - 640 - 9 / 94 / 0009 / $ 3 . 50 the knowledge base for Trdaria [ 22 ] . The purpose of the program mirrors that of the practice guideline to improve the management of pain in patients with cancer by informing physicians , nurses and other health care providers about current therapeutic options and principles . Talaria addresses many of the problems associated with booklet - based clinical practice guidelines . We have developed a novel hypermedia linking scheme to meet Talaria’s requirements . The scheme implicitly constructs links between “knowledge chunks” by assigning each chunk a location in a “context space” . A chunk links to another chunk if they are close in context space . To evaluate the effectiveness of the approach we conducted a protocol analysis . The results suggest that the linking scheme is effective and overcomes many of the difficulties associated with large hyper - linked documents . We begin with a sketch of the problem domain . 1 . 1 Cancer Pain and the AHCPR Guideline Pain is a pernicious force that increasingly threatens the functional capability and psychologic well - being of the cancer patient as disease progresses . Because of unrelieved pain , many patients spend the last weeks , months or even years of their lives with needless discomfort and disability [ 8 ] . Tragically , the extensive suffering caused by cancer pain is largely unnecessary . Gains in knowledge about pain and its control and technological advances in pain management now enable informed physicians to relieve up to 90 % of cancer pain [ 25 , 34 ] . However , many patients get inadequate relief because of underuse of treatment resources . This largely stems from a lack of knowledge amongst caregivers . Talaria , like the AHCPR guideline on cancer pain , addresses this obstacle . The AHCPR defines clinical practice guidelines as “systematically developed statements to assist practitioner and patient decisions about appropriate health care for specific clinical circumstances” . The AHCPR sponsors private sector panels , composed of experts from relevant disciplines , to develop these guidelines to reduce clinical uncertainty and improve patient outcomes . The cancer pain ECHT ’94 Proceedings 117 September 1994 guideline is a 260 - page , paperback booklet consisting of text , tables , and figures . It addresses pain assessment , the psychological and physiological impact of cancer pain , interventions for the treatment of cancer pain including pharmacological , psychosocial and procedurally based interventions , and a variety of special topics . The target audience for the guideline extends to patients ( both adults and children ) , patients’ families and clinicians at all levels . Clinical practice guidelines of non - federal origin have proliferated in recent years . The American Medical Association alone offers 1 , 300 different guidelines . The AHCPR estimates that over 10 , 000 guidelines have been developed in the history of medical practice . While the cancer pain guideline is our immediate focus , we intend to develop a general purpe methodology . 1 . 2 Talaria Objective and Requirements Much anecdotal evidence exists that guidelines impact practice patterns minimally [ 15 ] . More formal studies such as those of Grilli et al . [ 16 ] , Lomas et al . [ 26 ] , and Ford et al . [ 13 ] report similar findings . Our objective is to render guidelines in a more useful form . We have observed many deficiencies in the paper - based guidelines and these largely define the requirements for Talaria [ 12 , 28 ] : l l l . l l . Booklet guidelines have little depth and provide no support for users in specific specialties who want explanations of concepts , mechanisms , and procedures . Booklet guidelines cannot demonstrate procedurally based interventions . Booklet guidelines lack the facility to implement an instructional strategy and provide no feedback to the reader . Booklet guidelines provide minimal support for practical day - to - day problems such as drug dose calculations , or dose conversions across routes of delivery . While guidelines in booklet form facilitate distribution , such booklets typically get absorbed into the mound of literature accumulated by every healthcare provider . Booklet guidelines provide little motivation for clinicians to learn new information . Booklet guidelines provide little support for patient - cliniciart communication . Booklet guidelines do , however , provide an effective browsing tool and a key requirement is to emulate this ability . Hypermedia can support browsing as well as address the above deficiencies . However , in large hypermedia documents , manual creation and maintenance of links prove difficult [ 3 , 9 , 37 , 27 , 38 , 40 ] . Each time the document acquires a new knowledge chunk , the author must examine all the existing chunks to determine what new links are required . Tuning links to optimize performance presents similar difficulties . The cancer pain guideline has 136 sections , 18 Tables , and a variety of supporting material . Furthermore , the guideline is evolving : the AHCPR plans to issue new editions every two or three years . We require a linking scheme that does not demand hand - creation and maintenance of each link . 1 . 3 Overview of the Paper In Section 2 we describe the linking scheme we have developd . In Section 3 we present an evaluation of aspects of the scheme . In the fiial section we describe our current activities and future directions . 2 LINKING SCHEME While a traditional document is a collection of text organized into chapters , sections , and paragraphs , and arranged in a linear fashion , a hypermedia document is a collection of knowledge chunks arranged in a network . A knowledge chunk can be a piece of text , a movie , an animation sequence , a picture , an audio clip , a database or even a calculating tool ( see , for example , Anderson [ 1 ] , or Sheplock et al . [ 36 ] ) . Links connect knowledge chunks that have a semantic connection : if one chunk triggers an association with another , then the author links them and the user can get from one chunk to the other . We refer the reader to Nielsen [ 32 ] and Balasubramanian [ 2 ] for brief histories of hypertext and descriptions of the best known applications . Note however , there have been only a few reports on efforts to evaluate the effectiveness of such applications formally ; evaluation is central to our approach . 2 . 1 An Implicit Linking Scheme Kibby and Mayes [ 24 ] suggested a linking scheme that obviates the need for explicit links ( although it does not preclude explicit links ) . Our work has focused on extending their ideas , linking them to recent progress in knowledge acquisition , and evaluating their effectiveness . The fundamental idea is to independently assign each chunk a location in a high - dimensional “context space” . Chunks that are close together form a “neighborhood” and link implicitly since they share a similar context . The author or the user defines the neighborhood as the nodes within a certain distance of the current node , or as the nearest “n” nodes . We currently adopt the latter approach in Talaria and typically choose n to be between 10 and 30 to yield a mamgeable neighborhood size . The decisive advantage of this scheme is modularity : an author can link a new or modified knowledge chunk to its associated chunks simply by rating it against each of a number of “traits” , thereby eliminating the requirement to examine all existing chunks . ECHT ’94 Proceedings 118 September 1994 Pain Barriers to Sections Traits 2 . 3 . 1 2 . 3 . 2 T4 2 . 3 . 3 2 . 3 . 4 2 . 3 . 5 Assessment 221111 Pain Management 1 1 1 1 1 1 Bone 655221 Central Nervous System 366411 Skin 1 1 1145 Table 1 : A repertory grid with five traits end six sections of the draft AHCPR cancer pain guideline . Here - we u & d - a 6 - level rating scale . 2 . 2 Repertory Hypergrids We define the context of each knowledge chunk with a high - dimensional trait vector . Each element of a trait vector is a number representing the strength of association between the chunk and the corresponding trait . For example , in the cancer pain guideline , Section 3 . 3 . 2 ( Dosage Titration ) rated a 6 on “Drug” and a 2 on “Pain Assessment” on a scale from 1 to 6 . We score every knowledge chunk against every trait . Knowledge chunks that have similar ratings on a large number of traits will be relatively near each other in the space spanned by the traits and will thus be implicitly linked . Knowledge chunks that have rather different trait vectors will be far apart in this context space , and will not link to each other . We show in Table 1 a sample of trait vectors and corresponding traits for six chunks of the AHCPR Cancer Pain Guideline ( here we equate knowledge chunks with sections , tables , and figures in the guideline ) . Boose [ 5 ] referred to such a table as a “repertory grid” . In this context we call it a “repertory hypergrid” . We believe that researchers have not previously explored repertory grids in the hypermedia context . Boose et al . [ 7 ] discussed the advantages and disadvantages of various nominal , ordinal , and continuous rating scales . We have used a six - level ordinal rating scale for Talari ~ as shown in Table 2 . We return to this issue in Seetion 4 below . Rating Operational Definition 6 Chunk is precisely concerned with this trait 5 Trait is a secondary topic in the chunk 4 More than a passing referencw less than a secondary topic 3 Explicit passing reference 2 Implicit passing reference 1 No mention implicit or otherwise Table 2 : The 6 - level rating system . A precise definition is critical for consistency in the rating . In the next three subsections we discuss the construction of repertory hypergrids . 2 . 2 . 1 Triadic Elicitation of Traits From where do the traits come ? Waltz and Pollack [ 41 ] suggest that traits “should be chosen on the basis of f ~ st principles to correspond to the major distinctions humans make about situations in the world . ” We have found this rather general advice difficult to implement in practice , Fortunately , Boose and his colleagues [ 4 , 5 , 7 ] provided a formal methodology and software tools ( MacQuinas and Dart ) for identifying and analyzing traits . They based their approach on Kelly’s personal construct theory [ 23 ] . In MacQuinas , an “expert” first lists the possible solutions to a problem such as a medical diagnosis ( the solutions in that case would be diagnostic categories ) . These correspond to our knowledge chunks . Next , the expert specifies a collection of traits as follows : MacQuinas presents the solutions three at a time and asks the expert to identify what feature best distinguishes any one solution from the others . Kelly suggested these triads for efficiently identifying minimal sets of traits . Once the expert has identified the traits , he / she rates each solution against each trait to create the Epertory grid . 2 . 2 . 2 Grid Analysis Tools MacQuinas contains a wealth of tools for analyzing repertory grids , including trait implication graphs , trait and knowledge chunk cluster analyses , principal components analysis , hierarchical organization of traits and knowledge chunks , “laddering tools” for expanding and contracting traits , and tools for combining the trait - spaces of multiple experts . Boose et al . [ 7 ] describe many of these techniques for analyzing repertory grids . We have found cluster analysis particularly useful for identifying poorly discriminated chunks and redundant traits . We also use multidimensional sealing ( MIX ) to provide an approximate three - dimensional projection of the knowledge chunks . We then use brushing and spinning tools to visualize the chunks in 3 - D . In Figure 1 we show a two - dimensional projection of 20 of the seetions in the cancer pain guideline . This shows the relative location of the 20 ECHT ’94 Proceedings 119 September 1994 knowledge chunks in a two - dimensional projection of context space . n 6 . 1 94 n 6 . 2 = 4 . 2 . 2 “7 , 3 . 3 n 4 . 2 . 1 gg : ; s . . n W4 . 2 5 . 4 = 1 . 3 n 3 . 3 . 4 . 5 ! n 2 . . 4 n 1 . 5 g 1 . 1 n l q 2 . 3 . 1 Pigure 1 : MDS 2 - Dimensional view of context space . This shows 18 sections from the AHCPR Cancer Pain Guideline . We note the similarity with the spatialized text plots of Marshall and Shipman [ 30 ] . 2 . 3 Interface Design and the Travel Metaphor Talaria’s interface design derives principally from the concept of a Learning Support Environment ( LSE ) developed and implemented by Hammond and co - workers [ 18 , 19 ] . A similar approach characterizes the Hyperties system of Morariu and Schneiderman [ 31 ] and Marchionini and Schnei & rman [ 29 ] . An LSE provides the learner with a set of tools to support exploration of , or instruction in , some field of knowledge . The tools include both aids for accessing information and for learning [ 28 ] . We use a travel metaphor to structure the navigation tools and provide the user with art intuitive context mechanism . Each screen display , be it text , animation sequence , image or movie , represents a place to visit . The various access facilities represent the ways and means of traveling around . Two explicit forms of navigation through the materials reflect the extremes of learner - controlled and system - controlled access . These are go - it - alone travel and guided tours [ 39 ] . As Halasz [ 17 ] indicated , navigational tools alone are not sufficient . The metaphor encompasses a range of access facilities along with the navigation tools : maps give users “bird’s eye” views of the knowledge available and they can zoom in on any chosen chunk . An index provides a mechanism for keyword - based access . Ultimately both the maps and the index in Talaria could adapt to individual users’ needs . Ichimura and Matsushita [ 21 ] suggest that maps may be problematic : it is hard to generate maps that communicate effectively the contents of the nodes . A combination of fisheye views ( see , for example , [ 33 ] ) and pop - up chunk summaries may alleviate this problem . We are currently implementing these in Talaria . ECHT ’94 Proceedings 3 IMPLEMENTING THE SCHEME FOR THE CANCER PAIN GUIDELINE Using a single physician expert ( JG ) , we have constructed a repertory hypergrid for the complete AHCPR guideline with 29 traits and 136 knowledge chunks2 . The sections and subsections of the guideline define the knowledge chunks . 3 . 1 Traits Triadic elicitation of traits proceeded as follows : First , we selected 20 sections from the guideline . We chose these to be representative of the material in the guideline . Next , we randomly selected sets of three from this set of 20 sections . For each triad , a single expert ( again JG ) identified a trait which “best distinguished one of these from the other two . ” He endeavored to choose traits relevant for navigation . We continued in this fashion until five consecutive triads failed to elicit a new trait . At this point we had 29 distinct traits . We show these in Table 3 . surgical Psychololgic Education Non - l % wmacologic Management Procedural Pain Analgesics Adverse Outcome Pain Assessment Barriers to Pain Management Bone Central Nervous System Skin Treatment Modalities Monitoring Patients Drug Respiratory Sedative Ethics Diagnosis sleep Opioid Analgesic Non - Opioid Analgesic Family Regulations Demographics Anesthesia Indications Mechanisms of Pain Mechanisms of Pain Reliej Table 3 : The 29 traits used for the AHCPR Cancer Pain Guideline We note that some traits are specializations of others . For example , “Opioid Analgesic” is a special case of “Analgesics” . Currently we treat all traits on an equal footing . We are investigating alternative approaches . 3 . 2 Rating Procedure and Grid Analysis The rating of the 136 chunks against the 29 traits required approximately 80 man - hours . To ensure consistency and accuracy , it is essential to have at least two people participating - the expert and a knowledge engineer . Careful rating proved worthwhile : were - scored a randomly selected 20 sections more than one month after the initial rating and never differed by more than one on the six - point scale . The key to such consistency is a clearly defined rating scale 2JG is a senior physician with 16 years clinical experience , half of which has focused on cancer pain management . 120 September 1994 ( Table 2 ) and unambiguous trait descriptions . The complete grid is available from the fiist author . Grid analysis addresses two question ~ do we need all the traits we have ? Do we have all the traits we need ? We can address the former question with an analysis of the grid as discussed in Section 2 . 2 . 2 above and Section 3 . 3 . 3 below . However , the latter question requires dynamic attalysix do the links defined by the grid correspond to the links users make when using the guideline to address cancer pain management tasks ? We now describe such an analysis . 3 . 3 Evaluation Methodology The key output of the repertory hypergrid is a matrix of the pairwise distances between all the knowledge chunks . The linkplots of Bernstein et al . [ 3 ] provide an insightful method for viewing the links implied by this matrix for different neighborhood sizes ; see Figure 2 . D e s t i n a t i o n D e s t i n a t i o n 120 90 60 30 I 120 90 60 30 I Source I I I 1 I a 1 a 1 - O 30 60 90 120 Source Figure 2 Linkplots for the 136 chunks in Talaria . Each dot represents a link . The plot above uses a neighborhood size of 16 chunks while the plot below uses 30 chunks . The chunks are numbered in the order in which they appear in the cancer pain guideline . The rectangular structures in the plots reveal the ECHT ’94 Proceedings 121 chapter structure of the book . Note the linking scheme makes many tinks between chunks in different chapters in the guideline . In earlier pilot work , we asked several potential users of Talaria to assess a sample of such pairwise distances and then we compared those distances with those suggested by the repertory hypergrid . The correspondence was close although the task seemed contrived Ultimately we intend to compare competing repertory hypergrids with various distance metrics and trait and node weighting schemes on the basis of user performance in locating information in the hypermedia td . Nielsen [ 32 ] described several hypermedia usability tests . Initially however , rather than confound the linkage analysis with software - specific issues such as interface design , we conducted a protocol analysis ( see , for example , [ 6 ] , and the references therein ) using the guideline booklet itself . We selected four cancer pain management tasks from the case studies prepared by the Wisconsin State Cancer Pain Initiative . lltese case studies are prototypical of cancer pain management problemx instructional workshops throughout the country use them . We selected six subjects to participate in the analysis : a senior pain service physician ( A ) , a primary care internist ( B ) , a senior pain service nurse ( C ) , a pain service resident physician ( D ) , a family practitioner ( E ) , and a pediatric nurse practitioner ( F ) . We instructed the subjects to use the guideline booklet to address the four tasks and to “describe as fully as possible your thoughts as you browse the guidelines for the information you seek to address each task . ” We recorded the subjects’ use of the book throughout and subsequently used the video recording for clarification . The sessions ranged from 45 to 90 minutes . When a subject successively visited two “useful” sections while addressing a single task , we deemed that to be a link . We deemed a section to be useful , if the subject found information there pertinent to the task . The subjects visited 24 distinct chunks and made a total of 30 links . In the future we intend to add more open - ended tasks to explore other chunks in the book . 3 . 3 . 1 Evaluation of Linking Scheme For each of the links made by the subjects , we calculated the Euclidean distance from the source of the link to all the chunks in the document ( we discuss other distance metrics below ) . We then calculated the rank order of the destination of the link . For example , a subject made a link from Section 7 . 4 ( Substance Abusers ) to Section 1 . 5 . 1 ( Legal Regulation of Opioids ) . We rank otdered the distances from Section 7 . 4 to all the other chunks and found that Section 1 . 5 . 1 was the fifth nearest . Thus we would assign the link from 7 . 4 to 1 . 5 . 1 a rank order of five . Clearly we would like the destination of each link to be in the neighborhood of its source . Equrdly , we seek to September 1994 Neighborhood size of 20 captures 93 % of the links 100 80 60 40 20 0 o 10 20 30 Neighborhood Size Figure 3 : Plot of the percentage of the links made by the users in the protocol analysis against neighborhood size . Ideally , small neighborhoods would capture most or all of the links made by the subjects . A neighborhood of size n includes the n nearest chunks . minimize cognitive overload , and therefore want the The figure shows that Talaria requires a neighborhood size neighborhoods to be small [ 11 ] . Taken together , we require of 30 to capture all the links made by the subjects in the the rank order of the links made by the subjects to be as protocol analysis . A neighborhood size of 16 captures 24 of smrdl as possible . We show a plot of the rank orders of the the 30 links . Thus we have shown that for a range of tasks 30 links in Figure 3 . and users , the repertory hypergrid , with a manageable neighborhood size , captures the links made by the subjects . 125 - 1oo - - 75 “ - 50 - “ 25 - “ 0 + i o 00 Ii Euclidean City Rsquare 1 / > 1 bin < 6 / 6 bin Minimum Weighted Figure 4 : Boxplots of the rank orders of the implicit links formed from the repertory grid analysis using seven different distance metrics . The boxplots show the minimum , the 25th percentile , the media the 75th percentile , and the maximum excluding outliers . ECHT ’94 Proceedings 122 September 1994 3 . 3 . 2 Distance Metric Evaluation While Euclidean distance represents what is , perhaps , the most natural distance metric , we carried out a detailed investigation of six different metrics in addition to Euclidean distance . We show the results in Figme . 4 . When comparing two chunks’ trait vectors , we define the distance metrics as follows “city” block distance is the sum of the absolute pairwise differences ; “Rsquare” is the Pearson correlation co - efficient squard , “1 / > 1 bin” is the sum of the pairwise differences having dichotomized the six point scale into “l” and “bigger than l“ ; “ < 6 / 6 bin” is the same thing but dichotomizing into “less than 6“ and “6” ; “Minimum” is sum of the pairwise minim ~ “Weighted” is the sum of six minus the absolute pairwise differences weighted by the pairwise minima . From Figure 4 , we see that Euclidean distance , city block distance , and RSquare provide the best overall performance . Rsquare has the lowest median , but Euclidean has smaller overall variation and upper percentiles . 3 . 3 . 3 Trait Deletion Deleting five of the traits : Adverse outcome , Pain assessment , Central nervous system , Skin , and Demographics improves performance : using the Euclidean distance metric , a neighborhood size of 18 now captures all 30 of the links made by the subjeets and a neighborhood size of 14 captures 27 of the links . However , before removing these traits permanently , we intend to assess their utility in addressing a broader range of tasks . 4 DISCUSSION We have proposed an implicit linking scheme and used it to develop a hypermedia implementation of the AHCPR cancer pain guideline . Our protocol analysis suggests that the scheme captures efficiently the links made by users of the guideline . Clinical practice guidelines must be curren ~ hypermedia has much to offer hem . We currently are exploring many extensions to the basic scheme l The scheme does not preclude having a small number of additional author - or user - specified explicit links . 9 The inter - chunk distance provides a mechanism for implementing a scaled rather than binary link . Salton et al . [ 35 ] make a similar proposal , but in the context of text retrieval . c Chang’s HieNet by default creates a link between the smallest pair of nodes in a neighborhood [ 10 ] . This notion of parsimony may be useful in the guideline context . l Currently the links in Trdaria are untyped and connect entire chunk we may wish to explore generalizing this in the future . We adopted a six point rating wale in Talaria . Kibby and Mayes [ 24 ] suggest a binary scheme and it is easy for authors to specify . They base their approach on the human memory models of Hintzman [ 20 ] , who uses a three - point scale . Waltz and Pollaek [ 41 ] , and later Gallant [ 14 ] , present an essentially identieal approach , but in the context of natural language recognition . They adopted 4 - point and 5 - point scales respectively . Boose et al . [ 7 ] , in yet another context , suggested different scales for different traits , and Anderson [ 1 ] uses a 7 - point scale . Initially we used a binary rating scale but our analysis suggests that a finer rating wale provides superior performance ( see Figme 4 ) . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors are gmteful to Jeff Bradshaw , Peter Dunbar , and Robert Jacobsen for helpful contributions . This researeh is funded in part by a NIH SBIR grant to Statistical Sciences Inc . , NCI grant CA 38552 , and the Danish Research Academy . REFERENCES [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 3 [ 61 [ m Anderson , N . “Medical center : a modular hypermedia approach to program design” , In : Sociomedia : Multimedia , Hypermedia , and the Social Construction of Knowledge , E , Barrett ( Ed . ) , MIT Press , Cambridge , pp . 369 - 389 , 1992 . Balasubramanian , V . Hypermedia Issues and Applications , A State - of - the - Art Review , Independent Research Report as part of Ph . D . Program , Graduate School of Management , Rutgers University , December 1993 . Bernstein , M . , Bolter , J . D . , Joyce , M . , and Mylonas , E . “Arehiteetures for volatile hypertext” , Hypertext 91 : Proceedings of the Third ACM Conference on Hypertext , ACM Press , pp . 243 - 260 , 1991 Boose , J . H . “A knowledge acquisition program for expert systems based on personal construct psychology” , International Journal of Man - Machine Studies 23 , pp . 495 - 525 , 1985 . Boose , J . H . Expertise Tran # er for Expert System Design . Elsevier , New York , 1986 . Boose , J . H . “Knowledge acquisition tools , methods , and mediating representations” H . Motoda , R . Mizoguchi , J . Boose , B . Gaines ( Eds . ) , Knowledge Acquisition for Knowledge - Based Systems , 10S Press , Ohmsha , Ltd . , Tokyo , 1990 . Boose , J . H . , Shema , D . B . , and Bradshaw , J . M . “Recent progress in AQUINAS : a knowledge ECHT ’94 Proceedings 123 September 1994 acquisition workbench” , Knowledge Acquisition , 1 , pp . 185 - 214 , 1989 . Proceedings : Human Factors in Computer Systems , E . Soloway , D . Frye , and E . B . Sheppard ( Eds ) , ACM Press , pp . 269 - 273 , 1988 . [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Bonica , J . J . “Cancer pain” , The Management of Pain . Lea and Febiger , Malvem , PA , second edition , 1990 . [ 20 ] Hintzman , D . L . “Schema Abstraction in a multiple - trace memory model” , Psych Rev , 93 , 4 , pp . 411 - 428 , 1986 . Canter , D . , Rivers , R . , and Storrs , G . “Characterizing user navigation through complex data structures” , Behaviors and Information Technology , 4 , pp . 93 - 102 , 1985 . [ 21 ] Ichimura , S . and Matsushita , Y . “Another dimension to hypermedia access” , Hypertext ’93 : Proceedings of the Fifth ACM Conference on Hypertext , Seattle , pp . 63 - 72 , 1993 . [ 10 ] Chang , D . T . “HieNec A user - centered approach for automatic link generation” , Hypertext 93 : Proceedings of the Fifth ACM Conference on Hypertext , Seattle , pp . 145 - 158 , 1993 . [ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] Jacox , A . , Carr , D . B . , Payne , R . , et al . Management of Cancer Pain . Clinical Practice Guideline No . 9 . AHCPR Publication No . 94 - 0592 . Rockville , MD . Agency for Health Care Policy and Research , U . S . Department of Health and Human Services , Public Health Service , March 1994 . [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Conklin , J . “Hypertext : A survey and an introduction” , IEEE Computer , 20 , pp . 17 - 41 , 1987 . Cook , P . “An encyclopedia publisher’s perspective , Interactive Multimedia” , Apple Computer , Inc . , Microsoft Press , 1988 . Kelly , G . A . The Psychology of Personal Constructs . New York Norton , 1955 . Kibby , M . R . and Mayes , J . T . “Towards intelligent hypertext” , Hypertext : theory into practice , R . McAleae ( Ed . ) , Ablex , New Jersey , pp . 164 - 172 , 1989 . Ford , L . , Hunter , C . , Diehr , P . , Frelick , R . , and Yates , J . “Effects of patient management guidelines on physician practice guidelines : the Community Hospital Oncology Program experience” , Journal of Ciim”cal Pharmacology , 5 , pp . 504 - 511 , 1987 . [ 251 [ 26 ] Levy , M . H . “Pain management in advanced cancer” , Sem”n Oncol . , 12 , pp . 394 - 410 , 1985 . [ 14 ] Gallant , S . 1 . “A practical approach for representing context and for performing word sense disambiguation using neural networks” , Neural Computation , 3 , pp . 293 - 309 , 1991 . Lomas , J . , Anderson , G . , Dominick - Pierre , K . , Vayda , E . , Enkin , M . , and Hannah , W . “Do practice guidelines guide practice : The effect of a consensus statement on the practice of physicians” , New England Journal of Medicine , 321 , pp . 1306 - 1311 , 1989 . [ 15 ] [ 16 ] Gardner , E . “Putting guidelines into practice” , Mo & rn Healthcare , pp . 24 - 36 , 1992 . [ 2q Lucarella , D . , Parisotto , S . , and Zanzi , A . “MORE : Multimedia object retrieval environment” , Hypertext ’93 : Proceedings of the Fifth ACM Conference on Hypertext , Seattle , pp . 39 - 50 , 1993 . Grilli , R . , Alexanian , A . , Apolone , G . , Marsoin , S . , Nicolucci , A . , Torri , V . , Compagnucci , M . , and DiMambro , E . et al . “The impact of cancer treatment guidelines on actual practice in Italian general hospitals : The case of ovarian cancer” , Annals of Oncology , 1 , pp . 112 - 118 , 1991 . [ 281 Madigan , D . and Chapman , C . R . “Multimedia tools for cancer pain education” , Proceedings of the First ACM Workshop on Multimedia in Medical Education , H . Ng , J . Ong , and R . Ra & ( & is . ) , In press . [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Halasz , F . “Reflections on NoteCards : Seven issues for the next generation of hypermedia systems” , Communications of the ACM , 31 , pp . 836 - 852 , 1988 . [ 29 ] [ 30 ] Marchionini , G . and Schneidennan , B . “Finding facts and browsing knowledge in hypertext systems” , IEEE Computer , 21 , 1988 . Hammond , N . V . “Hypermedia and learning : who guides whom ? ” Computer assisted learning = lCCAL 89 , H . Maurer ( Ed . ) , Springer - Verlag , pp . 167 - 181 , 1989 . Marshall , C . C . and Shipman , F . M . “Searching for the missing link Discovering implict structure in spatial hypertext” , Hypertext ’93 : Proceedings of the Fifth ACM Conference on Hypertext , Seattle , pp . 217 - 230 , 1993 . Hammond , N . V . and Allinson , L . J . “Travels around a learning support environment rambling , orienteering or tutoring ? ” , CHZ ’88 Conference ECHT ’94 Proceedings 124 September 1994 [ 31 ] [ 32 ] p3 ] [ 341 [ 35 ] [ 361 [ 37 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] [ 41 ] Morariu , J . and Schneiderman , B . “Design and research on the interactive encyclopedia system @ IES ) ” Proceedings of the 29th Conference of the Association for the Development of Computer - based Instructional Systems , pp . 19 - 21 , 1986 . Nielsen , J . Hypertext and Hypermedia . New York Academic Press , 1990 . Noik , E . G . “Exploring large hyperdocuments : Fisheye views of nested networks” , Hypertext ’93 : Proceedings of the Fifth ACM Conference on Hypertext , Seattle , pp . 192 - 199 , 1993 . Portenoy , R . K . “Cancer pain : epidemiology and syndromes” , Cancer . 63 , pp . 2298 - 2307 , 1989 . Salton , G . , Allan , J . , and Buckley , C . “Automatic structuring and retrieval of large text files” , Communications of the ACM , 37 , pp . 97 - 108 , 1994 . Sheplock , G . J . , Thomas , P . S . , and Camporesi , E . M . “An interactive computer program for teaching regional anesthesia” , Anesthesiology Review , 20 , pp . 53 - 59 , 1993 . Tang , H . , Bardn , R . , and Clifton , C . “A new learning environment based on hypertext and its techniques” , Advanced Research on Computers in Education , R . Lewis and S . Otsuki ( Eds . ) , North - Holland , pp . 119 - 127 , 1991 . Tompa , F . W . , Blake , G . E . , and Raymond , D . R . “Hypertext by link - resolving components” , Hypertext ’93 : Proceedings of the Fifth ACM Conference on Hypertext , Seattle , pp . 118 - 130 , 1993 . Trigg , R . “Guided tours and tabletops : Tools for communicating in a hypertext environment” , ACM Transactions on Office Information Systems , 6 , pp . 398 - 414 , 1988 . Utting , K . and Yankelovich , N . “Context and orientation in hypermedia networks” , ACM Transactions on Information Systems , 7 , pp . 58 - 84 , 1989 . Waltz , D . L . and Pollack , J . B . ’’Massively parallel parsing : a strongly interactive model of natural language interpretation” , Cognitive Science , 9 , pp . 51 - 74 , 1985 . ECHT ’94 Proceedings 125 September 1994