Fostering Innovation : Effect of Experience on Exploration Thirty Ninth International Conference on Information Systems , San Francisco 2018 1 Fostering Innovation : Exploration is not Everybody’s Cup of Tea Completed Research Paper Vipul Aggarwal University of Washington Seattle , WA aggarv @ uw . edu Elina Hwang University of Washington Seattle , WA elina7 @ uw . edu Yong Tan University of Washington Seattle , WA ytan @ uw . edu Abstract Over the last two decades , many organizations have adopted open innovation to capture the creativity and knowledge of the crowd . This has not only led to creation of new revenue streams for for - profit firms but also created an avenue to channelize the innovativeness of the crowd to solve socio - economic challenges . Diverse , vibrant , and motivated participants form the backbone of such platforms . The goal of this study is to understand how their interactions can be used to inspire and stimulate creativity to produce innovative ideas . Specifically , we investigate the role of out - of - domain knowledge in spurring innovative idea generation among differently experienced innovators on open innovation platforms where such knowledge is easily accessible . We use unsupervised machine learning techniques , econometric model , along with a corroborative deep learning model to provide evidence for our conclusions . Our findings indicate that innovativeness of the generated ideas can be positively influenced by targeting the innovators based on their innovation challenge solving experience on the platform . We find that new innovators are best served with inspirations in the same knowledge domain as that of the challenge . However , it is very beneficial to serve experienced innovators with out - of - domain inspirations for a higher likelihood of successful innovation . This provides a roadmap for innovation platform administrators to increase the innovativeness of the generated ideas and fasten the idea production process as well . Keywords : open innovation platform , text mining , topic models Fostering Innovation : Effect of Experience on Exploration Thirty Ninth International Conference on Information Systems , San Francisco 2018 2 Introduction Over the last two decades , many organizations have adopted open innovation to capture the skills , knowledge , and creativity of the crowd . The underlying phenomenon , known as crowdsourcing , entails broadcasting of the organization’s problems on the preferred online community of innovators who come from different walks of life ( Howe 2006 ) . Open business models , premised on open innovation , allow the firm to reduce its R & D costs and generate new revenue streams by leveraging external knowledge and technology for product development ( Chesbrough 2015 ) . Slew of established firms have sought to accrue the benefits of open innovation . Dell established the IdeaStorm platform in 2007 , IBM initiated Idea Jam in 2001 , and Proctor and Gamble ( P & G ) had their own Connect & Develop program to tap into external knowledge . P & G had windfall revenues of over $ 200 M with their SpinBrush ( electric toothbrush ) product which was an outcome of Connect & Develop . Not only the big firms , but also myriad of start - ups have become very active in catering to various innovative needs of the modern society such as Innocentive ( scientific problems ) , OpenIDEO ( socio - economic challenges ) , Zooppa ( advertisement campaigns ) , Kaggle ( data analytics ) , TopCoder ( software development ) , etc . The success of open innovation models has led to huge investments by industrial alliances such as Renault - Nissan - Mitsubishi automotive alliance and KDDI Open Innovation Fund to the tune $ 1 . 1 billion to support open innovation initiatives . Indeed , Berchicci ( 2012 ) finds empirical support for investing in open innovation to spur product development and revenues in R & D intensive Italian manufacturing firms . The success of the crowdsourcing effort is mainly contingent upon the diversity and knowledge of the crowd among other factors . Depending on the nature of the problems to be solved , firms can select from either competition markets or collaborative communities , which use different incentive mechanisms to spur individual innovators ( Boudreau and Lakhani 2009 , Von Hippel 2007 , Amabile 1996 ) . Prior research has shown that high drop - out rate in such platforms is a resultant of innovators with unsuccessful ideas leaving the platform ( Huang et al 2014 ) . The observed idea success rate of under 5 % leads to a high attrition rate , especially , among nascent innovators and can cast doubts on the sustainability of open innovation platforms . Bayus ( 2012 ) reports the negative effect of past successes among serial innovators which can be offset , to a certain extent , by a diversity - seeking commenting behavior . However , beginners , who form a major chunk of participants , aren’t the focus of his study . The real challenge for us is to find ways to arrest their drop - out by increasing their innovativeness and consequently , their engagement with the platform . The right stimulus can spark the innovative engines in any corner of the Earth , among any kinds of participants . Therefore , it is essential that these platform finds ways to inspire these beginners to transform into successful innovators and become a regular participant in their ongoing challenges . The goal of this study is to understand how participant s’ interactions with the user - generated content on the platform can be used to inspire and stimulate creativity to produce innovative ideas . Innovation is nothing but the creative application of knowledge to solve challenging problems ( Schumpeter 1939 ) . Psychologists have long debated the complexities of innovation . It is an accepted belief among a section of researchers that deep expertise is a necessary condition for successful innovators . Such expertise is developed over time with dedicated practice ( Gentner et al 1983 ) . Yet , experts find it hard to break out of their thinking molds while solving problems that require innovative thinking ( Frensch and Sternberg 1989 ) . Jeppeson & Lakhani ( 2010 ) find that innovators with less experience in the focal problem’ s domain tend to be more successful at solving it as they provide a fresh perspective . So , deep knowledge is a must for innovation in the field of expertise but a detriment when the problem domain is different from the field of expertise . What if the problem domains are fuzzy and undefined as in the case of socio - economic challenges such as e - waste reduction or poverty alleviation ? Would deep knowledge help or prevent in eliciting out - of - the - box solutions ? Weisberg ( 1999 ) contends that innovation is merely possession of knowledge and any innovator with sufficient knowledge can solve the problem . Would this imply that innovators must be strategically directed to sources of inspirations to acquire that relevant knowledge ? We believe that a hybrid approach where knowledge acquisition is strategically complemented with knowledge application at different stages of an innovator’s problem - solving experience would yield a better outcome . Scientists often borrow solutions from one domain to solve problems in another domain to achieve technological breakthroughs ( Gentner et al 1997 , Gentner et al 1983 ) . Extant innovation literature puts emphasis on such processes involving recombination of different kinds of knowledge as the cornerstone Fostering Innovation : Effect of Experience on Exploration Thirty Ninth International Conference on Information Systems , San Francisco 2018 3 principle of innovation ( Ward 1995 , Weisberg 1999 , Finke et al 1992 ) . Indeed , the history of scientific accomplishments is littered with scientists drawing analogies from one field to solve problems in another . These analogies can be classified based on the semantic distance between the analogy and the problem to be solved . Distant analogies are sourced from knowledge domains that are different from that of the problem whereas near analogies belong to the same knowledge domain ( Dahl and Moreau , 2002 ) . For example , Johannes Kepler , famed 17th century German scientist best known for his three planetary laws of motion , was a big proponent of learning through analogies and credits them for his success in understanding planetary motions . To discern the differing motion of planets in the helio - centric model , Kepler used the light analogy which goes as follows : the strength of the light , in a defined area , weakens with distance from the source , therefore , the pull of the sun ( precursor to gravitational theory of Sir Isaac Newton ) on planets would act differently at different distances . This is an example of distant analogy . Similarly , an analogy between sound waves ( longitudinal waves ) & water waves ( transverse waves ) is another example of a distant analogy . Dunbar ( 1995 ) found that modern scientists also make extensive use of analogies to further advancements in their fields . The semantic distance between the analogy and the problem is posited to affect the likelihood of success of the generated innovation outcomes ( Gentner 1997 , Ward 1998 ) . Studies found that distant analogies have a constructive influence on the innovation outcome ( Dahl and Moreau 2002 , Christensen and Schunn 2007 , Hwang et al 2015 ) . They have argued that usage of distant analogies results in activation of diverse knowledge spaces which leads to novelty of ideas . However , the claims are not without contest . Dunbar ( 1997 ) found that though molecular biology scientists make liberal use of analogies to achieve scientific breakthroughs , but distant analogies were more suited for didacticism rather than semantic change or innovation . In the study of effect of semantic distance on innovation in U . S . Patents , Fu et al ( 2013 ) found that distant analogies tend do to more harm than good . Further , Enkle and Gassmann ( 2010 ) found no evidence of the positive effect of distant analogies after examining 25 cases of cross - industry innovation . These mixed results raise pertinent questions about the role of distant analogies in innovation . Our research aims to reconcile the differing results by investigating whether these inconclusive results are a manifestation of user - level characteristics . We purport that mixed findings on the effects of distant analogy in successful innovation can be explained by the innovation problem - solving experience of the participants of open innovation platforms . We investigate the role of out - of - domain knowledge i . e . distant analogies in spurring innovative idea generation among differently experienced innovators on open innovation platforms where such knowledge is easily accessible . We run our analysis over 3585 ideas submitted by 1657 unique innovators for diverse socio - economic issues . These innovators draw their inspirations from over 100 , 000 analogies . Because we are interested in the semantic distance between the problem text and the analogy text , we refer to the rich text mining literature in the machine learning discipline . We use unsupervised machine learning techniques for feature engineering , robust econometric models for causal analysis , and a corroborative deep learning model to provide evidence for our conclusions . Our findings indicate that innovativeness of the generated ideas can be positively influenced by targeting the innovators based on their innovation challenge - solving experience on the platform . We find that new innovators are best served with inspirations in the same knowledge domain as that of the challenge i . e . distant analogies are detrimental to the innovation outcome in the beginning of the innovator’s career on the platform . However , it is very beneficial to serve experienced innovators with out - of - domain inspirations for a higher likelihood of successful innovation . This provides a roadmap for innovation platform administrators to increase the innovativeness of the generated ideas , fasten the idea production process , and ultimately , arrest the drop - out rate of the open innovation platform beginners by providing them with relevant inspirations to innovate successfully . In next section , we discuss the extant literature on open innovation and reasoning through analogies . In the third section , we discuss the different tools and the construct variables created using those tools along with our empirical and machine learning models . In fourth section we present our results , and finally , conclude with practical recommendations in the fifth and the last section . Fostering Innovation : Effect of Experience on Exploration Thirty Ninth International Conference on Information Systems , San Francisco 2018 4 Theoretical Development Open Innovation In 1989 , infamous Exxon Valdez Oil spill occurred in Prince William Sound , Alaska , spilling close to 11 million US gallons of oil , contaminating 28 , 000 km2 of oceans . Ocean Spill Recovery Institute ( OSRI ) , an industry and government funded think - tank , was faced with a critical problem of recovering oil that had frozen to a viscous mass in oil recovery barges . After OSRI’s in - house experts failed to find a solution , OSRI posted the challenge on Innocentive . com , an open innovation platform . The winning solution came from a nanotechnology professional who could connect the OSRI’s problem to the analogous problem found in cement industry ( how to keep cement in liquid form during mass cement pours ) and proposed the cement industry’s solution ( a vibrating tool ) to solve OSRI’s problem ( Lakhani 2009 ) . The above example highlights the power of open innovation platforms where knowledge from different sources and from different domains finds its way into creative and feasible solutions to overcome challenges in new and mostly , unrelated domains . Henry Chesbrough has been a major proponent of open innovation and business models built upon it ( Chesbrough 2003 , Chesbrough 2006 ) . Success of open business models can be attributed to increased workforce mobility where employees are the carriers of ideas . This alone is not sufficient though ; internal R & D processes and some level of IP protection laws are required to make it a successful business model . Open innovation is of two types : outside - in and inside - out . Inside - out open innovation is concerned with taking the unused and underutilized ideas of a firm and selling / licensing them to other firms and organizations ( Chesbrough 2015 ) . This kind of open innovation is made conspicuous by the rising trade in intellectual property and patents . Outside - in variant is more concerned with letting in outside ideas and inputs into a firm’s innovation pipeline . Proctor & Gamble’s Connect and Develop is an example of outside - in innovation where the stated goal is to develop 50 % of the products using knowledge and ideas from outside the firm . In the outside - in variant , a key decision while creating the open innovation framework is how to channelize the innovativeness of the crowd or the outside participants . External innovators can be organized either as collaborative communities or as competitive markets ( Boudreau & Lakhani 2009 ) . Markets are successful when the problem solving requires broad experimentation whereas communities are more successful for challenges spanning knowledge domains and involving cumulative knowledge . These communities are built upon a culture of knowledge sharing and reciprocity whereas market participants tend to be protective and secretive of their novel ideas as the profit motive gains an upper hand over the purely intrinsic factors such as enjoyment derived from the innovation task itself ( Amabile 1996 ) . Nested Models allow the platform creators to have the competitive spirit of the markets and the knowledge sharing nature of the communities in a single setup . Our research focuses on understanding and improving platform designs for nested models . Innovation & Analogical Reasoning Recombinant innovation is the fundamental premise for outside - in type open innovation . The inflow of new and diverse ideas into a firm can increase the set of new product ideas , thereby impacting future revenues . Many researchers have proposed that novel ideas are built upon existing knowledge by combining them in new ways ( Fleming 2001 ; Schumpeter 1934 ) . Finke et al ( 1992 ) posited an iterative process of innovative idea generation where existing knowledge is recalled and combined with other inputs to create value . The process is repeated until the created value best fits the goals of the innovation process . The success of this process hinges on access to diverse knowledge , ability to recall relevant knowledge , and manner of recombination of knowledge . Ward ( 1995 ) notes that new ideas are built upon existing ideas and the success of the new idea is dependent upon the manner of recall of existing knowledge . Dunbar ( 1995 ) credits semantic reasoning as one of the major drivers of innovative process among scientists . It is the process of application of knowledge acquired in one field to solve problems of a different field . It operates by activating diverse knowledge domains ( with some semantic relation with the target problem ) which contributes to novelty of ideas as more sources of raw input knowledge bases lead to a higher likelihood of finding a successful outcome . The same phenomenon is observed in social networks through structural holes . It has been found that individuals occupying positions with access to Fostering Innovation : Effect of Experience on Exploration Thirty Ninth International Conference on Information Systems , San Francisco 2018 5 diverse information are more likely to create innovative ideas than individuals who do not occupy structural hole positions ( Burt 1992 , 2004 ) . In an innovation experiment , Dahl & Moreau ( 2002 ) found that participants who were provided with multiple analogies were more likely to create original ideas than participants who were given a single analogy . This exposure to diverse information also aids in breaking the curse of cognitive fixation : a tendency to focus deeply on the existing knowledge resulting in inability to think outside the box . In cognitive psychology , such exposure to diverse information helps individuals to analyze problems from different perspectives and create novel solutions ( Dugosh et al 2000 ) . Analogies Analogies can be subdivided into local , regional , and distant categories based on their semantic distance from the target problem - local and regional analogies are drawn from the same or very similar domains as the target problem and distant analogies are drawn from very different domains . Dunbar ( 1995 ) found local analogies play a very significant role in scientific development whereas distant analogies are used to highlight salient features of the problems under discussion . The very famous Ford assembly line was inspired from a meat packing company in Chicago , where animal carcasses were being cut and disassembled as the animals were moved past the workers on an overhead conveyor belt . This is , yet , another example of distant analogy kickstarting an industrial revolution . Open Innovation is littered with such examples of explicit or implicit distant analogies . The oil spill example from the Innocentive example highlights the distant analogy - based solution . Another example where distant analogy was used to understand a different domain phenomenon : understanding the nature and behavior of long loops in kidney tubules required the perspective of an engineer ( De Bono , 1968 ) . The engineer was able to connect the anatomical structure to that of counter - current multiplier , a well - known engineering device for increasing the concentration of liquids , and then reason from that analogy regarding the purpose and nature of loops in kidneys . Open innovation platforms , communities or markets also aid in easier access to different kinds of knowledge . Eckert & Stacey ( 1998 ) find that designers prefer to be directly exposed to the sources of inspirations for their innovation challenges . In our open innovation nested model setting , innovators engage with other innovators through commenting on their creations . Each comment represents the time and effort spent by the commenter in understanding and appreciating the corresponding innovator’s thoughts . The ideas that the commenter engages with serve as the new sources of diverse information and knowledge . Thus , we intend to use the commenting behavior of the platform users ( the innovators ) as the source of analogies or inspirations to construct the analogy network for an innovator . Role of Innovation Challenges’ exposure on Innovation Many researchers have exalted the role of conceptually far analogies or distant analogies . However , the evidence in support of this argument is mixed . Distant analogies do not impact conceptual change among scientists significantly ( Dunbar 1997 ) . Fu et al ( 2013 ) found that semantic distance can play a negative role in the ideation of innovation solutions . However , originality of the product design has been found to be positively correlated with the proportion of distant analogies used ( Dahl and Moreau 2002 ) . Between - domain or far analogies play a very significant role in design cognition and creativity is hampered when designers are anchored to within - domain exemplars ( Christensen and Schunn 2007 ) . Enkel and Gassmann ( 2010 ) found no evidence of any correlation between semantic distance and innovation outcomes in cross - industry innovation . Hwang et al ( 2015 ) find the likelihood of idea acceptance was found to be positively related to increasing distance between the solver’s field of technical expertise and the focal field of the problem . Thus , there is a need to bring a reconciliation amidst the conflicting results and findings . To understand these conflicting results , it is imperative to visit the mechanism of analogical reasoning . According to Gentner et al ( 1992 ) , it is a multi - step process involving identification of the similarities between the innovation challenge and the analogy , followed by extending the analogy to fit the problem , and an iterative sub - process of tinkering with the target problem and the analogy until a new coherent explanation is formed . The mixed results can represent the natural response of this mechanism in varying treatment conditions of their corresponding studies ( some studies , such as , by Yu et al ( 2014 ) presented the innovators with the analogies and examples to explore an innovative solution , group think biases Fostering Innovation : Effect of Experience on Exploration Thirty Ninth International Conference on Information Systems , San Francisco 2018 6 hindering adoption of new ideas & analogies leading to low innovation output ( Reitzig & Sorenson 2013 ) ) . It can also be argued that certain conditions , not tested in above studies , proved to be advantageous for innovators in solving the innovation challenge . In our setting , the innovator is given an innovation problem and left to figure out the analogies that will enable him to successfully develop an innovative solution . Therefore , this setting provides us with an end - to - end complete innovation process to identify and understand the characteristics that influence an innovation’s outcome w . r . t . analogical reasoning . The mechanism of analogical reasoning does not differentiate between different type of innovators . It is safe to assume that different individuals with varying degree of knowledge acquisition and knowledge creation would incorporate the analogical reasoning mechanism differently . It has been found that people with deep knowledge of a certain field are better at abstracting the underlying structure of problems in the corresponding field ( Gentner 1983 ) . In his essay on creativity and knowledge , Weisberg ( 1999 ) discusses the persistent tension between increase in domain knowledge and the ability to innovate . S / he cites the examples of famous artists such as The Beatles and Mozart who immersed themselves in practice ( improving knowledge and honing existing skills ) before their true creativity could blossom . However , many experiments have shown that an expertise in one field hampers the ability to innovate in analogous but different fields ( e . g . Frensch & Sternberg 1989 ) . So , is it the possession of knowledge that decides whether an innovator is successful in utilizing distant analogies ? In the context of open innovation , there is not just one relevant knowledge domain but many different kinds of domains . There is also the ability to successfully apply that knowledge to a new problem at hand . We believe that knowledge bases are equally important as is their application . Since , in the context of open innovation , every challenge has a very different focus and knowledge requirements , it is untenable to generalize that with dedicated practice ( regular contributions to new challenges on the platform ) , the innovator is not only gaining knowledge , but also learning the smart craft of carefully using analogies to become a better problem - solver or an innovator . Therefore , we find it important to question the role of innovator participation in the ability of the innovator to utilize distant analogies in an open innovation platform . Empirical Methodology Research Setting and Data Our empirical context is OpenIDEO . OpenIDEO is an online collaborative platform hosted by the design firm IDEO , which invites crowds to solve socio - economic challenges such as food wastage , sanitation issues in India , or e - waste recycling . Individuals from different backgrounds and demographics , collaborate to find innovative and feasible solutions to these challenges . Challenges are sponsored by organizations such as the United States Agency for International Development , Amplify Program , American Association of Retired Persons , Coca - Cola Enterprises , etc . OpenIDEO team , in conjunction with the sponsors , creates a challenge brief that describes the problem statement , and sets the expectations for the type of ideas needed . A challenge usually lasts for 3 months and follows a similar life cycle as depicted by Figure 1 . Majority of challenges begin with a research phase . During the research phase , platform users post potential reference ideas and news articles that could help create a cogent solution to the challenge statement . The research phase is followed by the ideation phase where innovators create detailed solutions that target some aspect of the problem and platform users vote upon these ideas . In the selection and improvement phase , some ideas are short listed for further improvement based upon the cumulative voting as well as the sponsors’ comments ( selection rates are between 4 % to 48 % with an average of 18 % ) . Based upon the feedback provided by the OpenIDEO team and the platform users , innovators further improve their ideas . In the expert evaluation and refinement phase , these improved ideas are further scrutinized by an expert panel which shortlists the most feasible ideas . Innovators of the shortlisted ideas are given some more time to further refine their ideas . Finally , winning ideas are chosen from these refined ideas ( 44 % of refined ideas are adjudged as winners ) . Overall , 8 % of all the submissions are selected as winners ( varies between 1 % to 20 % ) . Winning ideas are partially or fully - funded by their respective sponsoring organizations . Fostering Innovation : Effect of Experience on Exploration Thirty Ninth International Conference on Information Systems , San Francisco 2018 7 Research Phase Idea Generation Phase Selection and Improvement Phase Expert Evaluation and Refinement Phase Winner Selection Phase Figure 1 . OpenIDEO Challenge Life Cycle Our dataset consists of information on 22 , 208 postings ( 12 , 715 research postings and 9 , 493 full - fledged ideas ) written by 9 , 223 individuals spread over 39 challenges . Out of the 39 challenges , three challenges do not have a research phase by design . There are 3 , 439 users who have submitted at least 2 ideas . 104 , 450 comments are written on these postings . We have the timestamps and the text content of all the postings and their comments along with the metadata information such as number of likes , success level , etc . Because we are interested in how innovator’s inspirations influence his likelihood of success in innovation challenges , we remove ideas born of teamwork due to attribution problem , as well as ideas by authors who never commented upon any idea on the platform . This leaves us with 3585 ideas written by 1657 authors in 39 challenges . Text Manipulation Our focus is to evaluate how the creativity of ideas generated by individual innovators is influenced by their inspirations . This creativity of thought and application is often found embedded in the vocabularies used by the innovators and thus , any semantic understanding of the idea can be inferred from the textual analysis of the idea ( Kuhn TS . 1962 / 1996 ) . To understand the semantics of the ideas posted on OpenIDEO , it is important to pay attention to the clusters of words used and their contextual relationships to other ideas . This necessitates the need to develop a numerical representation of these ideas , in a manner , which is consistent as well as captures the global and local semantics involved in exposition . We follow the extensive natural language processing literature spanning manipulating naïve bag - of - word models to interpretable topic models to the state - of - the - art performance of vector models . Our preferred models of choice for semantic numerical representation of ideas is the structural topic model and the distributed - bag - of - words paragraph vectors . While the former allows us to model the latent topic discovery as a function of challenge content , the latter provides us with dense fixed - length vectors which capture the semantic similarity between ideas representing similar constructs . These models have credible performance gains over other methods such as latent Dirichlet allocation or word2vec concatenation which we elaborate in the next few paragraphs . In the bag - of words approach , each idea is represented as a count vector of words present in the global vocabulary . This naïve approach not only suffers from the extreme sparsity and the curse of dimensionality but also fails to capture any relationship between different ideas . Addition of the tf - idf scheme ( term frequency - inverse document frequency ) increases the usability of such representations in identification of discriminative terms for classification but falls short of providing any information about the semantical relationships between texts . These inadequacies led us to the unsupervised machine learning technique of Topic Models ( Blei et al 2003 ) . It allows for discovery of latent semantic structures in the text body . However , topic models’ inference has been found wanting due to the variational nature of their estimation methods . The concerns are further compounded by the fact that topic models lose any word - order information . This prompted us to run our models with paragraph vectors , which take order of the words in a text into account to deliver a fixed length semantic representation . Fostering Innovation : Effect of Experience on Exploration Thirty Ninth International Conference on Information Systems , San Francisco 2018 8 Topic Models Topic Modelling is a text - mining statistical model that allows us to discover the latent semantic topics that are assumed to have generated the observed words in the text corpus . This provides us with fixed - length dense numerical representation of variable - length text documents while preserving the essential statistical relationships embedded in those documents . Latent Dirichlet Allocation ( LDA ) is a very powerful topic modelling algorithm ( Blei et al 2003 ) . It is a generative probabilistic multi - level model where the topics and words are drawn from Dirichlet distributions ( assuming fixed number of topics and words ) for the entire collection of documents under analysis . Topic proportions are sampled from a derived multinomial distribution for every document and topic assignments and word - level probabilities are sampled at a word level . In our dataset , we have 39 different challenges focusing on a range of socio - economic problems such as improving the lives of people with disabilities , enabling access to healthcare using technology , reducing food wastage , etc . Given the very different focus of these challenges , it is safe to presume that each challenge has a different data generation process since they address different socio - economic problems . In other words , these challenges will contain ideas with structurally different words , and consequently , structurally different topic proportions . Hence , we make use of the structural topic model ( STM ) to generate topic distributions over all the ideas in the dataset where topic distributions are also dependent on the corresponding challenge ( Roberts et al 2016 ) . STM is an extension of LDA where the dirichlet prior on topical proportions is replaced by a logistic - normal linear model . Figure 2 . Graphical representation of the structural topic model where the topic proportions ,  also varies with the document level covariates , X , and the topic distribution over words ,  can vary with any user defined covariates as well . We employ standard text preprocessing techniques such as punctuation removal , number removal , stemming , and stop words removal . Selection of number of topics Topic modelling via variational methods is sensitive to initialization of hyper - parameters i . e . number of topics . In Blei et al ( 2003 ) and Blei and Lafferty ( 2007 ) , number of topics was arbitrarily chosen to be 100 to prove the capability of their methods . However , at an applied level , number of topics becomes an important consideration . As demonstrated by Chang et al ( 2009 ) , topics become more fine - grained with larger number of topics . This improves their predictive likelihood , but it does so at the cost of model interpretability . Mimno et al ( 2011 ) also found that the topic quality decreases with the number of topics . Therefore , we followed two approaches to discover the approximate “true” number of topics . First , we made use of the modified anchor words algorithm ( Lee and Mimno 2014 ) . Their algorithm reduces the high dimension word co - occurrence matrix to a low dimensional space through t - SNE transformation and then , extracts the words at the corners of the exact convex hull of this low dimensional representation as the seed words for the same number of topics . These words are referred to as anchor words : words representing specific topics that occur in a document with non - zero probability if the document is about that topic . However , this does not represent the exact number of topics and provides us with a useful place to start . Fostering Innovation : Effect of Experience on Exploration Thirty Ninth International Conference on Information Systems , San Francisco 2018 9 Second , we make use of certain topic quality metrics to run a grid search and arrive at the number which maximizes model interpretability . We run a computationally intensive search to maximize semantic coherence ( Mimno et al 2011 ) and FREX metric ( Bischof and Airoldi 2012 ) . Semantic Coherence fully utilizes the words co - occurrence matrix to quantify topic quality . It is an improvement over the Pointwise mutual information ( PMI ) metric which has a long history in language modelling . FREX provides us information about the exclusivity of words that occur in a topic in reference to their frequency . It is the weighted harmonic mean of the word’s rank in terms of exclusivity and frequency . We pick the number of topics that provide us with maximum values of semantic coherence and exclusivity as determined by FREX . We chose K = 51 based on the modified anchor words algorithm ( Lee and Mimno 2014 ) . When we compared this model with our selected model through grid search over semantic coherence and FREX , model with 51 topics was found to be the best . Therefore , we used a structural topic model with 51 topics to infer the numerical representation for the ideas submitted on OpenIDEO . Table 1 displays top words of some of the topics of the estimated topic model . Our econometric results are consistent with LDA and CTM too . Structural Topic Model Generated Topics Topic Description 1 2 3 4 5 6 Topic 1 “Combating zika virus” zika repel biolog acid disord bat Topic 2 “garbage disposal” bin recycl bottl bag trash garbag Topic 3 “reimagining end of life experience” endoflif death die hospic palliat funer Topic 4 “electronic waste handling” ewast electron ship wast reus lifecycl Table 1 . Inferred topics from the OpenIDEO corpus . A simple visual inspection highlights the exclusivity and informativeness of the topics Paragraph Vectors Bag - of - words based models suffer from a couple of issues : a ) they lose word ordering information ; b ) they ignore semantics of the words . Paragraph vector is an unsupervised machine learning algorithm that learns the fixed - length semantic representation of variable - length texts . Each vector is trained to predict words in the documents ( Goldberg and Levy 2014 ) . The training process samples words from a moving contextual window , thereby , capturing the semantics of the words in the order they are presented . We train such a model varying the contextual window size and the length of the vector to find the most suitable representation vis - à - vis predictive accuracy . The validated length of the vector and the contextual window is 300 and 7 respectively . Variable Construction In this section , we elaborate on the construction of our dependent and independent variables . Dependent Variable On the OpenIDEO platform , the quality of ideas is voted upon the platform users as well as deliberated by the panel of experts and sponsors . The power of the crowd in deciding the feasibility and the creativity of the idea reduces whereas the say of the panel of experts increases during the lifecycle of the idea in the challenge . Since each challenge has specific constraints ( due to the partially - defined nature and scale of the problems ) that are unobservable to the crowds , decisions taken solely by the panel comprising of experts and sponsors may not serve as the gold standard for innovation judgement . The existing literature mentions that deliberation by the expert panel is a gold standard for creativity judgement . However , recent research on the ability of the experts to identify innovation in the face of crowding and distant concepts has indicated that there is a higher likelihood of unintende d experts’ negligence in identification ( Piezunka and Dahlander 2015 ) . Therefore , we use the judgements derived from the crowd - voting in Fostering Innovation : Effect of Experience on Exploration Thirty Ninth International Conference on Information Systems , San Francisco 2018 10 conjunction with the expert panel’s recommendations as the indicator of whether the idea submitted by an innovator is an innovative solution or not . Independent Variables The success of semantic reasoning depends upon the ability of the individual to transfer knowledge from familiar domains to newer or vastly different ones . This transfer is dependent upon the semantic distance between the challenge and the analogy . This semantic distance can be expressed as the statistical distance between the semantically meaningful representations of ideas and challenges derived through the unsupervised machine learning techniques of topic modelling and paragraph vectors . Our measure of semantic distance is the Jensen - Shannon Distance ( JSD ) ( Equations 2 - 3 ) for topic model’s inference and the widely popular cosine distance for paragraph vectors . JSD , based upon Kullback – Leibler Divergence , gives us an accurate measure of semantic distance between the two probability distributions . Since , the topic model outputs a distribution over topics for every document , JSD allows us to capture the non - linear distance between them . We are also interested in the topic diversity of the challenges . Shannon Diversity Index ( SDI ) ( Equation 1 ) is a well - known measure from the ecology literature which provides information about the community composition by taking into account the relative abundance of different species . SDI informs us whether the challenge is focused on a very few themes or many themes as it measures the rarity and commonness of the topics in a challenge . SDI = 1 2 l og K i i i p p = −  where i p represents the proportion of the ith topic ( 1 ) JSD ( P , Q ) = 1 1 ( | | ) ( | | ) 2 2 K L P M K L Q M + ( 2 ) ( | | ) K L A B = l og K i i i i a a b  and M = 2 A B + ( 3 ) One of the major focuses of our study is to tease out the influence of regular and frequent participation in innovation challenges on the ability of innovators to effectively marshal semantic distance for higher quality of ideas . Weisberg ( 1999 ) points out how dedicated practice enables the artist or the innovator to become better at his craft . We measure this through regular participation in unique challenges . During the lifetime of the platform , the website design went through many changes where certain stages were either omitted ( for example : research phase is not present in 3 challenges ) or followed different levels of idea scrutiny . We classify all the different challenge designs as different structural groups and use it as a control . We create a metric for relative crowding to test the best time for submitting novel ideas . We use the fraction of days passed ( out of total duration of idea submission window ) prior to focal idea submission as our metric for relative crowding . We also control for the innovator’s experience in terms of the cumulative ideas submitted by the innovators , number of ideas the innovator has commented upon , and the duration of time spent on the platform until the focal idea submission . We include fixed effects for time divided up quarterly . Please refer to the appendix for detailed description of the independent variables . Though we do not observe the knowledge bases of an innovator , however , we can infer his knowledge through his contributions to the challenges . The quality of his knowledge can be further ascertained by the number of likes his ideas receive . Not only this , his breadth of knowledge can also be inferred from all the ideas s / he has engaged with through comments . Therefore , we construct a measure of the innovator’s skills using the topics derived in the topic modelling stage . The measure is the weighted ( by likes received for contributions and by number of comments for ideas s / he has commented upon ) Jaccard Index ( Equation 4 ) of the top 10 topics of ideas submitted prior to the focal submission ( A ) and the current challenge ( B ) . Intuitively , it informs us of the relevant knowledge an innovator possesses for the focal challenge conditional on the past submissions and exploration behavior on the platform . ( 4 ) Fostering Innovation : Effect of Experience on Exploration Thirty Ninth International Conference on Information Systems , San Francisco 2018 11 Endogeneity of Semantic Distance Though semantic distance has been posited to affect the innovative outcomes in all possible ways from negative effect to no effect to positive impact , however , the unobserved user ability can confound our estimates . It can affect our dependent variable as well as our main covariate of interest . Therefore , we need an exogenous source of variation , an instrument variable , to detect a causal relationship between semantic distance and the innovative outcome ( Imbens and Angrist 1994 ) . In our setting , innovator comments upon different ideas , thereby , selecting those ideas as his inspirations to come up with an innovative idea for a challenge in the future . S / he observes certain number of comments already present on those ideas before leaving his comment . Extant work on social media clearly establishes the effect of existing indications of quality such as number of likes or comments on the likelihood of user engagement . Because of this , we believe that these observed comments indirectly affect the innovative outcome in the future ( satisfying the exclusion restriction ) through their effect on selection of analogies of varying semantic distances . The first stage regression results are presented in Table 2 . Econometric Model We use a logistic regression model with random coefficients for innovators to estimate the impact of semantic distance between the target problem and the inspiration on the innovation outcome of the focal idea submission . Our model is presented in equations 5 - 7 . We index individual ideas by i , authors by j , and challenges by k . ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) Here , 1  is the coefficient of weighted average of the semantic distance between focal challenge and focal idea’s inspirations . We rescale our independent variables by following the work of Gelman ( 2008 ) to avoid incomparable comparisons of standardized variables with the untransformed binary variables . We estimate the model in R using lme4 . Results Econometric Model Results Our focus of investigation is two - fold : to find the effect of the semantic distance between the source analogies or inspirations and the target problem on the innovativeness of the submitted idea as well as to understand the role of persistent participation or practice in the open innovation challenges to make better use of semantic distance for higher quality of submitted idea . Our dependent variable is the innovative judgement as explained in the variable constructs . We present our results in Table 3 . We are interested in quantifying the effect of semantic distance between the sources of inspiration , referred to as analogies in this study , and the target problem . We find that this semantic distance has a negative effect on the likelihood of success . A two standard deviation increase in the semantic distance reduces the odd by almost 44 % . Intuitively , if our covariate of interest , semantic distance , was a binary variable for distant analogy , then a new ideator would reduce his odds of producing an innovative idea by Fostering Innovation : Effect of Experience on Exploration Thirty Ninth International Conference on Information Systems , San Francisco 2018 12 44 % if s / he chooses to use a distant analogy ( Gelman , 2008 ) . This implies that anchoring on out - of - domain concepts or distant concepts misleads these users into seeing utility when it does not really exist . First Stage Regression Results for Instrument Variable Point Estimate Standard Error t - statistic Average Credible Comments ( IV ) 2 . 120e - 02 9 . 499e - 04 22 . 324 Control Variables ( Exogenous Variables ) Adjusted R - squared 0 . 6443 F - statistic 5 . 017 Table 2 . First stage regression results for instrument variable analysis . The endogenous variable , weighted semantic distance , was regressed on the instrument variable , average credible comments and the exogenous variables as controls . We find that our IV is statistically significant with a t - value of 22 . 016 , thereby , validating the usage of our IV . Let us illustrate this with a real example from our dataset . A new user Alice ( name changed to protect identity ) participated in a climate change challenge with a focus on recycling initiatives at home . Alice submitted two ideas for this competition . The first idea , borrowed from Coca - Cola’s volunteering app with social media features to find and share good deeds , was about creating “No Waste Wednesdays” facebook page . This would help in spreading the cause and allow people to share best practices in recycling at home . This submission , as is clear , stems from a near analogy and was selected as a winner . She also submitted another idea where organizations would create physical quests in areas susceptible to climate change and individuals would pledge their behavior in favor of recycling for a few days that would lead to behavioral change as these individuals are invested in the pledge . This idea was borrowed from another idea about women empowerment in Kenya where school going girls were handed Ruby Cups , a kind of long - lasting reusable menstrual cup , for a small symbolic price to engender ownership of the cause . There is a distant connection of creating ownership to achieve goals between the two ideas . However , Alice’s second idea did not make it past the first stage . Our second focus was to understand the importance of repeated participation in different challenges on the ability of ideators to utilize semantic distance . Dedicated practice makes one perfect in their craft is an age - old truism . Firstly , there is no single craft in innovation challenges . These are very different problems which require myriad of skills to solve . Secondly , there is not much monetary incentive or fame in solving such challenges to instill discipline to practice regularly . Therefore , it is not certain whether practice can improve one’s ability to successfully utilize semantic distance . We find that , as ideators participate in more and more challenges , their ability to harness semantic distance effectively increases even after controlling for their relevant inferred and observed knowledge reserves . By participating in 2 - 3 challenges , s / he increases his odds of success through distant analogies by almost 30 % . Our results show that a user with contributions in more than 2 challenges alleviates the negative effect of semantic distance quite substantially . Logistic Regression with Random Slopes Dependent Variable : Success in Phase 1 Without IV With IV Intercept - 2 . 125 * * * ( 0 . 161 ) - 2 . 135 * * * ( 0 . 157 ) Semantic Distance - 0 . 615 * * * ( 0 . 177 ) IV Corrected Semantic Distance - 0 . 576 * * ( 0 . 178 ) Challenges Participated In 0 . 778 * ( 0 . 395 ) 0 . 718 ( 0 . 381 ) Cumulative Ideas - 0 . 020 ( 0 . 297 ) - 0 . 076 ( 0 . 285 ) Tenure - 0 . 456 * * ( 0 . 168 ) - 0 . 440 * ( 0 . 173 ) Fostering Innovation : Effect of Experience on Exploration Thirty Ninth International Conference on Information Systems , San Francisco 2018 13 Relative Crowding 0 . 470 * * * ( 0 . 130 ) 0 . 530 * * * ( 0 . 128 ) Inspiration Count - 0 . 114 ( 0 . 203 ) - 0 . 088 ( 0 . 187 ) User ' s Acquired Skills Submissions - 0 . 199 ( 0 . 135 ) - 0 . 162 ( 0 . 132 ) User ' s Acquired Skills Inspirations - 0 . 001 ( 0 . 227 ) 0 . 015 ( 0 . 224 ) Global Time Trend - 1 . 316 * * * ( 0 . 319 ) - 1 . 285 * * * ( 0 . 321 ) Semantic Distance : Challenges Participated In 1 . 124 * ( 0 . 470 ) IV Corrected Semantic Distance : Challenges Participated In 0 . 841 * ( 0 . 385 ) Observations 3 , 585 3 , 585 Log Likelihood - 1 , 081 . 826 - 1 , 089 . 294 Akaike Inf . Crit . 2 , 207 . 652 2 , 222 . 587 Bayesian Inf . Crit . 2 , 343 . 711 2 , 358 . 647 Note : * p < 0 . 05 ; * * p < 0 . 01 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 Table 3 . Results from the logistic regression with random effects are presented above . We allow for varying intercepts at challenge level along with varying slopes for research submissions per challenge , idea submissions per challenge , and diversity index of a challenge . We also allow for slopes for semantic distance to deviate with different authors . Our results throw light on the effects of semantic distance and how it does not have a uniform effect across user types . Extant literature treats semantic distance as a hammer that either does the job or does not . Our research provides nuance to understand the user dependent nature of semantic learning . Conclusions and Discussion Researchers have been investigating creativity and innovation in different contexts since time immemorial . These kinds of research try to understand one of the primal drivers of human cognition : analogy - based reasoning . It is important because creativity cannot be learned by an algorithm in this increasingly machine - driven world . Design pioneers opine that the next industrial revolution will be driven by human creativity as everything requiring manual labor will be attended to by robots . This necessitates the need to understand how analogical learning can be made more efficient , and hence , enable innovation . In this paper , we analyze the role of semantic distance in successful idea generation . Extant literature on analogy driven ideation hasn’t been able to conclusively pin down the role of distant analogies . With our research , we aim to reconcile previously differing findings and add contextualization to understand how and for whom distant analogy works . Individuals with no prior participation experience an adverse effect of using distant analogies . However , with regular participation , ideators can channelize distant analogies more fruitfully . Our research contributes to the existing literature on innovation and semantic learning by expanding our understanding of the effect of semantic distance on the innovative outcomes . We empirically prove that regular participation in new challenges enable an individual to become more innovative in applying his existing knowledge . This enhances our understanding of recombinant innovation where a key differentiator of successful outcome was existing knowledge . Based on an ideator’s actions , this knowledge can grow or deprecate over time . We further this construct with our findings that individual’s ability to innovate ( or creatively apply knowledge ) successfully increases with regular participation . This puts innovativeness in the same realm of skills which can be improved upon by hard - work and is not something that someone is born with . We also contribute methodologically through our usage of deep learning model to corroborate our findings in a predictive set up . Deep learning ( DL ) setup models the non - linear and sequential nature of our data more effectively in comparison to our linear parameterization . Similarity of results in DL and Fostering Innovation : Effect of Experience on Exploration Thirty Ninth International Conference on Information Systems , San Francisco 2018 14 econometric model increases our confidence in the construction of our specifications . Though not very novel , however , we believe that such amalgamation of econometrics and machine learning would enable us to justify our findings with industrially relevant benchmarks such as predictive accuracy to a wider range of researchers . Our study presented us with some re - affirming lessons for our own intellectual development as well as for individuals who are interested in solving open innovation problems . First , as a beginner , it is important to seek inspiration from ideas which are conceptually closer to the problem . In open innovation world , it is very easy to get lost in the myriad of ideas and proposals from vastly different domains . Only when one has enough experience in such problem - solving , then they should allow themselves to further their boundaries of inspiration seeking and explore to find truly innovative ideas . From the perspective of open innovation platforms such as Innocentive and OpenIDEO , our findings provide some answers on how to onboard new users and how to keep the older ones engaged in the innovation process . Our research is not without its limitations . Currently , we are looking at the commenting data as the source of inspirations . However , it is very much possible that a chunk of users absorbs information passively without leaving any public trail . We do not account for that behavior due to non - availability of browsing data . Needless to say , users can gain information and be inspired from content not on the platform . We also do not have the data on their off - platform behavior . There is scope of future research in understanding the selection and assessment of the ideas that are selected by the crowds in such contests . In the next iteration of our paper , we model the interaction of users with the open innovation platform , OpenIDEO , as a multi - variate point process , specifically Hawkes process , to understand the impact of user interaction with different research and ideas on their own propensity to participate and win . Our preliminary analysis with Hawkes process highlights the importance of writing research articles in motivating users to write complete ideas and participate in challenges . References Amabile , T . M . 1996 . “Creativity in Context” ( Boulder , Colorado : Westview Press ) Bischof , J . M . , and Airoldi , E . M . 2012 . “Sum marizing Topical Content with Word Frequency and Exclusivity , ” in International Conference on Machine Learning ( Vol . 29 ) , pp . 201 – 208 . Blei , D . M . , and Lafferty J . D . 2007 . “A Correlated Topic Model of Science . ” The Annals of Applied Statistics , 1 ( 1 ) , 17 – 35 . Blei D . M . , Ng A , Jordan M . 2003 . “Latent Dirichlet Allocation . ” Journal of Machine Learning Research , 3 , 993 – 1022 . Boudreau , K . , Lacetera N . , and Lakhani , K . R . 2008 . “Parallel Search , Incentives and Problem Type : Revisiting the Competition and Innovation Link , ” research paper no . 1264038 , Harvard Business School Technology & Operations Management Unit , Boston , Massachusetts Boudreau , K . and Lakhani , K . R . 2009 . How to manage outside innovation . MIT Sloan management review , 50 ( 4 ) , p . 69 . Breiman , L . 2001 . “Statistical Modeling : The Two Cultures . ” Statistical Science 26 : 199 - 231 Chang J . , Boyd - Graber J . , Gerrish S . , Wang C . , and Blei D . M . 2009 . Reading tea leaves : How humans interpret topic models . In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 21 ( NIPS ) Chesbrough , H . , Vanhaverbeke , W . , West , J . 2006 . Open Innovation : Researching a New Paradigm . Oxford University Press , Oxford . Chesbrough , H . 2006 . Open Business Models . Cambridge , MA : Harvard Business School Press . Chesbrough , H . 2015 . Open Innovation : Where We ' ve Been and Where We ' re Going , Research - Technology Management , 55 : 4 , 20 - 27 Christensen , B . T . , and Schunn , C . 2007 . “The Relationship of Analogical Distance to Analogical Function and Pre - Inventive Structures : The Case of Engineering Design , ” Mem . Cognit . , 35 ( 1 ) , pp . 29 – 38 . Eckert , C . M . , and Stacey , M . K . 1998 . Fortune Favours Only the Prepared Mind : Why Sources of Inspiration are Essential for Continuing Creativity , Creativity and Innovation Management , 7 , 9 - 16 Dahl , D . W . , and Moreau , P . 2002 . The Influence and Value of Analogical Thinking During New Product Ideation . Journal of Marketing Research : February 2002 , Vol . 39 , No . 1 , pp . 47 - 60 . Dunbar , K . 1995 . How scientists really reason : Scientific reasoning in real - world laboratories . In R . J . Steinberg & J . Davidson ( Eds . ) , The nature of insight ( pp . 365 - 395 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Fostering Innovation : Effect of Experience on Exploration Thirty Ninth International Conference on Information Systems , San Francisco 2018 15 Dunbar , K . 1997 . How scientists think : On - line creativity and conceptual change in science . In T . B . Ward , S . M . Smith , & J . Vaid ( Eds . ) , Creative thought : An investigation of conceptual structures and processes ( pp . 461 – 493 ) . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association Dunbar , K . , and Schunn , C . D . 1990 . The temporal nature of Scientific discovery : The roles of priming and analogy . Proceedings of the 12th annual meeting of the Cognitive science Society . Erlbaum : Hillsdale , New Jersey . De Bono , E . 1968 . New think : The use of lateral thinking in the generation of new ideas . Avon Books Epple , D . , Argote , L . , and Murphy , K . 1996 . An empirical investigation of the micro structure of knowledge acquisition and transfer through learning by doing . Operations Research , 44 , 77 – 86 . Enkel , E . , and Gassmann , O . 2010 . “Creative imitation : exploring the case of cross - industry innovation” , R & D Management , Vol . 40 No . 3 , pp . 256 - 70 Finke , R . A . , Ward , T . B . , and Smith , S . M . 1992 . Creative Cognition ( MIT Press , Cambridge , MA ) . Fuge , M . , Tee , K . , Agogino , A . M . , and Maton , K . 2014 . “Analysis of collaborative design networks : A case study of OpenIDEO , ” Journal of Computing and Information Science in Engineering 14 ( 2 ) , Frensch , P . A . , and Sternberg , R . J . 1989 . Expertise and intelligent thinking : When is it worse to know better . Advances in the psychology of human intelligence , 5 , pp . 157 - 188 . Gelman A . 2008 . “Scaling regression inputs by dividing by two standard deviations” . Statistics in Medicine 27 : 2865 – 2873 Gentner D . 1983 . Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework for analogy . Cognitive Science 7 ( 2 ) : 155 – 170 . Gentner , D . , Brem , S . , Ferguson , R . , Wolff , P . , Markman , A . B . , and Forbus , K . 1997 . “Analogy and Creativity in the Works of Johannes Kepler , ” in Creative Thought , Thomas B . Ward , Steven M . Smith , and Jyotsna Vaid , eds . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association , 403 – 59 . Goldberg , Y . , and Levy , O . 2014 . word2vec Explained : deriving Mikolov et al . ' s negative - sampling word - embedding method . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1402 . 3722 . Hochreiter S . , and Schmidhuber J . 1997 . “Long short - term memory , ” Neural Computation , vol . 9 , no . 8 , pp . 1735 – 1780 Hwang , E . , Singh , P . V . , and Argote , L . 2015 . Jack of All , Master of Some : Information Network and Innovation in Crowdsourcing Communities . Imbens , G . , and Angrist , J . 1994 . " Identification and estimation of local average treatment effects " . Econometrica . 62 ( 2 ) : 467 – 476 . Kaplan S . , and Vakili , K . 2015 . The double - edged sword of recombination in breakthrough innovation . Strategic Management J . 36 ( 10 ) : 1437 – 1457 . Kuhn , T . S . 1962 . The Structure of Scientific Revolutions University of Chicago Press : Chicago , IL . Lakhani , K . R . 2009 . " InnoCentive . com ( A ) . " Harvard Business School Case 608 - 170 Lakhani , K . R . , Fayard , A . L . , Natalia , L . , and Pokrywa , S . H . 2013 . “OpenIDEO . ” Harvard Business School Case 612 - 066 Le , Q . V . , and Mikolov , T . 2014 . Distributed representations of sentences and documents . In ICML . Lee M . , and Mimno , D . 2014 . “Low - dimensional Embeddings for Interpretable Anchor - Based Topic Inference . ” In Proceedings of Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing . Mimno , D . , Wallach , H . , Talley , E . , Leenders , M . , and McCallum , A . 2011 . “Optimizing Semantic Coherence in Topic Models , ” in Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , Association for Computational Linguistics , pp . 262 – 272 . Toubia , O . , and Netzer , O . 2016 . Idea Generation , Creativity , and Prototypicality . Marketing Science Piezunka , H . , and Dahlander , L . 2015 . Distant Search , Narrow Attention : How Crowding Alters Organizations’ Filtering of Suggestions in Crowdsourcing . Academy of Management Journal , 58 ( 3 ) , 856 – 880 . Raffel , C . , and Ellis , D . P . W . 2016 . Feed - Forward Networks with Attention Can Solve Some Long - Term Memory Problems Reitzig , M . , and Sorenson , O . 2013 . Biases in the selection stage of bottom ‐ up strategy formulation . Strategic Management Journal , 34 ( 7 ) , pp . 782 - 799 . Roberts , S . , and Airoldi , M . 2016 . " A model of text for experimentation in the social sciences " Journal of the American Statistical Association . Ward , T . B . 1995 . What’s old about new ideas ? Smith SM , Ward TB , Fiske RA , eds . The Creative Cognition Approach ( MIT Press , Cambridge , MA ) , 157 – 178 . Weisberg , R . W . 1999 . Creativity and knowledge : a challenge to theories . In Handbook of Creativity , Sternberg RJ ( ed ) . Cambridge University Press : Cambridge , UK ; Fostering Innovation : Effect of Experience on Exploration Thirty Ninth International Conference on Information Systems , San Francisco 2018 16 Yu , L . , Kittur , A . , and Kraut , R . E . 2014 . Searching for analogical ideas with crowds . In Proceedings of the 32Nd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’14 , ACM ( New York , NY , USA ) , 1225 – 1234 Yu , L . , Kittur , A . and Kraut , R . E . 2014 . Distributed analogical idea generation : inventing with crowds . In Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors in computing systems ( pp . 1245 - 1254 ) . ACM . Zhou , P . , Shi , W . , Tian , J . , Qi , Z . , Li , B . , Hao , H . , and Xu , B . 2016 . Attention - Based Bidirectional Long Short - Term Memory Networks for Relational Classification Appendix The independent variables used in the econometric model are as follows : 1 . Challenges Participated In : We track the number of challenges ( or problems or contests ) a user has participated in . 2 . Cumulative Ideas : We include the total number of ideas contributed by the focal author to all the challenges on the platform prior to the current submission 3 . Tenure : We include author’s experi ence as a control variable where the experience is measure in number of months spent as a registered user on the platform 4 . Relative Crowding : We include the fraction of days passed until the submission deadline to control for any first - mover advantage 5 . User Acquired Skills through Submissions : Users participate in different challenges and accrue different skills which can be discerned by evaluating their submissions . We find the jaccard index between all the submissions made by user prior to focal submission and the current challenge to gauge the user’s skill level 6 . User Acquired Skills through Inspiration : Same as above but through their interaction with other users’ submissions 7 . Inspiration Count : Number of research articles or ideas that the focal author has interacted with prior to focal submission