University of Windsor Scholarship at UWindsor Biological Sciences Publications Department of Biological Sciences 2008 Sex‐Specific Variability in the Immune System across Life‐History Stages . Oliver P . Love University of Windsor Katrina G . Salvante James Dale Tony D . Williams Follow this and additional works at : https : / / scholar . uwindsor . ca / biologypub Part of the Biology Commons This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Department of Biological Sciences at Scholarship at UWindsor . It has been accepted for inclusion in Biological Sciences Publications by an authorized administrator of Scholarship at UWindsor . For more information , please contact scholarship @ uwindsor . ca . Recommended Citation Love , Oliver P . ; Salvante , Katrina G . ; Dale , James ; and Williams , Tony D . , " Sex‐Specific Variability in the Immune System across Life‐History Stages . " ( 2008 ) . The American Naturalist , 172 , 3 , E99 - E112 . https : / / scholar . uwindsor . ca / biologypub / 1125 vol . 172 , no . 3 the american naturalist september 2008 E - Article Sex - Speciﬁc Variability in the Immune System across Life - History Stages Oliver P . Love , * Katrina G . Salvante , † James Dale , ‡ and Tony D . Williams § Department of Biological Sciences , Simon Fraser University , Burnaby , British Columbia V5A 1S6 , Canada Submitted February 12 , 2008 ; Accepted April 1 , 2008 ; Electronically published July 29 , 2008 abstract : Organisms theoretically manage their immune systems optimally across their life spans to maximize ﬁtness . However , we lack information on ( 1 ) how the immune system is managed across life - history stages , ( 2 ) whether the sexes manage immunity differ - entially , and ( 3 ) whether immunity is repeatable within an individual . We present a within - individual , repeated - measures experiment ex - amining life - history stage variation in the inﬂammatory immune response in the zebra ﬁnch ( Taeniopygia guttata ) . In juveniles , age - dependent variation in immune response differed in a sex - and context - speciﬁc manner , resulting in no repeatability across stages . In adults , females displayed little stage - dependent variation in immune response when laying while receiving a high - quality ( HQ ) diet ; how - ever , laying while receiving a low - quality ( LQ ) diet signiﬁcantly re - duced both immune responses and reproductive outputs in a manner consistent with a facultative ( resource - driven ) effect of reproduction on immunity . Moreover , a reduced immune response in females who were raising offspring while receiving an HQ diet suggests a residual effect of the energetic costs of reproduction . Conversely , adult males displayed no variation in immune responses across stages , with high repeatability from the nonbreeding stage to the egg - laying stage , regardless of diet quality ( HQ diet , ; LQ diet , ) . r p 0 . 51 r p 0 . 42 Females displayed high repeatability when laying while receiving the HQ diet ( ) ; however , repeatability disappeared when indi - r p 0 . 53 viduals received the LQ diet . High - response females receiving the HQ diet had greater immune ﬂexibility than did low - response fe - males who were laying while receiving the LQ diet . Data are con - sistent with immunity being a highly plastic trait that is sex - * Corresponding author ; e - mail : olovea @ sfu . ca . † Present address : Department of Biology , University of North Carolina , Chapel Hill , North Carolina , 27599 ; e - mail : ksalvante @ unc . edu . ‡ Present address : Max Planck Institute for Ornithology , P . O . Box 1564 , D - 82305 Starnberg ( Seewiesen ) , Germany ; e - mail : jamesdale68 @ yahoo . com . § E - mail : tdwillia @ sfu . ca . Am . Nat . 2008 . Vol . 172 , pp . E99 – E112 . (cid:1) 2008 by The University of Chi - cago . 0003 - 0147 / 2008 / 17203 - 50246 $ 15 . 00 . All rights reserved . DOI : 10 . 1086 / 589521 speciﬁcally modulated in a context - dependent manner andsuggestthat immunity at one stage may provide limited information about im - munity at future stages . Keywords : cell - mediated immunity , life - history theory , sex - speciﬁc differences , individual variation , repeatability , zebra ﬁnch ( Taenio - pygia guttata ) . Interpreting variation in immunocompetence is now thought to be a critical component in understanding the evolution of life histories ( e . g . , Zera and Harshman 2001 ; Viney et al . 2005 ; French et al . 2007 b ) , sexual selection ( Westneat and Birkhead 1998 ; McGraw and Ardia 2003 ) , and population dynamics ( Lochmiller 1996 ) . In general , immune systems are not always expected to respond max - imally ( Zuk and Stoehr 2002 ; Viney et al . 2005 ) , and hosts should exhibit considerable variability in defense strategies ( Wakelin and Apanius 1997 ; Lee 2006 ) . Moreover , short - term immunological adjustments should be managed op - timally with respect to long - term effects on an animal’s survival and lifetime reproductive success ( Viney et al . 2005 ; Bertrand et al . 2006 ) . Variation across stages must also encompass potential within - stage trade - offs between immune responses and other life - history stages , such as growth ( Soler et al . 2003 ; Chin et al . 2005 ; Dubiec et al . 2006 ) , reproduction ( Bonneaud et al . 2003 ; Ardia 2005 ; Hanssen et al . 2005 ; French et al . 2007 a , 2007 b ) , and molt ( Sanz et al . 2004 ; Martin 2005 ; Martin et al . 2006 a ) . There - fore , life - history theory predicts that optimal immune re - sponses should be plastic and context speciﬁc , where the maintenance and response of the system is managed across a wide range of environmental conditions and life - history stages ( Ricklefs and Wikelski 2002 ; Viney et al . 2005 ) . However , because most work to date has focused on com - paring life - history measures while controlling for a single life - history stage ( a productive way to begin understanding trade - offs between the immune system and other systems ) , we currently have an underappreciation of how the im - mune system is managed across the life span of an indi - vidual ( Sandland and Minchella 2003 ; Martin et al . 2006 a ) . Immune responses are thought to be “costly” in the This content downloaded from 137 . 207 . 184 . 219 on September 07 , 2017 08 : 35 : 24 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : / / www . journals . uchicago . edu / t - and - c ) . E100 The American Naturalist short term , on the basis of evidence of either increased energetic demands during immunological challenges ( De - mas et al . 1997 ; Ots et al . 2001 ; Martin et al . 2003 ; however , see Svensson et al . 1998 ) or apparent trade - offs between the immune system and life - history traits within speciﬁc life - history stages ( see references above ) . Furthermore , many of these trade - offs can be context speciﬁc , where a signiﬁcant driving force may be resource availability ( Chin et al . 2005 ; French et al . 2007 a , 2007 b ; Houston et al . 2007 ) . Although there is still debate over whether indi - viduals facultatively respond to variation in resources within stages or whether it is the stage per se that causes a change in immunity ( see French et al . 2007 a , 2007 b ) , individuals cannot ignore the potential future costs of mounting an immune response in the present because immunological responses in a current life - history stage can affect both future reproduction ( Hanssen et al . 2005 ) and survival ( Moret and Schmid - Hempel 2000 ; Ardia et al . 2003 ; Hanssen et al . 2004 ; Jacot et al . 2004 ) . Unfortunately , without knowledge of how animals manage their immune systems across different life - history stages , it is difﬁcult to interpret how future performance ( i . e . , of the immune system , the reproductive system , etc . ) will be impacted . Indeed , few studies have attempted to examine immune performance across life - history stages ( however , see Mar - tin et al . 2006 a ) . Rather , many ecological immunological studies in vertebrates inherently assume that measuring components of the immune system at a static life - history stage will ( 1 ) correlate with immune function at future stages and , more important , ( 2 ) provide meaningful pre - dictive information on both current condition and future survival and / or ﬁtness . The current state of knowledge in vertebrates contrasts strongly with studies in invertebrates , where research encompassing numerous life - history stages has been performed to understand how immunological modulations at one life - history stage affect the immune response at future stages ( Kraiijeveld and Godfray 1997 ; Moret and Schmid - Hempel 2000 ; Jacot et al . 2004 , 2005 a , 2005 b ; Rantala and Roff 2005 ) and survival ( Moret and Schmid - Hempel 2000 ; Jacot et al . 2004 ) . To investigate sex - speciﬁc plasticity in the vertebrate immune system across life - history stages and in response to changes in resource quality , we examined a commonly employed measure of inﬂammatory immune responsive - ness in ecological studies of vertebrates , the phytohemag - glutinin ( PHA ) skin test ( Norris and Evans 2000 ; Martin et al . 2006 c ; Salvante 2006 ) , using a within - individual , repeated - measures approach . Inﬂammation in response to injection of PHA is driven by dynamic cellular processes involving multiple leukocyte populations , wherein most leukocytes ( with the exception of heterophils and lym - phocytes ) increase over time following the injection ( Mar - tin et al . 2006 c ) . We chose to examine the inﬂammatory immune response because it has been used extensively by ecologists to investigate numerous life - history trade - offs in vertebrates ( Martin et al . 2006 c ; Salvante 2006 ) and because it should allow for unbiased repeated measures ( i . e . , little or no effects of priming of the immune response ; see “Methods” for a detailed explanation ) , unlike measures of humoral immunity that indicate “memory effects . ” Al - though recent work has suggested that the inﬂammatory response may involve a complex dynamic of cell types ( Martin et al . 2006 c ) , our goal was to simply examine large - scale changes in this commonly used technique as a general measure of cell - mediated immunity within a life - history context . We used a captive vertebrate model or - ganism , the zebra ﬁnch ( Taeniopygia guttata ) , which has been used extensively to examine immune - related life - history trade - offs in birds ( McGraw and Ardia 2003 ; Ber - trand et al . 2006 ; Dubiec et al . 2006 ) . However , we ob - served males and females concurrently through the same life - history stages under the same environmental condi - tions , a technique that has rarely been used in studies of immune responses ( Zuk and Stoehr 2002 ; however , see Moreno et al . 2001 ) . First , we examined ontogenetic var - iation in birds at three different life - history stages asso - ciated with varied energetic demands : nestlings at ﬂedging , juveniles at the pre – basic molt stage , and sexually mature adults . Second , among adult birds we examined variation within and across the nonbreeding , egg - laying , and chick - rearing stages ; to investigate how resource availability af - fects potential trade - offs between the immune and repro - ductive systems , we also manipulated diet quality during the egg - laying stage . Finally , to examine plasticity in the vertebrate immune system , we measured the between - stage repeatability of immune responses to test whether the inﬂammatory responses at future stages could be pre - dicted from the response at a current stage , because the necessity for plasticity in the immune system may divorce relationships between individual across - stage relation - ships . We hypothesized that , if the immune system com - prises plastic and context - speciﬁc physiological responses , then ( 1 ) inﬂammatory response should vary depending on both life - history stage and resource availability , with stages and resource conditions that are particularly demanding having lowered responses ; ( 2 ) repeatability between stages should generally be low when decreases in resource avail - ability force a trade - off between the immune system and other systems and higher when these trade - offs are ex - perimentally relaxed ; and ( 3 ) there should be an inter - action between sex and life - history stage / resource avail - ability on immune response because the sexes have different resource demands at speciﬁc life - history stages . Within the framework that males and females will face different costs and therefore have different evolutionary This content downloaded from 137 . 207 . 184 . 219 on September 07 , 2017 08 : 35 : 24 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : / / www . journals . uchicago . edu / t - and - c ) . Life - History Stage Variation in Immunity E101 “goals” at each of the life - history stages , we generated three main predictions . 1 . During postnatal development and pre – basic molt , resource - mediated , sex - speciﬁc differences in the respon - siveness of the immune system are predicted in species exhibiting sexual size dimorphism ( Møller et al . 1998 ; Moore and Wilson 2002 ; Rolff et al . 2005 ; Dubiec et al . 2006 ) or sexually dimorphic ornaments / displays ( Hill 1999 ; Møller et al . 1999 ; Ryder and Siva - Jothy 2000 ; Mc - Graw and Ardia 2003 ; Jacot et al . 2004 ; Kilpimaa et al . 2004 ) . Because of different stage - speciﬁc resource de - mands among sexes , we therefore predicted that there would be ( a ) no sex difference in inﬂammatory responses in ﬂedging zebra ﬁnches because the sexes are similar in size and have monomorphic plumage but that ( b ) sex differences in inﬂammatory responses would occur at molt , when males develop sexually dimorphic plumage . 2 . Immune responses are generally thought to be re - source dependent ( Dubiec et al . 2006 ; French et al . 2007 a , 2007 b ; Houston et al . 2007 ) ; as such , we predicted that the inﬂammatory response would decrease during life - history stages when resource competition with other phys - iological systems increases ( e . g . , French et al . 2007 b ) . Spe - ciﬁcally , ( a ) in adults , responses during nonbreeding should be the highest of all stages and similar between sexes , given that birds should have relatively low energetic costs other than those associated with daily maintenance ; ( b ) laying females should exhibit lower responses than their breeding mates because of the effects on immunity of higher resource reallocation toward egg production ver - sus sperm production ; and ( c ) this difference should be exacerbated in females who are laying while receiving a low - quality ( LQ ) diet . Individuals raising young should exhibit lower responses than they would during the non - breeding stage , given that parental workload signiﬁcantly rises during the chick - rearing stage ( Drent and Daan 1980 ; Hasselquist et al . 2001 ; Love et al . 2004 ; Ardia 2005 ) , po - tentially diverting energy away from being able to im - munologically respond . 3 . We predicted that the inﬂammatory responses of in - dividuals should exhibit some degree of plasticity across life - history stages given differential resource allocation to the immune system within and potentially between par - ticular life - history stages . As such , we predicted signiﬁcant interindividual variation in responses within stages ; al - though individuals may display similar general patterns in relation to changing resources within speciﬁc stages , we predict low within - bird repeatability of responses across stages . Importantly , the predicted differences between the sexes allow us to test whether potential trade - offs between the immune system and other systems at various stages are obligatory or facultative ( i . e . , resource driven ; French et al . 2007 a , 2007 b ) . For example , obligatory trade - offs would occur if either one sex at a given stage or all reproductively active individuals always display lower immune responses , whereas facultative trade - offs would be observed only when individuals have limited access to resources ( French et al . 2007 b ) . Methods Study Species and Dietary Manipulation Zebra ﬁnches are size monomorphic but sexually dichro - matic as adults ( Zann 1996 ) . In captivity , female zebra ﬁnches lay four to six eggs per clutch , with one egg laid per day . They incubate the eggs for 10 – 11 days and ﬂedge nestlings 20 – 23 days after hatching . Both parents attend the nestlings during the chick - rearing stage ( Zann 1996 ) . At ﬂedging , males and females exhibit monomorphic gray plumage with dark black beaks ; at approximately 8 weeks after hatching , juveniles begin to molt into adult plumage ( Zann 1996 ) . In this study , all zebra ﬁnches were housed in an indoor room at the Simon Fraser University Animal Care Facility ( Department of Biological Sciences , Simon Fraser University , Burnaby , British Columbia , Canada ) un - der controlled environmental conditions ( temperature , 19 – 23 (cid:2) C ; humidity , 35 % – 55 % ; constant light schedule of 14L : 10D ) . Experiments and animal husbandry were per - formed under a Simon Fraser University Animal Care Committee permit ( no . 558B ) and followed the guidelines of the Canadian Committee on Animal Care ( 1984 ) . All birds received mixed seed ( Panicum and white millet , 50 : 50 , approximately 12 . 0 % protein , 4 . 7 % lipid ; Jameson’s Pet Food , Vancouver ) as a maintenance diet , in addition to water , grit , and cuttleﬁsh bone ( calcium ) ad lib . and a multivitamin supplement that was added to the drinking water once a week . Breeding pairs ( ) were housed individually in n p 24 cages ( ) equipped with an exter - 61 cm # 46 cm # 41 cm nal nest box ( ) . Adult females 15 cm # 15 cm # 15 cm were randomly paired with an experienced adult male who had at least 28 days between any previous breeding at - tempts . As part of our regular breeding protocol , pairs were provided with an egg - food supplement ( “high qual - ity” [ HQ ] diet : 6 g of a mixture of hard - boiled egg , corn - meal , and bread crumbs [ 3 : 1 : 1 w / w , 30 . 2 % protein and 13 . 0 % lipid by dry mass ] ) daily between pairing and clutch completion in addition to the ad lib . seed diet . The LQ diet consisted of the ad lib . maintenance seed diet only . These diets are intended to best mimic diets in the wild , where nonbreeding birds have access to seed - only diets whereas breeding birds have access to sprouted ( protein - rich ) seeds ( Zann 1996 ) . As such , nestlings and chick - This content downloaded from 137 . 207 . 184 . 219 on September 07 , 2017 08 : 35 : 24 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : / / www . journals . uchicago . edu / t - and - c ) . E102 The American Naturalist Table 1 : Life - history stages used for measurement of the in - ﬂammatory immune response in zebra ﬁnches Stage Age ( days ) Diet Juvenile : Fledging 17 – 18 Seed and egg food Pre – basic molt 60 – 80 Seed Reproductively mature 120 Seed Adult : Chick rearing 1 120 Seed and egg food Egg laying ( HQ diet ) 1 120 Seed and egg food Egg laying ( LQ diet ) 1 120 Seed Nonbreeding 1 120 Seed Note : HQ p high quality ; LQ p low quality . Figure 1 : Intersexual variation in the inﬂammatory immune response across three life - history stages in juvenile zebra ﬁnches : ( a ) LSM (cid:3) ( asterisk represents for within - stage analysis ) and individual SEM P ! . 05 variation in ( b ) females and ( c ) males . rearing birds also had access to the HQ diet as a part of the standard breeding procedure . Experimental Design Two groups of birds ( juveniles and adults ) were used in the overall experiment . Individuals within each group were observed through the life - history stages outlined in table 1 . Although the only manner in which to measure within - individual responses in juveniles is sequentially across de - velopmental stages , we followed our experimental design for adult birds rather than use a possible fully factorial design because the former was the most logistically feasible given our particular set of questions ( e . g . , adult birds pro - duced offspring that were observed as a part of this study ) . Inﬂammatory responses were measured in juveniles ( ) and in adults ( ) when nestlings were 17 n p 77 n p 48 or 18 days of age ( deﬁned as the ﬂedging stage for nestlings and the chick - rearing stage for adults ; table 1 ) . Following ﬂedging , juveniles were housed in communal cages until molt began ( 60 – 80 days of age ; table 1 ) , at which time birds could be sexed on the basis of sexually dichromatic plumage , and inﬂammatory responses were again mea - sured . Following inﬂammatory response measurement , birds were placed in same - sex communal cages . Finally , at 120 days of age , inﬂammatory responses were again mea - sured in the juveniles , who were now considered to be sexually mature ( nonbreeding ) adults ( table 1 ) . Following the chick - rearing period , adult birds were rested for 45 days , at which time they were paired once again with the same mate ; inﬂammatory responses were measured at the ﬁrst - egg stage of laying while individuals were receiving the HQ diet ( table 1 ) . After clutches were complete , birds were unpaired and allowed to rest for 90 days . Following this , birds were paired again ( usually with the same mate ; 22 / 24 pairs ) , and inﬂammatory responses were again mea - sured during the egg - laying stage while birds now received the LQ diet ( table 1 ) . Finally , following another rest period of 90 days , inﬂammatory responses were measured in birds now considered to be nonbreeding adults ( table 1 ) . When not paired for breeding , adult birds were housed in same - sex cages but were not visually or acoustically isolated from birds of the opposite sex . In total , 24 pairs of adults were This content downloaded from 137 . 207 . 184 . 219 on September 07 , 2017 08 : 35 : 24 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : / / www . journals . uchicago . edu / t - and - c ) . Life - History Stage Variation in Immunity E103 Figure 2 : Intersexual variation in the inﬂammatory immune response across three life - history stages in adult zebra ﬁnches : ( a ) LSM (cid:3) SEM ( different letters represent statistically signiﬁcant differences between stages within a given sex , as calculated using the sequential Bonferroni post hoc method ; see “Methods” ) and individual variation in adult ( b ) females and ( c ) males . Laying birds were examined while they were re - ceiving a high - quality ( HQ ) and a low - quality ( LQ ) diet . measured across three life - history stages and two resource levels , and a total of 77 nestlings from these 24 nests were observed across three life - history stages . Measurement of the Innate Cutaneous Inﬂammatory Response We used a PHA injection assay to evaluate , in vivo , an innate cutaneous inﬂammatory immune response ; this technique is widely used in ecological immunology studies ( Tella et al . 2002 ; Martin et al . 2006 c ; Salvante 2006 ) . We intradermally injected the right wing web ( patagia ) of each bird with 30 m g PHA ( PHA - p , Sigma : L - 9132 ) in 30 m L of sterile phosphate buffered saline ( PBS ) using a monoject insulin syringe with an integrated 27 - gauge needle . The same volume of sterile PBS that was used in the PHA injection was injected , using a second needle , into the left wing web . Patagium thickness was measured three times at each wing web to 0 . 01 mm using a gauge micrometer ( Dyer , model 304 – 196 ) immediately before and 24 h after injection . The same person ( O . P . Love , who had examined more than 1 , 000 individual birds before this study ; Chin et al . 2005 ; Love et al . 2005 ; Rowland et al . 2007 ; Love and Williams 2008 ) performed all bird measurements in this study . To ensure similarity of measurement technique across individuals , the speciﬁc nature of skin twisting was used as the cue as to when the micrometer reading should be taken . The difference between the pre - and postinjec - tion responses was calculated for each wing independently , and then the change in thickness of the PBS - injected wing was subtracted from the change in thickness of the PHA - injected wing . The similarity of both preinjection ( r p , ) and postinjection ( , ) 0 . 986 P ! . 0001 r p 0 . 974 P ! . 0001 within - bird , within - stage measurements was high , and we used mean values of these three measurements for a within - stage response value . Juveniles and adults were weighed ( ) and body size was measured ( beak to (cid:3) 0 . 01g tarsus ; ) immediately following injections . Only (cid:3) 0 . 01mm one previous study examining the within - individual re - peatability of the immune response to PHA in birds had been conducted before we performed our study , and the authors report no evidence that exposure to the antigen at one stage had a priming effect on the response at a future stage ( Granbom et al . 2004 ) . If priming of the cell - mediated immune response had a potential confounding effect in this study , we would have predicted a signiﬁcant relationship between the number of exposure events and the immune response . However , there was no evidence in our data to suggest consistent within - individual patterns of this response with time over multiple exposure episodes ( see ﬁg . 1 b , 1 c ; ﬁg . 2 b , 2 c ) , and , as such , we are conﬁdent that repeated exposure to the PHA antigen did not cause confounding or “priming” effects . Statistical Analysis Mixed - model repeated - measures ANCOVA was used to examine changes in immune response across stages for both juveniles and adults , using immune response as the This content downloaded from 137 . 207 . 184 . 219 on September 07 , 2017 08 : 35 : 24 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : / / www . journals . uchicago . edu / t - and - c ) . E104 The American Naturalist Figure 3 : Interstage repeatability in the inﬂammatory immune response in juvenile female zebra ﬁnches ( a ) from the ﬂedging to the molt stages and ( b ) from the ﬂedging to the reproductively mature stages . repeated measure ( repeated across stages ) , sex as a ﬁxed factor , body mass at each stage as a covariate ( when related to responses ) , and adult pair number as a random factor to control for differences between nests owing to parental environmental / genetic quality . Post hoc comparisons were performed using the adjusted Bonferroni post hoc pro - cedure , with the P value corrected for the number of pair - wise comparisons made depending on the type of analysis used ( Rice 1989 ; corrected for the three possible P p . 017 stage comparisons among juveniles and for the P p . 0083 six possible stage comparisons among adults ) . To examine whether inﬂammatory responses and body mass are pre - dictive from one life - history stage to the next under vary - ing resource conditions , we calculated the repeatability for these two traits for both juveniles and adults according to Lessells and Boag ( 1987 ) . As deﬁned by Lessells and Boag ( 1987 , p . 116 ) , “repeatability is a measure used in quan - titative genetics to describe the proportion of variance in a character that occurs among rather than within individ - uals” ; therefore , our repeatability index reﬂects the pro - portion of variation in either the inﬂammatory response or the body mass among , rather than within , individuals . We included calculations of the repeatability of body mass in this study as a baseline trait that is often correlated with inﬂammatory responses and is expected to reveal some plasticity across stages , but perhaps less than the immune system is . To perform repeatability calculations in juveniles we included individual identity in the model , nested within brood , to avoid pseudoreplication when using multiple nestlings from a given nest ( C . Lessells , personal com - munication ) . It should be noted that sample sizes reported for adults decreased across the course of the experiment ( 1 ) because of natural mortality in this short - lived species and ( 2 ) because some adults did not breed while receiving the LQ diet . As such , repeatability calculations involving the LQ diet are limited by the number of females re - maining in the experiment that would breed under LQ diet conditions . Where relevant , nonsigniﬁcant interac - tions were backward eliminated ; results are presented for reduced models . Repeated - measures analysis was per - formed using PROC MIXED in SAS ( ver . 9 ) ; all other analyses were conducted using JMP ( ver . 6 . 0 ) . Results Ontogenetic Variation in Inﬂammatory Immune Responses Individual variation in immune responses across the three life - history stages examined in juvenile birds was high for both sexes ( female ANOVA : , , F p 2 . 51 df p 28 , 86 P p ; ﬁg . 1 b ; male ANOVA : , , . 01 F p 1 . 89 df p 47 , 142 P p ; ﬁg . 1 c ) . Males displayed signiﬁcantly higher inﬂam - . 004matory responses than females did at ﬂedging ( ANOVA : , , ) , whereas both sexes dis - F p 6 . 26 df p 1 , 75 P p . 016 played similar inﬂammatory responses at the pre – basic molt and reproductively mature stages ( ANOVA : F p , , , and , , 3 . 28 df p 1 , 52 P p . 08 F p 1 . 11 df p 1 , 52 , respectively ) . Despite large individual variations P p . 30 within stages , juvenile zebra ﬁnches exhibited consistent intersexual differences in the pattern of changes in the response from ﬂedging through the pre – basic molt stage to the reproductively mature stage ( repeated - measures ANCOVA , stage # sex effect : , , F p 2 . 38 df p 2 , 97 P ! This content downloaded from 137 . 207 . 184 . 219 on September 07 , 2017 08 : 35 : 24 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : / / www . journals . uchicago . edu / t - and - c ) . Life - History Stage Variation in Immunity E105 Figure 4 : Interstage repeatability in the inﬂammatory immune response in juvenile male zebra ﬁnches ( a ) from the ﬂedging to the molt stages and ( b ) from the ﬂedging to the reproductively mature stages . ; ﬁg . 1 a ) . In females , individuals at the reproductively . 05mature stage displayed stronger inﬂammatory responses than they had at both the ﬂedging and the pre – basic molt stages ( Bonferroni post hoc analysis : and P p . 008 P p , respectively ) ; however , no differences were observed . 05between individuals in the ﬂedging and pre – basic molt stages for females ( Bonferroni post hoc analysis : P p ) . In contrast , inﬂammatory responses in males were . 88similar at the ﬂedging and reproductively mature stages ( Bonferroni post hoc analysis : ) and were even P p . 85 higher at both these stages compared with responses dur - ing the pre – basic molt stage ( Bonferroni post hoc analysis : and , respectively ) . P p . 008 P p . 008 Adults : Individual and Life - History Stage Variation in Inﬂammatory Immune Responses As in juveniles , individual variation across stages in adult inﬂammatory responses was high for both sexes ( female ANOVA : , , ; ﬁg . 2 b ; male F p 2 . 33 df p 24 , 85 P p . 004 ANOVA : , , ; ﬁg . 2 c ) . Across F p 2 . 23 df p 23 , 83 P p . 007 stages , males displayed signiﬁcantly higher inﬂammatory responses than females did ( repeated - measures ANCOVA : , , ; ﬁg . 2 a ) . More important , F p 7 . 39 df p 1 , 29 P p . 011 however , adult female responses varied signiﬁcantly across life - history stages , whereas male responses did not ( repeated - measures ANCOVA , stage # sex effect : F p , , ; ﬁg . 2 a ) . However , although female 7 . 21 df p 3 , 31 P ! . 01 inﬂammatory responses that occured during the egg - laying stage while individuals received the HQ diet did not differ signiﬁcantly from those measured during the nonbreeding stage ( Bonferroni post hoc comparison , ; ﬁg . 2 a ) , P p . 01 inﬂammatory responses that occured during the laying stage while individuals were receiving the LQ diet and those that occured during chick rearing were signiﬁcantly lower than those that occurred during the nonbreeding stage ( Bonferroni post hoc comparison : and P p . 0004 , respectively ; ﬁg . 2 a ) . Furthermore , inﬂam - P p . 0014 matory responses in females who were laying while re - ceiving the LQ diet and those that occurred during chick rearing were signiﬁcantly lower than those that occurred while individuals were laying while receiving the HQ diet ( Bonferroni post hoc comparison : and P p . 005 P p , respectively ; ﬁg . 2 a ) . In contrast , overall variation in . 003adult male immune responses was much lower compared with that in females , and , unlike that with females , no pair - wise comparisons were statistically signiﬁcant be - tween stages for males ( Bonferroni post hoc comparisons : all ; ﬁg . 2 a ) . Finally , females displayed similar pos - P 1 . 01 itive relationships between clutch size ( reproductive effort ) and the inﬂammatory response , regardless of diet quality ( linear regression analysis : HQ diet , , , 2 r p 0 . 27 P p . 01 ; LQ diet , , , 2 slope p 0 . 026 r p 0 . 22 P p . 03 slope p ) . We did not observe a similar relationship for egg 0 . 022 size for either diet ( linear regression analysis : HQ diet , ; LQ diet , ) . P p . 20 P p . 11 Repeatability of the Inﬂammatory Immune Response and Body Mass In juvenile females , immune responses were not repeatable between the ﬂedging and the pre – basic molt stages ( , , ; ﬁg . 3 a ) or between the F p 1 . 14 df p 28 , 57 P p . 36 This content downloaded from 137 . 207 . 184 . 219 on September 07 , 2017 08 : 35 : 24 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : / / www . journals . uchicago . edu / t - and - c ) . E106 The American Naturalist Figure 5 : Interstage repeatability in the inﬂammatory immune response between the nonbreeding and the egg - laying stages in adult ( a ) female and ( b ) male zebra ﬁnches in relation to dietary treatment during laying ( while receiving either a high - quality diet or a low - quality diet ) . ﬂedging and the reproductively mature stages ( , F p 0 . 97 , ; ﬁg . 3 b ) . In juvenile males , although df p 28 , 57 P p . 53 immune responses were somewhat repeatable between the ﬂedging and the pre – basic molt stages ( 34 . 13 % , F p , , ; ﬁg . 4 a ) , they were not re - 2 . 04 df p 47 , 94 P p . 008 peatable between the ﬂedging and the reproductively ma - ture stages ( , , ; ﬁg . 4 b ) . In F p 1 . 27 df p 47 , 94 P p . 21 general , therefore , ﬂedging - stage immune responses did not predict variation in immune responses at subsequent stages . Similarly , female ﬂedging - stage body mass did not predict body mass at either the pre – basic molt stage ( , , ) or the reproductively ma - F p 0 . 43 df p 9 , 57 P p . 90 ture stage ( , , ) . In males , body F p 0 . 16 df p 9 , 57 P p . 99 mass was also not repeatable either between the ﬂedging and the pre – basic molt stages ( , , F p 0 . 31 df p 26 , 95 ) or between the ﬂedging and the reproductively P p . 99 mature stages ( , , ) . F p 0 . 17 df p 26 , 95 P p . 99 Inﬂammatory responses in nonbreeding adult birds sig - niﬁcantly predicted their responses during breeding under high - quality resource conditions . In adults of both sexes , when comparing inﬂammatory responses between the nonbreeding and the egg - laying stages ( while receiving the HQ diet ) , repeatability was 50 . 6 % in females ( , F p 3 . 05 , ; ﬁg . 5 a ) and 53 . 5 % in males ( df p 16 , 33 P p . 014 F p , , ; ﬁg . 5 b ) . However , when laying 3 . 29 df p 12 , 25 P p . 02 while receiving the LQ diet , although the responses at the nonbreeding and egg - laying stages were repeatable for males ( 42 . 1 % ; , , ; ﬁg . 5 b ) , F p 2 . 45 df p 12 , 25 P p . 06 they were not so for females ( , , F p 0 . 59 df p 16 , 33 ; ﬁg . 5 a ) . Comparing body masses at the non - P p . 85 breeding and egg - laying stages for individuals receiving the HQ diet resulted in high repeatability in both males ( 78 . 6 % ) and females ( 72 . 4 % ; , , F p 8 . 36 df p 12 , 25 for males ; , , P p . 0003 F p 6 . 24 df p 16 , 33 P p . 0003 for females ) . Moreover , unlike inﬂammatory responses , body mass was also strongly repeatable for both sexes when comparing the nonbreeding stage to the egg - laying stage for individuals receiving the LQ diet ( 54 . 9 % , , F p 3 . 44 , for males ; 68 . 6 % , , df p 12 , 25 P p . 018 F p 5 . 37 df p , for females ) . Finally , intraindividual var - 16 , 33 P p . 0006 iation in plasticity in the laying inﬂammatory immune response across diets was dependent on the initial inﬂam - matory response that occurred while the individual was receiving the HQ diet . The slope of the relationship be - tween the inﬂammatory response when individuals were receiving the HQ diet and that when individuals were receiving the LQ diet was 0 . 040—signiﬁcantly lower than a slope of 1 ( , , ; ﬁg . 6 ) . This t p (cid:1) 3 . 0897 df p 19 P p . 006 indicates that individuals who experienced high inﬂam - matory responses while receiving the HQ diet displayed signiﬁcantly greater ﬂexibility than did individuals who experienced low inﬂammatory responses while receiving the HQ diet when each group had to lay while receiving the LQ diet . Discussion Although many ecological studies have focused on the activity and responsiveness of the vertebrate immune sys - tem within speciﬁc life - history stages , little attention has been paid to understanding the proximate and ultimate This content downloaded from 137 . 207 . 184 . 219 on September 07 , 2017 08 : 35 : 24 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : / / www . journals . uchicago . edu / t - and - c ) . Life - History Stage Variation in Immunity E107 Figure 6 : Intraindividual variation in plasticity in the inﬂammatory im - mune response of females laying while receiving a high - quality ( HQ ) diet and then a low - quality ( LQ ) diet . Slope is signiﬁcantly ! 1 ( dashed line ) , indicating that individuals who had high inﬂammatory responses while receiving the HQ diet displayed signiﬁcantly greater immune ﬂexibility than did individuals when laying while receiving the LQ diet and who had low responses while receiving the HQ diet . reasons for how and why the immune system might display variation across life - history stages within individuals ( Møller et al . 1998 ; Martin et al . 2006 a ) . Understanding this “life span” scale variation is important for under - standing the role of the immune system in shaping the evolution of life histories ( Viney et al . 2005 ) . In fact , recent work in invertebrates has underscored that recognizing life - history stage variation may be key in correctly inter - preting optimal immune responses and trade - offs with other physiological systems within different life - history stages ( Moret and Schmid - Hempel 2000 ; Jacot et al . 2004 , 2005 a , 2005 b ; Rantala and Roff 2005 ) . The results of our study ﬁrst indicate that the commonly used measure of inﬂammatory response in vertebrates varies signiﬁcantly through ontogeny and into adulthood , with variation and potential trade - offs between responses and reproduction being sex speciﬁc and dependent on resource availability . Second , within - individual variation in inﬂammatory re - sponses was not repeatable between early development and key future life - history stages . However , adults who had access to abundant resources during reproduction dis - played high repeatability in inﬂammatory responsiveness between the nonreproductive and egg - laying stages . Nev - ertheless , when faced with limited resources , reproductive females appeared to facultatively reallocate resources / energy between reproduction and inﬂammatory respon - siveness , which resulted in the disappearance of within - individual repeatability across stages . Taken together , our results indicate that the immune system can display sig - niﬁcant and seemingly facultative sex - speciﬁc plasticity in response to the demands of various life - history stages and variable resource quality in vertebrates . Below we discuss our results within the framework of the predictions we developed above . Ontogenetic Changes in the Inﬂammatory Response Two common hypotheses often used to examine sex - speciﬁc differences in immune responsiveness across a num - ber of taxa are sexual size dimorphism ( SSD ; Møller et al . 1998 ; Moore and Wilson 2002 ; Rolff et al . 2005 ) and sex differences in potentially resource - costly male displays ( Hill 1999 ; Møller et al . 1999 ; Ryder and Siva - Jothy 2000 ; McGraw and Ardia 2003 ; Jacot et al . 2004 ; Kilpimaa et al . 2004 ; Rantala et al . 2007 ) . Zebra ﬁnches provide an ideal model to differentiate between these two hypotheses be - cause they are not size dimorphic and yet they exhibit temporal variation in the development of dimorphic visual displays ( i . e . , no differences at the ﬂedging stage , signiﬁ - cant differences during the pre – basic molt stage ) . How - ever , contrary to our prediction of similar responses across the sexes at ﬂedging , we observed higher inﬂammatory responses in males at the ﬂedging stage . While some stud - ies support the role of SSD in sex - speciﬁc trade - offs in resource allocation to immune function in species with larger males ( Mu¨ller et al . 2003 ; Tschirren et al . 2003 ; Chin et al . 2005 ; Dubiec et al . 2006 ) , research in a species ex - hibiting reversed SSD indicate that males still exhibit lower inﬂammatory responses than females do ( Fargallo et al . 2002 ) . Moreover , it is generally accepted that male mam - mals exhibit lower immune responses regardless of size and ornamentation ( Nelson and Demas 1996 ; Moore and Wilson 2002 ; Nelson 2002 ; Zuk and Stoehr 2002 ; Krasnov et al . 2005 ) , although results in insects appear to be mixed ( Vainio et al . 2004 ; Rantala et al . 2007 ) . Whether it is important for vertebrate females to redirect energy away from the immune system toward postnatal growth to max - imize reproductive output as adults is largely unknown . However , if true , this suggests that females may redirect resources away from the functioning of the immune sys - tem during development to increase ﬁtness , meaning that reduced nestling inﬂammatory responses are beneﬁcial in the long run . The second proposed hypothesis to explain lower in - ﬂammatory responses in males—namely , developing sec - ondary sexual traits such as ornamental plumage or skin coloration—is based on the potentially high resource cost of developing these displays or obtaining limited resources This content downloaded from 137 . 207 . 184 . 219 on September 07 , 2017 08 : 35 : 24 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : / / www . journals . uchicago . edu / t - and - c ) . E108 The American Naturalist used for displays ( Hill 1999 ; Møller et al . 1999 ; McGraw and Ardia 2003 ; Kilpimaa et al . 2004 ) . As such , we pre - dicted that males should experience the lowest inﬂam - matory responses at the pre – basic molt stage ; however , the sexes were similar in their inﬂammatory responses . Nev - ertheless , inﬂammatory responses in males did decrease from the ﬂedging stage to the molt stage , which may in - dicate that males may prepare in advance for the increased energetic demand of molting , similar to that which has been observed to occur in the seasonal preparation of the immune system for the stress of winter conditions in small mammals ( Demas and Nelson 1998 ) . Mechanistically , it is possible that the pleiotropic effects of hormones in - volved in the molt process ( such as thyroid hormone ; Payne 1972 ) may contribute to this decrease in inﬂam - matory response given the hormone’s role in B cell de - velopment ( reviewed in Dorshkind and Horseman 2000 ) . At reproductive maturity , the sexes displayed similar in - ﬂammatory responses . In general , our analysis of the var - iation in cutaneous inﬂammatory responses in juvenile zebra ﬁnches reveal that the sexes experience distinct im - mune management strategies during development and similar responses when they have reached adulthood . Variation in the Inﬂammatory Response of Adults The immune system is often regarded as a resource - driven physiological trait ( Klasing 2002 ) , and recent experimental manipulations indicate that the trade - off between repro - duction and the immune system in females may be fac - ultative ( resource driven ; French et al . 2007 a , 2007 b ) . On the basis of the idea of a direct trade - off between these two systems under limited - resource conditions , we pre - dicted that inﬂammatory responses of adult females would decrease from the nonbreeding stage to the egg - laying stage as females attempt to maintain reproductive output , be - cause the immune system may compete with egg produc - tion for a potentially limited pool of resources . In support of recent experimental work in lizards ( French et al . 2007 a , 2007 b ) , we found that , although inﬂammatory responses in reproductive ( egg - laying ) females with access to an HQ diet were not different from the inﬂammatory responses experienced when the birds were in the nonbreeding stage , individuals in the egg - laying stage who received an LQ diet experienced a signiﬁcant decrease in their inﬂam - matory responses . However , even when mothers were able to lay and raise nestlings with access to an HQ diet , the inﬂammatory response while raising offspring was signif - icantly lower than the one measured when individuals were classiﬁed as nonbreeders . Importantly , despite a reduction in the inﬂammatory responses experienced by laying in - dividuals that were receiving the LQ diet , mothers do not appear to directly trade off immune function for repro - duction ( contrary to what we predicted for this short - lived species ; Zann 1996 ; as proposed by Birkhead et al . [ 1999 ] ) . We observed that females displayed the same positive relationship ( and identical slopes ) between clutch size and the inﬂammatory response while receiving both diets ( see “Results” ) . Moreover , females experienced both reduced inﬂammatory responses and reduced reproductive effort ( clutch size and egg size ) when laying while receiving the LQ diet compared with those receiving the HQ diet ( egg size : paired t - test , ; clutch size paired t - test , P ! . 0001 ; O . P . Love , K . G . Salvante , J . Dale , and T . D . P p . 0014 Williams , unpublished data ) . Whether females have ﬂex - ibility in both systems ( i . e . , they are able to modulate both reproductive effort and inﬂammatory responses simulta - neously without facing a direct trade - off for either ) or whether decreased resources cause a ﬁxed decrease in both systems is unknown and requires more investigation . However , given that female zebra ﬁnches with access to an HQ ( protein - rich ) diet displayed no reduction in in - ﬂammatory responses during the egg - laying stage , our re - sults also suggest that modulation during reproduction is a facultative ( resource - driven ) response rather than an obligatory side effect of going through reproduction per se , as reported recently in a manipulative study in lizards ( French et al . 2007 a , 2007 b ) . Although ecologists have traditionally considered egg laying to be highly energetically costly in terms of both the nutrients placed in eggs ( Perrins 1996 ; Monaghan and Nager 1997 ) and the overall metabolic demand associated with egg production ( Nilsson and Ra˚berg 2001 ; Ve´zina and Williams 2002 ) , recent work has revealed that this metabolic increase may be small in relation to increases found at other life - history stages ( K . G . Salvante , F . Ve´zina , and T . D . Williams , unpublished data ) . In fact , females can employ many behavioral and energetic reallocation tactics to maintain daily energy expenditure ( Ve´zina and Williams 2003 ; Ve´zina et al . 2006 ) , and our results high - light yet another physiological mechanism ( namely , the inﬂammatory response ) by which mothers balance egg production and other physiological processes under con - ditions of limited resources . We found no evidence for variation in adult male in - ﬂammatory responses across life - history stages , regardless of resource quality during reproduction . This result in males may be explained by their putatively lower relative energetic contribution ( namely , sperm ) during the egg - laying stage , compared with females , and may also indicate that it is the accumulated energetic costs of laying and incubation that result in immune deﬁcits in females during the chick - rearing stage because males and females in this species are thought to work equally hard at chick rearing ( Zann 1996 ) . However , although the energetic costs of chick rearing are predicted to be signiﬁcant ( Drent and This content downloaded from 137 . 207 . 184 . 219 on September 07 , 2017 08 : 35 : 24 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : / / www . journals . uchicago . edu / t - and - c ) . Life - History Stage Variation in Immunity E109 Daan 1980 ; Hasselquist et al . 2001 ; Love et al . 2004 ; Ardia et al . 2003 ) , we understand that males who were raising offspring did so under captive conditions and when they had access to the HQ diet . Nonetheless , taken together , our measurements of the inﬂammatory response in adults during reproduction suggest a sex - speciﬁc modulation of the immune system in response to the energetically de - manding phases of both egg laying and chick rearing that is enhanced by the quality of available resources . Fur - thermore , females may modulate the immune system within stages to manage trade - offs between current and future reproduction and survival to maximize ﬁtness . Individual Variation and Repeatability of Inﬂammatory Responses Physiological ecologists are beginning to appreciate that how the immune system responds during a given stage should be dependent on both the immediate and the future costs of the current response ( Viney et al . 2005 ; Bertrand et al . 2006 ) . As such , we hypothesized that the inﬂam - matory immune response should be a plastic trait allowing individuals to express responses in a context - dependent manner given the energetic costs of mounting an immune response ( see Houston et al . 2007 ) . The immune system would therefore be expected to have a high degree of en - vironmental determination , allowing individuals to adjust responses to “optimize” overall energy investment . Inter - individual variation in inﬂammatory responses was marked both ( 1 ) among individuals within speciﬁc life - history stages and ( 2 ) within individuals across stages . Of particular interest is that many individuals do not display the “average” among - stage pattern as represented by the mean of the group , something that emphasizes the po - tential for individually optimal immune management strategies to exist . The importance of allowing the reader to view and interpret the unmasked variation is the pri - mary reason why we have provided both the clearly in - dividually variable patterns across life - history stages and the mean values for groups . In fact , studying individual variation in physiological traits has the potential to in - crease our ability to understand how and why physiological mechanisms inﬂuence ﬁtness ( Williams 2008 ) . In juveniles , responses measured at the end of postnatal development did not predict responses at key future life - history stages , namely , the pre – basic molt and reproduc - tively mature stages . The lack of repeatability in inﬂam - matory responses likely reﬂects the different within - stage inﬂuences that environmental quality has in shaping the response of the immune system across these stages ( Klasing 2002 ; Sandland and Minchella 2003 ; Chin et al . 2005 ) as well as the many non - resource - related sources potentially inﬂuencing immunes responses between stages such as exposure to pathogens ( Christe et al . 1998 ) and sexually selected differences ( Møller et al . 1999 ; Kilpimaa et al . 2004 ) . Measurement of the inﬂammatory response in ﬂedgling birds is particularly prevalent in many ecological studies ( e . g . , Soler et al . 2003 ; Tschirren et al . 2003 ; Chin et al . 2005 ; Dubiec et al . 2006 ) . Practically speaking , our results suggest that measuring the inﬂammatory immune response at only the ﬂedging stage provides limited in - formation about how the immune system of these indi - viduals will respond during future life - history stages and may even be misleading as to how the current response will impact future reproduction and ﬁtness . In adults , both sexes displayed signiﬁcant repeatability in both inﬂammatory responses and body mass between the nonbreeding and the egg - laying stages when neither sex was challenged by resource limitation ( i . e . , when laying while receiving the HQ diet ) . However , repeatability in adults who are breeding under HQ conditions is not nec - essarily evidence of a strong genetic component to the immune response measured here but instead might reﬂect the effect of common environment ( i . e . , responses are ex - pressed at a given value when resources are plentiful ) . This point is emphasized by the lack of repeatability across these two key life - history stages for females laying eggs while receiving limited resources ( LQ diet ) , whereas males dis - played high repeatability in their inﬂammatory responses when faced with the same diet constraints . This indicates that it is likely the energetic costs of egg production under limited conditions , rather than the reproductive stage per se that forces females to reallocate resources away from the immune system . Interestingly , regardless of the quality of resources available , both sexes displayed high repeata - bility of body mass , indicating that across - stage physio - logical adjustments can be made without interfering with body condition . Moreover , inﬂammatory responses were not repeatable in females laying on the LQ diet , whereas body mass was , which suggests that repeatability in re - sponses is strongly inﬂuenced by resource availability in egg - laying females . Furthermore , the amount of ﬂexibility available to individual females in their ability to respond immunologically when forced to lay while receiving the LQ diet is related to their ability to respond when laying while receiving the HQ diet ; that is , females with high inﬂammatory responses when laying while receiving the HQ diet displayed a greater ﬂexibility in being able to reduce responses when laying while receiving the LQ diet compared with individuals who had low inﬂammatory re - sponses while receiving the HQ diet ( i . e . , ﬁg . 6 ) . These results may also indicate a critical lower limit for the in - ﬂammatory immune response below which individuals may be signiﬁcantly at risk of infection . This content downloaded from 137 . 207 . 184 . 219 on September 07 , 2017 08 : 35 : 24 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : / / www . journals . uchicago . edu / t - and - c ) . E110 The American Naturalist Conclusions and Future Considerations The value in the experimental design of this study lies in our ability to examine ( 1 ) whether the sexes differ in their management of the immune system across stages , ( 2 ) whether the immune system exhibits plasticity across stages and in response to resource variation , and ( 3 ) whether inﬂammatory response or the state of the immune system at a given stage predicts how the system will re - spond at future life - history stages . Nevertheless , it is im - portant to note that , within the inﬂammatory response itself , there exists signiﬁcant temporal variation in the var - ious cell types that are recruited during the response ( Mar - tin et al . 2006 c ) . Moreover , the organismal immune re - sponse is highly complex and is differentiated into humoral , cell - mediated , and innate components ( Tiele - man et al . 2005 ; Salvante 2006 ) . As such , despite at least a decade of research by ecological immunologists , we still have a relatively poor understanding of how each of these three systems should both respond and work together in shaping life - history evolution ( Zera and Harshman 2001 ; Tella et al . 2002 ; Zuk and Stoehr 2002 ; Viney et al . 2005 ) . The juvenile and adult data presented here are consistent with the inﬂammatory immune response being a highly plastic and sex - speciﬁc trait reacting in a context - dependent manner . Although not possible with this present data set , relating intraindividual variation in inﬂammatory re - sponses ( and potentially any physiological trait ) to vari - ation in ﬁtness is now possible via a reaction norm ap - proach—something ecophysiologists are beginning to appreciate ( Williams 2008 ) . It is difﬁcult to make exten - sions to the innate and humoral responses , but it is rea - sonable to suggest that both responses would be expected to reveal a similar degree of plasticity as we have dem - onstrated here for the cellular response given that one would predict that individuals will be exposed to the ex - istence of seasonal and stage - speciﬁc pathogens , variation in resources , and stage - speciﬁc demands such as repro - duction . As has been recently appreciated , it is furthermore difﬁcult to predict how the various components will in - teract within each other in relation to variation in these demands across stages ( Martin et al . 2006 d ) . In this light , constitutive innate immunity ( which has a mixture of hu - moral and cellular components ; Tieleman et al . 2005 ) may be one of the best immune responses to examine in the context of a life - history stage in future studies . Our pur - pose in this study is to highlight for ecological immu - nologists the idea that individuals may manage immune responses differentially across their life span to maximize lifetime ﬁtness . Practically , our results suggest that ex - amining immunity within a single life - history stage ( i . e . , the nestling or reproduction stage ) or without knowledge of the variation in environmental quality ignores how plas - tic the immune system can be and , therefore , potentially provides misleading information about how individuals are managing their immune systems across their entire life spans . Second , because individuals may be capable of re - distribution among various arms of the immune system ( Martin et al . 2006 d ) , future studies measuring multiple types of responses or using a more holistic measure of immunity in individuals will be better at understanding management of the immune system . Finally , it is important to appreciate that species with differing life - history strat - egies ( Tella et al . 2002 ; Martin et al . 2006 d ) and even subspecies differing in breeding schedules and resource availability ( Martin 2005 ; Martin et al . 2006 b ) may differ in their immunological responses to antigens . As such , it is more relevant than ever for immunoecologists to ap - preciate the complexity of the life history of their study species before interpreting how immunological differences between individuals inﬂuence ﬁtness . Acknowledgments We wish to thank S . Poirier for her help with data col - lection . We also wish to thank C . Lessells for statistical help in calculating repeatability and E . Love , C . Semeniuk , E . Wagner , and two anonymous reviewers for helpful com - ments on previous drafts of this article . This research was funded by an operating Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada ( NSERC ) grant to T . D . W . and postdoctoral NSERC awards to O . P . L . , K . G . S , and J . D . Literature Cited Ardia , D . R . 2005 . Individual quality mediates trade - offs between reproductive effort and immune function in tree swallows . Journal of Animal Ecology 74 : 517 – 524 . Ardia , D . R . , K . A . Schat , and D . W . Winkler . 2003 . Reproductive effort reduces long - term immune function in breeding tree swal - lows ( Tachycineta bicolor ) . Proceedings of the Royal Society B : Biological Sciences 270 : 1679 – 1683 . Bertrand , S . , F . Criscuolo , B . Faivre , and G . Sorci . 2006 . Immune activation increases susceptibility to oxidative tissue damage in zebra ﬁnches . Functional Ecology 20 : 1022 – 1027 . Birkhead , T . R . , F . Fletcher , and E . J . Pellatt . 1999 . Nesling diet , secondary sexual traits and ﬁtness in the zebra ﬁnch . Proceedings of the Royal Society B : Biological Sciences 266 : 385 – 390 . Bonneaud , C . , J . Mazu , G . Gonzalez , C . Haussy , O . Chastel , B . Faivre , and G . Sorci . 2003 . Assessing the cot of mounting an immune response . American Naturalist 161 : 367 – 379 . Canadian Council on Animal Care ( CCAC ) . 1984 . Guide to the care and use of experimental animals . Vol . 2 . CCAC , Ottawa . Chin , E . H . , O . P . Love , A . M . Clark , and T . D . Williams . 2005 . Brood size and environmental conditions sex - speciﬁcally affect nestling immune response in the European starling Sturnus vulgaris . Jour - nal of Avian Biology 36 : 549 – 554 . Christe , P . , A . P . Møller , and F . de Lope . 1998 . Immunocompetence and nestling survival in the house martin : the tasty chick hypoth - esis . Oikos 83 : 175 – 179 . This content downloaded from 137 . 207 . 184 . 219 on September 07 , 2017 08 : 35 : 24 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : / / www . journals . uchicago . edu / t - and - c ) . Life - History Stage Variation in Immunity E111 Demas , G . E . , and R . J . Nelson . 1998 . Photoperiod , ambient tem - perature and food availability interact to affect reproductive and immune function in adult male deer mice ( Peromyscus manicu - latus ) . Journal of Biological Rhythms 13 : 253 – 262 . Demas , G . E . , V . Chefer , M . I . Talan , and R . J . Nelson . 1997 . Metabolic costs of mounting an antigen - stimulated immune response in adult and age C57BL / 6J mice . American Journal of Physiology 273 : R1631 – R1637 . Dorshkind , K . , and N . D . Horseman . 2000 . The roles of prolactin , growth hormone , insulin - like growth factor - I , and thyroid hor - mones in lymphocyte development and function : insights from genetic models of hormone and hormone receptor deﬁciency . En - docrine Reviews 21 : 292 – 312 . Drent , R . H . , and S . Daan . 1980 . The prudent parent : energetic adjustments in avian breeding . Ardea 68 : 225 – 252 . Dubiec , A . , M . Cichon , and K . Deptuch . 2006 . Sex - speciﬁc devel - opment of cell - mediated immunity under experimentally altered rearing conditions in blue tit nestlings . Proceedings of the Royal Society B : Biological Sciences 273 : 1759 – 1764 . Fargallo , J . A . , T . Laaksonen , V . Po¨yri , and E . Korpima¨ki . 2002 . Inter - sexual differences in the immune response of Eurasian kestrel nestlings under food shortage . Ecology Letters 5 : 95 – 101 . French , S . S . , G . I . H . Johnston , and M . C . Moore . 2007 a . Immune activity suppresses reproduction in food - limited female tree lizards ( Urosaurus ornatus ) . Functional Ecology 21 : 1115 – 1122 . French , S . S . , D . F . DeNardo , and M . C . Moore . 2007 b . Trade - offs between the reproductive and immune systems : facultative re - sponses to resources or obligate responses to reproduction ? Amer - ican Naturalist 170 : 79 – 89 . Granbom , M . , L . Ra˚berg , and H . G . Smith . 2004 . The spatial and temporal repeatability of PHA - responses . Behavioral Ecology 16 : 497 – 498 . Hanssen , S . A . , D . Hasselquist , I . Folstad , and K . E . Erikstad . 2004 . Costs of immunity : immune responsiveness reduces survival in a vertebrate . Proceedings of the Royal Society B : Biological Sciences 271 : 925 – 930 . ——— . 2005 . Cost of reproduction in a long - lived bird : incubation effort reduces immune function and future reproduction . Pro - ceedings of the Royal Society B : Biological Sciences272 : 1039 – 1046 . Hasselquist , D . , M . F . Wasson , and D . W . Winkler . 2001 . Humoral immunocompetence correlates with date of egg - laying and reﬂects work load in female tree swallows . Behavioral Ecology 12 : 93 – 97 . Hill , G . E . 1999 . Is there an immunological cost to carotenoid - based ornamental coloration ? American Naturalist 154 : 589 – 595 . Houston , A . I . , J . M . McNamara , Z . Barta , and K . C . Klasing . 2007 . The effect of energy reserves and food availability on optimal immune defence . Proceedings of the Royal Society B : Biological Sciences 274 : 2835 – 2842 . Jacot , A . , H . Scheuber , and M . W . G . Brinkof . 2004 . Costs of an induced immune response on sexual display and longevity in ﬁeld crickets . Evolution 58 : 2280 – 2286 . Jacot , A . , H . Scheuber , J . Kurtz , and M . W . G . Brinkof . 2005 a . Juvenile immune status affects the expression of a sexually selected trait in ﬁeld crickets . Journal of Evolutionary Biology 18 : 1060 – 1068 . ——— . 2005 b . Juvenile immune system activation induces a costly upregulation of adult immunity in ﬁeld crickets Gryllus campestris . Proceedings of the Royal Society B : Biological Sciences 272 : 63 – 69 . Kilpimaa , J . , R . V . Alatalo , and H . Siitari . 2004 . Trade - offs between sexual advertisement and immune function in the pied ﬂycatcher ( Ficedula hypoleuca ) . Proceedings of the Royal Society B : Biological Sciences 271 : 245 – 250 . Klasing , K . C . 2002 . The avian immune system : nutritional costs of ownership and use . Proceedings of the 23rd International Orni - thological Congress : 6 – 7 . Kraiijeveld , A . R , and H . C . J . Godfray . 1997 . Trade - off between parasitoid resistance and larval competitive ability in Drosophila melanogaster . Nature 389 : 278 – 289 . Krasnov , B . R . , S . Morand , H . Hawlena , I . S . Khokhlova , and G . I . Shenbrot . 2005 . Sex - biased parasitism , seasonality and sexual size dimorphism in desert rodents . Oecologia ( Berlin ) 146 : 209 – 217 . Lee , K . A . 2006 . Linking immune defenses and life history at the levels of the individual and the species . Integrative and Compar - ative Biology 46 : 1000 – 1015 . Lessells , C . M . , and P . T . Boag . 1987 . Unrepeatable repeatabilities : a common mistake . Auk 104 : 116 – 121 . Lochmiller , R . L . 1996 . Immunocompetence and animal population regulation . Oikos 76 : 594 – 602 . Love , O . P . , and T . D . Williams . 2008 . The adaptive value of stress - induced phenotypes in the wild : sex allocation , cost of reproduc - tion , and maternal ﬁtness . American Naturalist ( forthcoming ) . Love , O . P . , C . W . Breuner , F . Ve´zina , and T . D . Williams . 2004 . Mediation of a corticosterone - induced reproductive conﬂict . Hor - mones and Behavior 46 : 59 – 65 . Love , O . P . , E . H . Chin , K . E . Wynne - Edwards , and T . D . Williams . 2005 . Stress hormones : a link between maternal condition and sex - biased reproductive investment . American Naturalist 166 : 751 – 766 . Martin , L . B . 2005 . Trade - offs between molt and immune activity in two populations of house sparrows ( Passer domesticus ) . Canadian Journal of Zoology 83 : 780 – 787 . Martin , L . B . , A . Scheuerlein , and M . Wikelski . 2003 . Immuneactivity elevates energy expenditure of house sparrows : a link between direct and indirect costs ? Proceedings of the Royal Society B : Bi - ological Sciences 270 : 153 – 158 . Martin , L . B . , P . Han , J . Kwong , and M . Hau . 2006 a . Cutaneous immune activity varies with physiological state in female house sparrows ( Passer domesticus ) . Physiological and Biochemical Zo - ology 79 : 775 – 783 . Martin , L . B . , D . Hasselquist , and M . Wikelski . 2006 b . Immune in - vestments are linked to pace of life in house sparrows . Oecologia ( Berlin ) 147 : 565 – 575 . Martin , L . B . , P . Han , J . Lewittes , J . R . Kuhlman , K . C . Klasing , and M . Wikelski . 2006 c . Phytohemagglutinin - induced skin swelling in birds : histological support for a classic immunoecological tech - nique . Functional Ecology 20 : 290 – 299 . Martin , L . B . , Z . M . Weil , and R . J . Nelson . 2006 d . Reﬁning ap - proaches and diversifying directions in ecoimmunology . Integra - tive and Comparative Biology 46 : 1030 – 1039 . McGraw , K . J . , and D . R . Ardia . 2003 . Carotenoids , immunocom - petence , and the information content of sexual colors : an exper - imental test . American Naturalist 162 : 704 – 712 . Møller , A . P . , G . Sorci , and J . Erritzoe . 1998 . Sexual dimorphism in immune defense . American Naturalist 153 : 605 – 619 . Møller , A . P . , P . Christe , and E . Lux . 1999 . Parasitism , host immune function , and sexual selection . Quarterly Review of Biology 74 : 3 – 20 . Monaghan , P . , and R . G . Nager . 1997 . Why don’t birds lay more eggs ? Trends in Ecology & Evolution 12 : 270 – 274 . Moore , S . L . , and K . Wilson . 2002 . Parasites as a viability cost of This content downloaded from 137 . 207 . 184 . 219 on September 07 , 2017 08 : 35 : 24 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : / / www . journals . uchicago . edu / t - and - c ) . E112 The American Naturalist sexual selection in natural populations of mammals . Science 297 : 2015 – 2018 . Moreno , J . , J . Potti , P . Yorio , and P . G . Borboroglu . 2001 . Sex dif - ferences in cell - mediated immunity in the Magellanic penguin Spheniscus magellanicus . Annales Zoologici Fennici 38 : 111 – 116 . Moret , Y . , and P . Schmid - Hempel . 2000 . Survival for immunity : the price of immune system activation for bumblebee workers . Science 290 : 1166 – 1168 . Mu¨ller , W . , C . Dijkstra , and T . G . G . Groothuis . 2003 . Inter - sexual differences in T - cell - mediated immunity of black - headed gull chicks ( Larus ridibundus ) depend on the hatchingorder . Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 55 : 80 – 86 . Nelson , R . J . 2002 . Seasonal patterns of stress , immune function , and disease . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . Nelson , R . J . , and G . E . Demas . 1996 . Seasonal changes in immune function . Quarterly Review of Biology 71 : 511 – 548 . Nilsson , J . - A . , and L . Ra˚berg . 2001 . The resting metabolic cost of egg laying and nestling feeding great tits . Oecologia ( Berlin ) 128 : 187 – 192 . Norris , K . , and M . R . Evans . 2000 . Ecological immunology : life his - tory trade - offs and immune defense in birds . Behavioral Ecology 11 : 19 – 26 . Ots , I . , A . B . Ivankina , T . A . Ilyina , and P . Ho˜rak . 2001 . Immune challenge affects basal metabolic activity in wintering great tits . Proceedings of the Royal Society B : Biological Sciences 268 : 1175 – 1181 . Payne , R . B . 1972 . Mechanisms and control of molt . Pages 104 – 146 in D . S . Farner and J . R . King , eds . Avian biology . Vol . 2 . Academic Press , New York . Perrins , C . M . 1996 . Eggs , egg formation and the timing of breeding . Ibis 138 : 2 – 15 . Rantala , M . J . , and D . A . Roff . 2005 . An analysis of trade - offs in immune function , body size and development time in the Med - iterranean ﬁeld cricket . Functional Ecology 19 : 323 – 330 . Rantala , M . J . , D . A . Roff , and L . M . Rantala . 2007 . Forceps size and immune function in the earwing Forﬁcula auricularia L . Biological Journal of the Linnean Society 90 : 509 – 516 . Rice , W . R . 1989 . Analyzing tables of statistical tests . Evolution 43 : 223 – 225 . Ricklefs , R . E . , and M . Wikelski . 2002 . The physiology / life - history nexus . Trends in Ecology & Evolution 17 : 462 – 468 . Rolff , J . , S . A . O . Armitage , and D . W . Coltman . 2005 . Genetic con - straints and sexual dimorphism in immune defense . Evolution 59 : 1844 – 1850 . Rowland , E . , O . P . Love , J . J . Verspoor , L . Sheldon , and T . D . Williams . 2007 . Manipulating rearing conditions reveals developmental sen - sitivity of the smaller sex in a passerine bird , the European starling Sturnus vulgaris . Journal of Avian Biology 38 : 612 – 618 . Ryder , J . T . , and M . T . Siva - Jothy . 2000 . Male calling song provides a reliable signal of immune function in a cricket . Proceedings of the Royal Society B : Biological Sciences 267 : 1171 – 1175 . Salvante , K . G . 2006 . Techniques for studying integrated immune function in birds . Auk 123 : 575 – 586 . Sandland , G . S . , and D . J . Minchella . 2003 . Costs of immune defense : an enigma wrapped in an environmental cloak ? Trends in Para - sitology 19 : 571 – 574 . Sanz , J . J . , J . Moreno , S . Merino , and G . Toma´s . 2004 . A trade - off between two resource - demanding functions : post - nuptialmoltand immunity during reproduction in male pied ﬂycatchers . Journal of Animal Ecology 73 : 441 – 447 . Soler , J . J . , L . de Neve , T . Pe´rez - Contreras , M . Soler , and G . Sorci . 2003 . Trade - off between immunocompetence and growth in mag - pies : an experimental study . Proceedings of the Royal Society B : Biological Sciences 270 : 241 – 248 . Svensson , E . , L . Ra˚berg , C . Koch , and D . Hasselquist . 1998 . Energetic stress , immunosuppression and the cost of antibody response . Functional Ecology 12 : 912 – 919 . Tella , J . L . , A . Scheuerlein , and R . E . Ricklefs . 2002 . Is cell - mediated immunity related to the evolution of life - history strategies inbirds ? Proceedings of the Royal Society B : Biological Sciences 269 : 1059 – 1066 . Tieleman , B . I . , J . B . Williams , R . E . Ricklefs , and K . C . Klasing . 2005 . Constitutive innate immunity is a component of the pace - of - life syndrome in tropical birds . Proceedings of the Royal Society B : Biological Sciences 272 : 1715 – 1720 . Tschirren , B . , P . S . Fitze , and H . Richner . 2003 . Sexual dimorphism in susceptibility to parasites and cell - mediated immunity in great tit nestlings . Journal of Animal Ecology 72 : 839 – 845 . Vainio , L . , H . Hakkarainen , M . J . Rantala , and J . Sorvari . 2004 . In - dividual variation in immune function in the ant Formica exsecta : effects of the nest , body size and sex . Evolutionary Ecology 18 : 75 – 84 . Ve´zina , F . , and T . D . Williams . 2002 . Metabolic costs of egg pro - duction in the European starling ( Sturnus vulgaris ) . Physiological and Biochemical Zoology 75 : 377 – 385 . ——— . 2003 . Plasticity in body composition in breeding birds : what drives the metabolic costs of egg production ? Physiological and Biochemical Zoology 76 : 716 – 730 . Ve´zina , F . , J . R . Speakman , and T . D . Williams . 2006 . Individually variable energy management strategies in relation to energeticcosts of egg production . Ecology 87 : 2447 – 2458 . Viney , M . E . , E . M . Riley , and K . L . Buchanan . 2005 . Optimalimmune responses : immunocompetence revisited . Trends in Ecology & Evolution 20 : 665 – 669 . Wakelin , D . , and V . Apanius . 1997 . Immune defence : genetic control . Pages 30 – 58 in D . H . Clayton and J . Moore , eds . Host - parasite evolution : general principles and avian models . Oxford University Press , Oxford . Westneat , D . F . , and T . R . Birkhead . 1998 . Alternative hypotheses lining the immune system and mate choice for good genes . Pro - ceedings of the Royal Society B : Biological Sciences265 : 1065 – 1073 . Williams , T . D . 2008 . Individual variation in endocrine systems : mov - ing beyond the “tyranny of the golden mean . ” Philosophical Trans - actions of the Royal Society B : Biological Sciences 363 : 1687 – 1698 . Zann , R . A . 1996 . The zebra ﬁnch : a synthesis of ﬁeld and laboratory studies . Oxford University Press , New York . Zera , A . , and L . Harshman . 2001 . The physiology of life history trade - offs in animals . Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 32 : 95 – 126 . Zuk , M . , and A . M . Stoehr . 2002 . Immune defense and host life history . American Naturalist 160 ( suppl . ) : S9 – S22 . Associate Editor : Yannis Michalakis Editor : Michael C . Whitlock This content downloaded from 137 . 207 . 184 . 219 on September 07 , 2017 08 : 35 : 24 AM All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions ( http : / / www . journals . uchicago . edu / t - and - c ) .