Experimentai Studies of Group Decision Support Systems : An Assessrnent of Variables Studied and Methodology Jerry Fjermestad School of Industrial Management & New Jersey Center for Multimedia Research New Jersey Institute of Technology Newark , NJ 07 102 j erry @ eies . nj it . edu ABSTRACT By early 1996 , approximately 140 different controlled experiments had been published in 164 articles in refereed journals or conference proceedings , which examined processes and outcomes in computer - supported group decision making . This paper is a concise overview of what has been studied and how : the systems , independent and intervening variables manipulated or measured , and experimental procedures employed . A subsequent paper will examine the dependent variables and findings of the experiments . The purpose is not only to provide a comprehensive summary of past research , but also to critically assess what has been studied little or inadequately , in order to inform design choices for future experiments . 1 . Introduction : The study of Group Decision Support Systems ( GDSS ) In the mid - twentieth century , there were many studies of small group decision making , generally in the " Face to Face " ( FtF ) condition , which compared the decision making of individuals to that of groups , and which explored variables related to group effectiveness . Good reviews of this tradition in social psychology include those by Hare ( 1962 , 1976 ) , Shaw ( 1 97 1 , 1976 ) , Steiner ( 1972 ) , and McGrath ( 1984 ) . Generally , it was found that small groups , left to their own devices , suffered many process losses : " The degree to which actual productivity approaches potential productivity is a function of the appropriateness of its processes relative to the task demands " ( Steiner , 1972 ) . Among the key variables which have been observed to influence the effectiveness of small group decision making are leadership and S . Roxanne Hiltz Computer & Information Science & New Jersey Center for Multimedia Research New Jersey Institute of Technology Newark , NJ 071 02 hiltz @ eies . njit . edu structuring of the group process . For example , imposing certain structures for interaction on small Face - to Face ( FtF ) groups , such as a strict agenda which forces " rational " decision making , or brainstomiing ( Osbom 1957 ) or Nominal Group Techniques ( Van de Ven & Delbecq , 197 l ) , can improve process and outcomes . Particularly during the 19703 , there were also some experiments exploring the effects of media such as the telephone ( audio - only ) or video plus audio ( " videoconferencing " ) on small group decision making ( e . g . , Short , Williams & Christie , 1976 ) . Experiments on Group Decision Support Systems ( GDSS ) make their first explicit appearance in the literature in 1982 , in the Turoff and Hiltz article entitled " Computer support for group versus individual decisions . " Preliminary results of a series of controlled experiments at New Jersey Institute of Technology ( NJIT ) comparing the process and outcome of ; youps using Computer - Mediated Communication ( CMC ) versus FtF communication , and of unenhanced or " plain vanilla " CMC vs . CMC with the addition of various tools or structures to support group decision nnaking , also appeared there . With the exception of some : experiments on CMC at Camegie Mellon ( e . g . , Keisler et al . 1985 ) , there was relatively little other published experimental work until after the mid - So ' s , and one seldom saw the term , " GDSS . " However , programs of rlesearch were underway at the University of Minnesota and at the University of Arizona , as well as at NJIT , which would soon produce a flow of theoretical papers , empirical results , and well - trained and productive young researchers . DeSanctis and Gallupe ' s seminal paper , " A Foundation for the Study of Group Decision Support Systems " ( 1 987 ) has been extremely influential in providing a common 1060 - 3425 / 97 $ 10 . 00 0 1997 IEEE 45 framework for research on GDSS . They defined GDSS as combining " communication , computer , and decision technologies to support problem formulation and solution in group meetings " ( p . 589 ) . They also presented a " contingency " theory to help explain why GDSS is not always beneficial ; it would depend upon whether the nature of the technology and structuring provided was appropriate for the group size ( smaller vs . larger ) , the type of task , and the communication mode , of which they identified two : same place ( FtF , or " decision room " ) and different place , or dispersed . They also touched on what would later become Adaptive Structuration Theory ( e . g . , DeSanctis , Poole , Dickson , and Jackson , 1993 ) , with the statement , " The effectiveness of the technology depends on its appropriate design and u ' se by the group " ( DeSanctis & Gallupe , 1987 , p . 589 ) . The Minnesota students , including Vogel , Watson , Gallupe , Zigurs , and Sambamurthy , dispersed to a variety of universities where GDSS programs of research sprung up . Simultaneously , at the University of Arizona , major research initiatives were in progress using decision room technology which was to become GroupSystems . Under the direction of Jay F . Nunamaker . The researchers from this program include : Applegate , Dennis , Jessup , and Valichich . Some important distinctions were later added to the GDSS theoretical framework . For example , CMC can be same time ( synchronous ) , or different - time ( % synchronous " ) ; in many ways , these are totally different media , in terms of their effects on group communication processes . Pinsonneault & Kraemer ( 1990 ) make a related distinction between GDSS and " GCSS " or " Group Communication Support Systems , " which they observed as having " similar impacts on some aspects of group processes and outcomes , but opposite impacts on other aspects " ( p . 143 ) . In our review of the literature , we located 140 different empirical studies that met our criteria for this analysis . First , they were studies of groups , which we defined as comprising at least three members . Simmel ( l902 , 1950 ) , was the first to convincingly make the case that a dyad is fundamentally different than larger groups , because the triad is the smallest size aggregation in which there can be a " majority ' ' which stands against a minority . Secondly , they used a computer - based GDSS or GCSS with at least minimal features designed to support group communication and decision making processes . Third , the study was actually a controlled experiment : there were two or more conditions deliberately created and contrasted ; other variables were controlled in some manner ; and there was at least one independent and one dependent variable , which was measured and statistically analyzed . Finally , the study had to be published in a refereed journal or conference proceedings ; e . g . , unpublished dissertations or conference presentations or book chapters are not included . Everything that we could locate , published in English and available by early 1996 , is included . A few studies fail to meet one or more of these criteria , but are cited heavily in the literature , or seem to be significant studies , so they are included as " non - conforming studies , " and identified with an asterisk in the list of studies ; a footnote at the end notes how the study does not conform to our general guidelines . Undoubtedly , there are a few studies that we missed ; and , of course , more are being published almost weekly , so it is impossible to ever be completely " up to date . " We have recently identified seven other studies which are not included here . There are several prior summaries of GDSS studies , of which Benbasat & Lim ( 1993 ) is the most comprehensive ; others of note include Pinsonneault & Kraemer ( 1990 ) , Gray , Vogel & Beauclair ( 1990 ) ; McLeod ( 1992 ) , McGrath ( 1994 ) ; and Hollingshead & McGrath ( 1995 ) . However , none of these prior summaries include more than about 50 studies , since they were made before the great flood of GDSS publications in the mid - 1990 ' s . In addition , none of them use as comprehensive a framework for gathering information and putting it into a common terminology so that the procedures and results can be compared and statistically analyzed . 2 . The Theoretical Framework Theoretical frameworks are designed to aid in the understanding and the design of empirical investigations . A number of representative frameworks were utilized as the core from which we originally extracted a comprehensive factors model , including DeSanctis and Gallupe ( 1987 ) , Jalasi and Beauclair ( 1987 ) ; Dennis et . al , ( 1988 ) ; Pinsonneault and Kraemer ( 1989 ) ; Poole and DeSanctis ( 1990 ) ; Hiltz et a1 ( 1991 ) ; and Nunamaker et . a1 ( 1991 ) . This integrated framework was developed to provide complete coverage of factors present in the literature as a whole and has been previously published ( Fjermestad , Hiltz and Turoff , 1993 ) . Since that time , we have refined the ffamework based on reviewers ' suggestions about factors that could be placed differently in order to improve the logic of the model , and comparison of the initial theoretical model to the actual variables appearing in the empirical studies . The result appears as " Chart I ; " it will be only briefly explained here ; see Fjermestad ( 1997 ) for a complete description . This integrated theoretical framework is conceptualized as consisting of four major categories of variables : Contextual or independent variables ; Intervening 46 variables ; group Adaptation processes ; and Outcomes . Of these , the Contextual and one of the Intervening variables that have been studied ( methodology ) will be summarized in this paper , along with the experimental methods and procedures that have been used ; these are shaded in Chart I . Subsequent papers will discuss the remaining intervening and the adaptation and outcome factors and analyze which classes of hypotheses have and have not been supported . The Contextual factors are all external or driving variables that comprise the environment or conditions for the decision making task . It is from these variables that the " independent variables " manipulated in any given experiment are generally chosen . For any one experiment , they are ( relatively ) fixed br controlled . These include characteristics of the particular technology ( GSS ) being used , of the group , task , environmental and organizational contexts . Intervening factors , which also affect the group interaction , are derived from or added to the set of conditions created from the context of the group decision sessions . For example , the methods used by the group may vary as to session length , number of sessions , and presence and role of a facilitator . These factors can change from session to session , if the " meeting " goes on over a period of time , and thus are somewhat dynamic , rather than static . The variables we have categorized as " intervening are often treated as co - variates or moderator variables in the analysis of experimental results , but are sometimes treated as dependent variables . The second set of dynamic factors is the Adaptation ( adaptive structuration ) or interaction process of the group . This includes such things as their level of effort , their attitude toward the GDSS , and participation patterns . They are the variables that are controlled by the group on an individual or collective basis . Finally , the Outcomes are the result of the interplay of the intervening factors and adaptation of the group with the contextual factors . These results or dependent variables include efficiency measures ( e . g . , calendar time to decision ) , effectiveness measures ( e . g . , decision quality ) , usability of the system and methods used , and subjective satisfaction measures . 3 . The Studies and Their Categorization A list was compiled and copies obtained of all controlled experiments on GDSS published in English in refereed journal articles or conference proceedings . The results of some experiments were presented in more than one paper , resulting in a total of 163 papers representing 140 different studies . On the other hand , some papers presented multiple experiments ; in this case , the different experiments were given notations of " experiment 1 , I1 " experiment 2 , " etc . One problem in locating experimental studies of GDSS is that this is an interdisciplinary field , spanning the boundaries of Information Systems , Management , Computer Science , Social Psychology , and Communication . There are 3 1 different journals and five conference proceedings represented in the list of publications . The Hawaiian International Conference on Systems Sciences ( HICSS ) is the most frequent forum for presentation of GDSS studies ; a total of 24 studies has appeared only in HICSS proceedings thus far , and another 19 were published there frst , and subsequently in a journal . Thirteen papers have been published in MIS , and eight papers each in MISQ , Infixmation and Management , and Small Group Research . We have previously mentioned that the " flood " of GDSS studies is a phenomenon of the 90 ' s . This is very apparent from the following count of years of publication ( journal and conference proceedings ) : Table 1 GDSS Publication Years Year 1986 and Earlier 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 ( partial ) Total 1987 - 1989 Count 5 16 21 18 16 24 23 24 17 163 These experiments represent a large investment of time and money by a large number of researchers , finders , and subjects . We suspect that the tremendous popularity of the World Wide Web and web browsers will see a new surge of interest in GDSS , particularly of tlhe distributed and asynchronous variety , now that " user friendly " GUI ' s and " multi - media " can be included in the group support systems . It is very important that the research community have a complete understanding of what has been studied thus far and what has been studied little or not at all ; of " what we know and what we don ' t know " about GDSS effectiveness , in order to design future studies that will optimally contribute to our knowledge of how to build comprehensive analysis . The major aspects of the methodology and findings of experiments on GDSS have been put into a data base and and use these systems . That is the objective of our 47 organized into two large charts ( Example Chart A : Methodology and Example Chart B : Results ; the full charts are not included here , due to space limitations ) , focusing on methodology and findings . Only Summary Chart I1 is included here ; note the order of variables in this chart matches that in Chart I . 4 . What Has Been Studied : Contextual Factors 4 . 1 Technology Task Support - Tools : Variations in the specific type of task support provided by a computer - based system have been studied in only nine experiments . The tools and procedures used are the fundamental cause of the expected changes in process and outcome ; yet , most experiments seem to ( falsely ) assume that all GDSS ' s are a standard " package " that will have the same effect . The most frequently used task support tool is Brainstorming ( 34 studies ) used for idea generation , followed by ranking ( 18 ) or some other form of voting or preference rating ( 22 studies ) for support of preference or decision making tasks . It is interesting to note that research on FtF groups suggests that Nominal Group Technique ( NGT ) is more effective than brainstorming for idea generation ( Van de Ven & DelBecq , 1974 ) . However , NGT and alternative structures such as Dialectical Inquiry have generally not been built into GDSS software . Though such structures for interaction can conceivably be created solely through facilitator guidance or instructions to group members , the only way to assure that they are followed is to embody them in software . It appears that there has been a tendency for the first tool tried to be accepted uncritically by subsequent system designers . A software - supported ability for a group to build a list and an imposed agenda are described for five studies each ; none of the other specific tools have been used more than four times . In many instances the basic set of tools provided with the software was available for use by the subjects . Wiltz and Turoff ( 1992 ) , Nunamaker , Dennis , Martz , Valacich , and Vogel ( 1992 ) and Dickson , Poole and DeSanctis ( 1 992 ) provide an excellent review of the tools available with EIES2 , Groupsystems and SAMM , respectively . Task Structure : In addition to the type of system , proximity and time dispersion were classified . Summary Chart 11 shows that by far the majority of studies to date ( 92 of the 140 , or two thirds ) are in the Decision Room environment . An additional 14 studies used a condition with dispersed ( two or more linked ) decision rooms , and 21 studies compared a Face to Face with a dispersed condition ( most frequently CMC , synchronous or asynchronous ) . Only 9 studies utilized a fully distributed ( asynchronous ; different times and places ) condition , plus two more that compared synchronous with asynchronous time dispersion . Process Structure : The " level " of the GDSS or CMC system is a rough coding of its sophistication in terms of GDSS features , and follows the descriptions of " level 1 " and " level 2 " systems by DeSanctis & Gallupe ( 1987 ) . The majority of the systems used ( 68 % ) are level 1 systems , and another 4 % compare level 1 and level 2 systems . Some of the CMC systems are actually just email and are not structured to keep an organized and searchable record of the group discussion , as a conference is , but if that was what was used , it is included . However , nine of the studies use CMC systems so " poverty stricken " that we have labeled them " level 0 " because they do not provide even the minimal features that would facilitate a rich group discussion . The most restrictive and limited of these are systems with futed screens designed with fields to be filled in to support highly structured decision making for a specific task . For instance , if there were a " choice dilemma " task , the screen might have a field for the short problem description , and a field for inputting a number between 1 and 10 , which is the " answer " to the choice . At the bottom of the screen of these " poverty stricken " CMC facilities there is often only a single line , or in some cases , only a half of a line , which is the entire space allowed to compose and send free text communication to other group members . " Chat " systems with split screens that allow one to view only a few lines of text , provide little or no editing , and display what everybody is typing as they type it , letter by letter , are also classified as " level 0 . " They give the users no control over what they see and what and when they send , nor do they support the communication of well thought out and edited contributions , or a reviewable transcript of the group discussion . Many of these " level 0 " systems also send everything anonymously automatically , which is hardly conducive to responsible group discussion behavior . One wonders if these systems were designed to inhibit group discussion rather than to support it ! Process Support - Medium : by far the most frequently manipulated variable is communication mode , studied in a total of 91 experiments , or about two thirds . The most common contrast is unsupported FtF groups vs . GDSS supported FtF groups ( 32 studies ) . This is followed closely by 2 1 studies comparing groups communicating FtF vs . via CMC . A problem in many of these studies is that the tools or processes built into the GDSS or CMC or other type of computer - based system , are not available in any form to the FtF groups . Only six studies included a 48 full range of three modes : the unsupported FtF or " baseline " groups ; FtF groups that are given manual versions of the tools and processes ( e . g . , facilitation or an agenda or a decision process ) ; and the computer - supported condition . This is the only way to avoid confounding the tools or processes or other supports , with the mode of communication . Process Support - Technology : The Group Support Systems used have been classified into three primary types : " DSS " ( Decision Support Systems ) GDSS , or " CMC " ( Computer - Mediated Communication ) . A DSS is designed to support an individual decision maker ; three of the studies employed this sort of system , generally with one terminal available to the group to look at . " GDSS " refers to a system primarily designed for a " decision " room " application or other synchronous ( same time ) situation , which allows communication to take place via audio andor video media . The GDSS consists of tools to enforce structure ( e . g . , anonymous brainstorming ) on portions of the group ' s communication and deliberation , or to assist decision making ( e . g . , voting tools ) . The majority of the studies ( 69 % ) used a GDSS . CMC refers to a system designed primarily to support group discussion , such as a computer conferencing system , that may or may not have GDSS tools included . A total of 40 studies ( 29 % ) used a CMC system . Process Support - Design : In terms of specific sofhlrare , the most frequently used system has been Arizona ' s Groupsystems ( or its predecessors , EDS / EMS / EBS , PlexCenter , and Plexsys ) , used in 48 studies . Minnesota ' s SAMM was the platform for 15 experiments , while NJITs EIES or EIES2 was used in 7 published experiments , and unidentified or miscellaneous CMC ' s in 20 . Though a variety of systems have been studied , almost half of the experiments used one of the three specific systems developed at three universities where extensive programs of GDSS experiments began in the mid - 80 ' s ; thus there is a very real question of whether the " weight " of the findings thus far might be unduly dependent upon the characteristics of these specific systems . 4 . 2 Group The group variables ( see Chart I ) have been treated either as independent or as moderator variables and are labeled accordingly in Chart 11 . Group Size : Thriteen studies have used group size as a manipulated variable , with small vs . medium sized ~ O U P S ( e . g . , 6 vs . 12 ) as the most frequent choice . Only one study varying group size used groups larger than 12 . The modal group size is three ( See Chart 11 , 5 . 1 Method ) ; this is probably because one can obtain the largest number of groups with the smalkst number of subjects , with this group size . Four is the next most popular , followed by group size five , probably for similar reasons ; making a total of 45 % of the experiments using group size of 4 or fewer members . Many experiments did not rigidly control group size ; e . g . , 17 studies reported a range of 3 to 8 subjects per group , and another 15 reported a range of 4 to 8 . Altogether , only 12 studies , or lo % , used group sizes larger than 10 , which might be considered a dividing line between " small " and medium to large sized groups . Yet , as we shall review near the end of this assessment , both theory and empirical evidence lead us to believe that GDSS tools imd processes can be most beneficial for medium to large sized groups , rather than for very small groups such as those with only 2 , 3 , or 4 members . Group composition is even more troublesome ; only 5 ( or 4 % ) of the groups were established rather than ad hoc , and over 90 % use students as subjects . Twenty studies used group composition as an independent variable or co - variate . Members ' degree of knowledge or skill related to the task is the most frequently studied ( 5 e : xperiments ) . Such potentially important factors as gender composition and the use of established versus ad - hoc groujps have been studied in only two experiments each . Member Characteristics : These potentially include any attributes of individual members , such as their attitudes , personality traits , age , or previous experience with systems or tasks . Only five member characteristics have been studied , and except for leadershiip , each has been used only in a single experiment . Undergraduates were used as the subjects in 65 % of the experiments ; 7 % used professionals , and only 7 % used solely graduate students . Remus ( 1989 ) reported that undergraduate subjects made poorer decisions than did part - time MBA subjects ( who were all professionals working on an MBA degree ) . This study is important because the objective of the technology is to improve effectiveness . Remus ' s study documents that it is the interaction of experience working with the technology that produces effective performance . The experienced managers made less costly decisions , used more effective heuristics , and were less erratic than undergraduate students . In another study [ 20 ] retired professionals were compared with active professionals , with and without technology ( CMC versus no - CMC ) . An interaction effect between retired and CMC treatments ( retired with CMC out performed any other combination of groups ) was found . CMC groups were more satisfied with the group , the process , and had higher quality decisions ; . The fact that there can be an interaction betweein type of subjecther and the effectiveness of the technology Subjects Type : 49 emphasizes the need to experiment with a variety of types of subjects . The issue of the generalizability of the results of GDSS experiments , when they are so heavily based on the use of students as subjects , will also be further explored at the end of this assessment . 4 . 3 Task Task is the primary reason for the group to exist . Poole et . al . ( 1985 ) suggested that it alone could account for 50 % of the variance in group performance . Type : McGrath ( 1984 ) developed a task typology which consists of eight different task types within four categories . The graphical representation of this typology differentiates tasks on two dimensions . The first dimension classifies tasks on the basis of outcome : intellectual ( e . g . , a decision ) or behavioral ( e . g . , a " product1 ' or action ) . The second dimension uses the type of behavior of group members ( convergent or cooperative , vs . conflicting ) . This results in eight task types . We re - coded task type to make the categorizations match the descriptions given by McGrath ( 1984 ) and McGrath & Hollingshead ( 1994 ) , and consistent . It was interesting to note that some tasks had been described as belonging in two or three different categories , by different authors . What we see is that only 4 studies used Task type 1 ( Planning ) , and only one used task type 6 ( Mixed - motive , resolving conflicts of motive or interest ) . The most frequently used task type ( used 74 times or 41 % ) is the preference or decision making task ( type 4 ) , for which the preference of the majority is taken as the correct answer because there is no objective measure of quality . The second most frequently used task type is creativity ( generating ideas , brainstorming ) , employed in 29 % of the experimental sessions . Intellective tasks were used 21 % of the time . Given the " laboratory " settings of most studies , none used tasks purely in the " execute " quadrant , which includes psycho - motor behaviors and contests or battles , though one of the 30 instances with mixed task types did have a performance aspect , flying paper airplanes [ 3 ] . while 14 have varied task type . The most frequent task type contrast chosen for experimental design is intellective versus decision making ( preference ) tasks , a contrast included in ten experiments . 4 . 4 Context Task complexity has been varied in four experiments , This includes environmental and organizational variables . Given that most studies have used students in U . S . universities , for a single session , it is not surprising to find that few context variables have been studied . Assessment of prior experience with a system was varied in eleven studies . Culture ( e . g . , Singaporean vs . American ) has been looked at in three experiments . Obviously , this is an area of great neglect . 5 . 0 What Has Been Studied : Intervening Factors The intervening category of variables constitutes the first phase of the variable interactions posited by the contingency model . The group interacts with the task , context , and technology through the set of intervening variables . The intervening variables can be treated as either independent or control variables in experimental design and analysis . Most of them have been totally ignored . This discussion will be limited to experimental methodology , which is the only set of intervening variables frequently documented or studied . 5 . 1 Method Experimental Designs : Single independent variables ( with 2 - 5 conditions ) were used in 52 ( 36 % ) of the experiments . The 2 x 2 factorial design is the next most popular , accounting for 30 % of the experiments , with various other factorial designs accounting for another 33 % . In most studies , subjects served in only one experimental condition , but repeated measures designs were used in 25 % of the experiments . Training is the opportunity for the group to become familiar with the system itself , the tools to be used , the procedures to be followed , and the other group members , before being presented with a task to perform and generally a time limit in which to accomplish this task . Forty studies do not report on this important detail of the methodology at all . Another 52 mention that some sort of training was given , but no details are provided . A total of 11 studies gave the group a practice task as part of their training . When training is reported , it generally is of very short duration ; the mode is only 5 to 10 minutes . Only before the group task was assigned . The training variable is also notable because not a single study has specifically varied it to determine the effects of various types and amounts of training . Number of Sessions : 72 % of the experiments have involved the group members in only a single problem solving session ; they thus had no opportunity to exhibit much " adaptive structuration " of their use of the system based on experience . Five studies have been longitudinal , specifically looking for possible changes over time . Our twelve studies used a total of an hour or more of training 50 theoretical framework posits that adaptive structuration will be an important process influencing the outconies of technological support for group decision making ; and such group learning and reshaping of the technology in use takes time to unfold . Experiments using longitudinal designs tend to show that groups require some experience in order to learn how to coordinate their interaction using technological supports , particularly if they are using spacially distributed or asynchronous modes of communication . For example , Chidambaram and colleagues [ lo ] concluded on the basis of an early experiment using a longitudinal design that GSS groups need time to learn the system , and a later study [ SI concluded that asynchronous GSS groups require more than four sessions to learn how to intiract via the technology in ways that overcome its limitations . McGrath and colleagues [ 491 , in an experiment lasting 13 weeks , found that FtF groups significantly outperformed CMC groups for the first five weeks , but not in the last four weeks . Thus , both theoretical expectations and empirical results suggest that the results of single session studies , especially those lasting less than an hour total , will not be very generalizable to organizational use over a period of weeks to years . Facilitation : The majority of studies ( 66 % ) did not employ a group facilitator to help coordinate the interaction . In addition to contrasting facilitated with non - facilitated groups , one can purposely vary facilitator style , e . g . , a technical facilitator or “chauffeur” vs . a process facilitator or a human facilitator vs . automated facilitation . Most studies using GDSS simply confound facilitator presence and style with mode of communication . Seven experiments have examined facilitation as an explicitly manipulated factor . Number of Subjects : Many of the experiments suffer from a low level of statistical power because of the use of an inadequate total number of subjects , groups , andor groups per cell . For example , 17 studies use a total of less than 50 subjects and 44 ( 36 % ) use a total of under 20 groups . 23 % of the experiments fail to consistently provide a groups per cell size of five or larger , which might be considered just a “minimum” to have a good chance of detecting significant differences . Only 62 ( or 44 % ) have at least 10 groups per cell , which generally provides fairly good statistical power . Task Implementation : This includes the specific tasks used , as well as the instructions and specific wording , and the amount of time allowed . 106 different tasks were used , but some tasks have perhaps been over - used , such as the Foundation task ( 14 experiments ) Table 2 shows the most often used tasks . These eight tasks have been used in a total of 56 instances . The advantage of using a task that has been studied in many other experiments is that one can make some indirect comparisons of results . The disadvantage of over - use of a specific task is that the body of findings from experiments may be an artifact of a narrow range of specific tasks on which they were based . Duration of the Experiments : Almost a fifth of the studies failed to report the length of the task , which is an important methodological detail . Of those reporting a session length or upper limit , 35 % took less than half an hour . These tasks must have been extremely simple . Another 26 % took between 30 and 60 minutes , and also could not be considered very complex tasks if they could be completed in such a short time . Four studies investigated task complexity [ 5 , 36 , 106 , 1141 and found that as task complexity increases , the decision quality and depth of analysis improve in groups using GSS . Thus , it is of concem that the majority of experiments studying the effects of GSS used short , simple tasks that are probably least likely to need or benefit from technological supports to the decision making process . Table 2 Tasks and Usage Frequency Task Count Foundation 14 Choice Dilemma 7 Tourism 7 School of Business 6 International Studies 5 PVVI 5 Parkway Drug 5 PC Imports 7 6 . SUMMARY : What Needs to Be Studied ? It must be emphasized that the following conclusions are based solely on GDSS studies using controlled experiments ( laboratory or field ) as the methodology . We plan to do a similar survey of empirical studies using other methodologies ( e . g . , case studies , surveys ) in the future . Undoubtedly , such data will exhibit different pattems . 6 . 1 Gaps in the Experimental Research The field of GDSS is no longer new ; all experiments published in the future should have strong methodology and documentation . This includes adequate cell sizes , training times , and descriptions of the specific task , system , tools , and facilitation used . 51 The majority ( 87 % of 163 papers ) of experimental GDSS studies have been published in 1990 or later . Unfortunately , the scope of this body of work , and its external validityigeneralizability for " real " problem solving groups , is weaker than would be hoped . And despite the relative recency of this body of work , most of it was done on what is already " outmoded " technology , given the increasing pervasiveness of GUI ' s such as NetscapeTM and of hypertext and hypermedia systems embedded in the World Wide Web . This is not necessarily the " fault " of the experimenters , given rapidly changing technology and academic equipment budgets which often do not make it possible for research facilities to stay at the " state of the art . " However , this situation does suggest that perhaps some karlier experiments ( particularly ones in which ' no difference " was found between FtF groups and GDSS supported groups using what would now be considered " outmoded " systems ) should be replicated p i n g Web - based GDSS or conferencing systems , to see if the newer systems are more effective . The vast majority of experiments have concentrated on only a few of the potentially important variables that should be studied . Notably , though a large proportion of future use of GDSS will probably be in fully distributed ( asynchronous ) or mixed modes conditions , most of the experiments have been conducted in same timeisme place " decision rooms . " The tasks on which research has been conducted are clustered heavily in the " preference " and " brainstormingkreativity " sectors of the McGrath ( 1 984 ) typology . This makes it difficult to obtain any objective measures of decision quality so that the relative effectiveness of different modes and tools can be assessed . Very few experiments have been conducted in the " difficult " task areas of planning , negotiation , and conflict ; however , if a system is to be employed for the full range of group tasks that must be accomplished in long term , complex projects , these are necessary group tasks to support . More worrisome than task type is the apparent lack of complexity of the tasks used in most experiments . The majority ( 64 % ) of the tasks took less than an hour total for the GSS groups to learn the technology , adapt to the group , and agree on a decision or course of action . Generally , one would imagine that if an organizational group feels that it needs technology to help support decision making , it would be because the task was complex and lengthy . If not , then acquiring and / or traveling to a special computer - based facility and learning how to use it would undoubtedly seem like more trouble than it ' s worth ! The nature of the individual subjects and the distribution of group sizes used in most GDSS experiments are also of concern . Only 4 % of the studies used established rather than ad hoc groups , and over 90 % used students as the subjects . Using students has some advantages , since the relative homogeneity of the subjects removes a source of uncontrolled variance , and since most of them are familiar with computer keyboards and do not require extensive training to acquire the basic skills necessary to use a GDSS . However , their motivation to maximize effort and quality of decision is questionable , and they may also " put up " with things that " real " subjects would never tolerate , because they are used to doing as they are told by their teachers . Group Size , Task Characteristics , and GDSS Effectiveness : In terms of group size , most experiments used groups of five or fewer subjects . Yet , we know that GDSS is generally most helpful for larger sized groups . An Arizona study [ 191 comparing small ( size 3 ) , medium ( 9 ) , and large ( 18 ) groups showed that the larger the group using the GDSS , the better the performance and satisfaction of the group . Another pair of experiments using Groupsystems varied group size from 2 to 12 and concluded that the advantages of electronic brainstorming consistently become more pronounced as group size increases . Every other study varying group size [ 50 , 89 , 90 , 91 , 921 also showed larger groups out - performing smaller groups using GDSS . One study ( Valacich et al . , 1993 ) compared homogeneous to heterogeneous knowledge . The results suggested that greater performance gains were achieved for heterogeneous , large groups . Two studies investigated task complexity ( Bui and Sivasankaran , 1990 ; and Gallupe et al . , 1988 ) and found that as task complexity increases the decision quality and depth of analysis improve in groups using GSS . Thus , the limited evidence which exists suggests that complex tasks and larger groups will benefit more from GDSS , yet the experiments conducted to date have mostly used small groups with simple tasks . 6 . 2 What Needs to be Done There is a need for future experiments to place more emphasis on the use of larger groups of non - student subjects , using more complex tasks than has been typical . It is also time for more experiments to use a design which explores how factors such as group size and task type and complexity interact with specific types of tools and processes that can be provided by GDSS , rather than simply comparing GDSS to baseline or " manually supported " Face to Face groups . 52 More importantly , there have been no published experiments utilizing " anytime / anyplace " systems : the use of combined modes used by task groups , over a period of time . Likewise , state - 0 - the - art multimedia and / or Web - based systems need to be compared to the prior generations of " flat " text systems . In sum , despite well over 100 experiments , there are whole domains of GSS that have been left unexplored . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This research was supported by grants from the National Science Foundation program on Coordination Theory and Collaboration Technology ( NSF - IRI - 9408805 ) , from NJIT ( SBR - 421090 ) , and from the State of New Jersey Commission on Science and Technology to fhe Center for Multi - Media Research . The opinions expressed do not necessarily represent those of the National Science Foundation . Among the many people who have contributed to the program of research , in addition to the co - authors , are Kenneth Johnson , Rosalie Ocker , Ajaz Rana , Murray Turoff , and James Whitescarver . REFERENCES Benbasat , I . and Lim , L . H . , " The Effects of Group , Task , Context , and Technology Variables on the Usefulness of Group Support Systems : A Meta - Analysis of Experimental Studies , " Small Group Research , 24 , 4 , 1993 , 430462 . Dennis , A . , R . , George , J . , F . , Jessup , L . , M . , Nunamaker , J . , F . , and Vogel , D . , R . , " Information Technology to Support Electronic Meetings , " MIS Quarterly , December , 1988 , 591 - 618 . DeSanctis , G . and Gallupe , R . B . , " A Foundation for the Study of Group Decision Support Systems , " Management Science , 33 , 5 , 1987 , 589 - 609 . DeSanctis , G . , Poole , M . S . , Dickson , G . , and Jackson , M . " Interpretive Analysis of Team Use of Group Technologies , " Journal of Organizational Computing , 3 , I , 1993 , 1 - 30 . Dickson , G . W . , Poole , M . S . , and DeSanctis , G . , " An Overview of the GDSS Research Project and the SAMM System , " in Bostrom , R . P . , Watson , R . T . , and Kinney , S . T . , ( Eds . ) Computer Augmented Teamwork : A Guided Tour , 1992 , Van Nostrand Reinhold , New York . Fjermestad , I . , " An Integrated Framework for Group Support Commerce , 1997 ( accepted - pending revisions ) . Systems , " Journal Organizational Computing and Electronic Fjermestad , J . L . , Hiltz , S . R . , and Turoff , M . , " An Integrative Framework for the Study of Group Decision Support Systems , " Proceedings of the Twenty - Sixth Hawaii Internationai Conference on Systems Science , 1993 , IV , 179 - 1 88 . Gray , P . , Vogel , D . , and Beauclair , R . , " Assessing GDSS Empirical Research , " European Journal of Operational Research , 46 , 1990 , 162 - 178 . Hare , A . P . , Handbook of Small Group Research , New York : The Free Press . First ed . , 1962 , revised ed . , 1976 . Hiltz , S . R . , Dufner , D . K . , Holmes , M . E . , and Poole , S . M . , " Distributed Group Support Systems : Social Dynamics and Design Dilemmas , " Journal of Organizational Computing , 2 , 1 , 1991 , 135 - 159 . Hollingshead , A . B . and McGrath , J . E . , " Computer - Assisted Groups : A Critical Review of the Empirical Research , " in GUUO , R . A . , Salas , E . , and Associates , ( Eds . ) Team E8ectiveness and Decision Making in Organizations , 1995 . Jossey - Bass , San Francisco . Jelassi , M . T . , and Beauclair , R . A . , " An Integrated Framework for Group Decision Support System Design , " Information and Management , 13 , 1987 , 143 - 155 . Kiesler , S . , Zubrow , D . , Moses , A . M . , and Geller , V . , " Affect in computer - mediated communications : An Experiment in Synchronous Terminal - to - Terminal Discussion , " Human Computer Interaction , 1 , 1985 , 77 - 104 . McGrath , J . E . , Groups : Interaction and Performance , Engiewood Cliffs , NJ , Prentice - Hall , 1984 . McGrath , J . E . and Hollingshead , A . B . , Groups Interacting with Technology , Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage Publications , 1994 . McLeod , P . , " An Assessment of the Experimental Literature on the Electronic Support of Group Work : Results of a Meta - Analysis , " Human Computer Interaction , 7 , 3 , 1992 , 257 - 280 . Nunamaker , J . F . , Dennis , A . R . . George , J . F . , Martz , W . B . , Valacich , J . S . , and Vogel , D . R . , " GroupSystems , " in Bostrom , R . P . , Watson , R . T . , and Kinney , S . T . , ( Eds . ) Computer Augmented Teamwork : A Guided Tour , 1992 , Van Nostrand Reinhold , New York . Nunamaker , J . F . , Dennis , A . R . , Valacich , J . S . , Vogel , D . R . , & George , J . F . , " Electronic Meeting Systems to Support GroupWork , " Communications of the ACM , 34 , 7 , 1991 , 41 - 61 . Osbom , A . F . , Appiied Imagination ( rev . ed . ) . New York : Scribner ' s , 1957 . Pinsonneault , A . and Kraemer , K . L . , " The effects of electronic meetings on group processes and outcomes : An assessment of 53 the empirical research . “ Research , 46 , 1990 , 143 - 161 . Poole , M . S , and DeSanctis , G . , “Understanding the use of group decision support systems : The theory of adaptive structuration , ” In Steinfield , C . and Fulk , J . ( Eds . ) , Organizations and communzcation technology > 1990 , Beverly Hills : Sage Publications . Remus , W . , “Using Students as Subjects in Experiments on Decision Support Systems , “ Proceedings of the Twenty - Second Hawaii International Conference on Systems Sciencez 1989 , IV , European Journal of Operational 176 - 180 . Shaw , M . E . , Group Behavior , New York : McGraw - Hill , 1971 , 1976 . Short , J . , Williams , E . , and Christie , B . , The Social Psychology of Telecommunications , London : John Wiley & Sons , 1976 Simmel , G . Soziologie , Untersuchungen uber die Formen der Vergesell Schaftung , Leipzig : Duncker and Humblot , 1892 , 1907 . Simmel , G . , translated and edited by K . H . Wolff . The Sociology of Georg Simmel , New York : The Free Press , 1950 . Steiner , I . D . , Group Process and Productivity , New York Academic Press , 1972 . Group Dynamics . The Psychology of Small Turoff , M . and Hiltz , S . R . , “Computer support for group vs . individual decisions , ” IEEE Transactions on Communications COM - 20 , I , 1982 , 82 - 91 . Van de Ven , A . H . and Delbecq , A . L . , “ Nominal vs . Interacting Group Processes for Committee Decision - making Effectiveness , ” Academy of Management Journal , 14 , 2 , 1971 , 203 - 212 . The Experimental GSS Literature 1 Adrianson , L . and E . Hjelmquist , “Group Processes in Face - to - Face and Computer - Mediated Communication , ”Behavior & Information Technology , 10 , 4 ( 1991 ) , 281 - 296 . 2 Aiken , M . , J . Krosp , A . Shirani , and J . Martin , “Electronic Brainstorming in Small and Large Groups , ” Information & Management , 27 ( 1994 ) , 141 - 148 . 3 Anson , R . , R . Bostrom , and B . Wynne , “An Experiment Assessing Group Support Systems and Facilitator Effects on Meeting Outcomes , ” Management Science , 41 , 2 ( 1995 ) , 189 - 208 . 4 Archer , N . P . , “A Comparison of Computer Conferences with Face - To - Face Meetings for Small Group Business Decisions , ” Behaviour & Information Technology , 9 , 4 ( 1990 ) , 307 - 3 17 . 64 Austin , L . C , J K Liker , and P . L McLeod , “Who Controls the Technology in Group Support Systems ? Determinants and Consequences , ” Human - Computer Interaction , 8 ( 1 993 ) , 2 17 - 236 . 124 Berdahl , J . L . and K . M . Craig , “Equality of Participation and Influences in Groups : The Effects of Communication Medium and Sex Composition , ” Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) , 4 , 2 , 1996 , 179 - 201 . 5 Bui , T . and T . R . Sivasankaran , ”Relation Between GDSS Use and Group Task Complexity : An Experimental Study , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Third Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , III ( 1990 ) , 69 - 78 . 6 Bui , T . , T . R . Sivasankaran , Y . Filjol , and M . A . Woodbury , ”Identifying Organizational Opportunities For GDSS Use : Some Experimental Evidence , “ Transactions of the Seventh International Conference on Decision Support Systems , June 7 Burke , K . and L . Chidambaram , “Development in Electronically - Supported Groups : A Preliminary Longitudinal Study of Distributed and Face - to - Face Meetings , “ Proceedings of the Twenty - Seventh Hawaii International Conference odystem Sciences , IV ( 1994 ) , 104 - 113 . 7 Burke , K . and L . Chidambaram , “Developmental Differences Between Distributed and Face - to - Face Groups in Electronically Supported Meeting Environments : An Exploratory Investigation , Group Decision andNegotiation , 4 , 3 ( 1995 ) , 8 Burke , K . , L . Chidambaram , and J . Lock , “Evolution of Relational Factors Over Time : A Study of Distributed and Non - Distributed Meetings , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Eighth Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , IV 111 Burke , K . and L . Chidambaram , ADO Mediated Contexts Differ In Information Richness ? A Comparison of Collocated And Dispersed Meetings , @ Proceedings of the Twenty - Ninth Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , 9 Cass , K . , T . J . Heintz , and K . M . Kaiser , “Using a Voice - Synchronous GDSS In Dispersed Locations : A Preliminary Analysis of Participant Satisfaction , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Fourth Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , IV ( 1991 ) , 554 - 563 . 9 Cass , K . , T . J . Heintz , and K . M . Kaiser , “An Investigation of Satisfaction When Using a Voice - Synchronous GDSS in Dispersed Meetings , ” Infomution & hfunugemnt , 23 ( 1992 ) , 173 - 182 . 10 Chidambaram , L . , and R . P . Bostrom , “Evolution of Group Performance of Over Time : A Repeated Measures Study of GDSS Effects , “ Journal of Organzzational Computzng , 3 , 4 ( 1993 ) , 443 - 469 . 10 Chidambaram , L . , R . P . Bostrom , and B . E . Wynne , “A Longitudinal Study of the Impact of Group Decision Support Systems on Group Development , “ Journal of Management Information Systems , 7 , 3 ( 1 990 ) , 7 - 25 . 10 Chidambaram , L . , R . P . Bostrom , and B . E . Wynne , “An Empirical Investigation of : ‘the Impact of Computer Support on Group Performance , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Third Annual Hawaii International Conj2rence on System Sciences , N ( INO ) , 3 - 12 . 11 Chidambaram , L . and B . Jones , ”Impact on Communication Medium and Computer Support on Group Perceptions and Performance : A Comparison of Face - 0 - Face and Dispersed Meetings , ” MIS Quarter @ , 17 , 4 ( 1993 ) , 465 - 491 . “12 Chidambaram , L . and J . A . Kautz , “Defining Common Ground : Managing Diversity Through Electronic Meeting Systems , ”Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Information Systems , ( 1993 ) , 1 - 1 1 . ( 1987 ) , 68 - 75 . 213 - 234 . ( 1 995 ) , 14 - 23 . I11 ( 1996 ) , 92 - 101 . 54 112 Clapper , D . L . and A . P . Massey , “Predicting Group Output : Assessing the Relative Impacts of Task - Related Input and GSS Use , ” Proceedings of the Sixteenth International Conference on Infirmation Systems , ( 1995 ) , 65 - 80 . 13 Clapper , D . L . , E . R . McLean , and R . T . Watson , “An Experimental Investigation of the Effect of A Group Decision Support System on Normative Influence in Small Groups , ” Proceedings of the Twelf h International Conference on Information Systems , ( 1991 ) , 273 - 282 . 14 Connolly , T . , L . Jessup , and J . S . Valacich , “Effects of Anonymity and Evaluative Tone on Idea Generation in Computer - Mediated Groups , ” Management Science , 36 , 6 ( 1990 ) , 689 - 703 . * 15 COMOIIY , T . , R . L . Routhieaux , and S . K . Schneider , “On the Effectiveness of Group Brainstorming : Test of One Underlying Cognitive Mechanism , ” Small Group Research , 24 , 4 , ( 1993 ) , 124 Cummings , A . , A . Schlosser , and H . Arrow , “Developing Complex Group Products : Idea Combination in Computer - Mediated and Face - to - Face Groups , ” Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) , 4 , 2 , 1996 , 229 - 25 1 . 16 Daly , B . L . , “The Influence of Face - To - Face Versus Computer - Mediated Communication Channels on Collective Induction , ” AccmntingMmgement & Informotion Technology , 3 , l ( 1993 ) , 1 - 22 . 113 Dennis , A . , J . Aronson , B . Heninger , and E . Walker , ATask and Time Decomposition in Electronic Brainstorming , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Ninth Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , 111 ( 1 996 ) , 5 1 - 59 . 17 Dennis , A . R . , A . C . Easton , G . K . Easton , J . F . George , and J . F . Nunamaker , “Ad Hoc versus Established Groups in an Electronic Meting Environment , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Third Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , IV ( 1 990 ) , 23 - 29 . 18 Dennis , A . R . , and J . S . Valacich , “Computer Brainstorms : More Heads are Better Than One . , “ Journal of Applied 126 Dennis , A . , J . S . Valacich , T . Connolly and B . E . Wynne , “Process Structuring in Electronic Brainstorming , ” Information Systems Research , 7 , 2 , 1996 , 268 - 277 . 19 Dennis , A . R . , J . S . Valacich , and J . F . Nunamaker , “An Experimental Investigation of Small Medium and Large Groups in an Electronic Meeting System Environment , “ IEEE Transactions Systems Man Cybernetics , 20 , 5 ( 1990 ) , 1049 - 1057 . 20 DeSanctis , G . , M . J . DOnofrio , V . Sambamurthy , and M . S . Poole , “Comprehensiveness and Restrictiveness in Group Decision Heuristic : Effectsof Computer Support on Consensus Decision Making , ” Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Information Systems , ( 1989 ) , 13 1 - 40 , 21 Dickson , G . W . , G . DeSanctis , M . S . Poole , and M . Limayem , “Multicriteria Modeling and “What IF” Analysis as Conflict Management Tools for Group Decision Making , ” DSS Transaction , ( 1991 ) , 133 - 141 . 22 Dickson , G . W . , J . Lee - Partridge , and L . H . Robinson , “Exploring Modes of Facilitative Support for GDSS Technology , ” MIS Quarterly , June ( 1993 ) , 1 73 - 1 94 . 22 Dickson , G . W . , J . E . Lee , L . Robinson , and R . Heath , “Observations on GDSS Interactions : Chauffeured , Facilitated , and User - Driven Systems , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Second Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , ( 1 989 ) , 337 - 343 . 490 - 503 . PSyChOlOgy , 78 , 4 ( 1 993 ) , 53 1 - 537 . 23 Dubrovsky , V . J . , S . Kiesler , and B . N . Sethna , ”The Equalization Phenomenon : Status Effects in Computer - Mediated and Face - to - Face Decision Making Groups , ” Human Computer Interaction , 6 ( 1991 ) , 119 - 146 . 125 Dubrovsky , V . J . , D . Clapper , and M . Ullal , “The Effects of a Distinct Window Screen Design on Computer - Mediated Group Decision Making , ” Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 4 , 24 Dufner , D . K . , S . R . Hiltz , K . Johnson , and R . Czech , “Distributed Group Support Systems : The Effects of Voting Tools on Group Perceptions of Media Richness , ” Group Decision and Negotiation , 4 , 3 ( 1 993 , 235 - 250 . 24 Dufner , D . , S . R . Hiltz , and M . Turoff , “Distributed Group Support : A Preliminary Analysis of the Effects of the of Voting Tools and Sequential Procedures , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Seventh Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , IV , ( 1 994 ) , 1 14 - 1 23 . 25 Easton , G . K . , J . F . George , J . F . Nunamaker , and M . O . Pendergast , “Using Two Different Electronic Meeting System Tools for the Same Task : An Experimental Comparison , ” Journal of Management Information Systeh , 7 , l ( 1 990 ) , 85 - 99 . 26 Easton , A . C . , D . R . Vogel , and J . F . Nunamaker , “Interactive versus Stand - Alone Group Decision Support Systems for Stakeholder Identification and Assumption Surfacing in Small Groups , ” Decision Support Systems , 8 ( 1992 ) , 159 - 168 . 27 Easton , A . C . , D . R . Vogel , and J . F . Nunamaker , ” Stakeholder Identification and Assumption Surfacing in Small Groups : An Experimental Study , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Second Hawaii Intemational Conference on System Sciences , IV ( 1989 ) , 344 - 35 1 . * 28 Ellis , C . A . , G . L . Rein , and S . L . Jarvenpaa , “Nick Experimentation : Selected Results Conceming Effectiveness of Meeting Support Technology , ” Journal of Management Information Systems , 6 , 3 ( 1990 ) , 7 - 24 . 28 Ellis , C . A . , G . L . Rein , and S . L . Jarvenpaa , “Nick Experimentation : Some Selected Results , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Second Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , IV ( 1989 ) , 359 - 369 . * 29 Eveland , J . D . and T . K . Bikson , “Work Group Structures and Computer Support : A Field Experiment , “ ACM Transactions on 0 8 c e Information Systems , 6 , 4 , ( 1988 ) , 354 - 379 . 30 Fjermestad , J . , S . R . Hiltz , M . Turoff , C . Ford , K . Johnson , R . M . Czech , R . Ocker , F . Ferront , and M . Worrell , “Distributed Computer Supported Cooperative Strategic Decision Making Using Structured Conflict and Consensus Approaches , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Eight Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , III , ( 1999 , 222 - 23 1 . 31 Galegher , J . and R . E . Kraut , “Computer - Mediated Communication for Intellectual Teamwork : An Experiment in Group Writing , ” Informution System Research , 5 , 2 , ( 1994 ) , 110 - 138 31 Galegher , J . and R . E . Kraut , “Computer - Mediated Communication for Intellectual Teamwork : A Field Experiment in Group Writing , ” Proceedings of the Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work October ( 1990 ) , 95 - 78 . 32 Gallupe , RB . , “Suppressing the Contributions of the Group’s Best Member : Is GDSS Use Appropriate for All Group Tasks , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Third Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences . IV ( 1990 ) , 13 - 22 . 33 Gallupe , R . B . , L . M . Bastianutti , and W . H . Cooper , “Unlocking Brainstorms , ” Journal ofApplied PsychoZogv , 76 , 1 ( 1991 ) , 137 - 142 . 1996 , 33 - 49 . Use 55 34 Gallup , R . B . , W . H . Cooper , M . L . Grise , and L . M . Bastianutti , “Blocking Electronic Brainstorms , ” Journal of Applied 35 Gallupe , R . B . , A . R . Dennis , W . H . Cooper , J . S . Valacich , L . M . Bastianutti , and J . F . Nunamaker , “Electronic Brainstorming and Group Size , ” Academy of Management Journal , 35 , 2 ( 1992 ) , 350 - 369 . 36 Gallupe , R . B . , G . DeSanctis , and G . W . Dickson , ”Computer - Based Support for Group Problem - Finding : An Experimental Investigation , ” MIS QuarterZy , June ( 1988 ) , 277 - 296 . 37 Gallupe , R . B . and J . D . McKeen , “Enhancing Computer - Mediated Communications : An Experimental Investigation into the Use of a Group Decision Support System for Face - to - Face Versus Remote Meetings , “ Information and Management , 18 ( 1990 ) , 1 - 13 . 38 George , J . F . , A . R . Dennis , and J . F . Nunamaker , ”An Experimental Investigation of Facilitation in an EMS Decision Room , “ Group Decision and Negotiation , 1 ( 1992 ) , 57 - 70 . 39 George , J . F . , G . K . Easton , J . F . Nunamaker , and G . B . Northcraft , ”A Study of Collaborative Group Work With and Without Computer - Based Support , “ Information Systems Research , 1 , 4 ( 1990 ) , 394 - 415 . 40 Ghani , J . A . , R . Supnick , and P . Rooney , “The Experiences of Flow in Computer - Mediated and Face - To - Face Groups , ” Proceedings of the Twe2fth International Conference on Information Systems , ( 1991 ) , 229 - 237 . 41 Glasson , B . , D . Atkinson , V . Chang , and A . Whiteley , “Empowering Systems Developers Through Altemate Methods and Technologies : Testing the Efficacy of GDSS ( Group Decision Support Systems ) , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Third Annual Hawaii Internatzonal Conference on System Sciences , I11 42 Gopal , A . , R . P . Bostrom , and W . Chin , “Modeling the Process of GSS Use : An Adaptive Structuration Perspective , ” Journal of Management Information Systems , 9 , 3 ( 1993 ) , 45 - 69 . 42 Gopal , A , , R . P . Bostrom , and W . Chin , ”Modeling the Process of GSS Use . An Adaptive Structuration Perspective , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Fifth Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , IV ( 1992 ) , 208 - 219 . * 43 Griffth , T . L . , and G . B . Northcraft , ”Distinguish Between the Forest and Trees : Media , Features , and Methodology in Electronic Communication Research , ” Organizational Science , 44 Herschel , R . T . , “The Impact of Varying Gender Composition on Group Brainstorming Performance in a GSS Environment , ” Computer in Human Behavior , 10 , 2 ( 1994 ) , 209 - 222 . 44 Herschel , R . and B . E . Wynne , “An Analysis of the Performance of Groups of Varying Gender Composition in an Electronic Meeting System Environment , ” Transactions of DSS , 114 Hightower , R . and L . Sayeed , AThe Impact of Computer - Mediated Communication Systems on Biased Group Discussion , ” Computers zn Human Behavior , 1 , l , ( 1995 ) , 33 - 44 45 Hiltz , S . R . , K Johnson , and M . Turoff , “Experiments in Group Decision Making : Communication Process and Outcome in Face - to - Face Versus Computerized Conferences , “ Human Communications Research , 13 , 2 ( 1986 ) , 225 - 252 . 46 Hiltz , S . R . , K . Johnson , and M . Turoff , “Group Decision Support : The Effects of Human Leaders and Statistical Pvchologv , 79 , l ( 1994 ) , 77 - 86 . ( 1994 ) , 224 - 23 3 . 5 , 2 ( 1994 ) , 272 - 285 . ( 199 I ) , 156 - 167 . Feedback in Computerized Conferences , “ Journal of Management Information Systems , 8 , 2 ( 1991 ) , 81 - 108 . 47 Hiltz , S . R . , M . Turoff , and K . Johnson , “Experiments in Group Decision Making , 3 : Disinhibition , Deindividuation , and Group Process in Pen Name and Real Name Computer Conferences , “ Decision Support Systems , 5 ( 1989 ) , 217 - 232 . 48 Ho , T . H . and K . S . Raman , “The effect of GDSS and Elected Leadership on Small Group Meetings , “ Journal of Management Information Systems , 8 , 2 ( 1991 ) , 109 - 133 . 49 Hollingshead , A . B . , J . E . McGrath , K . M . O’Connor , “ Group Task Performance and Communication Technology : A Longitudinal Study of Computer - Mediated Versus Face - to - Face Groups , ” Small Group Research , 24 , 3 ( 1993 ) , 307 - 333 . 50 Huang , W . , K . S . Raman , and K . K . Wei , “A Process Study of Effects of GSS and Task Type on Informational and Normative Influence in Small Groups , ” Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Information Systems , ( 1993 ) , 91 - 101 . 51 Hwang , H . G . and J . Guynes , “The Effects of Group Size on Group Performance in Computer - Mediated Decision Making , ” Information & Management , 26 ( 1994 ) , 189 - 198 . 52 Hymes , C . M . and G . M . Olson , ”Unblocking Brainstorming Through the Use of a Simple Group Editor , ” Proceedings ofthe Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work October , 53 Iz , P . H . , ”An Experimental Assessment of Preference Aggregation in a Group Decision Support System Based on Multiple Criteria Optimization , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Fiph Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , IV ( 1992 ) , 185 - 189 . * 54 Jarvenpaa , S . L . , V . S . Rao , and G . P . Huber , “Computer Support for Meetings of Groups Working on Unstructured Problems : A Field Experiment , ” MIS Quurterb , 12 , 4 , ( 1988 ) , 645 - 665 . 55 Jessup , L . M . , T . Connolly , and J . Galegher , “The Effects of Anonymity on GDSS Group Process With an Idea - Generating Task , “ MIS Quarterly , September , ( 1990 ) , 313 - 321 . 123 Jessup , L . M . , J . L . , Egbert , and T . Connolly , “Understanding Computer - Supported Group Work : The Effects of Interaction Frequency on Group Process and Outcome , ’’ Joumal of Research on Computing in Education , 28 , 2 , 1996 , 190 - 208 . 56 Jessup , L . M . and D . A . Tansik , ”Decision Making in an Automated Environment : The Effects of Anonymity and Proximity with a Group Decision Support System , ” Decision Sciences , 22 , ( 1991 ) , 266 - 279 . 57 Joyner , R . and K . Tunstall , ”Computer Augmented Organizational Problem Solving , ” Management Science , 14 , 4 ( 1970 ) 212 - 225 . 115 Kahai , S . S . , B . J . Avolio , and J . J . Sosik , “Meeting Impacts of Two Types of EMS Anonymity and Initial Differences in Opinions , ” Proceedings of the Sixteenth International Conference on Information Systems , ( 1995 ) , 81 - 92 . 81 Lea , M . and R . Spears , ”Computer - mediated Communication , Deindividuation , and Group Decision Making , ” International Journal ofMan - Machine Studies , 34 , ( 1991 ) , 283 - 301 . 124 Lebie , L , J . A . Rhoades , and I . E . McGrath , ‘‘ Interaction Process in Computer - Mediated and Face - to - Face Groups , ” Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 4 , 1996 , 127 - 152 . 116 Lewe , H . , AComputer Support and Facilitated Structure in Meetings - An Empirical Comparison of Their Impact , ” ( 1992 ) 99 - 106 . 56 Proceedings of the Twenty - Ninth Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , I11 ( 1996 ) , 24 - 33 . 58 Lewis , L . F . , “A Decision Support System for Face - to - Face Groups , ” Journal of Information Science , 13 , ( 1987 ) , 2 I 1 - 2 19 . 59 Lim , L . H . , K . S . Raman , K . K . Wei , “ Interacting Effects of GDSS and Leadership , ” Decision Support Systems , 12 , 3 , ( 1 994 ) , 1 99 - 2 1 1 . 59 Lim , L . H . , K . S . Raman , and K . K . Wei , ”Does GDSS Promote More Democratic Decision - Making ? The Singapore Experiment , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Third Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , JV ( 1 990 ) , 59 - 68 . 60 Limayem , M . , J . E . Lee - Partridge , G . W . Dickson , and G . DeSanctis , “Enhancing GDSS Effectiveness : Automated versus Human Facilitation , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Sixth Hawaii International Conference on system sciences , IV , ( 1993 ) , 95 - 101 . 117 Losada , M . , P . Sanchez , and E . E . Nobe1 , “Collaborative Technology and Group Process Feedback : Their Impact on Interactive Sequences in Meetings , ” Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , ( 1990 ) , 53 - 64 . 61 Massey , A . P . , and D . L . Clapper , “Element Finding : The Impact of a Group Support Systems on a Crucial Phase of Sense Making , ” Journal of Management Information Systems , 1 1 , 4 , 48 McGrath , J . , “Introduction : The JEMCO Workshop - Description of a Longitudinal Study , ” Small Group Research , 124 McGrath , J . E . and H . Arrow , “Introduction : The JEMCO - 2 Study of Time , Technology , and Groups , ” Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) , 4 , 2 , 1996 , 107 - 126 . 62 McGuire , T . W . , S . Kiesler , and J . Siegel , “Group and Computer - Mediated Discussion Effects in Risk Decision Making , ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , * 63 McLeod , P . L . and S . E . Elston , “Persuasive Linguistic Devices in Anonymous Vs Identified Computer Supported Groups : An Exploratory Study , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Eight Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , IV , ( 1 995 ) , 163 - 170 . 64 McLeod , P . L . and J . K . Liker , “Electronic Meeting Systems : Evidence from a Low Structure Environment , ” Information Systems Research , 3 , 3 , ( 1992 ) , 195 - 223 . 118 Mejas , R . , L . Lazeneo , and D . Vogel , AA Cross - Cultural Comparison of GSS and non - GSS Consensus and Satisfaction Levels Within and Between the US . & Mexico , @ Proceedings of the Twenty - Ninth Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , 111 ( 1 996 ) , 408 - 41 7 . 65 Mennecke , B . E . , JA . Hoffer , and J . S . Valacich , “An Experimental Investigation of Group History and Group Support Systems Use on Information Sharing Performance and User Perceptions , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Eight Hawaii International conference on system sciences , IV , ( 1995 ) , 153 - 162 . 66 Miranda , S . M . , and R . P . Bostrom , “The Impact of Group Support Systems on Group Conflict and Conflict Management , ” Journal ofManagement Information Systems , 10 , 3 , ( 1994 ) , 63 - 95 . 66 Mimnda , S . M . , and R . P . Boarom , “The Impact of Group Support Systems on Group Conflict and Conflict Management : An Empirical Investigation , ” Proceedings of the Twenw - Sixth ( 1 993 , 149 - 1 76 . 24 , 3 , ( 1993 ) , 285 - 306 . 52 , 5 , ( 1987 ) , 9 17 - 930 . Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , 111 , 67 Ocker , R . , S . R . Hiltz , M . Turoff , J . Fjermestad , “The Effects of Distributed Group Support and Process Structuring on Requirements Development Teams : Results on Creativity and Quality , ” Journal of Management Information Systems , 67 Ocker , R . , S . R . Hiltz , M . Turoff , and J . Fjermestad , “Computer Support for Distributed Asynchronous Software Design Teams : Experimental Results on Creativity and Quality , ”Proceedings of the Twenty - Eight Hawaii International Con @ rence on system Sciences , 111 , ( 1995 ) , 4 - 13 . 119 Olson , J . S . , G . M . Olson , and D . K . Meader , “What Mix of Video and Audio is Useful for Remote Real - time Work ? ” Proceedings of Computer Human Interaction , ( 1 995 ) , 362 - 368 . 68 Olson , J . S . , G . M . Olson , M . Stomsten , and M . Carter , ”How a GroupEditor Changes the Character of a Design Meeting as Well as its Outcome , ” Proceedings of the Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ; October , ( 1 992 ) , 9 1 - 98 . 99 Poole , M . S . , and G . DeSanctis , “Microlevel Structuration in Computer - Supported Group Decision Making , ” Human Communication Research , 19 , 1 , ( 1992 ) , 5 - 49 . 99 Poole , M . S . , M . Holmes and G . DeSanctis , “Conflict Management in a Computer - Supported Meeting Environment , ” Management Science , 37 , 8 ( 1991 ) , 926 - 953 . 99 Poole , M . S . , M . Holmes , R . Watson , and G . DeSanctis , “Group Decision Support Systems and Group Communication : A Comparison of Decision Making in Computer - Supported and Non - supported Groups , ’’ Communications Research , 20 , 2 ( 1993 ) , 176 - 213 . 69 Raman , K . S . , B . C . Y . Tan , and K . K . Wei , ” An Empirical Study of Task Type and Communication Medium in GDSS , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Sixth Hawaii International Conference on Systems Science , IV , ( 1993 ) , 16 1 - 1 68 . * 70 Rao , V . S . , “Effects of Teleconferencing Technologies : An Evaluation Exploration of Comprehension , Feedback , Satisfaction and Role - related Differences , ” Group Decision andNegotiation , 4 , ( 1995 ) , 25 1 - 272 . 70 Rao , V . S . , “Dimensions of Satisfaction in Teleconferencing : An Exploratory Analysis , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Seventh Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , IV , ( 1994 ) , 124 - 133 . 71 Reagan - Cirincione , P . , “Improving the Accuracy of Group Judgment : A Process Intervention Combining Group Facilitation , Social Judgment Analysis , and Information Technology , ” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 58 , ( 1994 ) , 246 - 270 . 71 Reagan - Cirincione , P . , “Combining Group Facilitation , Decision Modeling , and Information Technology to Improve the Accuracy of Group Judgment , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - FiJh Hawaii International Confernce on System Sciences , IV , ( 1992 ) , 127 Reinig , B . A . , R . O . Briggs , M . M . Shepherd , J . Yen and J . F . Nunamaker , “Affective Reward and the Adoption of Group Support Systems , ” Journal of Management Information Systems , 12 , 2 , 1996 , 171 - 185 . 127 Reinig , B . A . , R . O . Briggs , M . M . Shepherd , J . Yen and J . F . Nunamaker , “Developing and Validating an Instrument to Measure the Impact of Group Support Technology on Affective Reward , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Eighth Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , IV ( 1995 ) , ( 1993 ) , 83 - 94 . 12 , 3 , ( 1996 ) , 127 - 153 . . 798 - 807 . 57 72 Rhee , W . S . , H . Pirkul , V . Jacob , and R . Barhki , “Effects of Computer - Mediated Communication on Group Negotiation An Empirical Study , ” Proceedzngs of the Twenty - Eighth Hawaiz International Conference on system Sciences , IV , ( 1995 ) , 210 - 279 73 Sambamurthy , V . and G . DeSanctis , “An Experimental Evaluation of GDSS Effects on Group Performance During Stakeholder Analysis , ” Proceedzngs of the Twenty - Third Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , N , ( 1990 ) , 79 - 88 . V . and M . S . Poole , “The effects of variations GDSS designs on management of cognitive conflict in groups , ” Information Systems Research , 3 , 3 73 Sambamurthy , V . , G . DeSanctis , and M . S . Poole , “The Effects of Alternative Computer - Based Technologies on Equivocality Reduction During Group Decision - Making , ’‘ Unpublished manuscript , School of Business , Florida State University , Tallahassee , 199 1 . 73 Sambamurthy , V . , M . S . Poole , and J . Kelly , ”The Effects of Variations in GDSS Capabilities on Decision - making Processes in Groups , “ Small Group Research , 24 , 4 ( 1993 ) , 523 - 546 . 120 Savicki , V . , M . Kelley , and D . Lingenfelter , “Gender and Group Composition in Small Task Groups Using Computer - Mediated Communication , ” Computers zn Human Behavior , 12 , 74 Sengupta , K . and D . Te’eni , “Cognitive Feedback in GDSS : Improving Control and Convergence , “ MIS Quarterly , 17 , l 74 Sengupta , K . and D . Te’eni , “Reducing Cognitive Conflict Through Feedback in GDSS : An Experiment in the Formulation of Group Preferences , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Sixth Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , IV , ( 1991 ) 63 1 - 640 75 Sharda , R . , Barr , S . H . , and McDonnell , J . C . , ”Decision Support System Effectiveness : A Review and an Empirical Test , ” Management Science , 34 , 2 , ( 1988 ) , 139 - 157 . 76 Shephard , M . M . , R . O . Briggs , B . A . Reninig , J . Yen , and J . F . Nunamaker , ”Social Comparison to Improve Electronic Brainstorming : Beyond Anonymity , ” Joumal of Management Information Systems , 12 , 3 , 1996 , 155 - 170 . 76 Shepherd , M . M . , R . O . Briggs , B . A . Reinig , and J . Yen , “Social Loafing in Electronic brainstorming : Invoking Social Comparison Through Technology and Facilitation Techniques to Improve Group Productivity , ” Proceedzngs of the Twenty - Eight Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , IV , 121 Sia , C . , B . C . Y . Tan , and K . Wei , “Exploring the Effects of Some Display and Task Factors on GSS User Groups , ” Information and Management , 30 , 1996 , 35 - 41 . 77 Slegel , J . , V . Dubrovsky , S . Kiesler , and T . W . McGuire , “Group Processes in Computer - Mediated Communication , “ Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 37 , 78 Silver , S . D . , B . J . Cohen , and J . H . Crutchfield , “Status Differentiation and Information Exchange in Face - to - Face and Computer - Mediated Idea Generation , ” Social Psychology Quarterly , 57 , 2 ( 1994 ) , 108 - 123 . * 79 Smith , J . Y . and M . T . Vanecek , ”Dispersed Group Decision Making Using Nonsimultaneous Computer Conferencing : A Report of Research , “ Journal of Management Information Systems , 7 , 2 ( 1 990 ) , 7 1 - 92 . ( 1992 ) , 224 - 25 1 . 2 , 1996 , 209 - 224 . ( 1993 ) , 87 - 113 . ( 1995 ) , 523 - 532 . ( 1986 ) , 157 - 187 . 79 Smith , J . Y . and M . T . Vanecek , “A Nonsimultaneous Computer Conference as a Component of Group Decision Support Systems , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Second Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , IV , ( 1989 ) , 370 - 377 . 80 Smith J . Y . and M . T . Vanecek , “Computer Conferencing and Task - Oriented Decisions : Implications for Group Decision Support , “ Information & Management , 14 , ( 1988 ) , 123 - 132 . 81 Spears , R . , M . Lea , and S . Lee , “De - Individuation and Group Polarization in Computer - Mediated Communication , ” British Journal of Social Psychologv , 29 , ( 1990 ) , 1 - 14 . 82 Steeb , R . and S . C . Johnston , “A Computer - Based Interactive System for Group Decision Making , ” IEEE Trans . Systems Man Cybernetics , 11 , 8 ( 1981 ) , 544 - 552 . 122 Straus , S . , “Getting a Clue : The Effects of Communication Media and Information Distribution of Participation and Performance in Computer - Mediated and Face - to - Face Groups , ” Small Group Research , 27 , 1 , 1996 , 115 - 142 . 83 Straus , S . G . , and J . E . McGrath , “Does the Medium Matter ? The Interaction of Task Type and Technology on Group Performance and Member Reactions , ” Journal of Applied 84 Tan , B . C . Y . , K . S . Raman , and K . K . Wei , “An Empirical Study of Task Dimension of Group Support Systems , ” IEEE Transactiom on System , Man , andcybemetrcs , 24 , I ( 1994 ) , 1054 - 1060 . 84 Tan , B . C . Y . , K . K . Wei , and K . S . Raman , “Effects of Supported and Task Type on Group Decision Outcome : A Study Using SAMM , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Fourth Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , N , ( 1991 ) , 537 - 546 85 Tan , B . C . Y . , K . K . Wei , and RT . Watson , “Dampening Status Influence Using A Group Support System : An Empirical Study , ” Transactions of the Thirteenth International Conference on Decision Support Systems , ( 1993 ) , 77 - 89 . 86 Toth , J . A . , “The Effects of Interactive Graphics and Text on Social Influence in Computer - Mediated Small Groups , ” Proceedzngs of the Confirence on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , October 22 , ( 1994 ) , 299 - 3 10 . 87 Tung , L . L . and A . R . Heminger , “The Effects of Dialectical Inquiry , Devil’s Advocacy , and Consensus Inquiry Methods in a GSS Environment , “ Information & Management , 25 , ( 1993 ) , 3341 * 88 Tryan , C . K . , J . F . George , and J . F . Nunamaker , “Group Support for Technical Review Teams : An Exploratory Investigation , Proceedings of the Twenty - Szxth Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , IV , ( 1993 ) , 102 - 1 11 . 4547 Turoff , M . and S . R . Hiltz , “Computer Support for Group Versus Individual Decisions , “ IEEE Transactions on Communication , 30 , l ( 1 982 ) , 82 - 90 . 89 Valacich , J . S . , A . R . Dennis , and T . Connolly , “Idea Generation in Computer - Based Groups : A New Ending to an Old Story , ” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 57 , ( 1994 ) , 488 - 467 . 90 Valacich , J . S . , A . R . Dennis , and J . F . Nunamaker , “Anonymity and Group Size Effects in an Electronic Meeting Systems Environment , “ Small Group Research , 23 , l ( 1992 ) , 49 - 73 . 91 Valacich , J . S . , J . F . George , J . F . Nunamaker , and D . R . Vogel , “Physical Proximity Effects on Computer - Mediated Group Idea Generation , Small Group Research , 25 , 1 ( 1994 ) , 83 - 104 . 92 Valacich , J . S . , B . C . Wheeler , B . E . Mennecke , R . Wachter , “The Effects of Numerical and Logical Group Size on Computer - Psychology , 79 , 1 ( 1994 ) , 87 - 97 . 58 Mediated Idea Generation , ” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 62 , 3 ( 1995 ) , 3 18 - 329 . 92 Valacich , J . S . , B . E . Mennecke , R . Wachter , and B . C . Wheeler , “Computer - Mediated Idea Generation : The Effects of Group Size and Group Heterogeneity , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Sixth Hawaii International Conference on Systems Science , IV , 93 Valacich , J . S . , D . Paranka , J . F . George , J . F . Nunamaker , “Communication Concurrency and the New Media : A New Dimension for Media Richness , ” Communication Research , 20 , 2 94 Valacich , J . S . and C . Schwenk , “Devil’s Advocacy and Dialectical Inquiry Effects on Group Decision Making Using Computer - Mediated Versus Verbal Communication , ” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 63 , 2 95 Valacich , J . S . and C . Schwenk , “Effects of Carping versus Objective Devil’s Advocacy on the Decision Making of Individuals and Groups Using Verbal Versus Computer - Mediated Communication , ” Decision Sciences , 26 , 3 , ( 1 995 ) 369 - 394 . 96 VanSchaik , F . D . and H . G . Sol , “Effectiveness of Decision Support Systems , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Third Hawaii International Conference on system sciences , IIL ( 1990 ) , 50 - 58 . 97 Venkatesh , M . and B . E . Wynne , “Effects of Problem Formulation and Process Structures on Performance and Perception in a GDSS Environment : An Experiment , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Fourth Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , 111 , ( 1991 ) , 564 - 572 . 98 Walther , J . B . , “Relational Aspect of Computer - Mediated Communication : Experimental Observations over Time , ” Organiz & ‘onal Science , 6 , 2 ( 1995 ) , 186 - 203 . 98 Walther , J . B . , “Longitudinal Experiment on Relational Tone in Computer - Mediated and Face to Face Interaction , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - F $ h Hawaii International Conference on Systems Science , IC ( 1 992 ) , 220 - 23 1 . 98 Walther , J . B . and J . K . Burgoon , ”Relational Communication in Computer - Mediated Interaction , ” Human Communications Research , 19 , 1 ( 1992 ) , 50 - 88 . 99 Watson . R . T . , G . DeSanctis , and M . S . Poole , “Using a GDSS to Facilitate Group Consensus : Some Intended and Unintended Consequences , ” MIS Quarterly , September , ( 1 988 ) , 463 - 477 . 100 Watson , R . T . , T . H . Ho , K . S . Raman , “A Fourth Dimension of Group Support Systems , ” Communications of the ACM , 37 , 10 101 Weisband , S . P . , “Group Discussion and First Advocacy Effects in Computer - Mediated and Face - to - Face Decision Making Groups , ” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 53 , ( 1992 ) , 352 - 380 . 102 Weisband , S . , “Overcoming Social Awareness in Computer - Supported Groups : Does Anonymity Really Help ? ” Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) , 2 , ( 1994 ) , 285 - 297 . 102 Weisband , S . , S . K . Scheidner , T . Connolly , “Computer - Mediated Communication and Social Information : Status Salience and Status Differences , ” Academy of Management Journal , 38 , 4 103 Wheeler , B . C . , B . E . Mennecke , and J . N . Scudder , “Restrictive Group Support Systems as a Source of Process Structure for High and Low Procedural Order Groups , ” Small Group Research , 24 , 4 ( 1993 ) , 504 - 522 . ( 1993 ) , 152 - 160 . ( 1 993 ) , 249 - 276 . ( 1995 ) , 158 - 173 . ( 1 994 ) , 44 - 55 . ( 1995 ) , 1124 - 1151 . 104 Wilson , J . and L . M . Jessup , “A Field Experiment on GSS Anonymity and Group Member Status , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Eighth Hawaii International Conzrence on System Sciences , IV , ( 1995 ) , 2 12 - 22 1 . 105 Winniford , M . , “Issues in Automated Voting , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Forth Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , IK ( 1991 ) , 621 - 630 . 106 Wood , J . G . and J . T . Nosek , “Discrimination of Structure and Technology in a Group Support System : The Role of Process Complexity , ” Proceedings of the International Confirence on Information Systems , 111 , ( 1994 ) , 187 - 1 99 . 107 Yellen , R . E . , M . Winniford , and C . C . Sanford , “Extraversion and Introversion in Electronically - Supported Meetings , ” Information & Management , 24 , ( 1 995 ) , 63 - 74 . “108 Zigurs , I . , G . DeSanctis , and J . Billingsley , “Adoption Pattems and Attitudinal Development in Computer - Supported Meetings : An Exploratory Study with SAMh4 , “ Journal of Management Information Systems , 7 , 4 ( 1 991 ) , 5 1 - 70 . * lo8 Zigurs , I . , G . DeSanctis , and J . Billingsley , “Exploring Attitudinal Development in Computer - Supported Groups , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Second Hawaii International Conzrence on System Sciences , I11 ( 1989 ) , 353 - 357 . 109 Zigurs , I . , M . S . Poole , and G . L . DeSanctis , “A Study of Influence in Computer - Mediated Group Decision Making , “ MIS Quarterly , December , ( 1 988 ) , 625 - 644 . 110 Zigurs , I . , E . V . Wilson , A . M . Sloane , R . F . Reitsma , and C . Lewis , “Simulation Models and Group Negotiation : Problems of Task Understanding and Computer Support , ” Proceedings of the Twenty - Seventh Hawaii International Conference on Systems Science , 111 , ( 1994 ) , 306 - 3 15 . Note : An * In front : Non - conforming studies 12 Chidambaram & Kautz , 1993 : One group per cell ; No 15 Connolly , Routheaux , & Schneider , 1993 : Individuals 28 Ellis , Rein , & Jarvenpaa , 1989 , 1990 : One group per cell . 29 Eveland & Bikson , 1988 : One group per cell ; No statistics . 43 Griffith & Northcraft , 1994 : Two subjects per group . 54 Jarvenpaa , Rao , Huber , 1988 : One group per cell . 63 Mcleod & Elston , 1995 : No Statistics . 70 Rao , 1994 , 1995 : No real task ; discussion only . 79 Smith & Vanecek , 1988 : Two subjects per group . 88 Tryan , George , & Nunamaker , 1992 : No statistics . 108 Zigurs , DeSanctis , & Billingsley , 1989 : No statistics - , statistics . pooled into groups . Case study . 59 h n * ) k 0 1 tn ul tn 0 & PI Y & 8 r l m N m N . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v ] . 0 " . . . 1 . . . r 1 W P I l l + . . . . . . . . . . e . . . . . c . . . h * h & . u . A In - 4 c u x 0 0 0 5s . 5 2 2 : I O P m o p & . w o l & . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ul z . . . 111 g . . . ; 1 : : . . . PI $ 4 PI . . . m u m m X v ] n u u W 4 4 a 0 m u - d 4 4 4 m a l > W " 0 w . a m - . . . . . . . . 2 & * , ul ul m a W rl E il . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ar & aJc car " N N - . 7 - 4 . . . . . . . . 61 Ti - - * . - - . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . _ . . _ . . . . . . . . , @ : ; 822 ig " a ; b 0 E - C E - C - q m t . d 0 * : . ? m r r t l C : . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 A cj 4 f vi w . bCE - tE - iE - iWWW c e c c e c e i ? i ? i ? i ? i ? : RP : 62 r m r s m o w m m VI a w w a ~ r l ~ m ~ r l . l - iN " ) rl * . u r l m r l d r l r l r l . . . u * a . . . . . . . . QI . . . . . . . . . a , . . . . . . . . . c , . o m a o c \ 1 I D N o o * a , m r s N m o 0 0 0 . 4 r l r l r l N r Q W . d I I I I I l l O u Prlrlrlrll - irl40c , rl ( UmrsIDrl E4 r l r l r l N m m z . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . f4 g . . . . . . . . . Q j ! : : : : : : : : . . . . . . . . 2 8 : : : : : : : : a 0 ~ 0 0 ~ 0 0 0 . Q R 0 m C D w o r l r l o 0 0 r l L o a o N w N o o o . . . . . . . . u w l - i r l m v w m + m I I I I I I I I + r l m r m r l r l . * 4 . . . . 4 . . . . 01 0 0 N l + X & I rlLoo - 4i 01 r l N Z a . . . . u I N : $ w r s o N N 0 . . . . . . . . . . 8 : : : : : r l m r s t n w I I I I N m v m IDtnrle . Nrlr ( . . . . . . . . . . . cJ 0 0 . rl rlrl * I I100 r a d 4 m w ( u r s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e . . . . . . N r l r l N r f r l rl . . . . . . . . . p . . . d . . . \ . e . I D . . . d . . . I CDOd w r l ( u e mrlm03 d o l . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . o m - l n w a a , c , u " m 0 . . . & . . o : : : $ rl m rl X N X X N e X N B c P - 4 VI 8 rl i u c 4 d m LI a , c , c ? 0 U m L o r l r s r l l - i m m r l r l l - i r l * . . d e m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . - E . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A H * " * . . $ u . o . . . . . . * . d m . c , . . . . . - . . . . . . . . . . . 0 0 * ~ ~ . . . . . . 4 u . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 c a , I n g . 4h . h * La u c u a u u cl ; UREJ - . m QLI a , : m O \ l \ \ E c u o o w - c u Z Z b - ! E ~ Z VI N r l N g : : : k 0 Y 63 u r , N m 3 3 V 0 m 2 d I h 64 I I i I - I I I I I 65