Uncovering Children’s Situated Design Capital – A Nexus Analytic Inquiry Matin Mahboob Kanafi INTERACT Research Unit , University of Oulu matin . mahboobkanafi @ oulu . fi Netta Iivari INTERACT Research Unit , University of Oulu netta . iivari @ oulu . fi Marianne Kinnula INTERACT Research Unit , University of Oulu marianne . kinnula @ oulu . fi Sumita Sharma INTERACT Research Unit , University of Oulu sumita . sharma @ oulu . fi ABSTRACT Nurturing children’s competences needed for their digital futures and inviting them to adopt a protagonist role within design pro - cess have recently been emphasized in child - computer interaction research . For children to be able to act as design protagonists , they need design capital . We carried out a project with 13 - 14 - year - olds and inquired under what circumstances the situated design capital of children emerged , enabling them to act as design protagonists without us deliberately steering them towards that . By employing the theoretical lens of nexus analysis , several factors were discov - ered that mediated children to utilize their situated design capital , including distributed agency , positive peer pressure , peer learning , and identity positioning . The findings imply that children’s situ - ated capital emanates from interactional phenomena , within which historical trajectories of the place , children , discourses , ideas , and objects intermingle . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing ; • Human computer interac - tion ( HCI ) ; • Empirical studies in HCI ; KEYWORDS Children , Design capital , Design , Making , Nexus analysis ACM Reference Format : Matin Mahboob Kanafi , Netta Iivari , Marianne Kinnula , and Sumita Sharma . 2022 . Uncovering Children’s Situated Design Capital – A Nexus Analytic Inquiry . In Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’22 ) , June 27 – 30 , 2022 , Braga , Portugal . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 14 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3501712 . 3529732 1 INTRODUCTION Child - Computer Interaction ( CCI ) has for long emphasized empow - erment of children in and through design . The research community has identified roles for children to adopt in the design process and methods that enable children to design in meaningful and inspir - ing ways . During recent years , CCI research has placed increasing Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . IDC ’22 , June 27 – 30 , 2022 , Braga , Portugal © 2022 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9197 - 9 / 22 / 06 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3501712 . 3529732 emphasis on children’s ability to have a voice and a say in the design process and in technology development more generally , cul - minating in the identification of a protagonist role [ 44 ] . In this role , children drive technology development and critically reflect on technology and its trajectories in their everyday life and in society . Studies have since examined this role [ 36 , 55 , 69 , 87 , 97 ] , showing also challenges involved in adopting the role [ 36 , 50 ] ; prior research has revealed that it is by no means obvious or easy for children to adopt this role . The current study examines the engagement of children in de - sign , along which some of them showed design protagonist charac - teristics as well as inspired other children’s design performances . Through examining this design process , we contribute to the CCI literature on the adoption of the protagonist role , particularly by shedding light on the resources children draw on in design in situ . These resources constitute part of children’s design capital . We fol - low Kanafi et al . [ 50 ] in dividing design capital into two facets : the competences children already have and bring into design process , and the competences related to “managing and mastering digital - ization” that need to be developed in children [ 50 ] . Particularly we focus on the former : on resources children have and bring into the design process . For addressing use of such resources , we introduce the term situated design capital for CCI research , inspired by the work by Lave and Wenger [ 62 ] and Scollon and Scollon [ 95 ] . Lave and Wenger introduced the notion of “situated learning” where they adopt a constructive perspective on sociocultural learning , highlighting that knowledge is leveraged within a specific context , stating that “even so - called general knowledge only has power in specific circumstances” [ 62 ] . Scollon and Scollon [ 95 ] , along these lines , advocate a situated perspective on social action , emphasiz - ing avoidance of “uprooting words and actions from the historical bodies of the individuals performing them , or disconnecting the discourses and actions from the sociocultural context of their for - mation and realization , or ignoring the history of these actions and discourses for the individual and in the situation” [ 96 ] . As our research question , we ask : what kind of circumstances ac - tivate and mediate children’s situated design capital ? To understand this , we carried out a “My Superhero” project with 21 children aged 13 - 14 with the underlying aim of supporting their agency and giv - ing them a voice in the design process . We did not steer the children actively towards a design protagonist role in the project ; instead , we examined how children’s situated design capital emerged naturally . As our theoretical lens , we used nexus analysis [ 95 ] . 408 IDC ’22 , June 27 – 30 , 2022 , Braga , Portugal Matin Mahboob Kanafi et al . 2 RELATED WORK Over recent decades , enabling children’s voices to be heard in tech - nology design process has drawn attention within diverse disci - plines ( e . g . , [ 13 , 53 , 85 , 106 ] ) , including Human - Computer Interac - tion ( HCI ) and more specifically Child - Computer Interaction ( CCI ) , which has particularly paid attention to that and still considers it as a well - grounded topic for the future CCI research [ 29 ] . Already in 2002 , Druin [ 22 ] presented a model where children’s roles in the design process were expanded from users of technology towards more powerful ones : a tester , an informant , and a design partner [ 22 ] . Since that , CCI researchers have brought forth various views on what nuances children’s role in the design process can contain . For example , Barendregt et al . [ 7 ] present a Role Definition Ma - trix indicating how children’s roles can vary in different phases of the design process , Kinnula et al . [ 56 ] explore the roles children themselves adopt in the design process , Large et al . [ 61 ] introduce a Bonded Design method covering a variety of the participants and employ it in the design process , and Doorn et al . [ 21 ] worked together with children while inviting children to embrace the role of a co - researcher . Recently , the design protagonist role was intro - duced by Iversen et al . [ 44 ] , where children are put at the center of the design process , expressing their voice , and participating in solving real - world design problems . Compared to other roles , the protagonist role introduces novel aspects in terms of its objectives , process , and outcomes : it underscores child empowerment in the process of technology development as well as children’s critical re - flection on it . Besides , the protagonist role aims at children making more informed decisions concerning technology in their lives and at developing children’s agency [ 44 ] . Along these lines , a growing body of CCI literature studies chil - dren’s empowerment regarding design and making , stimulated by the political participatory design [ 36 , 44 , 55 , 56 , 90 , 92 , 97 ] , and calls for ‘computational empowerment’ of children [ 20 , 45 ] that closely aligns with the protagonist notion . Following the intro - duction of the protagonist role , diverse studies have already been carried out to invite children to adopt a design protagonist role within technology design process [ 36 , 37 , 45 , 87 , 102 ] . These stud - ies have highlighted , among other issues , the importance of digital design literacy for children’s agency and empowerment , facilitating the adoption of the protagonist role [ 69 ] . Similarly , a recent study coins “design capital” as an ‘umbrella concept’ that covers various competences concerning the design protagonist role , including de - sign competences that are already situated in children ( e . g . , funds of knowledge , funds of identity , social and cultural capital , etc . ) and design competences that need to be developed in children ( e . g . , computational thinking , design thinking , design literacy , making literacy , etc . ) [ 50 ] . Our focus is particularly on the design compe - tences that children already possess : what they entail , and how they emerge and become drawn on in design , contributing to the protagonist role adoption . So far , the CCI literature is limited in thoroughly empirically examining these design competences as well as in specifying under what kind of circumstances children’s situated design capital is activated and mediated . Overall , there is a need to inspect under what circumstances children’s situated design capital becomes uncovered and flourishes in design , leading towards protagonist role adoption , and why inviting children to adopt this role is challenging [ 36 , 50 ] . The CCI literature has already addressed design capital situ - ated in children through concepts such as funds of knowledge , funds of identity , social and cultural capital , and historical body and interaction order [ 50 ] . The studies point out the importance of children’s existing knowledge , skills , and competences on one hand , and their social networks , interactions , and relationships on the other hand . Regarding the knowledge , skills and compe - tences , the literature has pointed out that design activities should be built on children’s ‘funds of knowledge’ [ 11 ] as well as leverage those , i . e . , children’s existing knowledge and competences [ 17 ] . Besides , children’s informal and unconventional scientific funds of knowledge should be integrated with formal scientific funds of knowledge at school [ 70 , 71 ] and children should be guided through activities built from their tacit knowledge [ 63 ] . It is also in accor - dance with the asset - based approach that capitalizes on the existing resources and strengths rather than lacks and needs in the commu - nities [ 14 , 42 , 51 , 57 , 81 , 105 ] . Funds of identity , a related concept , is also seen as a resource for children in design [ 58 ] . Historical body and cultural capital concepts have also been used to direct atten - tion to children’s existing knowledge , experiences , values , beliefs , and attitudes as resources in design [ 37 , 59 , 67 ] , similarly to the concept of cultural forms [ 34 , 35 ] . Although providing valuable insights , the studies are limited in examining in detail how and in what circumstances such capital , already situated in children , becomes a resource in design in situ . This is where this study aims to contribute . Regarding children’s social networks , interactions and relation - ships , social capital and interaction order concepts have been used to indicate the relevance of existing networks , relationships and associated skills and competences for children’s design activi - ties , showing how other people are shaping what is taking place [ 37 , 59 , 105 ] . The CCI literature has acknowledged the role of partic - ipants’ interactions not only among children but among all actors who have roles in design projects . As for peer interaction , children deepen their understanding and enhance their learning experiences through group work while sharing ideas , discussing and collaborat - ing [ 16 – 19 , 27 , 32 , 36 , 45 , 49 , 52 , 56 , 60 , 66 , 68 , 79 , 80 , 86 , 91 , 99 , 100 ] . Children are more creative when engaging in a collaborative creativ - ity challenge [ 15 , 49 , 80 , 98 ] . Also , when children share their results with their peers , there are reports that children declare a sense of achievement , and their motivation increases [ 1 , 28 , 33 , 47 , 98 , 100 ] . Furthermore , the role of adults , particularly teachers , in scaffold - ing children’s learning in design activities has been addressed [ 1 , 6 , 16 , 27 , 28 , 39 , 45 , 49 , 79 , 98 , 100 , 103 – 48 ] . Besides , parents’ engagement has been argued to provide support , motivation , and emotional security in design activities [ 17 , 48 , 54 , 74 , 89 , 91 ] . Fur - thermore , researchers are seen to contribute to the sessions through facilitation and assistance [ 1 , 8 , 17 , 47 , 48 , 99 ] . Hence , interactional phenomena have been widely studied in CCI , while we offer novel insights through a situated examination of how they act as resources in design in the sense of situated design capital as well as facilitate the activation of design capital children already possess : how and in what sense such interactional phenomena become relevant and a resource in design in situ . Nexus analysis offers us a theoretical lens for this situated approach [ 95 ] . 409 Uncovering Children’s Situated Design Capital – A Nexus Analytic Inquiry IDC ’22 , June 27 – 30 , 2022 , Braga , Portugal 3 NEXUS ANALYSIS – A SITUATED PERSPECTIVE FOR CHILDREN’S DESIGN CAPITAL Nexus analysis is a multidisciplinary research framework intercon - nected with practice and activity theories , anthropology , linguistics , discourse analytic studies , and interactional sociolinguistics [ 95 , 96 ] . In nexus analysis , the core concept is social action that is placed at the intersection of three concepts : historical body of the social actors , interaction order among them , and discourses in place , re - flecting on “the mapping of semiotic cycles of people , discourses , places , and mediational means involved in the social action we are studying” [ 95 ] . The concept of historical body , introduced by Nishida [ 76 ] akin to Bourdieu’s [ 9 ] habitus concept , underlies the embodied elements of an individual’s experiences . Historical body implies the “compost heap of social practices” [ 94 ] or a person’s accumulated experiences , beliefs , understanding , knowledge , and history with social practices . In other words , people may perform the same role in varied ways depending on their historical experi - ences [ 95 ] . Coined by Goffman [ 31 ] , the interaction order concept addresses the phenomenon that people may act differently deter - mined by the social context they interact within . In nexus analysis , the concept of interaction order emphasizes the network and inter - action among the social actors in the social circumstances under the study , although interaction does not need to happen within a group of people . The concept of discourses calls “to study empir - ically which discourses are relevant or foregrounded and which discourses are irrelevant or backgrounded for the social action ( s ) in which we are interested” as discourses are always appearing in situ [ 95 ] . Furthermore , the concept of discourses in place emphasizes that an “interaction is accomplished at some real , material place in the world” [ 95 ] . Nexus analysis is particularly valuable for this study as it advo - cates the situated perspective to any social action : it invites into a detailed examination of what is happening in situ . It guides us to see all social action as embedded , situated in its context , where the context covers all the above as well as the related historical trajectories meeting in the social action . In this study , we consid - ered “technology design” as the social action and children as the main social actors . Nexus analysis guides to appreciate the richness and complexity of this social action . The nexus analysis lens has already been employed in computing - related studies such as CCI and HCI ( e . g . [ 38 , 73 , 77 ] ) , the prior studies already showing the value of nexus analytic lens for CCI research . 4 RESEARCH DESIGN The “My Superhero” project was conducted in a school setting as a part of an information and communication technology ( ICT ) course with 7th graders ( 13 - 14 - year - olds ) . The underlying goal of the project was the children to learn about technology design process , addressing a problem of societal and personal relevance . Hence , the project was contributing to children’s technology edu - cation while also encouraging them to tackle real - world societal problems through design and technology . We selected a specific real - life problem of bullying that we know children encounter in their everyday lives and gave children a voice and empowered them to tackle that problem . We loosely followed the design process of Ventä - Olkkonen and colleagues [ 104 ] the children were sensitized to the topic after which they envisioned a solution , evaluated the solution , and reflected on the outcomes [ 25 ] . We aimed at inquir - ing under what circumstances children’s situated design capital emerges and they act as design protagonists , without us intention - ally steering children towards that role . The “My Superhero” project was conducted in four 45 - minutes sessions in an ICT classroom . 21 children , an ICT teacher , and two researchers participated in the project . 4 . 1 Data Collection Drawing on Scollon and Scollon’s field guide [ 95 ] , to navigate the nexus of practice , data was collected with various methods : a background survey , a booklet , a reflection paper , video recordings from the four sessions , children’s presentations of their design outcomes , an interview with the teacher , observation , and field notes of one of the researchers . The most relevant data to the current study consists of the written materials ( 21 survey responses , 20 booklets , and 15 reflection papers ) and the video data . Table 1 presents the data collection of this study . The first two sessions sensitized children to the topic and en - gaged them in early ideation . In the first session , the researchers introduced themselves as well as the project to the children . To introduce the main aim of the project and prepare the children for the design and prototyping sessions , two short videos were presented ; one about bullying at school and another one about dig - ital technology solutions against bullying . In addition , we inquired about children’s historical bodies to understand what kind of skills and competences children already had and to see whether there were any gaps regarding children’s background concerning the design activities . Thus , this phase consisted of individual activities for children . First , the children were asked to answer a 15 - minute survey concerning their background and previous experience in design and making . Following that , they were asked to complete a booklet prepared by the researchers . The main purpose of the booklet was to allow children to contemplate the role of the design protagonist . We applied the child - persona technique [ 2 ] for design - ing the booklet , as prior studies have pointed out that child - created personas authorize children to engage actively [ 2 , 3 , 43 , 75 ] . In the booklet , the children were asked to envision and draw a superhero , who is competent in designing digital technologies to help children to prevent or stop bullying at school , and describe the required char - acteristics , skills , and competences of this superhero . Next , children were asked to draw a comic strip in their booklets to show their superheroes how the problem of bullying might occur at school . Finally , we asked the children on behalf of their superheroes to design and draw digital technology in their booklets to help chil - dren to solve the problem of bullying at school . The booklets were completed by the end of session two . In sessions three and four , the children were invited to partici - pate in design and prototyping . We wanted to support children’s agency and allowed them to decide whether they worked in groups or individually . The main goal was to investigate how , without us intentionally steering them , the children act during the design and prototyping sessions and possibly lead the design process . Di - verse materials were provided for this phase consisting of Lego , 410 IDC ’22 , June 27 – 30 , 2022 , Braga , Portugal Matin Mahboob Kanafi et al . Table 1 : The data collection process of “My Superhero” project Session Main activities Collected data 1 Introduction of the project ( slides , videos ) Completing background surveys Filling in My Superhero booklets Completed background surveys 2 Completing My Superhero booklets Completed My Superhero booklets 3 Starting the design and prototyping activities Pictures and short videos of the designs and prototypes 4 Finalizing the design and prototyping activities Presenting the prototypes to the researchers Homework : Reflection on the activity Videos of the ( informal ) presentations Reflection diary Figure 1 : Methodology of the study Lego WeDo 0 . 2 , tablets , e - Textile kit , Lily pads , felt , cardboard , etc . Besides , laptops were already accessible in the ICT class for each student and children were allowed to use their personal mobile phones . We allowed children to select their materials for prototyp - ing their design ideas , using either the ideas from their booklets or a new one , with the aim of designing digital technology for solving bullying . At the end of session four , 9 different prototypes were completed by the children , and they presented their design solutions to the researchers . Finally , in the last session , the children were given a reflection paper for homework , consisting of ten ques - tions that encouraged critical reflection on the project . The papers were collected from the children a week later . 4 . 2 Data Analysis To efficiently operationalize the goals of this study , it become es - sential to gain an in - depth understanding of what was happening during the technology design process , hence we employed the nexus analysis lens [ 95 ] intertwined with thematic analysis [ 10 ] . The methodology of this study is visualized in Figure 1 demon - strating how nexus analysis and thematic analysis were mutually utilized to achieve a profound understanding of data . Primarily , to organize the data from the surveys , booklets , re - flection papers and transcriptions of children’s presentations , we employed tables and NVivo for coding and developing themes for the thematic analysis [ 10 ] of our data . Further , we explored the video recordings to investigate the actual work of children dur - ing the design and prototyping sessions . Drawing on Scollon and Scollon’s fieldguide [ 95 ] , the semiotic cycles of participants were mapped . We scrutinized 1 ) the histories and historical body of the children within the social action : for instance , how habitual or innovative the action - practice seems to be ; how intentional ( agen - tive ) or accidental the action - practice seems to be ; when and where the last prior ‘like’ action is ; what possible links between the par - ticipants , the action , and the type of place there are ; and what emotional valence or emotional impact on the participants there seems to be and 2 ) children’s interaction orders during the so - cial action : e . g . , children’s dialogues and chats with researchers , teacher , and each other ; and 3 ) discourses in place : e . g . , overt discourses , internalized as practice , cultural tools or mediational means ; how customary or unusual the place is for this action ; what the historical trajectory of this place is ; and what ‘place’ affords or is lacking for this social action , and 4 ) the history of interaction orders and mediational means , e . g . , of any tool children employ for performing their actions such as language , technology , etc . Our analysis , in line with nexus analysis , was heavily data driven : of 411 Uncovering Children’s Situated Design Capital – A Nexus Analytic Inquiry IDC ’22 , June 27 – 30 , 2022 , Braga , Portugal Figure 2 : Bullying scenarios drawn by children Table 2 : The bullying problem from children’s perspective Type of bullying Number Examples Verbal bullying 10 Funny comments on others appearance ( e . g . , you are too tall , too short , ugly , etc . ) Physical bullying 6 Pushing , shoving , kicking , punching , fist fighting Cyber bullying 3 Sending mean messages on social media , pranking cellphones , etc . Social bullying 2 To be ignored , intimidated , and excluded from a group ( e . g . , being judged due to having a different gender identity all the possible foci , the analysis scrutinized those aspects that be - came forefronted in the social action in situ . The emerging results were discussed among the researchers to formulate well - grounded findings . Overall , the analysis was focused on what activated and mediated the emergence of design capital and the design protag - onist characteristics ( agency , competences , skills , and reflection related to technology , ( see [ 36 , 44 ] ) in children in situ , but not ex - amining closer the actual protagonist characteristics manifested in the social action . 5 EMPRICAL FINDINGS Next , the findings of this study are presented . First , the main phases of the design process and their outcomes are presented , after which we discuss in detail how the situated design capital emerged in the design process . 5 . 1 Sensitize with the Problem - Analysis of the Bullying Problem from Children’s Perspectives Bullying is a violent problem concerning children that has already been addressed in CCI research ( for a review , see [ 41 ] ) . In pursuance of problem definition , in the first session of the project , we identified and clarified the scope of the problem to the children by presenting a short video concerning how this problem may occur at schools . Furthermore , in the booklets , children were asked to scrutinize the bullying problem by telling a story and drawing a comic strip to show their superheroes how bullying may occur at school . Through analysis of the booklets , we received 21 different bullying scenarios drawn or explained by children ( for example , Figure 2 ) . We categorized the scenarios into four types of bullying : verbal bullying , physical bullying , social bullying , and cyberbullying ( Ta - ble 2 ) . To seek a deep understanding of the problem and to generate requirements for the design , we presented another video on various technology designs for solving the bullying problem at school . In this step , together with children , we discussed what has been done in the past and what the solutions were . Next , we introduced di - verse materials they might use during this project for prototyping ( i . e . , Lego , Lego WeDo 0 . 2 , tablets , laptops , e - Textile kit , Lily pads , felt , cardboard , etc . ) . In this step , overall , children were invited to reflect on the problem they are addressing as well as to consider the objectives and aspects on how to solve the problem . 5 . 2 Create Design Solutions – Children’s Design and Prototyping for Preventing Bullying During the two prototyping sessions , we were interested to see what was happening and how children mobilized their situated design capital to attain the goals and solve the problem . Children provided some solutions by the means of technology design in relation to bullying scenarios they had drawn in their booklets . We received 9 different prototypes ( Figure 3 ) from children with varied solutions for solving the problems . Six teams were formed and six prototypes were designed by them ( Fig 3 A , B , C , D , E , F ) . Two children worked individually ( Fig 3 G , H ) while one of them designed two prototypes : an application and digital tokens in Fig 3 H . The children designed and developed prototypes using a variety of technologies and artefacts ; from posters and low - fi robots , to programmable Legos and games programmed in Unity . Technical skills and social awareness of the children were exemplary , showing 412 IDC ’22 , June 27 – 30 , 2022 , Braga , Portugal Matin Mahboob Kanafi et al . Figure 3 : Children’s solutions for solving bullying problems design protagonist characteristics . The prototypes included a Unity - based game called ‘God is Watching’ ( Fig 3 A ) where the player moved horizontally ( back and forth ) on a crowded platform to stop people from randomly punching each other . If a person gets punched , that is the player was not able to stop them in time , the game ends with an angry flying spaghetti monster announcing “You upset the Flying Spaghetti Monster and caused him to end reality . It is all YOUR fault because you bullied , don’t bully” . The other Unity - based game was ‘Scape the Bully’ ( Fig 3 B ) where the player has to stop a bully from punching children by fighting the bully using a sword and together with the children try to escape the bully . Three robot prototypes were also designed and developed : ‘Therapy bot’ ( Fig 3 F ) , ‘Bot Bot’ ( Fig 3 D ) , and ‘Fredrik’ ( Fig 3 E ) . Therapy bot is a portable robot that roams the schools to reach out to the bully and the bullied by displaying positive messages and mediating the conflict , encouraging the bully to engage in better interactions . ‘Bot Bot’ has the same agenda , of preventing or addressing bullying , but by imprisoning the bully in a jail located in the back of the robot . ‘Fredrik’ , a programmable Lego WeDo 2 . 0 robot , identifies bullying through its camera , reports their behaviour to teachers , and chases the bullies away from the situation to stop bullying . One group designed an app called ‘BIX’ ( Fig 3 C ) to raise aware - ness about LGBTQI + communities and topics including gender fluidity and diverse sexualities and to enable acceptance and inclu - sion of diverse students in schools and to reduce bullying against them . Two other applications ( see Fig 3 G and H ) were designed to report bullying and other experiences at schools and receive help and support from other children or adults . Another interesting design concept was the use of digital tokens to encourage friendly behaviour in schools ( Fig 3 H ) . 5 . 3 Evaluate the Solutions and Reflect on the Outcomes At the end of the project , the children were asked to critically re - flect on the design process , re - evaluate the problem , evaluate their design and prototyping processes , and try to find strengths and weaknesses in their work . Several questions regarding the evalua - tion of the design were asked in the reflection paper , for example , “If you could do this project again , what would you do differently ? Why ? ” The findings indicate that the children had different perspec - tives on their design processes . Most of the children’s evaluations indicate reflective skills : they realized that their design processes lacked appropriate planning and time management and if they could iterate the design processes , they would concentrate more on the planning . For example , Jonas stated : “ I wish I could have a better / clearer plan to start with during the project . Scrapped ideas wasted a lot of time” . Similarly , Carlos sited : [ I would like to do ] “ better planning and preparing because it would help me to be more efficient ” . Moreover , not being detail - oriented during the design process was mentioned by some children , they commented that they would like to work on details of their design . For instance , Sarah said : “ I would show the app in more detail . ” Furthermore , some children realized that their product is not a safe idea for preventing bullying and they need to reconsider it for the next possible project . For instance , Mario from the Fredrick group mentioned : “I would make a more safe approach to stop bullies , I don’t think that’s using a chainsaw is very safe ! ” . However , some children mentioned that their product was flawless , and they would not change or iterate it anymore . For example , Simon wrote : “ I would do nothing differently because I think we did a good job” . When we asked children to describe the learning outcomes of the project in the reflection paper , they described a multitude of skills and knowledge relevant to technology design process . The learning outcomes of the “MY Superhero” project are visualized in Figure 4 illustrating that coding / programming ( N = 7 ) , creativity ( N = 4 ) , bullying prevention ( N = 3 ) and design skills ( N = 3 ) were the most often mentioned learning outcomes of the project . Only one participant mentioned that he learned nothing . 413 Uncovering Children’s Situated Design Capital – A Nexus Analytic Inquiry IDC ’22 , June 27 – 30 , 2022 , Braga , Portugal Figure 4 : Learning outcomes of the project from children’s perspectives 5 . 4 Factors Shaping Children’s Situated Design Action 5 . 4 . 1 Shared histories and interaction orders shaping the situated design action . To gain a deep understanding of how children could creatively and self - directedly address the bullying problem through design and prototyping ( Figure 5 ) , we scrutinized their design ac - tivities through the nexus analytic lens . Nexus analysis calls for mapping the cycles of the people , places , discourses , objects , and concepts circulating around social action . In other words , “If we think of an action as a moment in time and space in which the his - torical bodies and the interaction order of people and the discourses in place intersect , then each of these can be thought of as having a history that leads into that moment and a future that leads away from it in arcs of semiotic cycles of change and transformation” [ 95 ] . We explored how these cycles of historical trajectories of place , children , discourses , ideas , and objects intermingled together might provide a scaffold for the emergence of children’s situated design capital . The findings from the background surveys indicate that as chil - dren were classmates , they knew each other and had equal access to the materials and equipment provided for them at school . Chil - dren indicated they had related experiences with diverse materials such as Lego , wood , clay , paper , puzzle - liked toys , yarn , thread , playdough and laptops while engaging in diverse activities dur - ing different courses such as ICT , crafts and math , showing that children shared many historical body and interaction order related experiences . Besides , shared experiences of digital technology use were identified including Khan Academy , Scratch , YouTube , and divers digital design tools ( e . g . , Canva , Photoshop , Paint 3D , Unity , Visual Studio , Roblox Studio , etc . ) . All children had prior experience in programming , electronics , robotics at school , and some of them had experiences of engaging in FabLab workshops and working with 3D printers and a laser cutter , culture of the school and the Finnish curriculum supporting that . The analysis implies that the action - practice ( design activity ) , the mediational means ( i . e . , all the objects used for design and prototyping ) and the place ( i . e . , ICT classroom ) under this study have come into the historical body of each participant and internalized as a “practice” [ 95 ] , i . e . , they can be considered as part of children’s design capital . 5 . 4 . 2 Factors contributing to the activation of situated design capital . Several mediating factors were identified that influenced the acti - vation and use of children’s situated design capital and flourishing of the protagonist mindset among children , including “distributed agency” , “positive peer pressure” , “peer learning” , and “identity positioning” , which we discuss next . Distributed agency . According to Wertsch et al . [ 105 ] , “agency is individual ( s ) - operating - with - mediational - means” [ 105 ] which " extends beyond the skin " , implying that agency is not a property of individuals in isolation ; it distributes “by involvement of cultural tools and mediational means” [ 105 ] . For example , digital tools can distribute agency in a classroom [ 4 ] . We maintain that although initially the project setting was formal and interaction order within the class quite traditional , the project transformed into a reverse panopticon interaction order where the agency was shifted from teacher to children and became distributed in interactions among children . First , the project was set as a panopticon event with the traditional arrangement in the classroom ( children sitting at their desks facing the front ) . However , during the design and prototyping sessions , we informed the children that they should work in groups , and they are allowed to form their own groups with their friends . Thus , they started to move within the class and changed their places . Some of them preferred to do prototyping on the floor ( Fig 5 C ) , two groups found a sofa placed at the end of the class as a nice and cozy place to chat and teamwork ( Fig 6 C ) , while the rest of the chil - dren preferred to do prototyping on their desks with their friends . Children were chatting , discussing , brainstorming their ideas , and even teaching each other ( Fig 5 A ) . The children were allowed to use their personal mobile phones and laptops were provided for each student in the ICT class . Hence , the children started to browse the internet , googling , and checking online coding platforms , etc . It seemed that by the means of digital technology they took control of the interaction order and their mediational tools for designing . The teacher was interested in this change in the class and checked each group , asked them some questions , and tried to understand what was happening within each group . In this new informal learning environment , overall , the agency became more equally distributed in the interaction between children , and the degree of children’s agency was increased while the teacher’s and researchers’ agency was decreased [ 62 ] . A reverse panopticon interaction order emerged 414 IDC ’22 , June 27 – 30 , 2022 , Braga , Portugal Matin Mahboob Kanafi et al . Figure 5 : Children engaging in design and prototyping activities which led children to utilize their situated design capital , in par - ticular their prior experiences of digital technology use ( such as phones , laptops , and tablets ) , browsing and searching the internet , sharing their experiences with their peers , and being inspired by them to act creatively . Some children reflected on that as well in their reflection papers ; for instance , Emma 1 stated : “ we were able to be creative . . . I loved the freedom to do whatever I want to do with my ideas ! ” . Similarly , Ella mentioned : “ I think the learning experience was great , we got to work independently ” . These quotes indicate that without us intentionally making children utilize their situated design capital , the children felt more creative and independent to employ their situated design capital through the new atmosphere in the classroom , created by the distributed agency . Overall , the findings indicate that distributed agency within the design activity resulted in inspiring children to utilize their situated design capital and mediated them to act as design protagonists . Positive peer - pressure . The importance of peer interaction , relationships and groups on the developmental context of children [ 88 ] has been addressed in prior studies [ 26 , 40 , 72 , 101 ] . Our find - ings indicate that positive peer pressure was one element that led children to utilize their situated design capital . Already when filling in their booklets , even though the children were doing it as an individual task , positive peer pressure was foregrounded . Children constantly considered and observed their peers’ drawings of the superheroes and their digital design ( solutions ) and compared those with their own drawings . Some of the children appreciated their friends’ work , erased their own drawings , and tried to start from scratch or tried to improve their drawing and design . Thereby , some of the children asked us for more time to improve their work . We let them work on their designs at home . Furthermore , our observations from video recordings of the design and prototyping sessions indi - cate a multitude of interaction orders intermingled with children’s historical bodies , which children mutually generated among them - selves [ 95 ] . The findings show that positive peer pressure among children guided them to stop playing around and inspired them to utilize their situated design capital . The data from video recordings 1 Children’s names have been changed due to anonymization purposes . clearly show that some of the children took the initiative , immedi - ately started to choose their materials and work on their ideas . They directed their peers during the design and prototyping activities as well . Interestingly , their peers got inspired by them and started to actively contribute . As an example of positive peer pressure , we refer to the group ‘God Is Watching’ . Ivan from this group , without considering the materials provided for this project , directly went to the back of the class , chose the computer as the material to work with and started to code and develop the game ( Fig 6 A ) . Subse - quently , his friends and another group ‘Scape the Bullies’ checked his work , started to ask questions from him and got inspired to utilize their coding skills for developing games as well ( Fig 6 B and C ) . This can be seen as related to ‘automatic actions’ of children : “Automatic actions are likely to embed submerged discourses” as they are not considered to be new or unpracticed actions [ 95 ] . Even though laptops were not among the provided materials for chil - dren , Ivan and the other children in the game developer groups automatically took into use the laptops and the computer at the ICT classroom . During the rest of design and prototyping sessions , these two groups were constantly brainstorming , discussing , and sharing their coding knowledge . They employed the Unity platform as their mediational means to communicate and mutually interact . Peer learning . According to Lave and Wenger [ 62 ] , learning happens within a context and prior studies have addressed that peers should be considered as a resource as children learn from each other [ 17 , 30 , 65 , 82 , 83 ] . Working as groups encourages peer learning among children [ 40 , 84 ] . The data analysis indicated the role of peer learning in activating children’s situated design capital . We found several ‘invisible discourses submerged in practice’ , e . g . , when one of the participants is ‘teaching’ a topic to any of the other participants , it indicates that the discourses have been ‘submerged’ into their personal practice by a long habit [ 95 ] , i . e . , are part of their capital . As an example , we refer to the ‘BIX’ group ( Fig 5 A ) . In this group , Sarah was calling attention to social bullying at school . She was teaching other team members about LGBTQI + communities and how creating an app can increase children’s knowledge and awareness of how children with different gender identities are likely to be victimized at school . Sarah stated : “ I noticed that a lot of 415 Uncovering Children’s Situated Design Capital – A Nexus Analytic Inquiry IDC ’22 , June 27 – 30 , 2022 , Braga , Portugal Figure 6 : Positive peer pressure among chilren during design activity people even in our age lack knowledge about everything and I think it is a pretty important topic and I thought maybe if we teach them already at a young age to know . . . it’s ok to be different , so if they just knew more , they would not bully those who do not fit to kind of to a normative world . ” In the reflection papers , children from the BIX group mentioned they learned new skills and knowledge from their peers in the group work . For instance , Julia wrote : “ I learned about different gender identities . . . LGBTQAI community and how to prevent bullying . . . [ I would like ] to educate more people about LGBTQAI rights and what it means . ” In addition , Julia indicated in her reflection paper that during the design activities she had a chance to recover her skills as she wrote : “ I learned and realized the skills that I have used but forgotten . ” Furthermore , children from other groups mentioned diverse learning outcomes that they had learned from their peers during the design activities including communication skills , teamwork skills , coding skills , programming robots , etc . Identity positioning . According to Scollon “any action posi - tions the social actor in relationship to others who are engaged in the practice” [ 93 ] . Bucholtz and Hall [ 12 ] see identity as “the social positioning of self and other” which “ is the product rather than the source of linguistic and other semiotic practices and therefore is a social and cultural rather than primarily internal psychologi - cal phenomenon” [ 12 ] . Identity should be considered “in terms of performance , as action” [ 5 ] . Esteban - Guitart and Moll [ 24 ] main - tain that “identity refers to an internalized and externalized set of meaning , practices , and distributed resources embedded in ways of life and contexts for learning . In an important way , a person’s self can be viewed as a dynamic organization of various resources , socially , historically , and culturally created” . Our findings indicate that identity positioning among children led them to utilize their situated design capital . They were socially positioning themselves both as individuals and as members of their groups in the class - room . Similar to other interactional places , the ICT classroom was a place for relational identity positioning for children which is in line with prior research concerning the impact of design and making on children’s identity making [ 17 , 19 , 39 ] . The data analysis of the video recordings reveals the emergence of an unplanned and unin - tentional phenomenon at the end of design and prototyping : the children started to proudly show their products to the other groups and it seemed a competition was occurring in the classroom . We interpret this as identity positioning ; children were performing and constructing their identities through their designs and prototypes , in other words , these semiotic resources were “identitized” [ 24 ] by the children . As an example , Ella , the leader of the ‘Bot Bot’ group , after finishing the prototype , stood up and proudly presented the robot to the other groups . She stated in her booklets that “ I am perfect as I am ! ” : [ like my superhero ] . Likewise , the group ‘God Is Watching’ after completing the game went to the next group , the ‘Therapy Robot’ , and expressed “ what are you doing ? We are having a game here ! ” and showed their prototype to them . After a short while , the team ‘Therapy Robot’ did the same action and introduced the robot to the ‘God Is Watching’ group . We interpret these examples as children ‘performing their identities’ as designers ( in our eyes , as design protagonists ) , when positioning their work as something to be worthy of proudly showing to their peers . 6 DISCUSSION This study was set to explore what kind of circumstances activate and mediate children’s situated design capital . In our “My Super - hero” project 13 - 14 - year - olds designed and prototyped a digital solution for preventing bullying . We utilized nexus analysis as our theoretical lens to analyze their situated action , for making sense of interactional phenomena acting as resources in design , particularly from the perspective of the capital already situated in the children . Previous CCI research has accumulated our understanding of vari - ous forms of capital children can have [ 50 ] and argued they should be leveraged in design activities [ 50 ] and used as a basis for design [ 11 ] . We take a step further in this study and contribute by intro - ducing the concept of situated design capital in relation to children engaging in the design process . We also contribute by shedding further light on the adoption of the protagonist role by children : we discuss how situated design capital contributes to that . We identified four central phenomena acting as resources and facilitating the activation of other resources in design : distributed agency , positive peer pressure , peer learning , and identity posi - tioning . We separated them analytically for research purposes , but in situ they are intertwined . Our findings indicate that distributed agency ( see [ 105 ] ) within the design activity was a central resource 416 IDC ’22 , June 27 – 30 , 2022 , Braga , Portugal Matin Mahboob Kanafi et al . inspiring the design process and the adoption of the design pro - tagonist role . Distributed agency in the sense of reallocation and sharing of power and initiative among the participants , reducing those of the teacher and researchers , increasing those of the chil - dren , generated a reverse panopticon interaction order in which children relied on their situated design capital in various ways : they drew on their prior experiences of digital technology , sharing their experiences with their peers and being inspired by them to act creatively . The children in our data utilized a variety of me - diational means based on their own choice and historical body , including the physical space they moved around , choosing the best suited places for their work ; digital and physical tools available for them – personal mobile phones , laptops , pen and paper ; and interaction between the actors in the space – the teacher , the re - searchers , and their peers . The concept of distributed agency draws CCI researchers’ and designers’ attention to the intricate social arrangements existing as well as emerging in classrooms . Small encouragement for children to form their own groups , rearrange the space , and take initiative in deciding on how to accomplish the design task resulted in great changes within this micro - cosmos ( see [ 41 ] ) that we consider as essential for the adoption of the design protagonist role [ 44 ] . Arrangements of physical space have also been previously brought up by CCI researchers as having an in - fluence on social interaction in design activities [ 64 , 78 ] , and that is something often relatively easy to make at least small changes to . However , important is to note that distributed agency emerged quite organically and naturally in our case . Even if CCI researchers and designers may be tempted to intentionally aim at activating distributed agency among the participants , sensitivity towards the complex micro - cosmos is always needed : towards the various and evolving configurations of interaction orders and historical bodies among the participants and discourses circulating around ( see also [ 41 ] ) . Positive peer pressure was also foregrounded in our data . The importance of peer interaction , relationships , and groups [ 88 ] has been addressed in prior studies [ 26 , 40 , 72 , 101 ] . The children in our data constantly interacted with their peers , observing others’ work , comparing their own work with that , and improving their own work . Peer pressure also guided the children towards work - ing more seriously , with some active children taking initiative and starting the work , even guiding others , with the others getting inspired . We maintain that children having strong characteristics of design protagonists [ 44 ] , already possessing a marked amount of design capital , were essential for the emergence of this phenom - enon : they inspired others to try harder and perform better . We see this phenomenon as quite hard to preplan or intentionally facilitate , however . It is heavily reliant on the children and the design capital they possess , and the relationship and interactions within the group of children . We found several ‘invisible’ discourses – being internalized as practice in the social action as they had become submerged in practice [ 95 ] connected to and contributing to peer learning . In line with Lave and Wenger [ 62 ] , we approach learning as situated , within a specific context , more inexperienced ones learning from more experienced ones . Prior studies have pointed out that peers should be considered as a resource as children learn from each other [ 17 , 30 , 65 , 82 , 83 ] and that working as groups encourages peer learning among children [ 40 , 84 ] . In our data , we identified cases where children possessing design protagonist characteristics [ 44 , 50 ] , were educating and informing other children . For one child , as an example , internalized subject knowledge and empathetic understanding of the LGBTQIA community emerged in the design session as a personal resource for design ; the design task guided their design towards potentially utilizing that resource , i . e . , the situation foregrounded this part of their design capital . But the foregrounding of one particular person’s design capital acted also as a seed for change for the other participants who learned new things from their peer , and one of them even considered that she wants to further use that knowledge beyond this particular project . We consider peer learning an untapped design resource for CCI projects with children . Such projects could place more emphasis on inquiring and understanding design capital that children possess and how that could be utilized as a resource in design as well as used to inspire other children . Open discussion early on in the projects related to the various kinds of interests and expertise of the children involved may reveal some of that . However , we again wish to highlight the emergent nature of situated design capital : something what children know , do , and think may appear as a valuable resource , but other potentially relevant aspects may remain ignored . The last interactional phenomenon uncovering children’s situ - ated design capital was their identity positioning . As mentioned , we view identity “in terms of performance , as action” [ 5 ] , that “posi - tions the social actor in relationship to others who are engaged in the practice” [ 93 ] . The children in our study engaged , unprompted by us , in competitive activities that we consider as identity position - ing performances , positioning children in relation to others . The children shared the results of their work with their peers , uncover - ing in those their design capital , and were able to reflect on it and their identity in relation to others . Similar to other interactional places , the ICT classroom was a place for relational identity posi - tioning for children , which is in line with prior research concerning the impact of design and making on children’s identity making [ 17 , 19 , 39 ] . The phenomenon of identity positioning may be very valuable in strengthening children’s design capital in the sense of creating a positive picture of their own and their groups’ design skills and competences . Those children in the group , whose design capital is not very high , can be proud of the group work result as well . This phenomenon can also be linked with positive peer pres - sure : some groups and children generated very advanced design solutions of which they were proud , potentially inspiring also other groups and individuals to strive for their best . For CCI researchers and designers , valuable is to acknowledge the prevalence of this phenomenon and to support children in building self - efficacy and a positive picture of their abilities and contributions in the design task . Here , competition might not be the right way to go ; in our case competition emerged unintentionally . We do not consider it necessary to try to prevent its emergence , but we may want to try to preserve a positive tone in these identity performances . As the phenomena described above are highly dependent on the actors – their historical bodies and existing relationships – and thus out of our control , it is impossible to give definite guidelines for how to utilize them . But from the situated design capital perspective it is possible to try to create such conditions that mediate activation of 417 Uncovering Children’s Situated Design Capital – A Nexus Analytic Inquiry IDC ’22 , June 27 – 30 , 2022 , Braga , Portugal the design capital : making a variety of tools , physical spaces , and expertise available for the participants and allowing free movement in the space ; aiming for positive , relaxed , open atmosphere that signals mutual respect between participants and makes sharing of own work a positive experience ; open reflection of participants’ strengths and how they can be put into best use within a group ; and shared reflections on the groups’ outcome and what groups can learn from each other . Our study has generated interesting implications for research on children’s design skills and competences . We introduced the concept of situated design capital , with which we underscore the situated nature of design expertise , competences , and skills . Such may or may not become relevant and drawn on in design . The situated lens , instead of generating lists of skills and competences , focuses on their use in situ . This perspective provides novel in - sights for researchers using concepts such as funds of knowledge , funds of identity , social and cultural capital , and historical body and interaction order [ 50 ] . We can consider further how and in which senses children’s ‘funds of knowledge’ and ‘funds of identity’ [ 11 , 58 , 70 , 71 , 105 ] as well as their social and cultural capital and cultural forms [ 34 , 35 , 67 ] become drawn on in design in situ . As to research on the design protagonist role [ 36 , 37 , 45 , 87 , 102 ] , we also offer new insights . If the aim is to help children to grow to design protagonists there is a general need to help children to de - velop their design capital , i . e . , teach them various digital technology design skills and competences . This is also where the excellence of the extant CCI research lies , and design education is increasingly integrated into children’s basic education ; technology comprehen - sion as a teaching subject in Danish schools as an example [ 102 ] . But it is also important to realize that any form of design education – formal or informal / non - formal [ 23 ] – is only one part of children’s lives and they most likely possess a variety of design capital from other sources . It is essential that we gain further understanding of what actualizes and mediates the emergence of the situated design capital in children . This includes at least the following : how the situated design capital emerges in the interaction with other actors ( e . g . , in identity positioning ) and builds on the historical body of all actors , which become a shared resource between the actors ( e . g . , in peer learning ) . We need to help children to uncover their existing design capital by creating situations and circumstances that raise reflection and facilitate its emergence ( e . g . , positive peer pressure , distributed agency ) . However , we need to keep in mind that situated design capital is always emergent and contextual : it depends on the participants and their historical bodies and interactions existing and evolving , which cannot be predetermined by researchers . 7 CONCLUSION The most central mediators that steered children towards utilizing their situated design capital in our data were distributed agency , positive peer pressure , peer learning , and identity positioning . How - ever , we expect that there can be numerous other factors activating and mediating the emergence of the situated design capital as well , and the ones we have found are just examples . By introducing a sit - uated perspective to children’s design capital , this study contributes particularly to studies nurturing design protagonism and to studies exploring the role of children’s background and experiences dur - ing design activities , using concepts such as social , cultural , and science capital , funds of knowledge , funds of identity , and cultural forms . Due to the COVID - 19 pandemic restrictions , our access to the school and children was limited and the project’s sessions were restrained . We weren’t able to analyze the culture and norms of the classroom and how they affected the situated design capital of the children as the project took place within a limited timeframe . That is an interesting topic for future research , similarly to studies on the emergence and performance of children’s individual and group identities – in this study we were able to offer only small glimpses into children’s identity positionings . Another limitation is that we did not analyse children’s designs in detail , which might have given us more insights . Children’s motivation to engage in design activities was also a limitation to this study , as some of the children joyfully engaged in the tasks but some were not so mo - tivated by them ; nevertheless , as the project was conducted as a part of the children’s ICT education , most of the children actively participated in our project . 8 SELECTION AND PARTICIPATION OF CHILDREN The participants of this study were children aged 13 - 14 who were studying at the international school of Oulu in Finland . The study was part of the children’s formal education and thus their participa - tion in the activities was mandatory for them . However , they had a possibility to not consent to research and withdraw their consent at any phase of the study . Prior to the project , we obtained permission from the school as well as consent forms from both children and their guardians . The consents forms included information about the research focus , descriptions , its outcomes , and the research materials to be collected in the project including text , drawings , photographs , audio , and video . The project followed the Ethics Guidelines of the Finnish National Agency for Research Integrity . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This study was funded by Academy of Finland ( Grant # 324685 , Make - a - Difference project ) . This research is connected to the GenZ - project , a strategic profiling project in human sciences at the Univer - sity of Oulu , supported by the Academy of Finland ( Grant # 318930 ) and the University of Oulu . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Genna Angello , Sharon Lynn Chu , Osazuwa Okundaye , Niloofar Zarei , and Francis Quek . 2016 . Making as the New Colored Pencil : Translating Elementary Curricula into Maker Activities . In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children , Manchester , United Kingdom , 68 – 78 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2930723 [ 2 ] Alissa N Antle . 2008 . Child - based personas : Need , ability and experience . Cog - nition , Technology and Work 10 , 2 ( 2008 ) , 155 – 166 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10111 - 007 - 0071 - 2 [ 3 ] Alissa Nicole Antle . 2006 . Child - personas : Fact or fiction ? In Proceedings of the Conference on Designing Interactive Systems , ACM , University Park , Pennsylva - nia , USA , 22 – 30 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1142405 . 1142411 [ 4 ] Stig Börje Asplund , Christina Olin - Scheller , and Marie Tanner . 2018 . Under the teacher’s radar : Literacy practices in task - related smartphone use in the connected classroom . L1 Educational Studies in Language and Literature 18 , ( 2018 ) , 1 – 26 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 17239 / L1ESLL - 2018 . 18 . 01 . 03 [ 5 ] Julie Bagga - Gupta , Sangeeta Feilberg and Hansen Aase Lyngvær . 2017 . Many Ways - of - Being Across Sites . Identity as ( Inter ) action . Identity Revisited and 418 IDC ’22 , June 27 – 30 , 2022 , Braga , Portugal Matin Mahboob Kanafi et al . Reimagined . Springer , Cham ( 2017 ) , 4 – 24 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 58056 - 2 _ 1 [ 6 ] M . Cecília C . Baranauskas and Julián E . Gutiérrez Posada . 2017 . Tangible and shared storytelling : Searching for the social dimension of constructionism . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children , Stanford , CA , USA , 193 – 203 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3079743 [ 7 ] WolmetBarendregt , MathildeM . Bekker , PeterBörjesson , EvaEriksson , andOlof Torgersson . 2016 . The role definition matrix : Creating a shared understanding of children’s participation in the design process . In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children , Manchester , United Kingdom , 577 – 582 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2935999 [ 8 ] Alexander Berman , Elizabeth Deuermeyer , Beth Nam , Sharon Lynn Chu , and Francis Quek . 2018 . Exploring the 3D Printing Process for Young Children in Curriculum - Aligned Making in the Classroom . In IDC 2018 - Proceedings of the 2018 ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children , Trondheim , Norway , 681 – 686 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3210799 [ 9 ] Pierre Bourdieu . 1979 . Distinction : A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste . Harvard University Press , Massachusetts , USA . [ 10 ] VirginiaBraunandVictoriaClarke . 2006 . Usingthematicanalysisinpsychology . Qualitative Research in Psychology 3 , 2 ( 2006 ) , 77 – 101 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1191 / 1478088706qp063oa [ 11 ] Eva Brooks and Jeanette Sjöberg . 2020 . A designerly approach as a foundation for school children’s computational thinking skills while developing digital games . In Proceedings of the Interaction Design and Children Conference , London , United Kingdom , 87 – 95 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3392063 . 3394402 [ 12 ] Mary Bucholtz and Kira Hall . 2005 . Identity and interaction : A sociocultural linguistic approach . Discourse Studies 7 , 4 – 5 ( 2005 ) , 585 – 614 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1461445605054407 [ 13 ] Louise Chawla and Harry Heft . 2002 . Children’s competence and the ecology of communities : A functional approach to the evaluation of participation . Journal of Environmental Psychology 22 , 1 – 2 ( 2002 ) , 201 – 216 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1006 / jevp . 2002 . 0244 [ 14 ] Alexander Cho , Roxana G . Herrera , Luis Chaidez , and Adilene Uriostegui . 2019 . The “COMADRE” project : An asset - based design approach to connecting low - income Latinx families to out - of - school learning opportunities . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , Glagsow , Scotland , UK , Paper 607 , 1 - 14 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300837 [ 15 ] Sharon Lynn Chu , Elizabeth Deuermeyer , Rachel Martin , Francis Quek , Alexan - der Berman , Mario Suarez , Niloofar Zarei , Beth Nam , and Colin Banigan . 2017 . Becoming Makers : Examining ‘Making’ Literacy in the Elementary School Sci - ence Classroom Sharon . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children , Stanford , CA , USA , 316 – 321 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3079745 [ 16 ] Sharon Lynn Chu , Elizabeth Deuermeyer , and Francis Quek . 2018 . Supporting scientific modeling through curriculum - based making in elementary school science classes . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 16 , ( 2018 ) , 1 – 8 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2017 . 09 . 002 [ 17 ] Sharon Lynn Chu , Francis Quek , Sourabh Bhangaonkar , Amy Boettcher Ging , and Kumar Sridharamurthy . 2015 . Making the Maker : A Means - to - an - Ends approach to nurturing the Maker mindset in elementary - aged children . In - ternational Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 5 , ( 2015 ) , 11 – 19 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2015 . 08 . 002 [ 18 ] Sharon Lynn Chu , Michael Saenz , and Francis Quek . 2016 . Connectors in maker kits : Investigating children’s motor abilities in making . In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children , Manchester , United Kingdom , 452 – 462 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2930714 [ 19 ] SharonLynnChu , RebeccaSchlegel , FrancisQuek , AndrewChristy , andKaiyuan Chen . 2017 . “I make , therefore I am” : The effects of curriculum - aligned making on children’s self - identity . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , Denver , CO , USA , 109 – 120 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025458 [ 20 ] Christian Dindler , Rachel Smith , and Ole Sejer Iversen . 2020 . Computational empowerment : participatory design in education . CoDesign 16 , 1 ( 2020 ) , 66 – 80 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2020 . 1722173 [ 21 ] FenneVanDoorn , PieterJanStappers , andMathieuGielen . 2013 . Designresearch by proxy : Using children as researchers to gain contextual knowledge about user experience . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in ComputingSystems , InProceedingsoftheSIGCHIconferenceonHumanFactors in Computing Systems ( pp . 2883 - 2892 ) , Paris , France , 2883 – 2891 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2481399 [ 22 ] Allison Druin . 2002 . The role of children in the design of new technology . Behaviour and Information Technology 21 , 1 ( 2002 ) , 1 – 25 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01449290110108659 [ 23 ] Haim Eshach . 2007 . Bridging in - school and out - of - school learning : Formal , non - formal , and informal education . Journal of Science Education and Technology 16 , 2 ( 2007 ) , 171 – 190 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10956 - 006 - 9027 - 1 [ 24 ] MoisèsEsteban - GuitartandLuisC . Moll . 2014 . FundsofIdentity : Anewconcept based on the Funds of Knowledge approach . Culture and Psychology 20 , 1 ( 2014 ) , 31 – 48 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1354067X13515934 [ 25 ] Jerry Alan Fails , Mona Leigh Guha , and Allison Druin . 2012 . Methods and techniques for involving children in the design of new technology for children . Foundations and Trends in Human - Computer Interaction 6 , 2 ( 2012 ) , 85 – 166 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1561 / 1100000018 [ 26 ] Daniel Fitton and Beth Bell . 2014 . Working with teenagers within HCI research : Understanding teen - computer interaction . In Proceedings of the 28th Interna - tional BCS Human Computer Interaction Conference : Sand , Sea and Sky - Holi - day HCI , HCI 2014 , Southport , UK , 201 – 206 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 14236 / ewic / hci2014 . 23 [ 27 ] Daniel Fitton , Janet C . Read , and John Dempsey . 2015 . Exploring children’s designsformakertechnologies . In ProceedingsofIDC2015 : The14thInternational Conference on Interaction Design and Children , Medford , MA , USA , 379 – 382 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2771839 . 2771921 [ 28 ] Christa Flores . 2018 . Problem - based science , a constructionist approach to sci - ence literacy in middle school . International Journal of Child - Computer Interac - tion 16 , ( 2018 ) , 25 – 30 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2017 . 11 . 001 [ 29 ] Michail Giannakos , Michael Stephen Horn , and Elisa Rubegni . 2020 . Ad - vancements on Child – Computer Interaction research : Contributions from IDC 2018 . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 23 – 24 , 100170 ( 2020 ) . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2020 . 100170 [ 30 ] Michail N . Giannakos and Letizia Jaccheri . 2013 . What motivates children to become creators of digital enriched artifacts ? In Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Creativity & Cognition , Sydney , NSW , Australia , 104 – 113 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2466627 . 2466634 [ 31 ] Erving Goffman . 1983 . The Interaction Order . American Sociological Review 48 , 1 ( 1983 ) , 1 – 17 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 2095141 [ 32 ] Nathan Holbert . 2016 . Leveraging cultural values and “ways of knowing” to increase diversity in maker activities . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 9 – 10 , ( 2016 ) , 33 – 39 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2016 . 10 . 002 [ 33 ] Nathan Holbert . 2016 . Bots for tots : Building inclusive makerspaces by lever - aging “ways of knowing . ” In Proceedings of IDC 2016 - The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children , Manchester , United Kingdom , 79 – 88 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2930718 [ 34 ] Michael S Horn . 2013 . Interaction Design , Books , and Cultural Forms . In Pro - ceedings of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children , New York , NY , USA , 628 – 631 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2485760 . 2485892 [ 35 ] MichaelS . Horn , SarahAlSulaiman , andJaimeKoh . 2013 . TranslatingRobertoto Omar : ComputationalLiteracy , Stickerbooks , andCulturalForms . In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children , New York , NY , USA , 120 – 127 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2485760 . 2485773 [ 36 ] Netta Iivari and Marianne Kinnula . 2018 . Empowering Children through Design and Making : towards Protagonist Role Adoption . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference , Hasselt and Genk , Belgium , Hasselt and Genk , Belgium , 1 - 12 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3210586 . 3210600 [ 37 ] NettaIivari , MarianneKinnula , LeenaKuure , andTiinaKeisanen . 2020 . “Arseing aroundwasFun ! ”A - HumorasaResourceinDesignandMaking . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , Honolulu , HI , USA , 1 – 13 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376169 [ 38 ] Netta Iivari , Marianne Kinnula , Leena Kuure , and Tonja Molin - Juustila . 2014 . Videodiaryasameansfordatagatheringwithchildren - Encounteringidentities in the making . International Journal of Human Computer Studies 72 , 5 ( 2014 ) , 507 – 521 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2014 . 02 . 003 [ 39 ] Netta Iivari , Marianne Kinnula , and Tonja Molin - Juustila . 2018 . You have to start somewhere - Initial meanings making in a design and making project . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children , Trondheim , Norway , 80 – 92 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3202742 [ 40 ] Netta Iivari , Tonja Molin - Juustila , and Marianne Kinnula . 2016 . The future digital innovators : Empowering the young generation with digital fabrication and making . In 2016 International Conference on Information Systems , ICIS 2016 , Dublin , Irland . [ 41 ] Netta Iivari , Leena Ventä - Olkkonen , Sumita Sharma , Tonja Molin - Juustila , and Essi Kinnunen . 2021 . CHI Against Bullying . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , Yokohama , Japan , 1 – 17 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445282 [ 42 ] Azalea Irani , Kriti Nelavelli , Kristin Hare , Paula Bondal , and Neha Kumar . 2018 . Refuge Tech : An Assets - Based Approach to Refugee Resettlement . In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , Montréal , QC , Canada , 1 – 6 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3170427 . 3188680 [ 43 ] Helvi Itenge - Wheeler , Heike Winschiers - Theophilus , Alessandro Soro , and Mar - got Brereton . 2018 . Child designers creating Personas to diversify design per - spectivesandconceptsfortheirowntechnologyenhancedlibrary . In Proceedings ofthe17thACMConferenceonInteractionDesignandChildren , ACM , Trondheim , Norway , 381 – 388 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3202760 [ 44 ] Ole Sejer Iversen , Rachel Charlotte Smith , and Christian Dindler . 2017 . Child as Protagonist : Expanding the Role of Children in Participatory Design . In Proceedings of the 2017 conference on interaction design and children , Stanford , CA , USA , 27 – 37 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3079725 419 Uncovering Children’s Situated Design Capital – A Nexus Analytic Inquiry IDC ’22 , June 27 – 30 , 2022 , Braga , Portugal [ 45 ] Ole Sejer Iversen , Rachel Charlotte Smith , and Christian Dindler . 2018 . From Computational Thinking to Computational Empowerment : A 21st Century PD Agenda . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference : Full Papers , Hasselt and Genk , Belgium , 1 – 11 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3210586 . 3210592 [ 46 ] KasperBuhlJakobsen , JeppeStougaard , MarianneGravesPetersen , JakobWinge , Jens Emil Grønbæk , and Majken Kirkegaard Rasmussen . 2016 . Expressivity in open - ended constructive play : Building and playing musical Lego instruments . In Proceedings of IDC 2016 - The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children , Manchester , United Kingdom , 46 – 57 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2930683 [ 47 ] Rose Johnson , Venus Shum , Yvonne Rogers , and Nicolai Marquardt . 2016 . Make or Shake : An Empirical Study of the Value of Making in Learning about Com - puting Technology . In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children , Manchester , United Kingdom , 440 – 451 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2930691 [ 48 ] Stephanie T . Jones , Melissa Perez , Sarah P . Lee , Kira Furuichi , and Marcelo Worsley . 2019 . Facilitation in an intergenerational making activity : How facili - tative moves shift across traditional and digital fabrication . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Interaction Design and Children , IDC 2019 , Boise , ID , USA , 237 – 245 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311927 . 3323125 [ 49 ] YasminKafai , OrkanTelhan , KarenHogan , DeboraLui , EmmaAnderson , Justice T Walker , and Sheri Hanna . 2017 . Growing Designs with biomakerlab in High School Classrooms . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children , Stanford , CA , USA , 503 – 508 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3084316 [ 50 ] Matin Mahboob Kanafi , Marianne Kinnula , and Netta Iivari . 2021 . Re - defining Characteristics of a Design Protagonist – Elements of Children’s Design Capital . In Proceedings of the BCS 34th British HCI Conference 2021 , London , UK , 226 – 240 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 14236 / ewic / hci2021 . 24 [ 51 ] Naveena Karusala , Apoorva Bhalla , and Neha Kumar . 2019 . Privacy , patri - archy , and participation on social media . In Proceedings of the 2019 on Design - ing Interactive Systems Conference , San Diego , CA , USA , 511 – 526 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3322276 . 3322355 [ 52 ] Eva Sophie Katterfeldt , Nadine Dittert , and Heidi Schelhowe . 2015 . Designing digital fabrication learning environments for Bildung : IMPLICATIONS from ten yearsofphysicalcomputingworkshops . InternationalJournalofChild - Computer Interaction 5 , ( 2015 ) , 3 – 10 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2015 . 08 . 001 [ 53 ] Saba Kawas , Ye Yuan , Akeiylah Dewitt , Qiao Jin , Susanne Kirchner , Abigail Bilger , Ethan Grantham , Julie A . Kientz , Andrea Tartaro , and Svetlana Yarosh . 2020 . Another decade of IDC research : Examining and reflecting on values and ethics . In Proceedings of the Interaction Design and Children Conference , IDC 2020 , London , United Kingdom , 205 – 215 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3392063 . 3394436 [ 54 ] Majeed Kazemitabaar , Jason McPeak , Alexander Jiao , Liang He , Thomas Outing , and Jon E . Froehlich . 2017 . MakerWear : A tangible approach to interactive wearable creation for children . In Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings , Denver , CO , USA , 133 – 145 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025887 [ 55 ] Marianne Kinnula and Netta Iivari . 2019 . Empowered to make a change : Guide - lines for empowering the young generation in and through digital technology design . In Proceedings of the FabLearn Europe 2019 Conference , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 8 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3335055 . 3335071 [ 56 ] Marianne Kinnula , Netta Iivari , Minna Isomursu , and Henrietta Kinnula . 2018 . Socializers , achievers or both ? Value - based roles of children in technology design projects . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 17 , ( 2018 ) , 39 – 49 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2018 . 04 . 004 [ 57 ] J . P . Kretzman and J . McKnight . 1993 . Introduction to Building Communities from the Inside Out : A Path Toward Finding and Mobilizing a Community’s Assets . Institute for Policy Research , Northwestern University , Evanston , IL , USA . [ 58 ] Natalia Kucirkova , Cecilie Evertsen - Stanghelle , Ingunn Studsrød , Ida Bruheim Jensen , and Ingunn Størksen . 2020 . Lessons for child – computer interaction studies following the research challenges during the Covid - 19 pandemic . In - ternational Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 26 , ( 2020 ) , 100203 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2020 . 100203 [ 59 ] Leena Kuure , Eija Halkola , Netta Iivari , Marianne Kinnula , and Tonja Molin - Juustila . 2010 . Children imitate ! Appreciating recycling in participatory design with children . In Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference , Sydney , Australia , 131 – 140 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1900441 . 1900460 [ 60 ] Stacey Kuznetsov , Laura C . Trutoiu , Casey Kute , Iris Howley , Dan Siewiorek , and Eric Paulos . 2011 . Breaking boundaries : Strategies for mentoring through textile computing workshops . In Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings , Vancouver , BC , Canada , 2957 – 2966 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979380 [ 61 ] Andrew Large , Valerie Nesset , Jamshid Beheshti , and Leanne Bowler . 2006 . “Bonded design” : A novel approach to intergenerational information technology design . Library and Information Science Research 28 , 1 ( 2006 ) , 64 – 82 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . lisr . 2005 . 11 . 014 [ 62 ] Jean Lave and Etienne Wenger . 1991 . Situated Learning : Legitimate Peripheral Participation . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . DOI : https : / / doi . org / http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / CBO9780511815355 [ 63 ] Tak Yeon Lee , Matthew Louis Mauriello , June Ahn , and Benjamin B . Bederson . 2014 . CTArcade : Computational thinking with games in school age children . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 2 , 1 ( 2014 ) , 26 – 33 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2014 . 06 . 003 [ 64 ] Victor R . Lee , Whitney Lewis , Kristin A . Searle , Mimi Recker , Jennifer Hansen , and Abigail L . Phillips . 2017 . Supporting interactive youth maker programs in public and school libraries : Design hypotheses and first implementations . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children , Stanford , CA , USA , 310 – 315 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3079741 [ 65 ] Breanne K . Litts . 2015 . Resources , facilitation , and partnerships : Three design considerations for youth makerspaces . In Proceedings of IDC 2015 : The 14th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children , Medford , MA , USA , 347 – 350 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2771839 . 2771913 [ 66 ] Covadonga Lorenzo . 2017 . Digital fabrication as a tool for teaching high - school students STEM at the University . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children , Stanford , CA , USA , 549 – 554 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3084323 [ 67 ] M A Madaio , F Tanoh , A B Seri , K Jasinska , and A Ogan . 2019 . “Everyone brings their grain of salt” : Designing for low - literate parental engagement with children’s literacy in Côte d’Ivoire . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , Association for Computing Machinery , Association for Computing Machinery , Glasgow , Scotland Uk , 1 – 14 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300695 [ 68 ] Jasmine K . McBeath , Richard P . Durán , and Danielle B . Harlow . 2017 . Not my gumdrop buttons ! Youth tool use in designing an electronic shrek - themed bean bagtoss . In Proceedingsofthe2017ConferenceonInteractionDesignandChildren , Stanford , CA , USA , 61 – 72 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3079721 [ 69 ] Maarten Van Mechelen , Marie Louise Wagner , Gökçe Elif Baykal , Rachel Char - lotte Smith , and Ole Sejer Sejer Iversen . 2021 . Digital Design Literacy in K - 9 Education : Experiences from Pioneer Teachers . In Proceedings of Interaction Design andChildren , Athens , Greece , Athens , Greece , ACM , New York , NY , USA , 32 - 42 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3459990 . 3460696 [ 70 ] K Mills , E Bonsignore , T Clegg , J Ahn , J Yip , D Pauw , L Cabrera , K Hernly , and C Pitt . 2018 . Designing to illuminate children’s scientific funds of knowledge through social media sharing . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children , Association for Computing Machinery , Inc , Trondheim , Norway , 266 – 277 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3202737 [ 71 ] Kelly Mills , Elizabeth Bonsignore , Tamara Clegg , June Ahn , Jason Yip , Daniel Pauw , Lautaro Cabrera , Kenna Hernly , and Caroline Pitt . 2019 . Connecting children’s scientific funds of knowledge shared on social media to science concepts . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 21 , ( 2019 ) , 54 – 64 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2019 . 04 . 003 [ 72 ] Tom Moher . 2009 . Putting interference to work in the design of a whole - class learning activity . In Proceedings of IDC 2009 - The 8th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children , Como , Italy , 115 – 122 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1551788 . 1551808 [ 73 ] Tonja Molin - Juustila , Marianne Kinnula , Netta Iivari , Leena Kuure , and Eija Halkola . 2015 . Multiple voices in ICT design with children - A nexus analyt - ical enquiry . Behaviour and Information Technology 34 , 11 ( 2015 ) , 1079 – 1091 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 0144929X . 2014 . 1003327 [ 74 ] Hideki Mori . 2017 . The Programmable battery : A tool to make computational making more simple , playful , and meaningful . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children , Stanford , CA , USA , 515 – 519 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3084318 [ 75 ] Christiane Moser , Verena Fuchsberger , and Manfred Tscheligi . 2011 . Using probes to create child personas for games . In ACM International Conference Proceeding Series , Lisbon , Portugal , Lisbon , Portugal , ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1 - 8 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2071423 . 2071472 [ 76 ] Kitaro Nishida . 1958 . Intelligibility and the Philosophy of Nothingness . Maruzen , Tokyo , Japan . [ 77 ] Behnaz Norouzi , Marianne Kinnula , and Netta Iivari . 2021 . Digital fabrication and Making with children : International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 28 , ( 2021 ) , 100267 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2021 . 100267 [ 78 ] Behnaz Norouzi , Marianne Kinnula , and Netta Iivari . 2021 . Making sense of 3d modelling and 3d printing activities of young people a nexus analytic inquiry . In Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings , Yokohama , Japan . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445139 [ 79 ] NancyOteroandPauloBlikstein . 2016 . Barcino , CreationofaCross - Disciplinary City . In The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children , Manchester , United Kingdom ACM , 694 – 700 . [ 80 ] Alisha Panjwani . 2017 . Constructing meaning : Designing powerful story - making explorations for children to express with tangible computational media . In IDC 2017 - Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children , Stanford , CA , USA , 358 – 364 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3079723 420 IDC ’22 , June 27 – 30 , 2022 , Braga , Portugal Matin Mahboob Kanafi et al . [ 81 ] Lucy Pei and Bonnie A . Nardi . 2019 . We did it right , but it was still wrong : Toward assets - based design . In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , Glasgow , Scotland UK , alt07 , 1 – 11 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290607 . 3310434 [ 82 ] IrenePoschandGeraldineFitzpatrick . 2012 . FirststepsintheFabLab . In Proceed - ings of the 24th Australian Computer - Human Interaction Conference , Melbourne , Victoria , Australia , 497 – 500 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2414536 . 2414612 [ 83 ] Irene Posch , Hideaki Ogawa , Christopher Lindinger , Roland Haring , and Horst Hörtner . 2010 . IntroducingtheFabLabasinteractiveexhibitionspace . In Proceed - ings of IDC2010 : The 9th International Conference on Interaction Design and Chil - dren , Barcelona , Spain , 254 – 257 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1810543 . 1810584 [ 84 ] Farzana Quayyum , Jonas Bueie , Juan Carlos Torrado Vidal , and Letizia Jaccheri . 2020 . Understanding coding activities for teens : A focus on school teachers’ perspectives . In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Interaction Design and Children Conference : Extended Abstracts , London , United Kingdom , 187 – 192 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3397617 . 3397833 [ 85 ] Janet C . Read and Mathilde M . Bekker . 2011 . The nature of Child Computer Interaction . In Proceedings of the 25th BCS Conference on Human - Computer Interaction , 163 – 170 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 14236 / ewic / hci2011 . 43 [ 86 ] G T Richard , S Giri , Z McKinley , and R W Ashley . 2018 . Blended making : Multi - interface designs and E - crafting with elementary and middle school youth . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Chil - dren , Association for Computing Machinery , Inc , Trondheim , Norway , 675 – 680 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3210798 [ 87 ] Eftychia Roumelioti , Rosella Gennari , Maristella Matera , Alessandra Melonio , and Mehdi Rizvi . 2020 . Towards making children independent in design . In CompanionPublicationofthe2020ACMDesigningInteractiveSystemsConference , Eindhoven , Netherlands , 227 – 232 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3393914 . 3395849 [ 88 ] Kenneth H . Rubin , William M . Bukowski , and Jeffrey G . Parker . 2006 . Peer Interactions , Relationships , and Groups . In Handbook of Child Psychology . 1 – 180 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / 9780470147658 . chpsy0310 [ 89 ] Ofir Sadka and Oren Zuckerman . 2017 . From parents to mentors : Parent - child interaction in Co - making activities . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children , Stanford , CA , USA , 609 – 615 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3084332 [ 90 ] SelinaSchepers , KatrienDreessen , andBiekeZaman . 2018 . Rethinkingchildren’s roles in Participatory Design : The child as a process designer . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 16 , ( 2018 ) , 47 – 54 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2017 . 12 . 001 [ 91 ] Selina Schepers , Katrien Dreessen , and Bieke Zaman . 2018 . Fun as a user gain in participatory design processes involving children : A case study . In IDC 2018 - Proceedings of the 2018 ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children , Trondheim , Norway , 396 – 404 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3202763 [ 92 ] Selina Schepers , Jessica Schoffelen , Bieke Zaman , and Katrien Dreessen . 2019 . Children’s roles in Participatory Design processes : making the role of process designer ‘work . ’ Interaction Design and Architecture ( s ) 41 , ( 2019 ) , 87 – 108 . [ 93 ] Ron Scollon . 2001 . Mediated discourse : the nexus of practice . Routledge . [ 94 ] Ron Scollon and Suzie Wong Scollon . 2003 . Discourses in place : language in the material world . Routledge , London . [ 95 ] Ron Scollon and Suzie Wong Scollon . 2004 . Nexus Analysis . Discourses and the emerging Internet . Routledge , London . UK . [ 96 ] S . W Scollon and Ingrid De Saint - Georges . 2013 . Mediated discourse analysis . The Routledge Handbook of Discourse Analysis . Taylor and Francis . 66 – 78 . [ 97 ] Rachel Charlotte Smith and Ole Sejer Iversen . 2018 . Participatory design for sustainable social change . Design Studies 59 , ( 2018 ) , 9 – 36 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2018 . 05 . 005 [ 98 ] Rachel Charlotte Smith , Ole Sejer Iversen , and Mikkel Hjorth . 2015 . Design thinking for digital fabrication in education . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 5 , ( 2015 ) , 20 – 28 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2015 . 10 . 002 [ 99 ] Sowmya Somanath , Lora Oehlberg , Janette Hughes , Ehud Sharlin , and Mario Costa Sousa . 2017 . “Maker” within constraints : Exploratory study of young learners using arduino at a high school in India . In Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings , Denver , CO , USA , 96 – 108 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025849 [ 100 ] Gary S . Stager . 2013 . Papert’s prison fab lab : Implications for the maker move - ment and education design . In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children , New York , NY , USA , 487 – 490 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2485760 . 2485811 [ 101 ] Tammy Toscos , Anne Faber , Shunying An , and Mona Praful Gandhi . 2006 . Chick Clique : Persuasive technology to motivate teenage girls to exercise . In Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings , Montréal , Québec , Canada , 1873 – 1878 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1125451 . 1125805 [ 102 ] Ari Tuhkala , Marie Louise Wagner , Ole Sejer Iversen , and Tommi Kärkkäinen . 2019 . Technology Comprehension — Combining computing , design , and soci - etal reflection as a national subject . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 20 , ( 2019 ) , 54 – 63 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2019 . 03 . 004 [ 103 ] Veena Vasudevan , Yasmin Kafai , and Lei Yang . 2015 . Make , wear , play : Remix designs of wearable controllers for scratch games by middle school youth . In Proceedings of IDC 2015 : The 14th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children , Medford , MA , USA , 339 – 342 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2771839 . 2771911 [ 104 ] Leena Ventä - olkkonen , Netta Iivari , Tonja Molin - juustila , Kari Kuutti , Nina Juustila - cevirel , and Jenni Holappa . 2021 . Nowhere to Now - here : Empowering ChildrentoReimagineBullyPreventionatSchoolsUsingCriticalDesignFiction . In DIS ’21 : Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2021June 2021 , Virtual Event , USA , 734 – 748 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3461778 . 3462044 [ 105 ] James V Wertsch , Peeter Tulviste , and Fran Hagstrom . 1993 . A Sociocultural Approach to Agency . Oxford Univ . Press . [ 106 ] Marisol Wong - Villacres , Carl Disalvo , Neha Kumar , and Betsy Disalvo . 2020 . Culture in Action : Unpacking Capacities to Inform Assets - Based Design . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , Association of Computing Machinary , Honolulu , HI , USA , 1 – 14 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376329 421