Human - Computer Co - Creativity : Blending Human and Computational Creativity Nicholas Davis Georgia Institute of Technology School of Interactive Computing Atlanta , GA ndavis35 @ gatech . edu Abstract This paper describes a thesis exploring how computer programs can collaborate as equals in the artistic creative process . The proposed system , CoCo Sketch , encodes some rudimentary stylistic rules of abstract sketching and music theory to contribute supplemental lines and music while the user sketches . We describe a three - part research method that includes defining rudimentary stylistic rules for abstract line drawing , exploring the interaction design for artistic improvisation with a computer , and evaluating how CoCo Sketch affects the artistic creative process . We report on the initial results of early investigations into artistic style that describe cognitive , perceptual , and behavioral processes used in abstract artists making . Introduction Creativity is an important topic in the Human Computer Interaction ( HCI ) and Artificial Intelligence ( AI ) research communities . HCI researchers build creativity support tools ( CSTs ) that augment and extend the creative abilities of humans , and AI researchers develop computationally creative systems to test cognitive theories of creativity . Enormous progress has been made in the two supplemental pursuits ; however , there is a gap in the research literature about blending humans and computers in a collaborative co - creative process . My thesis explores ways in which humans and computers can collaboratively improvise in the art making process . In this approach , the computer and human are viewed as a system through which a new type of human - computer co - creativity emerges . To investigate this issue , I propose a collaborative computational sketching system called CoCo Sketch . CoCo Sketch encodes some rudimentary stylistic rules of abstract sketching and music theory to contribute supplemental lines and music while the user sketches . The system investigates a new type of artistic creativity where a Copyright © 2013 , Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence ( www . aaai . org ) . All rights reserved . human and computer both make creative contributions to an artwork . This new type of human - computer co - creativity enables a computer to contribute as a partner in the creative process . The interaction design of CoCo Sketch is motivated by two creative collaboration domains : ( 1 ) The exquisite corpse drawing game where multiple collaborators each add to the same drawing , and ( 2 ) Jazz improvisation during which each collaborator responds to and builds on the other party’s contributions . I hypothesize that CoCo Sketch will support creativity by pushing artists to explore new and unexpected line combinations . Additionally , I hypothesize that CoCo Sketch’s dynamic musical accompaniment will increase creative engagement by reducing creative inhibitions and helping users attain a state of creative flow . I ask the following research questions . • RQ1 : What are the basic stylistic elements of the abstract line drawing genre that can be encoded in an AI system to enable meaningful artistic collaboration ? • RQ2 : How does improvisational human - computer co - creativity affect the artistic creative process and product ? • RQ3 : How does creative engagement change when a system generates musical accompaniment based on the user’s sketching behavior ? The primary contribution of this thesis is addressing a gap in the CST research literature on how computer colleagues can contribute to the creative process . Furthermore , the thesis paves a new path for the field of computational creativity in AI by exploring how computationally creative systems can be seamlessly blended into the human creative process . Finally , the thesis introduces a new systems view of creativity that describes how creativity can emerge from real - time human - computer improvisation and collaboration . As a new concept , human - computer co - creativity can be useful for understanding how to augment creativity across domains . The Doctoral Consortium at AIIDE 2013 ( WS - 13 - 23 ) 9 Related Work Creativity Support Tools Creativity Support Tools ( CSTs ) enhance and augment the user’s existing creative skills . The precise functionality of CSTs change based on creative domain , but they generally allow users to rapidly generate multiple alternatives , explore and simulate choices , and revert to earlier stages of an idea ( Schneiderman 2007 ) . Currently , most CSTs allow users to perform operations on their creative product and support decision - making about that product . Lubart ( 2005 ) enumerates four categories that describe how computers can support creativity . A computer nanny provides tools to schedule and maintain creative activities . A computer pen - pal supports collaboration within teams . Computer coaches stimulate creative thinking by suggesting creative activity based on expert knowledge in the domain . Computer colleagues may meaningfully contribute to tasks so a human - computer team becomes a contributor to a domain . This last category of CSTs , computer colleagues , offers interesting opportunities for creative expression , but it has not been researched very deeply . There are several artistic and sketching related CSTs that teach technical skills or stimulate creative thinking . For example , iCanDraw helps users draw realistic portraits by providing feedback about the accuracy of user’s lines according to an expertly drawn portrait that serves as the ground truth ( Dixon et al . 2010 ) . iCanDraw and other similar systems improve the user’s technical artistic ability , but none of these types of computational systems make creative contributions to the artwork itself . Computational Creativity Creativity is generally defined as a product that is novel , valuable , and surprising ( Sternberg 2006 ) . The field of computational creativity develops computer programs that autonomously produce works of art that are classified as creative . Harold Cohen ( McCorduck 1990 ) developed a computer program called Aaron that creates brightly colored digital artworks containing abstract shapes and human figures . Aaron’s algorithms are non - deterministic , which means the initial conditions and subsequent decisions of the system greatly influence the product . The product cannot be predicted because it does not follow a linear path , which means the artworks that Aaron produces are both novel and surprising . Furthermore , these artworks have demonstrated value through their acceptance as art that is displayed in galleries . Colton ( 2008 ) pushed the field of computational creativity forward when he suggested that creativity should be measured through process as well as product . For example , Aaron’s software architecture uses distributed processing where many different models analyze the each other’s decisions and reacts to them in unique ways . These modules all interact to yield an emergent artwork that was not completely dictated by the programmer , which makes its process more creative . The proposed project injects human creativity into the algorithms of a computationally creative system . Instead of random number generators introducing noise in the system to drive unpredictable results , the system will leverage the human’s creative contributions as input to the system . In this context , the focus is not on building a sufficiently creative computational system , but rather by enabling a creative system that includes both a human actor and distributed algorithms that process input independently . Co - Creativity Co - creativity is classified as multiple parties contributing to the creative process in a blended manner ( Candy et al . 2002 ) . In alternative creative situations , tasks can be accomplished through a distribution of labor , but the result only represents the sum of each individual contribution . Co - creativity goes beyond this division of labor model and allows all individuals to contribute collaboratively and synthetically . In this situation , ideas can be fused , combined , merged , and added onto in ways that stem from the unique mix of personalities and motivations of the team members ( Candy et al . 2002 ) . It can yield more creative solutions than if each party completed an isolated task and then added them together , i . e . the sum is greater than the parts . I introduce a new term called human - computer co - creativity that introduces a computer into this collaborative environment as an equal in the creative process . Depending on the implementation details , the computer can potentially collaborate with the user in a variety of ways . The crucial point here is that the computer does not follow a pre - defined script to guide the interaction . The program is adapting to the input of the user and generating responses to that input based on computationally creative algorithms . Human - computer co - creativity describes a situation in which the human and computer improvise in real time to generate a creative product . Here , creativity emerges through the interaction of both the human and the computer . This model of interaction is not a distribution of labor where each party performs different and independent tasks . The contributions of human and computer are mutually influential , which is the nature of collaboration and improvisation . Research Method The method for this thesis is threefold . ( 1 ) Perform qualitative empirical studies to begin to understand rudimentary stylistic elements of abstract drawings . ( 2 ) Encode those stylistic rules into algorithms and work to define the proper interaction design for CoCo Sketch through iterative prototyping and user testing . ( 3 ) Evaluate whether the prototype answers the hypotheses by 10 measuring its effect on the creative process of artists . The next sections will explain these three components in more detail . Encoding Artistic Style Defining general rules that describe artistic style is a complex pursuit . Scoping the aim of this task significantly simplifies it . For the purposes of this project , I will focus exclusively on abstract line drawings . Complex shapes , such as people and animals , add a significant amount of difficulty due to the complexity of computer vision and object recognition . By focusing on abstract line drawing , the rules only need to deal with the visual features of lines and their spatial relations . Furthermore , an exhaustive and generalized catalog of artistic style in this domain is not necessary because the system only needs enough domain knowledge to make meaningful contributions . Fortunately , abstract art is forgiving in the sense that contributions from the computer will not be ‘wrong’ in the same way that they would be in representational art , i . e . putting an ear where a nose should be . Three methods will be used to collect data about artistic style . The first step is making video records of abstract artists creating line drawings . After the artist is finished , they will be complete a retrospective protocol analysis describing their thoughts and motivations that guided their stylistic decisions . Performing a qualitative data analysis of this footage will help determine patterns and themes that can be used to describe the decision making process of artists . For example , does the artist have a certain strategy for making contributions , such as defining major lines and then adding details to those lines later ? Does this strategy change as the artwork progresses ? Next , the artists will engage in a more controlled task where they create response lines to a pre - determined set of inputs consisting of simple shapes , such as vertical and horizontal lines , circles , and squares in different positions on a piece of paper ( Davis et al . 2011 ) . Asking the artist to draw response lines and explain their reasoning will help isolate factors that influence their decision making process . Finally , the artists will play a collaborative art game ( Hsiao et al 2013 ) . In this game , the artist has to teach an ‘apprentice’ how to draw in a way that looks like the artist’s style . Interaction will occur through turn taking , and the artist will be asked to provide feedback to about the apprentice’s contributions , such as what was done right or wrong . This exercise will force the artist to be explicit about the rules and procedures s / he uses to make artistic decisions and help codify elements of artistic style . Preliminary analysis of the abstract art creative process reveals two fundamental types of contributions in an abstract artwork—contributions that elaborate and refine an existing structure , and contributions that catalyze the artwork ( Davis et al . 2011 ) . Elaborations build on existing lines and patterns , whereas catalysts introduce completely new themes and structures into the piece . Some abstract artists alternate their focus and perception between local features , regional patterns , and global relationships throughout their process . Local features refer to individual lines and their visual appearance . Regional patterns describe how lines and groups of lines interact and form coherent patterns . Global relationships describe the ways in which different parts of the drawing relate to each other and how to make a coherent overall composition . Local , regional , and global components all have independent and sometimes overlapping evaluation criteria . Each aspect of the artwork has what can be referred to as an aesthetic equilibrium that is reached by elaborating on the existing structures until they reach a state of stylistic ‘maturity , ’ meaning that the lines adhere to some internal set of aesthetic or perceptual logic ( Davis et al . 2011 ) . For example , sketchy lines may need to be made smooth , or skinny lines may need to be made thick in order for aesthetic equilibrium to be reached . Further analysis is needed to fully address RQ1 and create a more robust and detailed understanding of the creative process of abstract artists . Once some rudimentary stylistic rules exist , the improvisational structure and interaction design of CoCo Sketch needs to be developed . Designing for Improvised Interaction A semiotic analysis of the communication structure in improvisation will help inform the interaction dynamics and functions of the system . The most basic definition will be that of a creative trajectory , which is the shared understanding and intention to make creative contributions in a mutually negotiated and desired direction . There are many ways that computers can improvise with humans in the artistic creative process . Improvisation includes understanding and relating to the contributions of another party . In successful improvisation , an individual is able to discern a pattern or theme and respond to that theme in a meaningful way . This is the basic call and response format in jazz improvisation . I will begin the analysis from this starting point . Contributions that serve to establish a pattern or theme will be called establishing actions . This is similar to choosing a topic in a conversation . One party picks a creative trajectory and executes an initial action in that trajectory . The degree of expressivity , detail , or clarity of the establishing action will influence the interpretation of this action . For example , if the establishing action is too small or ambiguous , the other party may not understand how to contribute to it . When a party observes and experiences an establishing action , the choice is to accept that trajectory and align their subsequent actions with that pattern or reject it . A response action that accepts the suggested creative trajectory will be called a verification action , while a response that rejects a creative trajectory will be referred as a rejection action . An improvisatory action that verifies a pattern shows that the party was able to successfully interpret a pattern or part of a pattern . Additionally , it encodes a value judgment 11 on the part of the responder that shows that the party agrees with the suggested direction . Verification actions will typically align with the interpreted pattern or theme . This serves two purposes : 1 ) Testing whether the interpreted theme or pattern as the intended them or pattern , and 2 ) Indicating support for the established theme . When the initiating party experiences the verification action , they can verify that the theme was interpreted correctly and perform building actions that add to an established theme . At this point both parties are on similar creative trajectories and can perform small elaboration actions that push the established boundaries of the current theme . At any point during the creative trajectory , a party can choose to break the current communication channel and open up an alternative channel of communication to establish a new theme or pattern of collaboration . This type of action is termed a deviation action . A deviation action serves a double purpose of notifying the other party of the intention to deviate from the current creative trajectory as well as suggesting a new direction by trying to establish a new theme . Deviation actions can serve as catalysts to the creative process because they force the other party to respond in a creative way . Deviation actions can disturb an established equilibrium of a local area , region , or the global artwork . CoCo Sketch will separate state data for local , regional , and global information . The decision engine determining how CoCo Sketch will respond incorporates the improvisational semiotics outlined in this section as well as the rudimentary stylistic guidelines described earlier . Evaluation The mixed - method evaluation consists of three phases that include both quantitative and qualitative elements . To evaluate CoCo Sketch , 10 abstract artists will create three ten - minute sketches with CoCo Sketch . The first sketch will be the control condition with no assistance . The second sketch will improvise and collaborate with the user , and the third sketch will improvise as well as provide musical accompaniment . The CoCo Sketch tool will log sketch behavior and provide quantitative data , such as the number of lines , amount of ink per second , time lapse between lines , and average line length . This quantitative data can be used as one indication of how the different interventions affect sketching behavior , which addresses part of RQ2 about the creative process . Artists will be asked to perform a retrospective protocol analysis to describe their experience and thought processes for each of the conditions to provide qualitative insight about how the tool affected their creative process . The participants will also complete the Creativity Support Index ( Carol et al . 2009 ) , which provides measurements about creative engagement . This will help answer RQ3 about whether CoCo Sketch helps cultivate creative flow . Finally , the creative products for each three drawings will be given to an expert panel to evaluate their creativity using Amabile’s Consensual Assessment Technique ( 1996 ) . Conclusions This thesis addresses a gap in the research literature about computers colleagues that contribute as equals in the creative process . Human - computer co - creativity offers interesting possibilities in the fields of computational creativity as well as creativity support tools because it seamlessly integrates human and computational creativity . The research program that we presented included three components that deal with learning about artistic style , encoding those stylistic rules and defining the interaction , and finally evaluating the system . References Amabile , T . M . , Creativity in Context . 1996 . Westview Press : Boulder . Candy , L . , & Edmonds , E . Modeling co - creativity in art and technology . Proc . of Creativity & Cognition ‘02 , ( 2002 ) , 134 - 141 . Carroll , E . A . , Latulipe , C . , Fung , R . , and Terry , M . Creativity factor evaluation : towards a standardized survey metric for creativity support . Proc . of Creativity & Cognition ‘09 , ( 2009 ) , 127 – 136 . Colton , S . Creativity Versus the Perception of Creativity in Computational Systems . New Generation Computing , ( 2008 ) , 14 – 20 Davis , N . , Gupta , P . Gupta , S . , Do , Ellen Y . - L . Computing harmony with PerLogicArt : Perceptual Logic Inspired Collaborative Art . Proc . of Creativity & Cognition ‘11 , ( 2011 ) , 185 - 194 . Dixon , D . , Prasad , M . , & Hammond , T . ( 2010 ) . iCanDraw : using sketch recognition and corrective feedback to assist a user in drawing human faces . Proc . of CHI , ( 2010 ) , 897 - 906 . Hsiao , C . - P . , Davis , N . , Chen , S . , Sun , B . , Chen , R . , and Do , Ellen Y . - L . Sketch Master – A Sketch Game for Collecting Exploratory Data . Proc . of Creativity and Cognition 13’ ( 2013 ) . Lubart , T . How can computers be partners in the creative process : Classification and commentary on the Special Issue . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 63 , 4 - 5 ( 2005 ) , 365 – 369 . McCorduck , P . Aaron’s Code : Meta - Art , Artificial Intelligence and the Work of Harold Cohen . 1990 . W H Freeman & Co . : San Francisco . Sternberg , R . J . The nature of creativity . Creativity Research Journal 18 , 1 ( 2006 ) , 87 – 98 . Shneiderman , B . Creativity support tools : accelerating discovery and innovation . Communications of the ACM , 50 , 12 ( 2007 ) , 20 - 32 . 12