ANRV408 - PC61 - 17 ARI 25 February 2010 17 : 5 Superresolution Imaging using Single - Molecule Localization George Patterson , 1 Michael Davidson , 2 Suliana Manley , 3 and Jennifer Lippincott - Schwartz 4 1 Biophotonics Section , National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , Maryland 20892 2 National High Magnetic Field Laboratory and Department of Biological Science , The Florida State University , Tallahassee , Florida 32310 3 ´Ecole Polytechnique F´ed´erale de Lausanne , Lausanne , Switzerland CH - 1015 4 Cell Biology and Metabolism Program , Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , Maryland 20892 ; email : lippincj @ mail . nih . gov Annu . Rev . Phys . Chem . 2010 . 61 : 345 – 67 First published online as a Review in Advance on January 4 , 2010 The Annual Review of Physical Chemistry is online at physchem . annualreviews . org This article’s doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . physchem . 012809 . 103444 Copyright c (cid:2) 2010 by Annual Reviews . All rights reserved 0066 - 426X / 10 / 0505 - 0345 $ 20 . 00 Key Words superresolution microscopy , single molecule , PALM , STORM , FPALM , diffraction limit , photoactivation , photoactivatable ﬂuorescent protein , ﬂuorescence imaging Abstract Superresolution imaging is a rapidly emerging new ﬁeld of microscopy that dramatically improves the spatial resolution of light microscopy by over an order of magnitude ( ∼ 10 – 20 - nm resolution ) , allowing biological processes to be described at the molecular scale . Here , we discuss a form of superreso - lution microscopy based on the controlled activation and sampling of sparse subsets of photoconvertible ﬂuorescent molecules . In this single - molecule - based imaging approach , a wide variety of probes have proved valuable , ranging from genetically encodable photoactivatable ﬂuorescent proteins to photoswitchable cyanine dyes . These have been used in diverse applications of superresolution imaging : from three - dimensional , multicolor molecule localization to tracking of nanometric structures and molecules in living cells . Single - molecule - based superresolution imaging thus offers exciting possibilities for obtaining molecular - scale information on biological events occurring at variable timescales . 345 A nnu . R e v . P hy s . C h e m . 2010 . 61 : 345 - 367 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by N a ti on a l I n s tit u t e s o f H ea lt h L i b r a r y on 07 / 22 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV408 - PC61 - 17 ARI 25 February 2010 17 : 5 FP : ﬂuorescent protein Superresolution : resolution that is greater than the diffraction limit of light through a lens ( i . e . , better than 200 nm along the x - y axis and 500 nm along the z axis ) Illumination - based superresolution imaging : imaging using nonlinear optical approaches to reduce the focal spot size as in STED and SSIM STED : stimulated emission depletion ﬂuorescencemicroscopy SSIM : saturated structured illumination microscopy Probe - based superresolutionimaging : imaging using photoswitchable molecules to resolve dense populations of molecules by temporally switching on one molecule at a time in the population , determining its single - molecule position , and then summing together all molecular positions for a superresolution image as in PALM , FPALM , and STORM PALM : photoactivatedlocalizationmicroscopy FPALM : ﬂuorescence photoactivatedlocalizationmicroscopy INTRODUCTION Fluorescence microscopy , a favorite tool of biologists , magniﬁes and images light - emitting objects with a resolution down to one - quarter of a micrometer , enabling the study of ﬁne structural details of cellular architecture and dynamics . Key insights into events occurring inside cells , tissues , and whole organisms have thereby been achieved , such as the shape of intracellular transport vehicles ( 1 ) , the mechanism ( s ) for tissue remodeling ( 2 ) , and the movement of cancer cells within a diseased organism ( 3 ) . Contributing to the dramatic rise in ﬂuorescence microscopy has been the advent of genetically encoded ﬂuorescent proteins ( FPs ) acting as endogenous labels , allowing almost any protein or peptide to become ﬂuorescent inside cells and thereby to be visible within a bio - logical context ( 4 ) . The wide availability of sensitive cameras , inexpensive lasers , and high - quality optical lenses and ﬁlters has further permitted acquisition of superior images with spatiotemporal characteristics appropriate for addressing a diverse array of biological questions . Despite its revolutionary impact , ﬂuorescence microscopy faces a limit in its resolving capability—the diffraction of light . Arising from the wavelike character of light diffracting while passing through a lens , this limitation prevents objects smaller than ∼ 250 nm along the x - y axis and ∼ 500 nm in the z axis from being seen as anything but a blur . As many subcellular structures have features much smaller than this size—including microtubules , actin ﬁbers , ribosomes , transport vesicles , and the intramembrane organization of organelles—the need to break the diffraction barrier , imaging below the size limitation it deﬁnes , has been the holy grail of light microscopy for many years ( 5 ) . Recently , two distinct conceptual strategies have overcome light’s diffraction barrier , allowing the analysis of biological structures at the superresolution level . One strategy , referred to here as illumination - based superresolution , uses nonlinear optical approaches to reduce the focal spot size , as in stimulated emission depletion ( STED ) ﬂuorescence microscopy ( 6 ) and saturated structured illumination microscopy ( SSIM ) ( 7 ) . By modifying the excitation light pattern to yield a smaller spot size , STED and SSIM can resolve ﬁne structural details of biological specimens , such as the shape of mitochondrial membranes ( 8 ) and chromosomal and nuclear envelope organization ( 9 ) , down to ∼ 30 nm in the x - y direction in the case of STED and ∼ 100 nm in the case of SSIM . The second strategy for overcoming light’s diffraction barrier uses photoswitchable molecules to resolve dense populations of molecules with superresolution . This approach employs stochas - tic activation of ﬂuorescence to switch on individual photoactivatable molecules and then im - ages and bleaches them , temporally separating molecules that would otherwise be spatially in - distinguishable . Merging all the single - molecule positions obtained by the photoactivation and imaging / bleaching cycles yields a ﬁnal superresolution image . Referred to here as probe - based superresolution , this approach was independently developed by three groups and given the names photoactivated localization microscopy ( PALM ) ( 10 ) , ﬂuorescence photoactivated localization microscopy ( FPALM ) ( 11 ) , and stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy ( STORM ) ( 12 ) . Whereas PALM / FPALM use photoactivatable or photoconvertible FPs as probes , STORM uses synthetic ﬂuorophores as probes , as in the photoswitchable ﬂuorophore combination of Cy3 and Cy5 . Probe - based superresolution allows biological structures to be deﬁned with nanometric ac - curacy , similar to illumination - based superresolution . However , it additionally permits molecules comprising subcellular structures to be individually identiﬁed at high densities and their distribu - tions and dynamics to be analyzed . This opens many new possibilities for addressing mechanistic questions regarding biological function , including the mapping of molecular machinery , its stoi - chiometry , and dynamics . Both illumination - based and probe - based superresolution imaging approaches permit biol - ogists to now visualize structures and processes of cells at or near the molecular level . The 346 Patterson et al . A nnu . R e v . P hy s . C h e m . 2010 . 61 : 345 - 367 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by N a ti on a l I n s tit u t e s o f H ea lt h L i b r a r y on 07 / 22 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV408 - PC61 - 17 ARI 25 February 2010 17 : 5 Photoactivatableﬂuorescentprotein : a ﬂuorescent protein that switches from a dark state to a bright state in response to ultraviolet light Photoconvertibleﬂuorescentprotein : a ﬂuorescent protein that undergoes photoconversion from one emission wavelength to another , usually from green to red , in response to ultraviolet light STORM : stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy Diffraction limit : limit in resolving capability of conventional light microscopy order - of - magnitude improvement in spatial resolution achieved over previous light microscopy methods means that the new approaches have enormous potential for addressing numerous bi - ological questions requiring resolutions below 250 nm . So far , these approaches have provided details on the ﬁne architecture of cell structures such as mitochondria , lysosomes , focal adhesions , microtubules , and coated vesicles ( 8 , 10 , 13 ) . Dynamic processes have also been studied , including the movement of focal adhesion complexes ( 14 ) and bacteria polarity complexes ( 15 ) , as well as single molecules on the plasma membrane ( 16 , 17 ) . Here , we focus on probe - based superresolution imaging achieved using the single - molecule localization techniques of PALM / FPALM / STORM . We begin by discussing the concept under - lying its development and the photoswitchable probes that it utilizes . We then describe its current state of development , including its various applications and limitations . We end by discussing the future possibilities and challenges of probe - based superresolution imaging , and the scientiﬁc areas it is likely to strongly impact . CONCEPTUAL BASIS OF PROBE - BASED SUPERRESOLUTION IMAGING The principle of probe - based superresolution imaging rests on a combination of two capabilities : the imaging of single ﬂuorophores and the controlled activation and sampling of sparse subsets in time of such ﬂuorescent labels . Single - molecule imaging was initially demonstrated over a decade ago , ﬁrst at cryogenic temperatures ( 18 ) and later at room temperature with near - ﬁeld optics ( 19 ) , and has since evolved to standard microscopy techniques . The prior knowledge that a diffraction - limited image of a molecule originates from a single source allows one to estimate the location ( center ) of that molecule with a precision well beyond the diffraction limit . This precision scales with the inverse square of the number of detected photons ( 20 ) ( Figure 1 a ) . Thus ∼ 10 - nm localization of that molecule can be established with ∼ 1000 photons in a low background situation . Extension of this insight has resulted in many beautiful experiments studying isolated structures that are separated by > 0 . 3 μ m ( i . e . , the diffraction limit ) , such as labeled molecular motors ( 21 , 22 ) . The recent availability and ease of use of EMCCD ( electron multiplying charge coupled device ) cameras , with their single - photon sensitivity , have made this an easily implementable technique . The vast majority of proteins of interest in a biological system , however , are very densely dis - tributed , with signiﬁcantly more than one molecule sharing a diffraction - limited volume . In these cases , single - molecule - scalelocalization , asdescribedabove , isimpossiblebecausetheﬂuorescence image of molecules formed appears as a highly overlapping distribution of fuzzy diffraction - limited spots . The way around this problem is to localize sparse subsets of molecules . That was ﬁrst im - plied by an early experiment ( 23 ) in which individual densely distributed luminescent centers in a quantum well with distinct spectra were resolved by imaging with a sufﬁciently ﬁnely binned wavelength . Therefore , although there were many centers within a spatial resolution volume , they became resolvable when separated along another dimension , in this case , the wavelength . Within this higher - dimensional volume of x , y spatial coordinates and wavelength , it was possible to select a sufﬁciently sparse subset so that one could see the centers individually . This led to a generaliza - tion ( 24 ) that if the luminescence or ﬂuorescence response from multiple sources could be spread out in some higher - dimensional space , then it could be possible to image the sources individually , localize each of their centers , and accumulate the center coordinates to create a superresolution image . Unfortunately this was not practical in the 1990s with the ﬂuorescent labels available for biological systems as labels with the requisite attributes ( e . g . , separable narrow wavelengths ) were not known . www . annualreviews . org • Single - Molecular Superresolution Imaging 347 A nnu . R e v . P hy s . C h e m . 2010 . 61 : 345 - 367 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by N a ti on a l I n s tit u t e s o f H ea lt h L i b r a r y on 07 / 22 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV408 - PC61 - 17 ARI 25 February 2010 17 : 5 0 . 5 μm 1 2 3 4 Σ Localize Activate Summed Lateral resolution ( μm ) A x i a l r e s o l u t i o n ( μ m ) 0 – 0 . 1 0 . 1 0 0 . 1 – 0 . 1 0 . 2 – 0 . 2 WidefieldPSF y x z Gaussiandistribution a b c 348 Patterson et al . A nnu . R e v . P hy s . C h e m . 2010 . 61 : 345 - 367 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by N a ti on a l I n s tit u t e s o f H ea lt h L i b r a r y on 07 / 22 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV408 - PC61 - 17 ARI 25 February 2010 17 : 5 Quantum dot : inorganicsemiconductornanocrystalthatexhibitsbrightﬂuorescenceover a large wavelength range This changed with the discovery of photoactivatable ﬂuorescent labels ( 25 , 26 ) when it became possible to switch on thousands of sparse subsets of molecules created sequentially in time ( 10 ) . The operating principle of this method is to start with the vast majority of labels in an inactive state , not contributing to the ﬂuorescence . A small fraction ( (cid:3) 1 part in 100 ) is then activated and made capable of ﬂuorescence . This activation can be achieved by illumination with near - ultraviolet ( near - UV ) light that causes a chemical modiﬁcation in a few molecules and allows ﬂuorescence . That sparse subset is then imaged , and each ﬂuorescent label can then be localized to give nanometer - level precision coordinates . Those labels are then removed ( e . g . , by bleaching ) so that a new sparse subset can be put into the active state and sampled to add a new set of molecular coordinates ( Figure 1 b ) . This process can be repeated many thousands of times so that up to millions of such molecular coordinates can be accumulated within an imaged area . By rendering a composite image of all these coordinates , a single - molecule superresolution image of the labeled protein or structure is thereby created ( Figure 1 c ) . The molecular coordinates are not represented by only a point , showing their x , y location , but by a Gaussian intensity corresponding to the positional uncertainty of their location . Care must be taken to count each molecule only once even if its ﬂuorescence is blinking . PROBES FOR SINGLE - MOLECULE SUPERRESOLUTION MICROSCOPY Several ﬂuorophore classes have emerged as candidates for labeling subcellular targets in photoac - tivated localization single - molecule microscopy . These include genetically encoded FP fusions , small - molecule synthetic dyes , quantum dots , and hybrid systems that combine a genetically en - coded target peptide with a separate synthetic component that is membrane permeant . Each class of probes has its particular strengths and weaknesses , but no single class or individual ﬂuorophore has been developed that combines all the preferred characteristics of an ideal probe for single - molecule superresolution microscopy ( 27 – 29 ) . The principal criterion for ﬂuorescent probes in this class is that they must be capable of being photoactivated , photoswitched , or photoconverted by light of a speciﬁc wavelength as a means to alter their spectral properties for the detection of selected subpopulations . Among the most desirable attributes for single - molecule superresolution probes are very high brightness and contrast levels , which are necessary to maximize the number of photons that can be ←−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−− Figure 1 The point spread function ( PSF ) and principle of single - molecule superresolution imaging . ( a ) Focused light through a lens always produces a blurred or diffracted spot that is commonly represented by the PSF ( left panel ) with dimensions of ∼ 200 nm laterally ( x , y ) and ∼ 500 nm axially ( z ) for green light imaged through a lens having a numerical aperture of 1 . 4 . The lateral PSF of a ﬂuorescent point emitter can be ﬁtted to a two - dimensional Gaussian distribution ( right panel ) to obtain the centroid of the ﬂuorescent probe with nanometric accuracy . This is a key principle of single - molecule superresolution : ﬁtting with high precision the centroid of a diffracted , blurry spot from a ﬂuorescent molecule . ( b ) Single - molecule superresolution in practice is achieved by illuminating a densely populated specimen with low - intensity activation light so that only a sparse pool of molecules is activated . The position of each molecule is localized by ﬁtting the measured photon distribution with a two - dimensional Gaussian function . These molecules are then photobleached before additional cycles of activation and photobleaching of new molecules are performed . A composite superresolution image ( see the panel marked “Summed” ) that contains information about the localization of many single molecules can thereby be produced within a single diffraction - limited region . ( c ) PALM image of a thin section through a lysosome expressing CD63 tagged with the photoactivated ﬂuorescent protein Kaede , revealing highly localized molecules on the membranes of this organelle . Figure adapted from Reference 10 . www . annualreviews . org • Single - Molecular Superresolution Imaging 349 A nnu . R e v . P hy s . C h e m . 2010 . 61 : 345 - 367 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by N a ti on a l I n s tit u t e s o f H ea lt h L i b r a r y on 07 / 22 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV408 - PC61 - 17 ARI 25 February 2010 17 : 5 Optical highlighter : ﬂuorescent protein that switches on ﬂuorescence from a dark or different ﬂuorescent state using photoactivation , photoconversion , or photoswitchingtechniques detected per molecule before it photobleaches or reverts to a dark state . Brightness is determined by the product of the molar extinction coefﬁcient ( ε abs ) and the ﬂuorescence quantum yield ( ϕ ) ( 30 ) . Thus , the best probes have high extinction coefﬁcients and quantum yields and provide excellent contrast over the background ( 10 , 27 ) . In addition , photoswitching properties should include spectral proﬁles for the active and inactive species that are sufﬁciently well separated and thermally stable so that spontaneous interconversion energies are very low compared with the light - controlled activation energy . Ideally , these probes should also exhibit high switching reliability , low fatigue rates ( the number of survivable switching cycles ) , and switching kinetics that can be controlled ( 28 ) . In terms of photobleaching or photoswitching to a dark state , the best probes are those whose inactivation can be balanced with the activation rate to ensure that only a small population of molecules is activated ( i . e . , ﬂuorescent ) for readout , and that these activated molecules are separated by a distance greater than the resolution limits of the camera system . Furthermore , each photoactivated molecule should emit enough photons while in an activated state to accurately determine their lateral position coordinates ( 10 , 31 ) . Aside from displaying the necessary ﬂuorescent properties , single - molecule superresolution probes must also localize to their intended targets with high precision and exhibit the lowest pos - sible background noise levels . Fluorescent proteins , hybrid systems , and highly speciﬁc synthetic ﬂuorophores are able to selectively target protein assemblies or organelles , but most of the cadre of synthetics and quantum dots must ﬁrst be conjugated to a carrier molecule for precise labeling . In many cases , the exact proximity of the probe to the target is questionable , as is the number of actual ﬂuorophore units involved , especially when small synthetic dye molecules or quantum dots are conjugated to large antibodies ( 31 ) . Additionally , variations in photophysical properties ( such as ﬂuorescence quantum yield ) induced by environmental ﬂuctuations or intermolecular interac - tions can complicate data analysis . Finally , regardless of whether localization analysis is performed on ﬁxed or living cells , autoﬂuorescence arising from ﬁxatives and transfection reagents can often produce excessively high background signal ( 32 ) . Fluorescent Protein Probes The intrinsic ability of certain FPs to alter their spectral properties upon exposure to light of a speciﬁc wavelength coupled with their excellent targeting speciﬁcity has been widely exploited in superresolution imaging ( see Table 1 ) . Although FPs are known to undergo a variety of light - induced switching characteristics , including distinct emission and nonemission states as well as on - and - off blinking behavior ( 33 , 34 ) , the most useful properties are photoactivation , photocon - version , and photoswitching , functions that can be collectively termed optical highlighting ( 35 ) . Photoactivatable FPs are capable of being activated from a dark state to bright ﬂuorescence emis - sion upon illumination with UV or violet light , whereas photoconvertible FPs can be optically transformed from one ﬂuorescence emission bandwidth to another . In contrast , photoswitchable FPs have emission characteristics that can alternatively be turned on or off with speciﬁc illumina - tion . Aside from the requirement that FPs must display some type of optical highlighting behavior for superresolution imaging , they must also have sufﬁcient brightness , chromophore maturation rates , and monomeric character to express the fusion without artifacts , such as mistargeting and dysfunction ( 27 ) . Additionally , oligomerization in FPs can present a problem in stochastic super - resolution microscopy as there is more than one chromophore in each localized probe molecule . Photoactivatable ﬂuorescent proteins . The ﬁrst useful optical highlighter was engineered by substituting histidine for threonine at position 203 in wild - type GFP to produce a photoactivatable version ( termed PA - GFP ) with negligible absorbance in the region between 450 and 500 nm ( 25 ) . 350 Patterson et al . A nnu . R e v . P hy s . C h e m . 2010 . 61 : 345 - 367 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by N a ti on a l I n s tit u t e s o f H ea lt h L i b r a r y on 07 / 22 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV408 - PC61 - 17 ARI 25 February 2010 17 : 5 Table 1 Properties of selected optical highlighter ﬂuorescent protein derivatives Protein ( acronym ) Ex a ( nm ) Em ( nm ) EC ( × 10 − 3 M − 1 cm − 1 ) QY Quaternary structure Relative brightness b ( % of EGFP ) Reference Photoactivatable ﬂuorescent proteins PA - GFP ( N ) 400 515 20 . 7 0 . 13 Monomer 8 25 PA - GFP ( G ) 504 517 17 . 4 0 . 79 Monomer 41 25 PS - CFP2 ( C ) 400 468 43 . 0 0 . 20 Monomer 26 37 PS - CFP2 ( G ) 490 511 47 . 0 0 . 23 Monomer 32 37 PA - mCherry1 ( R ) 564 595 18 . 0 0 . 46 Monomer 25 36 Phamret ( C ) 458 475 32 . 5 0 . 40 Monomer 39 38 Phamret ( G ) 458 517 17 . 4 0 . 79 Monomer 41 38 Photoconvertible ﬂuorescent proteins mKikGR ( G ) 505 515 49 . 0 0 . 69 Monomer 101 41 mKikGR ( R ) 580 591 28 . 0 0 . 63 Monomer 53 41 tdEos ( G ) 506 516 84 . 0 0 . 66 Tandem dimer 165 40 tdEos ( R ) 569 581 33 . 0 0 . 60 Tandem dimer 59 40 mEos2 ( G ) 506 519 56 . 0 0 . 84 Monomer 140 30 mEos2 ( R ) 573 584 46 . 0 0 . 66 Monomer 90 30 Dendra2 ( G ) 490 507 45 . 0 0 . 50 Monomer 67 42 Dendra2 ( R ) 553 573 35 . 0 0 . 55 Monomer 57 42 Photoswitchable ﬂuorescent proteins Dronpa 503 517 95 . 0 0 . 85 Monomer 240 81 Dronpa - 3 487 514 58 . 0 0 . 33 Monomer 56 82 rsFastLine 496 518 39 . 1 0 . 77 Monomer 89 48 Padron 503 522 43 . 0 0 . 64 Monomer 82 47 bsDronpa 460 504 45 . 0 0 . 50 Monomer 67 47 KFP1 580 600 59 . 0 0 . 07 Tetramer 12 49 mTFP0 . 7 453 488 60 . 0 0 . 50 Monomer 89 50 E2GFP 515 523 29 . 3 0 . 91 Monomer 79 83 rsCherry 572 610 80 . 0 0 . 02 Monomer 5 51 rsCherryRev 572 608 84 . 0 0 . 005 Monomer 1 51 Photoconvertible / photoswitchable ﬂuorescent proteins IrisFP ( G ) 488 516 52 . 2 0 . 43 Tetramer 67 43 IrisFP ( R ) 551 580 35 . 4 0 . 47 Tetramer 50 43 a Abbreviations : Ex , excitation wavelength ; Em , emission wavelength ; EC , molar extinction coefﬁcient ; QY , quantum yield . b The computed brightness values were derived from the product of the molar extinction coefﬁcient and quantum yield , divided by the value for EGFP . Upon photoactivation with violet or UV light , the absorption maximum of PA - GFP is shifted from 400 nm to 504 nm , accompanied by a 100 - fold increase in ﬂuorescence when excited at 488 nm . A complementary probe derived from coral is a photoactivatable variant of mCherry ( named PA - mCherry1 ) having excitation and emission spectra at 564 and 595 nm , respectively ( 36 ) . Compared with earlier red variants , the mCherry version features faster maturation , better pH stability , faster photoactivation , improved photostability , and higher contrast . As a highlighter , PA - mCherry1 has been demonstrated to be an excellent complement to PA - GFP for dual - color superresolution microscopy investigations . Several additional photoactivatable FPs have been reported and may ﬁnd utility in superres - olution experiments . PS - CFP ( photoswitchable cyan ﬂuorescent protein ) exhibits a signiﬁcant www . annualreviews . org • Single - Molecular Superresolution Imaging 351 A nnu . R e v . P hy s . C h e m . 2010 . 61 : 345 - 367 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by N a ti on a l I n s tit u t e s o f H ea lt h L i b r a r y on 07 / 22 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV408 - PC61 - 17 ARI 25 February 2010 17 : 5 level of cyan ﬂuorescence prior to photoactivation with UV or violet light ( 37 ) . Unfortunately , the ﬂuorescence emission intensity of this probe is approximately twofold less than PA - GFP , signiﬁcantly reducing the contrast ratio . Another probe , termed Phamret , couples PA - GFP to a high - performance ECFP variant through a two – amino acid linker to form a photoactivatable tan - dem dimer ( 38 ) . When excited with 458 - nm light , Phamret emits cyan ﬂuorescence . The PA - GFP portion of Phamret can be photoactivated with 405 - nm illumination to evoke F¨orster resonance energy transfer between the ECFP and activated PA - GFP . After photoactivation , Phamret exhibits green ﬂuorescence ( 520 - nm peak ) upon illumination at 458 nm and can therefore potentially be used as a localization probe . The major downside of Phamret is that two FP units were used to construct the highlighter , increasing the size and possibly creating steric hindrance in some fusions . Photoconvertible ﬂuorescent proteins . One of the most useful classes of optical highlighter probes for superresolution microscopy comprises the growing number of FPs reported to undergo photoconversion from one emission wavelength to another ( principally , from green to red ) ( 32 , 35 ) . AlthoughanumberofhighlyefﬁcientFPsinthisclasshavebeenreported , manyaretetrameric in nature and thus are not useful as fusion markers . The ﬁrst photoconvertible FP used in PALM imaging was obtained from a stony coral and named EosFP ( 10 , 39 ) . This variant emits bright green ﬂuorescence at 516 nm and can be photoconverted to orange - red ( 581 nm ) ﬂuorescence when illuminated at near - UV wavelengths . Random and site - directed mutagenesis of tetrameric EosFP was used to generate two dimers and a true monomeric protein named mEosFP ( 40 ) . Unfortunately , the monomeric variant of EosFP can only be expressed efﬁciently at temperatures below 30 ◦ C , limiting the utility of mEosFP in mammalian systems . To create a pseudomonomer suitable for imaging fusions at 37 ◦ C , investigators linked two of the dimeric EosFP units together using a 16 – amino acid linker to produce a tandem dimer ( 40 ) . tdEosFP has turned out to be one of the most useful optical highlighters developed for superresolution imaging because of its high brightness levels and functionality as a tag in fusion vectors . Recently , an improved monomeric version that matures at 37 ◦ C , named mEos2 , has been reported ( 30 ) . Although not as bright as tdEos , mEos2 is an excellent complement for imaging problematic fusions ( tubulin , histones , gap junctions ) that localize poorly with tandem dimers . Several other optical highlighters with green - to - red photoconversion properties are candi - dates for superresolution imaging , but these have not been adequately tested for performance . A tetrameric highlighter isolated from coral and named KikGR was subjected to extensive mutagen - esis to yield a monomeric derivative containing 21 mutations ( mKikGR ) ( 41 ) . Both the green and red forms of mKikGR are less photostable and feature less photon output than mEos2 ; however , this highlighter might perform better in tubulin and gap junction fusions ( 30 ) . A monomeric vari - ant of the tetrameric DendFP has been developed through random and site - directed mutagenesis and named Dendra ( 42 ) . This highlighter features excitation and emission maxima for the green and red forms of 490 / 553 nm and 507 / 573 nm , respectively , and functions well in fusion tags for subcellular localization . The commercial version , Dendra2 ( Evrogen ) , is the ﬁrst monomeric red - to - green optical highlighter that has enjoyed widespread use as a tracking tool in live - cell imaging and may ﬁnd utility in superresolution imaging . A new and unique optical highlighter derived from wtEosFP couples the properties of pho - toconversion and photoswitching into a single reporter ( 43 ) . Named IrisFP , a single mutation in wtEosFP ( F173S ) bestows reversible photoswitching ( see below ) induced by cis - trans isomeriza - tion of the chromophore in both the native ( green ) and photoconverted ( red ) species . Similar to the wild - type parent , IrisFP undergoes photoconversion from a green - to a red - emitting state upon illumination with violet ( 405 nm ) or UV light . Illumination of the green IrisFP species with 352 Patterson et al . A nnu . R e v . P hy s . C h e m . 2010 . 61 : 345 - 367 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by N a ti on a l I n s tit u t e s o f H ea lt h L i b r a r y on 07 / 22 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV408 - PC61 - 17 ARI 25 February 2010 17 : 5 488 - nm laser light drives the highlighter to a nonﬂuorescent dark state , which can then revert to a bright species upon illumination with low - intensity 405 - nm light . High - intensity 405 - nm illumi - nation drives the IrisFP chromophore to the red state . Similar to the green state of IrisFP , the red state can be photoswitched off with 532 - nm light and back on again with 440 - nm light . Although hampered for use in fusions by the tetrameric quaternary structure , IrisFP represents a new class of optical highlighters that will perhaps be exploited for superresolution microscopy in the future . As a signiﬁcant side note , it appears that photoconversion in FPs is far more widespread than originally suspected , as evidenced by observations of alterations to the emission spectral proﬁles of cyan and yellow FPs following photobleaching experiments . In a recent investigation ( 44 ) , several of the orange and red Anthozoa proteins , including mOrange , mKate , and HcRed1 , were observed to shift emission to longer or shorter wavelengths upon intense illumination using single - and two - photon laser sources , although the contrast ratios between the native and photoconverted species are low . Thus , it is possible that photoconversion is far more widespread than originally suspected , but harnessing the phenomenon into a useful tool for superresolution microscopy could still prove challenging . Photoswitchable ﬂuorescent proteins . Several optical highlighters have been isolated that can be reliably toggled on or off by illumination with different excitation wavelengths , and these are called photoswitchable FPs . The most prominent and well - studied member of this class is Dronpa ( 35 , 45 , 46 ) , which is a monomeric variant derived from a stony coral tetramer . Dronpa exhibits an absorption maximum at 503 nm ( arising from the anionic , deprotonated chromophore ) with a mi - nor peak at 390 nm ( from the neutral , protonated chromophore ) . The anionic chromophore emits green ﬂuorescence with a maximum at 518 nm and has a brightness level almost 2 . 5 times that of EGFP . Dronpa photoswitching occurs in part by interconversion between the deprotonated ( on state ; bright ) and protonated ( off state ; dark ) forms . Illumination at 488 nm drives Dronpa to the dark species , after which the FP can be subsequently switched back on by brief illumination at 405 nm . This cycle can be repeated several hundred times without signiﬁcant photobleaching . The primary mechanism of FP photoswitching is thought to also arise from cis - trans isomerization of the hydroxybenzilidine ( tyrosyl side chain ) chromophore moiety that accompanies the changes in the protonation state , which may be an underlying mechanism that is common to all photoactivat - able and reversibly photoswitchable FP derivatives . Similar to other highlighters , Dronpa is useful in superresolution studies ( 31 ) , and variants of Dronpa with reversed photoswitching properties and broader spectra have been reported as candidates for superresolution imaging ( 47 , 48 ) . Future versionswillnodoubtfeaturehigherbrightnessandshouldproveusefulindynamicsinvestigations . Several photoswitching FPs in other regions of the color palette have been developed from anemones and corals . Kindling FP ( commercially available from Evrogen as KFP1 ) is a tetrameric highlighter that emits red ﬂuorescence at 600 nm upon illumination with green or yellow light ( 525 – 580 nm ) ( 49 ) . Upon cessation of illumination , KFP1 relaxes back to its initial nonﬂuorescent state . Irradiation with intense blue light ( 450 – 490 nm ) completely quenches KFP1 ﬂuorescence immediately , enabling control over the photoswitching for superresolution imaging . A cyan FP from coral named mTFP0 . 7 ( an intermediate in mTFP1 mutagenesis ) has also been demonstrated to photoswitch ( 50 ) , but has not been characterized . In addition , monomeric photoswitchable vari - ants of mCherry have recently been introduced as potential probes for superresolution microscopy ( 51 ) . Termed rsCherry and rsCherryRev , these derivatives display antagonistic switching modes . Here , irradiation of rsCherry with yellow light induces the bright state , and blue light drives the FP to the dark state , whereas the reverse is observed with rsCherryRev . Unfortunately , these FPs are only ∼ 10 % as bright as mCherry when expressed as ensembles in cells , but are equally bright as mCherry on the single - molecule level . www . annualreviews . org • Single - Molecular Superresolution Imaging 353 A nnu . R e v . P hy s . C h e m . 2010 . 61 : 345 - 367 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by N a ti on a l I n s tit u t e s o f H ea lt h L i b r a r y on 07 / 22 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV408 - PC61 - 17 ARI 25 February 2010 17 : 5 Synthetic Fluorophores and Quantum Dots Among the synthetic organic ﬂuorophores and inorganic quantum dots that have the potential to be useful probes for superresolution imaging are several candidates that display reversible photo - switching and irreversible photoactivation ( the latter are also referred to as caged ﬂuorophores ) ( 52 ) . Unfortunately , there have been no reports to date of organic compounds or quantum dots that are capable of being photoconverted from one emission wavelength to another . The main advantage of using synthetic ﬂuorophores and quantum dots is their high brightness , excellent photostability , good contrast , and greater fatigue resistance when compared to FPs ( 27 ) . For ex - ample , tdEos yields approximately 500 photons per molecule in contrast to the 6000 photons observed for the photoswitchable ﬂuorophore combination of Cy3 and Cy5 . Furthermore , the cyanine dyes can undergo over 200 switching cycles before photobleaching ( 53 ) . The primary disadvantage of using quantum dots and synthetic ﬂuorophores is the difﬁculty in targeting spe - ciﬁc locations and higher background signal when compared to FPs . The most reliable targeting scheme for ﬂuorophores in this class is conjugation to a primary or secondary antibody , although several new synthetic dyes have been demonstrated to localize in speciﬁc regions independently . Antibodies cannot permeate membranes and are therefore only useful in ﬁxed and permeabilized cells unless the target is displayed on the outer region of the plasma membrane . Labeling with antibodies is also relatively low in efﬁciency and adds 10 to 20 nm to the localization uncertainty between the label and the target . In addition , conjugates of quantum dots to antibodies do not perform on par with analogous conjugates using synthetic dyes such as Alexa Fluors and cyanines . Quantum dots are inorganic semiconductor nanocrystals composed of a CdSe core surrounded by a ZnS shell that exhibit ﬂuorescent properties owing to conﬁned exciton emission ( 54 ) . A passi - vation layer and hydrophilic coating must be applied to quantum dots for biological applications , andtheymustalsobeconjugatedtostreptavidinorantibodiesfortargeting . Theﬂuorescenceemis - sion proﬁle of quantum dots is remarkably symmetrical and generally exhibits a large quantum yield , whereas their broad absorption proﬁle enables them to be excited over a large wavelength range . The size of the CdSe core dictates the emission spectral proﬁle , with smaller cores ( ∼ 2 nm ) emitting in the blue regions and larger cores ( 5 – 7 nm ) emitting in the yellow and red wavelengths . In general , the photostability for quantum dots dramatically exceeds that of all other known ﬂuorophores , including synthetic ﬂuorophores and FPs , which creates a problem for stochastic superresolution imaging unless quantum dots can be converted into a photoswitchable state . Re - cently , investigators ( 55 ) demonstrated that manganese doping of ZnSe quantum dots can be used to generate a species that can be reversibly photoswitched with high efﬁciency using light without the requirement for external activators or quenchers ( effectors ) . Targeting remains a problem with quantum dots ; however , continued advancements in quantum dot chemistry will undoubtedly lead to new and better probes in this class . Among the synthetic reversibly photoswitchable probes that have found utility in superres - olution imaging are rhodamine derivatives , cyanine dyes ( Cy2 – Cy7 ) , and Alexa Fluors ( 29 , 53 , 56 ) . Several photochromic rhodamine derivatives have been demonstrated to photoswitch via a light - induced isomerization in the absence of effector molecules , but the cyanine and Alexa Fluor dyes require the assistance of a second ﬂuorophore . In switching rhodamine B , the closed isomer can transiently form a brightly ﬂuorescent species upon irradiation with UV or red light ( 57 ) . Within a few milliseconds to minutes , depending upon the solvent environment , the reaction is thermally reversed . Imaging of the photoswitched species with 530 - nm light excites ﬂuorescence emission , but does not return the switched molecule to the native state . This is a desirable char - acteristic as the ﬂuorescence emission can be monitored without erasing the ﬂuorescent species , which results in a higher photon count per switching event . Improved synthetic photoswitchers , 354 Patterson et al . A nnu . R e v . P hy s . C h e m . 2010 . 61 : 345 - 367 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by N a ti on a l I n s tit u t e s o f H ea lt h L i b r a r y on 07 / 22 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV408 - PC61 - 17 ARI 25 February 2010 17 : 5 including new rhodamine derivatives and diarylethenes , should increase the utility of these probes in superresolution imaging provided that difﬁculties with water solubility and conjugation to antibodies can be overcome . Thephotoswitchablecyaninedyeshavebeenthemostextensivelyusedsyntheticorganicprobes in stochastic superresolution imaging ( 13 , 29 , 58 ) . The near - infrared dye Cy5 has seen the most duty and can be used without an effector , although combining Cy5 with a secondary chromophore ( such as Cy3 , Cy2 , or Alexa Fluor 405 ) dramatically facilitates photoswitching . As an example application , thecombinationofCy5withCy3enablestheuseofaredlaser ( 635nm ) tophotoswitch Cy5 to a stable dark state , whereas exposure to 543 - nm light converts Cy5 back to the ﬂuorescent species . The rate of conversion back to the ﬂuorescent species depends on the proximity of the secondary effector ( Cy3 ) . Additional combinations of cyanine and Alexa Fluor dyes , such as Cy3 and Cy5 . 5 or Cy7 and Alexa Fluor 647 with Cy2 or Cy3 , have been reported , greatly expanding the available color palette for superresolution imaging ( 27 , 29 ) . Furthermore , a large number of commercially available synthetics , including most of the Alexa Fluor and ATTO dye families ( 59 ) , havebeendemonstratedtoreversiblyphotoswitchinﬁxedcellsusingaprotocolthatincludesthiol - containing reducing agents ( b - mercaptoethylamine , dithiothreitol , or glutathione ) to generate a stable nonﬂuorescent state ( 28 , 60 ) . Thus , even though the switching mechanism has yet to be determined , the potential for generating synthetic organic photoswitchers for multicolor imaging currently surpasses the limited palette of FPs that undergo light - induced modulation . Similar to the photoactivatable FPs ( PA - GFP and PA - mCherry ) , a large library of caged syn - thetics would be especially useful for stochastic superresolution imaging . Unfortunately , only a few promising candidates have been reported to date : caged versions of ﬂuorescein and rhodamine , which have been demonstrated to act in a manner similar to PA - GFP in PALM imaging . In prac - tice , the caged synthetics are liberated from their protective ester groups using irradiation with UV light to generate a ﬂuorescent species exhibiting excellent contrast that can be localized with high precision and then photobleached . Until a larger variety of caged ﬂuorophores emerges , this class will remain limited in superresolution imaging applications . The future of superresolution imaging relies on increasing the speciﬁcity and labeling efﬁciency of very bright photoswitchable ﬂuorophores while simultaneously decreasing the size of the tar - geting peptides . A wide spectrum of hybrid systems designed to couple synthetic ﬂuorophores with genetically encoded targets may one day be capable of achieving this goal ( 61 , 62 ) . All these systems utilize a peptide or protein sequence that is expressed in living cells and is capable of recruiting a small synthetic molecule to bestow ﬂuorescence . The most developed candidate in this class utilizes a tetracysteine motif fused to a variety of genetic targets to recruit blue , green , or red ﬂuorophores ( FlAsH , ReAsH , or CHoAsH , respectively ) capable of binding to the cysteine residues to generate a probe similar in speciﬁcity to FPs ( 63 ) . The major disadvantage of these combinations is the inability to overcome the high background levels of unbound ﬂuorophore that lower contrast . A number of other candidates have been developed , but none has seen signiﬁcant use in superresolution imaging . Survey of Molecular Localization Techniques Numerous molecular localization techniques have been published that identify more than one molecule per diffraction - limited spot . As mentioned above , one of the ﬁrst successful experiments in this ﬁeld was accomplished on individual densely distributed luminescent centers in a quantum well . These were resolved by imaging with a sufﬁciently ﬁnely binned wavelength to separate the components ( 23 ) . Spectrally selective imaging was used for pentacene molecules embedded in a p - terphenyl crystal and localized seven molecules located within the same spot at ∼ 40 - nm and www . annualreviews . org • Single - Molecular Superresolution Imaging 355 A nnu . R e v . P hy s . C h e m . 2010 . 61 : 345 - 367 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by N a ti on a l I n s tit u t e s o f H ea lt h L i b r a r y on 07 / 22 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV408 - PC61 - 17 ARI 25 February 2010 17 : 5 Point spread function ( PSF ) : diffraction - limited blurred spot obtained when a single point source light emitter is focused through a lens ∼ 100 - nm precisions in the lateral and axial directions , respectively . The molecules were imaged individually by tuning the laser excitation to match the absorption of each molecule ( 64 , 65 ) . Heilemann et al . ( 66 ) took advantage of the different ﬂuorescent lifetimes of the cyanine dye Cy5 and the rhodamine derivative JF9 to localize two different molecules ﬂuorescing with similar wave - lengths within the same diffraction - limited spot . Nanometer - localized multiple single - molecule ﬂuorescence microscopy imaged ﬁelds of molecules until all were photobleached and utilized the different rates of photobleaching to localize the molecules in sequential intervals . The centroid determination started with the most photostable , marked its position , subtracted its ﬂuorescence distribution from the next most photostable molecule , localized that molecule , and repeated the process . Through this process , up to ﬁve molecules were localized to < 10 - nm precision in the same spot ( 67 ) . Lidke et al . ( 68 ) used blinking behavior to detect and localize two quantum dots within a diffraction - limited spot . Whereas the techniques just described represent advances in precisely localizing more than one molecule , PALM ( 10 ) and F - PALM ( 11 ) extended them to thousands of molecules using photoac - tivatable FPs . Concurrently , STORM was developed based on the photoswitching phenomenon of several cyanine dyes when located in close proximity ( < 2 nm ) to each other ( 53 ) . This allowed investigators to turn molecules on and off repeatedly in a controlled manner and thus maintain the required low density of detected molecules ( 12 ) . Because these techniques advanced molecular localization to much higher numbers of molecules , this approach became relevant to cell biology studies and has led to many other developments based on similar principles . Depending on the ﬂuorophore , the molecules are synthesized as a dark molecule or they can be switched off . They become ﬂuorescent again either by activation of a small pool or by stochasticreturnfromametastabledarkstate . Forinstance , PALMIRA ( PALMwithindependently running acquisition ) ( 69 ) uses photoswitchable FPs , but as with other techniques [ dSTORM ( direct STORM ) ( 70 ) , RPM ( reversible photobleaching microscopy ) ( 71 ) , GSDIM ( ground - state depletion microscopy with individual molecule return ) ( 72 ) , DH - PSF ( double - helix point spread function ) ( 73 ) , and TL - PALM ( time - lapse PALM ) ( 15 ) ] , it uses photoswitching into dark states of several conventional ﬂuorescent dyes , such as Cy5 , Alexa 647 , Alexa488 , Texas Red , FITC , Rhodamine110 , Oregon Green , Atto532 , and Atto565 . In addition , the conventional FPs [ EGFP , EYFP ( 15 ) , Citrine , and PhiYFP ] have also been found to function in a similar manner ( 72 ) , and several red and orange proteins undergo photoconversion ( 44 ) . An initial irradiation step is required , often to produce the necessary low background for single - molecule imaging . This likely occurs through two possible mechanisms : photobleaching to single - molecule density and / or driving the population into metastable dark states . Static high - density molecular localization . Given the relatively long time required to collect an image as compared with diffraction - limited wide - ﬁeld or confocal imaging , static experiments represent the bulk of experiments in this ﬁeld . Because the cells are usually ﬁxed with an aldehyde derivative and are unlikely to undergo any structural alterations , the image acquisition time is not a critical factor and is normally dictated by the number of molecules in the sample and the patience of the investigator . These have led to images revealing the molecular organization of proteins within structures at nanometer resolution , and among the favorite structures to image have been the actin and microtubule networks . As they are distinct , well - characterized , < 25 - nm ﬁlaments located at various distances from each other , they make excellent resolution tests . Others include vinculin at focal adhesion sites and proteins embedded within the plasma membrane ( 10 , 16 , 31 ) . Another prominent example is the sensory clusters comprising the Escherichia coli chemotaxis network ( 74 ) , which were mapped at 15 - nm resolution to show that cluster formation occurred via stochastic self - assembly without cytoskeletal involvement or active transport of components . 356 Patterson et al . A nnu . R e v . P hy s . C h e m . 2010 . 61 : 345 - 367 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by N a ti on a l I n s tit u t e s o f H ea lt h L i b r a r y on 07 / 22 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV408 - PC61 - 17 ARI 25 February 2010 17 : 5 Nyquist criterion : states that the minimal sampling density needed to capture information from an image is two data points per resolution unit An interesting feature associated with single - molecule localization techniques is that the in - vestigator can deﬁne which molecules are displayed . For instance , the investigator may decide to display only molecules that localize with better than 10 - nm uncertainty . Here , molecular precision and the resolution obtainable with single - molecule localization must be distinguished . Although the location of molecules within a specimen can be determined to 1 – 2 nm in some cases , the stated resolution of distinct structural elements must obey the Nyquist criterion of sampling at approximately two data points per resolution unit . Thus , the density of the localized molecules becomes important for resolution claims . For example , Figure 2 shows a cow , Bossy , when her image is made up of an increasing number of points . At the lower densities , it is difﬁcult to even determine that it is an image of any cow , much less an image of Bossy . As the density of the a b c d Figure 2 Localization precision , resolution , and molecular density in single - molecule localization techniques . This series of images of Bossy the cow demonstrates how the superresolution image is built by plotting localized molecules , depicted here as points . For the purposes of illustration , the point sizes in panels a – c are depicted much larger than would be necessary to achieve the ﬁnal image shown in panel d . The image of Bossy in panel a shows many localized points , but the relatively low density does not allow recognition of the image . As more points are placed in the images in panels b and c , it becomes more recognizable , but distinguishing ( resolving ) the ﬁne features associated with Bossy’s image requires a higher density of points , as shown in panel d . Thus , an image can be produced that contains precisely localized points using single - molecule localization techniques , but the density of those points affects directly the capability to resolve the features of the image . www . annualreviews . org • Single - Molecular Superresolution Imaging 357 A nnu . R e v . P hy s . C h e m . 2010 . 61 : 345 - 367 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by N a ti on a l I n s tit u t e s o f H ea lt h L i b r a r y on 07 / 22 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV408 - PC61 - 17 ARI 25 February 2010 17 : 5 points increases , it becomes evident that the image contains a cow’s face , but it requires even more points to recognize Bossy . Single - molecule localization experiments face a similar problem . Images can be rendered with the molecules localized with the highest precisions , but this comes at the expense of the molecular density of the ﬁnal image , which directly affects the resolution of the image . Investigators may be faced with a similar problem simply based on the specimen and molecule of interest rather than an arbitrarily imposed limitation on molecular precision . This can occur from a normal low density of molecules within the specimen . For example , considering the size of a photoactivated FP with a diameter of ∼ 2 . 5 nm , a two - dimensional plane , such as an organelle membrane , will have a maximum density of ∼ 2 × 10 5 molecules μ m − 2 . To reach such a high den - sity , this assumes that only photoactivated FP tagged molecules are located in this plane . Molecules located in polymers may approach this level , but it is an unlikely physiological situation elsewhere in the cell . However , if photoactivated - FP - tagged proteins comprise 1 % of the molecules in an organelle membrane , this leads to ∼ 2000 molecules μ m − 2 ( ∼ 2 molecules per 40 – 50 nm ) , which is a sampling density that pales in comparison to the obtainable molecular precision seen by electron microscopy and limits any resolution claims about structural features . Nevertheless , experiments observing 2000 molecules μ m − 2 in an organelle membrane offer much information , despite any limits on resolution . They can reveal relative molecular distri - butions within the specimen , which is often the goal of an imaging experiment . However , this requires placing the data in the context of the rest of the specimen . Two approaches have been used so far to accomplish this : overlaying localized molecules with an electron micrograph of the same specimen ( 10 ) and , as discussed below , overlaying images of two different proteins localized in the same specimen via multicolor single - molecule localization . Multicolor high - density molecular localization . Several strategies have been used to perform probe - based superresolution imaging using dual - color probes ( 31 , 36 , 75 ) . The PALMIRA two - color scheme ( 75 ) employed photoswitchable rsFastlime paired with Cy5 . The Dronpa derivative rsFastlime is switched on and off , whereas Cy5 is transitioned into a dark state from which it spontaneously reverts into a ﬂuorescent molecule . Switching of the molecules into the dark state was utilized to maintain the low density of ﬂuorescent molecules necessary for single - molecule imaging . STORM experiments utilized the controlled photoswitching behavior of multiple cya - nine dye pairings tagged to antibodies to render two - color images of clathrin - coated pits and microtubules ( 13 ) . Equivalent experiments using two different colors of photoactivated FPs were hampered by either spectral overlap of the bright red photoconvertible FPs , such as EosFP , or low photon yield in red markers . However , in PALM experiments , Shroff et al . ( 31 ) were able to image the Dronpa / EosFP pairing by photoactivating and imaging EosFP until all were detected , localized , and photobleached before deactivating the Dronpa molecules using intense 488 - nm light . These were reactivated , localized , and combined with the EosFP images to construct the ﬁnal double - label image . A more straightforward approach for two - color PALM experiments employed a green marker and a bright red molecule that has no spectral overlap with the green partner . This was made possible with the development of a photoactivatable version of the popular mCherry called PAmCherry1 ( 36 ) . In these examples , the green partner , PA - GFP , and PAmCherry1 were both switched on with 405 - nm light while a 488 - nm and 561 - nm light imaged PAGFP and PAmCherry1 , respectively . Importantly , PAmCherry1 can also be used with several of the other green photoactivated FPs , such as Dronpa , rsFastlime , and PS - CFP2 , and can perhaps lead to better precision . 358 Patterson et al . A nnu . R e v . P hy s . C h e m . 2010 . 61 : 345 - 367 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by N a ti on a l I n s tit u t e s o f H ea lt h L i b r a r y on 07 / 22 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV408 - PC61 - 17 ARI 25 February 2010 17 : 5 Three - dimensional high - density molecular localization . Above we describe probe - based su - perresolution imaging largely as a two - dimensional imaging technique . The third dimension is constrained by the sample thickness to ∼ 100 nm if it is a microtomed section . Alternatively , a similar thickness of a sample adjacent to the glass surface can be probed with total internal re - ﬂection ﬂuorescence excitation radiation . Additional vertical ( z - axis ) positional information can be revealed by a variety of techniques combined with photoactivation and localization . These fall into a few different categories : those that exploit a z - dependent point spread function , those that use a side - view approach , and those that harness interferometry along the axial direction . The simplest example of a z - dependent point spread function is the defocusing of a point object that is above or below the ideal in - focus object plane . An image of such a point source can broaden , develop rings around a central peak , or otherwise evolve . One approach can capture two simultaneous images set to two slightly different object planes , i . e . , one underfocused and one overfocused . A beam splitter followed by imaging detection set to two different imaging focal distances can accomplish this . The ratio of spot sizes is a monotonic function of axial position and can be parameterized . This biplane method ( 76 ) has achieved close to the standard PALM lateral resolution ( degraded by only 20 % – 30 % ) and an axial resolution ( degraded by another factor of ∼ 2 ) , giving ∼ 75 - nm full width at half - maximum with FPs . Its advantage is its relative simplicity in accessing the extra dimension . A similar over - and underfocus can be implemented along two orthogonal axes of one image , so that the x axis can focus at a different z position than the y axis ( 77 ) . The addition of a weak cylindrical lens after the objective can produce this effect . In this way , a point source produces an elliptical image , with the ratio of x and y diame - ters reﬂecting a monotonic function of its axial position . Readout of ﬂuorescent ellipticities has given similar lateral and 50 – 60 - nm vertical resolution for a given number of detected photons for Cy3 - Cy5 dye pairs . More exotic z - dependent point spread functions have been produced with a spatial phase modulator . In particular , a double point image can be generated from a sin - gle source , but then the angular orientation of this doublet is dependent on the z axial position ( 73 ) . The angular orientation can be used as a readout of the axial position . As an alternative to spatial focusing , femtosecond pulses of excitation light can be focused in time ( 78 ) . This re - quires a more sophisticated setup and is dependent on two - photon excitation rather than linear single - photon approaches . However , it has an interesting advantage of reducing spurious exci - tation or activation in planes outside the thickness of interest . This preserves photoactivatable ﬂuorescence , enabling multiple 1 . 0 - μ m - thick planes to form stacks of PALM images up to 10 μ m thick . ThebestresolutioncanbeachievedwithinterferometrycombinedwithPALM . Thistechnique , called iPALM , has demonstrated 10 - nm vertical and 20 - nm lateral full width at half - maximum localization of FP labels ( 79 ) . Interferometry is a common position measurement technique that is based on how light interferes after it has taken two different position - dependent paths and is then combined with a beam splitter . The special requirements of coherence , calibration , and tolerance of the highly unstable ﬂuctuating nature of ﬂuorescence dictate the implementation . Coherence can be maintained by realizing that any emitted photon is always coherent against itself . Interfering the same photon that takes two paths with different z - dependent path lengths satisﬁes this ﬁrst requirement . The self - calibration requirement is also fulﬁlled by single - photon self - interference and can be tolerant to ﬂuctuations of a ﬂuorescent source by using simultaneous multiphase interferometry . To implement this over a unique wide ﬁeld , investigators developed a multiphase beam splitter that has been successfully demonstrated on resolving membranes , microtubules , endoplasmic reticulum , and focal adhesion architecture ( 79 ) ( Figure 3 ) . While achieving the best spatial localization , it is a relatively complex instrument in the earliest phase of engineering evolution and has a limited vertical range of 0 . 2 to 1 . 0 μ m . www . annualreviews . org • Single - Molecular Superresolution Imaging 359 A nnu . R e v . P hy s . C h e m . 2010 . 61 : 345 - 367 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by N a ti on a l I n s tit u t e s o f H ea lt h L i b r a r y on 07 / 22 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV408 - PC61 - 17 ARI 25 February 2010 17 : 5 1 μm 200 nm a Top view b Side view PM FA ER 0 224224 0 z position ( nm ) z position ( nm ) z position ( nm ) 224 z x Figure 3 iPALM image showing the three - dimensional localization of α v - integrin tagged with td - EosFP in a U2OS cell . Single molecules are color - coded based on their z position ( see the color scale in the panel a ) , with red molecules closest to the coverslip , followed by yellow , blue , and purple molecules at further distances . Displayed in both the top and side views , integrin molecules distribute at multiple cellular sites . In addition to their concentration within feet - like focal adhesions ( FA ) found near the coverslip ( see the yellow molecules ) , they can be seen in the plasma membrane ( PM , green molecules ) and in the tubular network comprising the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER , blue - purple molecules ) positioned ∼ 100 – 200 nm up from the PM . Figure adapted from Reference 79 . For a full evaluation of the different three - dimensional PALM approaches for a particular ex - periment , one needs to consider the practical constraints on the sample , such as tolerable thickness range , lateral size , timescale , labeling attributes , and technical effort , along with required reso - lution . Resolution is not just an instrumental number , but it is , in itself , critically intertwined with the labeling approach . For example , brighter labels with more photons give better localiza - tion accuracy but are tempered by considerations such as antibody linkage length , speciﬁcity , and 360 Patterson et al . A nnu . R e v . P hy s . C h e m . 2010 . 61 : 345 - 367 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by N a ti on a l I n s tit u t e s o f H ea lt h L i b r a r y on 07 / 22 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV408 - PC61 - 17 ARI 25 February 2010 17 : 5 1000 Number of photons emitted in 4π Fluorescentproteins Synthetic dyes iPALMaxial iPALMlateral Defocuslateral Defocusaxial R e s o l u t i o n ( F W H M , n m ) 2 10 100 10 , 000 Figure 4 Comparison of three - dimensional single - molecule localization techniques . The three - dimensional precision of iPALM and defocusing techniques is shown as a function of the number of photons emitted from gold beads . iPALM ( ﬁlled circles and ﬁlled squares ) has better localization precision per emitted photon than defocusing techniques ( unﬁlled circles and squares ) and displays better axial ( ﬁlled red circles ) than lateral ( ﬁlled blue squares ) resolution . Conversely , defocusing techniques have markedly less precision per emitted photon in the axial direction ( unﬁlled red circles ) compared with the lateral direction ( unﬁlled blue squares ) . FWHM , full width at half - maximum . Figure redrawn from Reference 79 . density of molecular labeling , whereas endogenous FP labels such as Eos have reduced brightness and require a more efﬁcient localization use of fewer photons . Figure 4 shows this trade - off for iPALM and the defocusing techniques as a comparison of different approaches . Dynamic , high - density molecular localization . Because of the iterative process of activation , imaging , and photobleaching , creating a single superresolution image has temporal constraints . This process can be expediated by increasing both activation and excitation light intensities to hasten the turnover of molecules , with careful attention to the health of cells . Several examples are available of live - cell imaging with photoactivatable markers to create either sequences of superresolution images ( 14 ) , average distributions of or distances between molecules in living cells ( 15 , 16 ) , and dynamic molecular maps ( 17 ) . As with any of the methods discussed above , the imaged molecular density in any single frame must remain low enough to isolate single molecules . However , the density of the localized molecules must be high enough to create a superresolution image if the aim is to measure the motions and rearrangements of protein - enriched structures on the subdiffraction - limited scale ( 14 ) . For this reason , slow - moving macromolecular structures , such as adhesion complexes during cell migration ( 14 ) or endoplasmic - reticulum morphological changes ( 47 ) , were appropriate candidates for proof of principle . Time series containing 25 – 40 - s collection intervals were required to localize up to 1000 molecules μ m − 2 frame − 1 ( 14 ) . The data revealed signiﬁcant spatiotemporal changes in the nanoscale organization of adhesion complexes that would have been undetectable by conventional diffraction - limited imaging . For example , www . annualreviews . org • Single - Molecular Superresolution Imaging 361 A nnu . R e v . P hy s . C h e m . 2010 . 61 : 345 - 367 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by N a ti on a l I n s tit u t e s o f H ea lt h L i b r a r y on 07 / 22 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV408 - PC61 - 17 ARI 25 February 2010 17 : 5 10 15 20 25 30 10 15 20 25 30 Molecular position ( μm ) M o l e c u l a r p o s i t i o n ( μ m ) Molecular position ( μm ) 10 15 20 25 30 10 15 20 25 30 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 D ( μ m 2 s – 1 ) a b Figure 5 Imaging dynamic , dense populations using single - particle - tracking PALM . The molecular motion of VSVG - tdEosFP was imaged in a COS 7 cell using 561 - nm light while simultaneously photoactivating subsets of the tdEosFP molecules . ( a ) The molecules were localized in each frame , and their determined positions in consecutive frames were linked into tracks . These represent molecules that ﬂuoresced for > 0 . 75 s and are plotted as different colors to distinguish individual tracks . ( b ) The diffusion coefﬁcient for each track was determined and plotted as a ﬁlled circle at the start of the track . Each has been assigned a color based on its value of D ( see color scale on right ) . differentzonesofanindividualadhesioncomplexmovedatvariablerates , recruitedorlostdifferent overall numbers of molecules , and underwent different shape changes . Conversely , Hess et al . ( 16 ) examined hemagglutinin molecules from inﬂuenza virus and an - alyzed their average separations within clusters distributed across the plasma membrane . Biteen et al . ( 15 ) similarly mapped protein organization in living bacteria by imaging the bacterial actin protein MreB tagged with YFP in Caulobacter crescentus cells . Manleyetal . ( 17 ) trackedthousandsofindividualmoleculesinamethodtermedsingle - particle - tracking PALM ( Figure 5 ) . They then used these trajectories to compare the distribution and dynamics of two photoactivated - FP - tagged viral proteins expressed in the plasma membrane , the ts045 vesicular stomatitis viral G protein ( VSVG ) and the human immunodeﬁciency virus type 1 ( HIV - 1 ) structural protein Gag . These studies resulted in spatially resolved maps of single - molecule diffusion coefﬁcients of these proteins , revealing strikingly different diffusional behavior : WhereasVSVGmoleculeswerehighlymobileandfreelyexploredtheplasmamembrane , Gagpro - teins were often in immobile clusters approximating the size of viral - like particles ( ∼ 100 – 200 - nm diameter ) . In similar experiments in bacteria using the photoactivated FP Dendra2 , the bacte - ria homolog of tubulin , Ftz , which forms a helical ﬁlamentous structure ( i . e . , Z - ring ) impor - tant for bacterial cytokinesis ( 80 ) , was imaged in E . coli to reveal both stationary and mobile molecules . Whereas superresolution movies capture slow dynamics and rearrangements of structures , molecular tracking with photoactivation can reveal more rapid dynamics of ensembles of molecules . Thus , these complementary methods offer molecular - scale information for biolog - ical problems with a range of different relevant timescales . 362 Patterson et al . A nnu . R e v . P hy s . C h e m . 2010 . 61 : 345 - 367 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by N a ti on a l I n s tit u t e s o f H ea lt h L i b r a r y on 07 / 22 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV408 - PC61 - 17 ARI 25 February 2010 17 : 5 CONCLUSION Superresolution imaging methods developed over the past three to four years have received in - creasingattentionamongbiologistsinterestedinunderstandingcellularprocessesatthenanoscale . Several methodologies are now available for imaging beyond the barrier imposed by diffraction . The promising illumination - based methods of STED and SSIM have pushed resolutions into the 50 – 100 - nm range . Proponents of these approaches have rightly pointed out that STED and SSIM utilize conventional ﬂuorophores , whereas single - molecule localization techniques such as PALM / STORM have the drawback of requiring special photoactivatable - type probes . Conventional probes have been used in single - molecule localization by relying on transitions of molecules between light and dark states , but these probably come with the loss of molecules during pre - experiment irradiation steps to lower the ﬂuorescence to single - molecule imaging levels . Given the commercial availability of subdiffraction - limited methods , such as STED and SSIM , why does subpixel localization of single ﬂuorescent molecules in a dense population ( i . e . , PALM / STORM ) generate excitement ? First , the approach is fairly straightforward , and the con - ceptsbehindthetechniquescanbereadilyexplainedtoinvestigatorslackingtraininginmicroscopy techniques . Second , the instrumentation necessary for imaging single molecules is accessible . Third , the resolution of single - molecule localization techniques can surpass those of STED or SSIM , depending on the ﬂuorophore and density of the molecule of interest in the specimen . Finally , single - molecule localization techniques allow the distribution and dynamics of individual molecules to be characterized relative to each other and to different molecules . This opens the possibility of examining biological questions that cannot be addressed simply by having higher resolution . Such questions include those requiring the determination of the stoichiometric ar - rangement of molecules within a subcellular structure and those needing the analysis of dynamic molecule motion within a subcellular environment , such as in the plasma membrane or within actin ﬁlaments , for clarifying how the molecules interact with their surroundings or participate within a molecular machine . The future of PALM / STORM and other single - molecule localization methods is encour - aging , but researchers must be mindful that these techniques began in earnest only three to four years ago , and the approaches can be considered still in the development stage . Probes need improvement , mainly in understanding or controlling their photophysical behaviors . Im - provements in instrumentation and analysis could enhance the speed of the experiments and signiﬁcantly decrease acquisition times . But these are growing pains that every new technique must overcome , and the ingenuity displayed thus far gives conﬁdence that imaging below the diffraction barrier will in the next several years become as commonplace as conventional imaging today . DISCLOSURE STATEMENT The authors are not aware of any afﬁliations , memberships , funding , or ﬁnancial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Harald Hess ( Janelia Farm Research Institute ) for critical editing of this manuscript and providing Figures 3 and 4 . www . annualreviews . org • Single - Molecular Superresolution Imaging 363 A nnu . R e v . P hy s . C h e m . 2010 . 61 : 345 - 367 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by N a ti on a l I n s tit u t e s o f H ea lt h L i b r a r y on 07 / 22 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV408 - PC61 - 17 ARI 25 February 2010 17 : 5 LITERATURE CITED 1 . Lippincott - Schwartz J , Roberts TH , Hirschberg K . 2000 . Secretory protein trafﬁcking and organelle dynamics in living cells . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 16 : 557 – 89 2 . Kiehart DP , Galbraith CG , Edwards KA , Rickoll WL , Montague RA . 2000 . Multiple forces contribute to cell sheet morphogenesis for dorsal closure in Drosophila . J . Cell Biol . 149 : 471 – 90 3 . Kan Z , Liu TJ . 1999 . Video microscopy of tumor metastasis : using the green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) gene as a cancer - cell - labeling system . Clin . Exp . Metastasis 17 : 49 – 55 4 . Tsien RY . 1998 . The green ﬂuorescent protein . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 67 : 509 – 44 5 . Hell SW . 2009 . Microscopy and its focal switch . Nat . Methods 6 : 24 – 32 6 . Hell SW , Wichmann J . 1994 . Breaking the diffraction resolution limit by stimulated emission : stimulated emission depletion ﬂuorescence microscopy . Opt . Lett . 19 : 780 – 82 7 . Gustafsson MG . 2005 . Nonlinear structured - illumination microscopy : wide - ﬁeld ﬂuorescence imaging with theoretically unlimited resolution . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 : 13081 – 86 8 . Schmidt R , Wurm CA , Punge A , Egner A , Jakobs S , Hell SW . 2009 . Mitochondrial cristae revealed with focused light . Nano Lett . 9 : 2508 – 10 9 . Schermelleh L , Carlton PM , Haase S , Shao L , Winoto L , et al . 2008 . Subdiffraction multicolor imaging of the nuclear periphery with 3D structured illumination microscopy . Science 320 : 1332 – 36 10 . Betzig E , Patterson GH , Sougrat R , Lindwasser OW , Olenych S , et al . 2006 . Imaging intracellular ﬂuorescent proteins at nanometer resolution . Science 313 : 1642 – 45 11 . Hess ST , Girirajan TP , Mason MD . 2006 . Ultra - high resolution imaging by ﬂuorescence photoactivation localization microscopy . Biophys . J . 91 : 4258 – 72 12 . Rust MJ , Bates M , Zhuang X . 2006 . Sub - diffraction - limit imaging by stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy ( STORM ) . Nat . Methods 3 : 793 – 95 13 . Bates M , Huang B , Dempsey GT , Zhuang X . 2007 . Multicolor super - resolution imaging with photo - switchable ﬂuorescent probes . Science 317 : 1749 – 53 14 . Shroff H , Galbraith CG , Galbraith JA , Betzig E . 2008 . Live - cell photoactivated localization microscopy of nanoscale adhesion dynamics . Nat . Methods 5 : 417 – 23 15 . Biteen JS , Thompson MA , Tselentis NK , Bowman GR , Shapiro L , Moerner WE . 2008 . Super - resolution imaging in live Caulobacter crescentus cells using photoswitchable EYFP . Nat . Methods 5 : 947 – 49 16 . Hess ST , Gould TJ , Gudheti MV , Maas SA , Mills KD , Zimmerberg J . 2007 . Dynamic clustered distri - bution of hemagglutinin resolved at 40 nm in living cell membranes discriminates between raft theories . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 : 17370 – 75 17 . Manley S , Gillette JM , Patterson GH , Shroff H , Hess HF , et al . 2008 . High - density mapping of single - molecule trajectories with photoactivated localization microscopy . Nat . Methods 5 : 155 – 57 18 . Moerner WE , Kador L . 1989 . Optical detection and spectroscopy of single molecules in a solid . Phys . Rev . Lett . 62 : 2535 – 38 19 . Betzig E , Chichester RJ . 1993 . Single molecules observed by near - ﬁeld scanning optical microscopy . Science 262 : 1422 – 25 20 . Thompson RE , Larson DR , Webb WW . 2002 . Precise nanometer localization analysis for individual ﬂuorescent probes . Biophys . J . 82 : 2775 – 83 21 . YildizA , ForkeyJN , McKinneySA , HaT , GoldmanYE , SelvinPR . 2003 . MyosinVwalkshand - overhand : single ﬂuorophore imaging with 1 . 5 - nm localization . Science 300 : 2061 – 65 22 . Yildiz A , Tomishige M , Vale RD , Selvin PR . 2004 . Kinesin walks hand - overhand . Science 303 : 676 – 78 23 . Hess HF , Betzig E , Harris TD , Pfeiffer LN , West KW . 1994 . Near - ﬁeld spectroscopy of the quantum constituents of a luminescent system . Science 264 : 1740 – 45 24 . Betzig E . 1995 . Proposed method for molecular optical imaging . Opt . Lett . 20 : 237 – 39 25 . Patterson GH , Lippincott - Schwartz J . 2002 . A photoactivatable GFP for selective photolabeling of pro - teins and cells . Science 297 : 1873 – 77 26 . Lippincott - Schwartz J , Patterson GH . 2009 . Photoactivatable ﬂuorescent proteins for diffraction - limited and super - resolution imaging . Trends Cell Biol . 19 : 555 – 65 27 . Fernandez - Suarez M , Ting AY . 2008 . Fluorescent probes for super - resolution imaging in living cells . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 : 929 – 43 364 Patterson et al . A nnu . R e v . P hy s . C h e m . 2010 . 61 : 345 - 367 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by N a ti on a l I n s tit u t e s o f H ea lt h L i b r a r y on 07 / 22 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV408 - PC61 - 17 ARI 25 February 2010 17 : 5 28 . Heilemann M , van de Linde S , Mukherjee A , Sauer M . 2009 . Super - resolution imaging with small organic ﬂuorophores . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . Engl . 48 : 6903 – 8 29 . Huang B , Bates M , Zhuang X . 2009 . Super - resolution ﬂuorescence microscopy . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 78 : 993 – 1016 30 . McKinney SA , Murphy CS , Hazelwood KL , Davidson MW , Looger LL . 2009 . A bright and photostable photoconvertible ﬂuorescent protein . Nat . Methods 6 : 131 – 33 31 . Shroff H , Galbraith CG , Galbraith JA , White H , Gillette J , et al . 2007 . Dual - color superresolution imaging of genetically expressed probes within individual adhesion complexes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 : 20308 – 13 32 . Day RN , Davidson MW . 2009 . The ﬂuorescent protein palette : tools for cellular imaging . Chem . Soc . Rev . 38 : 2887 – 921 33 . Cubitt AB , Woollenweber LA , Heim R . 1997 . Understanding structure - function relationships in the Aequorea victoria green ﬂuorescent protein . In Green Fluorescent Proteins , ed . KF Sullivan , SA Kay , pp . 19 – 30 . San Diego : Academic 34 . Dickson RM , Cubitt AB , Tsien RY , Moerner WE . 1997 . On / off blinking and switching behavior of single molecules of green ﬂuorescent protein . Nature 388 : 355 – 58 35 . Shaner NC , Patterson GH , Davidson MW . 2007 . Advances in ﬂuorescent protein technology . J . Cell Sci . 120 : 4247 – 60 36 . Subach FV , Patterson GH , Manley S , Gillette JM , Lippincott - Schwartz J , Verkhusha VV . 2009 . Pho - toactivatable mCherry for high - resolution two - color ﬂuorescence microscopy . Nat . Methods 6 : 153 – 59 37 . Chudakov DM , Verkhusha VV , Staroverov DB , Souslova EA , Lukyanov S , Lukyanov KA . 2004 . Photo - switchable cyan ﬂuorescent protein for protein tracking . Nat . Biotechnol . 22 : 1435 – 39 38 . Matsuda T , Miyawaki A , Nagai T . 2008 . Direct measurement of protein dynamics inside cells using a rationally designed photoconvertible protein . Nat . Methods 5 : 339 – 45 39 . Wiedenmann J , Ivanchenko S , Oswald F , Schmitt F , Rocker C , et al . 2004 . EosFP , a ﬂuorescent marker protein with UV - inducible green - to - red ﬂuorescence conversion . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 101 : 15905 – 10 40 . Nienhaus GU , Nienhaus K , Holzle A , Ivanchenko S , Renzi F , et al . 2006 . Photoconvertible ﬂuorescent protein EosFP : biophysical properties and cell biology applications . Photochem . Photobiol . 82 : 351 – 58 41 . Habuchi S , Tsutsui H , Kochaniak AB , Miyawaki A , van Oijen AM . 2008 . mKikGR , a monomeric photo - switchable ﬂuorescent protein . PLoS One 3 : e3944 42 . Gurskaya NG , Verkhusha VV , Shcheglov AS , Staroverov DB , Chepurnykh TV , et al . 2006 . Engineering of a monomeric green - to - red photoactivatable ﬂuorescent protein induced by blue light . Nat . Biotechnol . 24 : 461 – 65 43 . Adam V , Lelimousin M , Boehme S , Desfonds G , Nienhaus K , et al . 2008 . Structural characterization of IrisFP , an optical highlighter undergoing multiple photo - induced transformations . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 : 18343 – 48 44 . Kremers GJ , Hazelwood KL , Murphy CS , Davidson MW , Piston DW . 2009 . Photoconversion in orange and red ﬂuorescent proteins . Nat . Methods 6 : 355 – 58 45 . Ando R , Mizuno H , Miyawaki A . 2004 . Regulated fast nucleocytoplasmic shuttling observed by reversible protein highlighting . Science 306 : 1370 – 73 46 . Habuchi S , Ando R , Dedecker P , Verheijen W , Mizuno H , et al . 2005 . Reversible single - molecule pho - toswitching in the GFP - like ﬂuorescent protein Dronpa . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 : 9511 – 16 47 . Andresen M , Stiel AC , Folling J , Wenzel D , Schonle A , et al . 2008 . Photoswitchable ﬂuorescent pro - teins enable monochromatic multilabel imaging and dual color ﬂuorescence nanoscopy . Nat . Biotechnol . 26 : 1035 – 40 48 . Stiel AC , Trowitzsch S , Weber G , Andresen M , Eggeling C , et al . 2007 . 1 . 8 A bright - state structure of the reversibly switchable ﬂuorescent protein Dronpa guides the generation of fast switching variants . Biochem . J . 402 : 35 – 42 49 . Chudakov DM , Belousov VV , Zaraisky AG , Novoselov VV , Staroverov DB , et al . 2003 . Kindling ﬂuo - rescent proteins for precise in vivo photolabeling . Nat . Biotechnol . 21 : 191 – 94 50 . HendersonJN , AiHW , CampbellRE , RemingtonSJ . 2007 . Structuralbasisforreversiblephotobleaching of a green ﬂuorescent protein homologue . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 : 6672 – 77 www . annualreviews . org • Single - Molecular Superresolution Imaging 365 A nnu . R e v . P hy s . C h e m . 2010 . 61 : 345 - 367 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by N a ti on a l I n s tit u t e s o f H ea lt h L i b r a r y on 07 / 22 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV408 - PC61 - 17 ARI 25 February 2010 17 : 5 51 . Stiel AC , Andresen M , Bock H , Hilbert M , Schilde J , et al . 2008 . Generation of monomeric reversibly switchable red ﬂuorescent proteins for far - ﬁeld ﬂuorescence nanoscopy . Biophys . J . 95 : 2989 – 97 52 . Politz JC . 1999 . Use of caged ﬂuorophores to track macromolecular movement in living cells . Trends Cell Biol . 9 : 284 – 87 53 . Bates M , Blosser TR , Zhuang X . 2005 . Short - range spectroscopic ruler based on a single - molecule optical switch . Phys . Rev . Lett . 94 : 108101 54 . Michalet X , Pinaud FF , Bentolila LA , Tsay JM , Doose S , et al . 2005 . Quantum dots for live cells , in vivo imaging , and diagnostics . Science 307 : 538 – 44 55 . Irvine SE , Staudt T , Rittweger E , Engelhardt J , Hell SW . 2008 . Direct light - driven modulation of lumi - nescence from Mn - doped ZnSe quantum dots . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . Engl . 47 : 2685 – 88 56 . Lavis LD , Raines RT . 2008 . Bright ideas for chemical biology . ACS Chem . Biol . 3 : 142 – 55 57 . Folling J , Belov V , Kunetsky R , Medda R , Schonle A , et al . 2007 . Photochromic rhodamines provide nanoscopy with optical sectioning . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . Engl . 46 : 6266 – 70 58 . Bates M , Huang B , Zhuang X . 2008 . Super - resolution microscopy by nanoscale localization of photo - switchable ﬂuorescent probes . Curr . Opin . Chem . Biol . 12 : 505 – 14 59 . Donnert G , Eggeling C , Hell SW . 2007 . Major signal increase in ﬂuorescence microscopy through dark - state relaxation . Nat . Methods 4 : 81 – 86 60 . HeilemannM , MargeatE , KasperR , SauerM , TinnefeldP . 2005 . Carbocyaninedyesasefﬁcientreversible single - molecule optical switch . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 127 : 3801 – 6 61 . Chen I , Ting AY . 2005 . Site - speciﬁc labeling of proteins with small molecules in live cells . Curr . Opin . Biotechnol . 16 : 35 – 40 62 . Lin MZ , Wang L . 2008 . Selective labeling of proteins with chemical probes in living cells . Physiology ( Bethesda ) 23 : 131 – 41 63 . Adams SR , Campbell RE , Gross LA , Martin BR , Walkup GK , et al . 2002 . New biarsenical ligands and tetracysteine motifs for protein labeling in vitro and in vivo : synthesis and biological applications . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 124 : 6063 – 76 64 . van Oijen AM , K¨ohler J , Schmidt J , M¨uller M , Brakenhoff GJ . 1998 . Three - dimensional super - resolution by spectrally selective imaging . Chem . Phys . Lett . 292 : 183 – 87 65 . van Oijen AM , K¨ohler J , Schmidt J , M¨uller M , Brakenhoff GJ . 1999 . Far - ﬁeld ﬂuorescence microscopy beyond the diffraction limit . J . Opt . Soc . Am . 16 : 909 – 15 66 . Heilemann M , Herten DP , Heintzmann R , Cremer C , Muller C , et al . 2002 . High - resolution colocal - ization of single dye molecules by ﬂuorescence lifetime imaging microscopy . Anal . Chem . 74 : 3511 – 17 67 . Qu X , Wu D , Mets L , Scherer NF . 2004 . Nanometer - localized multiple single - molecule ﬂuorescence microscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 101 : 11298 – 303 68 . Lidke KA , Rieger B , Jovin TM , Heintzmann R . 2005 . Superresolution by localization of quantum dots using blinking statistics . Opt . Expr . 13 : 7052 – 62 69 . Geisler C , Schonle A , Von Middendorff C , Bock H , Eggeling C , et al . 2007 . Resolution of λ / 10 in ﬂuorescence microscopy using fast single molecule photo - switching . Appl . Phys . A 88 : 223 – 26 70 . Heilemann M , van de Linde S , Schuttpelz M , Kasper R , Seefeldt B , et al . 2008 . Subdiffraction - resolution ﬂuorescence imaging with conventional ﬂuorescent probes . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . Engl . 47 : 6172 – 76 71 . Baddeley D , Jayasinghe ID , Cremer C , Cannell MB , Soeller C . 2009 . Light - induced dark states of organic ﬂuochromes enable 30 nm resolution imaging in standard media . Biophys . J . 96 : L22 – 24 72 . Folling J , Bossi M , Bock H , Medda R , Wurm CA , et al . 2008 . Fluorescence nanoscopy by ground - state depletion and single - molecule return . Nat . Methods 5 : 943 – 45 73 . Pavani SR , Thompson MA , Biteen JS , Lord SJ , Liu N , et al . 2009 . Three - dimensional , single - molecule ﬂuorescence imaging beyond the diffraction limit by using a double - helix point spread function . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 106 : 2995 – 99 74 . Greenﬁeld D , McEvoy AL , Shroff H , Crooks GE , Wingreen NS , et al . 2009 . Self - organization of the Escherichia coli chemotaxis network imaged with super - resolution light microscopy . PLoS Biol . 7 : e1000137 75 . Bock H , Geisler C , Wurm CA , von Middendorff C , Jakobs S , et al . 2007 . Two - color far - ﬁeld ﬂuorescence nanoscopy based on photoswitchable emitters . Appl . Phys . B 88 : 161 – 65 76 . Juette MF , Gould TJ , Lessard MD , Mlodzianoski MJ , Nagpure BS , et al . 2008 . Three - dimensional sub - 100 nm resolution ﬂuorescence microscopy of thick samples . Nat . Methods 5 : 527 – 29 366 Patterson et al . A nnu . R e v . P hy s . C h e m . 2010 . 61 : 345 - 367 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by N a ti on a l I n s tit u t e s o f H ea lt h L i b r a r y on 07 / 22 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV408 - PC61 - 17 ARI 25 February 2010 17 : 5 77 . Huang B , Wang W , Bates M , Zhuang X . 2008 . Three - dimensional super - resolution imaging by stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy . Science 319 : 810 – 13 78 . Vaziri A , Tang J , Shroff H , Shank CV . 2008 . Multilayer three - dimensional super resolution imaging of thick biological samples . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 : 20221 – 26 79 . Shtengel G , Galbraith JA , Galbraith CG , Lippincott - Schwartz J , Gillette JM , et al . 2009 . Interferometric ﬂuorescent super - resolution microscopy resolves 3D cellular ultrastructure . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 106 : 3125 – 30 80 . Niu L , Yu J . 2008 . Investigating intracellular dynamics of FtsZ cytoskeleton with photoactivation single - molecule tracking . Biophys . J . 95 : 2009 – 16 81 . Ando R , Hama H , Yamamoto - Hino M , Mizuno H , Miyawaki A . 2002 . An optical marker based on the UV - induced green - to - red photoconversion of a ﬂuorescent protein . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 : 12651 – 56 82 . Flors C , Hotta J , Uji - i H , Dedecker P , Ando R , et al . 2007 . A stroboscopic approach for fast photoactivation - localization microscopy with Dronpa mutants . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 129 : 13970 – 77 83 . Bizzarri R , Arcangeli C , Arosio D , Ricci F , Faraci P , et al . 2006 . Development of a novel GFP - based ratiometric excitation and emission pH indicator for intracellular studies . Biophys . J . 90 : 3300 – 14 www . annualreviews . org • Single - Molecular Superresolution Imaging 367 A nnu . R e v . P hy s . C h e m . 2010 . 61 : 345 - 367 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by N a ti on a l I n s tit u t e s o f H ea lt h L i b r a r y on 07 / 22 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR408 - FM ARI 25 February 2010 18 : 1 Annual Review of Physical Chemistry Volume 61 , 2010 Contents On Walking in the Footprints of Giants Marilyn E . Jacox (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 1 Novel Computational Methods for Nanostructure Electronic Structure Calculations Lin - Wang Wang (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 19 Hyper - Raman Scattering by Molecular Vibrations Anne Myers Kelley (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 41 Chemistry of Hofmeister Anions and Osmolytes Yanjie Zhang and Paul S . Cremer (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 63 Tuned Range - Separated Hybrids in Density Functional Theory Roi Baer , Ester Livshits , and Ulrike Salzner (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 85 Subcellular Dynamics and Protein Conformation Fluctuations Measured by Fourier Imaging Correlation Spectroscopy Eric N . Senning and Andrew H . Marcus (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 111 Oxide Surface Science Ulrike Diebold , Shao - Chun Li , and Michael Schmid (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 129 The Diabatic Picture of Electron Transfer , Reaction Barriers , and Molecular Dynamics Troy Van Voorhis , Tim Kowalczyk , Benjamin Kaduk , Lee - Ping Wang , Chiao - Lun Cheng , and Qin Wu (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 149 Electrostatics of Strongly Charged Biological Polymers : Ion - Mediated Interactions and Self - Organization in Nucleic Acids and Proteins Gerard C . L . Wong and Lois Pollack (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 171 Dynamics on the Way to Forming Glass : Bubbles in Space - Time David Chandler and Juan P . Garrahan (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 191 Functional Motifs in Biochemical Reaction Networks John J . Tyson and B´ela Nov´ak (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 219 ix A nnu . R e v . P hy s . C h e m . 2010 . 61 : 345 - 367 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by N a ti on a l I n s tit u t e s o f H ea lt h L i b r a r y on 07 / 22 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR408 - FM ARI 25 February 2010 18 : 1 Electronic Properties of Nonideal Nanotube Materials : Helical Symmetry Breaking in DNA Hybrids Slava V . Rotkin (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 241 Molecular Structural Dynamics Probed by Ultrafast X - Ray Absorption Spectroscopy Christian Bressler and Majed Chergui (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 263 Statistical Mechanical Concepts in Immunology Arup K . Chakraborty and Andrej Koˇsmrlj (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 283 Biological Cluster Mass Spectrometry Nicholas Winograd and Barbara J . Garrison (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 305 Bio - Enabled Synthesis of Metamaterials Christopher C . DuFort and Bogdan Dragnea (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 323 Superresolution Imaging using Single - Molecule Localization George Patterson , Michael Davidson , Suliana Manley , and Jennifer Lippincott - Schwartz (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 345 From Artiﬁcial Atoms to Nanocrystal Molecules : Preparation and Properties of More Complex Nanostructures Charina L . Choi and A . Paul Alivisatos (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 369 Transition - Path Theory and Path - Finding Algorithms for the Study of Rare Events Weinan E and Eric Vanden - Eijnden (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 391 Complex Fluids : Probing Mechanical Properties of Biological Systems with Optical Tweezers H . Daniel Ou - Yang and Ming - Tzo Wei (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 421 Enhanced Sampling of Nonequilibrium Steady States Alex Dickson and Aaron R . Dinner (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 441 Fluctuations in Biological and Bioinspired Electron - Transfer Reactions Spiros S . Skourtis , David H . Waldeck , and David N . Beratan (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 461 Indexes Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors , Volumes 57 – 61 (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 487 Cumulative Index of Chapter Titles , Volumes 57 – 61 (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 490 Errata An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Physical Chemistry articles may be found at http : / / physchem . annualreviews . org / errata . shtml x Contents A nnu . R e v . P hy s . C h e m . 2010 . 61 : 345 - 367 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by N a ti on a l I n s tit u t e s o f H ea lt h L i b r a r y on 07 / 22 / 10 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y .