ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 Cell Mechanics : Integrating Cell Responses to Mechanical Stimuli Paul A . Janmey 1 and Christopher A . McCulloch 2 1 Departments of Physiology , Physics , and Bioengineering , Institute for Medicine and Engineering , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania 19104 ; email : janmey @ mail . med . upenn . edu 2 CIHR Group in Matrix Dynamics , Fitzgerald Building , University of Toronto , Toronto , Ontario , M5S 3E2 Canada ; email : christopher . mcculloch @ utoronto . ca Annu . Rev . Biomed . Eng . 2007 . 9 : 1 – 34 First published online as a Review in Advance on April 26 , 2007 The Annual Review of Biomedical Engineering is online at bioeng . annualreviews . org This article’s doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . bioeng . 9 . 060906 . 151927 Copyright c (cid:2) 2007 by Annual Reviews . All rights reserved 1523 - 9829 / 07 / 0815 - 0001 $ 20 . 00 Abstract Forces are increasingly recognized as major regulators of cell struc - ture and function , and the mechanical properties of cells are essential to the mechanisms by which cells sense forces , transmit them to the cell interior or to other cells , and transduce them into chemical sig - nals that impact a spectrum of cellular responses . Comparison of the mechanical properties of intact cells with those of the puriﬁed cytoskeletal biopolymers that are thought to dominate their elas - ticity reveal the extent to which the studies of puriﬁed systems can account for the mechanical properties of the much more heteroge - neous and complex cell . This review summarizes selected aspects of current work on cell mechanics with an emphasis on the structures that are activated in cell - cell contacts , that regulate ion ﬂow across the plasma membrane , and that may sense ﬂuid ﬂow that produces low levels of shear stress . 1 A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 Contents INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 MEASUREMENTS OF CELL STIFFNESS IN VITRO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 MODELS FOR CELL MECHANICS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 Viscoelastic Gels of Cytoskeletal Polymers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 Colloidal , Glassy , and Foam Models for Cell Mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 Time Dependence of Cell Elasticity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 IMPLICATIONS OF CELL MECHANICAL PROPERTIES FOR THE MECHANISMS BY WHICH FORCES ARE SENSED . . . . . . . 8 The Extracellular Matrix in Cell Mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 Attachment Receptors in Force Transmission and Sensing . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 Cadherins and Mechanobiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 Adhesion Systems and the Cytoskeleton in Regulation of Ion Channels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 Force Transmission to Intracellular Organelles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 HOW ARE FORCES EXERTED AT THE CELL SURFACE TRANSMITTED THROUGH THE CELL ? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 Theoretical Predictions of the Stress Field in a Model Cell . . . . . . . . . . . 15 Experimental Measurements of Intracellular Strains Caused by Extracellular Forces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 SENSING AND RESPONDING TO SHEAR STRESS CAUSED BY FLUID FLOW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 Primary Cilium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 Bending of the Primary Cilium by Fluid Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 CONCLUSIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 INTRODUCTION The mechanical properties of cells have attracted interest from the very beginning of cell biologic studies . Gel - sol transitions were recognized in the cytoplasm of crawling amoeboid cells in the eighteenth century ( 1 ) and ﬂow within plant cells provided some of the ﬁrst quantitative data describing non - Newtonian viscosity ( reviewed in Reference 2 ) . In the 1920s microscopic magnetic particles were manipulated within live cells to obtain quantitative measurements of elastic and viscous parameters by microrheology ( 3 , 4 ) . In part , the focus on cell mechanics has been motivated by efforts to deﬁne how cells perform mechanical work as they move ( 5 ) ; however , recently , increased interest in cell mechanics has been generated by demonstrations that the mechanical features of the extracellular environment and application of forces to cells trigger cellular responses that are essential for many aspects of cell structure and function ( reviewed in References 6 , 7 ) . This review focuses on examples of how cells respond to speciﬁc types of mechanical stresses , how the mechanical properties of cells might relate to the rheological properties of synthetic or model systems , and 2 Janmey · McCulloch A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 AFM : atomic force microscopy how the mechanical features of cytoskeletal elements provide the potential to detect and integrate physical stimuli . In contrast to the level of understanding of how speciﬁc chemicals trigger and transduce signals within cells , studies of how cells sense force and how they respond to different levels , durations , and directions of force are much less common , but have recently attracted increasing attention from biologists and bioengineers . Deﬁning speciﬁc structures and mechanisms by which forces—both external and internally generated—are sensed by cells and how this stimulus leads to speciﬁc responses is likely to help explain the complex functions of cells and to design better materials for cell and tissue engineering and other applications in vivo . MEASUREMENTS OF CELL STIFFNESS IN VITRO The mechanical properties of the cell are essential to force responses because they determinetheextentofdeformationoftheregionofthecellwheretheforceisapplied , and therefore the range of molecular deformations that can be triggered . Estimates of cellular stiffness derived from different types of microrheological methods cover a wide range depending on the methods used , the type and extent of deformation , and the time that the deformation is applied , as shown in Table 1 . The stiffness measured for isolated cultured cells ranges from 0 . 1 kPa to an approximate upper limit of near 40 kPa ( 8 ) for myocytes , similar to the range of stiffness measured for many soft tissues ( 9 ) . The magnitudes of these moduli can help determine which molecular structures are responsible for cellular stiffness . For example , a reasonable estimate for the concentration of cytoskeletal proteins is 10 mg / ml actin , and tubulin and intermediate ﬁlament proteins have similar but slightly lower concentrations . In vitro studies show that cross - linked networks of actin at this concentration have elastic moduli in the range of 10 to 5 , 000 Pa , as do intermediate ﬁlaments networks , but only when deformed to large strains ( 10 , 14 ) . Microtubules may also contribute to cellular stiffness if bound to the other ﬁlament systems , but most studies in which microtubules are depolymerized show little effect of the microtubules directly on cell elasticity except when their depolymerization leads to rearrangement or disassembly of the other ﬁlament types ( 11 , 12 ) . The dominance of actin in determining the stiffness of cells is shown by one recent study using atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) to quantify stiffness from small indenta - tions of less than 200 nm at the dorsal surface of endothelial cells ( 13 ) . These studies reveal a heterogeneous population of local stiffness values that separated into two sets with elastic moduli of 5 . 6 + / − 3 . 5 kPa and 1 . 5 + / − 0 . 76 kPa depending on whether there were actin - based stress ﬁbers underneath the AFM probe . Addition of cytocha - lasin to disassemble the actin network reduced the stiffness to 0 . 89 + / − 0 . 46 kPa and the network became more homogeneous . Measurements such as these argue strongly in support of a contribution of cytoskeletal networks to cell rheology that can be in - terpreted at least in part by the viscoelasticity of cross - linked gels made in vitro by the puriﬁed cytoskeletal components . For example , 0 . 7 mg / ml actin gels cross - linked by alpha actinin have elastic moduli on the order of 100 Pa ( 14 ) , and similar rigidities are seen for actin cross - linked by ﬁlamin A ( 15 , 16 ) . Because the elastic modulus of www . annualreviews . org • Integrating Cell Responses to Mechanical Stimuli 3 A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 Table 1 Comparison of elastic moduli measured for single cells in culture Cell type Elastic modulus ( kPa ) Method Reference Rat aortic smooth muscle 1 . 5 – 11 Elongation between plates ( 180 ) Endothelial 1 . 5 – 5 . 6 AFM ( 13 ) Aortic endothelial Normal / cholesterol depleted 0 . 32 / 0 . 54 Microaspiration ( 181 ) Endothelial 0 . 5 cytoplasm 5 nucleus Uniaxial compression ( 182 ) Inner hair cell 0 . 3 AFM ( 183 ) Outer hair cell 2 – 3 . 7 AFM ( 184 ) Cardiac myocytes 35 – 42 AFM ( 8 ) Fibroblast 0 . 6 – 1 . 6 AFM ( 185 ) Fibroblast 1 – 10 ( differential stretch modulus ) Uniaxial stretching / compression ( 21 ) Bovine articular chondrocytes 1 . 1 – 8 Creep cytoindentation apparatus ( 186 ) Chondrocytes , Endothelial 0 . 5 Microaspiration ( 187 ) Neutrophils passive / activated 0 . 38 / 0 . 8 AFM ( 188 ) C2C12 myoblasts 2 Cell loading device ( global compression ) ( 189 ) Alveolar epithelial 0 . 1 – 0 . 2 Magnetic twisting cytometry ( 190 ) Epithelial normal / cancerous 10 – 13 / 0 . 4 – 1 . 4 AFM ( 191 ) Osteoblast 1 – 2 AFM ( 192 ) Fibroblasts Normal / transformed 0 . 22 / 0 . 19 ; 0 . 42 – 0 . 48 / 1 . 0 Optical stretcher ( 193 , 194 ) Melanoma 0 . 3 – 2 . 0 frequency dependent Magnetic twisting rheometry ( 195 ) Kidney epithelial Cell cortex Cell interior 0 . 16 0 . 04 Magnetic twisting rheometry Tracer diffusion ( 44 ) 3T3 ﬁbroblast before / after shear ﬂow 0 . 015 / 0 . 06 Tracer diffusion ( 196 ) C2 - 7 myogenic 0 . 66 Uniaxial stretching rheometer ( 197 ) networks formed by semiﬂexible polymers is shown by experiment ( 10 ) and theory ( 17 ) to scale approximately with the square of the polymer concentration , 10 mg / ml cross - linked actin networks are predicted to have elastic moduli on the order of 10 kPa even at low strains and in the absence of other strengthening effects , such as interac - tions with other ﬁlaments or from prestress owing to internal contraction by motors . The values of elastic moduli calculated from force - deformation studies of cells are inherently difﬁcult to interpret even when the experimental results are highly reproducible and well controlled . Among the factors that complicate the analysis are the facts that the structure of the cell interior is not homogeneous ; the earliest studies of cell mechanics noted that many crawling cells have a hierarchy of layers with a liquid core , surrounded by one or two layers of solid material that either trapped or excluded organelles , and a very thin highly elastic membrane ( 18 ) . Therefore , the elastic modulus calculated from subcellular deformations is model dependent . 4 Janmey · McCulloch A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 Further complications arise from the fact that the composition of the cytoskeleton , the density of activated cross - linkers , and the presence of other cellular components vary spatially and as a function of time . An additional feature evident in many studies is that the elastic material is inherently nonlinear , in that its resistance to deforma - tion depends on the extent of deformation , even without active remodeling of the network . This nonlinear elastic response is a consequence of the physical properties of semiﬂexible polymers and creates the potential for cells to modify their stiffness by applying internal deformations , often called prestress , by activation of motors . A ﬁnal complication is that the elastic resistance of cells is probably not entirely due to the thermal motions of polymers that produce the familiar entropic elasticity of rubbers , nor to enthalpic bending of stiff rods , which is analogous to bending of macroscopic beams . For example , when actin ﬁlaments are not tightly cross - linked to each other , activation of myosin motors arranged in antiparallel dimers increases ﬂuidity because the long interdigitated ﬁlaments slide past each other more facilely when propelled by the actomyosin power stroke than by thermal motions ( 19 ) . The ﬁnding that many apparently random intracellular motions are much longer than can be accounted for by Brownian motion suggests that the rheology of the cytoskeleton and the cytoplasm in general may be substantially different from that of its constituents when they have come to equilibrium . Given all of these complexities , it is perhaps surprising that the stiffness of many different cell types , measured using a variety of methods that impose a limited range of strains for times on the order of seconds , does not vary more widely and that signiﬁcant differences between different cell types can be identiﬁed . This ﬁnding suggests that cells may work to maintain a tightly controlled rigidity under speciﬁc conditions , and therefore , deviations from a normal range of stiffness might be used to identify abnormal cells ( 20 ) . Moreover , cells change their stiffness when subjected to externalstress . Arecentstudysystematicallyvariedtheforceappliedtoﬁbroblastsheld adherent to two parallel plates and measured the stiffness in response to incremental deformation performed when the cell was held under tension . This study showed that the incremental elastic modulus can change by nearly an order of magnitude when the cell is held under tension ( 21 ) . The tension can arise either from application of external force to elongate the cell or by generation of internal stress owing to active intracellular processes that increase tension when the cell is kept at a constant height . Theseresultssupportearlierstudiesshowingthatinternaltension , oftencalled prestress , can increase the stiffness of cells . The tension or deformation - dependent increase in the elastic modulus is consistent with the nonlinear viscoelasticity of cytoskeletal networks , and it may allow for signiﬁcant changes in cell stiffness without changes in the amount of polymerized proteins . MODELS FOR CELL MECHANICS Viscoelastic Gels of Cytoskeletal Polymers In some cases , biological materials are sufﬁciently uniform , or their mechanical prop - erties are dominated by only a single structure , and they can be reasonably interpreted www . annualreviews . org • Integrating Cell Responses to Mechanical Stimuli 5 A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 by existing models for synthetic materials . For example , the mechanics of blood clots and some extracellular matrices are sufﬁciently dependent on the polymer networks that form them , i . e . , ﬁbrin ( 22 – 25 ) and collagen ( 26 ) , respectively , that their rhe - ology resembles that of gels of cross - linked polymers . Their relatively frequency - independent shear storage moduli and low mechanical loss , as well as the scaling of elastic moduli with polymer concentrations ( 10 , 17 ) , all resemble those of other semiﬂexible polymer networks . The relatively large elastic moduli for low volume fractions and strain - stiffening behavior distinguish these biomaterials from hydrogels of ﬂexible polymers , but they are relatively well modeled by theories for semiﬂexible chains ( 17 , 27 , 28 ) . The similarity in rheology between some extracellular materi - als and synthetic polymer gels and the strong effect of actin depolymerizing agents on cell mechanics has motivated attempts to account for cell rheology using models developed for polymer networks . The rheology of soft biological materials depends on the assembly of long protein ﬁlaments into networks of different geometries . The speciﬁc geometries of these net - works are determined by the chemical and mechanical properties of the ﬁlaments , as well as those of the cross - links that hold the ﬁlaments together . Despite their chem - ical and structural differences , the most abundant protein ﬁlaments of extracellular matrices and intracellular cytoskeletons have the common property of being semiﬂex - ible ﬁlaments cross - linked into open meshworks . Whereas some biopolymers such as elastin have elastic properties very similar to rubber - like materials ( 29 , 30 ) , gels formed by stiffer ﬁlaments , such as ﬁbrin , collagen , actin , and intermediate ﬁlaments , have distinct rheological properties ( 28 , 31 ) . For example , they are able to form elastic gels at very low volume fractions , less than 0 . 01 % under optimal conditions , and become stiffer the more they are deformed , a property termed strain - stiffening ( 28 ) . These mechanical properties likely contribute to the biological functions of cy - toskeletal proteins in forming elastic networks with minimal protein production and networks with large mesh sizes that allow passage of large macromolecular assemblies and organelles . The rheological properties of the networks formed in vivo are likely to differ in some aspects from those formed in vitro . In vivo , the production of both ﬁlaments and networks is tightly regulated by numerous assembly - promoting and cross - linking factors ( 32 , 33 ) that produce active networks with speciﬁed geometries far from equilibrium ( 19 , 34 – 36 ) and not yet capable of being produced from puriﬁed factors in vitro . Nevertheless , some unusual properties of cross - linked semiﬂexible polymer networks have recently been observed in live cells , lending support to the concept that the network properties of isolated biopolymers can provide some insight into cell mechanics . On the other hand , studies of isotropic biopolymer networks can only partly reﬂect the mechanical properties of an intact cell because whole - cell rhe - ology results from deformations of multiple layers within the cell , spanning the thin elastic membrane , the subcortical actin gel , a more granular gel - like inner layer , a more ﬂuid layer in the cell interior , and the nucleus , which is generally much stiffer than the rest of the cell ( 18 ) . How these multiple layers together determine cell rhe - ology remains difﬁcult to relate to the ﬁlamentous and other structures found within each region . 6 Janmey · McCulloch A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 Colloidal , Glassy , and Foam Models for Cell Mechanics Most biological materials , including single cells , are not well deﬁned by a single synthetic analog . In part , this results from their structural complexity and the fact that many are under internal tension ( 21 , 37 – 41 ) , are constantly remodeling , or are subject to apparently random , but nonthermal , ﬂuctuations that are rarely , if ever , found in synthetic materials ( 42 ) . Experimental evidence that cells were at least partly solid or could change from solid to liquid form was clear well before the concept of large macromolecules was accepted and well before cytoskeletal ﬁlaments were visualized by electron microscopy . Early explanations for cell rheology were based on concepts of colloid science ( 43 ) , in which interactions between small particles suspended in solvent , in this case granular material within the cytoplasm , led to solid - like rheology that allowed ﬂow as the tightly packed particles subjected to forces moved past each other . Many aspects of the time dependence of cell rheology resemble the rheology of colloids , foams , or soft glassy materials , and recent systematic studies of cell elasticity and viscosity over much larger ranges of time and frequency than were previously possible have motivated researchers to challenge models of cell mechanics analogous to polymer gels . Many recent studies have reported that cells and some puriﬁed systems mimicking the cytoskeleton have elastic moduli that follow a power law with a small fractional exponent , often near 0 . 1 to 0 . 2 over several orders of magnitude in time ( 38 , 39 , 44 – 50 ) . This behavior is inconsistent with polymer models containing a small number of relaxation times , or a ﬁnite longest relaxation time , as expected for a polymer gel , but rather it implies a continuum of relaxation times consistent with the rheology of immobilized colloids or soft glasses . The evidence in favor of power law rheology of single cells and other soft tissues is increasingly documented , although the precise molecular nature of this behavior remains unexplained . A related ﬁnding from mi - croscopic measurement of the ﬂuctuations of particles within the cytoplasm shows that while these motions appear random , they are much too large to be accounted for by thermal ﬂuctuations . Instead , these motions seem to result from random jostling of the cytoskeleton , membranes , and other structures that are in contact with motor proteins that produce mechanical motions of various kinds using the energy of ATP hydrolysis to do work ( 42 ) . In many cases , the resulting motions are unidirectional for long distances and easily distinguished from Brownian motion , but in other cases single steps in random directions could produce the apparently random but active movements within the cell , with a resulting spectrum of relaxation times that could contribute to the power law behavior of the overall rheology . Time Dependence of Cell Elasticity Whether the cell appears to behave as a glass , a gel , or something else may depend on the magnitude of the deformation and the time over which the response is observed . The power - law relation of the cell’s elastic modulus need not imply that the polymer properties of the cytoskeleton are unimportant or even dominant for the rheology of the cell . The basic model for polymer network elasticity assumes that the ﬁlaments remain chemically identical during deformation and that the cross - links between www . annualreviews . org • Integrating Cell Responses to Mechanical Stimuli 7 A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 them are rigid compared with the ﬁlaments themselves . Neither of these assumptions is necessarily true for live cells , and the active movement of ﬁlaments and other structures by motor proteins further complicates network rheology . Recent studies examining the viscoelasticity of cells and complex cytoskeletal protein networks show thatthetime - dependentrheologyofthesesystemscanbesimilar . Themultiplefactors that mediate cytoskeletal networks , such as the size , stability , geometry , and ﬂexibility of cross - linkers ; active motions ; and perhaps changes in ﬁlament structure ; can all contribute to rheology to produce the spectrum of relaxation times inferred from the time - dependent measurements of cells ( 51 ) . In summary , very few biological tissues are simple enough to approximate by any single rheological model . As a result , most rheological studies have been phenomeno - logical , with either a ﬁnite number of elastic and viscous elements coupled in series or parallel to mimic the rheological behavior , or scaling exponents and limiting values to deﬁne how they may be ﬁt by glass - like models ( 45 ) . These phenomenological models have been essential in many bioengineering contexts to develop protective or therapeutic strategies . However , developing mechanical models by which the proper - ties of speciﬁc molecular structures , motor - derived forces , and cell - cell or cell - matrix interactions account for tissue mechanics remains an area of active investigation . IMPLICATIONS OF CELL MECHANICAL PROPERTIES FOR THE MECHANISMS BY WHICH FORCES ARE SENSED Mechanosensationrequiresbydeﬁnitionanelementthatrespondstoanappliedforce , without necessarily being triggered by binding a speciﬁc chemical stimulus . One of the challenges in understanding cellular response to forces is that there is not yet a universally accepted or fully described instance of a cellular component that responds speciﬁcally to a particular type of force . Lack of precise molecular mechanisms for force sensing leaves open the possibility that what is interpreted as a purely mechan - ical stimulus might , in fact , be a chemical stimulus that occurs coincident with the force application . For example , the effects of shear ﬂow on endothelial and epithelial cells has plausibly been attributed either to a mechanosensor at the apical surface of these cells or to chemical sensors that detect concentration differences or gradients in solutes that ﬂow past the cell surface . Similarly , cellular response to forces that deform cell shape can plausibly be described as being due to mechanically induced changes in protein or membrane molecular conformations or , alternatively , to chemical differ - ences owing to reorientation of the spatial organization of cellular components that work cooperatively , with changes due to altering their spatial arrangements but not their individual structures . Several different structures have been proposed as sensors of force . These include extracellular matrix molecules , the cytoskeleton , transmembrane proteins , proteins at themembrane - phospholipidinterface , elementsofthenuclearmatrix , chromatin , and the lipid bilayer itself . The magnitudes of elastic moduli that describe both the cell’s global deformation in response to forces and the deformation of speciﬁc structures at the cell surface can help discriminate between different modes of mechanosens - ing . Below we consider the role of the extracellular matrix , matrix receptors , and 8 Janmey · McCulloch A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 intercellular adhesion receptors in mediating mechanical signals and how this might in turn impact mechanically activated ion channels . The Extracellular Matrix in Cell Mechanics In organs and the connective tissues that envelop organs , cells are embedded in soft or mineralized tissues that provide special situations for the transmission and sensation of mechanical forces . Cells in solid tissues , by virtue of their surrounding protein matrices , likely sense and respond to applied forces in ways that are very different , for example , from blood cells ﬂowing past endothelium ( 52 ) . Connective tissue cells are therefore mechanically adapted to the rheological properties of the matrix and their sensitivity and response to mechanical stimuli are signiﬁcantly impacted by the matrix proteins that surround them . Connective tissues provide essential physical and biological properties for trans - mission of gravitational and muscular forces by , for example , functionally joining muscle to bone . Another crucial facet of the extracellular matrix is its mechanical stabilization of tissues subjected to force , a general property that enables tissues and organs to maintain their shape and to prevent mechanically induced cell damage . Connective tissue matrices are comprised of predominantly collagen ﬁbers and a large variety of other ﬁbrillar and globular proteins , including ﬁbronectins , laminins , glycosaminoglycans , and tenascin . Specialized mineralizing tissues that exhibit highly ordered hydroxyapatite crystals distributed in a soft extracellular matrix can exhibit a wide range of stiffness , as seen in cortical bone compared with cartilage , for example . Notably , ﬁbrillar collagen is the most abundant protein in mammals ( 53 ) and in soft connective tissues , it can transmit tensile forces ( 54 ) to ﬁbroblasts and many other cell types with appropriate collagen receptors . Based on the structure and composi - tion of tissue - speciﬁc proteins , extracellular matrices are highly adapted to transmit , and to protect cells against , different types of mechanical loads , including tensile , compressive , shearing forces , and various combinations thereof ( 55 ) . Under conditions of increased loading , connective tissues exhibit clear - cut re - sponses to applied forces , including enhanced remodeling of connective tissue ma - trices ( 56 ) and increased proliferation of ﬁbroblasts and osteoblasts , which are the principal mesenchymal cell type of soft and mineralized connective tissues , respec - tively . These cells also contribute to the synthesis , degradation , and remodeling of extracellularmatrices , andtheirsensitivitytomechanicalforcesenablesforce - induced remodeling of the extracellular matrix . Conversely , the mechanical properties of the extracellular matrix have an important inﬂuence on the morphology and function of osteoblasts and ﬁbroblasts ( 57 ) . For example , mechanically stressed collagen lattices lead to a “synthetic” ﬁbroblast phenotype characterized by induction of connective tissue synthesis while simultaneously inhibiting matrix degradation ( 58 ) . Experiments using three - dimensional ( 3 - D ) collagen gels have also indicated that mechanical load - ing of tissues inﬂuences matrix remodeling ( 59 ) . Thus the extracellular matrix is a conductor of mechanical forces but its structure and composition is also inﬂu - enced by the cellular responses to those same applied or endogenously generated forces . www . annualreviews . org • Integrating Cell Responses to Mechanical Stimuli 9 A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 AJ : adherens junction Mechanotransduction : conversion of a force to a chemical or ionic change Attachment Receptors in Force Transmission and Sensing Cells in connective tissues adhere to extracellular matrices by a wide variety of matrix receptors , which may , under certain circumstances , become clustered into the aggre - gates termed focal adhesions or focal complexes . These complexes are candidate sites for transfer of contractile forces to the cytoskeleton in both cultured cells and cells in tissues ( 60 ) . Because of the facility of growing ﬁbroblasts in vitro and for applying various types of exogenous forces to these cells , cultured ﬁbroblasts have become important models for exploring mechanosensing and force response mechanisms in solid tissues . In ﬁbroblasts , force transmission is critically dependent on the attach - ment of cells to matrix molecules such as collagen or ﬁbronectin ( 61 ) ; this is manifest also in force - induced gene expression where tensile forces applied through matrix protein ( but not poly - l - lysine - coated beads ) can promote increased expression of the actin - binding protein ﬁlamin A ( 62 ) . Attachment of connective tissue cells to the extracellular matrix is contingent on the formation and remodeling of integrin - mediated adhesions , but cells also ad - here to each other by intercellular adhesive molecules , such as cadherins , that may also act as force sensors ( 63 ) . As N - cadherin - mediated adherens junctions ( AJs ) are inﬂuenced by integrin biology , ﬁbroblasts may be able to integrate mechanical sig - nals from both adhesion systems to coordinate responses relevant to differentiation , organogenesis , and wound healing ( 64 ) . Several studies have documented mechanical signaling responses through both cadherin and integrin adhesions ( 63 , 65 ) . Conse - quently , mechanotransduction , the process by which cells convert mechanical stimuli into biochemical responses , may not be a ﬁnite single process but may instead be a series of interrelated processes that involve the recruitment of a wide variety of cell attachment , cytoskeletal , and signaling proteins . These proteins may then form dockingandsignalingcomplexesthatareorientedintimeandspacetooptimizetrans - mission and processing of mechanical signals . Transmembrane proteins , particularly integrins and cadherins , are thought to play an important role in the function of protein complex – mediated mechanotransduction . Integrins , major transmembrane proteins that connect the cytoskeleton to the extracellular matrix , may be able to transmit mechanical forces across the plasma membrane ( 66 ) . Because integrins can also regulate a wide variety of signaling pathways ( 67 ) , they are well positioned to transduce physical forces into chemical signals . Transmembrane proteins can activate intracellular biochemical signaling path - ways either by binding an extracellular ligand ( chemical signaling ) or when they are unfolded or otherwise deformed by force ( mechanical signaling ) . Thus , the adhesive function of attachment molecules such as integrins and cadherins is a key element in mechanosensing and mechanotransduction . When external forces are applied to cultured cells , the cells exert tractional forces on the substratum to which they are attached , for example , focal adhesions complexes ( 68 ) . The initial reorganization and maturation of focal complexes into focal adhesions enhance force transmission and also further increase maturation of the adhesions ( 69 ) . Conversely , formation of focal adhesions requires tension generated by actin - bound myosin motors within the cell . These cell - generated forces are resisted by substrata if the substrata are sufﬁciently 10 Janmey · McCulloch A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 stiff to prevent deformation ( 70 ) . The processes of force transmission , sensing , and response create regulatory opportunities for signaling pathways that may guide cell migration , matrix assembly , and tissue organization ( 71 ) and these opportunities rely heavily on the adhesive domains of cells . The extensive heterogeneity of the mechani - cal properties of cells makes it unlikely that one single general model would be able to explain cell mechanics ( 72 ) , particularly in view of the segregated nature of surface ad - hesion receptors on cells ( e . g . , focal adhesions ) . Some cases of site - speciﬁc responses that are heavily inﬂuenced by receptor - matrix interactions are difﬁcult to reconcile with models that posit homogeneous biochemical and mechanical properties . This point is underlined by data showing that application of mechanical forces can be very localized and that cellular responses are often restricted to the local application site ( 73 ) or in some cases transmitted to discrete sites farther away ( 74 ) . Cadherins and Mechanobiology In mechanically loaded , rapidly remodeling ﬁbrous connective tissues such as the periodontal ligament , ﬁbroblasts exhibit an extensive network of adherens junctions ( AJs ) that provide direct physical coupling between adjacent cells ( 75 – 78 ) and endow cells with the capacity to act as a syncitium ( 63 ) . This property of cells in connective tissues has received relatively little attention but may be of considerable importance in modeling studies of cell and tissue mechanics . Notably , cadherin - mediated AJs in connective tissue ﬁbroblasts are important for physiological turnover of the ex - tracellular matrix , wound contraction , and intercellular mechanotransduction ( 76 , 79 – 81 ) , processes that involve mechanical signaling processes . Although the forma - tion and maturation of N - cadherin - mediated AJs in response to mechanical loading are still poorly characterized , new data indicate several interesting insights into cell mechanics . AJs are adhesive plaques located at the junction of contacting cells , and they are mediated by the classical cadherins , adapter proteins , and actin ﬁlaments . AJ - like structures in solid tissues , such as connective tissues , can be formed by N - cadherin ( 82 , 83 ) , which is broadly expressed by cells in nervous , ﬁbrous , mineralized , muscu - lar , vascular , and adipose tissues . N - cadherin - mediated AJs are of central importance in mechanical aspects of connective tissue function , including the regulation of cell attachment and migration ( 84 – 86 ) ; wound edge retraction ( 87 ) ; embryonic develop - ment and folding of cell layers ( 88 , 89 ) ; and differentiation and formation of neural ( 90 – 93 ) , muscle ( 94 – 97 ) , bone ( 98 – 100 ) , cartilage ( 101 – 103 ) , vasculature ( 104 ) , and ﬁbrous connective tissues ( 80 , 81 ) . All of these processes involve cell mechanics , not only in interactions with the extracellular matrix but also , importantly , in maintenance and remodeling of intercellular junctions . As indicated above , simple , one - dimensional models of mechanical signaling in many types of tissues do not take into account the remarkable complexity of the to - tal toolbox of components in the extracellular matrix and in intercellular adhesive systems . In the context of adhesion receptors , cooperative signaling between cad - herin and integrin adhesion systems may be relevant to mechanical signaling and the coordinated migration of cells that occurs in wound healing . For example , ectopic www . annualreviews . org • Integrating Cell Responses to Mechanical Stimuli 11 A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 expression of α 5 and β 1 integrins in primary myoblasts increases N - cadherin ex - pression and contact inhibition ( 86 ) , implicating integrin signaling in N - cadherin - mediatedcontactinhibition . InHeLacells , theimportanceofpaxillinandFAKsignal - ing in promoting N - cadherin - mediated contact formation , maintenance , and contact inhibition of motility has been suggested to involve a mechanism employing down - regulation of Rac1 activity at sites subjacent to intercellular contacts ( 105 ) . Evidently , integrin - and cadherin - mediated adhesions may cooperatively or antagonistically im - pact the formation and maintenance of the opposing adhesion system to regulate cell mechanics . Thus the adhesion of connective tissue cells to various types of extra - cellular matrix proteins can inﬂuence the formation of intercellular adhesions and , as a result , the mechanical properties of tissues . For example , epithelial cells adher - ing to ﬁbronectin or laminin maintain intercellular adhesions , whereas , if these cells attach to collagen , the intercellular junctions dissipate and the cells disperse ( 106 ) , indicating that different adhesion systems are tightly interdependent in terms of their mechanical properties . The regulation of cadherin - dependent intercellular junctions by speciﬁc integrin - mediated matrix adhesions has been noted in several different types of cells ( 107 – 111 ) , strongly indicating that models predicting mechanical be - haviors of tissues must take into account the cross - talk between the adhesion systems that adhere cells to matrix and cells to each other . Adhesion Systems and the Cytoskeleton in Regulation of Ion Channels At the single - cell level , mechanical signaling underlies a very large coterie of cell behaviors , including cell volume control , motility , response to applied forces , and phagocytosis , all of which can produce localized distortions of the cell membrane ( 112 , 113 ) . Force - induced changes of the physical properties of cell membranes may be able to regulate ion channel conductance ( 114 ) , directly implicating adhesion systems to cells and matrix proteins in early events of mechanotransduction . Some experimentalevidenceshowsthatalterationsofmembranetensioncanenhancemem - brane ( and presumably ion channel ) permeability to calcium ; these processes are in turn regulated by the adhesion systems utilized by cells and by the interaction of adhesion systems with the cytoskeleton . At least one model of mechanotransduction suggests a central role for the cytoskeleton in regulating membrane ion channels . This hypothesis proposes that cells regulate ion channel conductance , in part , by force transmission through adhesions to the cytoskeleton , and subsequent cytoskele - tal modiﬁcation of the gating properties of the channels . As mechanosensitive chan - nels include both stretch - activated and stretch - inactivated channels ( 114 ) , there is considerable scope for how applied forces , adhesion systems , and cytoskeletal pro - teins could impact global membrane permeability . For example , an early event after N - cadherin ligation of adjacent cells is the activation of plasma membrane stretch - sensitive Ca 2 + permeable channels and transient increases of Ca 2 + subjacent to sites of intercellular contact ( 63 ) . In many types of cells , including connective tissue ﬁ - broblasts , these transients are important determinants of cell contractility , motility ( 115 , 116 ) , and the formation of intercellular adhesions ( 63 , 117 ) . After N - cadherin 12 Janmey · McCulloch A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 ER : endoplasmic reticulum ligation , the amplitude of juxtamembrane Ca 2 + ﬂuxes correlates temporally with the recruitment of actin assembly at regions of cadherin - mediated adhesions ( 63 , 117 ) . Thus , the mechanics of adhesion formation and remodeling directly impacts fun - damental aspects of cell signaling that impact cell metabolism and are the subject of numerous studies of mechanical signaling events . The central notion underlying adhesion system regulation of ion channel conductance is that cell membranes are major targets of external mechanical forces ( 118 ) and that forces applied to the cell membrane can be translated into membrane tension . This elevated tension in turn activates increased ion channel conductance , ion inﬂux , and , potentially , downstream regulation of gene expression . As ion transport in various tissues can apparently be regulated by adhesion sys - tems that interact with the cortical actin cytoskeleton , it has been suggested that stretch - sensitive channels may be able to sense mechanical signals delivered from the submembrane , cytoplasmic face of the cell , possibly involving physical linkages to the cytoskeleton ( 113 ) . Support for this notion comes from earlier work showing that transmembrane calcium ion ﬂux is a rapid response to mammalian whole - cell mechanical stretching and is dependent on the relative levels of actin ﬁlament as - sembly in individual cells ( 119 ) . More speciﬁcally , using inside - out patch clamping , the involvement of actin assembly in the regulation of nonvoltage - gated sodium channels has been demonstrated in human myeloid leukemia cells ( 120 ) . Stretch - activated channels comprise several functionally characterized ion channels that are permeable to anions and cations ( 114 , 116 ) , but the molecular deﬁnition of these channels in mammalian cells has not been completely deﬁned . MscL , a mechanosen - sitive channel in Escherichia coli , was the ﬁrst major channel molecule to be char - acterized at the molecular level . Thus , MscL may be able to directly contribute to the “sense” of membrane stretch ( 121 ) . In mammalian cells , l - type channels may be the mechanosensor that regulates bone formation ( 122 ) . Transient receptor potential channel proteins have also been cited as possible mechanosensors ( 123 ) ; indeed , work in frog oocytes strongly indicates that TRCPC1 is a mechanosensitive cation channel ( 124 ) . Force Transmission to Intracellular Organelles Although there is a large body of work implicating force transmission through membrane - bound adhesion receptors that regulate stretch - sensitive channels in the cell membrane , mechanical stimuli also induce integrin - dependent Ca 2 + entry and / or Ca 2 + release from the endoplasmic reticulum in many cell types , including osteoblasts ( 125 ) , osteocytes ( 126 ) , chondrocytes ( 127 , 128 ) , mast cells ( 129 ) , cardiac myocytes ( 130 ) , endothelial cells ( 131 ) , and vascular smooth muscle cells ( 132 , 133 ) . These remarkable ﬁndings suggest that adhesion receptors , possibly by virtue of their con - nectivity with cytoskeletal elements , can activate calcium release from intracellular stores . One mechanism posits that mechanical stimuli promote release of ATP that in turn acts on purinergic receptors to discharge Ca 2 + from endoplasmic reticu - lum ( ER ) stores and induce Ca 2 + wave propagation ( 134 , 135 ) . However , more re - cent evidence indicates that force activates l - type channels to promote Ca 2 + entry www . annualreviews . org • Integrating Cell Responses to Mechanical Stimuli 13 A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 that stimulates vesicular ATP release ( 136 ) . Other data from epithelial cells and ﬁ - broblasts have shown that mechanically induced ATP release requires elevations of intracellular Ca 2 + and that Ca 2 + - dependent exocytosis plays a major role in mechanosensitive ATP release ( 137 ) . Application of forces to certain cell types pro - motes intracellular release that may rely in part on calcium - induced calcium release through activation of plasma membrane channels ( 138 ) , activation of a mechanosen - sitive phospholipase A2 , or a direct physical connection between the ER and plasma membrane adhesion receptors ( 139 ) . Collectively , these data indicate that mechan - ically induced increases of Ca 2 + are widely distributed among many different types of cells , but that the relative importance of mechanically sensitive plasma mem - brane and ER channels is not deﬁned . Recent data indicate that there may be localized mechanical connections between matrix adhesions on the plasma mem - branes of cells and the endoplasmic reticulum ( 140 , 141 ) , thereby suggesting the possibility that transmission of mechanical stimuli into the interior of cells can be mediated by physical approximation of intracellular organelles and cell membrane microdomains . HOW ARE FORCES EXERTED AT THE CELL SURFACE TRANSMITTED THROUGH THE CELL ? The mechanical properties of the cell determine how far and in which direction a force applied at the cell surface will deform or apply stress to an element within the cell . The distribution of forces through a complex viscoelastic material like a cell depends on details of the linkage between the site where the force is applied and the underlying cytoskeleton , the linkage of the membrane to the cytoskeleton , and the continuity of elastic links through the cell interior or linking the membrane to the nucleus . Even prior to active remodeling of the cell in response to the force , details of the preexisting cellular elements determine where in the cell the force will be transmitted . For example , when a point force is applied at the membrane to , for example , an integrin that is not tightly coupled to the underlying cortical actin network , the resulting deformation will be largely in the plasma membrane in which the integrin is embedded or in elements directly linked to the transmembrane protein . In this case , mechanically sensitive ion channels can be activated , but structures in the cell interior will not be strained . Any subsequent rearrangement of the internal structure would occur only secondary to a chemical signal being transduced from the mechanical signal . On the other hand , if an integrin is already linked to the 3 - D cytoskeleton , then force will be transmitted directly into the cell interior to deform the cytoskeleton or move internal organelles . In this case the plasma membrane of the cell might not be stretched , and therefore no inﬂux of Ca2 + would be triggered ( 142 , 143 ) . The importance of mechanical reinforcement of integrins for the manner in which they signal in response to force underlies the mechanism of mechanoprotection ( 7 , 144 ) , in which repeated or prolonged stress to a transmembrane protein does not trigger the same response as the initial force application , even though the signaling apparatus remains intact . Similarly , the nature of the contact at the base of the cell affects how it responds to forces applied elsewhere . 14 Janmey · McCulloch A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 1 . 01 0 . 84 0 . 67 0 . 51 0 . 34 0 . 17 0 . 00 X - displacement ( µm ) 0 . 67 0 . 47 0 . 28 0 . 08 – 0 . 12 – 0 . 31 – 0 . 51 Z - displacement ( µm ) F F a b x z x z Figure 1 Finite element analysis of the displacement ﬁeld in a cell with elastic modulus 100 Pa and viscosity 100 Pa . s after imposition of 500 pN force on a 4 . 5 - μ m - diameter bead tightly attached to the top of the cell with the depth of penetration shown . Only one - fourth of the bead is depicted as the gray quadrant . The displacements predicted 2 s after imposition of stress in the horizontal ( x ) and vertical ( z ) directions are shown in ( a ) and ( b ) panels , respectively . Adapted with permission from Reference 145 . Theoretical Predictions of the Stress Field in a Model Cell Finite element modeling has recently provided maps of how forces applied to the surface of a cell are transmitted through its interior in the context of magnetic twisting rheometry , a commonly used method ( see Table 1 ) to measure cell surface mechanics . As Figures 1 and 2 show , both the stress and strain ﬁelds are transmitted only a few microns away from the point of force application in both viscoelastic and purely elastic models of cell rheology . Figure 1 shows the displacements in the vertical and horizontal directions for a model in which approximately one - half of the radius of a 4 . 5 micron sphere is embedded into the membrane of a cell , which is characterized as a viscoelastic body with a shear modulus of 100 Pa and a viscosity of 100 Pa . s ( 145 ) . The horizontal movements that represent both recoverable elastic displacement and viscous dissipation are signiﬁcant only a few bead diameters away from the site of the www . annualreviews . org • Integrating Cell Responses to Mechanical Stimuli 15 A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 x z y a Stress = effective value b Total deformation = effective value 0 . 5 µm x z y Figure 2 Finite element analysis of the stress ( a ) and effective strain ( b ) for a 5 - μ m - high section of a cell with a 4 . 5 micron bead embedded 10 % of its height into the cell surface and subjected to a 15 ◦ rotation . The cell is modeled as an elastic body with shear modulus 1000 Pa and Poisson’s ratio = 0 . 49 . The color - coding is maximal for red ( stress = 940 Pa ; strain = 0 . 44 ) declining to baseline values at light blue . Adapted with permission from Reference 179 . Afﬁne : the macroscopic strain of a sample is equal to the microscopic strain at every point embedded bead , and extend only a few micrometers into the cell interior . In a purely elastic cell model with elastic modulus of 1000 Pa ( Figure 2 ) , the displacement and calculated stress ﬁelds appear to be even more conﬁned to the region of the embedded bead . The prediction from these simulations is that cytoskeletal deformation and movements of embedded organelles should follow a gradient of movements with the largest magnitudes near the edges of the bead . Experimental Measurements of Intracellular Strains Caused by Extracellular Forces Because the interior of the cell , including its cytoskeleton , is anisotropic and ther - modynamically far from equilibrium , the deformation of a cell in response to applied stress might not correspond to the predicted strain of a homogeneous viscoelastic material . For a simple continuous elastic material , the local strain everywhere within the sample corresponds to the macroscopic strain , and such uniform deformations are called afﬁne . However , many biological materials exhibit non - afﬁne deformation . For example , a detailed study of how the cytoskeleton is deformed by shear stress imaged the vimentin intermediate ﬁlament system before and 3 min after imposition of 1 . 2 Pa shear stress to the dorsal surface of an endothelial cell ( 146 ) . Reconstruction of network junction points in a triangulation map allowed quantitative measure - ment of the displacement ﬁeld . As Figure 3 shows , the microscopic displacements of the cytoskeleton are highly nonuniform and do not follow closely the direction of the stress . Some junction points even move in a direction opposite to the applied stress . A similar ﬁnding that speciﬁc sites in the cell interior move signiﬁcant distances and 16 Janmey · McCulloch A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 b a Figure 3 ( a ) Images from an optical section of the ﬂuorescently labeled vimentin network of an endothelial cell just before ( red ) and 3 min after ( green ) onset of shear stress ( 1 . 2 Pa ; left to right ) . Yellow indicates overlap corresponding to zero ﬁlament displacement . ( b ) Vertex displacement ﬁeld from the inset box in ( a ) . Arrow length and orientation indicate the magnitude and direction of displacement of the corresponding vertex on the skeleton ( gray ) , shown just before ﬂow onset . Adapted with permission from Reference 146 . in a direction different from those of forces applied to the cell membrane was made in a study in which twisting motions from a magnetic bead bound to surface integrins lead to displacement of ﬂuorescently labeled mitochondria used as ﬁducial markers for the cytoskeleton to which the mitochondria were bound ( 74 , 147 ) . These stud - ies , illustrated in Figure 4 , revealed that mitochondria often moved distances and in directions different from what would be expected for application of a local force to a viscoelastic continuum as shown in Figures 1 and 2 . Some mitochondria far away from the point of stress moved farther than mitochondria closer to the applied force , and movements toward the force were also noted . Because mitochondria are often bound to cytoskeletal ﬁlaments , and because the stress carried by individual ﬁlaments can depend strongly on the details of how they are linked to the point of applied www . annualreviews . org • Integrating Cell Responses to Mechanical Stimuli 17 A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 a b – 20 – 10 – 10 0 10 20 0 x ( µm ) µm Pa y ( µ m ) 10 20 0 . 06 0 . 05 0 . 04 0 . 03 0 . 02 0 . 01 0 250 200 150 100 50 0 – 20 – 10 – 10 0 10 20 0 x ( µm ) y ( µ m ) 10 20 Figure 4 Displacement ( a ) and stress ( b ) maps of airway smooth muscle cells after application of 90 Pa stress to a 4 . 5 μ m magnetic bead coated with RGD peptides and bound to integrins at the cell surface . The color map represents the magnitudes of the mitochondria displacements or stresses . The inset in part ( b ) shows the magnetic bead at the upper right . Adapted with permission from Reference 74 . force , these measurements are consistent with tensegrity models for cell mechan - ics , which emphasize the geometry of the networks and the interplay of tension and compression in cytoskeletal structure ( 148 ) . Some aspects of the differences between the microscopic strains of network nodes and the macroscopic strain are also quali - tatively consistent with recent calculations of the nonafﬁne strains of dilute networks of cross - linked semiﬂexible networks , including actin ( 31 , 149 ) and collagen ( 150 ) , even when they are not held under tension . Other features , such as the long - range displacement of individual mitochondria after application of a distant force and the effects of myosin inhibitors , support the concept of tensegrity and implicate the active contractility of the cell as important in determining how the internally prestressed cytoskeleton responds to external stresses ( 74 , 147 ) . SENSING AND RESPONDING TO SHEAR STRESS CAUSED BY FLUID FLOW Characterization of the magnitudes of elastic moduli and the structures at the cell surface have led to several different mechanisms by which cells may respond to shear stresses caused by ﬂuid ﬂow . As pointed out in a pioneering model of cytoskeletal elasticity based on modeling the ﬁlaments as elastic beams , a major challenge to understanding how endothelial cells sense shear stress is that the calculated and mea - sured elastic modulus of the cell is on the order of 1000 Pa , but the cell responds to 0 . 1 Pa stress at its surface ( 151 ) . Such a relatively small stress would produce a small strain the cytoskeleton as a whole . However , the mechanical continuity of the cytoskeleton is required for a decentralized response to the stress and to transmit it 18 Janmey · McCulloch A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 elsewhere within the cell ( 152 ) . There is a fairly wide range of values reported for the Young’s modulus of an endothelial cell , but most studies conclude that the elastic modulus of the endothelial cytoskeleton is in the range of 100 – 1000 Pa ( Table 1 ) . Therefore , a shear stress of 1 Pa , which is at the high end of the stress reached at the wall of a blood vessel , will strain a cell with an elastic modulus of 1000 Pa only 0 . 1 % . If the typical mesh size of the cytoskeleton is approximately 100 nm , this corresponds to a movement of actin or other ﬁlaments of no more than 1 ˚A , a distance almost surely less than that caused by the random ﬂuctuations from thermal energy . A similar estimate suggests that the stresses caused by ﬂuid ﬂow are also too small to deform a stretch - activated ion channel sufﬁciently to alter its conductivity . Therefore , if the re - sponse to shear ﬂow is really mechanical and not due to ﬂow of chemical messengers , an ampliﬁcation of the stress due to the ﬂuid ﬂow needs to be hypothesized . Various structural specializations of ﬂow - sensing cell membranes have been pro - posed as the shear stress sensors . Most models are based on the observation that the surfaces of cells such as endothelial cells are not smooth ( 152 ) , and therefore the local stress produced by ﬂuid ﬂow can be signiﬁcantly higher than the wall shear stress calculated by classical ﬂuid dynamics ( 153 , 154 ) for ﬂuid ﬂow across a ﬂat surface . Force imposed at specialized sites can be transmitted through the cytoskeleton to sites in the cell interior ( 155 ) . Because of the small forces due to shear ﬂow to which cells respond , the force sen - sor must either be much softer than a typical protein complex or else highly elongated and projected into the ﬂow ﬁeld to amplify the force . Two candidate structures to produce this force ampliﬁcation are the glycocalyx and the primary cilium . The glyco - calyx , an extended web of large , semiﬂexible , glycosylated macromolecules extending large distances up from the apical surface of the cell , can amplify the deformations due to ﬂuid ﬂow and focus them on the transmembrane proteins to which they are anchored and thereby transduce the shear stress into intracellular signals ( 156 ) . This modality of mechanotransduction is discussed in detail in the chapter by Tarbell et al . in this volume . Primary Cilium A convergence of structural and genetic data have recently focused attention on the primaryciliumasastructureresponsibleforshearstresssensinginsomecelltypes , no - tably epithelial cells and potentially in some endothelial cells ( reviewed in References 157 – 161 ) . Motile cilia of , for example , tracheal epithelia generate motion by acti - vation of microtubule motors within an elongated structure formed by a bundle of nine doublet microtubules surrounding a central pair of microtubules . In contrast , primary cilia are nonmotile because they lack the central microtubules , localize fewer microtubule motors , and use those motors for intraﬂagellar transport but not to slide microtubules past each other to generate bending movements . Most vertebrate cells that face a ﬂuid extracellular compartment , including many endothelial and epithelial cells , contain a single primary cilium that emanates from the mother centriole and ex - tends through the cortical actin meshwork to form membrane - bounded protrusions that project as much as 30 microns up from the cell surface . The nonmotile primary www . annualreviews . org • Integrating Cell Responses to Mechanical Stimuli 19 A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 cilium has been known for 100 years , and has been proposed to be a mechanosensor , largely on the basis of its morphology ( reviewed in Reference 162 ) . Molecular ev - idence for the mechanism by which this structure responds to forces has recently emerged largely from studies of the dysfunction of renal epithelial cells in polycystic kidney disease , and similar or perhaps different molecular strategies may be employed by other cell types that possess primary cilia . Mechanosensing by deﬂection of the microtubule - based primary cilium by ﬂuid ﬂow may occur by mechanisms analogous to those by which the actin - based stereocilia of the hair cell detects sound ( 163 ) . Experimental evidence for mechanical sensing by primary cilia has been reported for renal and other epithelial cells , osteocytes , and other cell types ( see the reviews cited above ) , but somewhat surprisingly there is less evidence for such a role in endothelial cells . Several types of endothelial cells express primary cilia ( 164 – 168 ) , and ﬂow - induced changes in their structure have been reported in corneal ( 164 ) and umbilical vein endothelia ( 169 ) ; however , in the latter case , physiological levels of ﬂuid shear stress led to their disassembly . On the other hand , they are detected on embryonic endocardial cells in regions of low shear stress ( 170 ) on endothelial cells at regions of atherosclerotic plaques ( 171 ) , and on hepatic stellate cells ( 172 ) , all of which are exposed to low levels of shear ﬂow or to disturbed ﬂow . Bending of the Primary Cilium by Fluid Flow The deﬂection of a primary cilium such as that from kangaroo rat kidney epithelial cells shown in Figure 5 subjected to a uniform load perpendicular to the long axis of the vertical cilium is given by the equation d 2 ψ d s 2 + k 2 ( ψ ) = 0 , ( 1 ) where ψ is the tangent angle at a distance s along the cilium contour and k is a constant that depends on the stiffness of the cilium and the magnitude of the load ( i . e . , shear stress due to ﬂuid ﬂow ) . Equation 1 is solvable only by approximation and requires assumptions about the displacement of the cilium base . Assuming that the cilium is a uniform nonextensible cylindrical beam and that its base remains ﬁxed at the surfaceofthecell , theangle α towhichthetipoftheciliumbendsunderaloadperunit a 5 µm b c d Figure 5 Time sequence of the bending of a primary cilium in response to ﬂuid shear stress . Prior to ﬂow ( a ) , the cilium is vertical and is bent after imposition of low ( b ) and high ( c ) levels of shear ﬂow . The cilium regains its resting conformation after ﬂow is stopped ( d ) . Adapted with permission from Reference 174 . 20 Janmey · McCulloch A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 length w is given by a = w L 3 6 EI , ( 2 ) where L is the length of the cilium , E is its Young’s modulus , and I is the moment of inertia of the cylindrical cross section . The load per unit length w is related to the ﬂuid ﬂow as ( 173 ) w = 4 πρ v 2 d / Re [ 2 . 002 − ln ( Re ) ] , where ρ is the density of the ﬂuid , v is the velocity of the ﬂuid , d is the diameter of the cilium and Re is the Reynolds number , estimated to be very low ( < 2 × 10 − 5 ) under these conditions ( 174 ) . The diameter of the cilium depends on the cell type and the experimental conditions and is in the range of 0 . 12 – 0 . 44 micron ( 166 ) . The product EI deﬁnes the ﬂexural rigidity of the cilium , which has been experi - mentally determined to be 3 . 1 + / − 1 0 . 8 × 10 − 23 Nm 2 ( 174 ) for a bundle containing nine doublet microtubules . The rigidity of the primary cilium derived from image analysis in a ﬂow ﬁeld is surprisingly not much larger than the rigidity of a single microtubule , which is approximately 2 . 2 × 10 − 23 Nm 2 ( 175 ) . If these values are both correct , then either doublet microtubules are more ﬂexible than single microtubules or the primary cilium may have an active mechanism , perhaps involving microtubule motors , to allow greater ﬂexibility in the microtubule bundle than would be expected for the simultaneous bending of nine doublet microtubules . In principle , there are at least three mechanisms by which the primary cilium or any other long narrow protrusion can amplify forces to allow a cell to respond to very small stresses ( Figure 6 ) . One mechanism uses the long lever arm of a rigid protrusion to increase the force at the base of the cilium . Extending the cilium several microns above the cell surface below a ﬂuid velocity gradient places the tip in a region of the ﬂow ﬁeld with larger velocity , and therefore more load is put on the protrusion . If the cilium undergoes rigid body rotation , as suggested by some studies ( 176 ) , the force at the base of the cilium embedded within the cortical actin meshwork and associated protein complexes in the spindle pole body and other microtubule - bound proteins may experience large enough forces to produce strains , leading to polypeptide un - folding , release of domain - domain interactions , or other transformations that require stressesgreaterthanthosegeneratedsimplybytheﬂuidﬂowingoverasmoothsurface . A second mechanism is suggested by the ﬁnding that mechanosensitive ion chan - nels are found away from the base of the cilium at regions where the cilium bends . When a beam of ﬁnite diameter bends , the side facing the concave bend is com - pressed and the opposite , outer surface is stretched . Therefore , ion channels and the transmembrane proteins that regulate them can be subjected to membrane stresses sufﬁcient to activate them even if the rest of the cell membrane remains at rest ( 177 ) . A third mechanism does not require a speciﬁc force to be applied to deform the cil - ium , but rather relies on the large elastic extracellular domains of proteins such as polycystin 1 that might be directly affected by ﬂuid ﬂow . The role of the cilium then is to project the transmembrane protein away from the cell surface so that it senses a larger ﬂow ﬁeld , in a manner analogous to the proposed function of the primary www . annualreviews . org • Integrating Cell Responses to Mechanical Stimuli 21 A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 Figure 6 Schematic diagram of primary cilium and the mechanisms by which it may respond to shear stress . The resting cilium is approximately vertical and is bent by ﬂuid ﬂow above the surface of the cell . Embedded in the membrane of the cilium are transmembrane proteins including ion channels , such as polycystin - 2 , and regulatory proteins , such as polycystin - 1 , which are associated with the channel . Bending of the cilium can activate ion channel activity by mechanisms analogous to those by which other stretch - activated channels are regulated . Integrins localized to the distal end of the cilium may similarly be activated by deformations produced when the cilium is displaced . Alternatively , the bending of the cilium can amplify force transmitted to the base of the cilium embedded in the cell interior because of the rigidity of the microtubule core and deformation of proteins at the base of the cilium may transduce the mechanical signal . cilium as a chemical sensor that places chemical receptors away from the cell surface . The potential for the primary cilium to act as a force sensor may not be limited to ﬂuid shear stress , as integrins have recently been identiﬁed to localize to the primary cilia of chondrocytes and may therefore act in cell - matrix or cell - cell mechanosensing ( 178 ) . CONCLUSIONS A survey of recent studies shows that many factors , including but not limited to the cytoskeleton , determine the mechanical properties of the cell . The strain - stiffening 22 Janmey · McCulloch A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 nature of the cytoskeleton allows for stress - dependent cell stiffening and reinforce - ment of cell rigidity at points where mechanical forces are applied . The magnitude of elastic moduli of a variety of cell types have been measured , and as the experimental systems and methods to derive elastic moduli from force - displacement measurements improve , the range of elastic moduli reported by different methods appears to be con - verging to the range of 100 to 10 , 000 Pa for measurements made at modest strains for periods of seconds . At the same time , it is also clear that cell stiffness is a het - erogeneous parameter that varies spatially and temporally as cells respond to their environment . The mechanical features of cells allow them to respond to a range of physical forces , and quantitative measures of the magnitudes of force required for cell activation and the elastic moduli of the cells that respond will help elucidate mechanisms of mechanotransduction that regulate many aspects of cell function . SUMMARY POINTS 1 . Single cell measurements typically yield values in the range of 100 to 10 , 000 Pa for cell elastic moduli . 2 . Cell stiffness increases as cells develop internal tension . 3 . Cell - cell contacts are as important as cell - matrix interfaces as sites of mechanotransduction . 4 . Elongated structures , such as the glycocalyx and the primary cilium , may enable cells to sense the small stresses generated by ﬂuid ﬂow . 5 . The time - dependence of cell rheology reveals features that differ from those of isotropic biopolymer gels . DISCLOSURE STATEMENT The authors are not aware of any biases that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review . LITERATURE CITED 1 . Roesel von Rosenhof AJ . 1744 . Der kleine Proteus . Der Insecten - Belustigung . Nurenberg 3 : 622 – 24 2 . Heilbrunn L . 1956 . The Dynamics of Living Protoplasm . New York : Academic . 327 pp . 3 . Freundlich H , Seifriz W . 1922 . Ueber die elastizit¨at der Solen und Gelen . Zeitschr . Phys . Chem . 104 : 233 4 . Seifriz W . 1923 . An elastic value of protoplasm , with further observations on the viscosity of protoplasm . J . Exp . Biol . 2 : 1 – 11 5 . Stossel TP . 1993 . On the crawling of animal cells . Science 260 : 1086 – 94 6 . Vogel V , Sheetz M . 2006 . Local force and geometry sensing regulate cell func - tions . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 : 265 – 75 www . annualreviews . org • Integrating Cell Responses to Mechanical Stimuli 23 A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 7 . BershadskyA , KozlovM , GeigerB . 2006 . Adhesion - mediatedmechanosensitiv - ity : a time to experiment , and a time to theorize . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 : 472 – 81 8 . Lieber SC , Aubry N , Pain J , Diaz G , Kim SJ , Vatner SF . 2004 . Aging increases stiffness of cardiac myocytes measured by atomic force microscopy nanoinden - tation . Am . J . Physiol . Heart Circ . Physiol . 287 : H645 – 51 9 . Levental I , Georges PC , Janmey PA . 2007 . Soft biological materials and their impact on cell function . Soft Matter 1 : 299 – 306 10 . Janmey PA , Euteneuer U , Traub P , Schliwa M . 1991 . Viscoelastic properties of vimentin compared with other ﬁlamentous biopolymer networks . J . Cell Biol . 113 : 155 – 60 11 . Takai E , Landesberg R , Katz RW , Hung CT , Guo XE . 2006 . Substrate mod - ulation of osteoblast adhesion strength , focal adhesion kinase activation , and responsiveness to mechanical stimuli . Mol . Cell Biomech . 3 : 1 – 12 12 . Trickey WR , Vail TP , Guilak F . 2004 . The role of the cytoskeleton in the viscoelastic properties of human articular chondrocytes . J . Orthop . Res . 22 : 131 – 39 13 . Costa KD , Sim AJ , Yin FC . 2006 . Non - Hertzian approach to analyzing me - chanical properties of endothelial cells probed by atomic force microscopy . J . Biomech . Eng . 128 : 176 – 84 14 . Wachsstock DH , Schwartz WH , Pollard TD . 1993 . Afﬁnity of alpha - actinin for actin determines the structure and mechanical properties of actin ﬁlament gels . Biophys . J . 65 : 205 – 14 15 . Gardel ML , Nakamura F , Hartwig JH , Crocker JC , Stossel TP , Weitz DA . 2006 . Prestressed F - actin networks cross - linked by hinged ﬁlamins replicate mechanical properties of cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 : 1762 – 67 16 . Janmey PA , Hvidt S , Lamb J , Stossel TP . 1990 . Resemblance of actin - binding protein / actin gels to covalently crosslinked networks . Nature 345 : 89 – 92 17 . MacKintosh FC , K¨as J , Janmey PA . 1995 . Elasticity of semiﬂexible biopolymer networks . Phys . Rev . Lett . 75 : 4425 – 28 18 . Mast SO . 1923 . Mechanics of locomotion in Amoeba . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 9 : 258 – 61 19 . Humphrey D , Duggan C , Saha D , Smith D , Kas J . 2002 . Active ﬂuidization of polymer networks through molecular motors . Nature 416 : 413 – 16 20 . Guck J , Schinkinger S , Lincoln B , Wottawah F , Ebert S , et al . 2005 . Optical deformability as an inherent cell marker for testing malignant transformation and metastatic competence . Biophys . J . 88 : 3689 – 98 21 . Fernandez P , Pullarkat PA , Ott A . 2006 . A master relation deﬁnes the nonlinear viscoelasticity of single ﬁbroblasts . Biophys . J . 90 : 3796 – 805 22 . Kaibara M , Fukada E . 1970 . Dynamic viscoelastic study for the structure of ﬁbrin networks in the clots of blood and plasma . Biorheology 6 : 329 – 39 23 . Roberts WW , Kramer O , Rosser RW , Nestler FH , Ferry JD . 1974 . Rheology of ﬁbrin clots . I . Dynamic viscoelastic properties and ﬂuid permeation . Biophys . Chem . 1 : 152 – 60 24 . Ryan EA , Mockros LF , Weisel JW , Lorand L . 1999 . Structural origins of ﬁbrin clot rheology . Biophys . J . 77 : 2813 – 26 24 Janmey · McCulloch A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 25 . Shah JV , Janmey PA . 1997 . Strain hardening of ﬁbrin gels and plasma clots . Rheol . Acta 36 : 262 – 68 26 . Djabourov M , Lechaire JP , Gaill F . 1993 . Structure and rheology of gelatin and collagen gels . Biorheology 30 : 191 – 205 27 . Morse DC . 2001 . Tube diameter in tightly entangled solutions of semiﬂexible polymers . Phys . Rev . E Stat . Nonlin . Soft Matter Phys . 63 : 031502 28 . Storm C , Pastore JJ , MacKintosh FC , Lubensky TC , Janmey PA . 2005 . Non - linear elasticity in biological gels . Nature 435 : 191 – 94 29 . Dorrington KL , McCrum NG . 1977 . Elastin as a rubber . Biopolymers 16 : 1201 – 22 30 . Gosline J , Lillie M , Carrington E , Guerette P , Ortlepp C , Savage K . 2002 . Elastic proteins : biological roles and mechanical properties . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . London B Biol . Sci . 357 : 121 – 32 31 . Onck PR , Koeman T , van Dillen T , van der Giessen E . 2005 . Alternative ex - planation of stiffening in cross - linked semiﬂexible networks . Phys . Rev . Lett . 95 : 178102 32 . dos Remedios CG , Chhabra D , Kekic M , Dedova IV , Tsubakihara M , et al . 2003 . Actin binding proteins : regulation of cytoskeletal microﬁlaments . Physiol . Rev . 83 : 433 – 73 33 . Winder SJ , Ayscough KR . 2005 . Actin - binding proteins . J . Cell Sci . 118 : 651 – 54 34 . Keller M , Tharmann R , Dichtl MA , Bausch AR , Sackmann E . 2003 . Slow ﬁla - ment dynamics and viscoelasticity in entangled and active actin networks . Philos . Trans . A Math . Phys . Eng . Sci . 361 : 699 – 711 ; discuss . 712 35 . Kruse K , Joanny JF , Julicher F , Prost J , Sekimoto K . 2005 . Generic theory of active polar gels : a paradigm for cytoskeletal dynamics . Eur . Phys . J . E Soft Matter 16 : 5 – 16 36 . Voituriez R , Joanny JF , Prost J . 2006 . Generic phase diagram of active polar ﬁlms . Phys . Rev . Lett . 96 : 028102 37 . Pourati J , Maniotis A , Spiegel D , Schaffer JL , Butler JP , et al . 1998 . Is cytoskele - tal tension a major determinant of cell deformability in adherent endothelial cells ? Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 274 : C1283 – 89 38 . Smith BA , Tolloczko B , Martin JG , Grutter P . 2005 . Probing the viscoelastic behavior of cultured airway smooth muscle cells with atomic force microscopy : stiffening induced by contractile agonist . Biophys . J . 88 : 2994 – 3007 39 . Trepat X , Grabulosa M , Buscemi L , Rico F , Farre R , Navajas D . 2005 . Throm - bin and histamine induce stiffening of alveolar epithelial cells . J . Appl . Physiol . 98 : 1567 – 74 40 . Trepat X , Grabulosa M , Puig F , Maksym GN , Navajas D , Farre R . 2004 . Vis - coelasticity of human alveolar epithelial cells subjected to stretch . Am . J . Physiol . Lung Cell Mol . Physiol . 287 : L1025 – 34 41 . Wang N , Stamenovic D . 2000 . Contribution of intermediate ﬁlaments to cell stiffness , stiffening , and growth . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 279 : C188 – 94 42 . Lau AW , Hoffman BD , Davies A , Crocker JC , Lubensky TC . 2003 . Microrhe - ology , stress ﬂuctuations , and active behavior of living cells . Phys . Rev . Lett . 91 : 198101 www . annualreviews . org • Integrating Cell Responses to Mechanical Stimuli 25 A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 43 . Heilbrunn LV . 1924 . The colloid chemistry of protoplasm : IV . The heat coag - ulation of protoplasm . Am . J . Physiol . 69 : 190 – 99 44 . Hoffman BD , Massiera G , Van Citters KM , Crocker JC . 2006 . The consensus mechanicsofculturedmammaliancells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 : 10259 – 64 45 . Lim CT , Zhou EH , Quek ST . 2006 . Mechanical models for living cells—a review . J . Biomech . 39 : 195 – 216 46 . Alcaraz J , Buscemi L , Grabulosa M , Trepat X , Fabry B , et al . 2003 . Microrheol - ogyofhumanlungepithelialcellsmeasuredbyatomicforcemicroscopy . Biophys . J . 84 : 2071 – 79 47 . Fabry B , Maksym GN , Butler JP , Glogauer M , Navajas D , et al . 2003 . Time scale and other invariants of integrative mechanical behavior in living cells . Phys . Rev . E Stat . Nonlin . Soft Matter Phys . 68 : 041914 48 . Puig - de - Morales M , Millet E , Fabry B , Navajas D , Wang N , et al . 2004 . Cy - toskeletal mechanics in adherent human airway smooth muscle cells : probe speciﬁcity and scaling of protein - protein dynamics . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 287 : C643 – 54 49 . Stamenovic D , Suki B , Fabry B , Wang N , Fredberg JJ . 2004 . Rheology of airway smooth muscle cells is associated with cytoskeletal contractile stress . J . Appl . Physiol . 96 : 1600 – 5 50 . LaudadioRE , MilletEJ , FabryB , AnSS , ButlerJP , FredbergJJ . 2005 . Ratairway smooth muscle cell during actin modulation : rheology and glassy dynamics . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 289 : C1388 – 95 51 . Deng L , Trepat X , Butler JP , Millet E , Morgan KG , et al . 2006 . Fast and slow dynamics of the cytoskeleton . Nat . Mater . 5 : 636 – 40 52 . Tzima E , Irani - Tehrani M , Kiosses WB , Dejana E , Schultz DA , et al . 2005 . A mechanosensory complex that mediates the endothelial cell response to ﬂuid shear stress . Nature 437 : 426 – 31 53 . Perez - Tamayo R . 1978 . Pathology of collagen degradation . A review . Am . J . Pathol . 92 : 508 – 66 54 . Provenzano PP , Vanderby RJ . 2006 . Collagen ﬁbril morphology and organiza - tion : implications for force transmission in ligament and tendon . Matrix Biol . 25 : 71 – 84 55 . Warden SJ , Hurst JA , Sanders MS , Turner CH , Burr DB , Li J . 2005 . Bone adap - tation to a mechanical loading program signiﬁcantly increases skeletal fatigue resistance . J . Bone Miner . Res . 20 : 809 – 16 56 . Ozaki S , Kaneko S , Podyma - Inoue KA , Yanagishita M , Soma K . 2005 . Mod - ulation of extracellular matrix synthesis and alkaline phosphatase activity of periodontal ligament cells by mechanical stress . J . Periodontal . Res . 40 : 110 – 17 57 . Hinz B , Gabbiani G . 2003 . Mechanisms of force generation and transmission by myoﬁbroblasts . Curr . Opin . Biotechnol . 14 : 538 – 46 58 . Kessler D , Dethlefsen S , Haase I , Plomann M , Hirche F , et al . 2001 . Fibroblasts inmechanicallystressedcollagenlatticesassumea“synthetic”phenotype . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 36575 – 85 59 . Mudera VC , Pleass R , Eastwood M , Tarnuzzer R , Schultz G , et al . 2000 . Molec - ular responses of human dermal ﬁbroblasts to dual cues : contact guidance and mechanical load . Cell Motil . Cytoskel . 45 : 1 – 9 26 Janmey · McCulloch A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 60 . Ingber DE . 2003 . Tensegrity II . How structural networks inﬂuence cellular information processing networks . J . Cell Sci . 116 : 1397 – 408 61 . Hinz B . 2006 . Masters and servants of the force : the role of matrix adhesions in myoﬁbroblast force perception and transmission . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 85 : 175 – 81 62 . D’Addario M , Arora PD , Ellen RP , McCulloch CA . 2002 . Interaction of p38 and Sp1 in a mechanical force - induced , beta 1 integrin - mediated transcrip - tional circuit that regulates the actin - binding protein ﬁlamin - A . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 47541 – 50 63 . Ko KS , Arora PD , McCulloch CA . 2001 . Cadherins mediate intercellular mechanical signaling in ﬁbroblasts by activation of stretch - sensitive calcium - permeable channels . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 35967 – 77 64 . Linask KK , Manisastry S , Han M . 2005 . Cross talk between cell - cell and cell - matrix adhesion signaling pathways during heart organogenesis : implications for cardiac birth defects . Microsc . Microanal . 11 : 200 – 8 65 . Potard US , Butler JP , Wang N . 1997 . Cytoskeletal mechanics in conﬂuent epithelial cells probed through integrins and E - cadherins . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 272 : C1654 – 63 66 . Huang S , Ingber DE . 1999 . The structural and mechanical complexity of cell - growth control . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 : E131 – 38 67 . Schwartz MA , Assoian RK . 2001 . Integrins and cell proliferation : regulation of cyclin - dependent kinases via cytoplasmic signaling pathways . J . Cell Sci . 114 : 2553 – 60 68 . Schoenwaelder SM , Burridge K . 1999 . Bidirectional signaling between the cy - toskeleton and integrins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 11 : 274 – 86 69 . Galbraith CG , Yamada KM , Sheetz MP . 2002 . The relationship between force and focal complex development . J . Cell Biol . 159 : 695 – 705 70 . Pelham RJJ , Wang Y . 1997 . Cell locomotion and focal adhesions are regulated by substrate ﬂexibility . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 : 13661 – 65 71 . Katsumi A , Orr AW , Tzima E , Schwartz MA . 2004 . Integrins in mechanotrans - duction . J . Biol . Chem . 279 : 12001 – 4 72 . Heidemann SR , Wirtz D . 2004 . Towards a regional approach to cell mechanics . Trends Cell Biol . 14 : 160 – 66 73 . Bershadsky AD , Balaban NQ , Geiger B . 2003 . Adhesion - dependent cell mechanosensitivity . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 : 677 – 95 74 . Hu S , Chen J , Fabry B , Numaguchi Y , Gouldstone A , et al . 2003 . Intracellular stress tomography reveals stress focusing and structural anisotropy in cytoskele - ton of living cells . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 285 : C1082 – 90 75 . BeertsenW , EvertsV . 1980 . Junctionsbetweenﬁbroblastsinmouseperiodontal ligament . J . Periodontal . Res . 15 : 655 – 68 76 . Ko KS , McCulloch CA . 2001 . Intercellular mechanotransduction : cellular cir - cuits that coordinate tissue responses to mechanical loading . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 285 : 1077 – 83 77 . Luo Y , Radice GL . 2003 . Cadherin - mediated adhesion is essential for myoﬁbril continuity across the plasma membrane but not for assembly of the contractile apparatus . J . Cell Sci . 116 : 1471 – 79 www . annualreviews . org • Integrating Cell Responses to Mechanical Stimuli 27 A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 78 . Shore RC , Berkovitz BK , Moxham BJ . 1981 . Intercellular contacts between ﬁbroblasts in the periodontal connective tissues of the rat . J . Anat . 133 : 67 – 76 79 . Hinz B , Gabbiani G . 2003 . Cell - matrix and cell - cell contacts of myoﬁbroblasts : role in connective tissue remodeling . Thromb . Haemost . 90 : 993 – 1002 80 . Hinz B , Pittet P , Smith - Clerc J , Chaponnier C , Meister JJ . 2004 . Myoﬁbroblast development is characterized by speciﬁc cell - cell adherens junctions . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 : 4310 – 20 81 . Tomasek JJ , Gabbiani G , Hinz B , Chaponnier C , Brown RA . 2002 . Myoﬁbrob - lasts and mechano - regulation of connective tissue remodelling . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 3 : 349 – 63 82 . Ko K , Arora P , Lee W , McCulloch C . 2000 . Biochemical and functional char - acterization of intercellular adhesion and gap junctions in ﬁbroblasts . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 279 : C147 – 57 83 . Heaysman JE , Pegrum SM . 1973 . Early contacts between ﬁbroblasts . An ultra - structural study . Exp . Cell Res . 78 : 71 – 78 84 . Akitaya T , Bronner - Fraser M . 1992 . Expression of cell adhesion molecules during initiation and cessation of neural crest cell migration . Dev . Dyn . 194 : 12 – 20 85 . Bronner - Fraser M , Wolf JJ , Murray BA . 1992 . Effects of antibodies against N - cadherin and N - CAM on the cranial neural crest and neural tube . Dev . Biol . 153 : 291 – 301 86 . Huttenlocher A , Lakonishok M , Kinder M , Wu S , Truong T , et al . 1998 . Inte - grin and cadherin synergy regulates contact inhibition of migration and motile activity . J . Cell Biol . 141 : 515 – 26 87 . De Wever O , Westbroek W , Verloes A , Bloemen N , Bracke M , et al . 2004 . Critical role of N - cadherin in myoﬁbroblast invasion and migration in vitro stimulated by colon - cancer - cell - derived TGF - beta or wounding . J . Cell Sci . 117 : 4691 – 703 88 . Garcia - Castro MI , Vielmetter E , Bronner - Fraser M . 2000 . N - cadherin , a cell adhesion molecule involved in establishment of embryonic left - right asymme - try . Science 288 : 1047 – 51 89 . Radice GL , Rayburn H , Matsunami H , Knudsen KA , Takeichi M , Hynes RO . 1997 . Developmental defects in mouse embryos lacking N - cadherin . Dev . Biol . 181 : 64 – 78 90 . Okamura K , Tanaka H , Yagita Y , Saeki Y , Taguchi A , et al . 2004 . Cadherin activity is required for activity - induced spine remodeling . J . Cell Biol . 167 : 961 – 72 91 . Yu X , Malenka RC . 2003 . Beta - catenin is critical for dendritic morphogenesis . Nat . Neurosci . 6 : 1169 – 77 92 . Uchida N , Honjo Y , Johnson KR , Wheelock MJ , Takeichi M . 1996 . The catenin / cadherin adhesion system is localized in synaptic junctions bordering transmitter release zones . J . Cell Biol . 135 : 767 – 79 93 . BamjiSX . 2005 . Cadherins : actinwiththecytoskeletontoformsynapses . Neuron 47 : 175 – 78 94 . Goichberg P , Geiger B . 1998 . Direct involvement of N - cadherin - mediated signaling in muscle differentiation . Mol . Biol . Cell 9 : 3119 – 31 28 Janmey · McCulloch A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 95 . Redﬁeld A , Nieman MT , Knudsen KA . 1997 . Cadherins promote skeletal mus - cle differentiation in three - dimensional cultures . J . Cell Biol . 138 : 1323 – 31 96 . George - Weinstein M , Gerhart J , Blitz J , Simak E , Knudsen KA . 1997 . N - cadherin promotes the commitment and differentiation of skeletal muscle pre - cursor cells . Dev . Biol . 185 : 14 – 24 97 . Mege RM , Goudou D , Diaz C , Nicolet M , Garcia L , et al . 1992 . N - cadherin and N - CAM in myoblast fusion : compared localisation and effect of blockade by peptides and antibodies . J . Cell Sci . 103 ( Pt . 4 ) : 897 – 906 98 . Castro CH , Shin CS , Stains JP , Cheng SL , Sheikh S , et al . 2004 . Targeted expression of a dominant - negative N - cadherin in vivo delays peak bone mass and increases adipogenesis . J . Cell Sci . 117 : 2853 – 64 99 . ChengSL , ShinCS , TowlerDA , CivitelliR . 2000 . Adominantnegativecadherin inhibits osteoblast differentiation . J . Bone Miner . Res . 15 : 2362 – 70 100 . Lemonnier J , Hay E , Delannoy P , Lomri A , Modrowski D , et al . 2001 . Role of N - cadherin and protein kinase C in osteoblast gene activation induced by the S252W ﬁbroblast growth factor receptor 2 mutation in Apert craniosynostosis . J . Bone Miner . Res . 16 : 832 – 45 101 . Haas AR , Tuan RS . 1999 . Chondrogenic differentiation of murine C3H10T1 / 2 multipotential mesenchymal cells : II . Stimulation by bone morphogenetic protein - 2 requires modulation of N - cadherin expression and function . Differ - entiation 64 : 77 – 89 102 . Oberlender SA , Tuan RS . 1994 . Spatiotemporal proﬁle of N - cadherin expres - sion in the developing limb mesenchyme . Cell Adhes . Commun . 2 : 521 – 37 103 . Tuli R , Tuli S , Nandi S , Huang X , Manner PA , et al . 2003 . Transforming growth factor - beta - mediated chondrogenesis of human mesenchymal progenitor cells involves N - cadherin and mitogen - activated protein kinase and Wnt signaling cross - talk . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 41227 – 36 104 . Luo Y , Radice GL . 2005 . N - cadherin acts upstream of VE - cadherin in control - ling vascular morphogenesis . J . Cell Biol . 169 : 29 – 34 105 . Yano H , Mazaki Y , Kurokawa K , Hanks SK , Matsuda M , Sabe H . 2004 . Roles played by a subset of integrin signaling molecules in cadherin - based cell - cell adhesion . J . Cell Biol . 166 : 283 – 95 106 . Sander EE , van Delft S , ten Klooster JP , Reid T , van der Kammen RA , et al . 1998 . Matrix - dependent Tiam1 / Rac signaling in epithelial cells promotes either cell - cell adhesion or cell migration and is regulated by phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase . J . Cell Biol . 143 : 1385 – 98 107 . Clark P . 1994 . Modulation of scatter factor / hepatocyte growth factor activity by cell - substratum adhesion . J . Cell Sci . 107 ( Pt . 5 ) : 1265 – 75 108 . Kawano K , Kantak SS , Murai M , Yao CC , Kramer RH . 2001 . Integrin al - pha3beta1 engagement disrupts intercellular adhesion . Exp . Cell Res . 262 : 180 – 96 109 . Marsden M , DeSimone DW . 2003 . Integrin - ECM interactions regulate cadherin - dependent cell adhesion and are required for convergent extension in Xenopus . Curr . Biol . 13 : 1182 – 91 110 . Sakai T , Larsen M , Yamada KM . 2003 . Fibronectin requirement in branching morphogenesis . Nature 423 : 876 – 81 www . annualreviews . org • Integrating Cell Responses to Mechanical Stimuli 29 A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 111 . Gimond C , van Der Flier A , van Delft S , Brakebusch C , Kuikman I , et al . 1999 . Induction of cell scattering by expression of beta1 integrins in beta1 - deﬁcient epithelial cells requires activation of members of the rho family of GTPases and downregulation of cadherin and catenin function . J . Cell Biol . 147 : 1325 – 40 112 . Tavernarakis N , Driscoll M . 2001 . Mechanotransduction in Caenorhabditis ele - gans : the role of DEG / ENaC ion channels . Cell Biochem . Biophys . 35 : 1 – 18 113 . Alenghat FJ , Ingber DE . 2002 . Mechanotransduction : all signals point to cy - toskeleton , matrix , and integrins . Sci . STKE 2002 : PE6 114 . Morris CE . 1990 . Mechanosensitive ion channels . J . Membr . Biol . 113 : 93 – 107 115 . Doyle AD , Lee J . 2005 . Cyclic changes in keratocyte speed and traction stress arise from Ca2 + - dependent regulation of cell adhesiveness . J . Cell Sci . 118 : 369 – 79 116 . Lee J , Ishihara A , Oxford G , Johnson B , Jacobson K . 1999 . Regulation of cell movement is mediated by stretch - activated calcium channels . Nature 400 : 382 – 86 117 . Ko KS , Arora PD , Bhide V , Chen A , McCulloch CA . 2001 . Cell - cell adhesion in human ﬁbroblasts requires calcium signaling . J . Cell Sci . 114 : 1155 – 67 118 . Martinac B . 2004 . Mechanosensitive ion channels : molecules of mechanotrans - duction . J . Cell Sci . 117 : 2449 – 60 119 . AroraPD , McCullochCA . 1994 . Dependenceofcollagenremodellingonalpha - smooth muscle actin expression by ﬁbroblasts . J . Cell Physiol . 159 : 161 – 75 120 . Shumilina EV , Negulyaev YA , Morachevskaya EA , Hinssen H , Khaitlina SY . 2003 . Regulation of sodium channel activity by capping of actin ﬁlaments . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 : 1709 – 16 121 . Sukharev SI , Blount P , Martinac B , Kung C . 1997 . Mechanosensitive channels of Escherichia coli : the MscL gene , protein , and activities . Annu . Rev . Physiol . 59 : 633 – 57 122 . Li J , Duncan RL , Burr DB , Turner CH . 2002 . L - type calcium channels mediate mechanically induced bone formation in vivo . J . Bone Miner . Res . 17 : 1795 – 800 123 . Minke B , Cook B . 2002 . TRP channel proteins and signal transduction . Physiol . Rev . 82 : 429 – 72 124 . Maroto R , Raso A , Wood TG , Kurosky A , Martinac B , Hamill OP . 2005 . TRPC1 forms the stretch - activated cation channel in vertebrate cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 : 179 – 85 125 . Haut Donahue TL , Genetos DC , Jacobs CR , Donahue HJ , Yellowley CE . 2004 . Annexin V disruption impairs mechanically induced calcium signaling in osteoblastic cells . Bone 35 : 656 – 63 126 . Mikuni - Takagaki Y . 1999 . Mechanical responses and signal transduction path - ways in stretched osteocytes . J . Bone Miner . Metab . 17 : 57 – 60 127 . Lee HS , Millward - Sadler SJ , Wright MO , Nuki G , Salter DM . 2000 . Integrin and mechanosensitive ion channel - dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of fo - cal adhesion proteins and beta - catenin in human articular chondrocytes after mechanical stimulation . J . Bone Miner . Res . 15 : 1501 – 9 128 . Mobasheri A , Carter SD , Martin - Vasallo P , Shakibaei M . 2002 . Integrins and stretch activated ion channels ; putative components of functional cell surface mechanoreceptors in articular chondrocytes . Cell Biol . Int . 26 : 1 – 18 30 Janmey · McCulloch A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 129 . Stokes AJ , Shimoda LM , Koblan - Huberson M , Adra CN , Turner H . 2004 . A TRPV2 - PKA signaling module for transduction of physical stimuli in mast cells . J . Exp . Med . 200 : 137 – 47 130 . Lammerding J , Kamm RD , Lee RT . 2004 . Mechanotransduction in cardiac myocytes . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 1015 : 53 – 70 131 . Nilius B , Droogmans G , Wondergem R . 2003 . Transient receptor potential channels in endothelium : solving the calcium entry puzzle ? Endothelium 10 : 5 – 15 132 . Davis MJ , Wu X , Nurkiewicz TR , Kawasaki J , Davis GE , et al . 2001 . Integrins and mechanotransduction of the vascular myogenic response . Am . J . Physiol . Heart Circ . Physiol . 280 : H1427 – 33 133 . Wu X , Mogford JE , Platts SH , Davis GE , Meininger GA , Davis MJ . 1998 . Modulation of calcium current in arteriolar smooth muscle by alphav beta3 and alpha5 beta1 integrin ligands . J . Cell Biol . 143 : 241 – 52 134 . Sauer H , Hescheler J , Wartenberg M . 2000 . Mechanical strain - induced Ca ( 2 + ) waves are propagated via ATP release and purinergic receptor activation . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 279 : C295 – 307 135 . Romanello M , D’Andrea P . 2001 . Dual mechanism of intercellular communi - cation in HOBIT osteoblastic cells : a role for gap - junctional hemichannels . J . Bone Miner . Res . 16 : 1465 – 76 136 . Genetos DC , Geist DJ , Liu D , Donahue HJ , Duncan RL . 2005 . Fluid shear - induced ATP secretion mediates prostaglandin release in MC3T3 - E1 os - teoblasts . J . Bone Miner . Res . 20 : 41 – 49 137 . Boudreault F , Grygorczyk R . 2004 . Cell swelling - induced ATP release is tightly dependent on intracellular calcium elevations . J . Physiol . 561 : 499 – 513 138 . Niggel J , Sigurdson W , Sachs F . 2000 . Mechanically induced calcium move - mentsinastrocytes , bovineaorticendothelialcellsandC6gliomacells . J . Membr . Biol . 174 : 121 – 34 139 . Hamill OP , Martinac B . 2001 . Molecular basis of mechanotransduction in living cells . Physiol . Rev . 81 : 685 – 740 140 . Wang Q , Downey GP , Herrera - Abreu MT , Kapus A , McCulloch CA . 2005 . SHP - 2 modulates interleukin - 1 - induced Ca2 + ﬂux and ERK activation via phosphorylation of phospholipase Cgamma1 . J . Biol . Chem . 280 : 8397 – 406 141 . Wang Q , Herrera Abreu MT , Siminovitch K , Downey GP , McCulloch CA . 2006 . Phosphorylation of SHP - 2 regulates interactions between the endoplas - mic reticulum and focal adhesions to restrict IL - 1 - induced Ca2 + signaling . J . Biol . Chem . 281 : 31093 – 105 142 . Glogauer M , Arora P , Chou D , Janmey PA , Downey GP , McCulloch CA . 1998 . The role of actin - binding protein 280 in integrin - dependent mechanoprotec - tion . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 1689 – 98 143 . Glogauer M , Arora P , Yao G , Sokholov I , Ferrier J , McCulloch CA . 1997 . Calcium ions and tyrosine phosphorylation interact coordinately with actin to regulate cytoprotective responses to stretching . J . Cell Sci . 110 ( Pt . 1 ) : 11 – 21 144 . von Wichert G , Haimovich B , Feng GS , Sheetz MP . 2003 . Force - dependent integrin - cytoskeleton linkage formation requires downregulation of focal com - plex dynamics by Shp2 . EMBO J . 22 : 5023 – 35 www . annualreviews . org • Integrating Cell Responses to Mechanical Stimuli 31 A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 145 . Karcher H , Lammerding J , Huang H , Lee RT , Kamm RD , Kaazempur - Mofrad MR . 2003 . A three - dimensional viscoelastic model for cell deformation with experimental veriﬁcation . Biophys . J . 85 : 3336 – 49 146 . Helmke BP , Rosen AB , Davies PF . 2003 . Mapping mechanical strain of an endogenous cytoskeletal network in living endothelial cells . Biophys . J . 84 : 2691 – 99 147 . HuS , WangN . 2006 . Controlofstresspropagationinthecytoplasmbyprestress and loading frequency . Mol . Cell Biomech . 3 : 49 – 60 148 . Ingber DE . 2006 . Cellular mechanotransduction : putting all the pieces together again . FASEB J . 20 : 811 – 27 149 . HeadDA , LevineAJ , MacKintoshFC . 2003 . Distinctregimesofelasticresponse and deformation modes of cross - linked cytoskeletal and semiﬂexible polymer networks . Phys . Rev . E Stat . Nonlin . Soft Matter Phys . 68 : 061907 150 . Chandran PL , Barocas VH . 2006 . Afﬁne versus nonafﬁne ﬁbril kinematics in collagen networks : theoretical studies of network behavior . J . Biomech . Eng . 128 : 259 – 70 151 . Satcher RLJ , Dewey CFJ . 1996 . Theoretical estimates of mechanical properties of the endothelial cell cytoskeleton . Biophys . J . 71 : 109 – 18 152 . Davies PF , Mundel T , Barbee KA . 1995 . A mechanism for heterogeneous en - dothelial responses to ﬂow in vivo and in vitro . J . Biomech . 28 : 1553 – 60 153 . Davies PF , Spaan JA , Krams R . 2005 . Shear stress biology of the endothelium . Ann . Biomed . Eng . 33 : 1714 – 18 154 . Helmke BP , Davies PF . 2002 . The cytoskeleton under external ﬂuid mechan - ical forces : hemodynamic forces acting on the endothelium . Ann . Biomed . Eng . 30 : 284 – 96 155 . Li YS , Haga JH , Chien S . 2005 . Molecular basis of the effects of shear stress on vascular endothelial cells . J . Biomech . 38 : 1949 – 71 156 . Florian JA , Kosky JR , Ainslie K , Pang Z , Dull RO , Tarbell JM . 2003 . Heparan sulfate proteoglycan is a mechanosensor on endothelial cells . Circ . Res . 93 : e136 - 42 157 . Nauli SM , Zhou J . 2004 . Polycystins and mechanosensation in renal and nodal cilia . Bioessays 26 : 844 – 56 158 . Praetorius HA , Spring KR . 2005 . A physiological view of the primary cilium . Annu . Rev . Physiol . 67 : 515 – 29 159 . Singla V , Reiter JF . 2006 . The primary cilium as the cell’s antenna : signaling at a sensory organelle . Science 313 : 629 – 33 160 . Whitﬁeld JF . 2003 . Primary cilium—is it an osteocyte’s strain - sensing ﬂowme - ter ? J . Cell Biochem . 89 : 233 – 37 161 . Pazour GJ , Witman GB . 2003 . The vertebrate primary cilium is a sensory organelle . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 : 105 – 10 162 . Wheatley DN . 2005 . Landmarks in the ﬁrst hundred years of primary ( 9 + 0 ) cilium research . Cell Biol . Int . 29 : 333 – 39 163 . Weinbaum S , Guo P , You L . 2001 . A new view of mechanotransduction and strainampliﬁcationincellswithmicrovilliandcellprocesses . Biorheology 38 : 119 – 42 32 Janmey · McCulloch A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 164 . Doughty MJ . 1998 . Changes in cell surface primary cilia and microvilli concur - rent with measurements of ﬂuid ﬂow across the rabbit corneal endothelium ex vivo . Tiss . Cell 30 : 634 – 43 165 . Huang BQ , Masyuk TV , Muff MA , Tietz PS , Masyuk AI , Larusso NF . 2006 . Isolation and characterization of cholangiocyte primary cilia . Am . J . Physiol . Gastrointest . Liver Physiol . 291 : G500 – 9 166 . Collin SP , Barry Collin H . 2004 . Primary cilia in vertebrate corneal endothelial cells . Cell Biol . Int . 28 : 125 – 30 167 . Gallagher BC . 1980 . Primary cilia of the corneal endothelium . Am . J . Anat . 159 : 475 – 84 168 . Bystrevskaia VB , Antonov AS , Perov NA . 1987 . Primary cilium in the endothe - lial cells of the human aorta . Dokl . Akad . Nauk . SSSR 297 : 1233 – 36 169 . Iomini C , Tejada K , Mo W , Vaananen H , Piperno G . 2004 . Primary cilia of human endothelial cells disassemble under laminar shear stress . J . Cell Biol . 164 : 811 – 17 170 . Van der Heiden K , Groenendijk BC , Hierck BP , Hogers B , Koerten HK , et al . 2006 . Monocilia on chicken embryonic endocardium in low shear stress areas . Dev . Dyn . 235 : 19 – 28 171 . Haust MD . 1987 . Endothelial cilia in human aortic atherosclerotic lesions . Vir - chow ? Arch . A Pathol . Anat . Histopathol . 410 : 317 – 26 172 . Tobe K , Tsuchiya T , Itoshima T , Nagashima H , Kobayashi T . 1985 . Electron microscopy of fat - storing cells in liver diseases with special reference to cilia and cytoplasmic cholesterol crystals . Arch . Histol . Jpn . 48 : 435 – 41 173 . Tritton DJ . 1977 . Physical Fluid Mechanics . New York : Van Nostrand Reinhold 174 . Schwartz EA , Leonard ML , Bizios R , Bowser SS . 1997 . Analysis and modeling of the primary cilium bending response to ﬂuid shear . Am . J . Physiol . Renal Physiol . 272 : F132 – 38 175 . Gittes F , Mickey B , Nettleton J , Howard J . 1993 . Flexural rigidity of micro - tubules and actin ﬁlaments measured from thermal ﬂuctuations in shape . J . Cell Biol . 120 : 923 – 34 176 . Liu W , Xu S , Woda C , Kim P , Weinbaum S , Satlin LM . 2003 . Effect of ﬂow and stretch on the [ Ca2 + ] i response of principal and intercalated cells in cortical collecting duct . Am . J . Physiol . Renal Physiol . 285 : F998 – 1012 177 . PraetoriusHA , FrokiaerJ , NielsenS , SpringKR . 2003 . Bendingtheprimarycil - ium opens Ca2 + - sensitive intermediate - conductance K + channels in MDCK cells . J . Membr . Biol . 191 : 193 – 200 178 . McGlashan SR , Jensen CG , Poole CA . 2006 . Localization of extracellular matrix receptors on the chondrocyte primary cilium . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 54 ( 9 ) : 1005 – 14 179 . Mijailovich SM , Kojic M , Zivkovic M , Fabry B , Fredberg JJ . 2002 . A ﬁnite ele - ment model of cell deformation during magnetic bead twisting . J . Appl . Physiol . 93 : 1429 – 36 180 . Nagayama K , Nagano Y , Sato M , Matsumoto T . 2006 . Effect of actin ﬁlament distribution on tensile properties of smooth muscle cells obtained from rat thoracic aortas . J . Biomech . 39 : 293 – 301 www . annualreviews . org • Integrating Cell Responses to Mechanical Stimuli 33 A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . ANRV317 - BE09 - 01 ARI 7 June 2007 15 : 9 181 . ByﬁeldFJ , Aranda - EspinozaH , RomanenkoVG , RothblatGH , LevitanI . 2004 . Cholesterol depletion increases membrane stiffness of aortic endothelial cells . Biophys . J . 87 : 3336 – 43 182 . Caille N , Thoumine O , Tardy Y , Meister JJ . 2002 . Contribution of the nucleus to the mechanical properties of endothelial cells . J . Biomech . 35 : 177 – 87 183 . Sugawara M , Ishida Y , Wada H . 2004 . Mechanical properties of sensory and supportingcellsintheorganofCortioftheguineapigcochlea—studybyatomic force microscopy . Hear Res . 192 : 57 – 64 184 . Sugawara M , Ishida Y , Wada H . 2002 . Local mechanical properties of guinea pig outer hair cells measured by atomic force microscopy . Hear Res . 174 : 222 – 29 185 . Mahaffy RE , Park S , Gerde E , Kas J , Shih CK . 2004 . Quantitative analysis of the viscoelastic properties of thin regions of ﬁbroblasts using atomic force microscopy . Biophys . J . 86 : 1777 – 93 186 . Koay EJ , Shieh AC , Athanasiou KA . 2003 . Creep indentation of single cells . J . Biomech . Eng . 125 : 334 – 41 187 . Hochmuth RM . 2000 . Micropipette aspiration of living cells . J . Biomech . 33 : 15 – 22 188 . Roca - Cusachs P , Almendros I , Sunyer R , Gavara N , Farre R , Navajas D . 2006 . Rheology of passive and adhesion - activated neutrophils probed by atomic force microscopy . Biophys . J . 91 ( 9 ) : 3508 – 18 189 . Peeters EA , Oomens CW , Bouten CV , Bader DL , Baaijens FP . 2005 . Vis - coelastic properties of single attached cells under compression . J . Biomech . Eng . 127 : 237 – 43 190 . Laurent VM , Fodil R , Canadas P , Fereol S , Louis B , et al . 2003 . Partitioning of cortical and deep cytoskeleton responses from transient magnetic bead twisting . Ann . Biomed . Eng . 31 : 1263 – 78 191 . Lekka M , Laidler P , Gil D , Lekki J , Stachura Z , Hrynkiewicz AZ . 1999 . Elas - ticity of normal and cancerous human bladder cells studied by scanning force microscopy . Eur . Biophys . J . 28 : 312 – 16 192 . Takai E , Costa KD , Shaheen A , Hung CT , Guo XE . 2005 . Osteoblast elastic modulus measured by atomic force microscopy is substrate dependent . Ann . Biomed . Eng . 33 : 963 – 71 193 . Ananthakrishnan R , Guck J , Wottawah F , Schinkinger S , Lincoln B , et al . 2006 . Quantifying the contribution of actin networks to the elastic strength of ﬁbrob - lasts . J . Theor . Biol . 242 : 502 – 16 194 . Park S , Koch D , Cardenas R , Kas J , Shih CK . 2005 . Cell motility and local viscoelasticity of ﬁbroblasts . Biophys . J . 89 : 4330 – 42 195 . CoughlinMF , Puig - de - MoralesM , BursacP , MellemaM , MilletE , FredbergJJ . 2006 . Filamin - a and rheological properties of cultured melanoma cells . Biophys . J . 90 : 2199 – 205 196 . Lee JS , Panorchan P , Hale CM , Khatau SB , Kole TP , et al . 2006 . Ballistic intracellular nanorheology reveals ROCK - hard cytoplasmic stiffening response to ﬂuid ﬂow . J . Cell Sci . 119 : 1760 – 68 197 . Desprat N , Richert A , Simeon J , Asnacios A . 2005 . Creep function of a single living cell . Biophys . J . 88 : 2224 – 33 34 Janmey · McCulloch A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR317 - FM ARI 7 June 2007 19 : 9 Annual Review of Biomedical Engineering Volume 9 , 2007 Contents Cell Mechanics : Integrating Cell Responses to Mechanical Stimuli Paul A . Janmey and Christopher A . McCulloch (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 1 Engineering Approaches to Biomanipulation Jaydev P . Desai , Anand Pillarisetti , and Ari D . Brooks (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 35 Forensic Injury Biomechanics Wilson C . Hayes , Mark S . Erickson , and Erik D . Power (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 55 Genetic Engineering for Skeletal Regenerative Medicine Charles A . Gersbach , Jennifer E . Phillips , and Andrés J . García (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 87 The Structure and Function of the Endothelial Glycocalyx Layer Sheldon Weinbaum , John M . Tarbell , and Edward R . Damiano (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 121 Fluid - Structure Interaction Analyses of Stented Abdominal Aortic Aneurysms C . Kleinstreuer , Z . Li , and M . A . Farber (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 169 Analysis of Time - Series Gene Expression Data : Methods , Challenges , and Opportunities I . P . Androulakis , E . Yang , and R . R . Almon (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 205 Interstitial Flow and Its Effects in Soft Tissues Melody A . Swartz and Mark E . Fleury (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 229 Nanotechnology Applications in Cancer Shuming Nie , Yun Xing , Gloria J . Kim , and Jonathan W . Simons (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 257 SNP Genotyping : Technologies and Biomedical Applications Sobin Kim and Ashish Misra (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 289 Current State of Imaging Protein - Protein Interactions In Vivo with Genetically Encoded Reporters Victor Villalobos , Snehal Naik , and David Piwnica - Worms (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 321 Magnetic Resonance – Compatible Robotic and Mechatronics Systems for Image - Guided Interventions and Rehabilitation : A Review Study Nikolaos V . Tsekos , Azadeh Khanicheh , Eftychios Christoforou , and Constantinos Mavroidis (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 351 v A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR317 - FM ARI 7 June 2007 19 : 9 SQUID - Detected Magnetic Resonance Imaging in Microtesla Fields John Clarke , Michael Hatridge , and Michael M¨o ß le (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 389 Ultrasound Microbubble Contrast Agents : Fundamentals and Application to Gene and Drug Delivery Katherine Ferrara , Rachel Pollard , and Mark Borden (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 415 Acoustic Detection of Coronary Artery Disease John Semmlow and Ketaki Rahalkar (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 449 Computational Anthropomorphic Models of the Human Anatomy : The Path to Realistic Monte Carlo Modeling in Radiological Sciences Habib Zaidi and Xie George Xu (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 471 Breast CT Stephen J . Glick (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 501 Noninvasive Human Brain Stimulation Timothy Wagner , Antoni Valero - Cabre , and Alvaro Pascual - Leone (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 527 Design of Health Care Technologies for the Developing World Robert A . Malkin (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 567 Indexes Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors , Volumes 1 – 9 (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 589 Cumulative Index of Chapter Titles , Volumes 1 – 9 (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 593 Errata An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Biomedical Engineering chapters ( if any , 1977 to the present ) may be found at http : / / bioeng . annualreviews . org / vi Contents A nnu . R e v . B i o m e d . E ng . 2007 . 9 : 1 - 34 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by C A P E S on 05 / 26 / 09 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y .