Prototypes of a Migrating Receptionist in Physical and Virtual Space Emma Mainza Chilufya emma . chilufya @ liu . se Department of Computer and Information Science , Linköping University Linköping , Sweden Mattias Arvola mattias . arvola @ liu . se Department of Computer and Information Science , Linköping University Linköping , Sweden Tom Ziemke tom . ziemke @ liu . se Department of Computer and Information Science , Linköping University Linköping , Sweden ABSTRACT A migrating receptionist is an intelligent virtual agent ( IVA ) de - signed to transfer from one embodiment to another . The embodi - ment can range from a virtual human - like form to a physical robot . We present a study of the prototyping and evaluation of a migrating virtual receptionist interface . One prototype was made in virtual reality ( VR ) and one in physical space . The study looks at how to de - sign a migrating virtual receptionist for a department of computer science . The virtual receptionist was designed to migrate from a screen by the entrance , to a mobile phone used while walking , and then to a robot in the coffee area . The evaluation was conducted with 23 participants who interacted with the virtual receptionist using both prototypes . Data was collected with the System Usability Scale ( SUS ) and Microsoft Reaction Cards . Although the physical space and the virtual space were different , the results of the eval - uation are similar . The SUS mean was 83 . 9 for the physical space and 78 . 3 for the virtual space . The reaction cards also showed more positive than negative reactions for both prototypes . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI ; Interface design prototyping ; Empirical studies in HCI ; Usability testing ; User centered design ; Participatory design . KEYWORDS Migrating agent , virtual receptionist , intelligent virtual agents , pro - totyping , design , virtual reality , robotic agent , embodiment , SUS , product reaction cards ACM Reference Format : Emma Mainza Chilufya , Mattias Arvola , and Tom Ziemke . 2023 . Proto - types of a Migrating Receptionist in Physical and Virtual Space . In ACM International Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents ( IVA ’23 ) , Septem - ber 19 – 22 , 2023 , Würzburg , Germany . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 4 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3570945 . 3607287 Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . IVA ’23 , September 19 – 22 , 2023 , Würzburg , Germany © 2023 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9994 - 4 / 23 / 09 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3570945 . 3607287 INTRODUCTION A virtual receptionist is an Intelligent virtualagent ( IVAs ) / Embodied Conversational Agent ( ECA ) that uses verbal and nonverbal input such as “the user’s voice [ . . . ] and contextual information to provide assistance by answering questions in natural language , making recommendations and performing actions” [ 9 ] . Such agents should be able to engage in face - to - face conversations with visitors to a place , demonstrating many of the same communicative behaviours as humans do in service situations . Different agent embodiments provide varying opportunities for interaction while imposing different limitations . Robots compared to ECAs have a greater physical presence [ 13 ] , but can suffer from mobility problems and power limitations [ 11 ] . Digital characters convey emotions more effectively but do not move in physical space . Characters on handheld devices can accompany their users but their size is a limitation , and they have limited interaction modalities [ 3 ] . We have created prototypes of an IVA that migrates between threeembodiments . Thiscan bethoughtof as a‘soul - shell’approach in which the IVA is characterised as the soul and the embodiments it inhabits as the shell and only one instance of the IVA is able to migrate between various shells [ 10 ] . The main research question discussed here is how to compose the user interface of a migrating virtual receptionist for a computer science department to cater to a desirable user experience and good usability . We describe the pro - posed design and its embodiments in two prototypes , which have been tested with 23 users . Data on perceived usability , product reactions , and strengths and weaknesses in the user experience was collected . As different prototypes filter a design space and manifest design ideas differently [ 14 ] , the two prototypes effectively work as data source triangulation [ 16 ] so as to increase confidence in the research findings . The prototypes of the migrating receptionist are based on the findings of a previous study on the conceptual designing of a virtual receptionist [ 1 ] . The aim of the study was to explore approaches to the remote conceptual design of an intelligent virtual receptionist at a university department using conceptual design methods : desktop walkthrough and bodystorming . The receptionist can greet visitors , give them directions to places and employees , and tell them about the research at the department . As it is a migrating agent , it can also follow the visitor as he or she moves through the building . MIGRATING RECEPTIONIST PROTOTYPES The interaction with the receptionist on the screens was based on a form of text - to - speech ( TTS ) . The user selected among text alternatives whilst the receptionist responded using speech . Two IVA ’23 , September 19 – 22 , 2023 , Würzburg , Germany Emma Mainza Chilufya , Mattias Arvola , and Tom Ziemke prototype versions were developed : one in virtual reality ( VR ) and one in physical space . Virtual Reality Prototype . The migrating receptionist in VR was developed and run in Unreal Engine 1 and the environment ( 3D layout of the department ) was developed using Blender 2 . HTC Vive Pro 3 was used for the VR user experience . Physical Space Prototype . The physical space prototype was de - veloped using a static website for the agent on the entrance and the mobile device screens . The robot used in the coffee area was a Furhat robot 4 . A touch projector screen 5 by the entrance was used for the initial interaction with the receptionist . Key differences in interaction between the prototypes include participants navigating between interaction areas using teleporta - tion and engaging with the robot through text - based dialogue in VR . Conversely , in the physical space prototype , interaction with the robot was speech - based . EVALUATION METHOD The data collection of the migrating virtual receptionist study was carried out with a number of tools and methods . These include the SUS , video recordings of the screen interactions in both prototypes and audio recordings of the product reaction card session . Product Reaction Cards . Product reaction cards were developed as part of the desirability toolkit which was created to understand the intangible emotional responses like desirability and fun resulting from a user’s experience with a product [ 5 , 6 ] . The method intro - duces a controlled vocabulary for participants [ 15 ] . The toolkit comprises a total of 118 words , from which we chose 15 words with positive connotations and 11 antonyms of some of the posi - tive words . We included 4 neutral words , where exceptional can be positive or negative based on context . The word choice was driven by the goals of creating an immer - sive , engaging , and seamless migrating receptionist prototype with user - friendly interfaces ; ensuring that users feel accompanied by the same agent across the embodiments ; and maintaining consis - tency and similarity in the interactions within the prototypes . System Usability Scale ( SUS ) . The SUS , developed by John Brooke [ 7 ] , is a standardised questionnaire used for the assessment of perceived usability [ 4 , 12 ] . The SUS is a relatively quick and easy - to - use tool to be used when doing usability evaluations . It is adaptable to various interface technologies due to its technology - neutral approach , allowing it to provide a comprehensive assessment [ 4 ] . The SUS is stated to be robust even with a relatively small number of participants ( 8 – 12 users ) [ 17 ] We used the original SUS questionnaire questions , with the word system representing the migrating receptionist prototype as that does not affect the results [ 4 , 8 ] . A questionnaire was given for each prototype ( VR and physical space ) experience of the study . 1 Unreal Engine 2 Blender 3 HTC Vive Pro 4 Furhat Robotics 5 Sony Xperia Touch Procedure . The study consisted of 23 participants , 12 members of staff , 6 female and 6 male ( age range : 21 – 59 ) . 11 students partici - pants , 6 female and 5 male ( age range : 18 – 49 ) . Following The European Code of Conduct for Research Integrity [ 2 ] , participants in the study first completed a consent form . They were then presented with the age and gender questionnaire , fol - lowed by a scenario asking them to find the office of a named staff member . Participants first interacted with the receptionist at the entrance screen . After providing information , the agent then mi - grated to the mobile phone , giving real - time directions to the office as they walked in the corridor . Participants were then informed that the member of staff was in a meeting and asked to wait in the coffee area . Participants were then given directions to the coffee area and the agent migrated to the robot in the coffee area . Figure 1 : Migrating receptionist in VR . This was followed by the product reaction card session , and then the SUS questionnaire . The order in which a participant experienced a prototype was balanced ( interchanged ) to reduce learning and order effects . RESULTS The SUS had a mean of 83 . 9 for the physical space and 78 . 3 for the virtual space . Table 1 shows the mean , standard deviation ( SD ) and minimum of the SUS score of both prototypes . Physical Space VR Mean : 83 . 9 78 . 3 Std Dev : 10 . 7 13 . 2 Min : 60 47 . 5 Table 1 : Mean , SD and min of the SUS score The results from the product reaction cards indicate a higher count of positive words than negative and neutral words for both prototypes . However , there are slight differences between the two , with the physical prototype having a higher count in areas such as ease of use , approachable , and relevance . The VR prototype scores higher in words such as immersive , exciting and stimulating . Some of the negative words that stand out for the physical space are Prototypes of a Migrating Receptionist IVA ’23 , September 19 – 22 , 2023 , Würzburg , Germany impersonal , complex and intimidating ( concerning the Furhat robot ) . The VR prototype has confusing , overwhelming and annoying . The neutral words familiar and Ok score the same for both prototypes . DISCUSSION This study aimed to explore how to compose the user interface of a migrating virtual receptionist for a computer science department to cater to a desirable user experience and good usability . The paper describes two prototypes of the same agent that filter the design space and manifest design ideas differently [ 14 ] . This and the use of quantitative and qualitative data collection effectively work as data source triangulation [ 16 ] to increase confidence in the research findings . Although differently filtered design spaces , the results of both prototypes were similar . Initially , it was that users would less accept the VR prototype due to limitations in mobility and the use of VR equipment . However , this was not supported by the results , which showed similar levels of acceptance between the VR and physical prototypes . The physical prototype exhibits slightly better results in the SUS results . Limitations The fact that the participants belong to the Department of Computer and Information Science might cause concern that perhaps partic - ipants were already familiar with the technologies used , which might make the interaction significantly easier than for outside visitors . It turned out that it was not necessarily the case . In the case of the physical space prototype , only 2 participants had used the Furhat robot for research and 5 had encountered Furhat . The VR experience varied , 3 participants had used VR for re - search and 4 had experienced it more than once . The majority ( n = 11 ) had experienced VR once as study participants or during a workshop . 4 of the 23 participants were novice users . Despite the varying levels of experience , none of the participants had encoun - tered a migrating receptionist or a section of the building replicated in such close detail in VR . The dissimilarities between the prototype designs , such as tele - portation , and text – based dialogue with the static robot in the coffee area ( in VR ) which could have affected the usability and likeness of the two prototypes had some unexpected effects . Most participants found the VR prototype more immersive which in turn made the interaction with the receptionist more personal and engaging . some participants found the interaction more intuitive as not only could they listen to the agent , but they also had subtexts making it easier as English was not their first language . The teleportation issue was overcome by most participants , as all participants first went through a trial session . The other solution was to have participants teleport by walking through a specified section of the interaction space : walking through the doorway to teleport to the corridor . Floating text in the teleportation segments was included to indicate the exact moment they were to teleport . The physical space issues include the different screen sizes of the mobile phones , resulting in the interactive not being clear for some users . This was resolved using the zoom function to enlarge the interface . Interaction with the Furhat robot yielded some negative comments . The projection of human – like abilities of the Furhat robot such as blinking , smiling , and nodding resulted in some par - ticipants reporting an experience similar to the uncanny valley phenomenon . Design Consequences The VR design affected responses to confusion , overwhelming , and difficulty . Participants expressed these emotions primarily due to unfamiliarity with the technology . Some common statements included : " The VR functionality with teleportation made it a bit more confusing " and " I found it confusing because I wasn’t sure what I was supposed to do . " To address this issue , the proposed design solution would involve assessing participants’ comfort levels before concluding the trial session . The physical space design affected responses to complexity , in - timidation , and inconsistency . Design modifications to address some of the issues include making the screen - based agent resemble the Furhat robot to establish familiarity . Another recommended change is to maintain uniformity of voice across all platforms . Additionally , reducing the human – like qualities of the coffee area robot can be considered to enhance user experience . Other design effects include the overall Text – to – speech setup of both prototypes which may have influenced the easy – to – use responses . The resolution of the factors stated above and the use of the positive SUS and reaction cards findings would assist in designing a useful migrating agent in public spaces . CONCLUSIONS The purpose of this study is to explore the design of migrating virtual receptionist interfaces for a computer science department , with the aim of making a contribution to how to design user in - terfaces of migrating embodied agents for public spaces . Using a migrating agent shows promise , as indicated by the high SUS scores in both prototypes . This supports the idea of a virtual receptionist seamlessly transitioning between different embodiments , making it a viable solution . The positive words of the reaction cards reflect the significance of familiarity and continuity across different embodiments . These choices emphasise the importance of creating a cohesive and un - interrupted user experience throughout the transitions between embodiments . Negative words highlight important deficiencies that should be taken into account in future designs . REFERENCES [ 1 ] 3472307 . 3484171 . 2021 . Conceptual designing of a virtual receptionist : remote desktop walkthrough and bodystorming in VR . In Proceedings of the 9th Interna - tional Conference on Human - Agent Interaction . 112 – 120 . [ 2 ] All European Academies . 2017 . The European code of conduct for research integrity . Promoting Research Integrity in a Global Environment ( 2017 ) . [ 3 ] Ruth Aylett , Michael Kriegel , Iain Wallace , Elena Segura , Johanna Mercurio , and Stina Nylander . 2013 . Memory and the design of migrating virtual agents . In 12th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems 2013 , AAMAS 2013 , Vol . 2 . [ 4 ] Aaron Bangor , Philip T . Kortum , and James T . Miller . 2008 . An empirical eval - uation of the system usability scale . International Journal of Human - Computer Interaction 24 , 6 ( 2008 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10447310802205776 [ 5 ] Carol M . Barnum . 2021 . Preparing for usability testing . In Usability Testing Essentials ( seconded . ) , CarolMBarnum ( Ed . ) . MorganKaufmann , 197 – 248 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / b978 - 0 - 12 - 816942 - 1 . 00006 - x [ 6 ] Joey Benedek and Trish Miner . 2002 . Measuring Desirability : New Methods for Evaluating Desirability in a Usability Lab Setting . Proc . UPA 2002 ( 2002 ) . IVA ’23 , September 19 – 22 , 2023 , Würzburg , Germany Emma Mainza Chilufya , Mattias Arvola , and Tom Ziemke [ 7 ] JohnBrooke . 1996 . SUS : A‘QuickandDirty’UsabilityScale . ( JordanPW , Thomas B , Weerdmeester BA , McClelland AL ed . ) . In Usability Evaluation In Industry . [ 8 ] John Brooke . 2013 . SUS : A Retrospective . Journal of Usability Studies 8 , 2 ( 2013 ) . [ 9 ] Benjamin R . Cowan , Nadia Pantidi , David Coyle , Kellie Morrissey , Peter Clarke , Sara Al - Shehri , David Earley , and Natasha Bandeira . 2017 . " What can i help you with ? " : Infrequent users’ experiences of intelligent personal assistants . In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction withMobileDevicesandServices , MobileHCI2017 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3098279 . 3098539 [ 10 ] K . L . Koay , D . S . Syrdal , K . Dautenhahn , K . Arent , Ł Małek , and B . Kreczmer . 2011 . Companion Migration – Initial Participants’ Feedback from a Video - Based Prototyping Study . Springer Netherlands , Dordrecht , 133 – 151 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 94 - 007 - 0582 - 1 _ 8 [ 11 ] M . Kriegel , R . Aylett , P . Cuba , M . Vala , and A . Paiva . 2011 . Robots Meet IVAs : A Mind - Body Interface for Migrating Artificial Intelligent Agents . . In LECTURE NOTES IN COMPUTER SCIENCE . 282 – 295 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 23974 - 8 _ 31 [ 12 ] James R . Lewis . 2018 . The System Usability Scale : Past , Present , and Future . International Journal of Human - Computer Interaction 34 , 7 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10447318 . 2018 . 1455307 [ 13 ] Jamy Li . 2015 . The benefit of being physically present : A survey of exper - imental works comparing copresent robots , telepresent robots and virtual agents . International Journal of Human Computer Studies 77 ( 2015 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2015 . 01 . 001 [ 14 ] Youn Kyung Lim , Erik Stolterman , and Josh Tenenberg . 2008 . The anatomy of prototypes : Prototypes as filters , prototypes as manifestations of design ideas . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 15 , 2 ( 2008 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1375761 . 1375762 [ 15 ] Kate Moran . 2016 . Using the Microsoft Desirability Toolkit to Test Visual Appeal . https : / / www . nngroup . com / articles / microsoft - desirability - toolkit [ 16 ] Veronica A . Thurmond . 2001 . The point of triangulation . Journal of Nursing Scholarship 33 , 3 ( 2001 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1547 - 5069 . 2001 . 00253 . x [ 17 ] Tom Tullis and Bill Albert . 2013 . Measuring the User Experience : Collecting , Analyzing , and Presenting Usability Metrics : Second Edition . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / C2011 - 0 - 00016 - 9