ICED15 DESIGN FOR INFANTS IS NOT DESIGN FOR CHILDREN : ON THE QUEST OF TOOLS TO MODEL A METHOD TO DESIGN FOR INFANTS Monsalve , Juliana ; Maya , Jorge EAFIT University , Colombia Abstract Child Centred Design focuses on understanding children’s contextual and experiential factors for design . However , the conventional user - designer interaction could not support the specific situation of designing for infants . This is due to infants are not verbal or self - reflective . Approaches addressing users largely dependent on caregivers could support the case of design for infants , considering the wide knowledge caretakers may hold about their care - receivers . This paper addresses a literature survey of tools for designing for children , aiming to provide theoretical support for the formalisation of a method for designing for infants . The study followed a systematic approach data abstraction and analysis . The study shows that the current CCD domain has a focus on co - design tools with intergenerational teams , addressing children older than 6 years old . There were no findings addressing the case of infants . However , it was found that frameworks intended to design for autistic children might support the case of design for infants , as they involve actively caretakers . Finally , this study proposes a selection of methods and tools that might be relevant when designing for infants . Keywords : child centred design , design for infants , User centred design , Design methodology , User experience Contact : Juliana Monsalve Arteaga Universidad EAFIT Product Design Engineering Colombia juliana @ my - joolz . com INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON ENGINEERING DESIGN , ICED15 27 - 30 JULY 2015 , POLITECNICO DI MILANO , ITALY Please cite this paper as : Surnames , Initials : Title of paper . In : Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Engineering Design ( ICED15 ) , Vol . nn : Title of Volume , Milan , Italy , 27 . - 30 . 07 . 2015 1 ICED15 1 INTRODUCTION This paper addresses a literature survey of tools 1 for designing for children ( 0 - 13 years old ) but focusing on and assessment of their suitability for the case of design for infants , i . e . , children under the age of 1 , who are not verbal and are dependent on caregivers This study belongs to a larger project , which aims to formalize a method 2 for designing for infants to be used in a Dutch company 3 designing baby strollers . This study aims to provide theoretical support for the formalization of the mentioned method . Below we will discuss the most relevant gaps identified in the authors’ current practice in the field of design for infants . 1 . 1 Design methodology and the conventional user - designer interaction . Design methodology 4 supports design work by providing structure , as an arrangement of steps to guide designers from the identification of the user’s needs to a final desired product . User Centered Design ( UCD ) methods focus on “understanding users’ activities , providing comprehension of the customers , their environment , the tasks they currently perform , and the tasks they anticipate performing in the future” ( Vredenburg , Isensee , et al , 2002 ) . UCD has evolved to develop specific tools according to the typology of users such as design for the elderly , design for disabled people and design for children ; the latter often referred as “Child Centered Design” ( CCD ) . However , “many designers are not used to learning about and designing for small specific user groups…” ( van Rijn , 2012 ) , alike infants . Due to infants are entirely dependent on caregivers and are not able to verbalize their thoughts , the conventional user - designer interaction does not fully support the specific design situation . Social sciences knowledge about child’s development has provided support when it comes to designing for infants , by informing designers about children’s milestones in every life - stage . Below , we discuss the role of social sciences in the practice of design for infants . 1 . 2 The complexity of social sciences knowledge and its practicality within design practice . Social sciences and human factors are integrated within UCD practice by translating knowledge about the user into insights that designers can understand and apply ( Sanders , 2002 ) . In the case of infants , social sciences display what we came to call an overload of information about the child’s development . A great amount of theories , models , principles and evidences are available to explain the physiology , cognition , behavior and children’s affect through their detailed stages of development . For example , as Baltes ( 1987 ) mentions , only the field of developmental psychology diverges in branches such us research areas , theories and / or theorists of psychological development , and life stages of psychological development . Each of these branches diverges in turn . In addition , the development of the child is influenced to a great extent by parenting , which in turn , “…is determined by characteristics of the parent , of the child , and of contextual subsystems of social support” ( Belsky , 1984 ) . This wide and complex universe of knowledge requires time and dedication to be accessed and grasped by designers during design practice . Therefore we believe there is a need of design tools to bridge this gap . Emergent design practice strives for wellbeing . Below we discuss the relevance that designing for infants may have in this field . 1 . 3 Design for infants and the emergent quest of design for wholesome lifestyles . Tennant et al . ( 2007 ) assert that “there is an increased interest in exploring the potential of technology and design to support wellbeing” . Recent approaches such as “Positive Design” have evolved as guidelines for the quest of designing wholesome lifestyles . This is , designing products that enhance people’s physical health , contribute to sustainability , and encourage subjective well - being ( well - being defined as positive mental health , and therefore not only the absence of mental illness , but also the presence of positive psychological functioning” . ( Thiem , Balaam , et al , 2012 ) ) . “Positive Design is an 1 Tool : the activities that support the development of a particular step during the design process . 2 Design method / procedure / Technique : the consecutive arrangement of tools intended to guide each of the stages of the design process , from the start denoted as the “problem definition” , up to the end , i . e . , an actual product . 3 Joolz , http : / / my - joolz . com / joolz / 4 Methodology : referred as the science and study of method and procedure . 2 ICED15 umbrella term for design research and intention in which explicit attention is paid to the effects of design on the subjective well - being of individuals and communities” ( Desmet & Pohlmeyer , 2013 ) . We believe that UCD procedures that actively involve end users and in this case , infants and caretakers , could have great impact on the way designers approach the design process , the resulted designed products and the way they are experienced by users in order to enhance their well - being . Results of prior exploratory studies of the authors in the field of design for infants led to relevant conclusions for the setup of the current study ( Monsalve & Maya , 2012 ) . Most important findings are discussed below . 1 . 4 Design for infants as a user - centred task . Prior exploratory studies of the authors in the field of design for infants ( Monsalve & Maya , 2012 ) led to the awareness of the little information available in the field of design for infants ; furthermore , it led to the identification of two renowned authors in the domain of design for and with children : Mathieu Gielen 5 , and Alison Druin 6 as starting points for further work . Moreover , these studies aimed to identify possible criteria for assessing existing tools to support the specific cases of design for infants . As hypothesis , the authors consider that design for infants is a user - centered task , however possibly implying higher complexity than other user - centered tasks ; this is due to the possibly faulty support of the conventional user - designer interaction to the specific design situation centered on infants ( see 1 . 2 ) . Therefore , the following criteria are proposed in order to assess the tools on their suitability to the case of design for infants ( See 5 , RQ2 and RQ3 ) : a . tools supporting researchers on identifying the experiential and contextual factors affecting the particular design situation involving infants , and b . tools supporting designers on translating above findings into real products ( Monsalve & Maya , 2012 ) . Below we present in detail the objectives of this study . 2 OBJECTIVES The goal of the research is to assess existing tools for designing for children focusing on those to design for infants available in secondary sources . By identifying the advantages and limitations of the existing tools for designing for children , the authors aim to propose recommendations for modeling a method intended to design for infants . In this manner , the following section ( 3 ) aims to describe the method followed in the study . Section 4 describes the results of the study and discusses the answers to the research questions proposed below . Finally section 5 describes the conclusions and proposes future work . Below , the specific objectives of this study are described as the research questions . 2 . 1 Research questions The RQ addressed in this study are presented below . RQ1 : What are the existing tools about ? • RQ1 . 1 : Which phase of the design process do they approach ? • RQ1 . 2 : What are the steps undertaken ? What are the inputs and the outputs ? • RQ1 . 3 What kind of models , psychological , procedural or from another typology do these tools rely on ? RQ2 : How the existing tools are supporting designers , researchers and users during the design process ? • RQ2 . 1 : How do these tools support designers and researchers on identifying the experiential and contextual factors that affect the design situation ? • RQ2 . 2 : How do these tools support designers and researchers on translating the findings into real products ? 5 Mathieu Gielen is a designer of products for children’s play , lecturer and researcher in TU Delft 6 Allison Druin is Professor in the University of Maryland ' s College of Information Studies . Her research has focused on developing new technologies for children with children as design partners . 3 ICED15 RQ3 : What are the limitations of the existing tools for designing for children , when applied in the case of designing for infants ? 3 METHOD The systematic approach employed in this study is described below . 3 . 1 Search process The search process was manual . It started with the consultation of the most recent publications of the previously identified authors ( See 1 . 4 : Gielen , Druin ) , and was expanded to the consultation of their cited references . Furthermore , digital libraries and search engines were used for collecting information . With the aim of scanning the field of design for children broadly , regardless of children’s age , design philosophy or typology of product , a set of keywords from a generic nature was selected : User Centered Design ( UCD ) , Child Centered Design , design for children , design methods for children , design for play . The search process finalized when the authors considered that a saturation point was reached ; this is , when no new relevant information was encountered . 3 . 1 . 1 Inclusion criteria Due to the awareness about the scarcity of information available , the impact factor for assessing the quality of the publications was low . The publications selected made part of book chapters , journals , conference proceedings and / or technical report . In addition , publications belonging to connected fields such as psychology , ergonomics , among others were also selected . 4 RESULTS 4 . 1 Results of the search process The result of the search process was a collection of a total of 117 publications . The scan of these publications lead to the identification of 5 categories . Even though all categories classify within Child Centered Design , some of them were taken as separate groups due to the high amount of publications , and the specialization of the topic . These categories are : “3 . Human Computer Interaction ( HCI ) for children” ; “5 . Design for difficult to reach users” , which concerns nonverbal users and / or largely dependent on caregivers such us autistic children ; finally , “6 . Design for play” expands to all users who involve in playful activities . Finally , a second filtering process , selecting publications with highest impact factor lead to a total of 96 publications to be checked in detail ( See Table 1 ) . Table 1 . Results of search process : amount and categorization of publications Category Subcategory No . 1 Children ' s development 1 . 1 Cognitive , psychological and physiological development 10 1 . 2 Parenting and children’s development . 5 1 . 3 Preverbal Children . 8 2 HCI for children 3 . 1 Co - design with children 19 3 . 2 Informant design with children 5 3 . 3 Learner centered design ( for children ) 7 3 Child Centered Design 4 . 1 Design for children 17 4 . 2 Contextmapping and generative techniques adapted for children 6 4 Design for difficult to reach users ( nonverbal ) 5 5 Design for play 14 Total 96 4 . 2 Data extraction The data extraction focused tabulating the information in the following 7 columns : 1 . Name of the method / tool ; 2 . General description of the method / tool ; 3 . Goal of the method / tool ; 4 . Children’s age 4 ICED15 ranges approached in the method / tool ; 5 . Phases of the design process approached in the design method / tool ; 6 . Steps undertaken in the method / tool ; 6 . Input and output of the method / tool and 7 . Model or theory supporting the method / tool . 4 . 3 Data analysis The data was analyzed applying the KJ Method ( Scupin , 1997 ) . This procedure requires the presence of a team as means for themes grouping , validation and consensus ; however this part of the study was followed by only one of the authors . Nevertheless , it is important to highlight that other methods also intended for data examination such as Thematic Analysis ( Braun & Clarke , 2006 ) require only one person . Therefore , we believe that the results of this procedure are anyway reliable . The data analysis started by familiarizing with the data of the table ; the research questions were approached and annotations were made on sticky notes . The sticky notes were placed on the wall and grouped by similarity . A total of 3 groups representing trends in the information resulted of this analysis , named as following ( see section 5 , trends ) : trend 1 : intergenerational teams and the role of children in the design process ; Trend 2 : The roles of caretakers in the design process and Trend 3 : The typology of products aimed to design . The data analysis conveyed the identification of a total of 9 methods for designing for children , and 23 different tools , which were registered as explained in 3 . 3 . In order to shorten the amount of information this paper includes the simplified versions of the results registration , displaying the methods and / or tools considered relevant for modeling a method for designing for infants according to the criteria explained in 1 . 4 . Table 2 displays a simplified version of 7 selected tools . Table 3 registers the key points of 3 selected methods . 5 DISCUSSION In this section we discuss the research questions based on the author’s hypothesis and criteria as explained in 1 . 4 . RQ1 : What the existing tools / methods for designing for children / infants are about ? The majority of the methods ( 6 / 9 ) belong to the domain of HCI ; two ( 2 / 9 ) methods belong to the domain of design for autistic children . One ( 1 / 9 ) method found concerns Contextmapping techniques ( See Table 3 ) adapted for the case of children . Furthermore , the majority of the tools ( 20 / 24 ) are enclosed within the domain of co - design / Participatory Design ( PD ) . In addition , the majority of these tools ( 14 / 24 ) relate to children in the 6 - 13 years old as design partners ( See table 2 ) . Most of the tools found concern an adaptation of PD tools to the specific case of children . Some of these adaptations consist on reducing the complexity of the activities , as well as the length and amusing approach to ensure children stay engaged . RQ1 . 1 : Which phase of the design process do they approach ? Most of the tools ( 20 / 24 ) approach the early phases of the design process : research , problem clarification , gathering inspiration . A significant amount of the tools approaches also the idea generation phase ( 12 / 24 ) . RQ1 . 2 : What are the inputs and the outputs ? What are the steps undertaken ? The steps vary significantly according to the type of tool ( See Table 2 ) . Inputs to the tools addressing the phase of researching the design situation and idea generation consists mostly on a . an intergenerational ( IG ) design team ; b . explanation of the design assignment ; c . a set of research / idea generation activities and d . papers with layouts and other art supplies . The outputs of the tools consist mostly on a . insights from the design situation represented in drawings , notes , storyboards , low - tech prototypes or words and b . Early ideas / concepts represented in drawings , mock - ups and other artifacts through low - tech prototyping . RQ1 . 3 What kind of models , do these tools rely on ? Tools rely on procedural models and some of them on psychological models . Procedural models indicate a step - by - step approaches for the search for information / inspiration about the user ; psychological models bring insights about the motivation and behaviour of the related subjects . These psychological models vary among cognitive , developmental and learning theories , e . g . Bonded Design ( See Table 3 ) relies on the model of Zone of Proximal Development ( Vigotsky , 1987 ) . 5 ICED15 RQ2 : How the existing tools / methods intended for designing for children are supporting designers , researchers and users in the design process ? The tools found provide not only frameworks , but also theoretical support to carry on a design assignment related with children . RQ2 . 1 : How do these tools support designers and researchers on identifying the experiential and contextual factors that affect the design situation ? No tools were found guiding the search for contextual and experiential factors in the specific case of infants . Activities such as observation in the real context may reveal important details of the design situation that designers could not grasp otherwise . We believe that these observation activities may be as helpful for the case of design for infants . In addition , activities aiming to access children’s thoughts and feelings involving simple tasks alike low - tech prototyping may be a practical and engaging way for caretakers and designers to collaborate in the design process when it comes to infants . In particular , Contextmapping and generative techniques support in detail above process . Practices such as involving caretakers during the design process are found in domains were target groups are largely dependent on caregivers . In this study , references alike were found in the field of design for disabled children e . g . , the framework developed by van Rijn ( 2012 ) for learning from encounters with autistic children and caretakers . As explained in 4 . 3 , the data extraction and analysis resulted in the following 3 groups representing trends in the information found : Trend 1 : Intergenerational teams , and the role of children in the design process . Most of the tools require an intergenerational team : adult designers and / or researchers and children participants . The tools addressing the collaboration of children in the design process involved them as users , testers , informants , and design partners ( Druin , 2012 ) . There is a clear tendency of involving children as informants and design partners . Adults perform activities related to the preparation and conclusions of each phase . Trend 2 : The roles of caretakers in the design process . Caretakers can be considered fundamental when it comes to design for and / or with children , or specifically for the case of designing for infants ; caretakers could take roles such us enablers , mediators , informants , users and co - designers ( van Rijn , Visser , et al 2011 ) ; however they are not actively involved in the design process of the tools surveyed . This can be explained by the fact that children older than 6 years old are verbal and self - reflective enough to discuss what they are thinking ( Druin , 2012 ) . Only the tools intended to design for autistic children involved actively caretakers . Theme 3 : The typology of products aimed to design . Literature refers to studies where the type of products to be designed mostly concern educational technology and HCI . The design of technology can be seen from the perspective of designing technical systems and thus , products in general can be seen as such . Table 2 . Simplified version of the tools considered suitable for designing for infants 6 ICED15 RQ2 . 2 : How do these tools / methods support designers and researchers on translating the findings into a suitable product embodiment ? Various brainstorming tools support designers and children participants on coming up with ideas for product interactions and interfaces of their preference , e . g . Hide & Seek , and blind’s men bluff from the bluebells method ( “design method that balances child - centred design with expert design in a progressive approach iterating between 4 techniques” ( Mazzone , et al , 2006 ) ) . However , no tools were found approaching specifically the embodiment of products for children . In addition , iterative usability tests may support the embodiment process . Tools such as technology immersion inviting children to intensively test concepts , and posterior focus groups / sessions following sticky note critiquing and discussions , may enhance the progressive evolution of a product’s usability and aesthetics ( See Table 2 ) . In the case of design for infants , once more we believe that these types of tools may have to be adapted to the case of collaboration with caretakers . RQ3 : What are the limitations of the current tools / methods for designing for children , when applied in the case of designing for infants ? Little reference was found about tools for designing specifically for infants . We believe that the tools found in the CCD field rely mostly on the children’s spoken feedback and therefore , would not fully support the case of design for infants . Considering the phases in the design process where direct contact with users is required , adaptations need to be addressed to support the case of design for infants . For example , activities such as observation , where researchers may need to understand physiological and behavioural manifestations of infants could require extensive support not only from caregivers , but also from the knowledge found in the social sciences . 7 ICED15 8 ICED15 6 CONCLUSIONS This paper aims to present the results of a survey of tools for designing for children and to build a theoretical basis for modeling a method for designing for infants . The study shows dominance of co - design tools with intergenerational teams , addressing children older than 6 years old , within the HCI and design of new technology domains , and a tendency to involving children as design partners . We believe that procedures that actively involve end users and in this case , infants and caretakers , could have a great impact on product design . UCD approaches addressing users largely dependent on caregivers could support the case of design for infants . The framework developed by van Rijn ( 2012 ) for learning from encounters with autistic children and caretakers ( See table 3 ) was found as a suitable match and / or starting point for a potential adaptation to the case of design for infants . We consider two main opportunities to adapt this framework . The first one lays on the design of tools to support designers on identifying tacit and latent needs of both infants and caretakers based on direct contact . Frameworks such as Contextmapping ( Gielen 2011 ) relying on generative techniques could support the above . The second consists on the design of tools that bridge the gap between the information overload from social sciences with the actual design practice . This is , tools that support designers accessing and applying this information throughout the entire design process but in particular , in the observation phases . On the other hand , the involvement of users in the design process may be conditioned by the resources , timeframes available and design philosophies . Tools such as Child Personas ( Antle , 2008 ) could support this challenge by building “fictional infant profiles” in early phases , which designers can return to in consequent stages . Furthermore , adaptations to the Distributed Co - Design method ( Walsh , 2010 ) could provide communication platforms to connect design teams , caretakers and infants in different locations ( See table 3 ) . Finally , approaches such as Bonded Design ( Large & Nesset ) , which propose a short but intensive interaction with users , could provide guidance on discerning the most suitable moments to have direct contact with users ( See Table 3 ) . For culminating the task of modeling a method for designing for infants , future work may include further theoretical studies such as : the study of the practice of methods / tools for designing for children / infants in the industry ; the study of tools to support phases of the design process which require direct contact with caretakers and infants : observation , idea generation , validation ; studies concerning the design of tools that convey knowledge of the social sciences regarding developmental stages of infants , applicable for design practice ; studies concerning the role of Positive Design in the practice of designing for infants . Moreover , future work includes also empirical studies concerning drafting , modeling , testing , iterating and validating tools / methods for designing for infants integrated in 3 different running projects at Joolz ( the company in concern , see 1 ) . These projects are subject to different design conditions such as type of product to be designed ( playing / non playing items ) . In this manner , the empirical studies aim to gain generic conclusions about the suitability of the tools / methods in varied cases and provide a practical framework for modeling the method in question . REFERENCES Ackoff , R . ( 1989 ) . From Data to Wisdom . Journal of Applied Systems Analysis , 16 , 3 - 9 . Amaro , A . C . , & Moreira , A . ( 2002 ) . Kids as storytellers and design partners : learning and the development of storytelling technologies . In Proc . 4o Simposio Intl . de Informática Educativa , 7 Taller Internacional de Software Educativo Vigo , Nov . 20 - 22 2002 ( p . 19 ) . Servicio de Publicaciones . Antle , A . ( 2008 ) . Child - based personas : need , ability and experience . Cognition , Technology & Work , 10 ( 2 ) , 155 - 166 . Baltes , P . ( 1987 ) . Theoretical propositions of life - span developmental psychology : On the dynamics between growth and decline . Developmental Psychology , 23 ( 5 ) , 611 - 626 . Belsky , J . ( 1984 ) . The Determinants of Parenting : A Process Model . Child Development , 55 ( 1 ) , 83 - 96 . Druin , A . ( 1999 ) . Cooperative Inquiry : Developing New Technologies for Children with Children . In Proc . of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( pp . 592 - 599 ) . ACM . Druin , A . ( 2013 ) . The Role of Children in the Design of New Technology . Behavior and information technology , 21 ( 1 ) , 1 - 25 . 9 ICED15 Fails , J . A . , Guha , L . M . , & Druin , A . ( 2012 ) . Methods and techniques for involving children in the design of new technology for children . Human - Computer Interaction , 6 ( 2 ) , 85 - 166 . Giaccardi , E . , Paredes , P . , Daz , P . , & Alvarado , D . ( 2012 ) . Embodied Narratives : A Performative Co - Design Technique . DIS - 12 Proc . of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference , pp . 1 - 10 . NY . Gibson , F . ( 2007 ) . Conducting focus groups with children and young people : strategies for success . Journal of Research in Nursing , 12 ( 5 ) , 473 - 483 . Gielen , M . A . ( 2007 ) . What´s on a Child´s Mind : Contextmapping Research for Designers´ Inspiration . In Ludic Engagement Designs for All conference . Gielen , M . ( 2010 ) . Essential concepts in Toy Design Education : Aimlessness , Empathy and Play Value . International Journal of Arts and Technology , 3 ( 1 ) , 4 - 16 . Gielen , M . ( 2008 ) . Exploring the Child´s Mind – Contextmapping Research with Children . Digital Creativity , 19 ( 3 ) , 174 - 184 van Doorn , F . , Gielen , M . , & Stappers , P . J . ( 2013 ) . Friends sharing Opinions : Users become Co - researchers to Evaluate Design Concepts . Judith , G . , & Judy , R . ( 2006 ) . CARSS : A Framework for Learner - Centred Design with Children . International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education , 16 , 381 - 413 . Large , A . , Nesset , V . , Beheshti , J . , & Bowler , L . ( 2006 ) . “Bonded design” : A novel approach to intergenerational information tech . design . Library & Information Science Research , 28 ( 1 ) , 64 - 82 . Leilei , X . , & Alastair Qin Wen , W . ( 2013 ) . Fictional inquiry : an alternative process to inspire creativity in children ' s co - design projects . Cultural ecology : new approaches to culture , architecture and ecology , 124 - 133 . School of Architecture + Built Environment , Deakin University , Geelong , Victoria . M . A . Desmet , P . , & Pohlmeyer , A . E . ( 2013 ) . Positive Design : An Introduction to Design for Subjective Well - Being . International Journal of Design , Vol . 7 ( 3 ) , 5 - 19 . Melonio , A . , & Gennari , R . ( 2013 ) . Co - Design with children : the State of the Art . Tech . Report KDRB Research Center , Free University of Bozen - Bolzano . Monsalve , J . , & Maya , J . ( 2012 ) . A product design method proposal for babie ' s play and learning . Proc . International Design Conference - DESIGN 2012 , pp . 1351 - 1362 . Dubrovnik . Moraveji , N . , Li , J . , Ding , J . , O’Kelley , P . , & Woolf , S . ( 2007 ) . Comicboarding : Using Comics as Proxies for Participatory Design with Children . Proc , CHI 2007 , San Jose , CA . Rebecca , S . , Mazzone , K . , Horton , E . , & Read , J . C . ( 2006 ) . Bluebells : A Design Method for Child - Centred Product Development . NordiCHI 2006 : Changing Roles , ( pp . 361 - 368 ) . Sanders , E . B . - N . ( 2002 ) . From User - Centered to Participatory Design Approaches . In J . Frascara , Design and the Social Sciences : Making Connections London , Taylor & Francis . Sanders , E . - N . , Brandt , E . , & Binder , T . ( 2010 ) . A Framework for Organizing the Tools and Techniques of Participatory . Proc . PDC 2010 , pp . 1 - 4 . Sidney . Scaife , M . , Rogers , Y . , Aldrich , F . , et al ( 1997 ) . Designing For or Designing With ? Informant Design for Interactive Learning Environments . Proc . Conf . on Hum . Factors in Comp . Syst . , 343 - 350 . Atlanta . Scupin , R . ( 1997 ) . The KJ method : A technique for analyzing data derived from Japanese ethnology . Human organization , 56 ( 2 ) , 233 - 237 . Sleeswijk Visser , F . , Stappers , P . J . , Van der Lugt , R . , & Sanders , E . - N . ( 2005 ) . Contextmapping : experiences from practice . CoDesign , 1 ( 2 ) , 119 – 149 . Tennant , R . , Joseph , R . , & Stewart - Brown , S . ( 2007 ) . The Affectometer 2 : A measure of positive mental health in UK populations . Quality of Life Research , 16 , 687 - 695 . Thiem , A . , Balaam , M . , Wallace , J . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Designing Wellbeing . DIS 2012 , Newcastle , UK . van Rijn , H . ( 2012 ) . Meaningful encounters . Explorative studies about designers learning from children with autism . Phd . Disertation , TU Delft , Delft . van Rijn , H . , Visser , F . S . , & Stappers , P . J . ( 2011 ) . Stories at the spot : designers learning from caregivers of children with autism . IASDR2011 . Delft . Vredenburg , K . , Isensee , S . , & Righi , C . ( 2002 ) . User - centered design : an integrated approach . New Jersey , Prentice - Hall . Walsh , G . ( 2010 ) . Developing DisCo : A distributed co - design , onl - line tool . PhD Thesis , University of Maryland , College of information studies . Walsh , G . , Druin , A . , Leigh Guha , M . , Foss , B . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Layered Elaboration : A New Technique for Co - Design with Children . Proc . SIGCHI Conf . on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1237 - 1240 NY . Wyeth , P . , & Diercke , C . ( 2006 ) . Designing Cultural Probes for Children . Proc . OZCHI 2006 , Sydne 10