Alphavirus RNA Replicase Is Located on the Cytoplasmic Surface of Endosomes and Lysosomes Susan Froshauer , Jiirgen Kartenbeck , and Ari Helenius Department of Cell Biology , Yale University School of Medicine , New Haven , Connecticut 06510 Abstract . Using morphological and cell biological techniques , we have shown that the RNA replicase of Semliki Forest and Sindbis virus ( two closely related alphaviruses ) is located in complex ribonucleoprotein structures associated with the cytoplasmic surface of modified secondary lysosomes and endosomes . These nucleoprotein complexes often form a bridge between the membrane of the endocytic vacuole and the rough endoplasmic reticulum where the synthesis of the struc - tural proteins of these viruses occurs . The results sug - gest that these cytopathic vacuoles constitute sites not only for viral RNA synthesis , but also for translation of structural proteins , and for the assembly of nucleocapsids . URINC the initial stages of virus infection , the genome and accessory proteins of incoming virions are de - livered into the cytosol of the animal cell . Penetra - tion into the cytosol occurs , as a rule , through the plasma membrane or the membrane of endocytic vacuoles . Sub - sequent uncoating of the genome and replication takes place either in the nucleus , in association with cytoplasmic or - ganelles , or in soluble cytoplasmic complexes . In many cases cellular factors appear to be needed in the early cytosolic processes . While the mechanisms of penetration and the mo - lecular events during replication are increasingly well under - stood for many viruses , little is now known about nucleocap - sid uncoating , intracytoplasmic relocation , transport to the nucleus , and association with intracellular proteins and organelles . In this paper we address the cell biology of the early cyto - plasmic events during Semliki Forest virus ( SFV ) ~ and Sindbis virus infection . These alphaviruses are known to en - ter cells by receptor - mediated endocytosis via coated pits , followed by acid - activated membrane fusion in the endo - somal compartment ( see Kielian and Helenius , 1986 ) . As a result the nucleocapsid , an isometric spherical particle com - posed of a single - stranded RNA molecule and 240 copies of a single capsid protein ( Fuller , 1987 ) , is released into the cytoplasm . The subsequent replication of alphaviral RNA occurs entirely within the cytoplasmic compartment in asso - ciation with cytoplasmic organelles ( see Strauss and Strauss , 1986 ) . The starting point for these studies was a group of observa - tions made some twenty years ago by Acheson and Tamm Jiirgen Kartenbeck ' s present address is Institute of Cell and Tumor Biology , German Cancer Research Center , Heidelberg , FRG . 1 . Abbreviations used in thispaper : CPV , cytopathic vacuoles I ; MOI , mul - tiplicity of infection ; RER , rough endoplasmic reticulum ; SFV , Semliki Forest virus . ( 1967 ) , Grimley et al . ( 1968 ) , and Friedman et al . ( 1972 ) , which showed that alphavirus - infected cells contained mor - phologically distinct cytopathic vacuoles . Some of these , the so - called cytopathic vacuoles I ( CPVs ) , were implicated as the organelles of RNA replication ( Grimley et al . , 1968 ; Friedman et al . , 1972 ) . CPVs were identified by EM as com - plex vacuolar structures , 0 . 6 - 2 . 0 p . m in diameter , equipped with characteristic 50 - nm light bulb - shaped membrane spherules lining the limiting membrane at regular intervals . However , given the limitations of the techniques available at the time , the correlation between the CPVs and RNA replica - tion remained tentative , and the origin and nature of the vacuoles unknown ( Grimley et al . , 1972 ; Friedman et al . , 1972 ) . The results presented in this paper show that CPVs are en - dosomes and lysosomes modified by association of virus - specific components . The viral RNA polymerase is present in large , branching , granular , and fibrous structures an - chored to the cytoplasmic surface of CPVs at the spherules . A connection between CPVs and the rough endoplasmic re - ticulum ( RER ) via these structures was also observed . Taken together , the results explain some of the key events during the early stages of the replication cycle . Furthermore , they suggest that translation , transcription , and assembly of viral nucleocapsids may occur within a single large CPV - associ - ated cytoplasmic structure . Materials and Methods Virus and Cell Cultures SFV was grown from a plaque - purified stock derived from the prototype Helsinki strain as described by Kfifiri / iinen et al . ( 1969 ) and Kielian et al . ( 1984 ) . Infection and cell maintenance procedures have been described ( Helenius et al . , 1980 , 1982 ; Schmid et al . , 1988 ) . Identical procedures were followed for propagation of Sindbis virus , a gift of Bart Sefton ( The Salk Institute , San Diego , CA ) . © The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 88 / 12 / 2075 / 12 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 107 , ( No . 6 , Pt . I ) Dec . 1988 2075 - 2086 2075 Antibodies Rabbit polyclonal anti - nsPl , nsP2 , nsP3 , and nsP4 antisera recognize SFV and Sindbis virus nonstructural proteins by immunoprecipitation ( Hardy and Strauss , 1988 ) . Anti - nsP3 and nsP4 sera also recognize Sindbis anti - gens by immunofluorescence ( this communication ) . Rabbit polyclonal anti - lgpll0 and anti - lgpl20 antisera and afffinity - purified rat monoclonal anti - Igpll0 IgG ( GL2A7 Kn ) have been described ( Lewis et al . , 1985 ; Green et al . , 1987 ) . Mouse monoclonal anti - lgp96 IgG ( E9A4 ) recognizes lgp96 in Chinese hamster ovary ( CHO ) cells ( S . Schmid , R . Fuchs , K . - P . Zimmer , and I . Mellman , Yale University Medical School , New Haven , CT ) . Rabbit polyclonal anti - cathepsin L recognizes cathepsin L in NIH3T3 and CHO cells . Affinity - purified goat anti - rabbit IgG , and rhodamine - conjugated goat anti - rat IgG were purchased from Tago Inc . ( Burlingame , CA ) . Peroxidase - conjugated sheep anti - mouse and anti - rabbit Fab fragments were from BIO - SYS ( Pasteur Institute , Paris , France ) . 5 - and 10 - nm gold - conjugated goat anti - rabbit and anti - mouse IgGs were from Janssen Pharmaceutica ( Beerse , Belgium ) . Metabolic Radiolabeling of Viral RNA and Proteins Pulse - labeled viral RNA was produced by treating cells for 1 h , 3 . 5 h after infection with 2 p , g / ml actinomycin D ( Worthington Biochemical Corp . , Freehold , NJ ) , then pulse labeling for 3 min with 500 p , Ci 3Huridine ( New England Nuclear , Boston , MA ) / 7 × 107 cells in prewarmed serum - fre¢ MEM with 2 p , g / ml of actinomycin D . Dishes were placed on ice and washed three times with ice - cold PBS containing 10 mM uridine . To label viral proteins , cells were incubated in methionine - free medium containing 2 ~ tg / ml actinomycin D for 30 min , 1 h after infection . Cells were labeled with 0 . 75 mCi 35Smethionine ( Amersham Corp . , Arlington Heights , IL ; 3 , 300 Ci / mmol ) / 7 × 107 cells . Free - flow Electrophoresis Virus - infected CHO cell homogenates were prepared from 1 × 10 s cells according to the method of Marsh et al . ( 1987 ) and Balch and Rothman ( 1985 ) . Under these conditions the majority of nuclei remain intact and 80 % of the cells are lyzed . Microsomes were prepared from postnuclear supernatants and resus - pended to 1 mg / ml protein . Before electrophoresis , microsomes were treated with 10 p . g / ml of TPCK - trypsin ( Worthington Biochemical Corp . ) for 5 min at 37°C , followed by treatment with 50 t ~ g / ml of soybean trypsin inhibitor ( Sigma Chemical Co . , St . Louis , MO ) . Free - flow electrophoresis was performed using the Bender and Hobein ElphorVap21 instrument ( Pro - tein Technologies , Inc . , Tucson , AZ ) at 130 mA and 1 , 700 - 1 , 800 V as de - scribed ( Marsh et al . , 1987 ) . Protein , RNA , and Enzyme Assays Protein was determined using the Coomassie Blue - binding assay ( Bradford , 1976 ) or by monitoring radioactivity when cells were labeled with 35Sme - thionine . JHuridine RNA was detected by monitoring TCA - precipitable radioactivity . Marker enzymes I ~ - hexosaminidase and alkaline phosphodi - esterase were assayed fluorometrically according to Pool et al . ( 1983 ) and Hawley et al . ( 1981 ) to locate lysosomes and plasma membrane , respectively . lmmunoprecipitation of Sindbis Nonstructural Proteins Pooled fractions obtained by free - flow electrophoresis were collected onto 1 M sucrose cushions by centrifugation at 28 , 000 rpm ( SW28 ) for 35 min ( 4°C ) , and pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer ( 1 mM PMSE 10 lag / ml leupeptin , 2 mM EDTA , and 1 % NP - 40 or 0 . 5 % SDS in PBS ) . 4 vol of immunoprecipitation buffer ( 50 mM " Iris , pH 7 . 4 , 300 mM NaCI , 4 mM EDTA , 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 , 200 Ixg / ml BSA , and 40 I . tg / ml PMSF ) were added to resuspended free - flow electrophoresis pellets or cell lysates and incubated for 1 . 5 h ( 0°C ) in the presence of 2 I . tl of rabbit anti - nsP anti - body . 100 p . l of a 10 % prewashed suspension of fixed Staphylococcus aureus ( vol / vol in immunoprecipitation buffer ; Zysorbin , Zymed Labs , San Fran - cisco , CA ) and 10 lal of goat anti - rabbit IgG were added before shaking sam - ples for 1 . 5 h ( 4°C ) . Immune complexes were pelleted , washed three times in HSA ( 0 . 6 M NaCI , 0 . 125 M KH2PO4 , pH 7 . 4 , containing 0 . 02 % Na azide ) , once in H20 , resuspended in Laemmli sample buffer , and heated for 15 min at 65°C . Gel Electrophoresis SDS - PAGE was carried out under reducing conditions using 10 % ( wt / vol ) polyacrylamide gels ( Laemmli , 1970 ) . Gels were stained with Coomassie Blue to detect high molecular mass standards ( Sigma Chemical Co . ) and enhanced with 1 M sodium salicylate for fluorography ( Chamberlin , 1979 ) . Indirect Immunofluorescence Microscopy Cells grown on multiwell slides ( Carlson Scientific , Inc . , Peotone , IL ) were methanol fixed for 10 min or Nakane fixed for 1 h ( McLean and Nakane , 1974 ) , both at 0°C . Nakane - fixed cells were permeabilized with 0 . 005 % saponin . Incubations with rabbit anti - nsP3 ( or nsP4 ) sera ( 1 : 500 ) and fluorescein - conjugated goat anti - rabbit IgG ( 1 : 40 ) were for 30 min ( 25°C ) . Rabbit anti - nsP antisera were preadsorbed to fixed , uninfected cells . Cells mounted in moviol were photographed in a Photomicroscope III ( Carl Zeiss , Inc . , Thornwood , NY ) equipped with epifluorescence . Electron Microscopy For thin - section electron microscopy , infected cells were fixed in 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde in cacodylate buffer ( 50 mM sodium cacodylate , pH 7 . 2 , 50 mM KCI , and 2 . 5 mM MgC12 ) for 10 min . Cells were stained , dehydrated , detached from dishes with 100 % propylene oxide , and embedded in Epon as described ( Helenius et al . , 1980 ) . Ultrathin sections were examined at 60 kV in an electron microscope ( 100 - CX ; JEOL USA , Peabody , MA ) after staining with uranyl acetate and / or lead citrate . Immunoperoxidase cytochemistry was performed using the procedure of Brown and Farquhar ( 1984 ) . Infected cells were fixed for 6 h ( 25°C ) using Nakane ' s fixative permeabilized with 0 . 001 % saponin , and incubated 12 h ( 0°C ) with primary antibodies ( anti - lgpl20 1 : 200 , anti - lgp96 1 : 100 , or anti - cathepsin L IgG 1 : 50 ) , followed by incubation for 1 . 5 h ( 25°C ) with peroxidase - conjugated sheep anti - rabbit Fab fragments ( 1 : 50 ) . Subse - quently , cells were fixed in 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde and treated with 50 mM Tris , pH 7 . 4 , containing 7 . 5 % sucrose , 0 . 2 % diaminobenzidine hydrochlo - ride , and 0 . 01 % hydrogen peroxide for 3 - 10 min , postfixed , and embedded as described . To examine free - flow electrophoresis fractions 13 - hexosaminidase and bulk protein peak fractions were collected into four 24 - ml pools and fixed in glutaraldehyde ( final concentration , 2 . 5 % ) . After fixation ( 30 min , 25°C ) , fractions were pelleted at 28 , 000 rpm ( SW28 , 30 min , 4°C ) onto a 1 M su - crose cushion . The sucrose cushion was resuspended in cacodylate buffer , and the membrane vesicles repelleted in an Eppendorf centrifuge for 15 rain . Morphometric analyses of thin sections obtained from the pelleted pools were performed according to the method of Weibel ( 1969 ) . The total mem - brane surface area in each pool was determined by measuring intersections of the limiting membrane of CPVs or vacuoles with a grid placed over the photomicrographs of the sections . The measurements were normalized to relative amounts of total protein recovered in the fractions . A total of 2 , 640 intersections of CPVs compared to 5 , 188 for all other vacuoles was determined . Uptake of Fluid Phase Markers Cationic ferritin ( Sigma Chemical Co . ) was prepared as described ( Nilsson et al . , 1983 ) and added to cells at a final concentration of 0 . 5 mg / ml and horseradish peroxidase ( Sigma ) at 10 mg / ml . Horseradish peroxidase was visualized histochemically by fixing cells with 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde in caco - dylate buffer and treating with diaminobenzidine ( see above ) . Immunogold Labeling of Semi - intact Cells The procedure of Beckers et al . ( 1978 ) was followed to render CHO cells semi - intact by the nitrocellulose technique . 70 - 80 % of the cells were dis - rupted based on trypan blue permeability . Permeabilized cells were fixed in 3 % fresh formaldehyde in PBS for 20 min on ice and incubated with anti - nsP3 or nsP4 antibodies ( 1 : 100 ) for 1 . 5 h ( 25°C ) , followed by incuba - tion with 5 - nm gold - conjugated goat anti - rabbit IgG ( 1 : 100 ) for 4 h ( 25°C ) . Immunogold Labeling of Saponin - permeabilized Cells CHO cells were Nakane fixed for 2 . 5 h , and permeabilized with 0 . 1 or 0 . 5 % saponin for 10 rain . Either rabbit anti - nsP3 ( or nsP4 ) antibodies or mouse anti - lgp96 IgG ( 1 : 100 ) were added for 2 . 5h , followed by incubation with 5 - nm gold - conjugated goat anti - rabbit IgG for single - labeling experiments The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 107 , 1988 2076 or 10 - nm gold - conjugated goat anti - rabbit lgG ( 1 : 10 ) with 5 - nm gold - conjugated goat anti - mouse IgG ( 1 : 10 ) for double - labeling . Secondary anti - bodies were added for 12 h ( 4°C ) . All other incubations were performed at 25°C . Results Ultrastructure of CPVs The morphology of CPVs has been described previously in detail ( Acheson and Tamm , 1967 ; Grimley et al . , 1968 , 1972 ) . Our electron micrographs of infected baby hamster kidney ( BHK ) and CHO cells are well in agreement with previous studies ( Fig . 1 ) . Although quite heterogenous with respect to size and internal contents , the CPVs were easily recognized by the charateristic spherules associated with the limiting membrane . We found they were distributed through - out the cytosol , but were often located in close proximity to elements of the RER ( Fig . 1 a ) . Although the previous studies have suggested that CPVs are either derived from the Golgi apparatus or from mito - chondria ( Grimley et al . , 1972 ; Friedman et al . , 1972 ) , we found that they looked more similar to lysosomes and endo - somes ( Fig . 1 , a , b , and g ) . For example , they contained mul - tivesicular inclusions , amorphous material , and occasional intact - looking virions . That the spherules represented in - vaginations of the limiting membrane of the vacuoles was clearly seen in fortuitous sections ( arrowhead , Fig . 1 b ) . In - side the spherule a dense , star - shaped structure was often seen with thin spokes radiating from a central mass ( Fig , 1 , • b - e ) . The narrow , membranous neck of the spherule ( outer diameter , 19 - 20 nm ; inner diameter , 8 nm ) typically con - tained an electron dense plug ( arrow , Fig . 1 c ) . The plug was sometimes connected to electron dense material extending into the cytoplasm ( large arrowhead , Fig . 1 , b - d ) . In some images this material had a threadlike appearance , and it often contained granules which corresponded in size and morphol - ogy to ribosomes and to nucleocapsids ( Fig , 1 , c and d ) . Clusters of spherules were present on the plasma mem - brane , and occasionally a spherule could be seen in a coated pit or a coated vesicle suggesting that it was being endocy - tosed ( Fig . 1 h ) . Images in which CPVs appeared to fuse with the plasma membrane suggested that intracellular CPVs could be the source of the plasma membrane spherules ( Fig . I f ) . We observed that CPVs became detectable after 1 h of in - fection at moderately high multiplicity ( multiplicity of infec - tion MOIl = 200 ) ( Table I ) . The CPVs observed at this early time point had endosome - like morphology and only a few spherules ( Fig . 1 g ) . At 5 h , when the cells reached a maximum level of virus production ( and were probably al - ready superinfected with progeny virus ) , numerous mature CPVs appeared . These had many spherules and a lysosome - like appearance ( Fig . 1 , a and b ) . The concentration of early CPVs was clearly dependent on MOI because if a low mul - tiplicity were used ( MOI = 20 ) , CPVs became detectable only after 5 h of infection . CPVs Are Modified Endosomes and Lysosomes Since CPVs displayed so many morphological similarities with endosomes and lysosomes , we tested whether endocy - tosed substances were delivered to them . As shown in Fig . 2 a , two commonly used , nonspecific endocytic tracers , cat - ionic ferritin and horseradish peroxidase , were internalized into the lumen of CPVs when added to the medium of in - fected cells . When the tracers were present for 2 h beginning 5 h after infection , 60 % of the CPVs in CHO cells became labeled . The extent of labeling of individual CPVs was quite variable , but this was true for endosomes and lysosomes in uninfected cells as well . Inclusion into CPVs was also seen when cells were treated with the tracers 1 h before infection only . These results suggested that the CPVs were part of the endocytic pathway and that they originated through modifica - tion of preexisting endocytic vacuoles . To examine whether some of the CPVs were endosomal , we determined whether CPVs could be labeled with cationic ferritin at 20°C . At this temperature endosomes can be la - beled with endocytic tracers but delivery to lysosomes is blocked ( Dunn et al . , 1980 ; Marsh et al . , 1983 ; Ukkonen et al . , 1986 ) . CHO cells were infected at 37°C for 2 h and then shifted to 20°C , and cationic ferritin was added for 1 h , 4 h after infection . It was found that a small fraction ( , o10 % ) of CPVs became labeled ( data not shown ) . The labeled CPVs had structural features typical of endosomes , including the tubular extensions ( Marsh et al . , 1986 ) . From this we con - cluded that a fraction of CPVs in CHO cells consisted of prelysosomal endocytic vacuoles . Immunoperoxidase cytochemistry showed that the major - ity of CPVs were lysosomal . CPVs stained positively for four lysosomal marker antigens : lgpl20 , lgpll0 , lgp96 , and ca - thepsin L ( Fig . 2 b ) . The lgps are highly glycosylated , trans - membrane proteins which are almost exclusively localized in lysosomal membranes of noninfected cells ( Lewis et al . , 1985 ; Green et al . , 1987 ; Schmid , S . , R . Fuchs , K . - P . Zim - mer , and I . Mellman , personal communication ) and cathep - sin L is a lysosomal hydrolase . When infected CHO cells were immunolabeled with antibodies to lgpl20 , 90 % of the organelles labeled were CPVs . In NIH3T3 cells infected with SFV , 40 % of the organelles labeled by anti - lgpll0 or anti - cathepsin L antibodies could be identified unambiguously as CPVs . Very few of the organelles stained with lgpl20 were normal lysosomes indicating that a large fraction of lyso - somes had been converted to CPVs after 5 h of infection . Isolation of CPVs The lysosomal nature of the majority of CPVs in CHO cells was consistent with their behavior during cell fractionation . When infected cells were subjected to the fractionation pro - tocol used in our laboratory to isolate lysosomes , enrichment of CPVs was achieved . We used the free - flow electrophoresis method of Harms et al . ( 1980 ) as modified by Marsh et al . ( 1987 ) . The method takes advantage of the anodal mobility of lysosomes in a strong electric field . CPVs were found to shift like lysosomes when subjected to this isolation pro - tocol . Microsomes prepared from SFV - or Sindbis - infected CHO cells were treated briefly with 1 % trypsin for 1 mg / ml of protein ( a treatment required for optimal separation of lysosomes from other organelles including endosomes ) and applied to the free - flow electrophoresis machine as previ - ously described ( Marsh et al . , 1987 ) . Fig . 3 a shows the separation of the lysosomal marker 13 - hexosaminidase and total protein in a typical experiment . It was very similar to that obtained for uninfected CHO ceils ( data not shown ; see Froshauer et al . Cell Biology of Alphavirus RNA Replication 2077 Figure 1 . Ultmstructure of CPVs . BHK cells were infected with SFV for 2 - 5 h ( MOI = 200 ) and examined by EM . ( a ) Overall distribution and membranous inclusions in CPVs showing lysosomal characteristics . The proximity of some CPVs to the PER can be seen . Spherules ( 50 nm ) can be seen lining the membrane of CPVs . ( b ) The small arrowhead indicates the continuity of the spherule neck ( outer diameter , 19 - 20 nm ; inner diameter , 8 nm ) with the vacuole membrane . The large arrowheads ( b - d ) indicate threadlike material attached to base of spherule at the electron dense plug ( arrow ; c ) . Granular material the size of ribosomes can be seen attached to the threads ( small arrow - heads ; c and d ) . ( e ) A virion ( v ) , spherules ( sp ) , nucleocapsid ( nc ) , and budding virus ( arrowhead ) are juxtaposed . ( f ) A vacuole with spherules is fused with the plasma membrane . ( g ) A CPV with tubular projections has the morphology of an endosome . ( h ) A spherule at the plasma membrane is in a coated pit . N , nucleus ; M , mitochondria ; G , Golgi apparatus ; sp , spherule ; v , virion ; nc , nucleocapsid . Bars : ( a ) 391 ; ( b ) 217 ; ( c ) 103 ; ( d ) 83 ; ( e ) 131 ; ( f ) 137 ; ( g ) 157 ; and ( h ) 140 nm . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 107 , 1988 2078 Table L The Time Course of CPV Formation Multiplicity of infection ( MOI ; Time Presence pfu / cell ) postinfection of CPVs h 20 3 - 5 + + 200 1 + 2 + + 4 + + + BHK cells were infected with SFV and prepared for EM analysis as described in Materials and Methods . ( - ) CPVs were not detected ; ( + ) CPVs rare ; ( + + ) CPVs obvious ; or ( + + + ) CPVs abundant . Marsh et al . , 1987 ; Schmid et al . , 1988 ) resulting in a more than fourfold enrichment of the lysosomal marker in the most anodal peak over total microsomal pellet . Markers for mitochondria , plasma membrane , endoplasmic reticulum , and most of the Golgi membranes eluted in the main protein peak ( data not shown ; see Marsh et al . , 1987 ; Schmid et al . , 1988 ) . Thin - section electron micrographs of pellets made from the lysosome peak ( pools I and II ) and the main protein peak ( pools III and IV ) showed that CPVs were , indeed , highly en - riched ( Fig . 3 b ) . A morphometric analysis of the pools ( nor - malizing against the protein content ) showed that 70 % of to - tal CPVs were in pool II , and that 71 % of the total membrane in pool II was in CPVs . Altogether the lysosomal peak con - tained 17 % of total microsomal protein . Although lightly trypsin treated to allow the anodal shift of lysosomes , the CPVs retained most of their morphological characteristics . The spherules with their dense central structures and plugs at their necks were present . The electron dense threads that extend into the cytoplasm from the CPV membrane in intact cells were , however , absent . The RNA Polymerase The enrichment of CPVs in the lysosome peak after free - flow electrophoresis gave us an opportunity to determine directly whether the CPVs contained the RNA replication machinery . We determined whether the RNA polymerase subunits were present using specific polyclonal antibodies that recognize nonstructural proteins nsP1 , 2 , 3 , and 4 of Sindbis virus ( Hardy and Strauss , 1988 ) . Although their individual roles have not been elucidated , the nsPs are known to be involved in viral RNA replication and processing , and they are thought to constitute subunits of the RNA polymerase complex . They are newly synthesized after penetration and are not com - ponents of incoming virions ( Clewley and Kennedy , 1976 ; Ranki and IO ~ ifinen , 1979 ; Gomatos et al . , 1980 ; Kergnen and Ruohonen , 1983 ; Strauss et al . , 1983 ; Lopez et al . , 1985 ; Hardy and Strauss , 1988 ) . We prepared microsomes from [ 35S ] methionine - labeled Sindbis - infected cells , subjected them to free - flow electro - phoresis , and immunoprecipitated pooled fractions after solubilization with NP - 40 . As shown in Fig . 4 , we found to our surprise that the fractions richest in CPVs contained the lowest amounts of nsP1 , 2 , 3 , and 4 . ( Pools 2 - 5 in Fig . 4 are equivalent to pools I - IV , respectively , in Fig . 3 a ) . The Figure 2 . CPVs labeled with cationic ferritin or with immunoperoxidase using lgpl20 antibodies . CHO cells were infected with SFV for 5 h ( MOI = 500 ) . ( a ) Cationic ferritin ( 0 . 5 mg / ml ) was added for I h at 4 h postinfection and examined by EM . Electron dense , granular material in the vacuoles is the ferritin label ( arrows ) . ( b ) Lgpl20 was stained by immunoperoxidase cytochemistry using rabbit polyclonal anti - lgpl20 IgG as primary antibody . Bars : ( a ) 360 ; ( b ) 100 nm . Froshauer et al . Cell Biology of Alphavirus RIgA Replication 2079 Figure 3 . Resolution of CPVs by free - flow electrophoresis of alphavirus - infected CHO cells . Approximately 1 x 108 cells were infected with SFV for 5 h ( MOI = 500 ) and subjected to free - flow electrophoresis as described in Materials and Methods . At 5 h postinfection , cells were pulse labeled for 2 min with [ 3H ] uridine in the presence of 2 I . tg / ml actinomycin D . ( a ) Lysosomes were detected by ~ hexos - aminidase activity ( I ) ( Pool et al . , 1983 ) , and protein ( D ) by Bradford assay ( 1976 ) . Newly synthesized viral RNA was detected by TCA - precipitable radioactivity ( A ) . Activities are expressed as the percent of total activity eluted by free - flow electrophoresis . The peak RNA fraction contained 1 , 870 cpm . Approximately 1 . 5 mg of protein was applied to the apparatus . Pools I - IV denote the fractions pooled to detect CPVs by ultrathin - section EM , and pools 1 - 6 , for immunoprecipitation of nsPs . The pools marked were from separate , but compara - ble , free - flow electrophoresis experiments . ( b ) Ultrastructure of CPVs in pellet of pool II . Morphometry ( see Materials and Methods ) showed that 71 % of the membrane in pool II was in CPVs . Note the threadlike material normally at the base of spherules is absent ( e . g . , Fig . 1 c ) . Figure 4 . Immunoprecipitation of Sindbis nsPs in free - flow electro - phoresis cell fractions . Sindbis - in - fected CHO cells ( MOI = 500 ) were labeled with [ 3SS ] methionine for 4 h , at 1 h postinfection ( see Materials and Methods ) . Pelleted pools ( Fig . 3 a ) were solubilized in NP - 40 and precipitated with poly - clonal rabbit anti - nsPl , 2 , 3 , and 4 antisera . Immune complexes were collected and resolved on a 10 % Laemmli gel . Bands in fluorogram correspond to nsPs in free - flow frac - tions . Six pools ( 1 - 6 ) were analyzed as indicated at the bottom . Samples in lanes 1 - 4 , labeled at the top of Pool 5 , were precipitated with anti - nsPl , 2 , 3 , and 4 , respectively . The antibody order was the same for each of the six pools . The arrowhead in lane 2 ( Pools 4 and 5 ) indicates an 89 - kD tryptic fragment precipitated by anti - nsP2 antiserum ; the arrowhead in lane 4 ( Pools 4 and 5 ) indicates a 66 - kD tryptic fragment precipitated by anti - nsP4 antiserum ( see Results ) . The positions of molecular mass markers from Coomassie Blue - stained gel are shown at the right . The positions of nsP1 , 2 , and 3 are also indicated . Pools 1 - 3 , and 6 contained no detectable nsPs . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 107 , 1988 2080 majority of nonstructural proteins were , in fact , found to cofractionate with the main protein peak , not with the lyso - somes . This finding indicated that the CPVs in this prepara - tion did not contain the enzyme . In the precipitations , we found that nsP1 was not only precipitated by anti - nsP1 , but also by anti - nsP2 , anti - nsP3 , and anti - nsP4 ( Fig . 4 ) . This suggested the presence of com - plexes between these proteins . When homogenates were trypsin treated for free - flow electrophoresis , anti - nsP2 also precipitated the nsP2 band ( 89 kD ) and a tryptic fragment of nsP2 ( 42 kD ) ( arrowhead ; Fig . 4 , Pool 4 and 5 , lane 2 ) . Anti - nsP4 precipitated a band of 66 kD which probably cor - responded to a tryptic fragment of nsP4 ( arrowhead , Fig . 4 , Pool 4 and 5 , lane 4 ) . If CPVs were involved in RNA replication , we would have expected them not only to contain the nonstructural proteins , but also viral RNA that could be labeled in the intact cell dur - ing a short [ 3H ] uridine pulse in the presence of actinomycin D . As shown in Fig . 3 a , viral RNA could be easily labeled in a 2 - min pulse , but it , too , was found to codistribute with the main protein peak . It was clear that by this method the isolated CPVs did not contain the viral RNA polymerase nor the replicative intermediates . Either the CPVs were not the site for RNA replication , or the RNA polymerase and replicative complexes had been lost during isolation , possi - bly due to the homogenization or the trypsin treatment . Immunolocalization of RNA Polymerase To extend our examination of the intracellular distribution of the RNA polymerase , we used immunofluorescence and ul - trastructural immunocytochemistry . Initial immunoprecipi - tation studies on [ 35S ] methionine - labeled CHO cells estab - lished that nsP1 and 2 were detectable in CHO cells by 2 h after infection , and nsP3 and 4 , which were less abundant , ~ 1 h later ( data not shown ) . Only two of the anti - nsP an - tisera , anti - nsP3 and anti - nsP4 , proved useful for immuno - localization . The two others failed to react with fixed anti - gens . Anti - nsP3 and 4 gave identical results in every respect and could be used interchangeably . Iramunofluorescence . Indirect immunofluorescence re - vealed that RNA polymerase subunits nsP3 and nsP4 were concentrated in discrete , solid spots distributed throughout the cytoplasm of the infected cells ( Fig . 5 ) . These spots did not have the rounded , vacuolar morphology typical of an - tigens localized to lysosomes or endosomes . In addition , while nearly all cells in the culture were infected , only a rela - tively small fraction showed strong staining for the RNA polymerase . The immunofluorescence results were encour - aging , however , since they showed there was enough antigen for high resolution ultrastructural immunolocalization . lramunogold - labeling in SemipermeabUized Cells . Our first ultrastructural approach relied on preparation of semi - intact cells according to the method of Beckers et al . ( 1987 ) . In their method , a nitrocellulose filter is placed onto the sur - face of an unfixed cell monolayer . When it is removed , frag - ments of the plasma membrane are detached without drasti - cally disturbing the overall morphology and architecture of the cell and its intracellular organelles . Biochemical data show that the procedure is much milder than homogenization ( Simons and Virta , 1987 ; Beckers et al . , 1987 ) . Making holes in the plasma membrane in this way allowed us to wash out the cytosol , fix lightly with formaldehyde , and introduce antibodies and colloidal gold conjugates . As secondary anti - bodies we used goat anti - rabbit IgG conjugated with 5 - nm gold particles . As shown in Fig . 6 ( arrows ) , the structures stained by anti - bodies to nsP3 and nsP4 were the fibrous , granular material that we had seen in normal thin sections extending from the CPVs into the cytosol ( e . g . , large arrowheads ; Fig . 1 , b and c ) . This material was now more easily discerned since most of the cytosol had been removed . It was revealed as a charac - teristic feature present on most CPVs . It seemed to be at - tached to the CPVs at the base of the spherules where the plug was located extending outwards as complex , fibrillar , and granular networks . In addition , labeling occurred at the base of spherules present on the plasma membrane ( Fig . 6 c ) . Here it was less extensive , but again clearly connected to the spherules . Gold labeling was only seen in infected cells , it Figure 5 . Indirect immunofluorescence localization of nsP3 in Sindbis - infected NIH3T3 cells . 4 h after infection ( MOI = 100 ) cells were methanol - fixed and stained with rhodamine - conjugated goat anti - rabbit IgG . Rabbit antisera were preadsorbed to uninfected NIH3T3 cells . Bar , 190 ltm . Froshauer et al . Cell Biology of AIphavirus RNA Replication 2081 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 107 , 1988 2082 was absent with control antibodies , and the pattern was re - producible . Clusters of gold particles were also seen on amorphous material associated with the RER , and some - times in free complexes without apparent membrane attach - ment . Association of immunogold with mitochondria and with the Golgi membranes was not observed , nor was it seen in regions of the plasma membranes devoid of spherules . Often a close proximity between RER membranes and CPVs could be observed ( Fig . 6 , a and f ) . It was striking that the amorphous , gold - stained material appeared to form a bridge between the RER surface and the CPV , as if sus - pended between these two organdies . This observation was in agreement with the frequent , " next - neighbor " relationship between the two organdies noted in normal thin sections ( Fig . 1 a ) . Nucleocapsids , dark spherical particles with di - ameters of 30 nm ( small arrowheads , Figs . 1 e and 6 , a , b , and f ) were also frequently components of the meshwork . Immunocytochemistry on Saponin - permeabilized Cells . To examine the RNA polymerase complexes further , we opened cells by saponin permeabilization as described by Brown and Farquhar ( 1984 ) . The advantage of this immuno - cytochemical technique is less disruption of the cells and cytoplasm ; the disadvantage is that the morphology of the spherules suffer from the saponin treatment . We found , how - ever , that the preservation of CPVs was satisfactory ( Fig . 6 b ) . The antibody - staining pattern confirmed the distribution of nsP3 and nsP4 seen in the semi - intact cells . The RNA poly - merase - containing structures were impressive in size , ex - tending 800 nm from the membrane of the CPV . Numerous nucleocapsids were present within the meshwork . The con - nections with the PER were quite clear . In no instance did we see staining of the spherules themselves with gold al - though any antigens within them should have been accessible after the saponin treatment . In double - labeling experiments nsP3 was labeled with 10 - nm gold and lgp96 , one of the lysosomal membrane antigens , with 5 - nm gold . It was found that the viral polymerase anti - bodies stained the outside surface of a CPV , and the lgp96 antibodies stained the lumen and the spherules ( not shown ) . This verified the dual nature of the CPV , it was a lysosome serving as a matrix for the viral RNA polymerase and for the replicative intermediates . Discussion Alphavirus infection induces at least two different types of cytopathic vacuoles : cytopathic vacuoles I and cytopathic vacuoles II . The results in this paper show that the cytopathic vacuoles I ( CPVs ) , which appear early in infection , are modi - fied lysosomes and endosomes . By immunocytochemistry we found that they have extensive , branched , nonmembra - nous structures that contain the viral RNA polymerase at - tached to their cytoplasmic surface at the bases of the spher - ules . The morphological analysis showed that the attached material also contains particulate bodies including ribo - somes and nucleocapsids . Wherever spherules were ob - served on the plasma membrane , similar cytoplasmic ribo - nucleoprotein material was present , but few nucleocapsids were seen . Taken together with previous data on the CPVs ( cell fractionation and autoradiography ) , it is evident that the material is likely to constitute the site of RNA replication in the cytoplasm of the infected cell . The majority of the CPVs were positive for cathepsin L , lysosomal membrane proteins , and endocytic markers inter - nalized either before or during infection . Upon cell fraction - ation using free - flow dectrophoresis , the majority behaved like normal lysosomes . During infection , preexisting lyso - somes were apparently converted into CPVs that continued to internalize endocytosed material . Particularly during the first hours of infection some CPVs appeared more prelyso - somal ( endosomal ) in character suggesting that CPVs may originate from modified endosomes , which then proceed to become lysosomes , as do normal endosomes , At later times nearly all the lysosomes in heavily infected CHO cells were converted to CPVs . When infected cells were permeabilized by rupturing the plasma membrane and inspected using immunocytochemis - try , frequent connections between the CPVs and the RER via the RNA polymerase - containing filamentous and granular networks were observed . The close apposition of CPVs and the RER was confirmed by immunocytochemistry using fixed saponin - permeabilized cells and by standard thin - section analysis . The distance between the two membranes was often filled with extensive networks of RNA polymer - ase - containing material and nucleocapsids . The origin and composition of the spherules that line the inside surface of CPV membrane , and provide a morphologi - cal hallmark for the structures , remains unknown . They clearly provide the attachment sites for the RNA polymer - ase - containing material , but contain no detectable parental viral RNA or RNA polymerase themselves , judging by im - munocytochemistry and cell fractionation . We found that the number of CPVs and spherules correlated roughly with the MOI ; small numbers of spherules were present in endo - somes by 1 h after infection , whereas endosomes and lyso - somes lined with spherules were observed only in late stages of infection ( i . e . , when superinfection was already ongoing ) . It remains a possibility that the spherules are , in fact , rem - nants of the incoming virus particles that stay associated with the endosomal and lysosomal membranes after fusion . We are in the process of determining whether the spherules con - tain parental nucleocapsid proteins which are known to have a relatively long half - life within the infected cell . Which cel - lular components they contain and why they obtain their characteristic shape and morphology is not clear . Figure 6 Immunogold localization of nsP3 and nsP4 . CHO cells were infected with Sindbis for 4 . 5 h ( MOI = 200 ) and disrupted with nitrocellulose filters ( a , c , and e ) or permeabilized with 0 . 1 % saponin ( b , d , and f ) . The nsP3 and nsP4 antigens were identified using 5 - nm gold - conjugated goat anti - rabbit IgG secondary antibodies and rabbit anti - nsP3 or nsP4 IgG primary antibodies , nsP4 antigens are labeled in e and nsP3 in a - d andf Large arrows indicate dense granular , threadlike material anchored at base of spherules . Neighbor - ing RER membranes in close contact with replication complexes are indicated ( a and f ) . Small arrowheads ( a , b , and f ) show nueleocap - sids ( nc ) . The threads found at the base of the spherules ( sp ) on plasma membrane also contain nsPs ( c ) . Bars : ( a ) 133 ; ( b ) 147 ; ( c ) 121 ; ( d ) 49 ; ( e ) 147 ; and ( f ) 169 nm . Froshauer et al . Cell Biology of Alphavirus RNA Replication 2083 The novel finding that endosomes and lysosomes may serve as a matrix for alphavirus RNA replication raises in - teresting functional questions . One of them concerns the mechanisms of early cytoplasmic events during virus entry . We have previously shown that SFV enters via a receptor - mediated endocytosis pathway involving acid - induced fusion of the viral membrane with the limiting membrane of endo - somes . The early steps in the pathway , now known to be com - mon to many enveloped and nonenveloped viruses ( see Kie - lian and Helenius , 1986 ; Marsh , M . , and A . Helenius , ii ! i ii i i iii iiiii iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii ! iii iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii iiiiiii iiii i i iiiiiii iii ! iiiiiii Costed pit L / 3 Coated vesicle ly , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . , . . . ! iii : . ' : ! ~ i endo $ orae S $ Late endosorne 6¢ Lysoeome ( CPV ) leunmdOp lasmic Figure 7 . Schematic depiction of steps involved in alphavirus entry and early cytoplasmic events . Steps 1 - 5 have been established in previous work ( see Kielian and Helenius , 1986 ; Marsh , M . , and A . Helenius , manuscript submitted for publication ) . Steps 5 - 7 are hypothetical , and based on the findings of this paper . ( 1 ) Binding of the virus particle to proteinaceous receptors on the plasma mem - brane ( occurs frequently to microvilli ) . ( 2 ) Lateral movement along the membrane and uptake into coated pits . ( 3 ) Internalization in coat - ed vesicles . ( 4 ) Delivery to early endosomes , in which the pH is low enough to induce a conformational change in spike glycoproteins , and activate membrane fusion and nucleocapsid penetration into the cytosol . ( 5 ) The nucleocapsid remains associated with the endosomal membrane where it uncoats , and where initial translation of non - structural proteins may begin . ( 6 ) The endosome fuses with a lyso - some thereby transferring the replication complex to the lysosomal membrane . ( 7 ) A large ribonucleoprotein matrix containing the viral RNA polymerase is formed at the surface of the lysosome , a " spher - ule " containing part of the lysosomal membrane , cellular proteins , and possibly a remnant of the nucleocapsid is generated , and , pos - sibly through mediation of the 26 - S RNA , contacts with the RER are established . As discussed in the text , the matrix may constitute the site for RNA replication , for translation of viral proteins , and for nucleocapsid assembly . manuscript submitted for publication ) , are schematically depicted in Fig . 7 . As a result of penetration , viral nucleocap - sids are transferred to the cytosolic compartment . Transfer occurs rapidly and efficiently once the viruses have reached the early endosome compartment . Once in the cytosol , it is not known whether the nucleocapsid structures remain as - sociated with the cytosolic surface of the endosome as indi - cated in Fig . 7 or are released free into the cytosol . The ob - servation that RNA replication may occur on the surface of lysosomes and endosomes suggests , however , that the nu - cleocapsid may , indeed , remain attached and that this is the way in which the genome is transported ultimately to the cytosolic surface of the lysosomes . It is well known that virus - containing endosomes in BHK cells are delivered by membrane fusion to lysosomes asynchronously during the first 2 h after virus internalization ( Kielian et al . , 1986 ) . The lysosomal membrane , or perhaps even the membrane of the endosome , may be the site where initial uncoating and trans - lation of the viral RNA and assembly of the functional RNA polymerase takes place . Nucleocapsids may remain mem - brane associated as a consequence of their affinity for the COOH - terminal tail of the spike glycoprotein E2 which after fusion should be exposed on the external surface of the en - dosomal membrane ( Helenius and Kartenbeck , 1980 ; Si - mons and Garoff , 1980 ) . According to this model , the site of RNA replication is pri - marily determined by the mode of entry . The alternative pathway , that the viral replicative complexes specifically bind to the membranes of lysosomes and endosomes later in the replicative cycle , cannot be excluded at this time , but studies in progress with microinjected infectious RNA should address this possibility . Whether the lysosomal association provides any advantages for viral replication is not known . It does suggest , however , that antiviral agents against al - phaviruses could be made more effective if targeted specifi - cally to lysosomes . Another interesting question concerns the apparent con - nection between the CPVs and the endoplasmic reticulum . We would like to propose that the network which spans the space between these organelles may in fact represent a " fac - tory " where viral RNA and proteins are synthesized , and where nucleocapsids are assembled . It is well known that one of the RNA species synthesized ( the 42 - S RNA SFV - 49 - S RNA Sindbis ) serves not only as the messenger for nonstructural proteins and the template for negative - strand synthesis , but also as the genomic RNA packaged into newly formed nucleocapsids . Another RNA species ( the 26 - S RNA ) , synthesized in the same RNA polymerase - containing matrix constitutes the subgenomic messenger for the synthe - sis of structural proteins ( Simmons and Strauss , 1972 ; Sawicki and Sawicki , 1980 ) . From this messenger a poly - protein precursor ( consisting of capsid and spike proteins ) is translated on membrane - bound polysomes in such a way that the nucleocapsid protein ( 30 kD ) stays in the cytosol and as - sociates rapidly with 42 - S RNA to form nucleocapsids ( Scheele and Pfefferkorn , 1969 ; S6derlund , 1973 ) . In con - trast , the glycoproteins E1 and p62 are translocated into the RER membrane and transported to the plasma membrane where viral assembly and budding takes place ( see Garoff et al . , 1982 ; Schlesinger and Schlesinger , 1986 ) . The main argument that favors a functional role for the CPV - RER interaction is that the nucleocapsids must be as - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 107 , 1988 2084 sembled from components synthesized both in the matrix , associated with the CPVs , and on the endoplasmic reticulum . Not only is the assembly of the capsid extremely rapid ( it only takes 5 - 7 min to chase the newly synthesized capsid protein into intact , fully assembled capsids ) , but it is also re - markably specific . Wengler et al . ( 1982 ) have shown that , whereas the capsid protein in the infected cell specifically as - sociates with the genomic 42 - S RNA , it binds indiscrimi - nately to virtually any single - stranded RNA in vitro . From these studies it is apparent that conditions inside the infected cell somehow favor specific interaction of the capsid protein with the 42 - S RNA . Could it be that the close apposition of the CPV and the RER , and the presence of a structured ma - trix sterically guides association of viral 42 - S RNA with the nucleocapsid protein ? Newly synthesized nucleocapsid pro - teins may , in fact , bind to the 42 - S RNA as it is being tran - scribed , explaining both the specificity of RNA packaging and the rapidity of nucleocapsid assembly . We are grateful to Hans Stukenbrok and Eva Bolzau for their skillful as - sistance with electron microscopy ; to Bruce Granger and the laboratory of Ira Mellman for many helpful discussions and for lgp and cathepsin L an - tisera ; and to Sandy Schmid for her valuable advice during the free - flow studies . We especially thank Reef Hardy for the generous gift of nsP an - tisera ; and Stella Hurtley , Ira Mellman , and Donald Engelman for thought - ful criticism of the manuscript . This work was supported by a fellowship from the Jane Coffin Childs Memorial Fund for Medical Research awarded to S . Froshauer and by Na tional Institutes of Health grant RO1 GM 38346 - 07 awarded to A . Helenius . Received for publication 14 July 1988 , and in revised form 18 August 1988 . References Acheson , N . H . , and I . Tamm . 1967 . Replication of Semliki Forest virus : an electron microscopic study . Virology . 32 : 128 - 143 . Balch , W + E . , and J . E . Rothman . 1985 . Characterization of protein transport between successive compartments of the Golgi apparatus : asymmetric prop - erties of donor and acceptor activities in a cell - free system . Arch . Biochem . Biophys . 240 : 413 - - 425 . Beckers , C . J . M . , D . S . Keller , and W . E . Balch , 1987 . Semi - intact cells per - meable to macromolecules : use in reconstitution of protein transport from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi complex . Cell . 50 : 523 - 534 . Bradford , M . 1976 . A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of micro - gram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein dye binding . Anal . Biochem . 72 : 248 - 254 , Brown , W . J . , and M . G . Farquhar . 1984 . Accumulation of coated vesicles bearing mannose - 6 - phosphate receptors for lysosmal enzymes in the Golgi region of I - cell fibroblasts . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 81 : 5135 - 5139 . Chamberlain , J . P . 1979 . Fluorographic detection of radioactivity in polyacryl - amide gels with water - soluble fluor , sodium salicylate . Anal . Biochem . 98 : 132 - 135 . Clewley , J . P . , and S . 1 . T . Kennedy . 1976 . Purification and polypeptide com - position of Semliki Forest virus RNA polymerase . J . Gen . Virol . 32 : 395 - 411 . Dunn , W . A . , A . L . Hubbard , and N . N . Aronson . 1980 . Low temperature selectively inhibits fusion between pinocytic vesicles and lysosomes during heterophagy of ~ 2 ~ l - asialofetuin by perfused rat liver . J . Biol . Chem . 255 : 5971 - 5978 . Friedman , R . M . , J . G . Levin , P . M . Grimley , and 1 . K . Berezesky . 1972 . Membrane - associated replication complex in arbovirus infection . J . Virol . 10 : 504 - 515 . Fuller , S . D . 1987 . The T - 4 envelope of Sindbis virus is organized by interac - tion with a complementary T - 3 capsid . Cell . 48 : 923 - 934 . Garoff , H . , C . Kondor - Koch , and H . Riedel . 1982 . Structure and assembly of alphavirus . Curr . Top . Microbiol . lmmunol . 99 : 1 - - 49 . Gomatos , P . J . , L . K ~ ri ~ iinen , S . Ker ~ men , M . Ranki , and D . L . Sawicki . 1980 . Semliki Forest virus replication complex capable of synthesizing 42S and 26S nascent RNA chains . J . Gen . ViroL 49 : 61 - 69 . Green , S . , K . - P . Zimmer , G . Grilliths , and I . Mellman . 1987 . Kinetics of intra - cellular transport and sorting of lysosomal membrane and plasma membrane proteins . J . Cell Biol . 105 : 1227 - 1240 . Grimley , P . M . , I . K . Berezesky , and R . M . Friedman . 1968 . Cytoplasmic structures associated with an arbovirus infection : loci of viral ribonucleic acid synthesis . J . Virot . 2 : 1326 - 1338 . Grimley , P . M . , J . G . Levin , I . K . Berezesky , and R . M . Friedman . 1972 . Specific membranous structures associated with the replication of Group A arboviruses . J . Virol . 10 : 492 - 503 . Hardy , W . R . , and J . E . Strauss . 1988 . Processing of nonstructural poly - proteins of Sindbis virus : study of the kinetics in vivo using monospecific antibodies . J . Virol . 62 : 998 - 1007 . Harms , E . , H . Kern , and J + A . Schneider . 1980 . Human lysosomes can be purified from diploid skin fibroblasts by free - flow electrophoresis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 77 : 6139 - 6143 . Hawley , D . M . , K . C . Tsou , and M . E . Hodes , 1981 . Preparation , properties and uses of two fluorogenic substrates for the detection of 5 ' ( venom ) and 3 ' ( spleen ) nucleotide phosphodiesterases . Anal . Biochem . 117 : 18 - 23 . Helenius , A . , and J . Kartenbeck . 1980 . The effects of octylglucoside on the Semliki Forest virus membrane : evidence for a spike protein - nucleocapsid interaction . Eur . J . Biochem . 106 : 613 - 618 . Helenius , A . , J . Kartenbeck , K . Simons , and E . Fries . 1980 . On the entry of Semliki Forest virus in BHK - 21 cells . J . Cell Biol . 84 : 404 - 420 . Helenius , A . , M . Marsh , and J . White . 1982 . Inhibition of Semliki Forest virus penetration by lysosomotropic weak bases . J . Gen . Virol . 58 : 47 - 61 . K ~ ri / iinen , L . , K . Simons , and C . von Bonsdorff . 1969 . Studies of Semliki Forest virus subviral components . Ann . Med . Exp . Biol . Fenn . 47 : 235 - 248 . Ker / inen , S . , and L . Ruohonen . 1983 . Nonstructural proteins of Semliki Forest virus : synthesis , processing and stability in infected cells . J . ViroL 47 : 505 - 515 . Kielian , M . , and A . Helenius . 1986 . Entry of alphaviruses . In The Togaviridae and Flaviviridae . S . Schlesinger and M . J . Schlesinger , editors . Plenum Press , New York . 91 - 119 . Kielian , M . C . , S . Ker / inen , L . K ~ iri ~ iinen , and A . Helenius . 1984 . Membrane fusion mutants of Semliki Forest virus . J . Cell Biol . 98 : 139 - 145 . Kielian , M . C . , M . Marsh , and A . Helenius . 1986 . Kinetics of endosome acidification detected by mutant and wildtype Semliki Forest virus . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 5 : 3103 - 3109 . Laemmli , U . K . 1970 . Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4 . Nature ( Lond . ) . 227 : 680 - 685 . Lewis , V . , S . A . Green , M . Marsh , P . Vihkko , A . Helenius , and I . Mellman . 1985 . Glycoproteins of the lysosomal membrane . J . Cell Biol . 100 : 1839 - 1847 . Lopez , S . , J . R . Bell , E . G + Strauss , andJ . H . Strauss . 1985 . The nonstructural proteins of Sindbis virus as studied with an antibody specific for the C termi - nus of the nonstructural readthrough polyprotein . Virology . 141 : 235 - 247 . Marsh , M . , E . Bolzau , and A . Helenius . 1983 . Penetration of Semliki Forest virus from acidic prelysosomal vacuoles . Cell . 32 : 931 - 940 . Marsh , M . , G . Griffiths , G . E . Dean , I . Mellman , and A . Helenius . 1986 . Three - dimensional structure of endosomes in BHK - 21 cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 83 : 2899 - 2903 . Marsh , M . , S . Schmid , H . Kern , E . Harms , P . Male , I . Mellman , and A . Helenius . 1987 . Rapid analytical and preparative isolation of functional en - dosomes by free - flow electrophoresis . J . Cell Biol . 104 : 875 - 886 . McLean , 1 . W . , and P . K . Nakane . 1974 . Periodate - lysine paraformaldehyde fixative . A new fixative for immunoelectron microscopy . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 22 : 1077 - 1083 . Nilsson , J . , T . Ksiazek , and J . Thyberg . 1983 . Endocytosis of cationic and an - ionic proteins in cultivated arterial smooth muscle cells . Exp . Cell Res . 143 : 359 - 365 . Pool , R . R . , K . M . Manrey , and B . Storrie . 1983 . Characterization ofpinocytic vesicles from CHO cells : resolution of pinosomes from lysosomes by analyt - ical centrifugation . Cell Biol . Int . Rep . 7 : 361 - 367 . Ranki , M . , and L . K ~ i ~ iri ~ iinen . 1979 . Solubilized RNA replication complex from Semlike Forest virus - infected cells . Virology . 98 : 298 - 307 . Sawicki , D . L . , and S . G . Sawicki . 1980 . Short - lived minus - strand polymerase for Semliki Forest virus . J . Virol . 34 : 108 - 118 . Scheele , C . H . , and E . R . Pfefferkorn . 1969 . Kinetics of incorporation of struc - tural proteins into Sindbis virus . J . Virol . 3 : 369 - 375 . Schlesinger , M . J . , and S . Schlesinger . 1986 . Formation and assembly of al - phavirus glycoproteins . In The Togaviridae and Flaviviridae . S . Schlesinger and M . J . Schlesinger , editors . Plenum Press , New York . 121 - 148 . Schmid , S . L . , R . Fuchs , P . Male , and 1 . Mellman . 1988 . Two distinct sub - populations of endosomes involved in membrane recycling and transport to lysosomes . Cell . 52 : 73 - 83 . Simmons , D . T . , and J . H . Strauss . 1972 . Replication of Sindbis virus II : multi - ple forms of double - stranded RNA isolated from infected cells . J . Mol . Biol . 71 : 615 - 631 . Simons , K . , and H . Garoff . 1980 . The budding mechanisms of enveloped ani - mal viruses . J . Gen . Virol . 50 : 1 - 21 . Simons , K . , and H . Virta . 1987 . Perforated MDCK cells support intracellular transport . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 6 : 2241 - 2247 . S0derlund , H . 1973 . Kinetics of formation of the Semliki Forest virus nucleo - capsid , lntervirology . 1 : 354 - 361 . Strauss , E . G . , and J . H . Strauss . 1986 . Structure and replication of the alphavi - rus genome . In The Togaviridae and Flaviviridae . S . Schlesinger and M . J . Schlesinger , editors . Plenum Press , New York . 35 - 90 . Strauss , E . G . , C . M . Rice , and J . H . Strauss . 1983 . Sequence coding for the alphavirus nonstructural proteins is interrupted by an opal termination codon . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 80 : 5271 - 5275 . Ukkonen , P . , V + Lewis , M . Marsh , A . Helenius , and I . Mellman . 1986 . Trans - Froshauer et al . Cell Biology of Alphavirus RNA Replication 2085 port of macrophage Fc receptors and Fc receptor - bound ligands to lyso - somes . J . Exp . Med . 163 : 952 - 971 . Weibel , E . R . 1969 . Stereological principles for morphometry in electron mi - croseopic cytology . Int . Rev . Cytol . 26 : 235 - 302 . Wengler , G . , U . Boege , G . Wengler , H . Bischoff , and K . Wahn . 1982 . The core protein of the alphavirus Sindbis virus assembles into core - like nucleo - proteins with the viral genome RNA and with other single - stranded nucleic acids in vitro . Virology . 118 : 401 - - 410 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 107 , 1988 2086