Paper to be presented at the DRUID Academy Conference 2019 at Aalborg University , Denmark January 16 - 18 , 2019 Exaptation and niche market creation : the role of the founding team’s prior experiences Fakher Omezzine Grenoble Ecole de Management Strategy and Management of Innovation fakher . omezzine @ grenoble - em . com Isabel M . Bodas - Freitas Grenoble Ecole de Management Technology Management Isabel - Maria . BODAS - FREITAS @ grenoble - em . com Abstract Conventionally , innovation theories have long held the view that innovations stem from either the introduction of breakthrough , or the marginal improvement of , products or processes . Yet according to Shumpeter ( 1939 ) , new combinations do not necessary require the introduction of new structures or the improvement of existing ones . The redeployment of existing structures ( e . g . technology ) in new application domains ( e . g . new markets ) also qualifies as a ? new combination ? which is considered as an innovation . the phenomenon of creating new functions for existing structures has been named as ? exaptation ? . A famous example of an exaptated product is Listerine , and its shift from a surgical antiseptic to an oral health care product . The innovation and entrepreneurship literatures have only recently recognized exaptation as a mechanism for the emergence of new markets , which eventually drives entrepreneurial activity . The creation of exptative combinations requires the flexible interpretation of ? what is already known ? in a manner that allow for the identification of potential functional shifts , and in linking identified functions to a fitting context . This raises the question of what determines the capacity to create new venture through new exaptative combinations ? Considering that entrepreneurs usually employ knowledge that they gained through prior employment in their search for new opportunities , we argue that the previous experiences of entrepreneurial teams shape their ability to create novel technology - market combinations . Since employers are rather heterogeneous in the knowledge that they possess and transfer to their employees , the entrepreneur’s knowledge base is dependent on the specific organizations where he / she previously worked . Employment at organizations with substantial abundant knowledge in particular is a significant contributor to developing an individual’s knowledge base that may assist him in developing the capacity to discover novel technology - market combinations ( Agarwal et al . , 2004 ) . Hence , we focus on how previous experiences at a large number of employers ( high inter - organizational mobility ) , and its interaction with experiences at entrepreneurially prominent organizations with different social structures ( Universities vs . KIS firms ) shape the creation of new market niches through exaptation . To accomplish this aim , we collected , and analyzed using a probit model , data on 62 new ventures ( and their corresponding 124 founders / co - founders ) that have employed blockchain technology in the energy sector worldwide . Blockchain is an example of an exaptated technology as it was initially developed to keep records of all Bitcoin , the famous cryptocurrency , transactions , and was later exaptated to serve different functions in several industries . Our analysis shows that entrepreneurial teams with high levels of inter - organizational mobility are more likely than those with lower levels to create new niche markets through exaptation that teams with low levels of inter - organizational mobility . This effect of inter - organizational mobility on exaptation is distinct , based on specific prior experience at entrepreneurially prominent organizations with different social structures . In particular , we found a significant complementarity between experience at entrepreneurially prominent universities and high levels of inter - organizational mobility . On the other hand , we found a substitution effect between experience at entrepreneurially prominent KIS firms and low levels of inter - organizational mobility . Our findings contribute to both innovation and entrepreneurship literatures by proposing and providing evidence that the specific experiences of entrepreneurial teams are the sources of knowledge that permits the creation of new market niches through exaptation , and by suggesting that the entrepreneurial team’s experience at entrepreneurially prominent organizations with different social structures can influence the adoption of a certain entry strategy . Our findings may also encourage policy makers to challenge the current status quo ( which tends to prioritize new ground - breaking technologies ) by qualifying exaptative projects to receive available public grants . We also believe that our results can assist new exaptative ventures in the formation of founding teams . Agarwal , R . , Echambadi , R . , Franco , A . M . , & Sarkar , M . B . ( 2004 ) . Knowledge transfer through inheritance : Spin - out generation , development , and survival . Academy of Management Journal , 47 ( 4 ) , 501 - 522 . Schumpeter , J . ( 1939 ) . Business Cycles : A Theoretical , Historical , and Statistical Analysis of the Capitalist Process . London : McGraw - Hill . Exaptation and niche market creation : the role of the founding team’s prior experiences Fakher Omezzine Grenoble Ecole de Management , France Fakher . omezzine @ grenoble - em . com Isabel - Maria Bodas - Freitas Grenoble Ecole de Management , France Isabel - maria . bodas - freitas @ grenoble - em . com 2 Abstract The creation of new markets through the repurposing of existing technologies to serve new functions requires the flexible interpretation of “what is already known” in a manner that allows for the identification of potential functional shifts , and in linking identified functions to a fitting context . We conceptualize the ability of new ventures to create new market niches through technological exaptation as dependent on heterogeneous and fungible knowledge , accumulated by founding teams’ members through their prior professional experiences . In particular , we show how previous experiences at a large number of employers , and its interaction with experiences at entrepreneurially prominent organizations with different social structures ( Universities vs . KIS firms ) shape the creation of new markets through exaptation . Empirically , we collected data on different blockchain applications in the energy sector worldwide . This dataset consists of 62 new ventures ( and their corresponding 124 founders / co - founders ) established between 2010 and May 2017 . Results show that entrepreneurial teams with high levels of inter - organizational mobility are more likely to create new markets through exaptation than teams with low levels . In addition , we found a significant complementarity between experience at entrepreneurially prominent universities and high levels of inter - organizational mobility , as well as a substitution effect between experience at entrepreneurially prominent KIS firms and low levels of inter - organizational mobility . Keywords : exaptation , market creation , new ventures , blockchain 3 INTRODUCTION Pursuing innovative ideas , organizations often creatively construct new markets that are adapted for their innovations , while they creatively destruct existing market structures and reshuffle resources allocation among activities and market players ( Schumpeter , 1939 ; Dew & Sarasvathy , 2016 ) . This process , triggered by new market creation , plays a vital role in economic renewal and growth ( Wennekers & Thurik , 1999 ) ; and hence , attracted many scholars ' attention . New market creation has been shown to often result from organizational efforts to develop capabilities to overcome technological changes and market waves that often follow such changes ( King and Tucci , 2002 ; Agarwal et al . , 2004 ) . While this seems to be the case for new market creation by existing organizations , but it may not be always applicable to new ventures . The literatures on industrial dynamics and entrepreneurship provide evidence on the existence of knowledge spillovers from incumbents , especially from organizations with large knowledge bases and networks , to new ventures through employee mobility ( Franco & Filson , 2006 ; Agarwal et al . , 2004 ; Burton et al . , 2002 ) . This suggests that new ventures’ capacitiy to create new markets may reside in their founding teams’ pre - acquired knowledge , often acquired through prior employment ( Sarasvathy , 2001 ; Klepper , 2001 ; Franco and Filson , 2006 ) . Employment experiences provide individuals with the possibility to accumulate technical and market knowledge without anticipating its subsequent use ( Shane , 2000 ; Belussi et al . , 2015 ) . This knowledge is “fungible” , i . e . it can be redeployed in different contexts and industries , and it is also “heterogeneous” , i . e . it is individual - specific based on the specific organizations in which the individual has previously worked ( Klepper , 2001 ; Franco and Filson , 2006 ) . 4 While the implications of founding teams’ prior employment experiences at organizations with large knowledge bases and networks on new ventures’ ability to survive and perform and create new markets ( Agarwal et al . , 2004 ; Franco and Filson , 2006 ; Burton et al . , 2002 ) has been considered , prior research has done so mostly neglecting that organizations with large knowledge bases may have distinct knowledge structures and operate under different networks . In addition , exposure to a broad employment experience ( large number of previous employers ) may equip individuals with skills and resources that enable them to identify unmet needs . Evidence shows that the founder’s former exposure to a variety of employers enables him / her to acquire knowledge , experience , and personal connections , which shape his / her entrepreneurial activity ( Lundmark , 2010 ; Mawdsley & Somaya , 2016 ; Dobrev and Merluzzi , 2017 ) . Hence , new ventures’ capacity to create new niche markets may vary according to the employment’s experience of their founding teams ( Sarasvathy , 2001 ; Klepper , 2001 ; Franco and Filson , 2006 ) . Still , we know little about how experience at organizations with large technological and market knowledge bases complement or substitute the skills developed through extensive inter - organizational mobility . Furthermore , these studies focused mostly on two processes of new market creation : 1 ) new markets that emerge as a response to changes in demand , user preferences , or institutions 2 ) new markets that emerge because of newly developed technologies permitting the introduction of new products or services ( Andriani and Cohen , 2013 ; Andriani and Carignani , 2014 ) . These research streams have mostly neglected that markets also emerge from the inherent creative potential of certain technologies to fulfill different functions . For instance , Listerine was first developed to be used as a surgical antiseptic ( Fine , 2010 ) , yet , despite its proven potential to modernize surgical 5 practices , the product was later used as an oral health care product and reached its potential in a different market , the mouthwash market . Similarly , Sildenafil citrate ( commercially known as Viagra ) was first developed to treat pulmonary arterial hypertension and was later used to treat Erectile Dysfunction , a new function that opened doors to a new market niche . In this sense , the repurposing of existing technologies can open new , unanticipated market trajectories ( Dew and Sarasvathy , 2016 , Belussi et al . 2015 ; Andriani and Cattani , 2016 ) . In this paper , we aim to advance existing knowledge on the ability of new ventures to create new markets through technological exaptation . Based on the entrepreneurship and innovation literatures , we conceptualize the ability of new ventures to create new market niches through the repurposing of existing technologies as dependent on heterogeneous and fungible knowledge , accumulated by founding teams’ members through their prior professional experiences ( Shane , 2000 ; Belussi et al . , 2015 ; Dew and Sarasvathy , 2016 ) . Prior employment experience is understood as the form by which founding teams develop specific skills and access specific resources that leverage their ability to identify and exploit new opportunities to use existing technologies to fill an existing uncovered demand need . We propose that heterogeneity in the entrepreneurial teams’ abilities to create new markets by repurposing existing technologies depends on the founding teams’ pre - existing skills and resources to recognize a large number and variety of opportunities ( Gruber et al . , 2103 ) . In addition , we propose and provide evidence that experience at organizations with distinct technology and market knowledge bases leverage differently the effect of inter - organizational mobility on the propensity to create new niche markets through technological exaptation . Specifically , we propose that founding teams’ employment experiences at organizations with substantial abundant knowledge regarding 6 technologies and markets , as well as with extensive connections to partners with valuable and high volume information , may complement or substitute the founding teams’ skills and resources to develop new technology - market combinations through technological exaptation . Empirically , we investigate how experience at organizations with prominent technology and market knowledge bases moderates the effect of the founding team’s inter - organizational mobility on the ability of the new venture to create new market niches through technological exaptation . For this purpose , we collected data on new ventures that used blockchain technology in the energy sector worldwide . We should stress that blockchain technology is per se the result of a technological repurposing . It is the result of repurposing the technology behind Bitcoin 1 , which enabled other functions to emerge , including peer - to - peer energy trading , carbon offsetting and electric vehicle charging 2 . Our dataset consists of 62 new ventures ( and their corresponding 124 founders / co - founders ) established between 2010 and May 2017 , which represent the full population for which information was available . The remainder of this paper is structured as follows : in Section 2 we introduce our theoretical background and our research model . Section 3 presents our methodology ; Sections 4 unveils our empirical results . In Section 5 we discuss our results followed by Section 6 , in which we conclude our paper , and discuss the theoretical and practical implications , and limitations . 1 Blockchain was developed for Bitcoin to solve the double - spending problem , which allowed the P2P trading of the crypto - currency . 2 Blockchain expanded to other industries in addition to the energy industry . In the public sector , blockchain is used in land sale and registration and in voting . In the pharmaceutical industry , blockchain is used to track the location and condition of supplies along the whole supply chain , with aim of decreasing supply chain fraud . 7 THEORETICAL BACKGROUND AND HYPOTHESES Exaptation , niche market creation and the importance of knowledge – An analytical framework The literature on entrepreneurship and innovation has long held that new markets are the outcome of exogenous forces such as changes in technology and consumer preferences , or the outcome of enforcing new products and services through entrepreneurship ( Andriani and Carignani , 2014 ; Dew and Sarasvathy , 2016 ) . These views are limited by their focus on the introduction of new breakthrough products and processes , or the improvement of existing products and processes as sources of innovations . Innovations can be the outcome of redeploying existing products or processes ( e . g . technology ) in new application domains that are different from the initially intended application domain ( Schumpeter , 1939 ; Levinthal , 1998 ; Cattani , 2006 ) – a phenomenon termed exaptation . Lately , exaptation received increasing interest in both the innovation and entrepreneurship literatures ( Belussi et al . , 2015 ; Dew and Sarasvathy , 2016 ; Mastrogiorgio and Gilsing , 2016 ; Andriani and Cattani , 2016 ) , as it challenges long - held views on market emergence ( Dew and Sarasvathy , 2016 ) . Technological exaptation enables evolutionary bifurcation in the trajectory of an existing technology ( Andriani and Cohen , 2013 ) without requiring an improvement of existing technological components . However , finding new trajectories for existing technologies is a complex process that requires the creative recombination of complex knowledge and its redeployment to new contexts ( Belussi et al . , 2015 ) . Where does this “knowledge” reside and how does its combinatory potential to old knowledge in a new domain become apparent ? 8 A famous debate within the entrepreneurship literature is regarding whether opportunities already exist and are awaiting to be discovered – a discovery perspective , or whether they are deliberately constructed by entrepreneurs – a creative perspective ( Sarasvathy , 2001 ) . Exaptation falls within the latter perspective . Under exaptation , entrepreneurs employ existing resources to conceive potential new functions for an existing technology and then transform these functions into new market niches ( Dew and Sarasvathy , 2016 ) . A critical resource to this process is knowledge and the ability to redeploy and recombine it ( Belussi et al . , 2015 ; Mastrogiorgio and Gilsing , 2016 ; Andriani and Cattani , 2016 ) . Differences in knowledge and in the ability to idiosyncratically connect that knowledge to an entrepreneurial context , explains the differences in the entrepreneurs’ abilities to recognize opportunities ( Grégoire and Shepherd , 2012 ) . Entrepreneurs acquire knowledge that is critical to their entrepreneurial activity through their previous employment ( Klepper , 2001 ; Franco and Filson , 2006 ) . Experience as an employee equips individuals with crucial know - how regarding technological and market needs that are vital for entrepreneurship ( Franco and Filson , 2006 ) and innovation ( Fallick et al . , 2006 ) . Entrepreneurs with high levels of inter - organizational mobility in particular ( with former experience at a large number of employers ) are likely to have more exposure to a variety of form - context relationships and social networks . Such exposure to different form - context relationships and social networks introduces diversity and connectivity ; two critical variables that influence the creation of new niche markets through exaptation ( Andriani and Cohen , 2013 ; Dew and Sarasvathy , 2016 ) . 9 Yet , since employers are rather heterogeneous and each possesses unique knowledge repositories and networks , an individual’s knowledge base , and his exposure to different form - context relationships and social networks , are dependent on the specific organizations where he / she previously worked ( Klepper , 2001 ; Franco and Filson , 2006 ; Burton et al . , 2002 ) . In this respect , Agarwal et al , ( 2004 ) suggest that employment at organizations with substantial abundant knowledge in particular is a significant contributor to developing an individual’s knowledge base that may assist him / her in developing the capacity to discover technology - market fitness . Industry - leading firms in particular hold considerable abundant knowledge repositories that are exploited by the firms’ employees through employee entrepreneurship ( Burton et al . , 2002 ) , hence these firms unintentionally become entrepreneurially prominent ( unintentionally generate more new ventures than other firms ) . Employees at entrepreneurially prominent organizations often exploit the extensive knowledge and contacts’ bases of these organizations and recombine them with skills and resources acquired in previous ( and future ) experiences to create new innovative ventures ( Burton et al . , 2002 ) . These prominent knowledge - abundant organizations however should not be considered as a homogenous grouping . Although these organizations play a significant role in the innovation system and in the genesis of new ventures ( Burton et al . 2002 ) , they are still different in the type of knowledge that is central to their activities . Entrepreneurs with prior experience at prominent organizations acquire organization - specific cutting - edge knowledge regarding markets and their needs as well as technologies and their functionalities ( Burton et al . , 2002 ) . Acquired groundbreaking knowledge regarding markets and their needs can enable the creation of a variety of opportunities from the same invention ( Shane , 2000 ) . On the other hand , acquired 10 technological competences , which can be leveraged over diverse markets ( Cattani , 2006 ; Gruber et al . , 2008 ) , are of importance to the creation of new markets where a technology can create benefit to users ( Gruber et al . , 2008 ) . Cutting - edge technological capabilities in particular allows individuals to recognize similarities between existing technologies and their ability to respond to new market needs ( Cattani , 2006 ) . The variation in the founding teams’ experience in these prominent organizations is likely to shape their ability to identify and exploit innovative technology - based ventures ( Oakey , 1995 ) , and may prove to be significant in opening up new application and market domains for existing technologies . Experience at prominent organizations in terms of their groundbreaking technological and market knowledge may thus interact with the entrepreneur’s capacity in developing new technology - market context relationships , resulting in the creation of new niche markets through the the generation of new functionalities for existing technologies . Accordingly , we conceptualize the ability of the new venture to open new market niche as the result of its founding team’s prior employment experience and variety ( Andriani and Cattani , 2016 ) . Based on prior literature , we characterize the founding team’s prior employment experience in terms of their degree of inter - organizational mobility ( Agrawal et al . , 2006 ) as well as in terms of their specific experiences at prominent organizations in terms of their technological and their market knowledge ( Agarwal et al . , 2004 ; Burton et al . , 2002 ) . We then examine how experience at prominent organizations with regards to their technological and market knowledge interact with inter - organizational mobility to explain the creation of new market niches through exaptation . 11 Hypotheses development Niche market creation through exaptation and inter - organizational mobility Inter - organizational mobility is a form of voluntary turnover that is regarded as a key medium for the transfer of knowledge between organizations and for building social capital ( Fallick et al . , 2006 ; Dobrev and Merluzzi , 2017 ; Agrawal et al . , 2006 ) . The frequent move from an organization to another creates boundary spanning opportunities ( Podolny and Baron , 1997 ; Tushman , 1977 ) , which allows individuals to relocate experience , knowledge , and personal networks to a new firm , while developing their social capital and knowledge bases ( Dobrev and Merluzzi , 2017 ; Agrawal et al . , 2006 ) . Once an individual joins a new organization , he / she recombines his / her previous experience ( in the form of accumulated knowledge and social capital ) with his / her current experience , creating new knowledge flows in the organization . The recombination of accumulated social capital and knowledge creates a fertile ground for the generation of market opportunities ( Burton et al . , 2002 ; Wang et al . , 2014 ; Lechner et al . , 2016 ) and for innovation ( Tushman , 1977 ; Burton et al . 2002 ; Fallick et al . , 2006 ) . A diverse employment experience exposes perspective entrepreneurs to different markets with different customers’ needs and to their different technological solutions , thus , increases the entrepreneurs’ exposure to a variety of technology - market context relationships , while enlarging their knowledge networks ( Burton et al . 2002 , Wang et al . , 2014 ) . Such exposure to various markets and technological solutions and the expansion of an individual’s knowledge network enhances his / her ability to address different markets using the same technology ( Andriani and Cattani , 2016 ; Mastrogiorgio and Gilsing , 2016 ) . 12 In light of this , Agarwal et al . ( 2007 ) and Gambardella and Giarratana ( 2010 ) claim that knowledge spillover that is associated with inter - organizational mobility encourages the creation of “highly - skilled” and “innovative” entrepreneurial ventures . Innovation and the creation of innovative new ventures are not necessarily an outcome of new knowledge as they are often the result of reusing old knowledge and recombining it to serve new needs ( Belussi et al . , 2015 ) . Exaptation in particular does not arise from new , breakthrough knowledge , but from manipulating prior knowledge ( Cattani , 2006 ) . Inter - organizational mobility allows for this knowledge recombination and redeployment ( Fallick et al . , 2006 ; Dobrev and Merluzzi , 2017 ) , as well as for awareness of different forms of using similar technologies to address different market needs . Therefore , entrepreneurial teams with high levels of inter - organizational mobility are more likely to be exposed to valuable knowledge regarding customers needs in different markets as well as large and varied social networks ( Gruber et al . 2013 ) and thus , are more likely to form different technology - market context relationships . Entrepreneurial teams with low levels of inter - organizational mobility may miss out on such valuable knowledge and networks and thus are more limited in creating new market domains that are suitable for their ventures ( Shane , 2000 ) . Based on the above discussion , we posit that new ventures with highly inter - organizationally mobile founding teams are likely to bring in important accumulated knowledge and social capital that foster the creation of new market niches through exaptation . Accordingly , we hypothesize the following : 13 H1 : Founding teams with high levels of inter - organizational mobility are more likely to create new market niches through exaptation for their ventures , than teams with low levels of inter - organizational mobility . Experience at entrepreneurially prominent organizations : a complement or a substitute to inter - organizational mobility ? Existing research in entrepreneurship , innovation , and strategy has highlighted different knowledge sources that shape the creation of innovative new ventures ( Agarwal and Shah , 2014 ; Shane , 2000 ; Lockett and Wright , 2005 ) . Significant scholarly attention has been devoted to understanding differences between universities and private firms in term of their distinct knowledge bases and network structures ( Wennberg et al . , 2011 ; Agarwal and Shah , 2014 ; Agarwal et al . ; 2007 ; Zahra et al . , 2007 ) . Prominent universities in particular play an important role in economic development , and hence attracted the attention of both scholars and policy makers ( Lockett and Wright , 2005 ; Hsu et al . , 2007 ) . Universities’ researchers operate under a different incentive structure than employees in the industry , even if the latter may also be involved in basic research activities . Universities’ researchers have incentives to develop new knowledge that is often guided by a specific technical problem or scientific inquiry rather than focusing on possible applications of such knowledge and how it can satisfy current market needs ( Zahra et al . , 2007 ) . Universities equip individuals with key knowledge that is useful for solving technological problems and proficiency in using various analytical tools while stimulating creativity and imagination . Entrepreneurs with an extensive experience at universities often stay close to the technological knowledge domain 14 they have developed which limits their possibilities to explore a wider number of possible applications for their technologies ( Zahra et al . , 2007 ) . Universities , in addition to their important role in developing cutting edge technological capabilities , often have close connections to other universities’ research teams . Thus , employees at prominent universities in particular not only develop groundbreaking technological capabilities but also build key social capital that assists in technology development . These knowledge and social capital assets are particularly relevant to inter - organizationally mobile entrepreneurial teams in expanding their understanding of different technologies and their awareness regarding different bottlenecks . When these entrepreneurial teams combine their knowledge about market needs and trends with technological capabilities developed through employment at prominent universities , they develop an ability to address markets’ requirements using existing technological tools . In this sense , inter - organizationally mobile entrepreneurs with working experience at entrepreneurially prominent universities develop key competences in discovering new ways of perceiving and understanding existing technologies and their potential uses . Entrepreneurial teams with former experience at universities therefore , may have acquired technical and methodological competencies for problem - solving and knowledge recombination , as well as specific state - of - art knowledge and social capital , that can assist them in the creation of new market niches through developing new trajectories for existing technologies . Entrepreneurial teams with low levels of inter - organizational mobility have less exposure to different markets , the specificity of their needs , and to the technological problems that are needed to be solved to fulfill these needs ( Burton et al . 2002 , Wang et al . , 2014 ) . In this 15 circumstance , experience at prominent universities will be unlikely to leverage much of the entrepreneurial team’s ability to develop and target new application domains and new market domain for existing technologies owing to the fact that market creation through exaptation depends on high technological capacity combined with comprehensive knowledge regarding markets and their needs . Not only does a low degree of inter - organizational mobility limit an individual’s knowledge regarding markets , but it also restricts her / his personal connections ( which constitutes his knowledge network ) . In this respect , Andriani and Cohen ( 2013 ) argue that “The potential for exaptation cannot be sought in the properties of a tool or its uses but rather must be found in the facilities in the developing context , for new utilities to be engendered . ” This implies that for entrepreneurial teams with low levels of inter - organizational mobility , experience at prominent universities , where they could have developed advanced technical , analytical and methodological competences , may not leverage their ability to create new market niches through exaptation , although they might be able to create new functions for existing technologies . The creation of new market niches through exaptation requires first a shift in function of an existing technology , and then the exploitation of the newly developed function ( e . g . in the form of a new venture ) ( Andriani and Cohen 2013 ; Dew and Sarasvathy , 2016 ) . For high levels of inter - organizational mobility , experience at entrepreneurially prominent universities may provide knowledge that complements and leverages the entrepreneurial team’s ability to create new market niches through exaptation . Founding teams with high inter - organizational mobility rates are likely to accumulate operational / market knowledge as they switch from one employer to another ( Mawdsley and Somaya , 2016 ) . When these “job - hopping” individuals join an entrepreneurially prominent university , they are also likely to acquire 16 knowledge regarding various technologies and their functionalities ( Balázs , 1996 ; Shane , 2000 ) . Exposure to various markets and the expansion of an individual’s knowledge network combined with knowledge regarding different technologies and tools may improve his / her ability to identify a fit between a new function and a potential market ( Lundmark , 2010 ) , and thus facilitate the creation of new market niches through exaptation . Moreover , when these “job - hoppers” join an entrepreneurially prominent university , they are often exposed to a large number of “shelved” university inventions that failed to get commercialized ( Agarwal et al . , 2004 ) . In this circumstance , entrepreneurial teams with high inter - organizational mobility use their experience in identifying and envisioning potential applications ( ones that are different from the intended application ) to these “shelved” technologies . In sum , founding teams with high levels of inter - organizational mobility , who possess knowledge about markets and their demands and on the technological bottlenecks to address them , will have a much more applied attitude towards research , and consequently develop competences in focusing on knowledge development that permit to repurpose existing technologies to solve specific existing market needs . Accordingly , entrepreneurial teams with high levels of inter - organizational mobility are likely to create new market niches through exaptation if they have experience at entrepreneurially prominent universities . Based on the above discussion , we posit the following : H2a : The effect of the founding team ' s experience in prominent universities complements the effect of inter - organizational mobility on the likelihood to create new market niches through exaptation , especially for founding teams with high levels of inter - organizational mobility . 17 In addition to experience at universities , experience at private firms is shown to be an important knowledge source that shapes the creation of innovative new ventures ( Agarwal et al . , 2004 ; Wennberg et al . , 2011 ; Burton et al . , 2002 ; Chatterji , 2009 ) . Knowledge Intensive Business Services Firms ( KIBS ) in particular is receiving increased scholarly attention due to their important role in generating added value to the economy ( Muller and Zenker , 2001 ; Miozzo and Grimshaw , 2005 ; Miles et al . , 1994 ) . KIBS firms “perform , mainly for other firms , services ( i . e . consulting , legal services , accounting services ) encompassing a high intellectual value - added” ( Muller and Zenker , 2001 ) . KIBS firms possess significant knowledge regarding different markets and their varied needs ( Strambach , 2008 ) . Employees of such firms are closely working with clients from different sectors to solve specific problems and challenges that these clients face ( Muller and Zenker , 2001 ; Aslesen and Isaksen , 2007 ) . This exposure to different industries and their requirements opens up paths for collaborative learning opportunities ( Aslesen and Isaksen , 2007 ) , which facilitate the ability to match offerings to customers’ needs ( Wennberg et al . , 2011 ) . Moreover , employees at KIBS firms often build numerous relationships through their interactions with different companies and their networks . These connections enlarge the employee’s network , which enables him / her to access valuable knowledge regarding different markets’ dynamics . Thus , although market knowledge acquired through inter - organizational mobility is important , it is by no mean the only valuable source of knowledge regarding market needs and trends . Entrepreneurs with former experience at KIBS firms , equally , develop key knowledge regarding different market trends and needs through direct customer contact and build social capital through contact with other professionals . These knowledge and social capital assets are 18 important in the creation of new market niches through exaptation ( Dew and Sarasvathy , 2016 ; Belussi et al . , 2015 ) . We thus argue that experience at prominent KIBS firms can substitute inter - organizational mobility . Due to their long - term close interaction with different clients from different sectors and their significant networks , employees at KIBS firms acquire valuable information regarding different markets and their necessities , as well as the technological bottlenecks that need to be addressed . This suggests that the knowledge that these employees acquire during their employment at KIBS firms may substitute the knowledge generated through inter - organizational mobility . Despite the fact that inter - organizational mobility equips individuals with valuable knowledge about markets and their necessities , employment at KIBS firms can act as a “parallel mechanism” to acquiring that same knowledge , which is vital for exaptation . Thus , employment at KIBS firms may prove to surrogate the effect of inter - organizational mobility on the creation of new market niches through exaptation . Entrepreneurial teams with low levels of inter - organizational mobility may have not acquired necessary knowledge regarding a variety of markets ( due to their lower exposure to different markets ) , their demands , and trends ( Wang et al . , 2014 ) , that enhances their ability to create new market niches through exaptation for their ventures . That being the case , experience at prominent KIBS firms becomes particularly relevant to entrepreneurial teams with low degrees of exposure to different employers owing to the fact that such experience is likely to provide these teams with the opportunity to access knowledge on multiple firms operating in different markets and eventually differently using similar technologies . Such experience at KIBS firms exposes individuals to a variety of market contexts from which market knowledge can be gleaned , and 19 assists in developing key social capital . Prior experience with different markets through employment at KIBS firms may then serve to compensate for the lack of market knowledge that is due to low levels of inter - organizational mobility , and provide alternative ways to gaining such knowledge , which is critical to market niche creation through exaptation . For entrepreneurial teams with high levels of inter - organizational mobility , experience at entrepreneurially prominent KIBS firms is unlikely to provide relevant additional knowledge that the teams need to identify new application and market domains for existing technologies . Entrepreneurial teams with high levels of inter - organizational mobility acquire key market knowledge from their exposure to diverse markets and their needs ( Mawdsley and Somaya , 2016 ) . Individuals who join an entrepreneurially prominent KIBS firm work closely with different clients’ needs and thus get exposed to a variety of markets while developing their professional knowledge networks . Thus employees at KIBS firms develop key knowledge regarding markets , their trends and necessities . Yet , the knowledge that these movers acquire at KIBS firms is perhaps perceived as “redundant” . Inter - organizational mobility and experience at KIBS firms are , to some extent , parallel mechanisms with respect to their potential to develop an individual’s knowledge regarding market trends and demands . In addition , individuals with high levels of inter - organizational mobility and with experience at prominent KIBS firms have been exposed to too many contexts , and their ability to recombine and process information regarding all those potentially relevant situations is likely to decrease . This may result from the fact that these very mobile individuals often join prominent KIBS firms to pursue specific projects on a topic / problem of his / her interest , with the only objective of increasing the attractiveness of his / her professional profile . 20 In sum , entrepreneurial teams with low levels of inter - organizational mobility may be more likely to benefit from an experience at KIBS firms with respect to the market knowledge they can gain . For these teams , experience at entrepreneurially prominent firms permits to acquire knowledge about markets and technological bottlenecks . For founding teams with high levels of inter - organizational mobility , the benefits from the experience at KIBS firms may become depreciated due to the individual’s inability to recombine so many different situations , to keep interest in processing and learning from diversity , and from the redundancy of some employment experiences . Based on the above discussion , we posit the following : H2b : The effect of the founding team ' s experience in prominent KIBS firms substitutes the effect of inter - organizational mobility on the likelihood to create new market niches through exaptation , especially for founding teams with low levels of inter - organizational mobility . DATA AND METHODOLOGY Data we collected data , using different sources , on 62 new ventures ( and their corresponding 124 founders / co - founders ) that have employed blockchain technology in the energy sector worldwide . Blockchain is an example of an exaptated technology as it was initially developed to keep records of all Bitcoin , the famous crypto - currency , transactions , and was later exaptated to 21 serve different functions , which enabled the creation of new market niches in several industries . The energy sector is one , among numerous other sectors , where blockchain technology enabled the creation of new niches , including the peer - to - peer energy trading niche , the decentralized EV charging niche , and the carbon credits tracking , trading and retiring niche . We first identified firms that have applied blockchain technology in the energy industry through two major sources : 1 ) the “Blockchain Resource Center for Utilities” provided by Indigo Advisory Group , a management consultancy group that provides technology and innovation services to utilities and energy companies , with a focus on emerging technologies such as Blockchain ; 2 ) the “Comprehensive Guide for Companies involved in Blockchain and Energy” provided by Solar Plaza , a Dutch company that provides networking opportunities for renewable energy professionals . We used these two resources to identify our sample since Indigo’s blockchain resource center and Solar’s Plaza guide are , at the time of writing , the only and the most recent resources that include a significant number of firms that have applied blockchain technology in the energy sector . The Blockchain Resource Center for Utilities tracks worldwide application of blockchain technology in the energy and utilities industry . The platform features more than 40 firms who have already employed blockchain technology in the energy industry , and provides the location of these companies and a small description of their blockchain activity . In addition to that , the resource center provides updated information about global activity , emerging use cases , and the key stakeholders across each use case . Solar Plaza’s comprehensive guide features over 90 companies and startups that have used ( or will use ) blockchain in the energy sector . The guide 22 included information about the companies and the different applications they have for blockchain technologies . Some of these companies were in the project for start - up phase or in the very early stage of the startup phase , as a consequence , we were unable to find enough information about these firms for our study . Additionally , since most of companies were present in both sources , the final dataset consists of 82 startups and established firms ( 62 startups and 20 established firms ) that have applied blockchain technology in the energy sector . For the purpose of this paper we will focus on data on the startups only . In order to collect information about the firms’ details , we referred to two major online data sources : 1 ) Crunchbase business information platform ; and 2 ) i3’s Innovation Network . Crunchbase is an online business information platform that provides company information for hundreds of thousands of worldwide private and public firms . This includes information about the date of founding , the founder ( s ) , the operating status , the number of employees , the company type ( Public or Private ) , the funding rounds and investors , and different events and news related to the firm . I3’s innovation network is an online platform , targeted mainly to startups to gain visibility by presenting their company to investors . The platform provides company information for more than 24 , 000 start - ups across 18 cleantech sectors . Because of its focus on startups across cleantech , sustainable innovation , and resource efficiency sectors , we found the platform to be ideal for our study . Additionally , we supplemented and cross - checked our data with information from the firms’ websites and Linkedin accounts , as well company press reports and news releases , and online articles . 23 We triangulate data collected through these sources , by accessing data on other datasets , namely CB Insights database , Pitchbook’s online platform , press releases and news reports . CB insights is a research firm that developed a tech market intelligence platform that tracks private companies , investments and acquisitions . In addition to the companies’ overview , the platform provides information about patents , investors , and press releases . CB insights uses both webcrawling algorithms and direct submission from investors to collect data and applies Natural Language Processing and Machine Learning approaches to maintain accuracy of the published information . Pitchbook is an online database that includes company details , for around one million private and public firms globally . The platform deploys more than 600 , 000 WebCrawlers to collect the most accurate and trustworthy business information from reliable sources . In addition to the firms’ information , we collected information about the entrepreneurs of the new ventures , using data from their LinkedIn accounts , their firms’ websites , Bloomberg website , and publicly available online information . We downloaded the CV’s of all the entrepreneurs from LinkedIn and cross - checked the information with data found on the firms’ websites , Bloomberg website and any other publicly available sources . We also ran keyword searches for all of the identified entrepreneurs to cross check our data and in some instances to collect missing information . We successfully identified the entrepreneurs for all firms , their years of experience , the industries they have worked in , the number of past employers , their previous employer , education level and school , whether they had top management experience or not , and their entrepreneurship experience . 24 Measurements Dependent variable Our dependent variable captures information on whether or not a venture created a new market niche through exaptation . Following Dew and Sarasvathy’s ( 2016 ) work , we define the creation of new market niche through exaptation as the creation of a new market domain through shifting the application domain of an existing technology ( in our case blockchain ) – from an old application domain to a new application domain , one that the technology was not initially intended to serve . Following this definition , we classify the ventures based on whether it creates a new market niche through exaptation and situates itself within this newly created niche , or whether the new venture situates itself in a pre - existing niche . In order to classify the ventures , we used the venture’s entry year as a reference and compared the venture’s entry market to the pre - existing markets created by other ventures from the previous years . In consequence , our dependent variable takes the values of “0” or “1” . New ventures that have created new niches ( n = 40 ) were assigned the value “1” , while new ventures did not ( n = 22 ) were assigned the value “0” . Independent variables Inter - organizational mobility : we captured the average level of the inter - organizational mobility of the founding teams by tracking their employment experience . The variable was measured using the following equation : Inter − organizational mobility = 2 3 4 5 367 25 Where J i is the number of employers that the “i th ” entrepreneur had , and n is the total number of founders for a given venture ( for ventures with only one founder , inter - organizational mobility is measured by simply counting the numbers of employers that the founder had before launching his venture ) . Using our data , Inter - organizational mobility ranges between 1 and 18 with the average of 5 . 5 employers previous to launching the venture . Experience at entrepreneurially prominent universities and KIBS firms : We followed Burton et al . ’s ( 2002 ) measure of prominence to identify organizations that generated the most number of new ventures in our dataset . Burton et al . ’s measure assumes that a firm’s prominence is captured through the number of ventures it has spawned . In order to apply the measure , we traced the past employers ( a total of 680 previous employers ) of all of the founders for all the ventures in our dataset . Using a binary matrix , we then linked the 62 ventures to these 680 employers . If any member of the founding team of a certain venture “X” worked in a given employer “Y” , the cell I x J Y takes the value 1 , else , the cell takes the value 0 . We then sum across the columns to generate a total number of generated ventures per employer . Employers with higher numbers of generated ventures are considered to be more entrepreneurially prominent than employers with lower numbers ( see Table 1 ) . For our analysis , we considered organizations to be entrepreneurially prominent if they have generated five or more ventures in our sample . After identifying the entrepreneurially prominent organizations , we separated entrepreneurially prominent universities from prominent KIBS firms using two binary variables . We verified whether any of the founders of a given new venture has previously worked in one of the entrepreneurially prominent firms ( Universities and KIBS ) or not . For each of the two variables , 26 the variable takes the value “1” if at least one founder from a given venture has previously worked in an entrepreneurially prominent firm ( Universities and KIBS ) , else it takes the value “0” . We excluded “Microsoft” from our analysis as it did not fall under the two types of entrepreneurially prominent organizations we are examining . We tested for the effect of including “Microsoft” in our analysis ( first as an entrepreneurially prominent university , and then as a KIBS firm ) and found that it had no significant effect on our results . We include these two variables in the analysis ( experience at prominent universities and experience at prominent KIBS firms ) and their interaction with the variable inter - organizational mobility 3 . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Insert Table 1 about here - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Control Variables : We included a number of factors relating to the new ventures’ and the founders’ characteristics as control variables . Previous research argues that the founders’ former experiences shape their ability to engage in entrepreneurial activities . We thus control for a number of factors associated with the founders’ career experiences . First , we control for the number of founders with experience in the energy industry ( focal market experience ) . Second , we control for the number of founders with experience in the IT or Finance industry ( solution / peripheral experience ) . Prior studies showed that founding teams with experience in a peripheral field can influence the entrepreneurs’ decision to adopt a certain entry strategy ( Cliff , 3 We do not account for whether the entrepreneur worked at an entrepreneurially prominent organization ( university or KIBS firm ) right before launching his venture or not , as only 2 entrepreneurs from 2 different ventures had their last employment experience , prior to launching their ventures , at an entrepreneurially prominent organization . 27 Jennings & Greenwood , 2006 ; Stam and Elfring , 2008 ) . Founders with experience in the focal industry are more exposed to the industry’s needs and trends , yet , they are often so focused in their focal believes and practices , which may affect their ability to innovate . Founders with more experience in a peripheral industry question existing believes and practices , which can foster innovation ( Cliff , Jennings & Greenwood , 2006 ) . Third , we follow prior studies ( Burton et al . , 2002 ; Dencker , Gruber & Shah , 2009 ; Vandor and Franke , 2016 ) and we control for the previous entrepreneurial experience of the founders . For ventures with at least one founder with previous entrepreneurial experience , the variable takes the value “1” , else , the variable takes the value “0” . Finally , we follow ( Burton et al . , 2002 ; Vandor and Franke , 2016 ) and control for the education level of the founders , as founding teams with a better level of education ( in terms of the highest achieved degree ) may have a privilege over teams with a lower level of education , in terms of their exaptative ability . Thus , for each venture , we measure the proportion of the founders who have a Master’s degree or higher . In addition to the founding team - specific controls , we also control for firm - specific characteristics . Using information about the founding teams’ former employers , relation to the focal industry , and affiliation with incumbents , we control for the firm’s mode of founding by classifying the ventures into spin - outs and non - spinouts . Spin - outs are ventures that are spawned from incumbents within the energy sector , while non - spinouts are ventures that are spawned from incumbents from other sectors . We also control for the venture’s age , size , and location ( i . e . USA , Europe , other ) . Table 2 includes descriptive statistics for all the variables in our model . 28 According to Table 2 , more than half of the ventures in our sample adopted an exaptative entry strategy . Entrepreneurs changed around 5 employers ( 5 . 54 ) on average during their careers , and almost one sixth of the founding teams had experience at either entrepreneurially prominent KIBS or at entrepreneurially prominent universities . The majority of the founding teams had previous entrepreneurial experience , and more than half of them had an average of a Master’s or a higher degree . On average , the founding teams had one member ( 1 . 24 ) with experience in the focal ( Energy ) industry and two members ( 1 . 85 ) with experience in the peripheral ( IT and Finance ) industry . Table 2 also shows that Four out of six ventures are spinouts in our sample and the average firm age is 2 . 25 years . Table 2 also shows the correlations among the variables used in our analysis . Overall , there is no evidence of multicollinearity issues in our data . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Insert Table 2 about here - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Estimation Since our dependent variable is a dichotomous variable , we used a probit regression analysis to test our three hypotheses . The probit model is appropriate for models with binary dependent variables ( which take the value of one of two possible values ) , and is widely used among strategy researchers ( Hoetker , 2007 ) . Our probit model with robust standard errors estimates the probability of creating new market niches through exaptation under the certain entrepreneurial team - specific and firm - specific characteristics described above . 29 RESULTS The probit regression estimates are presented in Table 3 . Model 1 includes control variables only . Model 2 includes the variables for inter - organizational mobility , experience at prominent universities and experience at prominent KIBS firms . Model 3 includes the interaction between inter - organizational mobility and experience at prominent KIBS firm . Model 4 includes the interaction between inter - organizational mobility and experience at prominent universities . Finally , Model 5 includes all of our dependent variables ( including both interactions ) . Results suggest that inter - organizational mobility influences positively the creation of new market niches through exaptation ( in the full model , model 5 : β = 0 . 313 ; p < 0 . 01 ) . This result supports our first hypotheses ( H1 ) that proposed that entrepreneurial teams with experience at a large number of employers are more likely create new market niches through exaptation than teams with low levels of inter - organizational mobility . Results also suggest that experience at prominent organizations moderates the relationship between inter - organizational mobility and the creation of new market niches through exaptation . The coefficient of the interaction between prominent university experience and inter - organizational mobility is positive and significant ( β = 0 . 657 ; p < 0 . 05 ) . This result supports H2a that proposed that experience at prominent universities moderates positively the relationship between inter - organizational mobility and the creation of new market niches through exaptation , especially for high levels of inter - organizational mobility ( In the next paragraph , we discuss how this moderation works at different levels of inter - organizational mobility ) . The coefficient of the 30 interaction between prominent KIBS and inter - organizational mobility is negative and significant ( β = - 0 . 619 ; p < 0 . 05 ) . This results supports H2b that stated that experience at prominent KIBS firms negatively moderates the relationship between inter - organizational mobility and the creation of new market niches through exaptation , especially for low levels of inter - organizational mobility . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Insert Table 3 about here - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - In order to further understand how experience at entrepreneurially prominent universities and KIBS firms moderates the effect of different levels of inter - organizational mobility on the probability of creating new market niches through exaptation , figure 1 and 2 plot the average marginal effects of the experience in entrepreneurially prominent universities and of the experience in entrepreneurially prominent KIBS firms , respectively , for different values of inter - organizational mobility , while keeping all the other covariates at their mean . Figure 1 shows that entrepreneurial teams with experience at prominent universities display a lower probability for creating new market niches through exaptation for low values of inter - organizational mobility , i . e . for entrepreneurial teams with average inter - organizational mobility inferior to 4 , than entrepreneurial teams that do not have that experience . For values of inter - organization mobility that are higher than 4 . 5 , entrepreneurial teams with experience at prominent university observe a higher probability to create new niches than those without that 31 experience . This result suggests that experience at prominent university moderates positively the effect of inter - organizational mobility on the creation of new market niches through exaptation . In other words , this result supports our hypothesis H2a , which suggests that experience at entrepreneurially prominent universities complements the effect of inter - organizational mobility on the creation of new market niches through exaptation . Figure 2 displays how experience at entrepreneurially prominent KIBS firms moderates the effect of different levels of inter - organizational mobility on the creation of new market niches through exaptation . Figure 2 shows for values of inter - organizational mobility that are inferior to 7 . 5 , entrepreneurial teams with experience at entrepreneurially prominent KIBS firms observe a higher probability to create new niches . While , for values that are superior to 7 . 5 , the probability to create new niches is lower for teams with experience at prominent KIBS than for teams without this experience . This difference of probability for high levels of inter - organizational mobility is not significant , given the high standard deviations . This result suggests that experience at entrepreneurially prominent KIBS firms substitutes the effect of inter - organizational mobility on the creation of new market niches through exaptation . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Insert Figure 1 about here - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 32 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Insert Figure 2 about here - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Control variables behave as following . Entrepreneurial teams with more focal market experience ( experience in the Energy sector ) are less likely to create new niches through exaptation ( β = - 0 . 506 , p < 0 . 05 ) . Experience in the peripheral industry ( IT and Finance ) , prior entrepreneurial experience , and the education level however seem to have no significant effect on the development of a new market niche through exaptation . The results also demonstrate that spinouts are more likely to create new niches that non - spinouts ( β = 0 . 799 , p < 0 . 1 ) . Finally , we found no evidence that firm age , size , and location have a significant effect on development of a new market niche through exaptation . Robustness checks We ran several other analyses to confirm robustness of our results . Table 4 and 5 provide the results of these further analyses . First , we tested for the robustness of our results by running our model with all possible combinations 4 ( a total of 256 regressions ) of the control variables ( see Table 4 ) . The results show that the coefficients for our core independent variables are consistently significant and are unvarying in their sign 5 . 4 We used Barslund’s ( 2007 ) robustness module to estimate a set of regressions where our dependent variable is regressed on our core variable and all different combinations of other non - core ( control ) variables . For a detailed explanation see Barslund ( 2007 ) . 5 Inter - organizational mobility is significant for 100 % of the regressions and is always positive ; the interaction between experience in entrepreneurially prominent universities and Inter - organizational mobility is always positive , and it is significant in 74 % of the models ; the interaction between experience in entrepreneurially prominent KIBS firms and Inter - organizational mobility is always negative , and it is significant in 62 % of the models . 33 Second , we recoded the moderating variables , entrepreneurially prominent universities and KIBS firms . Entrepreneurially prominent organizations were first defined as organizations that had generated at least “5” new ventures . We recoded those two variables , considering prominent universities or prominent KIBS as organizations that generated “4” or more ventures . Results ( Table 5 , Column 1 ) are similar to results reported in table 3 . Third , we recoded our inter - organizational mobility variable by measuring the average number of employers per year of experience for each of the entrepreneurial teams . A high average indicates high levels of inter - organizational mobility . Results ( Table 5 , column 2 ) are similar to results reported in table 3 , except for the coefficient of the interaction between experience at prominent universities and inter - organizational mobility which becomes non significant . Fourth , we split our sample based on the country where the venture was launched . This resulted in two sub - samples , the first for ventures that were launched in the USA and Europe ( Column 3 Table 4 ) , and the second for ventures that were launched for the rest of the world ( Column 4 Table 4 ) . For the sub sample containing ventures that were launched in the USA and Europe , results hold , with exception of the coefficient of the interaction between experience at prominent universities and inter - organizational mobility that becomes non significant . For the sub sample containing ventures that were launched in the “rest of the world” , results are similar to those reported in Table 3 , which appears to support our hypotheses . Finally , we tested our model on a smaller sample to check whether our hypotheses still hold or not . We tested our hypotheses for ventures whose entrepreneurial teams have an inter - 34 organizational mobility average that is inferior or equal to “5” ( N = 35 ) . Results ( Table 5 column 5 ) appear to support our hypotheses , meaning that our findings still hold under these different specifications . In conclusion , results from the robustness tests indicate that our analysis is largely robust . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Insert Table 4 about here - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Insert Table 5 about here - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - DISCUSSION This research set out to study the impact of the entrepreneurial teams’ careers histories on the creation of new market niches through exaptation . Using data on blockchain new ventures in the energy sector , we investigate how the inter - organizational mobility of the entrepreneurial team influences the creation of new niches , and how prior experience at prominent organizations with specific knowledge bases and networks can shape this relation . Below , we discuss our results , their theoretical and practical implications , limitations and suggestions for future research . 35 The findings of this study support our claim that the former experiences of founding teams play a major role in the creation of new niches through exaptation . First , we found evidence that the average inter - organizational mobility of the entrepreneurial team influences its ability to create new niches arising from exaptation . Specifically , entrepreneurial teams that are more inter - organizationally mobile are more likely to situate their venture in a new niche which they purposely create through exaptation , than teams that are less mobile . Our findings suggest that inter - organizational mobility provides individuals with market and technologically valuable knowledge , allowing for social capital spillovers . This knowledge spillover enhances the creation of new opportunities and allows for knowledge recombination competences , which both foster exaptation and eventually enable the creation of new niches . This is consistent with previous studies that have shown that inter - organizational mobility allows for knowledge and social capital spillovers , which can enhance opportunity recognition and foster innovation ( Fallick et al . , 2006 , Agrawal et al . , 2006 ) . Second , we showed that employment experience at entrepreneurially prominent organizations can have unalike influence on the effect of inter - organizational mobility on the creation of new niches through exaptation . This substantiates previous work on the importance of former experience at entrepreneurially prominent organizations on the entrepreneurial orientation ( in terms of entry strategy ) . Yet , our study moves beyond previous endeavors and addresses how the interaction between experience at entrepreneurially prominent organizations and inter - organizational mobility can have different effects on the entrepreneurial process . Although entrepreneurs with high levels of inter - organizational mobility are more likely than those with 36 low levels to create a new market niche through exaptation for their ventures , experience at certain entrepreneurially prominent organizations can reshape this relationship . For instance , entrepreneurs with experiences at entrepreneurially prominent universities can only exploit the potential of these experiences if they are also active movers . At low levels of inter - organizational mobility , these entrepreneurs may lack necessary knowledge regarding possible technology - market relationships and are therefore less likely to create a new niche through exaptation for their venture . In this sense , experience at entrepreneurially prominent universities seems to only complement the effect of inter - organizational mobility on the creation of a new niche at high levels of inter - organizational mobility . Our findings also suggest that among entrepreneurs with low inter - organizational mobility , the probability to create a new niche through exaptation is lower for those worked in a prominent university . This may be explained by the fact that these prominent universities oftentimes focus on developing new knowledge that may lead to groundbreaking technologies while paying less attention to developing new processes from existing technologies ( Shane , 2004 ) . In this sense , at low levels of inter - organizational mobility ( and thus less exposure to form - context relationships ) , employees at entrepreneurially prominent universities become captive of their universities’ research agendas and are often pinned to develop knowledge without a specific market domain or applications within a specific market domain of large university partners ( Gittelman , 2006 ) . Entrepreneurial teams with experiences at entrepreneurially prominent KIBS firms on the other hand can only exploit the potential of their experiences at these firms at low levels of inter - organizational mobility . Because high levels of inter - organizational mobility equip the founding 37 team with necessary knowledge on markets and technologies , benefits from the experience at KIBS firms at high levels of inter - organizational mobility will have very marginal benefits in terms of the ability to create new market niches through exaptation . In contrast , entrepreneurial teams with low levels of inter - organizational mobility are likely to lack key knowledge that is necessary to create new functions for existing technologies and consequently to create a new niche for this function . Under this circumstance , experience at entrepreneurially prominent KIBS firms acts as an alternative mechanism to developing specific market , technical and social knowledge that is required to create new niches through exaptation . The results also provide evidence supporting previous research , which argue that spinouts benefit from the former experience of the founding team at incumbents . The literature on spinouts shows that ventures that are spawned from industrial incumbents benefit from the knowledge acquired at the parent firms ( Agarwal et al . 2004 ; Klepper and Sleeper , 2005 ; Chatterji , 2009 ) . This key knowledge is argued to facilitate innovation and to shape the entry strategies that spinouts adopt . Our findings also support Cliff , Jennings & Greenwood’s ( 2006 ) claim that founding teams with greater experience in the focal industry are less likely to act as “innovative entrepreneurial teams” . Founding teams with greater experience in a certain focal industry are often so focused in the industry’s current believes and practices and end up reproducing established routines . Innovation in general and exaptation in particular requires the questioning of existing practices and a deviation from the ordinary technology use . 38 Theoretical implications We believe that our research mainly contributes to entrepreneurship theory . Building on the idea of exaptation as a driver for niche construction , our study challenges the idea that new markets emerge as an outcome of exogenous forces or as an outcome to vigorous entrepreneurial activity . Prior literature has mainly considered these two main mechanisms as the essence of market creation . Building on Dew and Sarasvathy’s work ( 2016 ) , we explain the variation in the organizations’ capacity to create new niche markets through a third mechanism – exaptation . We thus contribute to entrepreneurship theory by proposing and providing evidence that the specific experiences of entrepreneurial teams are the sources of knowledge that permits the creation of new market niches through exaptation . We show that the entrepreneurial team’s career histories explain the variation in their ability to create new markets through the development of new functions for existing technologies . We also extend prior entrepreneurship studies on how career histories shape the entrepreneurial orientation at the time of entry ( Burton et al . , 2002 ) . Whereas other studies on new venture creation and market entry have noted the importance of the career histories of entrepreneurial teams and the knowledge that is associated with it , little attempt has been made to analyze how prior experience ( and the knowledge associated with it ) developed at different organizations with different social structures interact with the entrepreneur’s ability to identify technology - market fitness . Our findings therefore contribute to entrepreneurship theory by suggesting that the entrepreneurial teams’ former experiences at organizations with different social structures ( i . e . Universities vs . KIBS firms ) can influence the adoption of a certain entry strategy . 39 Policy and managerial implications Our research suggests a number of practical implications . Many public subsidies often support the introduction of new technologies to the market , rather than the redeployment of current ones to answer new functions . Entrepreneurial opportunities may reside within technologies that are already existing and do not have to necessarily result from new innovations . Thus , by introducing exaptation as another approach that promotes the creation of new markets , our research may encourage policy makers to “look close” before looking “far ahead” and hence challenge the current status quo ( which tends to prioritize new ground - breaking technologies ) by qualifying exaptative projects to receive available public grants . Supporting these projects is important to the creation of new markets , which play a vital role in the successful development of economic growth . Our findings can also possibly support incumbents and new ventures in creating new niches through the deliberate repurposing of existing technologies into new application domains . We present conditions that can support the formation of founding teams that are more likely to be able to create new niche markets through exaptative innovation . By forming founding teams with former experience at a large number of employers , and at certain prominent organizations , new ventures and incumbents are likely to improve their ability to create new niche markets through exapatation that can provide them with a competitive advantage . This is particularly relevant for new ventures as entry in pre - existing markets that are dominated by incumbents is often a difficult and complicated process . 40 Limitations and Future research Our research has some limitations . First , although our sample includes the majority of new ventures who are involved in blockchain application in the energy industry , the sample is still relatively of small size . Blockchain activity in the energy sector is still in its early stages , thus we recommend that our findings be interpreted cautiously until further studies test our results on a larger sample . Related to this is the fact that this study focuses on a very peculiar single industry ; the energy sector . Hence , future work can be undertaken to investigate whether our results hold in other industries . Another limitation in our study lies in the fact that our data does not allow us to differentiate between the “ability” to create new niches through exaptation and the “desire” to do so . Yet despite this limitation , our findings still show that inter - organizationally mobile entrepreneurial teams are more likely to create new market niches through exaptation than teams with low inter - organizational mobility , and that experience at entrepreneurially prominent organizations shapes this relation . A more detailed study can be undertaken to distinguish between the ability to create new niches and the desire to do so , in the aim of specifically ascertaining the mechanism by which entrepreneurial teams adopt a certain entry strategy . Finally , future research can look at the performance of exaptative ventures in contrast to the performance of non - exaptative ( yet innovative ) ventures and investigate the differences in how they overcome their liability of newness , and eventually their survival . 41 References Agrawal , A . , Cockburn , I . M . , McHale J . ( 2006 ) . Gone but not forgotten : Labor flows , knowledge spillovers , and enduring social relationships . Journal of Economic Geography , 6 ( 5 ) : 571 – 591 Agarwal , R . , Echambadi , R . , Franco , A . M . , & Sarkar , M . B . ( 2004 ) . Knowledge transfer through inheritance : Spin - out generation , development , and survival . Academy of Management Journal , 47 ( 4 ) , 501 - 522 . Agarwal , R . , Audretsch D , Sarkar M . ( 2007 ) . The process of creative construction : Knowledge spillovers , entrepreneurship , and economic growth . Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal 1 : 263 – 286 . Agarwal , R . , and Shah , S . ( 2014 ) . Knowledge sources of entrepreneurship : Firm formation by academic , user and employee innovators . Research Policy , 43 ( 7 ) , 1109 - 1133 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2014 . 04 . 012 Andriani , P . and Cohen , J . ( 2013 ) , ‘From exaptation to radical niche construction in biological and technological complex systems , ’ Complexity , 18 ( 5 ) , 7 – 13 . Andriani , P . , & Carignani , G . ( 2014 ) . Modular exaptation : A missing link in the synthesis of artificial form . Research Policy , 43 ( 9 ) , 1608 - 1620 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2014 . 04 . 009 Andriani , P . , Cattani , G . ( 2016 ) . Exaptation as a source of creativity innovation and diversity : introduction to the special section . Ind . Corp . Change 25 ( 1 ) , 115 – 131 . Aslesen , H . , Isaksen , A . ( 2007 ) . Knowledge Intensive Business Services and Urban Industrial Development . The Service Industries Journal , 27 ( 3 ) , 321 - 338 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 02642060701207239 Balázs , K . , ( 1996 ) . Academic Entrepreneurs and their Role in Knowledge Transfer , STEEP Discussion Paper No . 37 , SPRU , University of Sussex . Barslund , M . ( 2007 ) : «CHECKROB : Stata Module to Perform Robustness Check of Alternative Specifications» . Statistical Software Components S456837 . Boston College Department of Economics . Belussi , F . , Sedita , S . R . , Ganzaroli , A . and Orsi , L . ( 2015 ) . Evolving through innovation and knowledge reutilization : The case of L ' Oréal . Innovation , Alliances , and Networks in High - Tech Environments ( p . 301 - 359 ) . Routledge . Burton , M . D . , Sørensen , J . B . & Beckman , C . M . ( 2002 ) . Coming from good stock : Career histories and new venture formation . Retrieved [ insert date ] from Cornell University , ILR School site : h p : / / digitalcommons . ilr . cornell . edu / articles / 250 / Cattani , G . ( 2006 ) . Technological pre - adaptation , speciation , and emergence of new technologies : how Corning invented and developed fiber optics . Industrial and Corporate Change , 15 ( 2 ) , 285 - 318 . doi : 10 . 1093 / icc / dtj016 Chatterji , A . ( 2009 ) . Spawned with a silver spoon ? Entrepreneurial performance and innovation in the medical device industry . Strategic Management Journal , 30 ( 2 ) , pp . 185 - 206 . Cliff , J . , Jennings , P . , and Greenwood , R . ( 2006 ) . New to the game and questioning the rules : The experiences and beliefs of founders who start imitative versus innovative firms . Journal Of Business Venturing , 21 ( 5 ) , 633 - 663 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2005 . 02 . 010 Dencker , C . , Gruber , M . , and Shah , S . K . ( 2009 ) Pre - Entry Knowledge , Learning , and the Survival of New Firms . Organization Science 20 ( 3 ) : 516 - 537 . 42 Dew , N . and Sarasvathy , S . , ( 2016 ) . Exaptation and niche construction : behavioral insights for an evolutionary theory . Industrial and Corporate Change , 25 ( 1 ) , pp . 167 - 179 . Dobrev , SD . , Merluzzi J . ( 2017 ) . Stayers versus movers : Social capital and early career imprinting among young professionals . Journal of Organizational Behavior , 39 : 67 – 81 Fallick , B . , Fleischman , C . and Rebitzer , J . ( 2006 ) . Job - Hopping in Silicon Valley : Some Evidence Concerning the Microfoundations of a High - Technology Cluster . Review of Economics and Statistics , 88 ( 3 ) , pp . 472 - 481 . Fine , D . , ( 2010 ) . Listerine : past , present and future – A test of thyme . Journal of Dentistry , 38 , pp . S2 - S5 . Franco , A . M . and Filson , D . ( 2006 ) , Spin - outs : knowledge diffusion through employee mobility . The RAND Journal of Economics , 37 : 841 - 860 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1756 - 2171 . 2006 . tb00060 . x Gambardella , A . , and Giarratana MS . ( 2010 ) . Localized knowledge spillovers and skill - biased performance . Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal 4 : 323 – 339 . Gittelman , M . ( 2006 ) . National institutions , public – private knowledge flows , and innovation performance : A comparative study of the biotechnology industry in the US and France . Research Policy , 35 , 1052 – 1068 . Grégoire , D . , & Shepherd , D . ( 2012 ) . Technology - Market Combinations and the Identification of Entrepreneurial Opportunities : An Investigation of the Opportunity - Individual Nexus . Academy Of Management Journal , 55 ( 4 ) , 753 - 785 . doi : 10 . 5465 / amj . 2011 . 0126 Gruber , M . , MacMillan , I . , Thompson , J . ( 2008 ) . Look before you leap : Market opportunity identification in emerging technology firms . Management Sci . 54 ( 9 ) 1652 – 1665 . Gruber , M . , MacMillan , I . , Thompson , J . ( 2013 ) . Escaping the Prior Knowledge Corridor : What Shapes the Number and Variety of Market Opportunities Identified Before Market Entry of Technology Start - ups ? . Hoetker , G . ( 2007 ) . The use of logit and probit models in strategic management research : Critical issues . Strategic Management Journal , 28 ( 4 ) , 331 - 343 . doi : 10 . 1002 / smj . 582 Hsu , D . , Roberts , E . , Eesley , C . ( 2007 ) . Entrepreneurs from technology - based universities : evidence from MIT . Research Policy 36 , 768 – 788 . Indigo . ( 2017 ) . BLOCKCHAIN IN ENERGY AND UTILITIES . [ ONLINE ] Available at : https : / / www . indigoadvisorygroup . com / blockchain . King , A . , and Tucci , C . ( 2002 ) . Incumbent Entry into New Market Niches : The Role of Experience and Managerial Choice in the Creation of Dynamic Capabilities . Management Science , 48 ( 2 ) , 171 - 186 . doi : 10 . 1287 / mnsc . 48 . 2 . 171 . 253 Klepper , S . ( 2001 ) . Employee Startups in High - Tech Industries . Industrial and Corporate Change , 10 ( 3 ) , 639 - 674 . doi : 10 . 1093 / icc / 10 . 3 . 639 Klepper , S . , & Sleeper , S . ( 2005 ) . Entry by Spinoffs . Management Science , 51 ( 8 ) , 1291 - 1306 . doi : 10 . 1287 / mnsc . 1050 . 0411 Lechner , C . , Kirschenhofer , F . and Dowling , M . ( 2016 ) . The influence of social capital on opportunity emergence and exploitation : a comparison of portfolio and serial entrepreneurs . Journal of Innovation and Entrepreneurship , 5 ( 1 ) . 43 Levinthal , D . A . ( 1998 ) , ‘The slow pace of rapid technological change : Gradualism and punctuation in technological change’ , Industrial and Corporate Change , 7 ( 2 ) , 217 - 247 Lockett , A . , Wright , M . ( 2005 ) . Resources , capabilities , risk capital and the creation of university spin - out companies . Research Policy 34 , 1043 – 1057 . Lundmark , E . ( 2010 ) . The Mobility of People , Ideas and Knowledge in the Entrepreneurial Society . Doktorsavhandling , Linköpings Universitet . Tillgänglig via : http : / / www . ep . liu . se / . ISBN : 978 - 91 - 7393 - 266 - 0 , ISSN : 0345 - 7524 . Mawdsley , J . , & Somaya , D . ( 2016 ) . Employee Mobility and Organizational Outcomes . Journal Of Management , 42 ( 1 ) , 85 - 113 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0149206315616459 Mastrogiorgio , M . and Gilsing , V . , ( 2016 ) . Innovation through exaptation and its determinants : The role of technological complexity , analogy making & patent scope . Research Policy , 45 ( 7 ) , pp . 1419 - 1435 . Miles , I . , Kastrinos , N . , Flanagan , K . , Bilderbeek , R . , den Hertog , P . , Huntink , W . , and Bouman , M . , ( 1994 ) . Knowledge - Intensive Business Services : Their Roles as Users , Carriers and Sources of Innovation . PREST , Manchester . Miozzo , M . , and Grimshaw , D . ( 2005 ) . Modularity and innovation in knowledge - intensive business services : IT outsourcing in Germany and the UK . Research Policy , 34 ( 9 ) , 1419 - 1439 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2005 . 06 . 005 Muller , E . , & Zenker , A . ( 2001 ) . Business services as actors of knowledge transformation : the role of KIBS in regional and national innovation systems . Research Policy , 30 ( 9 ) , 1501 - 1516 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0048 - 7333 ( 01 ) 00164 - 0 Oakey , R . ( 1995 ) . High - technology New Firms : Variable Barriers to Growth . Paul Chapman , London . Podolny , J . M . , & Baron , J . N . ( 1997 ) . Resources and relationships : Social networks and mobility in the workplace . American Sociological Review , 62 , 673 – 693 . Sarasvathy , S . ( 2001 ) . Causation and Effectuation : Toward a Theoretical Shift from Economic Inevitability to Entrepreneurial Contingency . The Academy of Management Review , 26 ( 2 ) , 243 - 263 . Retrieved from http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 259121 Schumpeter , J . A . , ( 1939 ) . Business Cycles : A Theoretical , Historical and Statistical Analysis of the Capitalist Process . McGraw Hill , New York Shane , S . ( 2000 ) . Prior Knowledge and the Discovery of Entrepreneurial Opportunities . Organization Science , 11 ( 4 ) , pp . 448 - 469 . Shane , S . ( 2004 ) Academic Entrepreneurship . Edward Elgar , New York . Stam , W . , & Elfring , T . ( 2008 ) . Entrepreneurial Orientation and New Venture Performance : The Moderating Role of Intra - And Extraindustry Social Capital . Academy Of Management Journal , 51 ( 1 ) , 97 - 111 . doi : 10 . 5465 / amj . 2008 . 30744031 Strambach , S . ( 2008 ) . Knowledge - Intensive Business Services ( KIBS ) as drivers of multilevel knowledge dynamics . International Journal Of Services Technology And Management , 10 ( 2 / 3 / 4 ) , 152 . doi : 10 . 1504 / ijstm . 2008 . 022117 44 Tushman , M . ( 1977 ) . Special Boundary Roles in the Innovation Process . Administrative Science Quarterly , 22 ( 4 ) , 587 - 605 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 2392402 Vandor , P . , & Franke , N . ( 2016 ) . See Paris and… found a business ? The impact of cross - cultural experience on opportunity recognition capabilities . Journal Of Business Venturing , 31 ( 4 ) , 388 - 407 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2016 . 03 . 003 Wang , C . , Rodan , S . , Fruin , M . , & Xu , X . ( 2014 ) . Knowledge networks , collaboration networks , and exploratory innovation . The Academy of Management Journal , 57 ( 2 ) , 484 - 514 . Wennberg , K . , Wiklund , J . , & Wright , M . ( 2011 ) . The effectiveness of university knowledge spillovers : Performance differences between university spinoffs and corporate spinoffs . Research Policy , 40 ( 8 ) , 1128 - 1143 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2011 . 05 . 014 Wennekers , S . , & Thurik , R . ( 1999 ) . Small Business Economics , 13 ( 1 ) , 27 - 56 . doi : 10 . 1023 / a : 1008063200484 Zahra , S . , Van de Velde , E . , & Larraneta , B . ( 2007 ) . Knowledge conversion capability and the performance of corporate and university spin - offs . Industrial And Corporate Change , 16 ( 4 ) , 569 - 608 . doi : 10 . 1093 / icc / dtm018 45 46 47 48 49 Figure 1 . Average marginal effect of the experience in entrepreneurially prominent universities Figure 2 . Average marginal effect of the experience in entrepreneurially prominent KIBS firms - . 5 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 P r ( E x ap t a t i on ) 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 3 3 . 5 4 4 . 5 5 5 . 5 6 6 . 5 7 7 . 5 8 8 . 5 9 9 . 5 1010 . 511 experience _ diversity University _ prominence = 0 University _ prominence = 1 Adjusted Predictions with 95 % CIs 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 P r ( E x ap t a t i on ) 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 3 3 . 5 4 4 . 5 5 5 . 5 6 6 . 5 7 7 . 5 8 8 . 5 9 9 . 5 1010 . 511 experience _ diversity ind _ prominence = 0 ind _ prominence = 1 Adjusted Predictions with 95 % CIs