a r X i v : c ond - m a t / 0602255v6 [ c ond - m a t . s o f t ] 12 D ec 2006 Dielectric relaxation of DNA aqueous solutions S . Tomi´c , ∗ S . Dolanski Babi´c , † and T . Vuleti´c Institut za ﬁziku , 10000 Zagreb , Croatia S . Krˇca and D . Ivankovi´c Institute Rudjer Boˇskovi´c , 10000 Zagreb , Croatia L . Gripari´c Department of Biological Chemistry , David Geﬀen School of Medicine , UCLA , Los Angeles , California 90095 , USA R . Podgornik Department of Physics , University of Ljubljana and J . Stefan Institute , 1000 Ljubljana , Slovenia and Laboratory of Physical and Structural Biology NICHD , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , Maryland 20892 , USA ( Dated : October 31 , 2018 ) We report on a detailed characterization of complex dielectric response of Na - DNA aqueous solutions by means of low - frequency dielectric spectroscopy ( 40 Hz - 110 MHz ) . Results reveal two broad relaxation modes of strength 20 < ∆ ε LF < 100 and 5 < ∆ ε HF < 20 , centered at 0 . 5 kHz < ν LF < 70 kHz and 0 . 1 MHz < ν HF < 15 MHz . The characteristic length scale of the LF process , 50 < L LF < 750nm , scales with DNA concentration as c − 0 . 29 ± 0 . 04 DNA and is independent of the ionic strength in the low added salt regime . Conversely , the measured length scale of the LF process does not vary with DNA concentration but depends on the ionic strength of the added salt as I − 1 s in the high added salt regime . On the other hand , the characteristic length scale of the HF process , 3 < L HF < 50 nm , varyes with DNA concentration as c − 0 . 5 DNA for intermediate and large DNA concentrations . At low DNA concentrations and in the low added salt limit the characteristic length scale of the HF process scales as c − 0 . 33 DNA . We put these results in perspective regarding the integrity of the double stranded form of DNA at low salt conditions as well as regarding the role of diﬀerent types of counterions in diﬀerent regimes of dielectric dispersion . We argue that the free DNA counterions are primarily active in the HF relaxation , while the condensed counterions play a role only in the LF relaxation . We also suggest theoretical interpretations for all these length scales in the whole regime of DNA and salt concentrations and discuss their ramiﬁcations and limitations . PACS numbers : 82 . 39 . Pj 87 . 15 . He 77 . 22 . Gm I . INTRODUCTION Semiﬂexible polyelectrolytes are ubiquitous in biolog - ical context ranging from charged biopolymers such as DNA or ﬁlamentous F actin , and then all the way to molecular aggregates such as bacterial fd viruses or the tobacco mosaic virus . They are an essential and fun - damental component of the cellular environment and make their mark in its every structural and functional aspect [ 1 ] . Their role is not conﬁned solely to various ( macro ) molecular assemblies in the biological milieu but are equally prevalent in colloidal systems and soft mat - ter in general [ 2 , 3 ] . It is their connectivity , stiﬀness and strong electrostatic interactions , that allow polyelec - trolytes to show a wide range of complex behaviors , de - pending on their concentration , their overall length and the concentration and valency of the added salt ions and ∗ URL : http : / / real - science . ifs . hr / ; Electronic address : stomic @ ifs . hr † Permanent address : Department of physics and biophysics , Med - ical School , University of Zagreb , 10000 Zagreb , Croatia . intrinsic counterions [ 4 ] . In the simplest case of monovalent counterions , poly - electrolytes are usually stretched due to electrostatic re - pulsions and therefore statistically assume a rod - like con - ﬁguration [ 5 ] . Polyvalent counterions on the other hand can turn electrostatic repulsion into attraction [ 6 ] . This s . c . correlation eﬀect is one of the most important fea - tures of the polyvalent counterions and has fundamental repercussions for all charged soft matter . Correlation at - traction can strongly reduce the rigidity of charged poly - mers which then collapse into highly compact states [ 7 ] . Deoxyribonucleic acid ( DNA ) is in many respects a paradigm of a stiﬀ , highly charged polymer . The struc - tural origin of the charge is due to negatively charged phosphate groups positioned along the DNA backbone [ 8 ] . The nominal charge density of double stranded DNA amounts to one negative elementary charge per 1 . 7 ˚A or two elementary charges per base pair . When dealing with electrostatic interactions and their consequences in DNA one can usually ignore the internal chemical structure of DNA except as it transpires through the bare value of the persistence length ( see below ) . Electrostatic interactions in stiﬀ polyelectrolytes with monovalent counterions and added salt in aqueous solu - 2 tions are standardly approached via the Poisson - Boltz - mann ( PB ) theory that combines electrostatics with sta - tistical mechanics on a simpliﬁed mean - ﬁeld level [ 3 ] . On the PB level the outcome of the competition between en - tropy of mobile charges and their electrostatic interaction energy leads grosso modo to two types of eﬀects . The ﬁrst one is connected with electrostatic interaction of counterions and ﬁxed charges on the polyelectrolyte . Positively charged counterions are attracted to the sur - face of the negatively charged DNA where they tend to accumulate in a layer of condensed counterions . This ac - cumulation can be understood within the framework of the Manning - Oosawa ( MO ) counterion condensation the - ory [ 3 ] as well as on the level of the solutions of the PB equation [ 9 ] . Within this theory the counterions accumu - late in the condensed layer around the cylindrical DNA surface only if the charge density parameter η > 1 . Here η = zl B / b , where z is the valency of the counterion , b is the linear charge spacing and l B is the Bjerrum length , deﬁned as l B = e 20 / ( 4 πεε 0 kT ) ( 1 ) Here e 0 is elementary charge , ε 0 is permeability of vac - uum , kT is thermal energy scale and ε is the dielectric constant of the solvent . Bjerrum length is obviously de - ﬁned as the separation between charges at which their electrostatic interaction energy equals their thermal en - ergy . In aqueous solutions l B = 7 . 1 ˚A . The charge density parameter η thus measures the relative strength of elec - trostatic interactions vs . thermal motion and is strongly dependent on the valency of the counterions . In the MO theory the counterions accumulate in the condensed layer exactly to such an extent that the eﬀective charge den - sity parameter η is reduced to 1 [ 10 ] , i . e . the eﬀective separation between charges is increased from b to l B . The condensed counterions in the MO theory are still assumed to be perfectly mobile . Because of counterion condensation the eﬀective charge of DNA is reduced by a factor r = 1 − 1 / ( zη ) . It is important to note here that the concept of counterion condensation is intrinsi - cally nonlinear and is a fundamental property of highly charged polymers . This includes DNA in both its double stranded ( b = 1 . 7 ˚A , η = 4 . 2 ) as well as single stranded ( b = 4 . 3 ˚A , η = 1 . 7 ) forms . Counterion condensation for monovalent DNA salts is experimentally observed di - rectly by small - angle X - ray scattering measurements [ 11 ] . For double stranded DNA and monovalent counterions , counterion condensation occurs with r = 0 . 76 . In the MO counterion condensation theory the condensation occurs only if the salt concentration is low enough to satisfy κ − 1 ≫ a , where a is the polymer radius and κ − 1 is the Debye screening length ( see below ) [ 10 ] . Furthermore the counterion condensation strictly occurs only in the limit of vanishingly small concentration of DNA [ 9 ] . For ﬁnite DNA concentrations a more complicated model of coun - terion condensation has to be invoked [ 9 ] that is based on the solution of the PB equation in the cell model ge - ometry . The second eﬀect of competition between entropy of mobile charges and their electrostatic interaction energy is due to the interaction of mobile ions in solution be - tween themselves and their redistribution in the ﬁeld of ﬁxed polyelectrolyte charges . This redistribution leads to screening of electrostatic interactions between ﬁxed charges . For small enough , ﬁxed , charge density the screening is accurately described by the Debye - H¨uckel equation , which is just a linearized form of the PB equa - tion [ 3 ] . On the Debye - H¨uckel level the screening is quan - tiﬁed by a screening or Debye length κ − 1 deﬁned as κ 2 = 8 πl B n ( 2 ) where again l B is the Bjerrum length and n is the den - sity of added salt . For monovalent salts the Debye length in ˚ A is given numerically as 3 . 04 I − 1 / 2 s , where I s is the ionic strength in M . Indeed for monovalent salts both ef - fects , ionic screening as well as counterion condensation , coexist . In general , however , one can not invoke screen - ing eﬀects in polyvalent salt solutions since in that case the whole PB conceptual framework breaks down and correlation , not screening , eﬀects [ 6 ] become the salient feature of the behavior of the system . The ionic screen - ing in monovalent salt solutions , augmented by the ef - fect of thermal DNA undulations , has been shown to quantitatively describe the measured osmotic pressure of DNA solutions in a fairly wide range of concentrations [ 12 , 13 , 14 ] . Apart from being a charged polymer , DNA is also molecularly rather stiﬀ . The ﬂexibility of polymers is usually described via the persistence length L p . Per - sistence length is nothing but the correlation length for orientational correlations along the molecular axis of the polymer [ 1 ] . For DNA the usually accepted value is about 500 ˚A [ 10 ] . Persistence length separates two regimes of behavior : rigid chain regime for contour lengths smaller than L p and ﬂexible chain regime for contour lengths much larger then L p . The persistence length depends on long range electrostatic interactions along the polyelec - trolyte chain . The inﬂuence of electrostatic interactions on the persistence length was ﬁrst considered by Odijk [ 15 ] and independently by Skolnick and Fixman [ 16 ] . Ac - cording to the Odijk - Skolnick - Fixman ( OSF ) theory , the total persistence length can be decomposed into a struc - tural ( L 0 ) and electrostatic ( L e ) contribution as L p = L 0 + L e = L 0 + l B / ( 2 bκ ) 2 ( 3 ) where b is again the separation between charges . As - suming the MO condensation , i . e . b = l B , one gets L p = L 0 + 0 . 324 I − 1 s in ˚A . As is clear from the OSF theory , counterion condensation reduces the electrostatic contribution to the persistence length due to an increase in the eﬀective separation between charges from b to l B . 3 The OSF result , though it can be nominally applied only at restrictive conditions , appears to work well when com - pared to experiments [ 17 ] as well as computer simulations [ 18 ] . On the other hand , in the regime of no added salt and thus weak electrostatic screening due to other chains and counterions , a semiﬂexible charged chain in a semidi - lute polyelectrolyte solution behaves like a random walk of correlation blobs ( see below ) with chain size R ∝ c − 0 . 25 [ 4 ] . Coming back to the electrostatic persistence length , it is worth mentioning that L e strongly depends on the valency of the counterions and in general on the details of the electrostatic interaction potential . For monovalent counterions L e is usually positive indicating an eﬀective repulsion between monomers . It is evident that starting assumptions κ − 1 ≫ a of the MO theory ( inﬁnitely thin polymers or highly dilute polyelectrolyte solutions ) and κ − 1 ≫ b of the OSF the - ory ( monovalent salt with low enough screening ) enforce their limited validity . It is not clear at all whether one can apply these theories in the limit where added salt concen - tration is smaller than the DNA concentration , viz . the concentration of intrinsic counterions . This fact raises further questions , even in the simplest case of DNA in monovalent salt solutions , of the general applicability of these models to predict the amount of counterion conden - sation , as well as to describe properties like fundamental length scales of DNA in solution . Due to the intrinsic length of native DNA , the concen - tration of polyelectrolyte solutions that we are dealing with in this contribution is always higher than the chain overlap concentration c * [ 4 ] . This means that we are ef - fectively always in the semidilute regime , where it has been known for a long time [ 4 , 19 ] , that a new length scale emerges describing the density correlations in the polyelectrolyte solution . This length scale is equal to the correlation length or the mesh size , describing the corre - lation volume in semidilute polyelectrolyte solutions , and is given by the de Gennes - Pfeuty - Dobrynin ( dGPD ) cor - relation length [ 4 , 20 , 21 ] that scales universally with the concentration of the polyelectrolyte , c , as ξ ∝ c − 0 . 5 ( 4 ) It is interesting that this form of scaling , ﬁrst derived for uncharged polymer solutions , is preserved also in the case of polyelectrolytes with some theoretically possible adjustments only in the case of added salt eﬀects , and is expected to be proportional to the screening length due to both free DNA counterions and added salt ions [ 4 ] . For polyelectrolyte solutions the interpretation of this scaling result is that for volumes smaller than ξ 3 the polyelec - trolyte chain is stiﬀened by electrostatic interactions [ 22 ] , whereas for scales larger than ξ , it behaves as a free ﬂight chain . In an attempt to clarify several of the above issues , we have undertaken an investigation of dielectric relax - ation properties of DNA solutions that covers a broad range of DNA concentrations , as well as added salt concentrations . We have used low - frequency dielectric spectroscopy technique , widely established as a direct and non - destructive tool to probe charged entities and their structure in various bio - macromolecular systems [ 23 , 24 , 25 ] . Our aim was not only to verify the predic - tions of the various theories in the well deﬁned conditions , but also to investigate the behavior of DNA at extreme conditions like very low and very high added salt limit . A brief report of this investigation has been published in Ref . [ 26 ] . Interpretation of our results depends on the nature of the conformation of DNA in low salt or even pure wa - ter solutions , more speciﬁcally on whether DNA is in a single stranded ( ss - ) or double stranded ( ds - ) conforma - tion . We have considered this question very carefully in what follows . Diﬀerent preparation protocols for DNA solutions were adopted in order to study the issue of ds - DNA stability in pure water ( see the Materials and Methods section ) solutions . Denaturation of DNA was in particular investigated for pure water DNA solutions . These studies indicate that indeed for semidilute con - ditions the DNA double - helix was never denatured into two spatially distinguishable and well separated single strands . DNA solutions were additionally characterized by UV spectrophotometry , electrophoresis and atomic emmission spectroscopy . Our results demonstrate that DNA counterions , free as well as condensed in variable proportions , contribute to the oscillating polarization in the applied electric ﬁeld and thus together determine the dielectric response of the DNA solution . The characteristic size of the relax - ation volume for the dielectric response of a semidilute DNA solution is given by one of the three fundamental length scales : the dGPD mesh size of the whole poly - electrolyte solution , the OSF salt - dependent persistence length of a single polyelectrolyte chain and the average size of the chain in the salt - free polyelectrolyte solution . The OSF prediction for the persistence length as a func - tion of added salt ionic strength is veriﬁed in the high added salt limit giving very good agreement . Our results indicate that by going from the high to the low salt limit and all the way down to the nominally pure water solu - tions , the characteristic length goes from the persistence length of the DNA in solution to a value that corresponds to the average size of the Gaussian chain composed of cor - relation blobs which scales as c − 0 . 25 DNA . Moreover , an exact condition is established that separates the high from the low added salt regime , which reads 2 I s = 0 . 4 c in , where c in is the concentration of DNA counterions , These two regimes diﬀer in whether the added salt ions provide the screening or DNA acts as its own salt . Finally , our results conﬁrm the theoretical prediction describing the concen - tration dependence of the mesh size of DNA solutions as ξ ∝ c − 0 . 5 DNA . In the limit of low DNA concentrations and low added salt , the semidilute solution correlation length deviates from the classical polyelectrolyte behav - ior and follows the scaling c − 0 . 33 DNA . Possible interpretations of this behavior are discussed and the appearance of lo - 4 cally ﬂuctuating regions with exposed hydrophobic cores is suggested as the mechanism for this anomalous scaling . II . MATERIALS AND METHODS Salmon testes and calf thymus lyophilized Na - DNA threads were obtained from Sigma and Rockland , re - spectively . Low protein content was declared and ver - iﬁed by our UV spectrophotometry measurements , for the former A 260 / A 280 = 1 . 65 − 1 . 70 and for the latter A 260 / A 280 = 1 . 87 . Inductively coupled plasma - atomic emmission spectroscopy ( ICP - AES ) elemental analysis was performed on the Na - DNA threads dissolved in pure water [ 27 ] . The results have shown that the phospho - rus and sodium contents were the same , implying that only intrinsic sodium atoms are present . Taking into account that for double stranded DNA , monomers cor - respond to base pairs of molecular weight 660 g / mol , this result implies 7 % by weight of Na + ions in DNA . This means that the concentration of intrinsic DNA counterions and the DNA concentration are related by c in [ mM ] = c DNA [ mg / mL ] × 3 µ mol / mg . Electrophore - sis measurements were performed on DNA dissolved in pure water and in NaCl electrolyte with diﬀerent ionic strengths . The obtained results have shown consistently the existence of polydisperse DNA fragments , most of them in the range 2 - 20 kbp . Since the scale of 3 . 4 ˚A corresponds to one base pair , we estimate the range of contour lengths of DNA fragments to be 0 . 7 - 7 µ m . DNA solutions with diﬀerent DNA concentrations and diﬀerent added salt ionic strengths were prepared accord - ing to two protocols , which we describe below : I Pure water DNA solutions : Dry DNA threads were dissolved in pure water for 48 hours at 4 o C so that the solutions within concentration range 0 . 01 ≤ c DNA ≤ 15 mg / mL were obtained . The ionic strength of pure water I s ≈ 0 . 01 mM was es - timated from the measured conductivity σ = 1 . 5 µ S / cm of the pure water sample in the chamber for dielectric spectroscopy , using molar conductiv - ity of the highly diluted NaCl ( 126 . 5 Scm 2 / mol ) . An increased conductivity value of pure water , as compared to the declared one [ 27 ] , is due to manip - ulation in the laboratory environment . II DNA solutions with added salt : II1 NaCl was added to DNA water solution with a chosen c DNA ( prepared according to I ) , so that the added salt ionic strength was achieved in the range 0 . 01 mM ≤ I s ≤ 4 mM . II2 DNA solutions with the same c DNA as in II1 and with the added salt ionic strength in the range 1 mM ≤ I s ≤ 4 mM were prepared start - ing from stock DNA solutions in which DNA was dissolved in 10 mM NaCl for 48 hours at 4 o C . One of the stock solutions was dialyzed against 10mM NaCl during 24 hours at 4 o C ( II2 . 2 ) , while the other was not ( II2 . 1 ) . II3 DNA solutions with concentrations in the range 0 . 1 ≤ c DNA ≤ 1 . 25 mg / mL and with the added salt ionic strength I s = 1 mM were prepared starting from a stock DNA solution in which DNA was dissolved in 10 mM NaCl for 48 hours at 4 o C . Stock solution was dia - lyzed against 1 mM NaCl during 24 hours at 4 o C . The stock solutions were stored at 4 o C and were di - luted just before dielectric spectroscopy measurements , which were completed in a few days . UV spectrophotom - etry and electrophoresis measurements were performed within next two weeks . For longer periods the stock solu - tions were stored at - 80 o C . pH of all solutions were found to be around 7 . Similar pH values were measured for DNA solutions prepared from 10 mM Tris - EDTA buﬀer ( TE ) , which adjusts pH to 7 . 6 ( not discussed in this ar - ticle ) . The results of ICP - AES elemental analysis indicated that solutions of Na - DNA dissolved in pure water did not contain any additional ions except declared sodium ones . This was further conﬁrmed by dielectric spectroscopy measurements , which gave identical results for DNA solu - tions with same DNA concentration and added salt ionic strength prepared according to the protocol II1 and II2 . Spectrophotometry measurements at 260 nm were per - formed to verify nominal DNA concentrations . The con - centration was determined assuming an extinction coef - ﬁcient at 260 nm A 260 = 20 for 1 mg / mL , meaning that the measured absorption A 260 = 1 corresponds to 0 . 05 mg / mL [ 28 , 29 ] . Throughout this article we will refer to nominal concentrations , which we have found to be in a good agreement with the measured ones . In par - ticular , the measured concentrations for DNA solutions II2 and II3 , performed on 10 aliquots , were consistently smaller by about 20 % than the nominal ones . We in - terpret this diﬀerence to be due to water content , not taken into account by the spectrophotometry approach . Indeed , lyophilized DNA if kept at 110 o C for 30 min loses about 20 % in weight . Dielectric spectroscopy measurements [ 25 ] were per - formed at room temperature ( 25 o C ) using a set - up which consists of a home - made parallel platinum plate capaci - tive chamber and temperature control unit , in conjunc - tion with the Agilent 4294A precision impedance ana - lyzer operating in ν = 40 Hz - 110 MHz frequency range . The capacitive chamber enables reliable complex admit - tance measurements with reproducibility of 1 . 5 % of sam - ples in solution with small volume of 100 µ L and with conductivities in the range of 1 . 5 - 2000 µ S / cm . Low ac amplitudes of 50 mV were employed in order to probe the DNA response in the linear regime , once we veriﬁed that for ac signal levels in the range between 20 mV and 500 mV the result was essentially the same . Lowest ac amplitudes were not used in order to avoid extensive aver - 5 aging . Admittance was sampled at 201 frequencies at 27 points per frequency decade . At each frequency , admit - tance was sampled 10 times and averaged . In addition , three consecutive frequency sweeps were taken in order to average out the temperature variations . Total time for described measurement amounts to 60 sec . Measurement functions are the real part of the admittance G exp ( ω ) and the capacitance C exp ( ω ) , where ω = 2 πν . In addition to DNA samples , the reference sam - ples were also measured in order to minimize stray impedances , including the free ion contribution and elec - trode polarization eﬀects , and extract the response due to DNA only [ 25 , 30 ] . Reference samples were cho - sen as NaCl solutions of diﬀerent molarities , adjusted to have the real part of admittances at 100 kHz the same as DNA solutions . In comparison to these solu - tions , independent adjustment of capacitance at 1 kHz demanded the reference NaCl concentrations that diﬀer at most by 20 % . Since the diﬀerence in capacitance be - tween reference NaCl solutions of similar molarities is approximately constant at frequencies above the inﬂu - ence of the electrode polarization , adjusting solely the real part of admittance eﬀectively also adjusts the ca - pacitance up to an additive term . As a result , the sub - traction of the reference response successfully eliminated inﬂuence of spurious eﬀects down to a low frequency limit in the range 0 . 5 - 30 kHz , depending on the so - lution molarity , and up to a high frequency limit of 30 MHz . Generally speaking , electrode polarization eﬀects are larger for higher DNA and added salt concentrations , so that the low frequency bound is shifted to higher fre - quencies . Assuming that the conductivity contribution of each entity in the solution is additive [ 2 ] , the DNA response is given by G ( ω ) = G exp ( ω ) − G ref ( ω ) and C ( ω ) = C exp ( ω ) − C ref ( ω ) , where G ref ( ω ) , C ref ( ω ) is the reference samples response . Finally , the real and imaginary parts of dieletric function are extracted using relations ε ′ ( ω ) = l S C ( ω ) ε 0 ( 5 ) ε ′′ ( ω ) = l S G ( ω ) ωε 0 ( 6 ) l / S = 0 . 1042 ± 0 . 0008 cm − 1 is the chamber con - stant , where S = 0 . 98 cm 2 is the eﬀective electrode cross - section corresponding to the sample of 100 µ L and l = 0 . 1021 ± 0 . 0001 cm is the distance between the elec - trodes . The chamber constant was determined by mea - suring the real part of admittance at 100 kHz of a 0 . 01 M and 0 . 0005 M KCl standard solutions ( Mettler - Toledo ) . It was also corroborated by the diﬀerence in capacitance of the chamber when empty and with 100 µ L of the pure water . In the latter case , the dielectric constant of pure water ǫ w = 78 . 65 was used as a standard . Detailed analysis of the DNA response was made in terms of the complex dielectric function ε ( ω ) given by a generalization of the Debye expression known as the phenomenological Havriliak - Negami ( HN ) function [ 31 ] ε ( ω ) − ε HF = ∆ ε 1 ( 1 + ( iωτ 0 ) 1 − α ) β ( 7 ) where ∆ ε = ε 0 − ε HF is the strength of the relaxation process , ε 0 is the static dielectric constant ( ω ≪ 1 / τ 0 ) and ε HF is the high frequency dielectric constant ( ω ≫ 1 / τ 0 ) . τ 0 is the mean relaxation time , while 1 − α and β are the shape parameters which describe the symmetric broadening of the relaxation time distribution function and skewness , respectively . We worked with β = 1 since this simpliﬁed HN formulation ( also known as the Cole - Cole function ) has been widely and successfully used to describe relaxation processes in disordered systems . Measured data were analyzed by using the least squares method in the complex plane [ 32 , 33 ] . Such an approach , which takes into consideration both the real and the imaginary part of the dielectric function at the same time , strongly improves the resolution if com - pared with the method in which the real and imaginary parts are treated separately . The complex plane method proved itself to be a powerful tool to resolve reliably two close modes in frequency even if the strength of one or both modes does not exceed ∆ ε = 2 − 3 , provided that the ratio of their dielectric strengths is smaller than the ratio of their positions in frequency . III . RESULTS We now present results of the dielectric response study performed on DNA solutions prepared according to pro - tocols described in Section II . The obtained dielectric re - laxation results for salmon testes and calf thymus DNA samples were essentially the same . For the sake of sim - plicity , in the remainder of this article we will speak of DNA samples only . Fig . 1 shows the frequency dependent real and imag - inary part of the dielectric function for selected DNA concentrations of DNA solutions . The results for pure water DNA solutions ( protocol I , concentrations a1 = 2 . 5 mg / mL , a2 = 0 . 4 mg / mL , a3 = 0 . 1 mg / mL and a4 = 0 . 0125 mg / mL ) are shown in panel a ) and b ) , while the results for DNA solutions with added salt of ionic strength I s = 1 mM ( protocol II3 , concentrations b1 = 0 . 83 mg / mL , b2 = 0 . 5 mg / mL , b3 = 0 . 31 mg / mL and b4 = 0 . 125 mg / mL ) are shown in panel c ) and d ) . The observed dielectric re - sponse is complex and the data were only successfully ﬁtted to a formula representing the sum of two HN func - tions . The full lines in Fig . 1 correspond to these ﬁts , while the dashed lines represent single HN forms . The main features of this response , for pure water DNA so - lutions , as well as for DNA solutions with added salt , are two broad modes , whose amplitude and position in frequency depend on the DNA concentration . The pa - rameter 1 − α , which describes the symmetrical broad - ening of the relaxation time distribution function , is concentration independent and similar for both modes 6 n ( Hz ) 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 4 10 5 10 6 10 7 10 8 e ' ' 1 10 100 a1 a4 a3 a2 S a l m on X ' 04 . j nb / 3115 25 o C pure water DNA solutions s a l m on - DNA [ m g / m l ] a 1 C 4 2 . 5 a 2 C 12 0 . 4 a 3 C 18 0 . 1 a 4 C 27 0 . 0125 a ) e ' 1 10 100 a1 a4 a3 a2 b ) n ( Hz ) 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 4 10 5 10 6 10 7 10 8 e ' ' 1 10 100 b1 b4 b3 b2 D i a l DNA 30 V I _ F I T . j nb / 1615 25 o C DNA solutions with added salt DNA i n 1 m M N a C l s a l m on - DNA [ m g / m L ] b1 C 2 0 . 83 b2 C 4 0 . 5 b3 C 6 0 . 31 b4 C 9 0 . 16 d ) e ' 1 10 100 c ) b1 b4 b3 b2 FIG . 1 : Double logarithmic plot of the frequency dependence of the real ( ε ’ ) and imaginary ( ε ” ) part of the dielectric func - tion at T = 25 o C of ( a , b ) pure water DNA solutions ( protocol I ) and ( c , d ) DNA water solutions with added salt I s = 1 mM ( protocol II3 ) for representative a1 - a4 ( 2 . 5 , 0 . 4 , 0 . 1 , 0 . 0125 mg / mL ) and b1 - b4 ( 0 . 83 , 0 . 5 , 0 . 31 , 0 . 125 mg / mL ) DNA con - centrations . The full lines are ﬁts to the sum of the two HN forms ; the dashed lines represent a single HN form . 1 − α ≈ 0 . 8 . The mode centered at higher frequencies ( 0 . 1 MHz < ν HF < 15 MHz ) is characterized by smaller dielectric strength ( 5 < ∆ ε HF < 20 ) than the mode ( 20 < ∆ ε LF < 100 ) centered at lower frequencies ( 0 . 5 kHz < ν LF < 70 kHz ) . In the remainder of this article , we will refer to these modes as the high - frequency ( HF ) and low - frequency ( LF ) mode , respectively . In what follows , we discuss possible assignments for these relaxation modes inside the framework of exist - ing theoretical approaches for polarization response of charged biopolymers in solution [ 25 , 35 , 36 , 37 , 38 ] . An applied ac ﬁeld generates an oscillating ﬂow of net charge associated with DNA counterions [ 39 ] and induces polar - ization . Since the counterion displacement is controlled by diﬀusion , the dielectric response is basically charac - terized by the mean relaxation time τ 0 ∝ L 2 / D in , where L is the associated length scale , and D in is the diﬀusion constant of counterions which is suﬃciently well approx - imated by the diﬀusion constant of bulk ions [ 25 , 40 ] . Since we deal with Na - DNA solutions , we take the diﬀu - sion constant of Na + ions D in = 1 . 33 · 10 − 9 m 2 / s . Note that the equation τ 0 ∝ L 2 / D in is a scaling relationship and the proportionality constant is of order one ( see Dis - cussion , part B ) . Several length scales are theoretically expected to be associated with dielectric relaxations of polyelectrolytes in solution : the contour length , the Debye screening length , the polymer chain statistical segment length and the polymer solution mesh size . The mean relaxation time for pure water DNA solu - tions , as well as for DNA solutions with added salt , is found in the range 10 − 8 − 1 . 5 · 10 − 6 s for the HF mode and 2 · 10 − 6 − 3 · 10 − 4 s for the LF mode . The correspond - ing characteristic length for the HF mode spans the range from 3 nm to 50 nm , while the characteristic length for the LF mode varies between 50 nm and 750 nm . Both of them are thus not within the range of the contour length distribution in our samples . On the other hand , the Debye screening length , the polymer solution mesh size and the polymer statistical segment length appear as plausible candidates . Moreover , it is noteworthy that speciﬁcally the values of the characteristic length for the LF mode are close to the values expected for the DNA persistence length . A . HF mode First , we address the HF mode . In the case of pure water DNA solutions the characteristic length L HF shows the scaling L HF ∝ c − 0 . 5 DNA with respect to the DNA con - centration , all the way down to a crossover concentration c co ∼ 0 . 6 mg / mL . At that point the scaling form is then changed to L HF ∝ c − 0 . 33 DNA ( Fig . 2a ) . The observed behav - ior at high DNA concetrations conforms exactly to the de Gennes - Pfeuty - Dobrynin ( dGPD ) [ 4 , 20 , 21 ] scaling form valid for salt - free polyelectrolyte solutions [ 4 , 25 ] . At low DNA concetrations , in the regime below c co , L HF 7 c DNA ( mg / mL ) 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 L H F ( n m ) 10 100 DN A 2 . j nb / 0214 25 o C k - 1 ~ I s - 0 . 5 I s ( mM ) 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 L H F ( n m ) 10 0 . 05 mg / mL 0 . 5 mg / mL a ) c co in same as for bulk Na b ) 25 o C 0 . 8 mg / mL FIG . 2 : a ) Characteristic length of the HF mode ( L HF ) for pure water DNA solutions ( protocol I , open squares ) and for DNA solutions with added salt I s = 1 mM ( protocol II3 , full squares ) as a function of DNA concentration ( c DNA ) . The full line is a ﬁt to the power law L HF ∝ c − 0 . 33 DNA and ∝ c − 0 . 5 DNA for c DNA smaller and larger than c co ∼ 0 . 6 mg / mL , respectively . b ) Characteristic length of the HF mode ( L HF ) for DNA so - lutions with varying added salt ( I s ) for three representative DNA concentrations : c DNA = 0 . 05 mg / mL ( diamonds , pro - tocol II1 ) , c DNA = 0 . 5 mg / mL ( full triangles , protocol II1 ; open triangles , protocol II2 . 1 ; open inverse triangles , proto - col II2 . 2 ) and c DNA = 0 . 8 mg / mL ( circles , protocol II2 . 1 ) . The full line denotes Debye screening length κ − 1 for the in - vestigated range of added salt ionic strength I s . displays an unusual behavior generally not observed in semidilute solutions . It appears as though at low DNA concentrations local conformational ﬂuctuations partially expose the hydrophobic core of DNA so that the corre - lation length scales as c − 0 . 33 DNA , as is the case of charged chains with partially exposed hydrophobic cores [ 4 ] . In dilute solutions , but only in dilute solutions , this scaling form would be typical for the average separation between chains [ 4 ] . The observed crossover might be thought to reﬂect the border between dilute and semidilute solutions [ 25 , 41 ] corresponding to the crossover concentration c ∗ [ 20 ] . For the shortest fragments of 2 kbp in our DNA so - lutions , we get c ∗ of the order of 0 . 006 mg / mL , while the lowest concentration of DNA solutions is 0 . 01 mg / mL . In this manner , the interpretation of c co ∼ 0 . 6 mg / mL as the dilute - semidilute crossover concentration c ∗ is ruled out . With added 1 mM salt , the dGPD behavior of L HF remains unchanged , thus L HF ∝ c − 0 . 5 DNA , as long as the concentration of intrinsic counterions c in ( proportional to c DNA ) is larger than the concentration of added salt ions 2 I s ( Fig . 2a ) . When the concentration of intrinsic counterions becomes smaller than the added salt concen - trations , the L HF apparently shows a leveling oﬀ , with a limiting value close to the Debye length appropriate for this salt concentration . One should be cautious here since the data become much less reliable exactly at low DNA concentrations ( see error bars in Fig . 2a ) . Three sets of additional data ( Fig . 2b ) for three representative DNA concentrations with varying added salt also seem to reveal that L HF does not vary with I s in most of the mea - sured range of added salt , while the corresponding Debye screening length in the same range of added salt values decreases substantially . Unfortunately the accuracy of the data again becomes much less reliable due to the progressive merging of the HF and LF modes when one approaches the regime , where the characteristic length scale becomes apparently larger than the nominal Debye length at that salt concentration . Next we consider the behavior of dielectric strength deﬁned as ∆ ε HF ≈ f HF · c in · α HF , where f HF is the fraction of counterions participating in the HF process , c in [ mM ] = c DNA [ mg / mL ] × 3 µ mol / mg ( as explained in Section II ) and α HF is the corresponding polarizabil - ity . The polarizability α HF is given by the scaling form α HF ∝ e 2 · L 2HF · / ( ε 0 kT ) ∝ l B · ε · L 2HF , [ 25 , 41 ] . Therefore , the fraction of counterions f HF participating in the HF process is proportional to ∆ ε HF / ( c DNA · L 2HF ) . In Fig . 3 we show the dependence of f HF on DNA concentration ( panel a ) ) and on the ionic strength of added salt ions ( panel b ) ) . The f HF data for pure water DNA solution displayed in panel a ) indicate that the fraction of counterions partici - pating in this relaxation process does not depend on the concentration of DNA . Since the HF relaxation happens at the length scale ξ which describes the density corre - lations between DNA chains , this result indicates that it is the free counterions as opposed to condensed counteri - ons , that can hop from chain to chain in the volume ξ 3 , that are the relaxation entities participating in the HF process . It is noteworthy that a similar interpretation was previously proposed by Ito et al . [ 41 ] for the relax - ation in synthetic polyelectrolytes observed in the same frequency range [ 25 ] . The data displayed in Fig . 3 b ) suggest that the frac - tion of intrinsic counterions f HF active in the HF mode remains constant when salt is added to the DNA solution as long as c DNA is substantially larger than I s . However , as soon as the concentration of added salt ions prevails over the concentration of intrinsic counterions , f HF starts to decrease . This is also discernible in the behavior of the f HF data for I s = 1 mM added salt solution shown 8 DN A 2 . j nb / 0215 c DNA ( mg / mL ) 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 D e H F / ( c DNA L H F 2 ) 10 - 2 10 - 1 10 0 25 o C a ) I s ( mM ) 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 D e H F / ( c DNA L H F 2 ) 10 - 2 10 - 1 10 0 0 . 05 mg / mL 0 . 5 mg / mL b ) 25 o C in as for bulk Na 0 . 8 mg / mL FIG . 3 : a ) Normalized dielectric strength of the HF mode ∆ ε HF / ( c DNA · L 2HF ) as a function of DNA concentration ( c DNA ) for pure water DNA solutions ( protocol I , open squares ) and for DNA solutions with added salt I s = 1 mM ( protocol II3 , full squares ) . The full line is a guide for the eye . b ) Normalized dielectric strength of the HF mode ∆ ε HF / ( c DNA · L 2HF ) vs . ionic strength of the added salt ( I s ) for three representative DNA concentrations : c DNA = 0 . 05 mg / mL ( diamonds , protocol II1 ) , c DNA = 0 . 5 mg / mL ( full triangles , protocol II1 ; open triangles , protocol II2 . 1 ; open inverse triangles , protocol II2 . 2 ) and c DNA = 0 . 8 mg / mL ( circles , protocol II2 . 1 ) . in panel a ) . A plausible suggestion would be that the salt renormalization of f HF is a consequence of screening due to added salt ions that seem to diminish the eﬀective number of counterions that can participate in the chain - chain hopping process . B . LF mode Second , we address the LF mode . For pure water DNA solutions ( protocol I ) , the characteristic length L LF in - creases with decreasing DNA concentration in almost three decades wide concentration range ( open inverse triangles in Fig . 4a ) ) following the power law L LF ∝ c − 0 . 29 ± 0 . 04 DNA . The exponent − 0 . 29 ± 0 . 04 suggests that in this regime L LF is proportional to the average size of the polyelectrolyte chain that behaves as a random walk of correlation blobs and scales as c − 0 . 25 DNA [ 4 ] . For DNA solutions with added salt I s = 1 mM ( protocol II3 , full inverse triangles in Fig . 4a ) ) , L LF coincides with the one found for pure water solutions with high DNA concentra - tions . As soon as the concentration of intrinsic counteri - ons c in ( proportional to c DNA ) becomes smaller than the concentration of bulk ions from added salt 2 I s , L LF starts to deviate from the L LF ∝ c − 0 . 29 DNA behavior and decreases to attain value of about 500 ˚A at which it saturates . The dependence of L LF on the added salt ionic strength I s is shown in Fig . 4b ) for three DNA concentrations . The observed data can be nicely ﬁt to the OSF behavior [ 15 , 16 ] of the form : L p = L 0 + a · I − 1 s . We get L 0 = 470 ˚A for the structural persistence length and a = 0 . 09 ˚AM . While the value of L 0 close to 500 ˚A is in accordance with standard expectations for DNA [ 10 ] , the value of the coeﬃcient a is somewhat smaller than expected by the OSF theory a = 0 . 324 ˚ AM . It is noteworthy that the OSF model applies as long as the ionic strength of added salt is larger than the concentration of the intrinsic counterions . The data for c DNA = 0 . 05 , 0 . 5 and 0 . 8 mg / mL deviate from the OSF behavior for I s < 0 . 03 mM , I s < 0 . 3 mM and I s < 0 . 5 mM , respectively . The value of L LF in this low salt limit attains the same value as in pure water DNA solutions ( see Fig . 4a ) . In Fig . 5a ) we show dependence of f LF ∝ ∆ ε LF / ( c DNA · L 2LF ) on the DNA concentration assuming again that the polarizability α LF varies as the characteristic length squared . The data show that the fraction of counterions f LF active in the LF mode is roughly speaking indepen - dent of the DNA concentration . This is valid for the pure water DNA solution , as well as in the case of I s = 1 mM added salt solution . In our view this result together with the fact that the LF relaxation happens at the length scale of the average size of the polyelectrolyte chain sug - gests that the LF relaxation engages mostly condensed counterions along and in close vicinity of the chain . However , the data displayed in panel b ) , as well as the data for I s = 1 mM in panel a ) suggest that the fraction of counterions participating in the LF process f LF becomes larger in the case of added salt solutions , compared to the pure water case , if the concentration of added salt ions becomes larger than c DNA . This means that at least some of the free counterions join the relax - ation of the condensed counterions along the segments of the same chain . It is thus impossible to completely sepa - rate condensed counterions from free counterions in their contribution to the LF relaxation mode . This conclusion bears crucially on the assumption that the scale of polar - izability is given by L LF ( I s ) . It is noteworthy that for the HF and LF modes the addition of salt changes the eﬀec - tive number of participating counterions in the opposite way . This might be attributed to the increased screen - ing for the interchain HF relaxation , and to the intrinsic counterion atmospheres squeezed closer to the chains due to reduced Debye length for the LF relaxation along the 9 c DNA ( mg / mL ) 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 L L F ( n m ) 100 1000 DN A 2 . j nb / 0216 25 o C 0 . 5mg / mL 0 . 05mg / mL Lp = 470A + 0 . 09 / I I s ( mM ) 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 L L F ( n m ) 10 100 1000 in same as for bulk Na 25 o C a ) b ) 0 . 8mg / mL FIG . 4 : a ) Characteristic length of the LF mode ( L LF ) for pure water DNA solutions ( protocol I , open inverse triangles ) and for DNA solutions with added salt I s = 1 mM ( pro - tocol II3 , full inverse triangles ) as a function of DNA con - centration ( c DNA ) . The full line is a ﬁt to the power law L LF ∝ c − 0 . 29 ± 0 . 04 DNA . b ) Characteristic length of the LF mode ( L LF ) for DNA solutions with varying added salt ( I s ) for three representative DNA concentrations : c DNA = 0 . 05 mg / mL ( di - amonds , protocol II1 ) , c DNA = 0 . 5 mg / mL ( full triangles , pro - tocol II1 ; open triangles , protocol II2 . 1 ; open inverse trian - gles , protocol II2 . 2 ) and c DNA = 0 . 8 mg / mL ( circles , protocol II2 . 1 ) . The full line is a ﬁt to the expression L p = L 0 + a · I − 1 s with L 0 = 470 ˚A and a = 0 . 09 ˚A . chain . As a ﬁnal remark , we point out that our results show - ing that the HF relaxation can be attributed to the semidilute mesh size ξ , in the polyelectrolyte semidilute solution in which single chain persistence length associ - ated with the LF relaxation is always larger than ξ , con - ﬁrm the prediction of Odijk [ 19 ] that the same scaling law ξ ∝ c − 0 . 5 should also be valid for semiﬂexible DNA polymers . DN A 2 . j nb / 0217 c DNA ( mg / mL ) 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 D e L F / ( c DNA L L F 2 ) 10 - 3 10 - 2 10 - 1 25 o C a ) in as for bulk Na + 0 . 8 mg / mL 0 . 05 mg / mL I s ( mM ) 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 D e L F / ( c DNA L L F 2 ) 10 - 3 10 - 2 10 - 1 25 o C b ) 0 . 5 mg / mL FIG . 5 : a ) Normalized dielectric strength of the LF mode ∆ ε LF / ( c DNA · L 2LF ) as a function of DNA concentration ( c DNA ) for pure water DNA solutions ( protocol I , open inverse tri - angles ) and for DNA solutions with added salt I s = 1 mM ( protocol II3 , full inverse triangles ) . The full line is a guide for the eye . b ) Normalized dielectric strength of the LF mode ∆ ε LF / ( c DNA · L 2LF ) vs . ionic strength of the added salt ( I s ) for three representative DNA concentrations : c DNA = 0 . 05 mg / mL ( diamonds , protocol II1 ) , c DNA = 0 . 5 mg / mL ( full triangles , protocol II1 ; open triangles , protocol II2 . 1 ; open inverse triangles , protocol II2 . 2 ) and c DNA = 0 . 8 mg / mL ( circles , protocol II2 . 1 ) . IV . DISCUSSION First , let us summarize the results of dielectric spec - troscopy measurements . In the linear ac ﬁeld regime , two broad relaxation modes are observed corresponding to three diﬀerent time and length scales . The HF mode is centered in the frequency range between 0 . 1 MHz and 15 MHz , depending solely on the DNA concentration as long as the DNA concentration remains larger than the added salt concentration . In this regime , the characteris - tic length scale is identiﬁed with the mesh size , and varies as ξ ∝ c − 0 . 5 DNA . Our data also seem to indicate that once the added salt becomes larger than the concentration of DNA intrinsic counterions , the high frequency charac - teristic length , rather than scaling as the semidilute so - 10 lution correlation length , levels oﬀ at a value close to the corresponding Debye length . More systematic exper - iments are needed to asses the possible added salt depen - dence in this regime of salt concentrations . In the limit of low DNA concentrations and low added salt , the semidi - lute solution correlation length smoothly crosses over to a less rapid scaling as ∝ c − 0 . 33 probably reﬂecting the appearance of locally ﬂuctuating regions with exposed hydrophobic cores . The LF mode is centered in the frequency range be - tween 0 . 5 kHz < ν LF < 70 kHz . In DNA solutions with added salt , the characteristic length scale of this mode corresponds to the persistence length , which varies ex - perimentally as L p ∝ I − 1 s . In the limit of low added salt , the characteristic length scale smoothly merges with the average size of the Gaussian chain composed of corre - lation blobs , which varies with DNA concentration as L LF ∝ c − 0 . 25 DNA . The dielectric data also seem to indicate that the free DNA counterions are mostly responsible for the high fre - quency relaxational mode , whereas the low frequency mode appears to be more complicated and the decou - pling of MO condensed and free DNA counterions seems to be diﬃcult with any degree of conﬁdence . Investigation of dielectric properties of DNA goes back to early ’60s and since then a reasonable number of pa - pers have been published [ 24 , 25 , 30 , 35 , 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 , 47 ] . In these studies , two dispersion modes associ - ated with the counterion ﬂuctuations were found , one at very low frequencies , which depended on molecular weight ( i . e . degree of polymerization , N ) and another one in the intermediate frequency region , which showed no N dependence , but did show a pronounced concentra - tion dependence . For the sake of completeness we also mention the third relaxation in the GHz frequency range , which is due to solvent ( water ) relaxation and therefore not directly a concern of this paper . The low frequency mode was consistently associated with the DNA contour length , while the intermediate fre - quency one was often associated with the DNA statistical segment length . These interpretations were based on the theoretical models of the Mandel group [ 35 , 36 , 48 ] devel - oped for the case of a single polyelectrolyte ( limit of very dilute solutions ) . Another interpretation of the inter - mediate frequency relaxation , proposed and veriﬁed un - til now only for synthetic monodisperse polyelectrolytes , was that it was due to the counterion ﬂuctuation along the correlation length [ 25 , 41 , 42 ] . It is worth noting the suggestion of Odijk [ 19 ] that the mesh size gives a phys - ical meaning to the statistically independent chain seg - ment length , which also scales as c − 0 . 5 [ 35 ] . The segment length was postulated to be due to the potential barriers along the chain , whose origin might be in the correlation length that measures the mean distance between contact points of the overlaping chains [ 20 ] . Our work reveals the existence of two , rather than one , distinct relaxation modes in the s . c . intermediate frequency range due to either a correlated response of counterions in the mesh of DNA chains in the solution , what we call the HF mode , or due to a response of the counterions along a single DNA chain , what we refer to as the LF mode . No previous experimental work was able to distinguish these two concentration dependent dispersions . The rea - son probably lies in the fact that the data analysis per - formed in the reported DNA dielectric spectroscopy stud - ies was not powerful enough to reveal and characterize two modes so close in frequency , where in addition one of them is small in amplitude . Indeed , work by Lee and Bone [ 47 ] hinted at two overlapping dispersions , but the authors were not able to characterize the smaller one properly . Another reason lies in the fact that none of these investigations covered so wide a range of DNA con - centrations and added salt ionic strengths , as we did in this work . A . Conformation of DNA in low salt solutions In this work we have paid special attention to the is - sue of the stability of ds - DNA helix , i . e . to the denatu - ration phase diagram [ 10 ] . The issue of DNA conforma - tion in pure water solutions is of paramount importance for proper understanding of our experiments . The ques - tion here is whether DNA at very low salt conditions is in the double stranded or single stranded form . Di - electric spectroscopy results strongly indicate that the double stranded form of DNA is stable in all pure water [ 27 ] solutions studied . Of course , a precise and deﬁni - tive information on the polyelectrolyte intrachain confor - mation of DNA solutions would demand the small - angle neutron scattering and / or X - ray scattering experiments performed at the same conditions . First evidence for the stability of the ds - DNA form comes from the fact that the results of the dielectric spectroscopy measurements obtained in DNA solutions with added salt prepared from water ( protocol II1 ) co - incide with the results obtained on DNA solutions pre - pared from 10 mM NaCl ( protocols II2 , II3 ) ( see Fig . 2b ) , 3b ) , 4b ) and 5b ) ) . Second , we mention that Mandel [ 35 ] already reported that dielectric behavior in pure water DNA solutions was not found to diﬀer markedly from that at low salt concentrations . Also the measured os - motic coeﬃcient in nominally pure water conditions [ 49 ] conﬁrms the assumption of an intact double stranded DNA form . Since the Manning charge density param - eters for ss - and ds - DNA are so diﬀerent this diﬀerence should be apparent also in the measured osmotic coeﬃ - cient . None is detected however . In an attempt to clarify more this issue , we have mea - sured dielectric properties of pure water DNA solutions for the DNA concentration range between c DNA = 0 . 5 mg / mL and c DNA = 0 . 01 mg / mL , prepared according to protocol I , before and after the controlled denaturation protocol . Denaturation was accomplished by the heating of solutions for 20 min at temperature of 97 o C , followed 11 by quenching to 4 o C . Dielectric measurements were sub - sequently made at 25 o C . The observed results were simi - lar for all studied DNA solutions . The dielectric strength and the relaxation time of the LF mode decreased sub - stantially after the heating , while the change observed for the HF mode was much smaller ( Fig . 6 ) . For c DNA = 0 . 01 mg / mL , the LF mode was not observed at all after the denaturation , implying the dielectric strength ∆ ε < 1 ( see Fig . 6b ) ) . Notice that ∆ ε of the LF mode for this DNA concentration is about 10 . We note that L LF , which measures the average size of the DNA chain , decreased after the heating , but showed the same power law behavior L LF ∝ c − 0 . 29 ± 0 . 04 DNA as for the untreated DNA solution ( Fig . 7b ) ) . The observed change indicates that denatured ss - DNA , which is in the form of coil , is shorter and has smaller average size of the chain . Furthermore , L HF which measures the correlation length of the DNA solution , decreased after the heating and showed the power law behavior L HF ∝ c − 0 . 33 DNA in the whole DNA concentration range ( Fig . 7a ) ) . A smaller value of L HF is expected for the denatured DNA solu - tion , since such a solution should contain twice the num - ber chains . The power law behavior with the exponent - 0 . 33 , observed now also for the larger DNA concentra - tions , indicates that the hydrophobic core of DNA is fully exposed once the heating protocol was applied . All these results conﬁrm that although untreated DNA at low salt and semidilute conditions might show locally exposed hydrophobic cores in a dynamic sense , a real / complete unzipping and separation of the strands might be accomplished only after the denatu - ration / heating protocol is applied . These observations therefore suggest that DNA in pure water solutions is not denatured into two spatially well separated single strands , but is rather in the double stranded form , lo - cally interspersed with exposed hydrophobic cores in the limit of low DNA concentrations . Furthermore , even after denaturation the two DNA strands appear to remain in relatively close proximity rather than becoming completely dissociated , an obser - vation well substantiated also by the correlation length measurements by SANS at semidilute DNA conditions [ 50 ] . In these measurements the correlation length mea - sures the characteristic distance between the hydrogen - containing ( sugar - amine base ) groups . Hammouda and Worcester [ 50 ] have recently determined that on melting of DNA in DNA / d - ethylene - glycol mixtures the correla - tion length increases from about 8 ˚A to about 12 - 15˚A , which implies that even after melting the two strands of the ds - DNA remain in very close proximity . This appears to be due to the presence of other chains in the semidi - lute solution that spatially constrain the separate strands even after melting and prevent complete dissocation [ 51 ] . The question furthermore arises if the renaturation process is fast enough to occur partially during dielectric measurements which are performed at 25 o C . In order to check this , we have repeatedly measured the response of pure water DNA solution , after the heating protocol to n ( Hz ) 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 4 10 5 10 6 10 7 10 8 e ' ' 1 10 100 pure water DNA solution c DNA = 0 . 1mg / mL denatured at : untreated d e n a t u r 0100 m g A ll _ t e m p E . J N B / 0404 21 . X I ' 05 97 o C 25 o C a ) n ( Hz ) 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 4 10 5 10 6 10 7 10 8 e ' ' 0 . 1 1 10 100 25 o C pure water DNA solution c DNA = 0 . 01mg / mL denatured at : untreated d e n a t u r a ti on B 25 . j nb / 0404 97 o C b ) FIG . 6 : Double logarithmic plot of the frequency depen - dence of the imaginary part of the dielectric function ( ε ” ) at T = 25 o C of a pure water DNA solution ( protocol I ) with DNA concentration c DNA = 0 . 1 mg / mL ( panel a ) ) and c DNA = 0 . 01 mg / mL ( panel b ) ) before ( denoted as untreated ) and after the heating to 97 o C ( denoted as denaturated , see Text ) . The full lines are ﬁts to the sum of the two HN forms ; the dashed lines represent a single HN form . 97 o C was applied . The time span was 100 min , the ﬁrst measurement was taken 3 minutes after the sample was heated from 4 o C to 25 o C . The observed response after 3 min and after 100 min was the same ( inside the error bar of 1 . 5 % ) indicating very long time constant characteriz - ing the renaturation process . This result conﬁrmed that 12 c DNA ( mg / mL ) 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 L H F ( n m ) 10 100 DN A 2 . j nb / 0219 25 o C a ) c co in same as for bulk Na pure water DNA solutions untreated denatured at 97 o C c DNA ( mg / mL ) 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 L L F ( n m ) 100 1000 DN A 2 . j nb / 0221 in same as for bulk Na b ) denatured at 97 o C untreated 25 o C pure water DNA solutions FIG . 7 : a ) The characteristic length L HF of the HF mode before ( open squares ) and after the heating to 97 o C ( full squares ) . The full line is a ﬁt to the power law L HF ∝ c − 0 . 33 DNA and ∝ c − 0 . 5 DNA for c DNA smaller and larger than c co ∼ 0 . 6 mg / mL , respectively . The dashed line is a ﬁt to the power law L HF ∝ c − 0 . 33 DNA in the whole DNA concentration range . b ) The characteristic length L LF of the LF mode before ( open triangles ) and after the heating to 97 o C ( full trian - gles ) . The full line and dashed lines are ﬁts to the power law L LF ∝ c − 0 . 29 ± 0 . 04 DNA . the observed dielectric properties are the ones of ss - DNA . Osmotic pressure results of Raspaud et al . [ 52 ] on short nucleosomal fragments of DNA also indicate that at high enough concentration , intrinsic DNA counterions prevent destabilization of ds - DNA helix in pure water solutions . These experiments show that the role of added salt ( I s ) in the ds - DNA stabilization becomes negligible in the high DNA concentration range i . e . in the limit c DNA ≫ I s . Osmotic pressure of intrinsic DNA counterions can thus be high enough to prevent denaturation of ds - DNA helix in pure water solutions . UV spectrophotometry experiments performed previ - ously by Record [ 53 ] on T4 and T7 phage DNA have also shown that ds - DNA denaturation depends not only on added salt concentration I s , but also on the con - centration of intrinsic DNA counterions , c in [ mM ] = c DNA [ mg / mL ] × 3 µ mol / mg ( see Section II ) . Moreover , ds - DNA was found to be stable at 25 o C dissolved in nom - inally pure water ( no added salt , I s → 0 ) for the concen - tration of intrinsic counterions larger than 0 . 2 mM . This again is consistent with our experiments on dielectric re - laxation of DNA solutions . Another meaningful question would be , what is the smallest c in which can still keep DNA in the double stranded form . The UV absorbance results indicated that no added salt is needed to stabilize ds - DNA in the case when the intrinsic counterion concentration , c in , is larger than 0 . 2 mM , while dielectric spectroscopy re - sults suggest it can be one order of magnitude smaller , c in > 0 . 03 mM . Notice that in the latter case c in is still larger than the estimated ion concentration of pure wa - ter ( 2 I s = 0 . 02 mM ) , i . e . c in > 2 I s . The osmotic pres - sure data indicate [ 52 ] that intrinsic counterions them - selves can stabilize ds - DNA for c in larger than 30 mM and 150 mM for two diﬀerent added salt concentrations 2 I s = 4 mM and 20 mM , respectively . All these results suggest that the concentrations of intrinsic counterions and added salt themselves are less important , rather it is their ratio that deﬁnes which limit prevails . Thus ab - sorbance and osmotic pressure data both suggest that for c in / 2 I s > 10 intrinsic counterions prevail in stabiliz - ing ds - DNA helix , while dielectric results suggest that this ratio might be shifted to c in / 2 I s > 1 . Neverthe - less , the unusual scaling exponent - 0 . 33 of the semidilute correlation length found for the DNA pure water solu - tions with DNA concentrations smaller than c co ∼ 0 . 6 mg / mL seem to suggest the existence of local conforma - tional ﬂuctuations which partially expose the hydropho - bic core of DNA . In order to verify this proposal a further comparative study , including UV spectrophotometry and dielectric spectroscopy , is planned to study in depth the conformation of DNA in pure water solutions . We are however convinced that in all our investigations DNA did not exist as two separated single coils , rather DNA was eﬀectively always in its double stranded form . B . Ionic screening : added salt versus intrinsic DNA counterions Next we address the issue of the respective roles in ionic screening of intrinsic DNA counterions and ions from the added salt . First , we examine conditions un - der which the OSF expression for the persistence length L p = L 0 + a · I − 1 s is valid . Dielectric data show that the inﬂuence of the added salt on the persistence length is important as long as the ionic strength I s is suﬃ - ciently larger than the concentration of intrinsic coun - terions . Plot in Fig . 8 reveals that this condition reads 2 I s > 0 . 4 c in . In this limit where the OSF theory applies , the coeﬃcient a should be equal 0 . 324 ˚AM ( assuming MO counterion condensation ) . However , experimentally , diﬀerent values are found . Measurements of DNA elastic properties as a function of ionic strength also yielded the coeﬃcient in the OSF expression , a = 0 . 8 ˚AM [ 17 ] , which 13 is diﬀerent from the one expected from the MO counte - rion condensation theory . On the other hand , a magnetic birefringence study by Maret and Weill [ 54 ] suggested the values of a between 0 . 25 and 0 . 45 , therefore indeed close to 0 . 324 . However , the authors ﬁtted their data to the ( 0 . 12 c in + I s ) − 1 instead to the OSF I − 1 s dependence . The ﬁrst term represents the inﬂuence of free DNA counteri - ons . It is rather obvious that the OSF ﬁt would not yield the MO value of the coeﬃcient a . Why thus is there a dif - ference between the MO value and the measured value of the coeﬃcient in the OSF dependence of the persistence length on the ionic strength of the added salt ? In an attempt to reconcile these various values , we have rescaled the persistence length from dielectric measure - ments as 2 . 5 · L LF → L LF in order to collapse the behav - ior from dielectric and elastic experiments onto a single curve ( Fig . 9 ) . Rescaling is justiﬁed since the expres - sion connecting L p from dielectric properties with the measured mean relaxation time is only valid as a scaling relationship . Numerical factors are less straightforward and are essentially unknown . An exact expression to - gether with an appropriate numerical coeﬃcient , known as the Einstein - Smoluchowski formula , is only known in the dc limit , where L = √ 2 Dτ . The ﬁt of this new rescaled version of the L LF to the OSF expression with two free parameters now gave L 0 = 530 ˚A and a = 0 . 69 ˚AM . The diﬀerence between this value of a and the one expected from the MO counte - rion condensation theory signals a diﬀerent eﬀective lin - ear charge density than the one stemming from the MO counterion condensation theory . This diﬀerence in the measured and theoretically expected value of a coeﬃcient of the OSF ﬁtting form for the persistence length would be consistent also with other experiments that provide a value for the eﬀective charge density [ 14 ] . Finally , let us examine the low salt limit ( 2 I s < 0 . 4 c in ) in which we expect that the intrinsic counterions be - come dominant . The characteristic length of the LF mode varies with DNA concentration as L LF ∝ c − 0 . 29 DNA , or equivalently as c − 0 . 29 in . This value of the exponent would allow us to identify L LF with the average size of the Gaussian chain composed of correlation blobs scaling as c − 0 . 25 DNA , where electrostatic interactions are screened by other chains and counterions , and thus DNA acts as its own salt . V . SUMMARY All these results make it quite clear that for the dielec - tric properties studied in this contribution the role of free and condensed intrinsic DNA counterions can not always be separated . For the HF relaxation we are reasonably sure that it is mostly the free counterions that act as the relaxation entities in a type of hopping process between the correlated DNA chains in a semidilute polyelectrolyte solution . On the contrary , for the LF relaxation process it seems to be mostly the condensed counterions that re - Din ( 0 . 5 ) = 0 . 9e - 9 Din ( 0 . 05 ) = 1 . 7e - 9 DN A 2 . j nb / 0130 B W 2 I s / c in 0 . 1 1 10 L L F / L L F ( I s ﬁ 0 ) 0 . 2 0 . 5 2 . 0 0 . 1 1 0 . 05 mg / mL 0 . 5 mg / mL 0 . 8 mg / mL FIG . 8 : Characteristic length of the LF mode ( L LF ) nor - malized with the value in pure water solutions ( low salt limit I s = 0 . 01 mM ) vs . added salt concentration normalized by the concentration of intrinsic counterions ( 2 I s / c in ) . Data are for three representative DNA concentrations : c DNA = 0 . 05 mg / mL ( diamonds , protocol II1 ) , c DNA = 0 . 5 mg / mL ( full triangles , protocol II1 ; open triangles , protocol II2 . 1 ; open inverse triangles , protocol II2 . 2 ) and c DNA = 0 . 8 mg / mL ( circles , protocol II2 . 1 ) . I s ( mM ) 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 100 1000 L L F ( n m ) 100 1000 DN A 2 . j nb / 0212 25 o C Lp = 530A + 0 . 69 / I in same as for bulk Na 0 . 5 mg / mL 0 . 05 mg / mL L P from Ref . [ 17 ] Lp = 500A + 0 . 324 / I 0 . 8 mg / mL FIG . 9 : Characteristic length of the LF mode , rescaled as 2 . 5 · L LF → L LF ( L LF data are from Fig . 4b ) ) is shown together with data from pulling of DNA ( crosses ) taken from Ref . [ 17 ] . The full line and dashed lines are ﬁts to OSF theory with L 0 = 530 ˚A and a = 0 . 69 ˚AM and with L 0 = 500 ˚A and a = 0 . 324 ˚AM corresponding to the theoretical OSF prediction with complete MO condensation . lax along or in close proximity to an individual chain in the polyelectrolyte solution , except at large enough salt concentrations where at least some of the free counterions seem to carry on this role . For the HF relaxation , the experimentally found spa - tial correlation providing the characteristic size of the 14 relaxation process is given universally by the polyelec - trolyte semidilute solution correlation length . The LF relaxation can be characterized by two diﬀerent correla - tion scales . At low salt concentration this correlation length can be identiﬁed with the average size of the polyelectrolyte chain , where electrostatic interactions are screened by other chains and counterions , thus where DNA acts as its own salt . At higher salt concentra - tions , the spatial correlations are provided by the single chain orientational correlation length , i . e . the persistence length , that depends on the salt concentration via the OSF mechanism . Both the correlation lengths for the LF relaxation seem to be telling us , that it is the single chain that is responsible for the relaxation process , in which counterions either ﬂuctuate orientationally on the length scale of the persistence length , or they ﬂuctuate between two ends of the average size of the chain in the solution . In conclusion , our results demonstrate that there are three fundamental length scales that determine the di - electric response of a semidilute DNA solution : the av - erage size of the polyelectrolyte chain in the regime in which DNA acts as its own salt , the OSF salt - dependent persistence length of a single polyelectrolyte chain and the dGPD semidilute solution correlation length or the mesh size of the polyelectrolyte solution . While the free DNA counterions can be identiﬁed reasonably well as the relaxation entities of the HF relaxation mode , the LF relaxation mode does not allow for such a clearcut separation between MO condensed and free counterions as relaxation entities . Our data suggest that in fact both of them contribute to various extent in diﬀerent salt and DNA concentration regimes . Finally , our results conﬁrm that although double - stranded DNA at low salt concentrations shows locally exposed hydrophobic cores in a dynamic sense , unzipping of the strands is accom - plished only after the denaturation / heating protocol is applied . But even then this unzipping of the two DNA strands is probably at most local and complete separa - tion of the strands at semidilute solutions is never really accomplished . This issue will be addressed in our further studies . Acknowledgments ICP - AES was performed by M . Ujevi´c at the Croa - tian National Institute of Public Health . We thank T . Ivek , D . Vurnek and R . ˇZaja for help in the data analysis and electrophoresis measurements . Discussions with D . Baigl , F . Livolant and E . Raspaud are greatly ac - knowledged . This work was supported by the Croatian Ministry of Science , Education and Sports . Rudi Pod - gornik would like to acknowledge the ﬁnancial support of the Agency for Research and Development of Slovenia under grant P1 - 0055 ( C ) . [ 1 ] M . Daune , Molecular Biophysics ( Oxford University Press , New York , 2003 ) . [ 2 ] F . Oosawa , Polyelectrolytes , ( Marcel Dekker , New York , 1971 ) . [ 3 ] K . S . Schmitz , Macroions in Solution and Colloidal Sus - pension ( VCH New York , 1993 ) . [ 4 ] A . V . Dobrynin and M . Rubinstein , Prog . Polym . Sci . 30 , 1049 ( 2005 ) ; A . V . Dobrynin , R . H . Colby and M . Ru - binstein , Macromolecules 28 , 1859 ( 1995 ) . [ 5 ] R . R . Netz and D . Andelman , Phys . Rep . 380 , 1 ( 2003 ) . [ 6 ] H . Boroudjerdi , Y . - W . Kim , A . Naji , R . R . Netz , X . Schlagberger and A . Serr , Phys . Rep . 416 , 129 ( 2005 ) . [ 7 ] P . L . Hansen , D . Svensek , V . A . Parsegian and R . Pod - gornik , Phys . Rev . E 60 , 1956 ( 1999 ) . [ 8 ] A . Y . Grosberg , T . T . Nguyen and B . I . Shklovskii , Rev . Mod . Phys . 74 , 329 ( 2002 ) . [ 9 ] P . L . Hansen , R . Podgornik and V . A . Parsegian , Phys . Rev . E 64 , 021907 ( 2001 ) . [ 10 ] V . A . Bloomﬁeld , D . M . Crothers and I . Tinocco , Jr . , Nu - cleic Acids ( University Science Books , Sausalito , 2000 ) . [ 11 ] R . Das , T . T . Mills , L . W . Kwok , G . S . Maskel , I . S . Mil - lett , S . Doniach , K . D . Finkelstein , D . Herschlag and L . Pollack , Phys . Rev . Lett . 90 , 188103 ( 2003 ) . [ 12 ] H . H . Strey , V . A . Parsegian and R . Podgornik , Phys . Rev . E 59 , 999 ( 1999 ) . [ 13 ] R . Podgornik , D . C . Rau and V . A . Parsegian , Macro - molecules 22 , 1780 ( 1989 ) . [ 14 ] R . Podgornik , D . C . Rau and V . A . Parsegian , Bio - phys . J . 66 , 962 ( 1994 ) . [ 15 ] T . Odijk , J . Polym . Sci . : Polym . Phys . 15 , 477 ( 1977 ) . [ 16 ] J . Skolnick and M . Fixman , Macromolecules 10 , 944 ( 1977 ) . [ 17 ] C . G . Baumann , S . B . Smith , V . A . Bloomﬁeld and C . Bustamante , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 6185 ( 1997 ) . [ 18 ] M . Ullner , J . Phys . Chem . B 107 , 8097 ( 2003 ) . [ 19 ] T . Odijk , Macromolecules 12 , 688 ( 1979 ) [ 20 ] P . G . de Gennes , P . Pincus , R . M . Velasco and F . Brochard , J . Phys . ( Paris ) 37 , 1461 ( 1976 ) . [ 21 ] P . Pfeuty , J . Phys . ( Paris ) 39 , C2 - 149 ( 1978 ) . [ 22 ] C . F . Schmidt , M . B¨armann , G . Isenberg and E . Sack - mann , Macromolecules 22 , 3638 ( 1989 ) . [ 23 ] R . Pethig , Dielectric and Electronic Properties of Biolog - ical Materials ( J . Wiley , New York , 1979 ) . [ 24 ] N . Nandi , K . Bhattacharyya and B . Bagchi , Chem . Rev . 100 , 2013 ( 2000 ) . [ 25 ] F . Bordi , C . Cametti and R . H . Colby , J . Phys . : Con - dens . Matter 16 , R1423 ( 2004 ) . [ 26 ] S . Tomi´c , T . Vuleti´c , S . Dolanski Babi´c , S . Krˇca , D . Ivankovi´c , L . Gripari´c and R . Podgornik , Phys . Rev . Lett . 97 , 098303 ( 2006 ) . [ 27 ] Throughout this article by pure water we mean ultrapure MilliQ water with declared con - ductivity σ = 0 . 056 µ S / cm ; http : / / www . milli - pore . com / markets / bioscience . nsf / home . [ 28 ] R . F . Steiner and R . F . Beers , Polynucleotides ( American 15 Elsevier , New York , 1961 ) . [ 29 ] W . Beers , A . Cerami , and E . Reich , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 58 , 1624 ( 1967 ) . [ 30 ] B . Saif , R . K . Mohr , C . J . Montrose and T . A . Litovitz , Biopolymers 31 , 1171 ( 1991 ) . [ 31 ] S . Havriliak and S . Negami , J . Polym . Sci . C 14 , 99 ( 1966 ) . [ 32 ] M . Pinteri´c , T . Vuleti´c , S . Tomi´c and J . U . von Sch¨utz , Eur . Phys . J . B 22 , 335 ( 2001 ) . [ 33 ] R . Hinrichs and J . A . H . da Jornada , Rev . Sci . In - strum . 68 , 193 ( 1997 ) . [ 34 ] W . E . Sonnen , G . E . Wesemberg and W . E . Vaughan , Biophys . Chem . 32 , 283 ( 1988 ) . [ 35 ] M . Mandel , Ann . NY Acad . Sci . 303 , 74 ( 1977 ) . [ 36 ] M . Mandel and T . Odijk , Ann . Rev . Phys . Chem . 35 , 75 ( 1984 ) . [ 37 ] S . S . Dukhin and V . N . Shilov , Adv . Coll . Interface Sci . 13 , 153 ( 1980 ) . [ 38 ] R . W . O’Brian , J . Coll . Interface Sci . 113 , 81 ( 1986 ) . [ 39 ] In the literature intrinsic DNA counterions are classiﬁed into two groups bearing diﬀerent names . The ﬁrst is com - monly named as condensed or bound and the second as diﬀuse or free . Throughout this article we will refer to these two groups as condensed and free counterions . [ 40 ] T . E . Angelini , R . Golestanian , R . H . Coridan , J . C . But - ler , A . Beraud , M . Krisch , H . Sinn , K . S . Schweizer and G . C . L . Wong , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 7962 ( 2006 ) . [ 41 ] K . Ito , A . Yagi , N . Ookubo and R . Hayakawa , Macro - molecules 23 , 857 ( 1990 ) . [ 42 ] F . Bordi , C . Cametti , T . Gili and R . H . Colby , Langmuir 18 , 6404 ( 2002 ) . [ 43 ] M . Sakamoto , H . Kanda , R . Hayakawa and Y . Wada , Biopolymers 15 , 879 ( 1976 ) . [ 44 ] R . J . Molinari , R . H . Cole and J . H . Gibbs , Biopolymers 20 , 977 ( 1981 ) . [ 45 ] S . Takashima , C . Gabriel , R . J . Sheppard and E . H . Grant , Biophysical J . 46 , 29 ( 1984 ) . [ 46 ] S . Bone and C . A . Small , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1260 , 85 ( 1995 ) . [ 47 ] R . Lee and S . Bone , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1397 , 316 ( 1998 ) . [ 48 ] F . Van der Touw and M . Mandel , Biophys . Chem . 2 , 218 ( 1974 ) . [ 49 ] H . E . Auer and Z . Alexandrowicz , Biopolymers 8 , 1 ( 1969 ) . [ 50 ] B . Hammouda and D . Worcester , Biophys . J . 91 , 2237 ( 2006 ) . [ 51 ] B . Hammouda , personal communication ( 2006 ) . [ 52 ] E . Raspaud , M . da Conceiao and F . Livolant , Phys . Rev . Lett . 84 , 2533 ( 2000 ) . [ 53 ] M . T . Record , Jr . , Biopolymers 14 , 2137 ( 1975 ) . [ 54 ] G . Maret and G . Weill , Biopolymers 22 , 2727 ( 1983 ) . [ 55 ] M . N . Spiteri , F . Bou´e , A . Lapp and J . P . Cotton , Phys . Rev . Lett . 77 , 5218 ( 1996 ) . [ 56 ] M . Muthukumar , J . Chem . Phys . 105 , 5183 ( 1996 ) .