IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION , VOL . 48 , NO . 3 , SEPTEMBER 2005 327 Keld Bodker , Finn Kensing , and Jesper Simonsen Participatory IT Design : Designing for Business and Workplace Realities Book Review —Reviewed by T IMOTHY L . J . F ERRIS , SENIOR MEMBER , IEEE Index Terms —IT design , project process . T his book concerns the process of designing IT systems for large , complex purposes . It is structured as a textbook - style introduction to the processes required for use in university teaching and for self - study purposes by people working in the field of IT system development . The content of the book is the fruit of a decade of research by the authors in their pursuit of a method to plan and design IT projects that will provide sustainable , useful solutions to the needs of the companies for which they are commissioned . The structure of the book reflects the pedagogical intentions of the authors . Part 1 discusses concepts and principles that are used repeatedly in the book . Part 2 discusses the phases of the method , with a chapter allocated to the exposition of each phase . The final part , 3 , concerns the tools and techniques of the method . The book contains additional information including an explanation of how to use the book , general references , and a list of publications arising from the decade of research , almost all of which are in the archival literature of the field . The pedagogical purpose of the book is evidenced in the presentation of the concepts of each chapter in a modest length of text , followed by a discussion of case study materials showing how the particular part of the methodology discussed has been addressed in a variety of circumstances . The case studies reflect both routine applications of the methods and problematic situations , including cases where the process had difficulties , in order to draw out the lessons learned from those problems . Manuscript received May 11 , 2005 ; revised May 14 , 2005 . The reviewer is with the Systems Engineering and Evaluation Centre , University of South Australia , Mawson Lakes 5095 , Australia ( email : timferris @ ieee . org ) . IEEE DOI 10 . 1109 / TPC . 2005 . 853942 Book Publisher : Cambridge , MA , and London : MIT Press , 2004 , 337 pp . , index . The four phases of the authors’ method , called the MUST method , are initiation , in - line analysis , in - depth analysis , and innovation phases . The acronym MUST is derived from the Danish for “theories and methods of initial analysis and design . ” These phases concern the early parts of IT project development and design . The authors’ interest is in the early parts of design projects , the phases in which the decisions critical to the overall success of the project are made , particularly the development of understanding the need for which the design project is seeking to provide a solution and core architectural decisions concerning the design . These matters are mentioned by many authors as vitally important to the overall success of the product system developed through the later project work , and many have provided general discussions of the issues but have not presented a solid procedural approach to deal with the problem . The importance of the problem addressed by this book has been realized for a considerable time , but it has been difficult to move beyond knowing the general need for IT systems to be developed with deep investigation of the situation and the processes for developing the intended product system appropriately . Difficulties in operationalizing the recognized need for contextual sensitivity have included the development of a suitable theory of the problem and the development of a method consistent with that theory . The first chapter addresses these problems by defining IT design and overviewing the MUST method , which links concepts , principles , techniques , and processes . Following this is a rehearsal of the problems often confronting IT projects , viewed from the perspective of stakeholder perceptions of the system rather than project processes , as is done by others . In addition , IT projects are often challenged by issues of complexity , change , situation dependency , and value conflicts . The authors discuss how the MUST method addresses these issues . Since the MUST method differs from other models of project development , the authors have a significant section concerning the relation of MUST 0361 - 1434 / $ 20 . 00 © 2005 IEEE 328 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION , VOL . 48 , NO . 3 , SEPTEMBER 2005 to a variety of earlier methods , such as the Waterfall and Evolutionary Models of project development . Chapter 2 presents the four fundamental principles of the MUST method . The first is that there must be a coherent vision for the change to be effected by the IT project , in order to provide protection from disappointment arising from unreasonable hopes for the system . Second , for both pragmatic and political reasons , there must be genuine user participation through people who truly represent the staff who will use the system . Third , there must be firsthand experience with work practices so that the IT system design is soundly based on a true understanding of the real work practice . Fourth , the principle of anchoring visions requires informing a target group who are not involved in design but can influence or be influenced by the implementation . Each of these principles is important because each affects either the clarity or product of the project itself or the perception of the product by stakeholders . Part 2 of the book describes the phases of the MUST method . Chapter 4 discusses the initiation phase in which the design project is clarified and scoped , so that the design project’s purpose and boundaries become clearly defined . This recognizes the diversity of design projects and the need to ensure a clear direction of work to ensure that the work will be effective . The importance of good work in the project establishment phase is well recognized , but there is always a need to remind people of the need for careful work because there is a continuing temptation to rush this part of the work out of a desire to see tangible products delivered at a steady rate . The problems confronting the initiation phase are the high ambitions of the stakeholders with respect to the desired product and the uncertainties associated with the situation and the goal . The description of this phase is reinforced by identifying a large number of products and activities that may be done during the phase . Chapter 5 discusses the in - line analysis phase . In this phase , the attention shifts from clarifying what the initial request would entail to clarifying the relation of the proposed product to the operational and strategic objectives of the procurer of the IT project . The purpose of this phase is to ensure that the design project recommends appropriate solutions . The output of this phase is a report concerning the strategic alignment of the proposed product with the procurer’s situation . The preparation of this report demands a clear definition of the intended product , as so far developed , and its review in light of the intended context of application . Chapter 6 discusses the in - depth analysis phase , in which a study is performed of the current situation in the work domains in which the product software will be deployed . The concern is to understand the current situation because this informs the rationale for the proposed software solution and leads to understanding of the deployment context . Chapter 7 discusses the innovation phase , in which the project group develops a coherent vision of the proposed solution . This phase is distinct from any descriptions of the final product that may have been produced in other phases in that those descriptions may have been partial . In the innovation phase , the goal is to produce a coherent description of the whole . Part 3 , comprising two chapters and one third of the book , is particularly valuable , being the transformation from the general description of the MUST method into an operationalized form . In Chapter 8 , techniques used in the MUST method are briefly described , and in Chapter 9 , the method for using the tools and techniques of the MUST method is expanded in detail . The special value of this book is in the content of this part of the work , and this is where the contrast between this book and many others is found . Many sources recommend that the designer explore the user needs and study the manner in which the user would use the prospective product prior to detail design , but do not provide satisfactory methods for designers to perform these tasks . This book is different in that it discusses strategies for exploring user needs , without falling into the trap of reducing the description of the activity to a mere procedure , which would have the failing of attempting to make one size fit all . The final pages , headed “Epilogue : How to make use of the book , ” provide some guidance for the reader who intends to use the book as a textbook , offering suggestions about using the book for instruction in both professional continuing education and university education settings . The usage of the book is different in the two cases because of the difference in learner background and experience . However , the authors have provided useful guidance that respects both classes of learners with a view to assisting in the use of their book as an instructional text . As a text , this book does not provide elements such as drill problems or exercises for students , and so demands that the instructor be creative in the use of the book , but this enables the instructor to use greater creativity and makes the book useful at multiple levels of learner knowledge .