Challenges in solving structures from radiation - damaged tomograms of protein nanocrystals assessed by simulation Ariana Peck 1 , Qing Yao 1 , Aaron S . Brewster 2 , Petrus H . Zwart 2 , 3 , John M . Heumann 4 , Nicholas K . Sauter 2 and Grant J . Jensen 1 ∗ 1 Division of Biology and Biological Engineering , California Institute of Technology , Pasadena , CA 91125 , USA 2 Molecular Biophysics and Integrated Bioimaging Division , Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory , Berkeley , CA 94720 , USA 3 Center for Advanced Mathematics in Energy Research Applications , Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory , Berkeley CA , 94720 , USA 4 Department of Molecular , Cellular , and Developmental Biology , University of Colorado Boulder , Boulder , CO 80309 , USA ( Dated : September 18 , 2020 ) Structure determination methods are needed to resolve the atomic details that underlie protein function . X - ray crystallography has provided most of our knowledge of protein structure but is constrained by the need for large , well - ordered crystals and the loss of phase information . The rapidly developing methods of serial femtosecond crystallography , micro - electron diﬀraction , and single - particle reconstruction circumvent the ﬁrst of these limitations by enabling data collection from nanocrystals or puriﬁed proteins . However , the ﬁrst two methods also suﬀer from the phase problem , while many proteins fall below the molecular weight threshold required by single - particle reconstruction . Cryo - electron tomography of protein nanocrystals has the potential to overcome these obstacles of mainstream structure determination methods . Here we present a data processing scheme that combines routines from X - ray crystallography and new algorithms we developed to solve structures from tomograms of nanocrystals . This pipeline handles image processing challenges speciﬁc to tomographic sampling of periodic specimens and is validated using simulated crystals . We also assess the tolerance of this workﬂow to the eﬀects of radiation damage . Our simulations indicate a trade - oﬀ between a wider tilt - range to facilitate merging data from multiple tomograms and a smaller tilt increment to improve phase accuracy . Since phase errors but not merging errors can be overcome with additional datasets , these results recommend distributing the dose over a wide angular range rather than using a ﬁner sampling interval to solve the protein structure . I . Introduction Protein structure determination critically advances our understanding of biochemical mechanisms and the molecular basis of disease . X - ray crystallography has been the principal method of structure determination for decades , accounting for 90 % of atomic models de - posited in the Protein Data Bank [ 1 ] . However , two limitations constrain this method’s broader applicabil - ity . First , some proteins do not readily form suﬃciently large and well - ordered crystals for characterization at synchrotron sources [ 2 , 3 ] . Second , the phase information needed to solve a protein’s structure cannot be experi - mentally measured . Estimating this lost information re - quires experimental perturbations that some crystals are not amenable to , very high resolution diﬀraction data , or the availability of a homologous structure [ 4 ] . Such prior information is often limited for proteins that are diﬃcult to crystallize , compounding the challenge of structurally characterizing new protein families . The need for large crystals has been overcome in part by the development of techniques suitable for sub - micron sized nanocrystals . One of these methods is se - rial femtosecond crystallography ( SFX ) , which relies on ∗ Correspondence to : jensen @ caltech . edu femtosecond - length X - ray pulses that are orders of mag - nitude brighter than synchrotron radiation [ 5 ] . SFX has signiﬁcantly advanced structural studies of diﬃcult - to - crystallize membrane proteins [ 6 , 7 ] and crystals sensitive to radiation damage [ 8 , 9 ] but suﬀers from low through - put . A second method is micro - electron diﬀraction ( mi - croED ) . This modality of cryo - electron microscopy ( cryo - EM ) takes advantage of the strong interaction between electrons and matter to enable data collection from crys - tals less than 1 µ m thick [ 10 ] . Similar to SFX , mi - croED has enabled structural studies of amyloid pro - teins that do not readily form large , well - ordered crystals [ 11 , 12 ] . However , neither method can measure the crys - tallographic phases , so this information must be inferred indirectly or supplied by other techniques [ 4 ] . Single particle reconstruction ( SPR ) is another cryo - EM modality that is increasingly eﬀective for high - resolution structure determination . In SPR , projection images of puriﬁed proteins are recorded , aligned , and merged to determine the protein’s structure [ 13 ] . This method thus overcomes the main limitations of X - ray crystallography , bypassing the need for crystallization and retaining the phase information . Further , recent technological advances have enabled SPR to achieve re - constructions with high - resolution limits comparable to X - ray crystallography [ 13 ] . However , without the sig - nal ampliﬁcation that results from coherent scattering by a crystal , molecular weight is a limiting factor . As 2 the object’s scattering mass decreases , errors in align - ing projection images increase and attenuate the high - resolution signal [ 14 , 15 ] . To date , the smallest macro - molecule solved by SPR to better than 4 ˚A resolution is a 40 kDa riboswitch , and only seven proteins < 100 kDa have been solved to similar resolution [ 16 ] . By contrast , the median mass of proteins in the human proteome is 41 kDa [ 17 ] , rendering SPR unsuitable for many proteins . Cryo - electron tomography ( cryo - ET ) is a third modal - ity of cryo - EM , and its application to nanocrystals could overcome the principal obstacles of mainstream structure determination methods [ 18 ] . In cryo - ET , a tilt - series of projection images is collected from a sample embedded in vitreous ice and reconstructed into a tomogram , a volume that contains 3D structural information about the spec - imen . This method has traditionally been used to study cellular ultrastructure , and the reconstruction approach of subtomogram averaging has recently determined near - atomic resolution ( < 5 ˚A ) structures of select puriﬁed pro - teins and ribosomes in situ [ 19 – 21 ] . Like microED , cryo - ET is suitable for protein nanocrystals , with an expected optimal sample thickness of 50 - 300 nm [ 22 , 23 ] . Like SPR , imaging rather than diﬀraction data are collected , so the phase information is retained during the exper - iment [ 24 ] . Further , collecting data in imaging mode provides a unique opportunity to spatially characterize and computationally correct for disorder [ 25 , 26 ] . In 2D electron crystallography , this was achieved by a proce - dure called lattice “unbending” [ 26 , 27 ] . Alternatively , disorder could be corrected in real space with subtomo - gram averaging algorithms [ 20 , 28 – 32 ] . Another beneﬁt of applying cryo - ET to nanocrystals is the potential to develop a hybrid method that combines high - resolution diﬀraction intensities from microED and low - resolution phases from imaging for structure solution . Even phases to intermediate resolution ( ∼ 7 ˚A ) should suﬃce to resolve α - helices and provide a robust starting model for phase extension [ 33 , 34 ] . Development of this hybrid method should be straightforward , as sample preparation and the microscope are shared between the two techniques . While electron imaging of 3D crystals has revealed lat - tice structure at nanoscale lengths [ 25 , 35 , 36 ] , to date structure determination has not been achieved from to - mograms of such samples . In our ﬁrst attempts to solve structures from experimental tomograms of nanocrystals , we found that low completeness was particularly severe at high tilt - angles and prohibitive to merging datasets . These observations prompted us to analyze the challenges of merging incomplete datasets and explore ways to im - prove data acquisition from nanocrystals . Additional diﬃculties , such as accounting for multiple scattering and the contrast transfer function , are anticipated during data processing [ 26 , 37 ] . However , we focused on factors that predicted the ability to merge multiple datasets , as merging is critical to overcome the missing wedge of in - formation inherent to tomography and loss of complete - ness due to radiation damage . Here we describe a data processing scheme to solve structures from tomograms of nanocrystals that leverages software from X - ray crys - tallography and algorithms we developed to handle chal - lenges unique to tomography data . We also assess this workﬂow’s tolerance to the eﬀects of radiation damage using simulated crystals . Our results recommend a data collection strategy that maximizes the angular spread of the reﬂections recorded in each tomogram to increase the likelihood of successfully merging datasets . II . Design of a data processing pipeline Structure determination from tomograms of nanocrys - tals could leverage algorithms from crystallography or , alternatively , rely on subtomogram averaging [ 38 ] ( see Discussion ) . Here we focus on the former approach . Since retention of phase information is unique to imaging methods , we emphasize the steps required to recover crys - tallographic phases from the tomogram’s Fourier trans - form . Our data processing pipeline leverages functions available in the SPARX [ 39 , 40 ] , DIALS [ 41 , 42 ] , and cctbx [ 43 ] software packages in addition to providing new algorithms developed speciﬁcally for tomographic data of crystal specimens . The steps are presented schematically in Fig . S1A and described in the following sections . To develop this workﬂow and explore diﬀerent ways of processing these data , we simulated tomograms of pro - tein nanocrystals . We selected lysozyme in P 1 symme - try ( PDB ID : 6D6G ) and a peptide inhibitor in P 2 1 2 1 2 1 symmetry ( PDB ID : 4BFH ) as model crystal systems to test distinct space group symmetries and protein folds . For each crystal system , the protein coordinates from the Protein Data Bank were tiled in Chimera to gener - ate 3D nanocrystals containing 10 unit cells along each dimension [ 44 ] . Density maps were simulated from the nanocrystal’s atomic coordinates to 2 . 5 ˚A resolution us - ing electron scattering factors with the cctbx software package and rotated to randomly - sampled orientations [ 43 ] . These intact volumes were projected into tilt - series spanning either a ± 60 ◦ tilt - range with 3 ◦ increments or a ± 40 ◦ tilt - range with 2 ◦ increments between projection images . No optical aberrations from the microscope , in - cluding the contrast transfer function , were simulated . The resulting tilt - series were reconstructed into tomo - grams using IMOD [ 45 ] . The workﬂow used to generate these simulated datasets is shown in Fig . S1B . A . Eliminating phase splitting Real crystals are characterized by imperfections that result in loss of exact periodicity . Imaging introduces further non - idealities , such as interpolation errors from discrete sampling and truncation of crystal edges due to a ﬁnite ﬁeld of view . These deviations from perfect crystallinity in real space result in spatially - smeared in - tensities and phase splitting at Bragg peak positions in reciprocal space ( Fig . S2 ) . Speciﬁcally , the phase values 3 B . A . FIG . 1 . Elimination of phase splitting at Bragg peaks . ( A ) Left : The 1KL plane is visualized for a simulated crystal , which is imperfectly periodic because the unit cell dimensions do not span an integer number of pixels . The brightness and color of each pixel are determined by its intensity and phase values , respectively . Right : Inset of the ( 1 , 1 , 1 ) reﬂection . Pixels with intensity values within three - fold of the maxi - mum intensity are visualized , and the phase values of these high - intensity pixels are noted in degrees . In ( B ) , a tapering function was applied to the crystal . The density was centered by auto - convolution and shifted to the volume’s origin before computing the Fourier transform . of pixels immediately surrounding peak centers shift by 180 ◦ between adjacent octants ( Figs . 1A , S1 ) . The split phases result from the presence of a circular discontinuity at the point considered the origin by the discrete Fourier transform , causing the phase to alternate sign between frequency bins in Fourier space . There is no such discon - tinuity for signals that are exactly periodic in the window of the Fourier transform , and hence no phase splitting for ideal ( albeit ﬁnite ) crystals . For imperfect crystals , we found that phase splitting could be eliminated by applying a symmetric tapering function in real space , followed by centering the density within the volume . Shifting the center of the result - ing volume to the origin removes the circular disconti - nuity at the origin of the Fourier transform calculation . Here we chose a tapered cosine ( Tukey ) window with a tapering fraction of 0 . 5 and computed the translation needed to center the crystal density using the SPARX library’s auto - convolution function [ 39 , 40 ] . Applying these pre - processing steps to crystals with imperfect peri - odicity eliminates phase splitting and results in a consis - tent phase value in the immediate vicinity of each Bragg peak ( Figs . 1B , S2 ) . B . Spot - ﬁnding and indexing We adapted algorithms from the crystallography soft - ware package DIALS to index the Bragg peaks in the tomogram’s 3D Fourier transform [ 41 ] . Peaks were iden - tiﬁed by scanning the Fourier transform along the x - axis ( parallel to the axis of rotation ) , and high - intensity pix - els in each slice were identiﬁed using the pixel threshold - ing algorithm described in Ref . [ 42 ] . Sets of contiguous bright pixels in adjacent slices were assembled into an initial spots list , which was then ﬁltered according to the speciﬁed gain ( the ratio of electrons per detector pixel to reported counts ) , resolution limits , and minimum and maximum number of included pixels [ 42 ] . Spot centroids were then mapped to reciprocal space . We used a 1d Fast Fourier transform algorithm to in - dex the spots and estimate the crystal’s orientation and unit cell constants to within a magniﬁcation scale factor . [ 42 , 46 ] . The provisional P 1 cell constants were reﬁned by enforcing constraints of the known space group sym - metry . For experimental data , it is unclear whether the intensity information from imaging will be suﬃciently ac - curate to determine the Laue class . Further , systemati - cally forbidden reﬂections may be present due to multi - ple scattering or lie in an unsampled region of reciprocal space , preventing identiﬁcation of screw axes [ 47 ] . How - ever , symmetry could readily be determined by microED instead ( see Discussion ) . Space group determination is critical for locating the crystallographic phase origin , as the phases do not reﬂect the space group symmetry until a crystallographic phase origin is found [ 47 ] . C . Bragg peak ﬁtting Peak ﬁtting involves assigning pixels to Bragg peaks , followed by integrating the intensities and averaging the phases of the assigned pixels . In X - ray crystallography and microED , proﬁle ﬁtting algorithms are used to inte - grate diﬀraction peaks [ 42 , 48 – 50 ] . Proﬁle ﬁtting assumes a standard spot shape and models how each reﬂection is sampled based on its orientation with respect to the rota - tion axis , crystal mosaicity , and beam divergence [ 49 ] . In the case of tomographic data , however , a generic reﬂec - tion proﬁle cannot be assumed . Each reﬂection is only partially measured due to the large spacing between tilt increments and lack of continuous rotation ( Fig . S3A ) , and at present we do not have adequate models to ac - count for these eﬀects . Developing a model to compen - sate for reﬂection partiality would improve the estimated intensities , but it would be challenging to devise a corre - sponding correction for the estimated phases . Given these challenges , we implemented the following heuristic approach to determine reﬂection proﬁles from tomographic data . First , the pixel coordinates of each lattice point in the tomogram’s Fourier transform were estimated from the crystal’s indexing matrix . The reﬂec - tion was discarded if it was predicted to lie in the missing 4 B . C . A . FIG . 2 . Peak ﬁtting for a representative reﬂection . ( A ) The intensity proﬁles of slices are visualized along the indicated direction and centered on the ( - 2 , 3 , - 8 ) reﬂection of a simulated crystal tomogram . In ( B ) , the intensities are shown in 2D , with high - intensity pixels assigned to the peak marked by an X . In ( C ) , the phases in the vicinity of the peak are visualized using the same color scheme as in Fig . 1 . The phase values of pixels retained as part of the peak are noted in degrees . The high - intensity pixel marked by a yellow X in ( B ) had a phase value of 17 ◦ and was discarded as an outlier . wedge , or the volume outside of the ± 60 ◦ or ± 40 ◦ region spanned by the tilt - series . A spherical subvolume cen - tered on each retained reﬂection within a speciﬁed radius was then considered ; for the simulated crystals analyzed here , we chose a radius of 7 ˚A − 1 . Pixels were initially as - signed to the peak if their intensities exceeded four stan - dard deviations above the subvolume’s mean intensity ( Fig . 2A - B ) . If multiple sets of noncontiguous pixels were found , the set with the centroid nearest to the predicted peak center was retained . The reﬂection was discarded if the observed peak centroid exceeded a distance of 2 recip - rocal pixels to the predicted peak center . Such discrep - ancies between the ideal and observed Bragg positions resulted from peak centers being poorly sampled due to the large angular spacing between tilt increments . These partially - measured reﬂections were rejected because the observed phase values were frequently shifted from the expected values by 180 ◦ ( Figs . S4 - 5 ) . To estimate the background intensity , the same sub - volume used to assign peak pixels was considered . Both the pixels assigned to the peak and any contiguous pix - els two standard deviations above the subvolume’s mean intensity were masked , with unmasked pixels considered background . This threshold was less conservative than the one used for assigning pixels to the peak to reduce the likelihood of including high - intensity outliers in the background region . We then estimated the values of the masked pixels by trilinear interpolation to approximate the background intensity beneath the peak . We used in - terpolation rather than assuming a constant background to better account for the anisotropic structure of the non - Bragg intensity , which results from the measured data being oriented along skew slices of ﬁnite thickness that are commonly separated by an angular increment of 2 or 3 ◦ . As a result , the orientation and magnitude of the background vary among peaks , depending on the peak’s position relative to the planes of sampled signal in Fourier space ( Fig . S3 ) . The estimated background values were then subtracted from the original intensities of the cor - responding pixels . The assignment of pixels to Bragg peaks was then reﬁned using the phase values ( Fig . 2C ) . Speciﬁcally , the intensity - weighted standard deviation of the assigned pixels’ phases was computed . If this metric exceeded a speciﬁed threshold , outlier pixels were iteratively re - moved until this threshold was reached . Empirically we found that a threshold of 15 ◦ enabled the recovery of accurate phase values . Ensuring consistent phase val - ues within the peak is critical , as the phase can change sharply outside the Bragg peak ( Fig . 2C ) . Finally , the re - ﬂection’s intensity and phase were respectively estimated from the sum of the intensity values and the intensity - weighted mean of the phase values of the retained pixels . Both the intensity and phase components of the Bragg peaks were ﬁt using tomograms pre - processed as de - scribed in Section IIA , which eliminated phase splitting . Although application of a tapered cosine function in real space reduced the intensities , it also prevented sharp edges in the window of the Fourier transform from be - ing convolved with the shape of the Bragg peaks in the frequency domain . As a result , the reﬂection proﬁles were more spherical and a higher number of Bragg peaks were retained by the peak - ﬁtting algorithm described above , which beneﬁted from this rounder shape . D . Merging datasets In cryo - ET , the experimental geometry limits the ac - cessible tilt range to ± 70 ◦ relative to the sample’s un - tilted orientation [ 38 , 51 ] . In principle , this rotation range should suﬃce to collect a complete dataset from a single crystal for most point groups [ 52 ] . In practice , however , 140 ◦ is an overestimate of the useful rotation range because intermediate to high - resolution informa - tion is lost both at high tilt angles due to increased spec - imen thickness and in images recorded late in the tilt - series due to accumulated dose [ 53 ] . Further , a popular data collection strategy in cryo - ET uses a 3 ◦ tilt incre - ment for a tilt - range of ± 60 ◦ [ 53 ] , so a fraction of Bragg peaks in the nominal tilt - range will fall between recorded images and not be sampled . The size of this fraction is anticipated to vary between samples and depend on fac - 5 FIG . 3 . Identifying a common phase origin . The phases extracted from tomograms of three randomly oriented , simu - lated crystals were merged . Each panel shows the relationship between the phases of reﬂections shared between the reference ( φ c 1 ) and added datasets ( φ c 2 ) before ( grey ) and after ( red ) shifting the latter to the reference origin determined by the ﬁrst crystal . With each additional dataset , the number of reference reﬂections increases , while the origin remains ﬁxed . tors like mosaicity and the resolution range . Achieving high completeness thus requires merging data from mul - tiple crystals in diﬀerent orientations . Merging phases from diﬀerent crystals requires posi - tioning the datasets on a common phase origin . Un - less this is also a crystallographic origin , the phases of symmetry - equivalent reﬂections are not related and the phase data eﬀectively have P 1 symmetry . Here we es - tablished a common phase origin by treating one crystal as reference and shifting the phase origins of the remain - ing datasets to this reference origin ( Fig . 3 ) . The frac - tional unit cell row vector , u , that shifts the phases of a second crystal to the reference origin was determined by minimizing the intensity - weighted mean residual be - tween the reference phases and the shifted phases of the second crystal : arg min u (cid:80) h ¯I c | ( φ c 2 ( h ) − 2 π hu ) − φ c 1 ( h ) | (cid:80) h ¯I c ( 1 ) where the minimization is performed over all discrete val - ues of u that fractionally sample the unit cell in real space according to a speciﬁed interval along each cell dimension . The sum is over the shared reﬂections be - tween datasets c 1 and c 2 , h is a column vector of Miller indices , and ¯I c is the mean intensity for reﬂection h . Eq . 1 is similar to the phased translation function used in molecular replacement searches , though here we compute intensity - weighted phase residuals rather than calculat - ing complex structure factors [ 54 ] . The term in paren - thesis , ( φ c 2 ( h ) − 2 π hu ) , describes how the phases of c 2 change when its phase origin is shifted by u . This ex - pression was then used to position the phases of all re - ﬂections of c 2 on the reference origin . To merge the next crystal , the reference phase set was updated to include all reﬂections recorded in the original c 1 and c 2 datasets . The reference phase set thus expanded with each merge while the reference origin remained roughly ﬁxed , with only minor adjustments after averaging the phases from diﬀerent crystals . Datasets were merged in the order the maximized the number of shared reﬂections between the reference data and the dataset being merged at each step . Once the ﬁnal dataset was merged , the phase of each reﬂection was estimated as the intensity - weighted mean phase for all observations of that reﬂection . Intensity information is unaﬀected by the choice of phase origin due to translational invariance . For consis - tency , however , we also treated the intensities as having P 1 symmetry during merging . Intensities from a second dataset , I c 2 , were uniformly scaled to the ﬁrst dataset , I c 1 , by minimizing the sum of squared residuals : arg min m , b , σ (cid:88) h ∈ ( c 1 ∩ c 2 ) (cid:16) log ( me − q 2 σ 2 I c 2 ( h ) + b ) − log ( I c 1 ( h ) ) (cid:17) 2 ( 2 ) where q is the magnitude of the reciprocal space vector associated with reﬂection h , the exponential term is the Debye - Waller factor [ 55 ] , and least - squares optimization is used to determine the scaling parameters m , b , and σ . We found that the use of logarithmic residuals im - proved the stability of the optimization algorithm . The next dataset was then scaled to the averaged intensities of the original c 1 and c 2 datasets . Once all datasets were merged , each reﬂection’s intensity was computed as the mean of all observations of that reﬂection . E . Locating a crystallographic phase origin As noted above , it is unlikely that the phase origin of the merged dataset will coincide with a crystallographic origin consistent with the crystal’s space group . In 2D electron crystallography , the crystallographic origin was found by testing fractional cell positions in the plane of the repeating unit for fulﬁllment of phase constraints im - posed by symmetry [ 47 , 56 ] . If the plane group was not known in advance , this origin reﬁnement procedure was performed for every possible plane group , and the plane group that yielded the lowest phase residual was selected . Crystal symmetry determination is easier for 2D crystals , however , as there are only 17 plane groups in contrast to 230 space groups [ 47 ] . Here we assumed that the space group was already known and extended the method of origin reﬁnement to 3D crystals as follows . The unit cell was sampled using a real space grid with equally - spaced nodes along each dimension , and each node or fractional cell position was considered a candi - date origin . The phases of the merged data , φ 0 , were shifted by the fractional cell vector , u , to this origin : φ u ( h ) = φ 0 ( h ) − 2 π hu . ( 3 ) We then evaluated the following three metrics . The ﬁrst metric corresponded to the phase residual of symmetry - equivalent reﬂections . The mean phase value for a given reﬂection h can be estimated from its symmetry - equivalent reﬂections as follows [ 57 ] : (cid:104) φ u ( h ) (cid:105) = (cid:104) φ u ( h s ) − 2 π h s t s (cid:105) . ( 4 ) 6 where the symmetry - equivalent reﬂections , h and h s , are related by the translation vector , t s , and the phase origin is u . We then computed the symmetry phase residual as the sum of the phase diﬀerences between this mean value and independent observations from the symmetry - equivalent reﬂections : R sym , φ u = (cid:80) h (cid:80) h s I ( h s ) | ( φ u ( h s ) − 2 π h s t s ) − (cid:104) φ u ( h ) (cid:105) | (cid:80) h (cid:80) h s I ( h s ) ( 5 ) where the double sum enumerates the set of unique re - ﬂections and , for each , the set of symmetry - equivalent reﬂections . The residual was intensity - weighted to favor stronger reﬂections . The second metric considered the diﬀerence between centric reﬂections and their expected phase values . Cen - tric reﬂections satisfy the condition hR = − h , where R is the rotation matrix associated with reﬂection h [ 57 ] . When reﬂection data are positioned on a crystallo - graphic phase origin , the phases of centric reﬂections are restricted to a limited set of possible values . We com - puted the intensity - weighted mean residual between the observed phase values at each candidate origin u and the expected phase values for these reﬂections as follows : R cen , φ u = (cid:80) h I h min (cid:8) | φ u ( h ) − π ht | , | φ u ( h ) − π ( ht + 1 ) | (cid:9) (cid:80) h I h ( 6 ) where t is the translation vector associated with reﬂec - tion h , and the sum is restricted to the observed centric reﬂections [ 58 ] . This metric was omitted for datasets that did not contain any centric reﬂections . For the third metric , an electron density map of the unit cell was computed from the intensities of the merged dataset and the shifted phases , φ u , using the cctbx library [ 43 ] . The skew of the density values was evaluated , as the density distribution of macromolecular crystals exhibits a positive skew in contrast to the Gaussian distribution characteristic of random maps . This distinction is used to judge map quality during automated structure solution after experimental phasing [ 59 ] . The advantage of this metric is that it uses all available reﬂections , rather than just the subset of either centric reﬂections or reﬂections with high multiplicity . For consistency with the phase residual metrics , the negative of the skew was computed such that lower values indicated more probable origins . These three metrics were normalized and summed with equal weighting to score each candidate origin given by the fractional cell vector , u . The fractional cell position with the lowest combined score was selected , and the phases of the merged dataset were shifted to this origin . The intensities and shifted phases were then reduced to the asymmetric unit , and symmetry constraints were im - posed . Speciﬁcally , the phases of symmetry - equivalent reﬂections were mapped to their expected values in the asymmetric unit ( see Eq . 4 ) and the intensity - weighted mean phase value was computed . The intensities of symmetry - equivalent reﬂections were averaged . As an alternative approach , individual datasets could be positioned on a crystallographic origin prior to merg - ing . In this case , the merging procedure would require a search over a limited number of positions rather than the entire unit cell , as space group symmetry restricts the number of crystallographic origins . However , we found that the process of merging two datasets was slightly more robust than positioning individual datasets on a crystallographic origin . We compared each strategy us - ing simulated datasets of a P 2 1 2 1 2 1 crystal with unit cell dimensions a , b , c = 16 . 2 , 29 . 1 , 47 , 7 ˚A generated with a range of mean phase errors ( 0 - 40 ◦ ) , completeness ( 10 - 40 % prior to accounting for space group symmetry ) , and relative B - factors ( described in more detail in Section III ; see Eq . 7 ) . The searches for the common origin between datasets and crystallographic origin were both performed using a sampling interval of 0 . 2 ˚A ; the phase origin was considered to be correctly found if the distance between the correct origin and the origin found by the algorithm was less than twice the sampling interval . We observed a 4 % higher success rate for ﬁnding a common phase ori - gin between two datasets than locating a crystallographic origin for each individual dataset ( Fig . S6A ) . Further , identifying a crystallographic origin was successful in 8 % more cases when the procedure was performed on the merged data from two tomograms than on a single tomo - gram ( Fig . S6B ) . In contrast , the success rate for merg - ing two and three datasets was similar ( Fig . S6C ) . These trends suggest a modest advantage to merging datasets to a common phase origin prior to ﬁnding a crystallo - graphic origin , as the latter procedure appeared to be more sensitive to the number of available reﬂections . III . Tests of robustness to radiation damage We validated the full workﬂow presented in Section II ( Fig . S1A ) by evaluating the accuracy of the reﬂec - tion data recovered from simulated tomograms . The pro - cessed data were compared to phases and intensities com - puted directly from the atomic model , in addition to re - ﬂection data recovered from “intact volumes” processed in the same manner as the simulated tomograms . Intact volumes refer to rotated crystal densities generated in the same manner as the simulated tomograms ( see Sec - tion II ) , except without projection into tilt - series and re - construction into tomograms . This comparison between intact volumes and simulated tomograms enabled assess - ing the inaccuracy and loss of completeness introduced by tomographic sampling beyond the baseline interpolation errors from simulating and rotating the crystal densities onto a discrete grid . For each structure ( 6D6G / 4BFH ) and type of volume ( intact volume / tomogram ) , perfor - mance was judged based on merging ﬁve datasets . This merging procedure was repeated ten times with unique sets of ﬁve datasets . Metrics evaluating the quality of the recovered reﬂec - tion data are shown in Table 1 . The information from the 7 A . Intact volume 1 tomogram 5 merged tomograms B . FIG . 4 . Merging undamaged tomograms recovers the reference density . Density maps were computed from reﬂection data for a representative intact volume ( left ) , one tomogram ( center ) , or the merge of ﬁve tomograms ( right ) . The simulated crystal system had either ( A ) triclinic or ( B ) orthorhombic symmetry . Each panel visualizes the map for the entire protein ( upper ) and the subset of residues circled in red ( lower ) . intact volumes was consistent with the reference phases ( R ref , φ < 2 . 5 ◦ ) and intensities ( CC > 0 . 97 ) computed from the initial atomic models . For the simulated tomograms , merging multiple datasets was required to achieve high completeness . When the tilt - range spanned 120 ◦ , or 67 % of reciprocal space , the data recovered from each tomo - gram were only 40 % complete in the absence of internal symmetry ( Table 1 ) . The unexpectedly low completeness stems from the large angular increment of the tilt - series : many Bragg peaks lie between tilt images and were ei - 8 TABLE I . Quality of merged data Intact Undamaged Mildly damaged Moderately damaged Severely damaged volumes tomograms tomograms , c = 0 . 3 tomograms , c = 0 . 2 tomograms , c = 0 . 1 ± 60 ± 40 ± 60 ± 40 ± 60 ± 40 ± 60 ± 40 No . crystals merged 1 5 1 5 1 5 1 5 1 5 1 5 1 5 1 5 1 5 6D6G ( P 1 ) Completeness , c a 0 . 96 0 . 99 0 . 39 0 . 89 0 . 34 0 . 85 0 . 30 0 . 72 0 . 30 0 . 78 0 . 20 0 . 55 0 . 20 0 . 58 0 . 10 0 . 31 0 . 10 0 . 33 R ref , φ b ( ◦ ) 2 . 4 2 . 6 9 . 2 6 . 2 7 . 4 5 . 5 18 . 9 15 . 0 10 . 4 8 . 8 20 . 2 20 . 9 13 . 6 13 . 6 19 . 5 22 . 1 12 . 3 13 . 6 CC ( I sim , I ref ) c 1 . 00 1 . 00 0 . 71 0 . 74 0 . 79 0 . 81 0 . 59 0 . 57 0 . 65 0 . 65 0 . 51 0 . 44 0 . 53 0 . 48 0 . 47 0 . 42 0 . 54 0 . 48 CC ( map , model ) d 0 . 98 0 . 99 0 . 58 0 . 85 0 . 56 0 . 88 0 . 50 0 . 72 0 . 50 0 . 79 0 . 42 0 . 60 0 . 41 0 . 64 0 . 34 0 . 52 0 . 34 0 . 58 4BFH ( P 2 1 2 1 2 1 ) Completeness 0 . 95 1 . 00 0 . 73 0 . 99 0 . 67 0 . 99 0 . 61 0 . 96 0 . 62 0 . 97 0 . 46 0 . 87 0 . 45 0 . 87 0 . 25 0 . 63 0 . 25 0 . 63 R ref , φ ( ◦ ) 1 . 0 1 . 0 6 . 1 2 . 8 5 . 2 2 . 2 11 . 0 4 . 9 8 . 4 3 . 5 16 . 8 12 . 6 12 . 2 8 . 1 24 . 6 27 . 0 11 . 9 15 . 3 CC ( I sim , I ref ) 0 . 98 0 . 98 0 . 81 0 . 87 0 . 86 0 . 90 0 . 72 0 . 76 0 . 73 0 . 76 0 . 59 0 . 55 0 . 59 0 . 57 0 . 56 0 . 46 0 . 58 0 . 51 CC ( map , model ) 0 . 97 0 . 99 0 . 79 0 . 92 0 . 78 0 . 95 0 . 69 0 . 87 0 . 72 0 . 88 0 . 58 0 . 74 0 . 59 0 . 74 0 . 46 0 . 60 0 . 44 0 . 61 a To a high - resolution limit of 3 . 3 ˚A . Entries show the mean value from ten runs of merging the indicated number of datasets consisting of intact volumes , undamaged tomograms , or tomograms simulated with radiation damage to achieve the speciﬁed fractional P 1 completeness ( c ) . b The intensity - weighted mean residual between phases from the datasets reduced to the asymmetric unit and reference phases computed directly from the atomic model . c The correlation coeﬃcient between the logs of reﬂection intensities computed from the reduced dataset and atomic model . d The correlation coeﬃcient between the real space maps computed from the reduced dataset and atomic model . ther not observed or discarded as poorly sampled . Gen - erating tomograms using a ± 40 ◦ tilt - range with 2 ◦ incre - ments rather than a ± 60 ◦ tilt - range with 3 ◦ increments resulted in a slight decrease in the overall completeness ( ∼ 5 % ) but a modest improvement in the accuracy of the reﬂection data due to the ﬁner sampling ( Table 1 ) . Merging tomograms and the presence of internal symme - try also improved the accuracy of the recovered phases , which showed good agreement with reference ( R ref , φ of 6 . 2 ◦ and 2 . 8 ◦ for the P 1 and P 2 1 2 1 2 1 crystal systems , respectively , when the tilt - range spanned ± 60 ◦ ) . In real space , loss of information due to the missing wedge leads to elongation of density in the direction of the beam [ 60 ] . These anisotropic eﬀects were apparent in density maps computed from single tomograms of the P 1 crystal , with continuous density along parallel bands and gaps along the protein backbone between these streaks ( Fig . 4A ) . Incorrect connectivity was less pronounced in density maps computed from single tomograms of the or - thorhombic crystal , as the presence of internal symmetry mitigated the directionality of the missing wedge eﬀect ( Fig . 4B ) . In both cases , merging multiple crystals im - proved the correlation with the reference map ( Table 1 ) . Radiation damage is a limiting factor in cryo - ET and results in loss of information , particularly at high - resolution , as data collection progresses [ 61 ] . To assess how this impacts recovery of the reference structure , we next applied the workﬂow to tomograms of these crystal systems with simulated damage . Damage events were as - sumed to occur at random sites in the crystal volume , and each “hit” was modeled as a blurring of the local density [ 62 ] . The blurring was performed by replacing a cubic subvolume of length 5 ˚A around each selected site with its Gaussian - ﬁltered copy , using a standard deviation of 1 ˚A along each axis for the 3D Gaussian kernel . Follow - ing a dose - symmetric tilt scheme [ 53 ] , an equal number of hits was applied to the randomly - oriented crystal be - fore computing each projection image to mimic a linear increase in absorbed dose across the tilt - series . Tomo - grams were reconstructed from these damaged tilt - series , and those that could not be indexed to the correct space group were discarded . For both crystal systems , we cal - ibrated the total number of hits , or eﬀective dose , that on average yielded tomograms with a completeness of 30 , 20 , or 10 % before accounting for space group symmetry , compared to the ∼ 40 % P 1 completeness observed for un - damaged tomograms ( Table 1 ) . To focus on the tolerance of data processing to low completeness , ten unique sets of ﬁve tomograms were merged if the completeness of each tomogram and the set’s average was respectively within 2 % and 1 % of the target completeness . Metrics evaluat - ing the average quality of the individual tomograms and merged datasets are reported in Table 1 . For both crystal systems , the reference structure was consistently recovered by merging tomograms that were each 30 % complete prior to accounting for space group symmetry . Merging improved the accuracy of the phases and resolved connectivity errors observed in real space maps computed from a single damaged tomogram ( Ta - ble 1 , Fig . 5 ) . While an initial completeness of 20 % could also be tolerated by the orthorhombic system , results for the triclinic crystal were variable , with the phase accu - racy frequently decreasing during the course of merging despite the increase in multiplicity ( Fig . S7 ) . For both crystal systems , an initial completeness of 10 % per tomo - gram was prohibitive to recovering the reference struc - ture . Despite the modest increase in cross - correlation with the reference map , merging reduced phase accuracy under this starting condition , indicating that a common phase origin was not correctly found ( Fig . S7 ) . The den - sity of the merged tomograms showed the wrong connec - tivity , including smearing of density in the solvent region between neighboring chains and gaps along the backbone ( Fig . 5 , right ) . In several cases , the merging procedure visibly aligned the missing wedges of the tomograms be - ing merged ( Fig . S8 ) , suggesting that the shape of the missing wedge rather than the reﬂection data dominated the signal . Similar trends in the relationship between 9 A . 30 % complete Damaged tomograms 20 % complete 10 % complete Undamaged tomograms 5 merged tomograms B . 1 tomogram 5 merged tomograms 1 tomogram FIG . 5 . Merging tomograms with damage - induced loss of completeness . Density maps were computed from reﬂection data recovered from one representative undamaged tomogram or damaged tomogram with the speciﬁed P 1 completeness ( upper ) , and after merging ﬁve tomograms of the indicated type ( lower ) . A subset of residues is visualized for the ( A ) triclinic and ( B ) orthorhombic crystal systems . initial completeness and failure to merge were observed when damaged tomograms were reconstructed from tilt - series spanning either a ± 60 ◦ tilt - range with 3 ◦ incre - ments or a ± 40 ◦ tilt - range with 2 ◦ increments , despite the lower initial phase errors of the latter ( Table 1 ) . Although this analysis suggests that > 10 % complete - ness per dataset is required for recovery of the correct structure , loss of overall completeness is not the only hall - mark of radiation damage . The progressive accumulation of damage alters the spatial distribution of the reﬂec - tion data by reducing the number of reﬂections recorded late in the tilt - series , or at high tilt angles for a dose - symmetric scheme . In addition , the simulated damage introduced phase errors , though the loss of phase accu - racy varied for the same amount of simulated dose ( Table 1 ) . To disentangle the impact of incompleteness , the an - gular spread of reﬂections across the tilt - range , and phase error on the ability to merge tomograms , we simulated radiation damage in reciprocal space according to the following model . For each simulated dataset , the crys - tal lattice was subjected to a random rotation in 3D . Structure factors were then computed to 3 . 3 ˚A , and the positions of Bragg peaks were predicted as a function of tilt angle ; reﬂections in the missing wedge region were ex - cluded . Reﬂection intensities were modeled as decaying with a B - factor that increased linearly with dose [ 62 ] : I d ( h ) = I 0 ( h ) e − 1 16 π 2 n ˜ B f q 2 ( 7 ) where I 0 is the intensity of the undamaged reﬂection , q is the magnitude of the reciprocal space vector associated with reﬂection h , ˜ B f is a relative B - factor , and n is the image number in the tilt - series , with n = 1 , 2 , 3 . . . corre - sponding to tilt angles 0 , - 3 , + 3 , - 6 . . . or 0 , - 2 , + 2 , - 4 . . . for a dose - symmetric scheme spanning ± 60 or ± 40 , respec - 10 A . B . C . FIG . 6 . The dependence of merging success on phase accuracy , completeness , and the angular spread of reﬂection data . A total of 25 , 920 simulated datasets were generated across three crystal systems , spanning a range of P 1 completeness , phase errors , and relative B - factors . Pairs of datasets with similar starting characteristics and in random orientations were merged . ( A ) The fractional merge error was computed as the magnitude of the vector error between the true and estimated fractional shifts required to position datasets on a common phase origin . This metric is shown as a function of the mean phase error ( left ) , P 1 completeness ( center ) , and how unevenly spread the reﬂections were across the tilt - range ( right ) for the datasets being merged . The latter was estimated as the Jensen - Shannon ( JS ) distance to a uniform angular distribution spanning ± 60 ◦ ( see Eq . 8 ) . Though 2880 pairs of datasets with a phase error of 0 ◦ were merged , the results are visually superimposed in the leftmost panel . ( B ) Merge errors are shown as a function of these three parameters or ( C ) the two indicated parameters of the datasets being merged . For ( B ) and ( C ) , red and black respectively indicate datasets for which the incorrect and correct origin shift was determined by the merging algorithm . The error threshold was set to be twice the sampling interval used by the algorithm , such that the correct phase origin was found only when the fractional merge error was < 0 . 03 . tively . The highest - intensity reﬂections in the simulated tilt - range were retained to achieve the speciﬁed initial completeness . The phase origin was subjected to a ran - dom fractional shift ( see Eq . 3 ) , and phase errors were drawn from a normal distribution with the standard devi - ation chosen to achieve the target mean phase error . We assumed that the phase errors were dose - independent , since to our knowledge there are no models for how phase accuracy decays as a function of dose . This error model also assumes that the eﬀects of tilt and the contrast trans - fer function , which modulate reﬂection phases with pre - dictable behavior , can be corrected for [ 26 ] . The advan - tage of this damage model is that it allowed us to in - dependently tune the phase accuracy , overall complete - ness , and angular spread of the reﬂection data across the tilt - range . Data were generated in this manner for the triclinic and orthorhombic systems used above in addi - tion to a tetragonal crystal of proteinase K ( PDB ID : 2ID8 ) , which has a ∼ 20 - fold larger unit cell by volume and higher symmetry . Reﬂection data were then merged as described in Section IID . Structure solution from tomograms of nanocrystals de - pends on ﬁnding the origin shift that correctly aligns the phases of multiple datasets . We assessed the accuracy of this merging procedure based on the merge error , the magnitude of the vector diﬀerence between the fractional origin shift estimated by our merging algorithm and the true shift required to align two datasets each subjected to a random phase shift . We considered the correct origin to be found when the merge error was less than twice the sampling interval used by the merging algorithm , corre - sponding to a fractional merge error of < 0 . 03 for each crystal system . We then examined the dependence of this merge error separately on the phase accuracy , over - all completeness , and the spatial distribution of the re - ﬂections of the datasets being merged . For the latter , we measured how unevenly the reﬂection data were dis - tributed across the tilt - range using the Jensen - Shannon ( JS ) distance . This statistical metric measures the dif - ference between a probability distribution of interest , p , and a reference probability distribution , q : JS = (cid:114) 1 2 ( D ( p | | m ) + D ( q | | m ) ) ( 8 ) where p is the normalized distribution of tilt angles for the observed reﬂections , q is the normalized uniform dis - 11 tribution spanning ± 60 ◦ , and m = 12 ( p + q ) . D is the Kullback - Leibler divergence given by : D ( x | | y ) = (cid:88) i , x ( i ) (cid:54) = 0 x ( i ) log x ( i ) y ( i ) ( 9 ) where the width of the angular bin i was set to 1 ◦ . Using our chosen reference distribution , the Jensen - Shannon distance measures how unevenly reﬂections are distributed across a full tilt - range of ± 60 ◦ , and the score is independent of the dataset’s completeness . Datasets that span a narrower tilt - range than ± 60 ◦ are penalized even when the reﬂection data are uniformly distributed since the normalized counts diﬀer from the expected fre - quencies ( Fig . S9 ) . Radiation damage also increases the Jensen - Shannon distance due to loss of Bragg peaks at higher tilt angles as data collection progresses ( Fig . S9 ) . The results from the three simulated crystal systems were pooled to examine trends that held across diﬀerent space group symmetries and a range of unit cell volumes . We found that the initial phase error and the reﬂec - tions’ angular spread across the tilt - series , as measured by the Jensen - Shannon distance , better predicted the likelihood of merging success compared to overall com - pleteness ( Fig . 6A ) . Provided that the reﬂections from individual tomograms were approximately evenly spread across the tilt - range ( JS < 0 . 18 ) , the correct origin shift could be determined even in the presence of an average phase error of up to 40 ◦ . By contrast , even relatively high completeness ( > 50 % , without accounting for space group symmetry ) did not guarantee ﬁnding the correct phase origin in the presence of moderate phase errors ( Fig . 6B - C ) . These trends argue for distributing the dose across as wide a tilt - range as possible to maximize the angular spread of reﬂections available from each tomo - gram . Although the real - space simulations indicated that a data collection scheme spanning ± 40 ◦ with 2 ◦ incre - ments would reduce phase errors relative to ± 60 ◦ with 3 ◦ increments due to the narrower tilt increment ( Table 1 ) , these results predict that the modest increase in phase accuracy will be outweighed by the increased diﬃculty in correctly merging datasets due to the narrower angular distribution of the reﬂection data across the tilt - range . IV . Discussion Cryo - ET of protein nanocrystals could deliver a method of high - resolution structure determination that both retains experimental phases and circumvents the need for large crystals in conventional X - ray crystallog - raphy and high molecular weight proteins in SPR . Here we describe a data processing pipeline to solve struc - tures from tomograms of nanocrystals . This workﬂow both leverages software from X - ray crystallography and provides new algorithms to handle challenges unique to tomographic data of crystalline specimens . These chal - lenges are related to correctly extracting the reﬂection phases , including eliminating phase splitting due to im - perfect periodicity , excluding partial reﬂections that re - sult in phase errors of 180 ◦ , and extending the phase ori - gin search procedure from 2D plane groups to 3D space groups . We validated this data processing scheme using simulated crystals and found that the recovered reﬂection information was accurate , yielding maps with a correla - tion coeﬃcient to reference of ∼ 0 . 9 after merging ﬁve tomograms without any structure reﬁnement . We also assessed the robustness of this pipeline to radi - ation damage , which limits the eﬀectiveness of structure determination methods . Merging tomograms of crystals in diﬀerent orientations is required to compensate loss of completeness , which results from both radiation damage and the missing wedge . We found that this merging pro - cedure was especially sensitive to the angular spread of the reﬂection data across the tilt - range and phase errors but less so to the completeness of the individual tomo - grams . These simulations indicate a trade - oﬀ between a wider tilt - range to facilitate merging datasets and a ﬁner tilt increment to reduce phase errors . Since including more datasets can overcome phase errors but not incor - rect origin shifts , these results recommend data collection strategies that maintain a wide tilt - range rather than decreasing the sampling interval . We also predict that a wider tilt - range would be favored over ﬁner sampling for high - resolution subtomogram averaging to similarly avoid aligning the missing wedge experienced by individ - ual particles during alignment . While this workﬂow addresses several data analysis is - sues speciﬁc to tomograms of nanocrystals , additional challenges remain . One critical issue is the optimal spec - imen thickness : thicker crystals increase signal - to - noise , but the accuracy of the signal suﬀers due to a larger de - focus gradient and increased multiple scattering [ 26 , 37 ] . We anticipate that the defocus gradient can be largely accounted for by a 3D correction of the contrast trans - fer function [ 63 , 64 ] , and microED has shown empiri - cally that multiple scattering introduces only marginal ( ∼ 5 % ) errors to the measured intensities for crystals 0 . 5 - 1 µ m thick [ 65 , 66 ] . However , the impact of these eﬀects on phase accuracy has not been characterized . Another common tomography challenge is the poorer image qual - ity at high tilt - angles . Given the sensitivity of the merg - ing procedure to the reﬂections’ distribution in recipro - cal space , simulations that additionally account for loss of image quality at high tilt - angles may be useful for fur - ther reﬁning data collection strategies from nanocrystals . Despite these technical challenges , recent successes in cryo - ET of noncrystalline specimens support applying this technique to solve structures from nanocrystals to high resolution . In particular , subtomogram averages of puriﬁed immature HIV - 1 Gag particles to 3 . 1 ˚A and in situ ribosomes to 3 . 7 ˚A demonstrate that high - resolution signal is available in tilt - series data [ 20 , 21 ] . As with SPR , only particles with high molecular weight can be aligned with suﬃcient accuracy for this high - resolution information to be retained during subtomogram averag - 12 ing . Alignment requires both determining the relative orientations of particles and positioning them on a com - mon phase origin . In comparison to SPR , the relative orientations of con - stituent proteins in a nanocrystal can be readily deter - mined by indexing the coherent signal from the entire crystal . Even tiny nanocrystals will have a higher molec - ular weight than an individual HIV - 1 Gag hexamer or ribosome , thereby extending the reach of cryo - ET to smaller proteins . In comparison to X - ray crystallogra - phy , both microED and cryo - ET of nanocrystals require a wider angular range of reﬂection data for indexing due to the negligible curvature of the Ewald sphere using electron radiation . Though successful indexing of indi - vidual electron diﬀraction stills has been reported [ 67 ] , in general a tilt - range of ± 20 ◦ is considered necessary to index microED data [ 68 ] . Cryo - ET data pose addi - tional challenges , as imaging but not diﬀraction data are negatively impacted by several factors including the de - focus gradient , translational drift , and loss of coherency due to inelastic scattering . These eﬀects have been pre - dicted to cumulatively reduce the signal - to - noise ratio of projection images by over 90 % compared to diﬀrac - tion stills collected from the same crystal , with increas - ing loss at higher resolution and for thicker crystals [ 69 ] . The diminished signal - to - noise will result in fewer ob - served reﬂections when collecting data in imaging versus diﬀraction mode for a ﬁxed dose or exacerbate radiation damage if the dose is increased to compensate . Either scenario could make indexing more diﬃcult for cryo - ET compared to microED data . Here we adapted algorithms from the crystallography software package DIALS to in - dex the Fourier transforms of simulated nanocrystal to - mograms [ 41 , 42 ] . We found that indexing was robust even for simulated tomograms with low completeness . While the use of nanocrystals facilitates determining relative particle orientations , the low molecular weight of the constituent proteins makes ﬁnding a common phase origin – the other step of particle alignment – more chal - lenging . High - resolution subtomogram averaging has ex - clusively targeted high molecular weight proteins , and with two exceptions , isolated particles in solvent [ 19 – 21 , 70 ] . These characteristics facilitate ﬁnding a com - mon phase origin from each particle’s center of mass . For nanocrystals composed of small and densely - packed pro - teins , a more extensive search over the unit cell volume is required to position datasets on a consistent phase origin . Finding a common phase origin to merge datasets is crit - ical for improving the accuracy of the recovered reﬂection data and overcoming low completeness . In the future , we anticipate that cryo - ET of nanocrys - tals could enable structure determination from disor - dered crystals , which are typically discarded during diﬀraction experiments . In crystals , disorder attenu - ates the high - resolution signal and has been observed at length scales relevant for nanocrystals [ 25 , 35 ] . In contrast to diﬀraction methods , imaging permits spa - tially characterizing and computationally correcting such disorder . One approach is to denoise the tomogram in Fourier space , followed by computationally “unbend - ing” lattice distortions using cross - correlation analysis between the denoised and original tomograms . Lattice unbending overcame the resolution - limiting eﬀects of dis - order in 2D electron crystallography , in which specimens were frequently bent or wrinkled [ 26 , 27 ] . Alternatively , subtomogram averaging could be performed in real space [ 38 ] . This technique has achieved subnanometer recon - structions of pleomorphic viruses with imperfect helical symmetry and could prove similarly useful for solving structures from tomograms of disordered nanocrystals [ 71 ] . In addition to extending the high - resolution limit of structure determination , the ability to spatially char - acterize disorder could provide insights into both the or - ganization of proteins that form ordered arrays in vivo and defects in these biological crystals [ 72 – 74 ] . In addition , we anticipate that the development of a hybrid method involving microED and cryo - ET of nanocrystals could become routine . This approach would combine diﬀraction intensities with low - resolution phases from experimental images to solve an initial structure , followed by phase extension to the high - resolution limit of the microED data [ 4 , 75 ] . Combining these techniques will be facilitated by the fact that sample preparation is shared between the techniques , and data can be collected on the same instrument [ 10 ] . Implementation of both dis - order corrections and a hybrid approach with microED will be critical to realize the full potential of cryo - ET of nanocrystals for high - resolution structure determination . Code availability The code developed to process tomograms of nanocrys - tals is available at https : / / github . com / apeck12 / cryoetX . Acknowledgments We thank Lauren Ann Metskas and Florian Schur for valuable discussions , in addition to David Stokes and Steven Ludtke for advice on the phase splitting phe - nomenon . A . P . is The Mark Foundation for Cancer Re - search Fellow of the Damon Runyon Cancer Research Foundation ( DRG 2361 - 19 ) . This work was supported by NIH grants R35 GM122588 ( to G . J . J ) , AI150464 ( to G . J . J ) , and GM117126 ( to N . K . S ) . [ 1 ] H . R . Powell , X - ray data processing , Bioscience Reports 10 . 1042 / BSR20170227 ( 2017 ) . [ 2 ] J . L . Smith , R . F . Fischetti , and M . Yamamoto , Micro - crystallography comes of age , Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 13 22 , 602 ( 2012 ) . [ 3 ] J . M . Holton and K . A . Frankel , The minimum crys - tal size needed for a complete diﬀraction data set , Acta Crystallogr . D Biol . Crystallogr . 66 , 393 ( 2010 ) . [ 4 ] G . Taylor , The phase problem , Acta Crystallogr . D Biol . Crystallogr . 59 , 1881 ( 2003 ) . [ 5 ] I . Schlichting , Serial femtosecond crystallography : the ﬁrst ﬁve years , IUCrJ 2 , 246 ( 2015 ) . [ 6 ] W . Liu , D . Wacker , C . Gati , G . W . Han , D . James , D . Wang , G . Nelson , U . Weierstall , V . Katritch , A . Barty , N . A . Zatsepin , D . Li , M . Messerschmidt , S . Boutet , G . J . Williams , J . E . Koglin , M . M . Seibert , C . Wang , S . T . Shah , S . Basu , R . Fromme , C . Kupitz , K . N . Rendek , I . Grotjohann , P . Fromme , R . A . Kirian , K . R . Beyerlein , T . A . White , H . N . Chapman , M . Caﬀrey , J . C . Spence , R . C . Stevens , and V . Cherezov , Serial femtosecond crys - tallography of G protein - coupled receptors , Science 342 , 1521 ( 2013 ) . [ 7 ] L . Zhu , U . Weierstall , V . Cherezov , and W . Liu , Se - rial Femtosecond Crystallography of Membrane Proteins , Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 922 , 151 ( 2016 ) . [ 8 ] I . D . Young , M . Ibrahim , R . Chatterjee , S . Gul , F . Fuller , S . Koroidov , A . S . Brewster , R . Tran , R . Alonso - Mori , T . Kroll , T . Michels - Clark , H . Laksmono , R . G . Sierra , C . A . Stan , R . Hussein , M . Zhang , L . Douthit , M . Ku - bin , C . de Lichtenberg , P . Long Vo , H . Nilsson , M . H . Cheah , D . Shevela , C . Saracini , M . A . Bean , I . Seuf - fert , D . Sokaras , T . C . Weng , E . Pastor , C . Weninger , T . Fransson , L . Lassalle , P . Brauer , P . Aller , P . T . Docker , B . Andi , A . M . Orville , J . M . Glownia , S . Nel - son , M . Sikorski , D . Zhu , M . S . Hunter , T . J . Lane , A . Aquila , J . E . Koglin , J . Robinson , M . Liang , S . Boutet , A . Y . Lyubimov , M . Uervirojnangkoorn , N . W . Moriarty , D . Liebschner , P . V . Afonine , D . G . Waterman , G . Evans , P . Wernet , H . Dobbek , W . I . Weis , A . T . Brunger , P . H . Zwart , P . D . Adams , A . Zouni , J . Messinger , U . Bergmann , N . K . Sauter , J . Kern , V . K . Yachandra , and J . Yano , Structure of photosystem II and substrate binding at room temperature , Nature 540 , 453 ( 2016 ) . [ 9 ] A . Ebrahim , T . Moreno - Chicano , M . V . Appleby , A . K . Chaplin , J . H . Beale , D . A . Sherrell , H . M . E . Duyvesteyn , S . Owada , K . Tono , H . Sugimoto , R . W . Strange , J . A . R . Worrall , D . Axford , R . L . Owen , and M . A . Hough , Dose - resolved serial synchrotron and XFEL structures of radiation - sensitive metalloproteins , IUCrJ 6 , 543 ( 2019 ) . [ 10 ] J . A . Rodriguez , D . S . Eisenberg , and T . Gonen , Taking the measure of MicroED , Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 46 , 79 ( 2017 ) . [ 11 ] J . A . Rodriguez , M . I . Ivanova , M . R . Sawaya , D . Cas - cio , F . E . Reyes , D . Shi , S . Sangwan , E . L . Guenther , L . M . Johnson , M . Zhang , L . Jiang , M . A . Arbing , B . L . Nannenga , J . Hattne , J . Whitelegge , A . S . Brewster , M . Messerschmidt , S . Boutet , N . K . Sauter , T . Gonen , and D . S . Eisenberg , Structure of the toxic core of α - synuclein from invisible crystals , Nature 525 , 486 ( 2015 ) . [ 12 ] M . J . de la Cruz , J . Hattne , D . Shi , P . Seidler , J . Ro - driguez , F . E . Reyes , M . R . Sawaya , D . Cascio , S . C . Weiss , S . K . Kim , C . S . Hinck , A . P . Hinck , G . Calero , D . Eisenberg , and T . Gonen , Atomic - resolution struc - tures from fragmented protein crystals with the cryoEM method MicroED , Nat . Methods 14 , 399 ( 2017 ) . [ 13 ] Y . Cheng , Single - Particle Cryo - EM at Crystallographic Resolution , Cell 161 , 450 ( 2015 ) . [ 14 ] R . Henderson , The potential and limitations of neutrons , electrons and X - rays for atomic resolution microscopy of unstained biological molecules , Q . Rev . Biophys . 28 , 171 ( 1995 ) . [ 15 ] G . J . Jensen , Alignment error envelopes for single particle analysis , J . Struct . Biol . 133 , 143 ( 2001 ) . [ 16 ] M . Wu and G . C . Lander , How low can we go ? structure determination of small biological complexes using single - particle cryo - em , Current Opinion in Structural Biology 64 , 9 ( 2020 ) . [ 17 ] L . Brocchieri and S . Karlin , Protein length in eukaryotic and prokaryotic proteomes , Nucleic Acids Res . 33 , 3390 ( 2005 ) . [ 18 ] C . M . Oikonomou and G . J . Jensen , Cellular Electron Cryotomography : Toward Structural Biology In Situ , Annu . Rev . Biochem . 86 , 873 ( 2017 ) . [ 19 ] F . K . Schur , Toward high - resolution in situ structural biology with cryo - electron tomography and subtomogram averaging , Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 58 , 1 ( 2019 ) . [ 20 ] B . A . Himes and P . Zhang , emClarity : software for high - resolution cryo - electron tomography and subtomogram averaging , Nat . Methods 15 , 955 ( 2018 ) . [ 21 ] D . Tegunov , L . Xue , C . Dienemann , P . Cramer , and J . Mahamid , Multi - particle cryo - em reﬁnement with m visualizes ribosome - antibiotic complex at 3 . 7 ˚a inside cells , bioRxiv 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 06 . 05 . 136341 ( 2020 ) . [ 22 ] M . W . Martynowycz , C . Glynn , J . Miao , M . Jason de la Cruz , J . Hattne , D . Shi , D . Cascio , J . Rodriguez , and T . Gonen , Microed structures from micrometer thick pro - tein crystals , bioRxiv 10 . 1101 / 152504 ( 2017 ) . [ 23 ] V . Luˇ c i´c , A . Rigort , and W . Baumeister , Cryo - electron tomography : the challenge of doing structural biology in situ , J . Cell Biol . 202 , 407 ( 2013 ) . [ 24 ] P . N . Unwin and R . Henderson , Molecular structure de - termination by electron microscopy of unstained crys - talline specimens , J . Mol . Biol . 94 , 425 ( 1975 ) . [ 25 ] I . Nederlof , Y . W . Li , M . van Heel , and J . P . Abra - hams , Imaging protein three - dimensional nanocrystals with cryo - EM , Acta Crystallogr . D Biol . Crystallogr . 69 , 852 ( 2013 ) . [ 26 ] R . Henderson , J . M . Baldwin , T . A . Ceska , F . Zemlin , E . Beckmann , and K . H . Downing , Model for the struc - ture of bacteriorhodopsin based on high - resolution elec - tron cryo - microscopy , J . Mol . Biol . 213 , 899 ( 1990 ) . [ 27 ] A . D . Schenk , D . Castano - Diez , B . Gipson , M . Arheit , X . Zeng , and H . Stahlberg , 3D reconstruction from 2D crystal image and diﬀraction data , Meth . Enzymol . 482 , 101 ( 2010 ) . [ 28 ] D . Nicastro , C . Schwartz , J . Pierson , R . Gaudette , M . E . Porter , and J . R . McIntosh , The molecular architecture of axonemes revealed by cryoelectron tomography . , Science 313 , 944 ( 2006 ) . [ 29 ] J . M . Heumann , A . Hoenger , and D . N . Mastronarde , Clustering and variance maps for cryo - electron tomogra - phy using wedge - masked diﬀerences . , J Struct Biol 175 , 288 ( 2011 ) . [ 30 ] D . Casta˜no - D´ıez , M . Kudryashev , M . Arheit , and H . Stahlberg , Dynamo : A ﬂexible , user - friendly devel - opment tool for subtomogram averaging of cryo - em data in high - performance computing environments , Journal of Structural Biology 178 , 139 ( 2012 ) , special Issue : Elec - tron Tomography . [ 31 ] T . A . Bharat and S . H . Scheres , Resolving macromolec - ular structures from electron cryo - tomography data us - 14 ing subtomogram averaging in RELION , Nat Protoc 11 , 2054 ( 2016 ) . [ 32 ] M . Chen , J . M . Bell , X . Shi , S . Y . Sun , Z . Wang , and S . J . Ludtke , A complete data processing workﬂow for cryo - ET and subtomogram averaging , Nat . Methods 16 , 1161 ( 2019 ) . [ 33 ] R . N . Jackson , A . J . McCoy , T . C . Terwilliger , R . J . Read , and B . Wiedenheft , X - ray structure determination using low - resolution electron microscopy maps for molec - ular replacement , Nat Protoc 10 , 1275 ( 2015 ) . [ 34 ] D . I . Stuart and N . G . Abrescia , From lows to highs : using low - resolution models to phase X - ray data , Acta Crystallogr . D Biol . Crystallogr . 69 , 2257 ( 2013 ) . [ 35 ] M . Gallagher - Jones , C . Ophus , K . C . Bustillo , D . R . Boyer , O . Panova , C . Glynn , C . T . Zee , J . Ciston , K . C . Mancia , A . M . Minor , and J . A . Rodriguez , Nanoscale mosaicity revealed in peptide microcrystals by scanning electron nanodiﬀraction , Commun Biol 2 , 26 ( 2019 ) . [ 36 ] E . van Genderen , Y . W . Li , I . Nederlof , and J . P . Abra - hams , Lattice ﬁlter for processing image data of three - dimensional protein nanocrystals , Acta Crystallogr D Struct Biol 72 , 34 ( 2016 ) . [ 37 ] G . Subramanian , S . Basu , H . Liu , J . - M . Zuo , and J . C . Spence , Solving protein nanocrystals by cryo - em diﬀrac - tion : Multiple scattering artifacts , Ultramicroscopy 148 , 87 ( 2015 ) . [ 38 ] W . Wan and J . A . Briggs , Cryo - Electron Tomography and Subtomogram Averaging , Meth . Enzymol . 579 , 329 ( 2016 ) . [ 39 ] G . Tang , L . Peng , P . R . Baldwin , D . S . Mann , W . Jiang , I . Rees , and S . J . Ludtke , EMAN2 : an extensible image processing suite for electron microscopy , J . Struct . Biol . 157 , 38 ( 2007 ) . [ 40 ] M . Hohn , G . Tang , G . Goodyear , P . Baldwin , Z . Huang , P . A . Penczek , C . Yang , R . M . Glaeser , P . D . Adams , and S . J . Ludtke , Sparx , a new environment for cryo - em image processing , Journal of Structural Biology 157 , 47 ( 2007 ) , software tools for macromolecular microscopy . [ 41 ] D . G . Waterman , G . Winter , J . M . Parkhurst , L . Fuentes - Montero , J . Hattne , A . S . Brewster , N . K . Sauter , and G . Evans , The DIALS framework for integration soft - ware , CCP4 Newsl . Protein Crystallogr . 49 , 16 ( 2013 ) . [ 42 ] G . Winter , D . G . Waterman , J . M . Parkhurst , A . S . Brewster , R . J . Gildea , M . Gerstel , L . Fuentes - Montero , M . Vollmar , T . Michels - Clark , I . D . Young , N . K . Sauter , and G . Evans , DIALS : implementation and evaluation of a new integration package , Acta Crystallogr D Struct Biol 74 , 85 ( 2018 ) . [ 43 ] R . W . Grosse - Kunstleve , N . K . Sauter , N . W . Moriarty , and P . D . Adams , The Computational Crystallography Toolbox : crystallographic algorithms in a reusable soft - ware framework , Journal of Applied Crystallography 35 , 126 ( 2002 ) . [ 44 ] E . F . Pettersen , T . D . Goddard , C . C . Huang , G . S . Couch , D . M . Greenblatt , E . C . Meng , and T . E . Ferrin , UCSF Chimera – a visualization system for exploratory re - search and analysis , J Comput Chem 25 , 1605 ( 2004 ) . [ 45 ] J . R . Kremer , D . N . Mastronarde , and J . R . McIntosh , Computer visualization of three - dimensional image data using IMOD , J . Struct . Biol . 116 , 71 ( 1996 ) . [ 46 ] N . K . Sauter , R . W . Grosse - Kunstleve , and P . D . Adams , Robust indexing for automatic data collection , J Appl Crystallogr 37 , 399 ( 2004 ) . [ 47 ] S . Hovm¨oller , Crisp : crystallographic image processing on a personal computer , Ultramicroscopy 41 , 121 ( 1992 ) . [ 48 ] J . W . Pﬂugrath , The ﬁner things in X - ray diﬀraction data collection , Acta Crystallogr . D Biol . Crystallogr . 55 , 1718 ( 1999 ) . [ 49 ] W . Kabsch , Integration , scaling , space - group assignment and post - reﬁnement , Acta Crystallogr . D Biol . Crystal - logr . 66 , 133 ( 2010 ) . [ 50 ] J . Hattne , F . E . Reyes , B . L . Nannenga , D . Shi , M . J . de la Cruz , A . G . Leslie , and T . Gonen , MicroED data collection and processing , Acta Crystallogr A Found Adv 71 , 353 ( 2015 ) . [ 51 ] D . N . Mastronarde , Dual - axis tomography : An approach with alignment methods that preserve resolution , Journal of Structural Biology 120 , 343 ( 1997 ) . [ 52 ] Z . Dauter , Data - collection strategies , Acta Crystallogr . D Biol . Crystallogr . 55 , 1703 ( 1999 ) . [ 53 ] W . J . H . Hagen , W . Wan , and J . A . G . Briggs , Imple - mentation of a cryo - electron tomography tilt - scheme op - timized for high resolution subtomogram averaging , J . Struct . Biol . 197 , 191 ( 2017 ) . [ 54 ] R . J . Read and A . J . Schierbeek , A phased translation function , Journal of Applied Crystallography 21 , 490 ( 1988 ) . [ 55 ] R . H . Blessing , D . Y . Guo , and D . A . Langs , Statistical expectation value of the Debye - Waller factor and E ( hkl ) values for macromolecular crystals , Acta Crystallogr . D Biol . Crystallogr . 52 , 257 ( 1996 ) . [ 56 ] L . A . Amos , R . Henderson , and P . N . Unwin , Three - dimensional structure determination by electron mi - croscopy of two - dimensional crystals , Prog . Biophys . Mol . Biol . 39 , 183 ( 1982 ) . [ 57 ] S . Hovm¨oller , Rotation matrices and translation vec - tors in crystallography , IUCr : Commission on Crystal - lographic Teaching 39 , 183 ( 1981 ) . [ 58 ] B . Rupp and K . Kantardjieﬀ , Biomolecular Crystallogra - phy : Principles , Practice , and Application to Structural Biology ( Garland Science , 2010 ) . [ 59 ] T . C . Terwilliger , P . D . Adams , R . J . Read , A . J . McCoy , N . W . Moriarty , R . W . Grosse - Kunstleve , P . V . Afonine , P . H . Zwart , and L . W . Hung , Decision - making in struc - ture solution using Bayesian estimates of map quality : the PHENIX AutoSol wizard , Acta Crystallogr . D Biol . Crystallogr . 65 , 582 ( 2009 ) . [ 60 ] M . Radermacher , Weighted back - projection methods , in Electron Tomography : Methods for Three - Dimensional Visualization of Structures in the Cell , edited by J . Frank ( Springer New York , New York , NY , 2006 ) pp . 245 – 273 . [ 61 ] L . A . Baker and J . L . Rubinstein , Radiation damage in electron cryomicroscopy , Meth . Enzymol . 481 , 371 ( 2010 ) . [ 62 ] H . Atakisi , L . Conger , D . W . Moreau , and R . E . Thorne , Resolution and dose dependence of radiation damage in biomolecular systems , IUCrJ 6 , 1040 ( 2019 ) . [ 63 ] G . J . Jensen and R . D . Kornberg , Defocus - gradient cor - rected back - projection , Ultramicroscopy 84 , 57 ( 2000 ) . [ 64 ] B . Turoˇnov´a , F . K . Schur , W . Wan , and J . A . Briggs , Ef - ﬁcient 3d - ctf correction for cryo - electron tomography us - ing novactf improves subtomogram averaging resolution to 3 . 4˚A , Journal of Structural Biology 199 , 187 ( 2017 ) . [ 65 ] D . Shi , B . L . Nannenga , M . G . Iadanza , and T . Go - nen , Three - dimensional electron crystallography of pro - tein microcrystals , 2 , e01345 ( 2013 ) . 15 [ 66 ] B . L . Nannenga , D . Shi , A . G . W . Leslie , and T . Gonen , High - resolution structure determination by continuous - rotation data collection in MicroED , Nat . Methods 11 , 927 ( 2014 ) . [ 67 ] Y . Gevorkov , A . Barty , W . Brehm , T . A . White , A . Tol - stikova , M . O . Wiedorn , A . Meents , R . R . Grigat , H . N . Chapman , and O . Yefanov , pinkIndexer - a universal in - dexer for pink - beam X - ray and electron diﬀraction snap - shots , Acta Crystallogr A Found Adv 76 , 121 ( 2020 ) . [ 68 ] B . L . Nannenga and T . Gonen , The cryo - EM method mi - crocrystal electron diﬀraction ( MicroED ) , Nat . Methods 16 , 369 ( 2019 ) . [ 69 ] M . T . B . Clabbers and J . P . Abrahams , Electron diﬀrac - tion and three - dimensional crystallography for structural biology , Crystallography Reviews 24 , 176 ( 2018 ) . [ 70 ] T . A . M . Bharat , D . Kureisaite - Ciziene , G . G . Hardy , E . W . Yu , J . M . Devant , W . J . H . Hagen , Y . V . Brun , J . A . G . Briggs , and J . L ? we , Structure of the hexag - onal surface layer on Caulobacter crescentus cells , Nat Microbiol 2 , 17059 ( 2017 ) . [ 71 ] W . Wan , L . Kolesnikova , M . Clarke , A . Koehler , T . Noda , S . Becker , and J . A . G . Briggs , Structure and assembly of the Ebola virus nucleocapsid , Nature 551 , 394 ( 2017 ) . [ 72 ] R . H . Lange , Crystalline islet B - granules in the grass snake ( Natrix natrix ( L . ) ) : tilting experiments in the electron microscope , J . Ultrastruct . Res . 46 , 301 ( 1974 ) . [ 73 ] S . G . Wolf , D . Frenkiel , T . Arad , S . E . Finkel , R . Kolter , and A . Minsky , DNA protection by stress - induced biocrystallization , Nature 400 , 83 ( 1999 ) . [ 74 ] L . A . Dadinova , Y . M . Chesnokov , R . A . Kamyshinsky , I . A . Orlov , M . V . Petoukhov , A . A . Mozhaev , E . Y . Soshinskaya , V . N . Lazarev , V . A . Manuvera , A . S . Orekhov , A . L . Vasiliev , and E . V . Shtykova , Protec - tive Dps - DNA co - crystallization in stressed cells : an in vitro structural study by small - angle X - ray scattering and cryo - electron tomography , FEBS Lett . 593 , 1360 ( 2019 ) . [ 75 ] K . Cowtan , Recent developments in classical density modiﬁcation , Acta Crystallogr . D Biol . Crystallogr . 66 , 470 ( 2010 ) .