Synthesehttps : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11229 - 018 - 1700 - 4 Models as signs : extending Kralemann and Lattman’s proposal on modeling models within Peirce’s theory of signs Sergio A . Gallegos 1 Received : 31 December 2016 / Accepted : 22 January 2018 © Springer Science + Business Media B . V . , part of Springer Nature 2018 Abstract In recent decades , philosophers of science have devoted considerable efforts to understand what models represent . One popular position is that models represent ﬁctional situations . Another position states that , though models often involve ﬁctional elements , they represent real objects or scenarios . Though these two positions may seem to be incompatible , I believe it is possible to reconcile them . Using a threefold distinction between different signs proposed by Peirce , I develop an argument based on a proposal recently made by Kralemann and Lattman ( in Synthese 190 : 3397 – 3420 , 2013 ) that shows that the two aforementioned positions can be reconciled by distin - guishing different ways in which a model representation can be used . In particular , on the basis of Peirce’s distinction between icons , indices and symbols , I argue that models can sometimes function as icons , sometimes as indexes and sometimes as symbols , depending on the context in which they are considered and the use that they are developed for because they all have iconic , indexical and symbolic features . In addition , I show that conceiving models as signs enables us to develop an account of scientiﬁc representation that meets the main desiderata that Shech ( in Synthese 192 : 3463 – 3485 , 2015 ) presents . Keywords Models · Scientiﬁc representation · C . S . Peirce · Semiotics · Signs · Kralemann and Lattman · Shech B Sergio A . Gallegos gallegossd @ gmail . com 1 Department of Philosophy , Metropolitan State University of Denver , CN 307J Campus Box 49 , P . O . Box 173362 , Denver , CO 80217 - 3362 , USA 123 Synthese 1 Introduction It is well acknowledged that scientiﬁc models have a variety of different roles : expla - nation , prediction , theory - testing and teaching . Frigg ( 2006 , p . 49 ) has pointed out that , in order to use scientiﬁc models to perform any of these functions , they must ﬁrst be able to represent . But , if scientiﬁc representation is indeed a basic function that models have and if it allows other roles to be carried out , a series of important questions arise : what do scientiﬁc models represent ? And how do they do it ? In which respects is scientiﬁc representation similar to or different from various other forms of representation , such as pictorial or linguistic representation ? And how does the representational role that scientiﬁc models have inﬂuence their other roles ? The last few decades have witnessed the emergence of an extensive literature that addresses those questions . But , even if this literature has clariﬁed a number of issues around which there is now some agreement , there are still key divergences on some of the aforementioned questions . For instance , the question about what scientiﬁc models represent has elicited dif - ferent , and often seemingly irreconcilable answers . To illustrate this , Barberousse and Ludwig ( 2009 , p . 57 ) have maintained that ‘models represent ﬁctional situations . ’ On the other hand , for Teller ( 2009 , p . 244 ) , even if models often involve ﬁctional elements , they are ‘used as component ﬁctions to represent the real trajectories or real objects , the real ﬂuid behavior of real bodies of water . ’ Let us call these two opposed views representational ﬁctionalism ( RF ) and representational realism ( RR ) about scientiﬁc models . Though RF and RR advocates appear to endorse diametrically contrasting views about what scientiﬁc models represent , I believe there is no tension at all between RF and RR , since models can represent both ﬁctional situations and real objects . This is not surprising given the nature of models . Indeed , models are , in my opinion , extremely versatile entities , and the failure to appreciate their huge versatility has led to the rise , not only of the dispute between advocates of RF and advocates of RR , but also of the parallel debate between those who think that models represent indirectly ( e . g . , Giere 2004 ; Frigg 2010 ) —let us call this position IR—and those who think that models represent directly ( e . g , Toon 2010 , 2012 ) —let us call this position DR . 1 The different positions in these two debates ( RF vs . RR and IR vs . DR ) have been articulated to address central questions about scientiﬁc representation . 2 In particular , two of the questions that participants in these debates tackle are the following ones : ( 1 ) how can we make sense of models that do not seem to represent any real scenario ? and ( 2 ) how can we make sense of models that misrepresent their objects ? Now , depending on which position on models is adopted , different challenges arise . For instance , an advocate of RF may state that models that do not seem to represent anything real 1 It is important to emphasize here that the debates are parallel , but not identical . The RF versus RR debate is about what models represent ( ﬁctional situations vs . real objects ) whereas the IR versus DR debate is about how models represent ( indirect or two - stage representation vs . direct or one - stage representation ) . 2 In a prior version of this article , a reviewer asked whether there is a one - to - one correspondence between RF and IR on one side , and RR and DR on the other , and if this is so , whether this entails that they are two different sides of the same coin , so to speak . Though these questions are important , I set them aside here for the sake of space , though I intend to address them in future work . 123 Synthese represent ﬁctional entities , though he then faces questions about the ontological status of these entities . 3 Or , an advocate of IR may state that a model misrepresents its target since some of the properties of the model do not correspond to or ﬁt well with any properties of the target . But he then faces questions about how properties of a ﬁctional entity or an abstract object can in the ﬁrst place correspond to or ﬁt with properties of a concrete , real target . 4 To address the tensions in these debates ( in particular , the tension between RF and RR ) , I propose the following : granting that a scientiﬁc model is a representation of some sort , perhaps it can represent not just one thing but various things . To appreciate how this is possible , consider the following example : suppose that , while you are driving , you see a road sign with a stylized airplane picture . 5 This picture can be used to represent an airplane , but also the direction of the airport and the airport itself . Now , the reason for this is that the stylized airplane sign has an iconic aspect ( insofar as the sign is similar in certain respects to an actual airplane ) , an indexical aspect ( insofar as the sign is oriented toward the airport in a certain way , thus pointing in a speciﬁc direction ) and a symbolic aspect ( insofar as the sign is used conventionally to represent an airport and not , say , an airplane factory ) . Thus , if scientiﬁc models function basically as representations ( i . e . , if they are a certain type of signs ) , perhaps they can be used to represent different things , just as the stylized airplane sign does . Considering this , the thesis I aim to establish in this paper is that the positions of RF and RR advocates can be reconciled through the use of a framework provided by Peirce’s theory of signs . In this , I am pursuing a strategy that Kralemann and Lattman ( 2013 ) have recently proposed . This involves using Peirce’s theory of signs to address questions about the ontological status of models raised by Mahr ( 2009 ) and other authors . Building on and extending the work of Kralemann and Lattman , who argue that scientiﬁc models are necessarily icons , I defend two claims : ( 1 ) even if scientiﬁc models are indeed icons , they also often have indexical and symbolic aspects ( i . e . , they can also functions as indexes and as symbols depending on the context in which they are deployed and the speciﬁc use they are given ) and ( 2 ) this representational versatility of models conceived within a Peircean framework can help us to dissolve the tension between RF and RR by showing that models can represent ﬁctional situations or real states of affairs depending on the circumstances in which they are used . In addition , I also show that , if we accept a Peircean framework where models are conceived as signs having different semiotic aspects , we can develop a satisfactory account of scientiﬁc 3 Toon ( 2010 , pp . 84 – 85 ) articulates what is at stake here as follows : “What exactly are ‘imagined physical systems’ of ‘hypothetical entities’ ? Like a number of other authors , Frigg compares model systems to ﬁctionalentities , likeunicornsorCountDracula . Ofcourse , thenatureofﬁctionalentities , andtheparticular question of whether such entities exist at all , is itself the subject of considerable controversy . ” 4 In a recent paper , Frigg and Nguyen ( 2016 , p . 228 ) attempt to address this question by introducing the notion of I - instantiation . The basic idea behind this notion is that a model M ( say , a physical ball - and - stick model of a water molecule ) I - instantiates a property P ( say , the property of having the sticks form a 104 . 45 ◦ angle ) iff its target T ( say , a water molecule ) instantiates a property P’ ( say , having a bent three - dimensional structure where the covalent bonds between the hydrogen atoms and the oxygen atom are arranged in a 104 . 45 ◦ angle ) and P’ is mapped onto P under a certain interpretation I . For Frigg and Nguyen , ‘this allows a model to I - instantiate properties that it does not instantiate’ . 5 I owe this example to Catherine Legg . 123 Synthese representation that satisﬁes the main desiderata that Shech ( 2015 ) has underscored after critically examining prior accounts of scientiﬁc representation made by Suárez ( 2004 ) and Contessa ( 2007 ) . I proceed in the following fashion . In Sect . 2 , I review in detail the proposal made by Kralemann and Lattman to address the question of the ontological status of models , which involves appealing to Peirce’s theory of signs ( in particular , to the distinction he made between icons , indexes and symbols ) , and I show brieﬂy what are the advantages of this view . In Sect . 3 , I offer an extension of the proposal of Kralemann and Lattman that shows that scientiﬁc models have not only iconic features , but also indexical and symbolic ones and I show how this enables us to address the tension between advocates of RF and of RR . In Sect . 4 , I show how conceiving scientiﬁc models as a type of signs that may have not only iconic , but also indexical and symbolic functions within a framework offered by Peirce’s theory of signs enables us to develop an account of scientiﬁc representation that meets the desiderata that Shech presents . Finally , I present in Sect . 5 a very brief conclusion that outlines some lines of future research . 2 Kralemann and Lattman’s use of Peirce’s theory of signs One of the most important questions raised in recent years about scientiﬁc models concerns the so - called ‘ontological puzzle’ : granting that there are many different types of entities that are scientiﬁc models ( e . g . , the double helix DNA model built by Watson and Crick , the Lotka – Volterra model of biological populations , etc . ) , what makes them all models ? This question is pressing because , as Mahr ( 2009 ) admits , scientiﬁc models exhibit a great diversity ( e . g . , some are concrete things such as a toy vehicle or a biological organism while others are abstract entities such as a system of differential equations or a set of computer instructions ) and there does not seem to be a feature common to all these various entities . Now , to address the ontological puzzle , Kralemann and Lattman have proposed considering scientiﬁc models as a certain type of signs within the framework of a Peircean view of scientiﬁc representation . The rationale for this approach is twofold . On one side , it enables us to vindicate the insight of Frigg that I mentioned in the introduction , namely , that a scientiﬁc model must , ﬁrst and foremost , represent , since one of the features of signs is that they are assumed to stand for something . 6 On the other side , conceiving scientiﬁc models as a kind of signs allows us to subsume scientiﬁc representation into the framework of a general semiotic theory that covers other forms of representation . To grasp the generality of Peirce’s theory of signs , consider the word ‘airport . ’ Peirce would agree that the word functions in English as a speciﬁc sign because it represents a certain entity ( i . e . , an airport ) in virtue of a conventional connection that is understood by English speakers . However , linguistic signs are not the only existing signs . As Grice ( 1957 ) pointed out , certain non - linguistic entities ( e . g . , a column of 6 By this , I do not mean that denotation is sufﬁcient for representation in the case of signs . Rather , my point here is the same that Shech ( 2015 , p . 3468 , fn12 ) makes : ‘the concept of representation presupposes that something is being represented , and it is in this minimal sense that representations are intentional objects . ’ Thus , in my view , the concept of sign presupposes that there is something the sign stands for . 123 Synthese smoke ) are signs of certain things ( e . g . , a ﬁre ) because there is a causal connection between them . And there are other non - linguistic entities ( e . g . , a portrait of Napoleon Bonaparte ) that are signs of other things ( e . g . , Napoleon Bonaparte ) because they bear a certain similarity to the things they stand for . This variety of representational relations that different signs may bear to many objects is captured in Peirce’s theory of signs by the following characterization of a sign : A sign , or representamen , is something which stands to somebody for something in some respect or capacity . It addresses somebody , that is , it creates in the mind of that person an equivalent sign , or perhaps a more developed sign . That sign which it creates I call the interpretant of the ﬁrst sign . The sign stands for something , its object . It stands for that object , not in all respects , but in reference to a sort of idea which I have sometimes called the ground of the representamen . ( CP 2 . 228 ) As this passage shows , Peirce characterizes a sign as something that represents or stands for something in some respect or capacity , which he calls the ground . This characterization , which is triadic insofar as Peirce deﬁnes a sign in relation to the object that it represents and to the person for whom the sign represents that object , is general enough to encompass all the previous examples . Indeed , the English word ‘airport’ is a sign of the airport because it stands for its object in virtue of a speciﬁc ground , which is a linguistic convention . The smoke is a sign of a ﬁre because it stands for its object in virtue of a different ground , which is a causal connection . And the portrait of Napoleon Bonaparte is a sign of Napoleon Bonaparte because it stands for its object in virtue of another ground , which happens to be a certain similarity . As we can appreciate , Peirce’s theory of signs allows us to provide a general account of these different forms of representation . In addition to allowing a systematic treatment of various different instances of representation that goes beyond linguistic representation , Peirce’s theory of signs has another key advantage that Kralemann and Lattman emphasize : it enables us to understand why , if scientiﬁc models are taken to be a type of signs , they have many characteristics that they do typically exhibit . For instance , it is widely acknowledged that scientiﬁc models represent only some aspects of their targets because they omit various characteristics of them as they are built through abstraction . 7 Within a Peircean theoryofsigns , thisfeatureofscientiﬁcmodelsisperfectlyunderstandabletotheextent that , as Kralemann and Lattman observe , it is just a particular instance of the general way in which all signs represent : Every sign stands for its object , but due to its non - identity [ to its object ] only in single respects . A photograph of a house , e . g . , represents only the visual appearance of a speciﬁc house , but not its material or its spatial extent , this visual appearance , in turn , being categorically different from the corresponding physical properties of the thing itself , which acts as the object of the photograph . 7 Even though some authors treat abstraction as a certain type of idealization ( e . g . , McMullin 1985 ) , I follow here Jones ( 2005 , p . 175 ) in distinguishing idealization from abstraction in the following manner : ‘we should take idealization to require the assertion of a falsehood , and take abstraction to involve the omission of a truth . ’ 123 Synthese So , every sign implies a respect , and it is especially this respect that Peirce calls the ‘ground of the representamen’ . ( 2013 , p . 3401 my emphasis ) Another important feature that models exhibit is that , although representing is one of their important features , this is not something that they do per se . As both Suárez ( 1999 ) and Frigg ( 2002 ) have emphasized in their discussion of models conceived as mere structures , models do not represent anything by themselves . In order to be able to represent , a model must be built and used in a speciﬁc context by an agent ( or a group of agents ) who makes it stand for something . 8 The fact that scientiﬁc models do not represent anything by themselves ( but only in relation to certain agents ) 9 is also properly captured by the conception of models as a type of signs that Kralemann and Lattman propose . Indeed , given that they ( 2013 , p . 3401 ) underscore the fact that within Peirce’s view ‘nothing is a sign by itself , ’ the proposal enables us to capture the insight that models can only represent when they used by intentional agents . Thus , in virtue of these two reasons , considering scientiﬁc models as a type of signs appears as a potentially fruitful approach in order to address the ontological puzzle . Having shown this , Kralemann and Lattman raise the following question : if scientiﬁc models are signs , what speciﬁc type of signs are they ? To tackle this , they offer a closer examination of Peirce’s theory of signs . In particular , they remark that Peirce draws a distinction between three types of signs in his early works : It follows that there are three types of representations : 1 st Those whose relations to their objects is a mere community in some quality , and these representations may be termed Likenesses [ or Icons ] . 2 nd Those whose relation to their objects corresponds to a correspondence in fact and these may be termed Indices ( … ) 3 rd . Those whose relation to their objects is an imputed character , which are the same as general signs , and these may be termed Symbols . ( W2 , 56 ) As we can appreciate , Peirce views signs as being divided into three main kinds that differ on the basis of the ground that they rely on to represent their objects : icons represent their objects on the basis of a similarity relation ( which is grounded , for Peirce , on the sharing of some feature ) , indexes represent their objects on the basis of 8 Toputthisideainotherwords , ifweconceiverepresentingasapolyadicrelation , wemust , asGiere ( 2004 , p . 743 ) puts it , ensure that ‘one place , of course , goes to the agents , the scientists who do the representing’ . 9 In a prior version of this paper , a reviewer pointed out that French ( 2003 , p . 1474 ) seems to defend the idea that models may represent by themselves without any agents to the extent that he claims that “whereas intentions are typically drawn upon in art in order to distinguish ‘artistic’ objects from other kinds , this is not the case in science . ” Now , I think that French’s view can be reconciled with Giere’s position in virtue of the following . When he discusses the parallels between artistic and scientiﬁc representation , French cites approvingly an insight of Budd ( 1993 , p . 162 ) according to which ‘representation consists in the perceived isomorphism of structure . ’ To illustrate this , French goes over an example discussed by Budd ( i . e . , the case of the anamorphic skull in Holbein’s The Ambassadors ) and he remarks that , though the picture is not isomorphic to a skull when one stands in front of the painting , it is isomorphic when one looks at the painting from the perspective of a spectator in an oblique position . On the basis of this insight , one could argue that what French holds is that , though it may seem that some models represent in isolation since there no actual agents who do the representing , in fact they always represent in relation to the perspective of some possible agent . 123 Synthese a causal or another factual , brute relation 10 and , ﬁnally , symbols represent their objects through a conventional relation ( which relies , as Peirce argues , on the ascription of a certain feature to an object , as when we ascribe the command to proceed with caution to a ﬂashing yellow light ) . Given this distinction , Kralemann and Lattman consider what kind of signs scientiﬁc models are , and they put forth the following thesis : Since the classiﬁcation of ( the functional aspect of ) signs into icons , indexes and symbols primarily has , as regards its deﬁnition , a conceptually exclusive character due to Peirce’s theory of categories and since no model is primarily and essentially an index or a symbol—an index represents its object in a direct , intrinsic , e . g . , causalmannerandasymbolbyaprimarilyconventionalorhabitual reference—models must necessarily belong to the class of icons ( or put , another way , their iconic aspect is the prevailing , basic one ) . ( 2013 , p . 3405 ) To support this claim , Kralemann and Lattman ( 2013 , p . 3405 ) contend that this ‘is shown by scale models or photographs : these signs represent their objects by a way of similarity between their own quality and the quality of their respective object . ’ In addition , they ( 2015 , p . 3405 ) maintainthatallmodelswithoutexceptionhaveaniconic dimension as ‘they all obviously bear an essential similarity to their objects which serves as the basis of their representational quality . ’ Following Peirce , Kralemann and Lattman highlight too that the similarity in question does not have to boil down to image - like similarity ( which corresponds to what Peirce calls ‘images’ ) since Peirce distinguishes in his works two other types of similarity : structural similarity ( which is the basis of icons he labels ‘diagrams’ ) and semiotic similarity ( which corresponds to icons that he refers to as ‘metaphors’ ) . In virtue of this , icons , which are a type of signs , are further divided according to Peirce into three sub - types of signs : images , diagrams and metaphors . Some scientiﬁc models seem to correspond to this taxonomy rather neatly . For instance , some fence - line contrast photographs function as ecological models , as Hongslo ( 2012 ) has shown , because they represent vegetation changes over time in a region in virtue of image - like similarity between the photographs and the depicted phenomena . Other models such as the Lotka – Volterra equations function as models in virtue of the existence of some structural similarities between the differential equa - tions and the ﬂuctuations of both prey and predator populations . 11 And , ﬁnally , some 10 Atkin ( 2013 ) characterizes the notion of index in Peirce’s theory of signs as follows : ‘If ( … ) our inter - pretation [ ofasign standingforanobject ] comesinvirtueofsome brute , existential fact , causal connections say , then the sign is an index . ’ Now , given that a sign functions as an index if we come to interpret it as standing for an object through some brute , existential fact , causal relations usually provide the basis for something to function as an index for Peirce ( as in the case of a weathercock , which indicates the direction of the wind ) , but entities may also function as indexes in virtue of other brute , existential facts ( e . g . , topo - logical or mereological relations ) . For instance , the road sign with a stylized airplane may function as an index of the direction of the airport in virtue of a topological relation between both objects and an emerged periscope may function as an index of a submerged submarine in virtue of a mereological relation between both objects . 11 Iranzo ( 2013 , p . 67 ) makes this point using this speciﬁc example . In fact , Iranzo also remarks that the view that scientiﬁc representation is based on structural similarity comes in different varieties . For instance , some proposals such as those of Van Fraassen ( 1980 ) and of Da Costa and French ( 2003 ) emphasize the use of structural isomorphism for scientiﬁc representation while other proposals such as that of Giere ( 2010 ) 123 Synthese models such as Darwin’s tree of life in his On the Origin of Species may represent phylogenetic relations between living and dead organisms in virtue of a semiotic simi - larity between the object and the model . 12 Considering this , I am in overall agreement with the view that Kralemann and Lattman present of scientiﬁc models as necessarily having an iconic aspect . This agreement raises two further questions : granting that sci - entiﬁc models necessarily have an iconic aspect qua signs , can they also have indexical and symbolic functions ? And , if this is so , can we use this fact to solve the tension between RF and RR advocates ? 3 Extending Kralemann and Lattman’s proposal to reconcile RR and RF Let us consider now in detail the issue of whether scientiﬁc models , in spite of having necessarily an iconic aspect , can also have indexical and symbolic aspects . Kralemann and Lattman maintain in the passage where they present their thesis that the distinction between icons , indexes and symbols is mutually exclusive in virtue of Peirce’s theory of categories . But they point out in a footnote ( 2013 , p . 3404 , fn5 ) that this does not preclude that ‘several or all the semiotic functions—which Peirce grasps by way of the termini technici icon , index and symbol—may be present at the same time in any empirical entity that acts as a sign , though with regard to a different aspect . ’ Thus , even though an icon cannot be an index or a symbol qua icon , Kralemann and Lattman acknowledge that an entity that functions in some speciﬁc context as an icon ( e . g . , a photograph of the Eiffel Tower that represents the Eiffel Tower through similarity ) can have at the same time but in a different respect an indexical function ( e . g . , it can point to the actual existence of the object it represents via a causal relation ) as well as a symbolic function in a different respect ( e . g . , it can function as a souvenir of a honeymoon trip via a certain convention ) . Now , if entities such as photographs that function as signs can display at the same time various semiotic functions in different respects , is it the case that scientiﬁc models can also have indexical and symbolic functions ? A brief look at the recent literature on modeling shows that various scientiﬁc models have , in addition to their iconic aspect , indexical and symbolic aspects . For instance , when Leonelli considers how certain speciﬁc exemplars of Arabidopsis thaliana can function as models after being developed in laboratories through a process she labels ‘material abstraction , ’ 13 she points out that the speciﬁc exemplars function as models Footnote 11 continued involve a more complex view that includes structural similarity but also appeals crucially to the intentions of the agents using the model . 12 Darwin ( [ 1859 ] 2009 , p . 129 ) describes his model in the following fashion : ‘The afﬁnities of all the beings of the same class have sometimes been represented by a great tree . I believe this simile largely speaks the truth . The green and budding twigs may represent existing species ; and those produced during each former year may represent the long succession of extinct species . ’ This view of scientiﬁc models , according to which they represent their targets via some analogical or metaphorical relations , is defended in the works of Black ( 1962 ) and Hesse ( 1963 ) . 13 ForLeonelli ( 2008 , p . 522 ) , materialabstractionisaprocessthat‘involvesselectingasetofmaterialfea - turesof Arabidopsis wildtypesaspotentiallyinterestingforresearchpurposes , devisingwaysinwhichthese propertiescanbeincorporatedintoauniquespecimen , makingsurethatspecimenswiththosecharacteristics 123 Synthese not only because of their similarities to wild instances of the plant , but also because the process of material abstraction has two key features : It is aimed at the material replication of features of plants . These features are selected as desirable insofar as they allow us to explore unknown aspects of Ara - bidopsis biology ( e . g , the regulatory mechanisms responsible for the phenotypic differences between Lan and Col ecotypes ) . The stability of these features across different laboratory settings is a necessary condition for the resulting model to have representational value . ( … ) Without agreeing on the traits that should char - acterize Lan and Col specimens as models of Arabidopsis plants , there can be no study of their regulatory systems , nor can results achieved through such study be applied to other species . Specimens that do not possess the traits selected by NASC researchers do not constitute trustworthy representatives of Arabidopsis wild types . ( 2008 , p . 522 ) As this passage suggests , using an instance of A . thaliana created in the laboratory through material abstraction as a model involves , in addition to the iconic dimension that characterizes all models , the two other semiotic functions . In order to represent some Arabidopsis wild types , the model organism must be such that it can be used to indicate ( i . e . , to ‘trace back to’ ) these wild types . This indicating or ‘tracing back’ is possible since there is a series of causal links existing between the model organism and certain wild specimens that obtain in virtue of certain phylogenetic relations and of laboratory manipulations . In virtue of this , the model organism represents other wild organisms since it operates as an index , just as the presence of petriﬁed wood in an area ( e . g . , Petriﬁed Forest National Park ) operates as an index of the existence of vegetal life in another era . Moreover , certain features of the model organism stand for features of wild organisms ( and not others ) because the scientists who created it selected via a convention certain features as desirable and left others aside . In virtue of this , some features of the model organism represent features found in the wild exemplars insofar as the features in question function as symbols . 14 As this example shows , an entity that functions as a scientiﬁc model can be , if we conceive it within the framework of Peirce’s theory of signs , a model in different ways since it can operate in some respects as an icon , in others as an index and , ﬁnally , in others as a symbol . This insight allows us to vindicate a distinction Liu ( 2015 ) has recently made in order to reject a deﬂationary conception of scientiﬁc representation proposed by Callender and Cohen ( 2006 ) . Callender and Cohen defend a view of scientiﬁc representation according to which it is ﬁrst and foremost a matter Footnote 13 continued can actually be grown , and constructing a toolkit of guidelines , materials and instruments allowing researchers worldwide to grow specimens in the same way’ . 14 In a prior version of this article , a referee pointed out that two of the functions that a sign may exhibit ( i . e . , index and symbol ) seem to be conﬂated in my discussion of Leonelli’s example . Part of the problem is that Leonelli herself does not separate clearly these two functions in her discussion of how material abstraction is used to create models of Arabidopsis . I have tried to clarify things by stressing that a certain specimen of Arabidopsis may represent some wild specimens ( qua index ) in virtue of some causal links between the organisms and that some of the features of this specimen may represent features in other plants ( qua symbols ) in virtue of a certain conventions established by scientists . 123 Synthese of conventional ﬁat within a framework that they label ‘the General Gricean account’ and that they ( 2006 , p . 70 ) characterize in terms of the following central claim : ‘all ( … ) types of representation can be explained ( in a uniﬁed way ) as deriving from some more fundamental sorts of representations that are taken to be mental states . ’ For them , in principle any entity whatsoever can be a scientiﬁc model of some phenomenon P as long as the entity in question is such that it reliably elicits the appropriate belief states in people that employ the model . 15 To be more speciﬁc , on the view that Callender and Cohen defend , while causal , resemblance and / or isomorphic relations may bear a certain role on whether an entity can be used to represent successfully a certain phenomenon P , they only function at most as pragmatic constraints since the key element behind scientiﬁc representation is a conventional stipulation . In virtue of this , Callender and Cohen ( 2006 , p . 77 ) endorse a position where ‘scientiﬁc representation is just another species of representation to which the General Gricean account is straightforwardly applicable . ’ Now , on one side , Liu ﬁnds ( quite rightly , I think ) this conception of scientiﬁc representation too deﬂated since it leaves aside causal and resemblance relations as mere pragmatic constraints , and puts all the weight upon the conventional or symbolic relations . 16 But , on the other side , he also wants to preserve the idea that there is an important conventional or symbolic element at work in cases of scientiﬁc representa - tion . To incorporate all these elements , Liu draws a distinction between two different types of signs that are used to represent in science ( which he calls , following Callender and Cohen , ‘representational vehicles’ ) . 17 For Liu , there are symbolic vehicles and epistemic ones , and the difference is the following one : [ Symbolic vehicles ] , whether linguistic or non linguistic , are essentially arbitrary physical objects that people use by agreement as tags or marks for the things they want to refer to . ( … ) Epistemic vehicles , those vehicles that we usually see in acts of modeling things or events in the world , scientiﬁcally or otherwise , are not used as symbols ( … ) A cursory look at the use of such scientiﬁc models would reveal two rather obvious points : ( i ) they cannot be had , unlike the symbolic vehicles , through a stipulation among the users and , more importantly ( ii ) they have features that are regarded as relating to their targets in such a way that they 15 Callender and Cohen ( 2006 , p . 74 ) illustrate this feature using the following example : ‘Can your left hand represent the Platonic form of beauty ? Of course , so long as you stipulate that the former represents the latter . Then , when your dinner partner asks what you are thinking about , you can direct attention to your left hand with the reasonable intention that your doing so will activate in your audience the belief that you are thinking about the Platonic form of beauty’ . 16 ForLiu ( 2015 , p . 47 ) , theinsufﬁciencyofmereconventionalorsymbolicrelationstodoallthemainwork in instances of scientiﬁc representation is illustrated using this example : ‘I have never been to Africa , yet I can acquire a good sense of what an African savannah looks like through vehicles of model representation . That is not possible if I can have access only to symbolic vehicles , even if I know and consent to all the symbols that relate to African savannahs ( … ) ’ . 17 Different authors use different terminology . For instance , Suárez ( 2003 , p . 225 ) refers to a representa - tional vehicle as the source of a representation in order to distinguish it from what he calls the target of the representation ( which is the object represented ) . I will use here , following Callender and Cohen as well as Liu , the term ‘representational vehicle’ since the term ‘source’ does not quite convey the idea that scientiﬁc models are used as tools to represent certain objects . 123 Synthese can be used to show or επχδειξη the targets or to learn about them . ( 2015 , p . 46 ) Liu maintains that this difference is important because it enables us to defend the claim that scientiﬁc representation has an epistemic aspect while also conceding that the representational use of models also has a conventional aspect . Liu’s distinction between epistemic and symbolic vehicles thus provides a valuable lens to study scien - tiﬁc representation since it allows us to appreciate that it is a multifaceted phenomenon , with both epistemic and symbolic dimensions . 18 Thus , a further reason to accept the thesis that models not only have iconic but also indexical and symbolic aspects is that , in addition of allowing us to make sense of how the process of material abstraction described by Leonelli endows models organisms such as A . thaliana with represen - tational value vis - à - vis other specimens , it also enables us to capture and vindicate the distinction that Liu makes between symbolic and epistemic vehicles . Indeed , if an item is employed as a scientiﬁc model in a context that stresses the conventional relations it bears to its target , it operates as a symbolic vehicle . And , if the object is used as a model to represent its target in a context that stresses the indexical and iconic relations that it bears to its target , the object operates as an epistemic vehicle . I have offered some reasons to support the thesis that scientiﬁc models not only have iconic features , but may also have indexical and symbolic ones that operate in different contexts , depending on the speciﬁc uses the models are given . But can we use this fact to reconcile the tension between advocates of RF and of RR ? As I mentioned previously , I want to present an argument to establish this . The structure of the argument is the following : I consider ﬁrst some examples of scientiﬁc models that are deemed to support the position of advocates of RR . On the basis of the thesis that models are signs that may have indexical and symbolic functions in addition to an iconic one , I argue that , when they used for certain purposes and in certain contexts , these models represent ﬁctional situations . I then consider some examples of models that are used to support the position of advocates of RF and , on the same basis , I argue that these models represent , when they are used for certain purposes and in certain contexts , real properties or real states of affairs . Finally , I argue that the tension between RF and RR can be resolved in way that vindicates an important observation about models made by Morrison and Morgan ( 1999 ) . Let me present the ﬁrst part of the argument . In order to start with as uncontroversial a case as possible , let us consider a model that was built explicitly to represent a part of the natural world : the US Army Corps of Engineers San Francisco Bay model in Sausalito . 19 By focusing on this speciﬁc model , an advocate of RR can make the case 18 In particular , Liu ( 2015 , p . 48 ) argues that , while some may be reluctant to separate epistemic vehicles from symbolic ones since some objects often seem to play both roles , the distinction is justiﬁed since they play both roles in different contexts as the following example shows : ‘The double helix model of DNA as a model showing the relevant structure of the molecules is rarely used as a convenient symbol in the context of scientiﬁc research and pedagogy . When it is used as a symbol , it is used as a symbol of a great scientiﬁc achievement ; and then , and usually only then , is a fully realized replica of the model ( … ) necessary to be placed somewhere to do the job of a scientiﬁc representation’ . 19 The fact that this model was devised and constructed by its builders to represent a portion of the real world is underscored by Weisberg ( 2013 , pp . 1 – 3 ) , who writes : ‘The Corps recognized the beneﬁts that the Reber plan might bring to the area , but it was certain that damning the bay would have serious , unintended 123 Synthese that scientiﬁc models do represent real states of affairs . I certainly do not want to dispute this claim , but here it would certainly pay off to be more precise . I agree with advocates of RR that the San Francisco Bay model represents a real state of affairs when the model is used to study the variation in intensity and direction of tidal ﬂows in the San Francisco Bay area . Moreover , I would add that it represents a real state of affairs because , though the model operates as an icon ( in virtue of certain structural similarities between the model and the bay ) and as a symbol ( in virtue of the agreement of the model’s creators to make it stand for the San Francisco Bay area ) , it functions mainly as an index insofar as it is related to its target by a causal connection that relates variations of the tidal ﬂows in the bay to changes in the model . 20 However , if the model is used for other purposes ( e . g . , to study the likelihood of earthquakes impacting the Bay area ) , what the model represents is not a real thing , but a ﬁctional situation since the physical model is clearly an idealization that omits many elements ( e . g . , faults ) that would be necessary to represent accurately the real geological structure of the Bay area . In virtue of this , I agree with advocates of RR that models may indeed represent real states of affairs . However , since models can also represent ﬁctional situations , advocates must also acknowledge that this is a contingent trait that depends on the context in which the models in question are deployed and the use they are given , since these factors determine what Peirce called ‘the ground of the representamen . ’ To appreciate how the ‘ground of the representamen’ can determine whether the model represents a real state of affairs or a ﬁctional situation , let us consider a second example . To defend RR while accepting that some models involve ﬁctional elements , Teller presents the following interesting thought - experiment : Imagine that when Euler developed his hydrodynamical equations everybody actually believed water to be a continuous medium . These equations give an excellent description of many aspects of the ﬂuid properties of water . Then these practitioners discovered that water is not a continuous medium ( … ) But now that we know that water is not a continuous medium , its characterization as continuous takes on the status of a ﬁctional element in otherwise very accurate models . ( 2009 , pp . 245 – 246 ) What I ﬁnd extremely interesting about this thought experiment is that it shows how an advocate of RR such as Teller is compelled to admit that models represent , when they are used in certain contexts and for certain purposes , ﬁctional situations . Indeed , the hydrodynamical equations of Euler represent a portion of a real state of affairs when they are used to study the ﬂuid properties of water , and this is because the model operates as an icon vis - à - vis a certain aspects of the ﬂuid properties of water in virtue of certain structural similarities . However , if the model is used to represent , not only the Footnote 19 continued consequences . It recognized that a battle of words would not be advisable in advising regional authorities ; it needed hard data . But how such data be collected without actually building the dams and risking harm to the bay ? Its solution was to build a massive hydraulic scale model of the San Francisco bay’ . 20 The primary indexical role of the San Francisco bay model is further highlighted by the fact that the model had to be calibrated so that it could to be used effectively to represent the tidal ﬂows . For further discussion of this , see Sect . 4 below . 123 Synthese ﬂuid properties of water , but the overall molecular structure of water ( which involves the constant formation and break - up of hydrogen bonds that makes water a discrete medium ) , then the model functions deliberately as a symbol as it is conventionally used to represent a ﬁctional entity . I turn now to the second part of the argument . Let us consider an example that supports the position of advocates of RF : the case of the mathematical model put forth by Fibonacci that represents the growth of a rabbit population . As Frigg has pointed out in his analysis of this example , this model—which describes the population growth in terms of the equation P ( t n ) = P ( t n − 1 ) + P ( t n − 2 ) , where P ( t n ) is the number of rabbits at time t n —omits many features that that real populations of rabbits exhibit : the mortality of individual rabbits , the unavailability of food at certain stages , etc . In virtue of this , Frigg argues that models such as this one represent ﬁctional entities : The above equation is not about rabbits per se ; it is about rabbits that never die , a garden that is inﬁnitely large and contains enough food for any number of rabbits , and rabbits that procreate at a constant rate at constant speed . This is not by any standards an accurate description of the real situation ; it is a ﬁctional scenario and P ( t n ) = P ( t n − 1 ) + P ( t n − 2 ) is true of this scenario . ( 2010 , p . 106 ) If no real scenario corresponds to the model , it would appear that what the mathe - matical model represents is a ﬁctional situation . However , I think that , just as in the previous case , it would pay off to be more precise . The equation does not represent accurately any real , concrete scenario for Frigg ; rather , it is used to generate an abstract model - system . In this circumstance , the equation functions explicitly as a symbol of the model - system because we conventionally use the equation to generate a ﬁctional scenario ( which , for Frigg , functions as a prop ) that enables us to establish certain claims that hold true within the model - system . But this is just part of the picture . Indeed , for Frigg , not only are model - systems represented by equations and other model - descriptions via particular conventions but , as he maintains when discussing another example , the model - systems usually represent themselves concrete portions of the real world : ( … ) consider the Bohr model of the hydrogen atom . On the current analysis this model consists of a model - system , which is speciﬁed by a model - description and which is described by a model apparatus ( classical mechanics plus the Bohr – Sommerfeld quantization rule ) . A number of facts obtain in the model - system , among them that it has discrete energy levels . We then take the model system to denote real hydrogen atoms , and then use a simple key ( … ) to translate this fact into the claim that hydrogen itself has discrete energy levels . ( 2010 , p . 128 ) As this passage shows , the model - system in this example operates for Frigg as an icon sinceitrepresentsaportionofrealityviastructuralsimilaritybetweenthemathematicalstructurethatelectronorbitshaveinthemodel - system and the spatial structure of tra - jectories followed by actual electrons in hydrogen atoms . Considering this , we can then appreciate that , though Frigg endorses RF when he considers the nature of the relation between model - description and model - system , he also endorses RR when he consid - ers the nature of the relation between model - system and target - system . Now , within the Peircean framework proposed here , Frigg’s simultaneous endorsement of RF and 123 Synthese RR is perfectly consistent since each position corresponds to a different semiotic relation between different objects . To be speciﬁc , what Frigg calls ‘p - representation’ corresponds to model - descriptions operating as symbols vis - à - vis model - systems and what he calls ‘t - representation’ corresponds to model - systems operating as icons ( or indexes ) vis - à - vis target - systems . 21 Let us consider a second example that has been used to defend RF . Barberousse and Ludwig have argued that one of the best examples that illustrates their position is the case of the Ehrenfest model in thermodynamics , which is used to explain how two bodies with different temperatures that are put into contact progressively tend to a state of thermal equilibrium . The Ehrenfest model involves thinking of the two bodies in thermal interaction as a box divided into two compartments labeled A and B , and such that A contains initially a series of balls numbered 1 through N . The model also involves supposing that we randomly draw a number between 1 and N ( all draws are supposed to be equiprobable ) , and the ball that corresponds to this number is moved to the other compartment . Now , the model is usually of great interest to physicists , as Barberousse and Ludwig remark , in virtue of two things : insofar as the number of balls in A tends to N / 2 as the number of draws increases , it reﬂects what happens to the target system during thermalization and the model enables us to predict with a probability of 1 that the system will return to its initial state after 2 N steps ( which corresponds to Poincaré’s recurrence theorem ) . Barberousse and Ludwig ( 2009 , p . 65 ) claim that this example provides support for RF because ‘it is clear that the Ehrenfest model represents a situation that is incompat - ible with our best physical theories ( . . . ) In none of these theories , is it possible to let molecules cross the wall one by one without disturbing the totality of the remaining system . ’ Considering this , they argue that the model cannot represent a real state of affairs , but rather represents a ﬁctional situation . I do not dispute the underlying truth of that claim . What I would only add , emphasizing some elements of what Barber - ousse and Ludwig maintain , is that the model represents a ﬁctional situation if it is intended to represent the totality of the system because nothing in reality corresponds accurately to it . And , in this case , the model works as a symbol since it is used con - ventionally to represent the whole process of thermalization , which involves complex causal interactions between molecules that cannot be captured by a mere probabilistic process . But , as Barberousse and Ludwig concede in a further passage , the model seems to have also a key ‘epistemic interest’ ( i . e . , it also tells us what the world is like ) , 22 which consists in the following : 21 In virtue of this , one of the advantages of adopting the Peircean framework that I present and defend here is that we don’t need to make a distinction ( as Frigg does ) between different kinds of representation . On my view , there is just one relation of representation that admits different grounds ( iconic , indexical or symbolic ) and that may hold between different items . 22 The term ‘epistemic’ that Barberousse and Ludwig use is potentially misleading since models may be used produce knowledge even if they do not tell us what the world is like . In virtue of this , I prefer the terminology ( as well as the associated distinction ) that Shech ( 2015 , p . 3464 ) puts forth in the following passage : ‘Scientists routinely use representational structures such as models to make inferences about the world ( epistemological aspect ) and to tell us what it is like ( ontological aspect ) . ’ Though both aspects are usually deployed in tandem while building and employing scientiﬁc models ( since one usually draws infer - encesfromwhatthereisintheworld , asareviewerpointedoutinapreviousversionofthisarticle ) , Ibelieve that it is important to distinguish them because they correspond to different functions : an inferential one 123 Synthese The epistemic interest of the Ehrenfest model is that it allows us to isolate the probabilistic component of the statistical - mechanical representation , and to show that this component alone , when separated from the causal - dynamical component , is similar to some aspects of the behavior of systems of molecules . ( 2009 , p . 66 ) Thus , when the Ehrenfest model is taken to represent , not the whole process of thermal interaction between two bodies , but just some features of the behavior of molecules , then the model clearly represents a portion of the real world insofar at it operates as an icon : the model represents part of a physical system through the structural similarities between the lottery process that the ﬁctional macroscopic balls are subject to and the action of the thermodynamic forces that the actual molecules are subject to . In virtue of all this , considering this example through the lens of Peirce’s theory of signs enables us to see that the position of Barberousse and Ludwig is not really at odds with RR . I can turn now to the third and ﬁnal stage of my argument . I have previously shown through the study of various examples of models used by advocates of RR to support their position that these examples can be seen , once they are viewed within the framework of Peirce’s theory of signs , as being perfectly compatible with the position of advocates of RF ( and vice versa ) . In virtue of this , I contend that , when we conceive scientiﬁc models as signs that can exhibit not only iconic but also indexical and symbolic functions , we can see that there is no one way in which models represent . In other words , there is no ‘right’ answer to the question : ‘Is representational realism or representational ﬁctionalism about models the correct view ? ’ In my view , both are correct because one and the same model can , in virtue of displaying different semiotic functions , represent either a real state of affairs ( or a portion of it ) or a ﬁctional situation or feature , depending on the context in which the model is deployed and the use that is made of it . This position , which is a kind of representational pluralism about scientiﬁc representation , 23 is supported by the fact that it allows us to vindicate an observation made by Morrison and Morgan ( 1999 ) . According to them , models are , ﬁrst and foremost , instruments of a certain kind that enable us , as many other instruments do , to accomplish a variety of different tasks . Just as a claw hammer can be used to drive a nail through a plank of wood or to subsequently pull that same nail from the plank , a model can be used , as Morrison and Morgan show , for different purposes : in some circumstances , it can be used to represent a theory while it can be used in different circumstances to represent the world . 24 This versatility of models that Morrison and Morgan highlight is a trait that can be satisfactorily explained if we think of models as complex signs with different aspects that can be emphasized ( or , on the contrary , downplayed ) by various users of the models depending on the goals that these users have and the context in which they are used . Thus , in virtue of this , it Footnote 22 continued and a descriptive one . The importance of separating these functions can be further supported by considering the fact that statisticians traditionally distinguish inferential statistics from descriptive statistics . 23 I am very grateful here to a reviewer who suggested presenting my position in these terms . 24 One of the best examples of this trait of scientiﬁc models is provided by Prandtl’s hydrodynamical model of a liquid with a very thin boundary layer , which is amply discussed by Morrison ( 1999 , pp . 53 – 60 ) . 123 Synthese seems that adopting and extending the proposal of Kalemann and Lattman allows us to reconcile the tension between advocates of RF and of RR . 4 Using the extended proposal as an account of scientiﬁc representation I have argued in the previous section that conceiving scientiﬁc models as signs with not only iconic but also indexical and symbolic functions or aspects enables us to address the tension between supporters of RF and of RR . Now , if my argument is correct , a further question arises : can we use my proposal to address further open questions concerning scientiﬁc representation ? In this section , I want to make a case for the thesis that the proposal that I present here can be used to address a crucial question , which is : ‘how can we develop a good account of scientiﬁc representation ? ’ In response to this question , several authors have put forth a number of interesting pro - posals , such as the inferential account of scientiﬁc representation articulated by Suárez ( 2004 ) and the interpretational account defended by Contessa ( 2007 ) . However , even if both accounts capture some important aspects of what scientiﬁc representation is and how it works , Shech ( 2015 ) has highlighted certain signiﬁcant shortcomings that both accounts exhibit and he has also pointed out what features a good account of scientiﬁc representation should have . To be more speciﬁc , Shech has shown ( quite convincingly , I think ) that , although Suárez’s inferential account is attractive because it stresses the importance of viewing scientiﬁc models as entities that can be used to make certain inferences about a target , it is silent on what allows certain inferences and not others to be licensed . In a similar way , Shech has also argued that , even if Contessa’s interpretational account of scientiﬁc representation is attractive in being sensitive to the fact that in order to separate valid and sound surrogative inferences one must adopt an interpretation of the target in terms of the vehicle used to represent it , it cannot account for cases in which a scientiﬁc model misrepresents its intended target . Now , in order to address these shortcomings , Shech ( 2015 , p . 2466 ) maintains that a satisfactory account of scientiﬁc representation requires taking scientiﬁc repre - sentations ‘to be intentional objects that come with reference , semantic content , and a representational code , with faithful representations acting as epistemic representa - tions that are ontological guides . ’ 25 Given this description , my purpose is to show that the proposal that I have defended earlier ( namely , that scientiﬁc models should be considered as signs within a Peircean framework that have iconic , indexical , and symbolic functions ) has the potential to allow us to develop a good general account of scientiﬁc representation . Let us consider the ﬁrst requirement that Shech introduces , i . e . , that scientiﬁc representations are intentional objects with a reference , a semantic content and a representational code . Now , if we conceive scientiﬁc models as a type of signs ( in accordance with the characterization of signs offered by Peirce in the passage that I cited above in Sect . 2 ) , we can then appreciate that they are straightforwardly inten - tional objects since signs are characteristically for Peirce about certain things ; they 25 I will explain below what all these terms , which are termini tecnici , mean and how the conditions they impose are met by the account I presented here . 123 Synthese also clearly have reference since signs are presumed stand for something for Peirce and they have speciﬁc semantic contents since they create interpretants in the minds of their users as Peirce points out . 26 Moreover , given that Peirce holds that our rea - soning is a semiotic process and that it is the use of certain signs that licenses some inferences , 27 it is then also clear that , if we conceive scientiﬁc models as signs , they also are associated with a certain representational code which , according to Shech ( 2015 , p . 3469 ) , ‘licenses valid inferences from vehicle to target . ’ This code , as Shech also observes , may be in some cases well known ( thus allowing the sign to be used to draw sound inferences ) or it may be unknown ( thus requiring to be ‘deciphered’ ) . 28 Let us consider now the second requirement that Shech introduces , i . e . , that a good account of scientiﬁc representation should be able to provide an account of how faithful representations act as ontological guides ( i . e . , how they tell us what the target is like ) . As Shech also points out , in order to explain this , a successful account of scientiﬁc representation must also be able to explain the occurrence of cases of misrepresentation . Considering this , two of his main objections to the accounts of both Suárez ( 2004 ) and Contessa ( 2007 ) are that neither one is able to account in a satisfactory way for cases of misrepresentation , and that neither is able to provide a good way of distinguishing accurate representations from misrepresentations . Now , I contend that within a Peircean framework where scientiﬁc models are conceived as signs with different semiotic aspects , there is a way to explain the occurrence of misrepresentations and to draw a distinction between faithful representations and misrepresentations . Toseethiswithmoreclarity , letusconsiderPeirce’sviewsonperception . According to Peirce , what we usually call ‘perceptions’ are really composed of two different but deeply interrelated elements : the percept , which ‘does not stand for anything’ ( CP 7 . 619 ) and is just ‘one single and undivided whole’ ( CP 7 . 626 ) that is exhausted by its phenomenal quality ( which Peirce calls its Firstness ) and by its exhibiting an interaction between perceiver and perceived object ( which Peirce calls its Secondness ) , andtheperceptualjudgment , which‘professestorepresentthepercept’ ( CP7 . 627 ) , and is , precisely in virtue of this , ‘of the nature of the sign , a representation’ ( Haack 1994 , p . 17 ) . Now , as Haack also points out , a key characteristic of perceptual judgments for Peirce ( which is also shared by all other signs ) is the following one : 26 The following passage from Kralemann and Lattman ( 2013 , pp . 3402 – 3403 ) shows that , if one adopts the view they propose , scientiﬁc models turn out to be intentional objects with both reference and speciﬁc semantic contents : ‘models are signs which represent something else , i . e . , their objects ; nonetheless they do not act as signs by themselves , but only when they are made to do so by an interpretative act of a subject that pursues a speciﬁc objective and who explicitly or implicitly chooses a theoretic or linguistic context including a frequently semantically coded prior knowledge , which in the concrete act of modeling connects the model with a speciﬁc semantic content , i . e . , its interpretation’ . 27 Peirce ( 1976 : NEM , IV , 353 ) ‘ ( … ) in all reasoning there must be something amounting to a diagram before the mind’s eye and the act of inference consists in observing the relation between the parts of that diagram that have not entered yet into the design of its construction’ . 28 This last point by Shech is important since it echoes a rather plausible claim made by Łukasiewicz and mentioned in Gyedimin ( 1986 , p . 198 ) , which is that the search for the universal laws of nature ( which is presumably one of the tasks of science ) could be compared to the deciphering of a coded message when the code is unknown . 123 Synthese The perceptual judgment ( … ) is a representation ; it is propositional , hence true or false , certain or uncertain . It is according to Peirce , indubitable , incorrigible ; that is to say , it is involuntary , and so outside the scope of logical scrutiny or correction . But it is , for all of that , fallible ; it may mis represent the percept . ( Haack 1994 , pp . 17 – 18 ) Within Peirce’s view , since all signs are characterized in terms of the relations they bear to their objects and to their interpretants , misrepresentation is something that can ( and does ) occur when the relations between sign and object and sign and interpretant do not match with each other . To appreciate this in the case of scientiﬁc models , let us consider one of the examples that Shech discusses : the representation of phase transitions . As he ( 2015 , p . 3478 ) observes , phasetransitionsmaybeeitherrepresentedbydiscontinuities or by sharp but continuous enough changes and , as he also points out , although ‘both representational structures are in ( in principle ) representationally adequate ( … ) given a background of scientiﬁc facts and theories—in this case , the atomic theory of matter— we say that one representational structure is a misrepresentation while another is not . ’ If we adopt my proposal , we may explain this difference as follows : although both representational structures are empirically adequate since their corresponding signs generate in the minds of the scientists who use them the same interpretant ( i . e . , they allow the same grasp of the phenomena studied ) , one of them is a misrepresentation because the signs that correspond to the two representational structures stand for different objects , one of which does not exist . In virtue of this , my proposal allows us to offer an account of how misrepresentation can ( and does ) occur when using scientiﬁc models . Let me turn now to the last element that , according to Shech , a good account of scientiﬁc representation should explain : how faithful representations can act as ontological guides ( i . e . , tell us what the world is like ) . As Shech points out , there are models that misrepresent the world 29 but are very useful in terms of allowing inferences that enable us to offer satisfactory explanations of phenomena or to make successful predictions whereas other models may be faithful to their target systems but they are mathematically intractable . Now , in order to accommodate these cases , Shech maintains the following : ( … ) a tenable theory of scientiﬁc representation needs a conceptual and ter - minological framework that allows us to differentiate between those aspects of a vehicle that that we think tell us what the target is like—the ontolog - ical sense of scientiﬁc representation—and those aspects that solely license sound inferences—the epistemological sense of scientiﬁc representation ( 2015 , p . 3480 ) In response to this demand , I contend that my proposal here provides us with a frame - work that enables us to distinguish the aspects that Shech mentions . Indeed , if we conceive scientiﬁc models as signs that can function in some circumstances as icons , 29 It is important to make a clariﬁcation here : in a sense , all models misrepresent their targets since they are all built using both abstraction and idealization , which involve willful and explicit distortions or omissions . However , this does not prevent us from judging some models as more ontologically faithful than others since , as Shech ( 2015 , p . 3480 ) observes , ‘faithfulness and accuracy are matters of degree’ . 123 Synthese in others as indexes and , ﬁnally , in others as symbols ( depending on the goals of the agents that use them and the context where they are used ) , we have the resources to differentiate the ontological and epistemological aspects of models qua representa - tional vehicles . Insofar as indexes represent their objects through a causal relation , I contend that the aspects of a scientiﬁc model that we think tell us what the world is like are those that function primarily as indexes vis - à - vis the objects they stand for . This claim is supported by the observation that , when we use models to tell what we think the world is like ( as engineers do when they use the San Francisco Bay model ) , the models that we use almost invariably require calibration , as Weisberg ( 2013 , pp . 96 – 97 ) remarks . Now , since calibration is a process dependent on causal relations that is intended to establish a relation between the values of a certain real quantity ( e . g . , temperature ) and certain indications of an instrument ( e . g . , a thermometer ) , one can argue that models only tell us what we think the world is like ( which is the ontological aspect of scientiﬁc representation ) if they are calibrated . And , since a model’s being calibrated involves having compared the measurement values that it delivers to those provided by a certain known standard to minimize measurement uncertainty , using a calibrated model to tell us what we think the world is like involves viewing it as an index that ‘points towards’ some aspects of the world , just as a calibrated thermometer ‘points towards’ a feature ( i . e . , temperature ) of a system . In addition , insofar as icons represent their objects through a kind of similarity whereas symbols represent their objects through a certain convention , I maintain that the aspects of a model that solely license sound inferences are those that function pri - marily as icons or as symbols . This contention is supported by two facts . First , there is a growing amount of psychological evidence showing that inferential processes ( and , to be more speciﬁc , inductive inferential processes ) are primarily acquired by infants on the basis of similarity ( e . g . , Shepard 1987 ; Sloutsky 2003 ; Weber and Osherson 2010 ) . Second , there is also substantial psychological evidence showing that , as infants grow up , names progressively become markers of a common category , thus allowing individuals to make certain inductive inferences on the basis of them while ignoring similarities ( e . g . , Sloutsky 2001 ; Keates and Graham 2007 ; Deng and Sloutsky 2013 ) . In virtue of this evidence that suggests that our ability to make inferences depends cru - cially on similarity and on the existence of linguistic labels , one can then argue that , if we want to use a model solely to make certain inferences ( which is the epistemological aspect of scientiﬁc representation ) , then we have to consider the model in question primarily as an icon or as a symbol . Thus , to sum up , we can satisfy Shech’s demand for a framework that enables us to separate the ontological and epistemological aspects of scientiﬁc representation using Peirce’s theory of signs . Indeed , within this frame - work , we can maintain that , when scientiﬁc models represent , the ontological role of scientiﬁc representation is done through the underscoring of indexical elements while the epistemological role is done through the underscoring of both iconic and symbolic elements . 123 Synthese 5 Conclusion I have argued here that , if we consider scientiﬁc models to be signs that possess iconic , indexical and symbolic functions within the framework of Peirce’s theory of signs , we can reconcile the positions of advocates of RR and of RF . I have also argued that adopting this framework is attractive since it provides the basis to develop an account of scientiﬁc representation that fulﬁlls all the main desiderata that , according to Shech , a good account should fulﬁll . 30 If what I have argued for here is correct , a couple of interesting lines of inquiry emerge : ( 1 ) can Peirce’s theory of signs help us to offer accounts of other functions ( e . g . , explanation , prediction , veriﬁcation ) that models have ? ( 2 ) If so , is it possible to develop , within the framework provided by Peirce’s theory of signs , a comprehensive account of all the functions that models have ? I intend to pursue these issues in future work . Acknowledgements A previous version of this paper was presented at the 2016 meeting of the Canadian Society for the History and Philosophy of Science held at the University of Calgary . I am very grateful for generouscommentsandfeedbackprovidedonthatoccasion bytheaudience , especially byCarlosMariscal , Adrian Currie and Elay Shech . I am also thankful to some Peircean scholars who generously provided a sounding board for the ideas in this paper in its earliest stages : Paniel Reyes Cárdenas , Douglas Niño , Shannon Dea and , especially , Catherine Legg . Three anonymous reviewers for Synthese also offered at various stages extremely valuable suggestions that contributed greatly to better the manuscript . Last , but notleast , IwanttothankmycolleagueBrianHutchinsonforreadingcarefullythemanuscriptandsuggesting many stylistic and substantial changes that helped to improve it . References Andrade , J . ( 2010 ) . What does doodling do ? Applied Cognitive Psychology , 24 ( 1 ) , 100 – 106 . Atkin , A . ( 2013 ) . Peirce’s theory of signs . In E . N . Zalta ( Ed . ) , The Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy ( Summer 2013 Edition ) . https : / / plato . stanford . edu / archives / sum2013 / entries / peirce - semiotics / . Barberousse , A . , & Ludwig , P . ( 2009 ) . Models as ﬁctions . In M . Suárez ( Ed . ) , Fictions in science . Philo - sophical essays on modeling and idealization ( pp . 56 – 73 ) . New York : Routledge . Black , M . ( 1962 ) . Modelsandmetaphors . Studiesinlanguageandphilosophy . NewYork : CornellUniversity Press . Budd , M . ( 1993 ) . How pictures look . In D . Knowles & J . Skorupski ( Eds . ) , Virtue and taste ( pp . 154 – 175 ) . Oxford : Blackwell . Callender , C . , & Cohen , J . ( 2006 ) . There is no special problem about scientiﬁc representation . Theoria , 55 , 67 – 85 . Contessa , G . ( 2007 ) . Scientiﬁc representation , interpretation and surrogative reasoning . Philosophy of Sci - ence , 74 , 48 – 68 . 30 A reviewer has pointed out that , though the Peircean framework that I articulated here is interesting , I have not done enough to show that Peirce’s conception of signs is strong enough to carry the epistemic roles that scientiﬁc models must fulﬁll in the practice of science—roles which include , not only representation , but also learning and testing hypotheses ( e . g . , Downes 2011 ) . Undertaking this project is beyond this paper . However , I think that the framework has the resources to develop an account of other epistemic roles that models have—in particular , of how scientists develop and choose models to learn . In the case of learning , the gist of the argument would be the following : granting that models are signs , we can in principle explain how they are used by scientists to learn by reﬂecting on how toddlers make doodles and combine them in different ways to learn and recall information , since doodling appears to promote learning according to psychological research . For more details on the connection between doodling and learning , see Andrade ( 2010 ) . 123 Synthese Da Costa , N . , & French , S . ( 2003 ) . Science and partial truth . A unitary approach to model and scientiﬁc reasoning . New York : Oxford University . Darwin , C . [ 1859 ] ( 2009 ) . On the origin of species ( annotated by James T . Costa ) . Harvard University Press : Cambridge , MA . Deng , W . , & Sloutsky , V . ( 2013 ) . The role of linguistic labels in inductive generalization . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 114 ( 3 ) , 432 – 455 . Downes , S . ( 2011 ) . Scientiﬁc models . Philosophy Compass , 6 ( 11 ) , 757 – 764 . French , S . ( 2003 ) . A model - theoretic account of representation ( or , I don’t know much about art . . . but I know it involves isomorphism ) . Philosophy of Science , 70 ( 5 ) , 1472 – 1483 . Frigg , R . ( 2002 ) . Models and representation : Why structures are not enough . CPNSS discussion paper series , DP MEAS 25 / 02 . Frigg , R . ( 2006 ) . Scientiﬁc representation and the semantic view of theories . Theoria , 55 , 49 – 65 . Frigg , R . ( 2010 ) . Fiction and scientiﬁc representation . In R . Frigg & M . C . Hunter ( Eds . ) , Beyond Mime - sis and convention . Boston studies in the philosophy of science ( Vol . 262 , pp . 97 – 138 ) . Dordrecht : Springer . Frigg , R . , & Nguyen , J . ( 2016 ) . The ﬁction view of models reloaded . The Monist , 99 ( 3 ) , 225 – 242 . Giere , R . ( 2004 ) . How models are used to represent reality . Philosophy of Science , 71 , S742 – S752 . Giere , R . ( 2010 ) . An agent - based conception of models and scientiﬁc representation . Synthese , 172 , 269 – 281 . Grice , P . ( 1957 ) . Meaning . Philosophical Review , 66 , 377 – 388 . Gyedimin , J . ( 1986 ) . Polish philosophy in the interwar period and Ludwik Fleck’s theory of thought - styles and thought - collective . In R . Cohen & T . Schnelle ( Eds . ) , Cognition and fact . Materials on Ludwik Fleck ( pp . 179 – 215 ) . Dordrecht : Springer . Haack , S . ( 1994 ) . How the critical common - sensist sees things . Histoire , Epistémologie , Langage , 16 ( 1 ) , 9 – 34 . Hesse , M . ( 1963 ) . Models and analogies in science . London : Sheed and Ward . Hongslo , E . ( 2012 ) . An ecology of difference : Fence - line contrast photographs as scientiﬁc models in ecology . Journal of Political Ecology , 22 , 339 – 356 . Iranzo , V . ( 2013 ) . Models and phenomena : Bas van Fraassen’s empiricist structuralism . In W . G . González ( Ed . ) , Bas van Fraassen’s approach to representation and models ( pp . 63 – 76 ) . Dordrecht : Springer . Jones , M . R . ( 2005 ) . Idealization and abstraction : A framework . In Martin R . Jones & Nancy Cartwright ( Eds . ) , Idealization XII : Correcting the model . Idealization and abstraction in the sciences ( pp . 173 – 217 ) . Amsterdam : Rodopi . Keates , J . , & Graham , S . ( 2007 ) . Category markers or attributes . Why do labels guide infants’ inductive inferences ? Psychological Science , 19 ( 12 ) , 1287 – 1293 . Kralemann , B . , & Lattman , C . ( 2013 ) . Models as icons : Modeling models in the semiotic framework of Peirce’s theory of signs . Synthese , 190 , 3397 – 3420 . Leonelli , S . ( 2008 ) . Performing abstraction : Two ways of modeling Arabidopsis thaliana . Biology and Philosophy , 23 , 509 – 528 . Liu , C . ( 2015 ) . Re - inﬂating the conception of scientiﬁc representation . International Studies in the Philos - ophy of Science , 29 ( 1 ) , 41 – 59 . Mahr , B . ( 2009 ) . Information science and the logic of models . Software and System Modeling , 8 , 365 – 383 . McMullin , E . ( 1985 ) . Galilean idealization . Studies in History and Philosophy of Science , 16 ( 3 ) , 247 – 273 . Morrison , M . ( 1999 ) . Models as autonomous agents . In M . Morgan & M . Morrison ( Eds . ) , Models as mediators . Perspectives on natural and social science ( pp . 38 – 65 ) . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Morrison , M . , & Morgan , M . ( 1999 ) . Modelsasmediatinginstruments . InM . Morgan & M . Morrison ( Eds . ) , Models as mediators ( pp . 10 – 37 ) . , Perspectives on natural and social science Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Peirce , C . S . ( 1965 – 1966 ) . Collected papers of Charles Sanders Peirce ( = CP ) , Vols . I – VIII ( Vols . I – VI edited by Charles Hartsthorne and Paul Weiss , Vols . VII – VII edited by Arthurs Burks ) . Cambridge , MA : Belknap Press . Peirce , C . S . ( 1976 ) . The new elements of mathematics ( = NEM ) , vols . I – IV ( edited by Carolyn Eisele ) . The Hague : Mouton Publishers . Peirce , C . S . ( 1982 – 2010 ) . Writings of Charles S . Peirce : A chronological edition ( = W ) , vols . 1 – 8 ( edited by the editors of the Peirce Edition Project ) . Indianapolis , IN : Indiana University Press . 123 Synthese Shech , E . ( 2015 ) . Scientiﬁc misrepresentation and guides to ontology : The need for representational code and content . Synthese , 192 , 3463 – 3485 . Shepard , R . ( 1987 ) . Towardauniversallawofgeneralizationforpsychologicalscience . Science , 237 ( 4820 ) , 1317 – 1323 . Sloutsky , V . ( 2003 ) . Theroleofsimilarityinthedevelopmentofcategorization . TrendsinCognitiveScience , 7 ( 6 ) , 246 – 251 . Sloutsky , V . M . , Lo , Y . F . , & Fisher , A . V . ( 2001 ) . How much does a shared name make things similar ? Linguistic labels , similarity and the development of inductive inference . Child Development , 72 ( 6 ) , 1695 – 1709 . Suárez , M . ( 1999 ) . Theories , models and representations . In L . Magnani , N . Nersessian , & P . Thagard ( Eds . ) , Model - based reasoning in scientiﬁc discovery ( pp . 75 – 83 ) . New York , NY : Kluwer Academic . Suárez , M . ( 2003 ) . Scientiﬁc representation : against similarity and isomorphism . International Studies in Philosophy of Science , 17 ( 3 ) , 225 – 244 . Suárez , M . ( 2004 ) . An inferential conception of scientiﬁc representation . Philosophy of Science , 71 , 767 – 779 . Teller , P . ( 2009 ) . Fictions , ﬁctionalization and truth in science . In M . Suárez ( Ed . ) , Fictions in science . Philosophical essays on modeling and idealization ( pp . 235 – 247 ) . New York : Routledge . Toon , A . ( 2010 ) . Modelsasmake - believe . InR . Frigg & M . C . Hunter ( Eds . ) , BeyondMimesisandconvention ( pp . 71 – 96 ) . , Boston studies in the philosophy of science Dordrecht : Springer . Toon , A . ( 2012 ) . Models as make - believe : Imagination , ﬁction and scientiﬁc representation . New York , NY : Palgrave Macmillan . Van Fraassen , B . ( 1980 ) . The scientiﬁc image . New York : Oxford University Press . Weber , M . , & Osherson , D . ( 2010 ) . Similarity and induction . Review of Philosophy and Psychology , 1 ( 2 ) , 245 – 264 . Weisberg , M . ( 2013 ) . Simulation and similarity : Using models to understand the world . New York : Oxford University Press . 123