ELS EVI E R Knowledge - Based Systems 13 ( 2000 ) 505 - 513 Knowledge - Based ql . tqTEvtq - - www . elsevier . com / iocate / knosvs Towards understanding and supporting creativity in design : analogies in a constrained cosnitive environment * N . Bonnardel * Research Center in Psychology of Cognition . Innguage and Emotion ( PstCLE ) , Université de Provence , 29 , avenue Robert Schuman , 13621 Ak en Provence , Abstract In order to show that the emergence of new ideas takes place in a " constrained cognitive environment " , we conducted two experimental shrdies in a creaiive professional area : non - routine design . The first study is focused on the role of analogical reasoning in creativity and . especially , on the nature of potential " sources " of inspiration . which facilitate the evocation process . The second study aims at understanding on which ground designers of different leveis of expenise construct their own constrained cognitive environment . Based on the obrained results , we suggest ways to facilitate creative acts from desigaers . @ 2000 Elsevier Science B . V . All rights reserved . Keywords : Creativity ; Design ; Analogy ; Constraints 1 . Creativity : questions and views Creativity can occur in a variery of situations , going from artistic situations ( e . g . painting or music composing ) to situations of technological innovation . However , creativity is both diffrcult to defrne and to explain . According to the dictionary , creativity refers to ' 1he ability to produce new and original ideas and things " , and creation has been defined as " to bring into being or form out of nothing " ( dictionary definition quoted in Ref . [ 2 ] ) . Contrary to this last definition , we argue that one of the mechanisms that contributes to the emergence of new ideas is analogy - making . It implies that new ideas would be in fact inspired , at least partially , by previous situations , which can belong or not to t } e same area than the current situation of creation . This ciaim is in accordance to certain authors ' descriptions of creativity , such as the ones by Koestler [ 20 ] or Boden [ 2 ] . Thus , Koestler 120 , p . l2ll explains creativity by " the sudden interlocking of two previously unrelated skiils , or matrices of thought " . However , several important questions remain to be answered to understand the use of analosies in creative * Tel ; + 334 - 42 - 95 - 3 ' 7 40 . E - ma il addre s s : nathb @ newsup . univ - mrs . fr ( N . Bonnardel ) . Ê Derived from ' Creativity in design activities : The roie of anaiogies in a constrained cognitive envirouDent ' , pubiished in the hoceedi . ngs of the Third Conference on Creativity and Cognition , Loughborough . LIK , Octo - ber 10 - 13 , 1999 , pp . 158 - 165 . Reproduced with permission from ACM O 1999 . 0950 - 7051 / 00 / $ - see front matter @ 2000 Elsevier Science B . V . Ali rishts reserved . PII : S0950 - 705 l ( 00 ) 00067 - 8 activities better . e What is the nature of the situations ( or " matrices of thought " ) that can be used as sources of inspiration ? e What makes someone thinking of an analogy anùor seeing an analogy where no one saw one before ? Conceming this last issue , Koestler [ 20 , p . 201 ] , points out the fact that analogies used in creative acts were not " hidden " anywhere but " created " by the imagination , and that such analogies could be considered as the result of a relation established in the mind through a process of seiec - tive emphasis . However we stiii have to defrne how such a selective emphasis can occur . Vy ' e argue that the seiective emphasis described by Koes - tier results from the construction by the creators themseives of a " constrained cognitive environment " . This claim contrasts to views of creativity as an " expression of free - dom " . It is . however . in accordance with certain views that acknowledge the intervention of constraints in creativity ( see , for instance , Ref . [ 2 ] ) , but we wish to go further by identifying on which basis the designers construct their own cognitive environment . Such a constrained cognitive environment could evolve during the creative activity and would comprise constraints of different types . Some of these constraints can result from unconscious processes and remain unconscious , showing themselves through apparently intuitive acts . However , other constraints - Îhe ones we wish to analyze - are the obiect of a more conscious treatment . In order to define N . Bonnardel / Knowledpe - Based Svstems l3 ( 2000 ) 505 - 513 them , the creators can take into account data from both the external context of the creative situation ( e . g . for instance , certain constraints , such as a deadline specified b1 ' other stakehoiders ) and from their own internal context , e . g . the activation of certain knowledge . Therefore , a part ofthe data used by creators to construct their own constrained cogni - tive environment would be dependent on situations of crea - tion encountered previously . Towards the end of contributing to answer the above questions and . therefore , to know more about : ( 1 ) the role of analogies in the emergence of new ideas ; and ( 2 ) the construction by creators themselves of their own constrained cognitive environment , we are going to analyze real - world activities in which professionals have to be crea - tive , to some extent : design activiries . Therefore , we first characterize this domain of study and we will show , based on the description of a reai event of discovery of a new solution , how anaiogical reasoning can be a source of crea - tivity . Then , we will present resuits of two experimentai studies conducted with desieners in order to determrne : 1 . The nature of sowces that can facilitate the evocation of creative analogies . 2 . The parameters on which designers of different levels of expertise can focus in order to construct their own constrained cognitive environment . 2 . Design activities In Cognitive Psychology , design activities are described as specific probiem - solving situations , as design probiems are both iII defined and open - ended . Design problems are considered i1l defined because designers have , initialiy , only an incomplete and imprecise mental representation of the design goals [ 11 , 28 ] . The designers ' mental representation evolves as the problem - solving progresses . This specificity ofdesign problems has been described as based on an itera - tive dialectic between problem - framing and problem - solving 127 , 291 . To summarize this process , during problem - framing , designers refine design goals and specifi - cations and , thus , refine their mental representation of the problem . During problem - solving . designers elaborate solu - tions and evaluate these solutions with respect to various criteria and constraints [ 3 , 5 ] . Thus . each designer constructs her or his own representation of the design probiem and deais in fact with a problem that has become specific to her or him . Indeed , different designers dealing with a same problem . develop different ideas and reach different solutions , materialized , for instance , by drawings or plans [ 1 ] . Therefore , design problems are also considered to be open - ended as there is usually no single correct solution for a given problem , but instead a variety of potential soiutions [ 1s ] . In such design activities , and especially in " non - routine " activities . designers have to create an innovative product as well to satisfy certain specifications . Although certain designers wish to keep their activities in some way " myster - ious " . we argue that their creativity can be , at least partially ' , explained by analogical reasoning , in accordance to certain research works - though not directly related to design - such as the ones of Boden [ 2 ] , Hofstadter [ 17 ] or Kolodner [ 21 ] . Schematically , in order to solve the problem at hand ( or " target " problem ) , the designer would refer to a simiiar probiem or situation . for which a solution aiready exists ( " source " solution ) and she / he would transfer certain features of this solution to develop the solution ( " target " soiution ) for the probiem at hand . In favor of this idea , we can describe examples of creative acts we observed in an area of high technoiogy : the design of aerospace products [ 4 ] . During long term observations conducted in this area , we noticed that , when designers had to deal with new probiems which required an innovative concept ( or soiution ) , these designers could be inspired b1 ' familiar objects , which did not belong to their professional domain . For example , to develop an innovative solution for a reflector , which had to be spread out in orbit ( and which was fundamentally different from the usual reflectors ) . one of the designers in charge of this project took into account the principle for drawing the curtains that were settled in front of his office . The anaiysis of the observed functioning allowed him to invent a mechanism for drawing , on earth . the reflective surface of the reflector without risks of tangling in the underlying metaliic struclure , and for , later , easily spreading it out in orbit . Such observations can be found both in design domains ( see also Refs . [ 9 , 3 1 ] ) and in other domains of innovations ( see , for example , the invention of the computer by Charies Babbage [ 18 ] ) , but we consider that design activities consti - tute a particularly interesting domain of study as creativity is intended to be a part of designers ' activities ( and despite the fact that , obviously , we miss certain events that can contri - bute to the creative acts . when they occur outside the profes - sional area ) . 3 . Analogies and emergence of new ideas In order to reach a better understanding of the role of analogies in the emergence of new ideas , we are going to present results of a first study [ 7 ] , which allowed us to control the sources designers could take into account for an analogical reasoning as well as to analyze the impact of different types of potential sources on the evocation process deveioped by designers . 3 . 1 . Description of the experimental situation This study was conducted with 10 voiunteer students in Applied Art ( in a technical school of Marseille . France ; . These students had acquired knowledge and skills in design N . Bonnardel / Knowledge - Based Systems 13 ( 2000 ) 505 - 513 The object to be designed was intended to be used in a Parisian ' ' cyber - café " . It should be a partrcular stool with a contemporary design in order to be attractive for young customers . Such stools should allow the user to have a good sitting position , holding the back upnghl . Towards this end , the users should put their knees on a support intended to this function . In additron , these stools should allow ùe users to rela4 by offering them the possibility to rock . Fig . 1 . Brief descriptron of the object to design . and were realiy involved in reai design projects . therefore , we will refer to them as " designers " . We asked them to design a new product , defined in colla - boration with their professor of Applied Arq in order to be sure that the design problem will be rea1l1 ' new for the sfudents and to present it in the same way than the design problems they were used to deal with . Therefore , the designers were provided with a schedule of conditions consisting , first , in a scenario describing both the object to design and its use ( see Fig . 1 ) and , secondiy , in a reminder of the main requirements to satisfy . Such a description leads to the evocation of objects we already know . In particular , the designers can evoke known objects or " sources " , in order to understand the object to be designed better together with the transfer of certain proper - ties of the sources to the problem at hand ( " target " ) . In order to identify the sources evoked by the designers who parucipated in this study , we asked them to think aloud . Though limits of this method have been pointed out ( see , for instance , Ref . [ 12 ] ) , it allows the access to , at least , a part of the designers ' thoughts and it is , therefore , frequently used in studies about design activities as well as in certain studies about analogical reasoning ( see , for instance , Ref . [ 16 ] ) . The designers ' verbaiizations as weli as their graphical activities were video recorded . Then , the verbalizations were tran - scribed and matched with the drawings made by the designers . In order to avoid too much subjectivity during the analysis , two " judges " analyzed the data separately , which allowed us to discuss possible points of disagreement in the interpretations . We observed that we reached a good degree of agreement ( no point of disagreement appeared ) . The experiment was 50 min long , which is a realistic duration to realize a rough draft of the ordered object . More precisely , it consisted of two phases of 25 min each . 1 . During the first 25 min , the designers were assigned to one out of two experimental conditions ( five designers in each condition ) : o a free condition , in which the designers could freely solve the problem and spontaneousiy evoke known l ' able i Charactenstics of the potential sources proposed to the designers Sources Intradomail objects ( " spontaneous sources " ) they couid refer to ; o a guided condition , in which we provided the designers with names of objects that could play the role of " suggested sources " . Two of these potential sources for an analogicai reasoning were considered intradomain . as they were belonging to the categoq / of " seats " . Two other potentiai sources were consid - ered interdomain , as they referred to objects very different from seats . In addition , one intradomain object and one interdomarn object had been studied by the designers during their Art Appiied class , whereas the two other objects had never been studied ( see Table 1 ) . Each of the names of objects were written on folders and delivered to the designers in a random order . In this first phase of the experiment , we chose to provide the designers with only names of objects and not graphical representations of specific objects ( or " instances " ) . These names refer to Çate - gories of objects and may lead the designers to infer what general principle or feature ( s ) can be extracted from this ciass of objects as relevant for the object to design . For instance , the designers may reflect on what could be relevant on a canoe - kayak or on a logotype for designing the specific stool described in the schedule of conditions . 2 . During the following 25 min , the designers of the fwo groups were in a similar siruadon : they had both names and a graphical representation of . each type of potential soruce , i . e . an " instance " of each category defined by the names . Contrary to the sources ' names , the graphical repre - sentations may facilitate more the identification of precise featues that designers can transfer to the object to design . Designen who beionged to the " guided " group could directly open the folders they had been provided with , to find out the specific graphical representations . During this second phase , designers who belonged to the " rree gr . . - l were provided with both the names and the graphical repre - sentations . 3 . 2 . Findings about the evocation process Two findings , related to the evocation process developed by designers , seem particulariy interesting . r The designers who belonged to the guided group evoked , Inærdomain Studied Never studied " Nomadic " stool Rocking chair Logotype Canoe - kayak N . Bonnardel / Knowledse - Based Swtems l3 ( 2000 ) 505 - 513 Intradomarn lnterodomain Table 2 Nature of the evoked sources according to the experimental conditions Nature of evoked sources Experimenta ^ l condition Free condition Guided condition 1 . The effect of " design fixation " may be dependent on the designers ' level of expertise : such an effect might become higher as the designers acquire expertise . Experi - enced designers , such as the professionais who participated in the study of Jansson and Smith [ 19 ] could be more influ - enced by the suggestion of objects specifically related to rhe object they have to design ( i . e . objects that directly belong to a same category ) . On the contrary , iess experienced designers , such as the students who participated in our study , could be more influenced by objects that are familiar to them , even if these objects are not a priori directly related to the object to design . Other results and , especially , the ones of the study of Purcell and Gero 126l are also in favor of this interpretation . Such an interpretation seems to ût particuiariy design problem - soiving : these problems being open - ended , they allow the designers to refer to various sources of inspiration . Therefore , iess experienced designers or novices have the opportunity to evoke sources that are familiar to them though not directly linked to the object to design . 2 . The effect we observed can also be explained with regard to the nature of the sources we suggested to the designers of the guided group , during the trst phase . These sources were presented as names of objects , related by different ways to the object to design . Such names reflect categories of objects and may lead the designers to think of general principles or features that could be transfened to the object to design . Therefore , contrary to what could have happened in the study realized by Jansson and Smith [ 19 ] , our designers did not focus on specific features of instances . Indeed . the sources we suggested led ttrem to extend their space of research . Moreover , as two of the suggested sources werc interdo - main , such potential sources may have facilitated the evoca - tion of other interdomain sources . For instance , the suggestion of a canoe - kayak as a potential source shows the designers that objects , which seem , a priori , very far from the object to design , can inspire them . Thus , the main part of the sources spontaneously evoked by the designers who beionged to the guided group consisted in interdomain sources ; whereas the designers who belonged to the free group mainly evoked intradomain sources . These two characteristics ( names of objects and interdo - main sources ) of some of the sources we suggested to the designers ofthe guided group have led them to be iess focused on surface characteristics of the object they have to design and more focused on deep principles ( e . g . iinked to the functioning of objects ) . Therefore , they have been able to take into consid - eration various domains and to look for functioning principles common they could transfer to the new object . 4 . Construction of a constrained cognitive environment Our hypothesis is that , in order to constrrct their own constrained cognitive environment , designers are going 61 T4 19 in mean significantiy more " spontaneous sources " than the designers ofthe free group : respectively , a total of33 sources vs . 7 , which corresponds in mean to 6 . 6 sources by designer vs . 1 . 4 ( p < . 05 ) . This effect appeared in the two phases of the experiment but was higher in the fust phase . o During the first phase , 26 sources were evoked in the guided condition vs . only 6 in the free condition . o During the second phase , 7 sources were evoked in the guided condition vs . 1 in the free condition . r This result can be explained with regard to another one : the designers who belonged to the guided group evoked , in mean . significanti ; , more interdomain sources than the designers of the free group : respectively , 3 . 8 interdomain sources by designer vs . 0 . 2 ( p < . 05 ) . Therefore , wholiy the sources evoked by the designers of the free group were intradomain contrary to what we observed for the designers of the guided group ( see Table 2 ) . 3 . 3 . Discussion As we just pointed out , the designers who beionged to the guided group evoked , especialiy during the first phase , a lot more sources than the designers of the free goup . Such a result shows a " snowball " effect of the potential sources we suggested to the designers of the guided group : we oniy suggested them four names of sources , whereas they evoked 26 " spontaneous sources " during the fust phase of the experiment . Therefore , it seems that the presentation of names of objects , which refer to categories of these objects , has a facilitating effect on the designers ' evocation process . Such an effect differs from previous f , ndings both about the general human cognitive functioning and about , more specifically , the designers ' cognitive functioning . Indeed , a " design fixation " effect ( Ref . [ 19 ] , quoted in Ref . 126l ) , similar to a certain extent to phenomenons of " functional ûxedness " and " mechanisation of thought " ( see Refs . J4 , 22 , 32 ) ) , had been previously observed : individuals , in general , and designers , in particular , , tend to reproduce feafures of the examples they were provided with . Thus , Jansson and Smith [ 19 ] showed that designers ( and . espe - cialiy , professional designers ) tend to reproduce numerous features of objects ' graphical representations they saw before , comprising features irrelevant to the task at hand . The effect we observed is opposite to such previous findings and can be explained with regard to two types of interprera - tions . N . Bonnardel / Knowledge - Based Systems l3 ( 2000 ) 505 - SI3 A manufacturer wishes to renew the image of torches . Towards this end , helshe asks you to think of a new concept oftorch use , based on a new gesture , due especially to the removal ofthe traditional switch . in order to reach a renewal of the image of torches , you do not have only io process to a styling treatment but also to rethink the concept of light appearance and disappearance . Fig . 2 . Limited description of rhe object to be designed 509 both to look for data in ûte external context and to activate specific elements of their internal context ( i . e . for instance . certain knowledge eiements ) . The internal context depends on several factors , such as the state ofproblem - solving and the designers ' level of experrise . Since we wish to analyze the role of these two types of contexts , we are golng to present certain results from another experiment [ 6 ] settled in order to reach a double objective , namely : o to identify the data designers take into account in the external context ; . to determine how the designers ' level of expertise influ - ences the taking into account of data from the extemal context . ' We assume that designers select among all the information eiements existing in the external context , the elements they consider to be important to design a new product . Such elements are going to underiie the definition of , , prescribed " constraints . Moreover . in order to construct their own " constrained cognitive environment " , the designers will add to the prescribed constraints , at ieast , two other tvpes of constraints [ 3 . 5 ] : . " constructed constraints " , when they derive from exper _ tise acquired in a speciûc domain ; r " deduced constraints " , when they result from an anaiysis by the designer of the implications of the current state of problem - solving or from an analysis of the implications of already defined constraints ( through a process of constraint propagation ) . Such constraints orient the designers ' focus ofattention and therefore iead them to think of already existing objects , those functioning may satisfy the constraints taken into account . Therefore , the analogical reasoning we described in the first study would be based on the focalisation of the designer on certain constraints . Table 3 The effect of the designers ' level of expenise on the number of information elements asked and used Designers ' level of expertise Inforrnation elements Used 4 . 1 . Description of the experimental situation Six volunteer designers participated in the experiment : . two professional designers , having two and six years of expertise in an offrce of Design ; e four students in Appiied Art , in their second year ( out of a three years degree course ) of specialized training in a technical school . In order to identiff the data or patameters on which they focused , we used the experimental paradigm of , , informa - tion on request " : the designers were provided with a descriprion of the design problem as limited as possible ( see Fig . 2 ) and they had to ask quesrions to the experimen - ter in order to be provided with the information elements . Usuaily , the selection of information elements in the exter - nal environment remains implicit , as the designers are provided with a reiativeiy specified schedule of conditions . In our experiment , such a seiection became more expiicit because the designers had to formulate questions about the features they were looking for . In order to give to the designers exactly the same infor - mation elements , when they inquired , the experimenter referred to a table that provided her with a precise descrip - tion of the different possible ansrvers . If one of the designers ' questions appeared to go beyond the planned answers , the experimenter answered ' , we don ' t know ( yet ) this information eiement " . In addition , when the designers requested technical information elements , they could access to descriptive documents , and a traditional torch was at their disposal for possibie manipulations . Each designer had a 2 h time to deal with the proposed problem . In order to determine how the designers used the gathered information elements , we also asked them to " think aloud " . As it was the case in the previous experiment , we video - recorded the designers activities , we transcribed their verba - lizations and matched them with their graphical produc - tions . In order to avoid too much subjectivity , the dara analysis was again conducted by the two judges , who reached a good degree of agreement . 4 . 2 . Findings about the data taken into account We conducted a quantitative and qualitative anaiysis of both the information elements the designers requested and the information elements they really referred to during the design problem - soiving . Professionals students 10 . 5 5 lô . 5 tl . 25 510 N . Bonnardel / KnowLedge - Based S , - stems l3 ( 2000 ) 505 - 513 4 . 2 . l . Quantitative results The quantitative results we obtained ( see Table 3 ) show that : o the professional designers asked , in mean , twice more information eiements than the students ( respectively , 10 . 5 vs . 5 ) ; o the same tendency occurs during the problem - solving itseli since professional designers referred , in mean , to more information elements than students ( respectively , 16 . 5 vs . 11 . 25 ) . In addition , the comparison of these two types of results shows another finding : both the professional designers and the students added new information elements to the ones they were provided with . Such new information elements were therefore assumed by the designers , and they could underiie the definition of new constraints , prob - ably specific to each designer . 4 . 2 . 2 . Qualitative results In order to know more about the information elements professional designers and students dealt with , we analyzed qualitatively the information elements they inquired and / or referred to . It aliowed us to define rtve tupics of interest , which are each composed of different information elements . 1 . Information elements about the company from which the demand is originated . 2 . Information elements about preexisting similar products . 3 . Information elements about the users and the conditions of use of the future product ( target , age of the target ; planned use ; conditons of storage ; etc . ) . 4 . Possible technical features ( source of energy , such as battery ; type of bulb ; materials ; etc . ) . 5 . Marketing information eiements ( name of the product ; marketing places ; production amount ; price ; range of products ) . Certain topics appeared to be of interest for all the designers , whatever their level of expertise . Thus , three types of information elements were taken into account by all the designers and deepiy anaiyzed . c Preexisting similar products . heexisting products were taken into account by all the designers in order to perform an analysis of the advantages and inconveniences of certain of the products ' features . Preexisting products constitute in fact " intradomain " sources of inspiration : the designers assessed certain of the products ' features and transferred those they considered as interesting for designing the new product . Designers could aiso rethink and improve features that they considered as presenting drawbacks . Therefore , the designers should be able to reach a new product , more efficient than the ones already existing . Such an analysis ofpreexisting products consti - tutes an important and necessary stage in the designers ' activities and , consequently , it is taught to students in Applied Art . Therefore , we observed it from both profes - sional designers and students . Conditions of use of the future product . Such a topic was broached by the designers after having defined who will be the user of the future product ( i . e . the target ) . The analysis of the conditions of use of the future product allowed the designers to define new constraints . such as " to let the user free of moving as she / he wishes " or " to aiiow him or her to hang the torch on the car " ) . On such bases , the designers then looked for specific features for the new product . Sources of energy . Such a technical feature constitutes an essential component for the new product to design . It is a determinant of its functioning and it appeared to have consequences on other feafures , such as the shape of the new product ( for instance , " the use of cylindrical batteries involves a cylindrical shape " ) . Other topics were specifically taken into account either by professional designers or by students . The two foliowing topics were broached only by profes - sional designers : o Information elements about the company from which the demanl is originated . Contrary to students , both profes - sionai designers took into account information eiements related to this topic . Especially , they asked questions about the considered sector of activity and the company ' s production network ( manufacturer or subcontractor ) . Students may have considered such information elements having no consequence on the design ofthe new product . However , professional designers adopted a different view , since they used such information elements to assess feafures they envisaged for the new product ( e . g . " this feature goes beyond competencies of Mazda " - the company which is intended to have expressed the demand ) and it also allowed a professional designer to define possible means of manufacruring ( " since it is Mazda , they will be able to offer themselves molds , espe - cially for an industrial quantity " ) . t Marketing information elements . Information elements about the production amount and the marketing places were only taken into account by professional designers , for instance , in order to know the extent of the company ' s sectors of activities and its categories of customers ( e . g . diffusion to professional vs . to consumer public ) , It also appeared that only one information eiement was taken into account specifically by students . It consists in a technicalfeature ofthe new product , related to the beam of the torch ( large vs . precise beam ) . This seems representative of the approach students adopted : they analyzed in details the new object to design and were more focused on speciûc features than professionai designers . N . Bannardel / Knowledge - Based Systems l3 e000 ) 505 _ 5l3 4 . 3 . Discussion The results we obtained tend to show that the designers , ievel ofexpertise ied to the adoption ofdifferent approaches for dealing with rhe problem ai hand : e Students appear to be specifically centered on the new product to design . Indeed , they took into account infor _ mation elements about the users and the conditions of use of the future product as weil as about technicar features reiated to this object . Moreover , they seem to remain fgcysed on specifrc features , which can constitute soluces of difficulties for them ( such as the beam of the torch ) . r Professional designers appear to adopt a more general approach than students , which aliow them to take into account information elements related to other aspects than their . . local " stage of design ( e . g . information elements reiated to the charact " riJtics ' oi , h " " ornpuny or to the marketing ) . The taking into account of information elements and constralnts related to other stages than the one of design itseif . shows that , though nu * " Àu , aesign st " ps occur indi _ vidually , they are in fact integrated in a " coll , aborative part _ nership among , for instance , the designer , the customer and / or the user of the new product , the minufacturer , etc . There - fore , we observed that professionat Oesigiers are able to adopt points of views of other stakeholiers , rnvolved in the design process at a more general level ; whereas , it does not seem to be the case of - students , af teast , Au . ing the early stages of design problem _ sotving . However , the adoption of different viewpoinls by a desiiner rn the early stages ofproblem - soiving can be essential in order to avoid decisions that wiil appear , later , either irnporrlUf " or diffi _ cult to apply , due ro incompatibilities witiriire objectives of other . stakehoiders ( e . g . incompatibilities between planned technical features and the manufacturer , s means ) , More _ over . as poinred by Fischer . [ 13 ] , having different viewpoints can allow the designer to discover aitÀatives , to develop a reflection based on a more enriched and meaningful perspective and , therefore , to enhance the quality of the designed artifact . 5 . Towards supporting creativity The different results obtained in the two studies we presented allow us to identify possible weaknesses of designers and , on this basis , to suggest . r * arn ways to support them in tàeir creative activitie - s . 5 . 1 . Supporting the emergence of new ideas Resuits of the first study we presented can be used in order to suggest , ar ieast , three ways , o , upfoa designers in their creative activities ( as well ; , p " rri ; ly , - other fypes of creators ) : r It seems important to propose to users of knowiedge - based systems not only , , . àr . r , , or examples of alreadv designed objecrs ( as it is the case , for instairce , ; À ; ; < tr ; sysrem , which supports architectural design t24l ) , but also more general categories of objects , which could lead . less specifically , the designers iowaros new direc _ ttons , to which they would not think of spontaneously , r Stiil in order to open up the space of research of preex - isting objects that Çan facilitate the understanding and the solving of design problems , it seems useful to , , igg . rt to users of support _ syste ms interdomain sourc es oJ . inspira - tion related , to a certain extent . to the problem at hand . This would imply to charactenze both features of the object to design and fearures of the objecrs stored in the system ' s knowledge _ base . Such a ciaracterization should be based not only on the objects , surface charac _ teristics but also on their structuraL characteristics ( such as functioning principles ) , in order to alrow ilnovative ' pattern - matching between the object to design ( target ) and various preexisting objects ( sources ) _ including objects a priori far from the àne to be designed . . I 9 . d way to open up the space of research and to facilitate the creation of new analogies could be also to provide designers with images of oùjects that apparentlv are not related to . the object to design ifo . instunce , rmages of randomized objects originated from various areas ) . Though these objects are a priori completely inde _ pendent of the object to design , àesigners could . invent relationships arnong these objects arid , therefore , . . see analogies where no one saw them , , ( see Ref , [ 25 ] for an example of such a process of invention of analogical relationships in order to design a specific object , such as a chair ) . 5 . 2 . Suppot - ting the taking into account of various viewpoints The results obtained in the second study we presented showed that students seem to have more âifficulties than professiolal designers to adopt , ar least during the eariy stages of design , a general approach combining different points of view . , Certain support - systems could , therefore , be useful to designers that are novice in a specific * " " , ' Ou , also to " Iq " ri : l : " d designers . It could be the " ase of sysrems with a " blackboard " architecture , such as tir " îOSS system f23J , which supports ûre design of sream rurbi ; ; , by presenr _ ing to the users knowjedge sources , . nr . ting aif " rent view _ points ( e . g . geometrical or electricaf requirements , viewpoints related to the manufacturing or to the market _ iog ) . - Other systems and , especiaily , . , critiquing systems , , could also support designers in taking into - uccount othe . constraints that the ones they define themselves and . 511 5t2 N . Bonnardel / Knowledge - Based Systems 13 ( 2000 ) 505 - 513 therefore , faciiitate the adoption of new viewpoints . Critiquing systems seem . to fit particularly the " open - ended " and " ili defined " characteristics of design probiems ( see , for instance , Ref . [ 14 ] ) : these systems allow the user to define her or his ' own design solution and they assist her or him in evaluating this solution . Such critiquing systems appeared , moreover , to be useful to both novices and experienced designers , though the benefits are different according to the designers ' level of expertise ( see Refs . t8 , 301 ) . 6 . Conclusion We have presented in this paper two sfudies about cogni - tive mechanisms that seem to go towards opposite direc - tl0ns . r Analogical reasoning based on high leve1 and interdo - main sources , which appeared to open up the space of research of new ideas . o The construction of a constrained cognitive environment , which tends to delimit the space of research , on the basis of constraints resulting from the takrng into account of the " externai context " ( e . g . prescribed constraints ) and / or from the taking into account of the " internal context " ( such as " constructed " constraints , which depend on the designers ' expertise , or such as " deduced " constraints , which can depend on the current state of probiem - solving ) , Our objective was to show that the combination of these two cognitive mechanisms underlie creative acts and we believe that it is the case not only for design activities but also for otler creative acts , comprising artistic activities , such as painting ( e . 9 . painters can respect the " gold number " or constraints such as " to avoid to center attraction points " ) . Acknowledgements The author would like to thank the designers who parti - cipated in these studies as well as the professors of Applied Art for their essential contribution to the construction of the experimental situations . References [ 1 ] A . Bisseret , C . Figéac - Letang , P . Falzon , Modeling opportunistic reasonings : the cognitive activity of traffic signal setting technicians , INRIA Research Report no . 893 , INRIA , Rocquencourr , 1988 . [ 2 ] M . Boden , The Creative Mind : Myths and Mechanisms , Weidenfeld & Nicoison . London , 1990 . [ 3 ] N . Bonnardel , Criteria used for the evaluation ofdesign solution , in : Y . Queinnec , F . Daniellou ( Eds . ) , Designing for Everyone a : rd Every - body , Taylor & Francis , l , ondon , 1991 . [ 4 ] N . Bonnardel , Le rôle de l ' évaluation dans les activités de conception ( The role of evaluation in design activities ) , PhD dlsssrtariqn eg th . University of Provence , INRIA , Rocquencourt , 1 992 . [ 5 ] N . Bonnardel , Comparison of evaluation processes in design activities and critiquing systsms : a way to improve design support systems , Technical Report CU - CS - 681 - 93 , University of Colorado , Boulder , 1993 . [ 6 ] N . Bonnardel , S . Loiseau , The effect of the level of expenise on the designers ' focus of attention , Unpublished manuscript , 1999 . [ 7 ] N . Bonnardel , M . Rech , Analogies in design activilies : a study of the evocation of inra and interdomain sources , in : K . Holyoali D . Gentner , B . Kokinov ( Eds . ) , Advances in Analogy Reseerch : Integra - tion of Theory and Data from the Cognitive , Computational , and Neural Sciences , NBU Series in Cognitive Science . New Buigarian University , Sof , a , 1998 , pp . 336 - 344 . [ 8 ] N . Bonnardel , T . Sumner , Supporting evaluation in design , Acta Psychologica 91 ( 1996 ) 221 - 244 . [ 9 ] F . Détienne , Reasoning from a schema and from an analog in software code reuse , Empirical Studies of hogrammers : Fourth Workshop , New Brunswick NJ . 6 - 8 December 1991 . [ 10 ] K . Duncker , On problem solving , Psychological Monographs 270 ( . 1945 ) pp . 2 - 9 . t11l C . M . Êastman , Cognitive processes and ill - defined problems : a case study from design , Proceedings ofthe First Joint Intemational Confer - ence on I . A . , Washington , DC , 1969 , pp . 669 - 690 . [ 12 ] K . A . Ericsson , H . A . Simon , Verbal reports as data , Psychological Review 87 ( 1980 ) 215 - 251 [ 13 ] G . Fischer , Symmetry of ignorance , social creativily , and meta - design , Kowledge - Based Systems Journal 13 ( 5 ) ( 2000 ) . [ 14 ] G . Fischer , A . C . Lemke , T . Mastaglio , A . I . Morch , Critics : An emer - ging approach to knowiedge - based human computer interaction , Intemational Journal of Man - Machine Studies 35 ( 5 ) ( 1991 ) 695 - 72r . [ 15 ] M . Fustier , La résoiution de problèmes : méthodologie de I ' action , Editions ESF & Librairies Techniques . Paris , 1989 . [ 16 ] J . S . Gero , T . Mc Neill , An approach to the analysis of design proto - cols , Design Studies 19 ( 1998 ) 21 - 61 . [ 17 ] D . R . Hofstadter , The Fluid Analogies Research Group , Ruid Concepts and Creative Analogies , Penguin Press , Somenet " 199 ? . [ 18 ] A . Hyman , Charies Babbage : Pioneer of the Computer , Ox - ford , 1982 . l19l D . G . Jansson , S . M . Smith , Design frxation , Proceedings of the Engi - neering Design Research Conference , National Science Foundation , University of Massachusetts , Amherst , 1989 , pp . 53 - 76 . [ 20 ] A . Koestler , The Act of Creation , London , 1975 . t21l J . L . Kolodner , Understanding creativity : a case - based approach , in : S . riless , K . - D . Althoff , M . M . Richter ( Eds . ) , Topics in Case - Base Reasoning , Lectures Notes in Artiûcial lnteliigence , no . 837 , Springer , Berlin , 1993 , pp . 3 - 20 . [ 22 ] A . S . Luchins , Mechanization in problem - solving , Psychological Monographs 248 ( 1942 ) 00 . [ 23 ] K . J . MacCalium , I . M . Caner , Oppomrnistic software architecture for support of design coordination , Knowledge - Based Systems Joumal 5 ( 1 ) ( 1992 ) 55 - 65 . [ 2a ] K . Natakoji , Increasing shared understanding of a design task between designers and design environments : the role of a specifica - tion component , Dissertaton Thesis , University of Colorado at Boulder , 1993 . t25l K . Nakakoji , Y . Yamamoto , M . Ohira , A framework that supports collective creativity in design using visual images , Knowledge - Based Systems Journal 13 ( 5 ) ( 2000 ) . t26 ) A . T . Purcell , J . S . Gero , The effects of examples on the results of a design activity [ Special issue on AI in Design ] , Knowledge - Based Systems Journal 5 ( 1 ) ( 1992 ) 82 - 91 . 127 ) D . A . Schôn , The Reflective Practitioner : How hofessionals Think in Action , Basic Books , New York , 1983 . t28l H . A . Simon , The strueture of ill structured probiems , Artificial lntel - ligence 4 ( 19 ? 3 ) 181 - 201 . I29l H . A . Simon , Problem forming , probiem frnding and probiem solving N . Bonnardel / Knowledge - Based Systems l3 ( 2000 ) 505 _ 5 ' 3 t30l in design , in : A . Collen . W . Gasparski ( Eds . ) , Design & Systems , Transaction Publishers , New Brunswick , 19e5 , pp . Zii _ îS ) T . Sumner , N . Bonnardel , B . Kallag - Hantaa , ffre cig ; ti " . ligooo _ 1 . , : 1 , h " * l1t : : hed design supporr sysrems , proceedings of CHI , 97 , Aaarlu , , 22 - 27 March 1997 , ACM press , New york , oo . Sg _ gO [ 31 ] W . Visser , Two functions of analog - ical reasoning in design : a cogni _ . ^ ^ - l " - : : py : hoiogy approach , Design Srudies n r . 6gà M _ qtq . t32l R . W . Weisberg , hoblem solving * A " r . uriuit1 , , in , R . J . St . _ b " . g ( Ed . ) , The Nature of trearivitv : Cont " * por . ry psychologicat Perspectives , Cambridge Universtty press , Camlridge , l9gg .