Nanoindentation of Polymers : An Overview Mark R . VanLandingham * † , John S . Villarrubia † , Will F . Guthrie † , and Greg F . Meyers ‡ † National Institute of Standards and Technology , 100 Bureau Drive , Gaithersburg , MD 20899 ‡ The Dow Chemical Company , Analytical Sciences , 1897E Building , Midland , MI 48667 SUMMARY : In this paper , the application of instrumented indentation devices to the measurement of the elastic modulus of polymeric materials is reviewed . This review includes a summary of traditional analyses of load - penetration data and a discussion of associated uncertainties . Also , the use of scanning probe microscopes to measure the nanoscale mechanical response of polymers is discussed , particularly with regard to the associated limitations . The application of these methods to polymers often leads to measurements of elastic modulus that are somewhat high relative to bulk measurements with potentially artificial trends in modulus as a function of penetration depth . Also , power law fits to indentation unloading curves are often a poor representation of the actual data , and the power law exponents tend to fall outside the theoretical range . These problems are likely caused by viscoelasticity , the effects of which have only been studied recently . Advancement of nanoindentation testing toward quantitative characterization of polymer properties will require material - independent calibration procedures , polymer reference materials , advances in instrumentation , and new testing and analysis procedures that account for viscoelastic and viscoplastic polymer behavior . Introduction Depth - sensing indentation ( DSI ) devices allow the amount of penetration of an indenter tip into a material to be measured often using either a constant loading rate or a constant displacement rate 1 - 3 ) . Further , these devices are often capable of producing contact areas and penetration depths characterized by sub - micrometer or even nanometer dimensions for hard materials ( e . g . , single - crystal silicon , hardness = 14 GPa 3 ) ) . One objective of using DSI methods is to produce quantitative , absolute measurements of elastic modulus , E . Producing such measurements with nanoscale spatial resolution can be a key to understanding mechanical behavior of technologically important material systems . However , polymeric materials create significant challenges to measuring E accurately using indentation testing . First , many polymers are so soft that the material response cannot be measured at all with DSI devices because the system compliances are too low 4 ) . Even for stiffer polymers ( E > 1 GPa ) , producing indents with both lateral and depth dimensions much less than 1 µ m is difficult . This difficulty is related to the load resolution , typically not better than ± 100 nN , and the inability of most DSI systems to detect initial contact loads less than 1 µ N . Thus , although DSI systems are capable of applying maximum loads on the order of 1 µ N , the smallest maximum loads applied in practice are typically tens of micronewtons to reduce the relative uncertainties in load and penetration depth . Finally , current analysis of DSI data is based on elasticity , which when applied to viscoelastic materials could lead to large uncertainties in the calculated values of E . Thus , current DSI methods have limited capabilities for studying polymer thin films , polymer composites , and other important polymer systems for which obtaining property information with nanometer spatial resolution is often desired . Further , other calibration and procedural issues persist with regard to modulus measurements that must be addressed prior to the application of these methods to viscoelastic materials . For example , current calibration procedures used in DSI rely on indentation of a reference material of known modulus . Recent studies , including an interlaboratory comparison 5 ) , have shown the calibration results to have poor reproducibility and large uncertainties . Scanning probe microscopy ( SPM ) , and in particular the atomic force microscope ( AFM ) , has been used to study polymeric materials with nanometer spatial resolution . The AFM employs a probe consisting of a sharp tip ( nominal tip radius on the order of 10 nm ) located near the end of a cantilever beam that is scanned across the sample surface using piezoelectric scanners . The AFM can also be operated in force mode to perform indentation tests . A force curve is produced , which is a plot of tip deflection as a function of the vertical motion of the scanner . This curve can be analyzed to provide information on the local mechanical response 6 - 8 ) . By changing the spring constant of the probe , forces applied during indentation can be varied from a few nanonewtons up to tens or perhaps hundreds of micronewtons . Also , the spring constant of the cantilever probe can be chosen such that small differences in response can be detected for polymers having a certain range of stiffness corresponding to the chosen spring constant 6 ) . However , accurate measurement of the probe spring constant can be difficult to achieve . This difficulty combined with a lack of information regarding the tip shape of the AFM probes generally reduces AFM indentation measurements to relative measurements . A modified version of the AFM , called the interfacial force microscope ( IFM ) 9 - 11 ) , has also been used to probe the indentation response of polymeric materials . For the IFM , applied force is measured using a self - balancing differential capacitance sensor . An electrochemically sharpened tungsten tip is displaced relative to the sample at a given displacement rate by piezoelectric scanners , and the measured force is recorded as a function of displacement . Often attempts are made to achieve purely elastic deformation by applying penetration depths of only a few nanometers to tens of nanometers , which is small compared to the tip radius ( ranges from 70 nm to 500 nm ) of the tungsten probe . In this case , Hertzian contact mechanics can be applied to the loading curve or unloading curve , as has generally been done for indentation testing with the IFM . In this paper , an overview of nanoindentation and its application to polymeric materials is given . First , traditional analyses of load - penetration data are presented followed by a discussion of uncertainty issues with regard to determining accurate measurements of elastic modulus . The application of depth - sensing indentation to measurements of polymer response is then reviewed . The use of scanning probe microscopes to measure mechanical properties of polymers is then presented , including comparisons to depth - sensing indentation where appropriate . Overview of Nanoindentation The Method of Oliver and Pharr The analysis of indentation load - penetration curves produced by depth - sensing indentation systems is often based on work by Oliver and Pharr 1 ) . Their analysis was in turn based upon relationships developed by Sneddon 12 ) for the penetration of a flat elastic half space by different probes with particular axisymmetric shapes ( e . g . , a flat - ended cylindrical punch , a paraboloid of revolution , and a cone ) . In general , the relationships between penetration depth , h , and load , P , for such indenter geometries can be represented in the form ( ) m f h h P − = α ( 1 ) where α contains geometric constants , the sample elastic modulus and Poisson ' s ratio , and the indenter elastic modulus and Poisson ' s ratio , h f is the final unloading depth , and m is a power law exponent that is related to the geometry of the indenter ; for a flat - ended cylindrical punch , m = 1 , for a paraboloid of revolution , m = 1 . 5 , and for a cone , m = 2 . In applying Equation 1 to the calculation of modulus , Oliver and Pharr 1 ) made two significant realizations . First , the slope of the unloading curve changes constantly due to constant changes in the contact area . In prior research , the upper portion of the unloading curve was approximated as linear , which incorrectly assumes that the contact area remains constant for the initial unloading of the material . This practice created a dependence of calculated modulus values on the number of points used in the linear fit 1 ) . Second , if the unloading curve can be fit by a power law expression given by Equation 1 , then a derivative , dP / dh , of that expression applied at the maximum loading point ( h max , P max ) should yield information about the state of contact at that point . This derivative was termed the contact stiffness , S , and is given by A E aE S r r π β 2 2 = = ( 2 ) where a is the contact radius and A is the projected area of tip - sample contact . The reduced modulus , E r , accounts for deformation of both the indenter and the sample and is given by ( ) ( ) i i r E E E 2 2 1 1 1 ν ν − + − = ( 3 ) where E and ν are the sample elastic modulus and Poisson ' s ratio , respectively , and E i and ν i are the elastic modulus and Poisson ' s ratio , respectively , of the indenter material . β is used to account for the triangular and square cross sections of many indenters used in nanoindentation studies . For β = 1 , the cross section of the indenter is assumed to be circular , as the contact radius , a , is replaced by ( A / π ) 1 / 2 , and Equation 2 ( with β = 1 ) is valid for any indenter that has a shape described by a solid body of revolution of a smooth function . However , the values of β , as determined by King 13 ) using numerical analysis , are only small corrections ( e . g . , β = 1 . 034 for a triangular punch ) and are not often used in practice . Another correction factor has recently been suggested due to unrealistic boundary conditions used by Sneddon 14 ) ( and also Hertz 15 ) ) . This correction factor , γ , which depends upon the sample Poisson ' s ratio , ν , and tip geometry ranges from approximately 1 . 05 to 1 . 10 for ν between 0 . 1 and 0 . 4 and a conical indenter with an opening angle of 70 . 32 ° . In Figure 1 , an indentation load - displacement curve is illustrated along with several important parameters used in the Oliver and Pharr analysis . The stiffness , S * , is the slope of the tangent line to the unloading curve at the maximum loading point ( h max , P max ) and is given by ( ) ( ) 1 max max , max * − − =   = m f P h h h m dh dP S α ( 4 ) where the parenthetic subscript denotes that the derivative is evaluated at the maximum loading point . When the displacement , h , is the total measured displacement of the system , S * is the total system stiffness . After successful calibration and removal of the load - frame compliance , the displacement of the load frame is removed so that h represents only the displacement of the tip into the sample . In this case , S * = S and the tangent line represents an unloading path for which the contact area does not change . Thus , the contact area , A , calculated using S ( see Equation 2 ) should be the actual contact area at maximum load . Also , extrapolating this line down to P = 0 yields an intercept value for depth , h i , which should be related to the contact depth , h c , associated with the maximum loading point . However , h c is related to the deformation behavior of the material and the shape of the indenter , as illustrated in Figure 2 . In fact , h c = h max - h s , where h s is defined as the elastic displacement of the surface at the contact perimeter and can be calculated for specific geometries using displacement equations from Sneddon ' s analyses 12 ) . For each of three specific tip shapes ( flat - ended punch , paraboloid of revolution , and cone ) , h s = ε P max / S where ε is a function of the particular tip geometry , as summarized in Table 1 . Thus , h c is given by S P h h c max max ε − = ( 5 ) The nanoindentation procedures include calibration of the load - frame compliance , C lf , and the tip shape area function , A ( h c ) . Prior to the load - frame compliance calibration , the measured displacement , h total , is a combination of displacement of the load frame , h lf , and displacement of the sample , h samp . Treating the system as two springs ( the load frame and the sample ) in series under a given load , P , samp lf total h h h + = ( 6 ) Dividing both sides by P , A E C C C C r lf s lf total 1 2 π + = + = ( 7 ) where the total compliance C total = 1 / S * and the sample compliance C s = 1 / S . A number of possible methods exist for determining C lf using a reference sample that is homogeneous and isotropic and for which both E and ν are known . Typically , a series of indentation measurements are made on the reference sample . Oliver and Pharr 1 ) suggested using an iterative technique to calibrate both the load - frame compliance and the tip shape with one set of data from a single reference sample , as both C lf and A are unknowns in Equation 7 . While this method has the advantage of not requiring an independent measurement of the area of each indent , its use has been limited , perhaps because it is mathematically intensive . Fig . 1 : An indentation load - displacement curve in which several important parameters used in the Oliver and Pharr analysis are illustrated . Fig . 2 : Illustration of the indentation geometry at maximum load for an ideal conical indenter . The use of the AFM with indentation measurements provides a method of high - resolution imaging of the plastic impression , which should have approximately the same projected area as the contact area at maximum load , particularly for a highly plastic reference material such LOADING UNLOADING S * h max h f h i Displacement , h P max L oa d , P h max = maximum displacement h f = final depth h i = intercept displacement P max h max h c Indenter Initial Surface Surface Profile at Maximum Load h s a as aluminum . Using this type of an approach , the measured compliance , C total , can be plotted as a function of 1 / √ A . A linear curve fit to the data can then be used to determine the load - frame compliance , C lf , which will be the value of the y - intercept . A third method and the one used in the present research is to assume that not only is E independent of penetration depth but also hardness , H = P max / A . Thus , if H is constant , C total can be plotted as a function of 1 / √ P max , and again the y - intercept of the fitted linear curve yields C lf . In this method , aluminum is often replaced by fused silica , because oxide formation on aluminum can create variations in E and H with penetration depth . For the load - frame compliance calibration , relatively large indentation loads and depths are applied to a reference material that exhibits significant plastic deformation ( e . g . aluminum ) so that the contact stiffness is large ( C s is small ) and thus C total is dominated by C lf . For the tip shape calibration , the series of indents applied to a reference material typically covers a larger range of maximum load and maximum penetration depth . The objective of tip shape calibration is to measure the cross - sectional area of the indenter tip as a function of distance from the apex . In Figure 2 , the indentation geometry for a conical indenter is illustrated in two dimensions . At a given load , P , the contact area , A , which is related to the contact radius , a , is the cross - sectional area of the indenter tip at a distance , h c ( the contact depth ) , from the tip apex . From measurements of h max , P max , and S , Equations 2 and 5 can be used to calculate A and h c , respectively , for each indentation . A tip shape function , A ( h c ) , is determined , given a sufficient number of measurements over a range of h c values , by fitting the A vs . h c data , typically using a multiterm polynomial fit of the form : ( ) . . . 4 / 1 3 2 / 1 2 1 2 0 + + + + = c c c c c h B h B h B h B h A ( 8 ) where B 0 , B 1 , . . . , B n are constant coefficients determined by the curve fit . Oliver and Pharr 1 ) suggested using up to 9 terms ( n = 8 ) with B 0 = 24 . 5 , stating that the area function of a perfect Berkovich indenter , which was the style of indenter they used , is given by ( ) 2 5 24 h h A = ( 9 ) and that all other terms account for deviations from the ideal geometry due to blunting of the tip . Once the load frame compliance and tip shape calibrations have been performed , either separately or iteratively , measurements of elastic modulus for samples of interest can be made from indentation data . The unloading curves are again fit to a power law function ( see Equation 1 ) , and the fitting parameters are used to calculate S * ( see Equation 4 ) , which is equal to S assuming a correctly determined value of C lf . S is then used to calculate h c ( see Equation 5 ) , and h c is used to calculate A from the tip shape area function . Finally , S and A are used to calculate E using Equation 2 . Uncertainties in Indentation Analysis Load Frame Compliance In reviewing the Oliver - Pharr procedure that is typically applied to nanoindentation measurements , the potential for significant uncertainties to arise , particularly in the calibration procedures , and propagate through to the calculation of modulus becomes apparent . First , the uncertainties in the calibration of load - frame compliance ( C lf ) , in which a reference sample is indented using high maximum loads , has been shown to be dependent on the properties of the reference material 5 ) . For the same DSI system and Berkovich tip , C lf measured by indenting fused silica ( E = 72 GPa ) was over a factor of two lower than that measured by indenting tungsten ( E = 410 GPa ) . The uncertainty in C lf should decrease as the ratio of frame compliance to sample compliance , C s , increases . C s is inversely proportional to the ratio E / √ H , and this ratio is approximately a factor of 8 larger for tungsten compared to fused silica . Thus , the values of C lf determined using tungsten are likely to have less uncertainty compared to those determined using fused silica , and in fact the variation of C lf with indenter geometry was much smaller for indentation of tungsten than for indentation of fused silica . In our own study of load frame compliance determination using a fused silica sample and a Berkovich tip , C lf was determined from a set of 24 indentations , 4 each at 6 nominal load levels ranging from 4 . 0 mN to 5 . 2 mN , which was the upper range of the DSI system . The power law fits from which S * was calculated were made using two different curve fitting methods . In the first method , a nonlinear power law fit was made with the DSI system software to a portion of the unloading data ranging from 95 % of the maximum load , P max , down to 20 % of P max . In the second method , a nonlinear power law fit was made with commercially available statistics software to nearly the entire unloading curve . Data at the top and bottom portions of the unloading curve were deleted only when the associated residual errors of the fit deviated from the following conventional assumptions 16 ) : 1 . the errors are normally distributed 2 . the errors have zero mean 3 . the errors are homogeneously distributed over the range of interest Using these criteria , data was deleted from the upper portion of the curve for the curve fits of only 4 of the 24 data sets , with the largest remaining load value being greater than 98 % of P max in each of those 4 cases . Also , the amount of data deleted from the lower portion of the curve was generally between 2 % and 15 % of P max . Typical residual plots corresponding to the final fits are shown for three different data sets in Figure 3 , and the resulting values of system compliance ( method 2 ) are compared to those determined using the DSI software fits ( method 1 ) in Figure 4 . To determine C lf , H was assumed to be constant with penetration depth such that a linear fit to C total vs . 1 / √ P max ( see Figure 4 ) yields a value of C lf equal to the y - intercept of the fitted linear curve ( see Equation 7 ) . For method 1 , C lf = ( 3 . 6 ± 1 . 9 ) nm / mN and for method 2 , C lf = ( 2 . 4 ± 3 . 0 ) nm / mN . Here and throughout this paper , a numerical value following a " ± " symbol is an estimated standard deviation , σ , unless otherwise stated . Thus for method 2 , the value determined for C lf is not statistically different from zero and for method 1 , a value of 0 nm / mN falls in the 95 % confidence range defined by ± 2 σ . These large uncertainties will significantly affect the tip shape calibration and subsequent modulus measurements . Therefore , given the finite load capabilities of DSI systems , care must be taken to minimize these uncertainties by choosing a reference sample to minimize sample compliance , taking a large number of measurements , and taking measurements over a large range of applied loads , which should include the upper load limit of the system . Tip Shape Calibration Besides the uncertainty in the load frame compliance , the determination of tip shape from the indentation of a reference sample has a number of additional sources of uncertainty . First , the power law curve fitting procedures can impact the determination of S , which is used to calculate both the contact area , A , and the contact depth , h c . Within the nanoindentation community , curve fits have been made using only a portion ( often less than half ) of the unloading data 17 ) . Because the power law model of Equation 1 has a physical basis that theoretically should fit the entire unloading curve , a sound basis for using only a portion of the data should be determined . ( Note , however , that the relationship between P and h during indentation unloading was found not to follow a power law form in a recent dimensional analysis study 18 ) . ) Generally , the rapid changes in velocity and direction that occur at the beginning of the unloading curve can affect the first few data points near the maximum load . Also , nonidealities near the tip apex and instrumental uncertainties at low loads can affect data at the low - load end of the unloading curve . However , these affects are highly dependent on the particular system , tip , and sample used , and thus the most appropriate range of data to use will not be universal . Also , power law fits can be made either by using a linear fit to log ( P ) - log ( h ) data or through an iterative nonlinear fit , and in many studies , the type of fit that was used is not clear . Fig . 3 : Typical residual plots corresponding to the final nonlinear power law fits to unloading curves from the load frame compliance calibration data are shown for ( a ) P max = 4 . 0 mN , ( b ) P max = 5 . 2 mN , and ( c ) and ( d ) P max = 4 . 5 mN . Plots ( a ) , ( b ) , and ( c ) are the differences between the predicted load , P ' , and the measured load , P , vs . P , while plot ( d ) is a quantile - quantile plot of the residuals in ( c ) . Of course , the issue is whether or not the curve fit is representative of the data set , particularly in terms of determining an appropriate value of S . To study effects of curve fitting on tip shape calibration , an additional set of 27 indentations , 3 to 5 each at 7 nominal load levels ranging from 0 . 05 mN to 3 . 0 mN , were made on fused silica with a Berkovich tip and were combined with the 24 indentations used for the compliance calibration . A value of 3 . 6 nm / mN was used for C lf . The same two curve fitting methods used in our previous study for Load p l f $ r e s 1000 2000 3000 4000 - 30 - 20 - 10 0 10 20 P ( µµµµ N ) 1000 2000 3000 4000 - 30 - 20 - 10 0 10 20 P - P ' ( µµµµ N ) Load p l f $ r e s 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 - 30 - 20 - 10 0 10 20 30 P - P ' ( µµµµ N ) P ( µµµµ N ) 1000 2000 3000 5000 4000 - 30 - 20 - 10 0 10 20 30 Load p l f $ r e s 1000 2000 3000 4000 - 20 0 20 - 20 0 20 P - P ' ( µµµµ N ) P ( µµµµ N ) 1000 2000 3000 4000 Quantiles of Standard Normal p l f $ r e s - 3 - 2 - 1 0 1 2 3 - 20 0 20 - 20 0 20 P - P ' ( µµµµ N ) Quantiles of Standard Normal 1 2 3 0 - 3 - 2 - 1 ( a ) ( c ) ( b ) ( d ) load frame compliance were used to fit the unloading curves for the 51 data sets . Again for method 2 , data were deleted only when the corresponding residual errors did not conform to the conventional assumptions regarding curve fitting . Data was deleted from the upper portion of the curve for the curve fits of only 5 of the additional 27 data sets , with the largest remaining load value being greater than 97 % of P max in each of those 5 cases . Also , except in a few cases , the amount of data deleted from the lower portion of the curve was generally less than 20 % of P max , as shown in Figure 5 for all 51 data sets . In fact for several unloading curves with P max < 1 mN , only a few points at the low load end were not used in the fit . Fig . 4 : Values of system compliance for the two curve fitting methods are plotted as a function of 1 / √ P max . For the high P max indents used for the compliance calibration , the values of S differ by less than 1 % for the two methods . However , for decreasing values of P max , the differences in S values becomes more significant with a tendency of S for method 2 ( S 2 ) to be greater than S for method 1 ( S 1 ) by as much as 8 % . This result indicates that , for the lower - load indents , the value of S is more significantly affected by the arbitrary deletion of data points , particularly the deletion of points from the high - load region of the unloading curve . Because A is related to S 2 , values of A corresponding to S 2 are approximately ( 5 . 5 ± 3 . 5 ) % larger than those corresponding to S 1 for P max < 0 . 3 mN , with a maximum difference of over 16 % . Simultaneously , values of h c corresponding to S 2 are approximately ( 3 . 5 ± 3 . 2 ) % larger than those corresponding to S 1 for P max < 0 . 3 mN . 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 0 . 43 0 . 44 0 . 45 0 . 46 0 . 47 0 . 48 0 . 49 0 . 5 0 . 51 P max - 1 / 2 ( mN - 1 / 2 ) T o t a l C o m p li a n ce ( n m / m N ) Method 1 Method 2 Fig . 5 : The data from the lower portion of the unloading curves not used for the nonlinear power law fits is plotted as a percentage of P max vs . P max . The method of calculating linear fits to log ( P ) - log ( h ) data was also considered . Taking the logarithm of both sides , Equation 1 becomes ( ) ( ) ( ) f h h m P − + = log log log α ( 10 ) If h f were to be used as a fitting parameter as it is in the nonlinear fits , an iterative scheme for this fit would need to be devised . Instead of developing such an algorithm , the values of h f calculated in the nonlinear fits were used in Equation 10 to fit several of the unloading curves using in the preceding study . Examples of residual plots associated with these fits are shown in Figure 6 . In Figure 6a and 6b , the residuals are shown in logarithmic units . In Figure 6c , the residuals are shown in units of load for comparison with Figure 6d , in which the residuals of the corresponding nonlinear fit are shown . Although the fitting parameters are similar for the two fits , the residuals in the units of the log - log fit ( Figures 6a and 6b ) deviate from the conventional assumptions discussed previously . Therefore , from a statistical standpoint , the nonlinear fit is preferred to a linear fit to logarithmic data . The uncertainties in A and h c related to the choice of curve fitting method , at least for this study , do not significantly affect the uncertainties in the tip shape area function , A ( h c ) . In fact , four - term polynomial fits in the form of Equation 8 to the three sets of ( h c , A ) data are statistically identical , as shown in Figure 7 . Also , for h c < 100 nm , the actual ( h c , A ) data points calculated using the three different types of fits to unloading curves all fall within ± 2 σ 0 5 10 15 20 25 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 P max ( µµµµ N ) % o f P m ax n o t u s e d i n f i t s of the A ( h c ) fits . These results are not surprising , given that as the measurement of S changes , A and h c will both either increase or decrease . Thus , differences in S for a given unloading curve due to different curve fits will likely be similar to differences in S for two unloading curves with the same nominal maximum load . However , as previously discussed , the calculated value of C lf appears to be quite sensitive to small changes in S * and the associated data scatter , at least for cases where the sample compliance is significant , such that curve fitting procedures do affect the determination of C lf . Also , for samples of unknown modulus , S is used only to calculate h c , so the associated uncertainties including those related to curve fitting , will lead to uncertainties in the value of A determined from A ( h c ) and thus to the value of E , particularly for lower load indents . Fig . 6 : ( a ) , ( b ) , and ( c ) are residual plots for linear fits to log ( P ) - log ( h - h f ) unloading data for P max = 0 . 5 mN . The residuals are in logarithmic units for ( a ) and ( b ) , while in ( c ) they are in the units of load . ( a ) and ( c ) are plots of residuals vs . load , while ( b ) is a quantile - quantile plot of the residuals in ( a ) . ( d ) is the residual plot ( residuals vs . load ) for the corresponding nonlinear fit . In a number of recent studies , material - independent methods of tip shape calibration using the AFM have been suggested and compared to the method of indenting a reference sample . In Load Load * ( e x p ( ll f $ r e s ) - 1 ) 0 100 200 300 400 500 - 5 0 5 10 15 P ( µµµµ N ) 100 200 300 400 0 - 5 0 10 P - P ' ( µµµµ N ) 15 5 500 Load p l f $ r e s 0 100 200 300 400 500 - 15 - 10 - 5 0 5 10 P ( µµµµ N ) 100 200 300 400 0 - 10 - 5 5 P - P ' ( µµµµ N ) 10 0 500 - 15 Load ll f $ r e s 0 100 200 300 400 500 - 0 . 1 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 P ( µµµµ N ) 100 200 300 400 0 - 0 . 1 0 0 . 2 l og ( P ) - l og ( P ' ) 0 . 1 500 Quantiles of Standard Normal ll f $ r e s - 3 - 2 - 1 0 1 2 3 - 0 . 1 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 Quantiles of Standard Normal - 2 - 1 1 2 - 3 - 0 . 1 0 0 . 2 l og ( P ) - l og ( P ' ) 0 . 1 3 0 ( a ) ( c ) ( b ) ( d ) one of these methods , the indenter tip is scanned with an AFM tip to yield direct information regarding the three - dimensional tip shape 5 , 19 ) . In another method , the indenter tip is used to scan samples with sharp features ( referred to as tip characterizers ) , generating images that are then used to determine the three - dimensional tip shape ( see Figure 8a ) using the method of blind reconstruction 20 ) . For both methods , tip shape area functions generated with the material - independent methods have not agreed with those determined by indenting a reference sample ( see Figure 8b ) . Fig . 7 : Plot of tip shape area function data , A vs . h c , for curve fitting methods 1 and 2 and for the linear fits to log ( P ) - log ( h - h f ) . Also shown are curves representing a four - term polynomial fit to each set of A ( h c ) data of the form of Equation 8 and ± two estimated standard deviations , σ , from each fit . In Figure 8b , the indentation area function data was determined using C lf = 3 . 6 nm / mN . The dashed curves in this figure indicate indentation area functions for C lf = ( 3 . 6 + 2 σ ) nm / mN ( upper curve ) and C lf = ( 3 . 6 - 2 σ ) nm / mN ( lower curve ) , where σ = 1 . 9 nm / mN ( see previous subsection ) . These dashed curves envelop all of the area function data . Thus , the large uncertainty in the load frame compliance could account for discrepancies between the material - independent and material - dependent tip shape area functions , at least in this case . 0 50 100 150 c ( h1 , h1 ) 0 100000 200000 300000 400000 500000 600000 c ( f i t + q t ( 0 . 975 , d f ) * s e . f i t , f i t - q t ( 0 . 975 , d f ) * s e . f i t ) 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 A ( n m 2 x 10 5 ) 0 50 100 150 h c ( nm ) 4 - term fit to Method 1 data 4 - term fit to Method 2 data 4 - term fit to log - log linear fit data ± 2 σσσσ for fit to Method 1 data ± 2 σσσσ for fit to Method 2 data ± 2 σσσσ for fit to log - log linear fit data log - log linear fit data Method 2 data Method 1 data Other uncertainties for the indentation method include those related to the detection of a true zero in load and displacement , the load and displacement measurements themselves , and the elastic properties of the sample and indenter materials . Differences between current analysis methods based on elasticity theory and real material behavior , including correction factors β and γ and the pile - up or sink - in of material around the tip - sample contact , can also be significant sources of uncertainty . Uncertainties related to the material - independent AFM methods include the finite sizes of either the AFM tip or the tip characterizer features , as well as non - tip artifacts such as thermal drift , scanner nonlinearities , feedback - loop response time , and slight deviations from orthogonality of the scanners . Also , the material - independent methods do not account for deformation of the indenter tip , such that the derived tip shape is perhaps a better representation of the actual tip shape than that determined via indentation due to the inclusion of tip deformation . We are currently investigating the impact of these various uncertainties on the total uncertainty of modulus measurements as determined from indentation data . While no complete uncertainty analysis has yet been performed regarding DSI methods , a few interlaboratory and / or intersystem comparisons have been done , all of which resulted in poor reproducibility in modulus measurements 5 , 21 , 22 ) . In one of these studies that included 8 laboratories and 6 different instrument types , measurements of E for fused silica ( nominally E = 72 GPa ) ranged from ( 67 . 2 ± 0 . 4 ) GPa to ( 84 ± 3 ) GPa for P max = 100 mN and from ( 68 . 6 ± 0 . 3 ) GPa to ( 86 . 3 ± 0 . 3 ) GPa for P max = 10 mN 5 ) . In another study with all data presumably taken by the same researchers but using 6 combinations of 3 different DSI instruments and 5 different tips , reduced modulus values for single crystal tungsten ranged from approximately ( 210 ± 50 ) GPa to ( 470 ± 60 ) GPa 21 ) . In addition , several of the instrument - tip combinations yielded values of reduced modulus that increased with increasing contact depth while other combinations yielded values that increased with decreasing contact depth . The large uncertainties reported for these comparisons are likely due to uncertainties in the calibrations , as has been discussed , as well as the repeatability of the measurements for each instrument 22 ) . Finally , the use of ideal tip shapes in indentation calculations can create large uncertainties . In our study , the opening angles , β , between the normal and the three faces of the two Berkovich tip were calculated from the blind reconstruction data to range from approximately 66 . 5 ° to 67 . 5 ° . These measured values of β are not equal to either the original specification by Berkovich of 65 . 033 ° degrees or the modified value of 65 . 3 ° specified by Oliver and Pharr . However , the measured values are in agreement with values measured for a number of Berkovich indenter tips using a metrological AFM that ranged between 65 . 7 ° and 67 . 4 ° 23 ) . ( a ) ( b ) Fig . 8 : ( a ) Blind reconstruction of a Berkovich indentation tip ; and ( b ) a plot of the area - depth relationship for two Berkovich tips in which blind reconstruction results are compared to results from an indentation tip - shape analysis . In ( b ) , the indentation area function data was determined using C lf = 3 . 6 nm / mN , and the dashed curves approximate indentation area functions for C lf = ( 3 . 6 + 2 σ ) nm / mN ( upper curve ) and C lf = ( 3 . 6 - 2 σ ) nm / mN ( lower curve ) , where σ = 1 . 9 nm / mN . 0 100000 200000 300000 400000 500000 600000 700000 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 h c or distance from apex ( nm ) A re a ( n m 2 ) A ( tip 1 ) A ( tip 2 ) BR ( tip 1 ) BR ( tip 2 ) Artifact due to joining solutions Artifacts due to periodicity of spike characterizer x ( nm ) y ( n m ) z ( nm ) 0 2000 - 2000 - 2 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 300 Besides the differences in opening angle , all conical and pyramidal indenter tips are likely to have some sort of defect geometry , for example blunting , at the tip apex , as noted by Briscoe and coworkers 24 - 26 ) . From our blind reconstruction results , the two Berkovich tips studied had blunt tips , exhibiting pyramidal geometry only for vertical distances from the apex of 15 nm or greater . Also , the opening angle measured close to the apex ( i . e . , approaching the blunt region ) was between 1 ° and 2 ° greater than the opening angle measured away the apex . As a result of these deviations from ideality , the area values corresponding to a given contact depth will be much different for real tips compared to an ideal tip , particularly for contact depths less than 100 nm as are commonly encountered in nanoindentation . Nanoindentation of Polymers Nanoindentation Using DSI Systems A number of problems exist with the current application of nanoindentation techniques to polymeric materials using both DSI and SPM systems . In general , measurements of E using DSI tend to increase with decreasing penetration depth , often referred to as an indentation size effect . This artifact also appears to be a problem for indentation of polymers using DSI 26 ) . Thus , either E ( surface ) > E ( bulk ) for a large number of materials , which seems unlikely , or these trends result from increased uncertainties for shallow depth indents that are likely due to tip defects near the apex and decreased signal - to - noise ratios at low load and displacement levels . Also , values of E measured for polymers using DSI are significantly higher than values measured using tensile testing or dynamic mechanical analysis ( DMA ) . For example , Lucas et al . reported E ( DSI ) = 1 . 2 GPa , E ( tensile test ) = 0 . 4 GPa , and E ( DMA ) = 0 . 5 GPa for polytetrafluoroethylene ( PTFE ) 4 ) . For some studies , modulus values measured using DSI have been compared to handbook or manufacturer values 25 ) . However , such comparisons can often be misleading , because quoted values of E for many polymer systems can cover a large range due to potential variations in microstructure , semicrystalline morphology , anisotropy , molecular weight , crosslink density , etc . Thus , comparisons of modulus values are most appropriate for polymer samples with identical chemistry , molecular weight , and processing history . To date , relatively few quasi - static indentation studies of polymers using DSI systems have been published , largely because of the inadequacies of DSI systems and traditional analysis methods as applied to measuring polymer properties . For example , the point taken as representing initial contact ( h = 0 ) generally corresponds to a significant applied load , such that penetration of the indenter tip into a polymer could be significant relative to the maximum displacement , h max . Also , viscoelastic creep during unloading can dramatically affect the slope of the unloading curve , leading to negative values of S in extreme cases 28 , 29 ) . This creep effect has been shown through modeling to be related to a continued increase in the contact radius during the initial portion of the unloading cycle 30 ) . Because of this affect , power law fits will generally not be applicable to fitting the unloading response of polymers . In fact , nonlinear power law fits ( see Equation 1 ) often will not reach a convergent solution . However , some commercial DSI system software will produce an answer based on the values of the fitting parameters for the Nth iteration , where N is the total number of iterations allowed by the fitting routine . Perhaps in realizing this problem , some researchers have reverted to determining S using a linear approximation to the upper portion of the unloading curve 31 ) , which assumes that the contact area remains constant for the initial unloading of the material . However , this practice creates a dependence of S on the number of points used in the linear fit , as discussed previously . Moreover , it ignores the cause of the deviation from power law behavior , namely viscoelastic creep . In our recent studies , a benzocyclobutene ( BCB ) polymer described in detail elsewhere 20 ) was indented with a DSI system using a Berkovich indenter tip . Load frame and tip shape calibrations had been determined using traditional DSI methods , as discussed previously . Additionally , blind reconstruction was used to generate a material - independent tip shape area function 20 ) . Eleven load - penetration curves were performed with maximum loads of between 43 µ N and 944 µ N . Several different fitting routines were used to fit the unloading curves . Power law fits using commercially available statistics software also did not converge . Power law fits using the commercial DSI system software also did not converge for any of the data sets , but values for S , h c , and E were output based on the values of the fitting parameters for the final iteration . In Figure 9 , the resulting curve fits are shown along with fits based on linear fits to logarithmic data , neither of which were good representations of the unloading curves . Note that for nonlinear power law fits , the power law exponents were all greater than 2 , ranging from 2 . 2 to 2 . 7 . Similar results were found by Briscoe and Sebastian . Using the commercially available statistics software , a smooth spline fitting routine was then used , which yielded excellent fits to the unloading data , as shown in Figure 10 . Besides producing a good fit to the data , this routine also produced a direct calculation of the first derivative of the fitted curve corresponding to each data point , as shown in Figure 11 as a function of load . For both the higher P max and lower P max indents shown in this figure , the slope of the upper portion of the unloading curve does in fact remain relatively constant . Using the spline fitting routine , however , yields values of S that are not dependent on a human judgement , such as deciding on the number of points to include in a linear fit to the upper portion of the unloading curve . Fig . 9 : An example of a DSI unloading curve for the BCB polymer and two corresponding curve fits : ( a ) a power law fit using the commercial DSI system software that did not converge and ( b ) a fit based on linear regression of logarithmic data . Fig . 10 : Examples of DSI unloading curves for the BCB polymer along with the smooth spline curve fits for two different loads . To compute values of E , values of S determined using the smooth spline fits were used to calculate h c using Equation 5 with ε = 0 . 75 . ( Note that because power law fitting was not used , this choice of ε here is somewhat arbitrary , i . e . it is not related to a power law exponent , m such as in Table 1 . ) Those values of h c were then used to determine A from the tip area function determined by indenting fused silica and that determined from blind P ( µµµµ N ) 0 200 400 600 800 100 200 300 400 h ( nm ) P ( µµµµ N ) 0 20 40 60 80 20 40 60 100 h ( nm ) 80 100 200 300 400 Depth 0 200 400 600 800 Load 20 40 60 80 100 Depth 0 20 40 60 80 Load 100 200 300 400 Depth 0 200 400 600 800 Load P ( µµµµ N ) 0 200 400 600 800 100 200 300 400 h ( nm ) 100 200 300 400 Depth 0 200 400 600 800 Load P ( µµµµ N ) 0 200 400 600 800 100 200 300 400 h ( nm ) reconstruction 20 ) . These two sets of modulus values are plotted in Figure 12a as a function of h c . In both cases , these modulus values do not show any dependence on h c , in contrast to the E values plotted in Figure 12b , which correspond to the non - convergent power law fits of the DSI system software . Of course , the uncertainties in the modulus values of Figure 12 are still under investigation , but the use of the non - convergent power law fits appears to be a possible source of artificial increases in E with decreasing h c . Fig . 11 : Plots of the first derivative of the smooth spline curves in Figure 10 as a function of load for two different loads . Averaging the modulus values in Figure 12a , E = ( 3 . 5 ± 0 . 3 ) GPa using the blind reconstruction area function , and E = ( 4 . 1 ± 0 . 2 ) GPa using the area function determined from the indentation of fused silica . Both of these values are slightly higher than the room - temperature tensile modulus of 2 . 9 GPa reported by the manufacturer . As discussed previously , however , the occurrence of creep during unloading affects the determination of S for polymeric materials . The indentations of the BCB polymer were performed using a load - hold - unload cycle , so an effort was made to characterize the indentation creep response from the 10 s portion of the cycle in which the load was held relatively constant at P max . The change in tip displacement , h , with time , t , during the hold cycles of each indentation data set was fit using a functional relationship of the form ∆ h ~ ( ∆ t ) n , and the exponent , n , ranged from 0 . 38 to 0 . 57 . To apply this crude characterize of creep response to the unloading curve , the convolution integral relating the time - dependent strain , ε ( t ) , to creep compliance , J ( t ) , and the time rate of change of stress , d σ / dt , was used 32 ) : 0 200 400 600 800 Load 0 2 4 6 8 10 p r ed i c t ( ss b c b , D ep t h , 1 ) $ y 200 400 600 800 P ( µµµµ N ) 0 d P / dh 0 2 4 6 8 10 0 20 40 60 80 Load 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 p r ed i c t ( ss b c b , D ep t h , 1 ) $ y 20 40 60 80 P ( µµµµ N ) 0 d P / dh 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 ( ) ( ) τ τ ε τσ d t J t dd ∫ − = ( 11 ) A uniform stress , σ ( t ) = P ( t ) / A ( t ) , was assumed , ε ( t ) was taken to be related to ∆ h / h , and J ( t ) = k 1 t n was assumed , where n was determined from the creep response during the hold cycles . Of course , the actual stress and strain distributions are highly non - uniform , and the hold portion of the indentation tests deviates significantly from a conventional creep test . Also , contrary to the Boltzmann Superposition Principle , the integral was not evaluated for all elements of the loading history , but rather just the unloading portion of the indentation loading cycle . Finally , whether indentation behavior of polymers follows the assumptions of linear viscoelasticity is not clear . Thus , this viscoelastic analysis is only a rough estimate of the actual viscoelastic behavior . Using this approach , the estimated viscoelastic creep was removed from the unloading data for each data set , and the smooth spline fits were again applied . The resulting values of S were approximately 3 % to 6 % lower that the S values determined previously for the total unloading curves . Using the blind reconstruction area function , the corresponding reductions in E values were between 3 % and 5 % , resulting in an average value of E = ( 3 . 4 ± 0 . 3 ) GPa . A more rigorous analytical or numerical approach might result in an even larger influence of creep response on the values of E determined from indentation unloading curves . Another potential effect could be that of hydrostatic stress , which has been shown to increase the apparent modulus value of some polymers 25 ) . Research in these areas is currently being pursued . More recent applications of DSI to measuring polymer properties have focused on indentation creep tests and also on dynamic indentation testing . Attempts have been made to model indentation creep and stress relaxation data using standard linear solid models from which values of E can be extracted from fits of the model predictions to the experimental data 33 - 36 ) . Generally , these attempts have met with mixed success , most likely because the experimental aspects do not conform to the assumptions of the analysis . For example , the modulus values measured for instantaneous applications of load or displacement are often much lower than expected , because a finite loading or displacement rate is used that does not simulate a step function . In one case , the contact area was assumed to be constant during viscoelastic creep 36 ) , which is not the case as discussed by Unertl 30 ) . The simplicity of the models used compared to the actual polymer behavior and assumptions regarding stress and strain could also lead to inaccuracies in the measured polymer properties . ( a ) ( b ) Fig . 12 : Plots of modulus measured for the BCB polymer from DSI as a function of contact depth . The modulus values in ( a ) were determined using smooth spline fits and the two different area functions indicated , while the modulus values in ( b ) were determined using non - convergent power law fits and the indentation area functions . Dynamic indentation testing has recently been developed for several indentation systems 28 , 37 ) . This method is similar to dynamic mechanical analysis ( DMA ) in that a sinusoidal input is applied and the output is monitored . For linear viscoelastic behavior , the output is also sinusoidal but can lag the input signal . The in - phase components of stress and strain can be used to determine the storage modulus , E ' , and the out - of - phase components are related to the loss modulus , E " . The ratio of these moduli , E " / E ' , is referred to as the loss tangent or tan δ . 0 1 2 3 4 5 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 h c ( nm ) E ( G P a ) 0 1 2 3 4 5 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 h c ( nm ) E ( G P a ) Using Blind Reconstruction Area Function Using Indentation Area Function In DMA , the input oscillation is normally displacement or strain and the output is load or stress . In DSI , an oscillatory load is applied and the displacement is monitored 28 ) . The in - phase component of the contact stiffness is then used to calculate E ' and the out - of - phase component is used to calculate E " . The equations used for these calculates are analogous to Equation 2 , replacing S with either the in - phase or out - of - phase component of the contact stiffness and replacing E r with either E ' or E " 37 ) . Unlike DMA , however , stress localization and large strain gradients are associated with DSI , and the assumptions of linear viscoelasticity have yet to be checked for dynamic indentation testing . Thus , caution should be used in evaluating the resulting dynamic modulus values . Nanoindentation Using SPM Systems Three classes of systems can be categorized as SPM nanoindentation systems . In the first type of system , AFM and DSI systems are integrated with the DSI transducer - tip assembly mounted in place of the AFM cantilever probe , and indentation is controlled by the DSI system . Contact mode scanning of the sample is also permitted using the DSI force signal in the AFM feedback loop . However , the contact force applied during scanning is orders of magnitude larger than typical AFM contact mode forces , and thus scanning with these systems can severely deform and damage polymeric materials . Also , indentation tips typically have larger tip radii compared to AFM cantilever tips , thus limiting the resolution of resulting images . However , the ability to scan the surface to find a suitably smooth area or particular surface features is often very important to nanoindentation studies . In terms of indentation testing , the system acts as a traditional DSI system , as has been discussed at length . In fact , this type of system was used in all of our studies of DSI that were previously discussed . The second type of instrumentation is the interfacial force microscope ( IFM ) developed at Sandia National Laboratory by Houston and co - workers 9 ) . In terms of nanoindentation of polymers , the IFM has a number of advantages over DSI systems . The main advantage is the ability to indent using rigid displacement control , which allows tip penetration into the sample to be controlled with subnanometer resolution and ensures that the load frame compliance is zero , thus simplifying analysis 11 ) . This attribute results in much lower applied forces compared to DSI such that true nanoscale spatial resolution can be achieved . Typically , electrochemically etched tungsten wires have been used with the IFM , and the tip radii have been determined using scanning electron microscopy to range from 70 nm to 500 nm 10 , 11 ) . Penetration of the tip into the sample is normally much less that the probe tip radius , and thus a Hertzian analysis , which is a special case of Equation 1 with m = 1 . 5 and α = 4E r √ R / 3 , can be used to evaluate the indentation response and calculate sample modulus . In many cases , no hysteresis is observed between loading and unloading curves , indicating pure elastic deformation , such that either the loading curve or unloading curve can be analyzed 11 , 38 ) . Reasonable modulus measurements for polymers using the IFM have been achieved , although similar questions regarding uncertainties as those discussed for DSI remain . Also , in one study , the IFM was used to perform an indentation stress relaxation experiment on PTFE , in which a 15 % decrease in the applied load was observed in less than 3 s of the application of a constant displacement 39 ) . The current scanning capabilities of the IFM , which include only contact mode , are limited compared to the AFM , but the contact mode scanning forces are significantly less than the integrated DSI - AFM system . Also because of the larger tip radii , image resolution for the IFM is not as good as for AFM . Quantitative indentation methods have also been developed recently using AFM cantilever probes that can also be used for imaging purposes 6 ) . Original attempts to use the AFM as an indentation device were done using a privately built system designed specifically for nanoindentation and having limited scanning capabilities 40 ) . More recent efforts , particularly those focussed on indenting polymers and biological materials , have utilized commercial AFM systems and commercial cantilever probes 41 - 46 ) . The advantage of using commercial systems is the potential to combine nanoindentation testing with robust , high resolution imaging capabilities . In fact , through recent developments by one AFM vendor , some commercial AFM systems offer the capability to switch back and forth between tapping mode imaging and indentation mode . However , because commercial AFM systems have not been specifically designed for indentation testing , a number of instrumental uncertainties severely limit their uses as nanoindenters 7 ) . Despite these limitations , successful nanoindentation studies of polymers have been reported . These successes include studies of a wide variety of commercial polymeric materials 42 ) , interphases in fiber - reinforce polymer materials 8 ) , crystalline regions in polyethylene and polyethylene blends 46 ) , aerogel powder particles 45 ) , polymer thin films 43 , 44 ) , and differences between the surface and interior of a polydimethylsiloxane 6 ) . In the AFM indentation studies performed to date , however , the measurements of modulus have been either relative measurements or measurements with large uncertainties due to the use of idealized tip shapes and nominal spring constants . Further , Hertzian or Sneddon models have been utilized in all of these studies , such that viscoelastic behavior has been ignored . In our recent studies , the BCB polymer used in the previously discussed DSI study was indented using a diamond - tipped stainless steel AFM cantilever probe . The spring constant , k c = ( 120 ± 10 ) N / m , was measured by the manufacturer using a technique in which the force applied to a mica sample is measured by a digital microbalance as a function of measured tip deflection . Blind reconstruction was then used to estimate the tip shape area function as described elsewhere 20 ) . Load frame compliance for the AFM cantilever was performed by pushing on a sapphire sample . In this case , because the sample contact stiffness is much larger than the probe spring constant , no tip penetration occurs and the measured force - displacement response is characteristic of the given AFM probe and the particular operating conditions . The probe response can be removed from the force - displacement responses measured on the polymer sample so that only the force - penetration response remains 6 - 8 ) . Eight load levels ranging from 1 . 4 µ N to 13 . 7 µ N were used to indent the BCB sample . For each load level , 10 force curves were obtained on a smooth sapphire sample , five directly before and five directly after indenting the BCB sample , using the same probe and operating conditions . As with the DSI study of the BCB polymer , smooth spline curves were fit to the unloading curves after unsuccessful attempts to get good fits using nonlinear power law fits and linear fits to logarithmic data . Results from this study are shown in Figures 13 and 14 . In Figure 13a , an AFM image of the plastic impressions remaining in the BCB material after indentation is shown . Representative load - penetration curves corresponding to each of the eight load levels are shown in Figure 13b . The resulting values of modulus are plotted as a function of penetration depth in Figure 14 . These values are generally much higher than the bulk modulus value determined from tensile testing , and are also high compared to the values determined in the DSI study . Again , these high modulus values were probably affected by viscoelastic creep , which as previously discussed can increase the initial slopes of the unloading curves . Unlike the DSI study of the BCB polymer , a hold segment was not used between loading and unloading . Also , the stress and strain distributions for the sharper , less ideal AFM tip might have been more severe compared to the Berkovich tip used in the DSI study . Thus , the effects of viscoelastic creep during unloading might have been worse for the AFM indentation study compared to the DSI study , resulting in the higher modulus values . ( a ) ( b ) Fig . 13 : ( a ) AFM image of the plastic impressions remaining in the BCB material after indentation ( height scale is 0 nm to 20 nm from black to white ) , and ( b ) representative load - penetration curves corresponding to each of the eight load levels . Conclusions In this paper , the use of depth - sensing indentation methods to measure the elastic modulus of polymeric materials was reviewed . Included in this review were discussions of traditional analyses of load - penetration data , the use of depth - sensing indenters and scanning probe microscopes to measure the nanoscale mechanical response of polymers , and the associated uncertainties and limitations of various nanoscale indentation measurements . The application of these methods to polymers often leads to inaccurate measurements of elastic modulus . For quasi - static indentation , viscoelastic behavior affects the shape of the unloading curve , resulting in modulus values that are high relative to bulk measurements . Attempts to characterize creep behavior during indentation experiments suffer from system limitations 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000 16000 0 20 40 60 80 100 Indentation Depth ( nm ) L oa d ( n N ) ( e . g . , relatively slow rates of loading compared to the necessary step loading ) and potentially inappropriate assumptions regarding the stress and strain distributions under indentation loads . While additional complications might arise , dynamic indentation testing has the potential to alleviate many of the problems associated with quasi - static indentation testing . However , a rigorous analysis of dynamic indentation behavior of polymers , particularly with regard to whether or not linear viscoelasticity holds , has not been reported . Advancement of these methods toward quantitative characterization of polymer properties will require material - independent calibration procedures , polymer reference materials , advances in instrumentation , and new testing and analysis procedures that account for polymer rheological behavior . Fig . 14 : Plot of modulus measured for the BCB polymer from indentation with an AFM cantilever as a function of contact depth . References 1 . W . C . Oliver , G . M . Pharr , J . Mater . Res . 7 ( 6 ) , 1564 ( 1992 ) . 2 . S . G . Corcoran , R . J . Colton , E . T . Lilleodden , W . W . Gerberich , Phys . Rev . B 55 ( 24 ) , 57 ( 1997 ) . 3 . M . F . Doerner , W . D . Nix , J . Mater . Res . 1 ( 4 ) , 601 ( 1986 ) . 4 . B . N . Lucas , in : Thin - Films - - Stresses and Mechanical Properties VII 505 , Materials Research Society , Pittsburgh , PA , 1998 , p . 97 . 5 . N . M . Jennett , J . Meneve , in : Fundamentals of Nanoindentation and Nanotribology 522 , Materials Research Society , Pittsburgh , PA , 1998 , p . 239 . 6 . M . R . VanLandingham , S . H . McKnight , G . R . Palmese , J . R . Elings , X . Huang , T . A . Bogetti , R . F . Eduljee , J . W . Gillespie Jr . , J . Adhesion 64 ( 1 - 4 ) , 31 ( 1997 ) . 7 . M . R . VanLandingham , Microscopy Today , Issue No . 97 - 10 , pp . 12 - 15 , 1997 . 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 0 20 40 60 80 100 h c ( nm ) E ( G P a ) 8 . M . R . VanLandingham , R . R . Dagastine , R . F . Eduljee , R . L . McCullough , J . W . Gillespie , Jr . , Composites − A 30 ( 1 ) , 75 ( 1999 ) . 9 . S . A . Joyce , J . E . Houston , Rev . Sci . Instrum . 62 ( 3 ) , 710 ( 1991 ) . 10 . S . A . Joyce , R . C . Thomas , J . E . Houston , T . A . Michalske , R . M . Crooks , Phys . Rev . Lett . 68 ( 18 ) , 2790 ( 1992 ) . 11 . J . D . Kiely , J . E . Houston , Phys . Rev . B 57 ( 19 ) , 12588 ( 1998 ) . 12 . I . N . Sneddon , Int . J . Engng . Sci . 3 , 47 ( 1965 ) . 13 . R . B . King , Int . J . Solids Structures 23 ( 12 ) , 1657 ( 1987 ) . 14 . J . C . Hay , A . Bolshakov , G . M . Pharr , J . Mater . Res . 14 ( 6 ) , 2296 ( 1999 ) . 15 . J . L . Hay , in : Proceedings of the SEM IX International Congress on Experimental Mechanics , Society for Experimental Mechanics , Bethel , CT , 2000 , p . 665 . 16 . J . Neter , M . H . Kutner , C . J . Nachtsheim , W . Wasserman , Applied Linear Statistical Models , Irwin , Chicago , IL , 1974 , p . 97 . 17 . B . Bhushan , A . V . Kulkarni , W . Banin , J . T . Wyrobek , Phil . Mag . A 74 ( 5 ) , 1117 ( 1996 ) . 18 . Y . - T . Cheng , C . - M . Cheng , Int . J . Solids Structures 36 , 1231 ( 1999 ) . 19 . J . L . Meneve , J . F . Smith , N . M . Jennett , S . R . J . Saunders , Appl . Surf . Sci . 100 / 101 , 64 ( 1998 ) . 20 . M . R . VanLandingham , J . S . Villarrubia , G . F . Meyers , in : Proceedings of the SEM IX International Congress on Experimental Mechanics , Society for Engineering Mechanics , Bethel , CT , 2000 , p . 912 . 21 . W . W . Gerberich , W . Yu , D . Kramer , A . Strojny , D . Bahr , E . Lilleodden , J . Nelson , J . Mater . Res . 13 ( 2 ) , 421 ( 1998 ) . 22 . S . R . J . Saunders , G . Shafirstein , N . M . Jennett , S . Osgerby , J . Meneve , J . F . Smith , H . Vetters , J . Haupt , Phil . Mag . A 74 ( 5 ) , 1129 ( 1996 ) . 23 . N . M . Jennett , personal communication ( June 1 , 2000 ) . 24 . B . J . Briscoe , K . S . Sebastian , M . J . Adams , J . Phys . D : Appl . Phys . 27 , 1156 ( 1994 ) . 25 . B . J . Briscoe , K . S . Sebastian , Proc . Roy . Soc . Lond . A 452 , 439 ( 1996 ) . 26 . B . J . Briscoe , K . S . Sebastian , S . K . Sinha , Philosophical Magazine A 74 ( 5 ) , 1159 ( 1996 ) . 27 . B . J . Briscoe , L . Fiori , E . Pelillo , J . Phys . D : Appl . Phys . 31 , 2395 ( 1998 ) . 28 . B . N . Lucas , W . C . Oliver , A . C . Ramamurthy , in : ANTEC Conference Proceedings 3 , Society of Plastics Engineers , Brookfield , CT , 1997 , p . 3445 . 29 . I . Adhihetty , J . Hay , W . Chen , P . Padmanabhan , in : Fundamentals of Nanoindentation and Nanotribology 522 , Materials Research Society , Pittsburgh , PA , 1998 , p . 317 . 30 . W . N Unertl , ACS Polym . Preprints 39 ( 2 ) , 1232 ( 1998 ) . 31 . A . Strojny , X . Xia , A . Tsou , W . W . Gerberich , J . Adhesion Sci . Technol . 12 ( 12 ) , 1299 ( 1998 ) . 32 . I . M . Ward , Mechanical Properties of Solid Polymers , Wiley - Interscience , New York 1971 , p . 85 . 33 . L . Cheng , X . Xia , W . Yu , L . E . Scriven , W . W . Gerberich , J . Polym . Sci : Part B : Polym . Phys . 38 , 10 ( 2000 ) . 34 . L . Cheng , L . E . Scriven , W . W . Gerberich , in : Fundamentals of Nanoindentation and Nanotribology 522 , Materials Research Society , Pittsburgh , PA , 1998 , p . 193 . 35 . A . Strojny , W . W . Gerberich , in : Fundamentals of Nanoindentation and Nanotribology 522 , Materials Research Society , Pittsburgh , PA , 1998 , p . 159 . 36 . K . B . Yoder , S . Ahuja , K . T . Dihn , D . A . Crowson , S . G . Corcoran , L . Cheng , W . W . Gerberich , in : Fundamentals of Nanoindentation and Nanotribology 522 , Materials Research Society , Pittsburgh , PA , 1998 , p . 205 . 37 . S . A . Syed Asif , J . B . Pethica , in : Thin - Films - - Stresses and Mechanical Properties VII 505 , Materials Research Society , Pittsburgh , PA , 1998 , p . 103 . 38 . S . K . Khanna , K . Paruchuri , P . Ranganthan , R . M . Winter , in : Proceedings of the SEM IX International Congress on Experimental Mechanics , Society for Engineering Mechanics , Bethel , CT , 2000 , p . 916 . 39 . A . J . Howard , R . R . Rye , J . E . Houston , J . Appl . Phys . 79 ( 4 ) , 1885 ( 1996 ) . 40 . N . A . Burnham , R . J . Colton , J . Vac . Sci . Technol . A 7 ( 4 ) , 2906 ( 1989 ) . 41 . A . L . Weisenhorn , M . Khorsandi , S . Kasas , V . Gotzos , H . - J . Butt , Nanotechnol . 4 , 106 ( 1993 ) . 42 . S . A . Chizhik , Z . Huang , V . V . Gorbunov , N . K . Myshkin , V . V . Tsukruk , Langmuir 14 , 2606 ( 1998 ) . 43 . J . Xu , J . Hooker , I . Adhihetty , P . Padmanabhan , W . Chen , in : Fundamentals of Nanoindentation and Nanotribology 522 , Materials Research Society , Pittsburgh , PA , 1998 , p . 217 . 44 . J . Domke , M . Radmacher , Langmuir 14 , 3320 ( 1998 ) . 45 . R . W . Stark , T . Drobek , M . Weth , J . Fricke , W . M . Heckl , Ultramicrosc . 75 , 161 ( 1998 ) . 46 . M . S . Bischel , M . R . VanLandingham , R . F . Eduljee , J . W . Gillespie Jr . , J . M . Schultz , J . Mater . Sci . 35 , 221 ( 2000 ) .