T h e E c o n o m i c s o f W o r l d w i d e C o r a l R ee f D e g r a d a t i o n T h e E c o n o m i c s o f W o r l d w i d e C o r a l R ee f D e g r a d a t i o n T h e E c o n o m i c s o f W o r l d w i d e C o r a l R ee f D e g r a d a t i o n T h e E c o n o m i c s o f W o r l d w i d e C o r a l R ee f D e g r a d a t i o n T h e E c o n o m i c s o f W o r l d w i d e C o r a l R ee f D e g r a d a t i o n Herman Cesar Lauretta Burke Lida Pet - Soede T h e E c o n o m i c s o f W o r l d w i d e C o r a l R ee f D e g r a d a t i o n T h e E c o n o m i c s o f W o r l d w i d e C o r a l R ee f D e g r a d a t i o n T h e E c o n o m i c s o f W o r l d w i d e C o r a l R ee f D e g r a d a t i o n T h e E c o n o m i c s o f W o r l d w i d e C o r a l R ee f D e g r a d a t i o n T h e E c o n o m i c s o f W o r l d w i d e C o r a l R ee f D e g r a d a t i o n Herman Cesar Lauretta Burke Lida Pet - Soede AcknowledgementsAcknowledgementsAcknowledgementsAcknowledgementsAcknowledgements First of all , we would like to thank Carel Drijver , Annette Cornelisse and Sian Owen at WWF and Kristian Teleki at the International Coral Reef Action Network ( ICRAN ) for their support , encouragement and critical reading of the docu - ment . We would also like to thank Pieter van Beukering and Andrew Finlay for their back - ground calculations and other valuable contri - butions to the report . Furthermore , we would like to thank Ken Kassem ( WWF - US ) for pro - viding the materials on the ‘hotspots’ . We are grateful for Gijs Blaisse , Jacqueline de Haan and Marcel Spijkerman for their work on the lay - out of the report . We would like to thank Maarten van Rouveroy , Andy Bruckner , Ross Jones and Marc Kochzius for letting us use their photos . The usual caveats remain . Financial Support Financial Support Financial Support Financial Support Financial Support This publication is a result of independent re - search funded by WWF ( www . panda . org / coral ) and ICRAN ( www . icran . org ) . The judgments made in this report do not necessarily reflect the views of the funding agencies . AbbreviationsAbbreviationsAbbreviationsAbbreviations Abbreviations NPV = Net Present Value DFP = Destructive Fishing Practice NOAA = National Oceanic and Atmos - pheric Administration GDP = Gross Domestic Product Correspondence address Correspondence address Correspondence address Correspondence address Correspondence address Herman Cesar ( CEEC ) Kastanjelaan 9 6828GH Arnhem The Netherlands Tel : + + 31 - 26 - 4452175 Fax : + + 31 - 26 - 3704915 E - mail : herman . cesar @ ivm . vu . nl Web : www . ceec . nl Background Information Background Information Background Information Background Information Background Information Copies available from Copies available from Copies available from Copies available from Copies available from WWF - Netherlands Postbus 7 3700 AA Zeist The Netherlands Tel . + + 31 - 30 - 6937333 Fax . + + 31 - 30 - 6911685 E - mail : acornelisse @ wwf . nl Web : www . panda . org / coral 22222 © February 2003 Cesar Environmental Eco - nomics Consulting ( CEEC ) Published by : Cesar Environmental Eco - nomics Consulting ( CEEC ) Maps : World Resources Institute , WWF - US , National Oceanic and Atmospheric Admin - istration ( NOAA ) Production : Inspiration Company , Arnhem Printed by : Veenman Drukkers , Ede Photo’s front page : top left ( © WWF - Canon / Catherine Holloway ) , centre left ( ©WWF - Canon / Tom Moss ) . Photo : reefs in dismal state ( by K . Ostlund ) Table of Contents Table of Contents Table of Contents Table of Contents Table of Contents Summary and Conclusions 4 Reefs in Peril 6 Status of Coral Reefs 6 Causes of Reef Decline 7 Impacts on Biodiversity 8 Impacts on People 9 Economic Valuation of Coral Reef Decline 1 0 Potential Economic Value of Coral Reefs 1 0 Tourism Overuse 1 1 Destructive Fishing 1 4 Runoff and Land - based Pollution 1 6 Coral Bleaching and Climate Change 1 8 References 2 0 Notes 2 1 Appendix : Poverty Trap Case Study 2 2 33333 creases in sea surface temperatures associ - ated with global climate change are causing ever more frequent bleaching events . Countries with coral reefs attract millions of SCUBA divers every year , yielding sig - nificant economic benefits to the host coun - try . Globally , tourism is estimated to pro - vide US $ 9 . 6 billion in annual net benefits and a multiple of this amount in tourism spending ( Table 1 ) . These revenue streams in coral reef areas are being threatened by the deterioration of coral reefs . Damage to the reefs has often been caused by the in - crease in tourism itself , through direct dam - age by careless tourists and through the un - regulated construction and the irresponsible operation of tourist related facilities . Mass tourism poses a threat to reefs and to the income that coral reefs provide to the local population . Sustainable tourism , on the other hand , is a source of income to people in reef areas . It even forms an alternative to destructive fishing practices . Reef fisheries provide nutrition and neces - sary incomes to millions of people in de - veloping countries . Potential reef fishing ben - efits are estimated at US $ 5 . 7 billion annu - ally . However , increases in fishing effort , driven by rising populations and more ef - fective fishing technology , have led to over - fishing , such that the obtained economic value of coral reef fisheries is now close to Summary and Conclusions Summary and Conclusions Summary and Conclusions Summary and Conclusions Summary and Conclusions Coral reefs are an incredibly valuable ecosys - tem . Not only are they very important for na - ture , but they represent a very high value for humankind , supporting millions of people whose lives depend on these natural resources for a source of food and income . Estimates in this report show that coral reefs provide each year nearly US $ 30 billion in net benefits in goods and services to world economies , including , tourism , fisheries and coastal protection ( Table 1 ) . Yet coral reefs are under heavy pressure . Al - ready , 27 % is permanently lost and with cur - rent trends , a further 30 % is at risk of being lost in the coming thirty years . With such devas - tating levels of destruction , the social and eco - nomic implications for the millions of people who depend on coral reefs are of great con - cern . Over 39 % of the world population now live within 100 kilometres of the coast and many people in these areas depend on reefs . Reefs protect coastlines and reef fish provide a source of nutrition and income . Poverty increases and food security decreases as fish stocks are de - pleted . This drives fishers further toward the use of destructive methods to catch what little there is left . Key causes of coral reef decline have been the over - development of the coastal area and the over - use of coral reef resources . Migration to coastal areas has created a surge in land devel - opment leading to clearance of important coastal ecosystems such as mangroves and seagrass beds . Unregulated coastal construction , such as hotels , factories and desalination plants , has increased sedimentation in the coastal wa - ters and is destroying reefs worldwide as light levels in the water column are reduced and reefs are smothered . Untreated sewage and chemical agriculture run - off ( e . g . pesticides , herbicides and fertilizers ) have caused nutrient loading into coral reef waters , leading to algal blooms and eutrophication . Overfishing and destructive fish - ing practices have decimated coral reef fish populations and their habitats . In addition , in - 44444 Source : authors’ own calculations Table 1 : Potential net benefit streams per year and net present value ( NPV ) of the world’s coral reefs ( in billion US $ ) Good / service Amount Fisheries 5 . 7 Coastal protection 9 . 0 Tourism / recreation 9 . 6 Biodiversity value 5 . 5 Total 29 . 8 NPV ( 50 year ; 3 % ) 797 . 4 zero in many developing countries . With fewer fish on the reefs many fishermen have resorted to more efficient yet highly damaging methods , such as bomb and cyanide fishing . Because enforcement of these illegal operations is difficult , the financial incentive to fishers in the short run is high . However , the ecological impact causes a net loss to society . For instance , in areas of Indonesia with high potential value of tourism and coastal protection , the socio - economic costs have been estimated to be four times higher than the total net private benefits from blast fishing . The cost of ‘inaction’ on blast fishing has been estimated at US $ 3 . 8 billion in Indonesia over the last 25 years . These figures would have justified enforcement expenditures of around US $ 400 million annually . Land - based pollution is another major threat to coral reefs as untreated sewage from urban areas and runoff from chemicals used in agriculture cause sedimentation and mass algal growth . Currently 22 % of the world’s coral reefs are under medium to high risk from these land - based sources of pollution . As a result , investment to decrease the flow of sediments and excess nutrients into coastal waters is often justified despite high upfront costs . For example , a proposed wastewater treatment plant in the Florida Keys requires around US $ 60 - 70 million in investment costs and around US $ 4 million annually in operation and mainetance costs . However , in the long - term , the benefits to the local population are much higher , estimated at around US $ 700 million in Net Present Value ( NPV ) terms . Additional side benefits such as reduction in water - borne diseases provide further arguments in favour of these investments . To be cost - effective , river basin management should be linked with coastal zone management . This is the essence of the H2O Partnership ( from Hilltop to Ocean ) launched at the World Summit on Sustainable Development in Johannesburg , Au - gust 2002 . Global climate change and related coral bleaching pose a final set of threats to coral reefs . In 1998 , 75 % of reefs worldwide were affected by bleaching and 16 % suffered mortality . Recent studies predict that bleaching could become an annual event within the next 25 to 50 years . The study here calculates the net present value of future losses over the next 50 years at a 3 % discount rate . The losses in the case of the ‘severe’ coral bleaching scenario with mass coral mortality are estimated around US $ 83 billion . For the ‘moderate’ scenario , where bleaching leads to less mortality , costs are estimated at around US $ 21 billion . Other associated impacts of global climate change also have adverse effects on coral reefs , such as increased frequencies of storms and hurricanes . A recent study estimates that climate change will cause losses of US $ 109 . 9 million in the Caribbean due to increased sea - surface tem - peratures , sea - level rise and loss of species , among others . This is equal to 13 . 8 % of the total GDP in the region . Reduction of other stressors to reefs such as those mentioned above , in combination with climate change adaptation measures , could help to decrease the impacts of climate change and coral bleaching on reefs . Without even attempting to measure their intrinsic value , it is clear that coral reefs contribute enormously to food , income and various other quantifiable benefits , if properly managed . Net potential benefits are estimated at US $ 30 billion per year . With current trends of reef degradation , revenues will decrease , in some cases by as much as 75 % with increasing costs . This will imperil the lives of millions of people who rely on reefs for food and income , especially in developing countries . Good reef management is costly , but the losses will be much higher if we fail to take action now . The choice is ours . 55555 Coral reefs are productive and biologically di - verse ecosystems covering only 0 . 2 % of the ocean floor , yet supporting an estimated 25 % of all marine life [ 1 ] . However , coral reefs face worldwide degradation , such that today we have already lost 27 % of the world’s reefs through a combination of natural and , more importantly , human impacts [ 2 ] . If present rates of destruc - tion are allowed to continue , 60 % of the world’s coral reefs will be destroyed over the next 30 years ( Figure 1 ) . Runoff , pollution , tourism overuse , destructive fishing and coral bleaching among others are all contributing to these trends ( see next page ) . Fig - ure 2 shows , for instance , the decrease in live coral cover over the last five years in the highly valued tourist / dived areas in the Sharm - el - Sheikh area of the Egyptian Sinai coast : live hard coral cover fell from nearly 40 % in 1997 to only 10 % in 2002 due to mass tourism expansion [ 3 ] . Aside from the local and regional human im - pacts , global climate change is posing a serious long - term threat to the world’s coral reefs . Mean Reefs in Peril Reefs in Peril Reefs in Peril Reefs in Peril Reefs in Peril sea - surface temperatures have increased by 0 . 3 - 0 . 6°C . With increased sea temperatures it is predicted that frequency and magnitude of hurricanes will increase . The combined effect of hurricanes and warm waters can have a devastating effect which has already been experienced in some areas . Belize witnessed a 50 % reduction in live coral cover in 1997 - 98 due in part to sedimentation from rainfall linked to hurri - cane Mitch and to the 1998 coral bleaching event [ 3 ] . Status of coral Reefs Status of coral Reefs Status of coral Reefs Status of coral Reefs Status of coral Reefs Photo : reef degredation Figure 2 : Change over time of hard and soft coral cover along the Sinai coast ( Egypt ) ; Source : [ 3 ] ) Figure 1 : Percentage of Coral Reefs under Threat World - wide [ 2 ] 66666 Remainder Permanentlylost At risk over the next 2 - 10 years 41 % 41 % 41 % 41 % 41 % 27 % 27 % 27 % 27 % 27 % 18 % 18 % 18 % 18 % 18 % 14 % 14 % 14 % 14 % 14 % At risk over the next 10 - 30 years hard coral soft coral c o r a l c o v e r ( % ) Reef decline is due to a host of stresses in coral reef areas . Four specific causes will be highlighted in this report . Ecological aspects of these causes are discussed here , while the economic implications are discussed later . Tourism overuse has had disastrous impacts on precisely the coral reefs on which the tourism industry depends . The main human impacts related to mass tourism development include sedimentation and loss of habitat by land reclamation , dust , and disposal of solid waste , sewage and sludge . This has , among other things , increased turbidity thereby reduc - ing the levels of light needed for growth and survival . Alongside this , careless practices have direct impacts on coral reef ecosystems , as corals are damaged and killed by contact with fins , hands , knees and also boat or anchor damage . Destructive fishing practices result in damage to either the fished habitat or the primary habitat - structuring organisms in that habitat , and include such well - known problems as blast and cyanide fishing and muro - ami drive nets 1 . The explosion in blast fishing shatters the stony corals and kills fish and invertebrates in a large surrounding area . Over time , blast fishing damages the whole reef and thereby destroys the resource base of many subsis - tence fishers . Poison fishing uses cyanide in concentrations that are not meant to kill but only tranquillise the fish , facilitating their capture . The cyanide is squirted into the reef cavities , often breaking branching coral to get to hiding fish . In the process , corals come under severe stress from the cyanide with many smaller reef organisms often dying from over - doses . Corals that are repetitively subjected to cyanide die . Runoff and land - based pollution from effluent discharge of industrial waste , domestic waste , agricultural sources and logging practices do great harm to corals . Sedimentation from dredging and runoff smothers corals , thus preventing the coral from exposure to sunlight and capturing plankton , their primary sources of energy and nutrition . In compari - son to the acute stress caused by destructive fishing practices , the chronic stress of sedimen - tation leads to slow and gradual decline of reef health . This , in turn , impedes growth and makes corals more susceptible to disease and death . Nutrient enrichment can introduce imbalance to the reef ecosystem due to stimulated phytoplankton growth . Moreover , it may bring about proliferation of seaweeds , which rapidly outgrow the slow - growing corals that are adapted to the low - nutrient concentrations typical of tropical seas . Climate change , and in particular its associated effect of coral bleaching , is a key threat to the future of coral reefs . Corals and many other reef organisms depend for survival on symbiotic algae living in the polyps as these algae provide up to 95 % of the coral’s energy for growth , reproduction , and feeding . These algae , zooxanthellae , also give the coral their beautiful colour and when the corals become stressed , the loss of the zooxanthellae from the coral colony leaves a bare white skeleton or ‘bleached’ appearance . If conditions im - prove and the source of stresses is removed affected corals may recover , with zooxanthel - lae returning but this depends on the duration and severity of the environmental distur - bance [ 4 ] . A prolonged period of stress increases the likelihood of coral death . The coral bleaching event of 1998 was by far the worst on record and also the most widespread as 16 % of coral reefs were effectively destroyed throughout the world [ 3 ] . This episode coincided with prolonged periods of drought and higher than average sea surface tem - peratures linked with the 1998 El Niño event . Causes of Reef Decline Causes of Reef Decline Causes of Reef Decline Causes of Reef Decline Causes of Reef Decline 77777 Coral reefs have been evolving for the last 240 million years and scientists estimate that , in to - tal , more than 1 million plant and animal spe - cies are associated with the coral reef ecosys - tem . These important natural resources provide a home , shelter and food for nearly one quarter of all known marine species , including over 4 , 000 species of fish , 700 species of coral , and thousands of other forms of plant and animal life . However , studies show that populations of a variety of marine and coastal species have de - clined by 30 % in the period 1970 - 95 [ 5 ] . With some 60 % of the world’s coral reefs ‘seri - ously at risk’ from human activities [ 6 ] , it is likely that certain species will disappear before they have been identified . These species may have contained bio - active components that held cures for cancer , HIV and other diseases . Now , more than half of all new cancer drug research fo - cuses on marine organisms . Compounds that have been extracted from a Caribbean reef sponge form the basis of AZT , a treatment for people with HIV infections . Alongside the ex - tinction of unknown species , commercially im - portant species are being wiped out which are critical to maintaining the natural balance of the coral reef ecosystem . Some important findings from recent research paint a clear pic - ture of the plight of coral reefs 2 : o reefs subject to land - based pollution showed a reduc - tion of 30 - 50 % in diversity at a 3 m depth , and a 40 - 60 % reduction in diversity at a 10 m depth compared to unpolluted reefs at simi - lar sites in Indonesia [ 7 ] . o commercial reef fish favoured by tourists for eat - ing may be facing extinction in the near future [ 8 ] . For example : Impacts on Biodiversity Impacts on Biodiversity Impacts on Biodiversity Impacts on Biodiversity Impacts on Biodiversity - Nassau Groupers were absent from 82 % of shallow Caribbean reefs - Baramundi Cod were absent from 95 % of Indo - Pacific reefs - Bumphead Parrotfish were absent from 89 % of Indo - Pacific reefs - Humphead wrasse were absent from 88 % of Indo - Pacific reefs . o Important and highly - valued seafood such as spiny lobster and triton shells are also close to being extinguished . Moray eels were not recorded on 81 % of reefs , and in the Indo - Pacific there were no grou - pers larger than 30 cm recorded at 48 % of reefs surveyed [ 8 ] . This may indicate for some grouper species mass overfish - ing and removal of fish before they have had a chance to reproduce . o There was also a decrease in the global mean number of butterfly fish – widely considered to be an indicator species for reef health and diversity - from 1997 to 2001 ( Figure 3 ) [ 8 ] . This could be an indi - cation of overfishing and destructive fish - ing methods as well as a decline in gen - eral reef health . Figure 3 : Mean Abundance of butterfly fish per 100 m 2 ( 1997 - 2001 ) on Indo - pacific and Atlantic reefs . Source : [ 8 ] 88888 Impacts on People Impacts on People Impacts on People Impacts on People Impacts on People The 2002 World Summit on Sustainable Development highlighted the importance of alle - viation of poverty amongst the millions of people whose lives depend on coral reefs . Almost two - fifth of the world’s population live less than 100 kilometres from the ocean [ 9 ] and most of these are in developing countries . As human populations continue to grow , coastal communities become increasingly dependent on healthy fish stocks . Reef - associated fisheries are an important component of this . See also Appendix on Poverty trap . A combination of high levels of fishing pressure and habitat destructive harvesting methods , re - sults in declining catches and reduces stock sizes to levels insufficient to en - sure reproduction . Table 2 indicates perceived changes in fish stocks since 10 years by fishers throughout Indonesia . A second example is the artisanal reef - dependent fishery which is crucial to approximately 23 , 000 fishers in Zanzibar , contributing over 60 % of protein consumption to local com - munities [ 12 ] . Along the reef strewn coastline of Eastern Africa , some 50 % of about 100 , 000 full - time fishers and several hundred thousand part - time fishers risk losing their livelihoods if over - fishing continues [ 13 ] . Overfishing in reef areas and coastal habitat destruction can often a result in continued and increased poverty . The open access character of coral reef fisheries increases fishing effort resulting in locally decreased catches , particularly in marginal fisheries . In a spiral of dimin - ishing returns , other family members then need to partake in securing daily food , often through reef gleaning such as harverting octopus and sea cucumbers at low tide . Associ - ated reef trampling with this ac - tivity puts yet another irreversible stress on the corals . Additionally , ( by ) - catch of other ( often endan - gered ) marine organisms such as whales and manta rays provide a welcome , if unsustainable , contri - bution to fishers’ incomes or sim - ply to the families’ dietary require - ments for protein . Figure 4 shows involvement of women in fisher - ies in Bunaken National Park sampled in 16 villages , indicating the dependence of entire families on the Park’s reefs [ 14 ] . Reason for decrease Site Respon - Decreasing Over - Habitat dents catch fishing destruction Derawan 259 74 % 55 % 8 % Spermonde a 225 73 % 71 % 16 % Bunaken MPA 216 56 % No data No data Riung MPA 160 42 % 34 % 2 % Source : [ 10 ] ; The Spermonde data ( a ) come from [ 11 ] Table 2 : Indonesian fishers’ perceptions on current status of reef fish stocks measured in daily catch compared with 10 years ago and reasons for change . Note difference between MPA sites and non - protected sites . O cc u rr e n ce i n s a m p l e o f 1 6 v i ll a g e s ( % ) Marine Activity S h e ll h a n d i c r a f t S e ll s h e ll s t o t o u r i s t s L o n g li n e ( b y b o a t ) N e t f i s h i n g u s i n g b o a t S m a ll h o o k a n d li n e S e a w ee d f a r m i n g B a m b o o h o o k a n d li n e T r a d e f i s h l o c a ll y G l e a n i n g T r a d e f i s h i n M a n a d o Figure 4 : Summary of Marine Activities by Women in Bunaken National Park , Indonesia ; ( Source [ 14 ] ) 99999 The fact that coral reefs have tremendous value often seems to elude policy and decision mak - ers . If these decision makers were more aware of the amount of capital that healthy reefs can bring to the economy in terms of tourism , fish - eries , coastal protection and biodiversity , a more concerted and united management effort would be possible . Economic valuation can help to ensure that coral reefs are properly taken into account in public decision - making and that fi - nancial resources – both locally and globally – are made available for their management and conservation . In addition , economic valuation enables the assessment of monetary losses to the economy when reefs are damaged as a re - sult of human activities ( e . g . ship groundings , oil spills ) . Below , new estimates are given of the reef value in monetary terms . Reefs provide a variety of goods and services , which create economic benefits to society . These economic benefits are often taken for granted , yet if these goods and services were taken away or destroyed , we would be forced to provide other methods to supply these benefits at sig - nificant costs . Table 3 illustrates the potential net benefit streams for the world in the order of US $ 30 billion per year if coral reefs were well managed and intact , based on new calculations 3 . The corresponding global asset value of coral reefs is estimated at nearly US $ 800 billion , cal - Economic Valuation of Coral Reef Decline Economic Valuation of Coral Reef Decline Economic Valuation of Coral Reef Decline Economic Valuation of Coral Reef Decline Economic Valuation of Coral Reef Decline Potential Economic Value of Coral Reefs Potential Economic Value of Coral Reefs Potential Economic Value of Coral Reefs Potential Economic Value of Coral Reefs Potential Economic Value of Coral Reefs culated at a 3 % discount rate and a 50 year timeframe . Potential net benefits from fisheries are esti - mated at US $ 5 . 7 billion a year . Yet , over - fishing and destructive fishing have taken their toll and reef fishery benefits in most places in the developing world are now close to zero – fishers merely fish to stay alive with - out making any profits . The aesthetic beauty of coral reefs attracts millions of tourists worldwide who come to dive and snorkel amongst these natural treasures . Reef tour - ism is growing rapidly and is estimated to provide potential annual net benefits of US $ 9 . 6 billion . Coral reefs also act as natural sea walls by providing a buffer to protect in - shore areas from the pounding of ocean waves . This protective function of reefs is estimated to be valued at US $ 9 . 0 billion per year . Finally , reef biodiversity has a high re - search and conservation value , as well as a non - use value , estimated together at US $ 5 . 5 billion annually . In addition to these quanti - fied values , reefs have drawn a mass of medi - cal and pharmaceutical research interest in the pursuit of finding cures for human diseases . These estimates provide new data on how much reefs can be worth in economic terms and give insight into the costs to society if these reefs are lost . 1010101010 Southeast Caribbean Indian Pacific Japan USA Australia World Asia ( ex . USA ) Ocean ( ex USA ) Reef area ( km 2 ) 89 , 000 19 , 000 54 , 000 67 , 000 3 , 000 3 , 000 49 , 000 284 , 000 Fisheries 2 , 281 391 969 1 , 060 89 70 858 5 , 718 Coastal protection 5 , 047 720 1 , 595 579 268 172 629 9 , 009 Tourism / recreation 4 , 872 663 1 , 408 269 779 483 1 , 147 9 , 621 Biodiversity value 458 79 199 172 529 401 3 , 645 5 , 483 Total 12 , 658 1 , 853 4 , 171 2 , 079 1 , 665 1 , 126 6 , 278 29 , 830 NPV ( at 3 % ) 338 , 348 49 , 527 111 , 484 55 , 584 44 , 500 30 , 097 167 , 819 797 , 359 Table 3 : Potential net benefit streams per year and net present value ( NPV ) of coral reefs per region ( in US $ million ) [ see note 3 for supporting calculations ] Tourism Overuse Tourism Overuse Tourism Overuse Tourism Overuse Tourism Overuse Tourism is the world’s largest industry , employing 199 million people and contributing US $ 3 , 500 billion ( 10 % ) to world GDP in 2002 [ 15 ] . Globally , tourism is one of the top five sources of foreign exchange for 83 % of countries . Moreover , it is the fastest expand - ing industry , growing annually at 4 . 6 % in the year 2000 [ 16 ] . Reef - related tourism is increas - ing even more rapidly with dive tourism growing at a rate of 20 % per year [ 17 ] . The Caribbean , for instance , attracts about 57 % of the world’s 10 million active SCUBA divers and it has been estimated that by the year 2005 , diving will generate about $ 1 . 2 billion annually [ 18 ] . Figure 5 shows the spread of dive centres and tourism as percentage of GDP . However , coastal tourism has in many places been a mixed blessing . The rapidly expanding mass tourism industry in the Caribbean has required large investments in coastal develop - ment to cater for the high influx of tourists , as there is an increasing demand for hotels , marinas , harbours , shops , sports facilities , etc . These rapid developments have had major impacts on the coral reefs , on which the tourism industry depends , with 32 % of Caribbean coral reefs estimated to be threatened by coastal development [ 6 ] . Sewage from coastal developments , including tourist resorts , is the largest form of pollution in the Caribbean as 80 - 90 % of the sewage generated is disposed of in near - shore coastal waters without ad - equate treatment [ 19 ] . Additionally , in many areas the sheer numbers of dive and snorkel tourists cause direct damage to coral reefs , often through careless behaviour including con - tact with fins and hands , as well as boat or anchor damage . In a further illustration , in 1993 the Cayman Islands generated about US $ 280 million from general tourism . Of this , US $ 84 million was spent by divers for diving and non - diving related activities [ 17 ] . Nearly 375 , 000 logged dives were recorded and some dive sites attracted 15 , 000 dives in one year . The Grand Cayman office of tourism considers that 1111111111 Figure 5 : Dive Centers and Tourism Economy as percentage of GDP in the Caribbean Source : Preliminary data from Reefs at Risk in the Caribbean project , WRI ( unpublished ) , based on [ 15 ] and UNEP - WCMC dive centers . Tourism economy GDP as % of National GDP Dive Centers 4 , 8 - 8 , 4 8 , 4 - 11 , 5 11 , 5 - 18 , 1 18 , 1 - 33 33 - 71 , 7 Photo : Tourism trampling on coral ( by Marc Kochzius ) dive sites can support between 4 , 500 to 5 , 000 dives per year before the reefs become seri - ously degraded [ 17 ] . A recent ecological study in Grand Cayman [ 20 ] found significantly lower overall hard coral cover at high intensity sites compared with low intensity and undived sites . High intensity sites were also found to have greater incidences of total dead coral and coral rubble [ 20 ] . Current levels of diving pressure are thus unsustainable and all reefs in the Cay - mans are now at serious risk . Diving is also important for the economy of Bonaire , Netherlands Antilles . Diving rates on this island have increased from about 20 , 000 total dives per year in 1991 to about 26 , 000 in 2001 . Diver impacts were analysed for Bonaire in the early 1990s [ 21 ] . This study found that diver impact becomes quickly apparent when use exceeds a level of 4 , 000 - 6 , 000 divers on a single dive site per year . Thanks to effective man - agement , current levels of diving are still largely within these limits . This has enabled Bonaire to maintain itself as one of the best dive sites in the world . A recent study in Hurghada estimated the per - centage of coral damage in correlation with the number of dives per year [ 22 ] . The results ( Fig - ure 6 ) show coral impacts in heavily dived sites . ( see also Box 2 ) . It is likely that the notion of carrying capacity is elastic rather than fixed [ 23 ] and depends on other factors , such as the level of diver education and briefing [ 24 ] , or adverse im - pacts from tourism development practices in general and construction in particular . Tourism clearly brings sub - stantial benefits to countries with reefs , estimated here at US $ 9 . 6 billion annually . How - ever , the income derived from tourism is threatened by reef degradation , often the result of mass tourism develop - ment . The challenge for policy makers and the private sector is to develop a high value sus - tainable tourism industry that maintains healthy reefs over time . Figure 6 : The correllation between the number of dives per year and the observed and calclutated percentage of coral damage recorded from the examined sites around Hurgada , Egypt [ 22 ] . 1212121212 Box 1 : Dive toursim in Egypt : where do we go ? Egypt offers 1 , 800 km of coastline and 3 , 800 km 2 of reef in the tropical waters of the Red Sea coast and in the Gulf of Aqaba [ 1 ] . Live coral cover is relatively high in Egypt , varying on reef slopes from 2 % to 62 % and along reef walls from 12 % to 85 % [ 2 ] . Reefs are of particular importance to the Egyptian economy due to their close proximity to the millions of tourists from Europe . Around 2 . 5 million visitors a year enjoy the tropical coastal areas of Egypt , of which 23 % come specifically to dive and a further 33 % participate in snorkeling activities [ 25 ] . In recent years , anthropogenic impacts have reduced coral cover in many places by 30 % [ 2 ] , both through direct contact ( fins and trampling ) as well as through land reclamation , artificial beach construction and hotel sewage . Around 61 % of the country’s coral reefs are estimated to be at serious risk from human impacts [ 6 ] . A recent study has shown that in areas where the number of divers far exceeds the diver carrying capacity , coral cover is gradually declining over time [ 22 ] and that an upper limit of around 10 , 000 divers annually per dive site seems to prevent serious degradation . Some of the most popular dive sites in Hurghada , however , are now hosting well above 100 , 000 divers a year . In such sites , the percentage live coral ranges from 29 - 34 % in such sites versus 69 - 75 % in non - diving control sites around Hurghada ( Figure 7 ) [ 22 ] . Preliminary results from a USAID - funded study on the economic value of dive tourism in Egypt highlight positive and negative impacts of diving [ 25 ] . Two scenarios are described with a 50 - year timeframe period : the ‘business - as - usual’ scenario and the ‘towards sustainability’ scenario . In Hurghada , where tourism has developed since the 1980s , the impacts of tourist activities have already caused a significant decline in the value of coral reefs . The annual net benefits will decrease over time in the ‘business - as - usual’ scenario as reefs continue to be exploited at the current levels . In the ‘towards sustainability’ scenario , the number of divers decline to carrying capacity levels and net benefits will stabilize after an initial drop ( Figure 7 ) . In Marsa Alam , where tourism only took off 2 - 3 years ago , there is less of a threat at present from human impacts and both scenarios show increasing net benefits over time over the coming 10 - 15 years . However , this is reached in two very different ways . While tourism numbers are stabilized in the ‘towards sustainability’ case with higher value added per tourist , the ‘business as usual’ scenario shows increasing numbers of tourists and decreasing value per tourist over time . After 2020 , the difference in approach starts to show off : net benefits in the ‘towards sustainability’ case keep increasing over time , while dive benefits of the ‘business - as - usual’ case start to diminish ( Figure 7 ) . Figure 7 : Change in annual benefits over time in Hurghada and Marsa Alam ( Source : [ 25 ] ) Hurghada Marsa Alam Business as usual Towards sustainability A nn u a l B e n e f i t s ( i n U S $ m illi on ) A nn u a l B e n e f i t s ( i n U S $ m illi on ) 1313131313 Destructive Fishing Destructive Fishing Destructive Fishing Destructive Fishing Destructive Fishing Destructive fishing practices ( DFPs ) include well - known problems such as blast and cyanide fish - ing and muro - ami nets 1 . DFPs result in direct damage to the fisheries habitat or to habitat - structuring organisms , such as hard coral com - munities [ 26 ] . Blast fishing occurs in the Carib - bean , East Africa and Southeast Asia . Cyanide fishing and muro - ami are largely restricted to Asia and parts of the Pacific . Figure 8 indicates high threat levels for major parts of Sulawesi ( Indonesia ) , the Philippines and Vietnam [ 27 ] . Economics drive the use of DFPs but sooner rather than later the reefs will have been de - stroyed having broad socio - economic impacts on coastal communities and society as a whole . Estimates from Indonesia show that costs of blast fishing to society , can be as much as 4 times higher than the benefits to fishers , resulting in a net loss after 20 years of blast fishing of over US $ 300 , 000 per km 2 of coral reef in areas with a high potential value of tourism and coastal protection , and US $ 33 , 900 per km 2 where there is low potential value [ 28 ] . The main quantifi - able costs are through loss of the coastal pro - tection function , and the foregone benefits of tourism and non - destructive fisheries . Based on these figures , the foregone benefits to Indone - sia of blast fishing during the last 25 years could be estimated at US $ 3 . 8 billion [ 29 ] . Bombs were originally made from World War II ammu - nition , but now chemical fertilizers are used at very low cost ( US $ 1 - 2 ) . Income from blast fishing compares to the highest incomes in conventional fisheries . Three types of blast fishing occur in Indonesia : small - , medium - and large - scale . At individual household level , differences between the three show incentives for scale enlargement ( Table 4 ) . Cyanide fishing is popular amongst the younger generation of fishers who perceive available resources opportunistically , and join the ranks of divers roaming reefs for grou - pers and elusive angelfish . Cyanide fishing is both used for the aquarium trade [ Box 2 ] as well as the live food fish trade . The latter emerged from Hong Kong , Taiwan and mainland - China [ 30 ] , where customers are willing to pay US $ 100 and more per serv - ing , especially for specific species of grou - pers ( especially Plectropomus spp . and Cromileptes altivelis ) and Napoleon wrasse ( Cheilinus undulatus ) . The high prices allow Indonesian traders and middlemen to employ skilled divers and use relatively advanced methods , yet sizes of cyanide operations vary from single outboard engine canoes to large - scale mother ships with several dinghies and 20 crew . Profits and incomes are higher than in any type of conventional fishery ( Table 4 ) . Photo : Blast fishers in Indonesia ( by Lida Pet - Soede ) Table 4 : Midpoint estimates of monthly average income in US $ for crew and owners of destructive fishing operations in Indonesia ( Source : [ 29 ] ) . Destructive Activity Small - Medium - Large - scale scale scale Blast fishing ( ‘97 ) : - Crew 55 146 179 - Owner 55 393 1100 Cyanide fishing : * Food fish ( ‘97 ) - Crew 100 252 400 - Owner 100 413 35000 * Aquarium fish ( ‘02 ) - Crew 120 253 114 1414141414 Box 2 : Aquarium Trade The global marine aquarium trade involves some 1000 fish species , 2000 coral species , live rock and other reef invertebrates such as clams , worms and sea feathers . Indonesia is a major exporter and its importance is rising yet the potential negative impact of international trade on the country’s wild populations is high . In 1997 Indonesia was the main supplier of marine aquarium fish to the EU , providing 217 . 1 tonnes ( 44 % ) . The volume shows a 60 % increase compared to 1996 ( 132 . 5 tonnes ) and 150 % compared to 1991 [ 32 ] . In 1996 , EU Member States importing most of Indonesia’s marine ornamental fish were : the Netherlands , United Kingdom , France and Germany , [ 32 ] . Compared to other Indonesian fisheries , the ornamental trade is a small but lucrative sector . Unfortunately destructive techniques are used and the trade experiences high losses during transpor - tation from bad handling . In response , the Marine Aquarium Council ( MAC ) has launched an effort to reform the trade through the establishment of a certification system which would allow hobbyists the choice of fish caught and transported using sustainable methods . Figure 8 : Occurrence of destructive fishing in Southeast Asia ( blast and cyanide fishing ) [ 27 ] Estimated Threat Level high medium low Individual fishers often seem locked into their destructive practices although their com - bined actions exhaust the resources that form the basis of their income . Management of the vast ocean waters poses serious logistical challenges , particularly where enforcement authorities have low wages and are thus susceptible to corruption . Yet the projected losses would seem to justify substantially increased enforcement efforts to halt the destructive practices and reverse the downward spiral of poverty and resource degradation . 1515151515 Runoff and Land - based Pollution Runoff and Land - based Pollution Runoff and Land - based Pollution Runoff and Land - based Pollution Runoff and Land - based Pollution Land - based sources of pollution and sediment are a significant threat to coral reefs , both through smothering coral with sediments and through increased nutrients and other pollutants , which create favourable conditions for algae and dis - ease . Some sediment and pollution come from activities near the coast , while others originate far inland and are transported by rivers to the coast . Land clearing and agricultural activities contribute to this threat . A 1998 study by the World Resources Institute estimates that 22 % of the world’s reefs are under medium to high threat from inland sources of pollution and sedi - ment [ 6 ] , sometimes with large economic con - sequences ( Figure 9 ) . Economic valuation of runoff and land - based pollution is nearly impossible as often there are multiple sources of pollution , having site - spe - cific and seasonal dispersal , and a variety of economic impacts ( water - borne diseases , lower fisheries productivity , reduced amenity , etc . ) . A possible exception is logging , where a specific activity leads to erosion and the con - sequences are restricted to one or two major impacts . An example is the logging versus fisheries and tourism case in El Nido , Palawan ( Philippines ) summarised in Table 5 [ 32 ] . There are two options to address logging : a logging ban ( 1 ) versus a continuation of log - ging ( 2 ) . Gross revenues are estimated for each sector under both options for 1987 - 1996 . Reults are striking as gross revenue under option 1 more than doubles that un - der option 2 even when logging revenue Table 5 : Tourism , fisheries and logging industries : ten - year sum of gross revenue ( ‘000 US $ ) under 2 scenario’s : Logging ban ( option 1 ) and continued logging ( option 2 ) ( Source : [ 32 ] . Gross Revenue Ban on Continued Option 1 - 2 logging ( 1 ) logging ( 2 ) Tourism 47 , 415 8 , 178 39 , 237 Fisheries 28 , 070 12 , 844 15 , 226 Logging 0 12 , 844 - 12 , 884 Total 75 , 485 33 , 906 41 , 579 Figure 9 : Sedimentation from inland sources [ 6 ] Estimated Threat Level high medium low 1616161616 under option 1 is nil since fisheries and tourism , generate large and continuing benefits . In contrast , continued logging generates smaller and decreasing benefits as after five years , both the logs and a significant part of the tourism and fisheries sectors will be depleted . The modest logging revenue generated under option 2 is easily offset by the decreased income from tourism and fisheries . This study helped convince the provincial government to withdraw this spe - cific logging licence [ 32 ] . These and other stud - ies have shown the benefits of reduction in runoff and pollu - tion . In developing countries policy mak - ers that are challenged to achieve economic progress are not eas - ily convinced of the benefit of investing in waste treatment and run - off reduction . Costs of wastewater treatment is indeed high , but the costs can be supported by even greater economic benefits ( Box 3 ) . At the World Summit on Sustainable Development , the H2O Partnership ( from Hilltop to Ocean ) was launched , promoting ocean protection from land based activities . Linking river basins with coastal zone management can reduce negative external effects of sedimentation on reefs . In this sense , this partnership is a modern institutional version of the traditional Hawaiian ahapu’ua system whereby the entire watershed from hilltop to reef and beyond is seen as one area to be managed by one clan . This ensures that any impacts of land - based activities on coral reefs are taken into account . Box 3 : Cost benefit Analysis for Wastewater Treatment Plant in Florida Keys [ 33 ] The Florida Keys contain extensive coral reefs and are a popular destination for water sports enthu - siasts . Given their isolated position , fresh water availability and wastewater issues have long been a management challenge . Pollution from wastewater in the Keys contributes to eutrophication of the coastal waters and degradation of local marine communities . A treatment plant would reduce waste - water entering this environment , yet it would require around US $ 60 - 70 million in investment costs and around US $ 4 million annually in operational costs . However , in the long - term the benefits with respect to the welfare gains of tourists are much higher , around US $ 700 million in NPV terms . Hence , the wastewater treatment plant is economically fully justified in this ecologically sensitive area . Photo : sedimentation ( by Ross Jones ) 1717171717 Global coral bleaching episodes and subsequent coral mortality are likely to result in serious socio - economic impacts . A study on the 1998 mas - sive bleaching event estimated a loss of US $ 700 – 8 , 200 million in net present value terms for the Indian Ocean [ 34 ] . Evidence suggests that the cause of these bleaching events is El Niño - related changes in sea - surface temperatures [ 34 ] ( Figure 10 ) . It is difficult to establish this link with scientific certainty but it is important , nonetheless , to estimate likely losses over time due to future changes in sea surface tempera - ture . Recent work on “hotspot frequencies” show a weak link with bleaching events . Figure 11 shows the cumulative number of hotspots over 16 years , between 1985 - 2000 . The data are based on cli - matological mean 5 - day maximum tempera - Coral Bleaching and Climate Change Coral Bleaching and Climate Change Coral Bleaching and Climate Change Coral Bleaching and Climate Change Coral Bleaching and Climate Change tures 4 . A hotspot is recorded whenever the temperature in a grid cell exceeds the mean maximum temperature in that cell by one de - gree Celsius . The map illustrates that there is a wide geographical variation in where hotspots are experienced . Note that a high frequency of hotspots does not indicate a high correlation with a high incidence of coral bleaching ( Figure 10 ) : corals can bleach in places where hotspots are infrequent and may even be less tolerant to hotspots than in areas that experience frequent hotspots . There is little biophysical and ecological knowledge of the impacts of large - scale coral mortality on ecosystem services [ 37 ] . This makes it even harder to estimate socio - economic impacts of large scale bleaching and related mortality . With these caveats in mind , new estimates on tourism , fisheries and biodiversity impacts are presented here , by region and by ecosystem function . Current estimates suggest a likely increase in the frequency of bleaching as a result of cli - mate change and predict that bleaching could become an annual event in the next 25 - 50 years [ 38 ] . Given the uncertainties discussed above , a scenario - analysis is used to estimate possible economic costs of these predictions . In the ‘moderate’ bleaching scenario – corals would bleach but mortality is limited - it is assumed that fisheries , tourism and Figure 10 : Major bleach - ing areas recorded for all years ( Source : [ 35 ] ) Figure 11 : Cumulative Number of Hotspots over 16 years ( 1985 - 2000 ) ( NOAA data through Ken Kassem , WWF - US ) Estimated levels of bleaching severe bleaching moderate bleaching low bleaching no bleaching 01 - 3 4 - 6 7 - 8 9 - 10 11 - 12 13 - 14 15 - 16 17 - 18 19 - 20 21 - 70 71 - 254 Legend 1818181818 biodiversity values will decline gradually over time to 90 % of their current level . In the ‘se - vere’ bleaching scenario with mass coral mor - tality , it is assumed that these values will de - cline to 50 % of current value . Current values are based on calculations presented in Table 3 . Total costs of bleaching over a 50 year time horizon with a 3 % discount rate are estimated at over US $ 84 billion in net present value . For moderate bleaching , this number is US $ 20 billion . The tourism value is highest with nearly US $ 40 billion in the ‘severe’ bleaching case , followed by fisheries ( US $ 23 billion ) and biodiversity ( US $ 22 billion ) ( Figure 12 ) . The regional distribution is given in Table 6 and shows that the main costs of bleaching are in Australia ( US $ 28 . 4 billion ) and Southeast Asia ( US $ 38 . 3 billion ) . In addition to bleaching , there are other associated impacts of climate change which will have adverse impacts on coral reefs and their economic value . It has been projected that the sea - surface temperature in the Caribbean could lead to about 40 % more hurricane activity in the area [ 39 ] . Hurricanes have the potential to destroy large areas of coral reef on a national and regional scale . Between 1997 and 1998 there was a 50 % reduction in live coral cover in Belize , mainly attributed to hurricane Mitch and the coral bleaching event of 1998 [ 3 ] . These events and subsequent impacts simply add to the overall economic costs to society . Overall , in the Caribbean , climate change is predicted to cause a loss of US $ 109 . 9 million in terms of increased sea - surface temperatures , sea - level rise and loss of species among others , which equates to 13 . 8 % of the total GDP [ 40 ] . The question is what short term measures are available to address coral bleaching , in addi - tion to the promotion of global efforts to curb emissions from burning fossil fuels . It may be possible to avoid the predictions of the ‘severe’ bleaching scenarios and remain at the level of the ‘moderate’ bleaching predictions . For example , it is possible that impacts of sea surface temperature changes on corals can be reduced by lowering the overall stress level on coral reefs through concerted efforts by all stakeholders ind more mainstream parts of international funding agencies’ activities in the Car - ibbean and the Pacific . A concerted effort is required to ensure that these efforts are extended more widely to other regions of the worlds and that progress in addressing global climate change is made . Severe bleaching Australia 28 . 4 Southeast Asia ( excl . Japan ) 38 . 3 Caribbean ( excl . USA ) 5 . 7 Indian Ocean ( incl . Red Sea ) 13 . 0 Pacific ( excl . Hawaii ) 7 . 6 USA ( excl . overseas territories ) 4 . 8 Japan 7 . 0 Total 104 . 8 Note : Calculated in Net Present Value ( NPV ) with 50 year time horizon at a 3 % discount rate . Table 6 : Regional allocation of costs of severe bleaching ( in billion US $ ) Figure 12 : Costs of bleaching distributed among sec - tors ( in billion US $ ) Moderate Bleaching Severe Bleaching Fisheries Tourism Biodiversity b i ll i o n U S $ 1919191919 ReferencesReferencesReferencesReferencesReferences [ 1 ] Spalding , M . D . , Ravilious , C . , Green , E . P . ( 2001 ) World Atlas of Coral Reefs . Prepared by the UNEP - World Conservation Monitoring Centre . University of Cali - fornia Press , Berkeley , USA [ 2 ] Wilkinson , C . ( 2000 ) Status of Coral Reefs of the World 2000 , Australian Institute of Marine Science ( AIMS ) , Global Coral Reef Monitoring Network ( GCRMN ) , Townsville , Australia [ 3 ] Wilkinson , C . ( 2002 ) Status of Coral Reefs of the World 2002 , Australian Institute of Marine Science ( AIMS ) , Global Coral Reef Monitoring Network ( GCRMN ) , Townsville , Australia [ 4 ] Hoegh Guldberg , O . ( 1999 ) Climate Change , Coral Bleaching and the Future of the World’s Coral Reefs , Report for Greenpeace , Australia [ 5 ] Groombridge , B . , Jenkins M . D . ( 2000 ) Global Biodiversity : Earth’s Living Resources in the 21st Century , The World Conservation Press , Cambridge , UK [ 6 ] Bryant , D . , Burke , L . , McManus , J . , Spalding , M . ( 1998 ) Reefs at Risk – A Map Based Indicator of Threats to the World’s Coral Reefs , WRI / ICLARM / WCMC / UNEP [ 7 ] Edinger E . N . , Jompa J . , Limmon G . V . , Widjatmoko W . , Risk M . J . ( 1998 ) Reef Degradation and Coral Biodiversity in Indonesia : Effects of Land - Based Pol - lution , Destructive Fishing Practices and Changes over Time , Marine Pollution Bulletin 36 : 617 - 630 [ 8 ] Hodgson , G . , J . Liebeler ( 2002 ) The Global Coral Reef Crisis : Trends and Solutions1997 - 2001 , Reef Check , University California Los Angeles ( UCLA ) , Los Ange - les , USA [ 9 ] Burke , L . , Kura , Y . , Kassem , K . , Revenga , C . , Spalding , M . , McAllister , D . ( 2001 ) Pilot Analysis of Global Ecosystems : Coastal Ecosystems , WRI , Washington , DC [ 10 ] WWF - Indonesia Wallacea Fisheries Program Docu - ment , unpublished 2002 . [ 11 ] Pet - Soede , C . , 2000 . Options for co - management of an Indonesian coastal fishery . PhD Thesis , Wageningen Agricultural University [ 12 ] Jiddawi N . S . ( 1997 ) The reef dependent fisheries of Zanzibar . In Johnstone R . W , Francis , J . Muhando , C . A . ( eds . ) Proceedings of the National Conference on Coral Reefs , Zanzibar , 2 - 4th Dec . 1997 : 22 - 35 [ 13 ] Moffat , D . , Ngoile , M . N . , Linden , O . , Francis J . ( 1998 ) The Reality of the Stomach : Coastal Management at the Local Level in Eastern Africa , Ambio 26 : 590 - 598 [ 14 ] Gallop , K . ( 2001 ) The impact of the Bunaken Na - tional Park management plan on women’s access to and utilization of marine resources , North Sulawesi , Indonesia . MSc Thesis . WWF Wallacea Fisheries Pro - gram . [ 15 ] World Travel and Tourism Council ( 2002 ) , End of Year Update , TSA Research Summary and Highlights ( also : www . wttc . org ) [ 16 ] World Tourism Organisation ( 1998 ) http : / / www . world - tourism . org [ 17 ] Madigan Pratt & Associates ( 1995 ) Diving in the Cayman Islands : Economic Impact & Requirements for Maintaining Its Premier Status , Prepared for the Cayman Islands Department of Tourism . Cited in Caribbean Environment Programme and United Nations Environment Programme , 1997 , Coastal Tourism in the Wider Caribbean – Impacts and Best Management Practices , Technical Report No . 38 . [ 18 ] Caribbean Latin American Action . ( 1998 ) Carib - bean Basin Profile , Caribbean Pro Publishing Ltd . Grand Cayman Island [ 19 ] Simmons & Associates ( 1994 ) The Impact of Tour - ism on the Marine Environment of the Caribbean , Prepared for the Caribbean Tourism Organisation , cited in Caribbean Environment Programme and United Nations Environment Programme , 1997 , Coastal Tourism in the Wider Caribbean – Impacts and Best Management Practices , Technical Report No . 38 [ 20 ] Tratalos , J . A . , Austin T . J . ( 2001 ) Impacts of recre - ational SCUBA diving on Coral Communities of the Caribbean Island of Grand Cayman , Biological Conservation 102 : 67 - 75 [ 21 ] Dixon , J . F . , Scura , L . F . , Van’t Hof , T . ( 1993 ) Meeting Ecological and Economic Goals : Marine Parks in the Caribbean , Ambio 22 : 117 - 125 [ 22 ] Abou Zaid . M . ( 2002 ) Impact of Diving Activi - ties on the Coral Reefs along the Red Sea Coast of Hurghada , mimeo Marine Biology and Fish Science Section , Zoology Department , Al - Azhar Univer - sity , Cairo [ 23 ] Hawkins , J . P . , Roberts , C . M . ( 1997 ) Estimating the Carrying Capacity of Coral Reefs for Recre - ational Scuba Diving , In : Proc . 8th Int . Coral Reef Symp . 2 : 1923 - 26 [ 24 ] Medio , D . , Ormond , R . F . G . , Pearson , M . ( 1997 ) Effects of briefings on rates of damage to corals by scuba divers . Biological Conservation 79 : 91 - 95 [ 25 ] Cesar , H . ( 2003 ) Economic valuation of the coral reefs of Egypt . Report prepared for the MVE - unit of EEPP , funded by USAID . Preliminary version , January 2003 ( mimeo ) [ 26 ] Erdmann , M . , Pet - Soede , L , N . Cabanban , A . ( 2002 ) . Destructive Fishing Practices in : Best , B . A . , Pomeroy , R . S . and Balboa , C . M . ( Eds . ) , Implica - tions for Coral Reef Management and Policy – Relevent Findings from the 9 th international Coral Reef Symposium , pag 78 - 81 , US - AID / WRI / CI / ISRS [ 27 ] Burke , L . , Selig , E . , Spalding , M . ( 2002 ) Reefs at Risk in Southeast Asia , World Resources Institute , Washington DC [ 28 ] Pet - Soede , L . , Cesar , H . , Pet , J . ( 1999 ) An Eco - 2020202020 nomic Analysis of Blast Fishing on Indonesian Coral Reefs , Environmental Conservation 26 : 83 - 93 [ 29 ] Pet - Soede , L . , Cesar , H . , Pet , J . ( 2000 ) . Blasting Away : The Economics of Blast Fishing on Indonesian Coral Reefs , in Cesar H . ( ed . ) Collected Essays on the Economics of Coral Reefs , CORDIO , Kalmar University , Kalmar , Sweden [ 30 ] Johannes , R . E . , Riepen , M . ( 1995 ) Environmental , Economic and Social Implications of the Live Reef Fish Trade in the Asia and the Western Pacific , The Nature Conservancy , Jakarta . [ 31 ] Raymakers , C . ( 1998 ) Unpublished fact sheet TRAFFIC and WWF - Netherlands , Zeist . [ 32 ] Hodgson , G . Dixon , J . A . ( 1988 ) Logging Versus Fisheries and Tourism in Palawan : an Environmental and Economic Analysis . East - West Environment and Policy Institute . Occasional Paper No . 7 [ 33 ] Wiley P . ( 1999 ) Cost Benefit Analysis for Wastewater Treatment Plant in Florida Keys . unpublished , NOAA , Silver Spring ( MD ) , USA [ 34 ] Wilkinson , C . Linden , O . , Cesar , H . , Hodgson , G . Rubens , J . Strong , A . E . ( 1999 ) Ecological and Socioeco - nomic Impacts of 1998 Coral Mortality in the Indian Ocean : An ENSO Impact and a Warning of Future Change ? AMBIO 26 : 188 - 196 [ 35 ] Reefbase ( 2003 ) Bleaching Map , www . reefbase . org / reefgis / mapper . asp [ 36 ] Kassem , K . ( 2003 ) Hotspot Frequency Images ( mimeo ) , WWF - US , Washington D . C . [ 37 ] Hoegh - Guldberg , O . , Hoegh - Guldberg , H . , Stout , D . K . , Cesar , H . , Timmerman , A . ( 2000 ) Pacific in Peril . Biological , Economic and Social Impacts of Climate Change on Pacific Coral Reefs , Greenpeace Australia [ 38 ] Hoegh - Guldberg , O . ( 1999 ) Climate Change , Coral Bleaching and the Future of the World’s Coral Reefs , Greenpeace Australia . [ 39 ] Gray , W . M . , Landsea , C . W . , Mielke P . , Berry , K . ( 1993 ) Predicting Atlantic basin seasonal tropical cyclone activity by 1 August , Weather Forecasting 8 : 73 - 86 [ 40 ] Tol , R . S . J . ( 1997 ) A Decision - Analytic Treatise of the Enhanced Greenhouse Effect . PhD Thesis , Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam , the Netherlands . [ 41 ] Cesar , H . , van Beukering , P . , Pintz , S . , Dierking , J . ( 2002 ) Economic Valuation of the Coral Reefs of Hawaii , Hawaii Coral Reefs Initiative , University of Hawaii , Hawaii , US . NotesNotesNotesNotesNotes 1 The muro - ami technique involves setting bottom nets and then driving reef fish out of their hiding places and into the nets by walking ( or swimming ) along the substrate and beating the reef with sticks and other hard implements . This practice is highly unsustainable as the reefs are destroyed from trampling and beating of sticks by the fishermen 2 Site selection of the Reef Check study is not random , among other things and therefore , the results of the study should be considered as indications rather than proofs over certain trends . 3 Potential values for are taken from a recent economic valuation study in Hawaii [ 41 ] . These values were used for Australia , the US and Japan . For all other countries , potential values presented in the Reefs at Risk Report for South East Asia are used [ 27 ] . Both publications give value ranges . Reefs at Risk data for coastal development and overexploitation were used to calculate the weighted averages . Low values for fisheries were used for areas with high levels of overexploitation , while high values of fisheries were used for areas with low and medium levels of overexploitation . This was also used for the biodiversity value . For coastal protection and tourism , high and medium levels of coastal development were used for the upper limit of the range , while low levels of coastal development were used for the lower limit of the range . An exception was made for the Pacific , where only areas with high coastal development were linked to the high tourism and coastal protection value . 4 From the 9km AVHRR Pathfinder database . 5 Our estimates of average expenses include depreciation costs for boats and gear and operational costs for fuel and food for crew if applicable ( multi - day - trips ) and estimates of average catches . Maximum catches are very different and on a good trip the income can be a multitude of our estimates for average net incomes . Furthermore , our estimates may vary from fishers’ estimates as these often not include depreciation of boat , engine and gear yet merely relate to gross income . 6 Multi - day trips . 2121212121 Appendix : Poverty Trap Case Study Appendix : Poverty Trap Case Study Appendix : Poverty Trap Case Study Appendix : Poverty Trap Case Study Appendix : Poverty Trap Case Study The poverty trap is a vicious circle of poverty , resource degradation and further impoverishment . Poverty is an important root cause for biodiversity loss and unsustainable re - source use resulting in an intertwining of pov - erty relief and sustainability . In addition , unsus - tainable use of resources also introduces pov - erty when the very base to the natural resources disappears . This persistence of poverty is illus - trated in the village of Lamakera in the Solor and Alor region of Indonesia . The region is a biodiversity hotspot for whales and other large marine life , including manta rays , marine turtles , billfish , tuna , ocean sunfish and other pelagics , mainly because of the region’s function as mi - gratory bottleneck with its productive currents and up - welling of nutrient - rich waters . How - ever , the concentration of marine resources and lack of marine protected areas also makes the region highly vulnerable to increasingly modern fisheries pressures often arriving in the area from the more crowded and fished - out parts of west - ern Indonesia . Destructive practices such as blast fishing and cyanide fishing are common , but impoverished local communities such as those in Lamakera , have turned to harvesting nearby manta ray populations . The general economic situation in the Solor and Alor region is similar to other regions in eastern Indonesia and must be considered in the light of dominating agricultural and service sector contributions to regional economic production . During the recent economic crisis the islands were also hit by a severe drought giving the younger generation further impetus to leave the area . Already significant numbers of the area’s inhabitants work in Malaysia as plantation , con - struction , or domestic workers . Aside from some minor government support projects that include small - scale seaweed farming , provision of some fish attracting devices and boats and engines , the general fishery is small - scale , focus - sing on resources nearby . Locals mention diffi - culties related to market access and education levels are low . Not all coastal communities are full - time fishers and many supplement their income through farming . Farming serves subsistence purposes but also allows minor cash gains from selling nuts , corn and copra . Infrastructure support - ing the local fishery is inadequate ( e . g . there are no ice facilities ) limiting the access to dis - tant markets ; and most fish must then be sold locally . On the large island of Lembata 80 % of the roads are either unpaved or in bad condition from landslides . Access to the is - lands is limited to small ferries from Larantuka on the eastern tip of Flores . As a result very few products are sold out of the area such as sea cucumbers , shark fins , and manta ray skin , meat and gills . The average income of fishing operations is dependent on the scale of the operations and on gross revenue of catches ( Table 7 ) . Catches are calculated on the basis of fish prices which depends on size and species , but is generally low pending local demand . Fishers relate de - creasing tuna catches in nearshore waters to large , long - line fleets operating efficiently in deeper offshore waters . Reef fish are also said to be less abundant than 5 years ago due to reef destruction by outside and local fishers using bombs and cyanide . Lamakera , situated on Solor has a whaling background , but increasingly fishers buy mo - torboats and use spear guns for catching manta rays . During the past five years this vil - lage has modernized its fishing fleet where all traditional whaling boats were sold 2 - 3 years ago and have been replaced by smaller boats 2222222222 Photo : Dried manta skin for sale ( by Lida Pet - Soede ) powered with 15 horse power outboard engines ( some subsidized through a poverty alle - viation scheme ) . It was at this point that whale hunters switched to spearing manta rays . This was likely fuelled by the new revenue streams offered by buyers of manta skin , sold as leather to Jakarta and the brachial filter plates removed from the gills , sold as traditional medicine in Hong Kong . Exporting cartilage for inclusion the export shark fin industry is also being considered . Traditional hook and line fishers who have seen their reef catches dwindle and their resulting economic situation has forced them to join the manta crews . Fishermen now focus on manta rays ( Manta birostris ) , locally known as belelang , bou ( Mobula tarapacana ) and moku ( Mobula sp . ) . Where once most of the manta was utilized in the village , now the vast majority is sold and the harvest has transformed into a commer - cial venture . Dried gill plates from one large manta bring between US $ 35 - 140 , dried skins US $ 6 / kg . Even the meat , which was once consumed in the village , is now sold locally . A bundle of 20 dried meat rings sell for US $ 3 . 5 - 4 . This new market for skin and gill plates has resulted from an increase in effort . The new boats have dramatically reduced travel time to fishing grounds from 4 days to 1 day , allowing the same number of trips per month as was previously possible in 6 months . The total effort also expanded from 18 to more than 30 boats thereby increasing the local fishing pressure by almost an order of magnitude in only 5 years . The total manta harvest per season ( May - October ) includes an average catch estimated to be 25 - 50 per boat per season , with an average take for the village of 60 - 90 per week . The total catch over the six - month season is estimated at 1 , 500 mantas ( ranging between 1050 - 2400 individuals ) , which represents a considerable increase over historic levels that were normally 200 - 300 per season . Even if effects of over - fishing are not yet apparent , it is highly unlikely that the harvest can continue at the current rate . Whereas shark populations are understood to be highly susceptible to fishing pressure , the closely related manta rays are at even greater risk . Manta rays normally give birth to only one offspring at a time . The gestation period is thought to be nine months and it is not known whether females give birth every year . Mantas are also a long - lived species and likely reach sexual maturity only after 4 to 5 years , although this remains to be verified . For long - lived species with low reproductive rates commercial harvests have repeatedly resulted in the collapse of popula - tions . There is no reason to think the mantas will be any different . Gear type Average Trips Gross Net Target Scale catch / trip / month income income species / boat / person Purse seine 300 kg 20 1000 55 Scads , squid Medium crew b Hook & line 3 . 5 kg 25 35 - 100 65 Reef fish Small 1 crew Traps 25 kg 25 100 90 Reef Small 1 crew Manta spear a 1 manta 15 120 95 Manta Medium 6 crew Trolling 5 kg 25 120 100 Tuna Small 1 crew Long line 1 kg fins dry 3 6 1200 110 Sharks Medium 4 crew b Trolling 10 25 360 - 480 120 Tuna Medium 3 crew Spear + 5 kg fish + 25 120 - 230 120 Reef fish + Small 1 crew snorkel 1 kg teripang teripang Table 7 . Estimated mean benefits ( US $ ) for fisheries in Alor and Solor region ( 1 US $ = Rp 10 . 000 ) . Sorted by net monthly income per crewmember . a : Seasonal 5 ; b : 50 / 50 benefit share . 2323232323 The institutional affiliations of the contributing authors and reviewer are :