Ciliary tip actin dynamics regulate the cadence of photoreceptor disc formation Roly Megaw 1 , 2 , (cid:0) , Abigail Moye 3 , Zhixian Zhang 3 , Fay Newton 1 , Fraser McPhie 1 , Laura C . Murphy 1 , Lisa McKie 1 , Feng He 3 , Melissa K . Jungnickel 1 , Alex von Kriegsheim 4 , Laura M . Machesky 5 , 6 , Theodore Wensel 3 , and Pleasantine Mill 1 1 MRC Human Genetics Unit , Institute of Genetics and Cancer , University of Edinburgh , Edinburgh , UK , EH4 2XU 2 Princess Alexandra Eye Pavilion , NHS Lothian , Edinburgh , United Kingdom , EH3 9HA 3 Verna and Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Baylor College of Medicine , Houston , Texas , USA , 77030 4 Edinburgh Cancer Research United Kingdom Centre , Institute of Genetics and Cancer , University of Edinburgh , Edinburgh , United Kingdom , EH4 2XU 5 CRUK Beatson Institute , Switchback Road , Bearsden , Glasgow , United Kingdom , G61 1BD 6 Institute of Cancer Sciences , University of Glasgow , Glasgow , United Kingdom , G61 1BD photoreceptor | cilia | retinitis pigmentosa | ciliopathies | outer segment | actin | RPGR | ectocytosis | cytoskeleton | disease modelling Correspondence : roly . megaw @ ed . ac . uk Abstract As signalling organelles , primary cilia regulate their mem - brane G protein - coupled receptor ( GPCR ) content by ecto - cytosis , a process requiring localised actin dynamics at their tip to alter membrane shape . ( 1 , 2 ) Mammalian photoreceptor outer segments comprise an expanse of folded membranes ( discs ) at the tip of highly - specialised connecting cilia ( CC ) , in which photosensitive GPCRs like rhodopsin are concen - trated . In an extraordinary feat of biology , outer segment discs are shed and remade daily . ( 3 ) Defects in this process , due to genetic mutations , cause retinitis pigmentosa ( RP ) , an untreatable , blinding disease . The mechanism by which pho - toreceptor cilia generate outer segments is therefore funda - mental for vision yet poorly understood . Here , we show the membrane deformation required for outer segment disc gen - esis is driven by dynamic changes in the actin cytoskeleton in a process akin to ectocytosis . Further , we show RPGR , a leading causal RP gene , regulates activity of actin bind - ing proteins crucial to this process . Disc genesis is com - promised in Rpgr mouse models , slowing the actin dynam - ics required for timely disc formation , leading to aborted membrane shedding as ectosome - like vesicles , photoreceptor death and visual loss . Manipulation of actin dynamics par - tially rescues the phenotype , suggesting this pathway could be targeted therapeutically . These findings help define how actin - mediated dynamics control outer segment turnover . Main Most mammalian cells assemble a primary cilium ; a microtubule - based structure that protrudes from the cell body and functions as a sensory organelle by detecting changes in the extracellular environment and initiating signalling . ( 4 ) Cilia dysfunction , due to pathogenic mutations in critical genes , leads to a spectrum of human diseases termed the cil - iopathies , which comprise multisystem disorders of the brain , lung , kidney and eye , amongst others . ( 4 ) Thus , tight control of cilia signalling is crucial for human health . Cilia function is optimised by compartmentalising the initia - tors of signalling cascades , such as G protein - coupled recep - tors ( GPCRs ) , in its membrane . This is achieved by high volume trafficking to the cilia , but more recently it has been shown that dynamic membrane changes at the ciliary tip can regulate GPCR concentration within the cilium in a process termed ectocytosis , which involves the shedding of cilia - membrane - derived vesicles into the extracellular space . ( 1 , 2 ) Ectosome formation is facilitated by local changes in the actin cytoskeleton to initiate the membrane deformation re - quired to form these structures that will be subsequently pinched off and shed . How important this biological pro - cess is across cell types and in the context of human health remains unclear . The photoreceptor contains one of the most highly spe - cialised primary cilia , that has evolved to optimise our vi - sual processing capabilities by compartmentalising its pho - tosensitive GPCRs within hundreds of disc - like membranous processes that stack on top of each other at the distal end of the cilia to form the cell’s outer segment ( OS ) . ( 5 , 6 ) To en - able recycling of its contents , the photoreceptor OS is com - pletely renewed every 7 to 10 days , ( 3 ) with distal discs shed for phagocytosis by the underlying retinal pigment epithe - lium ( RPE ) . ( 7 , 8 ) A fine balance , with continuous birth of photoreceptor discs to replace the shed OS material , is criti - cal to support vision . The mechanism that drives the ciliary membrane remodelling required for disc formation is yet to be fully determined , but evidence is mounting that it is an actin - driven process ( 8 – 11 ) and it has been speculated that the process has evolved as a form of ectocytosis . ( 10 , 12 , 13 ) Failure to renew photoreceptor discs has been implicated in retinitis pigmentosa ( RP ) , ( 13 ) a heterogenous group of inher - ited retinal dystrophies affecting 1 in 3000 people ( 14 ) that cause blindness . Patients present with night blindness and progressive constriction of their visual fields , prior to loss of central vision , as their photoreceptors degenerate . Here , using cryo - electron tomography , novel reporter mice and advanced live imaging techniques , we provide evidence supporting a model whereby the membrane deformation re - quired for photoreceptor disc formation is an actin driven process akin to ectocytosis . Further , we show that retinitis pigmentosa GTPase regulator ( RPGR ) , mutations in which cause 15 % of RP , ( 15 ) functions to control the tempo of disc Megaw et al . | bioR χ iv | November 10 , 2022 | 1 – 22 formation by binding the actin severing protein cofilin in the distal photoreceptor cilia and regulating its activity . RPGR mutations compromise cofilin activity , resulting in length - ened actin bundles in the newly forming disc , slowing their maturation . As a result , compromised discs are instead shed as ectosome - like vesicles , resulting in a reduced rate of disc morphogenesis , outer segment abnormalities , retinal stress , photoreceptor degeneration and loss of vision . We conclude , therefore , that highly regulated actin control in the nascent photoreceptor disc controls the cadence of disc genesis in the same manner as ectosome formation and that Rpgr plays a crucial role in the process . Disc formation is an active , actin driven pro - cess There is growing evidence that disc formation is actin - dependent . ( 8 – 11 ) It has not been definitively shown , how - ever , if this is due to an active process , whereby progres - sive nucleation of actin microfilaments ( akin to lamellipodia formation ) ( 16 ) mechanically deform the membrane . Alter - natively , it could be a passive process ( such as blebbing ) , whereby loss of adhesion between the membrane and un - derlying cortical actin allows the hydrostatic pressure within a cell to deform the membrane . ( 17 ) To distinguish between these possibilities in situ at nanoscale , we used cryo - electron tomography ( cryoET ) . ( 18 ) Flash freezing isolated mouse rod photoreceptor outer segments ( ROS ) allows visualisation of 3 - dimensional architecture at an ultrastructural level by cre - ating 3 - dimensional maps from a tilt series of electron to - mograph images . Three dimensional reconstructions showed microfilaments extending from the distal CC into the nascent disc ( Fig . 1a - c ) . Sub - tomogram averaging of these microfil - aments revealed similarities to filamentous actin’s published structure of 166 . 67 o twists per molecule and a 27 . 8 Å rise per molecule ( Fig . 1d - f ) . ( 19 ) Using live imaging of retinal slice cultures incubated with silicon rhodamine - actin ( SiR - Actin ) , a fluorogenic , cell permeable probe based on the highly spe - cific F actin binding drug jasplakinolide , we observed elonga - tion , constriction and movement of the microfilaments within the connecting cilium evident over time ( Extended Data Movie 1 ) . We thus conclude that dynamic actin changes oc - cur within nascent photoreceptor discs , suggesting a role for actin in disc genesis . RPGR is required for photoreceptor outer segment turnover Mutations in RPGR account for 70 - 90 % of X - linked RP ( XLRP ) and 10 - 15 % of all RP and result in a severe form of disease . ( 15 ) RPGR is alternatively spliced , with a retinal specific isoform containing a repetitive , disordered C - terminal domain of unknown function ( conventionally termed ‘ORF15’ ) that is a mutational hotspot for disease . ( 20 ) RPGR localises to the photoreceptor CC and its loss results in perturbation of CC actin regulation , with subsequent photore - ceptor degeneration . ( 12 , 21 – 23 ) To determine if RPGR plays a role in actin - driven disc genesis , we generated novel Rpgr - mutant mice harbouring humanised disease - causing muta - tions . N terminal RPGR mutations are associated with more se - vere human disease than those in the C terminal ORF15 domain . ( 24 ) However , mouse genetic background has been shown to influence disease severity . ( 25 ) To determine if mouse disease correlated with that of human , and was there - fore an appropriate model for this work , two novel muta - tions were generated in the same strain of mice , each repli - cating human pathogenic mutations ( see Methods and Ex - tended Data Fig . 1 ) . One harboured a frameshift mutation in Rpgr ’s N - terminus ( Extended Data Fig . 1a ; hereby re - ferred to as Rpgr Ex3d8 ) , while the other harboured a trun - cation mutation in the C - terminal repetitive domain of the retina - specific isoform ( Extended Data Fig . 1a ; hereby re - ferred to as Rpgr ORFd5 ) . Fundoscopy revealed retinal degeneration , characterised by punctate lesions at the posterior pole ( Extended Data Figs . 2a and 3a ) whilst fundus blue light autofluorescence showed accumulation of autofluorescent material within the retinas of both models ( Extended Data Figs . 2b and 3b ) , a clini - cal biomarker for photoreceptor disease . Electroretinograms ( ERGs ) that measure retinal photoreceptor function were recorded as mice aged ( Extended Data Figs . 2f and 4 ) . The dark - adapted scotopic ERG reflects primarily rod pho - toreceptor function at lower stimulus intensities , whereas the light - adapted photopic ERG reflects cone photoreceptor function . Both models developed significant loss of their scotopic ERG a - wave amplitude ( representing rod photore - ceptor dysfunction ) at 18 months ( Extended Data Figs . 2f and 4 ) . Cone photoreceptor function ( photopic ERG a - wave amplitude ) in the R Rpgr ORFd5 mouse remained comparable to wild type but was significantly reduced from 6 months of age in the Rpgr Ex3d8 mutant ( Extended Data Fig . 4 ) . Opti - cal coherence tomography showed loss of the outer nuclear ( photoreceptor ) layer at 18 months ( Extended Data Figs . 2c and 3c ) , which was supported by conventional histology in both models but was more severe in Rpgr Ex3d8 ( Extended Data Figs . 2d , e and 3d , e ) . In summary , loss of all Rpgr isoforms leads to more severe disease than loss of the retinal specific isoform alone , similar to human patient mutations . The Rpgr Ex3d8 mouse was brought forward for further stud - ies . We have previously shown RPGR mutations perturb actin regulation in both mouse and induced pluripotent stem cell - derived human photoreceptors . ( 15 ) Further , RPGR mutations result in loss of the retinal ellipsoid and interdigitating zones of XLRP patients on optical coherence tomography imaging ( Extended Data Figs . 5 ) ; signifying OS loss . We therefore assessed the outer segments of our Rpgr - mutant mouse lines using transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) . At 6 weeks of age , long before the mice show signs of retinal stress Ex - tended Data Figs . 2g ) and over 12 months before they un - dergo retinal degeneration ( Extended Data Figs . 2d , e and 3d , e ) , mutant outer segments display a ‘split disc’ pheno - type . Their discs have lost compaction and appear spaced out ( Fig . 2a ) . Further , mutant outer segments are significantly 2 | bioR χ iv Megaw et al . | Fig . 1 . Photoreceptor disc formation is an actin - driven process . ( a ) Cartoon schematic of a photoreceptor depicts the cell’s inner segment ( IS ) with the highly modified connecting cilium ( CC ) extending from its apex . From here an expanse of folded membrane extends , forming the outer segment ( OS ) discs . Basal discs ( BD ) are continually added at its base . ( b ) A projection from a tomogram of the basal disc of a wild type photoreceptor . ( c ) A slice through a tomographic reconstruction , segmented to highlight the ciliary and disc membranes ( green ) , microtubule based axoneme ( cyan ) and microfilaments ( purple ) . Microfilaments extend from the connecting cilium into the basal disc . ( d ) Front and back side impression of a subtomogram averaged map of microfilaments extending into the BD , with helical symmetry - imposed map ( e ) . ( f ) Previously published structure of F - actin ( EMBD - 6448 ) , highlighting 166 . 67 degree twist per molecule and 27 . 8 Å rise per molecule . ( Scale bars ; b , c = 100 nm ; d - f = 50 Å ) shorter from base to RPE ( Fig . 2b ) than wild type , suggest - ing Rpgr Ex3d8 outer segments contain fewer discs . This con - clusion is supported by proteomic data of 6 week mouse iso - lated rod outer segments and 3 month isolated retinas , which show Rpgr Ex3d8 retinas contain lower amounts of photore - ceptor disc component ( PRCD , Progressive Cone - Rod Dys - trophy ) ( Fig . 2d , Supplementary Tables . 1 and 2 ) , a 6 kDa membrane protein that localises exclusively to photoreceptor discs and segregates to the outer disc rim . ( 26 – 28 ) Reduced PRCD in Rpgr Ex3d8 retinas was confirmed on immunoblot - ting ( Fig . 2e , f ) . Basal discs at the base of the Rpgr Ex3d8 outer segment , however , are able to form ( Fig . 2c ) . While basal discs are still able to form , a reduced rate of disc formation could account for the split disc phenotype . Rpgr Ex3d8 mutants accumulated high levels of vesicles in the extra cellular space at the base of outer segments ( Fig . 2c ) . Vesicles of similar morphology were recently determined to be ciliary ectosomes in a RDS / peripherin mutant mouse ( rds - / - ) , which displays defective disc formation . ( 13 ) Abnor - mal ciliary membrane deformation , therefore , with compro - mised discs instead shed as ectosomes , could slow the rate of completed disc formation and account for this split disc phenotype . RPGR is located at the site of disc formation in the distal CC ( Fig . 3a ) and could therefore play a role in disc genesis . To test this , we engineered a novel re - porter mouse that would allow tracking of outer segment turnover . The C terminal end of the photosensitive GPCR , Rhodopsin , was tagged with the self - labelling peptide SNAP using CRISPR / Cas9 genome editing to target single cell em - bryos ( Extended Data Figs . 6a , b ) . These mice will here - inafter be referred to as Rhod SNAP . Rhodopsin is the major protein component of outer segment discs , and so incubating Rhod SNAP retinal slice cultures with SNAP fluorophores re - sults in outer segment labelling ( Extended Data Figs . 6c ) . The heterozygous SNAP tag knock - in is non - disruptive ; het - erozygous Rhod SNAP mice have normal retinal function at 6 months ( Extended Data Figs . 6d , e ) . Temporal Rhod SNAP labelling with different SNAP tags in vivo allowed optimisa - tion of a block - chase experiment to determine the rate of disc formation over 72 hours ( Fig . 3b , Extended Data Fig . 6f , g ) and so were crossed with the Rpgr Ex3d8 mouse . At 6 weeks of age , Rpgr Ex3d8 mice had a reduced rate of new disc formation ( Fig . 3c - e ) . We conclude that perturbation of RPGR results in a slowed rate of disc formation , leading to shortened , ‘split disc’ outer segments and vesicle shedding . Rpgr mutations lead to dysregulation of cofilin activity Previous work by ourselves and others supports a role for RPGR in regulating photoreceptor actin . ( 15 , 21 , 23 ) To fur - ther explore this , we undertook an unbiased total proteomic approach in control and Rpgr mutant retinal extracts ( Fig . 4a ) . At 3 months of age , computational analysis of differ - entially expressed proteins using Enrichr ( 29 – 31 ) ranked re - tinitis pigmentosa as the top disease in Rpgr Ex3d8 retina com - pared to wild type control ( Extended Data Fig . 7a ) . Fur - ther , analysis of protein pathways using Panther ranked cy - toskeletal regulation by Rho GTPases as a significantly dis - rupted pathway ( Extended Data Fig . 7a , Supplementary Tables . 1 and 2 ) . Of note , there was altered expression of the ARP2 / 3 complex protein ARP3 , known to play a role in disc morphogenesis . ( 10 ) To further explore this , immunoblotting was carried out on separate total retinal extracts , probing for a panel of actin nucleators and polymerisers . No changes were seen in levels of Cdc42 , profilin , Vasp or Wave proteins in Rpgr Ex3d8 retinas ( Extended Data Fig . 7b ) , but there was a small , significant reduction in the ARP2 / 3 complex protein ARP2 ( Fig . 4b ) . The ARP2 / 3 complex directly competes for binding sites on Megaw et al . | bioR χ iv | 3 Fig . 2 . Mutations in Rpgr lead to early structural compromise of photoreceptor outer segments ( OS ) . ( a ) Transmission electron micrograph of 6 week old wild type photoreceptors show OS composed of compacted discs extending to the underlying retinal pigment epithelium ( RPE ) ( left panel ) . Disc compaction is compromised in age - matched mutant photoreceptors , with discs appearing split and spaced out ( right panel ) . ( b ) OS are shorter in Rpgr Ex3d8 mice ( black circles denote mean measurement of OS length in each WT experimental animal ; black squares denote mean measurement of OS length in each mutant experimental animal ; n = 3 animals per genotype ; * * * * = p < 0 . 0001 ) . ( c ) Examination of basal discs at OS base shows compacted discs but an accumulation of shed vesicles ( red arrows ) in Rpgr Ex3d8 mice . ( d ) Mass spectrometry comparing protein composition of wild type versus Rpgr Ex3d8 3 month old retinas shows reduced expression of the outer segment protein PRCD in mutant mice . Red line denotes cut off p value for significance . ( e ) Immunoblotting of whole retina lysates confirms reduced PRCD in mutant mice , in keeping with reduced outer segment lengths . ( f ) Quantification of intensity of PRCD relative to loading control alpha tubulin ; n = 3 per group ; * * = p < 0 . 005 ) . ( Scale bars ; a = 5 µ m ; c = 0 . 5 µ m ) . Fig . 3 . Loss of Rpgr reduces the rate of photoreceptor disc formation . ( a ) Top panel : SIM images of wild type photoreceptors show localisation of RPGR’s retinal - specific isoform throughout the length of the photoreceptor connecting cilium , as evidenced by co - localisation with polyglutamylation staining . STORM images ( rightmost panel , arrowhead ) show RPGR localisation at the ciliary membrane . Bottom panel : Examination of Rpgr Ex3d8 photoreceptors show loss of RPGR staining at the connecting cilium . ( NB . green staining below polyglutamylation labelling represents non - specific centrosomal staining ) . ( b ) Creation of a Rhod SNAP knock in mouse allows measurement of rate of disc formation . Intravitreal delivery of blocking agent irreversibly binds all Rhodopsin - SNAP molecules . Sequential intravitreal injection of fluorescent SNAP ligand allows labelling of newly synthesised Rhodopsin - SNAP molecules , and therefore new discs . ( c , d ) Fluorescent imaging after block - chase procedure shows staining of newly made discs with fluorescent SNAP ligand , 3 days after initial block in wild type ( c ) and mutant ( d ) retinas . ( e ) Measurements of block - chase experiment , measuring ‘chased’ labelling of newly formed outer segments , shows a slowed rate of disc formation when Rpgr is perturbed . ( Scale bars ; a = 2 µ m ; c , d = 20 µ m ) 4 | bioR χ iv Megaw et al . | Fig . 4 . RPGR binds and regulates activity of the actin severing protein cofilin . ( a ) Mass spectrometry analysis of Rpgr Ex3d8 retina shows dysregulation of actin binding proteins ( labelled in yellow ; red arrows ) . ( b ) Immunoblotting shows modest reduction of ARP2 in Rpgr Ex3d8 retina lysates ( y axis denotes ratio of ARP2 to α - tubulin loading control ) . ( c ) Immunoblotting shows increased phosphorylation of cofilin at Serine 3 ( and therefore reduced activity ) ( y axis denotes ratio of phospho - cofilin to total cofilin ) . ( d ) Immunohistochemistry of an OS marker , RetP1 , and cofilin show cofilin localisation to the photoreceptor connecting cilium ( white arrowheads ) in wild type retinas . ( e ) Immunoprecipitation of wild type retinal lysates using magnetic beads coated ( + ) or uncoated ( - ) with cofilin antibody shows enrichment of cofilin in bound fraction ( bottom panel ) and the retinal specific isoform of RPGR , as detected using GT335 antibody ( black arrowhead , top panel ; band at 52 kDa is acetylated tubulin ) . ( Scale bar ; d = 20 µ m ) actin filaments with the actin depolymeriser cofilin , which we have previously shown to have reduced activity in patient - derived RPGR - mutant , iPSC retinal organoid cultures ( 12 ) and is thought to be present in early discs . ( 10 ) To this end , we analysed Rpgr Ex3d8 retinal lysates with immunoblotting , which showed increased phosphorylation , and therefore inac - tivation , of cofilin at Serine 3 ( Fig . 4c ) . Using immunofluo - rescence , we demonstrate that cofilin localises to the photore - ceptor CC membrane ( Fig . 4d ) , at the site of disc morpho - genesis and overlapping with RPGR localization ( Fig . 3a ) . We therefore sought to determine whether there is a bio - chemical interaction between RPGR and cofilin in vivo . En - dogenous co - immunoprecipitation ( co - IP ) experiments using murine retinal lysates confirmed an interaction between en - dogenous cofilin and the retinal specific isoform of RPGR ( Fig . 4e ) . ( 32 ) Given actin’s multifunctionality and its abun - dance throughout the cell , it is crucial that local , sub - cellular turnover is tightly controlled to ensure cellular processes are precisely executed , both temporally and spatially . Our find - ings support that RPGR binds and regulates actin binding protein activity in the distal CC to regulate basal disc for - mation . Perturbation of RPGR dysregulates actin - mediated photoreceptor disc formation Having demonstrated dysregulation of actin binding proteins in Rpgr Ex3d8 mice , and a reduced rate of disc formation , we examined local actin dynamics in the CC in the absence of RPGR . We confirmed increased filamentous actin was seen at the base of the OS in Rpgr Ex3d8 compared to wild type ( Extended Data Fig . 7c - e ) . ( 12 ) To better resolve actin bun - dle integrity at the site of basal disc formation , Rpgr Ex3d8 photoreceptors were further examined using cryoET . At 3 months of age , in keeping with reduced severing activity of cofilin , analysis revealed an increase in the length of actin mi - crofilaments in Rpgr Ex3d8 mice compared to wild type ( Fig . 5a - c ) . However , cryoET provides only a snapshot of the very dynamic process of actin turnover . To this end , we examined the rate of change of the actin microfilaments in Rpgr Ex3d8 and wild type mice as captured by live imaging of retinal slice cultures using a live actin label , SiR - Actin . Analysis showed reduced actin dynamics in the CC of Rpgr Ex3d8 pho - toreceptors ( Fig 5d , e , Extended Data Movies . 1 and 2 ) . In the absence of RPGR , we have shown increased levels , steady state lengths and slowed turnover of filamentous actin in the region of the newest basal discs , consistent with the altered actin dynamics leading to some nascent discs being aborted and being shed as the observed vesicles / ectosomes ( Fig . 2c ) . We reasoned , therefore , that depolymerising actin in mutant retinas could rescue the disc biogenesis phenotype . Rpgr Ex3d8 mice were treated for 6 hours with the actin de - polymeriser , cytochalasin D , by intravitreal injection of 0 . 5 µ l at 25 mM . TEM analysis revealed a significant reduc - tion in the number of vesicles shed at the base of the mu - tant outer segments with treatment ( Fig . 6a , b ) , as well as Megaw et al . | bioR χ iv | 5 Fig . 5 . Loss of Rpgr hyperstabilises actin in the basal photoreceptor disc and reduces actin dynamics . ( a , b ) A projection from a tomogram ( left panel ) and a slice through a tomographic reconstruction ( right panel ) of the basal disc of a wild type ( a ) and Rpgr Ex3d8 ( b ) photoreceptor to highlight the ciliary and disc membranes ( cyan ) , microtubule based axoneme ( tan ) and actin filaments ( purple ) . ( c ) Measurement of actin filament length in the basal disc of photoreceptor tomograms shows them to be increased in the Rpgr Ex3d8 mouse ( n = 4 per group ; * * * * = < 0 . 0001 ) . ( d ) Live imaging of retinal slice cultures using the Rhod SNAP mouse allows visualisation of nuclei ( blue ) and connecting cilium actin bundles ( magenta ) at the base of the outer segments ( cyan ) over time . Sample images at high magnification show actin bundle dynamics in wild type ( top panel ) and Rpgr Ex3d8 ( bottom panel ) photoreceptors . ( e ) Tracking of actin bundle movement by live cell imaging in culture shows reduced dynamics in Rpgr Ex3d8 retinas ( speed = distance moved in x axis / time measured ; n = 3 per group ; * * * * = < 0 . 0001 ) . ( f ) Sample images of tracked connecting cilium actin bundles in wild type ( top panel ) and Rpgr Ex3d8 ( bottom panel ) photoreceptors over a 60 minute period . ‘Dragon tail’ projection depicts distance moved in this time . ( Scale bars ; a , b = 100nm ; d ( large panel ) = 5 µ m ; d ( small panels ) = 0 . 7 µ m ; f = 0 . 7 µ m ) an overgrowth of the basal discs that did form as previously described ( 9 , 10 ) . With this rescue experiment , we conclude that the shedding of aborted discs as vesicles and a reduced rate of disc formation in RPGR mutants is due to compro - mised dynamic turnover of actin microfilaments extending from the photoreceptor CC into basal discs , due to cofilin dysregulation . Our results suggest that these defects in the cadence of disc biogenesis , resulting from increased length of these mutant actin microfilaments , can be therapeutically modulated short - term . Discussion Our in vivo data support that RPGR functions locally at the photoreceptor CC to spatially regulate activity of actin sev - ering proteins , such as cofilin , in order to appropriately pace actin - mediated disc formation . We have previously shown that RPGR interacts with another actin severing protein , gel - solin , and these interactions are perturbed in pathogenic hu - man RPGR retinal organoids ( 12 ) . We propose , therefore , that the glutamylated RPGR isoform serves as a structural scaf - fold that facilitates the timely recruitment and activation of actin binding proteins ( ABPs ) to control the appropriate pace of disc biogenesis ( Extended Data Fig . 8 ) . Our study raises important questions about what the molecular nature of this pacemaker is that controls the regular tempo . Previous work at the primary cilia tip has demonstrated the highly localised role that actin plays in ciliary membrane deformation in a content - dependent manner . Here , excision of a membranous bud ( ectosome ) at its distal end , facilitates the exit of GPCRs to regulate cilia content appropriately ( 1 , 2 ) . Similar mecha - nisms at the distal CC / transition zone may operate to ‘sense’ regulate membrane content , such as rhodopsin concentration , to regulate disc formation . Further studies are necessary to distinguish these models . We propose that photoreceptor disc formation shares a common ancestral mechanism of ectocy - tosis and RPGR’s retinal specific isoform may have evolved to promote this . It is over 30 years since disc formation was first proposed to be an actin - dependent process . In seminal TEM experi - ments , it was shown that actin was present in the distal CC ( 8 ) and that depolymerising actin inhibited the formation of new discs , but not the addition of membrane to existing ones , ( 9 ) suggesting actin bundling was required for the initial mem - brane deformation to begin the process . Subsequently , it was confirmed that the process of disc morphogenesis is one of evagination ( 33 – 35 ) , which would support a process of ac - 6 | bioR χ iv Megaw et al . | Fig . 6 . Treatment with an actin depolymerising agent rescues the vesicles shed from Rpgr - mutant photoreceptors . ( a ) The Rpgr Ex3d8 mouse sheds high numbers of vesicles from the base of the outer segment ( middle panel ) compared to wild type ( left panel ) . Intravitreal delivery of the actin depolymerising agent , cytochalasin D , rescues this phenotype , significantly reducing the number of shed vesicles ( right panel ) ( scale bars = 1 µ m ; OS = Outer Segment ; * = outer segment base ) . ( b ) Quantification showing significantly increased vesicle shedding at the base of the Rpgr Ex3d8 photoreceptors , which is rescued by cytochalasin treatment . ( Black circles denote mean number of vesicles at the base of each photoreceptor per experimental animal ; n = 3 animals per genotype ) . tive , actin protrusions initiating the process . In recent years , progress has been made in defining the molecular pathways that govern actin regulation in the CC ( 10 , 11 , 13 , 15 ) . Here , for the first time , we confirm the presence of actin micro - filament bundles within the basal disc and , by live imaging , demonstrate the dynamic changes in actin orientation that oc - cur precisely at the level of the distal CC . Force generation lies at the heart of all cellular membrane morphogenesis , which the actin cytoskeleton can produce due to its ability to form higher order structures . But these resulting structures can remain stable for an incredibly long time . ( 36 ) In order for cells to perform the rapid actin turnover critical for a metronomic , repeated membrane deformation such as that required for disc formation , regulated disman - tling of these networks is equally important . Thus , it would be predicted that a hyperstabilised actin cytoskeleton at the site of basal disc formation , as seen in our Rpgr - mutant mice , would compromise the cadence of disc genesis , which we demonstrate . The actin severing protein , cofilin , plays a central role in actin - filament length oscillation by trim - ming the aged end of a filament that continues to grow at the barbed end , ( 36 ) allowing branched networks to be disassembled . ( 37 ) Of interest , cofilin competes for binding to actin with the actin polymeriser , ARP2 / 3 , a protein pre - viously demonstrated to be crucial for disc formation . ( 10 ) Cofilin is known to regulate primary cilia length through actin rearrangement . ( 38 ) Our work suggests cofilin is required for mammalian photoreceptor disc formation , and the observa - tion that cofilin is present in aborted photoreceptor ectosomes when normal disc formation is disrupted ( 10 ) further supports this model . The molecular architecture of this RPGR - dependent scaffold at the distal CC involves SPATA7 and RPGRIP , ( 39 ) muta - tions in which also cause RP in humans . RPGR is mis - localised away from the distal CC in mice lacking either SPATA7 ( 39 ) or RPGRIP , ( 40 ) with failure of normal outer segment disc genesis . Importantly , while RPGR , RPGRIP and SPATA7 appear critical for photoreceptor function , they appear dispensable for cilia function in most other cell types . We speculate , therefore , that they have evolved as a scaf - fold at the site of disc formation to which actin binding pro - teins , critical for timely disc formation , can be recruited . Pharmaco - manipulation of actin activity could reverse the underlying cellular phenotypes disrupting disc biogenesis . Further work is required to address the translational poten - tial of our study , specifically to establish if actin modulation could slow the retinal degeneration seen in RPGR / XLRP pa - tients . Methods Animal experiments . All experiments followed international , national and institutional guidelines for the care and use of animals . Animal experiments were carried out under UK Home Office Project License PPL P1914806F in facilities at the University of Edinburgh ( PEL 719 60 / 2605 ) and were ap - proved by the University of Edinburgh animal welfare and ethical review body . Mouse generation . Rpgr mutant mice : Using CRISPR / Cas9 genome editing to target single cell embryos , deletion mu - tations were introduced into the Rpgr locus of C57Bl6 / J mice ( Extended Data Fig . 1 ) . Ensemble Rpgr EN - SMUSG00000031174 , chromosome X X : 10 , 175 , 515 was used for CRISPR design . The CRISPR target sequences ( 20 - nucleotide sequence preceded by Bbs1 ends ( Fd CACC / Rv AACA ) , followed by a protospacer adjacent motif [ PAM ] of ‘NGG’ ) were selected using the prediction software ( www . crispr . mit . edu ) and synthesised by Sigma , annealed and ligated into the pX330 - U6 - Chimeric - BB - CBh - hSpCas9 plasmid ( Addgene 42230 ) . The plasmid was transformed into chemically competent Stbl3 cells , colonies grown , maxi - prepped and correct sequencing confirmed by Sanger se - quencing . The repair template oligo for RpgrORFd5 ( see be - low ) was synthesised by Integrated DNA Technologies . See Supplementary Table 3 . 3 for list of guides and repair tem - plates . Megaw et al . | bioR χ iv | 7 An 8 base pair deletion was introduced into exon 3 ( c . 296del8 ) , resulting in a premature termination codon 68 base pairs downstream being shifted into frame and a pre - dicted null protein ( Extended Data Fig . 1 ) ; this mouse will hereby be referred to as Rpgr Ex3d8 . In a separate round of injections , a 5 base pair deletion was introduced at the be - ginning of the repetitive domain of RPGR’s retinal specific splice variant ( c . 2478del5 ) , resulting in a premature termi - nation codon 52 base pairs downstream being shifted into frame ( Extended Data Fig . 1 ) and a predicted truncated protein lacking all of the protein’s glutamate rich consen - sus motifs ( GEEEG ) , whose glutamylation is crucial for pro - tein function ( 32 ) . This mouse will hereby be referred to as Rpgr ORFd5 . Genome editing was performed by microinjection of the Rpgr guide / Cas9 plasmid ( 5 ng / µ l ) with or without a single stranded repair oligo mRpgr ( 100 ng / µ l ) into single cells embryos . The injected zygotes were cultured overnight in KSOM for subsequent transfer to the oviduct of pseudopreg - nant recipient females . ( 41 ) From microinjection CRISPR tar - geting , genomic DNA from founder ear - clip tissue was sub - ject to PCR screening and subsequent sequence verifica - tion of successful mutagenesis events by Sanger sequenc - ing ( Extended Data Fig . 1 ) . Founder mice , mosaic for desired mutations were crossed with CD1 mice to generate large numbers of F1 progeny and allow unwanted allelic vari - ants to segregate . Selected F1 mutants were backcrossed onto C57 mice and subsequently intercrossed . Initial genotyping was performed by PCR and Sanger sequencing using primers outlined in Supplementary Table 3 . 3 . The genotyping of subsequent animals was performed by TransNetyx . Western blot analysis showed loss of detection of a polyg - lutamylated protein running at the weight of Rpgr’s retinal isoform ( Extended Data Fig . 1 ) ( 32 ) . In the absence of a commercially available antibody for murine RPGR , we con - sider this as confirmation of loss of protein expression . Rhodopsin - SNAP ( Rhod SNAP ) mouse : Using CRISPR / Cas9 genome editing to target single cell embryos , a SNAP tag was introduced at the C terminal end of the Rhodopsin locus of C57Bl6 / J mice ( Extended Data Fig . 6 ) . En - semble Rhodopsin ENSMUST00000032471 . 9 , Chromo - some 6 : 115 , 908 , 709 - 115 , 916 , 997 was used for CRISPR guide design , selected using the prediction software ( www . crispr . mit . edu ) and synthetic crRNA synthesised by Dharmacon for use with their Edit - R tracrRNA technology . A repair plasmid , with SNAP targeted to Rhodopsin’s C ter - minus , was synthesised by GeneArt ( Invitrogen ) . crRNA and tracrRNA was annealed and injected with the repair plasmid and Cas9 protein ( Invitrogen 825641 Geneart Platinum ) . See Supplementary Table 3 . 3 for list of guides and repair tem - plates . Genome editing was performed by microinjection of the Rhodopsin guide / Cas9 protein / repair plasmid mix into sin - gle cells embryos . The injected zygotes were cultured overnight in KSOM for subsequent transfer to the oviduct of pseudopregnant recipient females . ( 41 ) From microinjection CRISPR targeting , genomic DNA from founder ear - clip tis - sue was subject to PCR screening and subsequent sequence verification of successful mutagenesis events by Sanger se - quencing ( Extended Data Fig . 6 ) . Founder mice , mosaic for desired mutations were crossed with CD1 mice to gener - ate large numbers of F1 progeny and allow unwanted allelic variants to segregate . Selected F1 mutants were backcrossed onto C57 mice and subsequently intercrossed . Initial geno - typing was performed by PCR and Sanger sequencing using primers outlined in Supplementary Table 3 . 3 . The genotyp - ing of subsequent animals was performed by TransNetyx . Successful SNAP - mediated dye incorporation in the knock in was confirmed by labelling rhodopsin in the photorecep - tor outer segments with fluorescent SNAP probes ( Extended Data Fig . 6 ) . Electrodiagnostic testing . All mice undergoing EDT were dark adapted overnight prior to the procedure , and experi - ments were carried out in a darkened room under red light using an HMsERG system ( Ocuscience ) . Mice were anes - thetised using isofluorane and pupils were dilated through the topical application of 1 % w / v tropicamide before being placed on a heated ERG plate . Three grounding electrodes were used subcutaneously ( tail , and each cheek ) and silver embedded electrodes were placed upon the cornea held in place with a contact lens . The standard International Soci - ety for Clinical Electrophysiology of Vision ( ISCEV ) pro - tocol was used , which recorded scotopic responses before a 10 min light adaptation phase in order to record photopic responses ( 42 ) . 3 and 10 cd . s / m - 2 light intensity scotopic re - sponses were used for analysis . Data was analysed using Graphpad Prism and compared by unpaired t - test . Optical coherence tomography ( OCT ) and blue light autoflu - orescence imaging . Mice were anesthetised using isofluo - rane and pupils were dilated through the topical application of 1 % w / v tropicamide before being placed on a custom built , heated plate on a Heidelberg Spectralis OCT machine . Mouse retina was brought into focus using IR imaging and fast volume scans ( 20 o x 20 o ) obtained ( 25 sections ; 240 µ m between sections ) by spectral domain OCT using a 55 dioptre lens adapted for small animals . Accumulation of autofluo - rescent material in the retina , a clinical biomarker for retinal dysfunction , was assessed using the BluePeak TM blue light function on the Spectralis . Protein extraction , antibodies and western blotting . Retinas were lysed in 50 mM Tris pH8 . 0 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 % NP - 40 buffer containing protease inhibitors . Protein samples were separated by SDS - PAGE and electroblotted onto nitrocellu - lose membranes ( Whatman ) using the iblot System for 6 min ( Invitrogen ) . Non - specific binding sites were blocked by in - cubation of the membrane with 5 % non - fat milk in TBS con - taining 0 . 1 % Tween 20 ( TBST ) for 1 hour . Proteins were detected using the primary antibodies diluted in blocking so - lution ( 4 % Bovine Serum Albumin in TBST ; Supplemen - tary Table 3 . 1 and 3 . 2 for list of antibodies ) . Following washing in PBST , blots were incubated with the appropriate secondary antibodies conjugated to horse - radish peroxidase 8 | bioR χ iv Megaw et al . | ( Pierce ) and chemiluminescence detection of Super Signal West Pico detection reagent ( Pierce ) by high resolution im - age capture using the ImageQuant LAS4000 camera system ( GE Healthcare ) . Images were transferred to Fiji / ImageJ and mean pixel intensity of protein bands measured for quantifi - cation , with an equal area of blot assessed across all bands . Rod outer segment proteomics . 6 week old , dark - adapted mice were maintained in constant darkness for 12 hr overnight prior to retina harvesting ( also performed in the dark with infrared illumination ) . Rod outer segments were isolated by vortexing retinas in 150ul of 27 % sucrose solution in 20 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 4 , 100 mM KCl , 2 mM MgCl2 and 0 . 1 mM EDTA , spinning at 200 g for 30 sec and collecting supernatant . Supernatant was diluted with the same buffer without sucrose and loaded in a step gradient of 27 % and 32 % sucrose prior to spinning at 25 , 000 rpm and outer seg - ment collection from the 32 - 27 % sucrose interface . Proteins were solubilized in 2 % SDS , 100 mM Tris·HCl ( pH 8 . 0 ) , reduced with 10 mM DTT ( D0632 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) , alky - lated with 25 mM iodoacetamide ( I1149 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) , and subjected to tryptic hydrolysis using the HILIC beads SP3 protocol ( 10 ) . The resulting peptides were analyzed with a nanoAcquity UPLC system ( Waters ) coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) employing the LC - MS / MS protocol in a data - independent ac - quisition mode . The peptides were separated on a 75 - µm × 150 - mm , 1 . 7 - µ m C18 BEH column ( Waters ) using a 120 - min gradient of 8 to 32 % of acetonitrile in 0 . 1 % formic acid at a flow rate of 0 . 3 mL / min at 45 °C . Eluting peptides were sprayed into the ion source of the Orbitrap Q Exactive HF at a voltage of 2 . 0 kV . Progenesis QI Proteomics software ( Waters ) was used to assign peptides to the features and gen - erate searchable files , which were submitted to Mascot ( ver - sion 2 . 5 ) for peptide identification . For peptide identification , we searched against the UniProt reviewed mouse database ( September 2019 release ) using carbamidomethyl at Cys as a fixed modification and Met oxidation as a variable modifica - tion . Proteins were included based on 3 criteria : 1 ) at least 1 peptide is identified in each independent experiment , 2 ) at least 2 peptides are identified in one experiment , and 3 ) the identification confidence score is > 95 % in both experiments . Whole retina proteomics . 3 month old , dark - adapted mice were maintained in constant darkness for 12 hr overnight prior to retina harvesting ( also performed in the dark with infrared illumination ) . Retinas were lysed in 2 % SDS and kept at - 80 °C until testing . 2 retinas from 1 mouse were used per biological replicate , with 5 biological repli - cates per group ( mutant and wild type ) . In all cases , cell lysates were digested using sequential digestion of LysC ( Wako ) and trypsin ( Pierce ) using the FASP proto - col ( https : / / pubmed . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / 25063446 / ) . Samples were acidified to 1 % TFA final volume and clarified by spinning on a benchtop centrifuge ( 15k g , 5 min ) . Sample clean - up to remove salts was performed using C18 stage - tips ( Rappsilber et al . , 2003 ) . Samples were eluted in 25 µl of 80 % acetonitrile containing 0 . 1 % TFA and dried using a SpeedVac system at 30 °C and resuspended in 0 . 1 % ( v / v ) TFA such that each sample contained 0 . 2 µ g / ml . All sam - ples were run on an Orbitrap FusionTM Lumos mass spec - trometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 , RSL - Nano µ HPLC ( both Thermo Fisher ) . 5 µ l of the samples were injected onto an Aurora column ( 25 cm , 75 µ m ID Ionoptiks , Australia ) and heated to 50 °C . Peptides were separated by a 150 min gradient from 5 - 40 % acetonitrile in 0 . 5 % acetic acid . Data was acquired as data - dependent acquisition with the follow - ing settings : MS resolution 240k , cycle time 1 s , MS / MS HCD ion - trap rapid acquisition , injection time 28 ms . The data were analyzed using the MaxQuant 1 . 6 software suite ( https : / / www . maxquant . org / ) by searching against the murine Uniprot database with the standard settings enabling LFQ de - termination and matching . The data were further analyzed using the Perseus software suite . LFQ values were normal - ized , 0 - values were imputed using a normal distribution using the standard settings . Immunohistochemistry . Mice were sacrificed and eyes enu - cleated and placed into Davidson’s fixative ( 28 . 5 % ethanol , 2 . 2 % neutral buffered formalin , 11 % glacial acetic acid ) for 1 hour ( cryosectioning ) or overnight ( wax embedding ) . For cryosectioning , eyes were removed from Davidson’s fixative and placed into a series of consecutive 10 % , 15 % and 20 % sucrose in PBS buffer for 15 mins , 15 mins and overnight respectively to cryopreservation . Eyes were then embedded using OCT and kept at - 80 °C until sectioned . Sections / cells were blocked / permeabilised with 4 % BSA ( Sigma ) and 0 . 5 % Triton X100 ( Fisher ) for 1 hour at RT , washed with PBS , in - cubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4 °C , washed in PBS , incubated with secondary antibodies for 60 min at RT , washed in PBS , incubated in Hoechst for 5 min at RT and mounted with coverslips using Fluoromount - G ( South - ern Biotech ) . For wax preservation , eyes were removed from Davidson’s fix and dehydrated through an ethanol se - ries of 70 % ethanol , twice in 70 % , the 80 % xyelene , thebn 90 % paraffin and finally twice in 100 % ; paraffin each for 45 mins . Hematoxylin and eosin staining was performed on 8 µm paraffin tissue sections and imaged on a Zeiss Brightfield microscope . Confocal imaging was performed on a Nikon Eclipse TiE inverted microscope with Perfect Focus Sys - tem using resonant scanning mirrors ( equipped with 405nm diode , 457 / 488 / 514nm Multiline Argon , 561nm DPSS and 638nm diode lasers ) with detection via four Photomulti - plier tubes ( 2x standard Photomultiplier tubes and 2x GaAsP PMTs ) . A 60x oil immersion lens was used . Data was ac - quired using NIS Elements AR software ( Nikon Instruments Europe , Netherlands ) . Z - stacks were processed and analysis in Fiji ( ImageJ ) . Airyscan imaging . Sample preparation for Airyscan confocal immunofluorescence microscopy . Mice 6 weeks of age were transcardially perfused with 80 mM PIPES , pH 6 . 8 , 5 mM EGTA , 2 mM MgCl2 , 4 % paraformaldehyde ) . Eyes were enucleated , and after the cornea was removed , they were immersion fixed overnight at 4 °C . After removal of lens , the eyecups were flash - frozen in optimal cutting tempera - Megaw et al . | bioR χ iv | 9 ture ( OCT ) using liquid nitrogen . 8 µ m cryosections were collected and stained for rhodamine wheat germ agglutinin ( Vector RL - 1022 ) and phalloidin conjugated to Atto647N ( Sigma 65906 ) . The sections were then mounted in Prolong Glass ( Invitrogen P36980 ) . Sections were imaged on a Zeiss LSM 880 Airyscan Fast Confocal Microscope using a 63x objective . Z - stacks were first processed in Zeiss ZenBlue software for Airyscan processing , then colour processing and analysis were performed in Fiji / ImageJ . Actin puncta quan - tification was performed by taking a 0 . 35 µ m ROI around each actin puncta that was at the base of an outer segment , slice by slice , on each z - stack . Then the averaged relative in - tegrated density of three background ROI’s were subtracted from each relative integrated density measurements from the actin ROIs . These measurements were then plotted in Prism software , where Students t - test statistical analysis was per - formed . Transmission electron microscopy . 6 week old mice were euthanized by transcardial perfusion using fixative ( 50mM MOPS , pH 7 . 4 , 2 % glutaraldehyde , 2 % paraformaldehyde , 2 . 2 mM CaCl2 ) . Eyecups were enucleated and placed in 1 mL of fixative . After 30 minutes , the cornea and lens were removed , then left to incubate in fixative for a total of 2 hours at room temperature . Thereafter , retinas were either : 1 . Washed in 0 . 1 M phosphate buffer ( pH 7 . 4 ) , postfixed with 1 % osmium tetroxide ( ElectronMicroscopy Science ) and de - hydrated in an ethanol series prior to embedding in Medium Epoxy Resin ( TAAB ) . Ultrathin ( 75 nm ) sections of the retina were then stained with aqueous uranyl - acetate andlead cit - rate and then examined with a Hitachi 7000 electron mi - croscope ( Electron Microscoperesearch services , Newcastle University Medical School ) . 2 . Polymerized in 4 % agarose ( Genemate E - 3126 - 25 ) . 150 µ m sections were collected into MilliQ waterusing a vi - bratome . Sections were then stained in 1 % tannic acid in 0 . 1 M HEPES , pH 7 . 4 , for 1 hour , with rocking at room tem - perature , covered . After rinsing in MilliQ water , the sec - tions were stainedwith 1 % uranyl acetate in 0 . 2 M maleate buffer , pH 6 . 0 , for 1 hour , with rocking at room tempera - ture , covered . The sections were rinsed in MilliQ water and dehydrated in a series of ethanol washes ( 50 % , 70 % , 90 % , 100 % , 100 % ) for 15 minutes each , followed by two 100 % acetone washes , 15 minutes each . The sections were then em - bedded in Epon - 12 resin by sandwiching the sections be - tween two sheetsof ACLAR ( EMS 50425 - 10 ) and leaving them at 60 °C for 48 hours . Ultrathin silver sections ( 60 nm ) were placed on copper slot grids ( EMS FF2010 - CU ) and poststained in 1 . 2 % uranyl acetate in MilliQwater for 6 min - utes , followed by staining in Sato’s lead ( a solution of 1 % lead acetate , 1 % lead nitrate , and 1 % lead citrate ; all from Electron Microscopy Sciences ) for 2 minutes . Grids were imaged on aJEOL JEM - 1400 electron microscope . Cytochalasin rescue experiment . Mice were anesthetised us - ing isofluorane and pupils were dilated through the topical application of 1 % w / v tropicamide . 0 . 5 µ l of 25mM Cytocha - lasin D ( Sigma ) in PBS was injected intravitreally . Contralat - eral eyes had a sham injection of 0 . 5 µ m PBS and served as the control eye . 6 hours later mice underwent transcar - dial perfusion using fixative and processed for electron mi - croscopy as outlined above . STORM immunohistochemistry and resin embedding . Un - fixed retinas from 6 - to 12 - week - old wild type mice were immunolabeled for STORM using a protocol previously developed . ( 43 ) Most 1 µ m resin sections were collected into 35 mm glass - bottom dishes , and 2 sections for each sample were also collected onto a 1 . 5 coverslip , mounted in Prolong Glass ( Invitrogen P36980 ) and imaged on a Structured Il - lumination Microscope ( SIM ) ; DeltaVision OMX Blaze v4 ( GE Healthcare , now Cytiva ) ; a PLANPON6 60× / NA 1 . 42 ( Olympus ) using oil with a refractive index of 1 . 520 . Z - spacing of 125 nm was used for each 1 µ m z - stack . SIM reconstructions and alignment were performed in Softworx 7 software . After analysis , reconstructions were processed in Fiji / ImageJ . Immediately prior to STORM imaging , 10 % sodium hydrox - ide ( w / v ) was mixed with pure 200 - proof ethanol for 45 minutes to prepare a mild sodium ethoxide solution . Glass - bottom dishes with ultrathin retina sections were immersed for 30 – 45 minutes for chemical etching of the resin . Etched sections were then washed and dried on a 50 °C heat block . The following STORM imaging buffer was prepared : 45 mM Tris ( pH 8 . 0 ) , 9 mM NaCl , and oxygen scavenging system : 10mM Sodium Sulfite , 10 % ( w / v ) dextrose + 100 mM MEA ( i . e . , L - cysteamine , Chem - Impex ) + 10 % VECTASHIELD ( Vector Laboratories ) . Imaging buffer was added onto the dried , etched sections and sealed with a second # 1 . 5 cover - slip for imaging . Imaging was performed on the Nikon N - STORM system , which features a CFI Apo TIRF 100× oil objective ( NA1 . 49 ) on an inverted Nikon Ti Eclipse micro - scope . Photobleaching and photoswitching initiation were performed using both the 561 and 647 mm laser lines at max - imum power . Imaging frames were collected at 30 frames per second . A total of 40 , 000 frames were collected for each imaging experiment . STORM image analysis . Two - dimensional ( 2D ) STORM analysis of STORM acquisition frames was performed using NIS - Elements Ar Analysis software . Analysis identification settings were used for detection of the individual point spread function ( PSF ) of photoswitching events in frames from both channels to be accepted and reconstructed as 2D Gaussian data points . These settings were as follows : minimum PSF height : 400 , maximum PSF height : 65 , 636 , minimum PSF width : 200 nm , maximum PSF width : 700 nm , initial fit width : 350 nm , maximum axial ratio : 2 . 5 , maximum dis - placement : 1 pixel . After analysis , reconstructions of single cilia were processed in Fiji / ImageJ for straightening . Block chase experiment . Mice underwent intravitreal ‘block’ injection of 1 µ l of 0 . 6 µ M SNAP - Cell TMR - Star ( New Eng - land Biolabs ( S9105S ) ) under inhalational anaesthesia . 72 hours later , mice were sacrificed . Eyes were immediately enucleated and underwent keratectomy , sclerectomy and 10 | bioR χ iv Megaw et al . | lensectomy . Retinal cups were embedded in 5 % agar moulds and immediately underwent sectioning on a fully automated vibratome ( Leica VT1200 S ) . Sections were ‘Chased’ by in - cubation with 0 . 6 µ M SNAP - Cell 647 - SiR ( New England Biolabs ( S9102S ) in retinal culture media for 90 minutes at 37 o C / 5 % CO2 . 30 minutes before imaging , NucBlue Live ReadyProbe Reagent ( Hoechst 33342 ; ThermoFisher R37605 ) was added to the culture for nuclear staining . Imag - ing of slices was acquired using a x40 oil immersion lens on the multimodal Imaging Platform Dragonfly ( Andor tech - nologies , Belfast UK ) equipped with 405 , 445 , 488 , 514 , 561 , 640 and 680nm lasers built on a Nikon Eclipse Ti - E inverted microscope body with Perfect focus system ( Nikon Instru - ments , Japan ) . Data was collected in Spinning Disk 40µm pinhole mode on the Zyla 4 . 2 sCMOS camera using Andor Fusion acquisition software . Image processing and analy - sis was performed in Fiji / ImageJ . Labelled cilia lengths were measured and plotted in Prism software , where Students t - test statistical analysis was performed . Live imaging of retinal slices . Mice were sacrificed by cer - vical dissection and eyes immediately enucleated . Keratec - tomy , lensectomy and sclerectomy were performed and reti - nas embedded in 5 % agar and 150 µ m sections made us - ing a fully automated VT1200S vibrating blade microtome ( Leica Biosystems ) . Sections were cultured in retinal me - dia ( DMEM extra ( Sigma ) with N2 supplement ( Life Tech ) and B27 supplement ( Life Tech ) ) in Ibidi 35mm glass bot - tomed wells at 37 o C in 5 % CO2 . Slices were incubated with 1 µ M SiR - Actin in DMSO ( Spirochrome ) , 10 µ M Vera - pamil in DMSO ( Spirochrome ) and of 0 . 6 µ M SNAP - Cell TMR - Star in DMSO ( New England Biolabs ( S9105S ) for 120 mins as per manufacturers’ instructions . NucBlue™ Live ReadyProbes™ Reagent ( Hoechst 33342 ; Thermo Fisher ) was added before live imaging . Images were acquired using a x60 water immersion lens on the multimodal Imaging Plat - form Dragonfly ( Andor technologies , Belfast UK ) equipped with 405 , 445 , 488 , 514 , 561 , 640 and 680nm lasers built on a Nikon Eclipse Ti - E inverted microscope body with Perfect focus system ( Nikon Instruments , Japan ) . Images were cap - tured in a single z stack every 30 seconds and data collected in Spinning Disk 40µm pinhole mode on a Zyla 4 . 2 sCMOS camera using Andor Fusion acquisition software . Environ - mental control of the cultured retinal slices was maintained during imaging with a Okolab bold line stage top incubation chamber incorporating temperature and humidified CO2 con - trol ( Okolab S . R . L , Ottaviano , NA , Italy ) . Live imaging was analysed using Imaris software . Tissue drift was corrected using an autoregressive motion tool by stabilising transla - tional movement of photoreceptor nuclei . Movement of actin microfilaments was tracked by individually selecting the re - gion of interest and measuring Brownian motion over time captured . 6 to 20 mobile actin filaments were analysed per sample . Data was exported to Excel and total distance moved in the X axis over time was calculated . Data for all filaments was then plotted in Prism software , where Student’s t - test sta - tistical analysis was performed . Isolation of rod outer segments ( ROS ) . Mice were main - tained in a 12 / 12 hour light ( 400 Lux ) / dark cycle . Wild - type C57BL / 6J , were purchased from Jackson lab ( Bar Har - bor , ME ) . 3 - month males of RpgrEx3d8 and C57BL / 6J mice used for tissue samples were euthanized by CO2 inhalation prior to dissection following American Association for Lab - oratory Animal Science protocols . Preparation of purified mouse ROS was modified from . ( 44 , 45 ) Briefly , freshly dis - sected retinas were collected in 200 µ l Ringer’s buffer ( 10 mM HEPES , 130 mM NaCl , 3 . 6 mM KCl , 1 . 2 mM MgCl2 , 1 . 2 mM CaCl2 , 0 . 02 mM EDTA , pH 7 . 4 ) with 8 % ( v / v ) Op - tiPrep ( Sigma ) under dim red light . Retinas were pipetted up and down with a 200 - µl wide orifice tip 50 times , and then centrifuged at 400 × g for 2 min at room temperature . The supernatants containing ROS were collected on ice . The pro - cess was repeated 4 - 5 times . All samples were pooled and loaded onto the top of 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 and 30 % ( v / v ) OptiPrep step - gradient and centrifuged for 60 min at 19 , 210 × g at 4 °C in a TLS - 55 rotor ( Beckman Coulter ) . The ROS band was collected with a 18G needle , diluted with Ringer’s buffer to 3ml , and pelleted in a TLS - 55 rotor for 30 min at 59 , 825 × g at 4 °C . The ROS pellet was resuspended in Ringer’s buffer , and this suspension was applied to grids for cryo - electron mi - croscopy . Cryoelectron tomography and image processing . Rod cell fragments containing outer segments , CC , and portions of the IS were collected from WT and Rpgr Ex3d8 mice by iso - osmotic density - gradient centrifugation and applied to EM grids as described above and previously ( 18 , 43 , 45 ) . Briefly , isolated WT or Rpgr Ex3d8 cilia were mixed with BSA - stabilized 15 nm fiducial gold ( 2 : 1 ) , and 2 . 5 - 3 µ l of the mixture was deposited on the freshly glow - discharged Quan - tifoil carbon - coated holey grids ( 200 mesh , Au R3 . 5 / 1 ) and blotted from the frontside or backside before plunging frozen in liquid ethane using a Vitrobot Mark IV ( FEI , Inc . ) or auto - mated plunge - freezing device Lecia EMGP ( Lecia , Inc . ) . The frozen - hydrated WT and Rpgr Ex3d8 specimens were stored in liquid nitrogen before imaging . The frozen - hydrated sam - ples were imaged on a JEOL 3200FSC electron microscope operated at 300 kV using a K2 Summit direct electron de - tector camera or on a JEOL JEM2200FS operated at 200 KV microscope with a DE12 direct electron detector . Both microscopes were equipped with a field emission gun , an in - column energy filter . Single - tilt image series were auto - matically collected using SerialEM ( 46 ) at a defocus range of 8 - 12 µ m and a magnification of 12 , 000x ( equivalent to 3 . 6 Å / pixel , WT ) and 15 , 000x ( equivalent to 4 . 2 Å ) / pixel , KO ) on each microscope . The total electron dose per tomo - gram was 80 – 100 electrons / Å2 , as typical for cellular cryo - ET . Each tilt series , for WT , has 35 tilt images covering an angular range 51° to + 51° with 3° increment ( ±51° , 3° incre - ment ) ; for Rpgr Ex3d8 , there were 51 tilt images with 2° incre - ment ( ±50° , 2° increment ) . Tilted images were automatically aligned and reconstructed using the automated workflow in EMAN2 software . ( 47 ) Tomographic reconstructions and 3D surface rendering of sub - tomogram averages were generated and visualized using IMOD ( 48 ) and UCSF Chimera ( 49 ) . For Megaw et al . | bioR χ iv | 11 the segmentation , to enhance the contrast , tomograms were averaged by two ( bin2 ) or four ( bin4 ) voxels and filtered uni - formly using a low - pass filter ( set up at 80 Å ) to reduce the noise . Structural features such as actin filaments , MT and PM were manually annotated using IMOD ( 50 , 51 ) and Scripts from EMAN2 ( 52 ) software package . The segmented maps were visualized using UCSF Chimera 3D software package . Subtomogram averaging of actin filaments . The actin fila - ments were picked from 4x binned tomograms before finer alignment with 1x binned data . Approximately 700 volumes of 60 x 60 x 60 nm actin filaments were extracted at the base of ROS region from WT and Rpgr Ex3d8 tomograms . The ini - tial models ( low - pass filtered to 60 Å ) were generated us - ing EMAN2 routine ( 53 – 55 ) without applying any symme - try . The subsequent iterative subtomogram refinement us - ing EMAN2 ( 47 ) yielded the averaged structures of actin fila - ments at 30 Å resolution . The refinement was performed in ‘gold - standard’ fashion with all particles randomly split into two subsets with resolution measured by the Fourier shell correlation of the density , using the ‘gold’ standard cut - off criterion of FSC = 0 . 143 . For the WT samples , approximately 400 volumes of 60 x 60 x 60 nm actin filaments were ex - tracted at the base of ROS region from five tomograms . For Rpgr Ex3d8 , approximately 350 volumes of 60 x 60 x 60 nm actin filaments were extracted at the base of ROS region from 6 tomograms . The previously reported F - actin periodicity of 5 . 5 to 5 . 9 nm was observed in initial models for both WT and RpgrEx3d8 . The results obtained with these initial models were consistent with the results obtained when using previ - ous F - actin models ( with 37 nm , and 27 nm half helical repeat lengths and low - pass filtered to 60 Å ) ( 56 ) as initial references to initiate iterative refinement of subtomogram - averaged models . Quantification and statistical analysis . All statistical analy - sis was carried out using GraphPad Prism 8 ( version 8 . 4 . 1 ; GraphPad software , USA ) as described in the text . To de - termine statistical significance , unpaired t - tests were used to compare between two groups , unless otherwise indicated . The mean ± the standard error of the mean ( SEM ) is reported in the corresponding figures as indicated . Statistical signifi - cance was set at P < 0 . 05 . Acknowledgements . We thank Hemant Khanna for providing his RPGR antibody . We acknowledge the proteomic facil - ity at the Duke Eye Centre for carrying out the 6 week old rod outer segments mass spec experiment . We thank Vadim Arshavsky for sharing his PRCD antibody and protocols , ac - cess to core facilties and for specialized mass spec analysis . We thank Craig Nicol for his help in making and format - ting the movies for this paper . This work was funded by the Wellcome Trust ( RM ; 219607 / Z / 19 / Z , FM ; 215343 / Z / 19 / Z , MJ ; ISSF , AvK ; 208402 / Z / 17 / Z ) , the National Institute for Health ( AM ; F32 EY031574 , TGW and ZZ ; R01 - EY026545 , TGW and FH ; R01 - EY031949 ) , Fight for Sight ( FN ; 5179 / 5180 ) , the Medical Research Council ( PM and LM ; MC - UU - 12018 / 26 ) , Cancer Research UK ( LMM ; A24452 ) and the Welch Foundation ( TGW ; Q - 0035 ) . Contributions . RM and PM conceived the project . RM , AM , ZZ , LCM , LMM , TGM and PM designed the experiments . RM , AM , ZZ , FN , FM , LCM , AvK , LM , FH and MKJ per - formed the experiments . RM , AM , ZZ , FN , FM , LCM , AvK , TGM and PM analysed the data . RM , LMM , TGM and PM coordinated the study and provided guidance . RM , AM , LMM , TGM and PM wrote the paper . All of the authors discussed the results and approved the final version of the manuscript . Declaration of interests The authors declare no competing interests . Bibliography 1 . Siew Cheng Phua , Shuhei Chiba , Masako Suzuki , Emily Su , Elle C Roberson , Ganesh V Pusapati , Stéphane Schurmans , Mitsutoshi Setou , Rajat Rohatgi , Jeremy F Reiter , Koji Ikegami , and Takanari Inoue . Dynamic remodeling of membrane composition drives cell cyclethroughprimaryciliaexcision . Cell , 168 ( 1 - 2 ) : 264 – 279 . e15 , jan2017 . ISSN00928674 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2016 . 12 . 032 . 2 . Andrew R Nager , Jaclyn S Goldstein , Vicente Herranz - Pérez , Didier Portran , Fan Ye , Jose Manuel Garcia - Verdugo , and Maxence V Nachury . An actin network dispatches cil - iary GPCRs into extracellular vesicles to modulate signaling . Cell , 168 ( 1 - 2 ) : 252 – 263 . e14 , jan 2017 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2016 . 11 . 036 . 3 . RWYoung . Therenewalofphotoreceptorcelloutersegments . TheJournalofCellBiology , 33 ( 1 ) : 61 – 72 , apr 1967 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 33 . 1 . 61 . 4 . Maxence V Nachury and David U Mick . Establishing and regulating the composition of cilia for signal transduction . Nature Reviews . Molecular Cell Biology , 20 ( 7 ) : 389 – 405 , jul 2019 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41580 - 019 - 0116 - 4 . 5 . D S Papermaster , B G Schneider , and J C Besharse . Vesicular transport of newly synthe - sized opsin from the golgi apparatus toward the rod outer segment . ultrastructural immuno - cytochemical and autoradiographic evidence in xenopus retinas . Investigative Ophthalmol - ogy & Visual Science , 26 ( 10 ) : 1386 – 1404 , oct 1985 . 6 . DDereticandDSPapermaster . Polarizedsortingofrhodopsinonpost - golgimembranesin frog retinal photoreceptor cells . The Journal of Cell Biology , 113 ( 6 ) : 1281 – 1293 , jun 1991 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 113 . 6 . 1281 . 7 . R W Young and D Bok . Participation of the retinal pigment epithelium in the rod outer segment renewal process . The Journal of Cell Biology , 42 ( 2 ) : 392 – 403 , aug 1969 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 42 . 2 . 392 . 8 . M H Chaitin , B G Schneider , M O Hall , and D S Papermaster . Actin in the photoreceptor connectingcilium : immunocytochemicallocalizationtothesiteofoutersegmentdiskforma - tion . The Journal of Cell Biology , 99 ( 1 Pt 1 ) : 239 – 247 , jul 1984 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 99 . 1 . 239 . 9 . D S Williams , K A Linberg , D K Vaughan , R N Fariss , and S K Fisher . Disruption of micro - filamentorganizationandderegulationofdiskmembranemorphogenesisbycytochalasind in rod and cone photoreceptors . The Journal of Comparative Neurology , 272 ( 2 ) : 161 – 176 , jun 1988 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cne . 902720202 . 10 . William J Spencer , Tylor R Lewis , Sebastien Phan , Martha A Cady , Ekaterina O Sere - brovskaya , Nicholas F Schneider , Keun - Young Kim , Lisa A Cameron , Nikolai P Skiba , Mark H Ellisman , and Vadim Y Arshavsky . Photoreceptor disc membranes are formed through an arp2 / 3 - dependent lamellipodium - like mechanism . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , dec 2019 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1913518117 . 11 . Julio C Corral - Serrano , Ideke J C Lamers , Jeroen van Reeuwijk , Lonneke Duijkers , Anita D M Hoogendoorn , Adem Yildirim , Nikoleta Argyrou , Renate A A Ruigrok , Stef J F Let - teboer , Rossano Butcher , Max D van Essen , Sanae Sakami , Sylvia E C van Beersum , Krzysztof Palczewski , Michael E Cheetham , Qin Liu , Karsten Boldt , Uwe Wolfrum , Marius Ueffing , Alejandro Garanto , Ronald Roepman , and Rob W J Collin . PCARE and WASF3 regulate ciliary f - actin assembly that is required for the initiation of photoreceptor outer seg - mentdiskformation . ProceedingsoftheNationalAcademyofSciencesoftheUnitedStates of America , 117 ( 18 ) : 9922 – 9931 , may 2020 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1903125117 . 12 . Roly Megaw , Hashem Abu - Arafeh , Melissa Jungnickel , Carla Mellough , Christine Gurniak , WalterWitke , WeiZhang , HemantKhanna , PleasantineMill , BaljeanDhillon , AlanFWright , Majlinda Lako , and Charles Ffrench - Constant . Gelsolin dysfunction causes photoreceptor loss in induced pluripotent cell and animal retinitis pigmentosa models . Nature Communi - cations , 8 ( 1 ) : 271 , aug 2017 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 017 - 00111 - 8 . 13 . Raquel Y Salinas , Jillian N Pearring , Jin - Dong Ding , William J Spencer , Ying Hao , and Vadim Y Arshavsky . Photoreceptor discs form through peripherin - dependent suppression ofciliaryectosomerelease . TheJournalofCellBiology , 216 ( 5 ) : 1489 – 1499 , may2017 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201608081 . 14 . Alan F Wright , Christina F Chakarova , Mai M Abd El - Aziz , and Shomi S Bhattacharya . Photoreceptor degeneration : genetic and mechanistic dissection of a complex trait . Nature Reviews . Genetics , 11 ( 4 ) : 273 – 284 , apr 2010 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrg2717 . 15 . Roly D Megaw , Dinesh C Soares , and Alan F Wright . RPGR : Its role in photoreceptor physiology , human disease , and future therapies . Experimental Eye Research , 138 : 32 – 41 , sep 2015 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . exer . 2015 . 06 . 007 . 12 | bioR χ iv Megaw et al . | 16 . Patrick W Oakes , Tamara C Bidone , Yvonne Beckham , Austin V Skeeters , Guillermina R Ramirez - San Juan , Stephen P Winter , Gregory A Voth , and Margaret L Gardel . Lamel - lipodium is a myosin - independent mechanosensor . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 115 ( 11 ) : 2646 – 2651 , mar 2018 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1715869115 . 17 . JPTrinkaus . Surfaceactivityandlocomotionoffundulusdeepcellsduringblastulaandgas - trula stages . Developmental Biology , 30 ( 1 ) : 69 – 103 , jan 1973 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0012 - 1606 ( 73 ) 90049 - 3 . 18 . JaredCGilliam , JuanTChang , IvetteMSandoval , YouwenZhang , TiansenLi , StevenJPit - tler , WahChiu , andTheodoreGWensel . Three - dimensionalarchitectureoftherodsensory cilium and its disruption in retinal neurodegeneration . Cell , 151 ( 5 ) : 1029 – 1041 , nov 2012 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 10 . 038 . 19 . RobertoDominguezandKennethCHolmes . Actinstructureandfunction . Annualreviewof biophysics , 40 : 169 – 186 , 2011 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev - biophys - 042910 - 155359 . 20 . R Vervoort , A Lennon , A C Bird , B Tulloch , R Axton , M G Miano , A Meindl , T Meitinger , A Ciccodicola , and A F Wright . Mutational hot spot within a new RPGR exon in x - linked retinitis pigmentosa . Nature Genetics , 25 ( 4 ) : 462 – 466 , aug 2000 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 78182 . 21 . Milica Gakovic , Xinhua Shu , Ioannis Kasioulis , Sarah Carpanini , Ignacio Moraga , and Alan F Wright . The role of RPGR in cilia formation and actin stability . Human Molecular Genetics , 20 ( 24 ) : 4840 – 4850 , dec 2011 . doi : 10 . 1093 / hmg / ddr423 . 22 . KolluNRao , LinjingLi , WeiZhang , RichardSBrush , RajuVSRajala , andHemantKhanna . Loss of human disease protein retinitis pigmentosa GTPase regulator ( RPGR ) differen - tially affects rod or cone - enriched retina . Human Molecular Genetics , 25 ( 7 ) : 1345 – 1356 , apr 2016 . doi : 10 . 1093 / hmg / ddw017 . 23 . Fidelle Chahine Karam , To Ha Loi , Alan Ma , Benjamin M Nash , John R Grigg , Darshan Parekh , Lisa G Riley , Elizabeth Farnsworth , Bruce Bennetts , Anai Gonzalez - Cordero , and Robyn V Jamieson . Human iPSC - derived retinal organoids and retinal pigment epithelium for novel intronic RPGR variant assessment for therapy suitability . Journal of personalized medicine , 12 ( 3 ) , mar 2022 . doi : 10 . 3390 / jpm12030502 . 24 . Dror Sharon , Michael A Sandberg , Vivian W Rabe , Melissa Stillberger , Thaddeus P Dryja , and Eliot L Berson . RP2 and RPGR mutations and clinical correlations in patients with x - linked retinitis pigmentosa . American Journal of Human Genetics , 73 ( 5 ) : 1131 – 1146 , nov 2003 . ISSN 0002 - 9297 . doi : 10 . 1086 / 379379 . 25 . Sandra Brunner , Sergej Skosyrski , Renate Kirschner - Schwabe , Klaus - Peter Knobeloch , John Neidhardt , Silke Feil , Esther Glaus , Ulrich F O Luhmann , Klaus Rüther , and Wolf - gang Berger . Cone versus rod disease in a mutant rpgr mouse caused by different genetic backgrounds . Investigative Ophthalmology & Visual Science , 51 ( 2 ) : 1106 – 1115 , feb 2010 . doi : 10 . 1167 / iovs . 08 - 2742 . 26 . Gilad Allon , Irit Mann , Lital Remez , Elisabeth Sehn , Leah Rizel , Mariela J Nevet , Ido Perl - man , Uwe Wolfrum , and Tamar Ben - Yosef . PRCD is concentrated at the base of photore - ceptor outer segments and is involved in outer segment disc formation . Human Molecular Genetics , 28 ( 24 ) : 4078 – 4088 , dec 2019 . doi : 10 . 1093 / hmg / ddz248 . 27 . William J Spencer , Jin - Dong Ding , Tylor R Lewis , Chen Yu , Sebastien Phan , Jillian N Pear - ring , Keun - Young Kim , Andrea Thor , Rose Mathew , Joan Kalnitsky , Ying Hao , Amanda M Travis , Sondip K Biswas , Woo - Kuen Lo , Joseph C Besharse , Mark H Ellisman , Daniel R Saban , Marie E Burns , and Vadim Y Arshavsky . PRCD is essential for high - fidelity pho - toreceptor disc formation . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 116 ( 26 ) : 13087 – 13096 , jun 2019 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1906421116 . 28 . Emily R Sechrest , Joseph Murphy , Subhadip Senapati , Andrew F X Goldberg , Paul S - H Park , and Saravanan Kolandaivelu . Loss of PRCD alters number and packaging density of rhodopsininrodphotoreceptordiscmembranes . ScientificReports , 10 ( 1 ) : 17885 , oct2020 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 74628 - 2 . 29 . Edward Y Chen , Christopher M Tan , Yan Kou , Qiaonan Duan , Zichen Wang , Gabriela Vaz Meirelles , Neil R Clark , and Avi Ma’ayan . Enrichr : interactive and collaborative HTML5 gene list enrichment analysis tool . BMC Bioinformatics , 14 : 128 , apr 2013 . doi : 10 . 1186 / 1471 - 2105 - 14 - 128 . 30 . Maxim V Kuleshov , Matthew R Jones , Andrew D Rouillard , Nicolas F Fernandez , Qiaonan Duan , Zichen Wang , Simon Koplev , Sherry L Jenkins , Kathleen M Jagodnik , Alexander Lachmann , Michael G McDermott , Caroline D Monteiro , Gregory W Gundersen , and Avi Ma’ayan . Enrichr : acomprehensivegenesetenrichmentanalysiswebserver2016update . Nucleic Acids Research , 44 ( W1 ) : W90 – 7 , jul 2016 . doi : 10 . 1093 / nar / gkw377 . 31 . Zhuorui Xie , Allison Bailey , Maxim V Kuleshov , Daniel J B Clarke , John E Evangelista , Sherry L Jenkins , Alexander Lachmann , Megan L Wojciechowicz , Eryk Kropiwnicki , Kath - leen M Jagodnik , Minji Jeon , and Avi Ma’ayan . Gene set knowledge discovery with enrichr . Current protocols , 1 ( 3 ) : e90 , mar 2021 . ISSN 2691 - 1299 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cpz1 . 90 . 32 . Xun Sun , James H Park , Jessica Gumerson , Zhijian Wu , Anand Swaroop , Haohua Qian , AntoninaRoll - Mecak , andTiansenLi . LossofRPGRglutamylationunderliesthepathogenic mechanism of retinal dystrophy caused by TTLL5 mutations . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 113 ( 21 ) : E2925 – 34 , may 2016 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1523201113 . 33 . Jin - DongDing , RaquelYSalinas , andVadimYArshavsky . Discsofmammalianrodphotore - ceptors form through the membrane evagination mechanism . The Journal of Cell Biology , 211 ( 3 ) : 495 – 502 , nov 2015 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201508093 . 34 . Thomas Burgoyne , Ingrid P Meschede , Jemima J Burden , Maryse Bailly , Miguel C Seabra , andClareEFutter . Roddiscrenewaloccursbyevaginationoftheciliaryplasmamembrane that makes cadherin - based contacts with the inner segment . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 112 ( 52 ) : 15922 – 15927 , dec 2015 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1509285113 . 35 . Stefanie Volland , Louise C Hughes , Christina Kong , Barry L Burgess , Kenneth A Linberg , Gabriel Luna , Z Hong Zhou , Steven K Fisher , and David S Williams . Three - dimensional organization of nascent rod outer segment disk membranes . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 112 ( 48 ) : 14870 – 14875 , dec 2015 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1516309112 . 36 . Alphée Michelot , Julien Berro , Christophe Guérin , Rajaa Boujemaa - Paterski , Christopher J Staiger , Jean - Louis Martiel , and Laurent Blanchoin . Actin - filament stochastic dynamics mediated by ADF / cofilin . Current Biology , 17 ( 10 ) : 825 – 833 , may 2007 . ISSN 0960 - 9822 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2007 . 04 . 037 . 37 . LaurèneGressin , AudreyGuillotin , ChristopheGuérin , LaurentBlanchoin , andAlphéeMich - elot . Architecture dependence of actin filament network disassembly . Current Biology , 25 ( 11 ) : 1437 – 1447 , jun 2015 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2015 . 04 . 011 . 38 . Cheng Zhang , Wen Zhang , Yi Lu , Xiaoyi Yan , Xiumin Yan , Xueliang Zhu , Wei Liu , Yuehong Yang , and Tianhua Zhou . NudC regulates actin dynamics and ciliogenesis by stabilizing cofilin 1 . Cell Research , 26 ( 2 ) : 239 – 253 , feb 2016 . doi : 10 . 1038 / cr . 2015 . 152 . 39 . Rachayata Dharmat , Aiden Eblimit , Michael A Robichaux , Zhixian Zhang , Thanh - Minh T Nguyen , Sung Yun Jung , Feng He , Antrix Jain , Yumei Li , Jun Qin , Paul Overbeek , Ronald Roepman , GraemeMardon , TheodoreGWensel , andRuiChen . SPATA7maintainsanovel photoreceptor - specificzoneinthedistalconnectingcilium . TheJournalofCellBiology , 217 ( 8 ) : 2851 – 2865 , aug 2018 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201712117 . 40 . Yun Zhao , Dong - Hyun Hong , Basil Pawlyk , Guohua Yue , Michael Adamian , Marcin Gryn - berg , Adam Godzik , and Tiansen Li . The retinitis pigmentosa GTPase regulator ( RPGR ) - interacting protein : subserving RPGR function and participating in disk morphogenesis . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 100 ( 7 ) : 3965 – 3970 , apr 2003 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0637349100 . 41 . Alexandra L . Joyner . Gene Targeting : A Practical Approach . Oxford University Press , Oxford , 2 edition , 2000 . ISBN 9780199637928 . 42 . Daphne L McCulloch , Michael F Marmor , Mitchell G Brigell , Ruth Hamilton , Graham E Holder , Radouil Tzekov , and Michael Bach . ISCEV standard for full - field clinical elec - troretinography ( 2015 update ) . Documenta ophthalmologica . Advances in ophthalmology , 130 ( 1 ) : 1 – 12 , feb 2015 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10633 - 014 - 9473 - 7 . 43 . Michael A Robichaux , Valencia L Potter , Zhixian Zhang , Feng He , Jun Liu , Michael F Schmid , and Theodore G Wensel . Defining the layers of a sensory cilium with STORM and cryoelectron nanoscopy . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 116 ( 47 ) : 23562 – 23572 , nov 2019 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1902003116 . 44 . Theodore G Wensel , Feng He , and Justine A Malinski . Purification , reconstitution on lipid vesicles , and assays of PDE6 and its activator g protein , transducin . Methods in Molecular Biology , 307 : 289 – 313 , 2005 . doi : 10 . 1385 / 1 - 59259 - 839 - 0 : 289 . 45 . Theodore G Wensel and Jared C Gilliam . Three - dimensional architecture of murine rod cilium revealed by cryo - EM . Methods in Molecular Biology , 1271 : 267 – 292 , 2015 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 2330 - 4 \ _ 18 . 46 . David N Mastronarde . Automated electron microscope tomography using robust prediction of specimen movements . Journal of Structural Biology , 152 ( 1 ) : 36 – 51 , oct 2005 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2005 . 07 . 007 . 47 . Muyuan Chen , Wei Dai , Stella Y Sun , Darius Jonasch , Cynthia Y He , Michael F Schmid , Wah Chiu , and Steven J Ludtke . Convolutional neural networks for automated annotation of cellular cryo - electron tomograms . Nature Methods , 14 ( 10 ) : 983 – 985 , oct 2017 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 4405 . 48 . D N Mastronarde . Dual - axis tomography : an approach with alignment methods that preserve resolution . Journal of Structural Biology , 120 ( 3 ) : 343 – 352 , dec 1997 . doi : 10 . 1006 / jsbi . 1997 . 3919 . 49 . EF Pettersen , TD Goddard , CC Huang , GS Couch , DM Greenblatt , EC Meng , and TE Ferrin . UCSF chimeravisualization system for exploratory research and analysis . Journal of Computational Chemistry , 25 ( 13 ) : 1605 – 1612 , oct 2004 . doi : 10 . 1002 / jcc . 20084 . 50 . J R Kremer , D N Mastronarde , and J R McIntosh . Computer visualization of three - dimensionalimagedatausingIMOD . JournalofStructuralBiology , 116 ( 1 ) : 71 – 76 , feb1996 . doi : 10 . 1006 / jsbi . 1996 . 0013 . 51 . David N Mastronarde and Susannah R Held . Automated tilt series alignment and tomo - graphic reconstruction in IMOD . Journal of Structural Biology , 197 ( 2 ) : 102 – 113 , feb 2017 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2016 . 07 . 011 . 52 . JamesMBell , MuyuanChen , PhilipRBaldwin , andStevenJLudtke . Highresolutionsingle particle refinement in EMAN2 . 1 . Methods , 100 : 25 – 34 , may 2016 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ymeth . 2016 . 02 . 018 . 53 . Guang Tang , Liwei Peng , Philip R Baldwin , Deepinder S Mann , Wen Jiang , Ian Rees , and Steven J Ludtke . EMAN2 : an extensible image processing suite for electron microscopy . Journal of Structural Biology , 157 ( 1 ) : 38 – 46 , jan 2007 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2006 . 05 . 009 . 54 . James M Bell , Muyuan Chen , Tunay Durmaz , Adam C Fluty , and Steven J Ludtke . New software tools in EMAN2 inspired by EMDatabank map challenge . Journal of Structural Biology , 204 ( 2 ) : 283 – 290 , nov 2018 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2018 . 09 . 002 . 55 . Muyuan Chen and Steven J Ludtke . Deep learning - based mixed - dimensional gaussian mixture model for characterizing variability in cryo - EM . Nature Methods , 18 ( 8 ) : 930 – 936 , aug 2021 . ISSN 1548 - 7091 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41592 - 021 - 01220 - 5 . 56 . Joseph Atherton , Melissa Stouffer , Fiona Francis , and Carolyn A Moores . Visualising the cytoskeletal machinery in neuronal growth cones using cryo - electron tomography . Journal of Cell Science , 135 ( 7 ) , apr 2022 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 259234 . Megaw et al . | bioR χ iv | 13