BORKNV6376 M02 The Coding Manual for Qualitative Researchers lfJ ZAPADOCESKA UNIVERZITA v PLZNI Univerzitnl knihovna NENIC MNE ! © Johnny Saldafia 2009 First published 2009 Reprinted 2009 , 2010 Apart from any f . 1ir dealing for the purposes of research or private study , or criticism or review , as permitted under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Ace , 1988 , this publication may be reproduced , stored or transmitted in any form , or by any means , onJy with the prior permission in writing of the publishers , or in the case of reprographic repmduction , in accordance with the terms of licences issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency . Enquiries concerning repmductiOll outside those terms should be sent to the publishers . SAGE Publications Led 1 Oliver ' s Yard 55 City Road London ECIY ISP SAGE Publications Inc . 2455 Teller Road Thousand Oak ~ , California 91320 SAGE Public ; ltions India Pvc Ltd B III I Mohan Cooperative Industrial Area Mathura Road New Delhi 110 044 SAGE Publications Asia - Pacific Pte Ltd 33 Pekin Street # 02 - 0 I Far East Square Singapore 048763 Univerzitni knihovna Zapadoceske univerzity V Plzni KN100004BB3 Librury of Congress Control Number : 2008931307 British Librnry Cataloguing in Publication datll A catalogue record for this hook is available from the British Library ISBN 978 - 1 - 84787 - 548 - 8 ISBN 97B - I - 8HB7 - 549 - 5 ( pbk ) Typeset by C & M Digitals Pvc Ltd , Cbenllai , India ~ ~ nted and bound in Great Britain by the MPG Book ~ Group 1 nnted on paper from sustainable resources Summary of Contents Acknowledgments xi One An Introduction to Codes and Coding 1 Two Writing Analytic Memos 32 Three First Cycle Coding Methods 45 Four Second Cycle Coding Methods 149 Five Post - Coding and Pre - Writing 185 Appendix A Exercises and Activities for Coding and Qualitative Data Analytic Skill Development 193 Appendix B Field Note , Interview Transcript , and Document Samples for Coding 196 Appendix C An Operational Model Diagram 201 Appendix D A Glossary of Analytic Recommendations 204 References 210 Index 220 About the Author 224 contents Aclmowledgments xi One An Introduction to Codes and Coding 1 Purposes of the Manual 1 What Is a Code ? 3 Coding examples 3 Coding for patterns 5 Coding filters 6 Coding as a heuristic 7 Codifying and Categorizing 8 From codes to categories 9 Recoding and recategorizing 10 From codes and categories to theory 11 The differences between codes and themes 13 What Gets Coded ? 13 Units of social organization 14 Amounts of data to code 15 The Mechanics of Coding 16 Pre - coding 16 Preliminary jottings 17 Questions to consider as you code 18 Coding contrasting data 18 The Numbers of Codes 19 " Lumping " and " splitting " the data 19 The quantities of qualities 20 The codebool ( or code list 21 Manual and CAQDAS Coding 21 Coding manually 22 Coding electronically 22 Data formatting for CAQDAS 23 viii THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS CONTENTS ix Coding capabilities with CAQDAS 23 Elemental M ~ thods 66 Searches and queries with CAQDAS 26 Structural Coding 66 Solo and Team Coding 26 Descriptive Coding 70 Coding collaboratively 27 In Vivo Coding 74 Coding solo 28 Process Coding 77 Necessary Personal Attributes for Coding 28 Initial Coding 81 On Method 30 Affective Methods 86 Coding as craft 31 Emotion Coding 86 Values Coding 89 Two Writing Analytic Memos 32 Versus Coding 93 What is an Analytic Memo ? 32 Evaluation Coding 97 Examples of Analytic Memos 34 Literary and Language Methods 102 Coding and Categorizing Analytic Memos 41 Dramaturgical Coding 102 Analytic memos generate codes and categories 41 Motif Coding 105 Grounded theory and its coding canon 41 Narrative Coding 108 Analytic Memos on Visual Data 42 Verbal Exchange Coding 113 Exploratory Methods 118 Three First Cycle Coding Methods 45 Holistic Coding 118 The Coding Cycles 45 Provisional Coding 120 Selecting the Appropriate Coding Method ( s ) 47 Hypothesis Coding 123 Various perspectives on coding decisions 47 Procedural Methods 127 " Generic " coding methods 48 OCM ( Outline of Cultural Materials ) Coding 127 Paradigmatic , conceptual , and methodological Protocol Coding 130 considerations 48 Domain and Taxonomic Coding 133 Coding and a priori goals 49 Themeing the Data 139 Coding in mixed methods stUdies 49 Forms for Additional First Cycle Coding Methods 146 New and hybrid coding schemes 50 General criteria for coding decisions 50 Four Second Cycle Coding Methods : 1 . 49 Overview of First Cycle Coding Methods 51 Overview of Second Cycle Coding Methods 150 The Coding Methods Profiles 52 Pattern Coding 152 Sources 52 Focused Coding 155 Description 52 Axial Coding 159 Applications 52 Theoretical Coding 163 Example 52 Elaborative Coding 168 Analysis 53 Longitudinal Coding 173 Notes 54 Forms for Additional Second Cycle Coding Methods 182 Grammatical Methods 55 Attribute Coding 55 Five Post - Coding and Pre - Writing : 1 . 85 Magnitude Coding 58 Focusing Strategies 186 Simultaneous Coding 62 The " top ten " list 186 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUAliTATIVE RESEARCHERS The study ' s " trinity " Codeweav { ng Rising Above the Data The " touch test " From codes to themes Ordering and Reordering Tabletop categories One thing at a time Headings and subheadings Begin with the conclusion Assistance from Others " Shop tal / ( ing " through the study Searching for " buried treasure " Closure Appendix A Exercises and Activities for Coding and Qualitative Data Analytic Skill Development Appendix B Field Note , Interview Transcript , and Document Samples for Coding Appendix C An Operational Model Diagram Appendix D A Glossary of Analytic Recommendations References Index About the Author 186 187 187 187 188 188 188 189 189 190 190 190 191 191 193 196 201 204 210 220 224 Acknowledgments Thanks are extended to : Patrick Brindle of SAGE , London , who initially encouraged me to create tlus manual ; My qualitative research instructors at Arizona State University : T0111 Barone , Mary Lee Smith , and Amira De la Garza , for introducing me to the methods and literature of qualitative inquiry ; HarryF . Wolcott , Norman K . Denzin , Yvonna S . Lincohl , Mitch Allen , and LauI : a A . McCanlU1on , for their inspiration , mentor - ship , and collegial support for my own research enrleavors ; Anne Kuckartz of MAXQDA / VERBI Software , Thomas Ringmayr of ATLAS . ti , and Karen Thomas ofNVivo / QSR International Pty Ltd , for their assistance with CAQDAS screenshots and permissions ; Laura Steward of Elsevier Ltd , and Patricia Zline of Rowman and Littlefield Publishing Group . for their assistance with figure permissions ; Claire Lipscomb and Vanessa Harwood of SAGE , London and the anonynlous manuscript reviewers for their pre - publication guidance throughout this project ; Jonothan Neclands and Touy Goode for the forn1atting ideas ; Lisa A . Kraluer and Chiara M . Lavio for selected data contributions from fieldwork ; Jim Simpson for the " shop talk " and support ; and All writers of references listed in this manual whose works , brought together in this collection , provide us with the right tools for the right job . You have just finished typing the fieldnotes from your final observation of the study ~ nd you proceed to file them . There , facing you , is all the material you have diligently collected . An empty feeling comes over you as you ask " Now what do I do ? " , I code , therefore I am . . ( Robert C . Bogdan and Sari Knopp Biklen , QualJtat / Ve Research for Education : An Introduction to Theories and Methods , 2007 , pp . 172 - 3 ) ( Anonymous , written on a seminar room chalkboard ) One An Introduction to Codes and Coding Any researcher who " \ vishes to become proficient at doing qualitative analysis must learn to code well and ea ~ ily . The excellence of the research rests in large part on the excellence of the coding . ( Anselm L . Strauss . QllalitatiP ( ! Allalysl : ~ jiJr Social SciclItists , 1987 , p . 27 ) Purposes of the Manual The three primary purposes of The Codillg lIimwal Jar Qlfalitatiuc Researchers are : • to briefly discuss the functions of codes , coding , and analytic memo writ ing during the qualitative data collection and analytic processes • to profile a selected yet diverse repertoire of coding methods generally applied in qualitative data analysis , and • to provide readers sources , descriptions . exa . mples , recommended applica tions , and exercises for coding and further analyzing qualitative data . This manual does not address such matters as qualitative research design or how to conduct interviews or participant observation fieldwork . These topics are already masterfully discussed in other textbooks . The Codi / lg MQ / lJlo / Jor QlIalitatillc Rcscarcl , crs is intended as a reference to supplement those existing works . This manual focuses exclusively on codes and coding and how they play a role in the qualitative data analytic process . For newcomers to qualitative inquiry it presents a repertoire of coding nlethods in broad brushstrokes . Additional information and extended discussion of the methods can be found in most of the cited sources . Grounded theory ( discussed in Chapter Two ) , for example , is elegantly profiled , streamlined , and re - envisioned in Kathy Charmaz ' s ( 2006 ) COllStflfcti / lg Gro / l / lded Theol ] ' : A Practical G / lide thro / lgh Qllolitotille Allo / ysis ; while Graham R . Gibbs ' ( 2007 ) Allo / l ' zillg Qllolitatille Dato provides an elegant survey of basic analytic processes . 2 THE CODING MANUAL FDR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS The Codillg 111 ( 1 / 1 / 101 does not maintain allegiance to anyone specific research genre or 111Cthodology . Throughout this book you ' l1 read a breadth of perspectives on codes and coding , s0111etinlCS purposely juxtaposed to illustrate and highlight the diverse opinions anIong scholars in the field . No one , including myself , can claim final authority 011 the " best " way to code qualitative data . In fact , there are a few instances where I take lTIoderate lib erty with adapting and even renaming prescribed coding methods for clarity or flexibility ' s sake . This is not intended to standardize terminology within the field , but simply to employ consistency throughout this particular man ual . My perspective acknowledges and promotes the pragmatist paradigm ( Patton , 2002 ) , which chooses " the right tool for the right job " since all research questions , methodologies , conceptual frameworks , and fieldwork parameters are context - specific . I also wrote this manual because I find it problematic ( but not difficult ) to teach coding in my own qualitative research methods course . I provide students with an array of readings about the process from 111ultiple sources because I have yet to find that single satisfactory book ( to me ) that focuses exclusively on the topic . General introductory texts in qualitative inquiry are so numerous and well - written that it becomes difficult not to find the best one to use , but which one of such quality works to select as the prinlary textbook . This man ual supplements introductory works in the subject because most limit their dis cussions about coding to the writer ' s prescribed , preferred , or signature methods . - I - wanted to provide in a single resource a selected collection of var ious coding methods developed by other researchers ( and myself ) that provides students and colleagues a handy reference for classroonl exercises and assign ments , and for their own independent research for thesis and dissertation field work and filture qualitative studies . But by no means is it an exhaustive resource . I deliberately exclude such discipline - specific 111ethods as Behavior Coding ( which notes problematic respondent and interviewer behaviors dur ing survey interviews [ Singleton & Straits , 2002 , p . 65 ] ) and such signature methods as the Davis Observation Code system ( for medical interviews [ Zoppi & Epstein , 2002 , p . 375 ] ) . If you need additional information and explanation about the coding methods , check the References . The Codillg l \ il1lllfal is intended primarily as a reference work . It is not nec essarily meant to be read cover - ta - cover , but it certainly can be if you " vish to acquaint yourself with all 29 coding methods profiles and their analytic possi bilities . There are , in fact , several principles related to coding matters not dis cussed in the first two chapters that are unique to SOIne of the profiles . rfyou choose to review all the contents , read selected sections at a time , not all of thenl in one sitting , otherwise it can overwhelm you . If you ' re scanning the manual to see which coding mecllOd ( s ) might be appropriate for your particular study , AN INTRODUCTION TO CODES AND COOiNG fil ' D . ' ption and Applications sections to see if further reading " d dle pro eS eSCfl . . rea fil ' . ' t d It ' s doubtful you ' ll use every coding method mcluded fthcpro elsmen e . 0 , al for our particular research endeavors throughout your career , in tillS manu Y " . Co ' , il bl here on an " as needed baSIS lor your umque proJects , but dley are ava a e d · I " culum the sequential order of the profiles has been Like an aca enllC curr , , . ' d d They don ' t necessarily progress ID a linear luanner from carefully conSl ere . I - but are clustered generally fr0111 the fill1danlental to the simple to comp ex , intermediate to the advanced . What is a Code ? . alit u· e inquIry ' is IlloSt often a word or short phrase that ~ ) ' lnbolically A code 111 qu a v , ' . tive salient essence - capturing , and ! or evocatIve attnbute aSSIgns a summa , ' . . . fl uage - based or visual data . The data can conSIst of 111ter - for a portlOn 0 ang· . . . . ts participant observation field notes , Journals , docUlllents , ht - VIeW transcnp , " . c t photographs video , websltes , e - mail correspondence , and craturc arthac s , ' T ' I oru ' on of data to be coded durin First Cycl coding processes so on . le p , . ' tude fronl a single word to a fu 1 sentence to an enbre can range 111 mag m , . age of text to a stream of nloving images , InlS ~ C ! aRrl ~ cle codmg P I dons coded can be the exact same umts , longer passages of processes , t le por d nfiguration of the codes themselves developed thus far . text , an even a r e c o , , . Just as a title represents and captures a book or fil111 or poem s pf1 ~ ary " con - d so does a code represent and capture a datum s prImary tent ' an essence , content and essence . Coding examples . . A I f coded datum as it is presented in tIlls manual , looks like tins nexampe oa , " . I k fr " a set of field notes about an mner CIty neIghborhood . The W len ta ~ en , , 0n1 . . . d ' tal ' Ized code in the right colunm is called a Descnpbve Code , onc - war capl - _ _ _ _ - - " " which slllnmarizes the primary topic of the excerpt : 1 I notice that the grand majority of homes have chain link fences in front of them , There are many dogs ( mostly German shepherds ) with signs on fences that say " Beware of the Dog , " 1 SECURITY Here is an exanlple of several codes applied to data from an interview tran . . I ' I I· h school senior describes his favorite teacher , The codes scnpt In w nc 1 a ng are based on what outcomes the student receives from his mentor , Note th ~ t one of the codes is taken directly from what the part " t himself says and 15 placed in quotation marks - this is called an I Vivo Code 3 4 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS 1 He cares about me . He has never told me but he does . : : : ; He ' s always been there for me , even when my parents were not . He ' s one of the few things that I hold as a constant in my life . So it ' s nice . 3 I really feel comfortable around him . 1 SENSE OF SELF - WORTH , STABILlTV , " COMFORTABLE " Did you agree with the codes ? Did other words or phrases run through your mind as you read the data ? It ' s all right if your choices differed from nrine . Coding is not a precise science ; it ' s primarily an interpretive act . G Also be aware that a code can sometinles sl / J / l / Iwrizc or cOlldctlsc data , not sim ply reduce it . The introductory examples above were kept purposely sinlple and direct . But depending on the researcher ' s academic discipline , ontological and epistemological orientations , theoretical and conceptual frameworks , and even the choice of coding method itself , sonIe codes can attribute more evocative meanings to data . In the excerpt below , a mother describes her teenage son ' s troubled school years . The codes emerge frOlll the perspective of middle - and junior high school years as a difficult period for most youth . They are not spe cific types of codes ; they are " first impression " phrases derived fronl an open ended process called Initial Coding : 1 My son , Barry , went through a really tough time about , probably started the end of fifth grade and went into sixth grade . : 1 When he was growing up young in school he was a people - pleaser and his teachers loved him to death . 3 Two boys In particular that he chose to try to emulate , wouldn ' t , were not very good for him . 4 They were very critical of him , they put him down all the time , and he kind of just took that and really kind of internalized it , I thinl { , for a long time . 5 In that time period , In the fifth grade , early sixth grade , they really just kind of shunned him all together , and so his networl { as he knew it was gone . , MIDDLE - SCHOOL HELL ' TEACHER ' S PET , BAD INFLUENCES , TWEEN ANGST 5 THE LOST BOY Note that when we reflect on a passage of data to decipher its core mean ing , we are dccodinJ ? i ~ when we determine its aQ : pro . ~ code and label it , we are ell coding . For ease of reference throughout this nIanual , codilI . . . f . ! , vill be the - sole ternl used . Simply understand that coding is the transitional process between data collection and more extensive data analysis . AN INTRODUCTION TO CODES AND COOING coding for patterns . . . . In the examples presented thus far , each umt of data was assIgned Its own . ode This is due primarily to the short length of the excerpts . In larger Uluque c . and complete data sets , you - will find that several to many of the sanle codes will be used repeatedly throughout . This is both natural and deliberate - : na : ural because there are mostly repetitive patterns of actIon and conSIstencIes 111 human affairs , and deliberate because one of the coder ' s primary goals is to find these repetitive patterns of action and consistencies in human affairs as docu - a 111 the data In the exal11plt ! 1JElow , note how the same Process Code ( a mente . . dlnilse - wmch captures action ) is used twice during this small unit of war ut . p elementary school c1assroonl activity : 1 Mrs . Jackson rises from her desk and announces , uOK , you guys , let ' s get lined up for lunch . RoW One . " Rve children seated In the first row of desks rise and walk to the classroom door . Some of the seated children talk to each other . 2 Mrs . Jacl { son looks at them and says , " No talldng , save it for the cafeteria . 3 RoW Two . N Rve children seated in the second row of desks rise and wall { to the children already standing in line . , LINING UP FOR LUNCH , MANAGING BEHAVIOR , LINING UP FOR LUNCH Another way the above passage could be coded is to acknowledge that MAN AGING BEHAVIOR is not a separate action or an interruption of the rou tine that disrupts the flow of LINING UP FOR LUNCH , but to interpret that MANAGING BEHAVIOR is an embedded or interconnected part of the larger social scheme that composes LINING UP FOR LUNCH . The coding might appear thusly , using a method called Simultaneous Coding ( which applies two or more codes within a single datll111 ) : 1 Mrs . Jacl { son rises from her desl { and announces , uOK , you guys , let ' s get lined up for lunch . RoW One . " Rve children seated In the first row of desks rise and walk to the classroom door . Some of the seated children talk to each other . 111 Mrs . Jackson looks at them and says , UNo talking , save It for the cafeteria . 1 Row Two . " Rve children seated in the second row of desl < s rise and walk to the children already standing in line . , LINING UP FOR LUNCH ' " MANAGING t BEHAVIOR Take note of sonIe important caveats when it C0111es to understanding pat terns and regularity : idiosyncrasy is a pattern ( Saldana , 2003 , pp . 118 - 22 ) and 5 6 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS there can be patterned variation in data ( Agar , 1996 , p . 10 ) . Sometimes we code and categorize data by what participants talk about . They may all share with you their personal perceptions of school experiences , for exanlple , but their individual value , attitude , and belief systems about education may vary greatly from being bored and disengaged to being enthusiastic and intrinsi cally l11otivated . When you search for patterns in coded data to categorize them , understand that sometimes YOll may group things together not just because they are exactly alike or very much alike , but because they might also have something in common - even if , paradoxically , that commonality con sists of differences . For example , each one of us may have a strong opinion about who should be leading our country . The fact that we each have an individual opinion about that issue is what we have in COlllmon . Ar ; for whol / l we each believe should be leading the country . that ' s where the \ differences and variations occur . Acknowledge that a confounding property of category construction in quali tative inquiry is that data within them cannot always be precisely and discretely bounded ; they are within " fuzzy " boundaries at best ( Tesch , 1990 , pp . 135 - 8 ) . That ' s why a method called Silllultaneous Coding is an option we have , when needed . Finally , Hatch ( 2002 ) offers that you think of patterns not just as sta ble regularities but as varying forms . A pattern can be characterized by : • similarity ( things happen the same way ) • difference ( they happen in predictably different ways ) • frequency ( they happen often or seldom ) • sequence ( they happen in a certain order ) • correspondence ( they happen in relation to other activities or events ) • causation ( one appears to cause another ) ( p . 155 ) Coding filters The act of coding requires that you wear your researcher ' s analytic lens . But how you perceive and interpret what is happening in the data depends on what type of filter covers that lens . For example , consider the following state ment from an older male : " There ' s just no place in this country for illegal inunigrants . Round them up and send those criminals back to where they came from . " One researcher , a grounded theorist using In Vivo Coding to keep the data rooted in the participant ' s own language , might code the datum this way : 1 There ' s Just no place in this country for illegal immigrants . Round them up and send those criminals back to Where they came from . , " NO PLACE " AN INTROOUCTION TO CODES AND CODING A second ~ esearcher , an urban ' ethnographer employing Descriptive Coding to document and categorize the breadth of opinions stated by multiple partici pants , might code the same datum this way : 1 There ' s Just no place In this country for illegal Immigrants . Round them up and send those criminals back to where they came from . , IMMIGRATION ISSUES And a third researcher , a critical race theorist employingValues Coding to cap ture and label subjective perspectives , may code the exact same datum this way : 1 There ' s just no place in this country for illegal Immigrants , Round them up and send those criminals bacl ( to where they came from . , XENOPHOBIA The collection of coding methods in this manual is a repertoire of possible filters to consider and apply to your approaches to qualitative inquiry . But even before that , your level of personal involvement as a participant observer - as a peripheral , active , or conlplete member during fieldwork - filters how you per ceive , document , and thus code your data ( Adler & Adler , 1987 ) . So do the types of questions you ask and the types of responses you receive during interviews ( I { vale , 1996 ; Rubin & Rubin , 1995 ) , the detail and structuring of your field notes ( Emerson , Fretz , & Shaw , 1995 ) , the gender and race ! etlmicity of your par ticipants - and yourself ( Dehar & Gordon , 1995 ; Stanfield & Dennis , 1993 ) , and whetller you collect data from adults or children ( Greene & Hogan , 2005 ; Zwiers & Morrissette , 1999 ) . Merriam ( 1998 ) states ~ ' our analysis and interpretation anr study ' s findings wiII reflect the constructs , concepts , language , models , and theories that structured the study in the first place " ( p . 4S ) . Aiia It IS not o @ y your approach to qualita tive inquiry ( e . g . , case study , etlmographic , phenomenological ) and ontological , epistemological , and methodological issues that influence . - and affect our cod ing decisions ( Creswell , 201l7 ; Mason , 201l2 ) . Sipe & GJ ~ iso ( 2004 ) in their revealing narrative about coding dilenullas for a children ' s literacy s udy , note that ' . : 4 ' ) 1 radiug is a judgment call " since we bring " our subjectivities . our per sonalities , our predispositions , [ and ] our quirks " to the process ( pp . 482 3 ) . Coding as a heuristic The majority of qualitative researchers will code their data both during and after collection as an analytic tactic , for coding is analysis ( Miles & Huberman , 1994 , p . 56 ) . Differing perspectives , however , attest that " Coding ; and analysis are not synonymous , tllOugh coding is a CnIcial aspect of analysis " CBasit , 2003 , p . 145 ) . - - 7 8 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS Coding is a heuristic ( from the Greek , mearring " to discover " ) ; ; - au . . exploratory problem - solving technique without specific formulas to follow : ' " Coding is only the Ullllal step toward an even more n ~ nd evocative anaJysis and interpre tation for a report . Coding is not just labeling , it is li / lki / l ~ : " It leads you from 1I1e data to the idea , and from the idea to all the data pertai - ; ; mg to tJilrt . idea " ( Richards & Morse , 2007 , p . 137 ) . And , coding is a cyclical act . Rarely is the first cycle of coding data perfectly attempted ' 1 : ! : . e second cycle ( and possibly the third and fourth , and so on ) of recoding further manages , filters , highlights , and focuses the salient features of the quahtanve datrre " EITId ror generatmg categories , themes , anal : ' Oncepts , grasp ~ ng meamng , anll70rbtiTICiIng iiieory : Coffey & Atkinson - ( 1996 ) propose that " coding is usually a mixture of data [ summation ] and data cOlllplication . . . breaking the data apart in analytically relevant ways in order to lead toward fur ther questions about the data " ( pp . 29 - 31 ) . Dey ( 1999 ) posits , tllOugh his original intent was to be critical , " With cate gories we iUlpute meanings , \ \ T " ith coding we C0111pute theol " ( p . 95 ) . To some , code is a dirty " four - letter word . " A few research methodologists perceive a code as mere shorthand or an abbreviation for the more irnportant category yet to be discovered . Unfortunately , some use the terms code and categol ) 1 interchange ably and even in combination when they are , in fact , two separate components of data analysis . I advocate that qualitative codes are essence - capturing and essential elements of the research story that , when clustered together accord ing to similarity and regularity - a pattern - they actively facilitate the devel Oplnent of categories and thus analysis of their connections . Ultimately , I like one of Charmaz ' s ( 2006 ) metaphors for the process when she states that cod ing " generates the bones of your analysis . . . . [ I ] ntegration will assemble those bones into a working skeleton " ( p . 45 ) . Codifying and Categorizing To coc1i . fjr is to arrange things in a systematic order , to make something part of a system or classification , to categorize . When codes are applied and reapplied to qualitative data , you are codifying - a process that permits data to be " segre gated , grouped , regrouped and [ elinked in order to consolidate meaning and explanation " ( Grbich , 2007 , p . 21 ) . Bernard ( 2006 ) succinctly states that analy sis " is the search for patterns in data and for ideas that help explain why those patterns are there in the first place " ( p . 452 ) . Coding is thus a metllOd that enables you to organize and group similarly coded data into categories or " fam ilies " because they share some characteristic - the beginning of a pattern ( see the examples in Pattern Coding and Focused Coding in Chapter Four ) . You use AN INTRODUCTION TO CODES AND CODING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , 1assification reasoning plus your tacit and intuitive senses to determine which " look alike " and " feel alike " when grouping them together ( Lincoln & Guba , 1985 , p . 347 ) . From codes to categorIes For example , in Harry , Sturges , & Klingner ' s ( 2005 ) ethnographic study of the 8verrepresentation of minorities in special education programs . data initially coded as classroom MATERIALS , COMPUTERS , and TEXTBOOKS were categorized under the major heading , Resources . As their study continued , another major category em _ erged labeled Teacher Skills with the ~ ubcategories IIIstmctiallol Skills and Mallagemellt Skills . The codes subsumed under these shbcategories - part of the overall hierarchical " coding scheme " ( Lewins & Silver , 2007 ) - were : Category : Teacher Skills Subcategory 1 . : Instructional Skills Code : PEDAGOGICAL Code : SOCIO·EMOTIONAL Code : STYLE / PERSONAL EXPRESSION Code : TECHNICAL Subcategory 2 : Management Skills Code : 8EHAVIORIST TECHNIQUES Code : GROUP MANAGEMENT Code : SOCIO·EMOTIONAL Code : STYLE ( overlaps with Instructional style ) Code : UNWRITTEN CURRICULUM ; , , ; another example , in Basit ' s ( 2003 ) study of the aspirations of teenage British Muslim girls . analysis of interview data with the girls , their parents , and their teachers brought forth 23 major categories that clustered under six major themes . . : " , One major theme was IDENTITY , and it " related categories were Ethnicity . Limguage , and Religion . Under the tl , eme CAREER ASPIRATIONS , the - : - : - - - = : - - categories were Career Choices , Unrealistic Aspirations , and Career Advice . Rubin & Rubin ( 1995 ) recommend that you refine the contents of each category ( working within ) from your data before you start comparing them with each other ( working across ) ( pp . 241 , 251 ) . Maykut & Morehouse ( 1994 ) refine each category by developing a rule for inclusion in the form of a propo sitional statement , coupled with sanlple data . For example , if an emergent cat egory in a case study is labeled Physical Health , its rule for inclusion as a propositional state111ent might read : Physical Health : The participant shares matters related to physical health such as wellness , medication , pain . etc . : " I ' m on 25 milligrams of amitriptyline each night " ; " . 1 hate gOing to the gym . " 9 1 . 0 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS Emergent categories might also evolve as conceptual processes rather than descriptive topics such as : Inequity : PartIcIpants perceive unfair treatment directed toward themselves and favorltism directed toward others : " I ' ve been worldng here for over 25 years and some newcomers are making higher salaries than me . " The categories ' propositional statements arc then cOlllpared with each other to discern possible relationships to create an olltcollle propositioll based on their combination . Recoding and recategorizlng Rarely will anyone get coding right the first time . Qualitative inquiry demands ll1cticulollS attention to language and deep reflection on the emergent patterns and meanings of human experience . Recoding can occur with a more attuned perspective using First Cycle methods again , while Second Cycle methods describe those processes that might be employed during the second ( and third and possibly fouru1 . . . ) review of data . fu you code and recode , expect - or rather , strive for - your codes and cat egories to become more refined . Some of your First Cycle codes may be later subsumed by other codes , relabeled , or dropped all together . As you progress toward Second Cycle coding , there may be some rearrangement and reclassi fication of coded data Into different and even new categories . Abbott ( 2004 ) cleverly likens the process to " decorating a room ; you try it , step back , move a few things , step back again , try a serious reorganization , and so on " ( p . 215 ) . For example , I observed and interviewed fouru1 and fifth grade children to learn the ways they hurt and oppress each oU1er ( Saldaiia , 2005b ) . This was preparatory fieldwork before an action research project that attempted to empower children with strategies , learned through improvised dramatic simu lations and role - playing , for dealing \ vith bullying in the school environment . I initially categorized their responses into Physical and Verbal forms of oppression . Some of the codes that fell under these categories were : Category : Physical Oppression Code : PUSHING Code : FIGHTING Code : SCRATCHING Category : Verbal Oppression Code : NAME·CALlING Code : THREATENING Code : LAUGHING AT As coding continued , I observed that a few oppressions were a combination of both physical alld verbal actions . For example , a child can EXCLUDE others AN INTRODUCTION TO CODES AND CODING hysically . from a gal11e , accOlnpanied with a verbal statement such as , " You ~ an ' t play \ Vi . th us . " Hence , a third major category emerged : Physical and Verbal Oppression . As the study continued , more data were collected through other methods , and gender differences in children ' s perceptions and enactIllent of oppression became strikingly apparent . To participants , oppression was not about the body and voice ; it was about " force " and " jce / jllgs , " The three initial categories were eventually reduced to two , and renamed based on what seemed to resonate with gender - based observations . The new categories and a few sample codes and rearranged subcodes included : category : Oppression through Physical Force ( primarily but not exclusively by boys ) Code : FIGHTING Subeode : SCRATCHING Subcode : PUSHING Subcode : PUNCHING Category : Oppression through Hurting Others ' Feelings ( primarily but not exclu sively by girls ) Code : PUTTING DOWN Subcode : NAME - CALliNG SUbcode : TEASING Subcode : TRASH TALKING See the Domain and Ta . xonomic Coding profile in Chapter Three for an extended discussion of this case , and the Initial and Focused Coding examples in Chapters Three and Four respectively to see how a series of codes gets categorized . From codes and categories to theory Some categories may contain clusters of coded data that merit fi . lrther refinement into subcategories . And " , hen the major categories are compared with each - GtBer ~ ' consolidated in various ways . you begin to transcend the " reality " of your data and pmgress - toU ' 1 ' U the thematic cQncep ' tual and theoretical . fu a very basic process , codifYing usually follows an ideal and streamlined scheme as illustrated in Figure 1 . 1 . Keep in mind that the actual act of reaching theory is much more com plex and messy than illustrated . Richards & Morse ( 2007 ) clarifY d , at " categorizing iidlOW we get ' up ' tiunl the diversity of data to the shapes of the data , the sorts of things represented . COl / cepts are how we get up to more general , hi her - level , and more abstract consttucts " ( p . 157 ) . Our ability to show how these themes an c , . : opts systematically interrelate lead toward the development of theory ( Corbin & Strauss , 2008 , p . 55 ) , though Layder ( 1998 ) contends U1at pre - established sociolog ical theories can inform , if not drive , the initial coding process itself . The devel opment of an original theory is not always a necessary outcome for qualitative : 1 . 2 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS Real - - - - - - - - ~ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ + J Abstract Code Code Category Category t ' , - - ~ Themesl Concepts , , ' - , - - - - - - , \ " Subcategory \ , f - - - - - - - 1 Subcategory Particular - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . _ J General FIGURE 1 . 1 A streamlined codes·ta - theory model for qualitative inquiry inquiry , but acknowledge that pree : ostmg theories drive the entire research enterprise , whether you are aware of them or not ( Mason , 2002 ) . In the example above of children ' s fOIms of oppression , there were two major categories that emerged from the study : Oppression through Physical FO " cf , and Oppression through Hurting Others ' Feelings . So , what major themes or concepts can be developed from these categories ? An obvious theolC we noticed was that , in later childhood , peer oppressioll is gCIJ dcred . One higher - level concept we constructed - an attempt to progress from the real to the abstract - was cMId stigma , based on the observation that chil dren frequently label those who are perceived different in various ways " weird , " and thus resort to oppressive actions ( GofEnan , 1963 ) . We could not , in confidence , formulate a formal theory from tlllS study due to the limited amount of fieldwork tune in the classrooms . But a key assertion ( Erickson , 1986 ) we did develop and put forth , based on the contexts of this study , was : To artist and activist Augusto Boal , adult participation in theatre for social change is " rehearsal for the revolution . " With ages 9 - 11 children , however , their participation in theatre for social change seems more like an " audition " for preadolescent social interaction . The key assertion of this study is : Theatre for social change overtly reveals the interpersonal social systems and power hierarchies within an elementary school classroom microculture , AN INTRODUCTION TO CODES AND CODING 0 0 ' , ~ . ~ ~ iiE : ; E : 1i ~ ~ th : : e ~ ioriginal dramatic simulations children create authentically reflect ' and stigmas . It diagnostically shows which children are leaders , resisters , and targets ; who is influential and who is ignored ; which may continue to assert dominance in later grade levels ; and which may succumb to those with more authority In later grade levels . ' is ( ada [ lte ( from Saldana , 2005b , p . : 1 . 31 ) This key assertion , like a theory , attempts to progress & OU1 the particular to the general by inferring tral / yer - that what was observed in just six eleu1en bry school classrooms at one particular site may also be observed in con1pa hbie elementary school classrooms in other locations . This assertion also progresses from the particular to the general by predictillg pattems of what may he observed and what may happen in similar present and future contexts . The differences between codes and themes Several qualitative research texts recomD1end that you initially " code for themes . " That , to me , is misleading advice because it muddies the wate£ : . Jl . theme is an ol / tcome of coding , categorization . and analytic reflection . not ~ on1e - . . , . - . ~ thing that is , in itself . coded ( that is why th ~ . e - " " Ae - " ' fI " , me - GQding " method ; , this manual , but there are references to thematic analysis and a section called Themeing the ~ Data ) . A datum is initially and , when needed , secondarily coded to discern and label its content and meaning according to the needs of the inq ~ iry . Rossman & Rallis ( 2003 ) explain the differences : " think of a category its a ' word o / ' phrasc describing some segment of your data that is explicit , whereas a : ' theme is a phrase or selltcllcc describing nlore sl / btle mid tacit processes " ( p . 282 , . . . . , emphasis added ) . As an exnmJ ; ! ! e , SECURITY can be a code , but A FALSE SENSE OF SECURITY can be a theme . Qualitative researchers are not algorith ; l1ic automatons . If we ' re carefully reading and reviewing the data before and as we ' re formally coding them , we can ' t help but notice a theme or h : vo ( or a pattern , trend , or concept ) here and there . Make a note of it in an analytic ll1emo ( see Chapter Two ) when it happens , for it can sometimes guide your continued coding processes . A set of themes is a good thing to emerge from analysis , but at the beginning cycles there are other rich discoveries to be made with spe cific ' coding methods that explore such phenomena as participant process , emotions , and values . What Gets Coded ? Richards & Morse ( 2007 ) humorously advise for analytic work , " If it moves , code it " ( p . 146 ) . But what exactly gets coded in the data ? : 1 . 3 : 14 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS Units of social organization Lofland , Snow , Anderson , & Lofland ( 2006 ) note that social life happens at four coordinates , " the intersection of one or more actors [ participants ] engag ing in one or more actiJlilies ( behaviors ) at a particular time in a specific place " ( p . 121 , emphasis in original ) . The authors first outline major " " its of social organization into : 1 . cultural practices ( daily routines , occupational tasks , microcultural activ ity , etc . ) ; 2 . episodes ( unanticipated or irregular activities such as divorce , championship games , natural disasters , etc . ) ; 3 . encounters Ca temporary interaction between two or more individuals such as sales transactions , panhandling , etc . ) ; 4 . roles ( student , mother , customer , etc . ) and social types ( bully , tight - ass , geek , etc . ) ; 5 . social and personal relationships ( husband and wife , party - goers , etc . ) ; 6 . groups and cliques ( gangs , congregations , families , jocks , etc . ) ; 7 . organizations ( schools . fast - food restaurants , prisons , corporations , etc . ) ; 8 . settlements and habitats ( villages , neighborhoods , etc . ) ; and 9 . subcultures and lifestyles ( the homeless , skinheads , gay leather bears , etc . ) But you won ' t find in this manual any coding methods based on the major units outlined above such as " Encounter Coding , " " Organization Coding " or " Lifestyle Coding . " When the units above are combined with aspects listed below , they then become topics for study a / ld [ Oditlg . Lo£land et al . ' s aspects include : 1 . cognitive aspects or meanings ( e . g . , ideologies . rules , self - concepts , identities ) ; 2 . emotional aspects or feelings ( e . g . , sympathy in health care , road rage , work place satisfaction ) ; 3 . hierarchical aspects or inequalities ( e . g . , racial inequality , battered women , high school cliques ) Aside from exanlining the magnitude and frequency of social life outlined above , Lo£land et a1 . also recommend examining how participant agency inter acts and interplays wjth structures and processes , plus causes and consequences observed in the data ( 2006 , pp . 144 - 67 ) . Aspect . , ill colllbillatioll with units lend themselves to such First Cycle coding methods ( see Chapter Three ) as Emotion Coding , Values Coding , and Versus Coding . Structures and processes can be discerned through Descriptive Coding , Process Coding , and Donlaill and Taxonom . 1c Coding , while causes and consequences can be discerned through Pattern Coding or grounded theory ' s AN INTRODUCTION TO CODES AND CODING , SeeOI 1 " CYFle coding nlethods ( see Chapter Four ) . But note that some question research ' s ability to assert causality : " the understanding of human icY : y , . te ) tperiencf is a matter of chronologies more than of causes and effects " ( Stake , ' . . " An , " u ' nt , of data to code One related issue with which qualitative research methodologists disagree is the amount of the data corpus - the total body of data - that should be coded . Some ( e . g . , Lofland et al . , 2006 ; Strauss , 1987 ; cf . Wolcott , 1999 ) feel that every recorded fieldwork detail is worthy of consideration , for it is from the pat t ~ rned minutiae of daily life that we nught generate significant social insight . . . . others ( e . g . , Seidman , 2006 ) , if not most , feel that only the most salient por clans of the corpus merit examination , and that even up to one half of the total ·record can be sUllIDlarized or deleted , leaving the primary half for intensive data analysis . The danger is that the portions deleted might contain the as yet ·unknown units of data that could pull everything togetl1er , or include the nega tive case that motivates a rethinking of a code , category , theme , concept , theory , or : assertion . Postmodern perspectives on ethnograpluc texts coruider all docu ~ · ~ l ~ ntation and reports partial and incomplete anyway , so the argument for main - taining· and coding a full or reduced ci . ' 1ta corpus seems moot . AnlOunt notwithstanding , insure that you have not just sufficient qualitative but sufficient qIlalit ) ' data witll which to work that have been appropriately transcribed and formatted ( see Poland , 2002 ) . I have learned from years of qualitative data analysis that , only with e " l ' eri ' " , . . c " ec , I now feel more secure knowing and feeling what is important in the record and what is not , and thus code what rises to the surface - " relevant as Auerbach & Silverstein ( 2003 ) label ir . The beginning of my fieldwork . ' . . " ' . ' , however , was a ll1ajor learning curve for me , and I coded anything and ev " rvthinp - that was collected . I advise the sall1e for novices to qualitative too , will eventually discover from e : : . . . - perience what matters and what doesn ' t in the data corpus . ( Of course , there will always be brief passages ·of ' minor or trivial consequence scattered throughout interviews and field Code these NI A - not applicable . ) So , what gets coded ? Slices of social life recorded in the data - participant perceptions , and the tangible documents and artifacts produced by own reflective data in the fornl of analytic nlemos ( discussed in Chapter ' [ wo ) and observer ' s comments in field notes are also substantive mate coding . The process does not have to be approached as if it were some . , < / , . \ . , ' lill ' lve mystery or detective story with deeply hidden clues and misleading red herrings scattered throughout . If " human actions are based upon , or infused by , meanings : that is , by intentions , motives , beliefS , rules , and values " : 15 16 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS ( Hanmlersley & Atkinson , 1995 , p . 7 ) , then why not just code these actions and social meanings directly ( assuming they are represented in your data and your inferential skills arc working at an optimum ) ? The entire process QJld prodJlcts of crcating data about the data in the form of codes , analytic memos , and graph ical summaries arc " metadata activities " ( MacQueen & Guest , 2008 , p . 1 . 4 ) . The Mechanics of Coding As you prepare text - based qualitative data for manual ( i . e . , paper and pencil ) coding and analyzing , layout printed interview transcripts , field notes , and other researcher - generated materials in double - spaced format on the left half or left two - thirds of the page , keeping a wide right - hand margin for writing codes and notes . Rather than keeping your , data running together as long unbroken passages , separate the text into short paragraph - length units with a line break in - between them whenever the topic or subtopic appears to change ( as best as you can , because in real life " social interaction does not occur in neat , isolated units " [ Glesne , 2006 , p . 150 ] ) . Gee , Michaels , & O ' Connor ( 1992 ) call these unit breaks and their rearrangement into poetic - like verses for dis course analysis " stanzas " of text , and emphasize that " formatting choices are a part of the analysis and may reveal or conceal aspects of meaning and intent " ( p . 240 ) . Unit divisions will also play a key role in formatting data for CAQDAS - Computer A " isted Qualitative Data Analysis Software - programs ( discussed later ) . Pre - codlng In addition to coding with words and short phrases , never overlook the opportunity to " pre - code " ( Layder . 1998 ) by circling , highlighting , bolding , underlining , or coloring rich or significant participant quotes or passages that strike you - those " codable moments " worthy of attention ( Boyatzis , 1998 ) . Creswell ( 2007 , pp . 168 - 9 ) recommends that such quotes found in . . cJ ; : ta contained in a CAQDAS program file can be simultaneously coder as QUOTES with their other codes to enable later retrieval . Selected programs have areas dedicated to storing intriguing quotations for later access . These data can become key pieces of the evidentiary warrant to support your propositions , assertions , or theory ( Booth , Colomb , & Williams , 2003 ; Erickson , 1986 ; Lofland et aI . , 2006 ) , and serve as illustrative examples throughout your report . The codes or quotes may even be so provocative that they become part of the title . organizational fraolework , or through - line of the report . For example , in my study of theatre of the oppressed ( Le . , theatre for social change ) \ vith elementary school children , I was puzzled why young AN INTRODUCTION TO CODES AND CODING continually employed combative tactics during lll1provisational dramatic ' " pe : op ' c . tq resolve imbalanced power issues , when I was trying to teach . proactive peace - building efforts . A fourth - grade girl poignantly pro - " " O " U the answer when we discussed my concerns by explaining to me , " Sometimes , you can ' t be nice to deal with oppression " ( Saldana , 2005b , p . 117 ) . The quote was so powerful that it began my final research report as a datum that would both capture the reader ' s interest and later explain the through line of the study . Preliminary Jottings Start coding as you collect and format your data , not afte , all fieldwork has been completed . Wh ~ n you ' re writing up field notes , transcribing recorded iitterviews , or filing documents you gathered ITom the site , jot down any pre HiUiriary word , ; or phrases for codes on the notes , transcripts . or docum _ ents themselves . or as an analytic mem . o or entry in a research journal for filture ref erence . They don ' t have to be accurate or final at this point , just ideas for ana lytic consideration while the study progresses . Be wary of relying on your ! nemory for future writing . Get your thoughts , however fleeting , documented fn : . ' - some way . Also make certain that these code jottings are distinct in some v . ray from the body of data - bracketed , capitalized . italicized , bolded , etc . Liamputtong & Ezzy ( 2005 , pp . 270 - 3 ) reconIDlend formatting pages of data into three columns rather than two . The first and widest column contains the data thenl selves - interview transcripts . field notes , etc . The second column contains space for preliminary code notes and jottings , while the third colUllln lists the final codes . The second column ' s fUminations or first impressions may help priwide a transitional link betvveen the raw data and codes : COLUMN 1 Raw Data 1 The closer I get to retirement age , the faster I want it to happen . I ' m not even 55 yet and I would give anything to retire now . But there ' s a mortgage to payoff and stili a lot more to sock away In , savings before I can even think of It . I keep playing the lottery , though . In hopes of wln ' ning those millions . No lucl < yet . COLUMN 2 COLUMN 3 Preliminary Codes Anal Code " retirement age " financial obligations dreams of early retirement 1 RETIREMENT ANXIETY 17 : 1 . 8 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS Virtually all methodologists recommend initial and thorough readings your data while writing analytic memos or jotting in the olargins tentative ideas for codes , topics , and noticeable patterns or thellIes . Write your code words or phrases completely rather than abbreviating them to nmemonics or assigning them reference numbers . Avoid such truncations as " PROC - AN CD " or " 122 - A , " which just make the decoding processes of your brain work much harder than they need to during analysis . Questions to consider as you code Auerbach & Silverstein ( 2003 , p . 44 ) reconunend that you keep a copy of your research concern , theoretical framework , central research question . goals of the study , and other major issues on one page in front of you to keep you focused and allay your anxieties because the pag ' 7 focuses your coding decisions . Emerson , Fretz , & Shaw ( 1995 ) advise a general list of questions to consider when coding field notes ( in chronological order ) , regardless of research purpose : • What are people doing ? What are they trying to accomplish ? • How , exactly , do they do this ? What specific means and / or strategies do they use ? • How do members ta1k about , characterize , and understand what is going on ? • What assumptions are they TIlaking ? • What do I see going on here ? What did I learn from these notes ? • Why did I include them ? ( p . 146 ) I would add to tlus list the question I ask myself during all cycles of coding and data analysis : " What strikes you ? " Creswell ( 2007 , p . 153 ) notes that a code can emerge from data that is not only expected but even surprising , unusual , or conceptually interesting . Coding contrasting data If you are working with multiple participants in a study , it may help to ' code one participant ' s data first , then progress to the second partic ; ipant ' s data . You might find that the second data set will influence and affect your recoding of the first participant ' s data , and the consequent coding of the remaining partic ipants ' data . The same may hold true for a coding system applied to an inter view transcript first , then to a day ' s field notes , then to a document . Bazeley ( 2007 ) recotnnlends that the second document coded should contrast " in some inlpartant way with the first . . . to maximize the potential for variety in con cepts ( or in their forms of expression ) early in the process " ( p . 61 ) . Be aware AN INTRODUCTION TO CODES AND CODING depending on the coding tnethod ( s ) chosen , some codes may appear nlore fi : eiluelotly in selected types of data than others . Selected CAQDAS program , fij ' IlCI0 0l1S can keep you abreast of the codes and their frequencies as analysis , , ' . . . . _ . Numbers of Codes actual number of codes , categories , themes and / or concepts you generate " " " ' f ' o " r ' - each project will vary and depend on many contextual factors , yet one ques tion students ask most is how often codes " should " get applied to qualitative data . The answer depends on the nature of your data , which particular coding Inethod you select for analysis , and how detailed you want or need to be - in other words , more filters to consider . ilLumplng " and " splitting " the data For example , the following data excerpt is from a speech by a second year , biner city , grades K - S school teacher speaking to pre - service education majors enrolled in a university teaching methods course ( Saldaiia , 1997 ) . She has just ~ ompleted several poignant vignettes about sonle of her most difficult students . Notice that just one In Vivo Code is applied to capture and represent the essence of this entire 145 - word excerpt - a broad brush - stroke representation called Holistic Coding : 11 ' m not telling you this to depress you or scare you but It was a reality for me . I thought I was so ready - for this population because 1 had taught other groups of kids . But this Is such a unique situation , the Inner city school . No , I should take that back : It ' s not as much of a unique situation anymore . There are more and more schools that are turning Into inner city schools . . . . I really had to learn about the kids . I had to learn about the culture , 1 had to learn the language , I had to learn the gang signals , I had to learn what music was allowed , what t ~ shlrts they could wear on certain days and not an other days . There was just a lot to learn that I had never even thought about . ' " A LOT TO LEARN " The above has been colloquially called " lump er " coding . The opposite is someone who codes as a " splitter , " or , one who splits the data into s ~ aller cod able moments . Thus , nlorC detailed In Vivo Coding of the exact same passage might appear thusly : : 1 . 9 20 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS I ' m not telling you this to depress you or scare you but It was a 1 reality for me . 2 I thought I was so ready for this populatIon because I had taught other groups of kids . But this is such a J unique situation , the inner city school . No , I should take that baclc It ' s not as much of a unique sItuation anymore . There are more and more schools that are turning into 4 inner city schools . . . . 5 I really had to learn about the kIds . I had to learn about 6 the culture , I had to learn the language , I had to learn the gang signals , I had to learn what music was allowed , what t ~ shJrts they could wear on certain days and not on other days . There was just 1 a [ at to learn that I had never even thought about . , " REALITY " , " I THOUGHT I WAS SO READY " , " UNIQUE SITUATION " 4 " INNER CITY SCHOOLS " , " I REALLY HAD TO LEARN " , " THE CULTURE " , " A LOT TO LEARN " Now this 145 - word excerpt is represented with seven codes rather than one . I state the numbers not to suggest that more is better or that less is more , but to highlight that lumping is an e " l ' edient coding method ( with future detailed subcoding still possible ) , while splitting generates a more nuanced analysis from the start . Each approach has its advantages and disadvantages aside fronl the obvious factors of time and mental energy required . Lumping gets to the essence of categorizing a phenomenon while splitting encourages careful scrutiny of social action represented in the data . But lumping may lead to a superficial analysis if the coder does not enlploy conceptual words and phrases , while fine - grained splitting of data may overwhelm the analyst when it comes time to categorize the codes . During Second Cycle coding , you might collapse the original nunlber of First Cycle codes into a smaller number as you reana lyze the data and find that larger segments of text are better suited to just one key code rather than several smaller ones . It is only from e ) . . " } Jerience that you ' l1 discover which approach works best for you , your particular study , and your particular research goals . The quantities of qualities Lichtman ( 2006 ) projects that most qualitative research studies in education will generate 80 - 100 codes that will be organized into 15 - 20 categories which even tually synthesize into five to seven major concepts ( pp . 164 - 5 ) . Creswell ( 2007 ) begins his analyses with a short - list of five to sLx Provisional Codes to begin the process of " lean coding . " This eJl . " } Jands to no more than 25 - 30 categories that then combine into five to six major themes ( p . 152 ) . Other disciplines and varying approaches to qualitative inquiry may prescribe different sets of numbers AN INTRODUCTION TO CODES AND CODING aso ~ O ' M - guidelines for analysi ~ . The final number of major themes or concept ' i be held to a minimUlll to keep dIe analysis coherent , but there is no stan - , d ; , rolZE ' O or nlagic nunlber to achieve . Unlike Lichtman ' s five to seven central : io ; co ' i ' c : onceFtts and Creswell ' s five to six major themes , anthropologi " Harry E Wolcott p . 10 ) generally advises throughout his writings that cluee of anything seems an elegant quantity for reporting qualitative work . ' Thecod " bc1ok or code list the number of codes can accumulate quite quickly and change as analy progresses , keep a record of your enlergent codes in a separate file as a code b ' ook - a cQlnpilation of the codes , their content descriptions , and a brief data example for reference . CAQDAS programs , by default , will mailltaill a list of codes you have created for the project and provide space to define them . This fan be reviewed periodically - both on dIe nlorutor screen and on hard copy - hs < ' coding progresses to assess its current contents and possible evolution . M ~ ktaining this list provides an analytic opportunity to organize and reorga ~ ~ e ' the codes into major categories and sub categories . This management tech - rllque ' also provides a comparative list if you are working with multiple ' P - ~ ~ tfcipants and sites . One school site ' s data , for example , may generate a list of ( : ades significantly different from another school site . Codebooks or CAQDAS code lists become especially critical as a set of cod - If7 : . . •• . ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ : ; ~ ~ ~ : ~ ~ : ; ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ : ~ ~ ; ; ~ the same pre - e et al . ( 2008 ) strongly recommend that each code book entry should contaill " the code , a brief definition , a full definition , guidelines for , when to use the code , guidelines for when not to use the code , and exam . P . lli ( ( p . 121 ) . Als ; ; ' note that a ~ differs fr , ; ; ; ; an " , acx , the latter being f coded composite of the data corpus , organized alphabetically , hierarchically , chronologically , categorically , etc . CAQDAS programs are superior for index hig functions with a qualitative data corpus . ~ anual and CAQDAS Coding ~ , 6me instructors of statistics and quantitative data analysis require that their students first learn how to " crunch the numbers " manually using only a ] locket / hand calculator to provide them with cognitive understanding and o ~ nership of the formulas and results . Once a statistical test has been adminis t , ered this way , they can then use COl1lputers wjth software specifically designed tb , calculate nunleric data . Coding and qualitative data analysis have their equivalent trial . I anI one of instructors who require that my students first perform " manual " coding qualitative data analysis using paper and pencil on hard copies of data 2 : 1 22 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS entered and formatted with basic word - processing software only . The reason is that each class assignolcnt of data gathering is relatively small - scale and thus ' a manageable project to analyze in tllis manner . But if a student ' s dissertation pro ject or my own independent research studies will require multiple participant interviews or extended fieldwork and extensive field note - taking , then CAQ DAS becomes a vital and indispensable tool for the enterprise . Basit ( 2003 ) compared personal c : \ " periences between manual and electronic coding and concluded , " the choice wil1 be dependent 011 the size of the project , the funds and time available , and the inclination and expertise of the researcher " ( p . 143 ) . Coding manually Trying to learn the basics of coding and qualitative data analysis simultane ously with the sODlctimes complex instnlctions and llltdtiple functions of CAQDAS programs can be overwhelming for some , if not most . Your mental energies may be nlOre focused on the software than the data . I recommend that for first - time or small - scale studies , code on hard - copy printouts first , not via a computer monitor ( cf . Bazeley , 2007 , p . 92 ) . There is something about manipulating qualitative ( data on e . . aper and writing codes in pencil that give ~ . G - l mref and ownership of the ' Y9rk . Perhaps dus advice stems from my admitted lack of technological expertise and old - fashioned ways of working that have become part of nly " codus " operandi . Nevertheless , there is someclling to be said for a large area of desk or table space with multiple pages or strips of paper spread out to see the smaller pieces of the larger puzzle - a literal perspective not always possible on a computer ' s monitor screen . Mter you feel the codes are fairly well set from your initial hard - copy work , then transfer your , codes onto the electronic file . But first , " Touch the data . . . . Handling cl , e data gets additional data out of memoryhnd into the record . It turns abstract information into concrete data " ( Graue & WaI , h , 1998 , p . 145 ) . Even proponents of CAQDAS recommend that hard - copy printouts of code lists and coded data be generated occasionally to permit you to work \ . vjth tra ditional writing materials such as red pens and highlighters to explore data in fresh ways . Coding electronically Mter you have gained sonle experience with hard - copy coding and have developed a basic understanding of the fundamentals of qualitative data analy sis , apply that experiential knowledge base by working \ vith CAQDAS . Keep in mind that CAQDAS itself does not actually code the data for you ; that task is still the responsibility of the researcher . The software efficiently stores , orga nizes , manages , and reconfigures your data to enable human analytic reflection . AN INTRODUCTION TO CODES AND CODING ne . ·progranl1s even enable ' coding of digital audio and video documents their files . I advise that you work - with a smaller portion of your data as a day ' s field notes or a single interview transcript , before import data corpus into the prograUl . As with all word - processed work on a inp , utC ' " , backUp your original files as a precautionary measure . / i \ l ' b " , e major CAQDAS programs to explore , whose commercial websites ; ~ 0 \ 01 ! ! ~ ir ~ , : , online tutorials and demonstration software / manual dowoloads of ~ . current versions , are : ' 0 " ! n ' , - f " r to Lewins & Silver ( 2007 ) and Bazeley ( 2007 ) for accompanying ! it on these programs . Also see Richards & Morse ( 2007 , pp . 85 - 90 ) for ' i ( ! : ~ ~ ~ . ~ [ ; ' Selected CAQDAS programs can and cannot do ; Hahn ( 2008 ) and La ( 2004 ) for qualitative data analysis with basic word - processing soft and Brent & Slusarz ( 2003 ) for advanced computational strategies software . Other CAQDAS programs , such as HyperRESEARCH and Miner , are discussed and reviewed at an ooline fonUll for users : http : / / ac . uk / . p . " ; , Dati . form , , ttll , g for CAQDAS heading and paragraph formats of qualitative data such as field notes and , ~ 0 • . • ' . · • . · . , Jhpalrtic . uj ; lr , interview transcripts , need to conform consistently with the par software package ' s prescriptions for text layout . TIns becomes vital for : · . ltHIJdlng and retrieval functions to work consistencly and reliably . ATLAS . ti , i ' " MA ) { Q ' DJ \ , and NVivo all import and handle documents saved in rich text •• : • . ' . tormar , enabling you to employ supplemental " cosmetic " coding devices such • . • • • . . . , ; colo ' " , d fonts , balding , and italicizing in your data ( Lewins & Silver , 2007 , p . 61 ) . of the best features of some CAQDAS programs is their ability to display labels themselves in various user - assigned colors for " at a glance " refer , : : · > , . pii , ' . a ' nd visual classification . Figure 1 . 2 illustrates a sample screen shot from current version ofNVivo . Note how the video data and its transcript > ' . • ' , . . , • . . . , c accortlpani " d with codes and " coding stripes , " which delineate which par is assigned a particular code . capabilities with CAQDAS Selected qualitative data analysis programs permit you to do what you can do . 35 , . inalou , illy , such as : apply lnore than one code to the sanle passage or sequential 23 24 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS , , , WruUol . . . ' . . . . , . . ' ' 1 . . ~ ~ ; " " 00 - ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' . = oq , " ' . . . " " " " • . , . " , " " " . " . . . . " " " " , . . . _ ~ . . " " " ' < " " n = > i ' ~ = f " " " 1 FIGURE 1 . 2 A Video Coding screenshot from NVivo , v . 8 ( NVivo 8 is designed and developed by QSR International Pty Ltd . NVivo is a trademarll or registered trademark of QSR International . Patents pending . www . qsrinternational . com ) passages of text ( variously labeled in the methods literature as " simultaneous coding , " " double coding , " " co - occurrence coding , " " DllIltiple coding , " or " overlap coding " ) ; code a smaller portion of text within a larger portion of coded text ( " subcoding , " " embedded coding , " or " nested coiling " ) ; and sub sume several similarly coded passages under one larger code ( " ' pattern coding , " " meta - coding , " " umbrella coding , " or " hierarchical coding " ) ; along with the ability to instantly and conveniently insert analytic memos related to a specific datum or code . Each CAQDAS program will employ its own distinct set of term5 for its coding functions and operations , so refer to the user ' s manual for specific ways of working . CAQDAS . unlike the human mind , can maintain and permit you to orga nize evolving and potentially complex coding systems into such formats as hierarchies and networks for " at a glance " user reference . Figure 1 . 3 illustrates a sample window excerpt from ATLAS . ti ' s Code Manager function , which lists each code by name and provides descending frequency counts of the codes in progress ( serendipitously , the codes are extracted fron1 work Dn a document about grounded theory ) . Though I stated above that software does not code for you , there is an inter esting utilitarian function called " auto coding " available in most CAQDAS AN INTRODUCTION TO CODES AND CODING , . . 05 / 31 . . . 11 / 12 , . . 17 , . . 05 / 31 . . . 11 / 12 . " 15 a , . . 05 / 31 . . . 11 / 12 . . . 14 a , . . 05 / 31 " , 11 / 12 . . . I revision 13 a " , 05 / 31 " . 11 / 12 . . . 13 a , . . 05 / 31 " . 11 / 12 . . . 12 a , . . 05 / 31 . . . 11 / 12 . . . 12 a , . . 05 / 31 . " 11 / 12 . . . 12 a , . . 05 / 31 . . . 11 / 12 , . . 12 a , , , 05 / 31 . . . 11 } t2 . . . density 11 a , . . 05 / 31 . . , 11 / 12 . . . 11 2 , , , 05 / 31 . . , 01 / 2 . 1 . . , , 11 a , , , 05 / 31 . . . 11 / 12 . . . 10 a ' ' ' ' 05 / 31 . . . 11 / 12 . . . 9 a , , , 05 / 31 . . . 11 / 12 . . , B a , , , 05 / 31 . . . 11 / 12 . . . B a , , , OS / 31 . . . 11112 . . . B 6 , , , 05 / 31 . . . 01 / 21 . . . 7 a , , , 05 / 31 . . . 11 / 12 " . question 7 a , , , 05 / 31 . . . 11 / 12 . . , 7 1 , , , 05 / 31 . . . 01 / 21 . . . relation ( ·shlp ) 7 1 , , , 05 / 31 . . . 01 / 21 . . . 7 ; a , , , 05 / 31 . . . 11 / 12 . . . 6 a , , , 05 / 31 . . . 11 / 12 . . , : ~ \ a , , , OS / 31 . . . 11 / 12 . " • a , , , 05 / 31 . . . 1l / 12 . . . : 6 3 , , , 05 / 31 " , 01 / 21 . . , 6 a , , , 05 / 31 . . . 11 / 12 , . . • " a , , , 05 / 31 . . . 11 / 12 . . . 5 a " , 06 / 05 . . . 11 / 12 . . . 5 " A 0 , , , 05 / 31 . . . 11 / 12 , . . 5 a , , , 05 / 31 . . . 11 / 12 , , , 4 ' 1 , , , 05 / 31 . . . 01 / 21 , . . 4 2 , , , 05 / 31 . . . 01 / 21 " . , a , , , 05 / 31 . . . 11 / 12 . . . , a , , , 05 / 31 . . . 11112 . . , 4 a , , , 05 / 31 . . . 11 / 12 . . . 4 , , , 05 / 31 . . . 01 / 21 . . . 4 a ' ' ' ' 05 / 31 . . . 11 / 12 , . . 4 a , , , 05 / 31 . . . 01 / 21 . . , 4 " , : 0 , , , 05 / 31 . . . 11 / 12 . . . 4 0 , , , 05 / 31 . . . 11 / 12 , . . , 0 , , , 06 / OS . . . 11 / 12 . . , 4 a , , , 05 / 31 . . . 11 / 12 . " 3 3 , , , OS / 31 . . . 01 / 21 . . , 3 a , , , 06 / 05 . . . 11 / 12 . . , 3 0 , , , 06 / 05 , . . 11 / 12 . . . 3 3 , , , 05 / 31 . . . 01 / 21 . . . 3 0 , , , 05 / 31 , . . 11 / 12 . . . 2 , , , , 05 / 31 . . . 01 / 21 . . . , , , , . . RGURE 1 . 3 A Code Manager screens hot excerpt from ATLAS . ti , v . 5 . 2 ( courtesy of ATLAS . ti ) 25 26 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS programs , which can alleyjate sonIC of the repetitiveness of manually similar passages of text . Passages have to be fornlatted in prescribed ways contain the exact same word or phrase , however , for tills function to accurately . The ATLAS . ti handbook strongly reconm1ends a manual atter auto coding has been performed to verify the software ' s coding ments , and Lewins & Silver ( 2007 ) suggest that researchers should not " compelled to make use of auto coding just because it is available " ( p . 21 ) . Searches and queries with CAQDAS Another one of CAQDAS ' s advantages over manuo1 paper - and - pencil mOJng and ano1ysis is its search and querying abilities to quicldy collect and display words and phrases and similarly - coded data for examination . Searches queries of coded passages can even find wh ~ re particular codes co - occur , lap , appear in a sequence , or lie in proximitY to each other . These search dons can perform such actions as retrieve , filter , group , link , and cOI11F , an " enabling the researcher to perform such human actions as infer , make conn " c " tions , identitY patterns and relationships , interpret , and build theory with data ( Lewins & Silver , 2007 , p . 13 ) . Figure 1 . 4 illustrates a sample MAXQDA . Code Relations Browser window , which enables you to detennine possible interrelationships among coded data ( Kuckartz , 2007 ) . The varying sizes of the squares within the matri - x : indicate the relative frequency of such matches . . CAQDAS also permit ' the researcher to shift quickly back and forth betwee ! ' multiple analytic tasks , such as coding , ano1ytic memo writing , and " " ' ' Ploring pat , terns in progress . Add to cin . . , the software ' s ability to recode , uncode , rename , delete ; move , merge , group , and assign different codes to shorter and longer passages of text with a few mouse clicks and keystrokes during Second Cycle coding , and the advantages of CAQDAS over paper and pencil soon become apparent . Rather than presenting in this section an extended discussion of CAQDAS ' s speeific applications with coding and data analysis , additiono1 references will bA made on an «as relevant " basis throughout the rest of this manual . Since D1 ( } s ~ readers of this book are more than likely newconlers to qualitative data analysis ; I assume that manuo1 coding will be the first method you employ . Thus , I pre - . sent the coding profiles with that assumption in mind . Those with e : o . . - perien - ce or e " ' Pertise in CAQDAS programs can adapt the coding principles described in this manual into their particular software package ' s active files and documents . Solo and Team Coding Coding in most qualitative studies is a solitary act - the " lone ethnographer " intinlately at work with her data ( GaIman , 2007 ) - but larger fieldwork pro jects may involve a tea111 . , ; ; : AN INTRODUCTION TO CODES AND COOING : • • • • • • • · • , ; " , • . : • • • • A Code Relations Browser screens hot from MAXQDA , v . 2007 of MAXQDA / VERBI Software ) : ; . , ~ . • , ' , , _ _ ~ r ' n ' nt research projects advocate that coding in these cases can and should ' collab ' Jral : ive effort ( Erickson & Stull , 1998 ; Guest & MacQueen , 2008 ) . minds bring multiple ways of ano1yzing and interpreting the data : " a tean1 builds codes and coding builds a team through the creation of interpretation and understanding of the phenomenon being . studi : d " et al . , 2001 , p . 382 ) . Provocative questions are posed for COl1 ! nderatlOn ' could possibly generate new and richer codes ( Olesen et al . , 1994 ) . nfunately , team members must coordinate and insure that their sometimes inru - " \ . 1 ; ' , · , 1i - n , 1int > efforts hamlOnize , particularly if a centra ' ! data base and CAQDAS are employed . Mac Queen et 01 . ( 2008 , p . 132 ) strongly advise that one of the team be assigned prinlary responsjbility as " codebook editor " - = - - one who creates , updates , reyjses , and maintains the 111aster list for the group . conducting action or community - based research can inyjte the participants / stakeholders themselves into the analytic process as a collab venture to provide a sense of ownership and investment in data analysis its consequent reconunendations for social change ( Stringer , 1999 ) . i ' ic1rtl , cutt & McCoy ( 2004 ) label focus group development of their own cat of interest " affinities . " Children and adolescents , too , can be taught to " vesti , : ate and analyze issues that relate to their soeio1 worlds { Alderson , 2000 ; ieiliignlal1 , 1998 ; Warren , 2000 ) . members can both code their own and others ' data gathered in the to cast a wider analytic net and provide a " reality check " for each other . types of collaborative ventures , il / tercoder agree / llent or illterpretillc COI / - the percentage at wInch different coders agree and remain consistent their assignnlent of particular codes to particular data - is an inlportant part . the process ( see Bernard , 2006 , pp . 512 - 15 ; Boyatzis , 1998 , pp . 144 - 59 ; : ! ru , cl ~ < a et al . , 2004 ; and Miles & Huberman , 1994 , p . 64 for simple formulas ) . is no standard or base percentage of agreenlent among qualitative 27 28 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS researchers , but the 85 - 90 % range seems a minimal benclmlark to those concerned with an evidentiary statistic . Other research tCaIl15 may wish to pense with such quantitative lueasures all together and rely on intensive discussion and simple group " consensus " as an agreement goal ( Harry , Sturges , Klingner , 2005 , p . 6 ) . Coding 5010 If you ' re working as a lone ethnographer , shop talk with a colleague or tor about your coding and analysis as you progress through them . Both and team coders can even consult the participants themselves during " ' ' ' ~ y " , ( a process sometinlcs called " member checking " ) as a way of validating findings thus far . Even if you and other members of a research seminar are working on different projects , sharing coded field note excerpts and dis ; cussitlg your " dilemmas " about coding and analysis generate peer support and even help you and others find better connections between categories in progress ( Burant et al . , 2007 ; StrallSs , 1987 ) . Discussion provides not only a ~ opportunity to articulate your internal thinking processes , but also presen ~ " vindows of opportunity for clarifying your emergent ideas and possibly , ing new insights about the data . Ezzy ( 2002 , pp . 67 - 74 ) recommends several strategies for checking the progress of your analysis while still in the field . Though applicable for teal1l researchers as well , the lone researcher can benefit most from these recomnleu - : darions to assess the trustwurthiness of her account : ( 1 ) check your int : e ' lpreta ~ . . • tions developed thus far with the participants themselves ; ( 2 ) initially code as you transcribe interview data ; and ( 3 ) maintain a reflective journal on tht ; research project with copious analytic menlOS . Necessary Personal Attributes for Coding Aside from such cognitive skills as induction , deduction , abduction , synthesis , evaluation , and logical and critical thinking , there are seven personal attributes all qualitative researchers should possess , particularly for coding processes . ; First , you need to be OI ; gallizcd . This is not a gift that some people have and others don ' t . Organization is a set of disciplined skills that can be learned and cul tivated as habits . A small - scale qualitative study ' s word count of data , viII range in the tens - and sometimes hundreds - of - thousands of words . The multiple codes you generate will need an organized framework for qualitative analysis . And despite the electronic filing systems of hard drives and CAQDAS , you will still encounter and manipulate many pages of paper in qualitative work . Date and label all incoming data and keep multiple digital and hard copies as backup . AN INTRODUCTION TO CODES AND CODING you need to exercise P ' CljclJcmllce . Virtually every writer of qualitative 111ethods literature remarks that coding data is challenging and time Isunung . SOJlle writers also declare how tedious and frustrating it can be . Take , £i : 0111 your work when you need to , of course - this will keep you and alert . But cultivate a personal work ethic and create an environ schedule that enable you to sustain extended periods of time \ \ rith tasks requiring your full concentration . you need to be able to dca / with a1 / 1b ( ~ J1it ) ' . The acts of coding and cod are not precise sciences with specific algorithms or procedures to follow . ' es , ' oc : cm , iolnaity answers may suddenly and serendipitously crystallize out of i ' , " II1 < , re . But at other tinles , a piece of the analytic puzzle may be missing for or weeks or even months . Rich ideas need time to formulate , so have trust in yourself that these may eluerge in due tUllC . But remember that accelerate the process through analytic memo writing . ~ ourlm , yOl1 will need to exercise flexibility . Coding is a cyclical process that you to recode not just once but twice ( and sometimes even lllOre ) . no one gets it right the first time . If you notice that your initialmeth lUay not be working for you or not delivering emergent answers be flexible with your approach and try a modified or different all together . Virtually all researcher - developed coding schemes are from the beginning - they evolve as analysis progresses . you need to be crcatiIJc . There ' s a lot of art to social science . Noted tlittbgpl , h " r Michael H . Agar ( 1996 ) asserts that the early stages of analysis ; jp " enn on u a little bit of data and a lot of right brain " ( p . 46 ) . We generally . a " ocate that qualitative researchers remain close to and deeply rooted in their every code and category you construct or select are choices from a range of possible options . Creativity also means the ability to think visu think in nletaphors , and to think of as lllany ways possible to approach fpl : oblenll . Creativity is essential for your data collection , data analysis , and even ' or ' vn , ur final written report . you need to be r ( l ! orollsly etltical . Honesty is perhaps another way to d § scril , e this , but I deliberately choose the phrase because it implies that you always be : rigorously ethical with your participants and treat them with rigorously ethical with your data and not ignore or delete those seel11 - problematic passages of text ; and rigorously ethical with your analysis by i ' . . iliitintaining a sense of scholarly integrity and working hard toward the final , " The seventh and arguably most important skill you need for coding is an ' Jocaim / m ) ' . Quantitative research ' s precision reste ; with nunlcric accu qualitative research , our precision rests with our word choices . An Uliabridlged dictionary and thesaurus become vital reference tools to find just 29 30 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS the right words for your codes , categories . thenlCS , concepts , and " " ' Ol " e , E " 1 ' lore the origins of key words in an unabridged dictionary to find SUlmr ; , ; " , , ' new meanings ( for exal11ple , did you know that the root word of hYjJocrite " actor " ? ) . A thesaurus review of a key word chosen as a code or category introduce you to an even better - and more precise - word for your analysis . For an applied introduction to the cognitive , kills and personal att : rib , ut , , , necessary for coding and qualitative data analysis . scc Appendi . . . . . A ' s and sinlulations . On Method Thorough - even cursory - descriptions about the researcher ' s code develop : . . ll1cnt and coding processes rarely make it into dIe methods section of a final report ( but a dissertation writer should consider including his or her codebook as an appendix to cl , e study ) . The majority of reader ' would most likely find cl , e discussion tedious or irrelevant compared to the nlore inlportant features , such as the major categories and findings . Plus , scholarly journals place length restric tions on article manuscripts , so some components of the research story must be left out and , more often than not , codes and coding f . 1l1 by the wayside . But iri all honesty , I don ' t think most of the academic conmlunity minds ( cf . Stewart , 1998 ) . I ' m not advocating that published re , earch should include what most feel is a behind - thc - scenes matter . Just acknowledge that the long time and rigor ous effort you put into , and joyous personal analytic growth you experience through , coding and analytic nlemo v . rriting are private affairs between you and your data ( cf . Constas , 1992 ) . When you invite inlportant guests to your home for dinner , you don ' t ask them to appear two or three hours before the sched uled serving tinle to watch you cook in the kitchen . They arrive just before the meal to feast on and enjoy what you ' ve worked so hard to prepare . Yet , analogy aside , please don ' t refer to or consider this manual a " cookbook " for your raw data . That suggests that the methods profiled here are like tested recipes guaranteed to produce successful dishes every time . Most method ~ lo­ gists concur that coding is " an idiosyncratic enterprise " ( Glesne , 2006 , p . 1 [ 53 ) and the " search for one perfect method of data analysis is fruitless " ( Coffey & Atkinson , 1996 , p . 2 ) . Each qualitative study is context - specific and your data are unique , as are you and your creative abilities to code them . I don ' t have the answers to your questions , but you and your data do . In good faith , I guarantee you some guidance and , if we ' re both lucky , perhaps some insight . ( I jokingly mused to myself whether tlus manual might be disparagingly tagged by some as " the Cliffs Notes of qualitative data analysis " or CodiIlg for DJ / 1 / llllies . Eidler way , as a pragmatist I ' ll take that as a colllplill / ellt about the work . ) AN INTRODUCTION TO CODES AND CODING craft well aware of the interpretivist turn in qualitative inquiry and the toward narrative presentation and emancipatory social action ethnographic fieldwork ( Denzin & Lincoln , 2005 ) . My own qualita - ~ " re , ; earcb projects , in f . ' 1ct , have ranged fr0111 the realist to the literary and confessional to the critical ( van Maanen , 1988 ) . But as a theatre prac - 111y discipline acknowledges that we nl ~ st attend to bad : the art alld what we do to make our stage productIon work successtul . And as a educator , it ' s my job to teach how to teach . Hence , I must have an " tlturLenlellt to various methods of classroom practice because my professional ' ~ ' I ~ s " on . sib , i1ities require that I do . Some lll _ ethods are organizational , managerial , < " ; n1L , " efficient , and related to carefully plal111ed curriculum de , ign . Yet 1 empha " , , ' , ' _ my student ' i that such processes as the creative impulse , trusting your . , ' , & , " in , lj1 ' , ; 15 , taking a risk , and just being empathetically human in the classroom legitimate methods of teaching practice . Education is conlplex ; so is " " " ne . ; , t life in general and so is qualitative inquiry in particular . This heightened , ever - present awareness of craft , ofuhow to , " transfers into work ethic . I have become both hunlbly and keenly aware not of what 1 ' 111 doing but why 1 ' 111 doing it . A Inetacognition of method , in an emergent , inductive - oriented , and socially conscious enterprise such a , qu : I1Irawlt inquiry , is vitally unportant . This awareness COllles with time and ( and trial and error ) , but develop111ent can be accelerated if you some preparatory knowledge of " how to . " I hope this manual S11100thes learning curve a bit and assists with your professional and personal growth researcher . Of - this introduction focused on codes and coding . There is an accompany i ' ng - - - heuristic with this process - writing analytic memos , the subject of the il ' ext chapter . 3 : 1 . Two Writing Analytic Memos Scrutiny of [ the data ] offers both empirical certainty and intuitive reminders . Insights emerge al ~ o from the subconscious and from bodily memories , never ' penned on paper . There are screndipitous connections to be made , if the writer is 0pCl ~ to th . em . Writing and analysis comprise a ' movement between the tangible " and mtaugtble , between the cerebral and sensual , between the visible and invisible . Interpretation moves from evidence to ideas and theory , then back again . There can be no set formulae , only broad guidelines , sensitive to specific cases . Qudith Okely , " Thinking Through Fieldwork , " 1994 , p . 32 ) The purpose of analytic memo writiog is to document and reflect on : _ yollLcoding process and code choices ; how the process ofiJlquir : y - . is . . tak ! . Qg shape : and the . . emer ~ 12 : 0t patterns , categories and subcategories , themes , and concepts irLyour . . . data - ail possibly ~ a ~ g tow . aid theo ~ C . odes written in the mar ~ ~ your hard - copy data or assooated witndliGl and hsted in a CAQDAS file are nothing more than labels until they ' re analyzed . Your private and personal written musings before , during , and about the entire enterprise is a question - raising , puzzle - piecing , connection - making , strategy - building , problenl - solving , answer - generating , rising - above - the - data heuristic . Robert E . Stal < e ( 1995 ) muses , " Good research is not about good methods as much as it is about good thinking " ( p . 19 ) . What is an Analytic Memo ? u f Analytic memos ~ ~ e somewhat con : , parable to researcher journal entties or W blogs - a place to dump your bram about the partICIpants , phenomenon , or process under investigation by thinking and thus writing and thus thinking / / ' 1 even more about thenltJv1emos are sites of conversation with ourselves about . IJ : / ' our data " ( Clarke , 2005 , p . 202 . 2 . iThink of a code not just as a significant word or phrase you applied to a datum , but as a pronlpt or trigger for written reflec - tion on the deeper and conlplex meanings it evokes . The purpose is researcher WRITING ANALYTIC MEMOS efie , o , ' ty on the data corpus , ' ~ thinking critically about what you are doing i " , [ , wIW , confronting and often challenging your own assumptions , and recog the extent to which your thoughts , actions and decisions shape how you ? researcl 1 and what you see " ( Mason , 2002 , p . 5 ) . Coding and analytic memo lvriting are concurrent qualitative data analyti ~ activities , for there is " a recip relationship between the development of a coding system and the evolu - of understanding a phenomenon " ( Weston et a1 . , 2001 , p . 397 ) . Let me clarify that 1 use . . a . uaLytlc nleI110 as nW term of choice because , to me , : @ ~ ~ } . Q ! U ! l ~ ~ ! ly ~ . . E " ~ ~ ~ ~ . lC : Q1 : lte . ~ Some methodologists recommend you different types of memos according to prunary purpose : a coding menlO , theoretical memo , research question memo , task memo , etc . But 1 have found it difficult in my own work to write and analytically within the bounded parameters of an artificial memo category as a framing device . Dey ( 1993 ) notes that memo writiog " should be a creative ' activity , relatively unencumbered by the rigours oflogic and the require of corroboratiog evidence . Memos should be suggestive ; they needn ' t be conclusi ' ve " ( p . 89 ) . I simply write what ' s going through my mind , thell determine " " > 1 , , ••• l •• , type of memo I ' ve written to tide it and dlUs later determine its place in the data corpus . Yes , memos are data ; and as such they , too , can be coded , cate gorized , and searched with CAQDAS programs . Dating each memo helps keep of the evolution of your study . Giving each memo a descriptive tide and " e ' { DCati , ' e subtitle enables you to c1assifir it and later retrieve it through a CAQ search . Depending on the depdl and breadth of your , witing , memos can even ' be woven as substantive portions into dle final written report . . Also important to note here is the difference between analytic memos and field notes . Field notes , as 1 distinguish them , are the researcher ' s written d , ocumentation of participant observation , which may include the observer ' s p ' ersonal and subjective responses to and interpretations of social action en . councer·eo . Field notes may contain valuable conmlents and insights that the reconuuended categories for analytic memo reflection described below . Thus , personal field notes are potential sites in which rich analysis may occur . I recommend extracting these luemo - like passages from the corpus and ~ eeping them in a separate file devoted exclusively to analytic reflection . " . Virtually every qualitative research methodologist agrees : Whenever dll ) ' tlIi / lg related to and significant about the coding or analysis of dle data comes to mind , stop , vhatever you ' re doing and write a memo about it immediately . Future direc tions , unanswered questions , frustrations with the analysis , insightful connections , and anything about the researched and the researcher are acceptable content for memos . CAQDAS programs like NVivo , MAXQDA , and ATLAS . cl enable the researcher to instantly insert and link an analytic menlO ( or conIDlent or alIDota tion ) to a specific datum or code . But sometinles " ah - ha " moments of insight 33 34 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS occur at unc : ' \ ' ' ' Pccted and inopportune times - in the shower , while driving , eating lunch , ete . So keep a small paper notepad and somedting to " Write with , or a hand . . , held digital audio recorder , nearby at all tinlCS for brief jottings or reminders in lieu of computer access . Don ' t rely on " mental notes to self . " Examples of Analytic Memos Despite the open - ended nature of analytic memo writing in qualitative inquiry , there are some general and reconmlcnded categories for reflection . Below ' is one of the coding examples from Chapter One . Exal11ples of analytic memq content related to the excerpt follow : 1 My son , Barry , went through a really tough time about , probably started the end of fifth grade and went into sixth grade . 2 When he was growing up young in school he was a people - pleaser and his teachers loved him to death . 3 Two boys in particular that he chose to try to emulate , wouldn ' t , were not very good for him . 4 They were very critical of him , they put him down all the time , and he l < ind of just tool { that and really kind of internalized it , I thinl < , for a long time . 5 In that time period , in the fifth grade , early sixth grade , they really just idnd of shunned him all together , and so his network as he knew it was gone . , MIDDLE - SCHOOL HELL ' TEACHER ' S PET , BAD INFLUENCES " TWEEN ANGST 5 THE LOST BOY Extensive memo writing , as illustrated below , over just one small passage of " : coded data , such as that above , is most unlikely . The example is kept deliber ately brief to show how the sanle piece of data can be approached frOlll mul tiple angles for analytic memo writing . Analytic memos can reflect on the following ( in no particular order of inIportance ) : Rcjlect Oil and wl " ite about frow 1 ' 011 pe , ' sOIwll1 ' relate to the pm ' tidpallts and / oJ ' the phetlollJeJloJl . Establish connections between yourself and the social world you ' re studying . Sympathize and empathize with the participants ' actions to understand their perspectives and worldviews . In what ways are you similar to thenI ? An analytic nIemo , based on the data excerpt above , might read : 11 November 2007 PERSONAL RELATIONSHIP TO THE STUDY : LIVING [ PREADOLESCEND HELL I can relate . Just change the grade levels to seventh and eighth and 8arry ' s story is my own . I , too , was the teacher ' s pet , the best little boy in the world . WRITING ANALYTIC MEMOS of my peers were such bullying bastards that they made junior high school hell for me . I wasn ' t made bad by the bad·ass influences around me . They put me down all the time , too . School became a place where I dreaded 8arry probably dreaded it , too . 011 and write about ] ' Ollr stud1 " s research questions . Focusing on your a [ determined beforehand ] articulated research questions , purposes , and analysis progresses will keep you on track with the project . Start by ; ; ~ . ; ri " , , ! the actual question itself then elaborate on answers in progress . An ana ~ mel11o rnight read : November 2007 RESEARCH QUESTION : FACTORS THAT INFLUENCE AND AFFECT This study addresses : What factors in Barry ' s past influenced and affected his current condition ? Rve years after the time frame of the mother ' s story , he ' s I loved by his teachers ; and yes , he is still a " people pleaser " - very popular r < " ; ; ; " , , n " his crowd . His tween years , as he himself put it in another retrospective , j ; ' nt , , , vlew , were " a dead period . " And when you lose your friends , it ' s hell . This ne , ' 111lddle school dead period seemed to have Influenced and affected his moody Into high school , but he overcame it . So now , the task is learning what hap to 8arry beginning in ninth grade that changed him for the better . OIl aJld wJ ' ite about ] , our code draices alld tllei , ' opcJ ' atiollal dtjiuitioJls . your codes and rationalize your specific choices for the data . This is an - " reality check " of your thinking processes , and reflection may gener other possible codes . Glaser ( 1978 ) reminds us that through " writing on codes , the analyst draws and fills out analytic properties of the e , cdpllve data " ( p . 84 ) . An analytic memo might read : November 2007 DEFINITION : TWEEN ANGST Barry Is in sixth grade , he ' s a " tween . " The word ~ tween " is almost climbo - Iike : In - between ; not quite a child , not quite a teen - you ' re a " tween . " This has a condescending tone to it . When you ' re In·between , you ' re in paren dr , " , " , When you ' re In - between , you ' re neither here nor there . It ' s a transition , a stage , a place where you can get lost , where you can lose yourself if not careful . Angst , the second part of the code phrase , is another choice that ' s my own word . The mother didn ' t say it directly , but that ' s what It seems her son experi· edced . Angst 9 or anxious tension - is what so many adolescents go through , but Vipnder If they ' re ever taught that word ? Will knowing that what they ' re going , ' , un u , u ~ " has a label ease the pain or make it any better ? To be rejected is one of , devastatIng acts for a tween ( and a child and a teenager and an adult ) . he rejected because he was a ~ people pleaser " ? I know I was . It sucks to - at least when you ' re a tween . TWEEN ANGST whenever Barry experienced this state , as described by ' , ~ lll1sE ' lf or his mother , during his sixth through eighth grade school years . 36 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS Code management systems in most CAQDAS programs will permit you enter a more concise definition for each code you generate , while memo systems provide more space to reflect and expand on the mcarungs . Rtj1ect Oil and write about tile emcJ : gerrt pattcJ ' rrs , categoJ ' ies , tlJcmes , and cepts . Remember that individual codes eventually become part· of a bnJad , ; scheme of classification . l ~ etlection on how the codes tentatively get into categories and / or subcategories . suggest a theme , or evoke a hjj ~ I " ' r - llev , ' 1 concept , may begin to crcate a sense of order to your analysis thus far . An analytic memo might read : 14 November 2007 EMERGENT PAITERNS , CATEGORIES , THEMES , AND CONCEPTS : MIDDLE SCHOOL HELL MIDDLE SCHOOL HELL seems to be an umbrella code for TWEEN ANGST and THE LOST BOY . Barry says in another interview that those years were a ~ DEAD PERIOD " for him - an evocative In Vivo Code . But I think I focus on the particular by using MIDDLE SCHOOL HELL to represent many students within that age range . However , don ' t discount ~ DEAD PERIOD " as a major theme or concept at this time . As I continue analysis , that code may be more conceptual than I think at this point in the study . Something In me doesn ' t want to let it go . A " DEAD PERIOD " can occur during any portion of a person ' s life , while TWEEN ANGST Is limited to a specific age range . Rtjlect all and un - ite about the possible networks ( links , conllcctiolls , orlcl - Iaps , flows ) amollg the codes , patterns , categories , themes , and concepts . One of the most criti . : . : ca ! outcomes of qualitative data analysis is to interpret how the individual compo . . ; . nents of the study weave together . The actual integration of key words franl the coding into the analytic memo narrative - a technique I call " codeweaving " - is a practical way of insuring cllat you ' re thinking how cl , e puzzle pieces fit together . First - draft diagrams of network relationships between and among concepts are a1so possible as analytic memo content ( see Appendix C for an extended example ) . Networking makes you cllink of possible hierarchies , chronological flows ; and influences and affects ( i . e . , cause and effect ) . The codes just franl the data excerpt above are : MIDDLE SCHOOL HELL , TEACHER ' S PET , BAD INFLUENCES , TWEEN ANGST , and THE LOST BOY . An analytic memo might read : 15 November 2007 NETWORKS : CODEWEAVING ABOUT MIDDLE SCHOOL HELL A codeweaving attempt with this data excerpt is : ~ Bad influences can turn teacher ' s pets into lost boys , resulting in tween angst in the limbo of middle school hell , " Another Version Is : " Middle school hell is a site of tween angst : teacher ' s pets can become lost boys by bad Influences . " Peer Influence , accord· ing to the developmental literature , becomes very strong during these preado lescent years . " His network as he Imew It was gone " suggests that when friendships decay , children become lost ( my term ) . [ A preliminary sketch of this codewoven process appears In Rgure 2 . 1 . ] WRITING ANALYTIC MEMOS Tween Angst . Bad Influences Lost Boys An analytic memo sketch on codeweaving d ' m ' ite about an cmcl ' gent ai ' related existing theOl ) I , Transcend an • . local and particular of your study , and reflect on how your observ ~ t1ons apply to other populations , to the bigger picture , to the generalizable , I ' sal Explore possible metaphors and symbols at work III your to t le Ul1lver . . . . C bility Speculate on how your theory predIcts human . oa , " . ' ' ' ' ' ' suggest translera . . . ' . ' and explains why those actions occur . Integrate eXlstmg the ~ nes mto thenl with your own particular study ' s data . An analytIc memo November 2007 T ~ j ' nR ' V ' HUMAN NETWORKS AND POSITIONING THEORY . . Who hasn ' t faced rejection at some point in his or her Ilf ~ , especlal ~ y dU , ~ I ~ g adolescent years ? I was particularly struck by the mother s observation , hiS ne " w , , , " as he knew it was gone . ~ When we lose our " networks , " we lose our con - I ' ks Like qualitative data analYSiS , we become isolated " bins " or our In • . k b . g dl awaiting placement in the overall scheme of things , bu : ns em ~ . , } i " r , errie , or renamed or subsumed if we don ' t contribute somethmg . Who hasn t felt ~ leftover " or ~ miscelfaneous " at some point In his or her life ? Once lost , we inward ' once lost , we hide . Positio ' nlng theory from the 1980s and 199 ~ S might be . re ~ evant here . Reflexive and Interactive positioning are the dynamiCs at worl { Within ~ arry and among him and his peers . But alsO checl { out the human develop ~ ent II ~ erature , as what ' s happening here may simply be " classic " alignment With tYPical ado· lescent social and emotional trends . ' ~ lcrlect on and Il " ' ite about an ) ' pl ' oblems wit " ttJC stud ] I , Opportunities to reflect on fieldwork or analytic " glitches " by writing about them may generate solu . ' I ' Is t raise provocative questions for bans to your dilenullas . T le act IS a 0 a way 0 . continued reflection , or to vent any personal frustrations you may be feelmg about the study . An analytic nleITIO might read : 37 38 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS 17 November 2007 PROBLEM : THINKING OUTSIDE THE CHRONOLOGICAL BOX I find I ' m locking myself into the traditional human development schema : early childhood , middle childhood , adolescence , adulthood , etc , The trajectory of Barry ' s life course is falling into the same old patterns of elementary , middle , and high school . Not that there ' s anything wrong with that , but perhaps I should be thinldng of other phase / stage systems for plotting his life course . By default we attrIbute portions of our lives as ~ the elementary school years . " " the high school years , " etc . Maybe I should divide what I ' m finding thus far into " turning points " or ~ milestones " schemas . regardless of grade level ? Rfjlect Oll and JlJI ' ite about tllly PCI ' sollaI 0 , . ethical dilemmas with the stud ] , ; Ethical issues of varying magnitude arise in virtually every study with human participants . Most of these dilemmas are usually unforeseen , based on what par ticipants unexpectedly bring to interviews or what the researcher observes in the field that counters her value , attitude , and belief system . " i . Reflection keeps you attuned to these matters and may help you brainstorn1 possible solutions ' ; An analytic memo might read : 18 November 2007 ETHICS : WHAT CAN / SHOULD I ASK ? I ' m stili hesitant to ask Barry to tall < more about that ~ dead period " In middle school . He seems evasive about it , looks downward whenever it ' s brought up . I don ' t want to cause him any emotional distress , but at the same time I feel I need to find out more about that time period in his life . Maybe asking his mother to talk about those years rather than Barry will get the info to help me plot his life course ? Barry Imows that I ' m interviewing her , so it ' s no secret . Riflect ou and write about futllre directiolls foJ ' the stlld ] , . Each qualitative research project is unique and cumulative in nature . The more you interview participants and observe them in natural social settings , the more ideas you generate for possible future research action . As data collection and analysis progress , you may discover missing elements or a need for additional data . Yoll 111ay even reconceptualize your entire initial approach and find inspiration from a new insight about the phenomenon or process under investigation . An ana lytic memo might read : 19 November 2007 FUTURE DIRECTIONS : ADDITIONAL TEACHER PARTICIPANTS If possible , track down some of Barry ' s teachers from mIddle school and see if I can get IRB [ Institutional Review Board } and theIr principal ' s permission to InterView them about Barry . It Would be interesting to hear what they remember about him from educators ' perspectives . Also interesting would be for me to asl ( them about the TWEEN ANGST code and see how they react . One of the things I ' m learning is how little I really know about middle and JunIor high school students . Since I worl { with elementary and high school youth for my WRITING ANALYTIC MEMOS I have a pretty good handle on them . But the tween years are elusive to me . Rnd and get bacl < in touch with what happens from sixth through eighth grades . alld write about the analytic memos ' geuemted thus fm· . Corbin & ( 2008 ) note that beginning memo writing tends to start off simply and : ricltively , while later writings become more substantive and abstract ( p . 108 ) . 110 ' JI > : " , ' ' ' ' ' may happen on its own accord , the researcher will also have to ~ i " , , : i ' Jm ; jy achieve it . It is worthwhile to periodically review the stock of ana . f ; r ' merrJOs developed thus far to compose " metamemos " that tactically SUt11 - a ~ d integrate what ' s been developed to date . This method also provides m " . f ! , se : Jrcl1er a " reality check " of the study and analysis in progress . An ana - scanning the analytic memos thus far , I notice recurring themes about " " ' , een . " middle , " ~ Iost . " I recall a lecture I heard about humans being caught parentheses " as a significant transitional state . Barry at this stage is also in C + ' m , mytranslltiIIJns : from elementary to high school , from child to adolescent , from too , eh " , " , pet to lost boy . There ' s that " betwixt and between " phrase that sticl ( s head , but it seems so trite . Barry on the classic uhero ' sjourney " is another " metapllor that comes to mind - the protagonist who must undergo severe trial loss of self to find oneself again . Perhaps my attempt to systematically cat - . 0 , " n , ri70 these data is proving useful for what could become an evocative narra· analysis instead ? Like Barry , I too feel caught in parentheses and ~ i . ; ; l ~ ~ f , ~ IIEI : N something as this analysis progresses . That can be a good thing , is _ a place for Inward reflection , deep introspection - before that break moment - I hope . , ; n . " , , , , . , Oil allll write abollt tIle filial report for the stud1 " Extended analytic , ' " " crnO ! can become substantive " think pieces . " suitable for integration into the report of your study . As you " write out loud , " you may find yourself com ' ; < ' , " [ ISir , , , passages that can easily be edited and inserted directly into the finished · •• • . . . v , Or , : you might use analytic memo writing as a way to ponder the organi structure , and contents of the forthcoming final report . An analytic , ; , " nlenlo might read : Make certain to cite the mother ' s observation . " His networi ( as he Imew it was gone " as an introductory quote for the section on Barry ' s " dead period . " Barry ' s mother Is becoming quite a prominent figure in this study . At first she was a supplemental partiCipant , interviewed primarily to gather additional info on Barry ' s life course . But I now see how her influences and affects on her son ' s life course have played very major roles . Barry speal ( s quite fondly of her and considers her a tremendous nurturer of who he Is and who he is becoming . It would be interesting 39 40 I ~ THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUAliTATIVE RESEARCHERS to edit and piece together portions of their separate interviews into a two·volce nar rative - one providing commentary on the other : BARRY : SANDY : BARRY : SANDY : BARRY In elementary school I was always picked on a lot , so I was always trying to fit In . Barry went through a really tough time about , probably started the end of fifth grade and went Into sixth grade . When he was growing up young in school he was a people - preaser and his teachers loved him to death . Two boys in particular that he chose to try to emulate were not very good for him . They Were very critical of him , they put him down all the time , and he kind of just took that and really kind of Internalized It , I think , for a long time . In that time period , in the fifth grade , early sixth grade , they really Just kind of shunned him all together , and so his network as he knew It was gone . It ' s kind of a dead period . At Lakewood Middle School he had a really tough time , real . tough . The first day of school in seventh grade , some - I ' ll use the term " gang·banger , " but I don ' t know - was plcldng on a little kid . And Barry said , AND SANDY : " Hey man , get off his case . " SANDY : And from that moment on , all of the tension Was focused on him . From the time he entered Lakewood to the time he left Lakewood , he was a target by the bad guys . That was a very tough time for him . Finally , the ATLAS . ti CAQDAS manual recommends that memos can be used as community " bulletin board " postings for multiple research t ~ am members to share information and exchange emergent ideas about the study as analysis progresses . To recap , analytic memos are opportunities for you to reflect on and write about : • • • • • • • • • • • how you personally relate to the participants and / or the phenomenon your study ' s research questions your code choices and their operational definitions the emergent patterns , categories , themes , and concepts the possible networks ( links , connections , overlaps , flows ) among the codes , patterns , categories , themes , and concepts an emergent or related existent theory any problems with the study any personal or ethical dilenunas , vjth the study future directions for the study the analytic memos generated thus far the final report for the study WRITING ANALYTIC MEMOS analytic n1elllO writing is the transitional process from coding to formal write - up of the study ( see Chapter Five ) . Your reflections on listed above collectively generate potential material for formulating of core ideas for presentation . Substanti ~ e analytic memos ll1ay also can to the quality of your analysis by rigorous reflection on the data . and Categorizing Analytic Memos memos themselves from the study can be coded and categorized : aording to their content . The descriptive titles in the examples above enable to group related memos by reflections on NETWORKS ; EMERGENT CATEGORIES , THEMES , AND CONCEPTS ; ETHICS ; ; rn ' TilMHvlC ) S ; etc . The subtitles function as subcodes or themes and enable ' to , sllbl : ateglorize the contents into more study - specific groupings - for analytic memos about specific participants , specific code groups , spe theories in progress , etc . CAQDAS programs provide these classification hl ( : ti ( lnS for organized reyjew and reflection . memos generate codes and categories m ' ; ' noole I stress tllToughout selected profiles in later chapters is that , even , T . ' . . . . , . . _ coded a portion of your data and categorized the codes into various 1 / ICIJ / O IIIritillg seme . s as all additiollal code - alld cafcgOI ) ' - gcllcmtil1g mc / fwd . , < I , ; n ; . 01o writing about the specific codes you ' ve applied to your data , you may even better ones . By memo writing about your puzzlement and loss for , ' " I < . " U . code for a particular datull1 , tlle perfect one may emerge . By memo about how S0111e codes seem to cluster and interrelate , a category for them be ' identified . Codes and categories are found not only in the margins or of interview transcripts and field notes - tl1ey are also embedded WitllilI memos . Corbin & Strouss ( 2008 ) provide meticulous and in - depth exam - of this pro ' cedure in their third edition of Basics of Qualitati ( le Resenldl . cyclical collection , coding , and analytic memo writing of data - a ' pIDcess generalIy termed " theoretical sampling " - are not distinct linear ·pn ) ce : sses but " should blur and intertwine continually , from the begimllng of anln1leSllg : J . tIon to its end " ( Glaser & Str : lUss , 1967 , p . 43 ) . This is one of the principles developed by grounded theory ' s premiere writers , Barney G . and Anselm 1 . Strauss , and elaborated in future writings by Juliet , I : : : ( lrbin , Kathy Charmaz , and Adele E . Clarke . , ' Girou , nd " d theory and its coding canon , , . . . • , •• ' Y , grounded theory , developed in the 1960s , is generally regarded as one the first methodologically systematic approaches to qualitative inquiry . The 41 42 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS process usually involves meticulous analytic attention by applying specific of codes to data through a series of cumulative coding cycles that " " " " ' " ( ( " , lead to the development of a theory - a theory " grounded " or rooted in original data themselves . In this coding manual , six particular methods are considered part of [ ! fOUn " " " theory ' s coding canon ( though they can all be used in other non - grounded ory studies ) : In Vivo , Process , Initial , Focused , Axial , and Theoretical Coding . earlier publications , Initial Coding was referred to as " Open " Coding , Theoretical Coding was referred to as " Selective " Coding . ) In Vivo , Process , and Initial Coding are First Cycle lllcthorls - processes for the beginning stages of data analysis that fracture or split the into individually coded segments . Focused , Axial , and Theoretical Coding Second Cycle ll1cthods - coding processes for the latter stages of data sis that both literally and metaphorically constantly compare , reorganize , Qr " focus " the codes into categories , prioritize them to develop " axis " categories around which others revolve , and synthesize them to formulate a central ' or core category that becomes the foundation for explication of a grounded the : . . ory . Categories also have " properties " and " dimensions " - variable qualities that display the range or distribution within similarly coded data . Each of these six coding methods will be profiled in later chapters , but cl , e thing to note here is the coding processes ' ongoing interrelationship with an ~ : ­ lytic memo writing . and the memos ' reorganization and integration into the final report of the study . Figure 2 . 2 presents a very reduced and element : d model of developing " classic " grounded theory for reference . Note how ana lytic memo writing is a linked component of the n1ajor stages leading toward the development of theory . I minimize the number of analytic memo examples in the coding profi1es that . follow because I myself find reading extensive ones in research methods textbooks too case - specific and somewhat fatiguing . If you wish to see how a trail of analytic memos progresses from First through Second Cycles of coding witlr the same data excerpt , see cl , e profiles for Initial , Focused , Axial , and Theoretical Coding . Analytic Memos on Visual Data A perceived problem is the coding of , " sual data such as photographs , print mate rials ( magazines , brochures , etc . ) , internet websites , video , and other items iri addition to the physical environments and artifacts of fieldwork ( roon1 decor , architecture , participant dress and accessories , etc . ) . Despite some preexisting coding frameworks for visual representation , I feel the best approach to analyi . . . ; ; ing visual data is a holistic , interpretive lens guided by strategic questions . Rather than one - word or phrase codes ( which are still possible , if desired ) , the WRITING ANALYTIC MEMOS In Vivo , Process , Initial , Focused , Axial , and Theoretical Coding Emergent Categories Central / Core Category Grounded Theory Data Collection An elemental model for developing " classic " grounded theory , " " , ' Ch " r ' , careful scrutiny of and reflection on in1ages , documented through ieJ , dI110t , , , and analytic n1emos , generate language - based data that accompa / lies tlle data . Any descriptors we use for docun1enting the images of social life employ rich , dynamic word , . Adele E . Clarke ' s ( 2005 ) " Mapping Visual ) ~ ( : bllrS < " " chapter in her text Sill / ario / lal A / lalysis presents a thorough list of IUesti ( Jl1s to consider ' & on1 the perspectives of aestlletic accomplislunent ( " How the variation in calor direct your attention - within the in1age ? " ) to contex critical readings ( " What work is the unage doing in the world ? What is . ! illl ~ licicly and e ' qJlicitly normalized ? " ) ( pp . 227 - - ll ) . below is a set of field notes about Barry ' s onstage performance _ three - dimensional , kinetic visual data - in one of his high school play ; , " UULU ' JIl > of a n10dern farce . Un1ike the observation of natural social life , of live or video - recorded theatrical performance takes into ~ ~ CCOlJnt both planned and spontaneous action by the actor ' s body and voice : Compared to other actors , 8arry ' s movements are sharp , crisp , economic . He niafntalns stili poses in compositions , does not steal focus . His voice is clear , " volume , articulate , wide variety , range . He is dynamic , has good energy , bellev ' able in his dialogue . Even when there ' s an error with a rope ( as part of the 43 44 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS set that falls ) he covers well . Unlike other actors , he does not " foot - fudge , " wan der , or rock . The others overact , miss the comic timing , speech is sometimes sloppy . difficult to hear . Barry has a leading man quality about him , a presence . He looks handsome , blonde hair cut close - had It long recently - sturdy build the physique of a beginning football player . I Rather than coding this documented set of visual ( and verbal ) data in the gin , an analytic memo about this field note set focuses on the m . sual di , ; cou " ; es : 10 November 2007 VISUAL DATA : BARRY ' S PHYSICALlTY A good actor needs what Howard Gardner calls " Idnesthetlc Intelligence . ~ Barry , as a high school actor , displays a heightened awareness of it on stage , though in everyday life his physicality is relaxed , even " dumpy . " This Intelligence comes from metacognition and technique , an attunement to and consciousness of everything your body is doing during performance . Not everyone has this skill , even university actors . The majority of male Hollywood celebrities are handsome , well·built , and their fan base Is drawn to their physical appearance . The beautiful , even In everyday life , also tend to be the popular . In the classroom , I notice girls surrounding Barry before class begins . His " leading man " presence not only means playing a lead role in a play , but leading others who are willing to follow In organized activity . Though he is aware of his body , he Is not arrogant about it , which perhaps adds even more to his charisma and appeal . In high school ( and adulthood ) , when you ' ve got looks , you ' ve gat an advantage . His I would cade : COMFORTABLE CONFIDENCE . The still image of a digital photo permits nuanced visual analysis , but et al . ( 2007 ) note that digital video data of action can be coded multiple times . for in - depth detail by replaying the file while focusing on different " " , . " " , . • with each " pass . " The co - authors , plus Lewins & Silver ( 2007 ) , profile several software programs ( e . g . , Transana , The Observer ) that can code digital video , they also note each one ' s limitations , such as cost , currency , and user - friendlineSs ~ Several CAQDAS programs ( e . g . , ATLAS . ti and NVivo ) can store and enable· digital video for coding in addition to text . A ' i a theatre practitioner I was trained to design for the stage , so visual acy is a " given " in my ethnographic ways of working . Today ' s mediated and visual cultures seem to indoctrinate and endow all of us by default with visual literacy - heightened awareness of images and their presentation and represen . . ; tation . From my readings of various systematic methods for analyzing visual data , I have yet to find a single satisfactory approach that rivals the tacit capa ' : " : bilities of human interpretation and reflection . Trust your intuitive impressions when analyzing and writing about visual 11laterials . The next chapter begins - with an overview of how to use this manual to guide you through its First Cycle coding methods profiles , and how to select the nlost appropriate one ( s ) for your particular qualitative research study . Cycle Coding Methods , the process of naming and locating your data bit ' i proceeds , your categories and subdivide . Learn to be content , however , with your early , simple cod i , ; " sd , co , es , knowing that with use they will become appropriately complex . , , ( Corrine Glesne , BccOlllillg QllalitatiJlc Rcsearchers : All llltrodllctioll , 2006 , p . 150 ) Coding Cycles production , a folk saying goes , " Plays are not written - they ' re rcwrit A comparable saying for qualitative researchers is , " Data are not coded _ recoded . " Some lllethodologisl ' i label the progressive refinement of codes as " stages " or " levels . " But to me , the reverberative nature of coding lnlJaring data to data , data to code , code to code , code to category , category category back to data , etc . - suggests that the qualitative analytic is cyclical rather than linear . coding methods in this manual are divided into two main sections : First Second Cycle coding methods ( see Figure 3 . 1 ) . Cycle methods are those processes that happen during the initial coding and are divided into seven subcategories : Gra . J1IDlatical , Elemental , ltteco , ' e , l _ lt " rary and Language , E ' ' l ) loratory , Procedural , and a final profile enti - Themeing the Data . Each subcategory ' s major characteristics will be in a brief introduction later in this chapter . Most First Cycle methods simple and direct . Cycle methods ( see Chapter Four ) are a bit 1110re challenging because require such analytic skills as classiJYing , prioritizing , integrating , synthesiz ~ , albsl : rar : tinll ' ; , conceptualizing , and theory building . If you have taken owner data through careful First Cycle coding ( and recoding ) , the transition Cycle method ' i becomes easier . But be aware that codes are not the ily ; medlC . d you should employ , as noted andrropologists George and Louise ( 1992 ) attest : " only the human observer can be alert to divergences and 46 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS Grammatical Methods Attribute Coding Magnitude Coding Simultaneous Coding Elemental Methods Structural Coding Descriptive Coding In Vivo Coding Process Coding Initial Coding Affective Methods Emotion Coding Values Coding Versus Coding Evaluation Coding Literary and Language Methods Dramaturgical Coding Motif Coding Narrative Coding Verbal Exchange Coding Exploratory Methods Holistic Coding Provisional Coding Hypothesis Coding Procedural Methods OCM ( Outline of CultUral Materials ) Coding Protocol Coding Domain and Taxonomic Coding Themeing the Data SECOND CYCLE CODING METHODS Pattern Coding Focused Coding Axial Coding Theoretical Coding Elaborative Coding Longitudinal Coding FIGURE 3 . 1 Rrst Cycle and Second Cycle coding methods subdeties d , at may prove to be more important than the data produced by any predetermined categories of observation or any instrunlent . . . . The categories of happenings repeat themselves endlessly in human affairs , yet each event is unique " ( pp . 66 - 7 ) . Thus , memo writing before , during , and after you code becomes a critical analytic heuristic ( see Chapter Two ) . FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS , leclling the Appropriate Coding Method ( s ) coding method ( s ) - and notice the plural option - is appropriate for , urpartic : ul : lr study ? Permit me to offer the sage yet tiresome advice we say , 0 ; ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' in qualitative inquiry : " It depends . " Noted methodologist Michael nlUll , ' " " ~ U ( 2002 ) ratioualizes this by noting , " Because each qualitative study , ll " " ] " · ' the analytical approach used will be unique " ( p . 433 ) . And , as I noted beginning of tlllS manual , no one , including myself , can claim final on the " best " way to code qualitative data . iD " pend ' ing on the nature and goals of your study , you may find that one cod i ~ liOelthod alone will suffice , or that two or more are needed to capture the bnlPlex I ) ( oces , ses or phenomena in your data . Most of the coding methods pro in this manual are not discrete and a few even overlap slightly in function ; can be " mixed and matched " when needed . Be cautious of muddying the waters , though , by employing too many methods for one study ( such as Cycle coding methods ) or integrating incompatible methods ( such as lti ' Il > : ploratory Method with a Procedural Method ) . me offer an array of different answers for the various contexts of begin - perspectives on coding decisions coding method ( s ) is appropriate for your particular study ? Some feel cod be prefaced and accompanied with careful reading and rereading of your as your subconscious , not just your coding system , develops connections that •• . • _ _ . •• _ of insight ( DeWalt & DeWalt , 2002 ) . Some feel that more than one method and at least two different analytic approaches should be explored study to enhance accountability and the depth and breadth of findings & Atkinson , 1996 ; Leech & Onwuegbuzie , 2005 ; Mello , 2002 ) . Some genres , such as discourse analysis . may not employ coding at all but rely on detailed transcription notation and extensive analytic memos about the ( Gee , Michael5 , & O ' Connor , 1992 ) . Some forego coding of data all together on phenomenological interpretations of the themes in and meanings of ( van Manen , 1990 ) . Some perceive coding an abhorrent act incompatible interpretivist qualitative research methodologies sllch as performance linclgtlphy and narrative inquiry ( Hendry , 2007 ; Lawrence - Lightfoot & Davis , Some believe prescribed methods of coding are all together aconceptual , lei : llanisti , c , futile , and purposeless ( Dey , 1999 ) . Others , like me , believe in the and payoff of coding for selected qualitative studies , yet , vish to keep , ms , e ] v , es open during initial data collection and review before determining coding method ( s ) - if any - will be most appropriate and most likely to a substantive analysis . I label tllls personal stance " pragmatic eclecticisnl . " 47 48 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS " Generic " coding methods Which coding method ( s ) is appropriate for your particular study ? An " . " " Ue " tor familiar with the methods profiled in this manual and your particular jeet can offer specific recommendations and guidance . In lieu of l11cntorship . suggest starting with a cOlllbination of these basic coding methods in the listed as a " generic " approach to your data and analysis . but remain open changing them if they are not generating substantive discoveries for you : First Cycle Coding Methods 1 . Attribute Coding ( for all data as a management technique ) 2 . Structural Coding or Holistic Coding ( for all data as a " grand overview ) 3 . Descriptive Coding ( for field notes , documents , and artifacts as a del : ail " d· inventory of their contents ) 4 . In Vivo Coding , Initial Coding , and / or Values Coding ( for interview scripts as a method of attuning yourself to participant language , perspec - . • tives , and worldviews ) Second Cycle Coding Methods 5 . Pattern Coding and / or Focused Coding ( for categorization of your coded data as an initial analytic strategy ) Paradigmatic , conceptual , and methodological considerations Which coding method ( s ) is appropriate for your particular study ? Specific cod ing nlethods decisions may happen before , during , and / or after an review of the data corpus . One study with young people I conducted ( Saldaila , 2005b ) primarily used In Vivo Coding to honer children ' s voices and tq ground the analysis from their perspectives ( In Vivo Codes use the direct guage of participants as codes rather than researcher - generated words phrases ) . Tlris choice was deternrined luforclwlld as part of the critical eth1l0· , graphic research design . Thus , the coding decision was based on the pmmti : ~ / lI . or theoretical approach to the study . But another project I conducted with teach - : ers ( Hager et al . , 2000 ) applied Versus Coding - phrases that capture d , e actu ~ and conceptual conflicts within , among , and between participants , sllch a ~ TEACHERS VS . ADMINISTRATORS - to the data after I noticed that interview transcripts and field notes were filled with tensions and power issues ; Thus , the coding decision was based on an el / lelgcllt cOllccptllalji " QIllCWork for the study . Still another longitudinal ethnographic study I conducted ( Saldane ' 1997 ) " mixed and matched " various coding methods at the begil11ring beeau ~ ~ FIRST CYCLE COOING METHODS quite sure what was happening and thus what I was looking for . What emerged as the primary method was Descriptive Coding since I had types of data ( interview transcripts . field notes , documents , etc . ) col - over a 20 - month period , alId I required a coding system _ that would me to analyze participant change across time . Thus , the coding decision on the lIIethodological / lccds of the study . ~ " ' , . d " nN a priori goals coding method ( s ) is appropriate for your particular study ? Some , etf , odok ' gis : ts advise that your choice of coding method ( s ) and even a provi - list of codes should be determined beforehand to harmonize with your conceptual fram _ ework or paradigm , and to enable an analysis that answers your research questions and goals ( see Structural , Provisional , lypod , esilS , protocol , and Elaborative Coding ) . But if your goal is to develop , ew ' rtflec , ry about a phenomenon or process , then classic or re - envisioned ' oti : nd " d theory and its accompanying coding methods - In Vivo , Process , Focused , A . xial , and Theoretical Coding - are your recommended but re ' lull : ed options . ( In the Examples and Analyses portions of these coding I stay with the sanle participant and her data to show how one partic progresses from First through Second Cycle coding methods . ) In mixed methods stUdies method ( s ) is appropriate for your particular study ? Depending qu : : ilitati , re coding method ( s ) ·you employ , the choice may have numeric wc " " , u and transformation possibilities . Mixed methods studies ( Tashakkori " ct ' UllC , 2003 ) currently explore how qualitative data can sonletil1leS be u , , ! , titi : ze ( l " for statistical analysis or survey instrument development : " infor from codes could be used in the quantitative follow - up or for specific , statements or quotes from participants " ( Creswell & PIano Clark , 145 ) . For instrument development , " a researcher might use the signifi nt . : statemenots or quotes to help write specific items for the irutrument : The would be major variables , and the themes would be constructs or scales ( p . 145 ) . In tlris manual , Magnitude Coding is a method that numbers or other symbols to data and even to codes themselves that rep - values on a scale such as : 3 = HIGH , 2 = MEDIUM , and 1 = LOW . There methodological purists who object to combining qualitative data with mtiltative measurement . But I feel that as researchers we should keep our , e , ' nn , ' " to numeric representation - when appropriate - as a supplemental to analysis . Magnitude Coding may be llsed concurrently with such as Values , Emotion , Evaluation , and Hypothesis Coding . 49 50 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS Most CAQDAS programs include such statistical capabilities as word counts ( e . g . , ATLAS . ti ' s " Word Cruncher " function ) , code frequency COllll ' O , matrix display of " quantitized " qualitative data in Excel spreadsheets , and transfer of converted qualitative data into quantitative data analysis Prograrlls . as SPSS - Statistical Package for the Social Sciences ( see www . sPSS . com ) . CAQDAS programs can aim import and associate quantitative data with the itative data set , enabling mixed methods analysis . H . . cmembcr that word in the data corpus does not necessarily suggest significance , but it is neVelth , worth e " l ' loring as a " query " ( as featured in NVivo , for example ) to emergent but as yet undetected patterns . New and hybrid coding schemes Which coding method ( s ) is appropriate for your particular study ? The 29 ing methods profiled in tIllS manual are not the only ones available to example . an elementary school reading teacher coded transcripts of her responses during literature discussion groups using Bloom ' s ta . . xonomy cognitive domain - KNOWLEDGE , COMPREHENSION , Af ' PL . ICATIO ~ ANALYSIS , SYNTHESIS , and EVALUATION ( Hubbard & Power , 1993 , p . One of my longitudinal case study ' s symbolic " volumes " and " t , ' mnn , , " , " selected stages fr001 his tumultuollS adolescence were arts - based coded musical dynamics ( a form of Magnitude Coding ) such as ADAGIO , 1VL ~ £ , l . l FORTE , ALLEGRETTO , and ANDANTE . You can develop new or coding methods or adapt existing schemes . custoll1ized to suit the uruque and disciplinary concerns of your study . Templates are provided to do , : uriie them after the First and Second Cycle coding methods have been profiled . General criteria for coding decisions Wlllch coding method ( s ) is appropriate for your particular study ? Flick p . 216 ) offers an excellent checklist for considering and selecting an method to apply in a qualitative research study , wlllch I have adapted for ' poses of this coding manual . Notice , though , that nlost of these questions not be answered until you have done some preliminary coding on a pOlrtiOu . oi your data . Thus , pilot test your initial choices , vith a few pages of field and / or interview transcripts and reflect on these questions : • Is the coding method ( s ) harmonizing with your study ' s conceptual or oretical framework ? ( e . g . , If your approach is critical ethnography , then amalgam of In Vivo , Emotion , Values , Versus , Dramaturgical , Exchange , and / or Evaluation Coding may be more appropriate Descriptive , Motif , and Hypothesis Coding . ) RRST CYCLE CODING METHODS I ; ' pco , : ling method ( s ) relating to or addressing your research questions ? Coding is designed to start organizing data around specific questions . but your additional coding medlOds choices afterward help YOll find answers , not create mysteries . ) feeling comfortable and confident applying the coding method ( s ) data ? ( i . e . , Is coding a provocative thinking exercise rather than a or confusing one ? ) the data lending themselves to the coding method ( s ) ? ( i . e . , Are the appropriate for field notes , appropriate for interview transcripts , coding method ( s ) providing the specificity you need ? ( Le . , Are you ; aerating a sufficient overall number of codes or a sufficient ratio of codes that enable you to see complexity and not complication ? ) coding method ( s ) leading you toward an analytic pathway ? ( e . g . , the construction of categories or ta . . xonomies , toward the deve1op patterns or themes , toward the beginnings of a grounded theory ? ) line " criterion is : applying the coding method ( s ) to the data , are you making new insights , and connections about your participants , their or the phenomenon under investigation ? ' , < •• . 1 . ' _ ' . coding method ( s ) is appropriate for your particular study ? It , rid . ; I3x ' 1ULine the recommended Applications in this manual for options , and direction , but not as mandates , restrictions , or limitations . There distinctive coding methods described in this manual , and the thirtieth ion - pIu filed nlethod is an approach that employs two or more methods , n , ecessalry - a form of " Eclectic Coding . " of First Cycle Coding Methods coding methods are organized into seven broad subcategories , but that several of these individual methods overlap slightly and can be " mixed and matched " for application in one particular study . For coding of an interview transcript might employ an amalganl of In Emotion , Values , and Dramaturgical Coding . A " another example , can be both Descriptive a / ld Holistic for qualitative metasynthe eeT ' herneillg the Data ) . r . UT1Dl ' ltical Methods are techniques for enhancing the organization and tex ' [ qualitative data . Elemental Methods are foundation approaches to coding 51 52 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS qualitative texts . Affective Methods investigate participant em _ arians , values , other subjective qualities of human ex - pcrience . Literary and Language draw on aspects of written and ora1 conununications for codes . H ' : pJIJratot ' Methods are those dlat pemur open - ended investigation , while Methods are , for lack of a better tem1 , " standardized " ways to code data . The section , Themeing the Data , acknowledges that extended passages of wue e " also capture the essence and essentials of participant meanings . The Coding Methods Profiles Each coding method profiled in the manual follows this outline : Sources Credit is given here to those writers whose works provide information or . ration for the coding method . The authors ' titles can be found in the K " lereni : ei section of the manual . A listing does not always mean that the source will tain further information about the particular coding procedure . In a few a reference may have utilized or described the nlethodological foundations a particular code \ , rjthout necessarily outlining procedures for applying it . Description A short description of the code and its function is provided . Somewhat plex coding methods will include an extended discussion for clarification . ~ Applications The general purpose and projected outcome of the coding ll1ethod is described here . A description of possible studies that might ( not must ) ineor ! , o rate the coding method is also provided . These reconmlendations may particular research metllOdologies ( e . g . , grounded theory , narrative inquiry ) , ciplines ( e . g . I education , cOllununication ) , outcomes ( e . g . • generating a list themes , learning about participant agency ) , and appropriateness ( e . g . , a method better suited for interview transcripts rather than field notes ) . Example Excerpts of varying length from field notes , interview tral15cripts , and dm : UITlent provide material for coding demonstrations . All authentic data included collected from independent or class research projects approved by my ullive , ~ jty Human Subjects Review Board ( which included participants ' permission lish collected data ) , previously published research , outdoor public nh , p , va ' OQ ) 1Si FIRST CYCLE COOING METHODS documents . Pseudonyms replace actual participant names , and the , , , , , l1 : lVe been changed to protect participant confidentiality . A few exam - data com - posed solely for . illustrative purposes . The content thc - mundane to the explicit and covers a number of subject areas ' \ teaching , human development , health care , workplace organization , rpersonal relationships ) . Most examples are deliberately brief and straight assist with comprehension . , \ ~ , , ' vp seen thus far , codes are presented in capital letters toward the margin next to the data with superscript numbers linking the data to its specific code : west along the highway ' s access road and up to Wlldpass Rd . there were 1 abandoned buildings In disrepair , . . spray painted gang on walls of several occupied and unoccupied . I passed a 3 Salvation Army Thrift Store , Auto parts store , a tire manufacturing plant , old in·between industrial sites , an auto glass store , arKet / L " luur " , Budget Tire , a checl < cashing service . spray paint was on the walls . , BUILDINGS ' GRAFFITI 3 BUSINESSES 4 GRAFFITI visual strategy is intended as an easy " at a glance " manual reference , but coding process does not have to follow tius system . If you ' re work hard copy ( highly reconullended for first - time and small - scale qualita projects ) , you can circle , underline , or highlight a passage of data WIIl " OLl it with a line to your penciled code written in the margin . If using CAQDAS ( highly recommended for large - scale or long - term research projects ) such as NVivo , MAXQDA , or ATLAS . ti , use their methods for selecting the text and type in or select from the evolv its acco111panying code . in mind that no h \ ' o qualitative researchers think and , 1110st likely , code ideas for codes may be ditferent - even better - than the ones I pre examples . Tt ' s all right if you interpret the data differently tl , an me . on the method , some examples merit a brief discussion of the C011 - analysis after coding . This section presents the possible directions might progress toward , recOlllI11endations for extended data analy cautionary advice . Again , the cited Sources will provide a more thor ~ " ' cu " " u , , , of what follows the particular coding process . of recommended - not mandated or all - inclusive - analytic and rep strategies for further consideration is included in this section , and such modalities as : research genres ( e . g . , phenomenology , portraiture ) , 53 54 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS analytic methods ( e . g . , frequency counts , content analysis ) , graphic rel , rel ; ent ; tions ( e . g . . matrices , displays ) , next cycle coding processes , and others . References will provide excellent detailed methods for enhancing your tative work . See Appendix D for a glossary of these analytic rec : ornrrlerldation , Notes Concluding or supplemental comments about the coding method are pnJVi , lp ~ in this section . FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS GRAMMATICAL METHODS raniunatl ' Cal coding methods refer not to the granunar oflanguage but to the lic g " , mm " tic : al principles of a technique . : Attribute Coding logs essential information about the data and demographic of the participants for future management and reference . all qualitative studies will employ some form of Attribute Coding . : MI ' gJutl , de Coding applies alphanumeric or symbolic codes to data , when to describe their variable characteristics , such as intensity or frequency . Codes add statistical texture to qualitative data and assist with methods or quantitative studies . ii ; : , illwl1taneous Coding occurs when two or more codes arc applied to or with a qualitative datum to detail its comple , dty . CAQDAS lends itself to this method since the programs can display and manage multiple code tSsi ! ~ lenlts simultaneously . ATIRIBUTE CODING 2003 ; DeWalt & DeWalt , 2002 ; Gibbs , 2002 ; Lofland et a1 . , 2006 & Huberman [ 1994 ] refer to this type of coding grammar as ~ D ' esc : rif ) ti , ' e Coding , " but that ternl will be used in a different context in tIlls . manmu . l \ ISC ) , Bogdan & Biklen [ 2007 ] classify tIllS type of coding granunar as . ' Settirlg / Ccmtext Codes . " Attribute Coding is chosen as the term for this to harmonize with CAQDAS language ) . Attribute Coding is the notation , usually at the beginrring of a data set rather embedded within it , of basic descriptive information such as : the field setting ( e . g . , school name , city , country ) , participant characteristics or # elmognlpl : tics ( e . g . , age , gender , ethnicity , health ) , data format ( e . g . , interview ; ram : crillt , field note , document ) , time frame ( e . g . , 2007 , May 2005 , 8 : 00 - 10 : 00 and other variables of interest for qualitative and some applications of quantitative analysis . CAQDAS programs enable you to enter Attribute Codes data sets in related files . ; ( 11 : trlbulte Coding is appropriate for virtually all qualitative studies , but partic for those with multiple participants and sites , and studies with a wide 55 56 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS variety of data forms ( e . g . . interview transcripts , field notes , journals , metHS , diaries , correspondence , artifacts , video ) . Attribute Coding is good qualitative data management and provides participant information and contexts for analysis and interpretation . Mason calls tIus process giving ci . ' 1ta various " ' addresses " for easy location - within the pus . Lofland et al . ( 2006 ) reconmlend that " folk / setting - specific " mtorrnationlb included as codes that identifY the types of activities and behaviors that the data set for future categorization and e ) . . - plorations of interrelationship . Examples Any data set might include the following sample Attribute Codes and tors for each participant in a standardized format established by the res ; ealrchei PARTICIPANT ( PSEUDONYM ) : BARRY AGE : 18 GRADE LEVEL : 12 GPA : 3 . 84 GENDER : MALE ETHNICITY : WHITE SEXUAL ORIENTATION : HETEROSEXUAL SOCIAL CLASS : LOWER - MIDDLE RELIGION : METHODIST DATA FORMAT : INTERVIEW 4 OF 5 TIME FRAME : MARCH 2006 A set of participant observation field notes might include Attribute Codes : PARTICIPANTS : 5th GRADE CHILDREN DATA FORMAT : P . O . FIELD NOTES / SET 14 OF 22 SITE : WILSON ELEMENTARY SCHOOL , PLAYGROUND DATE : 6 OCTOBER 2006 TIME : 11 : 45 a . m . - 12 : 05 p . m . ACTIVITIES INDEX [ a list of the field notes ' major contents ] : RECESS BOYS PLAYING SOCCER BOYS ARGUING GIRLS IN CONVERSATION GIRLS PLAYING FOUR - SQUARE TEACHER MONITORING DISCIPLINE Analysis CAQDAS programs can maintain and link Attribute Codes ( which in prcJgr . ml , ming language may be called Attributes , Properties , Values , etc . ) with data FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS heresearchl " opportunities to query and compare First and Second Cycle tables and matrices by such demographic variables as age , grade level , etl " . m ( oty , religion , geographic location , and others . Unanticipated patterns eIaliorl . ' ilu1p ( i . e . , correlation ) , influences and affects ( i . e . , causality ) , cultural ' iU ; d ' IIDol > ittldinaJ trends may emerge 1ionl the systematic investigation of hunch - driven queries according to selected characteristic combina - : ; n . : erest ( BazeJey , 2003 ) . Quantitative transfornlation of selected Attribute also possible to analyze them as nominal data and their possible correla other data sets ( e . g . , ATTRIBUTE ABSENT = 0 , ATTTlIBUTE = 1 ; for gender coding , MALE = 1 , FEMALE = 2 ) . & Rubin ( 1995 ) wisely advise that seemingly mundane attribute ref , ~ : ; , ; ; tI , ; " the data themselves , such as dates , time fralnes , and routine actions Irtil : iprmts mention , and the names of people and programs , can be coded reveal organizational . hierarchical , or chronological flows from the : ip " ciailly if multiple participants with differing perspectives are involved . Coding is intended as a codillg grallll / Jar , a way of documenting " cover " inforulation about participants , the site , and other related of the study . ways to further analyze Attribute Codes are ( see studies ( Merriam , 1998 ; Stake , 1995 ) analysis ( Krippendorff , 2003 ; Weber , 1990 ; Wilkinson & ~ lninlghall1 , 2003 ) ~ ! s : . cultural content analysis ( Bernard , 2006 ) , ouem " , counts ( LeCompte & Schensld , 1999 ) i1pl ' ctheIJreti·c techniques for semantic network analysis ( Namey , Guest , & Johnson , 2008 ) Jso - ati " ve charts , matrices , diagranlS ( Miles & Huberman , 1994 ; Morgan , & Guevara , 2008 ; Northcutt & McCoy , 2004 ; Paulston , 2000 ) logitullin ; , ] qualitative research ( Giele & Elder , 1998 ; Saldaiia , 2003 , 2008 ) tiXe , d - llle . : ho ' ds research ( Creswell , 2009 ; Creswell & Plana Clark , 2007 ; l > Sh , tkkcJri & Teddlie , 2003 ) lualitalive evaluation research ( Patton , 2002 ) research ( Fowler , 2001 ; Wilkinson & Birmingham , 2003 ) Vltilin· - ca , se and cross - case displays ( Gibbs , 2007 ; Miles & Huberman , 1994 ) cc - · - . . _ quaIitative studies ( e . g . , Greig , Taylor , & MacKay , 2007 ) should make efforts to separate and compare boys ' and girls ' data . For exaulple , research in brain - based learning suggests marked differences between the 57 58 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS ways children of both genders process information . M " ulljctllttlral / nllul ' tietlutir studies and projects in critical race theory should also separate and compare gathered from participants of different racial ! etlmic backgrounds " See , , , , , oekah Nathan ' s ( 2005 ) etlmography , My Frcs / II / IaI / Year , for an example ofhow / ittrltlute Cocling of university students by gender and etlmicity enabled her to observe " how their on - campus dining patterns countered the school ' s goals of aclhievjn ~ " " " conununity and diversity " ( pp " 61 - 6 , 171 - 2 ) " MAGNITUDE CODING Sources Miles & Huberman , 1994 ; Weston et al . 2001 Description Magnitude Coding consists of and adds a supplemental alphanumeric or sym ~ bolic code or sllbcode to an existing coded datum or category to indicate its intensity , frequency , direction , presence , or evaluative content . Magnitude Codes can be qualitative , quantitative , and / or nominal indicators to enhance description . Applications Magnitude Coding is appropriate for qualitative studies in social science disci ' : ' " plines that also support quantitative measures as evidence of outcomes . Some methodologists Qbject to combining qualitative and quantitative applications . ! V1i " ( ed - methods research , however , is a method gaining currency in qualitative inquiry ( Tashakkori & Teddlie , 2003 ) . Magnitude Coding is sup plemental shorthand to add texture to codes , subcodes , and categories . Sometimes words say it best ; sometimes numbers do ; and sometimes both can work in concert to compose a richer answer and corroborate each other . Examples Magnitude Codes can consist of words or abbreviations that suggest intensity : STRONGLY ( STR ) MODERATELY ( MOD ) NO OPINION ( NO ) or words or abbreviations that suggest frequency : OFTEN ( 0 ) SOMEWHAT ( S ) NOT AT ALL ( N ) FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS M " gnittl < df Codes can consist ofnul11bers in lieu of descriptive words to indi - , _ • c . . lency as well as such continua as weight or importance : intenslty or 1 . 1 eql , 3 ~ HIGH ~ MEDIUM ~ LOW o ~ NONE OR N / A 47 INSTANCES 16 EXCHANGES 87 % • . . Fielding ( 2008 ) recommends that coding can suggest " direction " of a par . · < . ' r " lrrr process , phenomenon , or concept : POSITIVE SELF·IMAGE NEGATIVE SEL ~ IMAGE Magnitude Codes can a1so suggest direction through symbols representing conceptual ideas or opinions : < - - ~ BACK TO BASICS EDUCATION - - > ~ PROGRESSIVE EDUCATIONAL CHANGE t ~ MAINTAIN STATUS QUO IN THE SCHOOLS H ~ MIXED RECOMMENDATIONS FOR EDUCATION ; M ~ agnitude Codes can apply symbols to indicate the presence or absence of something within a category : + ~ PRESENT Jij ~ ABSENT ? ~ UNKNOWN OR UNCLEAR Y ~ YES N ~ NO M ~ MAYBE Magnitude Codes can consist of words or numbers that suggest evaluative content : POS ~ POSITIVE NEG ~ NEGATIVE NEU ~ NEUTRAL MIX = MIXED In the example below , a patient describes the differences between ~ nd l ~ ler . its of his primary care and sleep medicine physicians . Descriptive Coding mdicates the subjects he addresses about each of them , and the numeric ratin ~ added aftenvard are the researcher ' s interpretation of the quality of care receIved . The rating system used for this example of Magnitude Coding is : 59 I 60 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS 3 = HIGH QUALITY 2 = SATISFACTORY QUALITY 1 = LOW QUALITY [ blanl ' l = NO EVALUATIVE COMMENT Intennew words and phrases that suggest and support the assigned radngS been bolded for reference : 1 Or Lucas - Smith ' s office . she ' s my main doctor , is very organized , the receptionists are friendly and the nursing staff acts very professionally . 2 But Or Johnson ' s office staff seem liI { e interns In training - and bad ones , at that . Sometimes you feel lII { e they haven ' t got a clue about what ' s gOing on , you Imow ? Now , 3 Or Lucas - Smith Is a bit cold , maybe too " professional , n but 4 she ' s relatively fresh out of med school so her knowledge is state - of - the - art . That ' s what I like about her : she was able to clear up two health problems of mine - a cyst under my left arm and a superficial blood clot on my leg - that previous doctors didn ' t know what to do about . Dr Johnson is kind of old - school but 5 he knows his stuff . 6 My office visits with hIm are OK but 7 he does so much small - talk that I wanna tell him , U Just treat me so I can get outta here , I ' ve already been waiting an hour for you . " 8 With Or Lucas - Smith , it ' s efficient in and outla there , probably because she ' s so popular and has lots of patients she needs to see . You don ' t feel rushed , but you do feel HIm you ' re there for a purpose , so let ' s get to it . Analysis 1 OR LS STAFF : 3 , OR J STAFF : 1 , OR LS ~ c ' uul , u ~ q : . , OR LS EXf ' FO ' Tloo . 5 OR J EXF ' ER1·ISE : 5 OR J OECORUI ~ : 7 OR J WAIT 8 OR LS WAIT " rI , " o . Magnitude Codes can be placed in a summary table or matrix for at . . a - , glance analysis ( see Figure 3 . 2 ) . CAQOAS programs and Microsoft Excel can generate selected mOSD , e , culled from Magnitude Codes . The MAXQOA program , for example , " or " ' ; " you to see the " weight " of a coded segment of text or a code itself in paris on to others , providing another measure of magnitude for analysis . Magnitude Coding is intended as a codht ! ! gral / Jl / lar , a way of ' ' ' qtlan ! titizin ' g ' ' and / or " qualitizing " a phenomenon ' s intensity , frequency , direction , pre : serlce , or evaluative content ( Tashakkori & Teddlie , 1998 ) . It is most often refin " ment or specification of a code during First Cycle coding Inethods but can also FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS DR aUALITY : DR LS DR J STAFF 3 DECORUM 2 2 EXPERTISE 3 3 WAIT TIME 3 TOTALS 11 7 Magnitude Codes in a summary table during Second Cycle coding for assessing variability and dimensions of subcode , or category . recomnlcnded ways to further analyze Magnitude Codes are ( see othesis Coding and Pattern Coding " , , , : rhem development ( Erickson , 1986 ) analysis ( Krippendorff , 2003 ; Weber , 1990 ; Wilkinson & ! 3i " llunglllam 2003 ) lta , nla ' tric : e , for univariate , bivariate , and n1l1ltivariate analysis ( Bcrnard , 2006 ) ~ sp ~ ptlve statistical analysis ( Bernard , 2006 ) ' eLIU " " " y counts ( LeCompte & Schensul , 1999 ) , mph - t : he ' orc : tic techniques for semantic network analysis ( Namey , Guest , & Johnson , 2008 ) Uu ~ trative charts , matrices , diagrams ( Miles & Hube , man , 1994 ; Morgan , CCUIU " " , & Guevara , 2008 ; Northcim & McCoy , 2004 ; Paulston , 2000 ) 1 . 0ngitlJdinaJ qualitative research ( Giele & Elder , 1998 ; Saldaiia , 2003 , 2008 ) rtlt , ecl - nletho , ds research ( Creswell , 2009 ; Creswell & Plana Clark , 2007 ; lasllaklmri & Teddlie , 2003 ) # ~ ; m ( l ' Cl \ ' c evaluation research ( patton , 2002 ) ethnography ( Handwerker , 2001 ) splicing , and linking data ( Ocy , 1993 ) research ( Fowler , 2001 ; Wilkinson & Birmingham , 2003 ) \ ' ltlun - case and cross - case displays ( Gibbs , 2007 ; Miles & Hubcrman , 1994 ) , - _ _ _ Codes can be applied to Values Codes , Emotion Codes , Hypothesis ~ ' " . IIU Evaluation Codes that may contain continua of intensity , frequency , presence , and / or evaluative content . 61 62 I THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS SIMULTANEOUS CODING Source Miles and Huberman , 1994 Description ( The methods literature uses various terms when referring to two ·or codes applied to the same passage or sequential passages of text : " siml " ltan " ollS coding , " " double coding , " " co - occurrence coding , " " multiple codilng , , " " overlan ' coding , " " subcoding , " " embedded coding , " " nested coding , " etc . SiJnultalleC ) US Coding , as the sllnpler term , will be used in this manual . ) Simultaneous Coding is the application of two or more different codes to a single qualitative datum , or the overlapped occurrence of twu or more cod ~ : , applied to sequential units of qualitative data , Applications Simultaneous Coding is appropriate when the data ' s content suggests multiple uleanings that necessitate and justifY more than one code since complex " social interacti ' on does not occur in neat , isolated units " ( G1esne , 2006 , p . 150 ) . & Huberman ( 1994 ) advise that simultaneous coding " is warranted if a seg ment is both descriptively and inferentially meaningful " ( p , 66 ) , Be aware that sonle may attribute indecisiveness on the researcher ' s part if Simultaneous Coding is used excessively . TIllS may also suggest that there is no clear focused research purpose and thus a clear lens and filter for ana1yzing the data . If Simultaneous Coding is used , justif ) r the rationale for its use . Examples A public school teacher is interviewed on how holding an advanced graduate degree affect , her salary , Her MFA ( Master of Fine Arts ) required 30 more credit hours than an MA ( Master of Arts ) , yet the district does not acknow ! : edge the legitimacy of her degree . In tills first example , note how tile clltirc flllit Hlerits two codes because the researcher perceives two separate issues at work within the teacher ' s story . Another code is applied later that refers to the " cul tural shock and adaptation " processes employed for the study ' s conceptual framework ( see Appendi . x C ) . This code operlaps with the two major unit codes : I : Did completing your MFA degree affect your pay scale or status of employment ? FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS In & , ib Not one bit . But I fought . I wrote· of letters to the district human ' director explaining that I have an is 60 credit hours . and they stipulated degree for a pay raise . And my degr ~ e was ~ dPIt , ' ng 30 more credit hours of schooling which be the UMaster ' s plus 24 , " which is the next And we went over it and over it and she give me the extra pay raise . And then I c ' , C " " , p " that I have 96 graduate credit hours 1 have far above the 30 credit hours for ' : ; ; , ; " , or ' , ; , and they still wouldn ' t give it to me . And kind of a moot Issue , they just won ' t do It . going to continue to pursue it or just . . . 2 No , I ' m going to [ et it be because I Imow win like that , you Imow ? I just know it . Um , gonna drop it and I probably won ' t reach . ~ ; . " . lester ' s plus 24 " while I ' m here because that ' s a whole ' nother degree for me . So I ' ll Just stick I ' m at right now , " INEQUITY " SCHOOL DISTRICT BUREAUCRACY 2 ACCULTURATION exalllple fronl field notes , a school fundraising event is described . " " ' ·· " ' - " ' ' ' - 1 / 1 ' ; 1 is assigned the descriptive Process Code FUNDRAISING , but this unit there are four separate yet related Process Codes that identifY actions at work . These could be perceived in this particular example as codes witllln the primary ! Jicrarcllical code : Valentine ' s Day and flowers can be seen by students and teachers through the } h " Ii . ' ay " , Nancy is dressed in a red sweater blue Jean shorts , and red glittered earrings . 8 : 00 a . m . I enter Nancy ' s classroom . A very cardboard box and two plastiC tubs with > e " rna , tlor , s are by the platform , Naney tells a ' c ' " " " _ _ > , UAren ' t they pretty this year ? They ' re than last year . " The flowers cost and the goal is to mai < e $ 150 profit on Nancy drove to a mall floral shop . Y " Sti " d " y to get them , l ~ She tells three girls who take flowers to sell , one dollar apiece , guys . And I don ' t have guys . lb We ' re gonna have so fun today . " The girls leave with the . Nancy goes into the hall and says to a \ _ > " J _ ' le UHey Mike , how are are you ? . . . They ' re sell them In the cafeteria . . . . Yeah , they ' re there now . " 1 FUNDRAISING " DELEGATING , . MOTIVATING " PROMOTING 63 ; 1 I I I I i 64 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS ll1 Two junior high students come in and look at the flowers . Boy : ~ Do you want one , Elena ? " Elena : " Yeah . " Boy : " What calor ? " Elena : ~ Red . " The Boy gives Nancy a dollar , waves the flower above Elena ' s head and says laughingly . " Here , herel " Analysis 1d TRI ' N ' ; Ar . T " i , The first example above displays a case that occasionally occurs in qUlilitativ data when the richness or complexity of an event or participant ' s story it difficult for a researcher to assign only one major code to the U . " U " " " ' UlI ' 1 the researcher ' s focus for the study includes several areas of interest , and if a gle datum captures or illustrates points related to more than one of those Simultaneous Coding can be applied . The method can also serve as a means investigating interrelationship . If passages coded INEQUITY are COllsi " terltly . coupled with such codes as SCHOOL DISTRICT STAFF AUTHORITY , PRINCIPAL ' S LEADERSHIp , and " , - L . , - LJLl TION ' , emergent patterns can be explored and tested . The second example ( FUNDRAISING ) shows how a particular coded nomenon or process can be broken down into its constituent elements tlmJug ; h Sin1llltaneous Coding . Such detail work can support and lead to Process Co , dirl ~ or Domain and Ta . ' i : onomic Coding . This type of coding may also help you both uthe bigger picture " and " the trees in the forest " at work in the data . Logistically , Simultaneous Coding should be used sparingly if there are sive amounts of data and especially if they will be coded manually . ClI . QDi \ , S . programs are better equipped to manage extensive Simultaneous ( Bazeley , 2007 , pp . 71 - 3 ; Lewins & Silver , 2007 , p . l1 ) . Van de Ven & ( 1995 ) transformed coded qualitative data into quantitative dichotomous variJ ables for longitudinal statistical analysis , but they first layered a " track " of up five different codes for a single key incident across tinle . Qualitative codes on this track consisted of such items as the people involved with the incident , relationships within their organization , and an assessment of their outcomes ' : ' The coding was not only simultaneous , it was IIIl1ltidilllcllsiollal . CAQDAS grams such as NVivo can apply multiple codes to the SIDle passage of which later enables the computer to process " intersections " - the generation associations , links , and matrices ( Bazeley , 2007 ) . Simultaneous Coding is intended as a codillg grammar , a way of applying multi " pIe coding methods , if and when needed , to complex passages of qualitative data : Some recommended ways to further analyze Simultaneous Codes are ( see , : Appendix D ) : • content analysis ( Krippendorff , 2003 ; Weber , 1990 ; Wilkinson & Birmingham , 2003 ) FIRST CYCLE COOING METHODS ~ ra . oh _ theOlretic techniques . for semantic network analysis ( Namey , Guest , , q ' h , uru , & Johnson , 2008 ) ' , j ] ] lu , trablve charts , matrices , diagrams ( Miles & Huberman , 1994 ; Morgan , IFello ' NS , & Guevara , 2008 ; Northcutt & McCoy , 2004 ; Paulston , 2000 ) int , ertf , lati . onl ; [ llp ( Saldana , 2003 ) , ' sitlJationlaJ analysis ( Clarke , 2005 ) : : splitting , splicing , and linking data ( Dey , 1993 ) . inl1llta : nec ) us Coding differs from the process of subcoding ( see Descriptive for an example ) . A subcode relates directly to its primary code ( e . g . , while Sitllultaneous Codes may clitTer in assigned 65 66 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS ELEMENTAL METHODS Elemental co ~ ng methods are primary approaches to qualitative data analysis They h ~ ve basIc but focused filters for reviewing the corpus and they build ~ foundatIon for future coding cycles . S ~ uctu ~ ~ oding applies a content - based or conceptual phrase representin a tOpIC of lI1qurry to a segment of d1ta to both code and categorize the data c g pu , Structural C d raJ ] Or _ . . . . 0 ~ s aIC gene y foundation work for further detailed cadin : I ? escn ~ tlve Codmg assigns basic labels to data to provide an inventory g ~ their tOpiCS Many alit ' d ' 0 . ' . qu aave Stll Ies employ Descriptive Codes as a first ste m data analYSIS . P In Vivo Coding and P C d ' . roCess 0 mg are foundatIOn methods £4 g ~ ounded . theory , though they are applicable to other analytic approaches . r : r VIVO . Codmg draws from the participant ' s own language for codes . Process ~ odmg uses gerunds exclusively for codes . These techniques are employed lfl o ~ her grounded theory methods : Initial , Focused , A . . - x : ial , and Theoretic I ~ ilin ~ a d Initial Coding is the first major stage of a grounded theory approach to the ata . The met ~ lOd 1S truly open - ended for a researcher ' s first review of the Cor pus , and can 1I1corporate In Vivo and Process Coding . STRUCTURAL CODING Sources MacQueen , McLellan - Lemal , Bartholo \ " , & M " - . " . illtem , 2008 ; Namey , Guest , Thairu , & Johnson , 2008 Description Stn : ctu ~ C ~ ding applies a content - based or conceptual phrase representing a tOp1C of l11qUlry to a segment of data that relates to a specific research question used to frame th . t . ( M M ' . e 111 etvlew acQuecn , McLellan - Lema1 , Bartholow & ilstem , 2008 p 104 ) TI . - " I ' , . ~ . le Sllhuar y coded segments are then collected together for more detailed coding and analysis . Applications Structural Codi ' . . . ng is approprIate for VIrtually all qualitative studie " but paracularly for those employing multiple participants . standardized or FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS ~ e ! ni - . structur·ed data - gathering ·protocols , hypothesis testing , or exploratory to gather topics lists or indexes of major categories or Structural Coding is a question - based code that , " acts as a labeling and ind . exrng device . allowing researchers to quickly access data likely to be rele to a particular analysis fr0111 a larger data set " ( Namey . Guest , Thairu , & IO ] ' U1s , on , 2008 , p . 141 ) . Structural Coding both codes and initially categorizes the data corpus . The Sources suggest that Structural Coding is perhaps more suitable for interview transcripts than other data such as researcher - generated notes , but open - ended survey responses are also appropriate with this A mixed - methods study is conducted to survey and interview participants who currendy smoke about their habit . One particular area of inquiry focuses on the smokers ' past cessation attempts ( if any ) to investigate their choices oftech niques and their success and ! or nonsuccess with them . In the exm11ple below . an interviewer asks a middle - aged adult male about ' his smoking history and habits . Note how these segments of data are preceded by the particular research question from the study , followed by its related Structural Code . Since Structural Coding does not rely on margined entries , the examples will scan across the entire page . Note that the participant ' s responses and the interviewer ' s questions , probes , and follow - ups are included " in the coded segments : Research Question : What types of smoking cessation techniques ( if any ) have partici pants attempted in the past ? Structural Code : ' UNSUCCESSFUL SMOKING CESSATION TECHNIQUES 11 : Have you ever tried to quit smoking ? PARTICIPANT : Yeah . several times . I : Were any of them successful ? PARTICIPANT : Only for a short while . Then I started back up again . I : What kinds of stop - smoking techniques have you tried In the past ? PARTICIPANT : The nicotine lozenges seemed to worl { best , and 1 was doing pretty well on those for about two or three weeks . But then life stuff got In the way and the wor \ { stress was too much so I started smol { ing again . I : What other techniques have you tried ? PARTICIPANT : A long time ago I tried cold turl , ey . I Just kept myself busy doing stuff around the house to keep my mind off of smoking . But then my car got bro \ { en into a couple of days later and the window got busted , so the stress just got to me and I started smoking again . 67 68 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS I : Are there any other ways you ' ve tried to stop smoking ? PARTICIPANT : Mm . ( pause ) No . Those were my only two attempts . Both of them failed , though . Research Question : What factors lead to participants ' unsuccessful smoking ces sation attempts ? Structural Code : ' REASONS FOR UNSUCCESSFUL SMOKING CESSATION : 2 I : You said that " stress got to " you as a reason to start smol { lng again . PARTICIPANT : Yeah , and not , it wasn ' t the stress of not smolling that got to me , it was life stress - the car breal { - in , worl { - it just got to be too much for me and I brol { e down and needed a cigarette , really needed one . I : What was it about work that made you want to smoke again ? PARTICIPANT : There was a lot of responsibility and expectations riding on me . I was worried that , well , at that time I was worried that things weren ' t going to turn out the way they needed to , whether I would have enough personnel , deadlines to meet , just too much stress . And I knew this was coming so maybe I just picked the wrong time to quit . I : And what is " life stuff " ? ( PARTICIPANT chuckles ) What does that PARTICIPANT : Life stuff - laundry , Ironing , grocery shopping , uh , feeding the cats , cleaning their litter boxes , running around to do this and that with barely any time to do it . I : I can relate to that . Now , when you went " cold turkey , " how did you cope ? Analysis " Structural Coding generally results in the identification of large segments of text on broad topics ; these segments can then fOrIn the basis for an in - depth analysis within or across topics " ( Mac Queen et al " 2008 , p . 125 ) . The coding method can be kept at a basic level by applying it as a categorization technique for further qualitative data analysis . But depending on the research study ' s goals , quantitative applications are also possible . Namey et a1 . ( 2008 ) - " suggest determining frequencies on the basis of the number of individual participant . , who mention a particular theme , rather than the total number of times a theme appears in the text . . . . [ A ] code frequency report can help identify which themes , ideas , or domains were common and which rarely occurred " ( p . 143 ) . In the study profiled above , other participants ' similarly coded interview segments would be collected together , then further coded andlor sub coded to extract data related to the specific research ques tions . UNSUCCESSFUL SMOIUNG CESSATION TECHNIQUES for this particular group might include such coded items and their frequency count ' i in descending order as : FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS Not to Think About It PATCHES NETWORK AIJERSI ( lN THERAPY Number of Participants 15 8 6 5 4 4 2 1 1 10 2 2 1 4 2 lIat a glance " scan of the above data would suggest that the category Intervention ( COUNSELlNG , HYPNOSIS , AVERSION was the least used technique with this particular group , while UIU ( E ' I COO \ vas the most frequent Independent Intervention . Graph - , ' cl . leoretiic data reduction techniques , " also referred to as semantic network analy may be used to identify complex semantic relationships in ~ odi ~ s of texts " clmou1 : 11 tables and matrices ( Namey et al . , 2008 , p . 146 ) . The data In till5 study can analyzed by gender , for eXaInple , to investigate any differences be ~ v ~ en 1nen ' s women ' s choices of snl0king cessation measures . Advanced stattsocal tech - , , : , ; , : c < . " ~ such as hierarchical clustering and multidimensional scaling can identity as5 ( ) ci ' lticms , co - occurrence , distance and proxmlity , dimension , and other quanti aspects of qualitative data . In the example above , Nicotine Substitutes 3 ' . ' . ' , . · , ( P , ' \ T ' Cl - lE : 5 , GUM , LOZENGES ) might statistically associate in hierarehical clus tering analysis . CAQDAS programs and their tran5fer of converted data to quan - , ' titative softvvare programs are indispensable for such analytic work . . . Quantitative follow - up , however , is not always necessary . Other qualita : 1Ve methods , s ' uch as thematic analysis and even grounded theory , arc also applica ble with structurally coded data . Some rec01111nellded ways to filfther analyze Structural Codes are ( see • First Cycle coding methods • content analysis ( Krippendorff , 2003 ; Weber , 1990 ; Wilkinson & Birmingham , 2003 ) • frequency counts ( LeCompte & Schensul , 1999 ) • graph - theoretic techniques for semantic network analysis ( Namey , Guest , Thairu , & Jolrnson , 2008 ) 69 70 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS • illustrative charts , matrices , diagrams ( Miles & Hubermall , 1994 ; MO " " , " ' Fellows , & Guevara , 2008 ; Northcutt & McCoy , 2004 ; Paulston , 2000 ) • interrelationship ( Saldana , 2003 ) • quick ethnography ( Handwerker , 2001 ) • splitting , splicing , and linking data ( Dey , 1993 ) • survey research ( Fowler , 2001 ; Wilkinson & Birmingham , 2003 ) • thematic analysis ( Auerbach & Silverstein , 2003 ; Boyatzis , 1998 ) • within - case and cross - case displays ( Gibbs , 2007 ; Miles & Huberman , 1 Notes Structural Coding is an analytic cousin of Holistic Coding . The latter , however , is more exploratory and even tentative in nature , while the former is framed and driven by a specific research question and topic . DESCRIPTIVE CODING Sources Miles & Huberman , 1994 ; Saldana , 2003 ; Wolcott , 1994 Description ( Tlus method is also called " Topic Coding " in some of the literature , but Descriptive Coding will be used in this manual to align with Wolcott ' s ternunology . ) Descriptive Coding 5unmlarizes in a word or short phrase - most often as a noun - the basic topic of a passage of qualitative data . To clarity , Tesch ( 1990 ) differentiates that " it is inlportallt that these [ codes ] are identifications of the topic , not abbreviations of the COl / tellt . The topic is what is talked or written abol / t . The content is the substance of the message " ( p . 119 ) . Applications Descriptive Coding is appropriate for virtually all qualitative studies , but partic ularly for beginning qualitative researchers learning how to code data , etlulOgra phies , and studies with a wide variety of data forms ( e . g . . interview transcripts , field notes , journals , documents , diaries , correspondence , artifacts , video ) . Many ethnographic studies usually begin with such general questions as " What is going on here ? " and such reflective questions as " What is this a study about ? " Descriptive Coding is just one approach to analyzing the data ' s basic topics to assist with answering these types of questions . Turner ( 1994 ) calls this cycle the development of a " basic vocabulary " of data to form " bread and FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS ' categories for further af . lalytic work ( p . 199 ) . Description is the foun for qualitative inquiry , and its prima ' ry goal is to assist the reader to see you saw and to hear what you heard ( Wolcott , 1994 , pp . 55 , 412 ) . ) e " CdlptIVe Codes fr0111 data collected across various time periods and charted are also essential for assessing longitudinal participant change Saldana , 2003 , 2008 ) . ; ; X ' etl ' 1l1 01 gr . lplcler walks through an inner city , lower income neighborhood in a : ~ Ilr ~ nletroF , olitan area and takes field notes describing the setting . The field notes descriptively - i . e . , factually and objectively as much as possible . The " OC " sections interspersed throughout arc Observer ' s Comments : tlog o , " & Biklen , 2007 , pp . 163 - 4 ) , subjective impressions or memos embedded the f . 1ctual description , which ai ' iO merit consideration for codes . Note several Descriptive Codes repeat as the topics shift : west along the highway ' S access road and up st . to Wildpass Rd . there were 1 abandoned walrenUW " " buildings in disrepair , : 1 spray painted gang on walls of several occupied and unoccupied bulI ' dlnlgs . I passed a 3 Salvation Army Thrift Store , Auto Parts store , a tire manufacturing plant , in - between industrIal sites , an auto glass Market / liquors , Budget Tire , a check cashIng 4 More spray paint was on the walls . There seems to be an abundance of car - oriented ~ ; ; l ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ fn the neighborhood . Industrial loo / fing - no ushowroom " qualities . Here Is where Is more important than sales . on Turquoise Rd . and walked along the ; p ' " lp , helry of an elementary school lot . 6 The majority homes had dirt front yards ; the only vegetation o ; : ; ' " , . ' ln . were weeds . Maybe one house per blocl ~ had , , , , , , . , WUWIIU be called a lawn . The majority seem un ' ltte . , ded , not cared for . The homes look like they built in the 19305 , 19405 at the latest . 7 I saw paint on the " No Trespassing " sign of the eleme , nt , , , v school and smaller gang symbols on It . A beer bottle and beer can were against the of the school . 9 Surfaces on the houses vary - ! . { ma : ybe one per block looks fairly well painted . The are peeling in paint , rotted wood , various materials stucco , tin ) on the same house . Priorities , energies , financial resources do not go the appearance of homes . There are more important to worry about . ' BUILDINGS ' GRAFFITI 3 BUSINESSES , GRAFFITI 5 BUSINESSES 6 HOUSES 7 GRAFFITI ' TRASH , HOUSES 71 . 1 ! 72 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS 10 I notice that the grand majority of homes have chain link fences in front of them . There are many dogs ( mostly German shepherds ) with signs on fences that say " Beware of the Dog . " QC : There ' s an attempt to I { eep things at home safe . Protection from robbers , protect / on of property . Keep your distance - this is mine . Depending on the volume of data , specificity , or anl0unt of detail you need for data analysis and categorization , Descriptive Codes can also assigned more detailed slIbcodes when needed ( Miles & Huberman , p . 61 ) . Gibbs ( 2007 ) explains that the most general code is called the " p , arent ' I ' while its sub codes are the " children " ; subcodes that share the same parent " siblings " in a hierarchy ( p . 74 ) : 1 Some houses , because of their disrepair , lool ~ abandoned . But the things seen through the window and in the yard clue you that someone still lives there . : 1 One house has a picture portrait of Jesus and a cross on its front wall . I notice TV antennas on several roofs . QC : 3 No cable TV - a luxury ; can ' t afford it ; not a priority . 4 Laundry hangs In the back yards of several homes on a clothesline . 5 There ' s a house with a small statue of the Virgin Mary in front , 6 " Beware of the Dog / Pera " signs . 7 Desl ( chairs , worn upholstered furniture are in the front yards of some homes . QC : 8 It ' s all we ' ve got . 9 ~ Pussy " is a spray painted word I decipher on an abandoned car . Analysis , HOUSES - DECOR 4 HOUSES . YARDS 5 HOUSES - DECOR 6 SECURITY - SIGNS ; HOUSES - YARDS 9 GRAFFITI - OBSCENE Descriptive Coding leads primarily to a categorized inventory , tabular account , summary , or index of the data ' s contents . It is essential groundwork for Second Cycle coding and further analysis and interpretation ( Wolcott , 1994 , p . 55 ) . In the example above , all qualitative data passages coded with HOUSES , for example , would be extracted from the main body of field notes and reassem - ' bled together in a separate file for an organized and categorized narrative por trait of the environment for further analysis : . Priorities , energies , and financial resources of this neighborhood ' s residents do not go into the appearance of their homes ( there are more important things to worry about ) . FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS Houses appear to have been . bullt in the 1930s through 1940s . I notice TV ' . nl : . nI 1a5 ( rather than cable ) on several roofs . Surfaces on the houses vary . one per block looks fairly well painted . But the majority ' s exter ~ ors have paint , rotting wood , and an assembly of wood , stucco , and tm on the house . Some , because of their disrepair , look una ~ end . ed and abandone ~ . look in the yards and inside the homes through their windows : people stili . ~ . . Laundry hangs on clotheslines in the back yards of seve ~ al homes . The maJor - have dirt front yards where the only vegetation growing IS weeds . May . be one er block has what would be called a lawn ; other front yards contain desk ~ nd worn upholstered furniture . There ' s a house with a small statue of the I I Mary In front . Another house has a picture portrait of Jesus and a cross on its front wall . < i , Some reconuuended ways to further analyze Descriptive Codes are ( see ; ) \ pp " ndix D ) : . Hypothesis Coding , Domain and Taxonomic Coding , Pattern Coding , and . Focused Coding content analysis ( Krippendorff , 2003 ; Weber , 1990 ; Wilkinson & Birmingham , 2003 ) content analysis ( Bernard , 2006 ) d0l11al1l1 and ta : mnomic analysis ( Schensul , Schensul , & LeCompte , 1999 ; Spradley , 1979 , 1980 ) . . : frequency counts ( LeCompte & Schensul , 1999 ) graph - theoretic techniques for semantic network analysis ( Namey , Guest , . , , " ' \ ' 0 " . , & Johnson , 2008 ) grounded theory ( Charmaz , 2006 ; Corbin & Strauss , 2008 ; Glaser & Strauss , 1967 ; Strauss & Corbin , 1998 ) mixed - methods research ( Creswell , 2009 ; Creswell & Plana Clark , 2007 ; Tashakkori & Teddlie , 2003 ) . qualitative evaluation research ( Patton , 2002 ) . . quick etlmography ( Handwerker , 2001 ) • . . . thematic analysis ( Auerbach & Silverstein , 2003 ; Boyatzis , 1998 ) and cross - case displays ( Gibbs , 2007 ; Miles & Huberman , Coding is a straightforward method for novices to qualitative re , ; ea , : ch , particularly for those first using CAQDAS programs . The method data at a basic level to provide the researcher an organizational of the study . 73 74 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS IN VIVO CODING Sources Charmaz , 2006 ; Corbin & Strauss , 2008 ; Claser , 1978 ; Claser & Strauss , 1967 ; Strauss , 1987 ; Strauss & Corbin , 1998 Description ( [ n Vivo Coding has also been labeled " Literal Coding " and " Verbatim , " C ' QlIlg " in selected methods literature . In this manual , In Vivo Coding will be used since it is the most well - known label . ) In vivo ' s root meaning is " in that which is alive , " and as a code refers to a word or short phrase fr0111 the actual language found in the qualitative data record , " the terms used by [ participants ] themselves " ( Strauss , 1987 , p . 33 ) . Folk or illdigC / loJ / s terms are participant - generated words from lll . cmbers of a particular culture , subculture , or microculture . Folk terms indicate the existence of the group ' s cultural categories ( McCurdy , Spradley , & Shandy , 2005 , p . 26 ) . For example , some homeless youths say that they " sp ' angc " ( ask passers - by for " spare change " ) . In Vivo Coding is one method of extracting these indigenous terms ( and refer to Domain and Ta . . xonomic Coding for more specific catego rization guidelines ) . Applications In Vivo Coding is appropriate for virtually all qualitative studies , but particu larly for beginning qualitative researchers learning how to code data , and stud : . . ies that prioritize and honor the participant ' s voice . In Vivo Coding is one of the methods to employ during grounded theory ' s Initial Coding but can be used " vith several other coding methods in this manual . [ n Vivo Coding is particularly useful in educational ethnographies with youth . The child and adolescent voices are often marginalized , and coding with their actual words enhances and deepens an adult ' s understanding of their cultures and world views . In Vivo Coding is a1 < o quite applicable to action research ( Stringer , 1999 ) since one of the genres primary goals is to frame the facilitator ' s interpretations of tenns " that participants use in their everyday lives , rather than in terms derived fium cl , e academic disciplines or professional practices " ( p . 91 ) . Example An adult female interviewer talks to Tiffany , a 16 year - old teenage girl , about her friendships at high schoo ! . Note how all In Vivo Codes are placed in quotation marks , and how virtually each line of data gets its own code : FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS school last year . 2 Freshman year , awful , I hated it . And Cl this year ' s a actually . Um . I 4 don ' t Imow why . over the summer I kind of 5 stopped about what other people thought and more about , just , I don ' t know . It ' s 6 hard I I 7 found stuff out about myself , I went bacl { , and all of a sudden out that when I 8 wasn ' t trying so to 9 have people llI { e me and to do other people wanted , people 11 liked me It was 12 kind of strange . Instead of to please them all the time , they liI < ed when I 14 wasn ' t trying as hard . And , I know , like every - , everybody might , um , who are just , kind of , 15 friends got " I , , , elr to me . And people who didn ' t really me 16 tried to get to Imow me . , " HATED SCHOOL " , " FRESHMAN YEAR AWFUL " , " THIS YEAR ' S BETTER " 4 " DON ' T KNOW WHY " 5 " STOPPED CARING " 6 " HARD TO EXPLAIN " 7 " FOUND STUFF OUT " , " WASN ' T TRYING SO HARD " 5 " HAVE PEOPLE LIKE ME " ' " " WHAT OTHER PEOPLE WANTED " " " LIKED ME MORE " " " KIND OF STRANGE " " " TRYING TO PLEASE THEM " " " WASN ' T TRYING AS HARD " " " FRIENDS GOT CLOSER " " " TRIED TO KNOW ME " " " I DON ' T KNOW " read interview transcripts or other documents that feature participant attune yourself to words and phrases that seem to call for bolding , urlaerlllung , italicizing , highlighting , or vocal emphasis if spoken aloud . Their may be attributed to such features as impacting nouns , action orient " d verbs , evocative word choices , clever or ironic phrases , similes and c , ITlet : lpllDrs , etc . If the same words , phrases , or variations thereof are used often participant ( such as " I don ' t know " in the example above ) , and seem merit an In Vivo Code , apply it . In Vivo Codes " can provide a crucial on whether you have grasped what is significant " to the participant , may help " crystallize and condense meanings " ( Charmaz , 2006 , p . 57 ) . , keep track of codes that are participant - inspired rather than researcher ; g ; en , erated by always putting [ n Vivo Codes in quotation marks : " HATED Key writers of grounded theory advocate Iueticulous work and that an In ( or other ) Code should appear next to every line of data . Depending on goals , [ n Vivo Codes can be applied with less frequency , such as one word phrase for every three to five sentences . In the interview excerpt above , than 17 [ n Vivo Codes I could have limited the number to four : YEAR AWFUL " , " FOUND STUFF OUT " , " WASN ' T . c . " ~ ; ; ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ V ~ S ~ O ~ ~ HARD ' " " FRIENDS COT CLOSER " . But don ' t infer that there is a fixed rule or formula for an average number of codes per page or a Dri ! COmrnellde , d ratio of codes to text . Trust your instincts with In Vivo Coding . 75 76 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS When something in the data appears to stand out , apply it as a Researcher reflection through analytic memo writing , coupled with Cycle coding , will condense the number of In Vivo Codes and Provid ~ reallalysis of your initial work . In Vivo Codes capture " behaviors or processes which will explain to the lyst how the basic problem of the actors is resolved or processed " ( Strauss ~ p . 33 ) and " help us to preserve participants ' meanings ofthci [ views and in the coding itself " ( Charmaz , 2006 , p . 55 ) . In Vivo Codes can ~ " ' ' ' Ute imagery , symbols , and metaphors for rich category , theme , and concept opment . Strauss ( : 1987 . p . 160 ) also reconullcnds that researchers examine Vivo Codes not just as themes but as possible dilllCIlSiolls of categories - i . e . , continuum or range of a property . In Vivo Codes could be used as the sole coding method for the First of data analysis , and the sole method of choice for small - scale studies , but th , ' m , " i . ; limit the researcher ' s perspective on the data , a perspective that can contribute nl0re conceptual and theoretical views about the phenomenon or . Sometimes the participant says it best ; sOll1etimes the researcher does . ni prepared and willing to mix and match coding ll1ethods as you proceed witll data analysis . CAQDAS programs such as NVivo , MAXQDA , and ATLAS . ti make In Vivo Coding easy by permitting the analyst to select a word or small phrase fr ~ ~ the data , clicking a dedicated icon , and assigning the selected text as an In Viv ~ Code . But be aware that some CAQDAS functions will retrieve multiple units only if they share the exact same code you have applied to them . In Vivo coded data most often are so unique that they will require careful review a ~ d self - categorization into an NVivo node , for example . Some reconmlended ways to filrther analyze In Vivo Codes are : Appendi , D ) : • Second Cycle coding ll1ethods • action research ( Altrichter , Posch , & Somekh , 1993 ; Stringer , 1999 ) • case studies ( Merriam , 1998 ; Stake , 1995 ) • domain and ta . . xonomic analysis ( Schensul , Schensul , & LeCompte , Spradley , 1979 , 1980 ) • frequency counts ( LeCompte & Schensul , 1999 ) • grounded theory ( Charmaz , 2006 ; Corbin & Strauss , 2008 ; Glaser & Strauss , 1967 ; Strauss & Corbin , 1998 ) • interactive qualitative analysis ( Northcutt & McCoy , 2004 ) • memo writing abollt the codes ( Charmaz , 2006 ; Corbin & Strauss , 2008 ; Glaser , 1978 ; Glaser & Strauss , 1967 ; Strauss , 1987 ) • metaphoric analysis ( Coffey & Atkinson , 1996 ; Todd & Harrison , 2008 ) • narrative inquiry and analysis ( Clanilinin & Connelly , : ' 000 ; Coffey & : Atkinson , 1996 ; Cortazzi , 1993 ; Daiute & Lightfoot , 2004 ; Riessman , 2008 ) FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS ; henomenology ( van Maner } , 1990 ) and dramatic constructions ( Denzin , J 997 ; Glesne , 2006 ; Kllowles & 2008 ; Saldana , 2005a ) " nlVVclca ! analysis ( Hatch , 2002 ) pOI : ttaitUlre ( Lawrence - Lightfoot & Davis , 1997 ) qir : : r1itatn1e evaluation research ( Patton , 2002 ) " thernaDc analysis ( Auerbach & Silverstein , 2003 ; Boyatzis , 1998 ) : sea . rdlers new to coiling qualitative data often find In Vivo Coding a safe secure method with which to begin . But be wary of overdependence on e . sl : ratl ' gy because it can limit your ability to transcend to more conceptual theoretical levels of analysis and insight . PROCESS CODING & Biklen , 2007 ; Charmaz , 2002 ; Corbin & Strauss , 200S ; Strauss & 1998 Coding uses gerunds ( " - ing " words ) exclusively to connote action in data ( Charmaz , 2002 ) . Simple observable activity ( e . g . , reading , playing , mtc : hirlg ' rv , drinking coffee ) and morc general conceptual action ( e . g . , strug negotiating , surviving , adapting ) can be coded as such through a Process The processes of human action can be " strategic , routine , randOlll , novel , utolm " Dc , and / or thoughtful " ( Corbin & Stcauss , 2008 , p . 247 ) . Coding is appropriate for virtually all qualitative studies , but particu those that search for " ongoing action / interaction / emotion taken in to situations , or problems , often with the purpose of reaching a goal ~ r , hal1 ! ilirtg a problem " ( Corbin & Strauss , 2008 , pp . 96 - 7 ) . For grounded the - Process Coding happens sll11ultaneously with Initial Coding and Axial and a search for colIseqIJcllccs of action / interaction is also part of the SI / bprocesscs are usually " the individual tactics , strategies , and routine that make up the brger act " ( Strauss & Corbin , 1998 , p . 169 ) . In Vivo Coding , Process Coding is not necessarily a specific method ' should be used as the sole coding approach to data , though it can be with U1aJJ - Sc : aJe projects . 77 78 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS Examples A first example franl field notes taken while observing at an elementary uses Process Coding to document basic activity . Note how the codes are gerund - based : 1 Mrs . Jackson rises from her desk and announces , " OK , you guys , let ' s get lined up for lunch . Row One . " Five children seated In the first row of desl { s rise and walk to the classroom door . Some of the seated children talk to each other . 2 . Mrs . Jacl { son looks , MANAGING BEHAVIOR at them and says , " No talldng , save it for the cafeteria . 3 Row Two . " Five children seated In the second row of desks rise and walk to the children already standing In line . 4 A girl asks Mrs . Jackson , " Does it smell III < e pizza ? " Mrs . Jackson smiles and replies , " Yeah , smells good , doesn ' t it ? " 4 BANTERING As a second example , an adult female interviewer talks to a teenage girl about rU1110rs . Note how the codes are all gerund - based ( and note that the inter viewer ' s questions and responses are not coded - just the participant ' s responses ) : TIFFANY : Well , ' that ' s one problem , that [ my school is ] pretty small , so ' If you say one thing to one person , 3 and then they decide to tell two people , 4 then those two people tell two people , and 5 in one period everybody else knows . 6 Everybody In the entire school knows that you said whatever it was , So . . . I : Have you ever had rumors spread about you ? TIFFANY : Yeah , 7 it ' s Just stupid stuff , completely outlandish things , too . B I , I don ' t really want to repeat them . I : That ' s OK , you don ' t have to . TIFFANY : 9 They were really , they were ridiculous . 10 And the worst thing about rumors , U I don ' t really care if people think that , because obviously they ' re pretty stupid to think that in the first place . But 12 the thing I care about Is , IlIte , last year . especially freshman year . was a really horrible year school - wise . And . 13 I guess It was good In a way that you find out who your real friends are . because 14 some of them turned on me and 15 then started to say that those things , PROBLEMIZING SCHOOL SIZE , SAYING ONE THING 3 TELLING OTHERS ' TELLING OTHERS 5 EVERYBODY KNOWING , KNOWING WHAT YOU SAID 7 REJECTING RUMORS B NOT REPEATING WHAT WAS SAID 9 REJECTING RIDICULOUSNESS W CRITICIZING RUMORS a NOT CARING WHAT PEOPLE THINK U REMEMBERING A HORRIBLE YEAR " FINDING OUT WHO YOUR REAL FRIENDS ARE " TURNING ON YOU " SAYING THINGS ARE TRUE FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS true and , like , 18 then people thought , ' I that person ' s her friend , so th , : ! y knoW . " And so , 17 it Just made the thing worse . And 18 you really learn about people and . uht and 19 who real friends are . LuAnn ' s ' pr , obalbllythe only person who ' s really me this entire time , and 21 Just at whatever they said . 16 ASSUMING BY OTHERS 17 MAKING THINGS WORSE ' " LEARNING A LOT ABOUT PEOPLE 19 LEARNING WHO YOUR FRIENDS ARE " STICKING BY FRIENOS " LAUGHING AT WHAT OTHERS SAY conventions of story - line are used in analytic memo wntmg when evi , ewing data for process - e . g . , the first step . the turning point , the second ' tIle dlird step . Participant language with transitional indicators such as Hif , " . . " because , " " then , " " and so , " etc . clue the researcher to a sequence or in action . These sequences or processes can be ordered as a numeric of actions , listed as a bullet - pointed set of outcomes , or graphically rep with first - draft illustrations as a flow diagram . Simple examples based interview above include : Narrative - Spreading Rumors : 1 . [ l1f you say one thing to one person . 2 . and then they decide to tell two people , 3 . then those two people tell two people . 4 . and in one period everybody else knows . Process - Spreading Rumors : SAYING ONE THING 2 , TELLING OTHERS 3 , TELLING OTHERS 4 . EVERYBODY KNOWING Figure 3 . 3 for an illustrated process of spreading rumors . Telling Others Telling Others Telling Others Telling Others Telling Others Telling Others An illustrated process for spreading rumors 79 80 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS Consequences of Rumors [ the Process Codes that led to the outcomes are for reference ] : • False accusations ( SAYING THINGS ARE TRUE , ASSUMING BY OTHERS ) • Confrontation ( TURNING ON YOU ) • HUrt feelings ( MAKING THINGS WORSE , CRITICIZING RUMORS ) • Bad memories ( NOT REPEATING WHAT WAS SAID , REMEMBERING A RIBLE YEAR ) • Reinforcement of loyalties ( FINDING OUT WHO YOUR REAL FRIENDS ARE LEARNING WHO YOUR FRIENDS ARE , STICKING BY FRIENDS ) , • Social awareness ( LEARNING A LOT ABOUT PEOPLE ) • " High road " personal growth ( REJECTING RUMORS , REJECTING N ' LIMJLUUS - ' NESS , CRITICIZING RUMORS , NOT CARING WHAT PEOPLE THINK , LAUGHING , AT WHAT OTHERS SAY ) Researcher reflection through analytic memo writing , coupled with Cycle coding , will condense the number ~ f Process Codes and pn , vi , de reanalysis of your initial work . Dey ( 1993 ) encourages consideration complex interplay of factors that compose a process and how wc can a sense of how events originate and evolve , and their shifting si ~ ~ fic : m , : e those involved . Process refers to movement and change over tUne . In a static description , we can develop a more dynamic account of events " ( p . CAQDAS program linking functions enable you to mark the trail of partici _ pant process throughout the data corpus . Some recommended ways to further analyze Process Codes are Appcndix D ) : • Second Cycle coding methods • action research ( Altrichter , Posch , & Somekh , 1993 ; Stringer , 1999 ) • case studies ( Merriam , 1998 ; Stake , 1995 ) • cognitive mapping ( Miles & Huberman , 1994 ; Northcutt & McCoy , • decision ! 11odeling ( l3ernard , 2006 ) • grounded theory ( Charmaz , 2006 ; Corbin & Strauss , 2008 ; Glaser & ~ tI . , U5 " , 1967 ; Strauss & Corbin , 1998 ) • illustrative charts , matrices , diagrams ( Miles & Huberman , 1994 ; M ( ) rg , n , Fellows , & Guevara , 2008 ; Northcutt & McCoy , 2004 ; Paulston , 2000 ) • menlO writing about the codes ( Charmaz , 2006 ; Corbin & Strauss , 2008 ; Glaser , 1978 ; Glaser & Strauss , 1967 ; Strauss , 1987 ) • splitting , splicing , and linking data ( Dey , 1993 ) • thematic analysis ( Auerbach & Si ] verstein , 2003 ; Boyatzis , 1998 ) • vignette writing ( Erickson , 1986 ; Graue & Walsh , 1998 ) Notes To appreciate the breadth & depth of Corbin & Strauss ' s ( 2008 ) discussion Process Coding , readers are referred to their book , Basics cif Q1Ialitative Res ~ ( / rc " , FIRST CYCLE COOING METHODS ~ , , ' o , lanati ( ' n and thorough examples of memo writing that capture process , nucro - and macro - leve1s of analysis call be projected onto the data . to Dramaturgical Coding for a comparable approach to analyzing , ; ciipant ' s tactics and strategies . INITIAL CODING 2006 ; Corbin & Strauss , 2008 ; Glaser , 1978 ; Glaser & Strauss , 1967 ; 1987 ; Strauss & Corbin , 1998 publicatioJ15 in grounded theory refer to Initial Coding as " Open Channaz ' s [ 2006 ] term will be used in this manual since it implies an procedural step in harmony with First Cycle coding processes . } Coding is breaking down qualitative data into discrete parts , closely them , and con1paring them for similarities and differences ( Strauss 1998 , p . 102 ) . The goal oflnitial Coding , particularly for grounded " ' - . . . . . . . . " : . , " is " to remain open to aU possible theoretical directions indicated readings of the data " ( Charmaz , 2006 , p . 46 ) . It is an opportunity for a researcher to reflect deeply on the contents and nuances of your data begin taking ownership of then1 . Initial Coding is not necessarily a spe ' rn , m " u1 " i , method . It is a First Cycle , open - ended approach to coding the some recommended general guidelines . Coding can employ In Vivo Coding or Process Coding , for example , oHlerselecl : ed methods profiled in this manual . At times you may notice that . of a possible or developing category are contained within the data . If them during the initial cycle . C , odi . ng is appropriate for virtually all qualitative studies , but particularly ~ b ( , ginniing qualitative researchers learning how to code data , ethnographies , i : scudies \ vith a wide variety of data forms ( e . g . , interview transcripts , field : es , jotlrnals , documents , diaries , correspondence , artifacts , video ) . Coding is intended as a starting point to provide the researcher - with leads for further e» . . 1Jloration and " to see the direction in which to take ( Glaser , 1978 , p . 56 ) . But Clarke ( 2005 ) recommends a period of and reflecting " on the data before beginning Initial Coding ventures proposed codes during this cycle are tentative and provisional . Some 8 : 1 . 82 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS codes may be reworded as analysis progresses . The task can also alert ' researcher that lllOre data are needed to support and build an emerging Cham1az ( 2006 ) advises that detailed , line - by - line Initial Coding ( as it lined below ) is perhaps more suitable for interview transcript ' i researcher - generated field notes . But Clarke ( 2005 ) , in her postmodern to grounded theory , stresses the need to examine the nonhuman material ments of our social world that will be found in field notes and artifacts . She prescribes that for initial visual discourse / materials analysis , coding is not tant but interpreting and analytic memo writing are critical . It is thus the themselves - the researcher ' s narratives - that are coded for further analysis . , Example An adult female interviewer asks a 16 year - old girl about her social trll , nclship , ( note that the interviewer ' s questions , responses , and conunents are not en , ' . i ! 2 just the participant ' s responses ) . It is not required during Initial Coding , " since one of the eventual goals of grounded theory is to fonnulate " " egcm . , from codes , I occasionally include not only a Process Code ( e . g . , l . . · , Ill ) J ; : . Llf ~ LiL but also sub code it , vid1 specific refecents ( e , g . , LABELING : " GEEKY PLE " , LABELING : ' jOCKS " ) . These referents mayor may not later into categories , dimensions , or properties of the data as analysis continues : [ I : Last week you were talking about the snobby girls at lunchroom . And then you just were talking about that you didn ' t like some people because they were cliquish . So what kind of , who are your friends ? Like , what kind of people do you hang out wlth ? l TIFFANY : ' I hang out with everyone . Really , : 2 I choose . Because I ' ve been [ livingl here for so long , you get , 3 I can loolt bacl ~ to kindergarten , and at some point I was 4 best friends with everybody who ' s been here , 5 practically . [ I : You mean in choir ? ] TIFFANY : ' Almost everybody in my grade . No , In school . And so there are 7 certain people that I ' ve Just been 8 friends with since forever . And then It ' s 9 not fair of me to stereotype either , like , say , " Oh well , like , the 10 really super popular pretty girls are all mean and U they ' re all snobby and they all talk about each other , " 12 ' cause they don ' t . Some of them , some of them don ' t . And 13 those are the ones I ' m friends , friends with . And then there are , " HANGING OUT WITH EVERYONE " 2 " CHOOSING " WHO YOU HANG OUTWITH 3 RECALLING FRIENDSHIPS , " BEST FRIENDS WITH EVERY BODY " , QUALIFYING : " PRACTICALLY " , QUALIFYING : " ALMOST " 7 FRIENDS WITH " CERTAIN , FRIENDS WITH " SINCE FOREVER ' 9 " NOT FAIR TO STEREOTYPE " W LABELlNG : " REALLY SUPER POPULAR PRETIY GIRLS " U IDENTIFYING STEREOTYPES 12 DISPELLING STEREOTYPES " CHOOSING FRIENDS : " SUPER POPULAR PRETIY GIRLS " FIRST CYCLE COOING METHODS are the 14 geeky people . of them though , the geel , s at - aren ' t liI < e harmless geeks . 16 strange - psycho - killer - geek - 17 Itind of geel < s _ [ I : So are Colorado . , . ? l TIFFANY : Yeah , of them are Idnd of , it ' s 19 But then again not the complete stereotype . of the , 21 not all of them are I I like , wanna kill all the I people . So , 22 I ' m friends with people . And then the 23 jocl < s , all of the guys are idiots , so i ' m , lrl , encls with the ones who can : : lIi , ughs ) So , so you WOUldn ' t put In any of the . . . ] 26 I ' m friends with someone of who they are , because of what group they , they out In basically . ' Cause I think really stupid to be , like , would people think if they saw , e . , vvall " lngwith this person ? " or . I think people , 31 people define popular . Mainly because I would hang out with someone who ' s hearted but a little slow , : omoan , d to someone very smart but very evil ( chuc / < le ) . " LABELlNG : " GEEKY PEOPLE " " QUALIFYING : " SOME OF THEM " " LABELlNG : " STRANGE - PSYCHO KILLER - GEEK " " QUALIFYING : " KINO OF " " QUALIFYING : " SOME OF THEM " " QUALIFYING : " BUT THEN . . . " " DISPELLING STEREOTYPES " QUALIFYING : " NOT ALL OF THEM " 22 CHOOSING FRIENDS : " GEEKS " 23 LABELlNG : " JOCKS " " DISPELLING STEREOTYPES " CHOOSING FRIENDS : JOCKS " WHO CAN CARRY ON A CONVERSATION " 26 CRITERIA FOR FRIENDSHIP : " WHO THEY ARE " 27 CRITERIA FDR FRIENDSHIP : NOT GROUP MEMBERSHIP 28 ETHICS OF FRIENDSHIP ' " NOT CONCERNED WITH WHAT OTHERS THINK 30 MAINTAINING INDIVIDUALITY " DEFINING SELF THROUGH OTHERS : " POPULAR " 32 CRITERIA FOR FRIENDSHIP : ' ' GOO ~ HEARTED BUT SLOW " 33 CRITERIA FOR FRIENDSHIP : NOT THOSE " VERY SMART BUT VERY EVIL " tU ! Ju ! ~ n you ' re advised to code quickly and spontaneously , pay meticulous to the rich dynamics of data through line - by - line coding - " micflJanalysis " of the corpus ( Struuss & Corbin , 1998 , p . 57 ) or what is 83 84 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS colloquially referred to as data " splitting . " Selected writers of grounded acknowledge that such detailed coding is not always necessary . so sellte : ncecl sentence or even paragraph - by - paragraph coding is permissible del , ecldirlt > your research goals and analytic work ethic . Codes in parentheses or " « : onlO nied with question marks can be part of the process for analytic IOJ ~ 01 " ' - 110 , 111C1l10 writing . One major facet of Initial Coding to grounded theory methodologists search for processes - participant actions that have antecedents , causes , quences , and a seme of temporality . CHOOSING FRIENDS and n , cnm STEREOTYPES ( the " - ing " codes ) ace two such active processes culled Initial Coding in the eXaDlple above that mayor may not be developed during Second Cycle coding . Also during this or later cycles of grounded theory coding , there will search for the properties and clilJlelIsio / ls of categories - conceptu ; ll ideas bring togethec similarly - coded and related passages of data . In the above , the process of CHOOSING FRIENDS has ri , e categories GllEl { S JOCKS , eacb with selected properties or CRITERIA FOR FFUE ! NlDSH [ P e . g . , JOCKS " WHO CAN CARRY ON A CONVERSATION " , Tbese egories and their properties mayor may not be developed filrther Second Cycle coding . A personal debriefing or " reality check " by the researcher is critical and after the initial coding of qualitative data , thus an analytic memo is ten to reflect on the process thus far . Notice that / / lewo writing also sc , . " e , " , , " codc - al / d category - gclIeratillg lJIethod . An analytic memo excerpt based on coding example above reads : 30 May 2007 CODE : DISCRIMINATING Adolescence seems to be a time of contradictions , especially when it comes to choosing your friends . Tiffany is aware of the cliques , their attributed I and theIr accompanying stereotypes at school . Though she herself labels a in broad terms ( " super popular pretty girls , N " geel < s , N " jocksNl , she acknowledges : - ' that there are subcategories within the group and exceptions to the st , , , eIDtyIDe , , . , Though she states she chooses friends for " who they are N and does not care , what others thlnl < of her for the friends she " hangs out " with , she has explicit ' crh ' teria for who from the stereotyped group she ' s friends with . She thinl < s others define her as upopularN and , as such , is aware of the stereotypical attributes from others that come with being part of that group . Her language Is peppered with qualifiers : usome of them , N " not all of them , " " I < ind of , " " practlcally . ~ " almost , N etc . Developmentally , as an adolescent she seems right on target for discriminating - DISCRIMINATING cognitlvely the exceptions to stereotypes , while being SOCIALLY DISCRIMINATE about her awn friendships . Strauss & Corbin ( 1998 ) advise that at least ten interviews or ob , ervatiorlS , , ' itb detailed coding are necessary for building a grounded theory ( p . 281 ) . Tl , n " , crh FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS Cycle process is labe1ed " i _ n ' itial " ~ r " open , " suggesting a wide variance . , Glaser ( 1978 ) recommends that the codes developed at this c < oUl " llOW relate to each other ( p . 57 ) . Strauss & Corbin ( 1998 ) also rec that a separate list of all emerging codes be kept as analysis continues the researcher visualize the work in progress and to avoid duplication . code lists will help immensely with this . reconullended ways to further analyze Initial Codes are ( see D ) : Cycle coding methods , pacticularly Focused Coding and Axial gDJUlld " d theory ( Charmaz , 2006 ; Corbin & Strallss , 2008 ; Glaser & Strauss , StrauSS & Corbin , 1998 ) writing about the codes ( Charmaz , 2006 ; Corbin & Strauss , : W08 ; 1978 ; Glaser & Strauss , 1967 ; Strauss , 1987 ) sitDlati ( mal analysis ( Clarke , 2005 ) ; lhematic analysis ( Auerbach & Silverstein , 2003 ; Boyatzis , 1998 ) Coding can range fr0111 _ the descriptive to the conceptual to the theo depending on what you observe in and infer from the data , and on your personal knowledge and experiences you bring to your of the phenomena - " e : . \ . 1Jeriential data " that should be integrated into _ analytic menlO writing , yet not the central focus of it . 85 86 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS AFFECTIVE METHODS Affective coding methods investigate subjective qualities of human expel , ief ( e . g . , emotions , values , conflicts , judgments ) by directly acknowledgin . h . g nammg t DSC expenences . Emotion Coding and Values Coding tap into the inner cognitive systenl < . participants . Emotion Coding , quite simply , labels the feelings participants have c : ' . . 1Jcrienced . V . 1lucs Coding assesses a participant ' s integrated value , tude , and belief systems at work . Versus Coding acknowledges that humans are frequently in conflict , and codes identifY which individuals , groups , or systems are struggling for Critical studies lend themselves to Versus Codes . Evaluation Coding focuses on how we can analyze data that judge the and worth of programs and policies . EMOTION CODING Sources Goleman , 1995 ; Prlls , 1996 Description Emotion Codes label the emotions recaIIed and / or experienced by the ipant , or inferred by the researcher about the participant . Goleman defines an emotion as " a feeling and its distinctive thoughts , psychological biological states , and range of propensities to act " ( p . 289 ) . Applications Emotion Coding is appropriate for virtually all qualitative studies , but ticularly for those that explore intrapersonal and interpersonal n , rrieir " n experiences and actions . Since emotions arc a universal human e ) . . - perience , our acknowledgement ' them in our research provides deep insight into the participants ' persF , ecltive worldviews , and life conditions . Virtually everything we do has an aCI : OInpan : yi ~ 1 emotion ( s ) : " One can ' t separate emotion fionl action ; they are part of the flow of events , one leading into the other " ( Corbin & StrallSS , 2008 , p . 7 ) . abilities to " read " nonverbal cues , to infer underlying affects , and to SYlmpatbiz and empathize with your participants , are critical for Emotion Coding . Example A gay man in his thirties shares Iris thoughts and feelings when he attends a and ponders his choices for potential sex partners ( note that some of these : ; " quotes , are In Vivo Codes ) : FIRST CYCLE COOING METHODS as hell . You ' re thinking , ' " Could this guy have AIDS ? the chance of having sex with him ? " You desperate for sex , but < \ if you keep your and not get too drunk , your personal debating Inside of you . You think , " OK , I ' ll have contact with him , but 5 that ' s it , no penetration . I ' ll " 6 But then some absolutelY hot stud comes willing to throw it all out the window for him . a Ah , when you ' re desperate , you do , do some things , you Imow ? Desperate and 9 lonely . 1 " SCARY " , UNCERTAINY , " DESPERATE " , RATIONAL 5 CAUTIOUS , LUST 7 IRONIC HUMOR , " DESPERATE " 9 " LONELY " of words exist to describe human el11otion , and thus the repertoire ' 6otential codes is vast . But what the English language contributes in diver accuracy can also beconle a source of frustration for the researcher to find just the right word to describe , and thus code , a participant ' s ex - periences . , " " oti , on Codes alone can be applied to data very similar in content and _ e . g . , E1110tion Coding of multiple interview transcripts in which ~ Iipat : tic : ip : ant describes the sal11e process , such as the prinlary emotional state lerl . p , onde : ring choices for potential sex partners : the phenomenon is fairly complex ( such as treatment for cancer ) , ilycont " xt : ual ( such as experiencing a divorce ) , or occurs across a relatively time period ( such as one ' s personal university education experiences ) , Codes could be subcoded or categorized in such a way that permits to discern which enlotion ( s ) occurs - with which specific period or - e . g . , Which emotions are present during the decision to divorce ? emotions are present during child custody hearings ? Which emotions during the signing of legal paperwork related to divorce ? In this Emotion Code could be preceded by ( or Simultaneously Coded with ) . s < rhlti , ' e or Process Code to place the enlotional experience in context : TO DIVORCE - PERSONAL FAILURE HEARING - HATRED PAPERS - REVENGEFUL Dol , beTt & Kurth - Schai ( 1992 ) also alert researchers to ci , e possible variation ; ! ntensity of a single emotion ( p . 139 ) . A " revengeful " action , for example , be conducted coolly , spitefully , or maliciously . If nuance is critical for the . consider subcodil1g the primary emotion further or applying Magnitude 87 88 ! < I THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS Coding . Also acknowledge that emotional states are very complex , and experiences can include multiple or conflicting emotions . Thus , ~ lIl1ultaJ " eri Coding and / or Versus Coding can be used concurrendy wid1 Emotion And since emotional responses are intricately woven \ vith our value , attitude belief systems , Values Coding also becomes a critical concurrent method . ' If an ANGER , ANGRY , MAD or comparable Emotion Code is pre ; ent aware that anger is a consequential emotion and that a triggering emotion ' cedes it , such as DEPRESSION , EMBARRASSMENT , or SHAME . data collection . explore the participant emotions before anger , and scan data during analysis when an ANGER code is present to determine the gering emotion and its appropriate code . CAQDAS will enable you to link emotional " trail " of data . Developmentally , middle childhood ( approximately ages 8 - 9 ) is a period emotional ambivalence in which chjldren e : ~ . " perience new emotions but do necessarily have the vocabulary to describe them . Some young people ( and may use metaphors and sim . i . 1es to explain their feelings ( e . g . , " a floating kind happy , " " like I was in uleTwilight Zone " ) . Researchers may opt to apply Codes during the first cycle of coding ( " THE TWILIGHT ZONE " ) , then standard labels during the next cycle for the emotions e : \ . " perienced by the ipant ( SURREAL ) . But if a metaphoric phrase seems to evocatively - if not accurately - capture the e ) . - perience , consider keeping it as the code of choice . Even in adulthood not everyone , particularly heterosexual ( Schwalbe & Wolkomir , 2002 ) , is capable of expressing their comfortable discussing then1 , or able to label them accurately . Some also be quite adept at emotion / impression management , deception , emotional denial ( which could also be coded as such ) . Researchers find themselves making several inferences about the subtextual tional experiences of some participants in selected settings and cont " xt ' l . Stay particularly attuned to participant body language and the nUlances of voice . Each major discipline ( psychology , sociology , human human development , education , etc . ) " vill approach and apply in different research on emotions . The subject is intricately complex , so explore the . ature in your field of study to assess the conceptual frameworks . operating def ~ . : - : initions , and theories regarding emotions . ' Some recommended ways to further analyze Emotion Codes are ( see Appendix D ) : • First Cycle coding methods • action research ( Altrichter , Posch , & Somekh , 1993 ; Stringer , 1999 ) • cognitive mapping ( Miles & Huberman , 1994 ; Northcntt & McCoy , 2004 ) FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS ~ nuerlCY counts ( LeCompte & Schensul , 1999 ) . ' ; ccebtiOlllShi·p ( Saldaiia , 2003 ) : ' _ _ cnllrse mapping ( Clausen , 1998 ) , ; ~ tapllOric analysis ( Coffey & Atkinson , 1996 ; Todd & Harrison , 2008 ) inquiry and analysis ( Clandinin & Connelly , 2000 ; Coffey & Atkinson , 1996 ; Cortazzi , 1993 ; Dainte & Lightfoot , 2004 ; Riessman , 2008 ) \ \ ' enOlllellOl , ogy ( van Manen , 1990 ) and dramatic constructions ( Denzin , 1997 ; Glesne , 2006 ; Knowles & 2008 ; Saldaila , 2005a ) ( Lawrence - Lightfoot & Davis , 1997 ) ; ituaticlOal analysis ( Clarke , 2005 ) not trained in counseling , be wary of playing amateur psychologist fieldwork , and exercise ethical caution and support when interview about sensitive matters which may generate strong and distressing in recall . Arlie Rnssell Hochschild ' s ( 2003 ) Tile Mmwged Heart : COllllllcrdalizatioll Fcc / i / lg for her groundbreaking sociological work and theories on Ihotionallabor " among airline flight attendants , and the possible transfer of theories to other service and helping professions . VALUES CODING & Wolf , 1993 ; LeCompte & Preissle , 1993 Coding is the application of codes onto qualitative data that reflect a rrti , cip : ant ' s values , attitudes , and belie ( - " representing his or her perspectives or each construct has a different Ineaning , V . 1Iues Coding , as a a pi / llfc is the importance we attribute to oneself , another person , thing , idea . " The greater the personal meaning [ of something to someone ] . the ule personal payoff ; the greater the personal payoff , the greater the per - value " ( Saldaija , 1995 , p . 28 ) . An attitllde is the way we think and feel about lne : self ; arloUler person , thing , or idea . Attitudes are part oC ' a relatively enduring of evaluative , affective reactions based upon and reflecting the evaluative ioncep , ts or beliefS , which have been learned " ( Shaw & Wright , 1967 , p . 3 ) . A part of a system that includes our values and attitudes , plus our personal 89 90 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS knowledge , e : \ . - periences , opinions , prejudices , morals , and other lnteqJreti perceptions of the social world . " BeliefS are embedded in the values to them " ( Woleott , 1999 , p . 97 ) . Applications Values Coding is appropriate for virtually all qualitative studies , but o " , tir . . ' " for those that explore cultural values and intrapersonal and interpersonal ticipant experiences and actions in case studies . There is complex interplay , influence , and affect between and three constructs that manifest themselves in thought , feeling , and dLLIOIlI ; bt Values Coding does not necessarily have to code for all three or dttterentia between them unless the study ' s goals include determining participant don , agency , causality , or ideology . Values , Codes can be determined a ( beforehand ) as Provisional Codes , or constructed during coding of the Values Coding is applicable not only to interview transcripts , but also to notes in which naturalistic participant actions are documented . Using sources , in fact , corroborates the coding and enllances trustworthiness findings ( LeCompte & Prei " le , 1993 , pp . 264 - 5 ) . What a participant states his values , attitudes , and beliefS may not always be truthfil1 or harmonize his observed actions and interactions . Example The types of Values Codes in the example below are distinguished through use of V : ( value ) , A : ( attitude ) , and B : ( belie ! ) , though it can sometimes slippery task to determine which participant statement is which type . high school senior and gifted actor , is asked what he wants to do with his after he graduates ( Saldaiia , 1998 , p . 108 ) : Well , I ' m struggling with that right now . 1 College is a very scary thing for me to think about . You know , : 2 It ' s hard to get into theatre except through the universities . So my tentative game plan - 3 in fact a couple different ways It could go - one , I may go to college and 4 major In theatre and minor In choral music and then come out and look for a job , lool { for a place to work as an actor . 5 The thing that scares me the most about that Is 6 my parents both had big dreams . My mom wanted to be an actress , my dad wanted to be a politiCian , you know they both had big dreams . Both went to college , got a degree 1 A : COLLEGE IS " " f ; CAHY " < ' 2 B : THEATRE IS eJlL ; LU " " S , B : FUTURE OPTIONS , V : FINE ARTS 5 A : FUTURE IS SCARY , B : UNOBTAINED DREAr , 1S ' ARE POSSIBLE FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS both teachers now . They teach . it was that they wanted to do , and to do that . I don ' t want to . C . . " ' ho ' ~ out . " I don ' t wanna have that be able to say , " Oh , this is hard for aJob in theatre , so [ ' m just g ~ nna teacher , " or " I ' m gonna go do this or whatever . a I don ' t wanna be able to dream that easily . love to do is to get out of high around town for a bit like , 1 don ' t some crap Job to get the money , c , " " ' " Vn , k or Chicago , and make It big . You know , every actor ' s go to one of the big towns and try , to get my big break . And U I It ' s not likely that it will even but there ' s a part of me , I guess it ' s , nrr ' Rnltlc side of me again that says It bad enough , I ' ll get It . And that ' s " seDa , ' atE ! S me from other people who are starving artists , that 15 drive , is that than anything , more than life , 16 I want this . 7 V : PURSUING PERSONAL DREAM 8 V : MAINTAINING PERSONAL DREAM 9 A : NON - THEATRE WORK IS MENIAL " V : SUCCESS " V : FAME 12 B : REALISTIC CAREER EXPECTATIONS " A : " ROMANTIC " " B : PERSEVERANCE NETS SUCCESS " A : " DRIVE " " V : PROFESSIONAL ACTING CAREER h ' ave coded units according to values , attitudes , and beliefS , the next step 6 ' , : att : gc " j , : e them and reflect on their collective Ineaning , interaction , and working under the premise that the three constructs are part of an ! rccmnec ' , cu system . With the above data we get : ARTS PROFESSIONAL DREAM SU ~ AII ~ TAINlr ~ G PERSONAL DREAM ' PIROfES ! ilor ~ AL ACTING CAREER COLLEGE IS " SCARY " FUTURE IS SCARY NON - THEATRE WORK IS MENIAL " ROMANTIC " . , : DRIVE " T " . , ' ro . IS EXCLUSIVE 91 92 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS UNDBTAINED DREAMS ARE POSSIBLE REALISTIC CAREER EXPECTATIONS PERSEVERANCE NETS SUCCESS Analytic reflection through memoing and assertion development weaves three constructs ' most salient codes together : Barry possesses the passion and perseverance to transcend realistic yet mUn . dane career options to pursue his dream as a professional actor in a business ' that makes no guarantees of success . Theatre is an imaginary world - a dream world - and those aspiring performers slumbering in its fearless fantasy know that they should wake up to confront reality , but prefer the art form ' s Illusory lures of possibllity and fame : " llmow that It ' s not likely that it will even happen , but then ; ! ' s a part of me , I guess it ' s the romantic side of me ' " that says if I want it bad enough , I ' ll get it . " Conceptual values , attitudes , and beliefS may not always be directly ' by participants . Phrases such as " It ' s important that , " " I like , " HI love , " or need " alert you to what may be valued , believed , thought , or felt , along such obvious cluing phrases as " I think , " " I feel , " and " I want . " Pa ; rtic ; ip , nL observation in natural social settings relies more on researcher inferences values , attitudes , and beliefs . But sometimes the most direct way to find what someone values , thinks , feels , and believes is to simply ask him , do you value ? " " What ' s important to you ? " " What matters to you n " , , , ; " ; ; " What do you think and feel about . . . 1 " Values " vithin an individual are influenced and affected by the social and networks to which he belongs . Gubriutn & Holstein ( 2009 , p . 70 ) also ICIIIUII [ 1 us , that values are shaped by the individual ' s specific biography and historic perlOO or existence . Analysis and analytic memos generated fiunl Values Coding e : \ ' " } Jlore the origins of the participant ' s value , attitude , and belief systems delived . from such individuals , institutions , and phenomena as parents , peers , school , gion , media , and age cohort , as well as the participant ' s personal and unique riences , development , and self - constructed identities from social interaction . Questionnaires and survey instruments , such as Likert scales and semantic ferentiai < ; , are designed to collect and measure a participant ' s values , attitudes , and beliefS about selected subjects ( Gable & Wolf , 1993 ) . The quantitative data , holV ever , transform meaning into numbers for statistical analysis , yet still has its place such fields as psychology , opinion research , and organizational studies . A1so , quantitative scales assume direction and intensity of a value , attitude , and belief , necessitating a fixed , linear col / tilllllllll of response ( e . g . , less to more , strongly to strongly disagree ) rather than a three - dimensional o [ call allowing for diverse responses and varying levels of depth ( Saldaila , 2003 , pp . 91 - 2 ) . Qualitative inquiry provides richer opportunities for gathering and assessing , in language - based mean ings , what the participant values , believes , thinks , and feels about social life . FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS Coding also requires ' h paradigm , perspective , and positionality . If a rttC1IP ' U " states , " I really think that marriage should only be between one and onc woman , " the researcher is challenged to code the statement any of ways depending on the rcseal ' cfIcr ~ 011111 systems of values , attitudes , " . . , 1 ' " , 1 , Thus , is dus participant ' s remark to be coded : V : TRADITIONAL wu < - tn ' 3 ~ , B : HETERONORMATIVITY , or A : HOMOPHOBIC1 [ fthe is to capture the participant ' s worldvicw or personal ideology , then the second codes are luore grounded in his perspective . But if the study is ethnography , for example , then the latter code may be more appropri / , c , U , luP ' Coding is values - laden . recommended ways to further analyze Values Codes are ( see Appendix D ) : action research ( Altrichter , Posch , & Somekh , 1993 ; Stringer , 1999 ) " , , ' rtion development ( Erickson , 1986 ) , case studies ( Merriam , 1998 ; Stake , 1995 ) analysis ( Krippendorff , 2003 ; Weber , 1990 ; Wilkinson & " ' Binllingham , 2003 ) c [ ( lSs - , culturaJ content analysis ( Bernard , 2006 ) ' ; > ' ti - anlevvork policy analysis ( Ritdue & Spencer , 1994 ) " ' B ' equlenl : y counts ( Le Compte & Schensul , 1999 ) ; ' { " inte ; racl : ive qualitative analysis ( Northcutt & McCoy , 2004 ) " Utile - COlme mapping ( Clausen , 1998 ) nI . o , ngituliinal qualitative research ( Giele & Elder , 1998 ; Saldaiia , 2003 , 2008 ) inquiry and analysis ( Clandinin & Connelly , 2000 ; Colfey & C } \ tkinSlJn , 1996 ; Cortazzi , 1993 ; Daiute & Lightfoot , 2004 ; Riessman , 2008 ) phenomenology ( van Manen , 1990 ) political analysis ( Hatch , 2002 ) , portr , titure ( Lawrellce - Lightfoot & Davis , 1997 ) qualitative evaluation research ( Patton , 2002 ) research ( Fowler , 2001 ; Wilkinson & Birmingham , 2003 ) the : tmltic analysis ( Auerbach & Silverstein , 2003 ; Boyatzis , 1998 ) iine : e V , ln , p < Coding can reflect a participant ' s needs and wants , see Dramaturgical for a comparable or complementary lllethod . VERSUS CODING ltri , : htc , r , Posch , & Somekh , 1993 ; Hager et aI . , 2000 ; Wolcott , 2003 93 94 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS Description Versus Codes identify in binary terms the individuals , groups , social organizations , phenomena , processes , concepts , etc . in direct conflict each other . WoJcott ( 2003 ) describes a moiety ( from the French , " half " ) as one of two - and only two - 111utually exclusive divisions· a group . He observed in Teachers IJcrsllS Tec / l / Iocrats that this social extends throughout educator subculture during times of stress rather daily business ( pp . 116 , 122 - 7 ) . Moieties exist in many facets of social and there is generally an asynunetrical power balance between duality that manifests itself as an X VS . Y code ( e . g . , TEACHERS SCHOOL ADMINISTRATORS , REPUBLICANS VS . Ut : : JVlIJLKlITl WORKVS . PLAY ) . Applications Versus Coding is appropriate for policy studies , discourse analysis , and qUlalitativ ! data sets that suggest strong conflicts within , among , and between particiF , ants . h In selected methodologies , such as critical ethnography , the researcher deliberately " take sides " with a group and its issue . For other genres , such , action research ( A1trichter , Posch , & S0111ekh , 1993 ; Stringer , 1999 ) , dis . cer·nirlg " the conflicting power issues among constituents and stakeholders is an tant diagnostic for initiating and facilitating positive social change . Agar ( 1 notes that a contemporary ethnographer " looks for patterns of social donllllao cion , hlerarchy , and social privilege . He or she exarrrines the power that patterns in place , how people accept or struggle against them . The focus is patterns that reveal injustice " ( p . 27 ) . Example In a study of teachers responding to state developed fine arts standards educational achievement ( Hager et aI . , 2000 ) , there were distinct mlJleaes that emerged as teachers reflected on and grappled with recent policies influencing and affecting their practice . Strong conflicts were evident in the data as participants openly shared their perspectives . One e - mail response reads : 1 My mentor teacher tool < one 1001 < at the standards when they came out , said " What a load of crap , N and dIsmissed them . 2 She thlnl < s the standards are often impossible to achieve and that you would have to be a superteacher with superstudents to even come close to covering all the material . 3 I don ' t use the 1 TEACHER VS . STANDARDS , " IMPOSSIBLE " VS . REALISTIC ' TEACHER VS . STANDARDS FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS ; ~ ~ a ' ~ ' ~ ~ : ' ~ ~ r : e : ~ i ~ ther . I believe that - ' my ~ . ' ~ many of the but 4 1 do not design them standards . I design them needS of students in my I tend to personalize projects for . , , , " " ' 1t5 . 5 I grade them individually self _ improvement rather than a to other students . I thinl < in 6 the standards expect be automatons with the same don ' t allow for varlances . 4 STANDARDS VS . STUDENT NEEDS 5 CUSTOM VS . COMPARISON , STANDARDIZATION VS . " VARIANCES " , nDictiing personnel , perspectives , policies , philosophies , curricula , practices , present in the data corpus from the study illustrated above , were as binaries , ranging frOln the actual to the conceptual : VS . DISTRICT REQUIREMENT VS . ELECTIVE TOWER VS . INNER CITY PRI , SCRIIPTIIJ ~ VS . AUTONOMY : PRUUIUI " 1 VS . PROCESS Codes were used occasionally when teachers ' statements were highly : , , : ; , , " , hl / e or difficult to reduce to a single word or phrase : OWNERSHIP VS . " WHO WROTE THESE ? " " VS . " TEACH TO THE TEST " , ' : ' 1 " hrm " h not necessary for all studies , Versus Coding may lead to three major the pru11ary stakeholders , how each side perceives and acts toward the and the central issue at stake - the latter of which could emerge as a theme , core category , key assertion , etC . In the study profiled in the . example above , the three finalnlOiety categories that subsumed all other Versus [ teachers ] vs . Them [ all other personnel , such as principals , school districts , the state department of education , state universities , etc . ] Your Way [ mandated yet poorly written state standards ] vs . Our Way . [ experienced educators working at the local level who Imow their art and their students ] : - ·Con - form [ conformity to prescribed and standardiZe ? currlc ~ la ] vs . Art - Form [ creative expression in the subject area and Its practice ] that the latter category is a fairly creative construct , one not dire ~ t1y by participants but one generated by the research team durmg 95 96 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS discussion about the study . When this conceptual category was uttered , it like an " Ah - ha ! " moment , cluing us that we had captured the central from our fieldwork . Categorize all codes from your data into one of the three major categ ( Jti , , ; ( Stakeholders , Perceptions / Actions , Issues ) as an initial analytic tactic , but yourself open to reorganizing the codes into other emergent categories not just limited to three . Social change theory also suggests that human : rarely in conflict with abstract concepts ( e . g . , PARTICIPANT VS . GION ) , but rather with other humans or them , elves ( e . g . , VS . CHURCH LEADERSHIP , PARTICIPANT VS . PERSONAL LOSS OF FAITH ) . Ground your initial Versus Coding in actual , observable conflicts . Abstract 1110lety categories can emerge during Second Cycle coding and later stages of analysis . A . related technique is " dilenmla analysis , " coined by Richard Winter , who applied the method in educational action research ( Altrichter , Posch , & Somekh , 1993 , pp . 146 - 52 ) . Data are reviewed to find and juxtapose inconsis ~ tencies and contradictions that inhibit professional practice and decision _ making . These dilenmlas are listed as sentences that alternate with " On the one hand " and " On the other hand . " For example : • On the one hand , standards legitimize the nlerit and worth of dance in the schools ; • On the other hand , dance is an elective rather than required course in the schools . ~ entence couplings such as these can be categorized appropriately and exam Ined by practitioners for reflection and action , or converted to Versus Codes for categorization and analysis . For example , the above coupling might be coded LEGITIMATE VS . ELECTIVE Or " MERIT AND WORTH " VS . OPTIONAL FRILL . CAQDAS programs can conveniently and elIectively link two dilIerent passages of data whose content or perspectives contradict each other for Versus Coding ( Lewins & Silver , 2007 , p . 63 ) . Another effective model for practitioner research is " force field analysis " which can list the opposing stakeholders ' perspectives and use directional arrows of varying sizes to illustrate the conflicting forces between change and the status quo ( Fox , Martin , & Green , 2007 , pp . 37 - 8 , 172 - 6 ) . Some reconunended ways to further analyze Versus Codes are ( see Appendix D ) : • action research ( Altrichter , Posch , & Somekh , 1993 ; Stringer , 1999 ) • assertion development ( Erickson , 1986 ) • framework policy analysis ( Ritchie & Spencer , 1994 ) FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS grounded theory ( Charmaz , 2006 ; Corbin & Strau " , 2008 ; Gbser & Strauss , 967 ; StrausS & Corbin , 1998 ) . : ~ , " interacti·ve qualitative analysis ( Northcutt & McCoy , 2004 ) narrative inquiry and analysis ( Clandinin & Connelly , 2000 ; ColIey & : Atkinson , 1996 ; Cortazzi , 1993 ; Daiute & Lightfoot , 2004 ; Riessman , 2008 ) political analysis ( Hatch , 2002 ) i polyvocal analysis ( Hatch , 2002 ) qualitative evaluation research ( Patton , 2002 ) • . situational analysis ( Clarke , 2005 ) . . within - case and cross - case displays ( Gibbs , 2007 ; Miles & Huberman , 1994 ) protagonist versus antagonist paradigm of Versus Coding doesn ' t neces sarily suggest that there is a clear - cut hero and villain evident in the data . Conflicts are contextual , nuanced , and each side has its own story to ten . Ciarke ( 2005 ) reinforces " that there are not ' two sides ' but rather N sides or nlUlciple perspectives in any discourse " ( p . 197 ) . Nevertheless , Versus Coding ~ ~ lJkes evident the power issues at hand as humans often perceive them - as binaries . See Harrl ~ & van Langenhove ( " 1999 ) for a discussion of " positioning iheory " in interpersonal interactions . EVALUATION CODING Patton , 2002 ; Rallis & R055man , 2003 Evaluation Coding is the application of non - quantitative codes onto qualita tive data that assign judgments about the l1lerit and worth of programs or pol icy ( Rallis & l { . . ossman , 2003 , p . 492 ) . Progranl evaluation is " the systematic collection of information about the activities , characteristics , and outcomes of programs to make judgments about the program , inlprove program effective ness , and / or inform decisions about filture progranulling . Policies , organiza tions , and personnel can also be evaluated " ( Patton , 2002 , p . 10 ) . To Rallis & Rossman , evaluation data describe , cOlnpare , and predict . Description focuses on patterned observations or participant responses of attributes and details that assess quality . Comparison explores how the progranl measures up to a stan dard Or ideal . Prediction provides recommendations for change , if needed , and how those changes nlight be implemented . 97 98 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS Applications Evaluation Coding is appropriate for policy , critical , action , or , garuz : atiIJn " i ; a ( of course ) evaluation studies , particularly across multiple sites and periods of time . Evaluation Coding can emerge from the evaluative perspective researcher or from the qualitative conmlcntary provided by palrti ' c ipan ! Selected coding methods profiled in tllis manual can be applied to or ment Evaluation Coding ( e . g . , Magnitude Coding , Descriptive Coding , Coding , and grounded theory coding methods ) , but Evaluation Coding is customized for specific studies since " the coding system D1USt also refled questions that initiated and structured the evaluation in the first place " & Maxwell , 1992 , p . 765 ) . Example The stewards of a community church surveyed its congregational m " mIJer , shil to gather written data on their perceptions of worship services and pDJgr ' arll ming . Selected individuals were interviewed for more in - depth re ' ; ponse ' . A year - old male who had recently left the church talks to a steward _ h . _ . . . ·L· experiences . The Evaluation Coding below employs an amalgam of Magnitude CCldirlQ ( to note whether the participant makes a positive [ + ] or negative H CO ' 1l1111ent ) , Descriptive Coding ( to note the topic ) and subcoding or In Vivo Coding note the specific qualitative evaluative cOInnIent ) , plus a reconmlendation ing tag ( REC ) with a specific memo / action for follow - up . Since E " al ' Jation Coding should reflect the nature and content of the inquiry , all codes relate to : specific personnel and programs : , I stopped going to Valley View [ Community Church ] because it just got so boring . : 1 Services were two hours long , sometimes longer . 3 I know that some people are OK with that , but not me . Ninety minutes top for services - an hour ' s even better . ( laughs ) 4 Opening music just went an and on , and if the pastor got an a roll , 5 the music would Just keep going on and on . [ I : What do you mean , " on a roll " ? 1 6 I mean , he ' d " let the spirit move him , " and so he ' d I < eep singing and singing and encouraging the choir to keep singing and singing , and it just made me so frustrated . I wanted things to move on . ' - SERVICES : " BORING " , REC : SHORTER SERVICES , REC : SURVEY CONGREGATION ON SERVICE LENGTH 4 _ OPENING MUSIC : TOO LONG , REC : DISCUSS SERVICE LENGTH WITH MUSIC DIRECTOR 6 REC : PASTOR - BALANCE PERSONAL WITH CONGREGATIONAL NEEDS FIRST CYCLE COOING METHODS _ _ " hh , " else ? ] : sermons also got too " folksy . " a When I ; ' " " rTle " the 9 sermons were powerful , ' " m , oatiive , intelligent , made me thlnll of I hadn ' t thought of before , and I had a church - goer for over two decades . over the past few months it got to be , ( ntiepetitlve , but it seemed like it because jus ' t nothing new to hear . 11 It ' s like i ' _ . , , " , , " prepare for them like he used to . he was making them up as he went 12 I don ' t think it ' s me that got above sermons , he Just started dumbing them 13 I fell asleep so many times during and that never used to happen . , I quit going there . 14 There was just no Inspiration for me there , you know I mean ? 7 _ SERMONS ' " TOO FOLKSY " 8 REC : PASTOR - REFLECT ON FORMER SERMON PREP & CONTENT 9 + SERMONS : USED TO BE " POWERFUL " " - SERMONS : " NOTHING NEW " " - SERMONS : SEEM UNPREPARED 12 _ SERMONS : " DUMBED DOWN " " REC : PASTOR - OBSERVE CONGREGATION DURING SERMONS H _ SERVICES : UNINSPIRING and constituents for evaluation research most often want to know fi ~ st : working and what isn ' t . Hence , the + and - Magnitude Codes rece ~ ve for quick categorization by the researcher , followed by the speClfic subtopic , and conmlent . For example , from the data above : 7p . ' S ! ~ : ~ ~ . ~ c ~ ~ o : ~ mments . •• USED TO BE " POWERFUL " " N ' i ~ a·t1ve Comments SERVICES : " BORING , " UNINSPIRING DPENING MUSIC : " TOO LONG " SERMONS : " NOTHING NEW , " SEEM UNPREPARED , " TOO FOLKSY , " " DUMBED DOWN " , 1e ! ~ or ' izir , g REC codes by personnel or area helps organize dIe flow of the , In , , ' n , ' , reconmlendations and follow - up . inductive work , Uthe evaluator analyst looks for changes in participants , tPrr " si , ons of change , program ideology about outcomes and inlpacts , and that people luake distinctions between " those who do and do not receive desired outcOIlles ( Patton , 2002 , p . 476 ) . Types of change to examine are in participant skills , attitudes , feelings , behaviors , and knowledge . The above can be analyzed at the micro - level for Valley View Community exclusive use to reflect on and possibly change their worship service ' s and content after a sufficient OU1uber of individuals have been inter for comparison . But the analysis can also extend to the macro - level by 99 : 100 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS utilizing grounded theory coding to explore how today ' s institutional systems mayor may not be serving the needs of their congregants , or how individual ' s faith is influenced and affected by church leadership and ritual s . Evaluation data can derive from individual interviews , focus groups , ipant observation , surveys , and documents . Individuals each have their opinions , so expect to find , and thus analyze and present , a wide range responses , not just an overall assessment . There arc many forms of ev " h " " . ; ~ c : outcome , implementation , prevention , sUlll111ative , formative , etc . See ( 2002 ) for an authoritative and full description of approaches , particularly processual evaluation , and Stringer ( 1999 ) for the f . 1cilitation and in " pl , emellltac tion of change as part of action research projects . Some reconul1cnded ways to further analyze Evaluation Codes Appendix D ) : • action research ( Altrichter , Posch , & Somekh , 1993 ; Stringer , 1999 ) • assertion development ( Erickson , 1986 ) • case stuclies ( Merriam , 1998 ; Stake , 1995 ) • decision modeling ( Bernard , 2006 ) • framework policy analysis ( Ritchie & Spencer , 1994 ) • frequency counts ( LeCompte & Schensul , 1999 ) • graph - theoretic techniques for semantic network analysis ( Namey , Guest , Thairu , & Joh1150n , 2008 ) • grounded theory ( Charmaz , 2006 ; Corbin & Strauss , 2008 ; Glaser & Strams 1967 ; Strauss & Corbin , 1998 ) , • illustrative charts , matrices , diagrams ( Miles & Huberman , 1994 ; Morgan , Fellows , & Guevara , 2008 ; Northcutt & McCoy , 2004 ; Paulston , 2000 ) • interactive qualitative analysis ( Northcutt & McCoy , 2004 ) • longitudinal qualitative research ( Giele & Elder , 1998 ; Saldai ; a , 2003 , 2008 ) • memo writing about the codes ( Charmaz , 2006 ; Corbin & Strauss . 2008 ; Glaser , 1978 ; Glaser & Strauss , 1967 ; Strauss , 1987 ) • mixed - methods research ( Creswell , 2009 ; Creswell & Plano Clark , 2007 ; Tashakkori & Teddlie , 2003 ) • political analysis ( Hatch , 2002 ) • polyvocal analysis ( Hatch , 2002 ) • qualitative evaluation research ( Patton , 2002 ) • situational analysis ( Clarke , 2005 ) • splitting , splicing , and linking data ( Dey , 1993 ) • thematic analysis ( Auerbach & Silverstein , 2003 ; Boyatzis , 1998 ) • within - case and cross - case clisplays ( Gibbs , 2007 ; Miles & Huberman , 1994 ) Notes Evaluation research may have political and hidden agendas depending on how it is contracted between the . client and analyst . It is not possible to be an FIRST CYCLE CODING METHOOS evaluator , but it is possible to be systematic in your col1ection and of data to assess merit and worth . ·Rely primarily on what the partici themselves - the primary stakeholders - say and do . Evaluation research ; r " ntexIHIJec : ll1c enterpdse ; as Stake ( 1995 ) notes , " All evaluation studies are ( p . 95 ) . : 10 : 1 1 . 02 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS . LITERARY AND LANGUAGE METHODS Literary and language coding methods borrow [ mnl established appnJache , ; , the analysis of literature , and a contemporary approach to the analysis of conmlUl1ication . Dramaturgical Coding , Motif Coding , and Narrative Coding various literary traditions for their unique coding assignnlcnts underlying sociological and psychological constructs . Dramaturgical Coding approaches cultural life as performance and its ticipants as characters in social dramas . Motif Coding applies folk lit " ratur·e ' , synlbolic elements as codes for an evocative approach to analysis . N : lr " , ti \ , ~ Coding incorporates literary terms as codes to discover the stnlctural ties of participants ' stories . Though these methods appear highly sy " ternatic . they can lead toward rich arts - based presentations . Verbal Exchange Coding is H . 1 . ( Bud ) Goodall , Jr . ' s signature etI1J1 ( ) gr , lphic approach to analyzing conversation through reflecting on social practices interpretive meanings . DRAMATURGICAL CODING Sources Berg , 2001 ; Feldman , 1995 ; Goflinan , 1959 ; Saldai ' ia , 2005a Description Dramaturgical Coding approaches naturalistic observations and interview tives as " social drama " in its broadest sense . Life is perceived as " F , erl ' orm : mr : e ; ' : with humans interacting as a cast of characters in conflict . Interview transcripts become monologue . soliloquy , and dialogue . Field notes and video of naturalis " : ' , tic social action represent improvised scenarios with stage Environnlents , participant dress , and artifacts are viewed as scenery , costmnes , hand properties . Dramaturgical Codes apply the terms and conventions of character ; play script , and production analysis onto qualitative data . For character , these include such items as : 1 . PartiCipant - actor objectives - motives in the form of action verbs : OBJ 2 . Conflicts or obstacles confronted by the participant - actor which prevent her from achieving her objectives : CON 3 . Participant - actor tactiCS or strategies to deal with conflicts or obstacles and to achieve her objectives : TAC 4 . Participant - actor attitudes toward the setting , others , and the conflict : ATT FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS Emotions experienced by the participant - actor ( see Emotion Coding ) : EMO subtexts , the participant - actor ' s unspoken thoughts or impression man agement . in the form of gerunds ( see Process Coding ) : SUB & Biklen ( 2007 ) refer to the above as " Strategy Codes . " : anmb " r ! ; le ' l Coding is appropriate for exploring intrapersonal and interper - participant experiences and actions in case studies , particularly those toward narrative or arts - based presentational forms ( Cahnmann - Taylor $ iegesmund , 200S ; Knowles & Cole , 200S ) . j : ) l : anlatl " r ! ~ ell Coding attunes the researcher to the qualities , perspectives , and , of the participant . It also provides a deep understanding of how humans interaction interpret and manage conflict . Lindlof & Taylor ( 2002 ) note " , . " nC1 : lJ actors ' understandings of lIIotille are central to many conmlunication ( p . 201 ) and " The drama frame is well suited for studies concerned with 6mmunicati ' Jr as performance " ( p . 236 ) . Lincoln & Denzin ( 2003 ) concur , 110t - culture is Han ongoing performance , not a noun , a product , or a static Culture is an unfolding production , thereby placing performances and representations at d , e center oflived experience " ( p . 32S ) . FeJdman ( 1995 ) that while " dramaturgical analysis is generally used to explicate very public tfolrm : lI1 ( : e , such as organizational ritual ' i , it can also be used to understand rela private performances such as the execution of parental roles " ( p . 41 ) . Coding is best applied to self - standing , inclusive vignettes , or stories in the data record . One could even subdivide the storied uscenes , " which may include such plotting devices as a curtain - prologue and climax ( Riessman , 200S , pp . 110 - 11 ) . researcher interviews a veteran female high school teacher about her by asking , " How do you deal with conflict and discipline in the c1ass The teacher responds with a personal anecdote and then describes her 1 I laugh because this last week has discipline week for me . 2 Why is it JrfreshlT . en are so unruly and disrespectful ? ·An ) ' Walls how do I deal with discipline ? 3 I forward , straight , and up - front . So , take crap from anybody . And 5 I call 9 , " their behavior . And this happened today as 6 a I { id sat there and roiled his eyes 1 AD : IRONIC , SUB : BURNING OUT 3 TAC : " Up·FRoNT " . . TAC : " DON ' T TAKE CRAP " ' TAC : ACCOUNTABILITY , CON : DISRESPECT 1 . 03 1 . 04 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS at me - 7 again . And B I just stopped him and I said , 9 " When you roll your eyes , you are basically saying ' F You ' to the person you ' re taJl ( ing to , and that is disrespectful and not acceptable in my room . iD So you either be gone or get written up for disrespect and dis - , insubordination , " Here on campus it ' s U two days suspension off campus . So , here 12 we are very , um , disciplined on the basis of respect as a number one Issue . And so , 13 I enforce that and 14 I teach that in my classroom every day by being 15 honest and calling I ( ids . Now , 16 some Idds get freal < ed out but eventually they get used to 17 my style and they appreCiate Jt , and they always come back and say , " Wow . I nev ' er looked at it that way . " So , it ' s a cool thing . But it ' s funny you bring it up because 1 . ! ! this week has Just been a nightmare week and I don ' t know why . 19 Isn ' t that weird ? Analysis 7 EMO : FRUSTRATION " OBJ : CONFRONT , TAC : ADMONISH 10 TAC : ULTIMATUM II TAC : SUSPENSION " OBJ : DISCIPLINE " OBJ : " I ENFORCE " " OBJ : TEACH RESPECT " TAC : HONESTY " CON : STUDENT " FREAII H TAC : " MY STYLE " 18 EMO : FRAZZLED " An : IRONIC After a series of vignettes , episodes , or stories have been collected , separate coded data into the six categories of character analysis : Objectives , Conflicts / Obstacles ; Tactics / Strategies , Attitudes , Emotions , and Subtext ~ . Take note of the types of actions ( objectives and tactics / strategies ) taken in response to the types of con flicts / obstacles the participant - actor confronts . Al ~ o acknowledge that an Objective might also include not just what the participant - actor wants but what she wants otlter people to do . The attitudes , emotions , and subtexts clue you to the internal perspectives of the participant - actor during these situations . Write a vignette ( Erickson , 1986 ; Graue & Wahh , 1998 ) as a first - person or omniscient narrative revealing the inner thoughts of the participant - actor ; or create a descrip tive profile of the participant - actor highlighting her personality characteristics ( or , in dramaturgical parlance , her characterization in social performance ) . Another dramaturgical character concept is the sJlPcrol . ~ fectil ) c - the overall or ultimate goal of the participant in the social drama . Respect - exhibited both in the classroom and for the teacher herself - may be the participant ' s superobjective in the vignette pro @ ed above . But additional stories culled from interviews and observations , coded appropriately , may reinforce that superobjective as the primary theme or reveal a different one at work within her . CofE - nan ( 1963 ) notes that we tend to assign a person we first meet wit ~ l cat egories and attributes that impute a " social identity . " Reciprocally , that person is implicitly requesting of others tllat the impression - the managed presentation of FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS d b fi dlem is a ' { character [ who 1 actually possesses the attributes fostere e ore ' . . to possess " ( Go£li : nan , 1959 , p . 17 ) . These first ImpreSSIOns change as e aIPp , , , rscontinues and we come to know the character of our participant ' s And if enough rapport has been developed between the researcher ~ haract . e t . : t tIle latter will reveal " backstage " knowledge of herself that partlClpant - ac or , . . lis < : lol ; es what is genuine behind tlle managed ImpresslOn of s ~ . . . al C cling is also applicable to field note data In WhICh two or DramaturgIC o · . . ' ticipants interact in daily routines or are observed 111 confltct \ vl . th Plar Comparing and contrasting their individual objectives and tactiCS oner . d ' f actions and reactions cyclically progress deepens your understan mg 0 relationships and the processes of human agency . . Acknowledge that inferences about others ' actions an ~ motIves are fro ~ 1 the o : , rspe . : ti ' , e of researcher as audience member of the SOCIal drama . These lnfer - Iuetinlcs be incorrect and a follow - up interview with the partic - , ences can so ' . ' I ant - actor may be necessary for confirmation . Dey ( 1999 ) cautions , h . owever , t ' e often cannot explain why we act as we do . People act out motIVes and \ V bl . 1 " ( 191 ) . i ' ilteres , ts that they lllay or may not be a e to arttcu ate p . . Some recommended ways to further analyze Dranlaturgical Codes are ( see App " ndix D ) : • case studies ( Merriam , 1998 ; Stake , 1995 ) ethnodrama ( Denzin , 1997 , 2003 ; Saldaiia , 2005a ) . narrative inquiry and analysis ( Clandinin & Connelly , 2000 ; Co£fey & Atkinson , 1996 ; Cortazzi , 1993 ; Daiute & Lightfoot , 2004 ; Rlessman , 2008 ) • performance studies ( Madison , 2005 ; Maclison & Hamera , 2006 ) phenomenology ( van Manen , 1990 ) ' . • portraiture ( Lawrence - Lightfoot & DaVls , 1997 ) . vignette writing ( Erickson , 1986 ; Graue & Walsh , 1998 ) Notes Since Dramaturgical Coding can reHect a participant ' s needs and wa . nts , also se . c Values Coding . For complementary methods related to dr ~ ma ~ urglcal analYSIS , N . C cling and Lieblich Zilber & Tuval - Maslnach s ( 2008 ) model see arratlve 0 " bf " agency , structure , communion , and serendipity . " MOTIF CODING Sources M tif Mello , 2002 ; Narayan & George , 2002 ; The Talcs Unlimited , In . c . St o . Website http : / / www . talesunlimited . com / StMotltFullLlstlngA . asp• Thompson , 1977 1 . 05 1 . 06 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS Description Motif Coding is the application onto qualitative data of previously developed or original index codes used to classifY types and elements of folk tales , myths t and legends . A type refers to the c0111plete talc and can include such general titles as " Superhuman Tasks , " " Ite1igiaus Stories , " and " Stories about Married Couples . " " A type is a traditional tale that has an independent existence . [ t may be told as a complete narrative and does not depend for its meaning on any other tale " ( Thompson , 1977 , p . 41S ) . A I / Iotifis " the smallest element in a tale " that has something unique about it , such as : characters ( fools , ogres , widows , etc . ) , significant objects or items in the action of the story ( a castle , food , strange customs , etc . ) , and single incidents of action ( hunting , transfor _ mation , marriage , etc . ) ( pp . 415 - 16 ) . An alphanumeric example of a Thompson Motif - Index of Folk Literature l11ythoIogical motif reads : . " A1319 . 9 Origin of sneezing . " The index contains thousands of detailed entries such as these . Applications Motif Coding is appropriate for cx - ploring intrapersonal and interpersonal par ticipant experiences and actions in case studies , particularly those leading toward narrative or arts - based presentational forms ( Cah11l11ann - Taylor & Siegesmund , 2008 ; Knowles & Cole , 20 ( 8 ) . Motif Coding may be better applied to story - based data extracted from interview transcripts or participant - generated dOCUll1cnts such as journals or diaries . The story should be a self - standing unit of data - a vignette or episode with a definite beginning , middle , and end . Thompson ' s Motif - Index is a specialized system primarily for folklorists and anthropologists , but the website is worth browsing by researchers from other disciplines to acquaint themselves with the breadth of topics about the human e : \ . . - penence . Example A young adult male describes his strained relationship with his alcoholic f . , cl , er , Motif Coding using cl , e Thompson Motif - Index has been applied to classifY the tale type and several significant elements of tllis story ( although original researcher generated Motif Codes could also have been applied ) . For reference only , the Thompson Motif - Index alphanumeric codes have been added after the phrases : TALE TYPE / MAJOR MOTIF - TRANSFORMATION : MAN TO OGRE [ 0941 1 We ' ve never been all that close . , FATHER AND SON [ P233 ] FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS used to be an alcoll0lic and he ' smol { ed 3 And , he was actually busted a couple of bacl { . And as part of this , the charges dropped , but he had to go to drug rehab . up until that point I really didn ' t get along my father , 4 he was really a jerk , > e , speclalll ) when he was drunl { , he was really a I 5 And then he sobered up , and for a while nothing changed , and then things changed and ~ verything was cool again . And , I don ' t know , G ' rnY grandpa was not an expressive man and was hardly ever home or anything like that , ~ nd so 7 my dad doesn ' t handle emotions very well . And what he does is , when he ' s upset he ' ll blow up and then go away , cool off , and then come bacl { and it ' s as If nothing happened . He got it all out of his system , he ' s cool with that . 8 I ' ll do that sometimes , but I have enough of my mom in me that I brood on things . 9 So when he blows up and says things he doesn ' t mean , comes bacl { and pretends liI ( e nothing ever happened , I just assume that those things that he said are to be held as true from that moment on . So he and I don ' t get along very well . ' TABU : DRINKING [ C2501 , PUNISHMENT : IMPRISONMENT [ Q4331 4 CRUEL FATHER [ Sl11 5 TRANSFORMATION : MAN TO DIFFERENT MAN [ 010 ] 5 CRUEL GRANDFATHER [ S421 7 VIOLENCE OFTEMPER IW185 ] 5 MOTHER AND SON [ P231 ] 9 NOT DARING TO CURSE FATHER DIRECTLY , SON DOES SO INDIRECTLY [ P236 . 31 Analysis Whether using an establisl ? ed index or your original creations for Motif Coding , the goal is to label both ordinary and significant elements of a story that have the potential for rich SYlllbolic analysis . The work of JerOlne Bruner ' s narrative universals , Joseph Calupbell and his " Hero ' s Journey , " or CarlJung ' s discussions of archetypes , dreams , and synlbols , are worth review ing for understanding the mythic properties at work in a story ' s motifs in addition to Stith Thompson ' s writings on folklore . One could even refer to B ' runo Bettelheim ' s ( 1976 ) classic treatise , The Uses qI EIlc / lalltlllCllt , to discern how a contemporary participant ' s story , coded and analyzed with classic folk tale motifs , possesses deep psychological m _ eaning . The young man ' s story in the exanlple above , according to Bettelheitn , is comparable to a classic folk tale whose content represents an essential experience for adolescent devel opment : " threatening as the parent may seenl at SOlue tilne , it is always the child who wins out in the long run , and it is the parent who is defeated . . . . The child not only survives the parents but surpasses them " ( p . 99 ) . A " an ana lytic tactic , one might even consider what moral or life lesson has been learned from the participant ' s story . Shank ( 2002 ) outlines how the participant ' s story 1 . 07 : 1 . 08 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS and the researcher ' s retelling of it can be structured as a myth . fable , folk and legend ( pp . 148 - 52 ) . Motif Coding is a creative , evocative method that orients you to the less qualities of the human condition , and represents contemporary , e ~ en mun ~ ­ dane , social life with epic qualities . The " ogres " in our lives range . from " demanding bosses to abusive spouses to violent bullies on the playgrotltltl . " transform " ourselves on occasion , not just from one human type to " ' ' ' ' ' ' U , , ; but from human to aninlal - like personas . MotifS are part literary element part psychological association . Some recommended ways to filrther analyze Motif Codes are ( see Appendi " D ) : • Narrative Coding and Focused Coding • case studies ( Merriam , 1998 ; Stake , 1995 ) • life - course mapping ( Clausen , 1998 ) • metaphoric analysis ( Coffey & Atkinson , 1996 ; Todd & Harrison , 2008 ) • narrative inquiry and analysis ( Clandinin & Connelly , 2000 ; Coffey & Atkinson , 1996 ; Cortazzi , 1993 ; Daiute & Lightfoot , 2004 ; Riessman , 2008 ) • phenomenology ( van Manen , 1990 ) • poetic and dramatic constructions ( Denzin . 1997 ; Glesne , 2006 ; Knowles & , Cole , 2008 ; Saldaiia , 2005a ) • portraiture ( Lawrence - Lightfoot & Davis , 1997 ) • thematic analysis ( Auerbach & Silverstein , 2003 ; Boyatzis , 1998 ) • vignette writing ( Erickson , 1986 ; Graue & Walsh , 1998 ) Notes Stith Thompson ' s alphanumeric Motif - Index ofFalk Literature was a ground ~ breaking work , but selected future scholars found the indexing system unwieldy , incomplete , and unrepresentative of the diverse canons of the world ' s folk literature . Additional indexing systems developed after his can be found in reference libraries and wehsites . Onc of the best descriptions ofThompson ' s system can be accessed from : http : / / www . talesunlimited . com / STmotifSearchhelp . asp For related methods , see Narrative , OCM ( Outline of Cultural Materials ) , and Protocol Coding . NARRATIVE CODING Sources Cortazzi , 1993 ; Daiute & Lightfoot , 2004 ; Polkinghorne , 1995 ; Riessmao , 2002 , 2008 FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS [ liessOJaO ( 2008 ) notes that narrative analysis includes diverse methods ( e . g . , , hel11atlC , structural , dialogic , perforInative ) . In this profile , Narrative Coding the conventions of ( primarily ) literary elements and analysis onto qual texts most often in the form of stories . " Stories express a kind of know 1 - that uniquely describes human experience in which actions and . . happ , ' " 111gS· contribute positively and negatively to attaining goals and fi . llfilling ; , , , " D ' Dses " ( Polkinghorne , 1995 , p . 8 ) . Narrative Coding - and analysis - blends : ' cooc ' : pts from the humanities , literary criticism , and the social sciences since , coding and interpretation of participant narratives can be approached fTOln lit , , , al : Y , sociological / sociolinguistic , psychological , and anthropological per sP " ctives ( Cortazzi , 1993 ; Daiute & Lightfoot , 2004 ) , Some methodological perspectives hold that the process of narrative analy is " highly exploratory and speculative " ( Freeman , 2004 , p . 74 ) , and its . " irlter ' DH , ti , ·e tools are designed to examine phenomena , issues , and people ' s , holistically " ( Daiute & Lightfoot , 2004 , p , xi ) . Nevertheless , there may be ; m : c " " , u ' " when the researcher wishes to code participant narratives from a lit perspective as a prelilninary approach to the data to understand its sto structured fOrIns . . Narrati1 / e Coding is appropriate for exploring intrapersonal and interpersonal experiences and actions to understand the human condition . throttgh story , which is justified in and of itself as a legitimate way of knowing : . . . stories should be sufficiently trusted to be left unaccompanied by snnqtle or theory " ( Hatch & Wisniewski , 1995 , p . 2 ) . Narrative analysis is particularly suitable for such inquiries as identity devel critical / feminist studies , and documentation of the life course . ; [ ' . fuaclces of narrative can become richly complex when the researcher explores th " particilpallt ' s subject positioning and presentation of self ( Goflinan , 1959 ) , e : \ . 1Jeriments with arts - based presentational and representational forms ( C ' lllI1malnn - 1 ' ayl , or & Sieges111und , 2008 ; Knowles & Cole , 2008 ) . mother reflects on her son ' s difficult preadolescent years . Prosaic , poetic , and dramatic elements are used as codes to highlight the structure and properties tIns narrative excerpt . Also note how the data are divided into smal1 stanzas analysis : GENRE : A MODERN - DAY GREEK TRAGEDY ; THE WITNESS ( MOTHER ) RECOUNTS THE HERO ' S ( HER SON ' S ) DFF·STAGE EVENTS THROUGH EPISODES : : 1 . 09 : 1 : 10 I . THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS Then he went through the time of 1 [ makes a ~ blow - off " face to illustrate ] , I don ' t wanna say anti - social , he was never 2 anti - social , but making the statement , 3 the way he dressed , the way he looked , everything was making a 4 statement . 5 And that was OK , too . In fact , 6 some of his middle school teachers would call me and say , 1 " I noticed that he ' s hanging out with some unsavory characters and I thinl { . . . , " you imow , that I { ind of stuff . B And I ' d say , " Well , actually I think his changes are real healthy ' cause he ' s finally determining what he likes . " 9 From that , and he had a really tough time at Lai < ewood Middle School 10 real tough . 11 The first day of school in seventh grade , some - 12 I ' ll use the term " gang - banger , " but 1 don ' t know - was picidng on a little I < id . And my son said , 13 " Hey man , get off his case . " 14 And from that moment on , all of the tension was focused on him . 15 From the time he entered Lal < ewood to the time he [ eft Lai < ewood , 16 he was a target by the bad guys . That was a very 11 tough time for him . " [ slight laughl Analysis 1 VISUAL CHARACTERIZATION : FACIAL EXPRESSION , MOTIF : " ANTI - SOCIAL " 3 REPETITIVE PHRASE , MOTIF : " STATEMENT " 8 UNIT TRANSITION 6 FLASHBACK , VOCAL MIMICRY - PARODY 8 DIALOGUE : TEACHER & " " TU " " RESPONSE 9 UNIT TRANSITION 10 MOTIF : " REAL TOUGH " 11 FLASHBACK 12 ASIDE 13 HIGH POINT 101 COMPLICATION 18 TIME FRAME 16 SON AS HERO VS . " BAD GUYS " n MOTIF : " TOUGH " " CODA·PATHOS Through Narrative Coding of the above example , the genre of the story modern - day Greek tragedy - emerged after the application of and rellectioq upon it ' i structures and properties . TIlls might lead the researcher to continu ~ ' : c } . - pIoring the mother ' s stories about her son through the lens of classical dram ~ or even Greek mythology , which might then stnlcture the narrative retelling ~ a series of grief tales . ( The 111other ' s closure - and moral - later in the tra . nSl : ri ] Jt reads , " It was kind oflike teaching the dog not to run in the street by getting hit· . . by a car . It was a horrible , painful , awfitl time , and yet , if it doesn ' t kill you it ' ll . make you stronger . That ' s what ' s happened to him . " ) Rubin & Rubin ( 1995 ) posit . " In a story , it is the messages , morals , or beliefS that arc important ; whether the specific events occurred or how they occurred is of minor concern " ( p . 25 ) . The frequent use of motifs in the participant ' s telling of her stories might also be woven into the recrafted narrative as motifS for literary uTIpact . Polkinghorne ( 1995 ) dilIerentiates between paradigmatic and lIarmtiJ ! c cogni tion . The former may include such approaches as grounded theory , which FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS inductive development ' of categories from the data , particularly iflarge llectI OI : 1S of stories are available for analyzing patterns ( Cortazzi , 1993 , p . 7 ) . types of findings arc " abstractions from the flow and flux of experi ( Polkinghorne , 1995 , p . 11 ) ; instead , narrative cognition seeks to undcr individual and unique human action . And among postmodernists , the of narrative inquiry is not a solitary research act but a collaborative ven between the researcher and participants . r . IJbr1U111 & Holstein ( 2009 ) advise that researchers analyzing narrative texts consider not just the psychological but the sociological contexts of sto collected from fieldwork : " stories operate wifitill society as much as they about society " ( p . 11 ) . Environments such as close relationships , local cul and organizations influence and affect the individual ' s telling of per - tales : " Approach the big and little stories as reflexively re1ated , not teg , orically distinct , dimensions ofnarrativity " ( p . 144 ) . unit of analysis is often big gulps of text - entire stories " ( Daiute & ightfoot , 2004 , p . 2 ) . To n10st narrative inquirers , insight into the n1eanings of " li " in : ll1t stories depends on deep researcher reflection through careful read nf the transcripts and extensive journaling . Clandinin & Connelly ( 2000 ) that they adhere to ' Jlllirl i / I ' ll / ilT , a way of thinking in which inquiry is not governed by theories , methodological tactics , and strategies " ( p . 121 ) . approach to narrative inquiry is to " find a form to represent . . . storied in storied ways , not to represent storied lives as exemplars of formal cat ( p . 141 ) . The write - up requires rich descriptive detail and a three ~ n , eru : iOl1a1 rendering of the participant ' s life . The ultimate goal is to create a tand - : llnne story as research representation that may depict " how and why a outcome came about " ( Polkinghorne , 1995 , p . 19 ) , but other to narrative inquiry might also deliberately stress open - ended : tmrhlre < to the researcher ' s recrafted narratives , structures that leave the reader evocative closure and provocative questions rather than li ' Xed answers parrme , 2000 ) . . . . . t ! anlb ' ' ' g ( 2004 ) notes , " it sin1ply is not enough to analyze narratives as units analysis for their structure and content , though it is a good starting point " 1s3 } . Just some of the many prosaic , poetic , and dramatic elements available coding and subcoding schemes for Narrative Coding include : ( survivor narrative , epiphany narrative , coming - out story , cautionary etc . ) Genre ( tragedy , con1edy , romance , melodrama , etc . ) ' / oPLrq . o , ; e ( personal / historical , moral , emancipatory , therapeutic , etc . ) Setting ( locale , enviroIDllent , local calor , season , etc . ) Plot ( episodic , chronological , vignette , scene , prologue , conflict / complication , turning point , rising action , climax , subplot , etc . ) 1 . 12 • • • • • • THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS Character ( narrator , protagonist , antagonist , composite , secondary , etc . ) Characterization ( physical description , status , motivations , hero , ITICk ! ; te , etc . ) Form ( monologue , soliloquy , dialogue , adjacency pair , song , etc . ) Point of View ( first - person , third - person , 011Uliscicnt , - witness , etc . ) Elements ( foreshadowing , flashback , flashfarward , juxtaposition , motif , sYlllbolism . allusion , metaphor , SiIllilc , coda , etc . ) Spoken Features ( pause , tone , emphasis / stress , fluency , alliteration , etc . ) Narrative researchers should also be attuned to story structures from non - European canons and how that influences and affects retelling . For exam ~ pIe , the use of SYlllbolisUl in Mexican stories frOlll an Eurocentric perspecti ~ e might be perceived as " overt , " " heavy - handed . " or " exotic , " whereas fron ~ Mexican perspectives the symbolic associations are " bold , " " strong , " and " brave . " Some recoITUllended ways to further analyze Narrative Codes are Appendix D ) : • • • • • • • • • • • case studies ( Merriam , 1998 ; Stake , 1995 ) life - course mapping ( Clausen , 1998 ) metaphoric analysis ( Coffey & Atkinson , 1996 ; Todd & Harrison , 2008 ) narrative inquiry and analysis ( Clandinin & ConneUy , 2000 ; Coffey & Atkinson , 1996 ; Cartazzi , 1993 ; Daiute & Lightfoot , 2004 ; Riessman , 2008 ) performance studies ( Madison , 2005 ; Madison & Hamera , 2006 ) phenomenology ( van Manen , 1990 ) poetic and dramatic constructions ( Denzin , 1997 ; Glesne , 2006 ; Knowles & Cole , 2008 ; Saldana , 2005a ) polyvocal analysis ( Hatch , 2002 ) portraiture ( Lawrence - Lightfoot & Davis , 1997 ) thematic analysis ( Auerbach & Silverstein , 2003 ; Boyatzis , 1998 ) vignette writing ( Erickson , 1986 ; Graue & Walsh , 1998 ) Notes See NTC ' s Dietiolla / ) ' of Litcrary Terllls ( Morner & Itausch , 1991 ) as a reference for prosaic , poetic , and dramatic elements , and Gibbs ( 2007 ) far an elegant overview of narrative forms . Also see Crossley ( 2007 ) for a superb autobio graphical ( and biographical ) interview protocol for narrative analysis in psy chology . For supplementary methods related to Narrative Coding , see Dramaturgical Coding and Motif Coding . FIRST CYCLE COOING METHODS VERBAL EXCHANGE CODING 2000 Exchange Coding is the verbatinl transcript analysis and interpretation of types of conversation and personal l11eanings of key moments in the xc ! 1I ; J111les . To Goodall ( 2000 ) , coding is determining the " generic type " of con reflection examines the 111eaning of the conversation . The goal is to fi . 1l1damental analytic skills to create an " crJocati ! ! c rcprescJltatioJl of the field - e ~ - perience , " the " writing of a st0l1 ' qf wltJlrc " ( p . 121 , emphasis in original ) . begins with a precise transcription of the verbal exchange ( which nonverbal cues and pauses ) between the speakers . The coder then draws a typology / continuum offive forms of verbal exchange to identify the ' unit ( s ) : PiIatie COlllllllllrio / l or Ritl / al IlIteraetioll , a " class of routine social interactions that arc themselves the basic verbal form of politeness rituals used to e : x - press social recognition and mutuality of address " ; an example is : A : Hey . B : ' Morning . A : How ' s it going ? B : OK . You ? Simple exchanges such as these can communicate such cultural patterns as status , gender , race , and class ditTerences , etc . ; Ordirw ' l ' COllllersatioll , " patterns of questions and responses that provide the interactants with data about personal . relational , and informational issues and concerns , as well as perform the routine ' business ' of . . . everyday life " ; Skillcd Corwc / ' satioll , which represents " a ' higher ' or ' deeper ' level of infor mation exchange / discussion " between individuals , and can include such exchanges as debates , conflict management , professional negotiations , etc . ; Pcrsollai Narmtillcs , consisting of " individual or mutual self - disclosure " of " pivotal events in a personal or organizational life " ; and Dialoguc , in which conversation " transcends " information exchange and the " boundaries of self , " and l110ves to higher levels of spontaneous , ecsta tic mutuality ( Goodall , 2000 , pp . 103 - 4 ) . , ; " , Selected questions assist the ethnographer in coding , interpreting , and reflect on the content and nleaning of the verbal exchange . Sample questions include : What is the nature of the relationship ? What arc the influences offi . . . " \ : ed 1 . 13 : 1 . 1 . 4 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS positionings ( gender , race / ethnicity . social class , etc . ) ? What are the vocal tones , and silences contributing to the overall meaning ? ( pp . 106 - 7 ) . The second level of Verbal Exchange Coding ' s categorization and c ) . . " plores the personal meanings of key moments by first examining such as speech mannerisms , nonverbal cOl1ul1unication habits , and rich points ' cultural lmowledge ( slang , jargon , etc . ) . The categorization then proceeds examine the practices or the " cllltllml pCifOnJIO / 1CCS of everyday life " ( p . 116 ) : 1 . ROlltilIes alld Ritl / als of structured and symbolically meaningful actions ing our day ; 2 . SlIrprisc - olld - SclIse - Alakillg Episodes of the unanticipated or unexpected ; 3 . Risk - Takill . . . . f . ! Episodes and Face - Sallillg Episodes of conflict - laden exchanges ; 4 . Crises in a verbal exchange or as an overarching pattern of lived . ence ; and 5 . Rites cif Passage , or what is done that significantly " alters or changes OUr personal sense of self or our social or professional status or identiti ; ( pp . 116 - 19 } . . Applications Verbal Exchange Coding is appropriate for a variety of human communication studies and studies that e : \ . . ] Jlore cultural practices . Verbal Exchange Coding can also be applied to pree " , isting ( secondary data ) ethnographic te " , 1 : s such as autoethnographies . The guidelines listed above should not suggest an overly systematic approach to analyzing verbal exchanges . Goodall ' s " coding " is a narrative rather than margined words and phrases . Goodall ' s text evocatively explores " the new etlulOgraphy " - storied accounts grounded in the data that weave " the personal experience of the researcher into meaning in ways that serYe as analyses of cul tures " ( p . 127 ) . Verbal Exchange Coding is intended as an introductory approach for novices to closely examine the cOlllplexity of talk through focused parameters of conversation types and everyday cultural practices . Interpretive l11eaning through extensive written reflection ( cOlllparable to an analytic memo ) rather than traditional margined coding illethods is encour aged . Example A junior high school play production class in an inner city fine arts magnet program has just read a scripted adaptation of a traditional Mexican American folk tale , La / lo " " , a ( The Hlecpillg WOl / lall ) . Nancy , the teacher / director , wants to have her Hispanic students il11provisationaliy create then write a 111Odern - day adaptation of the story for public performance . The verbatilll transcript below FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS , " e > , cerpt from the first brainstornllng session about the updated version . Exchange Coding does not rely on margined entries , the exanl scan across the entire page . The coding narrative follows : OK how can we take the story , this is the old version , how can we update It ~ har ~ cter - wise and word - wise to also updating it with the rap ? Like , how would you say if Maria was beautiful ? How would you say that in slang ? • She ' s fine ! OK , so that ' s what we need to have the words say . We need the updated word and the use of the rap together . I mean , where would you have this tal { e place ? She ' s walldng down McKinley and she shoots her 1 { lds . A drive - by . ( laughter from group ) In a blue Pont ! ac . So that ' s what you need to start thinking about , how can ~ e keep the same story intact , of what happens , but we need to convert it into something that ' s modern . She overdosed her kids . Does she take them to the lake or do they find them in a canal ? Yeah , they find them In a canal with bullet holes in their heads . Guys , think about that , don ' t get too gruesome , that ' s not our objective to mal < e this Into this gross massacre death thing , like finding that body that was burning In the dumpster , that ' s not what our goal is . Our goal Is to update the story Into your , how would you say it In today ' s language ? GIRL : And there were two locos . . . ( NANCY explains the costumes in the updated version , such as jeans ) G - string ? ( laughter from group ) That ' s Domingo In college . ( laughter from group ) So , you ' re gonna be wearing the big old baggy pants , big old flannel shirts , platform shoes . GIRL : We ' re not in the ' 70s . . NANCY : 1 want everyone to come in with something written down for the rap version , by Friday . It needs to be your version - It doesn ' t have to be the whole product , It just has to be the very beginning . BOY : ( rapping ) Once upon a time , there was a chica . ( laughter from group ) She pushed them In the river and along came the fuzz . ( laughter ) . . . ( NANCYaslrs where the setting for the modern versfon could be ) BOY : Long Beach , California . BOY : You been hanging around with that guy too much . ( boys laugh ) GIRL : No , instead of drowning them , she gave them drugs . BOY : Let ' s do it I1ke the lady did it , she threw them in a car and drove into the river . GIRL : And then she lied about it later . GIRL : No cuss words . CODING : This classroom verbal exchange is mostly ordinary conversation ( that ever - so slightly peaks toward s / filled conversation before it ) to accomplish the business of cre ative worl { . A white female teacher facilitates the development of an original play with a class of Hispanic youth who toss out occasional cala [ language of the street ] such as ~ / ocos " and ~ chjca . " There are several rich points of cultural Imowledge exchanged between them : " McKinley " [ a nearby street , noted for Its seediness ] , " ~ blue Pontiac " [ a iocal In - joke about the stereotypical drive - by car ] , " that body that was burning In the dumpster " [ a nelghborhood news story about a recent murder ] , " that guy " [ a notorious local gang member from California ] , points that would completely elude someone who didn ' t live in the immediate school neighborhood . : 1 : 15 : 1 : 1 . 6 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS The routine of the day is drama class in preparation for the ritual of oelrfnrmli " " atre . Students create risk - taking episodes by tossing out their original ideas turn , create a few surprise - maJdng episodes through irreverent humor - even humor when they laugh at a " drive - by " shooting reference . Not included in the are those sly 100 ) ( 5 and glances given by all speal { ers , including the teacher , suggest and validate inslder - and I I knowledge . Laughter is prominent throughout , evoked by both Nancy and her during this moderately fast - paced ~ brainstormlng " s8ss10n . REFLECTION [ excerptsl : Be careful what you asl < for - you just might get It . Nancy her students , encouraged them in fact , to create a modern - day version of a Violent tale . She said , ~ Our goal is to update the story , " which is exactly what the class doing . But In l1er role as public school educator she had to limit ( read : censor ) ideas to what would be acceptable for a public audience ( read : parents ) on stage . Communication of the adolescent voice , the Inner city voice , the Hispanic what progressive multicultural education is all about . But because we ' re dealing inner city minors ( some of whom have seen more gang activity and violence than white adults ) , there ' s a border we can ' t cross . Well , like " illegal " immigrants we cross it anyway , but there ' s always a risk . So the teacher , liI < e a border patrol has to stop these Hispanic youths from crossing the line . ( But I ' m playing the race here . Lots of high scl100l theatre programs in white suburban communities have the same censorship dilemma . ) Nevertheless , as an Hispanic whose voice is frequently dismissed , discounted , negated by my white colleagues at work , it burns me to see and hear young people " I want to hear and ha nor your voice , but you can ' t say that on the stage , " when heard them say much worse in the hallways as they move from one class to the The teacher is asking them to adapt a traditional foll < tale into modern - day contexts the purpose of creating art . These junior high schoolers ' lives are surrounded by lence ( sadly ) , so that ' s what they ' re weaving into their worl < . Analysis Goodall states that " analysis and coding of conversations and practices - as well interpretive reflections on the meaning of thenl - are really parts of the process offinding patterns that are capable of suggesting a story , an emerging of your interpretation of a culture " ( 2000 , p _ 121 ) _ Continued reflection on meanings of the classroom verbal exchanges documented above addresses aspect " i as the culture of the school , theatre classroom culture , H . ispanic cu . , , , , , . . , , adolescent culture , the culture of violence , gang subculture , and dleir com [ lIe ) . interrelationships and overlaps ( see Appendix C ) . Goodal1 ' s introductory interpretive approach to the analysis of talk is one of many extensive and systematic approaches to conversation and course analysis ( see Agar , 1994 ; Gee , Michaels , & O ' Connar , 1992 ; Jones , . Gallois , Calian , & Barker 1999 ; Lindlof & Taylor , 2002 ; Rapley . 2007 ; air1 Silverman , 2 ( 06 ) , which include detailed notation systems for trJl1scriptioQ - ' that indicate such speech patterns as pauses , word stress , overlapping dialogue , and other f . 1cet " i of conversation . FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS reconunended ways to further analyze Verbal Exchange Codes are ( see D ) : research ( Altrichter , Posch , & Somekh , 1993 ; Stringer , 1999 ) : t ! ulodranila ( Denzin . 1997 ; Saldaiia , 2005a ) m , , : tal , llcmc analysis ( Coffey & Atkil15on , 1996 ; Todd & Harrison , 2008 ) inquiry and analysis ( Clandinin & Connelly , 2000 ; Coffey & AI : ki [ lSOn , 1996 ; Cartazzi , 1993 ; Daiute & Lightfoot , 2004 ; Riessman , 2008 ) ; pf ! rfclrnlarlce studies ( Madison , 2005 ; Madison & Ham era , 2006 ) fiJblenIJl11encllo ! > f ( van Man en , 1990 ) thelmatjc analysis ( Auerbach & Silverstein , 2003 ; Boyatzis , 1998 ) yigllf ' tte writing ( Erickson , 1986 ; Graue & Walsh , 1998 ) ' evocative methods of analyzing talk and text exist . Gilligan , Spencer , feinberg , & Bertsch ( 2006 ) , " in response to the uneasiness and growing dis ti , f : iction with the nature of coding schemes typically being used [ in the to analyze qualitative data " ( p . 254 ) , developed the Listcl / il / g CI / ide , " a of psychological analysis that draws on voice , resonance , and relation as ports of entry into the human psyche " ( p . 253 ) . The four - step reading notation of verbatiul text examines plot , first - person references as poetic l ' Uf : tulres , and contrapuntal voices ( e _ g _ , melodic signatures , silence ) , followed interpretive synthesis based on the research question of interest . See & Tohnan ( 2008 ) far a clear and detailed example of a case study ' s tran analysis using the ListeJlillg CI / ide _ 117 1 . 18 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS EXPLORATORY METHODS Exploratory coding methods arc just that - exploratory and preliminary ments of codes to the data before more refined coding systems are de " el , " o , ' " and applied . Since qualitative inquiry is an emergent process of mV " ' ; ll ' [ . lborr . these coding methods use tentative labels as the data arc initially w ' ; ew " d . AEter ' they have been analyzed in this manner , researchers might proceed to more specific First Cycle or Second Cycle coding methods . Holistic Coding applies a single code to each large unit of data in the cor ' ; ' pus to capture a sense of the overall contents and the possible categories that may develop . Provisional Coding begins with a " start list " of researcher - generated codes based 011 what preparatory investigation suggests might appear in the data before they are analyzed . Hypothesis Coding applies researcher - developed " hunches " of what might occur in the data before or after they have been initially analyzed . As the cor pus is reviewed , the hypothesis - driven codes confinll or disconfirm what was projected , and the process can refine the coding system _ itself . Source Dey , 1993 Description HOLISTIC CODING Holistic Coding is an attempt " to grasp basic themes or issues in the data by absorbing them as a whole [ the coder as ' lumper ' ] rather than by analyzing them line by line [ the coder as ' splitter , ] " ( Dey , 1993 , p . 104 ) . The method is a preparatory approach to a unit of data before a more detailed coding or cate gorization process through First or Second Cycle methods . A " middle - order " approach , somewhere between holistic and line - by - line , is also possible as a Holistic Coding method . There are no specific m < L . . . imu111 length restrictions for data given a Holistic Code . The coded unit can be as small as one - half a page in length , to as large as an entire completed study . Applications Holistic Coding is appropriate for beginning qualitative researchers learning how to code data , and studies with a wide variety of data forms ( e . g . , interview tran scripts , field notes , journals , documents , diaries , correspondence , artifacts , video ) . FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS ; . f [ olisbC Coding is applicable \ vhen the researcher already has a general idea to investigate in the data , or " to ' chunk ' the text into broad topic areas , first step to seeing what is there " ( Bazeley , 2007 , p . 67 ) . [ t is also a time method for those with massive al110unts of data and / or a short period I tl ' c work But be aware that with less tinle to analyze often comes a , ana Y . substantive report . In most cases , Holistic Coding is preparatory ground - for more detailed coding of the data . , Hom ' " Coding may be more applicable to what might be labeled self sta , odlng units of data - vignettes or episodes - such as : interview excerpts of articipant ' s story with a definite beginning , middle , and end ; a short one p two - page docUlllent ; or a field note excerpt of social life with bou ~ ded such as time , place , action , and / or content ( e . g . , a 15 - nunute playground recess , a transa ~ tion at . a sales counter , a congregation ' s participation during a portion of worslup servIce ) . Example The fonowing guest lecture excerpt is frOlll a second year , inner city , grades K - 8 school teacher talking to education lllajors enrolled in a university teaching meth ods course ( Saldana , 1997 , p . 44 ) . She has just completed several poigoant vignettes about some of her most difficult students . The coding will follow the excerpt : I ' m not telling you this to depress you or scare you but it was a reality for me . I thought I was so ready for this population because I had taught other groups of kids . But this is such a unique situation , the inner city school . No , I should take that back : It ' s not as much of a unique situation anymore . There are more and more schools that are turning Into inner city schools . " . I really had to learn about the kids . I had to learn about the culture , I had to learn the language , I had to learn the gang signals , I had to learn what music was allowed , what t·shirts they could wear on certain days and not on other days . There was just a lot to learn that I had never even thought about . A single Holistic Code applied to represent this entire data excerpt might be a ~ I ~ Vi ~ O Code : uA LOT TO LEARN " . Another possible Holistic Code might be more deSCriptive In nature : CAUTIONARY ADVICE . If " middle - order " codes or categories are necessary for more detailed analysis , a few that might emerge from the data above for CAUTIONARY ADVICE would read : PRE - PROFESSIONAL PREPARATION LEARNING ON - THE - JOB AnalYSis After a first review of cl , e data corpus wicll Holistic Codes applied , " all cl , e data for a category can be brought together and examined as a who1e before deciding upon any refinement " ( Dey . 1993 . p . 105 ) . Thus . all data coded as LEARNING 119 120 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS ON - THE - JOB in cl , e study described above would be collected for scrutiny . The researcher might observe that those on - the - job learning might be lessened if clley were addressed in pre - professional teacher edlJCatia , l ' courses . Rather than coding datum - by - datum as soon as transcripts or field , have been prepared for analysis , it is a worthwhile investment of time and nitive energy to simply [ cad and re - read the corpus to see the bigger PlC : tu , : e . ' Dey ( 1993 ) suggests that " time spent becoming thoroughly absorbed in the data early in the analysis may save considerable time hl the later stages , as lems are less likely to arise later on from une : - . . - - pccted observations or SUdden changes in tack " ( p . 110 ) . Some recommended ways to further analyze Holistic Codes are ( see Appendix D ) : • First Cycle coding methods • action research ( Altrichter , Posch , & Somekh , 1993 ; Stringer , 1999 ) • memo writing about the codes ( Charmaz , 2006 ; Corbin & Strauss , 2008 ; Glaser , 1978 ; Gbser & Strauss , 1967 ; StrallSs , 1987 ) • qualitative evaluation research ( Patton , 2002 ) • quick ethnography ( Handwerker , 2001 ) • thematic analysis ( Auerbach & Silverstein , 2003 ; Boyatzis , 1998 ) Notes For an inquiry - based method related to Holistic Coding , see Structural Coding . PROVISIONAL CODING Sources Dey , 1993 ; Miles & Huberman , 1994 Description Provisional Coding establishes a predetermined ' ' ' start list ' set of codes prior to fieldwork " ( Miles & Huberman , 1994 , p . 58 ) . These codes can be developed frOln anticipated categories or types of responses / actions that may arise in the data yet to be collected . The provisional list is generated fronl such preparatory investigative matters as : Hterature reviews related to the study , the study ' s concep tual framework and research questions , previous research findings , pilot study field work , the researcher ' s previous knowledge and e ~ . . periences ( experiential data ) , and FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS ' ~ a1tcher - formlJ ! alted hypotheses or hunches . As qualitative data are collected . and analyzed . Provisional Codes can be revised , modified , deleted , or ! < pand ' ' ' ' to include new codes . p ~ , vi ' ; ional Coding is appropriate for qualitative studies that build on or cor icil , orate previous research and investigations . Miles & Huberman ~ ec ~ mmend list ranging from approximately 12 to 60 codes for most quahtatIve stud Creswell ( 2007 ) begins with a shorter list of five to six that begins the iafoC " SS of " lean coding . " This expands to no nlOre than 25 - 30 categories that combine into five to six major themes ( p . 152 ) . Layder ( 1998 ) encourages the search for " key words , phrases and concepts spring to mind in thinking about the area under conslderatlOn before an : collection or even a literature search has begun " ( p . 31 ) . Not only can tlllS serve as a possible series of Provisional Codes , the items can be codewoven Chapter Two ) to explore possible interrelationships related to the phe - Example in the field of classroonl drama with youth , creative expression by participants is most often realized in one of three ways : nonverbally ( through body nlDve " , . Inerlr , gesture , pantomime , etc . ) , verbally ( through verbal inlprovisation , reader ' s theatre , poetry , etc . ) , or a combination of both ( through choral speaking with gesture , verbal improvisation with pantomlllle , etc . } . These three nlocies of dra matic expression are " givens " in drama with youth , and can readily become part of the Provisional Code repertoire : BODY VOICE BODY - VOICE Previous research in the art form with children has focused primarily on language arts development through drama cw . ' gner , 1998 ) . Provisional Codes rilight then be developed that focus on such related variables of interest as : VOCABULARY DEVELOPMENT ORAL LANGUAGE FLUENCY STORY COMPREHENSION DISCUSSION SKILLS Once in the field , however . a start list of codes generated fr0111 previous research may be modified if the researcher observes that the drama £lcilitator 121 1 . 22 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS focuses on improvisational drama to develop classroom _ corrununity change with children rather than their language art , skills . ORAL GUAGE FLUENCY and DISCUSSION SIULLS might still be obs " rve , the drama classroom and thus the codes can he maintained . But LARY DEVELOPMENT and STORY COMPREHENSION· deleted as codes if the instructor ' s content focuses morc on thematIc ( such as bullying , conflict resolution , peacekeeping skills , etc . ) rather than dramatization and enactment . Hence , new codes might emerge that are relevant to the fieldwork observations , such as : COMMUNITY BUILDING BULLYING - PHYSICAL BULLYING - VERBAL CREATING CONFLICT RESOLVING CONFLICT Analysis Other research team members , a colleague not involved with the study ; or the participants themselves can provide the coder with a " reality check " Provisional Codes as they are initiated and modified . Obviously , Provisional Codes are first applied to qualitative data , the researcher may learn whether each item from the start list has relevance or not . Researchers should exercise caution with Provisional Codes . A classic work saying goes , " Be careful : If you go looking for something , you ' ] ] meaning that your preconceptions of what to expect in the field may di , ' tolrt vour objective and even interpretive observations of what is " really " happening If you become too enamored , vith your original Provisional Codes and unwilling to modifY them , you run the risk of trying to fit qualitative data into set of codes and categories that may not apply : " Premature coding is like turc closure ; it can prevent the investigator from being open to new ideas , native ways of thinking about a phenomenon , and divergent - and sOl11eltimes quite correct - e ) qJlanations for events " ( LeCompte & Schensul , 1999 , p . willingness to tolerate ambiguity , flexibility , and the ability to remain honest oneself arc necessary personal attributes for researchers and Provisional C ( ldill & : " As we encounter more data we can define our categories with greater precision , ' . ' Even an established category set is not cast in stone , but subject to continual ification and renewal through interaction with the data " ( Dey , 1993 , p . 124 ) . A small but vital investment of tilne and energy will go toward the devel opment of Provisional Codes . Preparatory pilot study through participant observation and interviews at the actual fieldwork site may yield a more rele vant sct ofP [ O \ nsional Codes than previously published research . The context ~ specific nature of qualitative inquiry suggests cllstomized ( or what nught be facetiously labeled " designer " ) coding systems and methods . FIRST CYCLE COOING METHODS programs allow the development and entry of Provisional Codes in management systems . As documents are reviewed , a pre - established ' ' ; ' ' , 0101 ' list can be direcdy assigned to a selected portion of data . CAQDAS can a1so be itllported fron1 and e . ' - " P0rted to other projects and users . recommended ways to further allalyze PrO \ nsional Codes are ( see analysis ( Krippendorff , 2003 ; Weber , 1990 ; Wilkinson & 3irn , Lingllam , 2003 ) research ( Creswell , 2009 ; Creswell & Piano Clark , 2007 ; [ asllaklwri & Teddlie , 2003 ) lua . ULa , " ' " evaluation research ( Patton , 2002 ) ethnography ( Handwerker , 2001 ) research ( Fowler , 2001 ; Wilkinson & Birmingham , 2003 ) cll < : m ' ltic analysis ( Auerbach & Silverstein , 2003 ; Boyatzis , 1998 ) ' Second Cycle method that employs a set of Provisional Codes , see bora . tive Coding . HYPOTHESIS CODING 2006 ; Weber , 1990 Iypodl . esis· Coding is the application of a researcher - generated , predetermined list onto qualitative data specifically to assess a researcher - generated hypoth codes are developed from a theory / prediction about what will be found data before they have been collected or analyzed . " While grounded dleory concem < : d widl the discovCl } ' Cl ! hypotheses [ induction ] from texts and the build - of e ) . - planatory 1110dels from the same or subsequently collected texts , content , [ and otller selected qualitative studies are ] concerned with testiJlg hypothe . [ deduction ] from the start " ( Bernard , 2006 , pp . 505 , 507 ) . Weber ( 1990 ) advo that the " best content - analytic studies use both qualitative and quantitative ipelrati , om on texts " ( p . lO ) . The statistical applications can range from simple fre counts to more complex multivariate analyses . liypothe " is Coding is appropriate for hypothesis testing and content analysis of qualitative data set , particularly the search for rules , causes , and explanations the data . 1 . 23 : 1 . 24 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS Hypothesis Coding can also be applied I11idway or later in a study ' s data collection or analysis to confirm or disconfirnl any aSSierltim theories developed thus f . 1r ( see Second Cycle coding methods ) . researchers will often enter a fieldwork setting or approach a body some idea of what will be present and what will most likely be nappeni However , this does not necessarily suggest that Hypothesis Coding ' : · 15 ranted . , The 111Cthod is a strategic choice for an efficient study that edges its ' focused or sometimes narrowly defined paranlcters of mvestig ; iti , Ethnographer Martyn Hammersley ( 1992 ) admits , " we cannot but constructing hypotheses , assessing them against experience and modilyil them wherc _ necessary , " even when wc " adopt a 1110rC informal and approach in which we sacrifice some of the sharpness of the test in allow more of our assumptions to be thrown open to chal1enge " ( p . 169 ) . Example A mixed - methods study ( Saldana , 1992 ) was conducted to assess how and White fourth - grade child audience members would respond to a oum ~ : Ual play production featuring two chardcters - one Hispanic and one VC ! h ; ' . : i hypothesized before the study began that Hispanic children would identifY ' empathize more with their Hispanic counterpart in the play , while White dren would be more likely to empathize with both characters but idenl : i£jl : more with their White counterpart . After viewing the production , interviews were conducted with children R ( similar ethnicity and gender clustered in small focus groups to collect responses to such questions as : " John felt that ] uan should speak English beCat1S ~ ; they lived in America . But ] uan felt that if they wanted to be friends , ] olm have to learn Spanish . Who was right ? ' [ collect initial response , then ask ] do you feel that way ? ' " ( Saldana , 1992 , p . 8 ) . The research team was trained e : x . " Pect five types of responses to the first forced - choice question , which also Hypothesis Codes applied to the transcript data : ] OHN , jUAN , ~ - , - , . . NEITHER , and NR [ NO RESPONSE ! " I DON ' T KNOW " ] . It was predicted that Hispanic children would most likely select ] UAN a ~ " right " while White children would be more likely to select BOTH or NEI " THER . I predicted tills outcome based on the hypothesis that Hispanic children ' s perceived similarities with Juan ' s language dilemmas in the play would influence and affect them to deliberately " take sides " with the spanish - , speaking character . Frequency COllnt ' i moderately supported this hypothesisin terms oflikelihood , but there was no statistically sigllificallt difference between the ethnic groups ' choices . Thus the original hypothesis was not deleted but modified as data analysis continued . ( For example , when the data were ana . . : : lyzed by gellder rather than ethnicity , girls chose Juan ' s side significantly morc than boys . ) RRST CYCLE COOING METHODS follow - Up question ; " Why do you feel that way ? " , it was hypoth selected types of justifications would emerge both similar alld IIlliqllC I . roup of children Based on conilllon ideologies about language et ullC g . . . . . the United States , the following codes ( and theIr mclUSlVe meamngs ) nevdoPt , d before analysis began : _ We have the right to speak whatever language we want in America _ We need to speak the same language in America - English _ We need to know hoW to speai { more than one language Response or " I don ' t know " excerpts below were coded according to the hypothesized set BOY : 1 John should learn Spanish , and Juan learn English better . GIRL : 2 . It ' s a free country and you can talk any r ~ I ~ ~ ; ~ I ~ YOU want . C - I GIRL : 3 Everybody should imow more than one ' Iangualge• It wasn ' t fair enough . that John wanted Juan to Engllsh , and he , he didn ' t want to speai { Spanish . 1 MORE , RIGHT 3 MORE were coded SAME , most likely due to its perception as a " politically perspective to share during interviews . However , as analysis contin unanticipated category and thus code emerged - the existence of languages in this country : ; ' ' ' ' ' PANIC BOY : 4 All the people In America speak different ' MANY HI : SPANIC GIRL : 5 There ' s a lot of people that speal \ all kinds 5 MANY and they come from all places . was hypothesized that the code MORE ( We need to know how to speak than one language ) would appear in both ethnic groups ' responses , but ( W " C have the right to speak whatever language we want in Alllcrica ) appear with more frequency among Hispanic children . The results dis : 6bfirmt : d one portion of the hypothesis . Both groups with somewhat equal advocated that Americans needed to know how to speak luore than language . Though Hispallics attested with more frequency than Whites thalt Almeri· . callS have the right to speak whatever language they wish , the dif was not statistically significant . In fact , it was the unforeseen code ( The existence of many languages in America ) that was significantly prominent among Hispanics ' responses than Whites . This discovery led • new observation : Although both Hispanic and Wl1ite youth in this study ·sunnorltert the ideology that one has the right to speak whatever language one in America , Hispanic children were more attuned to speaking a : 1 . 25 126 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS non - English language not just as a " right " but as a preexisting " given " United States . Analysis Whether quantitative and / or qualitative , an analysis of Hypothesis used to test the hypothesis under investigation . Even if you discove lik . ~ e 111 the study described above , that some of your proposed hypotheses confirmed tluough discrepant cases or statistical analysis , that in itselfi ' i learning and forces you to more closely examine the content of your thus develop more trustworthy findings . Educational researchers LeCcllllllte ' ~ reissle ( 1993 ) promote tllli as an ongoing process of qualitative ethnographers formulate and systematical1y test successive t ~ lIoughout the research project , genera , ting and verifYing successive nons , both mundane and theoretical , for the behavior exhibited and attitucle ; held by the people under study " ( p . 248 ) . Hypothesis Coding is a mixed - methods approach to data analysis most applied to content analysis but with some transferability to other qualit . ativl ~ . tudies . ~ positivist as the method appears , Weber ( 1990 ) assures researchers · there 15 no single right way to do content analysis . Instead , investigators Judge what methods are appropriate for their substantive problems " ( p . CAQDAS programs are well suited for Hypothesis Coding since the pn ) PclSe codes can be entered a priori in their code lllanagement systems , and ' search functions can he1p the researcher investigate and confirm possible relationships among the data . Some recommended ways to further analyze Hypothesis Codes are Appendix D ) : • assertion development ( Erickson , 1986 ) • content analysis ( KrippendorfI , 2003 ; Weber , 1990 ; Wilkinson Birmingham , 2003 ) • data matrices for univariate , bivariate , and multivariate analysis ( B1 ' rnard , 2 ( ) 06 ] • frequency counts ( LeCompte & Schensul , 1999 ) • longitudinal qualitative research ( Giele & Elder , 1998 ; Saldaiia , 2003 , • mixed - methods research ( Creswell , 2009 ; Creswell & PIano Clark , Tashakkori & Teddlie , 2003 ) • qualitative evaluation research ( patton , 2002 ) • quick etlmography ( Handwerker , 2001 ) Notes Hypothesis Coding differs from Protocol Coding in that the former ' s set codes are usually developed by the researcher herself , while the latter ' s set codes have been developed by other researchers . FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS PROCEDURAL METHODS coding methods arc prescriptive . They consist of pte - established n " svsterl15 or very specific ways of analyzing qualitat . ive data . Though some is provided for context - and site - specific studies , the methods pro @ ed in contain directed procedures to follow by their developers . ( Outline of Cultural Materials ) Coding uses an extensive index of topics developed by anthropologists for the classification of fieldwork ethnographic studies . It is a systematic coding system which has been to a massive data base for the discipline . Coding outlines the general methods , advantages , and disadvan following pre - established coding systems developed by other ' ~ arch " rs in subject areas related to your own inquiry . and ' Ih . . - x : onomic Coding presents some of the signature analytic meth Fbf ' and1Dop ( ) lol ~ SI James P . Spradley for the systematic search for and catego - of cultural terms . This method is also primarily for ethnographic studies . ( OUTLINE OF CULTURAL MATERIALS ) CODING 2006 ; DeWalt & DeWalt , 2002 ; Murdock et al . , 2004 - the OCM http : / / www . yale . edu / hraf / Ocm _ xml / traditionalOcm . xml ( Outline of Cultural Materials ) was developed in the mid - twenti Ice , ntllry by social scientists atYale University as a topical index for anthro and archeologists . " The OCM provides coding for the categories of life that have traditionally been included in ethnographic description history , demography , agriculture . . . ) " ( DeWalt & DeW - ut , 2002 , p . 167 ) . " consisting of thousands of entries , serves to organize the data base Human Relations Area Files ( HRAF ) , a massive collection of ethno field notes and accounts ' about hundreds of world cultures . Each " , and subdomain of the OCM are assigned specific reference numbers , : ~ xample : CLOTHING . 291 NORMAL GARB 292 SPECIAL GARMENTS index entry includes a description widl cross - references to odler relevant for example : 127 128 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS 292 SPECIAL GARMENTS Clothing of special occasions ( e . g . , festive rain gear , bathing costumes ) ; headgear and footwear not ordinarily war . ~ umes associated with special statuses and activities ; special methods o ~ r Ing garments ; etc . Ceremonial attire 796 ORGANIZED CEREMONIAL Dance costumes 535 DANCE Military uniforms 714 UNIFORM AND ACCOUTERMENT Dance and dramatic costumes 530 [ ARTS ] Drama costumes 536 DRAMA Applications OCM cocling is appropriate for ethnographic studies ( cultural and C [ ( ) SS - - cuw tural ) and studies of artifacts , folk art , and human production . The OCM is a specialized indexing system primarily for anthI , op ' ol , ) gi : , ~ ; ' but t1 ~ e web site is wo ~ th browsing by rese ~ rchers from other disciplines acquamt themselves WIth the breadth of possible topics about human rience for field note development . De WaIt & De Walt ( 2002 ) note " indexing is probably going to be more important than coding in the sis . of field notes " ( p . 180 ) . Database management software , particularly arttf . 1ct and docum _ ent coding , is strongly recoffiDlended by Bernard pp . 408 - 12 ) . Example The following is a descriptive field note excerpt of a Native American dancer ' s garments . The four OCM numeric codes listed at the beginning to the entire excerpt . Portions of the codes ' definitions and their included are placed in brackets for reader reference : 292 SPECIAL GARMENTS [ costumes associated with special . . . activities ] 301 ORNAMENT [ types of ornament worn . . . mode of attachment ] 535 DANCE [ information on dance styles . . . dance costumes and paraphernalia } ~ 311 VISUAL ARTS [ material objects whose expressive dimension Is primarily visual In nature . . . information on genres In visual arts { e . g . , beadwork , . . . } . . . design an ' d pattern } , , : , The H ~ . chunk hoop dancer ' s long - sleeved shirt is almost lemon - yellow In color , full the Wrists , and appears to be made out of sill { . His closed but loose - fitting vest has ~ ate reflective beading of triangular - shaped and jagged - edged motifs . This same mg pattern appears sewn as elbow patches on his shirt , headband , and skirt - . - - , " : . . • The bead colors are blue , darl { red , light purple , and silver . A lemon - yellow slll < scarf is tied once In front and hangs down to his stomach . The skirt appears to be stru ~ ted o ~ t of ~ eavy rough leather but Is also lemon - yellow In calor . Eight - inch long and one - mch WIde fnnge strips folloW along the edge of the sldrt , which bounce freely and solidly as he stamps his feet and quicl < ly rotates . A sIx - Inch wide strip of fringe at front and back of the skirt Is dyed burnt orange . The skirt ' s sides are cut to his FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS the front and back are I ~ . nee - Iength . The oval - shaped beaded skirt overlay In and bac \ { is also knee - length . His hoops are saffron - yellow with the same reflee ' ' ' 00 ' ' ' ' ' " patterns and calers at quarter portions af each one , which unifies his basic with the hoops . Codes can also be applied in the margins of field notes when the spe - El ~ tlt - inct long and one - inch wide fringe strips follow along the edge of ' 292 I which bounce freely and solidly 85 2 he stamps his feet and : 2 535 rotates . 3 A six - inch wide strip of fringe at the front and back of 3292 Is dyed burnt orange . The skirt ' s sides are cut to his upper while the . . . 13elrna : rd ( 2006 ) notes that context - specific studies may require highly specific codes that are not in the OCM , so decimals or words can be added after InloDlber to adapt , customize , and extend the subdomains even filrther . For : exIIDlIJle , if SPECIAL GARMENTS is OCM code 292 , I can add extensions . " T ' _ " , _ Costunles " for quantitative applications and analysis such as : w , ' , q ? 1 PASTORELA COSTUMES 292 . 11 SHEPHERDS ' COSTUMES 292 . 12 KINGS ' COSTUMES 292 . 13 DEVIL COSTUME Bernard I ~ c ( I1Tune . nds predetennined hypotheses before drawing representative cross samples from the HRAF cluough OCM codes , cl , en admirustering appropri statistical tests to confirm or disconfirm cl , e hypoclleses ( pp . 40G - - 4 , 515 - 21 ) . recommended ways to further analyze OCM Codes are ( see ! l - ppendlx D ) : . content analysis ( Krippendorff , 2003 ; Weber , 1990 ; Wilkimon & . , • Birmingham , 2003 ) • cross - cultural content analysis ( Bernard , 2006 ) data matrices for univariate , bivariate , and multivariate analysis ( Bernard , 2006 ) descriptive statistical analysis ( Bernard , 2006 ) domain and tlL ' i : onomic analysis ( 5chensul , Schemul , & LeCompte , 1999 ; Spradley , 1979 , 1980 ) frequency counts ( Le Compte & Schensul , 1999 ) memo writing about the codes ( Charmaz , 2006 ; Corbin & Strauss , 2008 ; Glaser , 1978 ; Glaser & StrallSs , 1967 ; Strauss , 1987 ) 129 130 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS • mixed - methods research ( Creswell , 2009 ; Creswell & PIan ~ Tashakkori & Teddlie , 2003 ) • quick ethnography ( Handwerker , 2001 ) Notes There are other established coding schemes developed by anltllropolc , gj " t " ethnographic studies , but the OCM is the largest and perhaps the Ulo ' t known among several academic disciplines . PROTOCOL CODING Sources Boyatzis , 1998 ; Schen , ul , LeCompte , Nastasi , & Borgatti , 1999 ; " HlilUer Sagot , 2000 [ as an exemplar ] Description A protocol in research with human participants refers to detailed and procedural guidelines for conducting an eX1Jeriment , adlllinistering a treatnlent or , in qualitative inquiry , conducting all aspects of field research and analysis . Protocol Coding is the collection and , in particular , the coding qualitative data according to a pre - established , reconunended , standardized , prescribed system . The generally comprehensive list of codes and categclries provided to the researcher are applied after her Own data collection . < n ~ " ·n " ' ! tocols also recommend specific qualitative ( and quantitative ) data analytic niques with the coded data . Applications Protocol Coding is appropriate for qualitative studies in disciplines pre - established and field - tested coding systems if the researcher ' s harmonize with the protocol ' s outcOlnes . Boyatzis ( 1998 ) cautions , use of prior data and research as the basis for development of a code that the researcher accepts another researcher ' s assumptions , prI ) jecIll ) n5 . ' and biases " ( p . 37 ) . Since standardized ways of coding and cate ~ : orizillg , data are provided to the researcher , the coder should insure that all MPllin ; " : C dons are clear and inclusive of all the possible types of responses collected . Some protocols , depencling on their transferability and tfllS " . vOlr " : thiness , may also contribute to the reliability and valiclity of the res , earc11ler ' : s , ' new study . FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS S t ( 1000 ) co - audlOred a richly detailed qualitative research protocol & aF - " . a ' on of violence aO ' : lll1st women WIth the ultl1uate goal of devel - investlga b - . ir . st : rategies to inlprove their conditions - i . e . , an action research l11odel . ServIce idE , rs , c0 1 nll1llUluty members , and women personally affected by fanilly violence Intf , , , , , ie , , ' ed with a reconunended list of questions . E . xamples asked of women i ~ ~ in , : lividulal interviews are : " Can you tell me about the violent situation that 1 , ' V1 ' llg , vith ; J " ( Follow - up ' Ask when the violence occurred and or were , . . , . f violence cile respondent has c : \ . . perienced } . Two focus group queslJ . ons I • . , . vorno " n are : " Wluch family members abuse / attack / mistreat other family and " WIlY does this violence occur ? " ( pp . 45 , 48 ) . . ~ Sf , " rc : hers are provided a specific series of codes q " a [ in the role ofj cate to apply to interview transcript . ~ and docum ~ nts . Mter cod ~ ng , the data analyzed through such techmques as matnces , ta . xonorrues , eX1Jlana ' nph ' VOl·ks . and decision modeling to assess the outcOlnes and plan strate c , lfltervelll : l ( Jns . Shrader & Sagot note : nqualitattili le methodology , the categories and codes . . . generally emerge as rocess unfolds , depending on the data collected and reviewed . However , p already gained in [ our earlier studies ] has generated a very ~ om . categorization system , which has been teste ~ I ~ ten . Latm American ' n " ' , " " ' . The structure of categories presented here IS Identical to the Qn ~ was applied in the analYSis of the data generated by the study . It constl the principal basis for the categorization process , but it is fleXible enough for new categories and subcategories to be added to fit the research ( p . 55 ) example , one major code and its cluster of subcodes applied to responses from women affected by family violence include ( adapted from & Sagot , 2000 , p . 63 ) : Code CAUSES . Subcode . ALCOH . DRUG . MONEY . EDUC . COND . PERS . MACHO . CONTR Definition Reasons that the respondent perceives as the causes of family violence Family violence due to : alcoholism or drinking drug use lacl < of money or financial problems lack of education social conditioning or learned behavior personality of the abuser or the abused intrinsic traits of men or umachismo " controlling behavior of the abuser 131 1 . 32 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS A woman speculating on the reason behind her husband ' s abusive might respond , " He was just a sick , twisted man , born that way . " This would receive the code : CAUSES . PERS . Another woman might offer , his daddy beat his mama , and now he ' s beating 111e , " This response coded : CAUSES . COND . AnalysIs Analytic applications with Protocol Coding should follow the source ' s procedures . Pre - established research protocols will most often prescribe or rec : orrlm , specific researcher training , data - gathering , coding , and analytic mmLocls . protocol may also include such parameters as a required minimum numb ' er : participants . a desired statistical range for assessing intercoder reliab > ility , other guidelines . Depending on the protocol , the procedures and in " trl , " , , ' ; n ' tion may appear inflexible and thus restrictive to certain researchers . But protocols , such as Shrader & Sagot ' s , acknowledge the context - specific ' " of qualitative inquiry and have built - in allowances for unique settings and Schensul , LeCompte , Nastasi , & Borgatti ( 1999 ) recommend using p , , ' exiistih or modified coding schemes for team coders when reviewing vi , de ' J - tapeddal and focus group interview transcripts . A disadvantage of using others ' systems is that the original de ' vdop , , " s . n not always be available to clarifY a vague passagc in their protocol for to answer unique questions that may arise during the course of your ovvn , i : J ] j Standardization is often perceived as antithetical to the qualitative Protocols provide much of the preparatory work for the new inve , ; tig : atlJr , she should be cautious of accepting every prescription at face protocol critically and , if necessary , adapt the guidelines to suit . . _ . . . . ' ' , - " research contexts . On the plus side , substantive contributions to a specific of study may be made if your particular study follows a protocol and builds previous research to confirnl and / or disconfirm the original firLdil " gs , aI expands the data and knowledge bases in the subject ( see Elaborative If you yourself develop a research protocol for other qualitative re , ; ealcaher make certain that all codes are distinctly clear : " If your code is too difEclL < 1t learn , other researchers will avoid it " ( Boyatzis , 1998 , p . 10 ) . Some works , such as dissertations or longer published journal articles , not advocate replication of their studies , but if the topic , research gu . eslio ; ns ; : H goals of those 5tudies have the potential for transferability to your own tigation , explore the possibilities of adapting their works ' suggested pn ) tOl : ols Since CAQDAS code lists can be imported from and exported to other ' jects and users , the programs lend themselves weU to Protocol Coding . FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS research has developed several instruments for the observation , and coding of children ' s behavior in natural settings and semi participatory activities ( Greig , Taylor , & MacKay , 2007 ; O ' Kane , an interesting protocol that codes and transforms qualitative inter for statistical analysis is the Leeds Attributional Coding Systclll et al . , 1999 ) , which assesses a participant ' s causal beliefs . Coding differs ITom Hypothesis Coding in that the fanner ' s set of have been developed by other researchers , while the latter ' s set of codes lell : erally developed by the researcher herself . DOMAIN AND TAXONOMIC CODING Spradley , & Shandy , 2005 ; Spradley , 1979 , 1980 and T ~ xononuc Coding is an ethnographic method for discovering knowledge people use to organize their behaviors and interpret eXIJeriences ( Spradley , 1980 , pp . 30 - 1 ) . " Every culture creates hundreds of of categories by taking unique things and classifying them together " but this knowledge is 1110Stly tacit . Hence , the ethnographer relies pri extensive interviews composed of strategic questions to discern cat : eg " ri , , , of meaning . and ta . . xonomic analysis are separate steps combined into a single " We call categories that categorize other categories domaim and the name thenl copcr terllls . . . . Ta . xonomies are simply D - rierarchical1lists things that are classified together under a domain word by mem - a microculture on the basis of SOIlle shared certain attributes " Spradley , & Shandy , 2005 , pp . 44 - 5 ) . For example , the domain of and its cover ternl might be labeled Codillg lHctlwds . The taxon under the cover ternl with two separate categories : First Cycle Methods and Second Cycle Coding Methods . The taxonomy with subcategories since under each category is a more specific set methods ( see Figure 3 . 1 or this manual ' s Table of Contents - those these cultural categories , it is presumed that " knowledge , includ cultural knowledge . is stored as a systenl of categories in tllc human [ UJ we can find the words that name things when informants talk 1 . 33 HI ! : 1 . 34 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS with other members of their microculture , we can infer the existence group ' s cultural categories . Wc call these informant - generated words folk ( McCurdy , Spradley , & Shandy , 2005 , pp . 35 - 6 ) . A verbatim data extract folk terms is mandatory for Domain and Ta . . xonolluc Coding . But no specific folk terms are generated by participants , the researcher devpln " , ' ! own - called allalytic terllls . To Spradley , nine possible sell / aI / tic relatiollships exist within domains include these types ( Spradley , 1979 , p . 111 ) , followed by examples reI ' , , " . • , codes and coding : Form 1 . Strict Inclusion 2 . Spatial 3 . Cause - effect 4 . Rationale 6 . Location for action 6 . Function 7 . Means - end 8 . Sequence 9 . Attribution Semantic Relationship X Is a kind of Y [ Process Coding is a kind of First Cycle coding method ] X is a place in Y , X Is a part of Y [ Wide margin space is a part of hard - copy coding ] X is a result of Y , X Is a cause of Y [ Analysis is a result of coding ] X is a reason for dOing Y [ Transcribing interviews Is a reason for coding them1 X is a place for doing Y [ A des / < is a place for coding ] X is used for Y [ A computer is used for coding ] X is a way to do Y [ Reading data carefully is a way to code them1 X Is a step ( stage ) in Y [ First Cycle Codingis a stage in coding data ] X is an attribute ( characteristIc ) of Y [ Quotation marks are an attrIbute of In Vivo Codes ] Strict jllcllfSioll forms are generally in the fO [ 1n of nouns in the data ; I1 , " , 1II5 ' - P , { , forms are generally in the form of verbs . For analysis , a semantic relationship is chosen first . Data are then re \ , jel . ved to End exanlples of the semantic relationship , and the related folk or terms are listed in a worksheet . From this , a folk taxollolllY , " a set of ca ' teg ; or ' io organized on the basis of . . a single semantic relationship , " is developed . The onomy " shows the relationships among all the folic terms in a ( SpradJey , 1979 , p . 137 ) . Spradley did not recommend in his early published works specific codes coding procedures for constructing domains and ta . . ' Xonomies . The search folk terms or development of analytic ter111S was completed simply by revie \ , ' ~ ing the data , highlighting the terms , observing and interviewing par·ticipantS . filrther for verification or additional data collection , and conlpiling the mation on separate worksheets . The 11lethods outlined here adapt SP , ra ( lky ' S procedures into a more code - based system for data organization and m : m ' lge " , nlent and , if needed , further analysis . FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS and Ta . . xonomic Coding is appropriate for ethnographic studies and C011 - detailed topics list or index of major categories or themes in the data . and Ta . x : ollOlnic Coding is a thorough yet time - intensive 111cthod ) [ ~ aOlzmlg categories of meaning from participants , provided there are suf data for analysis . It is particularly effective for studying microcultures a specific repertoire of folk terms - e . g . , homeless youth temlS may " street rat , " " sp ' ange , " " l11ake bank , " " green , " " squat , " " scl1 \ villies " & Pinley , 1999 ) . The approach , however , may be perceived by some as too much organization on the Inessiness of social life , as anthropol ; tC : liiliord Geertz ( 1973 ) cautioned : has done more , I think , to discredit cultural analysis than the con of impeccable depictions of formal order in whose actual existence quite believe . . . . [ The ] essential task of theory building here is not abstract regularities but to make thick description pOSSible , not to " np , en " e across cases but to generalize within them . ( pp . 157 , 165 ) experiment In theatre of the oppressed ( i . e . , theatre for social with fourth - and fifth - grade children ( Saldana , 2005b ) began by interviewing , and surveying children about the types of oppres - they encountered in school and at home . The excerpts below arc taken interviews and written , open - ended surveys , pronlpted by the , " _ _ 1 , 0 _ ' . inquiry of " what you ' ve seen or heard of how kids hurt other " _ oppression . " Folk terms within the verbatim text are " coded " by them and noting thenl in quotes in the margin for organizational Researcher - generated analytic terms / codes are also noted in the . After initially reviewing the transcripts and survey responses , I that oppressions occurred physically ( PHY ) , verbally ( VER ) , or a fubiri , . tion of both ( pHY / VER ) . This was the beginning ofa taxonomy , tentative one . Thus , the coding also classified the folk and analytic accordingly . Coding focuses cXc / lIsilJely on finding data that relate to ~ . SI ' m : anti·c relationship : Relationship : Means - end [ X Is a way to do Y } : What children describe below to " hurt " ( oppress ) others Children ' s folk term for the Domain : " HURTING " ; researcher ' s analytic term Domain : OPPRESSING ( major categories ) : Ways to hurt ( oppress ) others : PHYSICALLY , VERBALLY , IP ' NOlN ' AND VERBALLY COMBINED ' m·GR . ADE GIRLS [ group interview ] : 1 : There was thIs one boy , he was trying to another boy into two other boys . , PHY : " PUSH " : 1 . 35 1 . 36 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS 1 : Yes ? GIRL 2 : Some girls ' fight and you can get 3 scratched in the face , and they < 1 call you names . GIRL 3 : This guy tried to do a 5 wrestllng thIng to his friend , and then they did it to another 1 < ld and he got hurt . FOURTH·GRADE BOY [ group Interviewl : Sometimes when we ' re playing games and stuff , and thIs one boy comes over and he says , " Can I play with you guys ? " , and people say , 6 " No , you ' re not our kind of people , so 7 you better get out now . ~ FIFTH·GRADE BOY [ written survey responsel : One day 1 was at schhol I was playing soccer then 1 came back inside and almost everybody started 8 messing up my hair when It was messed up everybody started 9 laughing and 10 saying your hair is messed up I got really made they were still messing with my hair I closed my fist and pretended like I was going to II punch him . FIFTH·GRADE GIRL [ written survey respansel : I was 12 made fun of my fatness . I was 13 called fat , huge fatso are you going to have a baby . I was sad all the time . I ' m trying to luse wiaght but I just gain , gain and gain . Wiaght . I have not lose eney wight . I have not stoped being appresed . FIFTH·GRADE BOY [ written survey responsel : Some times my brother 14 calls me names . And we don ' t play with each other . We get made at each other . Sometimes he is a poor sport when we play games . Analysis , PHY : " FIGHT " ' PHY : " SCRATCHED " , VER : " CALL YOU 5 PHY : " WRESTLING " 6 PHY jVER : EXCLUDE 7 VER : THREATEN 8 PHY : " MESSING UP MY HAIR " 9 VER : " LAUGHING " " VER : TEASING H PHY : " PUNCH " 12 VER : " MADE FUN OF MY FATNESS " " VER : NAME·CALLlNG 14 VER : " CALLS ME NAMES " The codes representing the domain ( including repeated terms , which may sug - : gest a major category rather than subcategory ) arc then assembled into the , ir respective lists . Folk terms , if not uniquely a part of the microculture , can ' be modified into analytic terms ( e . g . , " push " becomes " pushing " ) : WAYS TO HURT ( OPPRESS ) OTHERS Physically pushing fighting scratching wrestling messing up hair punching Verbally name - calling threatening laughing teasing making fun of fatness name·calllng name - calling Physically and Verbally excluding FIRST CYCLE COOING METHODS / IalJ / e - CfllliIlJ ! is a frequent category , the researcher can return to the field articipants ( if they are willing to divulge , that is ) the types of nal11es P call each other and create a pool of sub categories - e . g . , " dork , " " " , , , ' on " etC . the study continued , luore data were collected through other methods , ender differences in chi1dren ' s perceptions and enactment of oppres gbecame strikingly apparent . The taxonomy ' s initial three categories eventually reduced to two , based on the children ' s folk categories that and seen1ed to resonate with gender - based observations : oppres - through physical force ( primarily , but not exclusively , by boys ) and through hurting others ' fcelillgs ( primarily , but not exclusively , ! ' 1 : lLx 1 on { ) mic diagrams can be developed in the form of a simple outline , box dia ~ ~ r : rrn , or tree diagralu in the form of lines and nodes . Taxonomic analysis in finding data subsets and their relationships . Using son1e of the cate extracted above , plus additional data from the study , the terms are reo [ , ' garliz { : d into a ta . x : onon1ic tree diagram ( excerpt ) , as illustrated in Figure 3 . 4 . Spradley ' s methods for domain and taxonomic analysis are the foundati ~ n two advanced stages : " CO / llpo / lC / ltial diU / lysis involves a search for the attnb that signal differences an10ng symbols in a domain . . . . The / lle a / lalysis dnvalves a search for the relationships among domains and how they are linked culture as a whole . . . . All of these types of analysis lead to the discovery meaning . . . . " ( Spradley , 1979 , p . 94 ) . Componential and theme analy not necessarily require Second Cyc1e coding , but instead rely on synthe the analytic work fron1 domains and ta . . x : onomies developed thus far , coupled with any necessary additional data co1lection to c1arify and confirm the ' colteg ; oriles ' relationships . ' Most CAQDAS programs include graphic capabilities to draw domains taxonomies . Son1e progranls , such as ATLAS . ti , can " calculate " and dis a visual model that illustrates your codes ' organizational arrangement based on their frequency and researcher - initiated linkages . CAQDAS pro can also arrange and manage your codes into hierarchies and trees , on your input . Some rec0I1IDlended ways to further analyze Domain and Ta . x : onomic Codes are ( see Appendix D ) : • cognitive mapping ( Miles & Huberman , 1994 ; Northcutt & McCoy , 2004 ) • componential and cultural theme analysis ( McCurdy , Spradley , & Shandy , 2005 ; Spradley , 1979 , 1980 ) • content analysis ( Krippendorff , 2003 ; Weber , 1990 ; Wilkinson & Birmingham , 2003 ) 1 . 37 ' . . ··· . · ' . ···1 " 1 . 38 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS Scratching Pushing Wrestling BY " FORCE " Beating up [ primarlly boys ] Taking things away r Messing up someo : eame . calling - E ~ ~ ~ : OPPRESSION Laughing at Wuss 1 OPPRESSION BY " FEELINGS " [ primarily girls ] Putting down Excluding Threatening Coercing Teasing - Making fUn of the body I I 1 Fat Breasts Trash talking 1 Rude talking Nasty talking Slandering Spreading rumors FIGURE 3 . 4 Excerpts from a taxonomic tree diagram of the ways children oppress others • cross - cultural content analysis ( Bernard , 2006 ) • domain and taxonomic analysis ( Schensul , Schensul . & LeCompte Spradley , 1979 , 1980 ) , • graph - theoretic techniques for semantic network analysis ( Name ) , ; Thairu , & Johnson , 2008 ) , • illustrative charts , matrices , diagrams ( Miles & Huberman 1994 - " Fellows , & Guevara , 2008 ; Northcutt & McCoy , 2004 ; Pauiston , 2000 ) · • memo writing about the codes ( Channaz , 2006 ; Corbil1 & Strauss Gbser , 1978 ; Glaser & Strauss , 1967 ; Strauss , 1987 ) , • qUIck ethnography ( Handwerker , 2001 ) • situational analysis ( Clarke , 2005 ) • splitting , splicing , and linking data ( Dey , 1993 ) • thematic analysis ( Auerbach & Silverstein , 2003 ; Boyatzis , 1998 ) • wlthm - case and cross - case displays ( Gibbs , 2007 ; Miles & Huberman , Notes Domain and Ta . . , , ( Ol10111ic Coding differs from T n Vivo Coding in that the mer method 5 ~ stemat : ically searches for specific hierarchical organization folk and analytIC terms , while the latter is an open - ended cocling method grounded theory and other coding methods . FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS THEMEING THE DATA in Chapter One that a theme is an ol / tcome of coding , categorization , reflection , not something that is , in itself , coded . But several qual methodologisl < ; reconIDlcnd labeling and thus analyzing portions of an extended thematic statement rather than a shorter code , as it is in this manual . Hence , " Thclllcing the Data " provides a brief profile & Silverstein , 2003 ; Boyatzis , 1998 ; DeSantis & Ugarriza , 2000 ; lie . DJU , Rubin & Rubin , 1995 ; Ryan & Bernard , 2003 ; van Manen , 1990 ierclel1mtlon and analytic function of a " theme " varies anlong the writers in the Sources above , but overall , a theme is a phrase or SCI / tellcc that what a unit of data is auollt andlor what it lIlCQJlS . Boyatzis ( 1998 ) that a theme " at a m . inimmn describes and organizes possible obser or at the ma . . xinlUln interprets aspects of the phenomenon . A theme identified at the manifest level ( directly observable in the informa at the latent level ( underlying the phenomenon ) " ( p . vii ) . DeSantis & ( 2000 ) , after an extensive literature review on the use of theme in aliiat ; ' le research , discovered that the term was often used interchangeably words as " category , " " domain , " " phrase , " " unit of analysis , " and oth - 358 ) . Ultimately , they proposed a more stable definition based on their analysis : " A thenle is an abstract entity that brings nleaning and iden - a . recurrent [ patterned ] e : : ' I . " perience and its variant manifestations . As theme captures and unifies the nature or basis of the experience into neanin ! ~ fnl whole " ( p . 362 ) . manifest level , a theme functions as a way to categorize a set of data into implicit topic that organizes a gronp of repeating ideas " ( Auerbach & ! ycrsre ! n , 2003 , p . 38 ) . This foundation work leads to the development of 19aer - Ievel theoretical constructs when simil . ar themes are clustered together . To & Rubin ( 1995 ) , themes are statements qlla [ in the role of ] ideas presented during interviews , or conceptual topics developed by the during a review of the data . Themes can consist of such ideas as i ) ; " FriptiOII1 ! ofbehavior widrin a culture , e " " planations for why sometlring hap - iconic statenlents , and nlOrals from participant stories . These themes are dis during data collection and initial analysis , and then examined furdler as ite , : vi " ws continue . The analytic goals are to winnow down the number of to eX " plorc in a report , and to develop an " overarching theme " from the 1 . 39 1 . 40 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS data corpus , or an " integrative theme " that weaves various themes ro ! , ethF ' a coherent narrative . At its latent level , themes serve phcnom _ cnology , " the study of world - the world as \ ~ e illlmediately experience it pre - reflectivel ) • . than as wc conceptuahze , categorize , or reflect on it . . . . Pllerloll1en ~ aims at gaining a deeper understanding of the nature or mealair , , ! everyday experiences " ( van Mancn , 1990 , p . 9 ) . To van Manen , interpretive , insightful discoveries - written attempts to get at the of data to make sense of them and give them shape . Overall , a theme : form of capturing the phenomenon one tries to understand " ( p . the collective set of researcher - generated thenles is not intended tematic analysis ; " themes are only fasteners , foci , or threads around the phenomenological description is facilitated " ( p . 91 ) . Like Rubin , van Manen recommends the winriowing of themes down to is " essential " rather than " incidental , " the fornler making the pllerlOlneno " what it is and without which the phenomenon could not be what ( p . 107 ) . Applications Themeing the Data is appropriate for virtually all qualitative studies , , " " F . . _ " cially for metasynthesis and metasummary studies ( see Notes at the end profile ) . Unlike content analysis , which begins with predefined categ : ories " thl matic analysis allows categories to emerge frOIll the data ( Ezzy , 2002 , p : Themeing the Data is not an expedient method of qualitative analysis . Tt is as intensive as coding and requires cOlllparable reflection on participant ings and outcomes . Like coding , thematic analysis or the search for thenles in the data strategic choice as part of the research design that includes the questions , goals , conceptual framework , and literature review . Kvale ( 1 labels this " thematizing " or describing the concept of the topic investigation before interviews begin ( p . 88 ) . Kvale , Rubin & Rubin ; van Manen attest that through carefully planned questioning te , chlligu " , participants construct the nleanings of what the researcher is trying ~ explore : uthe interviewer does not uncover SOlne preexisting l11eanings , supports the interviewees in developing their meanings throughout , the course of the interview " ( Kvale , 1996 , p . 226 ) . Themes should be stated simply as possible during the first cycle of analysis for " llleaning COll1o < , n sation , " then woven together for " meaning interpretation " to " explain sOlllething happened or what sonlething nleans " ( Rubin & Rubin , 1 p . 57 ) . FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS the Data is perhaps 1110re applicable to interviews and partici " " , ra l : eo documents and artifacts , rather than researcher - generated field iUCIlll , enlolclgl ' Lal study is conducted on " belonging " - what it 11leans The question is posed to a middle - aged adult male . Note how in the Iuargin relate directly to the goal of the study . Some are themes , others are latent , and some enlploy In Vivo Codes . There deliberate choices nlade ' between the phrases " Belonging nlcans " hTlelrIll ~ 6nl ' \ is . " The latter generally refers to concrete details or action le ' Qlanil : est level ; the fornler generally refers to conceptual ideas at the does It mean to you to " belong " ? ] , that ' s tough . To me , 1 it means " somewhere , a speclfic place place else . kind of place ? l y " , e " " ' , : ! I feel so grounded in that city . before ( Hurricane } Katrina , years J There ' s something about that place decadence , the style , the robustness find in any other city , even New Yorlc a kind of sensuality about the city , a mix music , stuff that ' s unique , thIngs you ' ll other place In that combination . . . . friends there , good friends , 5 good places to drink , places to eat . I go there , 6 I ' m always in search , hRnRr ' f8ctJumbalaya . I stili haven ' t found I ' m stili searching . I ' ve found the red beans , rice and sausage , but lImbi3lay , yet . else ? 7 Sldewalk vendors and artists Square , those psychlcs , homeless ; , I1 ) UnISIS wearing those Mardi Gras beads . them as decor all over my house , but wear them In New Orleans because do that when it ' s not Mardi Gras . S I ' m not a tourist there . I belong there though I don ' t live there . 1 BELONGING MEANS A " SPECIFIC PLACE " , BELONGING MEANS FEELING " GROUNDED " 3 BELONGING OCCURS IN A " UNIQUE " PLACE , BELONGING IS WHERE THERE ARE " GOOD FRIENDS " 5 BELONGING IS WHERE THERE ARE " GOOD MEMORIES " , BELONGING MEANS THE SEARCH FOR PERFECTION - UTOPIA , BELONGING IS KNOWING THE DETAILS OF THE CULTURE 8 YOU CAN BELONG SOME· WHERE WITHOUT ACTUALLY BEING THERE 1 . 41 . 142 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS 9 If I could do it tomorrow , I ' d sell my house and move to New Orleans and live there ' til I die . . 10 I feel I ' ve got some Cajun in me , and that ' s where I belong . [ I : Are you part Cajun ? ] 11 No , but I feel like I am . Analysis , BELONGING IS A DRIVE TO SOMEPLACE PERMANENT " BELONGING MEANS HAVING SENSE OF ANCESTRY U BELONGING MEANS HAVING SENSE OF IDENTITY The Sources for Themeing the Data propose various ways of analyzing reflecting on themes after they have been generated . Basic categorization an initial tactic is the one most often prescribed , so it will be illustrated here ; The themes listed next to the transcript above are now categorized aQ : o " l " , ing to cOITITI10nality , and ordered in superordiriate and subordinate outline mat to reflect on their possible groupings and relationships : I . Belonging means feeling " grounded " A . Belonging means having a sense of ancestry B . Belonging means having a sense of identity C . Belonging is knowing the details of the culture 11 . Belonging is a drive to be someplace permanent A . Belonging means a ~ specific place " B . Belonging occurs in a " unique " place C . You can belong somewhere without actually being there Ill . Belonging means the search for perfection - Utopia A . Belonging is where there are " good friends " B . Belonging is where there are " good memorles N The three m ~ or theme headings ( meta - themes ) suggest that " belonging " is : ( 1 ) an actual place ; ( 2 ) a sense of self in that place ; ( 3 ) an ideal place . A reflec tive analytic memo that builds on this initial categorization and weaves the the matic element ' i together might read : " Belonging " is both geographical and conceptual . It is an Ideal place where we feel , as an overarching theme , grounded - grounded with a sense of ancestry and memory , grounded with a sense of culture and identity , and grounded with a sense of permanence and perfection . A different approach to the themes would involve categorization in order to develop researcher - generated theoretical cOlIstmcts . Note how the categorization of themes here is different from the way they were organized above : Theoretical Construct 1 : Belonging is Social Supporting Themes : Belonging means a uspecific place " FIRST CYCLE CODING MErHODS Belonging occurs in a ~ unlquel ' place Belonging is knowing the details of the culture Belonging is where there are " good friends " Belonging means having a sense o ! identity . eD , e ! lca Construct 2 : Belonging is Memory " o ' lOemt , ; ; r , gThemes : Belonging is where there are " good memories " Belonging means having a sense of ancestry You can belong somewhere without actually being there he ' D " e ! lcal Construct 3 : Belonging is a Quest sup ~ , ortlln , g Themes : Belonging is a drive to be some place permanent Belonging means feeling " grounded " Belonging means the search for perfection - Utopia The write - up would then discuss each one of these constructs and how they or relate with each other . The themes and their related data serve as illustcati· , e examples to support the interpretation . same themes , organized and categorized in two ways , as illustrated ve , generat : e sonlewhat different perspectives on what it means to " belong . " merson , Fretz , & Shaw ( 1995 ) note that , aside from frequency , the themes developed and selected for analysis are those that resonate with pe , csuuM or disciplinary concerns ( p . 173 ) , Keep in mind that this initial analy only of one excerpt from one participant ' s interview transcript . Acldi ! tional participants may generate different as well as similar thel11es related , " belonging " that will be integrated into a fi . l11er analysis . The thel11es thus far can be referenced as interviews continue to assess their and to shape the researcher ' s interview questions . Sonle themes from particular exanlple above may be dropped as 1110re data are collected analysis continues . Some may be subsumed under broader categories , and themes may be retained . In Chapter One of this manual , I included a section titled " What Gets CCldedr ' For this particular method , one might ask , " What gets themed ? " Ryan Bernard ( 2003 ) recommend tl , at themes can be found in the data by look for such qualities as : repeating ideas , participant or indigenous terms , in . etaphocs and analogies , transitions or shifts in topic , similarities and dilIer of participant expression , linguistic connectors ( " because , " " since , " " etc . ) , theoretical issues suggested by the data ( e . g . , interpersonal rela : tio " " hips , social conflict and control ) , and even what is missing from - not dis or present in - the data . Themeing lends itself to selected CAQDAS programs , but themes are also intril > ; uing to Sllllply " cut and paste " in multiple arrangements on a basic word processor page to explore possible categories and relationships . 143 : 144 • • • • • • • • • • • THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS Some reconullcnded ways to fi . lrther analyze themes are ( see Appendix - assertion development ( Erickson , 1986 ) case studies ( Merriam , 1998 ; Stake , 1995 ) memo writing about the themes ( Charmaz , 2006 ; Corbin & Strau ~ s Glaser , 1978 ; Glaser & Strauss , I967 ; Strauss , 1987 ) , meta - ethnography , metasynthesis , and metasummary ( Finfgeld . Noblit & Hare , 1988 ; Sandelowski , Docherty , & Emden , 1997 ) metaphoric analysis ( Coffey & Atkinson , 1996 ; Todd & Harrison , 2008 ) narrative inquiry and analysis ( Clandinin & Connelly , 2000 ; Atkinson , 1996 ; Cortazzi , 1993 ; Daiute & Lightfoot , 2004 ; Riessman , phenomenology ( van Manen , 1990 ) poetic constructions ( Denzin , 1997 ; Glesne , 2006 ; Knowles & Cole , portraiture ( Lawrence - Lightfoot & Davis , 1997 ) thematic analysis ( Auerbach & Silverstein , 2003 ; Boyatzis , 1998 ) vignette writing ( Erickson , 1986 ; Graue & Walsh , 1998 ) Notes What follows is a brief overview of qualitative nletasynthesis and m " tasiUll1 mary , research enterprises that can employ unique combinations of coding themeing qualitative data . Metasynthesis and nletasunmlary are methodological approaches that compare , and synthesize the key findings of a number of related in ' terpn , ti , ' e / qualitative studies ( Finfgeld , 2003 ; Noblit & Hare , 1988 ; Docherty , & Emden , 1997 ) . A primary goal of these techniques is inductive " systematic comparison of case studies to draw cross - case conclusions . reduces the accounts while preserving the sense of the account through selection of key nletaphors and organizers , " such as themes , concepts , ideaS , perspectives ( Noblit & Hare , 1988 , pp . 13 - 14 ) . This is the qualitative . quantitative research ' s nleta - analysis . and relies on the researcher ' s strategic lection and cOlllparative analysis of phrases and sentences - i . e . , themes - represent the essences and essentials of previous studies . Some researchers apply a nux of Descriptive , Holistic , and Si ! ' 11l1It ; LI1eo ~ s Codes , for example , to represent the gist of an entire study . These codes be based on an a priori or emergent set of themes when reviewing a co , lle , ct , , ~ · . body of related studies for metasynthesis . Au ( 2007 ) , for example , re , ric , , veel ' qualitative educational studies and employed a si . x - code template m u , " " ' y each study ' s site - specific curricular changes in response to high - stakes tel , tirlg . Two of the si . x curriculum - based codes representing " dominant thel11es " " PCT - Pedagogic change to teacher - centered " and " KCF - Form nf ' kn , o " , k edge changed , fractured " ( p . 260 ) . FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS researchers do not inftially code ' but instead carefillly search for and thematic statements fr0111 the cal1eeted studies ' findings and , if neces - abstract the statements for comparison and metasul1lluary . Sandelowski & ( 2003 ) , for example , reviewed 45 qualitative studies on HIV - positive and cOlnpiled an initial set of almost 800 thematic statements that rep the studies ' major observations . These " raw data " themes were then and collapsed to 93 statements based on similarity , then coded and under ten major emergent categories about the women , such as and disclosure " and " mothering the HIV - negative and HIV - positive Though not necessary for metasynthesis , both Au ( 2007 ) and " cl " lo ' IVsl , , ' & Barroso ( 2003 ) calculated percentages of selected data to assess phenomena as participant effect sizes and major theme occurrences . Au ' s rrlUltaIleCll1S Coding system enabled him to infer " potentially significant rela between dominant themes " ( 201l7 , p , 263 ) . iNlet : osyntlhel ; i ' s and l11etasummary can employ a unique combination of cod - a / ld themeing the data . This approach seems necessary since " Metasynthesis a method designed to produce oversimplification ; rather , it is one in differences are retained and complexity enlightened . The goal is to more , not less . The outcome will be something like a conUl1on under of the nature of a phenomenon , not a consensual worldview " ( Thorne 2004 , p . 1 , 346 ) . following pages are provided for documenting additional First Cycle coding located in other sources or developed by the researcher . : 145 I I1 : 1 . 46 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS FIRST CYCLE CODING METHODS : 1 . 47 11 _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Coding _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - - - ' - _ Coding ' j Source ( s ) : Description : Application ( s ) : oolic " tion ( s ) : Example : Analysis : Notes : : 1 . 48 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Coding Source ( s ) : Description : Application ( s ) : Example : Analysis : Notes : Cycle Coding Methods analysis is a process that requires astute questioning , a relentless search for active observ ~ ltion , and accurate recalL Tt is a process of piecing together making the invisible obvious , of recognizing the significant from the i " , iigniific : mt , of linking seemingly unrelated facts logically , of fitting categories one another , and of attributing consequences to antecedents . It is a process of ; COI * , ctllre and verification , of correction and modification , of suggestion and It is a creative process of organizing data so that the analytic scheme will obvious . Uanice M . Morse , ' ' ' Emerging from the Data ' : The Cognitive Processes of Analysis in Qualitative Inquiry , " 1994 , p . 25 ) Cycle coding methods , if needed , are advanced ways of reorganizing and analyzjing data coded through First Cycle methods . They each require , as Morse , it , " fitting categories one \ vith another " to develop a coherent synthesis of the corpus . Before categories are assembled , your data may have to be recoded more accurate words or phrases were discovered for the original codes ; codes will be merged togedler because they are conceptually similar ; infre codes \ vill be assessed for their utility in the overall coding scheme ; and codes dlat seemed like good ideas during First Cycle coding may be all together because they are later deemed " marginal " or " redundant " cl , e data corpus has been fully reviewed ( Lewins & Silver , 2007 , p . 100 ) . . The primary goal during Second Cycle coding , if needed , is to develop a of categorical , thematic , conceptual , and / or theoretical organization from array of First Cycle codes . But some of the methods outlined in tIlls chap - may OCCUr during the initial as well as latter coding periods . Basically , your Cycle codes ( and their associated coded data ) are reorganized and recon to eventually develop a smaller and more select list of broader cate themes , and / or concepts . For example , if you generated 50 different for your data corpus during First Cycle coding , those 50 codes ( and their l ' s ~ lciated coded data ) are then recoded iL " i needed , then categorized according : 150 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS to similarity during Second Cycle coding , which might result in 25 codes onc category , 15 codes for a second category , and the remaining ten codes a third category . ( Keep in mind that tins is a very simple and clean exanlipl " Your actual process might generate different l1U1ubers or even approaches all together . ) But the goal is not necessarily to develop a perfectly hierarchical pointed outline or list of permanently fixed coding labels during and after cycle of analysis . Let me offer an analogy : Imagine buying a large piece of l1iture like a table that comes unassembled in a box which says ·· " , ; se1llbIV . required . " The instructions state that you take out all of the packaged such as the bolts , washers , nuts , table legs , and table top , then gather cl , e nel : essa , . y tools , such as a wrench and screwdriver . The instructions reCOn1l1lend that illllcIltOI ) , all parts to make certain everything you need is there , and that arrmlge tlte parts appropriately 0 / 1 tlte . floor bifore ~ lsse / lllJlillg . You ' ve probably mined by now where tIlls analogy is going . The individual pieces ofil11lentor : ied hardware and wood are the First Cycle coded data ; and their arrangenlent into organized categories on the floor , the tools , and the ass " mlbly : process are the Second Cycle coding methods of how everything fits together . : The analogy fails in one regard , however . There is a specific alld prescdbed of instructions for how the table is to be assembled . Any deviation from directions or substitution of materials and the integrity of the furniture is promised . In qualitative data analysis , some interpretive leeway is necessary indeed , creativity is essential to achieve new and hopefil11y striking persrleetiv , , , about the data . A bolt is a bolt , a wrench is a wrench , and a table top is a top . But after assembly , consider what would happen if you brought in an tric sander to reshape or smooth the wood ' s edges , or a brush and change the table ' s finish , or various tablecloths and centerpieces to eXlpel : inlent ) vvith and capture a certain " look . " The methods profiled in this chapter neither prescriptive nor inflexible . They arc guidelines for basic assembly opportunities for the researcher ' s elaboration . Like First Cycle methods , some Second Cycle methods can be cOlnp , atitlly mi " ed - and - matched as a form of " Eclectic Coding . " Depending on the for example , Pattern Coding could be used as the sole Second Cycle metllclo . ' : or serve in conjunction with Elaborative or Longitudinal Coding . Those ested in developing grounded theory might begin this cycle with Fo , eused , Coding , then progress toward A . xial and ! or Theoretical Coding . Overview of Second Cycle Coding Methods Pattern Coding develops the " meta - code " - the category label that idf : utiifie : , : similarly coded data . Pattern Codes not only organize the corpus but attl ' DllJt , to attribute meaning to that , organization . SECOND CYCLE CODING METHODS : pocU ! ; ed Coding , A . xial Coding , and Theoretical Coding are the latter stages developing grounded theory - the former stages being In Vivo , Process , ' n , , ; . - ; , I Coding . FoCll ' ; ed Coding categorizes coded data based on thematic or conceptual A . - . dal Coding describes a category ' s properties and dil11ensions and how the categories and subcategories relate to each other . Theoretical progresses toward discovering the central / core category that identifies primary theme of the research . In these three methods , reflective analytic writing is both a code - and category - generating heuristic . Coding builds on a previous study ' s codes , categories , and while a current and related study is undenvay . TIllS nlethod employs jdltlonal qualitative data to support or modify the researcher ' s observations eve ' lol , ea in an earlier project . Longitudinal Coding is the attribution of selected change processes to qua1 - data collected and c0111pared across tUlle . Matrices organize fieldwork bserv " tiCll1S , interview transcripts , and document excerpts into similar tempo - cat , egcJril " that permit researcher analysis and reflection on their sinlilarities differences from one tinle period through another . : 15 : 1 : 1 . 52 I THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS PATTERN CODING Source Miles & Hubennan , 1994 Description Pattern Codes are " expbnatory or inferential codes , ones that identify an gent theme , configuration , or explanation . They pull together a lot of into a lllOre meaningfi . l1 and parsimonious unit of analysis . They are a meta - code . . . . Pattern Coding is a way of grouping those sununaries smaller number of sets , themes , or constructs " ( Miles & Huberman , 1994 , Applications According to Miles & Huberman , Pattern Coding is appropriate for : • • • • • the second cycle of coding , after Initial Coding , for exalllple development of major themes from the data the search for rules , causes , and explanations in the data examining social networks and patterns of human relationships the formation of theoretical constructs and processes ( e . g . , " [ Le " : obiatin ~ i " bargaining " ) Example Five staff members of a small office were interviewed separately about administrative leadership . Each one remarked how internal com . mlI1i . cation , franl their director were occasionally haphazard , incomplete , or nom - exist , , , i Each passage below was initially Descriptive Coded or In Viva Coded . that one sentence is bolded because , during coding , it struck the researcher a strong statement : SECRETARY : 1 I often have to go back to her and get more information about what she wants done because her first set of instructions weren ' t clear . RECEPTIONIST : ' It ' s kind of hard worldng for her , because she rushes in , tells you what needs to be done , then goes into her office . : 3 After she ' s gone you start doing the job , and then you find out there ' s all these other things she didn ' t think of to tell you . ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT : ' Sometimes I think she expects you to read her mind and Imow what she wants , that she expects you to Imow everything that ' s going on without SECOND CYCLE CODING MEfHODS to tell you . 5 I can ' t do my· job effectively if ~ ~ ; t ce . mrr . unl " ate with me . MANAGER : S I hate it when she tells me In the or In a conversation what to do . I need it written In so there ' s documentation of the transaction for , " " tI " ns manager and the auditor . MANAGER : 7 Sometimes she doesn ' t always she needs , and then she gets upset later when been done . Well , that ' s because you never told me the first place . 5 " SHE DOESN ' T COMMUNICATE " S WRITIEN DIRECTIONS NEEDED 7 " YOU NEVER TOLD ME " codes were assembled together ( see Figure 4 . 1 ) to analyze their com and to create a Pattern Code . ideas were then brainstormed for the Pattern Code , among them : DOESN ' T COMMUNICATE " lan In Vivo Code from the Initial Coding cycle that seemed to hold summative power for the remaining codes ] WS ; & ( ; or ~ MIU ~ ICATION [ a title reference to the female administrator - a flip yet code ] researcher reflection , the final Pattern Code created and selected for DIRECTION [ a Pattern Code that suggests action with con se - interview excerpts contain consequential words and phrases such as " if , " " and " because , " which alert the researcher to infer what Ivliles & Unclear Instructions Rushed Directions Incomplete Directions Expectations of Info = Pattern Code us he Doesn ' t Communicate " Written Directions Needed " You NeverTold Me " Codes assembly to determine their Pattern Code : 1 . 53 r [ : 1 FI 1 . 54 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS Huberman state arc " rules , causes , and explanations " in the data . bolded sentence , " r can ' t do lUY job effectively if she doesn ' t nieate with Ine , " seems to holistica11y capture the spirit of the d , ' snlnc , theme at work . The Pattern Code , in concert with the " if / then " actions and DO ' ld " d ' st ment , led the researcher to construct the assertion , " Poor COIIIIIIIII " icatioll adlllillistratillc leadership reslIlts ill strifJ memhers I / Iho feel / lot jllst jmstratcd so / wily IIIJSIIC [ CS , if1l1 at their johs . JJ The explanatory narrative continues deuce to support the claim , then describes the dysfunctional W ' " koh , dynamics for the reader . For Second Cycle Pattern Coding , collect similarly coded passages data corpus . CAQDAS searches , queries , and retrievals will assist gready this process . Review the First Cycle codes to assess their commonality assign theln a Pattern Code . Use the Pattern Code as a stimulus to aeveJop statement that describes a major then1e , a pattern of action , a network relationships , or a theoretical construct fron1 the data . " Many codes - especially pattern codes - are captured in the farnt metaphors ( ' dwindling efforts , ' ' interactive glue ' ) , where they can syrlthesiz large blocks of data in a single trope " ( Miles & Huberman , 1994 , p . Several Pattern Codes can emerge from _ Second Cycle analysis of qualitati ~ data . Each one may hold merit as a major theme to analyze and develoo . hI Miles & Hubernlan also caution that " pattern codes are hunches : Some out , but many do not " ( p . 72 ) , E ' qJlaining " why " something happens is a slippery task in qualitative ( and even in some quantitative research ) . Gubrium & Holstein ( 1997 ) put that " the whats of the social world always inform our understanding of the . . . Taken together , dlese reciprocalw / Jaf and hOJII concerns offer a basis for ing a variety of " ' ' ' l ' questions " ( p , 196 ) . During this cycle of coding and if you seem to have only a tentative eX " } Jlanation for why something is happ , millg or has happened , return to the data to examine participant ' \ vhats " and " hows : ' , Some recOlTITIlended ways to further analyze Pattern Codes are Appendix D ) : • action research ( Altrichter , Posch , & Somekh , 1993 ; Stringer , 1999 ) • assertion development ( Erickson , 1986 ) • content analysis ( Krippendorff , 2003 ; Weber , 1990 ; Wilkinson Birmingham , 2003 ) • decision lUodeling ( Bernard , 2 ( 06 ) • grounded theory ( Charmaz , 2006 ; Corbin & Strauss , 2008 ; Glaser & ~ trau " ; ' 1967 ; Strauss & Corbin , 1998 ) • interactive qualitative analysis ( Northcutt & McCoy , 2004 ) SECOND CYCLE CODING METHODS research ( CresweU , 2009 : Creswell & Plano Clark , 2007 ; r . 1S1 : . aKl , on & Teddlie , 2003 ) " . . alitative evaluation research ( Patton , 2002 ) ~ ituati { J11al analysis ( Clarke , 2005 ) splitt1l1 . g , splicing , and linking data ( Dey , 1993 ) ' th , , , m1rtc analysis ( Auerbach & Silverstein , 2003 ; Boyatzis , 1998 ) i FOC1ISe , i , A . xial , and Theoretical Coding for comparable analytic processes Coding , FOCUSED CODING Coding follows Initial Coding , a First Cycle coding method . Focused searches for the most frequent or significant Initial Codes to develop ~ nost salient categories " in the data corpus and " requires decisions about initial codes make the most analytic sense " ( Char / naz , 2006 , pp . 46 , 57 ) . Coding is appropriate for virtual1y all qualitative studies , but particu - for sOldies employing grounded theory methodology , and the develop - of major categories or thenIes fro111 the data . . , F , ) Cu , sed Coding , as a Second Cycle analytic process , is a streamlined adap of classic grounded theory ' s A . xial Coding , The goal of this method is to categories without distracted attention at this time to their properties dimensions . Dey ( 1999 ) , however , cautions that categories , particularly in inquiry , do not always have their constituent elements sharing a set of features , do not always have sharp boundaries , and that " there different degrees ofbe1onging " ( pp . 69 - 70 ) . interview transcript excerpt fronl the Initial Coding profile in Chapter is used again to show how the codes transformed from the first to the 1 . 55 1 . 56 t n 11 11 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS second cycles ; refer to that first before proceeding . In the example sintilarly ( not necessarily exactly ) coded are clustered together and create tentative category nallIes with an emphasis on process thI ' Ol1 . Rh . th of gerunds ( U _ illg " words ; see Process Coiling ) . Note that just excerpt is the only one in its category : Category : DEFINING ONESELF AS A FRIEND I think people , 31 people define me as popular " DEFINING SELF THROUGH " POPULAR " Category : MAINTAINING FRIENDSHIPS 1 I hang out with everyone . Really . 3 I can look back to kindergarten , and at some point I was 4 best friends with everybody who ' s been here . And so there are 7 certain people that I ' ve just been 8 friends with since forever 1 " HANGING OUT WITH EVERY ONE " . ' RECALLING FRIENDSHIPS 4 " BEST FRIENDS WITH EVERY BODY " 7 FRIENDS WITH " CERTAIN 8 FRIENDS WITH " SINCE ru " eV " R Category : LABELlNG THE GROUPS 10 really super popular pretty girls are all mean 14 geeky people 16 strange - psycho - killer - geel { people - who - draw - swastikas - on their - backpacl { s 23 jocks 10 LABELlNG : " REALLY SUPER POPULAR PRETTY GIRLS " H LABELlNG : " GEEKY PEOPLE " 16 LABELlNG : " STRANGE PSYCHO - KILLER·GEEK " " LABELlNG : " JOCKS " Category : QUALIFYING THE GROUPS 5 practically 6 Almost everybody In my grade 15 Some of them though 17 kind of geeks 18 some of them are kind of 19 But then again 2 . 1 not all of them are completely , JiI ~ e B QUALIFYING : " PRACTICALLY " 6 QUALIFYING : " ALMOST " " QUALIFYING : " SOME OF 17 QUALIFYING : " KIND OF " 18 QUALIFYING : " SOME OF 19 QUALIFYING : " BUT THEN ••• " " QUALIFYING : " NOT ALL OF THEM " Category : DISPELLING STEREOTYPES OF THE GROUPS 9 not fair of me to stereotype either 11 they ' re all snobby and they all talk about each other 12 ' cause they don ' t . Some of them , some of them don ' t 20 there ' s not the complete stereotype 24 not all of the guys are idiots 9 " NOT FAIR TO STEREOTYPE " 11 IDENTIFYING STEREOTYPES 12 DISPELLING STEREOTYPES " DISPELLING STEREOTYPES " DISPELLING STEREOTYPES SECOND CYCLE CODING METHODS category : SETTING CRITERIA FOR FRIENDSHIPS the ones I ' m friends , with those people with the ones who with someone because are , of what group they , they basically . ' Cause I think stupid to be , like , ' " ' ' ' ' " ' ' ' [ " people thini ( if they saw me this person ? " or something . wouldn ' t define yourself , specific group ? ] rather hang out with someone ; " hpe , ted but a little slow , , " CHOOSING " WHO YOU HANG OUT WITH " CHOOSING FRIENDS : " SUPER POPULAR PRETTY GIRLS " " CHOOSING FRIENOS : " GEEKS " " CHOOSING FRIENDS : JOCKS " WHO CAN CARRY ON A CONVERSATION " " CRITERIA FOR FRIENDSHIP : " WHO THEY ARE " " CRITERIA FOR FRIENDSHIP : NOT GROUP MEMBERSHIP " ETHICS OF FRIENDSHIP " NOT CONCERNED WITH WHAT OTHERS THINK " MAINTAINING INDIVIDUALITY 32 CRITERIA FOR FRIENDSHIP : " GOOD HEARTED BUT SLOW " 33 CRITERIA FOR FRIENDSHIP : NOT THOSE " VERY SMART BUT VERY EVIL " . qIJ ! l [ in the role of ] categories are now listed for a review : ONESELF AS A FRIEND II ' JTPdNll ' m FRIENDSHIPS THE GROUPS ' MC " nH " ~ THE GROUPS , " eLLlr ' ~ STEREOTYPES OF THE GROUPS CRITERIA FOR FRIENDSHIPS memo reveals the researcher ' s thinking process about the codes and developed thus f . 1r . Notice that / lJC / l1O [ / I / ' itillg also SCI1JCS as a co dc - alld 1J " i ~ c / lcra / l / l . ( IIIctbod . The deliberate linking or weaving of codes and cate " " , ; , 1 , , ; , the narrative is a heuristic to integrate them semantically and sys ( see Chapter Two ) : FOCUSING THE CATEGORIES reviewing the categories , I feel that QUALIFYING THE GROUPS can be under DISPELLING THE STEREOTYPES OF THE GROUPS . Tiffany 1 . 57 : 158 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS provides exceptions to the stereotypes through her use of qualifiers . DEFINING ONESELF AS A FRIEND seems to have some connection with how adolescents go about MAINTAINING FRIENDSHIPS . Perhaps DEFINING ONESELF AS A FRIEND might be more accurately recoded as PERCEIVING ONESELF AS A FRIEND . According to Tiffany , others perceive her as ~ populart " so that ' s haw she may per ceive herself , which in turn influences and affects how she goes about MAIN . TAINING FRIENDSHIPS both in the past and present . Students in high school culture adopt the social group labels and stereotypes passed on to them from oral tradition , influences of media , and personal obser _ vation . Tiffany seems very aware of the social group names and how the group becomes stereotyped with particular attributes . But she negates the stereotyped images by finding exceptions to them . And it is those in the exceptions category who become her friends . She seems to be ACCEPTING THROUGH EXCEPTING . She acknowledges that some of her friends belong to the social groups with sub cultural labels and that they carry stereotypical baggage with them . Labels are for baggage , not for friends . The earlier Initial Coding memo on DISCRIMINATING as a process seems to stll ! hold during this cycle of coding . Once 1 get more data from other students , I can see if this category does indeed hold . Focused Coding enables you to compare newly constructed codes tlns cycle across other participants ' data to assess cOlllparability and transfer : " ability . The researcher can ask other high school participants how they con " : : struct friendships , then C0l11pare their coded data with Tiffany ' s . " Your fits the elllpirical world when you have constructed codes and developed into categories that crystallize participants ' experience " ( Charmaz , 2006 , p . Also note that categories are constructed emergently fro111 _ the reloq \ ' 1rtiz , lticm { and categorization of participant data : " Data should not be forced or selecl : ed to fit pre - conceived or pre - existent categories or discarded in favor ofke " ping an extant theory intact " ( Gbser , 1978 , p . 4 ) . Rubin & Rubin ( 1995 ) mend that simple organizational outlining of the categories and subc ; ltegorie , > gives you a handle on thenl . Using the major categories from above , the line might read : I . DEFINING ONESELF AS A FRIEND A . Maintaining Friendships 1 . Setting Criteria for Friendships B . Dispelling Stereotypes of the Groups 1 . Labeling the Groups 2 . Qualifying the Groups CAQDAS programs lend themselves very well to Focused Coding they simultaneously enable coding , category constrllction , and memo writing . SECOND CYCLE COOING METHODS recommended ways to ' further analyze Focused Codes are ( see App " nCUx D ) : A . xial Coding and Theoretical Coding grounded theory ( Charmaz , 2006 ; Corbin & StrallSs , 2008 ; Glaser & Strauss , 1967 ; Strauss & Corbin , 1998 ) interactive qualitative analysis ( Northcutt & McCoy , 2004 ) memo writing about the codes ( Charmaz , 2006 ; Corbin & Stral1ss , 2008 ; Glaser , 1978 ; Gbser & Strauss , 1967 ; StrallSS , 1987 ) situational amlysis ( Clarke , 2005 ) splitting , splicing , and linking data ( Dey , 1993 ) thematic analysis ( Auerbach & Silverstein , 2003 ; Boyatzis , 1998 ) Set , T ! lerlleIngthe Data and Pattern Coding as methods related to Focused Coding . AXIAL CODING ~ narn \ az , 2006 ; Glaser , 1978 ; Glaser & Strallss , 1967 ; Strauss , 1987 ; Strall " & 1998 Coding extends tlle analytic work fron1 Initial Coding and , to some extent , Coding . The purpose is to strategically reassemble data that were " split " Jr " fi : actur " d " during the Initial Coding process ( Strauss & Corbin , 1998 , p . 124 ) . ~ ' a . x : is " of A . xial Coding is a catcgo ' 1 ' ( like the a . xis of a wooden wheel with , , , ( end , , d spokes ) discerned from First Cycle coding . This method " relates cate to subcateogries [ and ] specifies tlle properties and dimensions of a category " Ghamlaz , 2006 , p . 60 ) . Properties ( i . e . , characteristics or attributes ) and dimensions Inc· , hnn of a property along a contim1l1l11 or range ) of a category refer to such 1D1IJorlents as the conditions , causes , and consequences of a process - actions that researcher know " if , v , then , how , and why " something happens ( p . 62 ) . Jcia1C ; o , : lirlg is appropriate for studies employing grounded theory l11ethod and studies with a wide variety of data form5 ( e . g . , interview transcripts , notes , journals , documents , diaries , correspondence , artifacts , video ) . : 159 : 160 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS Grouping similar1y coded data reduces the number ofInitial Codes you aped while sorting and re - lab cling them into conceptual categories . DUring cycle , " the code is sharpened to achieve its best fit " ( Glaser , 1978 , p . 62 ) , and can be nlOre than one A . xial Code developed during this process . A . xial is the transitional cycle between the Initial and Theoretical Coding processes grounded theory , though the method has become somewhat contested in writings ( see Notes at the end of this profile ) . Example One of the categories from the Focused Coding example in this chapter be used here ; refer to that first before proceeding . Keep in mind that only participant ' s data are analyzed as an e . . xanlple , along with the experiential ( i . e . , personal knowledge and experiences ) ' of the researcher . The anaJ ~ ' bc memo is an uncensored and permissibly messy opportunity to let thclup : liti flow and ideas enlerge . Also notice that I / lClllO IlIritillg srnJcs as a co dc - alld gOI ) , - gcllcratillg / / JctllOd . The deliberate linking or weaving of codes and gories vvithin the narrative is a heuristic to integrate them semantically systematically ( see Chapter Two ) . There are two Axial Codes explored ACCEPTING THROUGH EXCEPTING , and SOCIALIZING : 30 May 2007 AXIAL CODE : BEING SOCIALLY ACCEPTABLE / EXCEPTABLE ACCEPTING THROUGH EXCEPTING was one of the Focused Codes that could possibly transform into a category during this cycle of memo writing and analysis . ACCEPTING is a bit broader as a code and category , but I feel ACCEF ' TI ~ IG THROUGH EXCEPTING has a conceptual " ring " to it . The high school as social system is , to both adults and adolescents , a place to socialize . SOCIALIZING by adults happens when they indoctrinate young pie to the culturall < nowledge and ethos of the country , while SOCIALIZING by [ ascents is an opportunity to establish and maintain possibly lifelong frlEl , " , Ishlps ••• 1 remember reading an article that said adolescents who participate in extra " u , ricular athletics and arts activities liI { e first and foremost the opportunities activities provide to socialize with frfends - check out the specific reference log it in a memo later . BEING SOCIALLY ACCEPTABLE Is not just adhering to expected norms behavior . To adolescents , BEING SOCIALLY ACCEPTABLE / EXCEPTABLE are action / interaction patterns of friendships - who ' s In and who ' s out . The Properties [ characteristics or attributes ] of BEING SOCIALLY ACCEPT ABLE : • Adolescents accept peers with whom they find perceived similarities . • Adolescents accept those with whom they feel are compatible . • Adolescents accept those with whom they feel safe , or at least secure . • Adolescents accept those with whom they have shared interests . • Adolescents accept those who are dOing something they want to get into drugs , sports ) . • Adolescents accept those with whom they have fun . SECOND CYCLE CODING METHODS If you ' re none ofthe above , you ' re most likely SOCIALLY EXCEPTABLE . The Dimensions [ the location of a property along a continuum or range ; the conditions , causes , and consequences of a process that tell if , when , how , and why something happens ] of BEING SOCIALLY ACCEPTABLE / EXCEPTABLE : • popularity : You can be perceived as popular by some people , and disliked by others ( e . g . , some people adore Paris Hilton While others feel she is " socially unacceptable " ) • Popularity : Teens perceived as popular can come from several subcultures / cliques , not just the " popular pretty girls " and " jacks " - e . g . , a popular goth , even a popular geek . • Popularity : Some gravitate toward the popular because it builds their OWn self esteem ; others graVitate toward the popular because they ' re trendy ; others graVitate toward the popular because " there ' s just something about them " - charisma ? • Acceptability : We can accept some people but not be their friends - we except them . • Exceptability : Even the ~ outcasts " seem to find a group somewhere . • Acceptable while Exceptable : Some groups will let " that one kid " hang out with them even though he may not be particularly well liked . • Stereotypes : We can aclmowledge the stereotypes , but can find exceptions to the rule . " They ' re usually like this . But . . . . " My psychologist buddy shared with me that the human need to BELONG Is to be part of something ( like clubs , organizations ) . But to be ACCEPTED means to be validated , that I ' m OK , that I ' m a person , I have worth . If somebody belongs to something they are being accepted . If you ' re excepted , you don ' t belong . But ; even the excepted can find acceptance somewhere . I know that I ' m ACCEPTED by some and EXCEPTED by others for such SOCIAL CATEGORIES as my ethnicity , sexual orientation , age , size , etc . But it ' s being with your own kind , like with1i1 < e , " makes me feel comfortable , compatible . However , I can physically BELONG a group without feeling fully ACCEPTED by them - I feel EXCEPTED by them . Initial and Focused Coding , analytic memo \ witing is a critical com of A . , - - ial Coding . The focus , however , is placed on the emergent and ~ . IT , erlgir , g codes themselves , along with the categories ' properties and dimen Glaser & Strauss ( 1967 ) advise that " categories should not be so abstract to lose their sensitizing aspect , but yet must be abstract enough to make [ the ' meq ~ ngl theory a general guide to n1Ulti - conditional , ever - changing daily sit ( p . 242 ) . Northcutt & McCoy ( 2004 ) , in their signature qualitative system , observe that a participant will sometinles unknowingly do the work for the researcher when participant quotes in interview tran - that lend themselves as Axial Codes are found : " Itespondents will often how one [ category ] relates to another in the process of discussing the of one [ category ] " ( p . 242 ) . One of the ultimate goals during Ax : ial Coding ( along with continued gual data - gathering and analysis ) is to achieve satl / ratioll - " when no new : 16 : 1 162 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS ACCEPTABLE ~ , - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . Acknowledging Exceptions to the Stereotypes Accepting the Stereotypes Those with Common Interests - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Those with Uncommon Interests " Popular ' and Liked by Some - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . " Popular ' Yet Not Liked By Olhers Belonging and Accepted - Belonging but Not Accepted - Not BelongIng or Accepted Accepted and Belonging - - Accepted but Not Belonging - Not Accepted or BelongIng FIGURE 4 . 2 A simple dimensions and properties table derived from Axial information seems to emerge during coding , that is , when no new pr ' op , eroes , dimensions , conditions , actionslinteractions , or consequences are seen in data " ( Strauss & Corbin , 1998 , p . 136 ) . Diagrams of the phenomena at work are also encouraged during the Coding process ( see Figure 4 . 2 ) . These displays can be as simple as charts , or matrices , or as complex as £low diagrams . These i11ustrative techniques bring codes and analytic 11lenlOS to life help the researcher see where the story of the data is going . Onc ofStJ : auss ' s students shared that her " diagranulling process would begin with a phrase single code , perhaps even a hunch about what was important in the sis at that point in tinle [ with ] arrows and boxes showing connectiorlS ' ( ) f temporal progression " ( Strauss , 1987 , p . 179 ) . Clarke ' s ( 2005 ) analysis , social worlds / arenas , and positional maps are highly advised heuristics to explore the complexity of relationships anl0ng the major ments of the study . To appreciate the breadth and depth of Strauss ( 1987 ) and StrallSS Corbin ' s ( 1998 ) discussion of Axial Coding , readers are referred to QII ' aIiJ ' atiJ1c A ) } al ) , sisIo ) ' Social Scie ) } tists and BaSl ' cs ' ! f Q ) } alitati " e Research for a full e " lJin ] i " " tion on such matters as actionlinteraction ; structure and process ; and intervening , and contextual conditions ( also discussed for longitudinal tative research studies in Saldana , 2003 ) . Some reconullended ways to fi . lrther analyze Axial Codes are ( see Appendix , • Theoretical Coding • grounded theory ( Charmaz , 2006 ; Corbin & Strauss , 2008 ; Gb " er & u " . " " ' : ' 1967 ; Strauss & Corbin , 1998 ) • interrelationship ( Saldai \ a , 2003 ) • longitudinal qualitative research ( Giele & Elder , 1998 ; Saldaiia , 2003 , • memo writing about the codes ( Charmaz , 2006 ; Corbin & StraUSS , Gloser , 1978 ; Glaser & Strauss , 1967 ; Strauss , 1987 ) SECOND CYCLE COOING METHODS situational analysis ( Clarke , 2005 ) splitting , splicing , and linking data ( Dey , 1993 ) thematic analysis ( Auerbach & Silverstein , 2003 ; Boyatzis , 1998 ) : ha . rmaz ( 2006 ) and Dey ( 1999 ) take issue with Axial Coding . Charmaz per it as a cUInbersome step that may stifle analytic progress achieved & onl Initial Coding toward Theoretical Coding . Dey feels the logics of cat , poriz ; , ticm and process have not been fully developed by grounded theory ' s , riginatOI·s . . Even as grounded theory evolved , the methodological utility of Coding became a controversial issue between Glaser , Strauss , and Corbin " CIIU , " U , 1999 ) . Corbin herself downpbys the method in her later edition of : to ' . 1Ocled theory ' s procedures ( Corbin & Strauss , Z ( 08 ) . All sources are worth " , " , niDling as supplemental references before and during A - xial Coding . THEORETICAL CODING ' harm , " z . 2006 ; Corbin & Strauss , 2008 ; Glaser , 1978 ; Strauss , 1987 ; Strauss & 1998 publications in grounded theory refer to Theoretical Coding as Selective Coding . " The former term will be used in this manual since it 1110re ' pr ' Dp , , , ac : elY labels the outcome of this analytic cycle . ) Theoretical Code functions like an umbrella that covers and accounts for codes and categories formulated thus far in grounded theory analy ' < ; Integration begins with finding the primary them . e of the research - what ' : c ~ u " , . w grounded theory the cClltral or corc catcgOl ) 1 - which " consists of all product , ; of analysis condensed into a few words that seem to explain what research is all about ' " ( StrallSs & Corbin , 1998 , p . 146 ) . In Theoretical all categories and subcategories now become systematically linked central ! core category , the one " that appears to have the greatest ' ~ lilU " [ OlCY relevance " for the phenomenon ( Corbin & Strauss , 2008 , p . 104 ) . i ) ep " $ e ' l1tatic < l1 of the central / core category to readers can be made as an narrative or as a well - developed set of propositions ( Glaser & 1967 , p . 31 ) . Charmaz calls codes the " bones " that form the " skeleton " of our then think of the central or core category as the spillc of that skeleton , 163 : 164 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS which supports the corpus , aligns it , and connects to everything - else . ( 1987 ) c : \ : pands the metaphor by noting that continuous and detailed cycles eventually put " analytic meat on the analytic bones " ( p . 245 ) . Applications Theoretical Coding is appropriate as the culminating step toward aCil1eviri grounded theory ( but scc the Notes at the end of this profile for building caveats ) . Theoretical Coding integrates and synthesizes the categories derived coding and analysis to now create a theory , At this cycle , categories oe ' , elIJp " d thus ( ' Ir from Initial , Focused , and Axial Coding " have relevance for , and be applicable to , all cases in the study . It is the details included under each egory and subcategory , through the specifications of properties and dirnelnsilJns . that bring out the case differences and variations within a category " \ Liias ' er . " 1978 , p : 145 ) . A Theoretical Code specifies the possible relationships between categones and moves the analytic story in a theoretical direction 2006 , p . 63 ) . Example The example content / Tom the Initial , Focused , and A . . . . . ial Coding be applied here ; refer to those first before proceeding . A " lytic memo about theory can extend for pages , but only an excerpt is pr , oviided below . N , otice that 1I1C / 1I0 llll ' itillg scmcs as a codc - allri catcgoI1 ' - < ~ cllemtillg / / let / IOdiC but by tillS cycle of Thcoretical Coding the primary shift in narrative is the confirmed central / core category and its related categories . In the an , Llvt ; c . c Inemo , the categories and subcategories arc capitalized to enlphasize woven integration into the narrative : 5 June 2007 CENTRAL / CORE CATEGORY : DISCRIMINATING The central / core category o ! this study is : DISCRIMINATING . Adolescents DISCRIMINATE when they choose their friends . They DISCRIMINATE through a process of ACCEPTING AND EXCEPTING . Adolescents SOCIALLY ' DISCRIMINATE as an action , and are SOCIALLY DISCRIMINATE in their choice friendships . We have generally constructed the term DISCRIMINATION as an abhorrent ' qua , lIty in ourselves and in others . The term In negative contexts suggests racism ' , " seXism , and other " - isms " based on learned yet STEREOTYPING attitudes , val ues , and beliefs about others . But to DISCRIMINATE also means to distinguish by examining differences , to carefully select based on quality , When adolescents DISCRIMINATE ( as a verb ) they carefully select their friendships from a spectrum of peers BELONGING to various SOCIAL GROUP IDENTITIES . They are also ' SECOND CYCLE CODING METHODS nl ~ ; CRIMINA - rE ( as an adjective ) When they observe the distinguishing SOCIAL AND DIFFERENCES between themselves and others . ACCEPTING AND EXCEPTING suggests a continuum , ranging from full ad mis - of an individual into one ' s personal confidence or SOCIAL GROUP ; to neu or indifference about the IndiVidual ; through overt exclusion , rejection or _ ' / ~ ; ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ! ~ ~ ' I ~ Of the individual . Adolescents ACCEPT others when the conditions for • . I are positive , including such properties as compatibility and shared in ! l " e , , ! s . . Adolescents EXCEPT others when the conditions for FRIENDSHIP lie on opposite side of the spectrum . But regardless of where a teenager ' s choices peers lie on the continuum , he or she is actively DISCRIMINATING , We DIg . \ CIRJlllIINJITE when we ACCEPT and we DISCRIMINATE when we EXCEPT . We DIS CRIMIINA1 ' E when we EXCEPT the STEREOlYPES of selected adolescent SOCIAL ( e . g . , dumb joclls , killer geeks ) and ACCEPT them as FRIENDS . But we also ACCEPT the STEREOlYPES of these same SOCIAL GROUPS and EXCEPT as candidates for FRIENDSHIP . . grapllic - irl - F ' rog " ess that illustrates the central / core category and its processes thus far is in Figure 4 . 3 , published grounded theory research , authors neglect to explicitly state , central / core category of this study is . . , . " Make certain that your ana memo and final report include this phrase and name the category , central or core category appears frequently in the data coded and recoded L ' lr , and is phrased as an abstract concept that permits it to " e : . - . . . - pbin variation as the main point made by the data " ( Strauss & Corbin , 1998 , p . 147 ) . By cycle , " If all data cannot be coded , the emerging theory does not fully fit or for the data and must be modified " ( Glaser , 1978 , p . 56 ) . Analytic mcmos the final written report should explain and justify - \ vith reference to the themselves - how categories and subcategories relate to the central / core Discriminating - - - - - - - - - - Soc1al Discrimination - - - - - - - } + - . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - A diagram for a central / core category and its major processes : 165 : 1 . 66 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS category . The narrative also describes its related componcnt " i ( e . g . , interactions , properties , conditions ) for the reader . Additional or selective ' , pling of new or existing participant data is encouraged to identity any within the developing theory . Diagram refinClllcnt of the categories , dleory ( begun during A . . , dal Coding ) is encouraged during dus cycle to an operational model of the phenomenon or process and to map the ity of the story ( see Appendi . " C for an example ) . 1 caution , however , that mere numeric frequency of a code or cal : egIJry : data analysis and memos is not necessarily a reliable and valid 11 ' ldll : atclt central / core category . In one of my ethnographic studies ( Saldana , In Vivo Code " SUIWIVAL " appeared only four times in 20 months ' field notes and interview transcrlpt ' i . Yct the code held 511mmative " U ' WCC ' II major and minor categorics in the corpus and became the through - line study . So be conscious of a code ' s qllalities as - , well as its quantity . In less is more ( Saldaiia , 2003 , p . 115 ) . In Glaser ' s ( 1978 ) early work , he listed 18 " coding families " ( pp . guide researchers labeling data at the conceptual level . These families intended to sensitize the analyst to the many ways a category could be and included such things to consider as : IIlIit ( e . g . , family , role , oq " , nization ) ; ; ( e . g . , anlOunt , possibility , intensity ) , strategy ( e . g . , techniques , tactics , CIIttillg poillt ( e . g . , boundary , benclm ' h1rk , deviance ) . The " bread and hurtp , · " . r . family for sociologists are what he labels U Tile Six CJs : Causesj Contingencies , Consequences , Covariances and Conditions " ( p . 74 ) . Also as one of the f . ·mUly members is an illustration , such as a model , chart , Glaser also noted in lill early work that one type of core caltegory a sociological " ' basic social process " ( BSP ) , which includes such " becoming , " " career , " and " negotiating . " BSPs " are theoretical re£lecllon summarizations of the patterned , systematic uniformity flows of ( 1978 , p . 100 ) . BSPs are processual , meaning that they occur over involve change over tin1c , 1110st often demarcatcd in stages . If en ' ler ! ; egl central / core category , BSPs should also exhibit properties and dilllension ~ a particular en1phasis on the temporal aspects of action / interaction . Strauss & Corbin ( 1998 ) caution that " one can usefully code for " or psychological process , but to organize every study around the idea phases , or social - psychological processes linuts creativity " ( p . 294 ) ; Some recommended ways to further analyze Theoretical Codes Appendi . " D ) : • assertion development ( Erickson , 1986 ) • grounded theory ( Charmaz , 2006 ; Corbin & Str : lUSS , 2008 ; r ; 1 : L , eIC I ' l 1967 ; Strauss & Corbin , 1998 ) SECOND CYCLE CODING METHODS charts , matrices , diagrams ( Miles & Huberman , - 1994 ; Morgan , & Guevara , 2008 ; Northcutt & McCoy , 2004 ; Paulston , 2000 ) ingitudil1 , al qualitative research ( Giele & Elder , 1998 ; Saldaiia , 2003 , writing about the codes ( Charmaz , 2006 ; Corbin & Strauss , 2008 ; 1978 ; Glaser & Strauss , 1967 ; Strauss , 1987 ) fualiol1lal analysis ( Clarke , 2005 ) analysis ( Auerbach & Silverstein , 2003 ; Boyatzis , 1998 ) the breadth and depth of Strauss ( 1987 ) , Strauss & Corbin ' s Corbin & Strauss ' ( 2008 ) discussion ofTheoretical Coding , n1emos , readers are referred to QllalifafirJc Allalysis for Social Scielltists and QllalifatiJJc Research for a full explanation and thorough examples of , delvellopnll , nt and grounded theory explained in narrative ( storyline ) shou1d also examine Adele E . Clarke ' s Sitl / atio / lal Allalysis : Tlteory After tlte Postll / odel ' ll TIII ' II ( 2005 ) , which presents " a radically conceptual infrastructure " ( p . xxii ) of grounded theory that does not ' k " ~ " ' " analysis as a reductive act , but as one that intentionally maps mplexity of it : that we complicate our stories , represent not only difference ( s ) but C : ( J . lltrEldictIOllE and incoherencies in the data , note other possible readings , note some of our anxieties and omissions . . . . We need to address the inconsistencies , irregularities , and downright messiness of the world - not scrub it clean and dress it up for the special occasion of a I or a publication . ( p . 15 ) ~ ~ ~ l [ CnerS should also note postmodern perspectives on thcory - build Clarke ( 2005 ) is an advocate of grounded theory ' s initial ana n , ecno , os and constructions , ultimately she feels that " the era of grand . fheory is long over . . . . Life on the planet is changing too quickly penTlanenCe , 111uch less transcendence " ( p . 293 ) . Even Glaser hin1 - : albarldcJl1 " d the restrictive search for basic social processes in the ~ X " mjme Ian Dey ' s ( 1999 ) Grolllldillg Grollllded Tlteol ) " Gllidclitles for Cl / tallln ' which critiques the Inethod and takes issue with finding a categclry : " [ T ] he problem arises that data suggesting alternatives MCO . ny focusing on a single core variable , the research agenda may . 11e - dimcmsiorlal rather than multi - dimensional " ( p . 43 ) . : 1 . 67 : 168 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS ELABORATIVE CODING Source Auerbach & Silverstein , 2003 Descrlptlrm Elaborative Coding " is the process of analyzing textual data in order to theory further " ( Auerbach & Silverstein , 2003 , p . 104 ) . The method is " top - down " coding because one begins coding with the theoretical constructs from [ a ] previous study mind . This contrasts with the coding one does in an initial study ( bclttc , m . , where relevant text is selected without preconceived ideas in mind grounded theory ] . In elaborative coding where the goal is to refine thElon ' tic : aI ; • . •• ·· constructs from a previous study , relevant text is selected with those con ~ , ' structs in mind . ( po 104 ) Hence , a minimu111 of t \ vo different yet related studies - one completed one in progress - is necessary for Elaborative Coding . Theoretical cOlnstl : ucl " emerge fr0111 the coded data ' s themes that are then grouped together into egories or " meaningful units " ( p . 105 ) . Applications Elaborative Coding is appropriate for qualitative studies that build on or roborate previous research and investigations . Basically , the second study orates on the major theoretical findings of the first , even if there are differences between the two studies ' research concerns and conceptual works . Different participants or populations can also be used for the study . This method can support , strengthen , modifY , or disconfirnl the fin , dings $ from previous research . Example In the first project , a longitudinal case study was conducted with a boy Barry as he progressed from ages 5 through 18 . During childhood , Barry oped a strong interest in classroom inlprovisational drama and formal production that continued into his teenage years . Key adults in his life 1110ther and theatre teachers - cultivated this interest because they pelrceiiverl : him as a talented and gifted performer . The presentation of this first litfHOUl - se . : study was constructed as an ethnodramatic performance with Barry nn , rtr : lF ; ing himself ( Saldaiia , 1998 ) . Each play script scene represented a major in his life - course development . In Vivo Codes were used for the eight SECOND CYCLE CODING METHODS but morc traditional descriptions to recognize the themes are listed in i . " I DEVELOPED MY PASSION " ( CHILDHOOD EXPERIENCES AND INFLUENCES ) 2 . " I WAS COMPLETELY EMPTY " ( TROUBLED AND EPIPHANIC EARLY ADDLES· CENCE ) ' 3 . " I NEVER FOUND IT IN SPORTS " ( EXTRACURRICULAR / CAREER OPTIONS ) 4 . " I THINK A GOOD ACTOR . •• " ( DEVELOPMENT OF CRAFT ) 5 . " LOVE THE ART IN YOURSELF " ( DEVELOPMENT OF ARTISTRY ) 6 . " THE SUPPORT OF PEOPLE " ( INFLUENTIAL ADULTS ) . 7 . " THEATRE ' S A VERY SPIRITUAL THING " ( PERSONAL MEANING DERIVED FROM THEATRE ) " I WANT THIS " ( FUTURE CAREER / LIFE GOALS ) The magnitude of this case study is too complex to even sunmurize in tIris rte5icriptil : m , but for purposes of the method profile , one of the intended find was the developm _ ent of the participant ' s tfl / ' Ollgh - lilIc , a statement " that cap the essence and essentials of a participant ' s journey and change ( if any ) throu ~ \ h time " in longitudinal studies ( Saldaiia , 2003 , p . nO ) . Barry ' s family played a significant role in Iris life course , but during adolescence he ) , . , , " n , p disenchanted with several congregational matters . Since Barry ' s most period of artistic development clustered during his high school the through - line qlla [ in the role oq key assertion from the first study From his sophomore through senior years in high school , Barry gradually inter ' : ; r : haIMEld the Insufficient spiritual fulfillment he received at church with the more personal and purposeful spiritual fulfillment he experienced through the· atre . ( Salda ; ; a , 2003 , p . 154 ) The major theoretical construct for this first study was PASSION , derived from In Vivo Code that captured Barry ' s self - described affinity for his chosen art developed my passion for the arts and began seeing them as something as idealistic career , an almost - a romantic , bigger than life - you know , passioJl - I know how else to put it - a passioll for the arts ! " ( Saldaiia , 1998 , p . 92 ) . Mter this first study ' s presentation and completion , periodic contact with was maintained from ages 18 through 26 . During that period , I contin - to collect data related to his life course , and his trajectory thus far , even its multiple directions , appeared to harmonize with previous research in developmental trends ( Giele & Elder , 1998 ) . But this period was also of revelation for the researcher . Not only did I learn about current prob in Barry ' s life , I also learned about problems from his past not shared with during the first study - among them , a late diagnosis of bipolar disorder two unsuccessful suicide attempts . : 169 : 170 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS Auerbach & Silverstein ( 2003 ) advise that , for Elaborative Coding , Sometimes the relevant text that you select [ from your seeond stUdy ] will With your old theoretical eonstructs [ from the first study ] . This is hol , " , , , , , ' b ~ caushe it will lead you to develop your constructs further . On other occa . Slons , owever , the relevant text will not fit with one of your old theoretical ' " t t b ' . con· ~ rue s , ut Instead Will suggest new ones . This is also helpful , because it will Increase your understanding of your research concerns . ( p . 107 ) The original eight themes from the first study represent not only categc > rie , but roughly overlapping time periods - phases and stages in Barry ' s 11t ' HIOU ' , " development up through age 18 . The second study would profile his life ages IS through 26 ( our mutually agreed stopping point for the study ) . the original eight themes endure as his life story progressed ? OIJviou : , ly , the past cannot be changed , but the past can be r ~ interpreted in new contex ~ one ' s life progresses forward and new c : : . \ . l ' crien ' ces accul1lUlate . For the second study ( Saldana , 2008 ) , the first theme , EXPERIENCES AND INFLUENCES , endured as a period that primalilv : included his theatrical and religious experiences and influences . But the ond theme , TROUBLED AND EPIPHANIC EARLY AJ ) OLESCEl ' - ICll ' ; would now become the first phase of cl cycle that generated cl new theme the second cyc1e : TROUBLED AND EPIPHANIC EARLY Both of these periods included Earry ' s suicide attempts , but it was not after the second attempt that the late diagnosis of bipolar disorder was placing the original second theme in a new context . The third theme , EXTRACURRICULAJ1 . . / CAREER OPTIONS included football as a possible avenue of interest for Barry , but in retrospect category was a minor theme during the first study and was thus deleted as influence on his life course . The original fourth and fifth themes , DEVELOPMENT OF CRAFT DEVELOPMENT OF ARTISTRY were condensed into one theme for ' the second study : ARTISTIC DEVELOPMENT . Differentiation for the first study was made to show his progression £01n technician to artisan . The first study ' s si : < th theme , INFLUENTIAL ADULTS , is a " given " in life " course research and endured for the second study . The seventh theme , PERSONAL MEANING DERIVED FROM THEe ATRE ( or its In Vivo Code , " THEATRE ' S A VERY SPIRITUAL THING " ) was not deleted but 1110dified as the second study progressed and its data were ' coded , which placed this theme in a new context ( more on this below ) . Mter high school , Barry ' s opportunities for performance waned due to such contextual and intervening conditions as higher education priorities and full and part - time work for income needs . He majored in social work - with a nUl10r in religious studies , opting not to pursue theatre because of its limited chances SECOND CYCLE CODING METHODS ~ rfjnanCllal success . There were . still tUnes , though , when he felt ( as In Vivo " I ' M FEELING KIND OF LOST " . Descriptive Code THEATRE PARTICIPATION decreased signifi during llis college and university years , while the code YOUTH MIN appeared with n1 . ore frequency . In his mid - twenties , another epiphany that altered the eighth and final original theme , FUTURE L1U < . JO , : r " GOALS . During the second study , Barry received a spiritual from God to pursue the ministry . The theme took on new direction meaning , for he no longer had " career goals " but a LIFE CALLING . ' 1e " erthe : Iess , he felt his theatrical experiences and training benefited his youth , _ . , _ _ _ , ' , informal drama projects and his preaching skills . Though it was my field note code , not Barry ' s , I inverted the original study ' s " THE A VERY SPIRITUAL THING " to become SPIRITUALITY ' S A THEATRICAL THING . recap , the new seven thematic periods in Barry ' s life for the second study elU , , , gt : d as : CHILDHOOD EXPERIENCES AND INFLUENCES ( " I DEVELOPED MY PASSIOW ) TROUBLED AND EPIPHANIC EARLY ADOLESCENCE ( " I WAS COMPLETELY EMPTY " ) ARTISTIC DEVELOPMENT ( " LOVE THE ART IN YOURSELF " ) INFLUENTIAL ADULTS ( " THE SUPPORT OF PEOPLE " ) PERSONAL MEANING DERIVED FROM THEATRE ( " THEATRE ' S A VERY SPIRI TUAL THING " ) TROUBLED AND EPIPHANIC EARLY ADULTHOOD ( " I ' M FEELING KIND OF LOST " ) LIFE CALLING ( SPIRITUALlTY ' S A VERY THEATRICAL THING ) The second study also sought a through - line qlfa [ in the role ofj key asser to capture Barry ' s life - course development . The first through - line focm , ed on just three years of his adolescence . This final one , however , now to place his entire life thus far in a longitudinal context . Barry ' s life cOlnsisted of such successes as high academic achievelnent , recognition for his accolllplishments , leadership service roles , and spiritual fulfillinent . his life also consisted of a period of dnlg abuse , years of undiagnosed disorder , an alcoholic father once arrested for drug use , frequent with depression , and two unsuccessful suicide attempts . Barry ' s life now had new ll1eaning , new direction , and the through - line needed reflect that . The key assertion and accompanying narrative for the second He ascends . From ages five through twenty·six , Barry has sought ascension in both literal and symbolic ways to compensate for and transcend the depths he has experienced throughout his life course . He has excelled in academics , towered above peers , stood up far victims of bullying , gotten high on drugs , performed up on stage , surpassed teammates on the football field , lifted 171 172 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS weights , climbed rocl ( s , risen above drug use , appeared upbeat , looked up to his teachers 85 father figures . surmounted bipolarity , lived up to his mother ' s expec . tation5 , exhibited higher levels of intra - and interpersonal intelligence , empow _ ered church youth to reach new heights , sought advanced degrees , received a higher calling . grew in his faith , mounted the pulpit , uplifted others with his ser mons , and exalted his God . The primary theoretical construct for this case , which derived from the s ~ dy , would endure but take on new interpretive and ironic meaning for the second study . PASSION refers not only to a drive out of love for something , but also means suffering and outbreaks of intense , uncontrollable Barry experienced all of these passions in one forul or another throughout his life course . I - lis ups and downs , highs and lows , ascents and descents Were consistent yet erratic rhythms before his diagnosis of bipolarity . Even after receiving prescribed medication , he prefers not to take it when possible , rely " : : " ing instead on nlore natural aids for self - control , though he adm . its " some days are luore difficult than others . " Analysis This example pro @ ed the development and evolution of themes , thlDuph - E " . , and the meaning of a major theoretical construct from one longitudinal ( ages 5 - 18 ) of a case study through the next ( agesIS - J6 ) . The elaboration codes and themes would obviously evolve across time for a life - course p " ' Jc ' e , . uu [ . • collection , cOluparison , and coding of these two major pools of data made the changes that did occur luore apparent and generated a more provocative analysis . Sonle recommended ways to fi . llther analyze Elaborative Codes are Appendi . , D ) : • action research ( Altrichter , Posch , & SOl11eld " 1993 ; Stringer , 1999 ) • assertion development ( Erickson , 1986 ) • grounded theory ( Charmaz , 2006 ; Corbin & StrallSs , 200S ; Glaser & ~ rr " us " , ' · ' 1967 ; StrallSs & Corbin , 1998 ) • longitudinal qualitative research ( Giele & Elder , 1998 ; Saldana , 2003 , • nleI110 writing about the codes ( Charmaz , 2006 ; Corbin & Strauss , Glaser , 1978 ; Glaser & Strauss , 1967 ; Strauss , 1987 ) • meta - ethnography , metasynthesis , and nletasummary ( Finfge1d , Noblit & Hare , 1988 ; Sandelowski , Docherty , & Emden , 1997 ) • situational analysis ( Clarke , 2005 ) • thematic analysis ( Auerbach & Silverstein , 2003 ; Boyatzis , 1998 ) • within - case and cross - ease displays ( Gibbs , 2007 ; Miles & Huberman , 1994 ) SECOND CYCLE CODING METHODS . ·El : lbo ' ratlve Coding is more fully explained in Auerbach & Silverstein ' s ( 2003 ) text , Qllalifati [ Jc Data : All ] lItrorillctioll to Codillg mid Analysis . In their the researchers adopt and adapt grounded theory methodology for their on fathers and f . 1therhood among various populations . Readers are also to examine Layder ( 1998 ) for his " adaptive theory , " which builds on ' g [ ( JIlrlded theory ' s principles yet " combines the use of prior theory to lend and pattern to research data while simultaneously adapting to the order pattern contained in [ the ] eluerging data " ( p . viii ) . Layder ' s framework is a . ' co , nstrlll : t - ba , : ed variant of Elaborative Coding . LONGITUDINAL CODING & Elder , 1998 ; Saldana , 2003 , J008 brevity and clarity , this method pro6le focuses on life - course studies . See Notes for recoulmended references in anthropology and education . ) LelOg ~ hlldinal Coding is the attribution of selected change processes to qualita data collected and conlpared across tinle . Holstein & Gubrium ( 2000 ) , in EclliS , lrw : til , IV the Life COllrsc , conceptualize that : life course and its constituent parts or stages are not the objective features of experience that they are conventionally taken to be . Instead , the construc tionist approach helps Us view the life course as a social form that is con . SHUOlEIO and used to make sense of experience , , . . The life course doesn ' t simply unfold before and around us ; rather , we aetively organize the fiow , pattern , and direction of experience in developmental terms as we navigate the social terrain of our everyday lives . ( p . 182 ) Long - term quantitative analysis of change exanunes statistical increase , de , " e ' ISe , constancy , and so on in selected measured variables of interest . Yet can also be qllalift11iJlc increase , decrease , constancy , and so on within data from participants through tilue . Longitudinal Coding categorizes reSl , ar , ch , , , observations into a series of matrices ( SaJdana , 200S ; see Figure 4 . 4 ) comparative analysis and interpretation to generate inferences of change - any . The analytic tcmplate in Figurc 4 . 4 provides a method for 5UnUl1arizing vast of qualitative data collected fromlong - ternl research projects : 173 : 174 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS LONGITUDINAL QUALITATIVE DATA SUMMARY MATRIX DATA TIME POOUPOND , FROM _ ' - - . . l _ _ THROUGH - - . 1 - - . 1 _ _ STUDY . , _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ RESEARCHER ( S ) · , . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ( when possible or if relevant , note specific days , dates , times , periods , etc . below ; use appropriate DYNAMIC de , ; cril ' iC " , INCREASE ) : CUMULATIVE i SURGElEPIPHI DECREASE ! CONSTANT ! EMERGE l ' TURN POINT CEASE CONSISTENT IOIOSYN· CRATIC INTERRELATIONSHIPS CHANGES THAT OPPOSElHARMONIZE PARTIC / CONCEPT RHYTHMS WITH HUMAN DEV / SOCIAL PROCESSES ( phases , stages , cycles , elc . ln progress ) PRELIMINARY ASSERTIONS AS DATA ANALYSIS PROGRESSES ( refer 10 previous matrices ) THROUGH·L1NE ( in progress ) FIGURE 4 . 4 A longitudinal qualitative data summary matrix ( from Saldafia , 2003 & 2008 , courtesy of Elsevier / Academic Press , and Rowman and Littlefield Publishing Group / AltaMlra Press ) . SECOND CYCLE COOING METHODS that one matrix page . holds summary observations from three , worth of fieldwork . And if the study progresses through two years , there would be eight pages total of longitudinal qualitative data . . . . Think each three - month page as an animator ' s cartoon cell , whose artwork . hon ' < ~ " subtly or overtly with each successive drawing to suggest movement change . Or , imagine that each matrix sheet is a monthly page from a cal , which suggests a chronological progression of time and change 85 each page is turned . Or , imagine that each matrix page is a photograph of the : same child taken at different intervals across time , sa that each successive photo reveals growth and development . ( Saldafia , 2008 , p . 299 ) During the First Cycle of collection and analysis , qualitative data collected an extended period of tinle l11ay have been coded descriptively , ' ri " , cessLllally , etc . with a possible focus on participant emotions , values , and so Longitudinal Coding , the data corpus is reviewed categorically and across time to assess whether participant change may have occtlrred . Seven descriptive categories first organize the data into matrix cells Second Cycle coding ( Saldaiia , 2003 , 2008 ) . Briefly explained , they are : Increase and Etnerge : This cen includes both quantitative and qualitative summary observations that answer H / hat ill creases or cmcl ; gcs through tilllc ? An increase in a participant ' s income is an example of quantitative change , but accompanying qualitative increases / enlergences may include such related factors as " job responsibilities , " " stress , " and " reflection on career goals . " This code documents change that occurs in smooth and average trajectories , unlike the next two codes . Cumulative : This cel1 includes summary observations that answer TVlwt is C / l1I / 1I1ativc throl / gll til / lc ? Cumulative affects result from SllcccssiJJe experi ences across a span of time . EXa111ples include : a pianist ' s itllproved tech nique after a year of private lessons and independent practice , and acquired knowledge about interpersonal relationships after a few years of social activity and dating . Surges , Epiphanies , and Turning Points : This cell includes summary observations that answer rVlwt killds oJ Sl / / ; gcs , Cpip / Wllics , or fllmillg poillts occur thml / gh tillle ? These types of changes result from experiences of suffi cient magnitude that they significant1y alter the perceptions and / or life COurse of the participant . Examples include : graduation from high school , the terrorist attacks on the United States on 11 September 2001 , and unex pected ternlination from employment . Decrease and Cease : This cell includes summary observations that answer HIf / af decreascs or ccases tllrollgll timc ? Like increases , qualitative . decrease cells can include both quantitative and qualitative summary observations . Examples include : a decline in workplace m _ orale after a new : 175 11 I : 1 . 76 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS incompetent adnlinistrator is hired , and a decrease and eventual of illegal drug use . 5 . Constant and Consistent : This cell includes sunmlary observ " , ; n . ~ ; answer Hlfwt reJllaills COl / stallt or collsisfCJlt tlzrOllg " tilllc ? This is the since the " recurring and often regularized features of ( Lofland et al . , 2006 , p . 123 ) compose most data sets . Examples daily operations in a fast - food restaurant , and a pa ~ ticipant ' s Jo : ng - terrrlr riage to the same spouse . 6 . Idiosyncratic : This cell includes summary observations that answer idiosyncratic tlll " OllgIE till / C ? These are events that are not of magnitude , epiphanies , but rather the " inconsistent , ever - shifting , multidirectional and , ing fieldwork , unpredictable " actions in life ( Salcbila , 2003 , p . 166 ) . include : a teenager ' s c : o . . - pcrimcnts with an alternative wardrobe , a series lcmatic automobile repairs , and occasional non - life threatening illnesses . 7 . Missing : This cell includes summary observations that answer HIJIat ilIg t " rol / gh tillle ? During fieldwork , the researcher should note not what is present but also what is possibly and plausibly absent or nu , , , ing . as to influence and affect participants . Examples include : a teacher ' s knowledge on working with children " \ vith disabilities , no sexual during an adult ' s mid - life years , and incomplete standard operating dures for an organization to run efficiently . Throughout data entry , the researcher is encouraged to use dYllamic tors . These are carefi . llly selected verbs , adjectives , and adverbs that mnot " , rri rately " describe phenonlena and change , even though the act is , ' " approxinlate and lughly interpretive " ( Saldaiia , 2003 , p . 89 ) . Dynanuc des ; cril ~ \ 9 ( extend beyond linear continua , such as " less " and " more " of sonlething , and instead on the essential qualities of phenomena . For example . one might tute a phrase such as " getting more consenrative " with " adopting conSl , rvati , ideologies . ~ ' A global observation such as " growing older " becomes specific with such descriptive phrases as " salt - and - pepper hair , soft he sits down and rises , arthritic bones that ache dully ill hun1id w " athe , r : . ' Applications Longitudinal Coding is appropriate for longitudinal qualitative explore change and developIuent in individuals , groups , and through extended periods of time . Giele & Elder ( 1998 ) note that recent life - course study research has away fi - ol11 composing patterned models of general human acknowledge the unique character , unpredictable and diverse traje ' : torie ; s , complex interrelationship of the gendered individual exercising agency SECOND CYCLE CODING MErHODS social contexts through particular eras of time . Life history extends the sequential reporting of factual events , such as graduation [ ranI col : ; 6ull . - tlll1e employment , marriage . the birth of a first child , and so on , and ; ' cI , n ; ; id , ers participant traJIiforlllatioJ / in such domains as worldview , life sat and personal values . Reporting the life course can be stnlctured and thematically and narratively as well as chronologically in unique ana ( Clallsen , 1998 ) . The coding and categorizing method presented is just one of several qualitative and mixed - methods models available for iH ~ JdinaJ data analysis . e ' e < arnpie content presented here relates to the case profiled in Elaborative refer to that first before proceeding . : orlgilcudiin ; ll Qualitative Data Summary Matrix pages do not have to be into standardized tiIue blocks ( e . g . , each page holding six of data ) . Each matrix can hold a portion ( a large " pool " or smaller of data from the life course that adopts a traditional period we often in social life , such as the elementary school years , secondary school university education , etc . The periods can also be separated by major points in the life course whenever they may occur ( Clausen , 1998 ) . a division must be necessarily artificial , such as periods between follow - up interviews . the longitudinal study with Earry ( Saldaila , 2008 ) , the first data pool collected his major elementary school ad , ditiollal theatre - viewing experiences beyond the treatment . parerltal involveIuent in nurturing his theatre interest ages 11 - 12 , victim of bullying by peers 12 , reflecting on career choices ( actor , writer , " think tank " ) 12 , counseling for withdrawal and depression was not formally tracked from ages 12 through 16 , but in retrospective during later years , he recalled two key epiphanies - an unsuccessfi . l1 sui formal stage perfoTInance experience . Related ~ H , fu ~ SES / EMErt . C ; El " ( = ES data fr0111 the second matrix included : smoking , illegal drug use length ages 12 - 14 , an . xiety from peer bullying 14 , attitude " renaissance " from first and filture performance opportunities : 177 : 178 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS Follow - up and direct participant observation was initiated during secondary school years . The third matrix , representing ages following INCREASES / EMERGENCES : • new : mcntorship fr0111 theatre teachers • new : questioning his spiritual f . 1ith / belief systeul • roles in theatre productions • concentration during performance work • " passion " for the art [ arIn • leadership skills The fourth matrix , at ages ·18 - 23 , included the INCREASES / EMERGENCES : • new : personal credit card • new : prescription medication for bipolarity • attending comnlUnity college for general studies • learning Anlcrican Sign Language • exploring drama therapy as a career • service as a Sllnm1er camp counselor for special populations • attending a different church but same faith • searching for " artful living " The fifth matrix , during age 23 , listed the following as INCREASES / EMERGENCES in actions : • new : eyebrow piercing , facial hair , spiked hair style • deciding between social work and urban sociology as possible majors at university • providing urban ministry for youth The sixth and final matrix , during ages 24 - 26 , listed as INCREASES / EMERGENCES : • new : rock clitubing as a hobby • new : disclosure of his father ' s past spiritual abuse • new : tattoo 011 left arm - " fight , race faith " ( from 2 Timothy 4 : 7 ) • university education : pursuing a bachelor ' s degree in social work with minor in religious studies • preaching occasionally at Sunday worship services • working for " social justice " SECOND CYCLE CODING METHODS portions of data 1isted above , are just small excerpts fronl one data cell summarizing 21 years of participant observation , interviews , and doc collection about one human being whose life had been a relatively tul1 . , ultue ) us journey thus far . A chronological scan from st1rt to finish 0 f salient . that increased and emerged in Barry ' s life has an alm . ost narrative and 1 > r < " had , o " ' lllg flow to it . Not included in this category , of course , are those as SURGES , EPIPHANIES , AND TURNING POINTS in life course , such as his two unsuccessful suicide attempts , his diagnosis . ' . . ch ; " nl . ariitv , and his call to serve in the ministry . follows after the coding and categorization of data into the matrices ? of the seven descriptive coding cells are then chronologically c01upared comparable cells from other longitudinal matrices ( e . g . , increases from third matrix are compared with increases in the first and second matrices ) . differences inferred and interpreted are noted in the D ! fferellccs AUOIICjrOIll Data S / JI / IIllarics cells . There is also no need to keep analyses of Ine : reases completely separate fronl Decreases , for example , or the Cumulative cOlmpletely separate frotu the Idiosyncratic . As analysis continues , your obser and interpretations of interaction and interplay between these cate w - ill beconle sharpened as you reflect on their possible overlap and : " olmplex connections . next row of cells , COl / textl / al / lIJtCfIlCllillg COl / ( fitiolls ilif / IIC1lcillg / Affccfillg CI , ' ' ' ' ' OI ' ' Auouc , asks you to think how , how much , in what ways , and why the observations and noted differences may be present . Contextual . ccmOlCH , ns refer to social life ' s routine activities and daily matters , such as ~ " " UlJU . ' ~ school , working , parenting , ete . Contextual Conditions also refer to ugivens " of one ' s social identity or personal patterns , such as gender , eth and habits . Intervening Conditions refer to those events or matters can play a nlore substantive and significant role in activating change , such , a , hostile work environnlent , the enactment of new laws , or writing a Whether something is interpreted as a Contextual or Condition is admittedly a matter of researcher perception . A work envirot1luent might be a " given " Contextual Condition for occupations , but if it activates participant change , such as deteriorating then the Contextual becomes Intervening . , Again , the columns of change processes do not have to remain isolated . In by this time there should be an intricate wea \ nng of the actions and phe inspected thus far for the next items of analysis . IlItelTciatiollships cell notes observations and interpretations of direct ; orlm , ctiion or influences and affect ' i ( 111Y qualitative equivalent for the positivist : 179 : 180 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS " cause and effect " ) between selected matri . x items . For example , Increases correlate \ vith Decreases , the Cumulative may correlate with the Constant Consistent . Caution should be exercised here , as the cognitive conSltructio n " data connections can run amok . This is teSt : llllony to the general uu , erVat ; nn that social life is complexly interconnected , but evidence from the data should support any assertions of interrelationship . ChaJ / ges that Oppose / Harlllollize with HI / II / all DCIJdopl / IC / ltlSociai " ' , le " , ' •• " refers to the particulars of the case compared with previous studies and erature reviews in related areas . For example , does the case ' s life course to follow what might be generalized developmental trcnds or does it gest alternative pathways ? Does the participant ' s unique throughout the life course suggest reconceptualizing a basic social Ptl , c , , , , : such as " career " ? Participallt / Collceptl / al Rhytlims refers to obs ' ervations of patterned penodicL . ities of action , such as phases , stages , cycles , and other time - based LUl1Sl : ructs , [ [ sequential observations of change seem to cluster together in somewhat tinct ways , this may suggest the apportionment of action into phases ( separate but chronological action clusters ) , stages ( cumulative action clusters time ) , and cycles ( repetitive action clusters through tinle ) . Prelilllillary AssertioJ / s as Data Allalysis Progresses are statements that point " the various observations about the participants or phenomenon on the analysis thus far . Tllis is a large critical space in the matrLx for researcher to reflect on the data and their synthesis . Analytic memos M ' ; " " ri : elsewhere are necessary , but the matri . x is the place where salient ob ' < Clcvation , : are summarized and listed . The TIIfOI \ ~ h - Lillc ( see Elaborative Coding for examples ) is compar : Jble to , key assertion ( Erickson , 1986 ) or a central ! core category ( Corbin & " " " U " ' , ' 2008 ) , though it is not necessarily the ultimate analytic goal for a JOIlglltudirtai ' : qualitative study . The through - line is general1y a thematic statement that tures the totality of change processes in the participant . CAQDAS programs become indispensable for longitudinal studies . The software ' s ability to manage massive amounts of data in nized files , and to maintain and permit cOlllplex coding changes as a project gresses , arc beneficial advantages for the researcher . The ATLAS . ti prrlgclm features " Snapshot Coding , " wllich represents a " situation at a particular il1I ' n > lent in time " ( Lewins & Silver , 2007 , p . 218 ) , enabling the analyst to create a prc ' gtf $ " sion of documented snapshot moments to assess participant change ( if any ) . By default , a discussion oflongitudinal processes is lengthy . A complete ' tration of all the principles tersely summarized above could easily fill several volumes . Observations and assertions of participant change can be Cr < , dibly assumed only fr0111 long - term inll11ersion in the field , extensive and reflec : tive SECOND CYCLE CODING METHODS " " , rvle , vs with participants , and· astute recognition of differences in data col through time about the life ' course . Some recoTIullcnded ways to further analyze Longitudinal Codes arc ( see \ ppendl ' x D ) : assertion development ( Erickson , 1986 ) case studies ( Merriam , 1998 ; Stake , 1995 ) grounded theory ( Charmaz , 2006 ; Corbin & Strauss , 2008 ; Glaser & Straus < , 1967 ; Strauss & Corbin , 1998 ) illustrative charts , I11atrices , diagrams ( Miles & Huberman , 1994 ; Morgan , Fellows , & Guevara , 2008 ; Northcutt & McCoy , 2004 ; Paulston , 2000 ) interrelationship ( Saldana , 2003 ) life - course mapping ( Clausen , 1998 ) longitudinal qualitative re < carch ( Giele & Elder , 1998 ; Saldana , 2003 , 2008 ) memo writing about the codes ( Charmaz , 2006 ; Corbin & Strauss , 2008 ; Glaser , 1978 ; Glaser & Strauss , 1967 ; Strauss , 1987 ) narrative inquiry and analysis ( Clandinin & Connelly , 2000 ; Coffey & Atkinson , 1996 ; Cortazzi , 1993 ; Daiute & Lightfoot , 2004 ; Riessman , 2008 ) portraiture ( Lawrence - Lightfoot & Davis , 1997 ) situational analysis ( Clarke , 2005 ) thematic analysis ( Auerbach & Silverstein , 2003 ; Boyatzis , 1998 ) , vithin - case and cross - case display , ( Gibbs , 2007 ; Milcs & Huberman , 1994 ) learn more about Longitudinal Coding and research , refer to Giele & Elder and Saldaiia ( 2003 , 2008 ) for more procedural and analytic details about ll [ f ' - DOUrse and longitudinal research , respectively . The best theoretical and epis tel1lOl ' ogical discussion of life - course research i , Holstein & Gubrium ( 2000 ) . ' " ' ' PL ' ' ' ' ' on long - term _ fieldwork in anthropology - some studies lasting up to years - can be accessed from Kcmper & Itoyce ( 2002 ) . Educational change are masterfully profiled in Fullan ( 2001 ) and Hargreaves et at ( 2001 ) . For . 1I11 : otll11ation on uTimescapes , " promoted as the first major funded longitudinal , tudy of personal and family relationships in the UK , access : following pages are provided for documenting additional Second Cycle methods located in other sources or developed by the researcher . : 18 : 1 ~ i ill hi 1 . 82 Source ( s ) : Description : Application ( s ) : Example : Analysis : Notes : THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS SECOND CYCLE CODING METHODS 1 . 83 _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Coding _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - - - ' Coding : 184 Source ( s ) : Description : Application ( s ) : Exanlplc : Analysis : Notes : THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Coding Five post - Coding and Pre - Writing Life is just a bowl of strategies . ( ClitTord Gcertz , Local Kllow / cdgc : FI / rtlter & snys ill IIIIcrprctil1c A / lfhropoloL ~ ) " 1983 , p . 25 ) If YOll have diligently applied First Cycle coding methods to your data ( several times ) and - if needed - transitiol1cd those codes through Second Cycle methods ( again , several times ) . concurrendy maintained a substantive corpus of insightful analytic menlOS , and employed one or more additional analytic approaches to the data , if all has gone well , you should now have several major categories . themes , or concepts , or at least one theory ( or through - line or key assertion or primary narrative , etc . ) . That , of course , is the ideal scenario . But what if you ' re not yet there ? Or , what if you ' re already there and don ' t know how to proceed ? This brief closing chapter offers a few recommendations for what might be labeled " post - coding and pre - writing , " that transitional analytic process between coding cycles and the final write - up of your study . Where you are in your analytic journey does , to some degree . depend on which coding mcthod ( s ) you ' ve applied to your data . Versus Coding , for example , encourages you to find three major " m . oieties " ; ThenIeing the Data recommcnds listing the outcomes in outline format ; A . , - ; al Coding prescribes that you specifY the properties and dimensions of a luajor category . But sonIe find it difficult to make those final confirmatory assertions . Fear gets the better of us as we some times wonder after our analytic work is almost completed , " Have I gotten it right ? " " Did I learn anything new ? " " Now what do I do ? " I do not discuss how to craft and write the final report itself , for there are so many genres and formats of research reporting possible - etlmography , nalTative short story , ethnodrama , academic journal article , dissertation , dedicated website , etc . - that I call1ot adequately address them all ( see Gibbs , 2007 ; and Wolcott , 1994 and 200 I for expert guidance ) . Instead , I offer " a bowl of strategies " that 1 . 86 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS wi11 hopefil11y crystallize your analytic work thus f . 1I and provide a template Or springboard for your written docmnent or mediated report . Focusing Strategies Sometimes we become overwhelmed by the magnitude of our studies and thus need to intentionally focus the parameters of our investigation in progress to find its corc . Forcing yourself to select a limited number of various ideas that have emerged fr0111 your study encourages you to prioritize the multiple observations and reflect on their essential ll1canings . The IItop ten " list RegJrdless of codes applied to them , extract no more than ten quotes or pas sages ( preferably no longer than half a page in length each ) from your field notes , interview transcripts , documents , analytic mcnlOS , or other data that strike you as the most vivid and / or representational of your study . Print each excerpt on a separate page of paper . Reflect on these ten items ' contents and arrange thenl in various orders : chronologically , hierarchically , telescopically , episodically , from the eA1Jository to the climactic , fr0111 the mundane to the insightfi . ll , fr0111 the smaHest detail to the bigger picture , etc . I cannot predict what you may find since each study ' s data are unique . But you may discover different ways of structuring or outlining the write - up of your research story by arranging and rearranging the most salient ideas from the data corpus . The study ' s lltrinity " If you feel you are unable to identitY the key issues of your study after Second Cycle coding , ask yourself : What are the three ( and only three ) major codes , categories , themes , and / or concepts generated thus far that strike you , which stand out in your study ? Write each item in a separate bin on a piece of paper ( or use CAQDAS graphics on a monitor ) and arrange the three bins in a triangle . Which one of the three items , to you , is the apex or dominant item and why ? In what ways does this apex influence and atTect or interrelate with the other two codes , categories , themes , andlor concepts ( see Appendi . x C for the use of bins , lines , directional arrows , and other visual display strategies ) ? Explore other possible three - way combinations with other nlajor items fr0111 the study . POST·COOING AND PRE·WRITING codeweaving In Chapter Two I noted that one of the nlOst critical outc0111es of qualitative data analysis is to interpret how the individual components of the study weave together . Codeweaving is the actual integration of key code word . . and phrases into narrative form to see how the puzzle pieces fit together . The teclmique may , at first , create a forced and seemingly artificial assertion , but use it as a heuristic to explore the possible and plausible interaction and interplay of your major codes . Codeweave the primary codes , categories , themes , and / or concepts of your analysis into as few sentences as possible . Try writing several variations to inves tigate how the items might interrelate , suggest causality , indicate a process , or work holistically to create a broader theIne . Use the codewoven assertion as a topic sentence for a paragraph or extended narrative that explains the obser vations in greater detail . Rising Above the Data Sometimes an emergent set of codes or categories might seem " uninspiring " - a set of nouns that reveal only surface , descriptive patterns . These strategies may help you transcend nl . ere indexing of your data to progress toward richer interpretive meanings . The lltouch test " The " touch test " is a strategy for progressing from topic to concept , fr0111 the real to the abstract , and from the particular to generdl . I tell my students that you can literally touch someone who ' s a mother , but you cannot physically touch the con cept of " motherhood . " You can touch an old hOllse in poor disrepair , but you can not touch the phenonlenol1 of " poverty . " And you can touch a painting an artist has rendered , but you calUlot physically touch his " creative process . " Those things that cannot literally be touched are conceptual , phenomenological , and pmcessual , and represent forms of abstraction that most often suggest higher - level thinlcing . Examine the latter - developed set of codes and categories frOl11 your study . Can you physically touch what they represent ? If so , then explore how those codes and categories can be reworded and transformed into more abstract meanings to transcend the particulars of your study . For example , onc category from an adolescent case study might be his use and abuse of Drugs . But through richer Descriptive and / or Process Code language , the higher - level concepts , phenomena , and processes might be : depc / ldc / lcy , addicfioll , copillg / J / ccft atlisJII , scarc1lillgJor " h ( ghs " , or cscapil ~ gji " o / l1 . 1 . 87 : 1 . 88 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS From codes to themes If you have coded your data widl only words or short phrases and feel resultant codes are elusive , transfornl the final set of codes into 100lg " r - pltraseH ' themes ( see Themeing the Data in Chapter Three ) . Themeing may allow to draw out a code ' s truncated essence by elaborating 011 its meanings . - For example , a Process Code from your analysis m . ight be NEC ; OITIAlr _ i ING . Though d , e word might indeed identifY the general types of actions you observed among participants , the term is too broad ( and OVI , " U " " , ! ' nowadays ) to provide any analytic utility . Two reconmlcnded strategies ' fot Themeing the Data add the verbs " 111CanS " and " is " after the phen0I11ell01 ' , under investigation . Thus , expanding on " Negotiating means . . . " and " Negotiating is . . . " keeps you grounded in the data as you transcend By re - reading and reflecting on the data categorized under NEGOTIATING you may observe , for exal11ple , that " Negotiating means manipulating othe ~ ~ : or " Negotiating is the path afleast resistance . " These are more substantive and ' evocative prompts for writing . Ordering and Reordering A small list of just two to seven major codes , categories , thenles , and / or con : cepts - or even just one new theory - can seenl formidable when it comes time to writing about thenl in a report . The reconlnlendations and strategies offered below are a few ways to plot ( i . e . , structure ) their discussion . Tabletop categories One exercise in my qualitative research methods course involves the literal spa : tia } arrangement on a table of coded and categorized data . We first code the data in the margins of hard copy , cut each coded " chunk " of data into separ . t ~ e pieces of paper , pile thenl together into appropriate categories , staple each cat : egory ' s pile of coded data together , label each pile with its category name , then e : \ . 1Jlorc how they can be arranged on a tabletop to map the categories ' processes and structures . Depending on the data we use , sonlC category piles are arranged in a ~ in : gle column from top to bottom according to numeric frequency of thei ~ codes . Sometimes the categories are grouped together in superordinate and subordinate arrangenlents , like an outline or taxon01ny on paper . Other times selected categories may be clustered together in separate piles because they share a broader theme or concept . Yet at other tinles the categories may be placed in linear , circular , or networked arrangements on the tabletop because they suggest a process of influences and affects . And at other times POST - CODING AND PRE - WRITING category piles overlap each . other in Venn diagram - like fashion because share some similar traits while retaining their unique features . students remark that " touching the data " and physically l110ving categories a table top in multiple arrangements helps them better discover and , undel : 5rn . llu such organizational concepts as hierarchy , process , interrelation themeing , and structure . Ironically , this manual method is faster and f1exible than CAQDAS software ' s modeling functions . You can manip paper with two hands quicker than you can computer graphics with mouse . : ' , If you arc encountering difficulty with how your final set of categories , 1th " n " " , or concepts work together ( or separately ) , try this tabletop teclmique spatially arrange the items ( written on index cards or separate half sheeto ; ; of in various combinations until a process or stmcture emerges that " feels Use the layout as a visual template for your writing . If possible , adapt the into an accompanying operational model diagram for the study ( sec App " ndix C ) . thing at a time you ' ve constructed several major categories , themes , concepts , or theories your data , start by writing about them O / Ie at a tilllc . Mter your exhaustive qUlalitative data analysis you may have come to the realization of how intri everything interrelates , and how difficult it is to separate ideas from their cont " xts . But rest assured that discussing one thing at a time keeps you focused a writer , and keeps us focused as readers . Mter you ' ve discussed each element se ] par ' at " ly , then you can begin your reflections on how these items may con and weave complexly together . But which item do you discuss first , then second , then third , and so on ? . Rmlellllher that numeric frequency of data related to a code , category , theme , concept is not necessarily a reliable indicator of its importance or signifi so the itenl with the highest tally doesn ' t always merit first place in the ' \ V1nt , , - up . Various ordering strategies e : \ . ; st for your analytic discussion : fi ' om to minor , minor to major , particular to general , expository to clinlactic , sequence you choose will vary depending on the nature of your work its audience , but I appreciate being told early in a report what the " head of the research news is , followed by the story ' s details . Headi , ngs and subheadings code , category , theme , and concept labels themselves as headings and sub u . " U " " - I ' ? frequently in your written report . In a way , these devices are also forms coding and categorizing the sections of your text . They serve as organizing : 1 . 89 : 1 . 90 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS frames for your own development of the research story , and using them often keeps the reader 011 track with the linear units of your write - up . When 1 review a lengthy journal article manuscript or dissertation chapter undivided by headings and subheadings , 1 soon become lost without these cog _ nitive signposts to help guide me on my private reading journey . 1 slyly note in the margin for the writer , " Subheadings are your friend . " Review this chap _ ter alone and notice how frequently headings and subheadings are used to organize the post - coding and pIe - writing recommendations . Imagine how dif ficult it would have been to read and stay focused had this chapter been writ ten as one lengthy narrative . Subheadings arc your friend . Begin with the conclusion One of Iny dissertation students was a terrible procrastinator and sutTered from severe writer ' s block . She told nle after her fieldwork was completed and the formal writing stage began that she didn ' t know where or how to start . I face tiously but strategically replied , " Then start by writing the conclusion . " That advice actually triggered the development of a solid chapter that summarized the major outcomes of her study . All she had to do was now write the material leading up to those conclusions . The same recommendation may work for you . If you find yourself unable to start at the beginning , then begin with the conclusion . The final chapter of a longer work most often includes such conventional items as a recap of the study ' s goals and research design , a review of the major outcomes or findings fronl fieldwork , recommendations for future research in the topic , and a reflec tion on how the researcher herself has been influenced and atTected by the pro ject . Tins thumbnail sketch of the study ' s details may provide you with better direction for writing the full - length report . Assistance from Others A counseling folk saying 1 often pass along to others goes , " You can ' t see the frame when you ' re in the picture . " Sometimes we need an outside pair of eyes or cars to respond to our work in progress . " Shop talking " through the study Talk regularly with a trusted peer , colleague , advisor , mentor , e : ' - . . - pert , or even a friend about your research . This person can ask provocative questions the researcher hasn ' t considered , discuss and talk through the data analytic dilemmas you ' re f . ' lcing , and offer fresh perspectives on future directions with the study . If POST·CODING AND PRE·WRITING luch . - y , he or she may also Inten . tionally or inadvertently say that one thing us that pulls everything together . Many of my students working on their dissertation projects tell nle that our 011e - ·0I11 - 0I1e conversations about their studies are nlost productive because they to verbally articulate for the first time " what ' s going on " with their data and analysis . Through our " shop talk " exchanges , they often arrive at some of focus and clarity about their work , enabling thenl to better write the studies . Some inquiry approaches , such as action and feminist research , encourage participant owncrship of the data . Talking with the people you observed and ; ntennewe : o about your . ma1ytic reflections can also provide a " reality check " you and possibly stllllulate additional insights . Searching for jjburied treasure " When I read later drafts of my students ' dissertations , I anI always on the lookout for what I call " buried treasure . " In their analysis chapters , they sc , metim , , , make statements that , to me , demonstrate remarkable analytic insight about the study . But these statements are often el11bedded in the , , 1I1IULUC of a paragraph or section when they should be placed as a topic sen or summarizing idea . I circle the sentence in red ink and write in the margin such notes as , " This is brilliant ! " or HA major idea here , " and this sentencc and move it to the beginning of the paragraph . " Perhaps the students have been so illl111ersed in their studies ' data that they cannot See the forest for the trees . Perhaps they wrote what was , to them , another part of the analytic story , but were unaware that they had devel an insight of relative magnitude . When a substantive portion of your research is written , show it to a mentor or advisor and ask hin1 or her to be on the lookout for " buried treasure " in the report . j Il , es , eard , ers are offered varied yet sometimes contradictory advice in qualitative inquiry . We are told to capture the essence of our study ' s data , yet also told to our accounts with thick description . We are advised to " reduce " OLlr data an elegant set of wen - codified themes , yet also advised to write about the Intricate complexity of what we observed in the field . We are cautioned to . lnaill " in a sense of scientific rigor in an era of evidence - based accountability , also encouraged to explore more progressive forms of acadennc research ' qmITII " " such as poetic and autoethnographic representations . We are charged contribute productively to the knowledge bases of our disciplines , yet : 1 . 9 : 1 . : 192 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS also advised to leave our readers with more questions than answers evocative ambiguity and uncertainty enhancement . We don ' t need to reconcile the contradictions ; we only need to acl < ne " , , ] edge the multiplicity of theul and become well versed in variolls methods nlOdes of working with qualitative ( and quantitative ) data . 1 am a pr ; lgn " ati ~ eclectic researcher , and I sincerely feel everyone else should be one as There are times when coding the data is absolutely necessary , and other when it ' s most inappropriate for the study at hand . There arc times w " en , ' ' ' ' . need to write a 3D - page article for an academic journal , and other times we need to write a 3D - minute ethnodrama for the stage . And there arc when it ' s more powerful to end a presentation with tough questions , and tilues when it ' s more powerful to end with thoughtful answers . To be honest we need much more of the latter . • As a student and teacher of qualitative inquiry , what remains with me after I read a report or experience a presentation , regardless of form or format , is itS demonstration of the researcher ' s anilytic prowess . When I silently think verbally whisper " Wow . . . " at the conclusion of s01ucone ' s work , I know I have been given not just new knowledge but new awarCIICSS , and am now the better for it . Permit me to close with an adaptation and weaving of anthropologist Harry EWolcott ' s sage advice from his various writings , which I feel should serve ~ as our ideal goals as qualitative researchers : We must not only transform our data , we must transcend them : Insight is our forte ; The whole purpose of the enterprise is revelation ; We do it to be profound . and Activities for Coding d Qualitative Data Analytic Skill lopment activities can be conducted by oncself or with classmates in a qualitative methods course . These exercises are intended to attune the researcher basic principles of coding , pattern development , categorization , and analysis . arc you ? Empty your purse , wallct , backpack , or briefcase and place all on a table . Arrange , organize , and cluster those items that share siInilar char acteristics ( e . g . , all writing instruments in one pile , all credit cards in onc pile , all make : up in one pile ) . Give each pile its own label or category name . Write an " " hrtic memo on yourself that explores the assertion , " our identities arc sup and altered by various forms of identification " ( prior , 2004 , p . 88 ) . Also _ " " . 0 , " , " the higher - oeder analytic question : What do all the piles ( categories ) have Pattern of Patterns Patterns are ubiquitous in social and natural environments . Humans have a need and propcnsity to create patterns for order , function , or ornamentation , and those needs and thus ski11s transfer into our analysis of qualitative data . In ~ classroom or other average - size indoor environment ( such as an office , small restaurant , or bedroom ) , look for and list all patterns observed . These can range ~ om patterns in the architecture or decor ( e . g . , rows of fluorescent lighting tubes , slats in air conditioning vents ) to patterns in furnishings and their arrangements ( e . g . , desks lined up in rows , vertically arranged cabinet drawers ) . : 1 . 94 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS Next , organize the individual items in your master list into categories - a " pattern of patterns . " For example : • decomtillf ! paftcms : those patterns that arc purely ornamental or aesthetic such as stripes on upholstery fabric , painted marbling on a wall I • jil1lctiollal partcms : those patterns that have a utilitarian purpose , such as four legs on a chair , three hinges cOlmecting a door to its frame • Ot { ! allizatiollol patfcms : those patterns that bring order to the environmellt or its artifacts , such as books of similar topics shelved together , various office supplies in appropriate bins • other types of pattcrJls ] , 011 collstrllct Conduct the san1e exercise above in an outdoor / natural environment . However , create a different classification system for the individual patterns you obsenre ( e . g . , petals on a flower , leaves on a tree , clusters of cacti ) . T - SHIRT CODES Visit a clothing store , or have all members of a class wear a favorite t - shirt to a session . Address the following : • What is the t - shirt made of ? Look at the label ( if any ) sewn into the garment . That label , with information on the fabric cOlnposition and country of manufacture , is like an Attriblfte Code for the clothing item ' s contents . The label - the code - summarizes the entire t - shirt ' s basic contents . • What size is the t - shirt ? Again , look at the label ( or better still , try it on ) . The symbols S , M , L , XL , XXL , XXXL are MagI / ill / de Codes . The e ' qJeri " ence of trying it on yourself gives you a better understanding of what that size code actually means . These days , what passes for " mediUlu " in one brand of clothing may be labeled " large " by another manufacturer ' s line . If there is no label that specifies the t - shirt ' s size , use observation and comparison with other t - shirts to assess its probable size . • What words and / or images ( if any ) are on the front or back of the t - shirt ? Those words and in1 . 1ges are both textual and nonverbal III Villa Codes for the garment . Cluster together with others wearing similarly coded shirts ( a form of FOCI / sed Codi / lg ) and discuss not only what the messages have in conml0n but also what the people wearing them have in comnlon . What you identifY for each cluster or category of people might be called a Fait ' ' ' ' Code , based on the collective values , attitudes , and beliefS of the wearers - a form of [ / cl / I / CS Code . APPENDIX A Board Games Several commercial board gallles actually provide valuable experience with exercising necessary analytic skills for the qualitative researcher . such as pattern recognition . coding and categorizing , and inductive and deductive reasoning : • Tluee for All ! • The $ 100 , 000 Pyramid • Scattergories : 1 . 95 Field Note , Interview Transcript , and Document Samples for Coding The following samples of qualitative data are provided as content for individual or c1assroolll coding exercises . An interesting approach for classes is to have one - third of the group code the data using one method , another third ·with a different m . ethod , and the final third of the group code with a method . Compare findings and discuss how each method may have generated different outcomes . Also , the recommendations for coding are [ ranI the reper toire of First Cycle methods . E , : plore how the analysis progresses by applying a Second Cycle coding method afterward , sllch as Pattern Coding or Focused Coding . Field Note Sample - Observations at a University Weight Room In this field note excerpt , participant observation takes place at a sports and recreation complex ' s weight room on a February afternoon . The male participants are assigned descriptors in place of nal11es ( e . g . , WORK BOOTS , GOATEE ) . Observer ' s Comments ( OC ) , in addition to the descrip tive detail , are deliberately included as part of the sample . Code the following excerpt in the right - hand margin using Process Coding , Initial Coding , or } v . . uucs Coding , then write an analytic memo based on the codes . ( If Coding is chosen , diagram the social action at work here - see Appendix C ) : The prominent odor in the room can be described as " musl < y , sweaty clothes . " The ceiling height is approximately twelve feet and has air conditioning vents to maintain a comfortable temperature , and speakers where rocl < music from a radio station is playing at a moderate volume . The east side handwelght floor is covered with black , rectangular , rubber mats . The designated area for this ~ PPENDIX B ~ h , ; ervatlon has three weight benches . : metal frames with adj ' Jst ; abl , e , dark red , patent leather , padded platforms that accommodate a person sitting on and / or leaning against Benches are spaced to allow people to work by them others wori { on them . Weight and accessory racks , varioUS sizes and pounds of round metal dlsi ( s , are against the east wall and central pillar . north wall has large windows providing sunlight to " nn , n " , m " nt the florescent lighting . The south wall also has wlr , dows with a view of the Center ' s hall and towel booth . emlnated or plated signs on the east wall state ~ Weight policies " such as " Collars are Required " and your Weights . " Pro , mi , nerlt on the east side are seven foot high mirrors o " lendin ~ across the length of the wall . OC : It ' s liI ( e a voluntary , contemporary torture chamber ; only the serious need apply . With al / the metal and glass ' s a feeling of coldness , hardness , massiveness in the A white twenty - ish man in baggy jeans , a loose white t - shirt , and tan WORK BOOTS is seated on a weight bench . He two handweights , one in each hand , and lifts them slmultalne ( ) u , ; ly in arm curls . His face clenches in an expression that looks liI < e pain as he raises the weights to neck level . Throughout this exercise he is standing about three feet from and facing the wall length mirror . His medium - length is honey blonde . DC : His dress is not typical of what most men wear in this weight room . Most wear shorts and athletic shoes . TllroUgh his loose fitting clothes and by the size of his forearms I sensed that he fairly muscular . WORK BOOTS is still seated at the bench but the weights on the floor . He leans back , his hands Interlocl { ed behind his head , his legs spread apart . He looks at himself In the mirror . He then looks to the side , breathes in , stretches his arms , stands , and talllS to a THIN MAN next to him . WORK BOOTS picks up the same weights as before and continues arm curls for approximately twenty " reps " ( repetitions ) . Th " ou ~ h ( ) ut this he looks at himself In the mirror , smiles , then . . ilne " e . his face , looks down , then looks at himself In the QC : The man thin / rs he ' s hot . That classic leaning - back ~ with ~ your - arms - behlnd . your - head - legs ~ spread - apart pose is just too : 197 1 . 98 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS suggestive of stereotypical male sexuality ( U / ' m a fuclfin ' man " ) . He was chec / fing out his muscles - the breathing in to expand his chest was a personal pleasure sensation to feel himself . The continuous 100lfS and smiles he gives himself in the mirror malfe him looff IiIre an arrogant S . O . B . His self·esteem seems very high and he seems pleased with his own physical appearance . A fairly large but somewhat muscular man with a GOATEE , green ball cap , grey t - shirt , and blue shorts sits on a weight bench close to WORK BOOTS and arm curls one weight over and behind his head . His feet are not flat on the floor , but on " tiptoe . " GOATEE does approximately seven reps with one arm , then switches to another . He , too , faces the mirror but is now approximately ten feet away from it . QC : The " tiptoe " seemed so out of place - a stereotypical feminine action in juxtaposition with his large body frame . Weight lifting ballet - " masculine dance . " Dancers rehearse with mirrors , too . WORK BOOTS , standing , makes eye contact with himself in the mirror for approximately fifteen seconds . His mouth tWitches . He pici { s up the handweights and continues his reps , continually looldng at himself in the mirror as he does so . Interview Transcript Sample - A School Principal Talks about her School ' s Neighborhood In the following interview transcript . a white female principal of an inner city , grades K - S school with a predominantly Hispanic population . describes to interviewer the cultural conditions surrounding the site and the social services provided by the school to its students and 6milies . Code the following excerpt in the right - hand l11argin using Descriptive Coding , In Vivo Coding , orVerStlS Coding , then write an analytic memo based on the codes : We ' re helping people with rent , helping them get jobs , giving them emergency food , getting their power turned back on when it ' s been shut down , urn , families that are in jail , urn , bringing in a police resource officer , dealing with all of those agencies . We have someone In our social services office from Helping House , we have community police in that center , we have a migrant resource person in there . Yeah , that ' s not so much Hispanic culture as the culture of poverty , and , you know , all of the children here are on free lunch and free breai { fast . And it is different . This year is the first time that I have really seen a junior high teacher make the assignment that all kids have to do research APPENDIX B the library and see the kids take th ~ ir parents to the main of the public library on First Street and Main . It ' s , difference is I think that the gangs are not as active as have been . They ' re active in a different way , perhaps , awhile there the kids couldn ' t step across Main Street " , , " h , , " , t taking the chance of being shot . there ' s all the , the territoriality of the Hispanic gangs , plus the , uh , economic motives of the gangs that moved in from and L . A . If you look at this little area around the > SCh " OII , if you wal1 { across Juarez Street that ' s campito , and the campground where the migrant worl { ers used to live they worked the crops that were on this field where the I is . And then ( laughs ) , OK ? And , the migrant workers up from Mexico used to , uh , put stakes In the corners fields that they were working and mari { them as their 1 So we have several generations of families here who parts of gangs that were territorial gangs in the sense of , \ 5 where we worl { , which have now been corrupted by drugs and the money coming in for the Crips and the Bloods . Um , and the grandparents think it ' s perfectly all right if child Joins a gang and has his first communion in the weelt , because that gang was 1i1 { e being part of a labor for them . So , that ' s a mix of the economic thing , the of poverty , and the culture of the Mexican field , DUICUlment Sample - How to Construct a Successful You " Letter ; , The following document excerpt is a standard form letter included with a letter to a university student notifying her of a scholarship . document was created by a developl11ent office in charge of securing fram private and corporate donors and adntinistrating scholarships . rich text features ( bolding , italicizing ) are kept intact franl the original page document ( written in 12 pt . Times New Roman font ) . Code the text in the right - hand margin using Initial Coding , Values CCldiJlg . or through Themeing the Data , then write an analytic memo based ( ) U the codes . Or , write your open - ended impressions about the docunlent first , then code your written notes . Remember that documents are " social that can be examined critically because they " reflect the interests perspectives of their authors " ( Hammersley & Atkinson , 1995 , p . 165 ) carry " values and ideologies , either intended or not " ( Hitchcock & tiugh , , , . 1995 , p . 231 ) : 1 . 99 200 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS How to Construct a Successful Thank You Letter Here is a suggested guide to help you create your Thanl ( You letter : NOTE : Be sure to use a warm yet professional tone in your letter . Proofread and spell - check your letter . Keep a copy for your files . Date Your Name Street Address City , State , Zip Code Name of Scholarship Donor Person ' s Job Title , if applicable Name of Organization , If applicable Street Address City , State , Zip Code Dear Mr . / Mrs . / Dr . / Professor / Whatever : Thank your scholarship donor personally for the scholarship by Its title . Explain how it will help you ; give a relevant example of the scholarship ' s benefit to your academic career . Let the scholarship donor know what you have done and why you are in school . Briefly highlight any skills / accomplishments you have achieved at this point in your education . Be specific : List examples by titie . indicate your educational or professional goal and explain how this scholarship helps you in attaining this goal . Thank the scholarship donor once more . Sincerely , Your Signature Your Typed Name An Operational Model Diagram & Huberman ' s ( 1994 ) sage advice to " think di ' ] Jlay " can assist our concurrent coding , categorizing , and analytic memo writing efforts . Dey ( 1993 ) notes that when " we are dealing with c0111plex and voluminous data , diagrams can help us disentangle the threads of our analysis and present results in a coherent and . inteU . igible form , . . . not just a way of decorating our conclusions , they also provide a way of reaching them " ( p . 192 ) . Aside from manual pencil and paper . sketches , which work well as first drafts , CAQDAS programs enable you to or diagralll the el11ergent sequences or networks of your codes and cate related to your study in sophisticated ways , and permit related comments memos linked to the visual symbols for explanatory reference . This appendix includes a sample operational model diagram ( see Figure C . 1 ) from the author ' s etlmographic study of a white female theatre teacher at an city grades K - 8 magnet school for the arts ( Saldaila , 1997 ) . It is provided here to demonstrate how participant ' i , codes , categories , phenomena , processes , concepts can be mapped for the researcher ' s analytic synthesis and the reader ' s visual grasp of the study . Notice how the bins or nodes ( both plain and ho1ded and in various shapes and masses ) , connecting lines or links ( both solid and dashed ) , and arrows ( both one - way and two - directional ) illustrate not only the space and flow of action / interaction , but also suggest a sense of quality and : The diagram illustrates the key participant ' i in rectangular nodes : lHartillcz Schoo / s Childrell alld StqfJ ( a cultural group ) and NallC ) ' , the theatre instructor . convergence created the phenomenon of wllllmi shock ( Winke1man , for Nancy . The salient categories of Martinez School culture most diffi - for her to deal with as a beginning teacher were the Hispanic children ' s ( value , attitude , and belief systems ) , gaJlg subculture , and Spanish Imt ~ Jlagc . the stqfJ , Nancy had to submit to older and tenured faculty colleagues ' : plreSllUled alftllOrily over her as a novice educator . Nancy ' s actions and interactions to function in the school adhered to the plrocessual and cyclical patterns of cultural shock and adaptation outlined by 202 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS Martlnez School CultUre Adaptation FIGURE C . l An operational model diagram of an inner city teacher ' s cultural shock and survival processes Winkelrnan and represented in the diagram with oval nodes . In one eX : JI11lplei of cultural shock , Nancy dealt with a crisis ( e . g . , not being able to Spanish ) by adjllstillg to it ( e . g . , learning a few key Spanish words and ph " " , , ) ? A successful adaptation to the crisis ( e . g . , Spanish language oral fluency ) have led to what multicultural education scholar James A . Banks ( 1994 ) cross - wItl / raI jilllctiollillg . But half - hearted or insufficient coping strategies over - reliance on student translators , a small Spanish language vocabulary , ac ( : ept " . · ing dIe limitations of classroonl conullunication ) were aCClfltllmtioll , not ad : apt : ation . ' to her teaching context . This process was not as effective as cross - cultural tioning ; it was merely ( ( sl / J ' IJiuaI JJ ( note that the three major concepts APPENDIX C study are in bolded circular nodes ) ; . During Nancy ' s first two years as a teacher , new crises led to new adjustments ; once she adapted successfully to something , a new crisis would emerge , and so 011 . Whether Nancy successfillly adapted and exhibited cross - cultural functioning , or whether she acculturated and exhibited luere survival , across tinlc the process influenced and affected her [ O / / ccptiolI cif drama with Hispanic children , which changed her teaching philosophy , CII , . riCllbflJl , and practice . For example , rather than having them read plays fronl a Eurocentric canon , as she had done in her first year , Nancy later chose material with morc cultural relevance to the population ( see the examples in Verbal Exchange Coding and Holistic Coding ) . Some vet eran staff members made unreasonable demands 011 her prograul with stage per formance CA - pectations . Nancy ' s cultural shock and adaptation processes to this led to poor theatre production work in her first year of teaching ( " survival " ) , but more successnll outcomes in her second year ( cross - cultural functioning ) . This diagram was not created at the beginning of the ethnographic study . Its development emerged across three years of literature reviews , fieldwork ; data analysis , and writing . I ' ve observed in my research methods courses that students new to qualitative data analysis tend to diagram their conceptual bins in basic linear or circular arrangements . Though nothing is wrong " vith this as an initial tactic , social interaction is rarely linear or perfectly circular . Review some of the diagram displays in Miles & Huberman ( 1994 ) and the user man uals of CAQDAS programs to heighten your awareness of complex interaction interplay among participants and phenomena . Regardless of the length or scope of your study , think display . £ . ' 1 ' lore how your codes , categories , themes , and concept ' i can be represented visually to supplement analysis , c1ari . f ) r your thoughts , and enhance your written presentation . 203 A Glossary of Analytic Recommendations Below are onc - sentence descriptors of the coding methods profiles ' recommendations for further analytic work with coded qualitative data . See the References for addi ' : ' tional information and a discussion of procedures . action research ( Alo ' ichter , Posch , & Smnekh , 1993 ; Stringer , 1999 ) - a proactive research project geared toward constmctive and positive change in a socia1 setting by investigating participants ' conflicts and need ' i . ( see In Vivo , Process , Emotion , Va1ues , Versus , Evaluation , Verbal Exchange , Holistic , Pattern , Elaborative Coding ) assertion developtnent ( Erickson , 1986 ) - the construction of credible arid trustworthy observational summary statements based on confirming and dis confirming evidence in the qualitative data corpus . ( see Magnitude , V . 1Iues , Versus , Evaluation , Hypothesis , Pattern , Theoretical , Elaborative , Longitudinai Coding ; Themeing the Data ) case studies ( Merriam , 1998 ; Stake , 1995 ) - focused in - depth study and analysis of a unit of one - one person , one group , one organization , one event , etc . ( see Attribute , In Vivo , Process , Values , Evaluation , Dramaturgical , Motif , Narrative , Longitudinal Coding ; Themeing the Data ) cognitive mapping ( Miles & Huberman , 1994 ; Northcutt & McCoy , 2004 ) the detailed visual representation and presentation , most often in flowchart mat , of a cognitive process ( negotiating , decision - making , etc . ) . ( see Process l Emotion , Domain and Ta . . xonomic Coding ) componential and cultural theme analysis ( McCurdy , Spraclley , & Shandy , 2005 ; Spradley , 1979 , 1980 ) - the search for attributes of and relationships among domains [ categories ] for the discovery of cultural meaning . ( set ! Domain and Taxonomic Coding ) content analysis ( Krippendorff , 2003 ; Weber , 1990 ; Wilkinson & Binningh ; rrn , 2003 ) - the systematic qualitative and quantitative analysis of the contents of a data corpus ( documents , . te : \ . ' tS , films , etc . ) . ( see Attribute , Magnitude , APPENDIX D Simultaneous , Structural , Descrippve , Values , Domain and Ta . . xonomic , Pattern Coding ) Provisional , Hypothesis , OCM , cross - cultural content analysis ( Bernard , 2006 ) - a content analysis that compares data from twu or nlOre cultures . ( see Attribute , Descriptive , Values , GeM , Domain and Ta . xonOlllic Coding ) data luatrices for univariate , bivariate , and rnultivariate analysis ( Bernard , 2006 ) - the tabular layout of variable data for inferential analysis ( e . g . , histogram . s , ANGVA , factor analysis ) . ( see Magnitude , Hypothesis , GCM Coding ) decision modeling ( Bernard , 2006 ) - the graphic flowchart layout or series of if / then - statements of choices participants will make under particular condi tions . ( see Process , Evaluation , Pattern Coding ) descriptive statistical analysis ( Bernard , 2006 ) - the computation of basic descriptive statistics such as the median , 111ean , correlation coefficient , ete . for a set of data . ( see Magnitude , GCM Coding ) domain and taxonoluic analysis ( Schensul , Schensul , & LeCompte , 1999 ; Spraclley , 1979 , 1980 ) - the researcher ' s organizational and hierarchical arrange ment of participant - generated data into cultural categories of meaning . ( see Descriptive , In Vivo , DCM , Domain and Ta . xonomic Coding ) ethnodrama ( Denzin , 1997 , 2003 ; Saldaiia , 2005a ) - the creative transforma tion of qualitative data into play script fonn for theatrical performance . ( see Dramaturgical , Verbal Exchange Coding ) framework policy analysis ( Ritchie & Spencer , 1994 ) - a signature , multi stage analytic process ( e . g . , indexing , charting , mapping ) with qualitative data to identify key issues , concepts , and themes ITOn1 social policy research . ( see Values , Versus , Evaluation Coding ) frequency counts ( LeCompte & Schensul , 1999 ) - basic descriptive statistical summary information such as totals , frequencies , ratios , percentages , etc . about a ' set of data . ( see Attribute , Magnitude , Structural , Descriptive , In Vivo , Emotion , ' hlues , Evaluation , Hypothesis , GCM Coding ) graph - theoretic techniques for seluantic network analysis ( Namey , Guest , & Johnson , 2008 ) - statistics - based analyses ( e . g . , hierarchical clustering , ' multidimensional scaling ) of text . . to identify associations and semantic relation ships within the data . ( see Attribute , Magnitude , Simultaneous , Structural , Descriptive , Evaluation , Domain and Ta . xonomic Coding ) 205 206 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS grounded dleory ( Charmaz , 2006 ; Corbin & Strauss , 2008 ; Glaser & Strauss , 1967 ; Strauss & Corbin , 1998 ) - a systematic methodological approach to qual itative inquiry that generates theory " grounded " in the data themselves . ( see Descriptive . In Vivo , Process , Initial , Versus , Evaluation , Pattern , Focused . A . ~ alt Theoretical , Elaborative , Longitudinal Coding ; also see Chapter Two ) . illustrative charts , matrices , diagrams ( Nliles & Huberman , 1994 ; Morgan , Fellows , & Guevara , 2008 ; Northcutt & McCoy , 2004 ; Paulston , 2000 ) - the visual representation and presentation of qualitative data and their analysis through illustrative summary . ( see Attribute , Magnitude , Simultaneous , Structural , Process , Evaluation , Domain and Taxonoll1ic , Theoretical , Longitudinal Coding ; also see Appendi , C ) interactive qualitative analysis ( Northcutt & McCoy , 2004 ) - a signature method for facilitated and participatory qualitative data analysis and the com putation of the data ' s frequencies and interrelationships . ( see In Vivo , Values , Versus , Evaluation , Pattern , Focused Coding ) interrelationship ( Saldana , 2003 ) - qualitative " correlation " that examines possible influences and affects within , between , and among categorized data . ( see Simultaneous , Structural , Emotion , A . , : ial , Longitudinal Coding ) life - course mapping ( Clausen , 1998 ) - a chronological diagrammatic display of a person ' s life course with emphasis on the range of high and low points within various time periods ( also see Longitudinal Coding in Chapter Four ) . ( see Emotion , Values , Motif , Narrative , Longitudinal Coding ) longitndinal qualitative research ( Giele & Elder , 1998 ; Saldana , 2003 , 2008 ) - the collection and analysis of qualitative data from long - term fieldwork ( also see Longitudinal Coding in Chapter Four ) . ( see Attribute , Magnitude , Values , Evaluation , Hypothesis , A . " Xial , Theoretical , Elaborative , Longitudinal Coding ) memo writing about the codes / dIemes ( Charmaz , 2006 ; Corbin Strauss , 2008 ; Glaser , 1978 ; Glaser & Strauss , 1967 ; Strauss , 1987 ; Strauss & Corbin , 1998 ) - the researcher ' s written reflections on the study ' s codes / themes and comple . x lueanings of patterns in the qualitative data ( see In Vivo , Process , ' Initial , Evaluation , Holistic , OCM , Domain and Taxonomic , Focused , A . . xiali Theoretical , Elaborative , Longitudinal Coding ; Themeing the Data ; also see Chapter Two ) meta - edmography , metasyndIesis , and metasummary ( Finfgeld , 2003 ; N obbt & Hare , 1988 ; Sandelowski , Docherty , & Emden , 1997 ) - an analytic APPENOIX 0 review of multiple and related qualitative studies to assess their commonalities and differences of observations for synthesis or sunullary . ( see Elaborative coding ; Themeing the Data ) metaphoric analysis ( Coffey & Atkinson , 1996 ; Todd & Harrison , 2008 ) _ examination of how participant language is used figuratively ( e . g . , metaphor , analogy , simile ) . ( see In Vivo , Emotion , Motif , Narrative , Verbal Exchange Coding ; Themeing the Data ) mixed - methods research ( Creswell , 2009 ; Creswell & Piano Clark , 2007 ; Tashakkori & Teddlie , 2003 ) - a methodological research approach that com patibly combines quantitative and qualitative methods for data collection and analysis . ( see Attribute , Magnitude , Descriptive , Evaluation , Provisional , Hypothesis , DCM , Pattern Coding ) narrative inquiry and analysis ( Clandinin & Connelly , 2000 ; Coffey & Atkinson , 1996 ; Cortazzi , 1993 ; Daiute & Lightfoot , 2004 ; Riessman , 2008 ) - qualitative investigation , representation , and presentation of the participants ' lives through the use of story . ( see In Vivo , Emotion , Values , Versus , Dramaturgical , Motif , Narrative , Verbal Exchange , Longitudinal Coding ; Themeing the Data ) performance studies ( Madison , 2005 ; Madison & Hamera , 2006 ) - a disci pline that acknowledges " performance " in its broadest sense as an inherent quality of social interaction and social products . ( see Dramaturgical , Narrative , Verbal Exchange Coding ) phenOlnenology ( van Manen , 1990 ) - the study of the nature or ll1eaning of everyday c . : x - periences . ( see In Vivo , Emotion , Values , Dramaturgical , Motif , Narrative , Verbal Exchange Coding ; Themeing the Data ) poetic and dramatic constructions ( Denzin , 1997 ; Glesne , 2006 ; Knowles & Cole , 2008 ; Saldaiia , 2 ( ) 05a ) - arts - based approaches to qualitative inquiry and presentation using poetry and drama as e ) . . - - pressive literary genres . ( see In Vivo , Emotion , Motif , Narrative Coding ; Themeing the Data ) political analysis ( Hatch , 2002 ) - a qualitative approach that acknowledges and : lnalyzes the " political " conflicts and power issues inherent in social systems and organizations such as schools , bureaucracies , etc . ( see Values , Versus , Evaluation Coding ) cal analysis ( Hatch , 2002 ) - a qualitative approach that acknowl edges and analyzes the luultiple and sometimes contradictory perspectives of 207 208 THE CODING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS participants , giving voice to all . ( see In Vivo , Versus , Evaluation , Narrative Coding ) portraiture ( Lawrence - Lightfoot & Davis , 1997 ) - a signature approach to qualitative inquiry that renders holistic , complex , and ditllcnsional narratives of participants ' perspectives and c : \ : periences . ( see In Vivo , Enlotion , Va ! uesj Dramaturgical , Motif , Narrative , Longitudinal Coding ; Themeing the Data ) qualitative evaluation researeh ( Patton , 2002 ) - an approach that eollects and analyzes participant and programmatic data to assess m . crit , worth , effec tiveness , quality , value , ete . ( see Attribute , Magnitude , Descriptive , In Vivo , Values , Versus , Evaluation , Holistic , Provisional , Hypothesis , Pattern Coding ) quick ethnography ( Handwerker , 2001 ) - an approach to fieldwork in which the research paranlcters ( questions , observations , goals , etc . ) are tightly focllsed and efficient when time is linuted . ( see Magnitude , Structural , Descriptive , Holistic , Provisional , Hypothesis , OCM , Domain and Ta . ' ( onomic Coding ) situational analysis ( Clarke , 2005 ) - a signature approach to qualitative data analysis ( with foundations in grounded theory ) that acknowledges and visually maps the contexts and complexities of social life . ( see Simultaneous , Initial , Enlotion , Versus , Evaluation , Domain and T ~ > ; : onomic , Pattern , Focused , A . xial , Theoretical , Elaborative , Longitudinal Coding ) splitting , splicing , and linking data ( Dey , 1993 ) - a systematic approach to the categorization and interrelationship construction of units of qualitative data , most often assisted through CAQDAS . ( see Magnitude , Simultaneous , Structural , Process , Evaluation , Domain and Ta . xonomic , Pattern , Focused , A . xial Coding ) survey research ( Fowler , 2001 ; Wilkinson & Birmingham , 2003 ) - standard ized approaches and instrument formats , nlost often in written fornl , for gatli ' : ' ering quantitative and qualitative data from multiple participants . ( see Attributej ' Magnitude , Structural , Values , Provisional Coding ) thematic analysis ( Auerbach & Silverstein , 2003 ; Boyatzis , 1998 ) - summary and analysis of qualitative data through the use of extended phrases and / or sen tences rather than shorter codes . ( see Stnlctural , Descriptive , In Vivo , Process , Initial , Values , Evaluation , Motif , Narrative , Verbal Exchange , Holistic , Provisional , Domain and Taxonomic , Pattern , Focused , Axial , Theoretical , Elaborative , Longitudinal Coding ; Themeing the Data ) APPENDIX D - vignette writing ( Erickson , 1986 ; Graue & Walsh , 1998 ) - the written presentation and representation of a small scene of social action that illustrates and supports a sunul1ary assertion . ( see Process , Dramaturgical , Motif , Narrative , Verbal Exchange Coding ; Thcmeing the Data ) within - case and cross - case displays ( Gibbs , 2007 ; Miles & Huberman , 1994 ) - visual smumaries of qualitative data and analysis into tables , chart ' i , matrices , diagrams , etc . that illustrate the contrasts and ranges of observations . ( see Attribute , Magnitude , Structural , Descriptive , Versus , Evaluation , Domain and Ta . ' ( onomic , Elaborative , Longitudinal Coding ) 209 References Abbott , A . ( 2004 ) . JV [ ctlwds cif discollcry : HCllristics for the social SciCIICCS . New York : w . . w . Norton . Adler , 1 ~ A . , & Adler , P . ( 1987 ) . i1icl / lbcrship rolcs ill . / icld research . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Agar , M . ( " 1994 ) . L ! IIglI ( ~ ! ! C shock : UlIricrst ( / / ltfill , g Ilw wIll / re ( ? f [ ( l / l ! lcrsatioll . New York : Quill - William Morrow . Agar , M . I - I . ( 1996 ) . The pnycssiolla { stmll , l ! cr : All ilifOrl / U1 / , illtmrillctioll to ctllllo , gmphy . San Diego : Academic Press . Aldcrson . P . ( 2000 ) . Children as researchers : The effects of participation right > ; on research methodology . In P . Christensen & A . James ( Eds . ) . Research lIIith childrell : Pcrspcctillcs aud practices ( pp . 241 - 57 ) . London : Falmer Press . Altrichter , H . , Posch , E , & Somekh , B . ( 1993 ) . Tcadlcrs ill ! lCst ( ( ! lltc ( { / ! ; i , . lJ ! ork : AII illtrodl / c tirm to the lIIethods C ? / actioll resrarch . London : Routledge . Au , W . ( 2007 ) . High - stakes testing and curricular control : A qualitative metasynthesis . Edllcatiollal Researcher 36 ( 5 ) , 258 - 67 . Auerbach , C . E , & : . Silverstein , L . B . ( 2003 ) . Qllalitatille data : AII illtrodllCtioll t ~ codill ~ ~ alld ( / / lIIlysis . New York : New York University Press . Bamberg , M . ( 2004 ) . Positioning with Davie Hogan : Stories , tellings , and identities . In C Daiute & C . lightfoot ( Eds . ) , Narmtille mUllysis : Sflldyillg the dellc / opmellf of ; , ulil ' icf I / als ill society ( pp . 135 - 57 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Banks , J . A . ( 1994 ) . nIl / ltiet / lllic edl / catioll : Thcory mu / practice ( 3rd ed . ) . Boston : Allyn and Bacon . Barone , T . ( 2000 ) . Aesthetics , politics , awl edllcatiollal illtjuiry : Essays alld examples . New York : Peter Lang . Basit , T . N . ( 2003 ) . Manual or electronic ? The role of coding in qualitative data analysis . Edllcatill / lal Research 45 ( 2 ) , 143 - 54 . Bazeley , P . ( 2003 ) . Computerized data analysis for mixed methods research . In A . Tashakkori & C . Teddlie ( Eds . ) , HClIIdbook cif lIIixed lIIethods ill social & bcluwiomJ rcscarch ( pp . 385 - 422 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Bazeley , P . ( 2007 ) . Qrwlitatir1e data allalysis [ pith NVil ' o . London : Sage . Behar , R . , & Gordon , D . A . ( Eds . ) . ( 1995 ) . rVOI / IC / l l [ ' ritillJ ! witllre . Berkeley , CA : University of California Press . Berg , B . l . ( 2001 ) . Qllalitafifle research IJlet / wds fiJl ' the social scicllces ( 4th ed . ) . Boston : Allyn and Bacon . Bernard , H . R . ( 2006 ) . Research mcthods ill allthrapoitwy : QI / alitaril ! e mu / tj / l { lIItitafj [ le approaches . Walnut Creek , CA : AltaMira Press . Bettelheim , B . ( 1976 ) . Tlrc rises ~ f cllclralltlllcllt : The lIIe { lIIill ~ ~ alld illlportrlllce f ! . f . fail ) l tales . New York : Alfred A . Knopf . Bogdan , R . C . , & Biklen , S . K . ( 2 ( ) 07 ) . Qllalitatifle reserlrcllfilf edllcatioll : A " illtrodllctio / l to theories rlHd met / rods ( 5th ed . ) . Boston : Pearson Education . REFERENCES W . C . , Colomb , G . G . , & : WilIial11s , ] . M . ( 2003 ) . TI / C " ' if ' , ! f rescarcil ( 2nd cd . ) . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . B0Y ' " zl " , R . E . ( 1998 ) . l ' ·aHiformiHg tjllalitati / ! c il ! formatitm : TheIlUltic aI / a lysis alld code rlelicl - 0P / 1 / Cllt . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Erent , E . , & : Slusarz , P . ( 2003 ) . " Feeling the beat " : Intelligent coding advice from meta knowledge in qualitative research . Social ScieHce Compl / ter RCIII ' erIl2J ( 3 ) , 281 - 303 . Eurant , T . J . , Gray , C . , Ndaw , E . , MdGnney - Keys , V . , & Alien , G . ( 2007 ) . The rhythms of a teacher research group . i \ ; ] lIftiCIIltllral Perspcctil ' cs 9 ( 1 ) , 10 - 18 . Cahnmann - Taylor , M . , & Siegesl11und , R . ( 2008 ) . Arts - based rescarch ill cdllcatioll ; F ( lIlIIdafiOllsJor practice . New York : Routledgc . Charmaz , K . ( 2002 ) . Qualitative interviewing and grounded theory analysis . In J . F . Gubrium & J . A . HoIstein ( Eds . ) , HOlldbook cif illtcn , jCII ' rescarcll : Gmtexf & method ( pp . 675 - 94 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Charmaz , K . ( 2006 ) . COllsfrllctillg ~ ~ rorl / lded theol ) , : A practical L ~ I / idc throllgh qllalitatille { / / Ealy sis . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Clandinin , D . J . , & Connelly , F . M . ( 2000 ) . Normtifle illtjlliry : Experiellcc ( [ / U / story ill ql / al itatipc research . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Clarke , A . E . ( 2005 ) . Sitllatiollal mEalysis : Grollllded theory after the ! los / modem tll / ' ll . Thousand Oak . . ~ , CA : Sage . Clausen , ] . A . ( 1998 ) . Life reviews and life stories . In J . Z . Gicle & : G . H . Elder , Jr . ( Eels . ) , lUct / rods cif / ife COIIl ' se rescarch : Qllalitatille ami qllaHtitatille approaches ( pp . 189 - 2 - 12 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Coffey , A . , & Atkinson , P . ( ' l996 ) . iHokillg sellse l ! f tjllalitatille data : Comp / cmclltary rescarch stmtc , ! , ! ies . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Constas , M . A . ( 1992 ) . Qualitative analysis as a public event : The documentation of cat egory development procedures . Amcricml Edllcatiollal Research ) o / lmal 29 ( 2 ) , 2 . 53 - 66 . Corbin , J . , & Strauss , A . ( 2008 ) . Basics ' ! . f tjrwlitatille research : Ti ! CJl / litjlles allll procedures for dc [ JCiopillg grolllu / ed theol ) ' ( 3rd ed . ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Cortazzi , M . ( 1993 ) . Narmtillc alla / ysr : \ · . London : Falmer Press . Creswell , J . W . ( 2007 ) . QllaJitatil ' e ill ' l / lir ) ' alld research desigll : C / wosill , g mllllllg jil1e approaches ( 2nd ed . ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Creswell , J . w . ( 2009 ) . Research desCf ! II : Qlwlit ( lfil1e , qrwllfitatillc , mul mixed methods approaches ( 3rd ed . ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Crc ! . well , ] . w . , & Plano Clark , V . L . ( 2007 ) . DesL ~ lIilt ~ alld ClllldllCtillg mixed lIIethol / S rcsearch . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Crossley , M . ( 2007 ) . Narrative analysis . In E . lyons & A . Coyle ( Eds . ) , AI / alysillg tjlllllitrl tit ' e data ill psychology ( pp . 131 - 44 ) . London : Sage . Daiute , C , & Lightfoot , C ( Eds . ) . ( 2004 ) . Narratiuc ( lIIalysis : Swdyill , ! , ! the l / elfcloplllell { l ! f illliiJlidrwls ill society . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Denzin , N . ( 1997 ) . JrlleJ1Jrelil1e cthllogmphy : EtJlHogmplric practices Jor the 21st cel / tlll ) ' . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Denzin , N . ( 2003 ) . Pciforllla / lcc ethllography : Critical pedagog } 1 mId the politics of wltl / re . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Denzin , N . K . , & Lincoln , Y . S . ( Eds . ) . ( 2005 ) . TI , e S ~ ! , ! e halldbook cif qllalitatiJle research ( 3rd cd . ) . Thousand Oak . l , CA : Sage . DeSantis , L . , & Ugarriza , D . N . ( 2000 ) . The concept of theme as used in qualitative nursing research . r , r ' e ! itemjollmal of Nursillg Research 22 ( 3 ) , 351 - 72 . DeWalt , K . M . , & DeWalt , B . R . ( 2002 ) . Participllllt ohserrmtioll : A gllideforficld [ llorkers . Walnut Creek , CA : AltaIvlira Press . 21 . : 1 . 21 . 2 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS Dey , J . ( ' 1993 ) . QllalitalillC ! data i1 / wl ) ' sis : A IIscr : friclldly . ~ ! lidc for social scientists , London : ' Routledge . D ~ y , 1 . ( 1999 ) . Gro ! llldilt ~ groll / u / cc / rllcor ) , : GlliddillCS for qllafilatipc illquifY . San Acadl ' ! l11ic Press . - ' - b " ' ; ' Dobbert , M . L . t & Kurth - Schai , R . ( 1992 ) . Systematic ethnogrJphy : Toward an cvolu . . . tionary science of education and culture . In M . D . LeCompte , W L . Millroy , & j . Preisslc ( Eds . ) , TfH : ! w / ldlJook oJ qll ( JlitlltiJlc research ill cc / I / [ { Ifioll ( pp . 93 - 159 ) . San Diego : Academic Press . Eml ! fSOn , R . M . , Fretz , R . 1 . , & Shaw , L . L . ( 1995 ) . H / ritillg ctllllogmpllic ficldllotes . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Erickson , E ( 1986 ) . Qualitative methods in research on teaching . In M . C . Wittrock ( Ed . ) , HmHlllOok < 1 rcsc ( / rch all trachillg ( 3rd ed . ) ( pp . 119 - 61 ) . New York : MaCI11il1all . Erickson , K . , & StuB , D . ( " 1998 ) . DoiltQ tcall ! ctll / lo . ~ mphy : I + arllillgs aJ / { f advice . Thousand Oaks , CA ; Sage . Ezzy , D . ( 2002 ) . QllalitatiJlc allr / lysis : Practicc alld ilJllOJlatiOlI . London : Routledgc . Feldman , M . S . ( 1995 ) . Stratcgies jor illtcrpretillg , ] llIllitll / iIlC ' . data . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Fielding , N . ( 2008 ) . The role of computer - assisted qualitative data analysis : Impact on emergent methods in qualitative research . In S . N . Hesse - Biber & : P . Leavy ( Eds . ) . i - Jmuf / Hlok ojemrl ; gcllt mcthods ( pp . 675 - 95 ) . New York : Guilford . Finfgeld , D . L . ( 2003 ) . Metasynthesis : The state of the art - so ( 1r . Qllalitati [ ! ( ! Hcalth Rescardl 13 ( 7 ) , 893 - 904 . Finley , S . , & Finley , M . ( 1999 ) . Sp ' ange : A research story . Qua / itntirtc III ' ] lIir ) ' 5 ( 3 ) , 313 - 37 . Flick , U . ( 2002 ) . All illtroductioll to qualitatillc rcscnrc / J ( 2nd ed . ) . London : Sage . Fowler , F . j . , JT . ( 2001 ) . SlIJlIc } , It ' Scmrh I1Ictlwrls . Thomand Oaks , CA : Sage . Fox , M . , Martin , E , & Grcen . G . ( 2007 ) . Doiug pf ( lctitioucr rcscarch . London : Sage . Freeman , M . ( : 2004 ) . Data are everywhere : Narrative criticism _ in the literature of expe - rience . In C . Daiute & C . Lightfoot ( Eds . ) , NmmtiPL ' mwlpis : Stlld ) , illg thc dCfJeiol ' lIIe / lt ojill ( fipidl / als ill society ( pp . 63 - 81 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Fullan , M . ( 2001 ) . Tflr IICIII IIIcallill . g t ~ f cdllmtiollnf clulIIgc ( 3rd cd . ) . New York : Teachers College Press . Gable , R . K , & Wolf , M . B . ( ' 1993 ) . IIIStfllll / Cllt c / CUc / OpIllCllt ill the affcctiuc t ! oll / aill : l \ i / cnsllrillg attitlldcs muf mlllcs ill corporatc allt ! scflOol scttiltQs ( 2nd ed . ) . Boston : Kluwer , Academic Publishers . ~ l Galman , S . C . ( 2007 ) . Sflmlcl Ihe fOliC ctllllo , \ ! raphrr : A bcginller ' s LQllirle to ctllllogrnpll ) l . Walnut Creek , CA : AltaMira Press . Gce , ] . p . , Michac1s , S . , & O ' Connor , M . C . ( 1992 ) . Discourse analysis . In M . D . LeComptc , ' W L . Millroy , & ] . Preissle ( Eds . ) , ~ n , e haudbook [ if qllalitatiuc rcscarch ill education ( pp . 227 - 91 ) . San Diego : Acadel11ic Press . Geertz , C . ( " 1973 ) . Thick description : Toward all interpretive theory of culture . In Y . S . Lincoln & N . K . Denzin ( Eds . , 2003 ) , r " millJ ! poillts ill qllalitatil ' c rcsearc / ! : 7j ' illg kllots ill a IW / ldkcrchitj ( pp . 143 - 68 ) . W . 1Inut Creek , CA : A1taMira Press . Geertz , C . ( 1983 ) . Local kllOlP / cdge : Furthcr essays ill illtcrpreti [ lc allthropology . New - York : Basic Books . Gibbs , G . R . ( 2002 ) . Qllalitatille data mwlysis : . E . ' . ] llomtiolls Hlit / ! NViJlo , Buckingham ; Opcn University Press . Gibbs , G . R . ( 2007 ) . A / 1 ( / lyzill , g qUl / litati ! ! c da / a . London : Sage . Ciele , ] . Z . , & Elder , C . H . , Jr . ( Ed , . ) . ( 1998 ) . Methods of lye course research : Qualitati , , ' allll , ] ual / titativc approaches . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . REFERENCES GiIligan , C , Spencer , R . , Weinberg , M . K . , & Bertsch , T . ( 2006 ) . On the Listc " ill . \ ? Guidc : A voice - centered relational method . In S . N . Hesse - Bibcr & : E Leavy ( Eds . ) , ElIIcrgcllt / IIcthods ill social rescarcl ! ( pp . 253 - 71 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Giascr , B . G . ( 1978 ) . Thco / ' etiml sCIIsitillity . MiIlValley , CA : Sociology Press . Glaser , D . G . , & Str . lUSS , A . L . C \ 967 ) . Thc discollcry f ! f . l ! l ' OllIufcd tllcor } , : Stmtcgies . ftl , . , ] lIali tatiJlc rcsearch . New York : Aldine de Gruyter . Glesne , C . ( 2006 ) . Bccolllj , { r , ! , ] llalitatiJle rcscl ! rchers : AJI illtroduCfioll ( 3rd cd . ) . Boston : Allyn and Bacon . GOffillan , E . ( 1959 ) . Thc prcsc / lWioll cif self ill cllcl ' } ldl / y lifc . New York : Anchor Books . Goffinan , E . ( 1963 ) . SI ( Qllla : Notcs ( Ill the III ( / / W , ! ! CIIICllt ( ! f spoilcd hlmtity . Englewood Cliffs , Nl : Prentice - l - ! alL Gateman , D . ( 1995 ) . ElllotioJlal illtefl ( \ ! cllcc . New York : Bantam Books . Goodall , H , L . , ] r . ( 2000 ) . H ' i ' itill , l ! thc lIell ' rtllllttl ! mphy . Walnut Creek , CA : AltaMira Press . Graue , M . E . , & Walsh . D . ] . ( 1998 ) . Studyillg childrc / l ill contcxt : Thcories , IIIcthods , mul ctflics . Thousand Oaks . CA : Sage . Grbich , C . ( 2007 ) . Qllalitll / iJlc datl ! ll / w / ) ' sis : All inlroduction . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Grcene , S . , & Hogan , D . ( Eds . ) . ( 2005 ) . Rcscarcfu ' / lg childrell ' s expcricllcc : ApproacllCs ( / lid lJIetrlOris . London : Sage . Greig , A . , Taylor , ] . , & MacK . 1y , T . ( 2007 ) . Doing n - ' scmrl ! I / Iith chifdrCII ( 2nd cd . ) . London : Sage . Gubriul11 . J . F . , & Holstein , J . A . ( 1997 ) . The UClf ' hlllgllagc t ~ f ( juafitatil ' c mcthod . New York : Oxford University Press . Gllbriull1 , J . E , & Holstein , J , A . ( 2009 ) . Al / alyzi / lg / lmmti ! ! c rL ' { lIiI ) , . Tholl ! iand Oaks , CA ; Sage . Guest , G . , & . NbcQueen . K . M . ( 2008 ) . Hal / ( / book jor temll - bascd ' ] lIalitatillc rcscll / rh . Lanham , MD : AltaMira Press . Hager , L . , Maier , B . j . , O ' Hara , E . , Ott , D . , & Saldalia , J . ( 2000 ) . Theatre teachers ' perceptions of Arizona state standards . Yomlt Thcnlrc jOllfllal 14 , 64 - 77 . Halm , C . PO ( 8 ) . DoillL ~ , ] lIa / itatiJlc rcscmrh mi / lg youl " compulrr : A practical , guidc . London : Sage . Hammersley , M . ( ' 1992 ) . H1lwt ' s IIIrollLQ IJlith et / lllogmpfl ) l ? . MetlHldological L ' : - . : plomtiolls . London : ll . . outledge . Hammersley , M . , & Atkinson , P . ( 1995 ) . Etll1lugmphy : Prillciplcs ill practice ( 2nd ed . ) . London : Routledge . Hand \ Verker , W . l ~ ( 1001 ) . Quick L ' tlllwg / i1ph ) ~ W . 1lnut Creek , CA : AltaMira Press . Hargreaves , A . , Earl , L . , Moore , S . , & Manning , S . ( 2001 ) . LenJ ' / Jillg 10 chI / ugc : TcaclliJl . g IJryonr ! slllljccts I / w { slmu / ards . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Harre , R . , & van Langenhove , L . ( 1999 ) . PosilioJlillg thcor ) , : J \ 1oml COlltcxtS [ ? f illtclltiol / nl actiol / . Oxford : Blackwell Publishers . Harry , B . . Sturges , K . M . , & Klingncr , J . K . ( 2005 ) . Mapping the process : An exem plar of process and challenge in grounded theory analysis . Eell / mtiounl Rcsc ! l1 ' chcr 34 ( 1 ) , 3 - 13 . Hatch , J . A . ( 2002 ) . Doi / lg ( junlitatillc rcscmrfl ill criuCIltioll settings . Albany , NY : SUNY Press . Hatch , JA . , & Wisniewski . R . ( Eds . ) . ( 1995 ) . Life history mu { Iwrm / ill£ ! . London : Falmcr Press . Heiligman , D . ( " 1998 ) . Tilt : Nelll Hlrk pu / JIic Ubm ' 1 1 kid ' s guide to rcscarch . New York : Scholastic Reference . Hendry , P . M . ( 2007 ) . The future of narrJtive . Qllali [ atillc ruquill ' 13 ( 4 ) , 487 - 98 . Hitchcock , G . , & Hughes , D . ( ' 1995 ) . Rcscarcll awl thc Icachcr : A , ] lIl1litatiJlc illtrodllcliol1 to scl / Ool - [ , nscd rcscarcfl ( 2nd cd . ) . London : Roucledge . Hochschild , A . R . ( 2003 ) . The II / ( / / / ( ! gcd hcart : CO / / 1I11CJ ' cializlI / iOJl ~ fh1ll / l ( l / 1jcelillg ( 2nd t : d . ) . Berke1ey , CA : University of California Press . 21 . 3 21 . 4 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS Holstein , J . A . , & Gubrium , J . F . ( 2000 ) . COIISI / 1l [ till , ~ the I [ fc [ ( IlIrsc ( 2nd cd . ) . Dix Hills , NY : GenerJl Hall . Hruschka , D . J . . Schwartz , 0 . , St . John , D . C . , Picone - DccJ . ro , E . , Jenkins , R . A . , & Carey , J . W ( 2004 ) . Reliability in coding open - ended data : Lessons learned & 0111 HIV behaviof : ll research . Field Methods - 16 ( 3 } , 307 - 31 . Hubbard , R . S . , & Power , 13 . M . ( 1993 ) . The I1rt ( ! f classroo / J / illql / rry : A { ullldbookJi . 1r tcachcr _ researchers . Portsmouth , NB : Heinemann . Janes , E . , Gallois , c . , Callan , v . , & Barker , M . ( 1999 ) . Strategies of accommodation : Development of a coding system for conversational interaction . jOllrJIal oJ Lall , glfagc mui Social Psychology 1 S ( 2 ) , 1 : 23 - 52 . Kemper , R . v . , & Rayc ! ! , A . P . ( Eels . ) . ( 2002 ) . Chrolliclillg wfturcs : La / t ~ - terlll . fie ' d rescarch ill a / lthropologl ' . Walnut Creek , CA : AltaMira Press . Kendall , J . ( 1999 ) . A . . aal coding and the grounded theory controversy . H7cstcm JOl / mal cif Nursillg Rcscarch 21 ( 6 ) , 743 - 57 . Knowles , j . G . , & Cole , A . L . ( 2008 ) . Ha / U / book tift / IC arts ill qllalitatillc rcsearch : Pcrspcctil ' es , lJIetllOd % L ~ ies , examplcs , alJli issues . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Krippendorff , K . ( 2003 ) . COllfwt al / all ' sis : All illlrodllctitlll to its / IIet / lOdolo . ~ l ' . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Kuckartz , U . ( 2007 ) . 1 \ L4XQDA : ProJessioll ( Jl s ! iftll ' ( lreji . Jr qllalit ( Jlille data alI ( Jlysis . Bcrlin & Marburg , Germany : VER13I Software . Kvale , S . ( 1996 ) . iIJtemicllls : AI / illlrodllCtioll to q / I ( Jlit ( Jtil1c research illtCl ' llic / / lillg . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . , La Pelle , N . ( 2004 ) . Simplifying qualitative data analysis l15ing general purpose software tools . Field Mrthods 16 ( 1 ) , 85 - 108 . Lawrence - Lightfoot , S . , & Davis , J . H . ( 1997 ) . The art m / ( I seiellcc oJ portmitllrc . San Francisco : ] ossey - Bass . Layder , D . ( 1998 ) . Sociologim / pmcficc : Ullkillg fheory ( Jlld rcsemrh . London : Sage . LeCompte , M . n , & Preissle , ] . ( 1993 ) . Ethllogmplry mul qllalit ( Jtille desigll ill edllcatiollai resC ( Jrcll ( 2nd cd . ) . San Diego : Academic Press . LeCompte , ! vI . D . , & Schensul , J . J . ( 1999 ) . AJlalyzillg & IlItcrpreti / lg etlllltwmplrr ' c data . Walnut Creek , CA : AltaMira Press . Leech , N . 1 . , & Onwuegbuzie , A . ] . ( 2005 ) . Qualitative data analysis : Ways to improve accountability in qualitative research . Paper presented at the American Educational Research Association Annual Conference , Montreal . Lewins , A . , & Silver , C . ( 2007 ) . USillg sc ! filllarc ill qlwlitatil ' c rcsearc / , : A step - by - step guidc . London : Sage . Liamputtong , P . , & Ezzy , n ( 2005 ) . QllalitatiJlc rcsellrc / / mcthods ( 2nd cd . ) . South Melbourne : Oxford University Press . Lichtman , M . ( 2006 ) . Qllalitatillc research ill edllcatiOlI : A users , guide . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Lieblich , A . , Zilber , T . B . , & Tuval - Mashiach , R . ( 2008 ) . NarrJting human actions : The subjective experience of agency , structure , conullunion , and serendipity . Qualr ' tlltill ( ! IlIqllil } ' 14 ( 4 ) : 6 \ 3 - 31 . Lincoln , Y . S . , & Denzin , N . K . ( Eds . ) . ( 2003 ) . Timrillg poil / ts ill ql / alitatiJ ' c rcscarcfl : 1j ' illg kllots ill a I / ( / wlkercllilj . Walnut Creek , CA : AltaMira Press . Lincoln , Y . S . , & Guba , E . G . ( 1985 ) . Natumlistic iJlqlliry . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Lindlof , T . R . , & Taylor , B . C . ( 2002 ) . QllalitatiJle COllllllllllicafioll rcse ( Jrclllllctilotfs ( 2nd ed . ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . REFERENCES Lofla ~ ld , ] . ~ Sn ~ w , . D . , Ande : son , 1 . , ' & l ~ fland , 1 . H . ( 2006 ) . lIl1a / l ' zil ~ g soei ( J / setti / ~ gs : A gill de to qlllll / tat / IIL ' ob - alia / lOll al / ( f mI ( Jl ) , sls ( 4th ed . ) . Belmont , CA : Thol11son W . ' ld < ; w ~ rth . Mac Queen , K . M . , & Guest , G . ( 2008 ) . An introduction to team - based qualitative research . In G . Guest & K . M . MacQueen ( Eds . ) , HmldbookJor team - based qll ( Jlitatille rcsearc / I ( pp . 3 - 19 ) . Lanham , MD : AltaIvlira Press . Mac Queen , K . M . , McLellan - Lemal , E . , Bartholow , K . , & Milstein , B . ( l008 ) . Team based codebook ' development : Structure , process , and agreement . In G . Guest & K . M . MacQueen ( Eds . ) , Hmulbook Jor fcam - b ( Jscr ! ql / ( / litatiJlc rescarch ( pp . " 119 - 35 ) . Lanham , MD : AltaMira Press . Madison , D . S . ( 2005 ) . CrItical etbllognlplry : AIcflrod , L ' thics , mltl pcrfomw / lcc . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Madison , 0 . S . , & I - Jamera , ] . ( Eds . ) . ( 2006 ) . Tire S ( Jge lrmldhook q { perfimllllllcc studics . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Mason , ] . ( 1994 ) . Linking qualitative and quantitative data analysis . In A . Bryman & R . G . Burgess ( Eds . ) , AIJal ] lzillg qllalitatille data ( pp . 89 - 110 ) . London : Routledge . Mason , ] . ( 2002 ) . Qllalitat ; IIc rc . mlrdlillg ( 2nd ed . ) . London : Sage . Maycut , E , & Morehouse , R . ( 1994 ) . BcgilllJillg q / lIllitalillc rcsc ( Jrch : A philosophic allll prac tical LQllidc . London : Falmcr Press . McCurdy , D . w . , Spradley , j . E , and Shandy , D . j . ( 2005 ) . Tire cllll11ral experiellcc : Etllllo , gmplry ill COli / plc . ' . " society ( 2nd cd . ) . Long Grove , lL : W . 1Vcland Press . Mello , R . A . ( 2002 ) . Collocation analysis : A method for conceptualizing and under standing n . 1rranve daL ' l . Qua / itatin . ' Resemrh 2 ( 2 ) , 231 - 43 . Merriam , S . B . ( 1998 ) . QlIl1litafillc research amI casc study applimtiolls ill cdllcatioll . San Francisco : jossey - Bass . Miles , M . B . , & - Huberl11an , A . M . ( 1994 ) . QllalilcltillC d ( Jfa t1Illllysis ( 2nd ed . ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Morgan , D . , Fellows , c . , & Guevara , H . ( 2008 ) . Emergent approaches to focus group research . In S . N . Hesse - Biber & P . Leavy ( Eds . ) , [ - { mldbook ( if elllel ; f , ! cllt methods ( pp . I 89 - 2U5 ) . New York : Guilford . Morner , K . , & R : msch , R . ( 1991 ) . NTC ' s dietiolllllY ( ! f litem I ) ' terllls . New York : NTC Publishing Group . Morse , j . M . ( 1994 ) . " Emerging from the data " : Thc cognitive processes of analysis in qualitative inquiry . In J . M . Morse ( Ed . ) , Critical isslles ill q / lIl / itatil ' c rcse ( Jrclr methods ( pp . 12 - - 43 ) . ThotLIand Oaks , CA : Sage . Munton , A . G . , Silvester , ] . , Stratton , l ~ , & Hanks , H . ( 1999 ) . . llttrihuliO / ls ill aCfioll : A prac tical appro ( Jc / 1 to cadil / . \ ! qllalifllti / ! c d ( Jfa . Chichester : John Wiley & Sons Ltd . Murdock , G . P . et a1 . ( 2004 ) . GI / tlillc cif cl / ltllml materials ( 5th ed . } . Accessed 8 june 2007 from : http : / / www : Y . 1le . edu / hraf / Ocl11 _ xml / tr . 1mtionaIOcm . xml . Nal11ey , E . , Guest , G . , Thairll , 1 . , & johllson , L ( 2008 ) . Data reduction techniques for large qualitative data sets . In G . Guest & - K . M . Mac Queen ( Eds . ) , Ha / ldbook ( or tcmll - based qualitativc rcscarch ( pp . 137 - 61 ) . Lanhal11 , MD : AltaMira Press . . NarJY . 1n , K . , & Gcorge , K . M . ( 2001 ) . Personal and folk nar41tivc as cultural representa tion . In ] . E Gubriul11 & J . A . Holstein ( Eds . ) , I - lmullJ ( ) ok oj ' illfer ! liel / I rescarch : COl / text & lI " tllOd ( pp . 815 - 31 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . . Nathan , R . ( 2005 ) . JHy ji ' CShlllllll ycar : H11at a pn ! fessor leamcd by becolllill , ! ! { / stllt / Cllt . New York : Penguin Books . Noblit , G . w . , & Hare , R . D . ( 198S ) . Alcta - etlrlwgmphy : SYlltltcsizilt ~ t ] lIalitatille sflltiies . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . 21 . 5 21 . 6 . . " , 1 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS Northcutt . N . , & McCoy , D . ( 2004 ) . illtcractiflc qlwlitatiJ ! c mwlysis : A S ] ' stClIIs method for qllalitatillc research . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . O ' Kanl . ! , C . ( 2000 ) . The development of participatory techniques : Facilitating children ' s views about decisions which affect them . In P . Christensen & A . James ( Eds . ) , Research , pith cltildrCII : Pcrspcctipcs mu / practices ( pp . 136 - 59 ) . London : Falmer Press . Okely , J . ( 1994 ) . Thinking through fieldwork . In A . Bryman & re G . Burgess ( Eds . ) , A / Jalyziug qllalitntipc tlata ( pp . 18 - 34 ) . London : Routlerlge . Olesen , v . . Droes , N . , HattoD , D . , Chico , N . • & Schatzman , 1 . ( 1994 ) . Analyzing together : Recollections of a team approach . In A . Bryman & R . G . Burgess ( Eds . ) , Allaiyzillg qllalitatilil . ' data ( pp . 111 - 28 ) . London : Routledge . Patton , M . Q . ( 2002 ) . QllalitatilJI : rcsearch & clJalllatiol1 ml : thods ( 3rd ed . ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Paulston , R . G . ( Ed . ) . ( 2000 ) . Social cartogmphy : Alappillg ways C ? f sccillg social alld cdllca _ tiollal clwllgc . New York : Garland Publishing . Pitman , M . A . , & Ma : \ , vell , J . A . ( " 1992 ) . Qualitative approaches to evaluation : Models and methods . In M . D . LeCompte , W . 1 . Millroy , & ] . Preissl ~ ( Eds . ) , TI , e Itmulbook cif qlfalitati " e rescarch ill edlfcatioll ( pp . 729 - 70 ) . San Diego : Academic Press . Poland , B . D . ( 2002 ) . Transcription quality . In J . E Gubriu111 & J . A . Holstein ( Eels . ) , HCllldbook C ? f illtcrl ' ielIJ rescarch : COil text & mcthod ( pp . 629 - 49 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Pollcinghorne , D . E . Cl 995 ) . Narrative configuration in qualitative analysis . InJ . A . Hatch & R . Wisniewski ( Eels . ) , Ufo history alld Ilarmtil ' c ( pp . 5 - 23 ) . London : Falmer Press . Prior , L . ( 2004 ) . Doing things with documcnt ~ . In D . Silverman ( Ed . ) , Qualita ! ille rescarch : TllcOl ) " mcthod alld pmcticc ( 2nd cd . ) ( pp . 76 - 94 ) . London : Sage . Prus , R . ( 1996 ) . Sym / Jolic il / tcmctioll awl ethllographic research : Illtcr . wiJjcctiIJity ( ll / ( f the stl / dy cif hl / l / lal / / il ' ed experiellcc . Albany , NY : SUNY Press . Rallis , S . E , & Rossman , G . B . ( 2003 ) . Mixed methoels in evaluation contexts : A prag matic framework . In A . Tashakkori & C . Teddlie ( Eds . ) , Halldbook cf mixed methods ill social & bchallioml rcsearch ( pp . 491 - 5 ' 12 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Rapley , T . ( 2007 ) . Doill , g cOll / lcrsatiall , discollrsc alld dOCllmel / t allalysis . London : Sage . Richards , 1 . , & Monie , J . M . ( 2007 ) . RCIlr / lIlcfirstfor a users , - ~ I / idc to qllalitcrtiJ ! c mcthods ( 2nd cd . ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Riessman , C . K . ( 2002 ) . Narrative analysis . In A . M . Huberman & M . B . Miles ( Eds . ) , Thc ql / alitatjllc rescarchers colI / pallioll ( pp . 217 - 70 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Riessman , C . K . ( 2008 ) . Nllrratille / / Ietlwds jor thc IIII / llal / sciCl / ccs . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Ritchie , J . , & Spencer , L . ( 1994 ) . Qualitative data analysis for applied policy research . In A . BryOlan & R . G . Burgess ( Eds . ) , Alltllyzill , g qlla / itati " c data ( pp . 173 - 94 ) . London : Routlcdgc . Rossman , G . B . , & Rallis , S . E ( 2003 ) . Lrami / lg ill the field : All jlll / ' oductiall ta qllalitatille rescarch ( 2nd cd . ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Rubin , H . J . , & Rubin , I . S . ( 1995 ) . Qllalitatillc illtclVicl / liJt ~ : Thc art af hcarillg datll . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Ryan , G . W , & Bernard , H . R . ( 2003 ) . Techniques to identify themes . Field Aict / lOds 15 ( 1 ) , 85 - 109 . Saldaiia , J . ( 1992 ) . Assessing Anglo and Hispanic children ' s perceptions and responses to theatre : A cross - ethnic pilot study . YOlltl , Thcatre JO / lI ' II1l1 7 ( 2 ) , 3 - 14 . Saldana , J . ( 1995 ) . " Is theatre necessary ? " : Final exit interviews with sixth grade partic ipants from the ASU longitudinal study . Youth Thcatrejoufllal 9 , 14 - 30 . , REFERENCES Saldana , J . ( 1997 ) . " Survival " : A white teacher ' s concl ! ption of drama with inner city Hispanic youth . ' rollth Thcatre jOlmlal " 11 , 25 - 46 . Saldana , J . ( 1998 ) . " Maybe someday , if1 ' m famous . . . " : An ethnogrJphic performance tt ! xt . In J . Sa . xton & C . . Miller ( Eels . ) , Drama alld tllcatrc ill cC / lleatioll : 17 / C research of prac ticc , the practice of rescarch ( pp . 89 - 1 ( 9 ) . Brisbane : IDEA Publications . Saldaila , J . ( 2003 ) . LolIgitudil / al qllalif ( / ti " e rcscarch : AII ( / IJ ' zil ~ g d / ( I / Ige thrallJJh tilllc . Walnut Creek , CA : AltaMira Press . Saldatia , J . ( Ed . ) . ( 2005a ) . Etlllwdml1la : All ( / lIthologl ' cif rcality thcatrc . W ; tlnut Creek , CA : AltaMira Press . Saldaiia , J . ( 2005b ) , Theatre of the oppressed with children : A field e ' : - " " Periment . iiJ / ltfl Thclltrc JOl / rllal 19 , 1 J 7 - 33 . SaldaIia , J . ( 2008 ) . Analyzing longitudinal qualitative observational data . In S . Menard ( Ed . ) , Hallduook cif lal / gitl / diJlal rescarch : Dcs ( gll , measllrcmcllt , mId atlfllysis ( pp . 297 - 311 ) . Burlington , MA : Academic Press . Sandelowski , M . , & Barroso , J . ( 2003 ) . Creating Illt ! tasummaries of qualitative findings . Nllrsillg Rcsearch 52 ( 4 ) , 226 - 33 . Sandelowski , M . , Docherty , S . , & Emden , C . Cl 997 ) . Qualitative metasynthesis : Issues and techniques . Rescarch ill Nllrsillg & Health 20 ( 4 ) , 365 - 71 . Schensul , J . J . , LeCompte , M . D . , Nastasi , B . K . , & Borgatti , S . P . ( 1999 ) . EI / hallced ctllllo gmpllic mcthods : AlldioJlisllal tCclllliqllCS , fOCllscd group jl / fclVicl / ls , mul clicitafioll tCc ! lIIiqIlCS . Walnut Creek , CA : AltaMira Press . Schensul , S . L . . Schensul , J . J . . & LeCompte , M , D . ( " 1999 ) . EssC / ltilll ctllllograpflic mcthods : Obscfllafiolls , il1tel ' l ' iell ' . ' i , a / ld qllestioll / laircs . Walnut Creek , CA : AltaMira Press . Schwalbe , M . L . , & Wolkomir , M . ( 2002 ) . Interviewing men . In J . E Gubrium & J . A . Holstein ( Eds . ) , Ha / ulbook oJ illtcnliclfI rescarch : COlltcxt & mc / hod ( pp . 203 - 19 ) . Thousand Oaks . CA : Sage . Seidl : nall , L ( 2006 ) . Il / lcruiclI ' ilt ~ as quafitati / le rescarch : A gl / idc Jor rl . ' sCllrche / ' s ill Cilllcafioll alld thc social SciCllces ( 3rd ed . ) . NewYork : Teachers Collegt ! Press . Shank , G . D . ( 2002 ) . QWllifatiJlc research : A persollal skills ( / pproach . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Merrill Prentice - I - lall . Shaw , M . E . , & Wright , J . M . ( 1967 ) . Smlcs for the mcaSlIrcmcllt cif attitlldcs . New York : McGraw - HilI . Shrader , E . • & Sagot , M . ( 2000 ) . Domcstic uiolcllcc : rVomclI s I / la ) , Ol / t . Washington , DC : Pan American Health Organization . Silverman , D . ( 2006 ) . lllterprcti / lg qllalitatiuc data : 1Vlet / l ( Jrisjor ( / / w / yzillg talk , text mul il / ler acfiol / ( 3rd cd . ) . London : Sage . Singleton , R . A . , Jr . , & Straits , 13 . C . ( 2002 ) . Survey interviewing . In J . F . Gubrium & J . A . Holstein ( Eill . ) , Hal / dbook 4 il / fc / , / , , ·cl / I rescarch : COl / tcxt & mcthod ( pp . 59 - 82 ) . Thousand Oak , , , , CA : Sage . Sipe , L . R . , & Ghiso , M . P . ( 2004 ) . Developing conceptual categories in classroom descriptive research : Some problems and possibilities . Allthrop % g } ' al / d Edllcatioll Qllarterl ] , 35 ( 4 ) , 472 - 85 . Sorsoli , L . , & Tohnan , D . L . ( 2008 ) . Hearing voices : Listening for multiplicity and move ment in interview data . In S . N . Hesse - Biber & P . Leavy ( Eill . ) , HaHdbook 4 cmcrgellt lIIethods ( pp . 495 - 515 ) . New York : Guilford . Spindler , G . , & Spindler , L . ( 1992 ) . Cultural process and ethnography : An anthropolog ical perspective . In M . D . LeCompte , W . L . Millroy . & J . Preissle ( Eels . ) , TIll . ' / ul / Idbook of qlllllifatip£ : rcscarch ill cdl / catioll ( pp . 53 - 92 ) . San Diego : Academic Press . 21 . 7 2 : 1 . 8 THE COOING MANUAL FOR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS SpradJey , J . P . ( 1979 ) . The ctllllo , graphic illfcflJic / / ! ' Fort Worth , TX : Harcourt Brace Jovanovich . Spradley , J . P . ( 980 ) . P ( / / ' tiCljWllt obsl ! flJatioll . Fort Worth , TX : Harcourt Brace Jovanovich . Stake , R . E . ( \ 995 ) . ' The IIrt cif case stlldy rcsctlrcll . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Stanfidd , J . H . , 11 . & Denrns , R . M . ( Eds . ) . ( 1993 ) , Race alld et / Illicit } ' ill rcsearch mcthods . Ncwbury Park , CA : Sage . Stcwart , A . ( 1998 ) . The etllllo , grapl , cr ' s method . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Strauss , A . L . ( 1987 ) . QUl / fita ! iJ ! / ! ( llIal ) , s ; s for social scielltists . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Strauss , A . , & Corbin , J . ( 1998 ) . Basics ~ r lJuaNtalill / ! research : Tcdllliqllcs alld procedures . fill ' dCIie / opi1 ~ g , grolllH / cd thcory ( 2nd ed . ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Stringer , E . T . ( 1999 ) . / 1ctioll rcscardl ( 2nd ed . ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Tashakkori , A . , & Teddlie , C . ( 1998 ) . lHixcd mcthodology : COlllbillillg qllalitatillc alld qllall titatiJlc approadlcs . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 1hshakkori , A , & Teddlie , C . ( Eds . ) ( 2003 ) . Hmufbook cif lIIi . wd mcthods i / l social & bchaIJ - ioml rrscarch . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Tcsch , R . ( 1990 ) . Qualitativc rescarch : Al / alysis typcs and s ~ { il / larc tools . New York : Falmcr Pres ~ . Thompson , S . ( ' 1977 ) . Thcfolktalc . Berkeley , CA : University of California Prcss . Thorne , 5 . , Jensen , L . , Kearney , M . H . , Noblit , G . , & Sandelowski , M . ( 2004 ) . Qualitative metasynthcsis : Reflections on methodological orientation and ideologi cal agenda . Qualillltillc Hcalth Rcsearch l - l ( I 0 ) , l342 - 6S . Todd , Z . , & Harrison , S . J . ( 2008 ) . Metaphor analysis . In S . N . I - Iesse - Biber & P . Leavy ( Eds . ) , Haw / hook cif c / llcrgcllt IIIctlwds ( pp . 479 - 93 ) . New York : Guilford . Tumcr , B . A . ( 1994 ) . Patterns of crisis behaviour : A qualitative inquiry . In A . Bryman & R . G . Burgess ( Eds . ) , Allaiyzillg ql / ( ditatilJr data ( pp . ' 195 - 215 ) . London : Roudedge . Van de Ven , A . H . , & Pooie , M . S . ( 1995 ) . Methods for studying innovation develop ment in the Minnesota Innovation Research Program . In G . E Huber & A . H . Van de Ven ( Eds . ) , LOIIgitmliJJol j ; eld research mcthods : StudyiJJg proccsscs cif o ~ ! ! aJJizatioJlal dUII / , ! ! c ( pp . 155 - 85 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . van Maancn , j . ( 1988 ) . Talcs ( if thL ' field . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . van Manen , M . ( 1990 ) . RcsL ' archilLI ! / illcd I . ' . . " ' - : PCriCIICC : HUll / ail sciCllccfol ' all actioll sCllsitillr prd ago . ! , ' ) ' . Albany , NY : SUNY Press . Wagner , B . ] . ( 1998 ) . Etlumtiolla { drama alJ ( / iallguage arts : rVhot rL ' sL ' ITrch shows . Port ' imouth , NH : Heinemann . Walsh , D . J . , Bakin , N . , Lee , T . B . , Chung , Y . , Chung , K . , & Colleagues . ( 1007 ) . Using digital video in field - based research with children : A primer . In j . A . Hatch ( Ed . ) . Earl ) ' childhood qllll / itarillc rcsmrch ( pp . 43 - 62 ) . NcwYork : Routledgc . W ' lrren , S . ( 2000 ) . Let ' s do it properly : Inviting children to be researchers . In A . Lewis & G . Lindsay ( Eds . ) , Rcsearching childl ' L ' IIS PL ' rspcctillcs ( pp . 122 - 34 ) . Buckingham : Open University Press . Weber , R . P . ( 1990 ) . Basic COl / tL ' lIt allolysis ( 2nd ed . ) . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Weston , c . , Ganddl , T , 13eauchamp , j . , McAlpine , L . , Wiseman , c . , & Beauchamp . C . ( 2001 ) . Analyzing interview data : The development and evolution of a coding sys tem . QllalifatillL ' Sodology24 ( 3 ) , 381 - 400 . Wilkinson , D . , & Birmingham , P . ( 2003 ) . Using rL ' scorch il / sfmmcllts : A , ~ lIjdc . for rcsL ' arr / ICrs . London : Routlcdge Farmer . Winkclmall , M . ( 1994 ) . Cultural shock and adaptation . JOllrl / ol ( ! r COlfllSelillJ ! awl DCIlc / opmCllt 73 ( 2 ) , 121 - 6 . REFERENCES Wo1cott , H . E ( 1994 ) . Ti ' llllifo / ' / IIillg I } lmlitatillc , lata : DL ' scriptioH , al / lIll ' sis , al / ( l illtcrprctatioll . Thousand Oak ~ , CA : Sage . Wolcott , I - I . F . ( 1999 ) . EthlloJ ! mph ) ' : A 11111 ) ' ~ r scciug . Walnut Creek , CA : Altaf ' v1ira Press . Wolcott , H . E ( 2001 ) . H / dtillg lip qllolitatillr rcsL ' arch ( 2nd l ! d . ) . Thousand Oak " , CA : Sage . Wo1cott , H . E ( 20 ( 3 ) . Teachcrs ! ' L ' / ' SItS tL ' clwocmts : AII cdllcalioHaf blllollati ( J / I ill amhropologi - Cl / I pL ' l ' spectillc . Walnut Creek , CA : AltaMirJ Press . Zoppi , K . A . , & Epstein , R . M . ( 2002 ) . Interviewing in medical settings . In J . F . Gubrium & J . A . Holstein ( Eds . ) , Halldbook ~ ( illtcrlliL ' 1I1 rL ' scarch : COlltcxt & IIICtflOd ( pp . 355 - 83 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Zwiers , M . L . , & Morrissette , P . J . ( 1999 ) . EffcctillL ' illtL ' ll ' lCHliug { ~ r childrclI : A comprv / H ' lISiIlC guidc for cOltllsc / ors { / Iul hl / mml scmicc IPorkcrs . Philadelphia : Accelerated Dcvelopment . 2 : 1 . 9 Index action research , 74 , 94 , 98 , 100 , 131 agency , 14 , 105 analysis componential , 13 7 content , ] 23 , 126 , 140 conversation , 116 dilemma , 96 discourse , 16 , 116 fluid inquiry , 111 rneta - analysis , 144 outline format , 142 - 3 , 158 , 188 quantitative , 69 theme , thematic , 13 , 69 , 137 , 140 see also coding analytic memos as code and category generation , 41 , 84 , 151 , 157 - 8 , 160 , 161 , 164 - 6 coding and categorizing , 41 definition , 32 - 4 examples , 34 - 40 metamemos , 39 on process , 79 , 80 purpose , 32 as reflection , 15 , 33 on themes , 13 analytic terms , 134 , 136 - 7 , ] 38 arts - based presentation , 103 , 106 , 109 assertion , 92 , 124 , 180 key , 12 - 13 , 169 , 171 - 2 , 180 attitudes , see values autoetlmography , 114 basic social process ( llSP ) , 166 , 167 beliefs , see values Bettelheim , Bruno , ] 07 buried treasure , 191 CAQDAS and analytic memos , 24 , 33 - 4 , 158 ATLAS . ti , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 33 , 40 , 44 , SO , 53 , 76 , 137 , 180 CAQDAS COIlt . and attribute codes , SS , 56 - 7 auto coding , 25 - 6 code formats , 24 code frequency , 19 , 21 , 50 and coding , 22 - 6 , 73 , 158 HyperRESEARCH , 23 and hypothesis coding , 126 intersections , 64 linking , 80 and magnitude coding , 55 vs manual coding , 21 - 2 rvIAXQDA , 23 , 26 , 27 , 33 , 53 , 60 , 76 NVivo , 23 , 24 , 33 , 44 , 50 , 53 , 64 , 76 the Observer , 44 and provisional coding , 123 QDA Miner , 23 and quantitative data , 50 , 60 , 69 quotes , ] 6 searches and queries , 26 , 33 , 50 , 56 - 7 , 154 and second cycle coding , 26 and simultaneous coding , SS , 64 Transana , 44 unit divisions , 16 category in analytic memos , 36 central / core , 42 - 3 , 163 - 6 , 167 , 180 from codes , 8 - 11 , 82 , 135 , 159 , 163 construction of , 6 , 142 , 149 - 50 , ] 55 , 158 , 163 , 188 - 9 properties and dimensions of , 42 , 76 , 84 , 155 , 159 , 161 , 164 , 185 recategorizing , 10 - 11 subcategories , 11 , 21 , 158 , 159 , 163 , 164 causality , 15 , 152 , 154 change , 80 , 173 , 176 see also longitudinal Clarke , Adele E . , 43 , 82 , 167 INDEX code definition , 3 frequencies , 68 - 9 nested , 63 operational definition , 35 - 6 overlap , 62 - 3 quantities , 20 - 1 see also coding codebook , 21 , 27 codeweaving , 36 - 7 , 91 , 121 , 157 - 8 , 160 , 187 codifying , 8 , 11 coding a priori , 49 affective , 52 , 86 of analytic memos , 15 attribute , 48 , 55 - 8 , 194 axial , 42 - 3 , 49 , 77 , 85 , 151 - , 155 , 159 - 63 , 164 , 166 , 185 behavior , 2 and categories , 8 - 10 choices , 35 - 6 , 50 - ] collaboratively , 27 - 8 as craft , 31 cycles , 45 - 6 Davis observation system , 2 descriptive , 3 , 7 , 14 , 48 , 49 , 55 , 59 , 65 , 66 , 70 - 3 , 87 , 98 , 144 digital video , 44 domain and taxonomic , 11 , 14 , 64 , 73 , 74 , 127 , 131 , 133 - 8 dramaturgical , 81 , 93 , 102 - 5 , 112 eclectic , 51 elaborative , 49 , 123 , 151 , 168 - 73 elemental , 51 , 66 emotion , 14 , 49 , 6 ] , 86 - 9 evaluation , 49 , 61 , 86 , 97 - 101 exploratory , 52 , 118 families , 166 filters , 6 - 7 first cycle overview , 45 , 51 - 2 focused , 8 , 11 , 42 - 3 , 48 , 49 , 73 , 85 , 108 , 151 , 155 - 9 , 161 , 164 , 194 generic methods , 48 grammatical , 51 , 55 in grounded theory , 75 - 6 as heuristic , 7 - 8 , 157 , 160 hierarchical , 24 , 63 holistic , 19 , 48 , 70 , 118 - 20 , 144 hypothesis , 49 , 61 , 73 , 118 , 123 - 6 , 133 in vivo , 3 , 6 , 42 - 3 , 48 , 49 , 66 , 74 - 7 , 81 , 88 , 95 , 98 , 119 , 138 , 166 , 194 coding COllt , initial , 4 , 11 , 42 - 3 , 48 , 49 , 66 , 74 , 77 , 81 - 5 , 155 , 159 , 160 , 161 , 163 , 164 intercoder agreement , 27 - 8 , 132 interpretive convergence , 27 - 8 jottings , 17 - 18 Leeds attributional system , 133 linking , 8 literal , 74 literary and language , 52 , 102 longitudinal , 151 , 173 - 81 magnitude , 49 , 50 , 55 , 58 - 61 , 87 - 8 , 98 , 194 manually , 22 meta - , 24 , 150 , 152 motif , 102 , 105 - 8 , 110 , 112 narrative , 102 , 105 , 108 - 12 necessary personal attributes for , 28 - 30 observer ' s comments , 15 , 71 open , 42 , 81 outline of cultural materials ( OCM ) , 108 , 127 - 30 pattern , 8 , 14 , 24 , 48 , 73 , ISO , 152 - 5 , 159 , 194 perspectives on , 47 pre - coding , 16 - 17 procedural , 52 , 127 process , S , 14 , 42 - 3 , 49 , 63 , 64 , 66 , 77 - 81 , 82 , 84 , 87 , 156 profile contents , 52 - 4 protocol , 49 , 108 , 126 , 127 , 130 - 3 provisional , 49 , 90 , 118 , 120 - 3 questions to consider , 18 recoding , 10 - 11 , 149 - 50 scheme , 9 , 50 second cycle overview , 45 - 6 , 149 - 51 selection , 47 - 51 selective , 42 , 163 setting / context , 55 simultaneous , S , 6 , 24 , 55 , 62 - 5 , 87 , 88 , 144 , 145 snapshot , 180 solo , 28 strategy , 103 structural , 48 , 49 , 5 ] , 66 - 70 , 120 subcode , subcoding , 20 , 24 , 58 , 61 , 65 , 72 , 82 , 87 , 98 , 131 theoretical , 42 - 3 , 49 , 151 , 155 , 159 , 160 , 162 , 163 - 7 topiC , 70 values , 7 , 14 , 48 , 49 , 6 ] , 86 , 88 , 89 - 93 , 98 , 105 , 194 221 . 222 THE CODING MANUAL FDR QUALITATIVE RESEARCHERS coding COIlt . verbal exchange , 102 , 113 - 17 verbatim , 74 versus , 14 , 86 , 88 , 93 - 7 , 185 concept , 11 , 36 conceptual frameworl ~ , 48 conditions , 179 consequences , 77 critical ethnography , 94 critical race theory , 7 , 58 culture , cultural , 57 , 62 , 103 , 113 , 114 , 116 , 127 - 8 , 133 - 4 , 135 , 136 , 139 , 201 - 3 data amounts to code , 15 - 16 experiential , 85 , 120 , 160 lumping , 19 - 20 , 118 rnetadata , 16 splitting , 19 - 20 , 84 , llB , 159 video , 44 decision modeling , 131 diagram , 79 , 131 , 137 , 162 , 166 documents , 199 dynamics , 50 , 176 ' education , educational , 57 - 8 , 74 , 133 empathy , 34 ethics , 29 , 38 ethos , 201 field notes , 33 , 56 , 71 folk and indigenous tenns , 74 , 134 - 5 , 136 , 138 Geertz , Clifford , 135 gender , 57 - 8 , 69 Glaser , Barney , 166 Goffmao , Erving , 104 - 5 grounded theory authors , 1 , 41 coding canon , 41 - 3 and evaluation coding , 99 - 100 and focused coding , 155 and hypotheses , 123 and in vivo coding , 75 - 6 and initial coding , B3 - 5 and process coding , 77 second cycle , 14 - 15 , 151 grounded theory CO / It . and structural coding , 69 theoretical sampling , 41 and values coding , 9B , 170 hierarchy , 72 , 133 , 137 Hochschild , Artie Russell , B9 Human Relations Area Files ( I - lRAF ) , 127 , 129 hypothesis testing , 67 , 121 , 123 - 4 , 126 , 129 idiosyncrasy , S index , 21 , 67 , 72 , 107 , 12B , 135 influences and affects , 57 interrelationship , 26 , 57 , 64 , 179 life course , 109 , 16B , 171 , 173 , 176 - 7 see also longitudinal Likert scales , 92 Lislellillg guide , 117 longitudinal , 57 , 71 , 16B , 171 see also change matrix , matrices , 50 , 57 , 60 , 69 , 71 , 131 , 151 , 162 , 173 , 174 member cheCking , 2B metaphor , 37 , 76 , BB , 154 metasummary , metasynthesis , 140 , 144 - 5 methodological needs , 4B - 9 microanalysis , 83 - 4 mixed - methods , 49 - 50 , 58 , 124 , 126 , 177 narrative , 103 , 106 sce also coding , narrative Nathan , Rebekah , 5B networks , 36 , 131 , 152 , 154 , 201 operational model , 166 , 201 - 3 paradigm , 4B , 93 pattern in analytic memos , 36 coding for , 5 - 6 , B - 10 , 116 , 193 - 4 prediction , 13 performance , 102 , 103 phenomenology , 140 pragmatism , 2 problems with study , 37 - B propositional statement , 9 - 10 research questions , 35 rhythms , 1BO saturation , 161 - 2 semantic differential , 92 semantic relationship , 134 shop - talking , 190 - 1 SPSS , 50 subcoding , see coding , subcode , subcoding subdomain , 129 subprocesses , 77 superobjective , 104 sympathy , 34 tables , 57 , 60 , 69 , 162 text relevant , 15 stanzas , 16 theme analysis , 13 , 69 , 137 , 140 in analytic memos , 36 differences between code and , 13 , 1BB in focused coding , 155 meta - theme , 142 in pattern coding , 152 , 154 see also themeing the data therneing the data , 13 , 52 , 139 - 45 , 159 , 185 , 188 theoretical construct , 142 - 3 , 152 , 154 , 168 , 170 , 172 INDEX theory adaptive , 173 in analytic memos , 37 , 164 , 165 approaches , 48 - 9 , 124 , 167 from codes and categories , 11 - 13 , 12 , B2 , 124 , 161 , 164 , 168 positioning , 97 Thomson Motif - Index , 105 - 6 , lOB Thomson , Stith , 106 through - line , 17 , 169 , 171 - 2 , 1BO see also coding , longitudinal Timescapes , 181 transfer , transferability , 13 , 158 transformation , 177 trustworthiness , 28 units of social organization , 14 - 15 values , attitudes , beliefs , 6 , 38 , 89 - 90 , 201 see also coding , values van Manen , Max , 140 visual analysis , 42 - 4 , 82 discourses , 44 , B2 literacy , 44 Wolcott , Harry E , 94 , 192 writing final report , 39 - 40 , 189 - 90 Vignette , 104 223 About the Author Johnny Saldaila received his BFA and MFA degrees in Drama Education from the University of Texas at Austin , and is a Professor of Theatre at Arizona State University ' s ( ASU ) School of Theatre and Film in the Katherine K . Herberger College of the Arts . He is the author of LOllgitlldi1Jai Qllalitatillc Research : Alwlyzillg Clw / lgc throltf ! h Time , and the editor of Et ! lIIo ' drallla : All Allthology of Realit ) ' Theatre , both published by AltaMira Press . Mr . Saldaiia ' s research in longitudinal qualitative studies and performance ethnography has received awards from the American Alliance for Theatre & Education , the National Communication Association - Ethnography Division , and the ASU Herberger College of the Arts . He has published a wide range of research articles in such journals as Research i / l Drama Edl / ca ( ioll , lVIlIltiC / lltlfral PcrspcctifJC5 , YOlfth Theatre jOlfmal , JOJlmai cif CllrricII11II1I 01 / ( 1 Pcdagog ] ~ TcachilIg 77lcatrc , and Qllalitatipc IlIqlliry , and has contributed several chapters to research methods handbooks . For e - mail correspondence , contact : Johnny . Saldana @ asu . edu .