THE NEGATIVE EFFECT OF PREVIOUS EXPERIENCE ON PRODUCTIVE THINKING BY HERBERT G . BIRCH AND HERBERT S . RABINOWITZ The City College , Neat York The part which is played by past experience in human problem - solving behavior has long been a subject for experiment and discussion . Investi - gations viewing the evidence from dif - ferent theoretical vantage points have arrived at diverse conclusions , which in some instances identify problem solving with trial - and - error learning ( 3 ) , in other cases ( 1 , 8 ) consider past experience in general as providing the raw materials out of which a problem - solving response may be fabricated , and on occasion some investigators have even neglected to consider the question of past experience as essen - tial for a problem - solving theory ( 9 ) . One of the reasons for the diversity of roles which have been accorded to past experience is that problem solving is by no means a unitary process . Al - though in all problem solving a solu - tion is arrived at , the processes of be - havior whereby the solution is achieved are of several different kinds . Maier ( 8 ) has served to clarify this issue by sharpening the often be - labored distinction between repro - ductive and productive thinking . His discussion was developed in terms of the part which past experience may play in each type of performance . Reproductive thinking , Maier be - lieves , is characterized by the solution of problems by means of the existence of stimulus equivalences in the novel ( or problem ) situation and in the previously mastered situation . Thus , for him , reproductive thinking and transfer of training are to be con - sidered closely , similar if not identical phenomena . Productive thinking , however , ' is not merely the process of arriving at a solution through the direct application of previous learn - ing . In productive thinking past ex - perience is repatterned and restruct - ured to meet current demands , and is thus the counterpart of reasoning as Maier has defined that term ( 6 ) . In the present study we are concerned with the relation of past experience to the productive thinking process , and not with reproductive thinking . Probably the studies which have contributed most directly to an under - Standing of the manner in which the background of past experiences in - fluences the nature of human produc - tive thinking are those of Maier ( 6 , 7 ) and Duncker ( 2 ) . Maier , in his examination of the relation be - tween stimulus equivalence and rea - soning ( 8 ) , identified several ways in which past experience may affect problem - solving activities . Problem solving may be facilitated by equival - ences which exist in the immediate problem situation and in past experi - ence . Further , as he has shown else - where ( 6 ) , and as Birch ( 1 ) has shown for the chimpanzee , the background of past learning represents an essen - tial repertoire of behavior which must be available for restructuring when new situational demands develop . On the other hand , productive think - ing is impossible if the individual is chained to the past . The past ex - perience may become a hindrance and an obstacle which blocks produc - tive thinking and reduces behavior to stereotyped and fruitless essays . It is primarily with this negative effect which may be exercised by past experience that Duncker has dealt in 121 122 HERBERT G . BIRCH AND HERBERT S . RABINOWITZ his problem - solving experiments ( 2 ) . In a series of situations designed to study what he terms " functional - fixedness , " Duncker tried to deter - mine the manner in which the previous utilization of an object for a dissimi - lar function in the same problem con - text affected its availability in sub - sequent problem solving , and found that such specific experience made the objects previously utilized in this manner significantly less available as instruments when the problem pre - sented for solution was changed . Two weaknesses in experimental de - sign limit the generality of the in - ferences which may be drawn from Duncker ' s results . In the first place , by using the same objective situation for both his " pre - utilization " experi - ence and for his new problem - solving task , he makes it impossible to deter - mine whether the difficulty in using a previously utilized object for the solu - tion of a new problem derives from the limitation of the functional prop - erties of this object by the prior ex - perience , from the establishment of false problem - solving directions , from the development of attitudes of com - pletion ( " over and done with " ) on the part of the S which effectively remove the already - used object from the field of activity , or from any of a variety of other effects . Secondly , in selecting the different tools which would be available to the Ss in their problem - solving activities , Duncker made no attempt to equate the instruments for different degrees of objective ade - quacy as tools in solving the problem . Obviously , if the objects in the " pre - utilization " group are objectively less adequate as tools then are the non - pre - utilized materials , the scales are weighted in favor of fewer solutions for the " pre - utilization " group . In not a few instances Duncker ' s problem situations may be criticized on these grounds , and the question arises as to whether his results derive as much from the pre - experimental object se - lection as from the effects of pre - utilization of the materials by the subjects . To remove these impediments to interpretation of this aspect of the effects of previous experience on problem solving , it is necessary to study the problem under conditions in which the background of prior specific experience is obtained by the Ss in a situation remote from the crucial problem - solving task , and to contrast as problem - solving tools ob - jects whose adequacy as instruments is objectively equal . The design of the present study stems from these , considerations . SUBJECTS AND PROCEDURE Twenty - five students at the City College , New York , were used as Ss . in this experiment . These Ss were divided into three groups , a con - trol group and two experimental groups . The control group had 6 Ss , and the experimental groups contained 10 and 9 Ss , respectively . As the crucial problem - solving task in this experiment , all Ss were required to solve the two - cord problem used extensively by Maier ( 7 ) in his studies of " direction " in problem solving . In this problem the S is required to tie together the free ends of two cords which are suspended from the ceiling to the floor of a corridor . The distance between the two cords is such that the S cannot reach one cord if the other is held . In our arrangement the problem could be solved only if the S would tie a weight to the end of one of the strings and thus convert it into a pendu - lum which could be set swinging and then be caught on its upswing while the stationary cord was held . The two cords could then be tied to - gether and the problem solved . In our situation only two objects could be utilized as weights . The first of these objects was an electrical switch and the second , an electrical relay . The condi - tions of pretest training involved the acquisition of differential prior experience with these objects by our Ss . The pretest training was conducted as follows : Group S contained 9 Ss who were given the pretest task of completing an electrical circuit on a " bread - board " by using a switch , which had PRODUCTIVE THINKING 123 to be installed if the circuit were to be completed and controllable . • Group R consisted of 10 Ss who received pre - test training in the completion of an identical circuit by the use of a relay , which is essentially a switch . Group C , the control group , consisted of 6 engineering students with a wide variety of electrical experience . These Ss were given no pretraining . The Ss in groups R and S had had little or no experience with electrical wiring . Shortly after having completed the pretesting tasks , the Ss were presented with the two - cord problem and asked to solve it by using the ob - jects lying before them on a table . Only two objects were present , a switch and a relay , each identical with the ones used in the pretraining period . Since the two - cord problem is very difficult to solve without the presentation of " direction " - producing hints , such hints were presented by E 9 min . after the presentation of the problem . The hints consisted in brushing against the string or strings and " accidentally " setting them swinging . Solutions were always achieved within 3 min . after the presentation of hints . All Ss were individually tested . Upon com - pleting the two - cord problem , the Ss were asked why they had chosen either the switch or the relay as the pendulum weight . RESULTS The results reported will deal pri - marily with the nature of the choice of objects made by the Ss in the criti - cal task situation . These data for all groups are shown in Table I . The control group chose equally between the switch and the relay as pendulum weights which might be utilized for the solution of the two - cord problem . These data indicate that for indi - viduals with prior experience which is not heavily weighted in favor of TABLE I FREQUENCY OF CHOICE OF OBJECTS IN PROBLEM SOLUTION Group Control ( C ) Exper . ( R ) Exper . ( S ) N 6 10 9 No , Using Relay 3 0 7 No . Using Switch 3 102 either the switch or the relay , no sig - nificant difference exists between the objects in terms of their utility as tools in solving the two - cord problem . . The behavior of the Ss who had re - ceived specific pre - utilization experi - ence with either the switch or the relay differed in a striking manner from the behavior of the Ss who had not received such experience . Those who had initially been trained to com - plete an electical circuit with a relay never utilized this object as the pend - ulum weight for the solution of the two - cord problem . In every instance the Ss chose the switch , an object not previously manipulated , as the object which was to be converted into a pendulum bob in the solution of the two - cord problem . On the other hand , the Ss who had initially been trained to use a switch for the com - pletion of an electrical circuit pre - ponderantly chose the relay as the pendulum weight in solving the two - cord problem . If the results on solving the two - cord problem for both the switch and relay pre - utilization groups are com - bined , it is found that 17 of the 19 Ss used that object with which they had had no pre - experimental training as the problem - solving tool . There are less than five chances in one hundred that such results could have occurred as the result of chance fluctuations in responding on the part of the Ss . It may , therefore , be inferred that the nature of the previous specific experi - ences of the Ss were influential in determining their problem - solving choices . The replies which the Ss made to the question , " Why did you use the switch ( or relay ) as the pendulum weight ? " further indicate that the pre - utilization experiences exercised a decisive effect upon their problem - solving efforts . Those Ss who used 124 HERBERT G . BIRCH AND HERBERT S . RABINOWITZ the switch as the pendulum weight in the two - cord problem offered vary - ing reasons for its superiority over the relay as a pendulum bob . They claimed that it was easier to attach , more compact , etc . The Ss who tended to use the relay as the pendu - lum bob in solving the two - cord prob - lem proffered equally " good " reasons for their selection . The relay , they claimed , was easier to attach , heavier , etc . In both groups of Ss individuals became somewhat defensive when queried as to the reasons for their choices , and typically replied by pre - facing their answers with the remark , " Anyone can see that this one is better as a pendulum weight . " A number of Ss even went so far as to say , " any fool can see that this one is better . " Since these remarks are directed with equal vehemence at either the switch or at the relay , it is clear that the Ss were not advancing objective reasons for their choices , but were , rather , revealing the effects which their prior specific experience was having on their perceptions . DISCUSSION Although the present study was de - signed primarily to explore a neglected aspect of problem - solving behavior , it has some significance for problem - solving theory and provides clarifica - tions for several important questions . In the first place , the results reveal that the question of the role played by past experience in productive think - ing cannot receive a uniform answer until the nature of the past experience is clearly understood . Even though this study indicates that prior experi - ence of a specific kind with a potential problem - solving tool effectively pre - vents this instrument from being used in problem solution , there is little doubt on the basis of other studies ( l , 4 ) that a different kind of experi - ence may enhance the value of an ob - ject as a tool in problem solving . Therefore , what appears to be im - portant for problem solving is not that an individual ' s performance is dependent upon past experience per se , but rather that different kinds of experience are differentially effective in influencing the content of problem - solving behavior . Our results there - fore are in accord with those of Katona ( 5 ) , who found that how and what an individual learned and not simply whether he learned determined the amount of positive transfer effect that occurred in subsequent learning . Perhaps the most interesting phase of our results concerns the manner in which the individual ' s previous ex - perience influenced his perceptions . The pre - utilization experience appar - ently changed the perceived properties of the object previously used in a different context to such a degree that its problem - solving characteristic could not be readily seen . This change in perception was probably based on the manner in which the previous experience had emphasized the instrument as an electrical object and so made for extreme difficulty in perceiving it in terms of its general characteristic of mass , which is es - sential for pendulum construction . The kind of previous experience pre - sented therefore functioned to limit the number of the properties of the object that could be perceived by the S . These results suggest that there are two phenomenally describable kinds of learning that may be important in problem solving . The first variety of learning involves the acquisition by S of certain broad , non - specific , general notions about the properties of the object or method experienced . This was undoubtedly the case in Birch ' s study of chimpanzee problem PRODUCTIVE THINKING 125 solving ( 1 ) , where young chimpanzees who were initially incapable of using a stick to take distant food into reach manifested this ability after a very short period of play with sticks . It is this general , broad , nonspecific experi - ence which seems to provide the repertoire of experience essential for productive thinking . A second type of learning involves the acquisition of experiences which convert the initial perception of broad general properties of an object into perceptions of specific limited func - tional characteristics . It is this sec - ond variety of learning which appears to have occurred in the pre - utilization experiences of the Ss in our study and to have produced what Duncker ( 2 ) refers to as " functional fixedness " in problem - solving perceptions . Such fixedness limits the range of percept - ual organizations capable of being developed by the S and so interferes with problem solving . SUMMARY The present study was designed to investigate the effects of specific ex - perience with objects in unrelated situations upon their utilizability as problem - solving instruments . The results revealed that specific prior ex - perience limited the perception of ob - ject properties and made the experi - enced materials less available as problem - solving tools . These results are discussed in connection with Duncker ' s hypothesis of " functional fixedness , " and as contributions to the general areas of transfer and of productive thinking . ( Manuscript received February 2 , 1950 ) REFERENCES 1 . BIRCH , H . G . The relation of previous ex - perience to insightful problem - solving . / . comp . Psychol . , 1945 , 38 , 367 - 383 . 2 . DUNCKER , K . On problem - solving . ( Trans . L . S . Lees . ) Psychol . Monogr . , 1945 , No . 270 . 3 . GUTHRIE , E . R . , AND HORTON , G . P . Cats in a puzzle box . New York : Rinehart , 1946 . 4 . JACKSON , T . A . Use of the stick as a tool by young chimpanzees . / . comp . Psychol . , 1942 , 34 , 223 - 235 . 5 . KATONA , G . Organizing and memorizing . New York : Columbia Univ . Press , 1939 . 6 . MAIER , N . R . F . Reasoning in humans : I . On direction . J . comp . Psychol . , 1930 , 11 , 115 - 143 . 7 . MAIER , N . R . F . Reasoning in humans : II . The solution of a problem and its appear - ance in consciousness . / . comp . Psychol . , 1931 , 12 , 181 - 194 . 8 . MAIER , N . R , F . Reasoning in humans : III . The mechanisms of equivalent stimuli and of reasoning . / . exp . Psychol . , 1945 , 35 , 349 - 360 . 9 . WERTHEIMER , M . Productive thinking . New York : Harper , 1945 .