fcell - 09 - 682414 June 30 , 2021 Time : 17 : 1 # 1 REVIEW published : 06 July 2021 doi : 10 . 3389 / fcell . 2021 . 682414 Edited by : Ben Goult , University of Kent , United Kingdom Reviewed by : David Sarrio , Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red del Cáncer ( CIBERONC ) , Spain Claudia Tanja Mierke , Leipzig University , Germany * Correspondence : Karin Pﬁsterer karin . pﬁsterer @ meduniwien . ac . at Wolfgang Weninger w . weninger @ meduniwien . ac . at Specialty section : This article was submitted to Cell Adhesion and Migration , a section of the journal Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology Received : 18 March 2021 Accepted : 25 May 2021 Published : 06 July 2021 Citation : Pﬁsterer K , Shaw LE , Symmank D and Weninger W ( 2021 ) The Extracellular Matrix in Skin Inﬂammation and Infection . Front . Cell Dev . Biol . 9 : 682414 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fcell . 2021 . 682414 The Extracellular Matrix in Skin Inﬂammation and Infection Karin Pﬁsterer * , Lisa E . Shaw , Dörte Symmank and Wolfgang Weninger * Department of Dermatology , Medical University of Vienna , Vienna , Austria The extracellular matrix ( ECM ) is an integral component of all organs and plays a pivotal role in tissue homeostasis and repair . While the ECM was long thought to mostly have passive functions by providing physical stability to tissues , detailed characterization of its physical structure and biochemical properties have uncovered an unprecedented broad spectrum of functions . It is now clear that the ECM not only comprises the essential building block of tissues but also actively supports and maintains the dynamic interplay between tissue compartments as well as embedded resident and recruited inﬂammatory cells in response to pathologic stimuli . On the other hand , certain pathogens such as bacteria and viruses have evolved strategies that exploit ECM structures for infection of cells and tissues , and mutations in ECM proteins can give rise to a variety of genetic conditions . Here , we review the composition , structure and function of the ECM in cutaneous homeostasis , inﬂammatory skin diseases such as psoriasis and atopic dermatitis as well as infections as a paradigm for understanding its wider role in human health . Keywords : extracellular matrix ( ECM ) , cell migration , inﬂammation , infection , tissue homeostasis , skin , human INTRODUCTION As the body’s outermost surface , the skin must provide a tight barrier against a variety of physical and chemical noxae as well as pathogens , while at the same time facilitating communication with the environment . Schematically , human skin is arranged in three main layers . The epidermis is a stratiﬁed epithelium and is predominantly built by diﬀerent layers of keratinocytes . Basal layer keratinocytes have a stem cell - like character , proliferate and then diﬀerentiate while moving from the stratum basale toward the outside of the skin . The underlying dermis is composed of ﬁbroblasts , blood and lymphatic vessels , nerve ﬁbers and extracellular matrix ( ECM ) . Also embedded in the dermis are various immune cell subsets , skin appendages such as hair follicles , glands , and sensory organs . The hypodermis contains mainly fat cells and blood vessels ( Figure 1 ) . Similar to other organs , the ECM provides the necessary mechanical stability for the skin and , at least in part , enables its response to the environment . As such , the cutaneous ECM serves as a paradigm for our understanding of ECM composition , the relationship between tissue - resident immune cells and ECM as well as the adaptive response of the ECM toward external stimuli . Moreover , recent evidence suggests that the ECM plays a crucial part in preventing or facilitating cutaneous infections . In this review , we introduce general principles of ECM composition and remodeling . We will discuss how immune cells use the ECM for precise navigation through the extracellular space , a prerequisite for the proper function of immune responses . Finally , we will focus on ECM in the skin as a model of how inﬂammatory and infectious processes alter its biomechanical properties and Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 1 July 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 682414 fcell - 09 - 682414 June 30 , 2021 Time : 17 : 1 # 2 Pﬁsterer et al . Skin ECM in Inﬂammation and Infection how ECM components are usurped by infectious agents for breaching the body’s barrier tissues and infecting tissue - resident cells . COMPOSITION , REMODELING AND MECHANICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF SKIN ECM The ECM is an evolutionarily conserved , highly ﬂexible and dynamic scaﬀold that is constantly changed through controlled remodeling and restructuring processes . The diﬀerent layers of the skin , i . e . , epidermis and dermis , are separated by the basement membrane ( BM ) , a complex mixture of ECM proteins and ﬁbers that anchor the epithelium to the underlying tissue . Within the interstitial space of the dermis , cells such as ﬁbroblasts , immune cells , and vascular cells are surrounded by and in tight interaction with the ECM which provides physical support to these cells . It also allows cell sensing of ever - changing conditions in the local milieu and facilitates cell - to - cell communication in order to adapt to such shifting microenvironments . Nevertheless , a deregulation in ECM composition can directly contribute to or induce pathological conditions and is a hallmark of the aging process ( Bonnans et al . , 2014 ) . The ECM is further involved in relaying signals important for the recruitment of inﬂammatory cells in response to danger signals . Immune cells can use the ECM to migrate along biochemical gradients to sites of skin infection or tissue damage . However , components or mechanical properties of the matrix can also be exploited or actively changed . Pathogens , for instance , can use the ECM to invade into tissues and infect cells . Cancer cells can sense and alter mechanical properties such as stiﬀness of the ECM and exploit ECM stiﬀening to metastasize ( Chang et al . , 2017 ) . In the following , we will highlight our understanding of ECM components ( Table 1 ) and remodeling . COMPOSITION OF THE ECM Collagens The major structural component of the matrix in human skin is collagen , a high - molecular weight protein that provides structure and tensile strength . Collagen molecules are evolutionary conserved in multicellular organisms and contain multiple Glycin ( Gly ) - X - Y repeats , in which X and Y are frequently proline and hydroxyprolin , but can be exchanged by any other amino acid as well ( Mouw et al . , 2014 ; Fidler et al . , 2018 ) . This amino acid sequence allows three collagen polypeptide chains ( α - chains ) to assemble into a stable triple helix at the rough endoplasmic reticulum of collagen producing cells ( Fidler et al . , 2018 ; Figure 2A ) . Folding initiates at the C - terminal domain . Right - handed pro - collagen superhelices are secreted into the extracellular space and the N - and C - terminal propeptides are cleaved oﬀ by enzymes resulting in fully functional collagen ( Uitto et al . , 1989 ; Mouw et al . , 2014 ; Figure 2A ) . Collagens are produced and secreted primarily by ﬁbroblasts , but other cells such as basal keratinocytes have also been shown to express certain collagens , for example collagen type VII ( Uitto et al . , 1989 ; Nystrom and Bruckner - Tuderman , 2019 ) . The ﬁbrillary collagen types I , III , and V are the main collagen forms in the interstitial matrix of the dermis . Multiple processed ﬁbrillary collagen molecules assemble and are further stabilized by intra - and intermolecular crosslinking to ﬁnally form collagen ﬁbers of varying sizes ( Mouw et al . , 2014 ; Figure 2B ) . Only collagens type I , II , III , V , and XI self - assemble into ﬁbrils , whereas the others need assistance from other matrix proteins or assemble into network - like structures that are typical in BMs ( Bosman and Stamenkovic , 2003 ) . Recent research has shown that the procollagen production and ﬁbril formation is rhythmically regulated by the circadian day - night cycle ( Chang et al . , 2020 ) . In human skin collagen type III is the most abundant version during prenatal development . However , after birth type I collagen becomes the dominant form in the dermis of adult skin ( Uitto et al . , 1989 ) . Collagen type V is predominantly incorporated into existing collagen ﬁbrils ( Figure 2B ) . It inserts primarily between collagen type I strands and stabilizes them . Its abundance is low compared to the other two forms and the functional signiﬁcance is still under investigation ( Uitto et al . , 1989 ; Bosman and Stamenkovic , 2003 ; Mouw et al . , 2014 ) . Collagen type IV is the major structural component of the BM ( Uitto et al . , 1989 ) . It is structurally diﬀerent from type I collagen , as it has intramolecular discontinuities of the sequential Gly - X - Y motifs , which allows more ﬂexibility and the formation of a mesh - like network rather than a rigid , ﬁbrillary structure characteristic for interstitial ECM ( Uitto et al . , 1989 ; Figures 2 , 3 ) . Collagen type VI is ﬁlamentous and builds beaded microﬁbrils ( Figure 2B ) , which link collagen type IV to collagen type I and III in the papillary dermis . Collagen type VII assembles into anchoring ﬁbrils , which are located in the interphase between the BM and the papillary dermis and are important for stabilization of the dermal - epidermal junction . As such , collagen type VII can maintain the BM - interstitial matrix integrity via interaction with type IV collagen ( Uitto et al . , 1989 ; Bosman and Stamenkovic , 2003 ; Figures 2B , 3 ) . Interestingly , UV light has a direct eﬀect on the matrix as it depletes type VII collagen , which ultimately leads to reduced deposition of type I collagen and skin aging ( Watt and Fujiwara , 2011 ) . Collagens type XII and XIV belong to the group of FACIT ( ﬁbril - associated collagens with interrupted triple helices ) . FACIT collagen does not form ﬁbrils on its own , but associates with assembled collagen ﬁbrils and further stabilizes them ( Mouw et al . , 2014 ; Figure 2B ) . Membrane - associated collagens with interrupted triple helices ( MACIT ) such as collagens type XIII , XVII and XXIII bind to the cell surface of keratinocytes and can be released by cleavage ( Mouw et al . , 2014 ) . The MACIT collagen type XVII has been reported to maintain stem cells in hair follicles and its proteolysis by neutrophil elastases results in stem cell aging accompanied with hair follicle aging and alopecia ( Matsumura et al . , 2016 ) . The role of other FACIT and MACIT molecules in skin is not yet well understood . Elastic Fibers The two major components of elastic ﬁbers are elastin and microﬁbrils . Fibrillins , such as ﬁbrillin - 1 and - 2 , are the predominant component of microﬁbrils that wrap around elastin , which builds the core of the elastic ﬁber . Elastin covalently links to collagen , ﬁbrillin , ﬁbulin and microﬁbril - associated Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 2 July 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 682414 fcell - 09 - 682414 June 30 , 2021 Time : 17 : 1 # 3 Pﬁsterer et al . Skin ECM in Inﬂammation and Infection FIGURE 1 | Human skin . The outermost layer of human skin is built by stratiﬁed epidermis . The bottom layer is called stratum basale and contains proliferating basal keratinocytes that are anchored to the basement membrane . While differentiating , they migrate from the stratum basale , through the stratum spinosum , stratum granulosum , and the stratum lucidum ( not shown ) to the stratum corneum . The vascularized dermis can further be separated into the upper papillary and the lower reticular dermis . Skin appendages , such as hair follicles , are embedded in the dermis and reach through the epidermis , whereas other appendages reside mostly in the dermis . The innermost skin layer is called hypodermis and is built by fat storing adipocytes . Note that not all skin appendages , and skin cells are shown . glycoproteins and builds viscoelastic ﬁbers , which out - compete other components of the ECM in regards to biological , chemical and thermal stability ( Humphrey et al . , 2014 ; Alfano et al . , 2016 ) . In contrast to collagen , which provides tensile strength , elastin is important for tissue elasticity and resilience to restrain stretching . Genetic deﬁciencies or structural abnormalities of collagen types or elastic ﬁber components can result in severe skin diseases , and have been reviewed recently ( Fidler et al . , 2018 ; Bhattacharjee et al . , 2019 ; see also Table 1 ) . Glycoproteins Glycoproteins of the ECM have multiple functions ; they stabilize collagen ﬁbers during deposition , can add elasticity to guarantee ﬂexibility or enhance rigidity . Fibronectin is the dominant glycoprotein in the interstitial matrix of the dermis and is mainly produced by ﬁbroblasts and keratinocytes ( Uitto et al . , 1989 ; Bonnans et al . , 2014 ) . Laminin , like ﬁbronectin , is a ﬁbrous glycoprotein and a principal component of the sheet - like BM . The compact but ﬂexible meshwork - like scaﬀold built by type IV collagen is a prerequisite for the interaction with and incorporation of BM molecules , such as laminin 5 , perlecan and nidogen that link laminin to collagen type IV and heparan sulfate proteoglycans ( HSPG ) discussed later ( Bosman and Stamenkovic , 2003 ; Bonnans et al . , 2014 ) . Tissue - resident cells are constantly interacting with the ECM and are reliant on provided anchor points for migration , proliferation and diﬀerentiation ( Bonnans et al . , 2014 ; Figure 3 ) . Glycoproteins , such as ﬁbronectin and laminin , provide those anchor points by acting as ligands for cell surface receptors . They bridge cellular integrins and collagen ﬁbers , allowing eﬃcient cell attachment to the matrix and also cell migration through tissues . Basal keratinocytes for instance preferentially bind to type IV collagen in the BM and this interaction is dependent on laminin 5 ( Bosman and Stamenkovic , 2003 ; Watt and Fujiwara , 2011 ) . PG / GAGs Another central component of the core ECM are proteoglycans ( PG ) , which are interspersed between and stick to collagen ﬁbers in the ECM . Prominent PGs in the skin are biglycan , decorin , versican , ﬁbromodulin , and lumican in the interstitial matrix of the dermis , and perlecan and agrin in the BM ( Table 1 ) . PGs are heavily glycosylated and decorated with glycosaminoglycan ( GAG ) side chains . These mostly high - molecular weight PG / GAG polysaccharides sequester water molecules and store ions and are therefore essential regulators of hydration and ion homeostasis in the skin . The PGs versican and decorin can bind the GAGs hyaluronan and dermatan sulfate , which are involved in wound repair , infection clearance and skin hydration ( Bonnans et al . , 2014 ; Mouw et al . , 2014 ) . HSPG with its core protein perlecan is a major PG / GAG in the BM and can interact with collagens ( mainly type IV ) and glycoproteins ( ﬁbronectin , laminin ) to assemble and stabilize the ECM ( Andriessen et al . , 1997 ) . PGs either localize to the intercellular space or to cell surfaces , such as HSPG or syndecan ( Andriessen et al . , 1997 ) . PG / GAGs can interact with and sequester matrix - associated proteins , such as growth factors , signaling molecules and chemokines and are involved in the creation of matrix - dependent growth factor gradients ( Hynes , 2009 ; Bonnans et al . , 2014 ; Dyer , 2020 ) . These signaling gradients are essential to developmental processes and also immune cell recruitment in infection and inﬂammation ( Hynes , 2009 ) . CXCL4 for instance is secreted by macrophages at the site of inﬂammation , and has a high aﬃnity for HSPG present in the glycocalyx of the endothelial surface ( Dyer , 2020 ) . This localized chemokine presentation is crucial for controlling leukocyte recruitment into inﬂamed tissue ( Dyer , 2020 ) . Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 3 July 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 682414 fcell - 09 - 682414 June 30 , 2021 Time : 17 : 1 # 4 Pﬁsterer et al . Skin ECM in Inﬂammation and Infection TABLE 1 | Core extracellular matrix components in human skin . ECM component Localization within skin Function Collagen Collagen type I Interstitial matrix , dermis Most common collagen type in dermis , support , tensile strength , ﬁbrillary Collagen type III Interstitial matrix , dermis 1 / 3 of ﬁbrillary collagen in dermis , support , tensile strength , ﬁbrillary ; connected to Ehlers - Danlos syndrome Collagen type IV Basement membrane Network - forming structure , highly ﬂexible , provides strength , non - ﬁbrillary Collagen type V Interstitial matrix , dermis Minor collagen type in dermis , ﬁbrillary ; connected to Ehlers - Danlos syndrome Collagen type VI Papillary dermis and interstitial matrix Links collagen IV to ﬁbrillary collagen I and III in papillary dermis , binds decorin , biglycan , ﬁbronectin , builds beaded microﬁbrils Collagen type VII Basement membrane , papillary dermis Assembles into anchoring ﬁbrils that anchor BM to papillary dermis ; connected to EB Collagen type XII Interface between BM and papillary dermis Fibril - associated , interacts with TSP - 1 , FACIT Collagen type XIII Keratinocyte surface Transmembrane , ectodomain released by cleavage Collagen type XIV Interface between basement membrane and papillary matrix Fibril - associated , interacts with TSP - 1 , FACIT Collagen type XVII Keratinocyte surface Transmembrane , released by cleavage , attaches keratinocytes to basement membrane , regulates keratinocyte proliferation , maintains stem cells in hair follicles , MACIT Collagen type XXIII Keratinocyte surface Transmembrane , released by cleavage , MACIT Elastic ﬁbers Elastin Interstitial matrix , dermis , vessels Elasticity and resilience ; connected to Marfan syndrome and Cutis laxa Fibrillin - 1 Interstitial matrix , dermis Predominant form , provides skin elasticity and ﬂexibility , assists in BM anchorage to interstitial matrix , regulates TGF - β bioavailability , mechanosensor Fibrillin - 2 Interstitial matrix , dermis Present during development and wound healing , similar functions as ﬁbrillin - 1 Glycoproteins and matricellular proteins Laminin ( 332 , 311 , 511 ) Epidermal basement membrane Stabilize epidermal adhesion and mediate epidermal - dermal communication , can interact with anchoring ﬁbrils and collagen XVII , can polymerize into network Fibronectin Interstitial matrix , dermis Interacts with collagen , provides adhesion cues for cells Nidogen / entactin Basement membrane Colocalizes with laminin , important in embryonic development , bridging molecule , helps maintain epidermal integrity ( Continued ) TABLE 1 | Continued ECM component Localization within skin Function TSP - 1 Basement membrane , papillary dermis Wound healing , stimulates cell proliferation , tissue homeostasis , stimulates ECM synthesis Periostin Papillary dermis Wound healing , stimulates cell proliferation , involved in collagen deposition and scar formation Tenascin C Interstitial matrix , dermis , wound edges Low expression , upregulated in wound healing , stimulates cell proliferation Proteoglycans Biglycan Interstitial matrix , dermis Collagen - interacting protein , highly abundant in papillary dermis , regulates collagen ﬁbril formation Decorin Interstitial matrix , dermis Collagen - interacting protein , highly abundant in papillary dermis , regulates collagen ﬁbril formation , stabilizes tissue Perlecan Basement membrane Aids laminin - collagen IV linkage , signals via integrin binding and supports keratinocyte proliferation Versican Reticular dermis Large chondroitin sulfate PG , promotes stability via interaction with elastic ﬁbers and matricellular proteins , stimulates ﬁbroblast proliferation Fibromodulin Interstitial matrix , dermis Function uncertain Lumican Interstitial matrix , dermis Function uncertain , involved in collagen ﬁbrillogenesis Agrin Basement membrane Not fully understood GAG Heparan sulfate Basement membrane Involved in Wnt signaling , development , angiogenesis , metastasis , attachment site for viruses Hyaluronan / hyaluronic acid Interstitial matrix , dermis Tissue repair , regulates tissue hydrodynamics by water binding , interacts with CD44 Dermatan sulfate Interstitial matrix , dermis Involved in wound repair , infection , ﬁbrosis , carcinogenesis The list shown is not comprehensive . Further details on ECM proteins and associated diseases have been summarized in Uitto et al . ( 1989 ) , Bosman and Stamenkovic ( 2003 ) , Mouw et al . ( 2014 ) , Fidler et al . ( 2018 ) , Bhattacharjee et al . ( 2019 ) , Nystrom and Bruckner - Tuderman ( 2019 ) . PG , proteoglycan ; GAG , galactosaminoglycan / glycosaminoglycan ; HS , heparan sulfate ; BM , basement membrane ; TSP - 1 , thrombospondin 1 ; FACIT , ﬁbril - associated collagens with interrupted triple helices ; MACIT , membrane - associated collagens with interrupted triple helices ; EB , epidermolysis bullosa , a severe skin disease that manifests in skin fragility and blistering ( Bhattacharjee et al . , 2019 ) . Matricellular and Matrix - Associated Proteins Matricellular proteins and matrix - associated proteins primarily have regulatory roles on either matrix ﬁbers , cells embedded within the matrix or both . Matricellular proteins are a deﬁned group of dynamic regulatory proteins that possess binding sites for matrix molecules and cell surface receptors ( Nystrom and Bruckner - Tuderman , 2019 ) . These dynamic regulatory proteins are not Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 4 July 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 682414 fcell - 09 - 682414 June 30 , 2021 Time : 17 : 1 # 5 Pﬁsterer et al . Skin ECM in Inﬂammation and Infection structurally related , but share key characteristics such as secretion by certain cells , interaction with certain ECM ﬁbers , or certain functional roles during development and wound healing ( Nystrom and Bruckner - Tuderman , 2019 ) . In skin , thrombospondin ( TSP - 1 ) , periostin and tenascin C are of particular importance and are discussed in detail later . The matrix associates with a variety of ECM regulators , ECM - aﬃliated proteins and secreted signaling molecules , such as matrix modifying proteases and their inhibitors , cell growth factors and cytokines / chemokines ( Hynes , 2009 ; Bonnans et al . , 2014 ) . Interactions with matrix ﬁbers can limit the diﬀusion of these factors , build concentration hotspots of associated molecules by regulated binding and release , and enable ligand maturation of ECM - stored molecules . In general , matrix - associated proteins act in two ways – either in their bound form or in a released soluble version , and both states can emerge interchangeably . The ECM can sequester , locally release and activate growth factors ( EGF , FGF , VEGF ) and signaling molecules ( WNT , TGF - β ; Alfano et al . , 2016 ; Hynes , 2009 ) . TGF - β for instance depends on a tight interaction with matrix molecules for its activation by mechanical forces exerted on the matrix ( Lu et al . , 2011 ) . The latent TGF - β binding protein ( LAP ) , which keeps TGF - β in an inactive conformation , is anchored to ECM proteins , like ﬁbronectins . Mechanical strain can expose LAP - associated TGF - β and make it freely available for proteolytic modiﬁcations ( Hynes , 2009 ) . Many glycoproteins act as growth factor reservoirs and release matrix - bound growth factors after controlled proteolysis . Fibronectin binds VEGF and this interaction has been shown to be beneﬁcial for chronic wound healing . Provision of artiﬁcially generated ﬁbronectin / VEGF residues on an engineered matrix allowed simultaneous binding to cellular integrins and VEGF receptors on cells and strongly enhanced cell proliferation , migration and ameliorated wound healing in a diabetic mouse model ( Martino et al . , 2011 ) . Intrinsic domains within the ECM can also act as ligands for growth factor receptors ( Hynes , 2009 ) . Several ECM molecules , such as the glycoproteins laminin , TSP - 1 or tenascin , bear multiple repetitive domains that are homologous to EGF and can stimulate cell growth directly as solid - phase ligands or after release by proteolysis ( Engel , 1989 ) . ECM REMODELING – MATRIX DEPOSITION AND TURNOVER The ECM is a highly dynamic structure that is constantly remodeled to maintain tissue homeostasis . To be able to adapt to a changing environment the ECM is remodeled via de novo synthesis as well as proteolytic degradation that must be in equilibrium to maintain healthy tissues ( Humphrey et al . , 2014 ) . Fibroblasts and keratinocytes are major drivers of ECM remodeling in adult skin as they synthesize many ECM proteins and secrete matrix degrading enzymes ( Kisling et al . , 2019 ) . Fibroblasts are highly abundant in the dermis , less homogeneous than previously assumed and have distinct matrix secretion proﬁles ( Ghetti et al . , 2018 ) . Single - cell RNA sequencing of human skin samples identiﬁed six transcriptionally distinct ﬁbroblast clusters ( Vorstandlechner et al . , 2020 ) . Interestingly , a DPP4 - expressing ﬁbroblast type produces higher amounts of the ECM proteins type I collagen and ﬁbronectin compared with DPP4 - negative ﬁbroblasts ( Vorstandlechner et al . , 2020 ) . Fibroblasts also synthesize a great variety of matrix degrading enzymes and their regulators , such as matrix metalloproteases ( MMPs ) , tissue inhibitors of MMPs ( TIMPs ) , serine proteases ( i . e . , plasmins ) , granzymes , elastases and cathepsins that hydrolyze collagen , elastin , glycoproteins and PG / GAGs ( Bonnans et al . , 2014 ; Bhattacharjee et al . , 2019 ) . Further , immune cells secrete a plethora of cytokines and growth factors that can induce ECM synthesis or degradation ( IL - 1 , IL - 4 , IL - 6 , IL - 13 , TGF - β , TNF ) . TGF - β plays a key role in controlling both processes ( Liguori et al . , 2011 ; Bhattacharjee et al . , 2019 ) . Immune cells have also been shown to be involved in ECM generation and deposition . Migrating macrophages deliver ECM components and control timely deposition of type IV collagen at the de novo formed BM in drosophila embryos during development ( Matsubayashi et al . , 2017 ) . This mechanism could be conserved among species and potentially be important in malignant diseases displaying reactivation of developmental processes . Indeed , in humans , tumor - associated macrophages have the potential to express matrix molecules , such as PGs , ﬁbronectin and collagen type I , V , and VI ( Liguori et al . , 2011 ) . However , further studies will be needed to explore these processes in human embryogenesis , skin development and tissue malignancies . Wound Healing and the Immune System Type - 2 immune responses via interleukin - 4 receptor α signaling have been shown to play a key role in skin repair after mechanical injury . IL - 4 secretion by innate lymphoid cells and signaling in macrophages at the injury site controls the architecture and cross - linking of collagen ﬁbrils as well as the diameter and strength of these ﬁbrils ( Knipper Johanna et al . , 2015 ; Boothby et al . , 2020 ) . Collagen deposition and its structural regulation are particularly important in wound healing processes ( Boothby et al . , 2020 ) . The earliest phase after skin injury is inﬂammation , followed by deposition of new connective tissue , called granulation tissue , and keratinocytes migrate over this newly formed granulation tissue . Fibronectin plays a special role by providing a provisional matrix for the formation of granulation tissue ( Uitto et al . , 1989 ) . Fibroblasts are activated and diﬀerentiate into myoﬁbroblasts with elevated alpha smooth muscle actin ( α - SMA ) expression , thereby increasing mechanical tension – an important mechanical step for rapid wound closure . Further , myoﬁbroblasts synthesize ECM proteins in a TGF - β regulated manner ( Watt and Fujiwara , 2011 ) . TGF - β also induces periostin expression in ﬁbroblasts and basal keratinocytes during wound repair . Periostin , which is predominantly expressed in collagen - rich tissues that have to withhold mechanical stresses , is upregulated in skin granulation tissue with protein levels peaking after 7 days and declining to normal levels thereafter ( Norris et al . , 2007 ; Zhou et al . , 2010 ) . Lack of periostin in mice increases collagen stiﬀness and decreases elasticity compared to wild - type mice ( Norris et al . , 2007 ) . Interestingly , periostin is only found upon severe trauma and is not upregulated in the dermis after Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 5 July 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 682414 fcell - 09 - 682414 June 30 , 2021 Time : 17 : 1 # 6 Pﬁsterer et al . Skin ECM in Inﬂammation and Infection FIGURE 2 | Structure of pro - collagen and assembled collagen . ( A ) Three left - handed α - helices ( left ) form a right - handed collagen superhelix ( middle ) within collagen - producing cells . Once secreted to the extracellular space , enzymes cleave off the N - and C - terminal parts to form fully functional collagen ( right ) . ( B ) Different forms of collagen assemble into diverse structures . Fibrillar collagen molecules assemble into collagen ﬁbrils that are stabilized by crosslinking ( type I , III , V ) . The net - forming collagen type IV can build a meshwork that is highly ﬂexible compared to rigid ﬁbrils . Non - classical collagens , such as type V and FACIT interact with collagen ﬁbrils to enhance stability . Beaded collagen ( type VI ) links collagen type IV to collagen type I and III and increases tissue elasticity . Collagen type VII assembles into ﬁbrils that anchor the BM to the papillary dermis and maintain tissue integrity . incisional wounding ( Zhou et al . , 2010 ) . In adult skin the ratio of collagen type I : III is approximately 5 : 1 , but in wound healing this ratio can shift and result in aberrant scar formation like keloids ( Uitto et al . , 1989 ) . Despite clear diﬀerences in keloids and hypertrophic scars , both illustrate elevated periostin expression . However , hypertrophic scars contain thick collagen bundles with high levels of periostin surrounding the cells , whereas keloid scars lack cells with periostin around them ( Zhou et al . , 2010 ) . Transforming growth factor - β can also inhibit ECM degradation by downregulating matrix degrading enzymes such as MMP - 1 and by upregulating TIMPs ( Watt and Fujiwara , 2011 ) . Matrix proteases dynamically remodel the ECM and this turnover results in both matrix remodeling and restructuring , and in matrix signaling through the release of matrix - associated proteins by cleavage . MMPs are Ca 2 + dependent , Zn 2 + containing endopeptidases that cleave intact collagen ﬁbers and play a dominant role in ECM degradation and release of cytokines and chemokines . A plethora of MMPs have been described in humans and have been reviewed extensively ( Lu et al . , 2011 ; Bonnans et al . , 2014 ; Kisling et al . , 2019 ) . In human skin MMP - 1 is the major proteinase that degrades ﬁbrillar collagen type I and III . The resulting collagen fragments can be further cleaved by MMP - 3 and MMP - 9 with an overall preference for collagen ﬁbrils that have low amounts of crosslinking ( Quan and Fisher , 2015 ) . Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 6 July 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 682414 fcell - 09 - 682414 June 30 , 2021 Time : 17 : 1 # 7 Pﬁsterer et al . Skin ECM in Inﬂammation and Infection FIGURE 3 | ECM in healthy mammalian skin . ( A ) Skin is composed of the epidermis ( top part ) , dermis ( mid part ) and adipose cell - rich hypodermis ( lower part ) and resembles a highly accessible model tissue to study epithelia , connective tissue and extracellular matrix ( ECM ) structures speciﬁc for those layers . The BM ( purple ) connects the epidermis to the dermis , which is comprised of interstitial matrix . ( B ) The dominant structural component in the BM is collagen type IV , which builds a meshwork with interspersed laminin and ﬁbronectin . Together they build the basis for keratinocyte attachment via integrins . Collagen type VII reaches into the papillary dermis and stabilizes the dermal - epidermal junction . ( C ) In the dermis collagen type I and ﬁbronectin build a ﬁbrillary structure that allows cell adhesion and migration through the matrix . Shown is a ﬁbroblast attaching to collagen and ﬁbronectin via integrins . This leads to predominant degradation of loose collagen ﬁbers and accumulation of highly crosslinked stiﬀ collagen bundles during aging and in photodamaged skin ( Quan and Fisher , 2015 ; Shao et al . , 2019 ) which may contribute to enhanced tumor progression due to tissue stiﬀening , as has been reported for lysyl oxidase ( LOX ) ( Levental et al . , 2009 ) . CHANGING THE ECM ARCHITECTURE BY POSTTRANSLATIONAL MODIFICATIONS Posttranslational modiﬁcations add another level of complexity and regulatory opportunity to the already diverse tissue - and disease - speciﬁc matrix ( Fidler et al . , 2018 ) . For instance , collagen ﬁbers can be crosslinked resulting in modiﬁed ECM architecture and mechanical properties . Inter - and intramolecular crosslinking reactions are catalyzed by enzymatic crosslinkers , such as LOX and transglutaminase , whereas glycation with reducing sugar residues represents a non - enzymatic process ( Roy et al . , 2010 ) . Enzymatic Crosslinking The enzyme LOX is one of the most prominent regulators of ECM topography . Together with lox - like enzymes ( LOXL1 - 5 ) and lysyl hydroxylases these enzymes determine the extent of inter - and intramolecular crosslinking in the ECM and results in stiﬀening of the matrix ( Cai et al . , 2017 ; Rodriguez - Pascual and Rosell - Garcia , 2018 ; Vallet and Ricard - Blum , 2019 ) . Lysyl oxidase catalyzes the conversion of lysine and hydroxylysine residues into highly reactive aldehyde groups . Thereafter , these reactive groups spontaneously condense with other oxidized groups and form aldimine crosslinks ( Schiﬀ base ) with amino groups from neighboring ECM components ( Wolf et al . , 2009 ; Grau - Bové et al . , 2015 ) . This copper - dependent process allows covalent crosslinking between multiple nearby collagen ﬁbers , creating thick collagen bundles . It also allows crosslinks of collagen with elastin , and results in overall stiﬀening of the ECM ( Lu et al . , 2011 ) . The enzyme transglutaminase catalyzes a reaction between glutamine and lysine residues on adjacent ECM proteins creating covalent amide bonds and thereby alters ECM microstructures ( Orban et al . , 2004 ; Tse et al . , 2018 ) . Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 7 July 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 682414 fcell - 09 - 682414 June 30 , 2021 Time : 17 : 1 # 8 Pﬁsterer et al . Skin ECM in Inﬂammation and Infection In human skin stromal cells generate LOX , and a recently deﬁned ﬁbroblast subset has been suggested to be the main LOX producer ( Vorstandlechner et al . , 2020 ) . Collagen is not distributed and organized evenly throughout the dermis : it is rather loosely organized in the papillary dermis and densely packed and highly crosslinked in the reticular dermis ( Watt and Fujiwara , 2011 ) . This could be the result of a distinct distribution of ﬁbroblast subsets within the dermis resulting in hotspots of LOX concentration . Further , LOX expression is regulated by hypoxia - inducible factors ( HIFs ) that are upregulated in hypoxic environments and conditions . HIFs are induced by inﬂammatory hypoxia , infections causing immune responses , or local hypoxia due to more O 2 consumption ( Deng et al . , 2016 ) . Connections to inﬂammatory skin diseases and infections will be discussed later . As mentioned before , aging and UV light can have an eﬀect on skin elasticity and stiﬀness . This is partly mediated via UV - induced upregulation of LOX in photodamaged skin and enhanced by selective degradation of loose collagen ﬁbers that are not crosslinked ( Quan and Fisher , 2015 ; Shao et al . , 2019 ) . Another enzyme in human skin that is able to crosslink adjacent collagen ﬁbers and is involved in ﬁbrosis is transglutaminase . The ECM protein periostin , which is involved in collagen ﬁbrillogenesis , may function as a substrate of LOX or transglutaminase ( Norris et al . , 2007 ) . However , more research is needed to fully clarify these interactions mechanistically . Increased LOX expression and activity has been linked to cancer development and metastasis formation in various tissues and high LOX protein levels correlate with poor clinical prognosis ( Bonnans et al . , 2014 ) . To date little is known about the physiological relevance of LOX for maintaining human skin homeostasis . Non - enzymatic Glycation Glycation reactions happen spontaneously throughout the human body and involve the formation of advanced glycation end products ( AGEs ) from glucose or its metabolites . The carbonyl group of reducing sugars reacts with the amine groups of proteins and forms protein - AGE adducts with many intermediate products . The reaction includes multiple steps such as the formation of a Schiﬀ base , Amadori rearrangements , and oxidation reactions creating highly reactive functional groups ( Bansode et al . , 2020 ) . The protein - AGE adducts can form further intermolecular crosslinks with neighboring proteins ( protein - AGE - protein ; Bailey , 2001 ; Dandia et al . , 2019 ) . In particular collagen ﬁbrils of the ECM are frequently subject to glycation as they are highly accessible to sugars , such as glucose . As a result , the structure of the collagen matrix is altered and stiﬀened through collagen ﬁber bundling ( Mason et al . , 2013 ; Pﬁsterer et al . , 2020 ) . This can aﬀect the attachment of other ECM components and thereby change the overall matrix composition . Glycation has also been shown to lower the surface charge of collagen ﬁbrils , potentially altering charge associated molecule attachment , such as water , ions or similar ( Bansode et al . , 2020 ) . Certain diseases and aging can increase glycation processes in the human body . For instance , glycation reactions are increased in diabetic patients as a result of hyperglycemia and AGE production generally increases with age ( Dandia et al . , 2019 ) . Tissue dysfunction in elderly individuals is often caused by glycation - induced cross - linking and causes tissue stiﬀening ( Bailey , 2001 ) . Changes in the ECM composition and architecture determine the mechanical characteristics , such as stiﬀness and deformability and inﬂuence inﬂammatory skin diseases accompanied by altered cell - matrix interaction and cell migration ( Ringer et al . , 2017 ) . CELL - MATRIX INTERACTION , MIGRATION AND MECHANICAL FORCES Changes in the geometrical orientation of ﬁbers and their crosslinking can change the viscoelastic properties , reduce tissue ﬂexibility through stiﬀening of the matrix and inhibit permeability by building tight barriers that block entry of cells or drugs ( DuFort et al . , 2011 ) . The ECM can also provide structures to enhance cell motility and it has been shown that matrix stiﬀening directly correlates with cancer cell migration , metastasis formation and patient survival ( Levental et al . , 2009 ) . The interaction between cells and the matrix is of a reciprocal nature and highly dynamic , as both the cells and the matrix change spatially and temporally ( van Helvert et al . , 2018 ) . Cell - Matrix Interaction Cells use transmembrane adhesion receptors ( i . e . , integrins ) to attach and link their cytoskeleton to matrix components ( i . e . , ﬁbronectin ) . Multimodular intracellular adhesion complexes such as focal adhesions ( FA ) or podosomes build the connections between adhesion receptors and the cytoskeleton ( Raﬁq et al . , 2019 ; Michael and Parsons , 2020 ) . The intracellular parts of adhesion receptors are coupled to the actin cytoskeleton via multifaceted , specialized adhesion complexes that can sense and exert forces , called FA ( Michael and Parsons , 2020 ) . In 2D environments , integrins activate cell spreading on ﬁbronectin or collagens resulting in the formation of FA at cell margins , whereas FA in 3D are highly dynamic , more in number and not restricted to the base of the cell ( Adams et al . , 1999 ; Yamada and Sixt , 2019 ) . A recent study using a FRET tension sensor to measure loads on integrins showed that matrix adhesion and traction force generation is strongly inﬂuenced by the presence of integrins and ligand identity ( Tan et al . , 2020 ) . FA are essential for ECM pulling and pushing by the cell , and plaque molecules such as paxillin , talin and vinculin may play a central part in transmitting high forces on single integrin molecules ( van Helvert et al . , 2018 ; Yamada and Sixt , 2019 ; Tan et al . , 2020 ) . Dynamic mechanical links between the ECM , adhesion complexes comprising integrins and adapter molecules and the F - actin cytoskeleton are called molecular clutches ( Elosegui - Artola et al . , 2016 ) . Molecular clutches translate rearward moving F - actin ﬂow into traction force toward the ECM ( van Helvert et al . , 2018 ; Yamada and Sixt , 2019 ) . The ‘molecular clutch model’ involves repeated cycles of high force engagement and disengagement to the matrix via integrins / cadherins in FA and Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 8 July 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 682414 fcell - 09 - 682414 June 30 , 2021 Time : 17 : 1 # 9 Pﬁsterer et al . Skin ECM in Inﬂammation and Infection is involved in mechanosensing ( Elosegui - Artola et al . , 2016 ) . The clutch model has recently been challenged using FRET - tension sensors , and this showed that there is less load on each sensor and for a long period of time , which is in contrast to high energy rapid engagement and disengagement . Force transmission could be rather realized through a network of dynamic actin crosslinkers , which may be energetically favorable ( Tan et al . , 2020 ) . Vinculin and talin function as molecular clutch through direct but transient interaction with F - actin ﬁbers to translate rearward moving F - actin ﬂow into traction force toward the ECM ( van Helvert et al . , 2018 ; Yamada and Sixt , 2019 ) . Podosomes , in contrast , are cellular multimodular matrix attachment complexes that are common in myeloid cells and build localized attachment foci , which are not limited to cell edges ( Raﬁq et al . , 2019 ) . Podosomes have an actin - rich core and an outer ring - like structure built by adhesion molecules , such as integrins , and plaque molecules , such as paxillin , talin and vinculin , that link integrins to the actin cytoskeleton ( van den Dries et al . , 2019 ) . The serine / threonine kinase p21 - Activated kinase 4 ( PAK4 ) has been shown to localize to the ring - core interphase and is essential for podosome formation , dynamics and consequently macrophage migration ( Foxall et al . , 2019 ) . A recent study showed that the formation of FA and podosomes is regulated via interactions between actomyosin networks and microtubules ( Raﬁq et al . , 2019 ) . KANK proteins bridge talin with the tips of microtubules . Uncoupling activates Rho / ROCK signaling and enhances myosin II ﬁlament assembly resulting in a preferred formation of focal adhesions over podosomes ( Raﬁq et al . , 2019 ) . Vinculin and talin also localize to adhesion rings on actin - rich membrane projections called invadopodia ( Weaver , 2006 ) . Invasive squamous cell carcinoma cells use these specialized matrix - degrading cell structures that are stabilized by podoplanin to remodel ECM structures in a LIM kinase - dependent pathway for tissue invasion ( Scott et al . , 2010 ; Martín - Villar et al . , 2015 ) . Cells constantly need to sense changes in the properties of the ECM to allow them to adjust their behavior accordingly . Exploration of the matrix is often performed with actin - rich membrane protrusions , called ﬁlopodia . It has been shown that cell adhesion to ECM proteins , such as α 5 β 1 integrin to ﬁbronectin , but not adhesion to laminin or TSP - 1 , directly inﬂuences ﬁlopodia generation and stability by changing the PKC - dependent phosphorylation of fascin ( Adams and Schwartz , 2000 ) . Fascin bundles linear F - actin ﬁlaments in ﬁlopodia and is highly upregulated in migratory cancer cells , dendritic cells and Langerhans cells of the skin ( Adams et al . , 1999 ) . In addition , fascin is also diﬀerentially phosphorylated in response to the stiﬀness of the ECM , suggesting that both , tight cell adhesion to ﬁbronectin and interaction with stiﬀ matrix , may inﬂuence the spatio - temporal distribution of fascin and thereby regulate ﬁlopodia function and activity ( Pﬁsterer et al . , 2020 ) . Loss of matrix anchorage and its associated signaling can lead to the induction of a specialized form of programmed cell death , called anoikis . This can either be a result of matrix degradation or tension release within the matrix through wounding ( Humphrey et al . , 2014 ) . This regulatory mechanism is often inactive in invasive tumor cells that metastasize and may play a role in hyperproliferative skin diseases , such as psoriasis , as well ( Bonnans et al . , 2014 ) . ECM and Cell Migration Cell migration through ECM is a ﬁnely tuned balance of adhesion and detachment from the matrix concomitant with continuous cell deformation to enable movement . If cells adhere too tightly to the matrix , movement is limited and cells will become static . In contrast , the lack of anchor points or mechanical resistance can result in uncontrolled slippage on the matrix , with the consequence of reduced or halted cell migration ( Yamada and Sixt , 2019 ) . Before the onset of movement , many migratory cells explore the ECM with ﬁlopodia or sheet - like membrane protrusions called lamellipodia at the cell front . This allows sensing of the microenvironment and direct adaptation to the ECM topography , stiﬀness and anchor possibilities ( Pﬁsterer et al . , 2020 ) . Once the cell has successfully explored the ECM , ﬁlopodia are pulled in and cells mostly migrate in a ﬁlopodia - independent mode ( Leithner et al . , 2016 ) . Cell migration in 2D environments has been extensively studied and Michael Abercrombie postulated already in the 1970s the basic principles of 2D cell migration , consisting of repeated cycles of membrane protrusion at the leading edge ( lamellipodia ) , adhesion , rearward movement of F - actin , and cell retraction at the rear of the cell ( Abercrombie , 1980 ) . F - actin polymerization at the front of the cell drives membrane protrusions , such as lamellipodia , ﬁlopodia , membrane blebs or invadopodia , and these processes are tightly regulated by Rho GTPases ( Ridley , 2011 ; Lawson and Ridley , 2018 ) . In contrast to ﬂat 2D environments , cells use various migration modes in 3D , such as mesenchymal , amoeboid and lobopodial cell migration ( reviewed in Yamada and Sixt , 2019 and illustrated in Figure 4 ) . Leukocytes that patrol through the skin for homeostatic surveillance mainly use amoeboid migration , where they choose the path of least resistance , using low adhesion points and showcasing extensive cell deformation ( Weninger et al . , 2014 ; Yamada and Sixt , 2019 ) . Stromal cells , such as ﬁbroblasts , align along and attach to ECM tension ﬁbers during mesenchymal migration and often leave behind tunnels due to MMP degradation at the front . Lobopodial migration shows features of both amoeboid and mesenchymal migration in addition to bleb - like protrusions at the front , which are generated via intracellular pressure ( Yamada and Sixt , 2019 ) . Cells can interconvert between these forms and the mode is dependent on substrate adhesion , actin protrusion , actomyosin contraction and of the physical , chemical and architectural properties of the matrix ( Yamada and Sixt , 2019 ) . Mechanotransduction and Forces An important signaling mechanism is provided through reciprocal force generation between cells and the matrix . Loads on the ECM are sensed by cells and can result in enhanced Rho GTPase signaling and myosin contractility ( Yamada and Sixt , 2019 ) . In addition , cells within tissues are under constant mechanical tension , have to squeeze through tight spaces and thereby also exert pulling and pushing forces on the matrix or create tunnels through contractile forces in an otherwise dense matrix . Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 9 July 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 682414 fcell - 09 - 682414 June 30 , 2021 Time : 17 : 1 # 10 Pﬁsterer et al . Skin ECM in Inﬂammation and Infection FIGURE 4 | Different modes of cell migration in three - dimensional ( 3D ) matrix . Cells can migrate through 3D matrix using different ways of motility , such as mesenchymal , amoeboid and lobopodial migration . ( A ) Mesenchymal migration is characterized by high adhesions and cell protrusions at the leading edge that align along collagen ﬁbers . Cells that mainly use mesenchymal migration leave behind a tunnel in the ECM that can be utilized by following cells as tracks . ( B ) In contrast , amoeboid cell migration is less dependent on matrix adhesions . Cells show strong cell body and nucleus deformation during migration through tight spaces and generally choose the path of least resistance . ( C ) Lobopodial migration shows features of mesenchymal and amoeboid migration and typically has bleb protrusions at the migration front . Cells using one form of migration can change to using another form dependent on the environment . Physical parameters that inﬂuence cell migration are ECM stiﬀness , conﬁnement and topology and the cell needs to adapt to these mechanical features and its remodeling ( van Helvert et al . , 2018 ; Yamada and Sixt , 2019 ) . The density of collagen ﬁbrils varies in tissues within the human body and determines its porosity ( van Helvert et al . , 2018 ) . Porosity in combination with ﬁber alignment , matrix crosslinking and network tension deﬁne the physical properties of the ECM and can allow cell migration or prevent it . Small pore sizes for instance can be size selective or only allow cells to migrate through that can ﬂexibly adjust to small spaces . The prerequisites of cell ﬂexibility include active remodeling of the F - actin and microtubule cytoskeleton , and the deformation of the cell body and organelles . The nucleus is one of the most rigid organelles in eukaryotic cells that contains and protects the genetic information . Nuclear plasticity during cell migration is a prerequisite for eﬃcient tissue penetration and migration through tight interstitial spaces . Fascin has been shown to regulate nuclear movement and ﬂexibility by interacting with nesprin - 2 at the outer nuclear envelope and thereby coupling F - actin to the nucleus ( Jayo et al . , 2016 ) . However , increasing conﬁnement can quickly become a limiting factor , as seen during cellular transmigration through the BM . Nuclear rupture and content spillage can occur and cause DNA fragmentation . An exciting study using microﬂuidics to image nuclei during cell migration showed that after migration through pores sized smaller than 20 µ m 2 , cells lost integrity of the nuclear membrane ( Denais et al . , 2016 ) . However , cells developed rescue mechanisms that quickly restored nuclear content using the endosomal sorting complex required for transport III ( ESCRTIII ) machinery . Nuclear content was pulled in , followed by nuclear membrane and DNA damage repair and resulting in increased cell survival ( Denais et al . , 2016 ) . Another Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 10 July 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 682414 fcell - 09 - 682414 June 30 , 2021 Time : 17 : 1 # 11 Pﬁsterer et al . Skin ECM in Inﬂammation and Infection solution for successful migration through ECM of restrictive physical properties is active ECM remodeling . Matrix stiﬀening can induce MMP secretion to break down ECM components at the leading edge , in podosomes and invadosomes ( Chang et al . , 2017 ) . By utilising this , cells can create migration tracks behind them to form “superhighways” that can be used by trailing cells ( Lu et al . , 2011 ) . Cells and ECM form tissues and through dynamic reciprocal force transduction those tissues are dynamic entities . Changes in the physical properties of the ECM , such as pathological stiﬀening , are directly sensed by cells and have a direct impact on cell - interaction with the ECM and consequently cell migration ( Paszek et al . , 2005 ) . Cells sense force loads on the ECM with the actin - talin - integrin - ﬁbronectin clutch in a dynamic mechanism and force transmission has been predicted to follow a biphasic force / rigidity curve ( Elosegui - Artola et al . , 2016 ) . Cell contraction results in intracellular forces that can be translated into forward movement . Non - muscle myosin II on F - actin ﬁbers generates suﬃcient forces to actively retract the rear of the cell . Recently , it has been shown in a 3D ECM model that protrusion speed inﬂuences cell retraction by transduction of membrane tension in a positive feed - back loop ( Hetmanski et al . , 2019 ) . A decrease of rear membrane tension as a result of polarized stiﬀness and migration , increases caveolae formation and this promotes RhoA activation and cell retraction ( Hetmanski et al . , 2019 ) . In addition to sensing the stiﬀness , cells can also sense matrix geometry . The orientation and the alignment of ECM ﬁbers can inﬂuence guided cell migration , the thickness of collagen ﬁbers may have an impact on migration speed , and complex ECM topography and ﬁber nanotexture may provide anchor points for migrating cells ( van Helvert et al . , 2018 ) . Exciting new research showed recently that adhesion - independent leukocyte migration is impossible on 2D surfaces due to the lack of substrate attachment . In contrast , locomotion through 3D ECM was similar between talin - deﬁcient and wild - type cells and this was dependent on rough 3D topography to allow cells to use friction , and actin retrograde ﬂow for non - adhesive forward movement ( Bodor et al . , 2020 ; Reversat et al . , 2020 ) . Bi - directional reciprocity of forces between cells and the matrix can expose otherwise inaccessible cryptic peptide sequences on the ECM , open mechanosensitive ion channels , change receptor or ligand conformation to strengthen their interaction , and thereby alter cell - matrix interactions and biochemical signaling responses ( Vogel and Sheetz , 2006 ; Wang et al . , 2019 ) . The interstitial matrix is a reservoir of signaling molecules . Concentration gradients of chemokines , growth factors , and morphogens regulate and direct cell migratory behavior . The ECM is also the largest source of freely available Ca 2 + with a concentration of more than 1 mM ( Gopal et al . , 2020 ) . As a secondary messenger , Ca 2 + plays a dominant role in many cellular signaling pathways regulating immune cell activation , apoptosis , dynamic cytoskeletal rearrangements , cell adhesion , and migration . Besides sensing substrate rigidity through mechanosensitive adapter proteins , cells can also utilize mechanosensitive ion channels that are often located in close vicinity to FA ( Gopal et al . , 2020 ) . High force load on the matrix can be translated via FA to actin stress ﬁbers and ultimately result in opening of mechanosensitive Ca 2 + channels . Direct pulling on single actin stress ﬁbers using laser tweezers has also been shown to activate ion channels and result in localized increases in cytoplasmic Ca 2 + concentrations due to high inﬂux from extracellular stores ( Kobayashi and Sokabe , 2010 ) . Cell binding to and pulling on matrix - bound growth factors , cytokines or chemokines may enhance cell activation and also increase target cell speciﬁcity compared to soluble factors ( Engel , 1989 ) . Counterforces within the cell may be essential for activating signaling cascades ( Chang et al . , 2017 ) . One explanation could be that increased cellular forces through interaction with rigid matrix and pulling on actin ﬁlaments may enhance cell signaling responses ( Chang et al . , 2017 ) . Force sensing of the ECM environment can be seen in many cells and cells have been shown to migrate toward gradients of higher stiﬀness in a mechanism called durotaxis ( Sunyer and Trepat , 2020 ) . Changes of tissue integrity , ECM topology , rigidity , and composition can all modify cell migration and strongly aﬀect tissue homeostasis . THE ROLE OF SKIN INFLAMMATION AND INFECTION IN ECM REMODELING Role of the ECM in Inﬂammatory Skin Diseases Extracellular matrix proteins are essential players in the regulation of tissue responses toward external and internal stimuli . If ECM remodeling is out of equilibrium , pathological conditions are exacerbated . Genetic deletions of speciﬁc ECM proteins can lead to tissue defects and can even be lethal in development ( Bonnans et al . , 2014 ) . Due to the dynamic nature of the ECM , elevated remodeling rates may increase the risk of aberrant modiﬁcations , especially in tissue injury and inﬂammation ( Figure 5 ) . Immune cells are major regulators in ECM synthesis and deposition , degradation and remodeling . Immune cells produce proteases ( e . g . , MMPs ) , cytokines ( e . g . , IL - 1b , IFN - y ) , growth factors ( e . g . , TGF - β ) and ECM components ( e . g . , ﬁbronectin ) that are involved in the remodeling of ECM components ( Watt and Fujiwara , 2011 ; Bhattacharjee et al . , 2019 ) . In contrast , degradation of ECM proteins , such as hyaluronic acid , HSPG , and tenascin C can create fragments that induce inﬂammation and provide cues for immune cell recruitment ( Adair - Kirk and Senior , 2008 ; Kurbet et al . , 2016 ) . Laminin fragments can act as danger associated molecular patterns ( DAMPs ) and modulate cytokine and MMP expression ( Simon and Bromberg , 2017 ; Michopoulou et al . , 2020 ) . Collagen fragments increase IL - 1 β secretion in monocytes , whereas elastin peptides act as chemoattractant for immune cells ( Adair - Kirk and Senior , 2008 ) . Fibronectin splicing variants can activate toll like receptor ( TLR ) signaling , and cytokine and chemokine secretion in ﬁbroblasts ( Kelsh et al . , 2014 ) . Fibronectin has been associated with two Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 11 July 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 682414 fcell - 09 - 682414 June 30 , 2021 Time : 17 : 1 # 12 Pﬁsterer et al . Skin ECM in Inﬂammation and Infection FIGURE 5 | ECM changes in skin inﬂammation . Inﬂammatory skin diseases can alter the composition and structure of the ECM . ( A ) In healthy skin collagen type IV builds a network with interspersed laminin to form the BM . This provides attachment points for basal keratinocytes of the epidermis and forms a protective layer to control leukocyte navigation through adjusted gap sizes and limits entry of harmful invaders via incorporation of sticky PG / GAGs . ( B ) Psoriasis is deﬁned by high inﬁltration of IL - 17 and IL - 22 producing T helper cells . The BM in psoriasis is highly unstructured and thicker compared to healthy skin and shows elevated levels of laminin and ﬁbronectin . ( C ) In atopic dermatitis , which is a T helper 2 - driven inﬂammatory skin disease , collagen type IV and ﬁbronectin are decreased , resulting in a thinner BM . Increased hyaluronan and MMPs are further characteristic for atopic dermatitis ( not illustrated here ) . Not all relevant immune cells are illustrated . major inﬂammatory skin diseases , psoriasis and atopic dermatitis ( AD ; Bhattacharjee et al . , 2019 ) . Atopic dermatitis is a T helper 2 ( Th2 ) - driven chronic inﬂammatory skin disease that also shows aberrant BM composition in aﬀected skin ( Figure 5 ) . AD patients display reduced skin barrier function , which is caused by ﬁlaggrin mutations and reduced thickness of the BM with decreased amounts of collagen type IV and ﬁbronectin ( Bhattacharjee et al . , 2019 ) . Further , ﬁbronectin redistributes to the corniﬁed layer of uninvolved skin in AD patients , which allows bacterial colonization . Staphylococcus aureus ( S . aureus ) , the dominant pathogen on the skin of AD patients , has been shown to bind Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 12 July 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 682414 fcell - 09 - 682414 June 30 , 2021 Time : 17 : 1 # 13 Pﬁsterer et al . Skin ECM in Inﬂammation and Infection preferentially to ﬁbronectin in the stratum corneum of AD and not psoriasis patients ( Cho et al . , 2001 ) . S . aureus often causes chronic infections , results in increased immune cell inﬁltration to ﬁght the pathogen and can cause tissue damage through proteolysis by bacterial elastases ( Alfano et al . , 2016 ) . Chronic AD lesions are often characterized by eosinophil inﬁltration . Skin thickening in AD has been connected to secretion of leukotriene C4 by eosinophils , and ﬁbroblasts respond with increased collagen synthesis and secretion ( Oyoshi et al . , 2012 ) . Immune cell - induced MMP - dependent ECM degradation also plays a role in AD progression and AD patients have elevated serum levels of MMP - 8 and MMP - 9 . Increased macrophage inﬁltration in chronic AD may also adversely aﬀect ECM homeostasis by enhanced MMP activity ( Bhattacharjee et al . , 2019 ) . In an attempt to investigate the link between pruritus , a common symptom in AD , and nerve ﬁber elongation in the dermis , upregulated MMP - 8 has been shown to be involved ( Tominaga et al . , 2011 ) . MMP - 8 is induced by nerve growth factors secreted from keratinocytes and allows nerve ﬁbers to penetrate into the ECM . The resulting increase in nerve ﬁber density in the interstitial matrix may explain the development and enhancement of pruritus , which is typical for AD lesions ( Tominaga et al . , 2011 ) . AD is associated with IgE sensitization to various allergens and resulting allergic inﬂammatory reactions are often the cause and consequence of tissue remodeling . Allergic reactions may provoke histamine secretion by mast cells and this can trigger inﬂammatory reactions and itching sensation in AD patients as well . Histamine has also been shown to induce periostin - dependent collagen expression and deposition by ﬁbroblasts via ERK1 / 2 signaling through the histamine receptor 1 and thereby regulates ECM remodeling ( Yang et al . , 2014 ) . Periostin is highly expressed in the papillary dermis of embryonic skin and to a lesser extent in healthy adult skin . However , periostin is upregulated in wound healing processes and has also been reported to be highly abundant in AD skin ( Zhou et al . , 2010 ; Mishra et al . , 2020 ) . A recent study showed that periostin expression in keratinocytes is induced by thymic stromal lymphopoietin , calcipotriol and house dust mite , and is a potential inducer of allergic itch through engagement with α V β 3 integrin receptors on sensory neurons ( Mishra et al . , 2020 ) . In contrast to AD , periostin is reduced in psoriasis and the BM is thicker and unstructured , which further highlights the molecular and structural diﬀerences of these two skin diseases ( Zhou et al . , 2010 ; Bhattacharjee et al . , 2019 ; Figure 5 ) . Psoriasis is mainly driven by Th17 / Th22 cell skin inﬁltration and cytokine secretion . High immune cell inﬁltration in psoriasis can also aﬀect the structure and composition of the ECM . In addition to T cells and macrophages , neutrophils are recruited to wounded skin and are elevated in numbers in psoriatic skin lesions ( Bhattacharjee et al . , 2019 ; Boothby et al . , 2020 ) . Neutrophils can release elastase , which promotes elastic ﬁber degradation and MMP activation and could play a role in disease initiation by altering the matrix ( Bonnans et al . , 2014 ; Bhattacharjee et al . , 2019 ) . Recently , it has been reported that psoriatic non - lesional and lesional skin harbors high numbers of IL - 9 producing Th9 cells in addition to Th17 cells . IL - 9 abrogates keratinocyte migration by reducing actin stress ﬁbers and actomyosin contractility , whereas IL - 17A promotes MMP secretion in keratinocytes ( Das et al . , 2019 ) . As such , both interleukins may act directly or indirectly on collagen composition and mechanical tension exerted on the matrix by keratinocytes , respectively . Psoriasis has been clinically linked to cardiovascular diseases , representing a major comorbidity factor . Huang et al . ( 2019 ) showed that cholesterol accumulates in tissues and cannot be cleared in an imiquimod - induced experimental psoriasis mouse model . Consistent with psoriasis in humans , Th17 cells are highly abundant in skin of imiquimod - treated mice . Increased IL - 17 levels promoted collagen deposition , thickening of the collagen matrix and increased LOX - induced collagen crosslinking in the skin . As a result , relatively large high density lipoprotein ( HDL ) molecules get trapped in the high - density collagen structures and are unable to eﬃciently remove low density lipoprotein ( LDL ) from tissue and recirculate it to the plasma ( Huang et al . , 2019 ) . The diminished lipoprotein traﬃcking may represent a mechanism leading to increased cardiovascular diseases in psoriasis patients and highlights the role of ECM topology and charge on molecule movement in the interstitium . Certain medications that are commonly used to treat psoriasis and atopic dermatitis , can also induce ECM changes in the skin . Topical glucocorticoids have proven eﬀective in decreasing inﬂammation and skin irritation and can restore homeostasis ( Sarkar et al . , 2017 ) . However , they come at the expense of ECM integrity . Corticosteroids can modify connective tissues and result in dermal atrophy and striae formation ( Uitto et al . , 1989 ) . These modiﬁcations are mainly evoked through inhibition of ﬁbroblast proliferation , suppression of collagen synthesis by ﬁbroblasts , and reduction in collagenase and MMP secretion . Betamethasone , which is regularly used to treat psoriasis , can also suppress ECM expression in ﬁbroblasts and keratinocytes ( Norsgaard et al . , 2014 ) . Though , combined therapy with the vitamin D derivate calcipotriol can restore collagen and hyaluronic acid levels and prevent dermal and epidermal thinning ( Norsgaard et al . , 2014 ) . Ascorbic acid ( vitamin C ) also enhances collagen deposition by increasing collagen type I and III transcription in ﬁbroblasts , and by stabilizing triple - helical collagen ﬁbers for optimized secretion ( Uitto et al . , 1989 ) . Role of the ECM in Infection Components of the ECM are ubiquitously distributed throughout the human body and therefore attractive targets for pathogens for adhesion ( Singh et al . , 2012 ) . Bacteria and viruses share similar strategies to guarantee successful infection of host cells in various tissues without being limited to speciﬁc tissue types . Infections often cause severe tissue damage and inﬂammation and induce remodeling processes to restore tissue homeostasis . As a consequence of tissue degradation , novel ECM binding sites for pathogens can be exposed and can potentially increase further bacterial or viral adhesion and infection ( Singh et al . , 2012 ) . Viruses can either spread directly from cell to cell using already established cell – cell interactions , activate the cell cytoskeleton to induce de novo cell – cell interactions , like nanotube bridges , or diﬀuse through the ECM from cell to cell ( Sowinski et al . , 2008 ; Zhong et al . , 2013 ) . Free diﬀusion through Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 13 July 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 682414 fcell - 09 - 682414 June 30 , 2021 Time : 17 : 1 # 14 Pﬁsterer et al . Skin ECM in Inﬂammation and Infection the ECM requires high virus stability , and eﬃcient strategies for release from infected cells and infection of new cells . Attachment to sticky ECM components that surround cells can enrich virus particles close to the cell membrane for advanced infection . Pathogen Binding to ECM Components Many bacteria and viruses utilize ECM proteins for adhesion and invasion and this simple yet sophisticated strategy seems to prove eﬃcient ( Singh et al . , 2012 ; Table 2 ) . S . aureus for instance binds the glycoproteins laminin , collagen , elastin and ﬁbronectin , whereas many HPV subtypes use HSPGs for attachment ( Bienkowska - Haba and Sapp , 2011 ; Singh et al . , 2012 ) . HPV - 11 enters tissues through epithelial microlesions and binds via its capsid to laminin 5 , which is secreted by migrating and basal keratinocytes during wound repair ( Culp et al . , 2006 ) . Thereby , HPV elegantly exploits the interaction of α 6 - integrin with laminin 5 to invade into basal keratinocytes ( Singh et al . , 2012 ) . Polyomaviruses have been shown to attach with their large T - antigen to laminin and collagen type IV at the BM ( Singh et al . , 2012 ) . In contrast , Merkel cell polyomavirus , which is highly prevalent in the human population and the causative agent of Merkel cell carcinoma in 80 % of patients , depends on sulfated polysaccharides , such as heparan sulfate ( HS ) for attachment before it engages sialic acid receptors on ﬁbroblasts to invade ( Matrosovich et al . , 2013 ; Becker et al . , 2019 ) . Undersulfation of surface - bound GAGs , which are essential for initial cell attachment , reduced infection rates of Merkel cell polyomavirus in in vitro experiments ( Becker et al . , 2019 ) . Various other viruses , such as herpes simplex ( HSV ) and HPV - types also depend on sulfated GAGs such as HS for initial binding ( Stavolone and Lionetti , 2017 ; Hadigal et al . , 2020 ) . HPV - 16 for instance uses HSPG to attach to the BM , to the interstitial matrix or to cell membranes prior to cell infection ( Sapp and Bienkowska - Haba , 2009 ; DiGiuseppe et al . , 2017 ) . Additional binding to laminin 5 may enhance eﬃcient binding to HS and / or collagen ﬁbers , bringing viruses within close vicinity to cells interacting with the matrix . HS binding induces a conformational change in the viral capsid proteins L1 and L2 allowing HPV - 16 viruses that are attached to HSPG in the ECM to detach and bind to secondary HSPG binding sites on the cell membrane ( Sapp and Bienkowska - Haba , 2009 ) . The interaction between HPV and HS is predominantly dependent on charge distribution and not sequence speciﬁc ( Knappe et al . , 2007 ) . This allows the virus to utilize similar PG / GAGs for initial attachment and subsequent cell invasion independent of tissue source . Inﬂuenza and coronaviruses utilize highly conserved sialoglycan binding sites for cell invasion and it has been suggested for certain coronaviruses that HSPG attachment preceded sialic acid receptor binding ( Owczarek et al . , 2018 ; Tortorici et al . , 2019 ) . Unlike bacteria , viruses do not encode their own ECM - remodeling metalloproteinases , but are still able to modify the host ECM indirectly ( Alfano et al . , 2016 ) . Some viruses have been shown to upregulate cell adhesion molecules , such as the matrix ligand ICAM - 1 ( Parapoxviruses ; Schneider et al . , 2019 ) , while others directly modify the cellular cytoskeleton ( Smith et al . , 2008 ; Bienkowska - Haba and Sapp , 2011 ; Nikolic TABLE 2 | Pathogens exploiting the ECM for invasion . Pathogen ECM molecule ( s ) bound Infection strategy S . aureus Laminin , collagen I , IV , VI , elastin , FN Singh et al . , 2012 Tissue invasion and infection Candida albicans Laminin , collagen I , IV , FN Singh et al . , 2012 Tissue attachment and enrichment HPV - 11 Laminin 5 Culp et al . , 2006 Exploits interaction of α 6 - integrin with laminin 5 for keratinocyte invasion HPV - 16 HSPG , laminin 5 , heparan sulfate Sapp and Bienkowska - Haba , 2009 ; DiGiuseppe et al . , 2017 Used for attachment to BM , interstitial matrix or cell membranes prior to infection , brings virus in close vicinity of target cell that interacts with matrix Polyomavirus Laminin 5 , collagen IV at BM Singh et al . , 2012 Large T - antigen on virus binds to BM proteins Merkel cell polyomavirus Sulfated GAGs i . e . , heparan sulfate ; Matrosovich et al . , 2013 ; Becker et al . , 2019 Binding used to attach to sialic acid receptors on ﬁbroblasts for cell invasion HSV family HSPG on cell surface Hadigal et al . , 2020 Used for initial attachment before invasion Coronavirus HSPG Lang et al . , 2011 ; Milewska et al . , 2014 ; Owczarek et al . , 2018 Enrichment of viruses around cells to enhance infection The list shown is not exhaustive . S . aureus , Staphylococcus aureus ; FN , ﬁbronectin ; HPV , human papillomavirus ; HSV , herpes simplex virus ; HSPG , heparan sulfate proteoglycan ; GAG , galactosaminoglycan / glycosaminoglycan ; BM , basement membrane . et al . , 2011 ; Stavolone and Lionetti , 2017 ) . Both strategies can potentially change the force load on the matrix , either by upregulating cell binding to the matrix , inducing ﬁlopodia , or by increasing or decreasing pulling forces exerted by the cells through F - actin modiﬁcations ( Taylor et al . , 2011 ; Table 3 ) . Proinﬂammatory cytokines are secreted en masse by activated immune cells upon virus infection resulting in increased activation of MMPs and altered ECM deposition ( Han et al . , 2001 ) . As such , viruses can indirectly induce ECM remodeling by increasing collagenase expression in tissues . These posttranslational modiﬁcations of ECM components resemble a very basic mechanical way to escape the immune system by destroying the scaﬀold for immune cells to hold on to and also to increase tissue invasion by removing physical barriers for viral diﬀusion . The E2 protein of papillomavirus , for instance , induces MMP - 9 expression and results in collagen degradation ( Behren et al . , 2005 ) . Talmi - Frank et al . ( 2016 ) showed in a mouse model that inﬂuenza infection resulted in upregulation of MT1 - MMP expression in myeloid CD11b + CD45 + cells causing collateral tissue damage in the lung . Interestingly , infected mice rather died by uncontrolled host immune responses instead of the virus itself . Only the combined treatment of inﬂammation Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 14 July 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 682414 fcell - 09 - 682414 June 30 , 2021 Time : 17 : 1 # 15 Pﬁsterer et al . Skin ECM in Inﬂammation and Infection TABLE 3 | Viruses can modify the quantity and quality of the ECM directly and indirectly . Virus Involved molecules Potential effect on matrix Rhinovirus TLR3 , TLR7 / 8 Kuo et al . , 2011 Increase in ECM deposition Parapoxvirus ICAM Schneider et al . , 2019 Increased ICAM expression can enhance matrix interaction and increase load on matrix Papillomavirus , HIV , SARS - CoV2 host actin cytoskeleton Smith et al . , 2008 ; Bienkowska - Haba and Sapp , 2011 ; Nikolic et al . , 2011 ; Bouhaddou et al . , 2020 Changes in cell shape , cell protrusions or cellular tension can alter pulling forces on matrix Papillomavirus E2 protein , MMP - 9 Behren et al . , 2005 MMP - 9 induction induces collagen degradation Inﬂuenzavirus MT1 - MMP Talmi - Frank et al . , 2016 MMP upregulation in immune cell can damage ECM Coronavirus Urokinase Gralinski et al . , 2013 ECM degradation in lung can cause wounding and tissue thickening HBV Collagen type I , type III , TIMP , TGF - β Ye et al . , 2015 Upregulated collagen deposition and tissue ﬁbrosis Zika virus TGF - β , collagen type I , LOX Aguiar et al . , 2020 Reduced matrix deposition HBV Viral oncoprotein HBx Tse et al . , 2018 Stabilization of HIF - 1 can upregulate LOX Merkel cell polyomavirus ADAM 10 and 17 Nwogu et al . , 2018 Increase in cellular sheddases remove cell adhesion receptors and can reduce force load on matrix Shown are examples of virus ECM modiﬁcations . The list of viruses and molecules is not exhaustive . ICAM , intercellular adhesion molecule ; HIV , human immunodeﬁciency virus ; MMP , matrix metalloproteinase ; HBV , hepatitis B virus ; TGF - β , transforming growth factor beta ; HIF - 1 , hypoxia inducible factor 1 ; LOX , lysyl oxidase ; ADAM , a disintegrin and metalloproteinase . and the control of viral load could rescue infected mice , highlighting the importance of balancing immune response and tissue integrity for survival . This has also been shown for coronavirus infections , where an unbiased mathematical modeling approach identiﬁed that wound repair and ECM remodeling pathways determined lethal versus sublethal disease outcome ( Gralinski et al . , 2013 ) . SARS patients suﬀered severe lung injury and the urokinase pathway proved to be an essential regulator of disease outcome . High SARS - CoV - 2 loads resulted in lung wounding and tissue thickening with increased keratin , ﬁbronectin and plasminogen levels as a result of acute lung injury through tissue destruction ( Gralinski et al . , 2013 ) . ECM degradation can result in anoikis in healthy tissues . Oncoviruses can aﬀect tissue cell responses to changes in ECM attachment . Papillomavirus , Hepatitis virus and Epstein – Barr - virus have all been shown to promote cell resistance to anoikis , thereby allowing cancer cell invasion and metastasis ( Kakavandi et al . , 2018 ) . In contrast , rhinovirus infection of airway smooth muscle cells has been shown to increase ECM deposition , in particular ﬁbronectin , perlecan and collagen type IV , via activation of TLR3 and TLR7 / 8 ( Kuo et al . , 2011 ) . Also Hepatitis viruses , which infect liver cells , can upregulate collagen deposition and cause liver ﬁbrosis in the absence of acute inﬂammation ( Ye et al . , 2015 ; Stavolone and Lionetti , 2017 ) whereas other viruses like Zika decrease collagen production ( Aguiar et al . , 2020 ) . Enhanced or reduced attachment of cells to the matrix can also have an enormous eﬀect on the matrix force load due to in - or decreased cell - induced contraction . Thereby viruses can also indirectly modify physical parameters of the matrix and inﬂuence immune cell migration to infection sites . Further , viruses can inﬂuence qualitative changes to the ECM , such as crosslinking or tension load . Many changes to the physical ECM properties are initiated through oxidative stress and tissue inﬂammation caused by viral infections . Hepatitis B virus ( HBV ) encodes the viral onco - protein transactivator protein X ( HBx ) , which interacts with and stabilizes HIF - 1 , a hypoxia - induced transcription factor ( Tse et al . , 2018 ) . Thereby viruses can indirectly upregulate LOX expression resulting in LOX - dependent collagen crosslinking and subsequent stiﬀening of the matrix . Merkel cell polyomavirus induces carcinoma in mostly immunocompromised patients and disease progression has been associated with aging and prolonged UV exposure , suggesting a potential link between matrix stiﬀening and oncogenic progression of infection ( Becker et al . , 2019 ) . Immune system responses to viral infections often cause tissue inﬂammation . This is frequently associated with changes to the ECM and tissue stiﬀening , which may enhance interactions of tissue - resident cells with the matrix . Eﬀects on the host cytoskeleton through stiﬀened environments can for instance alter ﬁlopodia formation ( Bienkowska - Haba and Sapp , 2011 ) . Even slight stiﬀening in the matrix can have enormous eﬀects on ﬁlopodia number , length and activity ( Pﬁsterer et al . , 2020 ) . Recent studies show that certain viruses have adapted to be taken up by ﬁlopodia and thereby directly exploit and beneﬁt from immune system - induced matrix modiﬁcations for increasing their cell – cell contact independent infection rate ( Figure 6 ) . Filopodia sense the topology of the matrix and can thereby brush oﬀ virus particles that are concentrated in the matrix and around cells . Recently , it was found that SARS - CoV - 2 induces the formation of long branched ﬁlopodia in infected cells and this may be a potential strategy to eﬃciently invade cells ( Bouhaddou et al . , 2020 ) . This potential is not limited to coronavirus and other viruses can also modify the host actin machinery , suggesting a conserved mechanism for eﬃcient tissue infection ( Taylor et al . , 2011 ) . For instance , HPV - 31 , which mainly infects basal keratinocytes , is able to actively change the host cytoskeleton and induce ﬁlopodia formation ( Smith et al . , 2008 ) . HPV has also been shown to hop onto ﬁlopodia and surf along the ﬁlopodium shaft to the cell body in an actin - and myosin - dependent mechanism , before receptor binding and endocytosis ( Lehmann et al . , 2005 ; Smith et al . , 2008 ) . Virus - induced ﬁlopodia formation further Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 15 July 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 682414 fcell - 09 - 682414 June 30 , 2021 Time : 17 : 1 # 16 Pﬁsterer et al . Skin ECM in Inﬂammation and Infection FIGURE 6 | Filopodia grab virus particles off the matrix . Viruses that enter tissues stick to ECM proteins , such as HSPG , or freely diffuse in the interstitial ﬂuid . Upon cell infection some viruses modify the cellular cytoskeleton and are able to induce cell protrusions called ﬁlopodia . When ﬁlopodia explore and interact with components of the ECM , they encounter freely ﬂoating or HSPG - bound virus particles and pick them off the matrix . Viruses hop from matrix HSPG onto secondary cell membrane HSPG and can surf along the ﬁlopodia shaft toward the cell body , where they invade and infect the target cell . increases uptake of freely diﬀusive virus particles from the ECM and may represent a yet less explored strategy for viral invasion into tissues . CONCLUDING REMARKS Exciting new studies are highlighting the potential impact of ECM in maintaining health and how diseases impact the structure and composition of the ECM . However , knowledge in this ﬁeld is still limited and further studies will be needed to investigate the role of the ECM in health and disease . As one of the most accessible peripheral organs , the skin represents an ideal model system for investigating ECM changes in inﬂammation , infections and its associated eﬀects on tissue resident cells , such as immune cells ( Tajpara et al . , 2019 ) . Novel 3D models and engineered biomaterials enable researchers to investigate biological processes in a physiological in vitro setting using deﬁned parameter and further allow mathematical modeling approaches to answer questions ( Chaudhuri et al . , 2020 ) . Many studies helped decipher the role of the ECM in cancer cell migration and recent reports suggest that modifying the matrix could be beneﬁcial in the treatment of cancer and prevention of metastasis ( Bonnans et al . , 2014 ; Shen et al . , 2020 ; Zhang and Reinhart - King , 2020 ) . Inﬂammatory skin diseases and deregulated wound healing processes can result in aberrant deposition and remodeling of ECM components and cause ﬁbrosis . Further studies are needed to clarify , whether enzymatic and non - enzymatic matrix modiﬁcations play a role in the initiation or sustainment of inﬂammatory skin diseases . The identiﬁcation of potential links between hyperproliferative skin diseases , such as psoriasis , and matrix modiﬁcations could provide new anchor points for therapeutic interventions . Viral and bacterial infections can also deregulate tissue homeostasis either directly or indirectly . Interestingly , these processes seem to be independent of the target tissue and are further highly conserved between diﬀerent viruses . Human skin could serve as an easily accessible model tissue to study viral invasion with a focus on tissue matrix composition , direct matrix modiﬁcation or indirect changes to the force load on the matrix through modiﬁcation of the cytoskeleton in tissue resident cells . As such , inﬂammation caused by viral infection or chronic inﬂammatory diseases could also greatly beneﬁt from mechanomedicine . However , little research has been done beyond cancer research so far , leaving many open questions to be answered in future studies . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS KP and WW wrote the manuscript . LS proofread and edited the manuscript . DS prepared the ﬁgures with help from KP . All authors read and approved the manuscript . FUNDING Funding was provided by the WWTF and the “Land Niederösterreich” ( Danube ARC ) . KP was funded by the FFG . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to apologize for not being able to cite all relevant and exciting manuscripts on this topic due to space constraints . Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 16 July 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 682414 fcell - 09 - 682414 June 30 , 2021 Time : 17 : 1 # 17 Pﬁsterer et al . Skin ECM in Inﬂammation and Infection REFERENCES Abercrombie , M . ( 1980 ) . The Croonian Lecture , 1978 - The crawling movement of metazoan cells . Proc . Roy . Soc . Lon . 207 , 129 – 147 . doi : 10 . 1098 / rspb . 1980 . 0017 Adair - Kirk , T . L . , and Senior , R . M . ( 2008 ) . Fragments of extracellular matrix as mediators of inﬂammation . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 40 , 1101 – 1110 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . biocel . 2007 . 12 . 005 Adams , J . C . , and Schwartz , M . A . ( 2000 ) . Stimulation of fascin spikes by thrombospondin - 1 is mediated by the GTPases Rac and Cdc42 . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 807 – 822 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 150 . 4 . 807 Adams , J . C . , Clelland , J . D . , Collett , G . D . , Matsumura , F . , Yamashiro , S . , and Zhang , L . ( 1999 ) . Cell - matrix adhesions diﬀerentially regulate fascin phosphorylation . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 4177 – 4190 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . 10 . 12 . 4177 Aguiar , R . S . , Pohl , F . , Morais , G . L . , Nogueira , F . C . S . , Carvalho , J . B . , Guida , L . , et al . ( 2020 ) . Molecular alterations in the extracellular matrix in the brains of newborns with congenital Zika syndrome . Sci . Signal . 13 : eaay6736 . Alfano , M . , Canducci , F . , Nebuloni , M . , Clementi , M . , Montorsi , F . , and Salonia , A . ( 2016 ) . The interplay of extracellular matrix and microbiome in urothelial bladder cancer . Nat . Rev . Urol . 13 , 77 – 90 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrurol . 2015 . 292 Andriessen , M . P . , van den Born , J . , Latijnhouwers , M . A . , Bergers , M . , van de Kerkhof , P . C . , and Schalkwijk , J . ( 1997 ) . Basal membrane heparan sulphate proteoglycan expression during wound healing in human skin . J . Pathol . 183 , 264 – 271 . doi : 10 . 1002 / ( sici ) 1096 - 9896 ( 199711 ) 183 : 3 < 264 : : aid - path940 > 3 . 0 . co ; 2 - 3 Bailey , A . J . ( 2001 ) . Molecular mechanisms of ageing in connective tissues . Mech . Age . Devel . 122 , 735 – 755 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0047 - 6374 ( 01 ) 00225 - 1 Bansode , S . , Bashtanova , U . , Li , R . , Clark , J . , Müller , K . H . , Puszkarska , A . , et al . ( 2020 ) . Glycation changes molecular organization and charge distribution in type I collagen ﬁbrils . Scient . Rep . 10 : 3397 . Becker , M . , Dominguez , M . , Greune , L . , Soria - Martinez , L . , Pﬂeiderer , M . M . , Schowalter , R . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Infectious Entry of Merkel Cell Polyomavirus . J . Virol . 93 , e2004 – e2018 . Behren , A . , Simon , C . , Schwab , R . M . , Loetzsch , E . , Brodbeck , S . , Huber , E . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Papillomavirus E2 protein induces expression of the matrix metalloproteinase - 9 via the extracellular signal - regulated kinase / activator protein - 1 signaling pathway . Cancer Res . 65 , 11613 – 11621 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . can - 05 - 2672 Bhattacharjee , O . , Ayyangar , U . , Kurbet , A . S . , Ashok , D . , and Raghavan , S . ( 2019 ) . UnravelingtheECM - ImmuneCellCrosstalkinSkinDiseases . Front . CellDevel . Biol . 7 : 68 . Bienkowska - Haba , M . , and Sapp , M . ( 2011 ) . The cytoskeleton in papillomavirus infection . Viruses 3 , 260 – 271 . doi : 10 . 3390 / v3030260 Bodor , D . L . , Pönisch , W . , Endres , R . G . , and Paluch , E . K . ( 2020 ) . Of Cell Shapes and Motion : The Physical Basis of Animal Cell Migration . Devel . Cell 52 , 550 – 562 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2020 . 02 . 013 Bonnans , C . , Chou , J . , and Werb , Z . ( 2014 ) . Remodelling the extracellular matrix in development and disease . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 15 , 786 – 801 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm3904 Boothby , I . C . , Cohen , J . N . , and Rosenblum , M . D . ( 2020 ) . Regulatory T cells in skin injury : At the crossroads of tolerance and tissue repair . Sci . Immunol . 5 : eaaz9631 . doi : 10 . 1126 / sciimmunol . aaz9631 Bosman , F . T . , and Stamenkovic , I . ( 2003 ) . Functional structure and composition of the extracellular matrix . J . Pathol . 200 , 423 – 428 . doi : 10 . 1002 / path . 1437 Bouhaddou , M . , Memon , D . , Meyer , B . , White , K . M . , Rezelj , V . V . , Correa Marrero , M . , et al . ( 2020 ) . The Global Phosphorylation Landscape of SARS - CoV - 2 Infection . Cell 182 . 685 – 712 . e19 . Cai , L . , Xiong , X . , Kong , X . , and Xie , J . ( 2017 ) . The Role of the Lysyl Oxidases in Tissue Repair and Remodeling : A Concise Review . Tissue Eng . Regen . Med . 14 , 15 – 30 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s13770 - 016 - 0007 - 0 Chang , J . , Garva , R . , Pickard , A . , Yeung , C . C . , Mallikarjun , V . , Swift , J . , et al . ( 2020 ) . Circadian control of the secretory pathway maintains collagen homeostasis . Nat . Cell Biol . 22 , 74 – 86 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41556 - 019 - 0441 - z Chang , T . T . , Thakar , D . , and Weaver , V . M . ( 2017 ) . Force - dependent breaching of the basement membrane . Matrix Biol . 57 - 58 , 178 – 189 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . matbio . 2016 . 12 . 005 Chaudhuri , O . , Cooper - White , J . , Janmey , P . A . , Mooney , D . J . , and Shenoy , V . B . ( 2020 ) . Eﬀects of extracellular matrix viscoelasticity on cellular behaviour . Nature 584 , 535 – 546 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 020 - 2612 - 2 Cho , S . - H . , Strickland , I . , Boguniewicz , M . , andLeung , D . Y . M . ( 2001 ) . Fibronectin and ﬁbrinogen contribute to the enhanced binding of Staphylococcus aureus to atopic skin . J . Allerg . Clin . Immunol . 108 , 269 – 274 . doi : 10 . 1067 / mai . 2001 . 117455 Culp , T . D . , Budgeon , L . R . , Marinkovich , M . P . , Meneguzzi , G . , and Christensen , N . D . ( 2006 ) . Keratinocyte - secreted laminin 5 can function as a transient receptor for human papillomaviruses by binding virions and transferring them to adjacent cells . J . Virol . 80 , 8940 – 8950 . doi : 10 . 1128 / jvi . 00724 - 06 Dandia , H . , Makkad , K . , and Tayalia , P . ( 2019 ) . Glycated collagen - a 3D matrix system to study pathological cell behavior . Biomater . Sci . 7 , 3480 – 3488 . doi : 10 . 1039 / c9bm00184k Das , S . , Srinivasan , S . , Srivastava , A . , Kumar , S . , Das , G . , Das , S . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Diﬀerential Inﬂuence of IL - 9 and IL - 17 on Actin Cytoskeleton Regulates the Migration Potential of Human Keratinocytes . J . Immunol . 202 , 1949 – 1961 . doi : 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 1800823 Denais , C . M . , Gilbert , R . M . , Isermann , P . , McGregor , A . L . , te Lindert , M . , Weigelin , B . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Nuclear envelope rupture and repair during cancer cell migration . Science 352 , 353 – 358 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . aad7297 Deng , W . , Feng , X . , Li , X . , Wang , D . , and Sun , L . ( 2016 ) . Hypoxia - inducible factor 1 in autoimmune diseases . Cell . Immunol . 303 , 7 – 15 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cellimm . 2016 . 04 . 001 DiGiuseppe , S . , Bienkowska - Haba , M . , Guion , L . G . , and Sapp , M . ( 2017 ) . Cruising the cellular highways : How human papillomavirus travels from the surface to the nucleus . Virus Res . 231 , 1 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . virusres . 2016 . 10 . 015 DuFort , C . C . , Paszek , M . J . , and Weaver , V . M . ( 2011 ) . Balancing forces : architectural control of mechanotransduction . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 , 308 – 319 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm3112 Dyer , D . P . ( 2020 ) . Understanding the mechanisms that facilitate speciﬁcity , not redundancy , of chemokine - mediated leukocyte recruitment . Immunology 160 , 336 – 344 . doi : 10 . 1111 / imm . 13200 Elosegui - Artola , A . , Oria , R . , Chen , Y . , Kosmalska , A . , Pérez - González , C . , Castro , N . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Mechanical regulation of a molecular clutch deﬁnes force transmission and transduction in response to matrix rigidity . Nat . Cell Biol . 18 , 540 – 548 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3336 Engel , J . ( 1989 ) . EGF - like domains in extracellular matrix proteins : Localized signalsforgrowthanddiﬀerentiation ? FEBSLette . 251 , 1 – 7 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0014 - 5793 ( 89 ) 81417 - 6 Fidler , A . L . , Boudko , S . P . , Rokas , A . , and Hudson , B . G . ( 2018 ) . The triple helix of collagens – an ancient protein structure that enabled animal multicellularity and tissue evolution . J . Cell Sci . 131 : jcs203950 . Foxall , E . , Staszowska , A . , Hirvonen , L . M . , Georgouli , M . , Ciccioli , M . , Rimmer , A . , et al . ( 2019 ) . PAK4 Kinase Activity Plays a Crucial Role in the Podosome Ring of Myeloid Cells . Cell Rep . 29 , 3385 – 3393 . e3386 . Ghetti , M . , Topouzi , H . , Theocharidis , G . , Papa , V . , Williams , G . , Bondioli , E . , et al . ( 2018 ) . Subpopulations of dermal skin ﬁbroblasts secrete distinct extracellular matrix : implications for using skin substitutes in the clinic . Br . J . Dermatol . 179 , 381 – 393 . Gopal , S . , Multhaupt , H . A . B . , and Couchman , J . R . ( 2020 ) . Calcium in Cell - Extracellular Matrix Interactions . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 1131 , 1079 – 1102 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 030 - 12457 - 1 _ 43 Gralinski , L . E . , Bankhead , A . , Jeng , S . , Menachery , V . D . , Proll , S . , Belisle , S . E . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Mechanisms of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus - Induced Acute Lung Injury . mBio 4 , e271 – e213 . Grau - Bové , X . , Ruiz - Trillo , I . , and Rodriguez - Pascual , F . ( 2015 ) . Origin and evolution of lysyl oxidases . Scient . Rep . 5 , 10568 – 10568 . Hadigal , S . , Koganti , R . , Yadavalli , T . , Agelidis , A . , Suryawanshi , R . , and Shukla , D . ( 2020 ) . Heparanase - RegulatedSyndecan - 1SheddingFacilitatesHerpesSimplex Virus 1 Egress . J . Virol . 94 , e1672 – e1619 . Han , Y . P . , Tuan , T . L . , Wu , H . , Hughes , M . , and Garner , W . L . ( 2001 ) . TNF - alpha stimulates activation of pro - MMP2 in human skin through NF - ( kappa ) B mediated induction of MT1 - MMP . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 131 – 139 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 114 . 1 . 131 Hetmanski , J . H . R . , de Belly , H . , Busnelli , I . , Waring , T . , Nair , R . V . , Sokleva , V . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Membrane Tension Orchestrates Rear Retraction in Matrix - Directed Cell Migration . Dev . Cell 51 . 460 – 475 . e410 . Huang , L . H . , Zinselmeyer , B . H . , Chang , C . H . , Saunders , B . T . , Elvington , A . , Baba , O . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Interleukin - 17 Drives Interstitial Entrapment of Tissue Lipoproteins in Experimental Psoriasis . Cell Metabol . 29 , 475 – 487 e477 . Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 17 July 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 682414 fcell - 09 - 682414 June 30 , 2021 Time : 17 : 1 # 18 Pﬁsterer et al . Skin ECM in Inﬂammation and Infection Humphrey , J . D . , Dufresne , E . R . , and Schwartz , M . A . ( 2014 ) . Mechanotransduction and extracellular matrix homeostasis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 15 , 802 – 812 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm3896 Hynes , R . O . ( 2009 ) . The extracellular matrix : not just pretty ﬁbrils . Science 326 , 1216 – 1219 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1176009 Jayo , A . , Malboubi , M . , Antoku , S . , Chang , W . , Ortiz - Zapater , E . , Groen , C . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Fascin Regulates Nuclear Movement and Deformation in Migrating Cells . Dev . Cell 38 , 371 – 383 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2016 . 07 . 021 Kakavandi , E . , Shahbahrami , R . , Goudarzi , H . , Eslami , G . , andFaghihloo , E . ( 2018 ) . Anoikis resistance and oncoviruses . J . Cell . Biochem . 119 , 2484 – 2491 . doi : 10 . 1002 / jcb . 26363 Kelsh , R . , You , R . , Horzempa , C . , Zheng , M . , and McKeown - Longo , P . J . ( 2014 ) . Regulation of the innate immune response by ﬁbronectin : synergism between the III - 1 and EDA domains . PLoS One 9 : e102974 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0102974 Kisling , A . , Lust , R . M . , and Katwa , L . C . ( 2019 ) . What is the role of peptide fragments of collagen I and IV in health and disease ? Life Sci . 228 , 30 – 34 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . lfs . 2019 . 04 . 042 Knappe , M . , Bodevin , S . , Selinka , H . C . , Spillmann , D . , Streeck , R . E . , Chen , X . S . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Surface - exposed amino acid residues of HPV16 L1 protein mediating interaction with cell surface heparan sulfate . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 27913 – 27922 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . m705127200 Knipper , Johanna , A . , Willenborg , S . , Brinckmann , J . , Bloch , W . , Maaß , T . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Interleukin - 4 Receptor & # x3b1 ; Signaling in Myeloid Cells Controls Collagen Fibril Assembly in Skin Repair . Immunity 43 , 803 – 816 . Kobayashi , T . , and Sokabe , M . ( 2010 ) . Sensing substrate rigidity by mechanosensitive ion channels with stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 22 , 669 – 676 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2010 . 08 . 023 Kuo , C . , Lim , S . , King , N . J . , Johnston , S . L . , Burgess , J . K . , Black , J . L . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Rhinovirus infection induces extracellular matrix protein deposition in asthmatic and nonasthmatic airway smooth muscle cells . Am . J . Physiol . 300 , L951 – L957 . Kurbet , A . S . , Hegde , S . , Bhattacharjee , O . , Marepally , S . , Vemula , P . K . , and Raghavan , S . ( 2016 ) . Sterile Inﬂammation Enhances ECM Degradation in Integrin beta1 KO Embryonic Skin . Cell Rep . 16 , 3334 – 3347 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2016 . 08 . 062 Lang , J . , Yang , N . , Deng , J . , Liu , K . , Yang , P . , Zhang , G . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Inhibition of SARS pseudovirus cell entry by lactoferrin binding to heparan sulfate proteoglycans . PLOS ONE 6 : e23710 , doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0023710 Lawson , C . D . , and Ridley , A . J . ( 2018 ) . Rho GTPase signaling complexes in cell migration and invasion . J . Cell Biol . 217 , 447 – 457 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201612069 Lehmann , M . J . , Sherer , N . M . , Marks , C . B . , Pypaert , M . , and Mothes , W . ( 2005 ) . Actin - and myosin - driven movement of viruses along ﬁlopodia precedes their entry into cells . J . Cell Biol . 170 , 317 – 325 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200503059 Leithner , A . , Eichner , A . , Müller , J . , Reversat , A . , Brown , M . , Schwarz , J . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Diversiﬁed actin protrusions promote environmental exploration but are dispensable for locomotion of leukocytes . Nat . Cell Biol . 18 , 1253 – 1259 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3426 Levental , K . R . , Yu , H . , Kass , L . , Lakins , J . N . , Egeblad , M . , Erler , J . T . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Matrix crosslinking forces tumor progression by enhancing integrin signaling . Cell 139 , 891 – 906 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2009 . 10 . 027 Liguori , M . , Solinas , G . , Germano , G . , Mantovani , A . , and Allavena , P . ( 2011 ) . Tumor - associated macrophages as incessant builders and destroyers of the cancer stroma . Cancers 3 , 3740 – 3761 . doi : 10 . 3390 / cancers3043740 Lu , P . , Takai , K . , Weaver , V . M . , and Werb , Z . ( 2011 ) . Extracellular matrix degradation and remodeling in development and disease . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 3 : a005058 . doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a005058 Martino , M . M . , Tortelli , F . , Mochizuki , M . , Traub , S . , Ben - David , D . , Kuhn , G . A . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Engineering the Growth Factor Microenvironment with Fibronectin Domains to Promote Wound and Bone Tissue Healing . Sci . Transl . Med . 3 : 100ra189 . Martín - Villar , E . , Borda - d’Agua , B . , Carrasco - Ramirez , P . , Renart , J . , Parsons , M . , Quintanilla , M . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Podoplanin mediates ECM degradation by squamous carcinoma cells through control of invadopodia stability . Oncogene 34 , 4531 – 4544 . doi : 10 . 1038 / onc . 2014 . 388 Mason , B . N . , Starchenko , A . , Williams , R . M . , Bonassar , L . J . , and Reinhart - King , C . A . ( 2013 ) . Tuning three - dimensional collagen matrix stiﬀness independently of collagen concentration modulates endothelial cell behavior . Acta Biomater . 9 , 4635 – 4644 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . actbio . 2012 . 08 . 007 Matrosovich , M . , Herrler , G . , and Klenk , H . D . ( 2013 ) . SialoGlyco Chemistry and Biology II 1 - 28 . Berlin : Springer . Matsubayashi , Y . , Louani , A . , Dragu , A . , Sánchez - Sánchez , B . J . , Serna - Morales , E . , Yolland , L . , et al . ( 2017 ) . A Moving Source of Matrix Components Is Essential for De Novo Basement Membrane Formation . Curr . Biol . 27 . 3526 – 3534 . e3524 . Matsumura , H . , Mohri , Y . , Binh , N . T . , Morinaga , H . , Fukuda , M . , Ito , M . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Hair follicle aging is driven by transepidermal elimination of stem cells via COL17A1 proteolysis . Science 351 : aad4395 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . aad4395 Michael , M . , and Parsons , M . ( 2020 ) . New perspectives on integrin - dependent adhesions . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 63 , 31 – 37 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2019 . 12 . 008 Michopoulou , A . , Montmasson , M . , Garnier , C . , Lambert , E . , Dayan , G . , and Rousselle , P . ( 2020 ) . A novel mechanism in wound healing : Laminin 332 drives MMP9 / 14 activity by recruiting syndecan - 1 and CD44 . Matrix Biol . 94 , 1 – 17 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . matbio . 2020 . 06 . 004 Milewska , A . , Zarebski , M . , Nowak , P . , Stozek , K . , Potempa , J . , and Pyrc , K . ( 2014 ) . HumancoronavirusNL63utilizesheparansulfateproteoglycansforattachmenttotargetcells . Journal of virology 88 , 13221 – 13230 , doi : 10 . 1128 / jvi . 02078 - 14 Mishra , S . K . , Wheeler , J . J . , Pitake , S . , Ding , H . , Jiang , C . , Fukuyama , T . , et al . ( 2020 ) . Periostin Activation of Integrin Receptors on Sensory Neurons Induces Allergic Itch . Cell Rep . 31 : 107472 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2020 . 03 . 036 Mouw , J . K . , Ou , G . , and Weaver , V . M . ( 2014 ) . Extracellular matrix assembly : a multiscale deconstruction . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 15 , 771 – 785 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm3902 Nikolic , D . S . , Lehmann , M . , Felts , R . , Garcia , E . , Blanchet , F . P . , Subramaniam , S . , et al . ( 2011 ) . HIV - 1 activates Cdc42 and induces membrane extensions in immature dendritic cells to facilitate cell - to - cell virus propagation . Blood 118 , 4841 – 4852 . doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2010 - 09 - 305417 Norris , R . A . , Damon , B . , Mironov , V . , Kasyanov , V . , Ramamurthi , A . , Moreno - Rodriguez , R . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Periostin regulates collagen ﬁbrillogenesis and the biomechanical properties of connective tissues . J . Cell . Biochem . 101 , 695 – 711 . doi : 10 . 1002 / jcb . 21224 Norsgaard , H . , Kurdykowski , S . , Descargues , P . , Gonzalez , T . , Marstrand , T . , Dunstl , G . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Calcipotriol counteracts betamethasone - induced decrease in extracellular matrix components related to skin atrophy . Arch . Dermatol . Res . 306 , 719 – 729 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00403 - 014 - 1485 - 3 Nwogu , N . , Boyne , J . R . , Dobson , S . J . , Poterlowicz , K . , Blair , G . E . , Macdonald , A . et al . ( 2018 ) . Cellular sheddases are induced by Merkel Cell Polyomavirus small tumour antigen to mediate cell dissociation and invasiveness . PLoS Pathog 14 , e1007276 – e1007276 , doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1007276 Nystrom , A . , and Bruckner - Tuderman , L . ( 2019 ) . Matrix molecules and skin biology . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 89 , 136 – 146 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . semcdb . 2018 . 07 . 025 Orban , J . M . , Wilson , L . B . , Kofroth , J . A . , El - Kurdi , M . S . , Maul , T . M . , and Vorp , D . A . ( 2004 ) . Crosslinkingofcollagengelsbytransglutaminase . J . Biomed . Mater . Res . Part A 68A , 756 – 762 . doi : 10 . 1002 / jbm . a . 20110 Owczarek , K . , Szczepanski , A . , Milewska , A . , Baster , Z . , Rajfur , Z . , Sarna , M . , et al . ( 2018 ) . Early events during human coronavirus OC43 entry to the cell . Sci . Rep . 8 : 7124 . Oyoshi , M . K . , He , R . , Kanaoka , Y . , ElKhal , A . , Kawamoto , S . , Lewis , C . N . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Eosinophil - derived leukotriene C4 signals via type 2 cysteinyl leukotriene receptor to promote skin ﬁbrosis in a mouse model of atopic dermatitis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 109 , 4992 – 4997 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1203127109 Paszek , M . J . , Zahir , N . , Johnson , K . R . , Lakins , J . N . , Rozenberg , G . I . , Gefen , A . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Tensional homeostasis and the malignant phenotype . Cancer Cell 8 , 241 – 254 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ccr . 2005 . 08 . 010 Pﬁsterer , K . , Levitt , J . , Lawson , C . D . , Marsh , R . J . , Heddleston , J . M . , Wait , E . , et al . ( 2020 ) . FMNL2 regulates dynamics of fascin in ﬁlopodia . J . Cell Biol . 219 : e201906111 . Quan , T . , and Fisher , G . J . ( 2015 ) . Role of Age - Associated Alterations of the Dermal Extracellular Matrix Microenvironment in Human Skin Aging : A Mini - Review . Gerontology 61 , 427 – 434 . doi : 10 . 1159 / 000 371708 Raﬁq , N . B . M . , Nishimura , Y . , Plotnikov , S . V . , Thiagarajan , V . , Zhang , Z . , Shi , S . , et al . ( 2019 ) . A mechano - signalling network linking microtubules , myosin IIA ﬁlaments and integrin - based adhesions . Nat . Mater . 18 , 638 – 649 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41563 - 019 - 0371 - y Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 18 July 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 682414 fcell - 09 - 682414 June 30 , 2021 Time : 17 : 1 # 19 Pﬁsterer et al . Skin ECM in Inﬂammation and Infection Reversat , A . , Gaertner , F . , Merrin , J . , Stopp , J . , Tasciyan , S . , Aguilera , J . , etal . ( 2020 ) . Cellular locomotion using environmental topography . Nature 582 , 582 – 585 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 020 - 2283 - z Ridley , A . J . ( 2011 ) . Life at the leading edge . Cell 145 , 1012 – 1022 . Ringer , P . , Colo , G . , Fassler , R . , and Grashoﬀ , C . ( 2017 ) . Sensing the mechano - chemical properties of the extracellular matrix . Matrix Biol . 64 , 6 – 16 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . matbio . 2017 . 03 . 004 Rodriguez - Pascual , F . , and Rosell - Garcia , T . ( 2018 ) . Lysyl Oxidases : Functions and Disorders . J . Glaucoma 27 , S15 – S19 . Roy , R . , Boskey , A . , and Bonassar , L . J . ( 2010 ) . Processing of type I collagen gels using nonenzymatic glycation . J . Biomed . Mater . Res . A . 93 , 843 – 851 . Sapp , M . , and Bienkowska - Haba , M . ( 2009 ) . Viral entry mechanisms : human papillomavirus and a long journey from extracellular matrix to the nucleus . FEBS J . 276 , 7206 – 7216 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1742 - 4658 . 2009 . 07400 . x Sarkar , M . K . , Kaplan , N . , Tsoi , L . C . , Xing , X . , Liang , Y . , Swindell , W . R . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Endogenous Glucocorticoid Deﬁciency in Psoriasis Promotes Inﬂammation and Abnormal Diﬀerentiation . J . Investig . Dermatol . 137 , 1474 – 1483 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jid . 2017 . 02 . 972 Schneider , L . E . , Protschka , M . , Müller , U . , Muhsen , M . , Magin , T . M . , Anderegg , U . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Orf virus infection of human keratinocytes and dermal ﬁbroblasts : Limited virus detection and interference with intercellular adhesion molecule - 1 up - regulation . Exp . Dermatol . 28 , 142 – 151 . Scott , R . W . , Hooper , S . , Crighton , D . , Li , A . , König , I . , Munro , J . , et al . ( 2010 ) . LIM kinases are required for invasive path generation by tumor and tumor - associated stromal cells . J . Cell Biol . 191 , 169 – 185 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201002041 Shao , Y . , Qin , Z . , Alexander Wilks , J . , Balimunkwe , R . M . , Fisher , G . J . , Voorhees , J . J . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Physical properties of the photodamaged human skin dermis : Roughercollagensurfaceandstiﬀer / hardermechanicalproperties . Exp . Dermatol . 28 , 914 – 921 . doi : 10 . 1111 / exd . 13728 Shen , Y . , Wang , X . , Lu , J . , Salfenmoser , M . , Wirsik , N . M . , Schleussner , N . , et al . ( 2020 ) . Reduction of Liver Metastasis Stiﬀness Improves Response to Bevacizumab in Metastatic Colorectal Cancer . Cancer Cell 37 . 800 – 817 . e807 . Simon , T . , and Bromberg , J . S . ( 2017 ) . Regulation of the Immune System by Laminins . Trends Immunol . 38 , 858 – 871 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . it . 2017 . 06 . 002 Singh , B . , Fleury , C . , Jalalvand , F . , and Riesbeck , K . ( 2012 ) . Human pathogens utilize host extracellular matrix proteins laminin and collagen for adhesion and invasion of the host . FEMS Microbiol . Rev . 36 , 1122 – 1180 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1574 - 6976 . 2012 . 00340 . x Smith , J . L . , Lidke , D . S . , and Ozbun , M . A . ( 2008 ) . Virus activated ﬁlopodia promote human papillomavirus type 31 uptake from the extracellular matrix . Virology 381 , 16 – 21 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . virol . 2008 . 08 . 040 Sowinski , S . , Jolly , C . , Berninghausen , O . , Purbhoo , M . A . , Chauveau , A . , Köhler , K . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Membrane nanotubes physically connect T cells over long distances presenting a novel route for HIV - 1 transmission . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 , 211 – 219 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1682 Stavolone , L . , and Lionetti , V . ( 2017 ) . Extracellular Matrix in Plants and Animals : Hooks and Locks for Viruses . Front . Microbiol . 8 : 1760 . Sunyer , R . , and Trepat , X . ( 2020 ) . Durotaxis . Curr . Biol . 30 , R383 – R387 . Tajpara , P . , Mildner , M . , Schmidt , R . , Vierhapper , M . , Matiasek , J . , Popow - Kraupp , T . , et al . ( 2019 ) . A Preclinical Model for Studying Herpes Simplex Virus Infection . J . Investig . Dermatol . 139 , 673 – 682 . Talmi - Frank , D . , Altboum , Z . , Solomonov , I . , Udi , Y . , Jaitin , D . A . , Klepﬁsh , M . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Extracellular Matrix Proteolysis by MT1 - MMP Contributes to Inﬂuenza - RelatedTissueDamageandMortality . CellHostMicrobe 20 , 458 – 470 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . chom . 2016 . 09 . 005 Tan , S . J . , Chang , A . C . , Anderson , S . M . , Miller , C . M . , Prahl , L . S . , Odde , D . J . , etal . ( 2020 ) . Regulation and dynamics of force transmission at individual cell - matrix adhesion bonds . Sci . Adv . 6 : eaax0317 . doi : 10 . 1126 / sciadv . aax0317 Taylor , M . P . , Koyuncu , O . O . , and Enquist , L . W . ( 2011 ) . Subversion of the actin cytoskeleton during viral infection . Nat . Rev . Microbiol . 9 , 427 – 439 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrmicro2574 Tominaga , M . , Tengara , S . , Kamo , A . , Ogawa , H . , and Takamori , K . ( 2011 ) . Matrix Metalloproteinase - 8 Is Involved in Dermal Nerve Growth : Implications for Possible Application to Pruritus from In Vitro Models . J . Investig . Dermatol . 131 , 2105 – 2112 . doi : 10 . 1038 / jid . 2011 . 173 Tortorici , M . A . , Walls , A . C . , Lang , Y . , Wang , C . , Li , Z . , Koerhuis , D . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Structural basis for human coronavirus attachment to sialic acid receptors . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 26 , 481 – 489 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41594 - 019 - 0233 - y Tse , A . P . - W . , Sze , K . M . - F . , Shea , Q . T . - K . , Chiu , E . Y . - T . , Tsang , F . H . - C . , Chiu , D . K . - C . , et al . ( 2018 ) . Hepatitis transactivator protein X promotes extracellular matrix modiﬁcation through HIF / LOX pathway in liver cancer . Oncogenesis 7 : 44 . Uitto , J . , Olsen , D . R . , and Fazio , M . J . ( 1989 ) . Extracellular Matrix of the Skin : 50 Years of Progress . J . Investig . Dermatol . 92 , S61 – S77 . Vallet , S . D . , and Ricard - Blum , S . ( 2019 ) . Lysyl oxidases : from enzyme activity to extracellular matrix cross - links . Essays Biochem . 63 , 349 – 364 . doi : 10 . 1042 / ebc20180050 van den Dries , K . , Linder , S . , Maridonneau - Parini , I . , and Poincloux , R . ( 2019 ) . Probing the mechanical landscape - new insights into podosome architecture and mechanics . J . Cell Sci . 132 : jcs236828 . van Helvert , S . , Storm , C . , and Friedl , P . ( 2018 ) . Mechanoreciprocity in cell migration . Nat . Cell Biol . 20 , 8 – 20 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41556 - 017 - 0012 - 0 Vogel , V . , and Sheetz , M . ( 2006 ) . Local force and geometry sensing regulate cell functions . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 265 – 275 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm1890 Vorstandlechner , V . , Laggner , M . , Kalinina , P . , Haslik , W . , Radtke , C . , Shaw , L . , et al . ( 2020 ) . Deciphering the functional heterogeneity of skin ﬁbroblasts using single - cell RNA sequencing . FASEB J . 34 , 3677 – 3692 . doi : 10 . 1096 / fj . 201902001rr Wang , Y . , Yan , J . , and Goult , B . T . ( 2019 ) . Force - Dependent Binding Constants . Biochemistry 58 , 4696 – 4709 . doi : 10 . 1021 / acs . biochem . 9b00453 Watt , F . M . , and Fujiwara , H . ( 2011 ) . Cell - extracellular matrix interactions in normal and diseased skin . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect Biol . 3 : a005124 . doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a005124 Weaver , A . M . ( 2006 ) . Invadopodia : specialized cell structures for cancer invasion . Clin . Exp . Metast . 23 , 97 – 105 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10585 - 006 - 9014 - 1 Weninger , W . , Biro , M . , and Jain , R . ( 2014 ) . Leukocyte migration in the interstitial space of non - lymphoid organs . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 14 , 232 – 246 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nri3641 Wolf , K . , Alexander , S . , Schacht , V . , Coussens , L . M . , von Andrian , U . H . , van Rheenen , J . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Collagen - based cell migration models in vitro and in vivo . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 20 , 931 – 941 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . semcdb . 2009 . 08 . 005 Yamada , K . M . , and Sixt , M . ( 2019 ) . Mechanisms of 3D cell migration . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 20 , 738 – 752 . Yang , L . , Murota , H . , Serada , S . , Fujimoto , M . , Kudo , A . , Naka , T . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Histamine Contributes to Tissue Remodeling via Periostin Expression . J . Investig . Dermatol . 134 , 2105 – 2113 . doi : 10 . 1038 / jid . 2014 . 120 Ye , L . , Yu , H . , Li , C . , Hirsch , M . L . , Zhang , L . , Samulski , R . J . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Adeno - Associated Virus Vector Mediated Delivery of the HBV Genome Induces Chronic Hepatitis B Virus Infection and Liver Fibrosis in Mice . PLoS One 10 : e0130052 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0130052 Zhang , J . , and Reinhart - King , C . A . ( 2020 ) . Targeting Tissue Stiﬀness in Metastasis : Mechanomedicine Improves Cancer Therapy . Cancer Cell 37 , 754 – 755 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ccell . 2020 . 05 . 011 Zhong , P . , Agosto , L . M . , Munro , J . B . , and Mothes , W . ( 2013 ) . Cell - to - cell transmission of viruses . Curr . Opin . Virol . 3 , 44 – 50 . Zhou , H . M . , Wang , J . , Elliott , C . , Wen , W . , Hamilton , D . W . , and Conway , S . J . ( 2010 ) . Spatiotemporal expression of periostin during skin development and incisional wound healing : lessons for human ﬁbrotic scar formation . J . Cell Commun . Signal . 4 , 99 – 107 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s12079 - 010 - 0090 - 2 Conﬂict of Interest : The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest . Copyright © 2021 Pﬁsterer , Shaw , Symmank and Weninger . This is an open - access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License ( CCBY ) . Theuse , distributionorreproductioninotherforumsispermitted , provided the original author ( s ) and the copyright owner ( s ) are credited and that the original publicationinthisjournaliscited , inaccordancewithacceptedacademicpractice . No use , distributionorreproductionispermittedwhichdoesnotcomplywiththeseterms . Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 19 July 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 682414