ª The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 2001 / 04 / 529 / 13 $ 5 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 153 , Number 3 , April 30 , 2001 529 – 541 http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / 153 / 3 / 529 529 Rapid Cycling of Lipid Raft Markers between the Cell Surface and Golgi Complex J Benjamin J . Nichols , * Anne K . Kenworthy , * Roman S . Polishchuk , * Robert Lodge , * Theresa H . Roberts , * Koret Hirschberg , * Robert D . Phair , ‡ and Jennifer Lippincott - Schwartz * * Cell Biology and Metabolism Branch , National Institute of Child Health and Human Development , Bethesda , Maryland 20895 ; and ‡ BioInformatics Services , Rockville , Maryland 20854 Abstract . The endocytic itineraries of lipid raft mark - ers , such as glycosyl phosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) - anchored proteins and glycosphingolipids , are in - completely understood . Here we show that different GPI - anchored proteins have different intracellular dis - tributions ; some ( such as the folate receptor ) accum - ulate in transferrin - containing compartments , others ( such as CD59 and GPI - linked green ﬂuorescent pro - tein [ GFP ] ) accumulate in the Golgi apparatus . Selec - tive photobleaching shows that the Golgi pool of both GPI - GFP and CD59 - GFP constantly and rapidly ex - changes with the pool of these proteins found on the plasma membrane ( PM ) . We visualized intermediates carrying GPI - GFP from the Golgi apparatus to the PM and separate structures delivering GPI - GFP to the Golgi apparatus . GPI - GFP does not accumulate within endocytic com - partments containing transferrin , although it is detected in intracellular structures which are endosomes by the criteria of accessibility to a ﬂuid phase marker and to cholera and shiga toxin B subunits ( CTxB and STxB , which are also found in rafts ) . GPI - GFP and a propor - tion of the total CTxB and STxB taken up into cells are endocytosed independently of clathrin - associated ma - chinery and are delivered to the Golgi complex via indistinguishable mechanisms . Hence , they enter the Golgi complex in the same intermediates , get there in - dependently of both clathrin and rab5 function , and are excluded from it at 20 8 C and under conditions of cho - lesterol sequestration . The PM – Golgi cycling pathway followed by GPI - GFP could serve to regulate lipid raft distribution and function within cells . Key words : Golgi complex • endocytes • glycosyl phos - phatidylinositol anchor • raft • green ﬂuorescent protein Introduction A functionally diverse set of cell surface proteins , includ - ing receptors , adhesion molecules , and enzymes , become insoluble to extraction in the detergent Triton X - 100 as they traverse the secretory pathway and are delivered to the plasma membrane ( PM ) . 1 Acquisition of resistance to detergent extraction is thought to correspond to assembly into stable microdomains , which can be conceptualized as lipid rafts floating in the membrane ( Simons and Ikonen , 1997 ; Pralle et al . , 2000 ) . Purification of detergent - resis - tant membranes shows that they are enriched in sterols , glycosphingolipids , sphingolipids , saturated phospholipids , and glycosyl phosphatidyl inositol ( GPI ) - anchored pro - teins ( Simons and Ikonen , 1997 ; Brown and London , 1998 ) . Lipid rafts , as defined by detergent resistance , have been associated with sorting of proteins bound for the cell surface during exit from the Golgi complex , as well as with organization of signaling molecules on the cell surface ( Si - mons and Ikonen , 1997 ; Stauffer and Meyer , 1997 ; Brown and London , 1998 ) . The lateral heterogeneity within indi - vidual cell membranes generated by rafts could thus play a crucial role in processes as diverse as signal transduction and cell polarity . Given the range of important cell biological roles attrib - uted to lipid rafts , a detailed understanding of the manner in which rafts are removed from and potentially recycled back to the cell surface is an important goal . To clarify the intracellular pathways followed by rafts we have investi - gated the transport itineraries of two main classes of raft markers , GPI - anchored proteins and the lipid - binding J The online version of this article contains supplemental material . B . Nichol’s present address is Laboratory of Molecular Biology , Medi - cal Research Council , Cambridge CB2 2QH , UK . Address correspondence to Jennifer Lippincott - Schwartz , Cell Biology and Metabolism Branch , National Institute of Child Health and Human Development , Building 18T , Library Drive , Bethesda , MD 20895 - 0001 . Tel . : ( 301 ) 402 - 1010 . Fax : ( 301 ) 402 - 0078 . E - mail : jlippin @ helix . nih . gov 1 Abbreviations used in this paper : CFP , cyan fluorescent protein ; CTxB , cholera toxin B ; GFP , green FP ; GPI , glycosyl phosphatidylinositol ; NRK , normal rat kidney ; PM , plasma membrane ; STxB , shiga TxB ; YFP , yellow FP . on A p r il 20 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 30 , 2001 / content / suppl / 2001 / 04 / 30 / 153 . 3 . 529 . DC1 . html Supplemental Material can be found at : The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 153 , 2001 530 subunits of specific bacterial toxins . The lipid moiety of GPI - anchored proteins is sufficient for incorporation into the detergent - resistant membranes of rafts ( Benting et al . , 1999 ) . These proteins undergo endocytosis , most likely by both clathrin - dependent and - independent mechanisms , but in most cases subsequent intracellular trafficking re - mains little understood ( Lisanti et al . , 1990 ; Rothberg et al . , 1990 ; Parton et al . , 1994 ; Fransson et al . , 1995 ; Smart et al . , 1996 ; Skretting et al . , 1999 ) . The GPI - anchored pro - tein that has been characterized most extensively in terms of its endocytic itinerary , the folate receptor , is taken up into transferrin - labeled endocytic compartments ( Mayor et al . , 1998 ; Varma and Mayor , 1998 ) . However , there is at least one published example of a GPI - anchored protein ( a GPI - anchored heparan sulfate proteoglycan ) that ap - pears to be delivered to the Golgi complex after internal - ization from the cell surface ( Fransson et al . , 1995 ) , suggesting that different GPI - anchored proteins traffic differently , possibly because of sorting signals in their ectodomains ( Zurzolo et al . , 1993 ; Benting et al . , 1999 ) . In this study we used markers for a variety of GPI - anchored proteins , including folate receptor , CD59 ( Davies and Lachmann , 1993 ) , and a construct composed of GPI - anchored green fluorescent protein ( GPI - GFP ) . Because GPI - GFP lacks identifiable sorting signals other than the GPI anchor itself , its distribution is likely to represent only the interaction of the GPI anchor with other cell sur - face lipid components . The lipid - binding B subunits of shiga and cholera toxins ( STxB and CTxB , respectively ) are the second class of markers we used for studying the uptake of lipid rafts . These markers are found in detergent - resistant mem - brane fractions ( Orlandi and Fishman , 1998 ; Katagiri et al . , 1999 ) . CTxB and STxB bind to the glycosphingolipids GM1 and Gb3 , respectively , at the cell surface . As is the case with GPI - anchored proteins , previous work has re - vealed that the endocytic itineraries of these toxins are complex . Studies on internalization of CTxB have gen - erally focussed on a clathrin - independent mechanism , whereas STxB is thought to enter the cell via clathrin - coated pits ( Sandvig et al . , 1989 ; Orlandi and Fishman , 1998 ) . After internalization both toxin subunits are deliv - ered to the Golgi complex , from which STxB subse - quently is slowly delivered to the ER ( Mallard et al . , 1998 ) . Using time - lapse fluorescence microscopy and selective photobleaching techniques , we have followed the intra - cellular itineraries of lipid raft markers . We found that , unlike the folate receptor , CD59 and GPI - GFP do not ac - cumulate within transferrin - labeled endosomes ( Mayor et al . , 1998 ) . Instead , these raft markers continuously cycle between the PM and the Golgi complex . GPI - GFP is ex - cluded from clathrin - coated pits and reaches the Golgi apparatus independently of both clathrin - interacting en - docytic machinery and rab5 . CTxB and STxB follow the same pathway as GPI - GFP and CD59 from the cell sur - face to the Golgi complex , but they also accumulate in transferrin - labeled endosomes . Reduced cholesterol lev - els or incubation at 20 8 C inhibit trafficking of GPI - GFP and delivery of CTxB and STxB to the Golgi complex , without preventing uptake into transferrin - containing en - dosomes . Materials and Methods DNA Constructs and Cell Transfection Transient transfections were carried out using FuGENE™ 6 ( Roche ) . Sta - ble cell lines were produced by selection for G418 resistance . The GPI - GFP construct was from S . Lacey ( Southwestern University , TX ) , GPI - yellow fluorescent protein ( YFP ) was from M . Edidin ( Johns Hopkins University , Baltimore , MD ) Plasmids expressing VSV - Gts045 - CFP and GalT - CFP were derived , by exchange of GFP for cyan fluorescent protein ( CFP ) , from constructs described previously ( Presley et al . , 1997 ; Zaal et al . , 1999 ) . The CD59 - GFP – expressing plasmid was produced by inserting CD59 cDNA between the EcoRI and BglII sites of plasmid ss - GFP ( Nehls et al . , 2000 ) . Rab5S34N and Q79L were created by PCR site – directed mu - tagenesis and cloned KpnI / BamHI into pEGFPc1 and appropriate spec - tral variants ( CLONTECH Laboratories , Inc . ) . The plasmid expressing dominant negative epsin mutant ( just the DPW domain of epsin ) was from P . DeCamilli ( Yale University , New Haven , CT ; Chen et al . , 1998 ) . Plasmid - expressing Eps15 mutant ( D95 / 295 ) was from A . Benmerah ( In - stitut Pasteur , Paris , France ; Benmerah et al . , 1999 ) Labeling with Antibody and Fluorescent Ligands The following antibodies were used : monoclonal anti - mannosidaseii ( Zaal et al . , 1999 ) , monoclonal anti - CD59 and monoclonal antifolate receptor ( Kenworthy and Edidin , 1998 ) , polyclonal anti - GFP ( Molecular Probes ) , and monoclonal anti - FLAG epitope ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . Secondary antibod - ies were from Southern Biotechnology Associates , Inc . 10K dextran con - jugated to Fluoro - Ruby™ was from Molecular Probes . Immunofluores - ence protocol was as described ( Zaal et al . , 1999 ) . CTxB and human holotransferrin were from Sigma - Aldrich . Cross - linkable Cy5 or Cy3 fluo - rophores were conjugated to CTxB or transferrin according to the manu - facturer’s instructions ( Amersham Pharmacia Biotech ) . STxB subunit was from L . Johannes ( Institut Curie , Paris , France ) . For labeling COS - 7 or HeLa cells , transferrin was used at 5 m g / ml ; for normal rat kidney ( NRK ) cells , 25 m g / ml was used . CTxB and STxB were used at 1 m g / ml . Cells were fixed or imaged after 25 min uptake unless otherwise indicated . Antibody uptake experiments consisted of precooling cells on ice , add - ing Cy3 - transferrin ( 5 m g / ml ) and 9E10 anti - myc antibody ( 0 . 1 m g / ml ) for 10 min , washing into prewarmed DME , and allowing uptake for the times indicated before fixation distribution of 9E10 after uptake was ascertained with a Cy5 - conjugated secondary antibody . Triton X - 100 , Cycloheximide , and Filipin Treatment In Triton X - 100 extraction experiments , live cells were cooled to 4 8 C , washed into ice cold 1 % Triton X - 100 in PBS , left for 20 min , then washed into 2 % formaldehyde in PBS , and fixed as usual . Cycloheximide was used at 200 m g / ml for COS - 7 cells and 25 m g / ml for other cell lines . Filipin was used at the concentrations indicated , all images shown are of cells treated for 45 min and then fixed . Filipin and cycloheximide were from Sigma - Aldrich . Microscopy All fluorescence images were obtained using a confocal microscope ( LSM510 ; ZEISS ) . Excitation wavelengths and filter - sets for GFP , YFP , CFP , Cy3 , rhodamine , and Cy5 were as supplied by the manufacturer or described previously ( Zaal et al . , 1999 ) . Images of fixed cells not intended for quantification of fluorescence intensities were taken using 63 3 1 . 4 NA or 100 3 1 . 4 NA objectives with the confocal pinhole set to one Airey unit . Live cell images and images intended for quantitative analysis were ob - tained with a 40 3 1 . 3 NA objective and the confocal pinhole set fully open . Selective photobleaching was carried out on the ZEISS LSM510 us - ing 75 consecutive scans with a 488 - nm laser line at full power . Live cells were held at 35 8 C . To stain GPI - GFP for immunoelectron microscopy , transfected cells were fixed and incubated with anti - GFP antibody ( Molecular Probes ) as described ( Polishchuk et al . , 2000 ) . Then the cells were labeled with Nan - ogold - conjugated secondary antibody and Gold Enhance kit ( Nanoprobes , Inc . ) and processed for embedding and cutting according routine protocols . on A p r il 20 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 30 , 2001 Nichols et al . Membrane Cycling from the Plasma Membrane to the Golgi Complex 531 Image Analysis For 8 - bit color images , pixel intensity levels were adjusted using Adobe Photoshop ® so that maximal and minimal values were z 0 and 255 in each channel . For quantitation of overlap between different markers , images were thresholded by eye to produce a binary representation of structures where a given marker was enriched . Such images for both markers to be com - pared were combined using a logical and , so as to yield an image of only those pixels which were positive in both of the binary images . Then the to - tal number of pixels in each of the binary images and the combined image were compared to give a percentage of those pixels containing one marker that also contained the other . The Golgi region was excluded from the analysis . Values given represent the mean from three separate cells . In Quicktime movies the contrast of original images was in some cases increased . Quicktime movies employ the Cinepak compression algorithm and were produced using Adobe Premiere ® . Quantitation of mean fluo - rescence intensity in selected regions of interest was carried out using NIH Image . All measurements of fluorescence intensity were background - cor - rected , and where necessary corrected for partial photobleaching during image collection . Kinetic Analysis Standard methods of compartmental analysis were used ( Jacquez , 1996 ; Hirschberg et al . , 1998 ) . A model of GPI - GFP trafficking was developed that includes ER processing , transport to the Golgi complex , exchange with the large PM pool , and , ultimately , protein turnover . A special fea - ture of the GPI analysis is a compartment representing the fraction of the PM pool that is visualized over the Golgi region . Data in the Golgi region of interest were fitted to the sum of the Golgi compartment and the com - partment representing overlaying PM . All the rate constants could then be estimated with coefficients of variation between 8 and 13 % , using the optimizer included in the SAAM II ( SAAM Institute ) software . Online Supplemental Material Quicktime movies alluded to in Results are available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / 153 / 3 / 529 / DC1 . Video 1 shows recovery of the Golgi pool of GPI - GFP after photobleaching ( Fig . 2 ) . Video 2 shows de - pletion of the Golgi pool of GPI - GFP as a consequence of depletion of the PM pool by repetitive photobleaching ( Fig . 2 ) . Video 3 shows exocytic transport intermediates carrying GPI - GFP out from the Golgi ( Fig . 3 ) . Video 4 shows endocytic transport intermediates delivering STxB , CTxB , and GPI - GFP to the Golgi complex ( Fig . 5 ) . Results Steady - State Localization of GPI - GFP and CD59 in PM and Golgi Membranes GPI - GFP behaved as a lipid raft – associated protein , being incorporated into detergent - resistant domains . When cells were extracted with 1 % Triton X - 100 before fixation , GPI - GFP was resistant to this treatment , whereas vesicu - lar stomatitis virus G protein was efficiently removed ( Fig . 1 A ; Mayor and Maxfield , 1995 ) . The steady - state distribu - tion of GPI - GFP in COS - 7 , NRK , HeLa , and MDCK cells included two major pools , one at the cell surface and one in a juxtanuclear compartment ( Fig . 1 B ) . This compart - ment ( see boxed area in Fig . 1 B ) was identified as the Golgi complex rather than recycling endosomes ( which frequently have a similar distribution ) by colocalization with a Golgi resident enzyme , mannosidase II , and lack of colocalization with endocytosed transferrin ( Fig . 1 , C and D ) . Typically , 90 % of the total cellular GPI - GFP fluores - cence appeared on the cell surface , whereas z 10 % was found in the Golgi complex . We next asked whether there are endogenous GPI - anchored proteins that share the same distribution as GPI - GFP . Antibody staining of HeLa cells expressing GPI - GFP showed that CD59 , a ubiquitous GPI - anchored protein ( Davies and Lachmann , 1993 ) , is also found both in a juxtanuclear , intracellular pool and on the cell surface , even after prolonged cycloheximide treatment to chase nascent protein out of the secretory pathway ( Fig . 1 E ) . The juxtanuclear pool colocalized extensively with GPI - GFP and was further identified as the Golgi complex by labeling with antibodies against the Golgi protein GM130 . A chimera with GFP fused to the NH 2 terminus of CD59 ( CD59 - GFP ) expressed in NRK cells also had a distribu - tion similar to that of GPI - GFP and endogenous CD59 . This included a juxtanuclear pool that colocalized with mannosidase II after cycloheximide treatment , but not with transferrin - containing recycling endosomes ( Fig . 1 F , data not shown ) . In contrast , antibodies against another GPI - anchored protein , the folate receptor , stained struc - tures which were separate from the Golgi complex , many of which could be labeled with endocytosed transferrin ( Fig . 1 G ; Mayor et al . , 1998 ) . These observations indicate that GPI - GFP , CD59 , and a GFP fusion based on CD59 are found in both the PM and the Golgi complex , whereas a third GPI - anchored protein , the folate receptor , has a different distribution that overlaps with transferrin - con - taining endosomes . Constitutive Cycling of GPI - GFP between the Golgi Complex and Cell Surface As a direct test of whether the Golgi pool of GPI - GFP is dependent on a flux of newly synthesized protein from the ER , GPI - GFP – expressing cells were incubated in cyclo - heximide ( which blocks protein synthesis ) for 5 h , and the ratio between the mean fluorescence intensity of the Golgi region and that of the rest of the cell was calculated at dif - ferent time points ( Fig . 2 C ) . The relative Golgi fluores - cence of GPI - GFP declined slightly during the first 2 h of the experiment , but then remained constant . This suggests that only a small proportion ( 15 – 25 % ) of Golgi fluores - cence is derived from newly synthesized GPI - GFP , with the remainder the result of active maintenance of GPI - GFP in the Golgi complex . Selective photobleaching provided a direct way of ad - dressing whether GPI - GFP in the Golgi complex ex - changes with GPI - GFP on the PM . The Golgi pool of GPI - GFP was selectively photobleached in cells where protein synthesis had been inhibited , and recovery of fluorescence into the Golgi region was followed over time ( Fig . 2 A and Video 1 ) . After bleaching the Golgi region , there was no increase in total cellular fluorescence ( since protein syn - thesis was inhibited ) . Nevertheless , Golgi fluorescence rapidly recovered as cell surface fluorescence decreased . The ratio between mean fluorescence intensity in the Golgi region and that outside of this region returned to the same value as was observed before the bleach , implying that all of the GPI - GFP in the Golgi region is constantly exchanging with the non - Golgi pool ( i . e . , the PM ) . Pho - tobleaching of the Golgi pool of CD59 - GFP under the same conditions gave similar results ( Fig . 2 B ) , and , as de - scribed above , the Golgi pool of endogenous CD59 was not chased out by addition of cycloheximide . This implies that the Golgi pools of endogenous CD59 , CD59 - GFP , on A p r il 20 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 30 , 2001 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 153 , 2001 532 and GPI - GFP are maintained by constant exchange with the PM , rather than by new protein synthesis . Kinetic analysis of quantitative data obtained from the photobleaching experiments permitted an estimation of the rate constants characterizing transport of GPI - GFP be - tween PM and Golgi complex ( Fig . 2 D ) . Standard meth - ods of kinetic analysis were used , with the PM and Golgi pools of GPI - GFP treated as two compartments exchang - ing via first order processes , each with a characteristic rate constant ( see Materials and Methods ) . Least squares fitting of these data yielded 0 . 111 min 2 1 as the rate constant gov - erning GPI - GFP transport from Golgi to PM , and 0 . 0042 min 2 1 for PM to Golgi transport . Given these rate con - stants , an average GPI - GFP molecule resides in the PM for z 200 min and in the Golgi complex for z 9 min ( mean resi - dence time in a given compartment being the reciprocal of the rate constant for exit from that compartment ) . Repetitive photobleaching of a small area of the PM eliminated GPI - GFP fluorescence from the entire PM pool and gradually depleted the Golgi pool to 10 – 20 % of its initial fluorescence intensity ( Fig . 2 E and Video 2 ) , as expected if GPI - GFP fluorescence in the Golgi complex is dependent on constant supply from the PM . The cells in this experiment were not treated with cycloheximide , so the data again imply that the majority of the steady - state pool of GPI - GFP in the Golgi complex is dependent on constant exchange with the PM . We used an independent approach to confirm that GPI - GFP returns to the Golgi after exposure at the cell surface . GPI - GFP with an additional myc epitope was expressed in COS - 7 cells . Anti - myc antibody was taken up to the Golgi apparatus in transfected cells , whereas no internalization of antibody was detected in neighboring nontransfected cells ( Fig . 2 F ) . Exocytic Transport Intermediates Containing GPI - GFP Continuous cycling of GPI - GFP between the Golgi and the cell surface implies that GPI - GFP should be present in both exocytic and endocytic transport intermediates . To re - solve exocytic intermediates carrying GPI - GFP out from the Golgi , the non - Golgi pool of GPI - GFP was eliminated by photobleach . Subsequent time - lapse imaging revealed numerous transport intermediates containing GPI - GFP rapidly emerging from the Golgi complex ( Fig . 3 and Video 3 , A and B ) . These transport intermediates appeared as small spherical or tubular structures and they moved along curvilinear tracks ( Video 3 , A and B ) . No motile transport intermediates were seen when microtubules were depoly - merized with nocodazole treatment ( data not shown ) . In - termediates were still observed in cycloheximide - treated cells . The PM fluorescence gradually recovered after the Figure 1 . Localization of specific GPI - anchored proteins to the Golgi complex . ( A ) Triton X - 100 extraction of COS - 7 cells express - ing GPI - CFP ( green ) and VSVG - YFP ( red ) . ( B ) GFP fluorescence from GPI - GFP expressed in COS - 7 cells . Similar distributions were seen in NRK , HeLa , and MDCK cells . ( C ) Immunofluorescence staining comparing the distribution of a Golgi enzyme , mannosi - dase II , with that of the perinuclear pool of GPI - GFP in NRK cells . Only a restricted region of the cell , equivalent to the boxed area in A , is shown . ( D ) Perinuclear distribution of Cy3 - transfer - rin and GPI - GFP in NRK cells . ( E ) Triple - labeling of a HeLa cell for endogenous CD59 , GPI - GFP , and the Golgi marker GM130 . ( F ) Comparison of CD59 - GFP and mannosidase II distributions in COS - 7 cells . ( G ) Triple - labeling of a HeLa cell for endogenous folate receptor , Cy3 - transferrin , and GM130 . Bars , 5 mm . on A p r il 20 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 30 , 2001 Nichols et al . Membrane Cycling from the Plasma Membrane to the Golgi Complex 533 photobleach ( Fig . 3 ) , so the intermediates appear to func - tion in delivery of GPI - GFP to the cell surface . GPI - GFP Is Found in Endocytic Structures That Contain STxB and CTxB , but Not Transferrin We examined narrow optical sections of fixed cells that had been labeled with several endocytic markers . A high proportion of those GPI - GFP – positive structures found scattered throughout the cytoplasm were labeled with 10K dextran after a 15 min uptake ( 36 % of pixels in GPI - GFP – positive structures were also positive for dextran ; see Ma - terials and Methods ; Fig . 4 A ) . Those GPI - GFP structures that did not contain dextran could well represent separate exocytic intermediates , as visualized in Fig . 3 . GPI - GFP – positive structures did not overlap with endocytosed trans - ferrin after continuous uptake for 20 min ( 2 . 5 % of pixels in GPI - GFP structures contained transferrin ; Fig . 4 B ) or after shorter periods of uptake ( data not shown ) . Further - more , GPI - GFP – containing structures did not colocalize Figure 2 . Constitutive cycling of GPI - GFP and CD59 - GFP between the Golgi complex and the PM . ( A ) The Golgi pool of GPI - GFP recovers rapidly after photobleach . The area enclosed by a white line in the prebleach image was photobleached . The times shown in the second two panels denote minutes postbleach . COS - 7 cells were pretreated with 200 m g / ml cy - cloheximide for 2 h before photobleaching . ( B ) The Golgi pool of CD59 - GFP re - covers rapidly after pho - tobleach . The experiment was carried out as in Fig . 1 C . ( C ) The Golgi pool of GPI - GFP is not dependent on new protein synthesis . The ratio between mean fluores - cence intensity in the Golgi region and mean fluores - cence intensity in the rest of the cell is then plotted as a function of time after addi - tion of 200 m g / ml cyclohex - imide to COS - 7 cells . n $ 15 6 SE . ( D ) The Golgi pool of GPI - GFP recovers after photobleach ; quantitation and kinetics . The Golgi pool of GPI - GFP was eliminated by photobleach as shown in C . Mean fluorescence intensity of Golgi and non - Golgi pools was determined at the times indicated and expressed as a percentage of the prebleach ratio between these values ( filled circles ) . These data were applied to a kinetic model ( see Materials and Methods ) so as to derive rate constants describing ex - change between Golgi and PM pools . The solid line gives the recovery curve predicted by this model , and rate constants are shown in the adjacent cartoon . Cells were pretreated with 200 m g / ml cycloheximide for 2 h before the experiment . n 5 6 6 SE . ( E ) Depletion of the cell surface pool of GPI - GFP by repeated photobleaching leads to depletion of the Golgi pool . The area enclosed by a white box was completely photobleached every minute . Cells were not cycloheximide treated . ( F ) Anti - myc antibody 9E10 is endocytosed to the Golgi complex specifically in cells expressing ( myc - tagged ) GPI - GFP . Antibody uptake experiments are described in detail in Materials and Methods . The asterisk highlights a cell not expressing GPI - GFP , but labeled with Cy3 - transferrin . The perinuclear clustering of transferrin in cells after 60 min of uptake represents recycling endosomes which are devoid of GPI - GFP ( Fig . 1 D ) . Supplemental video available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / 153 / 3 / 529 / DC1 . on A p r il 20 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 30 , 2001 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 153 , 2001 534 with the early endosomal marker EEA1 ( 3 % of pixels in GPI - GFP structures contained EEA1 ; Fig . 4 C ; Stenmark et al . , 1996 ) . We next ascertained the distribution of STxB and CTxB , which , like GPI - GFP , are associated with lipid rafts and traffic from the cell surface to the Golgi complex . The intracellular distribution of structures containing CTxB af - ter 30 min of continuous uptake from the PM was very similar to that of STxB , although PM labeling was stronger for CTxB ( 87 % of pixels in CTxB structures contained STxB ; Fig . 4 D ) , arguing that STxB and CTxB share com - mon endocytic trafficking pathways . In GPI - GFP – express - ing cells , many of the endocytic structures containing CTxB or STxB also contained GPI - GFP ( 42 % of pixels in CTxB structures contained GPI - GFP , 71 % of pixels in GPI - GFP structures contained CTxB ; Fig . 4 E , not shown in the case of STxB ) . Those that did not contain GPI - GFP are likely to represent transferrin - containing endosomes , since endocytosed STxB and CTxB also partially colocal - ized with transferrin - labeled early and recycling endo - somes ( 30 % of pixels in CTxB structures contained Tf ; Fig . 4 F ) . The presence of STxB in these endosomal com - partments has been reported previously ( Mallard et al . , 1998 ) . Thus , GPI - GFP accumulates to detectable levels in a population of endocytic structures which contain STxB and CTxB , but not transferrin receptor or EEA1 , whereas STxB and CTxB are found both in GPI - GFP – labeled en - docytic structures and those which contain transferrin . GPI - GFP , CTxB , and STxB Enter the Golgi Complex in the Same Transport Intermediates We used selective photobleaching and time - lapse imaging to visualize delivery of GPI - GFP to the Golgi complex . A series of images of a small region of the cell adjacent to the Golgi complex were rapidly collected immediately after photobleaching of the GPI - GFP fluorescence associated with the Golgi complex and the surrounding area ( Video 4 , A – D ) . Small transport intermediates containing GPI - GFP were observed tracking into the photobleached Golgi region where they disappeared , presumably due to fusion with the Golgi complex and subsequent dispersal of fluo - rescence . GPI - GFP – expressing cells were labeled with STxB and CTxB and the same photobleaching protocol was followed . As shown in Fig . 5 , A and B , both STxB and CTxB were seen in GFP - GPI – containing structures that moved in towards the Golgi complex . We also detected additional intermediates containing STxB or CTxB but not GPI - GFP ( not shown in Fig . 5 ; see Video 4 , A – D ) , which could represent CTxB and STxB within transferrin - containing endosomes localized near the Golgi complex . Our results indicate that the transport itinerary of GPI - GFP to the Golgi complex overlaps with that of STxB and CTxB . GPI - GFP and a Proportion of STxB and CTxB Are Internalized via a Clathrin - independent Process To investigate whether uptake and consequent delivery to the Golgi complex of GPI - GFP , STxB , and CTxB requires clathrin - dependent endocytic machinery , we used domi - nant negative mutants of epsin and eps15 , proteins neces - sary for clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Chen et al . , 1998 ; Benmerah et al . , 1999 ) . In cells transiently transfected or microinjected with a plasmid expressing epsin or eps15 mutants , transferrin uptake was reduced significantly more than uptake of CTxB and STxB ( Fig . 6 , A and B ; quantitation in Fig . 6 D ) . This differential effect is consis - tent with only a proportion of the total CTxB and STxB being internalized via the same endocytic machinery as transferrin , implying that the remainder may use a clath - rin - independent mechanism . Importantly , CTxB and STxB were still efficiently delivered from the PM to the Golgi complex in the absence of clathrin - mediated internaliza - tion ( Fig . 6 C ) . We examined the rate of GPI - GFP cycling between the Golgi and the PM by using photobleaching techniques in cells expressing mutants of epsin . Cells were microinjected with the epsin mutant plasmid , left for 6 h to allow expres - sion , and then the Golgi pool of GPI - GFP fluorescence was photobleached . Recovery of Golgi fluorescence in the mutant cells was no different than in noninjected cells ( Fig . 6 E ) . Thus , whereas transferrin uptake requires epsin , eps15 , and the clathrin - dependent endocytic ma - chinery , delivery of GPI - GFP , STxB , and CTxB from PM to Golgi complex does not . Figure 3 . Exocytic transport intermediates carrying GPI - GFP . GPI - GFP was ex - pressed in COS - 7 cells . All fluorescence outside of the region indicated in the pre - bleach image was eliminated by photobleaching . Note that the fluorescence intensity of the Golgi region is saturated ( pixel value equals 255 for 8 - bit images ) in all of these images to allow visualization of the less bright transport intermediates . Times in sub - sequent panels are relative to the end of the photobleach . Supplemental video avail - able at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / 153 / 3 / 529 / DC1 . Bar , 5 m m . on A p r il 20 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 30 , 2001 Nichols et al . Membrane Cycling from the Plasma Membrane to the Golgi Complex 535 As a more direct test of whether GPI - GFP is taken up via clathrin - coated pits , we used immunoelectron micros - copy to ascertain the distribution of GPI - GFP on the cell surface ( Fig . 6 F ) . GPI - GFP was clearly excluded from coated pits and vesicles ( linear density of gold particles on the PM was 4 . 07 6 0 . 28 m 2 1 , in clathrin - coated pits and vesicles it was 0 . 07 6 0 . 02 m 2 1 , and background [ mitochon - drial ] signal was 0 . 05 6 0 . 02 m 2 1 ) . GPI - GFP , STxB , and CTxB Do Not Require Rab5 Activity for Delivery to the Golgi Complex Early endosome function requires the GTPase rab5 , and expression of the GDP - bound form of rab5 ( S34N mutant ) perturbs early endosomes and inhibits transferrin uptake ( Stenmark et al . , 1994 ) . In cells expressing rab5 S34N , transferrin uptake was significantly reduced , whereas de - Figure 4 . Characterization of endosomes con - taining GPI - GFP , STxB , and CTxB . In all images the dashed boxes indicate the area shown in the adjacent color panel . Color images have all been processed by adjusting the black level and maxi - mal pixel intensity level in order to aid compari - son of the distribution of scattered punctate structures . Cells are COS - 7 and were all fixed . ( A ) Endocytosed 10K Fluoro - Ruby™ dextran la - bels structures containing GPI - GFP . ( B ) Endocy - tosed Cy3 - transferrin labels different structures from those containing GPI - GFP . ( C ) GPI - GFP is not present in EEA1 - positive endosomes ( D ) Endocytosed STxB - Cy3 and CTxB - Cy5 have the same intracellular distribution . ( E ) Endocytosed CTxB labels structures containing GPI - GFP . ( F ) Endocytosed CTxB - Cy3 is found both in the Golgi complex , as labeled by GPI - GFP , and in recycling endosomes as labeled by transferrin - Cy5 . Bars , 5 m m . on A p r il 20 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 30 , 2001 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 153 , 2001 536 livery of CTxB and STxB ( not shown ) to the Golgi com - plex was not significantly affected ( Fig . 7 A ) . Moreover , selective photobleaching of the Golgi pool of GPI - GFP in cells expressing rab5 S34N did not reveal any change in the kinetics of exchange of GPI - GFP between PM and Golgi pools ( Fig . 7 B ) . Thus , the activity of rab5 is not re - quired for delivery of raft markers from the PM to the Golgi complex . The GTP - bound form of rab5 ( Q79L mutant ) causes pronounced changes in the morphology of rab5 - positive endosomes , without blocking transport of transferrin through these structures ( Stenmark et al . , 1994 ) . The char - acteristic morphology of early endosomes under these conditions allowed us to ask whether any GPI - GFP what - soever is found in such structures . As shown in Fig . 7 C , not even trace amounts of GPI - GFP were found in the en - larged early endosomes produced by rab5 Q79L . Effect of 20 8 C Incubation on PM – Golgi Cycling Incubation at 20 8 C blocks both uptake of STxB to the Golgi complex and exit from this organelle ( Mallard et al . , 1998 ; Van Deurs et al . , 1988 ) . We found that uptake of transferrin was not significantly perturbed at this tempera - ture , but both CTxB ( Fig . 8 A ) and STxB ( not shown , but see Mallard et al . , 1998 ) were only taken up into transfer - rin - containing endosomes , not into the Golgi complex . This led us to test whether the PM – Golgi trafficking of raft markers is differentially sensitive to 20 8 C treatment . When the Golgi pool of GPI - GFP was photobleached in cells held at 20 8 C for 40 min , recovery of this pool was effec - tively blocked ( Fig . 8 B ) , showing that transport of GPI - GFP from the cell surface into the Golgi complex occurs very inefficiently , if at all , under these conditions . There - fore , the PM – Golgi cycling of raft markers appears to be more sensitive to 20 8 C treatment than the endocytic traf - ficking of transferrin . Effect of Cholesterol Depletion on GPI - GFP , STxB , and CTxB Trafficking Drugs that perturb cholesterol activity are known to in - hibit traffic of markers for lipid rafts during both exocyto - sis and endocytosis , and have been used extensively as tools to differentiate between raft - and nonraft - mediated processes ( Keller and Simons , 1998 ; Orlandi and Fishman , 1998 ) . Filipin , which binds to cholesterol in membranes , had little or no effect on the uptake of either CTxB or STxB to the Golgi complex at a concentration of 1 m g / ml ( compare Fig . 8 C with 4 F ; in all cases intracellular STxB labeling was indistinguishable from that with CTxB ) . At a higher concentration of filipin , 10 m g / ml , however , inter - Figure 5 . GPI - GFP enters the Golgi complex in endocytic transport intermediates con - taining both CTxB - Cy3 ( A ) and STxB - Cy3 ( B ) . The area inside the red and yellow dashed line was photo - bleached , and the time - lapse images shown are of the boxed region . Times shown are relative to the first image in the series . Supplemental video available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / 153 / 3 / 529 / DC1 . Bars , 5 m m . on A p r il 20 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 30 , 2001 Nichols et al . Membrane Cycling from the Plasma Membrane to the Golgi Complex 537 nalization of both CTxB and STxB was reduced and both markers were largely excluded from the Golgi complex . The CTxB and STxB that internalized under these condi - tions colocalized extensively with transferrin ( Fig . 8 C ) . The amount of transferrin taken up into the cells appeared normal at both filipin concentrations , though treatment with 10 m g / ml filipin caused a slightly increased accumula - tion in peripheral as opposed to perinuclear endosomes . Thus , cholesterol sequestration by filipin inhibits uptake of STxB and CTxB into the Golgi with little or no effect on their uptake into transferrin - containing endosomes . To test the effect of cholesterol perturbation on GPI - GFP transport , GPI - GFP – expressing cells were treated with 10 m g / ml filipin for 60 min and examined . GPI - GFP had partially redistributed from the cell surface to the Golgi complex under these conditions ( Fig . 8 D ) . This re - distribution most likely occurred as a result of endocyto - sis , as it occurred similarly in cycloheximide - treated and untreated cells , and as total GFP fluorescence in filipin - treated cells did not increase ( total fluorescence was 80 6 7 % , n 5 14 , of starting fluorescence after 1 h in 10 m g / ml filipin ) . After 60 min at the lower concentration of filipin ( 1 m g / ml ) , accumulation of GPI - GFP in the Golgi com - plex was also apparent ( Fig . 8 D ) . This contrasts with the lack of an effect on CTxB or STxB at this filipin concen - tration ( Fig . 8 C ) , implying that exit of GPI - GFP from the Golgi complex is more sensitive to filipin treatment than uptake of STxB and CTxB ( and potentially GPI - GFP ) from the cell surface . These findings show that the trafficking of GPI - GFP , STxB , and CTxB is more sensi - Figure 6 . GPI - GFP , STxB , and CTxB are inter - nalized via a clathrin - independent process . ( A ) Expression of a dominant negative mutant of epsin blocks transferrin - Cy3 uptake more than uptake of CTxB - Cy5 . Epsin mutant was ex - pressed by transient transfection of COS - 7 cells and detected with anti - FLAG epitope antibod - ies . Uptake of both markers was for 25 min . ( B ) Expression of a dominant negative mutant of eps15 blocks transferrin - Cy3 uptake more than uptake of CTxB - Cy5 . Eps15 mutant tagged with GFP was expressed by transient transfection of COS - 7 cells . Uptake of both markers was for 25 min . ( C ) Expression of the dominant negative epsin mutant does not block delivery of CTxB - Cy3 to the Golgi complex . The Golgi complex was labeled with antibodies against b - COP and a Cy5 - conjugated secondary . ( D ) Quantitation of the effects of epsin ( black bars ) and eps15 ( grey bars ) mutants on transferrin , STxB , and CTxB uptake . Mean fluorescence intensity from STxB , CTxB , or transferrin taken up over 25 min by mutant - transfected cells is expressed as a per - centage of the same value from surrounding non - transfected cells . Bars are 6 SE ; n $ 10 . ( E ) Quantitation of the effects of Epsin mutant on GPI - GFP uptake . The graph shows data from a typical experiment where the Golgi complex in normal ( h ) or epsin mutant – microinjected ( d ) cells was photobleached ( as in Figs . 2 A and 6 D ) at time 5 0 s . Mean fluorescence intensity of the Golgi region is expressed as a ratio with the mean fluorescence intensity outside the Golgi as in previous experiments . ( F ) Immunoelectron microscopy showing distribution of GPI - GFP on the cell surface . on A p r il 20 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 30 , 2001 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 153 , 2001 538 tive to cholesterol depletion than the trafficking of trans - ferrin . Discussion We have used a minimal GPI - linked protein , GPI - GFP , which associates with detergent - resistant domains on the PM , as a marker to study raft trafficking within cells . Both selective photobleaching and antibody uptake experi - ments showed that after biosynthetic delivery to the PM , GPI - GFP undergoes continuous internalization and trans - port to the Golgi complex , followed by recycling back to the PM . The two major steady - state pools of GPI - GFP within the cell , in the Golgi and on the PM , are thus con - stantly exchanging . This finding led us to investigate more closely the transport route between PM and Golgi that is followed by GPI - GFP in order to understand its relation - ship to other endocytic routes , and its potential role in raft distribution and function within cells . One striking feature of the PM – Golgi trafficking pathway followed by GPI - GFP is its kinetic properties . Recovery of GPI - GFP fluorescence in the Golgi after selective pho - tobleaching of this organelle occurred with a half - time of 8 min , indicating a rapid transit time for GPI - GFP molecules moving from PM to the Golgi complex . Kinetic modeling of these data provided rate constants describing exchange of GPI - GFP between PM and Golgi , and implies that on aver - age GPI - GFP molecules reside in the Golgi for only 9 min before being efficiently sorted for return to the PM . The rapid kinetics of GPI - GFP cycling pointed to the existence of abundant transport intermediates carrying GPI - GFP both into and out from the Golgi . Selective pho - tobleaching to remove PM or Golgi fluorescence allowed us to directly visualize distinct endocytic and exocytic membrane - bound carriers for GPI - GFP . The exocytic car - riers required microtubules for movement away from the Golgi apparatus and appeared to fuse directly with the PM ( our unpublished observations ) . Intermediates carrying GPI - GFP into the Golgi region are endocytic in origin , as they contained further markers for lipid rafts , STxB and CTxB , taken up from the cell surface . However , we were unable to track these intermediates from their point of ori - gin and so could not directly identify the organelle where they originate . To better characterize the endocytic itinerary of GPI - GFP , we compared its distribution with that of a variety of endocytic markers . GPI - GFP was detected in endocytic structures readily accessible to CTxB , STxB , or 10K dex - tran ( fluid phase marker ) added at the cell surface . How - ever , we did not detect significant overlap between GPI - GFP and transferrin - containing endosomes . This finding lead us to look more carefully at the requirements for transport of GPI - GFP and other raft markers from the PM to the Golgi complex . Requirements for Transport of Raft Markers from the PM to the Golgi Complex CTxB is thought to follow a clathrin - independent pathway from the PM to the Golgi complex ( Orlandi and Fishman , 1998 ) . We asked whether internalization of GPI - GFP re - quires the activity of clathrin - coated pits by overexpress - ing mutants of either eps15 or epsin , which both disrupt clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Chen et al . , 1998 ; Ben - merah et al . , 1999 ) . Expression of either mutant protein caused a significant decrease in the amount of transferrin Figure 7 . GPI - GFP , CTxB , and STxB do not re - quired rab5 activity for delivery to the Golgi complex . ( A ) Expression of a dominant negative mutant of rab5 ( S34N ) blocks intracellular accu - mulation of transferrin - Cy3 without preventing delivery of CTxB - Cy5 to the Golgi complex . Rab5 mutant tagged with CFP was expressed by transient transfection of COS - 7 cells ; uptake of both ligands was for 25 min . ( B ) Kinetics for ex - change of GPI - YFP between cell surface and Golgi pools is unaffected by rab5 S34N . Cyclo - heximide - treated COS - 7 cells coexpressing rab5 S34N – CFP and GPI - YFP were loaded with Cy5 – transferrin to identify cells where rab5 S34N expression was sufficient to significantly impair transferrin uptake . The Golgi pool of GPI - YFP in these cells was bleached and recov - ery followed with time as in Fig . 2 A . ( C ) GPI - YFP does not accumulate in the aberrant early endosomes induced by expression of rab5 Q79L . Rab5 Q79L – CFP and GPI - YFP were coex - pressed in COS - 7 cells . on A p r il 20 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 30 , 2001 Nichols et al . Membrane Cycling from the Plasma Membrane to the Golgi Complex 539 taken up into cells , but did not perturb cycling of GPI - GFP between PM and Golgi pools . Furthermore , immu - nogold labeling revealed that GPI - GFP on the cell sur - face is largely excluded from clathrin - coated pits . In cells expressing eps15 or epsin mutants , delivery of STxB and CTxB to the Golgi complex was unaffected , despite the fact that total uptake of the toxins from the cell surface decreased . These results support a mechanism for uptake Figure 8 . Effect of a 20 8 C block and cholesterol deple - tion on GPI - GFP , STxB , and CTxB trafficking . ( A ) Incu - bation at 20 8 C blocks deliv - ery of CTxB - Cy5 to the Golgi complex , but not uptake of transferrin - Cy3 . GPI - GFP – expressing COS - 7 cells were incubated at the temperature indicated for 40 min before labeling with transferrin - Cy3 and CTxB - Cy5 . Color images display the distributions of CTxB ( red ) and GPI - GFP ( green ) . ( B ) Incubation at 20 8 C blocks delivery of GPI - GFP to the Golgi complex . GPI - GFP – expressing COS - 7 cells were incubated at the temperature indicated for 40 min before photobleach of the Golgi pool . An equiva - lent experiment carried out at 37 8 C is shown in Fig . 2 C . The graph compares the re - covery of the Golgi pool of GPI - GFP after photobleach - ing at 37 8 C ( black line ) and 25 8 C ( red lines ) . The appar - ent rapid increase in the Golgi pool immediately after photobleaching at 20 8 C is due to lateral diffusion of GPI - GFP on the PM into the Golgi region . n 5 4 for both data sets . ( C ) Filipin treat - ment blocks delivery of CTxB - Cy5 to the Golgi com - plex . COS - 7 cells were ex - posed to filipin at the concen - trations shown for 1 h . Only the juxtanuclear , Golgi re - gion of the cells is shown . Color images display the dis - tributions of CTxB ( red ) and GPI - GFP ( green ) . Transfer - rin - Cy3 and CTxB - Cy5 up - take were as described in Materials and Methods . ( D ) Filipin treatment causes re - distribution of GPI - GFP from the cell surface to the Golgi complex . Fluores - cence images are of GPI - GFP expressed in COS - 7 cells 1 h after treatment with the concentration of filipin shown . Note that to avoid pixel saturation , different imaging conditions are used for each image . The bar graph shows quantitation of the mean fluorescence intensity within the Golgi region as a ratio with that of the non - Golgi region . n $ 10 6 SE . Total GPI - GFP fluorescence intensity in filipin - treated cells changed slightly ; total fluorescence was 80 6 7 % , n = 14 , of initial fluorescence after 1 h in 10 m g / ml filipin . Bars , 5 m m . on A p r il 20 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 30 , 2001 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 153 , 2001 540 of GPI - GFP , as well as of a proportion of the total STxB and CTxB internalized under normal conditions , that does not involve clathrin - coated pits and indicates that uptake via this mechanism leads to delivery to the Golgi complex . Further results suggest that , after internalization , raft markers continue to utilize endocytic machinery distinct from that used by transferrin . In cells expressing rab5 S34N , which interferes with early endosome function and hence uptake of transferrin ( Stenmark et al . , 1996 ) , deliv - ery of STxB and CTxB to the Golgi were unaffected , and selective photobleaching revealed the kinetics of GPI - GFP trafficking to be unaltered . Furthermore , overexpres - sion of rab5 Q79L caused accumulation of aberrant early endosomal membranes with a characteristic and readily identified morphology , and these membranes were devoid of GPI - GFP . The function and organization of rafts is perturbed by depletion of cholesterol from membranes , providing a tool to discriminate between raft - and nonraft - depen - dent processes ( Simons and Ikonen , 1997 ; Keller and Si - mons , 1998 ) . Sequestration of cholesterol by filipin had a significant effect on the trafficking of GPI - GFP , CTxB , and STxB . Filipin treatment of cells at concen - trations that did not significantly affect transferrin up - take blocked delivery of CTxB and STxB to the Golgi complex ( Orlandi and Fishman , 1998 ) . It also resulted in the accumulation of GPI - GFP in the Golgi complex and a corresponding depletion from the cell surface , im - plying that the point in the cycling itinerary of GPI - GFP which is most acutely sensitive to cholesterol levels is Golgi exit . The PM – Golgi cycling of raft markers was also differen - tially sensitive to 20 8 C treatment compared with other en - docytic pathways . Indeed , incubation of cells at 20 8 C re - sulted in effects that were similar to those of cholesterol depletion . The reduced ability of raft markers ( and pre - sumably raft lipids ) to recycle to the Golgi at 20°C could well be related to the more general block in membrane trafficking through the secretory pathway observed under these conditions . Previous work has suggested that many proteins which traffic from PM to the Golgi complex , including TGN38 , furin , and STxB , are taken up via clathrin - coated pits into transferrin - positive recycling endosomes before be - ing sorted out for subsequent delivery to the Golgi com - plex ( Ghosh et al . , 1998 ; Mallard et al . , 1998 ) . Our find - ings raise the possibility that the itinerary of raft markers en route to the Golgi is distinct from the pathway fol - lowed by transferrin . However , we can not directly ex - clude the possibility that GPI - GFP does , at some stage , pass through the same endosomes as transferrin , in which case the observed differences in steady - state distribution would be explained by rapid sorting of GPI - GFP out of the transferrin - positive compartment . Despite this ca - veat , previous work on toxin uptake clearly shows that internalization via clathrin - coated pits is not functionally equivalent to internalization via a separate , cholesterol - requiring mechanism , so it seems unlikely that these dis - tinct uptake pathways lead to delivery to a common en - docytic organelle ( Orlandi and Fishman , 1998 ; Schapiro et al . , 1998 ) . Different Endocytic Distributions for Different Raft Markers We asked whether endogenous GPI - anchored proteins be - have in the same way as GPI - GFP . The distribution of en - dogenous CD59 and the behavior of a GFP fusion based on this GPI - anchored protein in selective photobleaching ex - periments , were identical to that of GPI - GFP , indicating that trafficking of these molecules between the cell surface and the Golgi complex reflects a more general constitutive pathway , rather than one unique to GPI - GFP . A similar pathway may be followed by a GPI - anchored heparan sul - fate proteoglycan , as previous work shows that after this proteoglycan has been biotinylated at the cell surface it can subsequently undergo addition of heparan sulfate side chains in the Golgi complex ( Fransson et al . , 1995 ) . Given our findings , it is likely that raft lipids continuously circulate between PM and Golgi pools . Consistent with this , studies on the uptake of exogenous raft lipids have shown that these molecules traffic from the PM to the Golgi complex , as evi - denced by Golgi - specific modifications acquired by these lipids after uptake from the cell surface ( Giglioni et al . , 1990 ; Martin and Pagano , 1994 ; Schwarzmann et al . , 1995 ) . The PM – Golgi pathway described by GPI - GFP appears to be raft specific , yet not all raft - associated molecules fol - low it . For the folate receptor ( which is GPI - anchored ) , our data confirmed a distribution within transferrin - labeled early and recycling endosomes that has previously been described in detail by Mayor et al . ( 1998 ) . Moreover , whilst a proportion of the total internalized STxB and CTxB is delivered to the Golgi apparatus in the same man - ner as GPI - GFP , the remainder is internalized in a clath - rin - dependent fashion . Both CTxB and STxB accumulate in transferrin - labeled compartments as well as the Golgi complex . Folate receptor enters transferrin - labeled endo - somes significantly more efficiently ( 2 % per min ; Mayor et al . , 1998 ) than the minimal GPI - anchored protein , GPI - GFP moves to the Golgi complex ( 0 . 5 % per min deter - mined from our photobleaching experiments ) . Accumula - tion of raft - associated proteins , such as the folate receptor within transferrin - containing endosomes , could thus be mediated by additional sorting signals . Further Questions The precise sequence of trafficking events required to get GPI - GFP and other raft markers from the PM to the Golgi complex is currently not clear . The presence of GPI - GFP in endocytic structures which are readily accessible to fluid - phase ( 10K dextran ) uptake implies that if GPI - GFP passes through these structures en route to the Golgi , fur - ther sorting step or steps must occur so as to exclude lume - nal volume relative to membrane surface area , as the Golgi complex itself it not readily labeled by fluid - phase uptake . Similarly , the structures responsible for budding of GPI - GFP from the PM remain to be ascertained . Given that there is likely to be a considerable flux of lipid rafts between the PM and the Golgi complex , what might be the cell biological significance of this pathway ? Lipid rafts have been shown to play a role in sorting at the TGN of both polarized and nonpolarized cells , and the components of these rafts may well play a more general role in Golgi organization ( Bretscher and Munro , 1993 ; Si - on A p r il 20 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 30 , 2001 Nichols et al . Membrane Cycling from the Plasma Membrane to the Golgi Complex 541 mons and Ikonen , 1997 ) . It has been presumed that the lipid and protein components of these membrane domains are supplied in the Golgi complex by new synthesis , but our results raise the possibility that recycling of rafts from the PM to the Golgi also plays an important role in this process . A related potential function of raft recycling is in the selective endocytosis of particular cell surface compo - nents during generation of polarized cell surface domains . A further potential role is in regulation of cell - signaling events ( Stauffer and Meyer , 1997 ; Brown and London , 1998 ) . Many cell surface receptors and signaling molecules are recruited into detergent - resistant domains , so the in - ternalization of these domains may well play an important role in signaling events . The existence of a specific marker for this membrane cycling pathway , GPI - GFP , will allow these and other questions related to the functional signifi - cance of the pathway to be addressed in future studies . We thank all those who contributed antibodies and reagents . We espe - cially thank L . Johannes for generously providing the STxB . B . J . Nichols was funded by an International Prize Travelling Research Fellowship from the Wellcome Trust ( London , UK ) . A . K . Kenworthy was funded by a fellowship from the National Research Council . R . Lodge was funded by a Canadian MRC postdoctoral fellowship . Submitted : 30 October 2000 Revised : 7 March 2001 Accepted : 7 March 2001 References Benting , J . H . , A . G . Rietveld , and K . Simons . 1999 . N - glycans mediate the api - cal sorting of a GPI - anchored , raft - associated protein in Madin - Darby ca - nine kidney cells . J . Cell Biol . 146 : 313 – 320 . Benmerah , A . , M . Bayrou , N . Cerf - Bensussan , and A . Dautry - Varsat . 1999 . In - hibition of clathrin - coated pit assembly by an Eps15 mutant . J . Cell Sci . 112 : 1303 – 1311 . Bretscher , M . S . , and S . Munro . 1993 . Cholesterol and the Golgi apparatus . Sci - ence . 261 : 1280 – 1281 . Brown , D . A . , and E . London . 1998 . Functions of lipid rafts in biological mem - branes . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 14 : 111 – 136 . Chen , H . , S . Fre , V . I . Slepnev , M . R . Capua , K . Takei , M . H . Butler , P . P . Di Fiore , and P . De Camilli . 1998 . Epsin is an EH - domain - binding protein im - plicated in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nature . 394 : 793 – 797 . Davies , A . , and P . J . Lachmann . 1993 . Membrane defence against complement ly - sis : the structure and biological properties of CD59 . Immunol . Res . 12 : 258 – 275 . Fransson , L . A . , G . Edgren , B . Havsmark , and A . Schmidtchen . 1995 . Recycling of a glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored heparan sulphate proteoglycan in skin fibroblasts . Glycobiology . 5 : 407 – 415 . Ghosh , R . N . , W . G . Mallet , T . T . Soe , T . E . McGraw , and F . R . Maxfield . 1998 . An endocytosed TGN38 chimeric protein is delivered to the TGN after traf - ficking through the endocytic recycling compartment in CHO cells . J . Cell Biol . 142 : 923 – 936 . Giglioni , A . , M . Pitto , V . Chigorno , L . Zorzino , and R . Ghidoni . 1990 . Subcellu - lar metabolism of exogenous GM1 ganglioside in normal human fibroblasts . Biochem . Int . 22 : 85 – 94 . Hirschberg , K . , C . M . Miller , J . Ellenberg , J . F . Presley , E . D . Siggia , R . D . Phair , and J . Lippincott - Schwartz . 1998 . Kinetic analysis of secretory protein traffic and characterization of Golgi to plasma membrane transport intermediates in living cells . J . Cell Biol . 143 : 1485 – 1503 . Jacquez , J . A . 1996 . Compartmental Analysis in Biology and Medicine . 3rd edi - tion . Biomedware , Ann Arbor , MI . 512 pp . Katagiri , Y . U . , T . Mori , H . Nakajima , C . Katagiri , T . Taguchi , T . Takeda , N . Kiyokawa , and J . Fujimoto . 1999 . Activation of Src family kinase Yes in - duced by Shiga toxin binding to globotriaosyl ceramide Gb3 / CD77 in low density , detergent - insoluble microdomains . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 35278 – 35282 . Keller , P . , and K . Simons . 1998 . Cholesterol is required for surface transport of influenza virus hemagglutinin . J . Cell Biol . 140 : 1357 – 1367 . Kenworthy , A . K . , and M . Edidin . 1998 . Distribution of a glycosylphosphatidyl - inositol - anchored protein at the apical surface of MDCK cells examined at a resolution of , 100 Å using imaging fluorescence resonance energy transfer . J . Cell Biol . 142 : 68 – 84 . Lisanti , M . P . , I . W . Caras , T . Gilbert , D . Hanzel , and E . Rodriguez - Boulan . 1990 . Vectorial apical delivery and slow endocytosis of a glycolipid - anchored fusion protein in transfected MDCK cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 87 : 7419 – 7423 . Mallard , F . , A . Claude , D . Tenza , J . Salamero , B . Goud , and L . Johannes . 1998 . Direct pathway from early / recycling endosomes and the Golgi apparatus re - vealed through the study of Shiga toxin B subunit . J . Cell Biol . 143 : 973 – 990 . Martin , O . C . , and R . E . Pagano . 1994 . Internalization and sorting of a fluores - cent analogue of glucosylceramide to the Golgi apparatus of human skin fi - broblasts : utilization of endocytic and nonendocytic transport mechanisms . J . Cell Biol . 125 : 769 – 781 . Mayor , S . , and F . R . Maxfield . 1995 . Insolubility and redistribution of GPI - anchored proteins at the cell surface after detergent treatment . Mol . Biol . Cell . 6 : 929 – 944 . Mayor , S . , S . Sabharanjak , and F . R . Maxfield . 1998 . Cholesterol - dependent re - tention of GPI - anchored proteins in endosomes . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 17 : 4626 – 4638 . Nehls , S . , E . L . Snapp , N . B . Cole , K . J . M . Zaal , A . K . Kenworthy , T . H . Roberts , J . Ellenberg , J . F . Presley , E . Siggia , and J . Lippincott - Schwartz . 2000 . Dy - namics and retention of misfolded proteins in native ER membranes . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 : 288 – 295 . Orlandi , P . A . , and P . H . Fishman . 1998 . Filipin - dependent inhibition of cholera toxin : evidence for toxin internalization and activation through caveolae - like domains . J . Cell Biol . 141 : 905 – 915 . Parton , R . G . , B . Joggerst , and K . Simons . 1994 . Regulated internalization of ca - veolae . J . Cell Biol . 127 : 1199 – 1215 . Polishchuk , R . S . , E . V . Polishchuk , P . Marra , S . Alberti , R . Buccione , A . Luini , and A . A . Mironov . 2000 . Correlative light - electron microscopy reveals the tubular - saccular ultrastructure of carriers operating between Golgi appara - tus and plasma membrane . J . Cell Biol . 148 : 45 – 58 . Pralle , A . , P . Keller , E . Florin , K . Simons , and J . K . Horber . 2000 . Sphingolipid - cholesterol rafts diffuse as small entities in the plasma membrane of mam - malian cells . J . Cell Biol . 148 : 997 – 1008 . Presley , J . F . , S . Mayor , T . E . McGraw , K . W . Dunn , and F . R . Maxfield . 1997 . Bafilomycin A1 treatment retards transferrin receptor recycling more than bulk membrane recycling . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 13929 – 13936 . Rothberg , K . G . , Y . - S . Ying , J . F . Kolhouse , B . A . Kamen , and R . G . W . Ander - son . 1990 . The glycophospholipid - linked folate receptor internalizes folate without entering the clathrin - coated pit endocytic pathway . J . Cell Biol . 110 : 637 – 649 . Sandvig , K . , S . Olsnes , J . E . Brown , O . W . Petersen , and B . van Deurs . 1989 . En - docytosis from coated pits of Shiga toxin : a glycolipid - binding protein from Shigella dysenteriae 1 . J . Cell Biol . 108 : 1331 – 1343 . Schapiro , F . B . , C . Lingwood , W . Furuya , and S . Grinstein . 1998 . pH - indepen - dent retrograde targeting of glycolipids to the Golgi complex . Am . J . Phys - iol . 274 : 319 – 332 . Schwarzmann , G . , P . Hofmann , U . Putz , and B . Albrecht . 1995 . Demonstration of direct glycosylation of nondegradable glucosylceramide analogs in cul - tured cells . J . Biol . Chem . 270 : 21271 – 21276 . Simons , K . , and E . Ikonen . 1997 . Functional rafts in cell membranes . Nature . 387 : 569 – 572 . Skretting , G . , M . L . Torgersen , B . Van Deurs , and K . Sandvig . 1999 . Endocytic mechanisms responsible for uptake of GPI - anchored diptheria toxin recep - tor . J . Cell Sci . 112 : 3899 – 3909 . Smart , E . J . , C . Mineo , and R . G . Anderson . 1996 . Clustered folate receptors de - liver 5 - methyltetrahydrofolate to cytoplasm of MA104 cells . J . Cell Biol . 134 : 1169 – 1177 . Stauffer , T . P . , and T . Meyer . 1997 . Compartmentalized IgE receptor - mediated signal transduction in living cells . J . Cell Biol . 139 : 1447 – 1454 . Stenmark , H . , R . Aasland , B . H . Toh , and A . D’Arrigo . 1996 . Endosomal local - ization of the autoantigen EEA1 is mediated by a zinc - binding FYVE finger . J . Biol . Chem . 271 : 24048 – 24054 . Stenmark , H . , R . G . Parton , O . Steele - Mortime , A . Lutcke , J . Gruenberg , and M . Zerial . 1994 . Inhibition of rab5 GTPase activity stimulates membrane fu - sion in endocytosis . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 13 : 1287 – 1296 . Van Deurs , B . , K . Sandvig , O . W . Petersen , S . Olsnes , K . Simons , and G . Grif - fiths . 1988 . Estimation of the amount of internalized ricin that reaches the trans - Golgi network . J . Cell Biol . 106 : 253 – 267 . Varma , R . , and S . Mayor . 1998 . GPI - anchored proteins are organized in submi - cron domains at the cell surface . Nature . 394 : 798 – 801 . Zaal , K . J . , C . L . Smith , R . S . Polishchuk , N . Altan , N . B . Cole , J . Ellenberg , K . Hirschberg , J . F . Presley , T . H . Roberts , E . Siggia , R . D . Phair , and J . Lippin - cott - Schwartz . 1999 . Golgi membranes are absorbed into and reemerge from the ER during mitosis . Cell . 99 : 589 – 601 . Zurzolo , C . , M . P . Lisanti , I . W . Caras , L . Nitsch , and E . Rodriguez - Boulan . 1993 . Glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored proteins are preferentially tar - geted to the basolateral surface in Fischer rat thyroid epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 121 : 1031 – 1039 . on A p r il 20 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 30 , 2001