Fundamentalists , Integrationists , & Transformationists : An Empirical Theory of Men Software Engineers’ Orientations in Gender Inequalities Yi Wang 1 , 2 , Xinyue Zhang 1 , 2 , & Wei Wang 1 1 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications 2 Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Distributed Computing and Service ( BUPT ) , MoE Beijing , P . R . China { yiwang , xinyuezhang , weiwang } @ bupt . edu . cn Abstract —Professional software development is an occupation dominated by men software engineers . Recently , researchers have been investigating gender inequality in the software development profession from multiple perspectives . While most of the extant literature on gender inequality in software development takes the perspective of female developers , the vast majority of the software development workforce – men software engineers – receives much less attention . In this article , we reported on a quantitative interview study aiming at developing empirical understandings of men software engineers’ orientations in gender inequalities . Through analyzing interview narratives from 21 professional men software engineers , plenty of findings emerged , enabling us to build a theoretical framework characterizing three different types of orientations in gender inequalities . In our theory , men software engineers’ orientation in gender issues could be conceptualized as fundamentalists , integrationists , and transformationists . We introduced each type’s characteristics from three aspects of individuals’ social cognition , which are belief , attitude , and action . We further discussed the implications and the limitations of the study . I . I NTRODUCTION After World War II , women have made significant progress in participating in the labor market of many historically men - dominated professions [ 1 ] , [ 2 ] . However , some occupations , particularly those well - paid , knowledge - intensive ones , remain relatively closed to women . Professional software development is such a men - dominated occupation . According to a recent labor market census , in 2022 , women software engineers only account for 21 % of the software development labor force and earn 18 % less than men software engineers on average , almost gaining no material improvement compared with the situation in 2015 [ 3 ] . The pandemic of COVID - 19 also made the situation worse [ 4 ] . The underrepresentation of women in software development has drawn many concerns from researchers and policymakers . For example , we have seen a growing body of literature focusing on creating new opportunities and pathways for women in software develop - ment [ 5 ] – [ 8 ] , encouraging sustained participation [ 9 ] , setting code of conduct in workplaces [ 10 ] , as well as establishing devoted offices of diversity and inclusion in many software development organizations , e . g . , Google , IBM , Microsoft , etc . By now , we still had to admit that the software development profession was dominated by men software engineers , at least numerically . However , we had a limited understanding of such a group’s orientations in gender issues . The picture revealed of women’s experience ( e . g . , Canedo et al . [ 11 ] ) could not be complete without extending the focus beyond the experience of women to consider men’s experience [ 12 ] – [ 14 ] . Since men were so heavily predominant at almost every level in software development , any meaningful changes in software development organizations that were meant to im - prove women’s situations cannot be achieved without their contributions . Sociologist Claire Duncanson also pointed out that achieving gender equality requires men to be encouraged to make changes at both belief and behavior levels [ 15 ] . Therefore , it is crucial to explore how men understand the situations of gender inequalities in software development ; and how such understandings could contribute to reinforcing or remedying gender inequalities . We sought to develop an empirical theory to discover and describe men software engineers’ orientations in gender issues , to fill the above knowledge gap , and to draw potential practical implications . We thus took an inductive approach to perform a qualitative study by interviewing 21 men software engineers from 7 organizations of various backgrounds . Our data anal - yses of their interviews revealed rich findings . Specifically , we discovered men software engineers’ different beliefs , atti - tudes , and actions , which formed a panoramic view of men’s orientations in gender inequalities . Based on these findings , an empirical theory of men software engineers’ orientation was established . We further discussed the theoretical and practical implications of the study . Specifically , the study’s contributions are tri - fold : • The study approached gender inequalities in software development by focusing on men software engineers’ orientations . As far as our best knowledge , it was the 25 2023 IEEE / ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineering : Software Engineering in Society ( ICSE - SEIS ) 2832 - 7616 / 23 / $ 31 . 00 ©2023 IEEE DOI 10 . 1109 / ICSE - SEIS58686 . 2023 . 00009 2023 I EEE / A C M 45 t h I n t e r n a ti on a l C on f e r e n ce on S o f t w a r e E ng i n ee r i ng : S o f t w a r e E ng i n ee r i ng i n S o c i e t y ( I C S E - S E I S ) | 979 - 8 - 3503 - 2261 - 3 / 23 / $ 31 . 00 © 2023 I EEE | DO I : 10 . 1109 / I C S E - S E I S 58686 . 2023 . 00009 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . first attempt with men software engineers as the main research subjects regarding the topic of gender issues in software development . • The study developed an empirical theory that charac - terized men software engineers’ orientations into three types ; each had three dimensions corresponding to three key social cognition themes . • The study derived a rich set of theoretical and practical implications for future research and potential interven - tions for creating better conditions for women in the software development profession . Based on our work , we urge a comprehensive research agenda and efforts from men software engineers’ perspective . It is an impossible mission to effectively reduce discrimination against women without the participation of men in software development . We hope this study could serve as a starting point for this stream of research in software engineering diversity and inclusion or at least draw some researchers’ attention to this direction . Besides , note that we fully acknowledge and agree that gender is not binary , and those people who identify themselves as non - binary genders also suffer disadvantages in the software development profession . However , in this article , we use men vs . women because the vast majority of software engineers identify themselves in these two genders , and the tensions between them are most prevalent among equality issues between different genders . Paper Organization . The rest of the article proceeds as follows . Section II briefly reviewed the background of the study . Section III introduced the research design . Section IV previews the empirical theory . Sections V , VI , and VII offer detailed descriptions of three types of men software developers’ orien - tations , respectively . Section VIII presented the inconsistencies and transitions in men’s orientations . Section IX discussed the study’s implications and limitations . Section X concluded the whole article . II . B ACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK In this section , we briefly introduce the background and related work of the study . We start with a general review of gender roles in workplaces ; then , we focus on gender inequality in professional software development . A . Gender Roles in Workplaces Gender issues in modern society have been studied for over a half - century by sociologists , psychologists , economists , and researchers from many other domains . Since the 1980s , with women’s growing engagement in the labor force , researchers turned their attention to gender roles in workplaces . Re - searchers have identified a considerable number of challenges faced by women in their organizations . Researchers have formed an agreement that “gender inequality in organizations is a complex phenomenon that can be seen in organizational structures , processes , and practices” [ 16 ] . For example , “incon - gruous , gendered bureaucratic structures” of North American universities create systematic barriers to women’s advance - ment in academic careers [ 17 ] ; specialized labor process creates inequalities in earnings and career development [ 18 ] . Besides , the interaction between macro contextual factors at the societal level , e . g . , collective beliefs such as culture , may interact with these organizational - level factors to make gender inequalities more severe . Given the scope of this article , we would not enumerate these studies and their findings . Interested readers should refer to specialized journals such as “Gender & Society” or “Journal of Gender Studies” , and general social science journals such as “American Journal of Sociology . ” In short , it is fair to say that : ( 1 ) American women , particularly those who work as professionals , still face substantial barriers ; ( 2 ) their roles in workplaces are often associated with simplified gender stereotypes such as motherhood or caregiver . Thus , there is still a long way to go for women’s long - term advancement in workplaces and society . B . Gender Inequalities in Software Development Gender inequalities in professional software development have been well documented not only in the academic literature but also in many popular media outlets . Each of them serves a different purpose . Researchers put their efforts into identifying gender gaps in computing , as well as designing interventions for promoting women’s participation . For example , StackOver - flow was intensively studied and found to have systematic biases towards women [ 19 ] , [ 20 ] , so does the G IT H UB [ 21 ] . Lee & Carver’s survey focusing on practitioners revealed that gender inequality was among the major concerns of the open source community [ 22 ] . For more research in this topic , readers may refer to Rodr´ıguez - P´erez et al . ’s recent literature survey [ 23 ] . A few recent studies go beyond the explicit discrimination towards women in the software development profession . For example , the idea of implicit gender biases was introduced into software engineering literature in [ 24 ] . They developed customized tests to assess implicit biases in the software development profession . GenderMag method were proposed to provide gender - sensitive design [ 6 ] , [ 25 ] . Other tools and methods were also proposed and discussed from multiple perspectives , such as improving contributors’ experiences [ 26 ] , bridging geo - distance [ 27 ] , and balancing the hiring process [ 28 ] . In addition to research literature , popular media outlets ( incl . online social media such as Reddit , Twitter , etc . ) have done a great job of promoting the public’s awareness of gender inequalities in software development . However , the media’s roles are not restricted by providing information to the public . It also serves the society guardian’s role , which helps shape many organizations’ internal governance as an external force . Besides , the value of gender diversity had been well - recognized in software engineering research . Vasilescu et al . ’s early work provided evidence for the positive role of gender diversity in software development productivity , and quality [ 29 ] . Zolduoarrati & Licorish found that female contributors tend to have a more cooperative orientation on Stack Overflow , providing a necessary supportive and collective outlook for the health of the community [ 30 ] . In short , the software 26 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . TABLE I B ASIC I NFORMATION OF THE P ARTICIPANTS ’ O RGANIZATIONS . Org . Size * Business Domain Gender Equality Policy Implemented ? * * Alpha Ultra - Large Internet Yes Beta Ultra - Large IT Products and Services Yes Gamma Large Enterprise Applications Yes Delta Medium Healthcare Yes but Limited Epsilon Medium Security and Data Recovery Yes Zeta Small Data Management Minimal Eta Small AI - powered Online Education No * . Ultra - large : > 2 , 000 full - time software engineers , large : 500 – 2 , 000 full - time software engineers , medium : 50 – 500 full - time software engineers , small : < 50 full - time software engineers . * * . If an organization has diversity policies , incl . a gender - related component , we also count it . engineering research community had formed a consensus on the positive effects of gender diversity in multiple aspects of software development [ 28 ] , [ 31 ] . C . Our Contributions Building upon the rich previous work , our work contributes to the existing literature by adding the perspectives of men software engineers to form broader insights . By capturing their perceptions of gender inequalities , the reasons behind these perceptions , and their perceptions’ impacts on decisions and actions when encountering gender - related scenarios , our work made a first step towards understanding the numerically dominant ( ≈ 80 % ) group of software development workforce , which could be a critical factor of the success of any pro gender equality interventions in practices . III . E MPIRICAL M ETHODS We took an inductive , qualitative approach in this study . We used the semi - structured interview as the main research method to capture men software engineers’ perceptions of gender issues in professional software development . A . Participants 1 ) Recruiting Participants : The participants were recruited through the 5 - step site - based procedure for locating and recruiting qualitative study participants proposed in Arcury & Quandt [ 32 ] . The first step specifies the characteristics of potential par - ticipants . In this study , ideal potential participants should be men software engineers full - timely employed in professional software development organizations in the United States . The second step generates a list of sites ( i . e . , software development organizations ) . In this step , we aimed to form a sample of organizations with two goals : ( 1 ) the selected organizations should be able to represent a wide range of software de - velopment organizations regarding their size and domain ; ( 2 ) the selected organizations should have some connections with the research team to ensure us to find “gatekeepers” to help recruiting participants . By the end of this step , we created a list of 12 organizations . The third step is to learn the characteristics of the potential sites and refine the site lists . We performed this step through informal conversations with each site’s gatekeeper , whom the research team has already been familiar with . In the fourth step , the main task was to make decisions on the final targeted sites and how many participants would be recruited from each site . We decided to select seven organizations and target 3 - 4 potential interviewees in each organization . The last step was to recruit the participants . We recruited the interviewees through the gatekeepers . 2 ) Characteristics of Targeted Organizations and Partic - ipants : Eventually , we had 21 men software engineers in the selected seven professional software development orga - nizations . In this article , for privacy considerations , we use the first seven Greek letters ( Alpha – Eta ) to represent these organizations . Tab . 1 summarizes their key characteristics . It is easy to conclude that they indeed represent a wide range of software development organizations in terms of size and business domain . The last column shows if an organization has explicitly implemented gender equality policies . TABLE II B ASIC I NFORMATION OF THE P ARTICIPANTS No . Org . Role * Age Exp . @ Org . Exp . @ SE P1 Alpha SDE 20 - 30 0 - 5 5 - 10 P2 Alpha SDET 20 - 30 0 - 5 0 - 5 P3 Alpha SDE 30 - 40 5 - 10 10 - 20 P4 Beta Res . E 30 - 40 0 - 5 10 - 20 P5 Beta SDE 30 - 40 10 - 20 > 20 P6 Beta SDE 20 - 30 0 - 5 0 - 5 P7 Beta STSM 40 - 50 > 20 > 20 P8 Gamma Lead SDE 20 - 30 0 - 5 5 - 10 P9 Gamma SDE 20 - 30 5 - 10 5 - 10 P10 Gamma SDE 30 - 40 5 - 10 10 - 20 P11 Delta SDE 20 - 30 0 - 5 0 - 5 P12 Delta SDET 20 - 30 0 - 5 5 - 10 P13 Delta Lead SDE 30 - 40 10 - 20 10 - 20 P14 Epsilon Res . E 20 - 30 0 - 5 0 - 5 P15 Epsilon SDE 40 - 50 5 - 10 > 20 P16 Epsilon Res . E 30 - 40 5 - 10 5 - 10 P17 Zeta Eng . Dir . 30 - 40 0 - 5 10 - 20 P18 Zeta SDE 20 - 30 0 - 5 0 - 5 P19 Eta SDE 20 - 30 0 - 5 0 - 5 P20 Eta SDE 20 - 30 0 - 5 0 - 5 P21 Eta SDE 20 - 30 0 - 5 5 - 10 * . SDE : Software Development Engineer , SDET : Software Develop - ment Engineer in Test , Res . E : Research Engineers , STSM : Senior Technical Staff Member , Lead SDE : Lead Software Development Engineer , Eng . Dir . Engineering Director . Tab . 2 provides all participants’ basic information . Over half of them ( 12 out of 21 ) are in their 20s ; 7 are in their 30s , and the rest 2 in their 40s . For privacy considerations , we did not put their ethnic / racial information in Tab . 2 . In general , 27 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . Fig . 1 . The Theoretical Framework of Men Software Engineers’ Orientations in Gender Inequalities . we have a diverse sample with informants from almost every ethnic background . B . Interview Process We conducted face - to - face ( N = 6 ) , video ( N = 4 ) , and audio / phone interviews ( N = 11 ) with the 21 participants between 12 / 2018 to 05 / 2019 . The interviews lasted from 22 to 46 minutes ( total : 609 minutes ) . Among all 21 interviews , 15 interviews were recorded ( voice only for video interviews ) with informants’ consent ; for the rest six interviews , the interviewers took detailed notes . The recorded interviews were transcribed and combined with interview notes for data analysis . The interview plan was developed in accordance with the three RQs . In each interview , an interviewer first provided a brief introduction of the study , and double - checked the interviewee’s consent . The interview started with questions collecting some background information about the interviewee and his organization . Then , we asked the interviewee’s opin - ions about gender inequalities in the software industry and his organization . For each opinion he expressed , we asked the reasons and logic behind it . We also asked how such opinions influenced his decisions and actions . During the entire interview process , we followed the recommendations in Myers [ 33 ] , i . e . , we were open to new themes and continuously adjusted and refined the interview guide in light of emerging responses . C . Data Analysis The 15 recorded interviews were transcribed . Together with the rest six interview notes , they formed the primary documents of the data analysis . We used the qualitative data analysis software ATLAS . ti to assist with the qualitative data analysis . We initially performed open coding to observation notes and interview transcripts . Two researchers independently coded the data first , and then shared , discussed , and re - solved coded transcript and descriptive memos about emerging themes in the data . Upon the finish of the open coding , we fol - lowed the constant comparative method [ 34 ] , [ 35 ] to identify the recurring themes / categories in the interview transcripts and notes and develop descriptive theories for the target topic of men software engineers’ orientations in gender inequalities in software development , why they have these perceptions , and how these perceptions influence their decisions and actions . IV . T HE E MPIRICAL T HEORY Before presenting the detailed results and findings in the following sections , we provide a preview of them in this sec - tion , which is represented by an empirical theory summarizing three major classes of men software engineers’ orientations in gender inequalities . Fig . 1 depicts the overview of empirical theory . The framework was inspired by Howard’s white orientation framework [ 36 ] on racial inequalities . We reused its three labels “ fundamentalists ” , “ integrationists ” , and “transforma - tionists” to classify men software engineers’ overall orientation in gender issues . Each type of orientation was associated with three dimensions , which were belief , attitude , and action . These three dimensions captured the key elements of indi - viduals’ social cognition , thus could provide a comprehensive theoretical understanding of men software engineers’ orienta - tions . The sentence under each dimension summarized the cor - responding type’s characteristics in this dimension . Detailed introductions of them were in the following three Sections ( V , 28 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . VI , and VII ) . In addition , the observed inconsistencies among the three dimensions and transitions among the three types were reported in Section VIII . V . F UNDAMENTALISTS We refer to the first type of men software developers as ”fundamentalists” since they were the most stubborn support - ers of men’s dominance in software development . Their main characteristics were summarized as follows . A . Belief : Denying , Legitimizing , or Rationalizing Men’s Dominance in Software Development The first characteristic of fundamentalists was that those individuals tended to deny , legitimize , or rationalize men’s dominance in software development . They denied the exis - tence of gender inequality , often argued that gender imbalances resulted from women’s own choices , and rationalized men’s dominance in various ways . 1 ) Gender Imbalances May Result from Women’s Own Choices : The “free choice” framework is popular and has a long tradition in American society [ 37 ] . Such a framework makes people form a belief that the modern US society pro - vides equal opportunities and gender “imbalances” ( preferred word by many fundamentalists as an alternative for “inequal - ities” ) in professional software engineering are a product of women’s own choice . Several informants expressed a certain level of such logic in their narratives . For example , informant P19 commented : Having a job or a baby is a woman’s own choice . You cannot have them all . Neither a man can have them all . Almost every afternoon , I have to make choices between working overtime and going home early to have more time with my two years old daughter . I can sacrifice the time with my daughter and put my blood and sweat into this startup . It is not an easy decision . 2 ) Some Parts of Damore’s White Paper Is Right . . . If Not All : Our data show that about over one - third of informants ( 6 out of 21 ) employed the argument that the physiological and psychological differences between men and women contribute to women’s underrepresentation when justifying their positions on gender inequalities in software development . For example , informant P21 said : Writing software requires to be logical ; women are too sensitive and emotional . Different brain structures of the two sexes determine this . You can’t change it . Many other biological differences also make women not quite suitable for software development jobs . Women have periods . If they work on code during periods , I will suspect the quality will be bad . Then , the interviewer asked him to explain why there are so many good women software engineers . His answer was : “ It is all about statistics . There are millions of female developers . I am not surprised if there are a few thousand very good ones . ” It is interesting to find that our informants’ narratives were at least partially similar to James Damore’s notorious memo 1 . We confronted informant P21 if he supported James Damore’s idea . He refused to answer . Other informants also referred to some of Damore’s arguments , such as personality differences , although none of them explicitly supported James Damore and his memo . B . Attitude : Rejecting challenges to Their Beliefs on Men’s Dominance in Software Development A few informants ( P6 and P7 ) did hold quite old - fashioned masculine attitudes that men’s dominance ( not only in the software development profession ) shall be maintained and not be challenged . For instance , informant P7 argued that men’s dominance has divine righteousness : In Timothy , Paul wrote : “I do not permit a woman to teach or to exercise authority over a man ; rather , she is to remain quiet . ” See , it is written in the holy scripts of most of the United States peoples’ religions . So if you claim you’re a Christian , you shall follow it . Neoliberalism theology tries to distort it and tells people men and women are equal . It is b * * * * * * t ! I am proud of being a Christian , and I must follow the Bible . Even in the Muslim religion , women also need to obey men . We are not going to judge P7 ’s religious beliefs . However , this example at least showed that people’s perceptions are indeed largely determined by culture and social factors beyond their current experiences . For such kinds of attitudes , changing them could be very hard , if not impossible . C . Action : Behaving Monoculturally , Opposing Gender Di - versity , and Advocating Men’s Dominance A fundamentalist often behaved in a monocultural way and labeled himself as a fair person . Informant P6 exhibited such a characteristic . He told us that : “the only way” he judged a colleague was “the source code . ” He believed doing so was fair to everyone , no matter men or women . They often justified their behaviors in a way that their men - dominated engineering cultural practices are superior to other cultural practices seeking gender equality . Thus , they often advocated men’s dominance should be maintained . For example , P19 explained his reason for not supporting a hiring plan favoring underrepresented groups as follows : I don’t think we should hire women developers . Instead , I think we must hire good developers . We could sit here to discuss races and genders because we have good developers to build good products , making our business profitable . Coincidentally , most of these good developers are male for whatever reasons . It is natural selection leading our industry dominated by men rather than women . I think it should be kept as it is . 1 Googles Ideological Echo Chamber , available at : https : / / assets . documentcloud . org / documents / 3914586 / Googles - Ideological - Echo - Chamber . pdf 29 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . VI . I NTEGRATIONIST A . Belief : Acknowledging Men Were Privileged , Starting Questioning Men’s Dominance An integrationist often began to acknowledge the fact that men were privileged in software development . He became more aware of the barriers faced by those outside the dominant culture . Many informants agree that there are a lot more expectations for women to spend more time at home to take care of their families . They also assume to take the major reproductive responsibilities . Many people in software development organizations are often insensitive to women’s extra burden resulting from these responsibilities . Informant P9 told us how his organization ( Gamma ) put pressure on women : Our management has many tricks to kick out pregnant women who are protected by laws . How could they do that ? They may assign a pregnant woman to an unfa - miliar area that requires her to spend a lot of time and energy in learning . Which is impossible for a pregnant woman . In this situation , she may eventually decide to quit the job . Their reflections were often triggered by their own experi - ences or some specific life events . For example , informant P4 had a daughter about six years ago . He said : If my daughter decides to be a software engineer after graduating from college , shall I encourage her or not ? I won’t , if the situation is still like today . People just don’t respect women in software development . In this example , his baby girl presented him with an opportunity to reflect on gender inequalities in software development . B . Attitude : Being Aware of Different Beliefs and Perspectives on Men’s Dominance in Software Development , and Accepting Them It is no doubt that the view of assuming all men as suppressive and negligent of women’s situation and gender inequalities is out of date . Slightly less than two - thirds of informants agree that it was justified that women , as a minority group in the software development profession , should have their concerns . They also agree that such concerns should be heard . They understand that women were often isolated from the majority’s networks , so their concerns were hard to be addressed seriously . For example , informant P18 commented : If you are a woman , a woman writing code , and look around , it is hard to find other women in your company’s office blocks . You would feel small and isolated . You have to face many things by yourself . You need to behave like a man . You try to make other people forget that you’re a woman . But you don’t have the support network for all of these messes in your company . Working like a man does not make you become a part of the men’s world . Things were getting even more complicated when a female software engineer had multiple identities of minorities . Ac - cording to P3 , many women software engineers in the US software development industry are Asian . He said : Being Asian women software developers makes their life even harder . For any manager , it is always easier to blame an Asian girl than blame a blonde . I remember there is some research that people are pickier about Asian women . It is fair to say , in most software development organizations in the US , if not all , policies that explicitly and systematically against women have either been abolished or disappeared . However , there are many subtle ways to marginalize women in their workplaces . Our informants also reflected on this point as the main reason for them to take a pro gender equality attitude . For example , informant P9 told us his story : Many important conversations between men happened in very informal environments “inaccessible” to women . Sometimes , I met our chief architect in the restroom , and got some information there . I also went to gentlemen’s clubs with other buddies . My manager is a woman , but I shall know what’s going on in the top circle better than her . I feel sorry for her . I think we could make things more open to everybody , men and women . In this story , his manager , a woman who had gained a leader - ship position , was still excluded from the men’s networks . In such cases , she may lack the key information for her work or career advancement opportunities . C . Action : Concerning Gender Diversity Agenda , Participat - ing Gender Diversity Programs , yet Excusing Inaction 1 ) Concerning and Participating : Sociologists had ob - served that a fair amount of men had growing concerns about gender inequalities and are willing to review and reflect on their own behaviors [ 38 ] . They were often concerned if software development organizations had gender diversity agenda and used it as an important factor in decision - making . For instance , an informant told us that he rejected a com - pany’s job offer because that company treated women in a “very unfair way . ” Besides , when there are opportunities ( e . g . , organizational programs to improve gender diversity ) , typical integrationists would like to take them to participate . For example , P16 told us that he was proud of what he did to improve gender equality in his department . In the last couple of years , I mentored two female engineers and five female interns . If a female engineer asks for help , I seldom reject it . It looks silly , but I am really happy to help them grow . I am currently working with a few colleagues to organize a female hackathon in our company . I don’t get paid for these things , but I am proud of being a part . 2 ) Excusing Inaction : Although many integrationists have started to participate in various gender diversity programs , it is not uncommon for them to justify their inaction in organizational situations . 3 ) It Is Not My / My Organization’s Priority : While the vast majority of the informants agreed on the existence of problems related to gender inequalities in their organizations , not everyone believes these problems are urgent and require immediate actions to fix them . They often argued that solving 30 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . gender inequalities is not their organization’s priority . For the majority of informants , they agreed that it is legitimated to give up efforts on solving gender inequalities for business purposes . For example , informant P20 described his company’s situation to us : Our company is a small startup . We have to spend most of our energy and resources to survive . Our technical team has 17 men . But how many women ? Zero ! It is not good at all . But , you know , hiring a good male developer is much easier and cheaper . It is a market reality ; you must respect the reality in the business world , not somebody’s ideology . Otherwise , the market will punish you . Many business executives may tell you they favor gender equality , but if you have a chance to have a close look at their real behaviors [ laughter ] , they are better capitalists . Several informants insisted that gender inequalities should not be brought out separately and are not more impor - tant / urgent than other forms of inequalities . Informant P5 , who is an African - American and has over 20 years experience in software development , said that : When I was a student at UCSC . I was interning here . I think I was the only black person in the entire department at that time . I don’t remember if there were any female engineers . Now , nine female engineers are working here , and both our new hires are female . But I am still the only black person . Gender is a problem , but it is improving . Race is another problem , but I haven’t seen any improvement in the last 20 years . Informant P2 echoed P5 ’s opinion by emphasizing a com - prehensive action plan to diversify his organization’s work - force . He gave us some statistics about their organizations : Women hold about 20 % of all leadership positions . That is not an encouraging number because 30 % of [ his company’s name ] are women . However , it is not that bad if you know that only 2 % of the leadership positions are for African Americans and 4 % for Hispanics . What we need is a plan for all underrepresented groups and some execution . Moreover , it is interesting to find people in software de - velopment often extend technical logic when thinking and approaching organizational issues . Another informant ( P12 ) commented : When we have bugs in [ a software system developed by P12’s company ] , we prioritize them to solve the most severe first . Now , there are many bugs in our company ; the gender problem is one of them . But we do not really need to treat it as our priority or one of the top ten . Because leaving it there may cause only 1 % or even 0 . 01 % performance loss . Hiring better developers is our top priority . They can be men or women . Honestly , we are not as big as FANG 2 ; we are not listed [ on the stock 2 FANG refers to four big Internet companies : Facebook , Amazon , Netflix , and Google . market ] . So , we are not under the same pressure from the public and media to solve gender inequalities . 4 ) Gender Inequalities Could Not Be Fixed at Individual and Organization Levels : Several informants also argued that gender inequalities could not be solved by software develop - ment organizations only . They argued that gender inequalities are macro - level problems involving the entire society ; their organizations as micro - units of the society could not bear all the responsibilities . Informant P17 explained such positions using an analogy : My company is an end consumer of the entire “software engineer” supply chain . I mean , you can’t ask an end consumer to deal with the entire supply chain’s problem . I’m from the other LA [ Louisiana ] . You know that it is a place where women are supposed to be despaired housewives and stay at home . They never want their girl to be a professional . Education systems fail to train good women engineers . We have one of the lowest women work participation rates among all industrialized countries . Gender inequalities are our society , culture , religion , and everybody’s mistakes . I don’t deny these companies’ responsibilities . But many others are more responsible than companies . VII . T RANSFORMATIONIST A . Belief : Recognizing the Necessity of Gender Diversity in Software Development , Seeking It Proactively 1 ) The Debt Men Owed to Women in Last 4 , 000 Years : Transformationists view gender inequalities are historical problems . The current gender inequalities result from the suppression of women in almost the entire human history . By relating gender inequalities in software development to a broad historical background , transformationists formed their progres - sive beliefs on gender inequality in their organizations and the software industry . For example , informant P15 explained : When I was young , I once believed one could be success - ful if he was smart and worked hard in the United States . As I am getting old , I realize that it is not true because the dominant groups in societies always systematically make some groups in the hard mode . Of course , what men did to women . We destroy their independence . If you read the wiki article : Legal rights of women in history , you will reach the same conclusion as me . It is a debt and a sin . Now we have a chance to pay it back . So we should start from the situations near us . Even in modern society , woman has to live their life according to men - dominated society’s expectations . Informant P8 told us one of his observations . When he worked with his orga - nization’s marketing team , he noticed that all women’s faces that appeared in their product brochure were “ Photoshoped ” to remove the wrinkles while nobody cared about the wrinkles on men’s faces . “ There are many such subtle things to force women to like women . ” he commented . 31 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . 2 ) Nothing Could Change if Waiting Other’s Conscience : By realizing the necessity of gender diversity in software de - velopment , transformationists believe it should be proactively sought . They discarded the idea of waiting for the change to happen . As informant P13 explained to us : I used to think the United States is the most civilized country on the earth . But I was shocked when taking a financial history class in college . The lecturer told us it took 16 years for women to be granted the legal right to open a credit card in their own name . So you guess what I learned from it ? People need to fight for the right they deserve , not wait . If you just wait , nothing will happen , and nothing will change . Putting all the hope in others’ consciences is pretty risky . B . Attitude : Feeling Antipathy to Men’s Dominance in Soft - ware Development , Being Passionate to Change Transformationists often felt antipathy to men’s dominance . For example , informant P10 , who worked in Gamma , told us that some people in the senior management of his company often viewed women who put their careers over their families as employees who did not fit the company’s values . This made him very sympathetic to the dilemma of women software engineers and feel disgusting : As a woman , if you work hard , they tell you that we can’t promote you because avoiding family responsibilities does not fit the company’s values . If you tell them you are going to take the responsibility of being a new mom , they try to manage out you . It is disgusting . You have to be a superwoman . Oh , that doesn’t work either ; they will find another way to destroy your career . C . Action : Advocating and Promoting Gender Diversity Proactively , Taking Measures to Combat Toxic Men’s Dom - inance 1 ) Championing Pro Gender Equality Activities : Trans - formationaists took various forms of activities to promote gender equality in software development within and beyond their organizations . Some of them were regular coaches in the summer girl programming camp . An informant and his friend developed an internal Web App to help to locate potential mentors in their company . We cannot enumerate all their contributions , but every small piece they did is counted toward the ultimate goal of gender equality . Compared with integra - tionalists , transformationaists were not merely participating in these activities but often played the leader or organizer role . For example , informant P10 initiated a Robotics Programming Mentoring program for local middle school girls from lower - income families . He also served in the program chair role for seven years , growing the program from 6 participants to over 200 . According to what he told us , this voluntary work took over 200 hours of effort and over 6 , 000 personal funds per year . Nevertheless , he believed it was a worthwhile endeavor for it brings “ fair opportunity and equality to the next generation . ” 2 ) Voicing for the Insulted and Humiliated : Transforma - tionists believed men’s dominance should be publicly chal - lenged and dismantled . Therefore , they took multiple mea - sures to combat men’s dominance . They often had a moral obligation to voice for the insulted and humiliated gender group in their organization and community . Informant P13 , as a transformationist , emphasized the importance of voicing for the non - dominated groups . If I am not a developer , I would be a social activist . I used to be one when I was a college student , running a student group to fight local poverty in Chattanooga . Since then , I have known it is important to let the poor people , the insulted and humiliated people , be heard . Otherwise , the dominant group will defame them , saying they are lazy , stupid , and do not deserve to be treated fairly . Just like some people in our industry did . Transformationists were not restricted by their own sphere of influence but pushed the boundaries . For them , the word “transform” often meant to make other people become trans - formationists too . For example , as a team lead , P13 encour - aged his team members to be more proactive and exercise their collective influence to make changes in their organization . VIII . I NCONSISTENCIES AND T RANSITIONS A . Inconsistencies While the above three types well captured the key char - acteristics of men software engineers’ orientations in gen - der inequalities , we also noticed some minor inconsistencies among belief , attitude , and action . That is , while one might hold one type’s beliefs and attitudes , but act in another type’s way . Particularly , our study found two kinds of potential inconsistencies . The first happened between fundamentalists and integra - tionists . Some fundamentalists , while having rigid beliefs and attitudes , might also participate in some gender diversity activities . Their participation might result from many reasons , e . g . , social pressure , organizations’ requirements , and so on . Though they may not truthfully support such activities , their participation should be encouraged because fundamentalists’ beliefs and attitudes , if not put into action , were not quite harmful . Meanwhile , this also evidences that even funda - mentalists had to follow the social practices if a pro - gender equality environment had been established . The second type of inconsistency happened between inte - grationists and transformantionists . Some transformantionists , while they had formed the corresponding beliefs and attitudes , were reluctant to take action . We noticed a big obstacle was the construction and communication of their masculinities identity , particularly for those with relatively conservative backgrounds . They often worried that leading pro - gender equality activities would hurt their masculine images , making people think of them as less competitive and ambitious . These were often assumed to be critical success factors in the software devel - opment profession . Such inconsistencies , to some degree , reflected the deep tensions in the development of gender equality in recent 32 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . years . On the one hand , gender equality had become a part of mainstream values . Even those who had different beliefs or attitudes , i . e . , fundamentalists , often do not want to or dare to put them into action ( the inconsistencies between fundamentalists and integrationists ) . On the other hand , we noticed the old values were still powerful enough to prohibit people’s behavior , particularly at the transformationist level . Such phenomena were not only existing in the gender equality area . Researchers had well known those transformationists’ struggles in race / class equality areas [ 39 ] . B . Transitions 1 ) Progresses : It was not surprising to observe progressive transitions , i . e . , from fundamentalists to integrationists , and from integrationists to transformations . The latter happened much more frequently than the former . The transition process from integrationists to transformations often occurred in the close interpersonal interactions between two types of indi - viduals . An integrationist may learn from his transformations role models in their interactions . There was often no cultural burden for such a transition since they were basically sharing similar value propositions . The transition from fundamentalists to integrationists was not that easy . Such a transition depended on the deconstruction and reconstruction of an individual’s value system . In some sense , they had to renounce their orig - inal cultural values . In our 21 interviews , only one informant indicated that he experienced such a process when he moved to the University of Colorado Boulder to pursue his graduate degree from Gadsden , AL , and discovered his homosexual orientation during the same time . For him , it was an extremely “ painful ” process . 2 ) Retrogrades : Note that transitions were bi - directional and not necessarily from the pro men’s dominance side to the pro - gender diversity side . While most transitions were that an informant became more gender - sensitive , a few cases did show some retrograde , particularly when some social and organiza - tional contexts changed . For example , many software develop - ment organizations recently joined the trend of supporting and implementing affirmative action . Such practices caused some men software engineers’ frustration , which made them change gender equality orientations . For example , informant P12 told us about his frustration with his prior employer : [ His prior employer ] pushed affirmative action too far . All kinds of support are ready for women and people of color . They can expect people in management to help get promotions , good annual reviews , and higher bonuses . If you are a white man , congratulations ! Helping you won’t make the management people write down “promoting diversity” in their KPI reviews or resumes . An informant further questioned if Affirmative Action is equal to fairness . Informant P7 challenged the interviewer with the following scenario : Let’s assume you are on the job market . You are going to graduate from Cornell computer science in three months . But you owe 200K in debt ; you need a job . You have passed your dream company’s six rounds of interviews . Your performances are phenomenal . However , the company can’t hire you because they need to save the headcount for gender diversity . The company then hires a girl who is not as good as you . Is it fair to you ? IX . D ISCUSSIONS In this section , we are going to briefly discuss the theoretical and practical implications of the study reported in this article . We also briefly discuss the limitations of the study . A . Implications 1 ) Theoretical Implication : Studying Men Software Engi - neers Is Worthwhile : This study’s main contribution to the literature was the development of the theory of men software engineers’ orientations in gender inequalities . Such an empiri - cal theory featured three characteristics : novel , comprehensive , and contemporary . First , the literature on gender inequalities in the software development profession has predominantly focused on the barriers and challenges faced by women software engineers as a minority group . Although some recent literature did consider the interactions between men and women in software development , e . g . , [ 22 ] , men software engineers’ orientations in gender issues have not been systematically investigated . As far as our current knowledge , there is no extant literature in software engineering , considering men software engineers’ experiences and perspectives on gender issues . By filling the gap in understanding the numerically dominant group , the theoretical framework thus had high novelty . Second , our findings uncovered diverse beliefs , attitudes , and actions among men software engineers , when coming to gender issues within the context of software develop - ment . Thus , we could develop a comprehensive picture of gender inequalities in software development . Such a picture would help researchers from multiple aspects . First , it enabled researchers to develop an understanding of a trajectory of change related to perspectives of gender inequalities . Second , it allowed researchers to develop appropriate interventions to address gender inequalities from multiple dimensions and levels , rather than ignoring a majority of organization citizens , i . e . , men software engineers . As indicated by our data , without communication with men about why some policies are being implemented to support women specifically , they may lead to retrograde in men software engineers’ orientations ( see Section VIII . B as an example ) . Lastly , being contemporary contained meanings of two aspects . In the first place , when people thought of “gender inequalities” , they might come to the historical feminism movement starting from the late 1970s . However , after several decades , it has become a polymorphic movement exhibiting rich diversity and differences , under different contexts . Modern theories should chronicle such changes , particularly , incorpo - rating men’s understandings of these issues , and our theory could serve this purpose well . In the second place , being contemporary also means that our theory serves as a snapshot 33 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . and reflects the social reality of the long pathway toward gender equality in the software development profession . It became out - of - date immediately after it was proposed . It should be a referential point when examining future evolution of men’s orientations of gender inequalities . B . Practical Implication : Changing People’s Mind is Hard , Change Their Actions First Our results suggest that there were still some men software engineers taking gender blind or against gender equality positions . Moreover , while many of them agreed that James Damore was an extremist , they were more or less sharing some of Damore’s opinions and arguments . Emphasizing the biological and psychological differences between men and women is still one of the main reasons for some funda - mentalists ignoring gender equality . When an organization wants to implement measures to reduce gender inequalities , their uncooperative attitudes and actions may be a significant threat to such measures’ effectiveness ; for example , creating obstacles in hiring qualified women developers [ 40 ] . Thus , the challenge is how to change their minds . This is a very hard question that requires tremendous efforts from both researchers and policymakers in software development organizations . As the first step to achieving this goal , we believe open conversations between men and women have particular impor - tance . A software development organization should not fear men software engineers expressing opinions against gender equality . Instead , organizations may encourage them to speak out , which is better than letting them silently do damage to pro - gender equality measures . Simply firing them , as what Google had done to James Damore , is a quick fix for avoiding further hurting the company’s public image but far from an optimal solution . Indeed , an organization may view such con - troversial events as opportunities to facilitate open dialogues and to educate their employees [ 41 ] . Besides , our results suggest that personal experiences ( e . g . , observing his female manager being excluded from men’s network , see Section VII . B ) with the gender inequalities and women’s struggles would help men reflect on and revise their own positions on gender issues . Software development organizations may develop some programs to increase such personal exposure . However , cultivating an environment to oppose some pro men’s dominant actions might still have practical value . Sec - tion VII reported that fundamentalists might also participate in gender diversity activities due to social and policy pressures , although they did not truthfully believe in the values of gender diversity . Thus , researchers and policymakers may need to consider people’s actions together with their contexts and design proper interventions to facilitate changes , even such changes only at the behavioral level . Besides , many startups might owe certain gender diversity debt – no or only a token representation of women – throughout its growth stages which could be costly later for dealing with it [ 42 ] . Thus action earlier is essential for preventing the rises of such debts from being persistent . C . Limitations As with any empirical study , the work reported in this article has some limitations . First , given the sensitivity of the topic , we cannot guarantee that our participants expressed their thoughts without considering them to be socially desirable . Such a problem is common in similar topics [ 43 ] – [ 45 ] . Sec - ond , while we are confident about the scientific rigor of the study execution and the data analysis , it is unavoidable that the interpretation of the data would be influenced by researchers’ subjectivity [ 46 ] – [ 48 ] . Third , the sample of informants may be biased . No matter what their orientations are , those who accepted the invitations for interviews are at least the men sensitive to gender issues . For those who declined our invita - tions , they may be the “silent majority” [ 49 ] . Capturing their perceptions requires further efforts using multiple techniques , including techniques using secondary data [ 50 ] . Third , we have to admit the difficulties of creating clear categories for men software engineers’ orientations in gender inequalities based on people’s narratives in interviews . An interviewee’s narratives are not necessarily to be coherent and consistent discourses and may be contradictory to his / her own words . However , in the bottom line , informant narratives do demon - strate the complexities of men software engineers’ orientation of gender inequalities and provide an overarching framework , which again emphasizes the importance of considering men software engineers . X . C ONCLUDING R EMARKS In this paper , we reported a qualitative study focusing on gender inequalities in professional software development . Unlike most extant literature , we took a unique focus on men software engineers . By interviewing 21 men software engi - neers and qualitatively analyzing their narratives , our study developed an empirical theory of men software engineers’ ori - entations regarding gender inequalities in their organizations and the industry . Such an empirical theory highlighted the three dimensions of orientations , namely , belief , attitude , and action , which formed a systematic and consistent framework for understanding men software engineers . The empirical theory would be able to serve as a compass for future work aiming at developing an understanding of a trajectory of change related to perspectives of gender inequalities . To sum up , we demonstrate that men’s understanding of gender inequalities in software development must be taken into account in solving gender inequalities . Thus , open conversa - tions with men software engineers are necessary and urgent via multiple channels . We see this as the most significant con - tribution of this study . For future work , researchers interested in gender issues in software development , including ourselves , shall pay more attention to men software engineers by studying their beliefs , preferences , and constraints on gender issues , as well as explore possible interventions fostering their pro - gender equality understandings and corresponding actions . Considering their vast majority , any small changes would make meaningful changes in achieving gender equality goals . 34 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . D ATA A VAILABILITY Our data come from interviews with participants working for professional software development organizations . Even with de - identification techniques ( removal / redaction of proper names , specific details , etc . ) , the anonymity of participants and their organizations cannot be fully guaranteed , particularly for those who were working for small companies . Due to these privacy and potential legal concerns , as well as the sensitivity of the topics of the study , we can only share this dataset with others who agree to maintain the anonymity of the participants and obtain their own IRB approval ( from their own institutions ) for the use of the data , but we cannot post the dataset in an open repository . Researchers interested in obtaining the dataset should contact the authors directly . A CKNOWLEDGMENT The work is partially supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China ( NSFC ) under the grants 62076232 , and 62172049 . The authors would like to thank all participants , regardless their opinions , as well as anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments and suggestions . Corresponding author : Wei Wang . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] F . D . Blau , P . Brummund , and A . Y . - H . Liu , “Trends in occupational segregation by gender 1970 - 2009 : Adjusting for the impact of changes in the occupational coding system , ” Demography , vol . 50 , no . 2 , pp . 471 – 492 , 2013 . [ 2 ] P . England , “The gender revolution : Uneven and stalled , ” Gender and Society , vol . 24 , no . 2 , pp . 149 – 166 , 2010 . [ 3 ] datausa . io , “Demographics of software developers ( 2015 ) , ” https : / / datausa . io / profile / soc / 15113X / , 2015 , [ Online ; accessed 09 / 26 / 2017 ] . [ 4 ] D . Rossi and S . Zacchiroli , “Worldwide gender differences in public code contributions and how they have been affected by the covid - 19 pandemic , ” in 2022 IEEE / ACM 44th International Conference on Software Engineering : Software Engineering in Society ( ICSE - SEIS ) , 2022 , pp . 172 – 183 . [ 5 ] J . E . Fountain , “Constructing the information society : women , informa - tion technology , and design , ” Technology in Society , vol . 22 , no . 1 , pp . 45 – 62 , 2000 . [ 6 ] C . Mendez , H . S . Padala , Z . Steine - Hanson , C . Hilderbrand , A . Horvath , C . Hill , L . Simpson , N . Patil , A . Sarma , and M . Burnett , “Open source barriers to entry , revisited : A sociotechnical perspective , ” in Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Software Engineering , ser . ICSE ’18 . New York , NY , USA : ACM , 2018 , pp . 1004 – 1015 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 3180155 . 3180241 [ 7 ] G . T . Richard , Y . B . Kafai , B . Adleberg , and O . Telhan , “Stitchfest : Di - versifying a college hackathon to broaden participation and perceptions in computing , ” in Proc . SIGCSE’15 , 2015 , pp . 114 – 119 . [ 8 ] B . Trinkenreich , I . Wiese , A . Sarma , M . Gerosa , and I . Steinmacher , “Women’s participation in open source software : a survey of the liter - ature , ” ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology ( TOSEM ) , vol . 31 , no . 4 , pp . 1 – 37 , 2022 . [ 9 ] H . S . Qiu , A . Nolte , A . Brown , A . Serebrenik , and B . Vasilescu , “Going farther together : The impact of social capital on sustained participation in open source , ” in Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Software Engineering , ser . ICSE ’19 . Piscataway , NJ , USA : IEEE Press , 2019 , pp . 688 – 699 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ICSE . 2019 . 00078 [ 10 ] P . Tourani , B . Adams , and A . Serebrenik , “Code of conduct in open source projects , ” in Proc . SANER . IEEE , 2017 , pp . 24 – 33 . [ 11 ] E . D . Canedo , R . Bonif´acio , M . V . Okimoto , A . Serebrenik , G . Pinto , and E . Monteiro , “Work practices and perceptions from women core developers in oss communities , ” in Proceedings of the 14th ACM / IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement ( ESEM ) , ser . ESEM ’20 . New York , NY , USA : Association for Computing Machinery , 2020 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3382494 . 3410682 [ 12 ] E . Anderson and M . McCormack , “Inclusive masculinity theory : Overview , reflection and refinement , ” Journal of Gender Studies , vol . 27 , no . 5 , pp . 547 – 561 , 2018 . [ 13 ] L . Gaston , R . Magrath , and E . Anderson , “From hegemonic to inclusive masculinities in english professional football : Marking a cultural shift , ” Journal of Gender Studies , vol . 27 , no . 3 , pp . 301 – 312 , 2018 . [ 14 ] S . Roberts , Young Working - class Men in Transition . Routledge , 2018 . [ 15 ] C . Duncanson , “Hegemonic masculinity and the possibility of change in gender relations , ” Men and Masculinities , vol . 18 , no . 2 , pp . 231 – 248 , 2015 . [ 16 ] C . L . Ridgeway , “Interaction and the conservation of gender inequality : Considering employment , ” American Sociological Review , pp . 218 – 235 , 1997 . [ 17 ] N . Sattari and R . L . Sandefur , “Gender in academic stem : A focus on men faculty , ” Gender , Work & Organization , vol . 26 , no . 2 , pp . 158 – 179 , 2019 . [ 18 ] D . Tomaskovic - Devey and S . Skaggs , “Sex segregation , labor process organization , and gender earnings inequality , ” American Journal of Sociology , vol . 108 , no . 1 , pp . 102 – 128 , 2002 . [ 19 ] A . May , J . Wachs , and A . Hann´ak , “Gender differences in participation and reward on stack overflow , ” Empirical Software Engineering , pp . 1 – 23 , 2019 . [ 20 ] B . Vasilescu , A . Capiluppi , and A . Serebrenik , “Gender , representation and online participation : A quantitative study of stackoverflow , ” in 2012 International Conference on Social Informatics . IEEE , 2012 , pp . 332 – 338 . [ 21 ] N . Imtiaz , J . Middleton , J . Chakraborty , N . Robson , G . Bai , and E . Murphy - Hill , “Investigating the effects of gender bias on github , ” in 2019 IEEE / ACM 41st International Conference on Software Engineering ( ICSE ) , May 2019 , pp . 700 – 711 . [ 22 ] A . Lee and J . C . Carver , “Floss participants’ perceptions about gender and inclusiveness : A survey , ” in 2019 IEEE / ACM 41st International Conference on Software Engineering ( ICSE ) , May 2019 , pp . 677 – 687 . [ 23 ] G . Rodr´ıguez - P´erez , R . Nadri , and M . Nagappan , “Perceived diversity in software engineering : a systematic literature review , ” Empirical Software Engineering , vol . 26 , no . 5 , pp . 1 – 38 , 2021 . [ 24 ] Y . Wang and D . Redmiles , “Implicit gender biases in professional software development : An empirical study , ” in Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Software Engineering : Software Engineering in Society , ser . ICSE - SEIS ’19 . Piscataway , NJ , USA : IEEE Press , 2019 , pp . 1 – 10 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ICSE - SEIS . 2019 . 00009 [ 25 ] M . Vorvoreanu , L . Zhang , Y . - H . Huang , C . Hilderbrand , Z . Steine - Hanson , and M . Burnett , “From gender biases to gender - inclusive design : An empirical investigation , ” in Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ser . CHI ’19 . New York , NY , USA : ACM , 2019 , pp . 53 : 1 – 53 : 14 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300283 [ 26 ] H . S . Padala , C . Mendez , F . Fronchetti , I . Steinmacher , Z . Steine - Hanson , C . Hilderbrand , A . Horvath , C . Hill , L . Simpson , M . Burnett , M . Gerosa , and A . Sarma , “How gender - biased tools shape newcomer experiences in oss projects , ” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineer - ing , vol . 48 , no . 1 , pp . 241 – 259 , 2022 . [ 27 ] G . A . A . Prana , D . Ford , A . Rastogi , D . Lo , R . Purandare , and N . Nagap - pan , “Including everyone , everywhere : Understanding opportunities and challenges of geographic gender - inclusion in oss , ” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , vol . 48 , no . 9 , pp . 3394 – 3409 , 2022 . [ 28 ] T . Kanij , J . Grundy , J . McIntosh , A . Sarma , and G . Aniruddha , “A new approach towards ensuring gender inclusive se job advertisements , ” in 2022 IEEE / ACM 44th International Conference on Software Engineer - ing : Software Engineering in Society ( ICSE - SEIS ) , 2022 , pp . 1 – 11 . [ 29 ] B . Vasilescu , D . Posnett , B . Ray , M . G . van den Brand , A . Serebrenik , P . Devanbu , and V . Filkov , “Gender and tenure diversity in github teams , ” in Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ser . CHI ’15 . New York , NY , USA : Association for Computing Machinery , 2015 , p . 3789 – 3798 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702549 35 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . [ 30 ] E . Zolduoarrati and S . A . Licorish , “On the value of encouraging gen - der tolerance and inclusiveness in software engineering communities , ” Information and Software Technology , vol . 139 , p . 106667 , 2021 . [ 31 ] G . Catolino , F . Palomba , D . A . Tamburri , A . Serebrenik , and F . Ferrucci , “Gender diversity and women in software teams : How do they affect community smells ? ” in 2019 IEEE / ACM 41st International Conference on Software Engineering : Software Engineering in Society ( ICSE - SEIS ) , 2019 , pp . 11 – 20 . [ 32 ] T . A . Arcury and S . A . Quandt , “Participant recruitment for qualitative research : A site - based approach to community research in complex societies , ” Human Organization , vol . 58 , no . 2 , pp . 128 – 133 , 1999 . [ 33 ] M . D . Myers , Qualitative Research in Business and Management . Sage , 2013 . [ 34 ] H . Boeije , “A purposeful approach to the constant comparative method in the analysis of qualitative interviews , ” Quality and Quantity , vol . 36 , no . 4 , pp . 391 – 409 , 2002 . [ 35 ] B . G . Glaser , “The constant comparative method of qualitative analysis , ” Social Problems , vol . 12 , no . 4 , pp . 436 – 445 , 1965 . [ 36 ] G . R . Howard , We Can’t Teach What We Don’t Know : White Teachers , Multiracial Schools . Teachers College Press , 2016 . [ 37 ] N . M . Stephens and C . S . Levine , “Opting out or denying discrimination ? how the framework of free choice in american society influences perceptions of gender inequality , ” Psychological Science , vol . 22 , no . 10 , pp . 1231 – 1236 , 2011 . [ 38 ] E . Lamont , “The limited construction of an egalitarian masculinity : College - educated men’s dating and relationship narratives , ” Men and Masculinities , vol . 18 , no . 3 , pp . 271 – 292 , 2015 . [ 39 ] J . C . Jupp , T . R . Berry , and T . J . Lensmire , “Second - wave white teacher identity studies : A review of white teacher identity literatures from 2004 through 2014 , ” Review of Educational Research , vol . 86 , no . 4 , pp . 1151 – 1191 , 2016 . [ 40 ] S . Campero , “Hiring and intra - occupational gender segregation in soft - ware engineering , ” American Sociological Review , vol . 86 , no . 1 , pp . 60 – 92 , 2021 . [ 41 ] J . E . Mills , M . E . Ayre , and J . Gill , Gender inclusive engineering education . Routledge , 2011 . [ 42 ] Y . Engel , T . Lewis , M . S . Cardon , and T . Hentschel , “Signaling diversity debt : Startup gender composition and the gender gap in joiners’ interest , ” Academy of Management Journal , pp . Accepted , to appear , 2022 . [ 43 ] J . Chung and G . S . Monroe , “Exploring social desirability bias , ” Journal of Business Ethics , vol . 44 , no . 4 , pp . 291 – 302 , 2003 . [ 44 ] F . Kreuter , S . Presser , and R . Tourangeau , “Social desirability bias in cati , ivr , and web surveys : The effects of mode and question sensitivity , ” Public Opinion Quarterly , vol . 72 , no . 5 , pp . 847 – 865 , 2008 . [ 45 ] A . C . Mooney , C . K . Campbell , M . - J . Ratlhagana , J . S . Grignon , S . Mazibuko , E . Agnew , H . Gilmore , S . Barnhart , A . Puren , S . B . Shade , T . Liegler , and S . A . Lippman , “Beyond social desirability bias : Investigating inconsistencies in self - reported hiv testing and treatment behaviors among hiv - positive adults in north west province , south africa , ” Aids and Behavior , vol . 22 , no . 7 , pp . 2368 – 2379 , 2018 . [ 46 ] J . Lazar , J . H . Feng , and H . Hochheiser , Research Methods in Human - Computer Interaction . Morgan Kaufmann , 2010 . [ 47 ] C . Seaman , “Qualitative methods in empirical studies of software engineering , ” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , vol . 25 , no . 4 , pp . 557 – 572 , 1999 . [ 48 ] S . Spiggle , “Analysis and interpretation of qualitative data in consumer research , ” Journal of Consumer Research , vol . 21 , no . 3 , pp . 491 – 503 , 1994 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / academic . microsoft . com / paper / 2125706233 [ 49 ] C . F . Karpowitz , T . Mendelberg , and L . Shaker , “Gender inequality in deliberative participation , ” American Political Science Review , vol . 106 , no . 3 , pp . 533 – 547 , 2012 . [ 50 ] L . Wang , J . Niu , X . Liu , and K . Mao , “The silent majority speaks : Inferring silent users’ opinions in online social networks , ” in The World Wide Web Conference , ser . WWW ’19 . New York , NY , USA : ACM , 2019 , pp . 3321 – 3327 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 3308558 . 3313423 36 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply .