The Kindness of Strangers : The Usefulness of Electronic Weak Ties for Technical Advice David Constant • Lee Sproull • Sara Kiesler Department of Social and Decision Sciences , Carnegie Mellon University , Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania 15213 School of Management , Boston University , Boston , Massachusetts 02215 Department of Social and Decision Sciences , Carnegie Mellon University , Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania 15213 Abstract People use weak ties—relationships with acquaintances or strangers—to seek help unavailable from friends or col - leagues . Yet in the absence of personal relationships or the expectation of direct reciprocity , help from weak ties might not be forthcoming or could be of low quality . We examined the practice of distant employees ( strangers ) exchanging tech - nical advice through a large organizational computer net - work . A survey of advice seekers and those who replied was conducted to test hypotheses about the viability and useful - ness of such electronic weak tie exchanges . Theories of organizational motivation suggest that positive regard for the larger organization can substitute for direct incentives or personal relationships in motivating people to help others . Theories of weak ties suggest that the usefulness of this help may depend on the number of ties , the diversity of ties , or the resources of help providers . We hypothesized that , in an organizational context , the firm - specific resources and organizational motivation of people who provide advice will predict the usefulness of advice . We investigated these theories in a study of employees of a global computer manufacturer . We collected survey and ob - servational data on the relationships between information seekers and information providers ; the number , diversity , resources , and motivations of information providers , and subjective ratings of the usefulness of the advice ( from both parties in the exchange ) and whether or not the advice solved information seekers ' problems . We found that information providers gave useful advice and solved the problems of information seekers , despite their lack of a personal connection with the seekers . The data support the main hypotheses and provide some support for resource and diversity explanations of weak tie influence . We discuss how this organization ' s culture sustained useful infor - mation exchange through weak ties . ( Organizational Behauior , Communication , Computer Net - works ; Social Networks ; Helping ; Altruism ; Organizational Cit - izenship ; Information Exchange ; Information Systems ) In geographically dispersed organizations , employees cannot always get useful advice from their local col - leagues . If expertise is not available locally , simply finding out who has it may be difficult . Inducing those who have it to share it may be even more difficult . People in organizations usually prefer to exchange help through strong collegial ties , which develop with physi - cal proximity ( e . g . , Allen 1977 , Monge et al . 1985 , Kraut et al . 1988 ) , group membership ( Zurcher 1965 , Crane 1971 ) , a history of prior relationships ( Krackhardt 1992 , 1994a ) , and demographic similarity ( Wagner et al . 1984 , Zenger and Lawrence 1989 ) . De - pending upon unknown employees at distant locations for technical advice requires depending upon the kind - ness of strangers . Computer networks , which are being used by grow - ing numbers of organizations , make it relatively easy and inexpensive to ask distant acquaintances for advice via e - mail . They also make it possible to ask strangers for advice . A person can post a query of the form , " Does anybody know . . . ? " to a large electronic distri - bution list , electronic conference , or computer bulletin board without knowing who might read it . People who read the query can reply without having . to know the person who posted it . Computer networks can link people in the absence of acquaintance , physical prox - imity , group membership , a history of prior relation - 1047 - 7039 / 96 / 0702 / 0119 / $ 01 . 25 Copyright © 1996 . Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VOL 7 , No . 2 , March - April 1996 119 DAVID CONSTANT , LEE SPROULL AND SARA KIESLER The Kindness of Strangers ships , and demographic similarity . This paper explores the process of giving and receiving technical advice over an organizational computer network . We draw upon theories of weak ties and prosocial motivation to suggest how this process can lead to useful advice and we use data from one multinational firm to illustrate the process . Theoretical Framework and Predictions A theory of " the strength of weak ties " proposed by Granovetter ( 1973 ) suggests that relative strangers could offer an advantage over friends and colleagues in obtaining useful information . Granovetter ( 1973 , 1982 ) argues that strong - tie relationships occur among peo - ple who are similar in many respects ; similar people are likely to know the same things and are unlikely to know dissimilar things . When information is unavail - able through strong ties , people may obtain it through weak ties : relationships characterized by absent or in - frequent contact , lack of emotional closeness , and no history of reciprocal services . Weak ties serve as infor - mation bridges across cliques of strong ties and can offer people access to resources that are not found in their strong - tie relationships . Subsequent research has given some support to this " strength - of - weak - ties " hy - pothesis ( Granovetter 1982 , Brown and Reingen 1987 , Stevenson and Gilly 1991 , Weenig and Midden 1991 ) . Weak tie theorists have proposed three arguments for why weak ties are useful . One argument is simply that weak ties comprise more numerous potential helpers than strong ties do ( Friedkin 1982 ) . Statisti - cally , if weak ties are more numerous than strong ties , then calling on weak ties increases the probability that at least one contact will have useful information . If an employee broadcasts a request for technical informa - tion on a computer network , many people will see the request . Numerous replies increase the probability of finding one correct answer . If the problem is additive , that is , the solution is made up of many parts , numer - ous replies could increase the total usefulness of con - tributions . This argument leads to our first hypothesis : Advice from more people will be more useful than advice from fewer people . There are some reasons for arguing that numerous weak ties might not result in more useful advice , how - ever . A bigger sample of weak ties is likely to increase bad advice as well as good advice . Very poor advice might be especially costly , causing confusion , uncer - tainty , or " information overload . " Numerous weak ties , therefore , will be useful only to the extent that the benefits of more good advice outweigh the costs of more bad advice . Perhaps it is not the number of people giving advice , per se , that makes weak ties useful but the range or diversity of those ties . Burt ( 1983 ) points out that if all of a person ' s weak - tie contacts are themselves mem - bers of the same strong - tie group , then the expertise offered by those ties will be redundant . He suggests that it is the extent to which weak - tie contacts tap diverse groups that makes weak ties useful . A diverse range of ties increases the probability of finding a useful answer if expertise is heterogeneously dis - tributed across groups but homogeneously distributed within groups . Group diversity also could increase al - ternative solutions ( people offer different answers ) or provide pieces to a multi - part solution ( people offer partial advice that can be combined into a solution ) . This argument leads to our second hypothesis : Advice from more diverse ties will be more useful than advice from less diverse ties . Useful weak ties might draw upon not merely diverse resources , but superior resources . Lin , Ensel , and Vaughn ( 1981 ) argue that those using weak ties will solicit help from people having desirable resources : wealth , status , prestige , power , or access to others ( see also Lin , Vaughn , and Ensel 1981 , Lin 1982 , DiMaggio and Mohr 1985 , Lin and Dumin 1986 , Marsden and Hurlbert 1988 ) . Investigations evaluating this idea have been concerned primarily with job mobility . Referrals to attractive jobs come from people who have more seniority , higher job status , or more desirable employ - ers . Useful weak - tie contacts therefore tend to have resources that are superior to those of seekers . In this view , the number and range of ties are important only insofar as they tap superior resources . In the context of technical advice , superior resources are ones that increase the probability of a contact ' s offering correct or otherwise useful advice . In an orga - nization , a contact ' s personal resources and social re - sources derived from his or her organizational position , department , or location might be differentially helpful ( e . g . , Krackhardt 1992 ) . Personal resources important in technical help might be the contact ' s technical ex - pertise , industry experience , and firm experience . The more technical expertise and experience a contact has , the more likely that contact will provide useful techni - cal advice . Resources relevant to technical help that depend on job or position are the contact ' s physical proximity to the technical center of the organization and the contact ' s hierarchical status . Physical proximity to other experts has been shown to be important for the exchange of technical . information ( Allen 1977 , 120 ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VOI . 7 , No . 2 , March - April 1996 DAVID CONSTANT , LEE SPROULL AND SARA KIESLER The Kindness of Strangers Kraut et al . 1990 , Finholt 1993 , Lave 1991 ) . Thus , proximity to the technical center of the organization can be viewed as a useful resource . The relationship of hierarchical position to useful technical help is problematic . Hierarchical position is an important social resource for organizational power ( Krackhardt 1990 ) . However , power may not be rele - vant to technical advice . An organizational cliche is that people whose technical knowledge is outdated are promoted into management . In this view , a contact ' s hierarchical status would be negatively related to use - ful technical knpwledge . Alternatively , even though managers may no longer have useful technical informa - tion themselves , they may know who does have it . In this case , a contact ' s hierarchical status would be posi - tively related to useful technical knowledge . Because we had no way of gauging which organizational re - sources would be most important for giving useful advice , we posed the following general resource hy - pothesis : Advice from people with more resources will be more useful than advice from people with fewer resources . The Problem of Motivation The usefulness of computer network help from strangers is problematic . The help seeker has no direct way of assessing the provider ' s reliability , expertise , possible strategic motives for misinformation , or knowledge about the seeker ' s situation . The seeker also has no control over the provider ' s incentives . The provider has littie information about the seeker and therefore may misunderstand the request for help or advice , use inappropriate assumptions in generating a response , or formulate that response using language or concepts not shared by the seeker . These difficulties should increase with the weakness of the tie , i . e . , with the physical and social distance of the information provider from the seeker . Some theorists suggest that if help is offered in the absence of direct reciprocity , it may not be very useful ( e . g . . Thorn and Connolly 1987 ) . In this view strangers who could offer high quality help will find it too costly do so . Only those who have " nothing better to do " may offer assistance , which is likely to be of poor quality . Even when weak ties are potentially helpful , the motivation of strangers to help may be poor . People provide help to people they know , people they like , people who are similar , and people who have helped them ( e . g . , Festinger et al . 1950 , Fulton et al . 1977 , Kelley and Thibaut 1978 , Dovidio 1984 , Williamson and Clark 1989 , Amato 1990 , Heimer 1992 , Krackhardt 1992 ) . In personal relationships , benefactors them - selves benefit from providing help , either through in - creasing the beneficiary ' s obligation to reciprocate or through receiving the beneficiary ' s esteem or both . Generalized requests for help over a computer net - work do not meet the requirements of personal con - nection . Why would someone respond to a request for help from a stranger when the likelihood of direct personal benefit is low ? Friendship and similarity are unlikely explanations . Personal friendships are uncom - mon across the geographic distances spanned by com - puter networks ( Feldman 1987 ) . Computer networks offer few cues to make demographic similarity salient to a potential benefactor ( Sproull and Kiesler 1986 ) . Also , computer networks do not provide a very rich medium for proffering esteem and gratitude ( Daft and Lengel 1986 ) . Theories of prosocial motivation suggest two alterna - tive processes that could lead people to provide useful technical help to strangers , even when this help is personally costly . First , some theorists have posited that people are not only pragmatic but also expressive of feelings , values , and self - identities ( Bandura 1986 , Schlenker 1985 , Shamir 1991 ) . If technical expertise is important in self - identity , experts can gain personal benefits from helping strangers on a computer network with technical problems . Helping others can increase self - esteem , personal identification with the organiza - tion , self - respect , respect from others , and feelings of commitment ( e . g . , Orr 1989 ) . This reasoning suggests that personal benefits can lead experts to offer techni - cal help even in the absence of personal acquaintance , similarity , or the likelihood of direct reciprocity . How - ever , the usefulness of advice from experts motivated by personal benefit is questionable since such advice may be provided idiosyncratically or without close at - tention to the requirements of information seekers . A second theoretical argument is that instead of direct personal benefit , help on a computer network is founded on organizational citizenship ( Bateman and Organ 1983 , Brief and Motowidlo 1986 ) and norms of generalized reciprocity ( Mauss 1967 , Berkowitz and Daniels 1964 , Titmuss 1971 ) . Faced with a request for help , those who are organizationally motivated would be concerned with such things as how much they are needed , how they can be useful to others , and how their advice might solve organizational problems . Peo - ple who have a strong organizational orientation are likely to be sensitive to the needs of help seekers and to adjust their advice to the requirements of those asking for help . Accordingly , we offer a fourth hypoth - esis : Advice from people who are more organizationally motivated will be more useful than advice from people who are less organizationally motivated . ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VOL 7 , No , 2 , March - April 1996 121 DAVID CONSTANT , LEE SPROULL AND SARA KIESLER The Kindness of Strangers Generalized reciprocity emerges when people have positive regard for the social system in which requests for help are embedded and show respect for it through offering help . Their regard may have an indirect basis in personal experience . For instance , they may have been helped by others on the computer network in the past or they may expect that someone on the network would help them in the future if they had a question . Alternatively , their regard might stem from a more abstract view of the computer network as an organiza - tional resource and worthy institution . In either case offering help is unrelated to direct reciprocity and more related to maintaining the social institution of the network as an organizational resource . Hence in opposition to the prediction developed from an eco - nomic rational theory of exchange ( e . g . , Thorn and Connolly 1987 ) that help providers will be unmotivated people who have nothing better to do and not much to offer , we offer a fifth hypothesis : On average , informa - tion providers will represent a pool of people whose re - sources for helping are at least as good as and perhaps better than those of information seekers . Methodological Perspective Previous research on weak ties has been conducted mainly through studies using retrospective accounts of the search for a successful outcome . These studies do not provide base rate data on all the weak ties that seekers of help tried , and do not include ties that proved useless ( see Nohria 1992 , for one exception ) . Lacking within - search comparisons of individuals ' use - ful and useless contacts , we cannot estimate the true association between weak - tie connections and the out - come of seeking help through weak ties . Further , retro - spective accounts often produce " good stories " ( Ross 1989 ) . Retrospective survey research on the search process may be biased in favor of stories that inflate the usefulness of weak ties . Previous research also has not addressed the liabili - ties of weak - tie searches . Although weak ties poten - tially draw on resources that are more numerous , diverse , or better than strong ties do , they also could generate wasted effort and useless information . By collecting data from information seekers and each of their subsequent information providers , our study pro - vides a way to estimate the overall value of search . Method Research Setting The study was conducted at Tandem Computers Incor - porated , a Fortune 500 computer manufacturer whose headquarters and main technical organization are lo - cated in Silicon Valley . Tandem employs over 11 , 000 people worldwide in the manufacture and sales of its products . Virtually all employees use a corporate com - puter network , which allows employees to send and receive mail messages from computer terminals on their desks . The system is used extensively : employees from all levels of the company and from all locations feel free to ( and in fact do ) send messages to the president , to managers not in their direct chain of command , or to people outside their subunits ; tens of thousands of messages are sent and received each day . The e - mail system at Tandem organizes messages into first - class , second - class , and third - class mail . First - class mail is for person - to - person messages and for work - related distribution lists ( e . g . , All _ Sales _ Reps ) . Second - class mail is for work - related broadcast messages that go to the entire organization , including announcements from headquarters , industry news , and requests for information . Third - class mail is for extracurricular broadcast messages such as restau - rant reviews or " want ads . " The focus of this research is broadcast requests for information appearing on second - class mail . About 30 % of the second class mes - sages on the network contained such requests . An example of a query and responses found in second class mail is given in Appendix A . Study Design and Data Collection The study used an event - driven survey methodology , whose triggering event was a request for information broadcast in second - class mail . During the six - week research period , 82 employees broadcast one or more questions and announced they would make the replies available in public reply files on the network . When each question appeared , we sent survey questionnaires electronically to the information seeker who broadcast the question and to the information providers who replied to the question . ' Information seekers received two surveys : the first asked them about themselves and requested that they keep all replies to their question ; the second survey , sent one week later , asked them to evaluate each reply they had received . The survey sent to information providers asked them for information about themselves and about why they replied to the information seeker . We also captured the text of each question and all replies that had been placed in public reply files . We used Tandem ' s online organizational database to gather data on respondents ' geographic location and hierarchical level . For purposes of comparison we also collected data from an additional 67 employees who broadcast re - 122 ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VOI . 7 , No . 2 , March - April 1996 DAVID CONSTANT , LEE SPROULL AND SARA KIESLER The Kindness of Strangers quests for information but did not create public reply files . We captured the text of their questions and sent them both surveys but we did not collect data from their providers because their providers ' replies had not been made public . Independent and Dependent Variables Strength of Ties and Relationship Variables . We mea - sured the strength of ties by asking information providers how well they knew the information seeker on a 10 - point scale ( 1 = " don ' t know at all " and 10 = " know very well " ) . We measured network history by asking how many questions they had posed and replies they had given in the past year on second class mail . We evaluated the demographic similarity of seek - ers to providers using difference scores on headquar - ters location ( 1 = seeker or provider at headquarters ; 0 = both or neither at headquarters ) , managerial posi - tion ( 1 = seeker or provider is a manager ; 0 = both or neither ) , hierarchical level ( difference in the number of levels from the CEO ) , firm experience ( difference in years of experience ) , and industry experience ( dif - ference in years of experience ) . Our measures of firm and industry experience similarity are roughly equiva - lent to demographic similarity variables used in prior research ( Zenger and Lawrence 1989 ) . Resources . We used years of firm experience and years of experience in the computer industry as mea - sures of resources for both seekers and providers . We estimated the expertise of information providers by asking them on a 10 - point scale : " How informed are you on the subject matter of this question ? " ( 1 = novice and 10 = expert ) . We also used three measures of resources associated with a person ' s organizational po - sition . One was location at headquarters , the site of most engineering and product development ( 0 = no ; 1 = yes ) . Another was whether or not the person held a managerial position . A third was hierarchical level , coded as lower when the employee reported through fewer levels to the CEO . We used two estimates of the range or diversity of the social groups to which information providers be - , longed . Diversity is a group - level variable , a character - istic of the group of information providers who reply to the information seeker ' s request for advice . The mea - sure of group diversity should be relevant to the useful - ness of technical advice . Because Tandem has field offices all over the world , we operationalized diversity for each information seeker ' s set of providers as the number of different countries where information providers were based . Since the firm ' s products and clients differ across countries , and since field offices in each country have staff who were educated in their native land , the more countries represented in a set of replies , the more those replies would be expected to reflect differences in people ' s resources for technical advice . We also operationalized diversity for each in - formation seeker ' s providers as the number of different hierarchical levels of information providers . People at different levels often have different perspectives on a firm ' s approach to problems : for example , on whether a machine is worth fixing , or whether one should rely on experts at headquarters . The more hierarchical levels represented in a group of replies , the more perspec - tives the information seeker receives . ^ Provider Motivation . We measured providers ' moti - vations by asking them to allocate 100 points among several reasons that they might have had for replying to the information seeker . We listed four reasons associ - ated with personal benefits and four reasons associated with organizational motivation . Usefulness and Content of Aid . To measure the use - fulness of advice , we asked information seekers to " please ' award ' $ 0 to $ 25 to each answer based on how helpful it was to you . " We asked information providers to award themselves $ 0 to $ 25 according to how useful they thought their reply was to the information seeker . We also asked information seekers to impose a " fine " of as much as $ 25 on any answer that wasted their time . And we asked information seekers an open - ended question , " What have you done or what do you intend to do as a result of each reply ? " We coded the re - sponses to indicate whether one or more of the replies solved the seeker ' s problem ( solved problem = 1 , did not solve problem = 0 ) . A coder blind to the research hypotheses analyzed the texts of replies to determine their content using the following categories : technical content , story of per - sonal experience , pointer to a person , document , database , or customer , inclusion of a document or e - mail from others , request for clarification , and ex - pression of interest in seeing replies from others . The first author coded a subset of the responses to check for reliability . Scott ' s Pi for inter - coder agreement ranged from 0 . 75 to 1 . 0 , with the exception of the story category , which had a Pi of 0 . 45 , and was dropped from analysis . Analyses The data are grouped , with each group consisting of , data about : ( a ) an information seeker , ( b ) the question broadcast by the seeker , ( c ) the information providers ORGANIZATION SCTENCE / VOI , 7 , No , 2 , March - April 1996 123 DAVID CONSTANT , LEE SPROULL AND SARA KIESLER The Kindness of Strangers who responded to that information seeker , and ( d ) the replies given by the information providers . We tested hypotheses involving individual characteristics , such as the resources of information providers , at the individ - ual level controlling for group ( information seeker ) . This procedure controls for dependence among providers and replies to the same question . We tested hypotheses involving group characteristics , such as di - versity of contact resources , at the group level . Results Response Rates and Sample Characteristics We collected 100 % of the 82 question texts and sent two questionnaires sequentially to the 82 information seekers who posted them , 55 of whom completed both ( 67 % response rate ) . These information seekers re - ported receiving 429 replies to their broadcast ques - tions , an average of 7 . 8 replies per question . They gave us the names of 365 repliers to whom we sent surveys . We received 295 completed surveys from the repliers ( 80 % response rate ) and obtained the text of 263 replies . We obtained online organizational employee data for 92 % of information seekers and providers . For analyses combining data from different sources ( seeker and provider characteristics , and question and reply characteristics ) , we used a core sample of infor - mation exchanges with no missing categories of data . These exchanges include the seeker ' s question , two completed questionnaires from the information seeker , a text file of public replies to the question , and com - pleted questionnaires from the repliers . Full data were available for 48 of the 82 questions broadcasted , leav - ing an effective response rate of 58 % : 48 information seekers , their 48 questions , their 263 information providers , and the 263 public replies they gave . To explore possible effects of missing data , we com - pared the similarity of our research sample to ( a ) information seekers who kept their replies private , ( b ) public replies archived over the previous year , and ( c ) the general population of employees in the firm . We had data on the office location , hierarchical level , industry experience , firm experience , and self - reported experience with second - class e - mail of both public and private information seekers . They differed only in their reported experience with second - class e - mail ; informa - tion seekers in our research sample had replied to others more , p < 0 . 05 . Because we did not survey private information providers , we could not compare them with public information providers . However , inso - far as we could determine , private and public transac - tions did not differ ; there were no differences between . the two in number of replies , usefulness of replies , or whether replies solved the information seeker ' s prob - lem . Our research sample was similar to the population of employees who use second class mail . Sample employ - ees are predominantly male professionals , propor - tionally the same as those who use second - class mail generally and the same as in the company as a whole . However , significantly more of our sample and of sec - ond - class e - mail users are in sales and field support positions than in the company as a whole , and more are located in smaller sites , in offices more distant from headquarters , and outside the United States . Questions Asked and Information Received Information seekers asked primarily technical ques - tions that averaged nearly half a page ( mean = 12 . 1 lines of text , s . d . = 8 . 7 ) . They did not pose their ques - tions lightly : 91 % of information seekers reported querying at least one other information source before broadcasting their question . Information providers , on average , estimated they spent 9 minutes ( s . d . = 4 . 1 ) on their replies . Replies averaged about three quarters of a page ( mean = 19 . 1 lines , s . d . = 81 . 3 ) . Fifty - four per - cent of the answers contained technical information , and 53 % contained a referral to another source of information , such as a specific person or computer file . Information seekers valued the usefulness of the average reply they received at $ 11 . 30 ( s . d . = $ 8 . 70 ; min . = $ 0 , max . = $ 25 ) . ( See Appendix A for an exam - ple of values given by one information seeker to the replies she received . ) The value of the best reply was highly correlated with the value of the mean reply ( r [ 48 ] = 0 . 79 , p < 0 . 0001 ) . This correlation suggests a " halo " response effect by information seekers , or that replies were additive . Information seekers used fines so infrequently—only 8 . 4 % of replies were assigned any fine—that we did not use fines in the analysis . On average , information providers valued their own replies at $ 13 . 20 ( s . d . = $ 8 . 00 ; min . = $ 0 , max . = $ 25 ) . Half of the information seekers ( 49 % ) said that the replies they received solved their problem . The mean usefulness of information seekers ' replies was positively but not significantly correlated with whether or not information seekers said their problem was solved ( / - = 0 . 18 ) . The value of the best reply also was not signifi - cantly correlated with whether or not the problem was solved ( r = 0 . 20 ) . Since we cannot evaluate the com - parative validity of these measures , we used both the dollar value of usefulness and whether or not the problem was solved as dependent variables in our 124 ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VO1 . 7 , No . 2 , March - April 1996 DAVID CONSTANT , LEE SPROULL AND SARA KIESLER The Kindness of Strangers analyses . Usefulness can be used in both individual - level and group - level analyses whereas problem solu - tion can be used only in group - level analyses . If weak ties for technical help actually do provide useful advice , this usefulness should be reflected in the technical content of replies . To address the question of how the content of advice is related to its usefulness , we regressed the usefulness of information on the presence or absence of technical content and referrals to other sources of information , controlling for infor - mation seeker and the resources of providers . This analysis was performed at the individual level , so that the content and usefulness of each reply could be matched . ^ The model is significant ( f [ 46 , 159 ] = 2 . 60 , p < 0 . 0001 , R ^ = 0 . 429 ) as is the improvement over a model with only provider resources and infor - mation seeker ( A / ? ^ = 0 . 034 , F [ 2 , 159 ] = 5 . 50 , p < 0 . 005 ) . The unstandardized coefficients for technical content and referrals are 2 . 74 ( std . err . = 1 . 27 , p = 0 . 03 ) and 3 . 36 ( std . err . = 1 . 27 , / ? = 0 . 009 ) , respec - tively . Strength of Ties and Basis of Relationship As we had expected , people did not have a personal connection to the person they helped . Information providers did not know their seekers ; 81 % of the providers said they did not know the seekers at all ; an additional 10 % said they were barely acquainted . Ac - quaintance was uncorrelated with the number of replies ( r = - 0 . 11 ) , with the usefulness of replies ( r = 0 . 07 ) , or with the solution of the seekers ' problems ( r = 0 . 05 ) . A history of posting or answering questions on second - class e - mail was uncorrelated with acquaintance ( rs = 0 ) nor did this history predict the number of replies ( rs = 0 ) or their usefulness ( r = 0 . 06 , r = 0 . 03 , respec - tively ) or whether or not seekers ' problems were solved ( r = - 0 . 07 , r = 0 . 03 ) . Providers did not help based on the friendliness , social content , or tone of the questions they saw . We used three " sociability " measures : whether the question included a greeting , a closing , or named the company . The presence of a personal open - ing or closing or both in the question was negatively correlated with the number of replies , r [ 48 ] = - 0 . 30 , / ) < 0 . 05 . The social content of questions did not predict the usefulness of replies or whether or not the problem was solved . Information providers generally did not help based on their similarity to the person needing help . On only one measure of similarity , whether both or neither person worked at a headquarters location , were infor - mation providers more similar to their " own " informa - tion seeker than they were to the mean of all the information seekers . There was no similarity effect for managerial status , hierarchical level , firm experience , and industry experience . Group level correlations be - tween the usefulness of replies and the similarity of information seekers to their information providers in - dicated that similarity of managerial status and simi - larity of firm tenure were negatively related to the usefulness of replies ( r = - 0 . 12 , p < 0 . 07 and r = - 0 . 12 , p < 0 . 05 , respectively ) and similarity of indus - try tenure was related positively ( r = 0 . 13 , p < 0 . 05 ) . However , adding similarity variables to a regression of usefulness on information provider did not improve the model ( R ^ without similarity variables = 0 . 34 ; with similarity variables = 0 . 37 , change F = 1 . 64 , n . s . ) . The similarity of information providers to their information seeker also was not correlated with whether or not the seeker ' s problem was solved ; none of the individual correlations was significant and a logistic regression of problem solution on information provider and similar - ity variables was not significant . In sum , the data reported above do not describe a system of direct social exchange whereby people give useful help to those with whom they have a personal relationship , to those who are similar , or to those who have helped them . Neither acquaintance , a history of reciprocity using the network to exchange advice , nor similarity was very important in predicting the inci - dence or usefulness of replies . The Usefulness of Information We examined three hypotheses about the usefulness of weak - tie information : the number of replies will pre - dict the usefulness of replies ; the range or diversity of groups from which providers come will predict the usefulness of replies ; the resources of information providers will predict the usefulness of replies . ( See Table 1 for a correlation matrix of all variables used in these analyses . ) In each analysis we used hierarchical regression to estimate the contribution of separate groups of variables to the overall model . At the individ - ual level we can test hypotheses about how the number of replies and the resources of information providers predict usefulness . At the group level we can test hypotheses about how the number of replies and re - source diversity predict problem solutions , as well as usefulness . Number of Replies . We regressed the usefulness of replies on the number of replies controlling for infor - mation providers ' resources . This regression is signifi - cant at p < 0 . 01 and the coefficient for the number of replies is negative . ( See Table 2 . ) This result does not ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VOI . 7 , No . 2 , March - April 1996 125 DAVID CONSTANT , LEE SPROULL AND SARA KIESLER The Kindness of Strangers support the hypothesis that the number of weak ties statistically increases the likelihood of obtaining good advice . We explored this relationship further by investigat - ing if the number of replies was positively related to the most useful reply , reasoning that more replies might offer more opportunity to find one truly useful answer . Regressions of the most useful reply on the number of replies were carried out at the group level , since each information seeker can have only one best reply ( or several replies receiving a tie score for most usefulness ) . The coefficients are positive but not statis - tically significant , with and without controls for re - sources ( bivariate r = 0 . 22 , p = 0 . 14 ) . The number of replies is more strongly related to the least useful reply ( bivariate r = — 0 . 30 , p < 0 . 04 ) . This relatively big drop in the usefulness of the worst reply when there were more replies could explain why mean usefulness de - clined with more replies . The same result was obtained in analyses using information providers ' own assess - ments of the usefulness of their replies which , unlike seekers ' assessments , are not affected by their evalua - tions of other replies . The number of replies also did not predict whether or not information seekers ' problems were solved . In sum , for these information seekers , more replies did not improve the net benefit of weak ties . Information Provider Resources . As Table 2 shows , resources of information providers were positively re - lated to seekers ' usefulness ratings . ' ' At the individual level , controlling for the number of replies , there are significant coefficients at the 0 . 05 level for the re - sources of being a manager , hierarchical level , and expertise . In a similar analysis controlling for informa - tion seeker instead of number of replies , the only significant coefficient is the resource of expertise . These analyses generally support our hypothesis that weak ties for technical advice in an organization are useful to the degree they tap people with superior resources . At the group level we used mean usefulness of replies as the dependent variable ( Table 3 ) to test effects of groups of replies rather than of individual replies . A model with resources , controlling for num - ber of replies , is significant at the 0 . 06 level . It contains significant coefficients at the 0 . 10 level for the resource of being a manager and at the 0 . 05 level for the resource of firm experience . Diversity . We used the number of different coun - tries and the number of different hierarchical levels represented in a group of replies as proxies for diver - sity . We regressed mean usefulness on number of replies , resources , and diversity . ( See second column of Table 3 . ) Diversity contributes to the prediction of usefulness but in a direction opposite to the hypoth - esis . In the combined model the resources of being a manager and firm experience , but fewer levels of the hierarchy represented in replies , contribute to useful - ness . Adding diversity to a model containing number of replies and resources increases the R ^ by 0 . 09 ( p < 0 . 10 ) . This analysis suggests that advice from a less hierarchically diverse ( rather than more diverse ) set of ties increases usefulness . Solving the Problem A group - level model regressing solving the problem on resources , controlling for number of replies , is signifi - cant ( A " ^ = 17 . 25 , p = 0 . 02 ) . ( See Table 4 . ) Within this model the coefficient for working at the technical cen - ter of the organization is significant at the 0 . 05 level . In contrast to the findings for mean usefulness , the diversity of ties contributes positively to the model when problem solution is the dependent variable . Gen - erally , the coefficients are positive in this analysis . In the full model , the resources of working at the techni - cal center ip < 0 . 01 ) and being an expert ( p < 0 . 10 ) , but not being a manager ip < 0 . 05 ) , and having more countries represented in the replies ( p < 0 . 10 ) predict solving the problem . Diversity alone , controlling for number of replies , does not predict problem solution . The full model with resources and diversity , controlling for number of replies , is an improvement over a model without diversity ( A ; ^ ' ^ = 4 . 85 , p < 0 . 10 ) . Effects of Motivation When asked , " Why did you answer this question ? " information providers gave reasons of personal benefit as well as reasons related to general organizational benefit , but they gave more of the latter than the former ( paired - f [ 262 ] = 8 . 75 , p < 0 . 01 ) . That is , they favored reasons such as " Answering questions like this is part of being a good company citizen " over " I enjoy helping people " or " I enjoy solving , problems . " ( See Table 5 . ) We found little evidence that providers ' per - sonal history of giving or receiving help over the net - work or their acquaintance with information seekers predicted the reasons they gave for helping . ^ Table 6 shows individual level analyses regressing usefulness of advice on personal benefits and organiza - tional motivations for answering questions . The re - gressions are shown with and without controls for resources . Column 1 shows that the personal benefit of earning respect ( p < 0 . 05 ) and the organizational mo - 126 ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VOI . 7 , No . 2 , March - April 1996 DAVID CONSTANT , LEE SPROULL AND SARA KIESLER The Kindness of Strangers - 0 . 43 - 0 , 13 0 . 04 - 0 . 09 - 0 , 11 0 . 04 0 . 13 - 0 . 17 0 . 16 - 0 . 13 0 . 16 - 0 . 10 0 . 21 0 . 27 0 . 10 0 . 02 - 0 . 03 0 . 30 0 , 53 0 . 26 - 0 . 24 0 . 11 0 . 16 0 . 00 - 0 . 18 0 . 22 0 . 28 - 0 . 01 0 . 41 0 . 22 0 . 10 0 . 04 0 . 13 0 . 08 - 0 . 11 0 . 06 0 . 45 - 0 . 34 0 . 01 0 , 66 Table 1 Correlations among Measures of Replies and Information Providers ' Resources Individual Level ^ 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 . Usefulness of Reply - 0 . 05 0 . 08 0 . 08 0 . 17 0 , 11 - 0 , 06 RESOURCES 2 . HQ Location 0 . 01 3 . Manager 4 . Hierarchical Level ' ' 5 . Expertise 6 . Firnn Experience 7 . Industry Experience Group Level ' ^ 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 1 . Usefulness of Replies 0 . 18 2 . Solved the Problem 3 . Number of Replies RESOURCES 4 . Mean Providers at 0 , 02 - 0 . 46 0 . 01 0 . 14 0 . 02 0 . 06 0 . 61 HQ Location 5 . Mean Providers Who 0 . 19 - 0 . 35 - 0 . 01 0 . 27 0 . 19 0 . 02 Are Managers 6 . Mean Hierarchical - 0 . 10 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 21 0 . 13 - 0 . 33 Level of Providers ' ' 7 . Mean Expertise of 0 . 28 - 0 . 03 - 0 , 26 - 0 , 06 Providers 8 . Mean Firm 0 , 22 - 0 , 09 0 . 08 Experience of Providers 9 . Mean Industry 0 . 00 - 0 . 06 Experience of Providers DIVERSITY 10 , Number of Different . 0 , 28 Countries 11 , Number of Different Levels " Correlations of 0 , 12 and greater are significant at the individual level , p < 0 , 05 . Ns = 249 - 286 , ' ' Hierarchical level is coded as levels from the CEO ; a smaller integer = higher hierarchical level , ^ Correlations of 0 . 28 and greater are significant at the group level , p < 0 . 05 , Ns = 45 - 48 . tivations of " it ' spart of my job to help " ( / 7 < 0 . 05 ) and resources and shows slightly stronger results in the " it ' s only fair to help " ( p < 0 . 10 ) predict the usefulness same direction . of replies . Change statistics indicate that adding per - The results shown in Table 6 support our hypothesis sonal benefits to the model does not improve the that organizational motivations of information model , but adding organizational motivation to the providers can predict the usefulness of their technical model does improve it ( p < 0 . 05 ) . Column 2 adds help . The personal benefit of earning respect also ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VOI . 7 , No . 2 , March - April 1996 127 DAVID CONSTANT , LEE SPROULL AND SARA KIESLER The Kindness of Strangers Table 2 Regressions Predicting Repiy Usefuiness from the Number of Repiies and Information Providers ' Resources ( Individual Level ) Variables Information Seeker ^ Number of Replies ' ' Resources HQ Location Manager Hierarchical Level ' ^ Expertise ( 1 - 10 ) Firm Experience Industry Experience Models b ( se ) - 0 . 24 * ' 0 . 55 3 . 51 * 1 . 20 * 0 . 45 * 0 . 32 + - 0 . 12 0 . 119 ' ( 0 . 06 ) { 1 . 33 ) ( 7 . 65 ) ( 0 . 60 ) ( 0 . 23 ) iO . IB ) { 0 . 09 ) b ( se ) 1 . 19 2 . 37 0 . 97 0 . 59 * ' 0 . 22 - 0 . 12 0 . 414 ( 7 . 35 ) ( 7 . 60 ) ( 0 . 62 ) ' ( 0 . 23 ) { 0 . 18 ) { 0 . 09 ) Table 3 Regressions Predicting Mean Reply Usefulness from the Number of Replies , the Mean of Information Providers ' Resources , and the Diversity of Ties ( Group Levei ) • " p < 0 . 10 . * p < 0 . 05 . * * p < 0 . 01 . Note . The table contains unstandardized coefficients . Both models are significant , p < 0 . 01 . N = 242 . ^ A model using information seeker { df = 47 ) alone as a predictor variable explains 39 % of the variance in usefulness ( F [ 44 , 233 ] = 2 . 72 , p < 0 . 01 ) . ' ' Number of replies is automatically controlled when information seeker is controlled in the second model . ^ Hierarchical level is coded as levels from the CEO ; a smaller integer = higher hierarchical level . . • predicted usefulness . Self reports of motivation may be suspect , particularly when they emphasize socially de - sirable items . However , there is no reason that providers ' social desirability would be expected to have a positive relationship with seekers ' usefulness ratings . Our results show that providers ' organizational motiva - tion items , and an item probably less socially desirable , " earning others ' respect , " predicted how seekers rated the usefulness of replies . Hence we have some cause to take providers ' self - reported reasons at face value . If information providers help simply because they have nothing better to do , their resources and the quality of their help is likely to be inferior . If , instead , information providers are motivated by a communal orientation to the needs of others and to the problems of the organization , they may represent a pool of helpers whose resources are as good or superior to those of information seekers . We argued that in a community where generalized reciprocity is a norm , people generally should be motivated to help others . Variables Number of Replies Mean Resources Mean Providers at HQ Location Mean Providers Who Are Managers Mean Hierarchical Level of Providers ^ Mean Expertise Mean Firm Experience Mean Industry Experience Diversity of Ties Number of Different Countries from Which Providers Come Number of Different Hierarchical Levels from Which Providers Come F df P b ( - 0 . 21 1 . 39 12 . 08 1 . 91 0 . 41 1 . 27 ' - 0 . 01 Models \ se ) { 0 . 13 ) { 4 . 47 ) + ( 6 . 26 ) ( 7 . 86 ) ( 0 . 67 ) * { 0 . 55 ) ( 0 . 25 ) 0 . 29 2 7 , . 18 45 0 . 06 b ( - 0 . 01 4 . 33 12 . 91 ' 1 . 91 0 . 62 1 . 05 - 0 . 19 - 0 . 05 - 2 . 15 ' se ) ( 0 . 76 ) ( 4 . 53 ) ' ( 6 . 03 ) ( 7 . 86 ) ( 0 . 68 ) + ( 0 . 53 ) ( 0 . 23 ) { 0 . 72 ) ' { 0 . 94 ) 0 . 38 2 . 44 9 , 45 0 . 03 > < 0 . 10 . * p < 0 . 05 . Note . The table contains unstandardized coefficients . N = 46 . ' ' Hierarchical levei is coded as levels from the CEQ ; a smaller integer = higher hierarchical level . Therefore , the pool of information providers should offer as good or better resources as the pool of infor - mation seekers . To examine this hypothesis , we com - pared the resources of information providers with those of information seekers . Providers did not have signifi - cantly more firm or industry experience than did seek - ers . Providers did have significantly more resources of managerial and hierarchical status and location at the technical center of the organization . We could not directly compare seekers and providers on expertise because we did not measure seekers ' level of expertise . ( See Table 7 . ) 128 ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VOL 7 , No . 2 , March - April 1996 DAVID CONSTANT , LEE SPROULL AND SARA KIESLER The Kindness of Strangers Table 4 Logistic Regressions Predicting Whether or Not the Problem Was Solved from the Number of Replies , the iVIean of Information Providers ' Resources , and the Diversity of Ties ( Group Level ) Models Variables b { se ) b { se ) Number of Replies Mean Resources Mean Providers at HQ Location Mean Providers Who Are Managers Mean Hierarchical Level ^ of Providers Mean Expertise Mean Firm Experience Mean Industry Experience Diversity of Ties Number of Different Countries from Which Providers Come Number of Different Hierarchical Levels from Which Providers Come df P - 0 . 12 { 0 . 08 ) - 0 . 17 ( 0 . 70 ) 8 . 00 * ( 3 . 75 ) 11 . 00 * * ( 4 . 75 ) - 4 . 61 { 2 . 92 ) - 6 . 36 * ( 3 . 73 ) 1 . 85 ( 7 . 02 ) 1 . 79 ( 7 . 75 ) 0 . 47 ( 0 . 34 ) 0 . 71 + { 0 . 40 ) 0 . 13 ( 0 . 25 ) 0 . 15 { 0 . 27 ) 0 . 08 ( 0 . 77 ) 0 . 06 ( 0 . 72 ) 0 . 84 + ( 0 . 43 ) - 0 . 49 ( 0 . 57 ) 17 . 2570 . 02 22 . 1090 . 01 * p < 0 . 10 . * p < 0 . 05 . * * p < 0 . 01 . Note . The table contains unstandardized coefficients . N = 47 . ^ Hierarchical level is coded as levels from the CEO ; a smaller integer = higher hierarchical level . Discussion In this study , weak ties established through a computer network offered information seekers technical informa - tion or referrals . Information providers gave useful advice and solved the problems of information seekers despite their lacking a personal connection with the seekers . Weak ties with superior resources provided more useful information . Controlling for those re - sources , the number of replies was not positively re - lated to the average usefulness of replies , to the most useful advice , or to the solution of problems . The diversity of ties as well as the resources of information Table 5 information Providers ' Reasons for Repiying Mean { s . d . ) Percentage of Number of Information Providers Points Given Choosing This as a Reasons to Reason Most Important Reason ^ Personal Benefits 1 enjoy helping others . 1 enjoy solving problems . 1 enjoy earning respect . The company rewards information sharing . Total personal benefits 16 . 0 9 . 5 4 . 8 0 . 9 31 . 2 ( 75 . 3 ) ( 77 . 9 ) { 7 . 7 ) ( 3 . 0 ) ( 30 . 0 ) 23 15 8 1 Organizational Motivation Being a good company 17 . 8 ( 78 . 5 ) 27 citizen . The problem is important to 14 . 0 ( 77 . 8 ) 21 the company . It ' s part of my job to answer 12 . 6 ( 78 . 8 ) 21 questions like this one . I expect others to help me , so 11 . 8 ( 73 . 0 ) 17 it ' s only fair to help them . Total organizational 56 . 2 { 27 . 8 ) motivation . " Other " . 12 . 6 { 23 . 2 ) 23 Note . N = 263 . ^ The most important reason is the reason given the most points , or the reasons tied for the most points . providers contributed to whether or not seekers ' prob - lems were solved . Finally , replies from people respond - ing out of organizational motivation were rated as more useful . In this study , expertise contributed both to the use - fulness of advice and to problem solving . But replies could be deemed useful without actually solving prob - lems . Information seekers obtained advice they consid - ered very useful ( but that did not necessarily solve the problem ) from ties with managers ( being a manager is negatively related to expertise , r = - 0 . 35 , p < 0 . 05 at the group level ; see Table 1 ) and from ties having more firm experience ( positively correlated with expertise ; r = 0 . 28 , p < 0 . 05 at the group level ) . By contrast , in - formation seekers ' problems were solved through diverse ties from different countries ( negatively corre - lated with expertise , r = - 0 . 26 , p = 0 . 06 ) , and by hav - ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VOI . 7 , No . 2 , March - April 1996 129 DAVID CONSTANT , LEE SPROULL AND SARA KIESLER The Kindness of Strangers Table 6 Regressions Predicting Repiy Usefuiness from Information Providers ' Resources and Self - reported Motivations for Replying ( Individuai Level ) Models Tabie 7 iViean Resources of information Seekers and information Providers Variables Information Seeker Resources HQ Location Manager Hierarchical Level ^ Expertise ( 1 - 10 ) Firm Experience Industry Experience Personal Benefits Motivation Enjoy Helping Others Enjoy Solving Problems Earn Respect Firm Rewards Sharing Organizational Motivation Good Organizational Oitizen Important Firm Problem Part of My Job to Help It ' s Only Fair to Help R2 F df P b ( se ) - 0 . 01 ( 0 . 03 ) - 0 . 03 ( 0 . 05 ) 0 . 14 + ( 0 . 07 ) - 0 . 23 ( 0 . 79 ) 0 . 01 ( 0 . 03 ) - 0 . 02 ( 0 . 03 ) 0 . 07 * ( 0 . 03 ) 0 . 07 ( 0 . 04 ) 0 . 46 2 . 93 49 , 221 < 0 . 01 b ( se ) * * * 1 . 32 ( 7 . 40 ) 2 . 04 ( 7 . 63 ) 0 . 80 ( 0 . 63 ) 0 . 32 ( 0 . 24 ) 0 . 08 ( 0 . 78 ) - 0 . 18 * ( 0 . 09 ) - 0 . 01 ( 0 . 03 ) - 0 . 04 ( 0 . 05 ) 0 . 14 + ( 0 . 07 ) - 0 . 22 ( 0 . 79 ) 0 . 02 ( 0 . 03 ) - 0 . 02 ( 0 . 03 ) 0 . 07 * ( 0 . 03 ) 0 . 08 + ( 0 . 04 ) 0 . 48 2 . 80 55 , 221 < 0 . 01 * p < 0 . 05 . * * p < 0 . 01 . Note . The table contains unstandardized coefficients . ' ' Hierarchical level is coded as levels from the CEO ; a smaiier integer = higher hierarchical level . ing more ties at the technical center and more ties with lower level people ( both unrelated to expertise ) . Ap - parently information providers who solved people ' s problems and those who gave very useful advice were somewhat different groups ; the type of information they offered may have been different too . For instance , it seems consistent with our data that repliers who solved the seeker ' s problem gave site - specific technical answers ( which would be tapped more easily at the technical center as well as through more diverse ties ) Resources Information Information Seei < ers Providers ( n = 48 ) ( n = 281 ) t statistic HQ location ( yes = 1 , no = 0 ) Manager ( yes = 1 , no = 0 ) Hierarchical level ^ Firm experience ( years ) Industry experience ( years ) 14 % 2 % 6 . 0 4 . 0 12 . 2 ( 0 . ( 2 . ( 6 . 8 ) 7 ) 2 ) 31 % 12 % 5 . 6 4 . 3 13 . 8 ( 1 . ( 3 ( 6 0 ) . 0 ) . 8 ) 2 . 88 * * 3 . 23 * * 2 . 50 * 0 . 71 1 . 52 * p < 0 . 05 . * * p < 0 . 01 . ^ Hierarchical level is coded as levels from the CEO ; a smaller integer = higher hierarchical level . whereas those who gave especially useful advice gave broader firm - specific knowledge ( which managers and people with longer firm experience would have ) . We found that diversity of countries from which information providers came contributed to solving in - formation seekers ' problems . However diversity did not contribute to ratings of usefulness . These findings are consistent with a process in which diversity does not increase the likelihood of finding the best experts ( in general ) but might increase the likelihood of obtaining site - specific advice ( for example , advice about a prod - uct used in only one or a few countries ) . The value of diversity might be especially high when experience is very widely and unevenly distributed in an organization and people encounter rare problems . Our results are consistent with the theory that weak ties ' usefulness is due to their bridging capacity as Granovetter ( 1982 ) and Burt ( 1983 ) have hypothesized , rather than to their sheer number , as has been sug - gested by Friedkin ( 1982 ) . The computer network used to draw on weak ties linked people across distance , time , country , and hierarchical level and organizational subunit . Consistent with the resource arguments of Lin and his colleagues ( e . g . , Lin 1982 ) , these links were useful to the degree they put people in touch with those offering superior resources ; they were not useful nor did they have a greater likelihood of solving the information seeker ' s problem when they were simply greater in number . People who received more replies did get replies of high quality ; they also received replies of very low quality . Perhaps many replies caused confu - sion or uncertainty , which detracted from potentially beneficial information . 130 ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VO1 . 7 , No . 2 , March - April 1996 DAVID CONSTANT , LEE SPROULL AND SARA KIESLER The Kindness of Strangers Our results extend the superior resources formula - tion of weak ties to the domain of technical informa - tion exchange and suggest that the event - driven survey of information seekers and their information providers can be used to evaluate aspects of weak ties . In gen - eral , the results support the idea that the usefulness of weak ties for obtaining technical advice depends upon the help seeker ' s access to providers ' resources . Infor - mation providers in this study had somewhat superior resources to those of information seekers , and those who had better resources gave more useful advice . Provider resources , however , must be evaluated in terms of the particular kind of information sought . For example , in this study , industry experience was not related to providing useful technical advice . By con - trast , if help seekers had been looking for competitor information or for job information , industry experience might well have been positively associated with useful - ness of advice . Ours is a case study of weak - tie sharing within one geographically - dispersed organization . The firm we studied views the computer network as a critical corpo - rate resource , encourages employees to use it , and rewards them for devising software that improves com - munication . We have no data on employees who did not help—the baseline statistics on the motivations or expertise of employees in general—so our inferences must be cautious . Yet it seems unlikely that , in the absence of a culture that supports information sharing and considers the network to be an organizational resource , the kinds of information exchanges among weak ties we observed could be sustained for long . The form of exchange we observed had been established more than six years before the data were collected , evidence of considerable stability . Technology alone will not impel this kind of weak - tie sharing over time ; an organizational culture that fosters it also is neces - sary . In this organization strangers incur the costs of " kindness " because they can perform as experts and meet important needs of others . Norms of generalized reciprocity sustain kindness as a social institution and lead people who can provide useful help to do so . Given a corporate culture that promotes information sharing , we suggest three probable scope conditions for our findings related to kind of information , degree of slack in employee time , and intensity of usage . Techni - cal information is relatively more likely to be ex - changed in a computer network weak - tie environment than are other kinds of information such as strategic , political , or personal information . For example , we never saw any broadcast questions of the form , " Does anybody know who will be named as the next engineer - ing vice president ? " or " Does anybody know what X is like as a boss ? " Undoubtedly people used the computer network to search for non - technical information , but they probably did so within their strong - tie relation - ships rather than through weak ties . Although answer - ing questions had relatively low costs , it was not cost - less ; information providers had to have enough slack in their work day so that the nine minutes ( on average ) they reported it took them to produce a reply was not viewed as excessive . By contrast , in professional organi - zations that require employees to account for their time to the tenth of an hour for billing purposes , nine minutes of " free " help could be viewed as costly to the provider . The number of questions asked per day must be governed by self - limiting processes . We saw about seven questions a day ; if there had been 700 or 7 , 000 the system would have been swamped and , presumably , would not have continued to yield useful answers . Broadcasting requests for help over a computer net - work can be viewed as a public goods problem in which it is in no one ' s best interest to respond and in which people rich in resources will be particularly disinclined to respond ( Thorn and Connolly 1987 ) . Others have noted that a small " critical mass " can overcome this problem ( e . g . , Marwell et al . 1988 ) . The models gener - ally assume a situation where free riders cannot be excluded but neither increase the net cost to providers nor decrease the net benefit to recipients . These char - acteristics are true of the situation we studied , since neither information providers nor information seekers would notice free riders who read the public reply files . A remaining problem , however , is that a person ' s con - tribution may be inconsequential or redundant . Why would someone take the time to give advice when someone else could do it ? Our data do not show that inconsequentiality was a problem . Information providers with more expertise tended to beUeve fewer others replied { r [ 2QS \ = - Q . 2 \ , p < Q . Ql ) . However , 73 % of the information providers could give us the name of at least one other person who could answer the question . And the average provider estimated that 15 . 4 other people replied to the question to which they replied . These findings suggest that many providers , including experts , replied in spite of their apparent inconsequentiality . Macy ( 1990 ) has argued that group members can learn to contribute despite their marginal significance or inconsequentiality when they observe others con - tributing and see rewards to the public good . Once a critical mass of contributors is achieved , the legitimacy and value of contributing can be self - reinforcing . Com - puter networks with public reply files and other facili - ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VOL 1 , No . 2 , March - April 1996 131 DAVID CONSTANT , LEE SPROULL AND SARA KIESLER The Kindness of Strangers ties for public information exchange , like those at the company we studied , may contribute to the creation of a critical mass by increasing the visibility of prosocial behavior ( Cialdini et al . 1990 ) . Computer networks make it physically easy to reach large numbers of people and make weak - tie contacts , and they also make - it relatively easy to respond to information re - quests . They also offer more opportunities to see oth - ers contributing than would be available in face - to - face interactions . By facilitating social observation of tech - nical information exchange , computer networks may encourage people to contribute for personal benefits such as pride , and they may reinforce norms of contri - bution within a culture that values it . Hence computer networks can provide a means for leveraging the " kindness of strangers . " Acknowledgements We thank Terry Connolly , Robyn Dawes , Tom Finholt , David Krackhardt , Arie Lewin , and four anonymous OS reviewers for their helpful comments . This research was supported by a National Re - seareh Council of Canada fellowship to David Constant , a System Development Foundation grant to Lee Sproull , and an NIMH Re - search Scientist Development award # MH 00933 to Sara Kiesler . Appendix A . Broadcast Question and Replies on the Computer Network ( This example is verbatim from our sample , except that the proper names of employees and products have been changed . The " Value to Information Seeker " of each reply is the actual rating " Nadia " made of the usefulness of her replies . ) Question SENT : 89 - 06 - 12 15 : 44 FROM : BOULANGER _ NADIA TO : DL . ALL _ TANDEM @ SLC SUBJECT : 2 : ? ? 2311 at 7 but s t i ll too dim ? ? Hi a l l , I am sure I ' m not the first to ask this question but I can find no help in Quest [ online database of previ - ous public questions and replies ] so I ' m copying the world to see if I can get any answers . I have a number of 2311 ' s [ computer terminals ] ( 50 + ) installed at ABC Co . and many of them are starting to get too dim even at the max brightness setting . Is there any way to increase the brightness on these monitors or is the solution a replacement . Any info would be greatly appreciated . Replies if any at \ SLC . $ CE . DIM2311 . REPLYS / / ocaf ( O« of public replies file ] . Regards , Nadia Repties SENT : 8 9 - 0 6 - 13 09 : 06 FROM : REICH _ STEVE @ AUSTIN In Reply To : 89 - 06 - 12 15 : 44 FROM BOULANGER ^ NADIA 2 : ? ? 2311 at 7 but still too dim ? ? How long have these 2311s been installed ? What is the duty power - on cycle ( 5days / lOhrs , 7days / 24hrs , etc . ) ? Are they / were they using screen - saver ? If so , what was the value ? Value to Information Seeker = $ 5 . 00 SENT : 89 - 06 - 13 08 : 37 FROM : GLASS _ Phil OAUSTIN In Reply To : 89 - 06 - 12 15 : 44 FROM BOULANGER _ NADIA 2 : ? ? 2311 at 7 but still too dim ? ? Hi , Try tweaking the potentiometer inside the moni - tor . I ' ve had to do the same with the terminals and Agelbars ( no comments please ) when I worked in the private sector . I ' ve never taken a 2311 apart , so I can ' t tell you the location of the pot , but you should see something on or near it to indicate that it controls brightness . My only word of warning is to be damn careful when you stick a screwdriver in there . You may want to cover the shaft in a layer of electrical tape . Good luck . Regards , Phil Glass Value to Information Seeker = $ 5 . 00 SENT : 89 - 06 - 13 01 : 18 FROM : SCHOENBERG _ ARNIE OBELGIUM In Reply to : 89 - 06 - 12 15 : 44 FROM BOULANGER ^ NADIA 2 : ? ? 2311 at 7 but still too dim ? ? Hallo Nadia , No problem . With two screws you can easily remove the top cover of the 2311 . Under the cover you will find the monitorboard and on that board the two potmeters for brightness and contrast . Greetings , Arnie Value to Information Seeker = $ 25 . 00 SENT : 89 - 06 - 12 18 : 01 FROM : CAGE _ JOHN ©PRUNE In Reply to : 89 - 06 - 12 15 : 44 FROM BOULANGER ^ NADIA 2 : ? ? 2311 at 7 but still too dim ? ? 132 ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VOI . 7 , No . 2 , March - April 1996 DAVID CONSTANT , LEE SPROULL AND SARA KIESLER The Kindness of Strangers Nadia , We had a few of ' em that we took apart and tweeked up a pot labeled " b rite " or " brightness " or some such . They ' re still working ! jc Value to Information Seeker = $ 20 . 00 SENT : 89 - 06 - 13 12 : 01 FROM : PENTLAND _ BARBARA @ ORCA In Reply to : 89 - 06 - 12 15 : 44 FROM BOULANGER . NADIA 2 : ? ? 2311 at 7 but still too dim ? ? THE COST TO MAINTAIN THESE UNITS WOULD GREATLY EX - CEED THE PRICE IN WHICH WE BOUGHT THEM FOR . THE BEST SOLUTION IS TO THROW THESE UNITS OUT AND PUR - CHASE NEW ONES . BESIDES THAT REPLACEMENT PARTS ARE SLIM TO NONE . . Value to Information Seeker = none given SENT : 89 - 06 - 14 10 : 11 FROM : SCHAEFFER ^ MURRAY ©EASY TO : BOULANGER _ NADIA @ SLC SUBJECT : ? ? 2311 at 7 but still too dim ? ? In Reply to : 89 - 06 - 12 15 : 44 FROM BOULANGER _ NADIA 2 : ? ? 2311 at 7 but still too dim ? ? Nadia , There is probably an adjustment inside the moni - tor . You should ask your CE [ customer engineer ] about adjusting the range with the internal pot . Murray Value to Information Seeker = $ 5 . 00 SENT : 89 - 06 - 15 07 : 14 FROM : THEBERGE _ PAUL SPITT SUBJECT : 2311 BRIGHTNESS HI THERE , THERE IS AN INTERNAL BRIGHTNESS POT THAT CAN BE ACCESSED BY OPENING UP THE MONITOR . I HAVE AD - JUSTED QUITE A . FEW TERMINALS THIS WAY . I DON ' T PCNOW IF THIS IS THE PRESCRIBED METHOD BUT IT WORKS ! HOPE THIS HELPS ! PAUL THEBERGE Value to Information Seeker = $ 20 . 00 SENT : 89 - 06 - 17 19 : 27 FROM : LEVERKUHN _ ADRIAN @ OMAHA In Reply to : 89 - 06 - 12 15 : 44 FROM BOULANGER _ NADIA 2 : ? ? 2311 at 7 but still too dim ? ? Nadia , I had a couple of the Beta units and that was one of the problems , only it occurred after a week . I tried getting inside and adjusting , just as I have done with 2316s with about the same re - sults . You can crank up the brightness a bit but then you start to lose your contrast and get com - plaints of " fuzzy " characters . We have found that the units , being FRUs [ tietd - replaceable units ] in - toto are not worth the effort . Adrian Value to Information Seeker = $ 15 . 00 Endnotes ' in the case of 17 people who broadcast more than one question during the research period , we asked only about the first question . In the case of people who replied to more than one question , we sent a separate survey about each reply they sent up to three . ^ Because diversity is a group level variable in our study , we could not use measures of demographic diversity that assess how individuals differ from one another within a group ( e . g . , Tsui et al . 1992 ) . Other measures such as Blau ' s index of heterogeneity ( 1977 ) depend upon distributional assumptions that are untestable in this context . Our measures , while simple , are unbiased and relevant to technical advice and therefore are useful in this context ( Krackhardt 1994b ) . In cases where the overlapping of dyadic data is pronounced , the violation of independence assumptions can be serious ( Krackhardt 1988 ) . In our case the number of overlapping dyads ( those with a common seeker and / or replier ) is small relative to the total number of dyads . • " We used hierarchical regression to separately examine the effects of two blocks of resource variables : personal resources ( expertise , firm experience , and industry experience ) and social resources attached to location or job position ( location near headquarters , being a man - ager , and hierarchical position ) . Because we did not obtain consis - tent differences between these blocks of variables , we do not discuss them separately further . ' Of 24 correlations examined , 3 were significant at the 0 . 05 level . A history of replying in second class mail was correlated with the personal benefit , " I gain respect from others " ( r = 0 . 14 , p < 0 . 05 ) . Acquaintance was positively correlated with saying " It ' s part of my job " ( r = 0 . 22 , p < 0 . 001 ) and negatively with " It ' s part of being a good citizen " ( r = - 0 . 12 , p < 0 . 05 ) . References Allen , T . J . ( 1977 ) , Managing the Flow of Technology , Cambridge , MA : The MIT Press . Amato , P . R . ( 1990 ) , " Personality and Social Network Involvement as Predictors of Helping Behavior in Everyday Life , " Social Psychology Quarterly , 53 , 31 - 43 . Bandura , A . ( 1986 ) , Social Foundations of Thought and Action : A Social Cognitive Theory , Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Bateman , T . S . and D . W . Organ ( 1983 ) , " Job Satisfaction and the Good Soldier : The Relationship Between Affect and Employee ' Citizenship ' , " Academy of Management Joumal , 26 , 587 - 595 . Berkowitz , L . and L . R . Daniels ( 1964 ) , " Affecting the Salience of the Social Responsibility Norm : Effects of Past Help on the Response to Dependency Relationships , " Joumat of Abnormal and Social Psychology , 68 , 275 - 281 . ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VOI . 7 , No . 2 , March - April 1996 133 DAVID CONSTANT , LEE SPROULL AND SARA KIESLER The Kindness of Strangers Blau , P . M . ( 1977 ) , Inequality and Heterogeneity , New York : The Free Press . Brief , A . P . , and S . J . Motowidlo ( 1986 ) , " Prosocial Organizational Behaviots , " Academy of Management Review , 10 , 710 - 725 . Brown , J . J . , and P . H . Reingen ( 1987 ) , " Social Ties and Word - of - mouth Referral Behavior , " Joumal of Consumer Research , 14 , 350 - 362 . Burt , R . S . ( 1983 ) , " Range , " in R . S . Burt and M . J . Minor ( Eds . ) , Applied Network Analysis , Beverly Hills , CA : Sage , 176 - 194 . Cialdini , R . B . , R . R . Reno , and C . A . Kallgren ( 1990 ) , " A Focus Theory of Normative Conduct : Recycling the Concept of Norms to Reduce Littering in Public Places , " Joumal of Personality and Sociat Psychology , 58 , 1015 - 1026 . Crane , D . ( 1971 ) , The Invisible College , Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Daft , R . and R . Lengel ( 1986 ) , " Organizational Information Re - quirements , Media Richness and Structural Design , " Manage - ment Science , 32 , 554 - 571 . DiMaggio , P . and J . Mohr ( 1985 ) , " Cultural Capital , Educational Attainment , and Marital Selection , " American Joumal of Sociol - ogy , 90 , 1231 - 1261 . Dovidio , J . F . ( 1984 ) , " Helping and Altruism : An Empirical and Conceptual Overview , " in L . Berkowitz ( Ed . ) , Advances in Ex - perimental Social Psychology , Vol . 17 , New York : Academic Press . Feldman , M . S . ( 1987 ) , " Electronic Mail and Weak Ties in Organiza - tions , " Office : Technology and People , 3 , 83 - 101 . Festinger , L . , S . Schachter , and K . Back ( 1950 ) , Social Pressures in Informal Groups : A Study of Human Factors in Housing , New York : Harper . Finholt , T . ( 1993 ) , Outsiders on the Inside , Carnegie - Mellon Univer - sity , Pittsburgh , PA : Unpublished doctoral dissertation . Friedkin , N . ( 1982 ) , " Information Flow Through Strong and Weak Ties in Intraorganizational Social Networks , " Social Networks , 3 , 273 - 285 . Fulton , J . , R . Fulton , and R . Simmons ( 1977 ) , " The Cadaver Donor and the Gift of Life , " in R . Simmons , S . Klein , and R . Simmons ( Eds . ) , Gift of Life : The Social and Psychological Impact of Organ Transplantation , New York : John Wiley and Sons , 338 - 376 . Granovetter , M . ( 1973 ) , " The Strength of Weak Ties , " American Joumal of Sociology , 78 , 1360 - 1380 . ( 1982 ) , " The Strength of Weak Ties : A Network Theory Revis - ited , " in P . Marsden and N . Lin ( Eds . ) , Sociat Structure and Network Analysis , New York : John Wiley and Sons , 105 - 130 . Heimer , C . ( 1992 ) , " Doing Your Job and Helping Your Friends : Universalistic Norms about Obligations to Particular Others in Networks , " in N . Nohria and R . G . Eccles ( Eds . ) , Networks and Organizations : Structure , Form , and Action , Boston , MA : Harvard Business School Press , 143 - 164 . Kelley , H . H . and J . W . Thibaut ( 1978 ) , Interpersonal Relations : A Theory of Interdependence , New York : Wiley . Krackhardt , D . ( 1988 ) , " Predicting with Networks : A Multiple Re - gression Approach to Analyzing Dyadic Data , " Social Networks , • 10 , 359 - 381 . ( 1990 ) , " Assessing the Political Landscape : Structure , Cogni - tion , and Power in Organizations , " Administrative Science Quar - terly , 35 , 342 - 369 . ( 1992 ) , " The Strength of Strong Ties : The Importance of Philos in Organizations , " in N . Nohria and R . Eccles ( Eds . ) , Organiza - tions and Networks : Structure , Form , and Action , Boston , MA : Harvard Business School Press , 216 - 239 . ( 1994a ) , " Constraints on the Interactive Organization as an Ideal Type , " in C . Heckscher and Anne Donnelan ( Eds . ) , The Post - Bureaucratic Organization , Beverly Hills , CA : Sage , 211 - 222 . ( 1994b ) , Personal Communication Kraut , R . E . , C . Egido , and J . Galegher ( 1990 ) , " Patterns of Contact and Communication in Scientific Research Collaborations , " in J . Galegher , R . E . Kraut , and C . Egido ( Eds . ) , Intellectual Teamwork : Social and Technological Foundations of Cooperative Work , Hillside , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , 149 - 172 . , J . Galegher , and C . Egido ( 1988 ) , " Relationships and Tasks in Scientific Collaboration , " / / u / nfl / i - Com / ) u ( er / «ferac ( io« , 3 , 31—58 . Lave , J . ( 1991 ) , " Situating Learning in Communities of Practice , " in L . B . Resnick , J . M . Levine , and S . D . Teasley ( Eds . ) , Perspec - tives on Socially Shared Cognition , Washington , D . C : American Psychological Association , 63 - 84 . Lin , N . ( 1982 ) , " Social Resources and Instrumental Action , " in P . Marsden and N . Lin ( Eds . ) , Social Structure and Network Analysis , Beverly Hills , CA : Sage . and M . Dumin ( 1986 ) , " Access to Occupations Through Social Ties , " Social Networks , 8 , 365 - 385 . , W . M . Ensel , and J . C . Vaughn ( 1981 ) , " Social Resources and Strength of Ties : Structural Factors in Occupational Status Attainment , " American Sociological Review , 46 , 393 - 405 . , J . C . Vaughn , and W . M . Ensel ( 1981 ) , " Social Resources and Occupational Status Attainment , " Social Forces , 59 , 4 , 1163 - 1181 . Macy , M . ( 1990 ) , " Learning Theory and the Logic of Critical Mass , " American Sociological Review , 55 , 809 - 826 . Marsden , P . V . , and J . S . Hurlbert ( 1988 ) , " Social Resources and Mobility Outcomes : A Replication and Extension , " Social Forces , 66 , 1038 - 1059 . Marwell , G . , P . Oliver , and R . Prahl ( 1988 ) , " Social Networks and Collective Actions : A Theory of Critical Mass III , " American Joumal of Sociology , 94 , 502 - 532 . Mauss , M . ( 1967 ) , The Gift , New York : Norton , 1st ed . , 1925 . Monge , P . R . , L . W . Rothman , E . M . Eisenberg , K . L . Miller , and K . Kirste ( 1985 ) , " The Dynamics of Organizational Proximity , " Management Science , 31 , 1129 - 1141 . Nohria , N . ( 1992 ) , " Information and Search in the Creation of New Business Ventures : The Case of the 128 Venture Group , " in N . Nohria and R . G . Eccles ( Eds . ) , Networks and Organizations : Structure , Form , and Action , Boston , MA : Harvard Business School Press , 240 - 261 . Orr , J . E . ( 1989 ) , " Sharing Knowledge , Celebrating Identity : War Stories and Community Memory among Service Technicians , " in D . S . Middleton and D . Edwards ( Eds . ) , Collective Remembering : Memory in Society , Beverly Hills , CA : Sage . 134 ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VOI . 7 , No . 2 , March - April 1996 DAVID CONSTANT , LEE SPROULL AND SARA KIESLER The Kindness of Strangers Ross , M . ( 1989 ) , " Relation of Implicit Theories to the Construction of Personal Histories , " Psychological Review , 96 , 341 - 357 . Schlenker , B . R . ( 1985 ) , " Identity and Self - Identification , " in B . R . Schlenker ( Ed . ) , The Self and Social Life , New York : McGraw - Hill . Scott , J . ( 1991 ) , Social Network Analysis : A Handbook , Newbury Park , CA : Sage Publications . Shamir , B . ( 1991 ) , " Meaning , Self and Motivation in Organizations , " Organization Studies , 12 , 405 - 424 . Sproull , L . and S . ICiesler ( 1986 ) , " Reducing Social Context Cues : Electronic Mail in Organizational Communication , " Manage - ment Science , 32 , 1492 - 1512 . Stevenson , W . B . and M . C . Gilly ( 1991 ) , " Information Processing and Problem Solving : The Migration of Problems through For - mal Positions and Networks of Ties , " Academy of Management Joumal , 34 , 918 - 928 . Thorn , B . K . and T . Connolly ( 1987 ) , " Discretionary Data Bases : A Theory and Some Experimental Findings , " Communication Re - search , 14 , 512 - 528 . Titmuss , R . M . ( 1971 ) , The Gift Relationship : From Human Btood to Social Policy , New York : Pantheon Books . Tsui , A . S . , T . D . Egan , and C . A . O ' Reilly ( 1992 ) , " Being Different : Relational Demography and Organizational Attachment , " Ad - ministrative Science Quarterly , 37 , 549 - 579 . Wagner , W . G . , J . Pfeffer , and C . A . O ' Reilly ( 1984 ) , " Organiza - tional Demography and Turnover in Top - Management Groups . " Administrative Science Quarterly , 29 , 74 - 92 . Weenig , M . W . and C . J . Midden ( 1991 ) , " Communication Network Influences on Information Diffusion and Persuasion , " Joumal of Personality and Social Psychology , 61 , 734 - 742 . Williamson , G . , and M . Clark ( 1989 ) , " The Communal / Exchange Distinction and Some Implications for Understanding Justice in Families , " Social Justice Research , 3 , 77 - 103 . Zenger , T . R . , and B . S . Lawrence ( 1989 ) , " Organizational Demogra - phy : The Differential Effects of Age and Tenure Distributions on Technical CommnnicsAion , " Academy of Management Joumal , 32 , 353 - 376 . Zurcher , L . A . ( 1965 ) , " The Sailor Aboard Ship : A Study of Role Behavior in a Total Institution , " Social Forces , 43 , 389 - 400 . Accepted by Arie Y . Lewin ; received March 1993 . This paper has been with the authors for three revisions . ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VOI . 7 , No . 2 , March - April 1996 135