Child Development , November / December 2001 , Volume 72 , Number 6 , Pages 1695 – 1709 How Much Does a Shared Name Make Things Similar ? Linguistic Labels , Similarity , and the Development of Inductive Inference Vladimir M . Sloutsky , Ya - Fen Lo , and Anna V . Fisher This article examines the development of inductive generalization , and presents a model of young children’s induction and two experiments testing the model . The model speciﬁes contribution of linguistic labels and perceptual similarity to young children’s induction and predicts a correspondence between similarity judg - ment and induction of young children . In Experiment 1 , 4 - to 5 - year - olds , 7 - to 8 - year - olds , and 11 - to 12 - year - olds were presented with triads of schematic faces ( a Target and two Test stimuli ) , which varied in perceptual similarity , with one of the Test stimuli sharing a linguistic label with the Target , and another having a different label . Participants were taught an unobservable biological property about the Target and asked to generalize the property to one of the Test stimuli . Although 4 - to 5 - year - olds’ proportions of label - based inductive gener - alizations varied with the degree of perceptual similarity among the compared stimuli , 11 - to 12 - year - olds re - lied exclusively on labels , and 7 - to 8 - year - olds appeared to be a transitional group . In Experiment 2 these ﬁnd - ings were replicated using naturalistic stimuli ( i . e . , photographs of animals ) , with perceptual similarity manipulated by “morphing” naturalistic pictures into each other in a ﬁxed number of steps . Overall results support predictions of the model and point to a developmental shift from treating linguistic labels as an attribute contributing to similarity to treating them as markers of a common category—a shift that appears to occur be - tween 8 and 11 years of age . INTRODUCTION Inductive generalization is an important component of human thinking . Furthermore , some believe that induc - tion is the most important component because “in - ductive inference is the only process . . . by which new knowledge comes into the world” ( Fisher , 1935 / 1951 , p . 7 ) . Induction requires at least two stimuli or stimuli sets : the base and the target . Examples of inductive generalizations are ( 1 ) X 1 has property Y , therefore X 2 has property Y , ( 2 ) X s have property Y , Z s are like X s , therefore Z s have property Y ; or ( 3 ) X 1 has property Y , therefore all X have property Y . The ﬁrst type of induc - tion has been deﬁned as speciﬁc induction , whereas the latter two have been deﬁned as general induction ( for a discussion , see Osherson , Smith , Wilkie , Lopez , & Shaﬁr , 1990 ) . There is much evidence that infants and young chil - dren are capable of speciﬁc inductive generalizations ( Gelman & Markman , 1986 , 1987 ; Mandler & McDon - ough , 1996 , 1998 ) ; however , mechanisms underlying such generalizations remain unclear . Several proposals attempting to specify these mechanisms have been dis - cussed ( for discussions , see Eimas , 1994 ; Keil , 1989 ; Mandler & McDonough , 1998 ) . These include a similar - ity - based approach ( i . e . , induction from X 1 to X 2 is a function of similarity between X 1 and X 2 ) and a cate - gory - based approach ( i . e . , induction from X 1 to X 2 is a function of X 1 and X 2 belonging to the same category X ) . According to the similarity - based approach , induc - tion starts out as a special case of the “universal law of generalization” ( Shepard , 1987 ) . The law states that the probability of generalizing a response ( e . g . , fear ) from one stimulus to another stimulus varies with featural overlap between the stimuli . An alternative proposal suggests that for certain categories , such as natural kinds , induction starts out as a category - based process ( for reviews and discussions , see Gelman & Coley , 1991 ; Gelman , Coley , & Gottfried , 1994 ) . In this case , at least for natural kinds , inductive generalization is driven by the category membership rather than by fea - tural overlap . For example , a person is more likely to generalize a property ( e . g . , the ability to drink ) from a bird to another dissimilar - looking bird than from a bird to a similar - looking airplane ( Gelman & Coley , 1991 ; Gelman & Markman , 1986 ; Mandler & McDon - ough , 1998 ) . Both positions have well - recognized weaknesses . Weaknesses of the similarity position were originally pointed out by the philosopher Nelson Goodman ( 1972 / 1992 ) . Consider a simple inductive task . A child has two pets—a white bird and a black dog . The bird likes oats , whereas the dog likes meat . Then the child gets another pet—a white dog . Should the child ex - pect the new dog to be a meat lover , like another dog , or to be an oat lover , like another white animal ? And what about the age of the new pet : should it be more similar to the other dog , or to the white bird ? When © 2001 by the Society for Research in Child Development , Inc . All rights reserved . 0009 - 3920 / 2001 / 7206 - 0006 1696 Child Development asked both of these questions , adults tend to balk at the second question and to make speciﬁc induction based on natural kind membership for the ﬁrst , that is , dogs rather than white things ( Gelman , 1988 ; Nisbett , Krantz , Jepson , & Kunda , 1983 ) . The argument against similarity thus states that induction requires more than a mere comparison of features ; one needs to know which dimensions and features are important , which requires prior knowledge ( for related discussions , see also Medin , Goldstone , & Gentner , 1993 ; Murphy & Medin , 1985 ) . There is a cost attached to the category - based posi - tion , however . In particular , this position has to as - sume the existence of complex knowledge that is nec - essary for performing induction in a category - based manner . First , the children have to have a mental rep - resentation of the category in question ( or a category placeholder , if an entity is novel ) . This is necessary be - cause the generalization decision is based on the mem - bership of both the base and the target in the category . Second , children have to have an identiﬁcation proce - dure , to identify the base and the target as members of the category . This is necessary because even if they have a mental representation of the category and knowledge of its properties , they also have to assign an instance to a particular category . In addition , children have to have knowledge of the distinction between natural or theo - retical kinds that support induction ( e . g . , mammals ) and arbitrary groupings or intuitive kinds that do not support induction ( e . g . , red things ) . Finally , children have to have knowledge of properties that are impor - tant for a particular natural kind ( e . g . , “lays eggs” is a category - important property for birds , whereas “are fun to watch” is not ) . This knowledge is important be - cause many properties could be induced only within a particular natural kind , but not across ( e . g . , “lays eggs” could be generalized within the category bird , but not to the category mammal , tree , or atom ) . These assumed abilities are quite complex and , although used to ex - plain induction , require explanation themselves . Of course , arguments such as those listed above can - not eliminate either theoretical position . For example , the similarity - based position assumes the existence of attentional and perceptual constraints on the process of similarity computation . In particular , some researchers have argued that often people do not have to extract and individuate features from objects ; rather they de - tect features and integrate those features they attend to into a perceived whole ( Thompson & Massaro , 1989 ; Treisman & Gelade , 1980 ) . In this case , computation of similarity does not require knowledge of “impor - tant” features and dimensions , because computation of similarity will be performed only over those fea - tures that are attended to . Furthermore , high atten - tional weight of a feature does not have to be accom - panied by the knowledge of the importance of this feature . By the same token , the category - based posi - tion may argue that identiﬁcation of the base and the target as members of the same category could be as - sisted by linguistic labels , and in the absence of such labels induction may be performed along the lines of perceptual similarity . Furthermore , the knowledge of category - important properties does not have to be full blown—children and adults may occasionally gener - alize properties erroneously . To perform induction in a category - based manner , they just need some crude understanding that ( 1 ) individual entities are mem - bers of stable categories ; ( 2 ) members of stable catego - ries share many properties ; and ( 3 ) some properties can be generalized from one member of a category to other members ( e . g . , lays eggs ) , whereas some prop - erties cannot be generalized to other members ( e . g . , is dirty ) . In fact , 4 - to 5 - year - old children have been shown to understand that , at least for some stable cat - egories ( e . g . , natural kinds ) , properties such as “fell on the ﬂoor” are not generalizable , whereas proper - ties such as “has hard bones inside the body” are gen - eralizable ( Gelman , 1988 , Experiment 1 ; Gutheil , Vera , & Keil , 1998 ) . Therefore , although both positions are logically pos - sible , the question of which of these possibilities actu - ally takes place remains an open empirical question . In this article , we present arguments that the similarity - based position is capable of explaining inductive gen - eralization in young children . If the argument is cor - rect , and inductive generalization in young children is similarity based , then at least some of the existing models of similarity should be able to predict perfor - mance of young children on induction tasks . One such model has been proposed recently to account for young children’s similarity judgment ( Sloutsky & Lo , 1999 ) . In what follows , the model and its predictions are speciﬁed , and the experiments designed to test predictions of the model are presented . The label - as - attribute model proposes a low - level mechanism underlying similarity judgment . The model is based on the product - rule model of similarity ( Estes , 1994 ; Medin , 1975 ) that speciﬁes similarity among non - labeled feature patterns . In the product - rule model , similarity is computed using equation 1 : ( 1 ) where N denotes the total number of relevant at - tributes , k denotes the number of matches , and S ( 0 (cid:2) S (cid:2) 1 ) denotes values ( weights ) of a mismatch . For ex - ample , suppose that a child is presented with two schematic faces , A and B ( see Figure 1 ) . Further , sup - pose that these faces consist of four distinct features Sim i j , ( ) S N (cid:3) k , (cid:4) Sloutsky , Lo , and Fisher 1697 ( i . e . , the shape of the face , eyes , nose , and the size of ears ) , that they share two of these features ( i . e . , the shape of the face and eyes ) , and differ on the other two . Finally , suppose that S (cid:4) . 5 , the value frequently derived empirically in past research ( Estes , 1994 ) . In this case , similarity between A and B would be equal to . 25 ( i . e . , . 5 2 ) . Note that similarity between entities de - creases rapidly with a decrease in the number of mis - matches , approximating the exponential decay function discussed elsewhere ( Nosofsky , 1984 ) . For example , if the faces shared only one of the four features , their sim - ilarity would be equal to . 125 ( i . e . , . 5 3 ) . On the other hand , if the faces shared all four features , they would be identical , and their similarity would be equal to 1 ( i . e . , . 5 0 ) . The label - as - attribute model suggests that ( 1 ) lin - guistic labels are considered by young children as at - tributes of entities , and ( 2 ) linguistic labels have greater contribution to similarity judgment for younger chil - dren than do other attributes . Both suggestions have been supported empirically ( see Sloutsky & Lo , 1999 ) . Why would labels weigh more for younger children and what might be a mechanism underlying the greater weight of labels at an earlier age ? One possible expla - nation is that labels have larger weights because they represent the auditory modality , and the auditory system matures earlier than the visual system . In par - ticular , the auditory system starts functioning during the last trimester of gestation ( Birnholz & Benaceraff , 1983 ; for a review , see also Jusczyk , 1998 ) , whereas the visual system does not start functioning until after birth . As a result , even though the neural bases of vi - sual perception are fully developed at quite a young age ( e . g . , Aslin & Smith , 1988 ) , auditory stimuli may still have a privileged processing status for younger children , thus resulting in larger weights of auditory stimuli . In this case , auditorily presented labels are not only attended to , but they may also attract attention to visual attributes that correlate with the labels . In fact , it has been demonstrated that 15 - month - olds grouped objects together when the objects shared a label or a nonlinguistic auditory input ( instrumental music input ) when either input perfectly correlated with an infant’s ﬁxation of an object ( Roberts , 1995 ; Roberts & Jacob , 1991 ; but see Balaban & Waxman , 1997 ) . Additionally , it was found that in a learning task , auditory stimuli over - shadowed visual stimuli for 4 - year - olds , whereas vi - sual stimuli overshadowed auditory stimuli for adults ( Napolitano , Sloutsky , & Boysen , 2001 ) . According to the label - as - attribute model , similarity of labeled feature patterns could be calculated using equation 2 : ( 2 ) where N denotes the total number of visual attributes , k denotes the number of matches , S Vis . attr . denotes values ( attentional weights ) of a mismatch on a visual attribute , S Label denotes values of label mismatches , and L denotes a label match . When there is a label match , L (cid:4) 1 , and S Label (cid:4) 1 ; when there is a label mismatch , L (cid:4) 0 , and S Label (cid:5) 1 . Note that S ( 0 (cid:2) S (cid:2) 1 ) denotes attentional weights of mismatches , and the contribution of S is large if S is close to 0 and small if S is close to 1 . In other words , the closer the value of S to 1 , the smaller the contribution of a mismatch to overall difference of compared entities ; whereas the closer the value of S to 0 , the greater its contribution to overall difference . When two entities are identical on all dimensions ( i . e . , there are no mismatches ) , their similarity should be equal to 1 ; otherwise , it is smaller than 1 . Note that ac - cording to this model , when neither entity is labeled ( i . e . , S Label (cid:4) 1 ) , similarity between entities is deter - mined by the number of overlapping visual at - tributes , thus conforming to equation 1 . Labels are presented as a separate term in the equation because they are expected to have larger attentional weights than most visual attributes . In the case in which the weight of a label does not differ from that of other at - tributes , the label simply becomes one of the at - tributes in the computation of similarity , and equa - tion 2 turns into equation 1 . Of course , there could be another case of nonlabeling , when two unfamiliar en - tities share a label , and one unfamiliar entity is not la - beled at all . Should the model treat an absent label as a mismatch ? On the one hand , in terms of distal stim - uli , absence of a label should constitute a mismatch ; on the other hand , in terms of mental representation , it may not . We , therefore , consider this an open ques - tion and defer answering it until further empirical investigation . Finally , the model suggests that if the child is pre - sented with a Target feature pattern ( T ) and Test feature patterns ( A and B ) and asked which of the Test patterns is more similar to the Target , the child’s choices could be predicted using equation 3 : Sim i j , ( ) S Label1 L (cid:3) S Vis . attr . N k (cid:3) , (cid:4) Figure 1 A pair of stimulus patterns with distinct facial features . 1698 Child Development ( 3 ) In short , we argue that if induction in young children is indeed similarity based , then the same model that predicts similarity judgment in young children ( e . g . , Sloutsky & Lo , 1999 ) should be able to predict their in - ductive inference . The proposal is not unreasonable , as there is a large body of evidence indicating that ( at least for artifacts ) overall similarity explains young children’s speciﬁc induction ( Gentner , 1978 ; Landau , Smith , & Jones , 1998 ; Smith , Jones , & Landau , 1996 ) . One important ( and testable ) consequence of this proposal is that because linguistic labels contribute to similarity in a quantitative manner rather than in a qualitative “all - or - nothing” manner , they should also make a quantitative contribution to young children’s induction . To make this difference between the qualita - tive and quantitative contributions clear , suppose that a young child is presented with a set of unique triads of stimuli . Each triad comprises Test stimuli A and B and Target T . Furthermore , let us , for the purposes of this illustration , hold perceptual similarity of B to T constant across trials , while varying similarity of A to T . On each trial , the child is informed that the Target has some nonobvious property ( e . g . , has pink bones ) and is asked which of the Test stimuli was likely to have the property in question . If stimuli A and B are not labeled , proportions of inductive generalization from A to T should change as a function of perceptual similarity between A and T ( for a related discussion , see Keil , 1989 ; for corroborating evidence , see Gel - man & Markman , 1987 ; Springer , 1992 , Experiment 1 ) . This type of induction is represented in Figure 2 ( see the dashed line ) . However , if B and T share a lin - guistic label , patterns of induction should differ . First , labels could contribute qualitatively to induc - tive inference , such that induction is performed strictly along the shared labels ( see the solid line with black diamonds in Figure 2 ) . Alternatively , labels could contribute quantitatively , in which case the slope and intercept should depend on the weight of the label ( see lines with clear diamonds , circles , and triangles in Figure 2 , with each line representing a different weight of the label ) . Note that the label - as - attribute model predicts a quantitative contribution of linguistic labels to induc - tion , and the critical prediction of the model is variabil - ity in label - based inductive generalization as a func - tion of similarity among A , B , and T . In the case of qualitative effects of labels on induction , the propor - tion of label - based generalizations should be invari - antly near ceiling , independent of perceptual similar - ity . Such qualitative effects should be observed when P B ( ) Sim T B , ( ) Sim T B , ( ) Sim T A , ( ) (cid:6) - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . (cid:4) a person knows that the category label is the best pre - dictor of certain properties of members of the category . For example , if a person familiar with the biological taxonomy is told that two animals are mammals , that person would be able to generalize many ( although , of course , not all ) biological properties from one animal to another , independent of these animals’ appearance . Therefore , labels may have qualitative effects when in - duction is based on domain - speciﬁc knowledge . In addition to the qualitative prediction ( i . e . , vari - ability in label - based generalization as a function of similarity among A , B , and T ) , the label - as - attribute model is capable of predicting ordinal differences across different levels of perceptual similarity . Suppose that patterns A , B , and T have distinct features ( see Figure 3 ) . Each of the Test stimuli might share zero vi - sual attributes , one visual attribute , or two visual at - tributes with the Target , so that Test A always shares either the same number or more attributes with the Target than Test B . Combinations of attributes shared by each of the Test stimuli and the Target deﬁne several distinct stimulus pattern conditions . For example , a T - 00 pattern means that the Target shares zero attributes with both Test stimuli , whereas a T - 20 pattern means that the Target shares two attributes with Test A and zero attributes with Test B . If we know S Vis . attr . and S Label , we could compute similarity of Test A and the Target , and Test B and the Target for each of these stimulus pattern conditions , using equation 2 . Plug - ging these similarities into equation 3 , we could pre - Figure 2 Possible patterns of induction in young children : induction driven by labels alone , induction driven by percep - tual similarity alone , and induction jointly driven by labels and perceptual similarity with different weights of labels . A (cid:4) Test stimulus A ; B (cid:4) Test stimulus B ; T (cid:4) Target . Sloutsky , Lo , and Fisher 1699 dict probabilities of inductive generalization between the Target and the Test stimulus that shares the label with the Target ( i . e . , Test B ) for each of the stimulus pat - tern conditions . Values of S Vis . attr . (cid:4) . 5 and S Label (cid:4) . 4 were derived from Sloutsky & Lo’s ( 1999 ) data on 6 - to 7 - year - olds’ similarity judgment using these exact stimuli patterns . These estimates were plugged into equation 2 , thus yielding similarity estimates that were plugged , in turn , into equation 3 , thus yielding the presented probabilities . These predicted probabilities for each stimulus pattern condition are presented in Table 1 . The model presented in equation 2 was based on the assumption that different visual attributes have approximately equal attentional weights , something that represents a convenient simpliﬁcation . For exam - ple , overall shape of the face may be a more important feature than the size of ears . Thus , to avoid systematic biases stemming from this simpliﬁcation , we ( 1 ) ran - domly assigned features to each of the stimulus pat - tern conditions , and ( 2 ) calibrated the stimuli . To cali - brate the stimuli , we conducted a calibration study with all T - 00 , T - 11 , and T - 22 stimuli patterns ( each based on a unique combination of features ) . In the study , young children and college undergraduates decided which of the Test stimuli was more similar to the Target . Only those stimulus patterns in which young children and undergraduate participants deemed each of the Test stimuli to be equally similar to the Target were selected for the reported experiment . Note that T - 00 , T - 11 , and T - 22 conditions were similar in that in each of these conditions , Test stimuli A and B were equally similar to the Target . Because attentional weights do not have to remain the same across different tasks and experi - mental conditions , predictions in Table 1 were ordinal rather than precise quantitative ones . Based on the model of label - as - attribute we made the following critical predictions : 1 . Independent of labeling , inductive generaliza - tion in young children should vary as a function of featural overlap among the compared entities . 2 . Speciﬁc ordinal relations among the stimulus pat - tern conditions should be as follows ( see Table 1 ) : P ( T - 00 ) (cid:4) P ( T - 11 ) (cid:4) P ( T - 22 ) (cid:7) P ( T - 10 ) (cid:4) P ( T - 21 ) (cid:7) P ( T - 20 ) . 3 . Labels should contribute quantitatively to induc - tive inference of young children ( see Figure 2 for possible patterns of quantitative contribution ) . In what follows , two experiments that tested pre - dictions of the model with artiﬁcial stimuli ( Experi - ment 1 ) and with naturalistic stimuli ( Experiment 2 ) are presented . The goals of these experiments were : ( 1 ) to test the formulated critical predictions outlined above , ( 2 ) to examine the overall ﬁt of the label - as - at - tribute model , and ( 3 ) to provide descriptive accounts of the development of induction . EXPERIMENT 1 Method Participants A group of 97 children age 4 to 12 years partici - pated in the experiment . The participants represented three age groups : ( 1 ) 42 four - to ﬁve - year - olds ( M (cid:4) 4 . 34 years , SD (cid:4) . 49 years ; 25 males and 17 females ) , 30 seven - to eight - year - olds ( M (cid:4) 8 . 1 years , SD (cid:4) . 5 years ; 15 males and 15 females ) , and 25 eleven - to twelve - year - olds ( M (cid:4) 11 . 8 years , SD (cid:4) . 5 years ; 15 Figure 3 Example of stimuli presented in one trial in the T - 21 condition : The Target shares the shape of the face and the nose with Test stimulus A , and the size of the ears with Test stimu - lus B . Table 1 Predicted Probability of Generalizing an Unobservable Property from the Target to Test Stimulus B by Labeling Condition and Stimulus Pattern Condition StimulusPatternCondition Labeling Condition No Label Label Shared with B T - 00 . 5 . 71 T - 11 . 5 . 71 T - 22 . 5 . 71 T - 10 . 33 . 56 T - 21 . 33 . 56 T - 20 . 2 . 38 1700 Child Development males and 10 females ) . The participants were re - cruited from day - care centers and elementary and middle schools located in middle - class suburbs of Columbus , Ohio . Materials The materials included triads of 5 cm (cid:8) 5 cm sche - matic faces , two of which were Test stimuli and one of which was a Target , with the Target on the bottom and the two Test stimuli located equidistantly above ( see Figure 3 ) . Each schematic face had three distinct attributes ( shape of head , shape of ears , and shape of nose ) , and each attribute had three values ( e . g . , “curve - lined” nose , “straight - lined” nose , and “angled” nose ) . Materials also included 36 artiﬁcial bisyllable labels ( e . g . , Bala , Gula , and so forth ) and a set of unobserv - able biological properties of the Target . These unob - servable properties included bones , brain , heart , stom - ach , fat , and blood , varying in size , shape , or color . Participants were asked which of the Test stimuli was more likely to share an unobservable property with the Target . Design and Procedure The experiment had a mixed design with labeling condition ( Label versus No Label ) and age as between - subject factors and stimulus pattern as a within - subject variable . For both levels of the labeling condition , participants were presented with the same triads of schematic faces , two of which were Test stimuli and one of which was a Target . The only difference was that in the Label condition all stimuli were labeled , whereas in the No - Label condition these stimuli were not labeled . In the Label condition , the Target always shared labels with Test B and always had a different label than Test A . The stimulus pattern condition in - cluded six levels , T - 00 , T - 11 , T - 22 , T - 10 , T - 21 , and T - 20 . As mentioned previously , T refers to the Target , the ﬁrst digit refers to the number of attributes shared by Test A with the Target , and the second digit refers to the number of attributes shared by Test B with the Target . Children were seen by a female experimenter in a quiet room in their day - care centers . Before the experi - mental task , children were introduced to some warm - up questions and were given feedback . Warm - up trials . In the warm - up trials , children were presented with Test and Target stimuli and were asked to choose the Test stimulus that shared a biological property with the Target . In the ﬁrst warm - up trial , participants were presented with a Target ( a shark ) and two Test stimuli ( a bear and a tree branch ) . In the second warm - up trial , they were presented with a rab - bit as a Target , and an apple and a dog as Test stimuli . In the third warm - up trial , children were presented with a ﬁsh as a Target , and a turtle and a spider as Test stimuli . In all warm - up trials , children were ﬁrst told that the Target stimuli either had bones , blood , or a skele - ton inside the body . Children then were asked to de - termine which of the two Test stimuli had the same thing inside the body as the Target . If a child failed to make an inductive generalization , the researcher ex - plained how each of the Test stimuli could have the same thing as the Target . The goal of the warm - up trials was to eliminate those participants who did not un - derstand the task and produced random responses . If a child was capable of making inductive generaliza - tion in two out of three warm - up trials , the researcher proceeded to the experimental trials . No child was eliminated from the study because all participants pro - vided satisfactory responses in at least two out of three warm - up trials . Experimental trials . In the Label condition , children were ﬁrst auditorily introduced to the labels for the Target and Test pictures . After each stimulus was la - beled , children were asked to repeat these labels . No labels were introduced in the No - Label condition . Children were then introduced to an unobservable bi - ological property of the Target stimulus and were asked which of the Test stimuli was more likely to have this property . Positions of the two Test pictures ( i . e . , to the left or right of the Target ) were counterbalanced across the experimental trials . In both conditions , par - ticipants had 24 experimental trials ( six within - subject stimulus patterns with four trials each ) . The order of stimulus patterns was randomized within participants . The important part of the instructions was as follows : I am going to show you some pictures of Aliens , so you’ll learn more about them . Are you ready to start ? Let’s start ! Here we have three Alien pictures [ pictures were introduced at this point ] . They come from different planets . . . for example , Guga and Bala . Could you please repeat these names ? Look at this one . This is a Guga [ points to the target ] . This is a Bala [ points to Test stimulus A ] , and this is a Guga [ points to Test stimulus B ] . This Guga has yellow blood inside the body . Which one of them [ points to two Test stimuli ] has yellow blood inside the body like this Guga ? Does this Guga [ points to Test stim - ulus B ] have yellow blood inside the body like this Guga [ points to the target ] or does this Bala [ points to Test stimulus A ] have yellow blood inside the body like this Guga [ points to the target ] ? Note that in the No - Label condition all stimuli were Sloutsky , Lo , and Fisher 1701 referred to as “this one . ” The order of introduction of the Test stimuli and the order of induction questions were randomized . Results and Discussion Proportions of Test B choices broken down by age , stimulus pattern , and labeling conditions are pre - sented in Figure 4 . Recall that B choices refer to the se - lection of the Test stimulus that in the Label condition always shared the label with the Target . To examine overall age effects , proportions of B choices were subjected to a three - way mixed ANOVA with labeling condition and age as factors and stimulus pattern condition as the repeated measure . The analysis revealed a signiﬁcant main effect for the stimulus pat - tern condition , F ( 5 , 455 ) (cid:4) 14 . 6 , MSE (cid:4) . 08 , p (cid:5) . 001 ; a signiﬁcant main effect for labeling condition , F ( 1 , 91 ) (cid:4) 114 . 4 , MSE (cid:4) . 03 , p (cid:5) . 001 ; and a signiﬁcant main effect for age , F ( 2 , 91 ) (cid:4) 6 . 1 , MSE (cid:4) . 02 , p (cid:5) . 005 . There was also a marginally signiﬁcant Age (cid:8) Labeling Condition interaction , F ( 2 , 91 ) (cid:4) 2 . 6 , MSE (cid:4) . 03 , p (cid:4) . 08 , with larger effects for labeling condition in the group of 11 - to 12 - year - olds ( M Label (cid:3) M NoLabel (cid:4) 64 % ) than in the group of 4 - to 5 - year - olds ( M Label (cid:3) M NoLabel (cid:4) 42 % ) or in the group of 7 - to 8 - year - olds ( M Label (cid:3) M NoLabel (cid:4) 40 % ) . Finally , there was a signiﬁcant Age (cid:8) Stimulus Pattern Condition interaction , F ( 10 , 455 ) (cid:4) 2 . 8 , MSE (cid:4) . 08 , p (cid:5) . 005 , with smaller differences among the stim - ulus pattern conditions in the group of 11 - to 12 - year - olds ( Max . Diff (cid:4) 14 % ) than in the group of 4 - to 5 - year - olds ( Max . Diff (cid:4) 46 % ) or the group of 7 - to 8 - year - olds ( Max . Diff (cid:4) 46 % ) . No other interactions were signiﬁcant . Having established overall age effects , we also deemed it necessary to conduct more detailed analyses within each age group . Proportions of Test B generalizations in the group of 4 - to 5 - year - olds are presented in the leftmost panel of Figure 4 . These data were subjected to a mixed ANOVA with labeling condition as a factor and stim - ulus pattern condition as a repeated measure . The analysis revealed a signiﬁcant main effect for labeling condition , F ( 1 , 40 ) (cid:4) 174 . 22 , MSE (cid:4) . 05 , p (cid:5) . 002 , and a signiﬁcant main effect for the stimulus pattern con - dition , F ( 5 , 200 ) (cid:4) 14 . 6 , MSE (cid:4) . 09 , p (cid:5) . 001 ; the inter - action was not signiﬁcant , F (cid:5) 1 , p (cid:4) . 9 . To test the hypothesized predictions , a set of planned comparisons was performed contrasting proportions of Test B generalizations across labeling and stimulus pattern conditions . As predicted ( see Table 1 ) , the pro - portions of inductive generalizations to Test B in T - 00 , T - 11 , and T - 22 conditions were statistically equivalent , all t s ( 42 ) (cid:5) 1 . At the same time , as predicted , propor - tions of Test B generalizations differed signiﬁcantly across the T - 10 , T - 21 , and T - 20 conditions . Planned comparisons pointed to the following order among the conditions in the proportion of Test B generalizations : T - 00 (cid:4) T - 11 (cid:4) T - 22 (cid:7) T - 21 (cid:4) T - 10 (cid:7) T - 20 , for all indi - cated differences t s ( 42 ) (cid:7) 3 . 7 , Bonferroni - adjusted p s (cid:5) . 01 . As predicted , differences between T - 21 and T - 10 were not signiﬁcant , t ( 42 ) (cid:5) 1 . These results clearly support both critical predictions : the qualitative pre - diction that the proportion of label - based generaliza - tions varies as a function of the number of features shared by the Target with each of the test stimuli , and the ordinal prediction . Participants’ responses closely followed predictions presented in Table 1 , exhibiting the predicted order in the proportion of Test B gener - alizations . Overall ﬁt between predicted probabilities ( Table 1 ) and observed frequencies is presented in Figure 5 . Predictions of the label - as - attribute model ﬁt the ob - served data well : the model of label - as - attribute ac - counted for approximately 88 % of the observed vari - ance , R 2 (cid:4) . 884 . Proportions of Test B generalizations in the group of 7 - to 8 - year - olds are presented in the middle panel of Figure 4 . These data were subjected to a mixed ANOVA with labeling condition as a factor and stim - ulus pattern condition as the repeated measure . The analysis revealed a signiﬁcant main effect for labeling condition , F ( 1 , 28 ) (cid:4) 15 . 11 , MSE (cid:4) . 5 , p (cid:5) . 002 , and a Figure 4 Percentage of Test B generalizations broken down by age , stimulus pattern , and labeling conditions ( Experiment 1 ) . 1702 Child Development signiﬁcant main effect for the stimulus pattern condi - tion , F ( 5 , 140 ) (cid:4) 5 . 7 , MSE (cid:4) . 1 , p (cid:5) . 001 , whereas the interaction was not signiﬁcant , F (cid:5) 1 , p (cid:4) . 48 . Planned comparisons indicated that there were no differences in Test B generalizations among the indeterminate con - ditions ( T - 00 , T - 11 , and T - 22 ) , p s (cid:7) . 25 , and among the determinate conditions ( T - 10 , T - 21 , and T - 20 ) , p s (cid:7) . 49 , whereas there were signiﬁcant differences be - tween the aggregated scores on determinate and in - determinate conditions , t s (cid:7) 2 . 1 , p s (cid:5) . 05 . Thus , the primary difference between the responses of 4 - to 5 - year - olds and 7 - to 8 - year - olds was that older chil - dren lacked ordinal differences in proportions of Test B generalizations across T - 10 , T - 21 , and T - 20 condi - tions : in the group of 4 - to 5 - year - olds the direction was P ( T - 10 ) (cid:4) P ( T - 21 ) (cid:7) P ( T - 20 ) , whereas in the group of 7 - to 8 - year - olds there was no direction , P ( T - 10 ) (cid:4) P ( T - 21 ) (cid:4) P ( T - 20 ) . Proportions of Test B generalizations in the group of 11 - to 12 - year - olds are presented in the rightmost panel of Figure 4 . These data were subjected to a mixed ANOVA with labeling condition as a factor and stimulus pattern condition as the repeated mea - sure . The analysis revealed a signiﬁcant main effect for labeling condition , F ( 1 , 23 ) (cid:4) 534 , MSE (cid:4) . 03 , p (cid:5) . 001 , a signiﬁcant main effect for the stimulus pattern condition , F ( 5 , 115 ) (cid:4) 2 . 5 , MSE (cid:4) . 03 , p (cid:5) . 05 , and a sig - niﬁcant interaction , F ( 5 , 115 ) (cid:4) 3 , MSE (cid:4) . 03 , p (cid:5) . 05 . The interaction was driven by the fact that in the No - Label condition there were signiﬁcant differences be - tween aggregated scores for the indeterminate stimu - lus pattern conditions ( T - 00 , T - 11 , and T - 22 ) and those for the determinate conditions ( T - 10 , T - 21 , and T - 20 ) , t ( 11 ) (cid:4) 3 . 6 , p (cid:5) . 01 , whereas there were no such dif - ferences in the Label condition , t (cid:5) 1 . In fact , with the exception of one participant on one trial ( i . e . , 311 out of 312 responses ) , all participants on all trials in the Label condition used labels as the only basis for their induction . Note that 11 - to 12 - year - olds exhibited important differences compared with 4 - to 5 - and 7 - to 8 - year - olds . In the No - Label condition , responses of 11 - to 12 - year - olds were similar to those in the two younger groups . In particular , there were no differences in Test B gener - alizations among the indeterminate conditions ( T - 00 , T - 11 , and T - 22 ) , p s (cid:7) . 9 , and among the determinate conditions ( T - 10 , T - 21 , and T - 20 ) , p s (cid:7) . 7 ; whereas , as noted above , there was a signiﬁcant difference be - tween the aggregated scores on determinate and in - determinate conditions . In the Label condition , how - ever , proportions of Test B generalizations were statistically equivalent across the stimuli patterns with participants using labels as the only basis for their induction . Overall , results presented in Figure 4 indicate that when only perceptual information was available , par - ticipants across all age groups based their inductive inference on this information : in all age groups induc - tive inference was a function of the number of at - tributes shared by the Target with the Test stimuli . In - troduction of labels ( recall that the Test B stimulus always shared the label with the Target ) , however , dra - matically changed the proportions of B choices in the group of 11 - to 12 - year - olds , but not in 4 - to 5 - year - olds or in 7 - to 8 - year - olds . Whereas labels contributed qualitatively to induction performed by 11 - to 12 - year - olds and these participants relied exclusively on labels when performing induction , labels contributed quantitatively to induction performed by 4 - to 5 - and 7 - to 8 - year - olds , who relied on overall similarity computed over visual attributes and labels . Recall that one of the goals of this experiment was to examine developmental differences in inductive infer - ence . Results of the present experiment indicated that although younger children performed induction across labeled entities in a similarity - based manner , 11 - to 12 - year - olds performed such induction in a category - based manner . At the same time , 7 - to 8 - year - olds ap - peared to be a transitional group : their patterns of re - sponses in the Label condition did not exhibit the ordi - nal relations observed in 4 - to 5 - year - olds , and yet they were not invariably at ceiling as were the responses of the 11 - to 12 - year - olds . To further examine the devel - opmental transition , we compared proportions of participants in each of the three age groups who con - sistently performed label - based generalizations . Perfor - mance was considered consistent if a participant made the same choice on 18 out of 24 trials . This criterion was adopted because 18 out of 24 trials , with chance level equal to . 5 , constitutes a reliable , above - chance perfor - mance , binomial test , p (cid:5) . 01 . Thirty nine percent of 4 - to 5 - year - olds , 56 % of 7 - to 8 - year - olds , and 100 % of 11 - to 12 - year - olds exhibited consistent label - based Figure 5 Theoretical probabilities ( computed from the model using Equation 3 ) and observed probabilities of generaliza - tion of biological properties to Test B ( Experiment 1 ) . Sloutsky , Lo , and Fisher 1703 generalizations . To examine the signiﬁcance of these age - related differences , proportions of consistent re - sponders were subjected to a (cid:9) 2 analysis . The analysis pointed to signiﬁcant differences between the groups , (cid:9) 2 ( 2 , N (cid:4) 57 ) (cid:4) 13 . 5 , p (cid:5) . 001 , with 11 - to 12 - year - olds demonstrating the largest proportion of consistent label - based responders , z s (cid:7) 1 . 99 , p s (cid:5) . 05 . Thus , it seems reasonable to infer a developmental shift from similarity - based to category - based induction , occur - ring between 8 and 11 , i . e . , around 9 to 10 years of age . In short , ﬁndings of this experiment supported pre - dicted ordinal differences among the stimulus pattern conditions and indicated a good overall ﬁt between predicted and observed data . In addition , ﬁndings pointed to important developmental differences in in - ductive generalization of 4 - to 5 - year - olds , 7 - to 8 - year - olds , and 11 - to 12 - year - olds . However , it could be argued that the label - as - attribute account of young children’s induction could be stimuli speciﬁc : the results of the reported experi - ment were based on artiﬁcial , perceptually impover - ished artiﬁcial stimuli . Although these stimuli have im - portant advantages in that they afford individuation of features and thus make these features tractable , these stimuli also have important limitations . In particular , it is unclear whether these stimuli are representative of naturalistic stimuli , and , therefore , it is unclear whether the results of Experiment 1 are generalizable to natural - istic , perceptually rich stimuli . It also could be argued that the results might have been different if stimuli were not humanlike : infants and young children have been shown to develop differ - ent types of representation for human and nonhuman animals ( Quinn & Eimas , 1998 ) . Although the former could be represented as individual exemplars , the latter may have summary ( i . e . , category - based yet percep - tual ) representations . Therefore , having supported the label - as - attribute model , we deemed it necessary to conduct another ex - periment to examine whether the regularities observed in Experiment 1 held for naturalistic , nonhumanlike stimuli . Because it is impossible to individuate features and to precisely calculate featural overlap with com - plex naturalistic stimuli patterns , we manipulated sim - ilarity by “morphing” naturalistic pictures into each other in a ﬁxed number of steps . EXPERIMENT 2 The goal of this experiment was to replicate the ﬁnd - ings of Experiment 1 with naturalistic stimuli . Findings would corroborate those of Experiment 1 if naturalistic stimuli exhibited patterns of variance similar to those observed in the leftmost panel in Figure 4 . In other words , we predicted that with naturalistic stimuli , the proportion of Test B generalizations in 4 - to 5 - year - olds should exhibit a main effect for stimulus pattern condition . Method Participants A group of 26 children age 4 to 5 years ( M (cid:4) 4 . 8 years , SD (cid:4) . 7 years ; 17 males and 10 females ) and 40 undergraduate students ( M (cid:4) 21 . 9 years , SD (cid:4) 2 . 9 years ; 17 males and 10 females ) participated in the ex - periment . Child participants were recruited from day - care centers located in middle - class suburbs of Colum - bus , Ohio and Houston , Texas , whereas undergraduate participants were students at the Ohio State University participating in the experiment in partial fulﬁllment of an introductory psychology course requirement . Materials The materials included triads of 5 . 6 cm (cid:8) 5 . 6 cm colored pictures of animals , two of which were Test stimuli and one of which was a Target , with the Target on the top and the two Test stimuli located equidis - tantly below . These materials were created in the fol - lowing manner . First , 20 unique animal photographs were selected from a variety of Internet sites and soft - ware collections ( e . g . , Corel Gallery 1 , 300 , 000 ) . These photographs were grouped into 10 pairs . Then each member of the pair was morphed into another member of the pair using MorphMan 1 . 1 ( Stoik Corporation , Moscow , Russia , 1999 ) . All morphing sequences con - sisted of eight intermediate steps . Each step in the se - quence resulted in an approximately equal proportion of changed features as compared with a preceding step . An example of a morphed sequence with a cat morphed into a dog is presented in Figure 6 . When morphed sequences were created , each member of the sequence was paired with each end point of the se - quence ( i . e . , cat and dog are end points ) . These pairs were presented to 60 undergraduate students in the fol - lowing preliminary experiment . Each undergraduate participant was presented with one pair of stimuli ( an end point of a sequence and a step in the sequence ) at a time and was asked to make a “same – different” judg - ment . Each pair was presented six times . These stimuli were presented on a PC computer monitor . The order of trials was randomized , and the experiment was con - trolled by SuperLab 2 . 0 ( Cedrus Corporation , San Pedro , CA , 1999 ) . The proportion of “same” responses within a pair aggregated across trials and participants was used as a measure of similarity between the mem - 1704 Child Development bers of the pair . This preliminary experiment was nec - essary because stimuli used in Experiment 2 did not afford individuation and calculation of overlapping features used in Experiment 1 . Next , experimental triads ( see Figure 7 ) were created with end points of se - quences serving as Targets and morphed images serv - ing as Test stimuli . The creation of triads was based on similarity between each of the Test stimuli and the Tar - get . Three types of unique triads were created : ( 1 ) those in which both Test stimuli were judged to be equally similar to the Target [ Sim ( Test A , Target ) (cid:3) Sim ( Test B , Target ) (cid:4) 0 ] , ( 2 ) those in which Test A was judged to be somewhat more similar to the Target than Test B [ Sim ( Test A , Target ) (cid:3) Sim ( Test B , Target ) (cid:4) . 5 to . 6 ] , and ( 3 ) those in which Test A was judged to be much more similar to the Target than Test B [ Sim ( Test A , Tar - get ) (cid:3) Sim ( Test B , Target ) (cid:4) . 8 to . 9 ] . These triads were referred to as T - 0 , T - . 5 , and T - . 9 stimuli pattern condi - tions , respectively . The T - 0 , T - . 5 , and T - . 9 stimuli pattern conditions consisted of four triads each ( with each of the four triads made up of different animal pairs ) , thus resulting in 12 triads . Materials also included the set of artiﬁcial bisyllable labels and the set of unobservable bi - ological properties used in Experiment 1 . Design and Procedure The design and procedure used in Experiment 2 were similar to those used in Experiment 1 , except that in Experiment 2 , stimuli were presented on a computer screen , presentation of the stimuli was controlled by a specially written computer program , and there were no warm - up trials . In both conditions , participants had 12 experimental trials ( three within - subject stim - ulus patterns with four trials each ) . Children were seen in a quiet room in their day - care centers , whereas undergraduate students were seen in a re - search lab on campus . Results and Discussion Proportions of Test B choices broken down by age , stimulus pattern , and labeling conditions are pre - sented in Figure 8 . Recall that B choices refer to the se - lection of the Test stimulus that in the Label condition shared the label with the Target . To examine overall age effects , proportions of B choices were subjected to a three - way mixed ANOVA with labeling condition and age as factors and stimu - lus pattern condition as the repeated measure . The analysis revealed a signiﬁcant main effect for the stim - ulus pattern condition , F ( 2 , 126 ) (cid:4) 23 . 1 , MSE (cid:4) . 04 , p (cid:5) . 001 ; a signiﬁcant main effect for labeling condi - tion , F ( 1 , 63 ) (cid:4) 225 , MSE (cid:4) . 06 , p (cid:5) . 001 ; and a signif - icant main effect for age , F ( 1 , 63 ) (cid:4) 4 . 99 , MSE (cid:4) . 06 , p (cid:5) . 05 . There was also a signiﬁcant Age (cid:8) Labeling Condition interaction , F ( 1 , 63 ) (cid:4) 47 . 75 , MSE (cid:4) . 06 , p (cid:5) . 001 , with larger effects for labeling condition in Figure 6 An example of an eight - step morphing sequence with a cat morphed into a dog ( Experiment 2 ) . Sloutsky , Lo , and Fisher 1705 Figure 7 Examples of stimuli presented in the three stimulus pattern conditions ( Experiment 2 ) . stimulus pattern condition as the repeated measure . For the 4 - to 5 - year - olds , the analysis revealed a signif - icant main effect for the labeling condition , F ( 1 , 25 ) (cid:4) 15 . 5 , MSE (cid:4) . 1 , p (cid:5) . 005 , and a signiﬁcant main effect for the stimulus pattern condition , F ( 2 , 50 ) (cid:4) 4 , MSE (cid:4) . 06 , p (cid:5) . 05 , whereas the interaction was not signiﬁ - cant , F (cid:5) 1 , p (cid:4) . 9 . Planned comparisons indicated the following direction of the proportion in label - based generalization : T - 0 (cid:7) T - . 5 (cid:4) T - . 9 , for all indicated dif - ferences t s ( 15 ) (cid:7) 2 . 4 , Bonferroni - adjusted p s (cid:5) . 08 , for T - . 5 versus T - . 9 , t ( 15 ) (cid:5) 1 , Bonferroni adjusted p (cid:4) 1 . For the undergraduate group , the analysis re - vealed a signiﬁcant main effect for the labeling condi - tion , F ( 1 , 38 ) (cid:4) 59 . 6 , MSE (cid:4) . 03 , p (cid:5) . 001 , and a signif - icant main effect for the stimulus pattern condition , F ( 2 , 76 ) (cid:4) 28 . 4 , MSE (cid:4) . 03 , p (cid:5) . 001 . The interaction was the group of undergraduates ( M Label (cid:3) M NoLabel (cid:4) 76 % ) than in the group of 4 - to 5 - year - olds ( M Label (cid:3) M NoLabel (cid:4) 28 % ) . Finally , there was a signiﬁcant Label (cid:8) Stimulus Pattern Condition interaction , F ( 2 , 126 ) (cid:4) 5 . 9 , MSE (cid:4) . 04 , p (cid:5) . 005 , with smaller differences among the stimulus pattern conditions in the Label condition ( Max . Diff (cid:4) 12 % ) than in the No - Label con - dition ( Max . Diff (cid:4) 39 % ) , and a signiﬁcant three - way ( Age (cid:8) Labeling Condition (cid:8) Stimulus Pattern Con - dition ) interaction , F ( 2 , 126 ) (cid:4) 9 . 6 , MSE (cid:4) . 04 , p (cid:5) . 001 . No other interactions were signiﬁcant . Having established overall age effects , we deemed it neces - sary to conduct more detailed analyses within each age group . Data in Figure 8 were subjected to two mixed ANOVAs with labeling condition as a factor and 1706 Child Development also signiﬁcant , F ( 2 , 76 ) (cid:4) 34 . 4 , MSE (cid:4) . 03 , p (cid:5) . 001 , which indicates that there were differences across the stimulus pattern conditions in the No - Label condi - tion ( M T - 0 (cid:4) . 53 , M T - . 5 (cid:4) . 04 , and M T - . 9 (cid:4) . 01 ) , whereas there were no such differences in the Label condition ( M T - 0 (cid:4) . 97 , M T - . 5 (cid:4) . 96 , and M T - . 9 (cid:4) . 93 ) . To test differences among the stimulus pattern con - ditions , a set of planned comparisons was performed contrasting proportions of Test B generalizations across labeling and stimulus pattern conditions . Planned comparisons pointed to the following order among the conditions in the proportion of Test B gen - eralizations in the No - Label condition : T - 0 (cid:7) T - . 5 (cid:4) T - . 9 , for all indicated differences t s ( 19 ) (cid:7) 6 . 5 , Bonferroni - adjusted p s (cid:5) . 001 , for T - . 5 versus T - . 9 , t ( 19 ) (cid:4) 1 , Bon - ferroni - adjusted p (cid:4) . 99 . At the same time , in the Label condition there were no differences across the stimu - lus pattern conditions , t s ( 19 ) (cid:5) 1 , with the majority of participants performing label - based generalization independent of the stimulus pattern condition . Interestingly enough , results point to differences in the proportion of Test B generalizations in the No - Label conditions between adult and children participants : In 4 - to 5 - year - olds , these proportions decreased gradually with an increase of similarity between Test A and the Target ; whereas in adults , these proportions decreased steeply ( see Figure 8 ) . These different rates of decrease may have stemmed from the increased ability to discriminate stimuli by adults than by chil - dren ; in which case , under T - . 5 , and T - . 9 conditions , stimuli A and B appear to be very different to adults , whereas they appear to be somewhat similar to chil - dren . Although such differences in the discrimination ability are not unexpected ( e . g . , for an extensive theo - retical treatment , see Gibson , 1969 ) , additional research is required . In short , results of Experiment 2 were similar to those of Experiment 1 : when labels were available , adult participants used labels as the only basis of their induction , whereas young children’s induction var - ied as a function of overall similarity among the Test stimuli and the Target . GENERAL DISCUSSION Critical results of the two reported experiments sup - port predictions of the label - as - attribute model and point to marked differences in induction of young children , on the one hand , and preadolescent and adults , on the other . In Experiment 1 , young children performed induction in accordance with predictions of the label - as - attribute model . In both Label and No - Label conditions , their inductive generalization var - ied as a function of featural overlap among compared entities . Furthermore , observed probabilities of label - based generalizations in young children exhibited predicted ordinal relations among the stimulus pattern conditions : P ( T - 00 ) (cid:4) P ( T - 11 ) (cid:4) P ( T - 22 ) (cid:7) P ( T - 10 ) (cid:4) P ( T - 21 ) (cid:7) P ( T - 20 ) . Results of Experiment 1 also pointed to developmental differences in the contribution of labels to induction : whereas the majority of 4 - to 5 - year - olds performed induction by relying on the overall similarity as determined by a combination of label and perceptual similarity , the majority of preado - lescents relied exclusively on labels . At the same time , 7 - to 8 - year - olds appeared to be a transitional group , in that there were more consistent label responders among 7 - to 8 - year - olds than among 4 - to 5 - year - olds , but less than among 11 - to 12 - year - olds . Experiment 2 corroborated results of Experiment 1 , indicating that the regularities observed in Experi - ment 1 held for naturalistic , perceptually rich stimuli . Figure 8 Percentage of Test B generalizations broken down by age , stimulus pattern , and labeling conditions ( Experiment 2 ) . * Above chance , p (cid:5) . 001 ; (cid:6) below chance , p (cid:5) . 08 ; (cid:6)(cid:6) below chance , p (cid:5) . 01 ; (cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6) below chance , p (cid:5) . 001 . Sloutsky , Lo , and Fisher 1707 As in Experiment 1 , for both labeled and nonlabeled stimuli , inductive generalization performed by 4 - to 5 - year - olds varied as a function of similarity among the compared stimuli . At the same time , adults , simi - lar to preadolescents in Experiment 1 , relied almost exclusively on labels when performing induction . Recall that these experiments were designed to ( 1 ) test critical predictions derived from the label - as - attribute model , ( 2 ) test the overall ﬁt of the model by comparing predicted and observed values , and ( 3 ) provide descriptive accounts of the development of induction from early childhood to preadolescence . The reported results suggest that the experiments met these goals . First , these results support critical predictions of the label - as - attribute model . As predicted by the model , young children exhibited variability in gener - alization from Target to Test B as a function of similar - ity of Test A and Test B , on the one hand , and the Tar - get , on the other hand . Furthermore , the observed responses exhibited predicted ordinal differences in proportions of Test B generalizations across the stimu - lus pattern conditions for both Label and No - Label con - ditions . These differences were as follows : P ( T - 00 ) (cid:4) P ( T - 11 ) (cid:4) P ( T - 22 ) (cid:7) P ( T - 10 ) (cid:4) P ( T - 21 ) (cid:7) P ( T - 20 ) . In addition , the model of label - as - attribute accounted for approximately 88 % of the observed variance in young children’s inductive generalizations . Sloutsky and Lo ( 1999 , Experiment 1 ) proposed the label - as - attribute model as a model of similarity . It ac - counted for approximately 75 % of the observed vari - ance in young children’s similarity judgments . Fur - thermore , the similarity judgment responses of young children that were observed by Sloutsky and Lo ( 1999 ) correlate highly with the induction responses of young children observed in Experiment 1 of the current study , r ( 12 ) (cid:4) . 96 . In their study , Sloutsky and Lo ( 1999 ) used the same stimuli , the same stimulus pattern conditions , and the same labeling conditions as those used in Experiment 1 of the current study . In addition , their task and procedure were very similar to the current study , except that participants were asked to determine which of the test stimuli was more similar to the Target . Thus , a single model predicted both similarity judgment and inductive inference in young children , and young children’s similarity judg - ment correlated highly with their induction . These ﬁndings support the notion that there might be a sin - gle mechanism underlying similarity judgment and inductive inference in young children , offering a par - simonious explanation for young children’s induc - tion and similarity judgment . Furthermore , young children’s reliance on overall similarity when performing induction , rather than on a single most predictive attribute , such as category label , is similar to their reliance on holistic similarity when making similarity judgments ( Smith , 1989a , 1989b ) . Holistic similarity , or overall proximity of stimuli on several dimensions , has been contrasted with dimen - sional identity , or attribute match on a single dimension . For example , in terms of holistic or overall similarity , a black circle is more similar to a gray ellipse than it is to a white circle ( identity of shape ) or a black rectan - gle ( identity of color ) . In Smith’s studies , young chil - dren were found to rely on holistic similarity , whereas in older children’s similarity judgment , dimensional identity ( e . g . , a black circle and a white circle ) was found to play a more prominent role . As with Smith’s ( 1989a , 1989b ) results with similarity judgment , the results of this study indicate that although younger children tended to perform induction based on the overlap of several features , older children focused on a single attribute ( such as category labels ) that they deemed to be most predictive of unobservable prop - erties . Taken together , these results further support the contention that induction and similarity in young children are interrelated . The reported results also point to an important de - velopmental trend in the direction of reliance on a sin - gle most predictive attribute , or knowledge - based in - duction . Although there was a sizable minority of 4 - to 5 - year - old children who performed induction rely - ing exclusively on labels , all preadolescents and adults performed induction in this manner . The fact that in young children the proportion of label - based generalization varied as a function of the overall similarity , whereas preadolescents and adults in - variantly relied on the common linguistic labels , points to developmental differences between inductive gen - eralization in young children and preadolescents . The reported results suggest that speciﬁc induction may start out as a knowledge - lean similarity - based pro - cess and develop into a knowledge - based process , in which category label is used as a single most predictive attribute ; of course , the same regularity has to be estab - lished across several knowledge domains to provide conclusive evidence to support this suggestion . This developmental shift may occur sometime between 8 and 11 years of age . Indeed , whereas speciﬁc induc - tion of 4 - year - olds is similarity based , 7 - to 8 - year - olds appear to be a transitional group , and 11 - to 12 - year - olds perform induction on the basis of common labels , independent of the overall similarity . It seems plausible that this developmental shift may be a function of the development of ( 1 ) a domain - general record of probabilities , and ( 2 ) a domain - speciﬁc biological knowledge . The record of probabilities sug - gests that two remotely similar objects sharing a label 1708 Child Development are more likely to be considered members of the same category than to be considered members of different categories . This probability could be estimated by its complement , or the probability that two remotely sim - ilar entities that have the same label would be consid - ered members of different categories . This probability of the complement could be estimated by the base rate of homonyms ( and homophones ) , and , therefore , would be negligibly small : it is difﬁcult to come up with a noun having a homonym within the same on - tological class ( e . g . , living creature having a homonym that indicates a completely different living creature ) . Hence , as children grow , they acquire more evidence conﬁrming that remotely similar entities sharing the label are likely to be members of the same category . In addition , biological knowledge acquired at school may further corroborate these probabilistic intuitions , suggesting that a category label ( e . g . , mammal ) is the single best predictor of most anatomical and physio - logical properties of mammalian animals . Therefore , in the absence of labels , both children and preadolescents ( and adults ) rely on the overall per - ceptual similarity among compared entities . However , when labels are available , young children continue to rely on the overall similarity , whereas preadolescents and adults switch to labels as the most predictive at - tributes . Interestingly enough , the predictive value of labels for induction is independent of similarity : Sloutsky & Lo ( 1999 ) demonstrated that shared labels made virtually no contribution to similarity judgments of preadolescents ( but made a sizable , yet quantitative , contribution to similarity judgments of young chil - dren ) . In other words , labels affect both similarity and induction in young children , but affect only induction in preadolescents and adults . Therefore , it seems rea - sonable to conclude that in young children ( 1 ) similar - ity and induction are related , and ( 2 ) labels contribute quantitatively to both similarity and induction . At the same time , in older children and adults ( 1 ) similarity and induction are independent , and ( 2 ) labels make no contribution to similarity , but contribute qualita - tively to their induction . There are several issues to be examined in future re - search . If induction performed by young children is based on overall similarity among compared entities , then introduction of new classes of attributes ( both perceptual and nonperceptual ) that contribute to over - all similarity should also contribute to inductive gener - alizations . For example , we have evidence that some unobservable informational attributes , such as kinship information , contribute to induction of young chil - dren . Of course , it is reasonable to expect that different classes of attributes would have different attentional weights , and it would be important to estimate these weights . It would be important also to trace changes in these weights with development and learning . In addi - tion , it seems important to examine whether a lack of information about an attribute constitutes a mismatch . For example , how would occluded parts of objects be added to the computation of similarity ? Furthermore , if a Target shares the label with Test B , but Test A is not labeled , would this constitute a label mismatch ? Finally , it would be necessary to test the model of label - as - attributes on younger participants and have more densely spaced developmental observations . In short , although the ability of the label - as - attribute model to account for younger children’s induction under different stimuli conditions requires further test - ing , the reported ﬁndings support predictions that with both contrived and naturalistic stimuli , young chil - dren perform speciﬁc induction in a similarity - based manner . At the same time , results indicate that preado - lescents and adults rely almost exclusively on labels as a single most predictive attribute when performing speciﬁc induction . Thus , reported results point to a de - velopmental shift from treating linguistic labels as an attribute that contributes to similarity to treating them as markers of a common category , a shift that occurs between 8 and 11 years of age . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This research was supported by grants from the James S . McDonnell Foundation and the National Science Foundation ( BCS # 0078945 ) to the ﬁrst author . The au - thors would like to thank James L . Dannemiller , Brad Morris , Aaron Rader , Margie Spino , Aaron Yarlas , Paul Harris , and two anonymous reviewers for their feed - back . They are also thankful to Jenny Volvovski for cre - ating the stimuli for Experiment 1 , and to Dave Brown for creating and letting them use the cat - dog sequence in Experiment 2 . ADDRESSES AND AFFILIATIONS Corresponding author : Vladimir M . Sloutsky , Center for Cognitive Science , Ohio State University , 21 Page Hall , 1810 College Road , Columbus , OH 43210 - 1336 ; e - mail : sloutsky . 1 @ osu . edu . Ya - Fen Lo is at Rice Uni - versity , Houston , TX ; Anna V . Fisher is also at Ohio State University . REFERENCES Aslin , R . , & Smith , L . ( 1988 ) . Perceptual development . An - nual Review of Psychology , 39 , 435 – 474 . Balaban , M . T . , & Waxman , S . R . ( 1997 ) . Do words facilitate object categorization in 9 - month - old infants ? Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 64 , 3 – 26 . Sloutsky , Lo , and Fisher 1709 Birnholz , J . C . , & Benaceraff , B . B . ( 1983 ) . The development of human fetal hearing . Science , 222 , 516 – 518 . Eimas , P . ( 1994 ) . Categorization in early infancy and the continuity of development . Cognition , 50 ( 1 – 3 ) , 83 – 93 . Estes , W . K . ( 1994 ) . Classiﬁcation and cognition . New York : Oxford University Press . Fisher , R . ( 1951 ) . The design of experiments . New York : Hafner Publishing Company . ( Original work published 1935 ) Gelman , S . A . ( 1988 ) . The development of induction within natural kind and artifact categories . Cognitive Psychology , 20 , 65 – 95 . Gelman , S . A . , & Coley , J . ( 1991 ) . Language and categoriza - tion : The acquisition of natural kind terms . In S . A . Gel - man & J . P . Byrnes ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on language and thought : Interrelations in development ( pp . 146 – 196 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Gelman , S . A . , Coley , J . D . , & Gottfried , G . M . ( 1994 ) . Es - sentialist beliefs in children : The acquisition of con - cepts and theories . In L . Hirschfeld & S . Gelman ( Eds . ) , Mapping the mind : Domain speciﬁcity in cognition and cul - ture ( pp . 234 – 254 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Gelman , S . A . , & Markman , E . ( 1986 ) . Categories and induc - tion in young children . Cognition , 23 , 183 – 209 . Gelman , S . A . , & Markman , E . ( 1987 ) . Young children’s in - ductions from natural kinds : The role of categories and appearances . Child Development , 58 , 1532 – 1541 . Gentner , D . ( 1978 ) . A study of early word meaning : What looks like a jiggy but acts like a zimbo ? Papers and Re - ports on Child Language Development , 15 , 1 – 6 . Gibson , E . J . ( 1969 ) . Principles of perceptual learning and devel - opment . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . Goodman , N . ( 1992 ) . Seven strictures on similarity . In M . Douglas & D . Hull ( Eds . ) , How classiﬁcation works ( pp . 13 – 23 ) . Edinburgh , Scotland : Edinburgh University Press . ( Original work published 1972 ) Gutheil , G . , Vera , A . , & Keil , F . C . ( 1998 ) . Do houseﬂies think ? Patterns of induction and biological beliefs in de - velopment . Cognition , 66 , 33 – 49 . Jusczyk , P . W . ( 1998 ) . The discovery of spoken language . Cam - bridge , MA : MIT Press . Keil , F . C . ( 1989 ) . Concepts , kinds , and cognitive development . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Landau , B . , Smith , L . , & Jones , S . ( 1998 ) . Object shape , object function , and object name . Journal of Memory and Lan - guage , 36 , 1 – 27 . Mandler , J . M . , & McDonough , L . ( 1996 ) . Drinking and driv - ing don’t mix : Inductive generalization in infancy . Cog - nition , 59 , 307 – 335 . Mandler , J . M . , & McDonough , L . ( 1998 ) . Studies in induc - tive inference in infancy . Cognitive Psychology , 37 , 60 – 96 . Medin , D . ( 1975 ) . A theory of context in discrimination learning . In G . Bower ( Ed . ) , The psychology of learning and motivation ( Vol . 9 , pp . 263 – 314 ) . New York : Academic . Medin , D . L . , Goldstone , R . L . , & Gentner , D . ( 1993 ) . Re - spects for similarity . Psychological Review , 100 , 254 – 278 . Murphy , G . L . , & Medin , D . L . ( 1985 ) . The role of theories in conceptual coherence . Psychological Review , 92 , 289 – 316 . Napolitano , A . , Sloutsky , V . M . , & Boysen , S . T . ( 2001 ) . Mo - dality preference and its change in the course of devel - opment . In J . Moore & K . Stenning ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the XXIII Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 681 – 685 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Nisbett , R . E . , Krantz , D . H . , Jepson , C . , & Kunda , Z . ( 1983 ) . The use of statistical heuristics in everyday inductive reasoning . Psychological Review , 90 , 339 – 363 . Nosofsky , R . M . ( 1984 ) . Choice , similarity , and the context theory of classiﬁcation . Journal of Experimental Psychol - ogy : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 10 , 104 – 114 . Osherson , D . N . , Smith , E . E . , Wilkie , O . , Lopez , A . , & Shaﬁr , E . ( 1990 ) . Category - based induction . Psychological Re - view , 97 , 185 – 200 . Quinn , P . , & Eimas , P . ( 1998 ) . Evidence for global categorical representation of humans by young infants . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 69 , 151 – 174 . Roberts , K . ( 1995 ) . Categorical responding in 15 - month - olds : Inﬂuence of the noun - category bias and the covari - ation between visual ﬁxation and auditory input . Cogni - tive Development , 10 , 21 – 41 . Roberts , K . , & Jacob , M . ( 1991 ) . Linguistic versus attentional inﬂuences on nonlinguistic categorization in 15 - months - old infants . Cognitive Development , 6 , 355 – 375 . Shepard , R . ( 1987 ) . Toward a universal law of generaliza - tion for psychological science . Science , 237 , 1317 – 1323 . Sloutsky , V . M . , & Lo , Y . - F . ( 1999 ) . How much does a shared name make things similar ? Part 1 . Linguistic labels and the development of similarity judgement . Developmental Psychology , 6 , 1478 – 1492 . Smith , L . ( 1989a ) . A model of perceptual classiﬁcation in children and adults . Psychological Review , 96 , 125 – 144 . Smith , L . ( 1989b ) . From global similarities to kinds of simi - larities : The construction of dimensions in development . In S . Vosnuadou & A . Orthony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and ana - logical reasoning ( pp . 146 – 178 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Smith , L . B . , Jones , S . S . , & Landau , B . ( 1996 ) . Naming in young children : A dumb attentional mechanism . Cogni - tion , 60 , 143 – 171 . Springer , K . ( 1992 ) . Children’s awareness of the biological implications of kinship . Child Development , 63 , 950 – 959 . Thompson , L . A . , & Massaro , D . ( 1989 ) . Before you see it , you see its parts : Evidence for feature encoding and integration in children and adults . Cognitive Psychology , 21 , 334 – 362 . Treisman , A . M . , & Gelade , G . ( 1980 ) . A feature integration theory of attention . Cognitive Psychology , 12 , 97 – 136 .