Participatory Design Process with Older Users Michael Massimi mikem @ dgp . toronto . edu Department of Computer Science University of Toronto Ronald Baecker rmb @ kmdi . toronto . edu Knowledge Media Design Institute University of Toronto Abstract This paper reflects on two months of conducting intensive participatory design with a team of five senior citizens , with the purpose of transforming an off - the - shelf mobile phone into a specially - designed memory aid . We discuss the activities we used to engage the seniors , and how we used a combination of sources to influence the needs analysis phase . We also reflect on three selected themes that emerged during the process . Introduction System designs often overlook the needs of older users . Ubiquitous computing promises computation will be embedded in artifacts that are more approachable and context - aware , but we must act now to prevent ubiquitous computing from becoming as senior - hostile as most current systems . Researchers have proposed several methods for including the concerns of seniors in system design ; these range from traditional techniques like interviews and usability testing to novel experience sampling techniques . Participatory design methods in particular have been successful in eliciting requirements from users . This study reports on an ongoing participatory design process . We began with the notion that context - aware devices could be used to support memory in older people . Using ubicomp techniques like context - awareness and capture / access to bolster human memory is not a new concept ; systems like Forget - me - not and PEPYS demonstrated these concepts in middle - aged adults several years ago [ 2 ] . Likewise , geriatric psychologists have studied how older people create , structure , and manage their own memories by exploiting external aids and internal strategies . Some seniors create their own unique strategies and routines . Most use variations on common strategies like repetition , concentrating , and writing things down . In other words , from the systems side we know it is technologically feasible to create electronic , context - aware memory aids . From the psychology side , we also know that seniors use external memory aids late into life in order to manage their activities of daily living . What our current study examines is how we can involve seniors in designing their own electronic memory aids . Participatory Design Process Recruitment and Team Composition From the geriatric psychology literature and observations in a clinical setting , we noted that remembering names was the most commonly cited problem for seniors . Based on this need , we assembled a participatory design team . We first created a flyer that elicited participation from people who were ( a ) free from Mild Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer’s Disease , ( b ) over 50 , and ( c ) particularly poor at remembering names . We recruited seniors by sending flyers to community associations and day centers . Interesting people then called us and we conducted a phone interview with each one . We collected a small amount of demographic data during these interviews and subsequently invited them to join us for a first session . In total , four participants came to the first session . Three weeks later , a fifth participant joined the team . We were also able to recruit a geriatric psychologist to supervise the sessions and act as a facilitator . Due to time restraints , however , he could not attend meetings at the most convenient time for the seniors . In lieu of his presence at design meetings , he met with the author between sessions and influenced the design with his expertise in group work and memory in older adults . The final design team composition is presented in Table 1 . Member Age Role Unique features R1 23 Researcher Computer scientist , organizer R2 60s Researcher Geriatric psychologist P1 76 Senior Poor memory , very self - aware , journalism background P2 71 Senior Hearing aid , secretarial background P3 78 Senior Familial tremors , secretarial background P4 55 Senior Fine arts background P5 86 Senior Hearing aid , uses a cane Table 1 : Participatory design team composition Needs Analysis In some participatory design studies with people who have special needs , the organizers left the actual system to be designed as an open question . Participants in these studies identified needs during the process , and subsequently one was selected to elaborate . We used a different approach . Stemming from our literature review , clinical observations , and a preliminary needs analysis , we entered the participatory design phase with the notion that we could use a context - aware mobile phone to help support name recall in seniors . Upon the first group meeting , however , it became clear that the support of memory via context was not the only important issue at hand . As a design team , we conducted a second needs analysis to supplement the needs provided by the literature and observation . By conducting a second needs analysis , we allowed the design team to have more control over the entire phone , rather than only context - aware name recollection . We fused the PD team’s needs analysis with the literature’s needs analysis in order to yield our final requirements set . Many of the needs obtained from the PD session complimented the pre - established ones from the literature ( e . g . , the need for a calendar complimented the need for an address book ) . To elicit needs , we used participatory artifact analysis , scenarios , and open - ended discussion . Requirements Engineering To settle on a set of features for the mobile phone , we used the scenarios as a starting point . We divided the participants into teams , and each team created their own set of scenarios . Each set contained one “best case , ” “average case , ” and “worst case” scenario . The team then generated a list of features that a phone must have in order to support them in these various scenarios . The major requirements from this process could be grouped into four main categories : calendar , address book , communications , and games . Paper Prototyping We then created screen designs for the calendar and address book using the PICTIVE technique [ 3 ] . In general , seniors had trouble engaging with the paper prototyping activity . In interviews , they stated this was for various reasons – some seemed to be a lack of confidence , while others simply did not understand the task . P1 said “How can I draw that ? I’m not a spatial person , I don’t even know , I can barely express in words how I am going to draw that . ” Once participants were engaged , however , they became very adamant and interested . P3 said “At first I was very resistant to play that game [ PICTIVE ] , and later it was fun . ” Some serious conversations and dissenting viewpoints emerged about the design , with the researcher sometimes having to step in to resolve conflicts about particular points ( e . g . the ordering of items on a menu ) . Validation With paper designs for the calendar and address book complete , the researchers translated the paper designs into digital ones . These digital designs were mockups done in PowerPoint . These mockups were then presented to the design team for their approval at a final session . The team then pointed out where adjustments ought to be made , and what design elements were particularly interesting . Individual Sessions At this point in time , the team opted to move to individual sessions for the summer . This was prompted by two occurrences . First , the seniors were beginning to have some group breakdowns . P5 , with hearing problems , could not hear people seated across the table from her during the meetings . She was also interested in taking the project in a direction different from the rest of the team . Second , the seniors were commuting into downtown Toronto each week for the meetings and the summertime heat became a problem . For the duration of the summertime , the participants are meeting the researcher in one - on - one interviews every few weeks to continue designing and validation . At the time of this writing , one round of interviews has been completed . During these interviews the researcher brought the chosen hardware to the participants and had them use it for an hour in order to acquaint themselves with it . Further , they offered suggestions on how to adjust the built - in Microsoft Windows Mobile 5 operating system to meet their needs . The team will begin to meet again in September for purposes of continuing evaluation . Emergent Themes Participatory design is a reflective practice , and thus far , several themes have emerged from the time spent in meetings . First , participatory design meetings were social events for the seniors . As Ellis and Kurniawan noted , it was important to build trust and friendship between the members of the design team in order to work effectively as a group [ 1 ] . Because our team of seniors did not know one another before the start of this process , new friendships were forged . The team opted to stop for tea and a snack halfway through the meeting each week ; during this time , they discussed many matters unrelated to the process at hand , such as health of family and friends , shared past experiences , and so on . In fact , one of the participants has begun to tutor another on how to use the computer and the internet as a result of their meeting in the design sessions . Second , the seniors saw participation in this project as a means for understanding another generation . For them , the computer and mobile phone are seen as emblematic of the culture of younger people . By learning about these artifacts and working alongside a younger computer scientist , they could , in a sense , understand and connect with a different generation . Finally , there was a breakdown in communication when context - awareness was introduced to the seniors . By indicating to them that location sensing could be used to assist their memories , they immediately were put on the defensive . One participant imagined we would track her because we thought she had dementia . Another thought that if she needed a phone to tell her where she was , then she should be locked away already . It is interesting to note that the participants were very good at critiquing designs , mediocre at screen designing , and very poor at imagining next - generation technology . These relative strengths may be used to create better participatory design activities in the future . Conclusion We have described the process that occurred in a recent participatory design with senior citizens . While they were customizing a mobile phone and an associated context - aware application , it is important to note that the process itself is a particularly enlightening . By meeting with the seniors continuously over time and engaging them in different activities , they were able to articulate their needs more clearly and the resultant design benefited from their involvement . References [ 1 ] R . D . Ellis and S . H . Kurniawan . Increasing the usability of online information for older users : A case study in participatory design . International Journal of Human - Computer Interaction , 12 ( 2 ) : 263 – 276 , 2000 . [ 2 ] M . Lamming , P . Brown , K . Carter , M . Eldridge , M . Flynn , G . Louie , P . Robinson , and A . Sellen . The design of a human memory prosthesis . The Computer Journal , 37 ( 3 ) : 153 – 163 , 1994 . [ 3 ] M . J . Muller . Retrospective on a year of participatory design using the PICTIVE technique . Proceedings of CHI ’92 , 455 – 462 . ACM , May 3 - 7 , 1992 .