ICED15 EVALUATION OF A STRATEGIC METHOD TO IMPROVE PROTOTYPE PERFORMANCE WITH REDUCED COST AND FABRICATION TIME Camburn , Bradley Adam ( 1 ) ; Jensen , Daniel ( 2 ) ; Crawford , Richard ( 3 ) ; Otto , Kevin ( 1 ) ; Wood , Kristin ( 1 ) 1 : Singapore University of Technology and Design , Singapore ; 2 : United States Air Force Academy , United States of America ; 3 : The University of Texas at Austin , United States of America Abstract Prototyping is tied into many stages of product development , where implementation choices have critical effects on overall design outcome . We review six techniques for strategic prototyping and synthesize empirically derived heuristics for their application . The heuristics are integrated in a generalized method for strategic prototyping . Two complementary experiments are conducted to evaluate each technique , as well as one potential form of the method . Direct performance measurement quantifies the continued marginal performance increases associated with iteration ( build and test cycle of a single concept ) , and the benefit of pursuing multiple design concepts . Results also show scaled prototyping , subsystem isolation , requirement relaxation , and virtual prototyping can reduce cost and fabrication time . The method is correlated with increased use of these techniques , and higher quantitative final performance . The strategy method is a broad planning tool that leads to improvement of final design performance and reducted fabrication cost and time . Potential areas for improvement are evaluation of : marginal benefits from many parallel concept tests , and alternate method layouts . Keywords : Design methods , Early design phases , Product modelling , models , Prototyping Contact : Bradley Adam Camburn Singapore University of Technology and Design Engineering Product Development Singapore bcamburn @ gmail . com INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON ENGINEERING DESIGN , ICED15 27 - 30 JULY 2015 , POLITECNICO DI MILANO , ITALY Please cite this paper as : Surnames , Initials : Title of paper . In : Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Engineering Design ( ICED15 ) , Vol . nn : Title of Volume , Milan , Italy , 27 . - 30 . 07 . 2015 1 ICED15 1 INTRODUCTION Prototyping is a key activity for both convergence ( validation ) and divergence ( exploration ) in a design space ( Reed Doke 1990 , Lim et al . 2008 , Lennings et al . 2000 , Moe et al . 2004 ) . To develop a prototype , the design problem must be partitioned ( Gero 1990 ) . In this context , partitioning means selecting a subspace for testing . The specific objectives of this partitioning must be decided ( Otto and Wood 2001 , Drezner 1992 ) . This reflective interaction is essential to forming a constructive view of the design space ( Schön 1992 ) . Physical models help clarify requirements ( Gordon and Bieman 1995 ) , and identify potential avenues for performance increase ( Viswanathan 2012 ) . This process can improve design decision making ( Drezner 1992 ) . Of critical note , sensitivity analysis identifies prototyping as a driver of design outcome ( Badri et al . 1997 ) . Further empirical evidence shows that a chosen approach to prototyping impacts these outcomes ( Thomke 1998 ) . However , there is an inconsistent success rate in product development ( Badri et al . 1997 ) . Prototyping strategies are often developed in an ad hoc manner , and may contribute to that inconsistency . These observations highlight the criticality of strategic prototyping ( Riek 2001 ) . Empirical techniques must be defined and validated to promote the reproducibility of successful outcomes ( Krishnan and Ulrich 2001 ) . This study explores prototyping for the development and testing of new electro - mechanical products or systems designs . A strategic method is proposed that is inspired by previous research ( Camburn et al . 2013 ) , with refined heuristics synthesized from empirical research . The objective of this method is to improve the performance outcome of a prototyping effort while also reducing expense of time and other resources . The method provides a guide to implement six strategy variables , each of which defines a range of possible choices for implementing a prototype ( such as the number of iterations , or physical scale ) . Refer to Figure 1 . These choices include the number of prototypes to be explored , and the implementation characteristics of each build . Accordingly , the method provides a way to navigate this space . Detailed description of the techniques follows . Furthermore , novel empirical results regarding the outcome - effects of the specific techniques are provided . Figure 1 . Expanded - dimensional space of a prototyping strategy . A strategy may consist of several concepts , and multiple iterations , each with unique implementation characteristics . 1 . 1 Review of Techniques for Direct Performance Increase This section will cover two techniques that when employed , typically result in increased final performance . Iteration Iteration is the sequential testing and refinement of a prototype . Refer to Figure 2 . It is reported as a key strategy element [ 61 ] , and allows systematic advancement towards a mature design ( Drezner and Huang 2009 ) . Iteration is critical to identifying errors and simplifying parts ( Zemke 2012 ) . Empirical studies have shown that teams in an iterative design condition significantly outperform teams without iteration , for reported self efficacy as well as direct performance measures ( Dow et al . 2009 ) . However , as Thomke observes from an industry case study ( Thomke 1998 ) , and Viswanathan from a controlled empirical study ( Viswanathan 2012 ) , fabrication methods can affect the number of iterations pursued ( with more complicated fabrication leading to fewer iterations ) . One approach for 2 ICED15 planning the number of iterations is roughly estimated from the ratio of potential performance increase value , to expected testing cost ( Thomke and Bell 2001 ) . A similar alternative estimates iteration number from the ratio of total available time to the expected time required to test each iteration ( Glegg 1981 ) . These approaches help ensure that the strategy for iteration will not exceed the project budget . Parallel Prototyping Parallel prototyping , is the fabrication and comparison of multiple design concepts in parallel . Refer to Figure 2 . Parallel prototyping provides critical feedback for concept selection ( Christie et al . 2012 ) . This feedback may occur at the system or subsystem level ( Gero 1990 ) . Observations from industry identify that concurrent development enhances outcome ( Badri et al . 1997 ) . However , strategy selection has implications to cost and time expenditure ( Ulrich 2000 ) . Parallel prototyping has demonstrated value in a time - constrained environment , with several apparently equal design concepts e . g . as evaluated by Pugh chart ( Riek 2001 ) . However , the integration of information across efforts is critical ( Thomke 2003 ) . Empirical studies support that teams pursuing parallel testing achieve greater performance and diversity than groups with only a single design , or several iterations ( Dow et al . 2010 , Dow et al . 2012 , Neeley Jr et al . 2013 ) . Teams that develop parallel prototypes may perceive an increased time constraint ( Neeley Jr et al . 2013 , Camburn et al . 2013 ) . One high level guide is to employ parallel prototyping when budget is flexible ( Moe et al . 2004 ) . Specifically , Riek proposed that the number of concepts to test may be given by the ratio of budget to expected prototyping cost ( Riek 2001 ) . An alternative is given by Dahan as the ratio of profit uncertainty to the cost of each prototype ( Dahan and Mendelson 2001 ) . Figure 2 . Performance increase techniques ( left to right ) iterative design , parallel testing 1 . 2 Review of Techniques for Cost and Effort Reduction This section will cover four techniques that typically increase the feasibility of a prototyping effort by reducing cost and / or time required for development . Scaling A scaled prototype mimics behaviour ( s ) of a larger ( or smaller ) design through similitude . Refer to Figure 3 . Similitude , discovered in the 19 th century , enabled the production of accurate scaled models ( Kempf 1940 ) . This method was advanced by Naval designers in the mid 20 th century ( Kempf 1940 ) . Scaling can be employed to reduce cost ( Otto and Wood 2001 ) , or enhance feasibility of testing a prototype ( Christie et al . 2012 ) . With the advent of advanced computer modelling , scaled virtual models can include incredibly dense design information , ultimately leading to more complex designs ( Mitchell 2004 ) . One method , empirical similitude , involves independently scaling several parameters of the system in parallel to form an integrated , vectorized model with very high accuracy ( Cho et al . 1998 ) . In - situ observation identifies that is it critical to scale loads accordingly ( Viswanathan 2012 ) . To strategically execute scaling , methods suggest evaluating feasibility of the full design before scaling ( Moe et al . 2004 , Christie et al . 2012 ) . Isolated Subsystem Testing An isolated subsystem prototype , is a segmented build for a single subsystem ( or group of subsystems ) explored in isolation . Refer to Figure 3 . System segmentation can permit rapid exploration of different aspects of the design ( Horváth and Bois 2012 ) . Dod studies show that subsystem isolation result in lowered costs and reduced uncertainty ( Drezner and Huang 2009 ) . Isolated subsystem prototypes can make it easier to demonstrate one function ( Horváth and Bois 2012 ) . It may be difficult to address unanticipated needs with this approach ( Rogers et al . 2013 ) . The strategic approach of each subsystem 3 ICED15 may vary ( Christie et al . 2012 , Yan et al . 2002 ) . For instance , they may be a mixture of physical , virtual ( Yan et al . 2002 ) , or scaled models ( Faithfull et al . 2001 ) . However , effective re - integration is critical . It is possible to pseudo - connect the isolated models ; analogous to a network ( Yan et al . 2002 ) . This technique is suggested especially in evolutionary design where the upgrade is primarily concentrated in one subsystem ( Christie et al . 2012 ) . Relaxed Requirement Prototypes A relaxed requirement prototype , is a prototype wherein functionality may be evaluated with less stringency than necessary for the final requirements . Refer to Figure 3 . Low fidelity prototyping facilitates forward movement ( Kelley 2001 , Gerber and Carroll 2012 ) concept level discussion , ( Wong 1992 ) , and reduced cost ( Otto and Wood 2001 ) . This in turn also enables evaluation of multiple concepts ( Thomke and Bell 2001 ) at a rapid pace ( Drezner and Huang 2009 ) . Low fidelity prototypes are critical in simulating usage ( Buchenau and Suri 2000 ) . They are more holistic than other approaches ( Blomkvist and Holmlid 2010 ) . The DoD identifies that this approach is essential for early risk reduction , and requirement refinement ( Drezner and Huang 2009 ) . Though they may be inaccurate , they can be practical because of the tradeoff between accuracy and cost ( Otto and Wood 2001 ) . Since even a fully functional prototype may misrepresent features ( Little 2003 ) , the test environment must be realistic ( Drezner and Huang 2009 ) . Reduced requirement prototyping is also suggested when a full system may be infeasible given fabrication capabilities in context ( Sefelin et al . 2003 ) . Adjustment of the requirements should be executed with careful consideration ( Christie et al . 2012 , Otto and Wood 2001 ) . Evaluation of the importance of specific design requirements ( possibly from QFD ) should play a role in decisions related to design requirement relaxation . Virtual Prototyping A virtual prototype , is a model constructed on a computational platform that simulates an aspect of a physical design . Refer to Figure 3 . Virtual models can contain complex topology ( Mitchell 2004 ) , and provide easy access to test data that might be challenging to measure otherwise ( Spinoff 2008 ) . Examples are fatigue data , or risk assessment of logistical problems such as process modelling of bridge construction . These benefits may be summarized under the ability of virtual prototyping to synthesize design and testing ( Wang 2002 ) . Virtual models also permit integration of design and manufacture ( Sghaier and Soriano 2008 ) , algorithmic design through formalisms ( Shea and Cagan 1999 ) , or simultaneous demonstrations in multiple locations ( Cugini et al . 2008 ) . Empirical studies demonstrate cases where virtual modelling is faster ( Hammon et al . 2014 ) , performs equally ( Wojtczuk and Bonnardel 2010 ) , required less effort ( Riek 2001 ) , and provided more flexibility , compared to physical models ( Sefelin et al . 2003 ) . A study found material quality was not perceptible from virtual models ( Dahan and Srinivasan 2000 ) . Virtual modelling tool interfaces may be non - intuitive ( Wojtczuk and Bonnardel 2010 ) . Virtual models can only simulate phenomena that are directly encoded ( Riek 2001 ) . One approach is to select between physical and virtual models based on the ratio of effort to accuracy ( Otto and Wood 2001 ) . Another method suggests strategic identification of desired results ( Christie et al . 2012 ) . Figure 3 . ( left to right ) scaled prototype ( architectural ) , isolated subsystem ( simple joints ) , relaxed requirement ( paper mockup ) , virtual prototype ( chair aesthetic design ) 2 INTEGRATED PROTOTYPING STRATEGY METHOD The literature was carefully evaluated , and critical empirical evidence summarized . This foundation is used in the strategy method ( Figure 4 ) to identify design contexts likely to benefit from a particular technique . Iteration and parallel prototyping directly lead to performance increase . In a complementary fashion , scaling , subsystem isolation , requirement relaxation , and virtual prototyping can reduce time and cost expenditure without performance loss . Thus , it may be feasible to implement a performance 4 ICED15 enhancing strategy , even in cases of limited resources . The method presents one potential synthesis architecture , however there are alternatives that may be equally valid such as analytical models , flash cards depicting techniques , or a prototype planning notebook . The goals are to encourage systematic prototyping , and to expand the prototyping space to a larger dimensionality ( in this case 6 n ) rather than a traditional stage - gate approach of proof of concept , alpha , then beta level prototyping . Furthermore , this synthesis of the empirically founded heuristics is designed to directly incorporate general design contexts . This version of the method is presented as a set of six techniques , each with several heuristics to guide implementation of the specific technique . The designer may provide a Likert response to each heuristic and take the average under a specific technique to identify a strategy for that technique . The magnitude of the average helps to identify the potential applicability of that specific technique . If a neutral response is identified , the designer may re - assess each heuristic to establish preferred direction . This combination approach allows for simultaneous consideration of the potentially competing heuristics . Furthermore , reviewing the heuristics in a single matrix may present significant time savings compared to trial and error learning approaches . Figure 4 . Integrated strategy method , which employs a direct synthesis of the heuristics for each technique to provide a prototyping strategy planning tool . 3 DESIGN EXPERIMENTS Two complementary experiments provide an opportunity to investigate the techniques and method . The experiments are similar , with variation in duration and design problem to permit a broader understanding of effects . One focuses on a short term , design challenge , and the other a long - term in - situ study . The design challenge study helps to examine and compare direct performance ; with multiple teams working on the same problem . The in - situ study provides results regarding budget and time expenditure ; teams approach varied design problems , allowing broader evaluation of the method . Note that the participant pools of each experiment were exclusive . The participants were a random mixture of male and female junior and senior university students in mechanical engineering or industrial design . Participation was voluntary . 5 ICED15 3 . 1 Design Challenge The controlled study permits direct performance measure quantifications . The performance objective was variable and has no practical upper limit . Refer to Figure 5 . Teams were required to construct a device that uses potential energy to move a piece of paper , as far as possible down a hallway . Each team was given a set materials kit . A researcher manually recorded elapsed time for each test with a stopwatch and distance travelled in each test using a tape measure . The specific requirements of the design objective , and an example solution are shown in Figure 5 . Teams were required to start within a given boundary . Teams were given 15 minutes of instruction , followed by 5 minutes of free ideation ( control ) or exposure to the strategy method ( experimental ) , and finally 50 minutes of build and test time . There were 64 participants in this study , equally divided between experimental and control groups . Participants completed the design problem in teams of two persons . 3 . 2 In - Situ Study For the in - situ study , teams in a senior mechanical engineering capstone design course were provided with the method and materials via a lecture at the outset of the semester . This study , in particular , permits analysis of budget , and time expenditure . The projects are industry sponsored and teams often develop fully functional prototypes ( Figure 5 ) . Solutions range from offshore mining components , to medical equipment . This study permitted a long term exploration of the strategy , as well as evaluation over a wide range of design problem types . For this study , researchers interviewed each team individually , after 3 months of prototyping time to determine : budget for each prototype ( in USD ) , time to build each prototype , use of scaling , subsystem isolation , requirement relaxation , and virtual prototyping . This study had 105 participants , who completed the design projects in teams of 3 to 5 individuals . Figure 5 . ( left to right ) design challenge layout , example solution ( design challenge ) , example solution - cam phaser ( in - situ ) 4 EXAMINATION OF RESULTS This section explores results from the two experiments described in the previous section . First , individual techniques are evaluated . Then , the effect on performance of the integrated method is shown . To establish significance of testing , the Student’s t - test is used in cases of variable mean , where any p - value less than 0 . 05 is considered sufficient to reject the null hypothesis . Correspondingly , test of two proportions is employed for instances of binomial distribution ( using a transformed z - test ) , wherein any p - value less than 0 . 05 is also taken as sufficient to reject the null hypothesis . 4 . 1 Results for Individual Techniques Iteration These results , from the design challenge , are first to report the marginal effects of continued cycles of iteration ( Figure 6 ) . Performance continues to increase up to 400 % of the initial distance score , with an average performance increase of 12 % per cycle . The r 2 value of linear regression of the results is 0 . 85 . Fabrication time with respect to iteration is also reported for the first time . Observations show a remarkable complement to performance results , with a decreasing fabrication time over continued iteration . There was a significant drop after the first build , and after that a gradual reduction in the fabrication time for each build of about 8 % per cycle . In a few outlying cases , the fabrication time suddenly increased . Observation notes connect these events to instances when a prototype failed critically and required significant repair time . 6 ICED15 Figure 6 . ( left ) performance over increasing cycles of iteration . ( right ) time to develop each iteration . ±1 standard error shown . Each point represents the average value ( distance or time ) of the i th iteration , of all teams . Source : design challenge study . Parallel Concepts Exploration of a second concept resulted in a similar pattern . Performance of a second concept was greater than the first concept . The average distance reached by a team’s second concept was 12 . 19 meters , while that of the first concept was only 5 . 79 meters . This difference is significant with Student ' s t - test at p < 0 . 001 . Similarly , the first build of a second concept took significantly ( p = 0 . 04 ) less time ( 12 minutes ) than the very first build ( 30 minutes ) . Interaction of Iteration and Parallel Testing Comparative observation was made between iterative and parallel testing . Teams were given freedom to select their own strategy to emulate a realistic design scenario ; therefore , a few terms are missing from the full factorial analysis . On average , teams introduced the second concept on the 3 rd iteration . Interestingly , the average score of their first two iterations were significantly ( p = 0 . 05 ) lower ( 5 . 79 m ) than teams that only developed one concept ( 8 . 83 m ) . This suggests these teams identified a flaw in their first concept . Also , on average , the first iteration of a second concept took significantly ( p = 0 . 02 ) less time ( 10 minutes ) compared to the very first build ( 28 minutes ) . Thus , the time spent on the first build may be due to learning the context , more than implementing a specific design concept . Scaling Scaled prototyping was associated with a reduction in cost ( p = 0 . 003 ) . There was also a reduction in the time required to build each prototype , but not quite significantly ( p = 0 . 058 ) . Finally there was no significant loss of performance with scaled prototypes . See Figure 7 . Isolated Subsystem Testing On average , isolated subsystem prototyping was associated with a reduction in time and cost ; however , the difference was not fully significant ( p = 0 . 07 for each ) ; and there was no significant performance loss . There were a relatively small number of isolated subsystem tests in this study . Refer to Figure 7 . Requirement Relaxation Requirement relaxation was on average associated with lower cost ( p = 0 . 01 ) and time ( t - test , p < 0 . 001 ) than for a full prototype . As expected , performance of the relaxed prototype was lower ( t - test p = 0 . 009 ) . Refer to Figure 7 . The final performance ( last prototype ) of teams which fabricated at least one relaxed requirement prototype , was not significantly different than those that did not ( p = 0 . 38 ) . Virtual Prototyping Virtual prototyping was associated with a vast reduction of cost ( p = 0 . 005 ) . This is given in the context that modeling software was available . In other contexts this software may require purchase . There was no significant difference in time , and a slight increase in performance ( p = 0 . 009 ) . Refer to Figure 7 . Interaction of Scaling , Subsystem Isolation , Requirement Relaxation , and Virtual Prototyping The possibility of testing for interaction effects between scaling , subsystem isolation , requirement relaxation , and virtual prototyping was evaluated . Due to the strategic freedom allotted to teams , only significant main effects could be studied and identified through the experiments . 7 ICED15 Figure 7 . for each chart , ( from left to right ) cost , time spent , and performance achieved , the average scores are shown across all prototypes ; the two bins above each technique represent the average either with or without the given technique ±1 standard error shown . Source is the in - situ study 4 . 2 Results for the Integrated Method In the design challenge , experimental teams ( exposed to the method ) pursued more iterations ( 13 ) on average than the control group ( 9 . 3 ) with statistical significance ( p = 0 . 006 ) . The experimental teams explored more concepts ( 1 . 69 ) , on average than the control teams ( 1 . 26 ) with statistical significance ( p = 0 . 005 ) . The experimental teams produced their first prototype in less time ( 19 minutes ) compared to the control ( 41 minutes ) on average , with statistical significance ( p = 0 . 014 ) . The experimental teams achieved greater performance on average ( 15 . 24 m ) than the control ( 12 . 49 m ) with statistical significance ( p = 0 . 018 ) . Scaling , subsystem isolation , requirement relaxation , and virtual prototyping were assessed in the in - situ study by asking teams to self evaluate how closely they adhered or not to the strategy ( Table 1 ) . In cases where teams reported closely adhering to the strategy , implementation of all four variables was present in a significantly higher percentage of prototypes ( p < 0 . 05 ) using the test of two proportions . Self efficacy results also indicated that high adherence was correlated with high overall performance . Table 1 . Use of scaling , subsystem isolation , requirement relaxation , and virtual prototyping ( in - situ study ) , percentage of total prototypes with each technique , w . r . t . strategy adherence Self reported adherence to strategy method Scaling Subsystem Isolation Requirement Relaxation Virtual Low Adherence ( 1 , 2 ) 33 % 0 % 50 % 43 % High Adherence ( 4 , 5 ) 54 % 48 % 86 % 77 % p value 0 . 0427 0 . 0001 0 . 0278 0 . 0176 5 CONCLUDING REMARKS AND FUTURE VISION Strategic prototyping can positively influence design outcome , but methodologies for implementation are fragmented . This study builds on a significant literature review with substantial empirical foundations for each of six heuristically guided specific prototyping techniques . These techniques are then integrated into a single context - independent prototyping strategy method . Finally , experimental evaluations of the techniques and method demonstrate their capability to increase performance , to reduce cost , and to reduce time expenses of prototyping . Observations indicate that iteration directly leads to increased performance , and the marginal benefits of continued iteration are provided for the first time . Results also confirm the benefits of parallel prototyping , but instances of large numbers of design concept tests were not seen , so it was not possible to report the marginal benefits of parallel concepts . Furthermore , the results detail the effectiveness of scaling , subsystem isolation , requirement relaxation , and virtual prototyping to reduce cost and time required to develop a prototype , without loss of performance . Finally , it was observed 8 ICED15 that exposure to the method was associated with increased application of all six specific techniques , and overall performance increase . To enhance generalizability , two experiments are pursued : a short term directed experiment in which all teams address a set problem ; and an in - situ study in which each group approaches a different problem over a long time period . The results match previously reported empirical results in the literature review ; which are in some cases drawn from larger industry studies . It is important to note that strategy must be pursued with inclusion of adaptive reasoning . The heuristics are a guide . It is important to pre - evaluate an approach’s feasibility before implementation . Potential future research may include alternative , formats for the strategy method or testing of hybrid techniques , e . g . relaxed requirement virtual prototype . Areas for improvement are expansion of data to include full factorial terms , and to corroborate the in - situ study results with a controlled study . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This work is supported by the Singapore University of Technology and Design ( SUTD ) and the SUTD - MIT International Design Center ( IDC , idc . sutd . edu . sg ) . This material is also based in part on research sponsored by the United Sates Air Force Academy under agreement number FA7000 - 12 - 2 - 2005 . The US Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Government purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation thereon . The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies or endorsements , either expressed or implied , of the United States Air Force Academy or the US government . REFERENCES Badri , M . A . , Mortagy , A . , Davis , D . and Davis , D . ( 1997 ) ' Effective analysis and planning of R & D stages : a simulation approach ' , International Journal of Project Management , 15 ( 6 ) , 351 - 358 . Blomkvist , J . and Holmlid , S . ( 2010 ) ' Service prototyping according to service design practitioners ' , ServDes . Buchenau , M . and Suri , J . F . ( 2000 ) Experience prototyping , Proceedings of the 3rd conference on Designing interactive systems : processes , practices , methods , and techniques , Camburn , B . A . , Dunlap , B . U . , Kuhr , R . , Viswanathan , V . K . , Linsey , J . S . , Jensen , D . D . , Crawford , R . H . , Otto , K . and Wood , K . L . ( 2013 ) Methods for Prototyping Strategies in Conceptual Phases of Design : Framework and Experimental Assessment , ASME 2013 IDETC , Portland . Cho , U . , Wood , K . L . and Crawford , R . H . ( 1998 ) ' Online functional testing with rapid prototypes : a novel empirical similarity method ' , Rapid Prototyping Journal , 4 ( 3 ) , 128 - 138 . Christie , E . J . , Jensen , D . D . , Buckley , R . T . , Ziegler , K . K . and Crawford , R . H . ( 2012 ) ' Prototyping strategies : literature review and identification of critical variables ' , in ASEE Annual Conference and Exposition , San Antonio , TX , Cugini , U . , Bordegoni , M . and Mana , R . ( 2008 ) ' The role of virtual prototyping and simulation in the fashion sector ' , International Journal on Interactive Design and Manufacturing , 2 ( 1 ) , 33 - 38 . Dahan , E . and Mendelson , H . ( 2001 ) ' An extreme - value model of concept testing ' , Management Science , 47 ( 1 ) , 102 - 116 . Dahan , E . and Srinivasan , V . ( 2000 ) ' The Predictive Power of Internet ‐ Based Product Concept Testing Using Visual Depiction and Animation ' , Journal of Product Innovation Management , 17 ( 2 ) , 99 - 109 . Dow , S . P . , Fortuna , J . , Schwartz , D . , Altringer , B . , Schwartz , D . L . and Klemmer , S . R . ( 2012 ) ' Prototyping dynamics : sharing multiple designs improves exploration , group rapport , and results ' in Design Thinking Research , Springer , 47 - 70 . Dow , S . P . , Glassco , A . , Kass , J . , Schwarz , M . , Schwartz , D . L . and Klemmer , S . R . ( 2010 ) ' Parallel prototyping leads to better design results , more divergence , and increased self - efficacy ' , ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) , 17 ( 4 ) , 18 . Dow , S . P . , Heddleston , K . and Klemmer , S . R . ( 2009 ) The efficacy of prototyping under time constraints , ACM conference on Creativity and cognition , Drezner , J . A . ( 1992 ) The Nature and Role of Prototyping in Weapon System Development , Santa Monica , CA : RAND Corp . Drezner , J . A . and Huang , M . ( 2009 ) On Prototyping : Lessons from RAND Research , RAND . Faithfull , P . T . , Ball , R . J . and Jones , R . P . ( 2001 ) ' An investigation into the use of hardware - in - the - loop simulation with a scaled physical prototype as an aid to design ' , Journal of Engineering Design , 12 ( 2 ) , 231 - 243 . Gerber , E . and Carroll , M . ( 2012 ) ' The psychological experience of prototyping ' , Design Studies , 31 ( 1 ) , 64 - 84 . Gero , J . S . ( 1990 ) ' Design Prototypes : A Knowledge Representation Schema for Design ' , AI magazine , 9 ICED15 Glegg , G . L . ( 1981 ) The Development of Design , Cambridge University Press . Gordon , V . S . and Bieman , J . M . ( 1995 ) ' Rapid prototyping : lessons learned ' , IEEE software , 12 ( 1 ) , 85 - 95 . Hammon , C . L . , Green , M . G . , Dunlap , B . U . , Camburn , B . A . , Crawford , R . and Jensen , D . ( 2014 ) ' Virtual or Physical Prototypes ? Development and Testing of a Prototyping Planning Tool ' , in ASEE Annual Conference and Exposition , Indianapolis , IL , Horváth , I . and Bois , E . D . ( 2012 ) ' Using modular abstract prototypes as evolving research means in design inclusive research ' , in ASME - IDETC , Chicago , IL , USA , Kelley , T . ( 2001 ) ' Prototyping is the Shorthand of Design ' , Design Management Journal , 12 ( 3 ) . Kempf , G . ( 1940 ) The Development of Ship Model testing Since 1900 , Navy Yard , Washington , D . C . : United States Experimental Model Basin . Krishnan , V . and Ulrich , K . T . ( 2001 ) ' Product development decisions : A review of the literature ' , Management Science , 47 ( 1 ) , 1 - 21 . Lennings , A . F . , Broek , J . J . , Horváth , I . , Sleijffers , W . and Smit , A . d . ( 2000 ) ' Editable physical models for conceptual design ' , in proceedings of the TMCE 2000 symposium , Lim , Y . - K . , Stolterman , E . and Tenenberg , J . ( 2008 ) ' The anatomy of prototypes : Prototypes as filters , prototypes as manifestations of design ideas ' , ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) , 15 ( 2 ) , 7 . Little , T . ( 2003 ) ' Prototyping " rope - a - dopes " and other pitfalls ' , ASK Magazine , Mitchell , W . J . ( 2004 ) ' Beyond the ivory tower : Constructing complexity in the digital age ' , Science , 303 ( 5663 ) , 1472 - 1473 . Moe , R . , Jensen , D . D . and Wood , K . L . ( 2004 ) Prototype partitioning based on requirement flexibility , ASME - IDETC , Neeley Jr , W . L . , Lim , K . , Zhu , A . and Yang , M . C . ( 2013 ) Building fast to think faster : exploiting rapid prototyping to accelerate ideation during early stage design , ASME - IDETC , Portland , OR . Otto , K . and Wood , K . ( 2001 ) ' Product design : techniques in reverse engineering and new product design ' in , Prentice - Hall . Reed Doke , E . ( 1990 ) ' An industry survey of emerging prototyping methodologies ' , Information & Management , 18 ( 4 ) , 169 - 176 . Riek , R . F . ( 2001 ) ' From experience : Capturing hard ‐ won NPD lessons in checklists ' , Journal of Product Innovation Management , 18 ( 5 ) , 301 - 313 . Rogers , D . , Church , M . , Patel , U . and Menon , C . ( 2013 ) ' The Evolution of Rapid Prototyping ' , in SIAT Symposium on International Automotive Technology , India , Schön , D . A . ( 1992 ) ' Designing as reflective conversation with the materials of a design situation ' , Knowledge - based Systems , 5 ( 1 ) , 3 - 14 . Sefelin , R . , Tscheligi , M . and Giller , V . ( 2003 ) Paper prototyping - what is it good for ? : a comparison of paper - and computer - based low - fidelity prototyping , Human factors in computing systems , ACM , Sghaier , A . and Soriano , T . ( 2008 ) ' Using high - level models for modeling industrial machines in a virtual environment ' , International Journal on Interactive Design and Manufacturing ( IJIDeM ) , 2 , 99 - 106 . Shea , K . and Cagan , J . ( 1999 ) ' Languages and semantics of grammatical discrete structures ' , Ai Edam , 13 ( 04 ) , 241 - 251 . Spinoff ( 2008 ) Engineering Models Ease and Speed Prototyping , Transportation , NASA . Thomke , S . and Bell , D . E . ( 2001 ) ' Sequential testing in product development ' , Management Science , 47 ( 2 ) , 308 - 323 . Thomke , S . H . ( 1998 ) ' Managing experimentation in the design of new products ' , Management Science , 44 ( 6 ) , 743 - 762 . Thomke , S . H . ( 2003 ) Experimentation matters : unlocking the potential of new technologies for innovation , Harvard Business Press . Ulrich , K . T . ( 2000 ) Product design and development , New York : McGraw - Hill Education . Viswanathan , V . K . ( 2012 ) Cognitive Effects of Physical Models in Engineering Idea Generation thesis Texas A & M University . Wang , G . G . ( 2002 ) ' Definition and review of virtual prototyping ' , Journal of Computing and Information Science in engineering , 2 ( 3 ) , 232 - 236 . Wojtczuk , A . and Bonnardel , N . ( 2010 ) Externalisation in design : impact of different tools on designers ' activities and on the assessment of final design , Annual European Conference on Cognitive Ergonomics , Wong , Y . Y . ( 1992 ) Rough and ready prototypes : lessons from graphic design , Posters and short talks of the 1992 SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , Yan , Q . - Z . , Williams , J . M . and Li , J . ( 2002 ) Chassis Control System Development Using Simulation : Software in the Loop , Rapid Prototyping , and Hardware in the Loop , SAE Automotive Dynamics and Stability Conference and Exhibition , Detroit , Michigan . Zemke , S . C . ( 2012 ) ' Student learning in multiple prototype cycles ' , in ASEE Annual Conference and Exposition , San Antonio , TX , 10