BASIC RESEARCH www . jasn . org Distinct Requirements for Vacuolar Protein Sorting 34 Downstream Effector Phosphatidylinositol 3 - Phosphate 5 - Kinase in Podocytes Versus Proximal Tubular Cells Madhusudan Venkatareddy , * Rakesh Verma , * Anne Kalinowski , * Sanjeevkumar R . Patel , * Assia Shisheva , † and Puneet Garg * * Division of Nephrology , Department of Internal Medicine , University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , Michigan ; and † Department of Physiology , Wayne State University School of Medicine , Detroit , Michigan ABSTRACT The mechanisms by which the glomerular ﬁ ltration barrier prevents the loss of large macromolecules and simultaneously , maintains the ﬁ lter remain poorly understood . Recent studies proposed that podocytes have anactive role inboth the endocytosis of ﬁ ltered macromolecules and the maintenance ofthe ﬁ ltration barrier . Deletion of a key endosomal traf ﬁ cking regulator , the class 3 phosphatidylinositol ( PtdIns ) 3 - kinase vacuolar protein sorting 34 ( Vps34 ) , in podocytes results in aberrant endosomal membrane morphology and podocyte dysfunction . We recently showed that the vacuolation phenotype in cultured Vps34 – de ﬁ cient podocytes is caused by the absence of a substrate for the Vps34 downstream effector PtdIns 3 - phosphate 5 - kinase ( PIKfyve ) , which phosphorylates Vps34 - generated PtdIns ( 3 ) P to produce PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P2 . PIKfyve perturbation and PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P2 reduction result in massive membrane vacuolation along the endosomal system , but the cell - speci ﬁ c functions of PIKfyve in vivo remain unclear . We show here that the genetic deletion of PIKfyve in endocytically active proximal tubular cells resulted in the development of large cytoplasmic vacuoles caused by arrested endocytic traf ﬁ c progression at a late - endosome stage . In contrast , deletion of PIKfyve in glo - merular podocytes did not signi ﬁ cantly alter the endosomal morphology , even in age 18 - month - old mice . However , onculturing , the PIKfyve - deleted podocytes developed massive cytoplasmicvacuoles . Insummary , these data suggest that glomerular podocytes and proximal tubules have different requirements for PIKfyve function , likely related to distinct in vivo needs for endocytic ﬂ ux . J Am Soc Nephrol 27 : ccc – ccc , 2016 . doi : 10 . 1681 / ASN . 2015050555 Albuminuria ( proteinuria ) is one of the hallmarks of proteinuric kidney disease and strongly and indepen - dentlyassociated with kidneydisease progressionand cardiovascular events . 1 – 3 The amount of albumin that gets across the healthy ﬁ ltration barrier remains controversial . 4 – 6 Studies have shown that proximal tubular cells can reabsorb albumin through recep - tor - mediated endocytosis . 5 – 10 The neonatal Fc recep - tor ( FcRn ) located at the apical brush border of proximal tubular cells has been implicated in the re - absorption of albumin and Igs ( IgG ) . 7 – 9 Podocytes also express the FcRn receptor ; glomeruli of mice lacking the FcRn receptor in the podocytes had de - layed clearance and accumulation of IgG in tracer studies . 9 More recently , podocyte uptake of Evans Blue – labeled albumin was observed in a puromycin aminonucleoside injury model by transcytosis , a well characterized process for moving materials from one cell membrane domain to another . 10 However , many of the studies showing the ability of podocytes to Received May 20 , 2015 . Accepted December 9 , 2015 . Published online ahead of print . Publication date available at www . jasn . org . Correspondence : Dr . Puneet Garg , Division of Nephrology , University of Michigan School of Medicine , 1150 West Medical Center Drive , MSRB2 , Room 1570D , Ann Arbor , MI 48109 . Email : pungarg @ umich . edu Copyright © 2016 by the American Society of Nephrology J Am Soc Nephrol 27 : ccc – ccc , 2016 ISSN : 1046 - 6673 / 2709 - ccc 1 endocytose labeled albumin or IgG have been performed in vi - tro 11 – 14 ( i . e . , in isolated cultured podocytes ) and may not truly mirror the events occurring in vivo . Human diseases and mouse models with disruption of the ﬁ ltration barrier resulting in large amounts of protein leak are not ideally suited to elucidate the role of endocytosis in podocyte homeostasis , because the behav - ior of podocytes is likely altered . Cargointernalizationisanearlyendocyticeventthatoccursat the plasma membrane where extracellular material along with fragments of the plasma membrane form membrane - bound vesicles . Endocytosisisimportantforthecelltoacquirenutrients , mount a response to antigens and pathogens , and regulate signaling that originates at the cell membrane . Similar to other cell types , endocytic membrane traf ﬁ cking is a critical cellular mechanism that is required for podocyte homeostasis . Two recent studies investigated the consequence of perturbing endo - somal traf ﬁ cking in podocytes by deleting the phosphatidylino - sitol ( PtdIns ) 3 - kinase , vacuolar protein sorting 34 ( Vps34 ) , in a podocyte - speci ﬁ c manner . 15 , 16 Podocytes lacking Vps34 de - veloped large cytoplasmic vacuoles and proteinuria , resulting in death at 3 – 9 weeks of age . Vps34 is a highly conserved class 3 PtdIns 3 - kinase that phosphorylates the 3 - OH inositol - head group to generate phosphatidylinositol - 3 - phosphate [ PtdIns ( 3 ) P ] . As part of distinct multiprotein complexes , Vps34 - generated PtdIns ( 3 ) P is necessary for transition of early endosomes to late endosomes as well as autophagosome maturation . 17 – 20 In our recent study , we showed that the Vps34 downstream effector phosphatidylinositol 3 - phosphate 5 - kinase ( PIKfyve ) is responsible for the vacuolation phenotype observed in Vps34 - deleted podocytes in culture . 21 Replenishment of Vps34 in cultured Vps34 – de ﬁ cient cells did rescue the vacu - olation phenotype but only in the presence of intact PIKfyve activity . 21 PIKfyve is an Fyve ( Fab1p , YOTB , Vac1p , and early endosome antigen 1 [ EEA1 ] ) ﬁ nger - containing phosphoino - sitide ( PI ) kinase that phosphorylates PtdIns and Vps34 - generated PtdIns ( 3 ) P on the 5 - hyrdroxyl position to make the low – abundance signaling lipids phosphatidylinositol - 5 - phosphate [ PtdIns ( 5 ) P ] and phosphatidylinositol - 3 , 5 - phosphate 2 [ PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P2 ] , respectively . 22 – 24 In contrast to PtdIns ( 3 ) P , which is found in early endosomal compartments , PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P2 is thought to predominate in late endosomes and / or lysosomes . 25 – 28 Similar to Vps34 , perturbations in PIKfyve – catalyzed PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P2 synthesis lead to several de - fects , including a dramatic enlargement of endosomal / lyso - somal membranes . 23 , 29 – 31 To study the role of PIKfyve in vivo , we generated two mouse models , where PIKfyve is de - leted in either podocytes or proximal tubular epithelial cells . To our surprise , deletion of PIKfyve in podocytes resulted in a normal phenotype , even when mice were ages # 18 months old . In contrast , deletion of PIKfyve in highly endocytically active proximal tubular cells resulted in the development of large vacuoles . We also compared the podocyte - speci ﬁ c dele - tion of Vps34 and PIKfyve to better understand the dramat - ically different phenotypes . The data presented in this study suggest that the observed phenotype of Vps34 deletion in glo - merular podocytes cannot be explained solely by a primary defect in endosomal membrane traf ﬁ cking . Furthermore , lack of a marked morphologic phenotype in PIKfyve – deleted glo - merular podocytes compared with proximal tubular cells sug - gests that healthy podocytes may have low rates of endocytic ﬂ ux . RESULTS Conditional Deletion of PIKfyve in Podocytes Results in a Normal Renal Phenotype To study the podocyte - speci ﬁ c function of PIKfyve in vivo , we crossed the previously described PIKfyve ﬂ / ﬂ homozygous mice with Nphs2 - Cre mice and generated mice that have PIKfyve deletion in podocytes ( PIKfyve podko ) . 32 , 33 PIKfyve podko mice were born in a normal Mendelian distribution and normal at birth . However , to our surprise , glomeruli of PIKfyve podko mice were structurally similar to their littermate controls at both birth and 18 months of age . Transmission electron mi - croscopy ( EM ) images showed a normal foot process structure and glomerular basement membrane and only the occasional presence of vacuoles ( Figure 1A ) . The foot process width mea - sured by the slit diaphragm frequency was also similar between PIKfyve podko mice and their littermate controls ( Fig - ure 1B ) . Likewise , urine albumin excretion was similar in PIKfyve podko mice compared with littermate controls ( Figure 1 , C and D ) . Con ﬁ rmation of PIKfyve Gene Deletion in Glomerular Podocytes Because of the lack of a phenotype , several additional studies were performed to con ﬁ rm deletion of PIKfyve in podocytes . We ﬁ rst used the mTmG Cre - reporter mouse 34 to visually con ﬁ rm expression of Cre - recombinase . Nphs2 - Cre mice were bred with the mTmG ﬂ / ﬂ mouse to generate mTmG ﬂ / ﬂ / Nphs2 - Cre mice . Successful recombination was con ﬁ rmed by the robust green ﬂ uorescence in podocytes ( Figure 2A ) . Nphs2 - Cre , mTmG ﬂ / ﬂ mice were subsequently bred with PIKfyve ﬂ / ﬂ mice to generate podocyte - speci ﬁ c deletion of PIKfyve . In addition , deletion of PIKfyve was con ﬁ rmed at both the message ( mRNA ) and protein levels , and green ﬂ uorescent protein ( GFP ) - expressing podocytes were isolated from mTmG / PIKfyve ﬂ / ﬂ , Nphs2 - Cre + and non – Cre - expressing litter - mate mice using ﬂ ow cytometry . cDNA generated by reverse transcription shows the change in size of the PCR product using primers on either side of exon 6 ( Figure 2B ) . The PCR product was further sequenced to con ﬁ rm the deletion of the ﬂ oxed segment ( Supplemental Figure 1 ) . The deletion of PIKfyve mRNA transcript was further con ﬁ rmed by insitu hybridization using ﬂ uorescence – labeled RNA probes compli - mentary to exon 6 of PIKfyve . Kidney sections were stained with podocin antibody to visualize the glomerular tuft . The cells on the periphery of the glomerular tuft in the wild – type 2 Journal of the American Society of Nephrology J Am Soc Nephrol 27 : ccc – ccc , 2016 BASIC RESEARCH www . jasn . org kidney sections show presence of ﬂ uorescent dots ( Figure 2C , upper panel ) . Similar dots are not seen in PIKfyve - deleted podocytes ( Figure 2C , lower panel ) , indicating successful de - letion of exon 6 after Cre - mediated recombination . We also con ﬁ rmed the absence of PIKfyve protein by Western blot analyses with a C – terminal PIKfyve antibody subsequent to cell sorting from isolated glomeruli ( Figure 2D ) . Podocytes transfected with a construct encoding PIKfyve were used as a positive control . We repeatedly documented approxi - mately 90 % reduction in the PIKfyve immunoreactive band in podocytes collected from PIKfyve ﬂ / ﬂ , Nphs2 - Cre + versus PIKfyve ﬂ / ﬂ , Nphs2 - Cre 2 glomeruli ( Figure 2D ) . Pikfyve - Deleted Podocytes in Culture Readily Develop Translucent Vacuoles In a second approach for con ﬁ rming func - tional deletion of PIKfyve , we examined if both isolated and immortalized PIKfyve – deleted podocytes derived from the mTmG ﬂ / ﬂ , PIKfyve ﬂ / ﬂ , Cre + mice could form cytoplas - mic vacuoles in vitro . Reportedly , in rare cases , there might be a discrepancy be - tween data obtained by the Cre reporter and the strength of the gene deletion . 35 Formation of translucent cytoplasmic vacuoles is a proven sensitive assay for per - turbed PIKfyve function and hence , re - duced PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P2 levels as observed in a number of dividing cells , including podocytes in culture . 21 , 25 Isolated glomer - uli from the mTmG ﬂ / ﬂ , PIKfyve ﬂ / ﬂ , Cre + mice were plated on culture dishes . At day 0 , there was expression of both red and green ﬂ uorescence in the glomeruli ( Figure 3A ) . Intriguingly , however , the GFP - expressing cells that spread outward from the glomeruli show development of large vacuoles by days 5 – 8 . In contrast , en - dothelial and mesangial cells that did not undergo Cre - mediated recombination and express red ﬂ uorescence lacked such vacu - olation morphology . We also observed vacuolization after PIKfyve deletion in non - dividing immortalized podocyte cells that were allowed to differentiate at 37°C for 14 days ( Supplemental Figure 2 ) . These results are consistent with the conclusion that PIKfyve deletion has occurred in the glomeruli in vivo . Levels of PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P2 , PtdIns ( 5 ) P , and PtdIns ( 3 ) P in Cultured PIKfyve Knockout Podocytes Cell studies have previously revealed that aberrant cytoplasmic vacuoles are formed after signi ﬁ cant reduction of PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P2 levels ( . 60 % ) 32 and only in dividing but not in terminally differentiated cells . 26 , 36 Measurement of PIsusing HPLC in cultured cells expressing green ﬂ uorescence ( mTmG / PIKfyve ﬂ / ﬂ , Nphs2 - Cre + ) after cell sorting by FACS is shown in Figure 3B . Although both PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P2 and PtdIns ( 5 ) P lipid products signi ﬁ cantly de - creased in PIKfyve - deleted cells , they were not completely ab - sent . There was a statistically signi ﬁ cant increase in total PtdIns ( 3 ) P levels in PIKfyve - deleted podocytes , suggesting ac - cumulation of PtdIns ( 3 ) P in the absence of PIKfyve . These ﬁ ndings argue for a possible persistence of small amounts of PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P2 in the podocytes in vivo . Figure 1 . Conditional PIKfyve deletion in mouse podocytes results in normal phe - notype . ( A , top panel ) Hematoxylin and eosin staining of paraf ﬁ n – embedded mouse kidney sections from PIKfyve ﬂ / ﬂ , Nphs2 - Cre 2 ( control ) and PIKfyve ﬂ / ﬂ , Nphs2 - Cre + ( PIKfyve podko ) mice . ( A , middle and bottom panels ) Transmission electron micrographs of kidneys from control and PIKfyve podko mice show a normal podocyte foot process architecture and the absence of vacuoles in the PIKfyve podko podocytes . ( B ) Number of junctions per micro - meter of glomerular basement membrane ( GBM ) surface as seen by transmission EM . Data are means 6 SEMs . ( C ) Urine collected from PIKfyve podko mice and their age – matched littermate controls was resolved using SDS - PAGE . BSA standards were run for compar - ison . Results shown are representative of ﬁ ve or more 12 - month - old mice per group . ( D ) Urine albumin - to - creatinine ratio in PIKfyve podko and age – matched littermate control mice as measured by ELISA . Error bars are SEMs . J Am Soc Nephrol 27 : ccc – ccc , 2016 PIKfyve in Glomeruli Versus Proximal Tubules 3 www . jasn . org BASIC RESEARCH Proximal Tubular Cells Deleted of PIKfyve Robustly Develop Large Translucent Vacuoles It is possible that persistence of low levels of PIKfyve gene func - tion after deletion is suf ﬁ cient to sustain podocyte homeostasis . We hypothesized that deletion of PIKfyve in a cell that is highly endocytically active would result in development of vacuoles , even if low levels of PIKfyve activity persisted . Kidney proximal tubular cells are highly active in reabsorption of proteins , electro - lytes , and glucose from the ultra ﬁ ltrate gen - erated by the glomerulus . To delete PIKfyve in the proximal tubules , we initially crossed PEPCK - Cre mice with the mTmG Cre - reporter mouse to generate PEPCK - Cre , mTmG mice . PEPCK - Cre – driven recombi - nation resulted in a mosaic pattern ( Figure 4A , top panel ) , because the PEPCK promoter is inserted as a single - copy transgene on the X chromosome . 37 PEPCK - Cre , mTmG mice were then crossed with PIKfyve ﬂ / ﬂ mice to generate proximal tubule – speci ﬁ c PIKfyve deletion . The mice were born in normal Mendelian distribution and normal at birth . However , we observed large vacu - oles in the enhanced green ﬂ uorescent pro - tein ( EGFP ) – expressing proximal epithelial cells indicative of successful Cre – driven re - combination ( Figure 4A , middle panel ) . Presence of vacuoles was also con ﬁ rmed by histology and transmission electron micros - copy ( Figure 4B ) . Theabsence ofvacuolation in the podocytes is illustrated by simulta - neous deletion of PIKfyve in glomeruli and proximal tubules ( Figure 4A , bottom panel ) . Insitu hybridization using ﬂ uorescence – labeled cRNA probes for PIKfyve exon 6 shows an absence of the PIKfyve mRNA in proximal tubular cells with high expression of Lamp1 ( Supplemental Figure 3A ) . Tissue processing for insitu hybridization resulted in loss of the GFP - emitted ﬂ uorescence . To circumvent this obstacle , we used Lamp1 as a marker of PIKfyve deletion . In a sepa - rate experiment , we were able to show in - creased Lamp1 staining in proximal tubular cells that have GFP expression in frozen kidney tissue ( Supplemental Figure 3B ) . Membrane Localization of Podocyte Junctional Protein Nephrin Is Aberrant in Vps34 – Deleted Glomerular Podocytes As an initial characterization of the Vps34 - and PIKfyve - deleted podocytes , we com - pared the targeting of junctional proteins , like nephrin and zona occludens - 1 ( ZO - 1 ) , with the podocyte - intercellular junction . Staining of kidney sections from 4 - week - old Vps34 podko mice revealed loss of the linear stain - ing for nephrin compared with both PIKfyve – deleted and age – matched littermate control wild – type mice ( Figure 5A ) . Interestingly , at 4 weeks of age , staining for ZO - 1 and Figure 2 . Deletion of PIKfyve in mouse podocytes . ( A ) Immuno ﬂ uorescence images of frozen kidney section showing green ﬂ uorescence exclusively in the glomerulus in a podocyte - speci ﬁ c distribution when the mTmG Cre - reporter mouse was bred with the Nphs2 - Cre mouse . ( B ) Deletion of the ﬂ oxed segment was con ﬁ rmed by reverse transcription of mRNA extracted from podocytes isolated by ﬂ ow cytometry . PCR ampli ﬁ cation with primers ( arrows ) ﬂ anking the ﬂ oxed segment shows a change in the size of the PCR product by the predicted 172 bp . Depicted is the position of the primers along the PIKfyve gene ( arrows ) . The box shows the ampli ﬁ ed section of the gene . The length of the sequence between the loxP sites is 150 bp . ( C ) In situ hy - bridization using RNA scope probes against exon 6 of PIKfyve . Each individual dot indicates an mRNA strand . ( C , upper panel ) There are ﬂ uorescent dots in the cells on the periphery of the glomerular tuft in wild - type mouse ( arrowheads ) . C , lower panel shows absence of dots in the cell periphery . Podocin was used to label the podocytes . ( D ) Lysates from wild - type podocytes ( lane 1 ) and podocytes lacking PIKfyve ( lane 2 ) were resolved using SDS - PAGE and blotted with antibody against the C terminus of PIKfyve . Lysates from HEK293 cells transfected with GFP - tagged PIKfyve were used as positive control . Quanti ﬁ cation of band densities using Unscan presented next to the blot . Error bars are SEMs ( n = 4 ) . Twelve - month - old mice were used in these experiments . 4 Journal of the American Society of Nephrology J Am Soc Nephrol 27 : ccc – ccc , 2016 BASIC RESEARCH www . jasn . org Figure 3 . PIKfyve - deleted podocytes develop vacuoles in vitro . ( A ) Glomeruli isolated from 6 - month - old mTmG / PIKfyve ﬂ / ﬂ , Nphs2 - Cre mouse kidneys develop large vacuoles by days 6 – 8 in culture . ( B ) Quantitation by HPLC from four independent experiments calculated as a percentage of the total PI radioactivity and presented as means 6 SEMs . The total PI radioactivity was obtained by summing the counts within the elution times corresponding to the individual [ 3 H ] GroPIns peaks as detailed in Concise Methods . The changes in PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P 2 , PtdIns ( 5 ) P , and PtdIns ( 3 ) P in PIKfyve ﬂ / ﬂ , Cre 2 versus PIKfyve ﬂ / ﬂ , Cre + were statistically signi ﬁ cant . * P , 0 . 01 using paired t test analysis . J Am Soc Nephrol 27 : ccc – ccc , 2016 PIKfyve in Glomeruli Versus Proximal Tubules 5 www . jasn . org BASIC RESEARCH synaptopodin in Vps34 - deleted podocytes was similar to con - trols . Electron microscopy using immunogold labeling showed nephrin in vesicles in Vps34 – deleted mouse podo - cytes ( Figure 5B ) , suggesting either improper targeting of newly synthesized nephrin from the trans - Golginetwork ( TGN ) or nephrin removed from the membrane by endo - cytosis . PIKfyve – deleted mouse podocytes showed a decrease in ZO - 1 staining compared with age – matched littermate con - trols ( Figure 5A ) . After calcium switch , in vitro return of tight junction proteins , like claudin and ZO - 1 , is affected by the pres - ence of PIKfyve inhibitor , suggesting a role of PIKfyve in traf ﬁ cking of these proteins to the plasma membrane . 38 How - ever , decreases in ZO - 1 levels did not seem to affect the integrity of thepodocyte intercellular junctionasevidenced by thefact that PIKfyve podko mice did not become proteinuric with age . Endosome and TGN Morphology of Glomerular Podocytes Is Markedly Altered in Vps34 - Deleted Podocytes but Not Markedly Altered in PIKfyve - Deleted Podocytes TocomparetheconsequencesoftheabsenceofPIKfyveorVps34 , we stained kidney sections from adult mice with a battery of vesicular markers . A schematic diagram of the endocytic com - partments , their characteristic markers , and the direction of the vesicle traf ﬁ cking is shown in Supplemental Figure 4A . 39 Staining for APPL1 adaptor protein showsincreased staining inpodocytes deleted ofVps34 ( Figure 6 , row1 ) . APPLendosomesrepresentan early endocytic intermediate and are precursors of the classic PtdIns ( 3 ) P - containing endosomes , and Vps34 plays a critical role in this conversion . 40 Staining for EEA1 showed a reduction in EEA1 staining in podocytes lacking Vps34 at the earlier time point of 4 - week - old mice ( Figure 6 , row 2 ) . EEA1 contains an Fyve ﬁ nger domain that interacts with PtdIns ( 3 ) P , resulting in enrichment of EEA1 at the vesicular membrane . Lysosomal – associated membrane protein Lamp1 has been traditionally used as a lysosomal marker , but it is also found in late endosomes and lysosomal precursor vesicles being traf ﬁ cked from the TGN . 41 – 43 Lamp1 staining was robust and diffuse in podocytes lacking Vps34 ( Figure 6 , row 3 ) . In wild - type and PIKfyve - deleted podocytes , thestaining issimilarandpunctate , suggesting its presence in vesicles or lysosomes . Other than its role in endosome fusion , small GTPase Rab5 orchestrates early or sorting endosome dynamics . Switch of expression from Rab5 to Rab7 marks the transition to late endosomes and attainment of the capability to fuse with lysosomes . 44 Rab5 expression is increased in the podocytes that lack Vps34 compared with wild - type and PIKfyve - deleted podocytes ( Figure 6 , row 4 ) . The increase in expression of Lamp1 when there is failure of maturation to late endosomes Figure 4 . PIKfyve deletion in mouse proximal tubular epithelial cells triggers formation of large cytoplasmic vacuoles . ( A , top panel ) Immuno ﬂ uorescence images of frozen kidney sections showing expression of green ﬂ uorescence in proximal tubules when the mTmG ﬂ / ﬂ mouse was bred with the PEPCK - Cre mouse . There is a mosaic pattern of GFP expression in the proximal tu - bules ( arrowheads ) . ( A , middle panel ) Numerous vacuoles are seen in the cytoplasm of proximal tubular cells expressing GFP . Frozen kidney sections of a 2 - month - old mTmG / PIKfyve ﬂ / ﬂ mouse carrying both Nphs2 - Cre and PEPCK - Cre ( double knock - out ) show expression of GFP in both podocytes and proximal tubular cells . ( A , bottom panel ) There are numerous vacuoles in the proximal epithelial cells adjacent to a glomerulus with normal - appearing podocytes . ( B , top panel ) Hematoxylin and eosin – stained paraf ﬁ n – embedded kidney section showing presence of large vacuoles in the PIKfyve – deleted proximal epithelial cells . ( B , middle and bottom panels ) Transmission EM images con ﬁ rm the presence of large vacuoles in the cytoplasm of the proximal epi - thelial cells deleted of PIKfyve . 6 Journal of the American Society of Nephrology J Am Soc Nephrol 27 : ccc – ccc , 2016 BASIC RESEARCH www . jasn . org would argue for a different source of Lamp1 - positive vesicles , like the TGN . To examine the TGN , we monitored two proteins that are enriched in the Golgi apparatus ( namely , Rab11 and Syntaxin - 6 ) . Rab11 has been localized at the TGN , post - Golgi vesicles , and recycling endosomes , placing it at the intersection between the endocytic and exocytic traf ﬁ cking pathways . 45 , 46 Rab11 localizes to the apical recycling endosomes and plays a role in apicobasal polarity , facilitating the delivery of appropriate proteins to the apical surface from the TGN . 47 Vps34 - deleted podocytes showed an increase in Rab11 staining ( Figure 6 , row 5 ) , suggesting an arrest of traf ﬁ cking of Rab11 - positive vesicles . TGN marker Syntaxin - 6 has an SNARE motif that drives the engine required for vesicular mem - brane fusion . Syntaxin - 6 is implicated in TGN - endosome traf ﬁ cking of lysosomal pre - cursors . 48 In wild - type and PIKfyve - deleted podocytes , Syntaxin - 6 expression is limited to a small area adjacent to the nucleus in a pattern expected for the Golgi apparatus . In Vps34 - deleted podocytes , Syntaxin - 6 stain - ing is diffuse within the cytoplasm ( Figure 6 , row 6 ) , suggesting the possibility of aber - rant traf ﬁ cking from the Golgi apparatus in the absence of Vps34 - generated PtdIns ( 3 ) P . Quanti ﬁ cation of immuno ﬂ uorescence us - ing ImageJ ( National Institutes of Health , Be - thesda , MD ) is shown in Supplemental 4B . Western blot analysis using cell lysates from isolated PIKfyve and Vps34 - deleted podo - cytes con ﬁ rms the observations made using immunohistochemistry on kidney sections ( Supplemental Figure 5 ) . Glomerular lysates were not used for this analysis , because thereis contribution from mesangial as well as endo - thelial cells that made it dif ﬁ cult to assess changes occurringspeci ﬁ cally in podocytes af - ter deletion . In summary , these data suggest that there is signi ﬁ cant contribution of the TGNtotheaccumulationofendocyticmarkerproteinsintheVps34 - deleted podocytes . Consistent with the observed lack of gross morphologic abnormalities , our inspection of the endocytic structures withvarious mark - ers in PIKfyve - deleted podocytes revealed that vesicular traf ﬁ cking from the TGN is not sig - ni ﬁ cantly perturbed , likely related to the pre - served and even augmented PtdIns ( 3 ) P levels . Accumulation of Late Endosomal Markers in PIKfyve – Deleted Proximal Tubular Cells Because of the mosaic pattern of PEPCK - Cre – mediated deletion within the same tu - bules , there are regions where the cells do not have PIKfyve deletion ( Figure 7A , regions between the arrowheads ) . Whereas the mosaic pattern prevented develop - ment of a phenotype in terms of tubular proteinuria or renal failure , it offered us control cells within the same kidney section . Staining for clathrin showed a linear pattern along the apical cell surface of the tubular cells in both normal and PIKfyve – deleted tubular cells ( Figure 7A , row 1 ) . This suggests the normal process of clathrin - mediated endocytosis as revealed in our previous cell studies with PIKfyve perturbation . 49 By contrast , we observed accumulation of EEA1 - , APPL1 - , Rab5 - , and Rab11 - positive Figure 5 . Vesicular localization of nephrin in Vps34 – deleted mouse podocytes . ( A ) Indirect immuno ﬂ uorescence staining of paraf ﬁ n – embedded 4 - week - old mouse kid - ney sections from Vps34 podko shows that nephrin is present largely in vesicles ( ar - rowheads ) . Nephrin staining in PIKfyve podko mice is similar to that of the littermate controls . Staining for synaptopodin and ZO - 1 is similar in both Vps34 podko and PIKfyve podko and their littermate control kidneys . Scale bars , 50 m m . ( B ) Immunogold transmission EM shows presence of nephrin in vesicles ( arrowheads ) in Vps34 podko mouse podocytes . Images were photographed at 3 5800 and cropped to emphasize the presence of immunogold particles in vesicles . J Am Soc Nephrol 27 : ccc – ccc , 2016 PIKfyve in Glomeruli Versus Proximal Tubules 7 www . jasn . org BASIC RESEARCH vesicles in the PIKfyve - deleted cells compared with normal cells ( Figure 7A ) . Quanti ﬁ cation of the immuno ﬂ uorescence using ImageJ software ( National Institutes of Health ) con ﬁ rms signif - icant increase in accumulation of early , late , and recycling endo - somes ( Figure 7B ) . These data suggest that , in proximal tubular cells , the absence of PIKfyve results in the anticipated phenotype , where endosomal membrane traf ﬁ cking is altered and resembles Vps34 - deleted podocytes . Autophagy Is Not Affected in PIKfyve - Deleted Podocytes and Proximal Tubular Cells Autophagy is an important cellular process that has been shown to be important for podocyte homeostasis . 50 Both Vps34 and PIKfyve have been shown to play a role in auto - phagic pathways . 19 , 51 – 54 Kidney sections from the wild type , Vps34 podko , and PIKfyve knockout ( both podocyte and tubu - lar ) were immunostained for autophagy markers LC3 and p62 Figure 6 . Membrane traf ﬁ cking and endocytic ﬂ ux from Golgi is impaired in Vps34 – deleted mouse podocytes . Immuno ﬂ uorescence staining of kidney sections from 4 - week - old Vps34 – deleted and 6 - month - old PIKfyve – deleted mouse podocytes for various vesicular markers . There is increased staining for Lamp1 , APPL1 Rab5 , Rab11 , and Syntaxin - 6 . Rab11 and Syntaxin - 6are markers of vesicles that originate from the Golgi . Staining in PIKfyve - deleted podocytes for these markers is similar to that in wild - type podocytes . Rows 4 – 6 are enlarged images of the boxed areas in rows 1 – 3 . Arrowheads point to the podocytes at the periphery of the glomerulus . Scale bars , 20 m min rows 1 – 3 ; 5 m m in rows 4 – 6 . 8 Journal of the American Society of Nephrology J Am Soc Nephrol 27 : ccc – ccc , 2016 BASIC RESEARCH www . jasn . org Figure 7 . Aberrant accumulation of endosomal markers in PIKfyve – deleted proximal tubular cells . ( A ) PIKfyve – deleted proximal tubular cells show increased staining for vesicular markers APPL1 , EEA1 , Rab5 , Rab11 , and Lamp1 . Lamp1 staining is used to identify cells that have undergone Cre – mediated PIKfyve deletion because of the mosaic pattern of PEPCK promoter – driven Creexpression . Two - month - old mice were used for these experiments . Scale bars , 20 m m . ( B ) Quanti ﬁ cation of the immuno ﬂ uorescence in PIKfyve – deleted proximal tubular cells processed by ImageJ software . Data show signi ﬁ cant accumulation of Lamp1 in proximal tubular epithelial cells . Lamp1 staining was used to double - stain cells that have deletion of PIKfyve . There is accumulation of Clathrin , EEA1 , Rab5 , and Rab11 J Am Soc Nephrol 27 : ccc – ccc , 2016 PIKfyve in Glomeruli Versus Proximal Tubules 9 www . jasn . org BASIC RESEARCH ( Figure 8 , A and C ) . Reportedly , the inhibition of autophagy correlates with increased level of p62 , suggesting that steady - state levels of p62 re ﬂ ect the autophagic status . 55 , 56 Expression levels of both LC3 and p62 are higher in Vps34 - deleted podo - cytes as revealed by quanti ﬁ cation with ImageJ software ( Na - tional Institutes of Health ) ( Figure 8 , B and D ) . Western blot analysis using cell lysates from isolated Vps34 – and PIKfyve – deleted podocytes shows similar increases in both LC3 and p62 after Vps34 deletion ( Supplemental Figure 5 ) . Interestingly , PIKfyve deletion in both podocytes and tubular cells does not affect expression of either LC3 or p62 ( Figure 8D ) . These re - sults suggest that a change in autophagic ﬂ ux is likely to con - tribute toward the severe phenotype seen in Vps34 podko mice . FITC – Labeled Albumin Uptake In Vivo To assess the integrity of the ﬁ lter in Vps34 podko and PIKfyve podko mice or the mice with simultaneous deletion of PIKfyve in podocytes and proximal tubular epithelial cells ( i . e . , PIKfyve ﬂ / ﬂ , Nphs2 - Cre + / PEPCK - Cre + ) , we perfused the animals with FITC – labeled human albumin ( FITC - h alb ) . We used both 3 - and 6 - week - old Vps34 podko mice for these experi - ments . The 3 - week - old Vps34 podko mice are not overtly pro - teinuric . Few glomeruli in the Vps34 - deleted mouse that were vacuolated and unhealthy had signi ﬁ cant amounts of FITC - h alb leak , whereas there was no visible leak in the glo - meruli that were completely healthy in appearance . Further - more , the glomeruli from the Vps34 podko mouse kidneys that had large amounts of leak did not show evidence of FITC - h alb within the podocytes ( Figure 9A ) . Rarely , a glomerulus from the 6 - week - old Vps34 podko mouse showed green droplets within the podocytes ( Figure 9A , row 4 and inset ) . After perfusion at various time points , green ﬂ uorescence was visible along the glo - merular basement membrane that was well demarcated by the synaptopodin staining ( red in Figure 9B ) on the urinary side ( Fig - ure 9B ) . Despite saturation with FITC - h alb on the vascular side , we were unable to visualize FITC - h alb uptake by the podocytes in kidney sections from the PIKfyve podko mice . Quanti ﬁ cation of the immuno ﬂ uorescence in highly proteinuric 6 - week - old Vps34 podko and 6 - month - old PIKfyve ﬂ / ﬂ , Nphs2 - Cre + / PEPCK - Cre + kid - neys showed an increase in tubular uptake of the FITC - h alb ( Supplemental Figure 6 ) . The PIKfyve ﬂ / ﬂ , Nphs2 - Cre + / PEPCK - Cre + dual – knockout mice that also have abnormality in membrane traf ﬁ cking in tubular cells show accumulation of small amounts of FITC - h alb that are present in the ultra ﬁ ltrate . Some PIKfyve – Deleted Glomerular Podocytes Develop Vacuoles after Unilateral Nephrectomy Numerous podocytes – speci ﬁ c gene deletion models develop a phenotype after stress . We hypothesized that PIKfyve - deleted podocytes under duress would develop vacuoles . We used the unilateral nephrectomy model , because in this model , the podocytes undergo hypertrophy and membrane expansion that require endosomal traf ﬁ cking . After unilateral nephrectomy , the remnantkidneyundergoesrapid enlargementinsize , almostdou - bling in 4 – 5 days ; 10 - month - old PIKfyve podko and age – matched littermate PIKfyve ﬂ / ﬂ , Nphs2Cre 2 mice were used in the experiment . Animals were euthanized at 5 and 10 days postsurgery , and anal - ysis revealed similar ﬁ ndings at both time points . There is uniform increase in immunostaining for Lamp1 in podocytes postsurgery in PIKfyve podko mice compared with the wild type ( Figure 10A , top panel ) . Quanti ﬁ cation of Lamp1 immuno ﬂ uo - rescence by ImageJ software ( National Institutes of Health ) shows a statistically signi ﬁ cant increase in Lamp1 staining in the PIKfyve - deleted podocytes ( Figure 10B ) . Transmission EM images showed the presence of large vacuoles in some PIKfyve podko glomerular podocytes ( Figure 10A ) . Although only occasional PIKfyve - deleted podocytes developed vacuoles after nephrectomy , it is feasible that PIKfyve podko nephrectomized mice could develop podocyte dysfunction on aging and / or additional insults , which remain to be tested . DISCUSSION Podocytes are highly complex terminally differentiated epithelial cellsthatareinconstantcontactwithlargeamountsofultra ﬁ ltrate that is available for pinocytosis . Although vesicles have been observed in podocytes , 57 their origin remains unclear . Studies have shown accumulation of aberrant cytoplasmic vacuoles in podocytes with Vps34 deletion , which resulted in glomerular scarring and proteinuria . 15 , 16 Although these studies highlighted the importance of endocytosis and autophagy , they did not ad - dress the issue of endocytic ﬂ ux in healthy podocytes . Our recent studies have shownthat cultured Vps34 – de ﬁ cientpodocytes can - not be rescued by re - expression of Vps34 when PIKfyve activity is chemically inhibited . 21 These data suggest that the abnormal vacuolation phenotype observed in Vps34 – deleted cultured po - docytes is caused by failed PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P2 synthesis . This study was undertaken to determine the role of PIKfyve in glomerular podocytes and proximal tubular cells in mouse models with the respective tissue – speci ﬁ c PIKfyve gene deletions . The key ﬁ nding that we presented here is the conspicuous absence of a vacuolation phenotype in glomerular podocytes with the PIKfyve knockout , which persisted in aged animals . By contrast , deletion of PIKfyve in proximal tubular cells , which are known to actively proliferate and endocytose , 58 – 60 produced massive cyto - plasmic vacuolation along with an aberrant morphology of the endosomal system . Whereas our results might be explained in several ways as discussed below , we favor the interpretation that healthy podocytes exhibit low levels of basal endocytosis . Our study provides several lines of evidence that support the contention that the lack of aberrant cytoplasmic vacuolation inPIKfyve – deletedproximaltubular epithelialcells . Resultsareexpressedas integrateddensityandcorrectedtotalcell ﬂ uorescence . Error bars are SEMs . WT , wild type . Scale bars , 20 m m . * * P , 0 . 01 ; * * * P , 0 . 001 . 10 Journal of the American Society of Nephrology J Am Soc Nephrol 27 : ccc – ccc , 2016 BASIC RESEARCH www . jasn . org Figure 8 . Deletion of PIKfyve in mouse podocytes and tubular cells does not affect autophagy markers LC3 and p62 . ( A ) There is accumulation of autophagy marker LC3 in Vps34 – deleted mouse podocytes indicative of altered autophagic ﬂ ux . ( B ) Quanti ﬁ cation of LC3 staining using ImageJ software in Vps34 - and PIKfyve - deleted podocytes . ( C ) p62 Staining in wild - type podocytes , Vps34 - deleted podocytes , PIKfyve - deleted podocytes , and PIKfyve – deleted proximal tubular cells . Note the increase of the p62 staining in Vps34 - deleted podocytes ( arrowheads in row 5 ) . ( D ) Quanti ﬁ cation of p62 staining using ImageJ software . Results are expressed as integrated density and J Am Soc Nephrol 27 : ccc – ccc , 2016 PIKfyve in Glomeruli Versus Proximal Tubules 11 www . jasn . org BASIC RESEARCH in glomerular podocytes in the PIKfyve podko mouse model is as - sociated with a low rate of endosomal ﬂ ux in the glomeruli . Thus , we observed formation of vacuoles in cultured podo - cytes isolated from the PIKfyve podko mouse glomeruli ( Figure 3 ) . The podocytes that spread outward from isolated glomer - uli could have developed vacuoles partly as a consequence of increased PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P2 requirements for cell division . We also observed similar vacuolization phenotypes in immortal - ized podocytes that were grown under conditions that favor differentiation but not cell division ( Supplemental Figure 2 ) . Thus , it is conceivable that the demand for PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P2 - dependent processes increases as cultured cells undergo adhesion , growth , migration , and division . Concordantly , PIKfyve – deleted proximal tubular cells that , in addition to being highly endocytically active , are under constant cell turn - over readily developed vacuoles in vivo ( Figure 4 ) . The role of PIKfyve in cell division is substantiated by the facts that global PIKfyve gene knockout results in mouse embryo lethality be - fore the 32 - to 64 - cell stage , and the knockout MEFs display reduced DNA synthesis and impaired cell division . 32 Further - more , in FITC - albumin perfusion studies , although we ob - served accumulation of FITC - albumin in PIKfyve – deleted proximal tubular cells ( Supplemental Figure 6 ) , we were un - able to ﬁ nd albumin droplets in both PIKfyve - and Vps34 - deleted podocytes , even when the glomeruli showed large amounts of protein leak as seen in the Vps34 podko mouse kidneys ( Figure 9 ) . Importantly , our notion for reduced en - docytosis in podocytes versus proximal tubular cells is also corroborated by ﬁ ndings in the PIKfyve hypomorphic mouse model , where cytoplasmic vacuolation is readily seen in renal tubular cells but not in glomeruli derived from young pups . 61 A de ﬁ nitive proof of our claim that , in situ , glomerular podo - cytes have relatively low levels of basal endocytosis would re - quire additional investigation by more advanced and powerful in vivo approaches , such as intravital multiphoton microcopy . Alternatively , the contrast in morphologic phenotypes after PIKfyve deletion in podocytes and proximal tubular cells in vivo could suggest either that PIKfyve is dispensable for po - docyte homeostasis or that the residual levels of PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P2 are suf ﬁ cient to handle the demands of endosomal traf ﬁ cking in unchallenged podocytes . Indeed , ﬁ ndings by both PIKfyve knockdown and knockout approaches in different cell types have established that $ 10 % of the normal levels of PIKfyve could provide signi ﬁ cant amounts of PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P2 and thus , that they may not trigger cytoplasmic vacuolation and endomembrane dysregulation . 32 , 61 – 63 In fact , depending on the cell type and status ( cycling or differentiated ) , # 60 % – 88 % diminution of PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P2 may not produce aberrant endomembrane vacuolation as revealed in differentiated adi - pocytes in culture , yeast cells , muscle , fat , or other tissues . 27 , 32 , 61 – 65 Although our data with the mTmG reporter and Western blotting are consistent with a complete gene / protein loss ( Figure 2 ) , a potential insuf ﬁ ciency of the antibody sensitivity and / or discrepancies occurring by the mTmG reporter 35 could not rule out residual amounts of the PIKfyve protein . Concordantly , lack of a complete loss of PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P2 in PIKfyve - deleted po - docytes is suggested by detecting approximately 15 % residual levels of the PIKfyve lipid products PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P2 and PtdIns ( 5 ) P by HPLC ( Figure 3B ) . Because the glomerular siev - ing coef ﬁ cient for albumin in healthy mouse glomeruli is quite low , the residual low levels of PIKfyve activity might have been able to handle the basal demands of healthy podocytes . 66 , 67 Typically , all epithelial cells endocytose cargo from the apical surface , which is then transported to the vascular space through the basolateral membrane . Unlike conventional epithelial cells , podocytes might be unable to easily move cargo back to the vascular space across the glomerular base - ment membrane on their basolateral aspect . One might , thus , postulate that the unique location of podocytes under - lines low basal endocytic ﬂ ux . It is feasible that podocytes are also unique in that they rely on autophagic pathways to process proteins and cellular debris . Several studies have shown high levels of autophagy in podocytes , 50 , 68 , 69 which are bene ﬁ cial to podocytes , whereas perturbation of autophagy is detrimen - tal . 70 , 71 Our immuno ﬂ uorescence data showing unaltered endogenous LC3 and p62 levels on deletion of PIKfyve in glomeruli and proximal tubule are consistent with intact auto - phagy ( Figure 8 , B and D , Supplemental Figure 5 ) . By contrast , aberrant autophagic ﬂ ux is evident in the Vps34 - deleted podocytes that have higher levels of LC3 and p62 compared with wild - type and PIKfyve - deleted podocytes ( Figure 8 , B and D , Supplemental Figure 5 ) . We also observed perturbed staining of TGN marker Syntaxin 6 as well as slit diaphragm junctional protein nephrin after deletion of Vps34 . These observations sug - gest that the severe phenotype observed in Vps34 - deleted podo - cytes could be caused by perturbation of multiple cellular processes that are regulated by PtdIns ( 3 ) P . Our study highlights that there are fundamental differences in the endocytic ﬂ ux on cell culturing compared with the same cell type in its natural in vivo environment . We cannot exclude the possibility that , in hu - mans , prolonged proteinuria and injury to the podocytes in pro - teinuric kidneydiseases might resultin accelerated endocytosis of proteins and further damage of podocytes and glomerular integ - rity . Additional studies are needed to unravelthe uniquenature of podocytes and how different cell types modify the need of critical cellular mechanisms to adapt to their environment . CONCISE METHODS Antibodies Af ﬁ nity – puri ﬁ ed rabbit polyclonal antibodies against nephrin were previously described . 72 – 74 Puri ﬁ ed rabbit mAbs against APPL1 corrected total cell ﬂ uorescence ; 4 - week - old Vps34 knockout mice and 3 - month - old PIKfyve knockout mice were used in these experi - ments . Error bars are SEMs . KO , knockout ; WT , wild type . Scale bars , 20 m m in A , upper panel and B ; 5 m m in A , lower panel . * * * P , 0 . 001 . 12 Journal of the American Society of Nephrology J Am Soc Nephrol 27 : ccc – ccc , 2016 BASIC RESEARCH www . jasn . org ( D83H4 ) , Clathrin ( D3C6 ) , EEA1 ( C45B10 ) , LC3 , p62 , Rab5 ( CDB1 ) , Syntaxin - 6 ( C34B2 ) , and Rab11 ( D4F5 ) were obtained from Cell Signaling Technology ( Danvers , MA ) . Rabbit polyclonal C – terminal PIKfyve antibodies were described elsewhere . 32 The Lamp1 ( 1D4B ) mAb , developed by August J . Thomas , was obtained from the Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank created by the NICHD of the National Institutes of Health and maintained at the Department of Biology , University of Iowa ( Iowa City , IA ) . 75 Mouse mAb against synaptopodin ( D1B4 ) was purchased from American Research Products ( Waltham , MA ) . Figure 9 . Podocytes fail to accumulate FITC - h alb . ( A ) Perfusion of 3 - week - old kidneys of Vps34 ﬂ / ﬂ , Nphs2 - Cre + mice and their littermate controls shows leak of FITC albumin in a few severely affected glomeruli ( arrowheads ) . Accumulation of FITC - h alb is not seen in wild – type or Vps34 – deleted mouse podocytes . Even at 6 weeks of age , the Vps34 – deleted mouse podocytes show only minimal accumulation of FITC - h alb in rare glomeruli ( row 4 ) . Scale bars , 20 m m . ( B ) Perfusion time course of 12 - month - old kidneys of PIKfyve ﬂ / ﬂ , Nphs2 - Cre + mice and their littermate controls shows absence of FITC - h alb in podocytes . B , right panel shows enlarged images of boxed area in B , left panel . Scale bars , 20 m m in B , left panel ; 5 m m in B , right panel . J Am Soc Nephrol 27 : ccc – ccc , 2016 PIKfyve in Glomeruli Versus Proximal Tubules 13 www . jasn . org BASIC RESEARCH Plasmids Control and Cre – encoding adenoviral constructs were obtained from the viral core at the University of Michigan . GFP – tagged PIKfyve construct was generating by subcloning mouse PIKfyve into pTag - GFP - C ( Evrogen , Moscow , Russia ) vector using standard PCR – based cloning techniques . Construct was sequenced at the Uni - versity of Michigan Sequencing Core to con ﬁ rm the incorporation of PIKfyve gene . Cell Culture Cells were maintained in RPMI 1640 with glutamax ( Life Technol - ogies , Carlsbad , CA ) and supplemented with 10 % FBS ( Life Tech - nologies ) and 200 U / ml penicillin and streptomycin ( Roche , Basel , Switzerland ) along with insulin , transferrin , and selenium ( Life Technologies ) . Transient transfections were carried out using Lipofectamine 2000 ( Life Technologies ) and Amaxa Nucleofactor II ( Lonza Corporation ) . Stable transfections were carried out using packaged adenoviral vectors along with polybrene as previously described . 76 Generation of the Podocyte – and Proximal Tubule – Speci ﬁ c PIKfyve Knockout Mouse The PIKfyve ﬂ / ﬂ mouse has been previously described . 32 Brie ﬂ y , two loxP sites were inserted to ﬂ ank exon 6 that encodes the FYVE ﬁ nger domain . The excision of exon 6 by Cre recombinase results in a frameshift and early stop codon at residue 170 , with the ﬁ rst 159 amino acids from the mouse pikfyv e sequence . Double – ﬂ uorescentCre - reportermouse [ STOCK Gt ( ROSA ) 26Sortm4 ( ACTB - tdTomato , - EGFP ) Luo / J ; ob - tained from The Jackson Laboratory , Bar Harbor , ME ] expressing red ﬂ uorescence before and green ﬂ uorescence after Cre - mediated recombination has been described previously . 34 This Cre - reporter mouse line contains an loxP – ﬂ anked membrane – targeted TomatoRed ( mT ) followed by membrane – targeted EGFP ( mG ) . The targeted vector was designed with a CMV enhancer / chicken b – actin core promoter ( pCA ) driving expression of the loxP – ﬂ anked , N – terminal membraned – tagged tdTomato protein ( mT ) followed by a polyadenylation signal . Immediately distal to the second loxP site is an N – terminal membrane – tagged EGFP sequence ( mG ) itself followed by a polyadenylation site . Cre – mediated recombina - tionresults indeletionof themT cassette , allowing expression of GFP located downstream in Cre - expressing cells or tissues . Nphs2 - Cre and PEPCK - Cre mice were initially bred with the double – ﬂ uorescent Cre - reporter mice ( referred to as the mTmG mice in the text ) to generate mTmG ﬂ / ﬂ , Nphs2 - Cre and mTmG ﬂ / ﬂ , PEPCK - Cre mice . A subset of the mTmG ﬂ / ﬂ , Nphs2 - Cre and mTmG ﬂ / ﬂ , PEPCK - Cre mice was bred to generate mTmG mice with both Nphs2 - Cre and PEPCK - Cre . These three mice strains were then bred with the PIKfyve ﬂ / ﬂ mice to generate deletion of PIKfyve in both podocytes and proximal tubules individually and together . Generation of Immortalized Podocyte Cell Lines Glomeruli were isolated from kidneys using the standard sieving method described previously . 77 , 78 Isolated glomeruli were plated onto 10 - cmculturedish . Celloutgrowthsfromtheglomeruliareseenin3days andprimarily podocytes . 21 , 79 Thecellsaretrypsinizedandplatedonnew culture plates . When nearing con ﬂ uence , cells were treated with adeno - virus carrying SV40 Tantigen ( titer 1 . 3 3 1011 ; Viral Core , University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , MI ) . Packaged viral particles were dissolved in complete media at MOI = 200 and minimal volume covering the cells ; 4 hours later , medium was added to a volume optimal for the dish size . Medium was replaced 14 hours later with fresh complete media . Fluorescent InSitu RNA Hybridization In situ RNA hybridization was performed using multiplex RNA scope technology ( Advanced Cell Diagnostics , Hayward , CA ) following the manufacturer ’ s protocol described previously . 80 Brie ﬂ y , formalin – ﬁ xed 10 - m m - thick frozen mouse kidney sections were mounted on glass slides . The slides were subjected to RNAscope Multiplex Fluo - rescent Assay . The procedure began with 20 minutes of boiling in Pretreat 2 followed by Pretreat 4 ( protease ) for 30 minutes at room temperature . The slides were hybridized with RNAscope probes against PIKfyve exon 6 for 3 hours at 40°C , and the remainder of the assay protocol was implemented . The ﬂ uorescent signal was Figure 10 . Occasional vacuole formation in PIKfyve – deleted mouse podocytes after unilateral nephrectomy . ( A ) Immuno ﬂ uorescence images showing increased expres - sion of Lamp1 ( arrowheads ) in PIKfyve - deleted podocytes 5 days after unilateral ne - phrectomy ( A , top panel ) . Transmission EM images show vacuoles in PIKfyve - deleted podocytes . Large vacuoles were evident only in a few podocytes . The adjoining po - docyte in the image does not have any vacuoles . ( B ) Quanti ﬁ cation of immuno ﬂ uo - rescence using ImageJ software showing signi ﬁ cantly elevated Lamp1 expression in PIKfyve - deleted podocytes . Scale bars , 20 m m . * P , 0 . 01 . 14 Journal of the American Society of Nephrology J Am Soc Nephrol 27 : ccc – ccc , 2016 BASIC RESEARCH www . jasn . org visualized and captured using a Leica Inverted SP5 3 Confocal Microscope ( Leica Microsystems , Buffalo Grove , IL ; University of Michigan Microscopy and Imaging Analysis Core Facility ) . Multiple images were stacked together to generate a composite image . Accord - ing to Advanced Cell Diagnostics , each mRNA molecule hybridized to a probe appears as a separate small ﬂ uorescent dot . HPLC Analysis of Cultured Mouse Podocytes FACS – sorted green ﬂ uorescence – expressing mouse podocytes from the mTmG ﬂ / ﬂ , PIKfyve ﬂ / ﬂ , Nphs2 - Cre + mouse and age – matched control mouse were subjected to HPLC analysis . Cells from the ﬁ rst passage were grown in 100 - mm dishes to 60 % – 70 % con ﬂ uence . Cultures were rinsed twice with PBS ( pH 7 . 4 ) and incubated for 48 hours with inositol - labeling medium inositol ( GE Healthcare , Waukesha , WI ) containing 6 ml inositol - free DMEM ( Chemicon International , Inc . ) , 10 m Ci / ml myo - [ 2 - 3 H ] inositol ( GE Healthcare ) , 10 % ( vol / vol ) dialyzed FBS ( 26400 ; Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) , 20mM Hepes ( pH 7 . 2 – 7 . 5 ) , 5 m g / ml transferrin , and 5 m g / ml insulin . Myo - [ 2 - 3 H ] inositol – labeled cells were washed with PBS and treated with 1 ml 4 . 5 % perchloric acid for 15 minutes at room temperature . Cells were scraped off and spun at 12 , 000 3 g for 10 minutes at 4 ° C . To deacylate lipids , samples were mixed with 1 ml methanol / 40 % methylamine / L - butanol ( 45 . 7 % methanol , 10 . 7 % methylamine , and 11 . 4 % L - butanol ; vol / vol / vol ) and incubated at 55 ° C for 1 hour . Samples were vacuum dried , resuspended in 0 . 5 ml water , and extracted with butanol : ethyl ether : ethyl formate ( 20 : 4 : 1 ; vol / vol / vol ) . The aqueous phase was vacuum dried and resuspended in 70 m l water , and 50 m leach sample was analyzed by HPLC ( UFLC CBM - 20A Lite ; Shimadzu , Tokyo , Japan ) using an amino exchange 4 . 6 3 250 - mm column ( PartiSphere SAX ; Whatman ) as described previously . 21 , 22 Radiolabeled eluate was detected by an inline scintillation analyzer ( Beta - RAM Model 5 RHPLC Detector ; LabLogic ) . Fractions were collected every 0 . 25 minutes and analyzed for radioactiv - ity . For comparison of PtdIns polyphosphate levels , raw counts of each peak were expressed as a percentage of total PtdInscalculated from sum - mation of the radioactivity from [ 3 H ] - GroPIns ( PI ; PI3P ; PI4P ; PI5P ; PI3 , 5P2 ; and PI4 , 5P2 ) peaks . Immuno ﬂ uorescence Staining of Kidney Sections Kidneys were perfused and ﬁ xed with periodate - lysine - paraformal - dehyde ( PLP ) and immersed in 10 % neutral – buffered formalin overnight ( Fisher Scienti ﬁ c , Waltham , MA ) followed by paraf ﬁ n em - bedding . The paraf ﬁ n - embedded tissue was sectioned at 3 m m using a Leica Microtome ( RM2255 ; Leica Microsystems ) . Before staining , the slides were deparaf ﬁ nized in xylene and hydrated by a series of graded alcohol solutions followed by PBS . Epitopes were retrieved using re - trieve all one from 92°C to 94°C for 3 – 4 hours in a water bath . Slides were immersed in 0 . 1 % sodium borohydrate in Sorenson phosphate buffer for 15 minutes and permeabilized in 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 for 5 minutes . Blocking was done with 10 % host serum depending on the host animal of the primary antibody . Sections were incubated over - night at 4°C with primary antibody that was diluted in 1 % BSA . After washes with PBS , sections were incubated with ﬂ uorescence – conjugated secondary antibody for 2 hours at room temperature . Confocal microscopy and acquisition of images were performed using a Leica Inverted SP5 3 Confocal Microscope ( Leica Microsystems ; Universityof Michigan Microscopy and Imaging Analysis Core Facility ) . FITC - Albumin Perfusion Experiments FITC - h alb ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) was reconstituted in 1 ml PBS at a concentration of 100 mg / ml ( 10 % solution ) . Mice were in - jected with 250 m l 10 % FITC - h alb through the tail vein . The animals were euthanized at various time points . Kidneys were perfused and ﬁ xed with PLP and immersed in 30 % sucrose solution in PBS over - night . The kidney slices were embedded in Tissue - Tek O . C . T Com - pound ( Sakura Finetek , Inc . , Torrance , CA ) and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen . The embedded tissue was sectioned at 3 - to 4 - m m thickness using a Leica Cryostat ( Leica Microsystems ) . Confocal microscopy and acquisition of images were performed using a Leica Inverted SP5 3 Confocal Microscope ( Leica Microsystems ; University of Michigan Microscopy and Imaging Analysis Core Facility ) . Immunogold Electron Microscopy PLP – perfused and – ﬁ xed kidney tissue was sectioned using a vibrotome ( Leica Microsystems ) at 100 - m m thickness and treated with 0 . 1 % sodium borohydrate in Sorensen phosphate buffer for 15 minutes . Per - meabilization was achieved with 0 . 05 % Triton X - 100 for 30 minutes . Sections were blocked using a combination of normal 5 % – 10 % goat ( host ) serum , 0 . 1 % cold water ﬁ sh - skin gelatin , and 1 % – 5 % BSA ( Elec - tron Microscopy Sciences , Hat ﬁ eld , PA ) . After blocking sections were incubated in 0 . 1 % – 0 . 2 % Aurion BSA - c Incubation Buffer ( Electron Mi - croscopy Sciences ) , sections were then incubated with primary antibody diluted ( 1 : 500 dilution ) in incubation buffer overnight . After a rigorous wash , specimens were incubated with nanogold conjugate ( ultra small immunogold 0 . 8 - nmparticle diameter ; Electron Microscopy Sciences ) diluted ( 1 : 50 dilution ) in incubation buffer ( Electron Microscopy Sci - ences ) . Before silver enhancement , sections were post ﬁ xed in 2 % glu - traldehydeinSorensonphosphatebufferfor2hours . Silverenhancement of the sections was done with Aurion R - Gent SE - EM Reagent ( Electron Microscopy Sciences ) . Sections were ﬁ xed with 0 . 5 % osmium for 15 minutes followed by embedding in resin . Images were taken using a Philips CM - 100 Transmission Electron Microscope at the Microscopy and Image Analysis Core Facility at the University of Michigan . EM and Slit Diaphragm Frequency Analyses Preparation of mouse kidneys for scanning and transmission EM was performed by standard methods . For scanning EM , 20 glomeruli of each sample were analyzed with the AMRAY 1910 Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope at the University of Michigan Micro - scopeandImageAnalysisCoreFacility . FortransmissionEM , samples were examined by the Philips CM - 100 Transmission Electron Micro - scopeat the University of Michigan Microscope and Image Analysis Core Facility . Slit diaphragm frequency was assessed by counting the numberofjunctionspermicrometerofthebasementmembrane ; $ 10 samples were analyzed in each experimental condition . ImageJ Quantitation and Statistical Analyses Data are presented as means 6 SEMs throughout the text unless oth - erwise speci ﬁ ed . The numbers of experiments performed for each experiment have been mentioned in the ﬁ gures . All experiments were performed at least three times . ImageJ software ( National Institutes of Health ) was used to quantify the ﬂ uorescence in $ 10 cells in each glo - merulus ; $ 10 glomeruli in each experimental condition were examined J Am Soc Nephrol 27 : ccc – ccc , 2016 PIKfyve in Glomeruli Versus Proximal Tubules 15 www . jasn . org BASIC RESEARCH to generate the data for statistical analysis . Using the ImageJ ( National Institutes of Health ) drawing tool , an outline was sketched around the cell to measure the ﬂ uorescence ( for podocytes , cells on the periphery of thetuftwereselected ) . Aregionnexttoeachcellthathadno ﬂ uorescence was selected for background ﬂ uorescence . Corrected total cell ﬂ uores - cencewascalculated using theformula corrected total cell ﬂ uorescence = integrated density 2 ( area of selected cell 3 mean ﬂ uorescence of background reading ) . Statistical comparisons were performed using two – tailed t test or ANOVA where applicable . A value of P # 0 . 05 was considered to represent statistically signi ﬁ cant difference . Unilateral Nephrectomy Mouse Model of Podocyte Hypertrophy Six - month - old PIKfyve ﬂ / ﬂ , Nphs2 - Cre + mice and their age – matched lit - termate controls ( PIKfyve ﬂ / ﬂ , Nphs2 - Cre 2 ) underwentleft unilateral ne - phrectomy under iso ﬂ uorane anesthesia . At day 5 or 10 , mice were euthanized , and kidneys were harvested for histologic analysis . Study Approval All animal studies were approved by the University Committee on the Use and Care of Animals , Institutional Review Board at the University of Michigan School of Medicine . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors thank Jeff Harrison at the University of Michigan Mi - croscopy and Image Analysis Core Facility for his advice and help in electron microscopy and confocal imaging . We also thank Jeffery Hodgin and Yingbao Yang for their assistance in performance of the unilateral nephrectomy . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) , National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases Grants DK097027 ( to P . G . ) and DK096053 ( to P . G . ) and American Society of Nephrology Carl Gottshalk Research Scholar Award ( to P . G . ) . The work was also supported by NIH and American Diabetes Association Grants DK082409 ( to S . P . ) and DK05058 , 7 - 13 - BS - 161 ( to A . S . ) . Support was also obtained from the University of Michigan ’ s George M . O ’ Brien Translational Research Core Center Grant P30 DK0801943 and Michigan Center for Diabetes Trans - lational Research Core Grant P60 DK020572 . The funders had no role in study design , data collection and analysis , decision to publish , or preparation of manuscript . DISCLOSURES None . REFERENCES 1 . van der Velde M , Matsushita K , Coresh J , Astor BC , Woodward M , Levey A , de Jong P , Gansevoort RT , van der Velde M , Matsushita K , Coresh J , Astor BC , Woodward M , Levey AS , deJong PE , Gansevoort RT , Levey A , El - Nahas M , Eckardt KU , Kasiske BL , Ninomiya T , Chalmers J , Macmahon S , Tonelli M , Hemmelgarn B , Sacks F , Curhan G , Collins AJ , Li S , Chen SC , Hawaii Cohort KP , Lee BJ , Ishani A , Neaton J , Svendsen K , Mann JF , Yusuf S , Teo KK , Gao P , Nelson RG , Knowler WC , Bilo HJ , Joosten H , Kleefstra N , Groenier KH , Auguste P , Veldhuis K , Wang Y , Camarata L , Thomas B , Manley T ; Chronic Kidney Disease Prognosis Consortium : Lower estimated glomerular ﬁ ltration rate and higher albuminuria are associated with all - cause and cardiovascular mortality . A collaborative meta - analysis of high - risk population cohorts . Kidney Int 79 : 1341 – 1352 , 2011 2 . Ninomiya T , Perkovic V , de Galan BE , Zoungas S , Pillai A , Jardine M , Patel A , Cass A , Neal B , Poulter N , Mogensen CE , Cooper M , Marre M , Williams B , Hamet P , Mancia G , Woodward M , Macmahon S , Chalmers J ; ADVANCE Collaborative Group : Albuminuria and kidney function independently predict cardiovascular and renal outcomes in diabetes . J Am Soc Nephrol 20 : 1813 – 1821 , 2009 3 . Ruggenenti P , Perna A , Mosconi L , Pisoni R , Remuzzi G : Urinary proteinexcretionrateisthebestindependentpredictorofESRFinnon - diabetic proteinuric chronic nephropathies . “ Gruppo Italiano di Studi Epidemiologici in Nefrologia ” ( GISEN ) . Kidney Int 53 : 1209 – 1216 , 1998 4 . Russo LM , Sandoval RM , Brown D , Molitoris BA , Comper WD : Con - troversies in nephrology : Response to ‘ renal albumin handling , facts , and artifacts ’ . Kidney Int 72 : 1195 – 1197 , 2007 5 . Russo LM , Sandoval RM , McKee M , Osicka TM , Collins AB , Brown D , Molitoris BA , Comper WD : Thenormalkidney ﬁ ltersnephroticlevelsof albumin retrieved by proximal tubule cells : Retrieval is disrupted in nephrotic states . Kidney Int 71 : 504 – 513 , 2007 6 . Klinghoffer RA , Sachsenmaier C , Cooper JA , Soriano P : Src family kinases are required for integrin but not PDGFR signal transduction . EMBO J 18 : 2459 – 2471 , 1999 7 . Dickson LE , Wagner MC , Sandoval RM , Molitoris BA : The proximal tubule and albuminuria : Really ! J Am Soc Nephrol 25 : 443 – 453 , 2014 8 . Roopenian DC , Akilesh S : FcRn : The neonatal Fc receptor comes of age . Nat Rev Immuno l 7 : 715 – 725 , 2007 9 . Akilesh S , Huber TB , Wu H , Wang G , Hartleben B , Kopp JB , Miner JH , Roopenian DC , Unanue ER , Shaw AS : PodocytesuseFcRntoclear IgG from the glomerular basement membrane . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105 : 967 – 972 , 2008 10 . Kinugasa S , Tojo A , Sakai T , Tsumura H , Takahashi M , Hirata Y , Fujita T : Selective albuminuria via podocyte albumin transport in puromycin nephrotic rats is attenuated by an inhibitor of NADPH oxidase . Kidney Int 80 : 1328 – 1338 , 2011 11 . Okamura K , Dummer P , Kopp J , Qiu L , Levi M , Faubel S , Blaine J : Endocytosis of albumin by podocytes elicits an in ﬂ ammatory response and induces apoptotic cell death . PLoS One 8 : e54817 , 2013 12 . Dobrinskikh E , Okamura K , Kopp JB , Doctor RB , Blaine J : Human podocytes perform polarized , caveolae - dependent albumin endocy - tosis . Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 306 : F941 – F951 , 2014 13 . Eyre J , Ioannou K , Grubb BD , Saleem MA , Mathieson PW , Brunskill NJ , Christensen EI , Topham PS : Statin - sensitive endocytosis of albumin by glomerular podocytes . Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 292 : F674 – F681 , 2007 14 . Carson JM , Okamura K , Wakashin H , McFann K , Dobrinskikh E , Kopp JB , Blaine J : Podocytes degrade endocytosed albumin primarily in ly - sosomes . PLoS One 9 : e99771 , 2014 15 . Bechtel W , Helmstädter M , Balica J , Hartleben B , Kiefer B , Hrnjic F , Schell C , Kretz O , Liu S , Geist F , Kerjaschki D , Walz G , Huber TB : Vps34 de ﬁ ciency reveals the importance of endocytosis for podocyte homeostasis . J Am Soc Nephrol 24 : 727 – 743 , 2013 16 . Chen J , Chen MX , Fogo AB , Harris RC , Chen JK : mVps34 deletion in podocytes causesglomerulosclerosis by disrupting intracellular vesicle traf ﬁ cking . J Am Soc Nephrol 24 : 198 – 207 , 2013 17 . Backer JM : The regulation and function of Class III PI3Ks : Novel roles for Vps34 . Biochem J 410 : 1 – 17 , 2008 18 . Funderburk SF , Wang QJ , Yue Z : The Beclin 1 - VPS34 complex – at the crossroads of autophagy and beyond . Trends Cell Biol 20 : 355 – 362 , 2010 16 Journal of the American Society of Nephrology J Am Soc Nephrol 27 : ccc – ccc , 2016 BASIC RESEARCH www . jasn . org 19 . Kurihara H , Anderson JM , Farquhar MG : Increased Tyr phosphory - lation of ZO - 1 during modi ﬁ cation of tight junctions between glomer - ular foot processes . Am J Physiol 268 : F514 – F524 , 1995 20 . Vanhaesebroeck B , Guillermet - Guibert J , Graupera M , Bilanges B : The emerging mechanisms of isoform - speci ﬁ c PI3K signalling . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11 : 329 – 341 , 2010 21 . Ikonomov OC , Sbrissa D , Venkatareddy M , Tisdale E , Garg P , Shisheva A : ClassIIIPI3 - kinaseisthemainsourceofPtdIns3Psubstrate and membrane recruitment signal for PIKfyve constitutive function in podocyte endomembrane homeostasis . Biochim Biophys Acta 1853 : 1240 – 1250 , 2015 22 . Shisheva A : PIKfyve : The road to PtdIns 5 - P and PtdIns 3 , 5 - P ( 2 ) . Cell Biol Int 25 : 1201 – 1206 , 2001 23 . Shisheva A : PIKfyve : Partners , signi ﬁ cance , debates and paradoxes . Cell Biol Int 32 : 591 – 604 , 2008 24 . Shisheva A , Sbrissa D , Ikonomov O : Plentiful PtdIns5P from scanty PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P2 or from ample PtdIns ? PIKfyve - dependent models : Evi - dence and speculation ( response to : DOI 10 . 1002 / bies . 201300012 ) . BioEssays 37 : 267 – 277 , 2015 25 . Ikonomov OC , Sbrissa D , Shisheva A : Mammalian cell morphology and endocytic membrane homeostasis require enzymatically active phosphoinositide 5 - kinase PIKfyve . J Biol Chem 276 : 26141 – 26147 , 2001 26 . Shisheva A , Rusin B , Ikonomov OC , DeMarco C , Sbrissa D : Locali - zation and insulin - regulated relocation of phosphoinositide 5 - kinase PIKfyve in 3T3 - L1 adipocytes . J Biol Chem 276 : 11859 – 11869 , 2001 27 . Gary JD , Wurmser AE , Bonangelino CJ , Weisman LS , Emr SD : Fab1p is essential for PtdIns ( 3 ) P 5 - kinase activity and the maintenance of vacuolar size and membrane homeostasis . J Cell Biol 143 : 65 – 79 , 1998 28 . Nicot AS , Fares H , Payrastre B , Chisholm AD , Labouesse M , Laporte J : The phosphoinositide kinase PIKfyve / Fab1p regulates terminal ly - sosome maturation in Caenorhabditis elegans . Mol Biol Cell 17 : 3062 – 3074 , 2006 29 . Ikonomov OC , Sbrissa D , Mlak K , Deeb R , Fligger J , Soans A , Finley RL Jr . , Shisheva A : Active PIKfyve associates with and promotes the membrane attachment of the late endosome - to - trans - Golgi network transport factor Rab9 effector p40 . J Biol Chem 278 : 50863 – 50871 , 2003 30 . Colognato H , Ramachandrappa S , Olsen IM , ffrench - Constant C : Integrins direct Src family kinases to regulate distinct phases of oligo - dendrocyte development . J Cell Biol 167 : 365 – 375 , 2004 31 . Pozzi A , Jarad G , Moeckel GW , Coffa S , Zhang X , Gewin L , Eremina V , Hudson BG , Borza DB , Harris RC , Holzman LB , Phillips CL , Fassler R , Quaggin SE , Miner JH , Zent R : Beta1 integrin expression by podo - cytes is required to maintain glomerular structural integrity . Dev Biol 316 : 288 – 301 , 2008 32 . Ikonomov OC , Sbrissa D , Delvecchio K , Xie Y , Jin JP , Rappolee D , Shisheva A : The phosphoinositide kinase PIKfyve is vital in early embryonic development : preimplantation lethality of PIKfyve 2 / 2 embryos but normality of PIKfyve 1 / 2 mice . J Biol Chem 286 ( 15 ) : 13404 – 13413 , 2011 33 . Moeller MJ , Sanden SK , Soo ﬁ A , Wiggins RC , Holzman LB : Two gene fragments that direct podocyte - speci ﬁ c expression in transgenic mice . J Am Soc Nephrol 13 : 1561 – 1567 , 2002 34 . Muzumdar MD , Tasic B , Miyamichi K , Li L , Luo L : A global double - ﬂ uorescent Cre reporter mouse . Genesis 45 : 593 – 605 , 2007 35 . Vooijs M , Jonkers J , Berns A : A highly ef ﬁ cient ligand - regulated Cre recombinase mouse line shows that LoxP recombination is position dependent . EMBO Rep 2 : 292 – 297 , 2001 36 . Arias - Salgado EG , Lizano S , Sarkar S , Brugge JS , Ginsberg MH , Shattil SJ : Src kinase activation by direct interaction with the integrin beta cytoplasmicdomain . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA 100 : 13298 – 13302 , 2003 37 . Rankin EB , Tomaszewski JE , Haase VH : Renal cyst development in mice with conditional inactivation of the von Hippel - Lindau tumor suppressor . Cancer Res 66 : 2576 – 2583 , 2006 38 . Dukes JD , Whitley P , Chalmers AD : The PIKfyve inhibitor YM201636 blocks the continuous recycling of the tight junction proteins claudin - 1 and claudin - 2 in MDCK cells . PLoS One 7 : e28659 , 2012 39 . Huotari J , Helenius A : Endosome maturation . EMBOJ 30 : 3481 – 3500 , 2011 40 . Zoncu R , Perera RM , Balkin DM , Pirruccello M , Toomre D , De Camilli P : A phosphoinositide switch controls the maturation and signaling properties of APPL endosomes . Cell 136 : 1110 – 1121 , 2009 41 . Green SA , Zimmer KP , Grif ﬁ ths G , Mellman I : Kinetics of intracellular transport and sorting of lysosomal membrane and plasma membrane proteins . J Cell Biol 105 : 1227 – 1240 , 1987 42 . Harter C , Mellman I : Transport of the lysosomal membrane glyco - protein lgp120 ( lgp - A ) to lysosomes does not require appearance on the plasma membrane . J Cell Biol 117 : 311 – 325 , 1992 43 . Höning S , Hunziker W : Cytoplasmic determinants involved in direct lysosomal sorting , endocytosis , and basolateral targeting of rat lgp120 ( lamp - I ) in MDCK cells . J Cell Biol 128 : 321 – 332 , 1995 44 . Poteryaev D , Datta S , Ackema K , Zerial M , Spang A : Identi ﬁ cation of the switch in early - to - late endosome transition . Cell 141 : 497 – 508 , 2010 45 . Urbé S , Huber LA , Zerial M , Tooze SA , Parton RG : Rab11 , a small GTPase associated with both constitutive and regulated secretory pathways in PC12 cells . FEBS Lett 334 : 175 – 182 , 1993 46 . Welz T , Wellbourne - Wood J , Kerkhoff E : Orchestration of cell surface proteins by Rab11 . Trends Cell Biol 24 : 407 – 415 , 2014 47 . Apodaca G , Gallo LI , Bryant DM : Role of membrane traf ﬁ c in the generation of epithelial cell asymmetry . Nat Cell Biol 14 : 1235 – 1243 , 2012 48 . Bock JB , Klumperman J , Davanger S , Scheller RH : Syntaxin 6 func - tions in trans - Golgi network vesicle traf ﬁ cking . Mol Biol Cell 8 : 1261 – 1271 , 1997 49 . Ikonomov OC , Sbrissa D , Foti M , Carpentier JL , Shisheva A : PIKfyve controls ﬂ uid phase endocytosis but not recycling / degradation of en - docytosed receptors or sorting of procathepsin D by regulating mul - tivesicular body morphogenesis . Mol Biol Cell 14 : 4581 – 4591 , 2003 50 . Hartleben B , Gödel M , Meyer - Schwesinger C , Liu S , Ulrich T , Köbler S , Wiech T , Grahammer F , Arnold SJ , Lindenmeyer MT , Cohen CD , Pavenstädt H , Kerjaschki D , Mizushima N , Shaw AS , Walz G , Huber TB : Autophagy in ﬂ uences glomerular disease susceptibility and main - tains podocyte homeostasis in aging mice . J Clin Invest 120 : 1084 – 1096 , 2010 51 . Vicinanza M , Korolchuk VI , Ashkenazi A , Puri C , Menzies FM , Clarke JH , Rubinsztein DC : PI ( 5 ) P regulates autophagosome biogenesis . Mol Cell 57 : 219 – 234 , 2015 52 . Martin S , Harper CB , May LM , Coulson EJ , Meunier FA , Osborne SL : Inhibition of PIKfyve by YM - 201636 dysregulates autophagy and leads to apoptosis - independent neuronal cell death . PLoS One 8 : e60152 , 2013 53 . Ferguson CJ , Lenk GM , Meisler MH : Defective autophagy in neurons and astrocytes from mice de ﬁ cient in PI ( 3 , 5 ) P2 . Hum Mol Genet 18 : 4868 – 4878 , 2009 54 . Chen L , Sung SS , Yip ML , Lawrence HR , Ren Y , Guida WC , Sebti SM , Lawrence NJ , Wu J : Discovery of a novel shp2 protein tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor . Mol Pharmacol 70 : 562 – 570 , 2006 55 . Komatsu M , Wang QJ , Holstein GR , Friedrich VL Jr . , Iwata J , Kominami E , Chait BT , Tanaka K , Yue Z : Essential role for autophagy protein Atg7 in the maintenance of axonal homeostasis and the pre - vention of axonal degeneration . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104 : 14489 – 14494 , 2007 56 . Komatsu M , Waguri S , Koike M , Sou YS , Ueno T , Hara T , Mizushima N , Iwata J , Ezaki J , Murata S , Hamazaki J , Nishito Y , Iemura S , Natsume T , Yanagawa T , Uwayama J , Warabi E , Yoshida H , Ishii T , Kobayashi A , Yamamoto M , Yue Z , Uchiyama Y , Kominami E , Tanaka K : Homeostatic levels of p62 control cytoplasmic inclusion body for - mation in autophagy - de ﬁ cient mice . Cell 131 : 1149 – 1163 , 2007 J Am Soc Nephrol 27 : ccc – ccc , 2016 PIKfyve in Glomeruli Versus Proximal Tubules 17 www . jasn . org BASIC RESEARCH 57 . Farquhar MG , Vernier RL , Good RA : An electron microscope study of the glomerulus in nephrosis , glomerulonephritis , and lupus erythematosus . J Exp Med 106 : 649 – 660 , 1957 58 . Vogetseder A , Picard N , Gaspert A , Walch M , Kaissling B , Le Hir M : Proliferation capacity of the renal proximal tubule involves the bulk of dif - ferentiated epithelial cells . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 294 : C22 – C28 , 2008 59 . Brunskill NJ : Molecular interactions between albumin and proximal tubular cells . Exp Nephrol 6 : 491 – 495 , 1998 60 . Brunskill NJ , Stuart J , Tobin AB , Walls J , Nahorski S : Receptor - mediated endocytosis of albumin by kidney proximal tubule cells is regulated by phosphatidylinositide 3 - kinase . J Clin Invest 101 : 2140 – 2150 , 1998 61 . Lowell CA , Fumagalli L , Berton G : De ﬁ ciencyofSrcfamilykinasesp59 / 61hck and p58c - fgr results in defective adhesion - dependent neutro - phil functions . J Cell Biol 133 : 895 – 910 , 1996 62 . Sbrissa D , Ikonomov OC , Strakova J , Dondapati R , Mlak K , Deeb R , Silver R , Shisheva A : A mammalian ortholog of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Vac14 that associates with and up - regulates PIKfyve phos - phoinositide 5 - kinase activity . Mol Cell Biol 24 : 10437 – 10447 , 2004 63 . Sbrissa D , Shisheva A : Acquisition of unprecedented phosphatidylinositol 3 , 5 - bisphosphate rise in hyperosmotically stressed 3T3 - L1 adipocytes , mediated by ArPIKfyve - PIKfyve pathway . J Biol Chem 280 : 7883 – 7889 , 2005 64 . Ikonomov OC , Sbrissa D , Shisheva A : Fat cell - speci ﬁ c inactivation of one or both PIKfyve alleles in mice causes insulin [ Abstract ] . Available at : http : / / physiology . med . wayne . edu / pdfs / psl2012abstracts . pdf . Accessed August 24 , 2012 65 . Ikonomov OC , Sbrissa D , Delvecchio K , Feng HZ , Cartee GD , Jin JP , Shisheva A : Muscle - speci ﬁ c Pikfyve gene disruption causes glucose intolerance , insulin resistance , adiposity , and hyperinsulinemia but not muscle ﬁ ber - type switching . Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 305 : E119 – E131 , 2013 66 . Russo LM , Sandoval RM , Campos SB , Molitoris BA , Comper WD , Brown D : Impaired tubular uptake explains albuminuria in early di - abetic nephropathy . J Am Soc Nephrol 20 : 489 – 494 , 2009 67 . Sandoval RM , Wagner MC , Patel M , Campos - Bilderback SB , Rhodes GJ , Wang E , Wean SE , Clendenon SS , Molitoris BA : Multiple factors in ﬂ uence glomerular albumin permeability in rats . J Am Soc Nephrol 23 : 447 – 457 , 2012 68 . Hartleben B , Wanner N , Huber TB : Autophagy in glomerular health and disease . Semin Nephrol 34 : 42 – 52 , 2014 69 . Weide T , Huber TB : Implications of autophagy for glomerular aging and disease . Cell Tissue Res 343 : 467 – 473 , 2011 70 . Liebau MC , Braun F , Höpker K , Weitbrecht C , Bartels V , Müller RU , Brodesser S , Saleem MA , Benzing T , Schermer B , Cybulla M , Kurschat CE : Dysregulated autophagy contributes to podocyte damage in Fabry ’ s disease . PLoS One 8 : e63506 , 2013 71 . Wu L , Feng Z , Cui S , Hou K , Tang L , Zhou J , Cai G , Xie Y , Hong Q , Fu B , Chen X : Rapamycin upregulates autophagy by inhibiting the mTOR - ULK1 pathway , resulting in reduced podocyte injury . PLoS One 8 : e63799 , 2013 72 . Holzman LB , St . John PL , Kovari IA , Verma R , Holthofer H , Abrahamson DR : Nephrin localizes to the slit pore of the glomerular epithelial cell . Kidney Int 56 : 1481 – 1491 , 1999 73 . Verma R , Kovari I , Soo ﬁ A , Nihalani D , Patrie K , Holzman LB : Nephrin ectodomain engagement results in Src kinase activation , nephrin phosphorylation , Nck recruitment , and actin polymerization . J Clin In - vest 116 : 1346 – 1359 , 2006 74 . Verma R , Wharram B , Kovari I , Kunkel R , Nihalani D , Wary KK , Wiggins RC , Killen P , Holzman LB : Fyn binds to and phosphorylates the kidney slit diaphragm component Nephrin . J Biol Chem 278 : 20716 – 20723 , 2003 75 . Hughes EN , August JT : Characterization of plasma membrane pro - teins identi ﬁ ed by monoclonal antibodies . J Biol Chem 256 : 664 – 671 , 1981 76 . Venkatareddy M , Cook L , Abuarquob K , Verma R , Garg P : Nephrin regulateslamellipodia formationbyassemblingaprotein complexthat includes Ship2 , ﬁ lamin and lamellipodin . PLoS One 6 : e28710 , 2011 77 . Salant DJ , Darby C , Couser WG : Experimental membranous glomer - ulonephritis in rats . Quantitative studies of glomerular immune deposit formationinisolated glomeruli andwhole animals . J Clin Invest 66 : 71 – 81 , 1980 78 . Garg P , Verma R , Cook L , Soo ﬁ A , Venkatareddy M , George B , Mizuno K , Gurniak C , Witke W , Holzman LB : Actin - depolymerizing factor co ﬁ lin - 1 is necessary in maintaining mature podocyte architec - ture . J Biol Chem 285 : 22676 – 22688 , 2010 79 . Ni L , Saleem M , Mathieson PW : Podocyte culture : Tricks of the trade . Nephrology ( Carlton ) 17 : 525 – 531 , 2012 80 . Gross - Thebing T , Paksa A , Raz E : Simultaneous high - resolution de - tection of multiple transcripts combined with localization of proteins in whole - mount embryos . BMC Biol 12 : 55 , 2014 This article contains supplemental material online at http : / / jasn . asnjournals . org / lookup / suppl / doi : 10 . 1681 / ASN . 2015050555 / - / DCSupplemental . 18 Journal of the American Society of Nephrology J Am Soc Nephrol 27 : ccc – ccc , 2016 BASIC RESEARCH www . jasn . org