Current Biology 22 , R96 – R101 , February 7 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2011 . 12 . 010 Minireview Actin Filaments as Tension Sensors Vitold E . Galkin , Albina Orlova , and Edward H . Egelman The ﬁeld of mechanobiology has witnessed an explosive growth over the past several years as interest has greatly increased in understanding how mechanical forces are transduced by cells and how cells migrate , adhere and generate traction . Actin , a highly abundant and anoma - lously conserved protein , plays a large role in forming the dynamic cytoskeleton that is so essential for cell form , motility and mechanosensitivity . While the actin ﬁlament ( F - actin ) has been viewed as dynamic in terms of polymer - ization and depolymerization , new results suggest that F - actin itself may function as a highly dynamic tension sensor . This property may help explain the unusual con - servation of actin’s sequence , as well as shed further light on actin’s essential role in structures from sarcomeres to stress ﬁbers . Actin is a central player in many aspects of cell biology and has been intensively studied for more than 60 years , but surprisingly we continue to realize how little we still under - stand about this protein . While actin was ﬁrst studied in muscle , most research on actin today is focused on the crucial roles that actin plays in the cytoskeleton and in non - muscle motility . The burgeoning ﬁeld of mechanobiol - ogy [ 1 ] addresses questions of how mechanical forces are sensed and generated by cytoskeletal elements , and it has become clear that the transduction of such mechanical signals [ 2 ] is as important as the sensing of molecules . The cell has elaborate mechanisms for generating different actin networks in different parts of the cell , each with distinct binding proteins and functions , and our understanding of the mechanisms responsible for such specialization is still unfolding [ 3 ] . New areas of study , such as the role of actin in the nucleoskeleton , have recently emerged , while less than 10 years ago the existence of actin within the nucleus was ﬁercely debated . Advances in cryo - electron microscopy ( cryo - EM ; Figure 1 ) have provided unprecedented insights into actin ﬁlament structure and dynamics [ 4 , 5 ] . One of the most striking features about actin , in addition to its abundance , has been its exquisite degree of sequence conservation . From chickens to humans , an evolutionary dis - tance of more than 300 million years , every one of the 375 residues in the skeletal muscle isoform has been conserved . If one looks at an evolutionary distance of more than 1 billion years , around 90 % of the residues are identical between yeast actin and the cytoplasmic isoform of human actin . While suggestions have been made about why almost all actin residues might be under selective pressure , we have no deﬁnitive answer at this point . One possibility for actin’s anomalous sequence conserva - tion is that the interaction of actin with more than 100 – 200 actin - binding proteins might constrain many residues . But this argument ignores the fact that many actin - binding proteins have signiﬁcantly diverged over the same evolu - tionary distances ( for example , from yeast to humans ) . Further , the residues in actin that are not absolutely conserved [ 6 ] are mainly on the surface of the ﬁlament where they would directly interact with actin - binding proteins . A quite different argument comes from the observation that highly expressed proteins evolve slowly [ 7 ] , presumably as a means to prevent protein misfolding . This argument may explain some of the anomalous sequence conservation , since actin is one of the most highly expressed proteins in many cells , but is unlikely to explain why every amino acid appears to be under rather intense selective pressure . We would like to advance a different hypothesis in this Minire - view , one supported by a series of recent papers [ 4 , 5 , 8 – 11 ] , suggesting that cooperative and allosteric properties of the actin ﬁlament are essential for its cellular function , and that the internal networks within the actin subunit needed to maintain such allosteric linkages [ 12 ] have placed every residue under selective pressure . A Working Hypothesis Allosteric interactions may explain why buried residues in actin , which cannot interact with actin - binding proteins in musclesuchasmyosin , tropomyosin , troponinand a - actinin , are responsible for hereditary myopathies [ 13 ] . For example , it has been shown that replacing residue 372 in yeast actin with the residue found at this position in vertebrate muscle actin ( the H372R mutation ) led to severe growth defects [ 14 ] . However , substitution of four amino - terminal muscle actin residues into the amino terminus of yeast actin restored the viability of cells with the H372R mutation [ 14 ] . Since these two regions are widely separated in both G - and F - actin ( Figure 1B ) , the best explanation for this effect involves an allosteric linkage between these regions [ 14 ] . Structural results showing coupled conformational states in F - actin are completely consistent with such an allosteric linkage [ 5 ] , and this can explain why mutations in residue 132 , buried in the subunit but located between the amino and carboxyl terminus ( Figure 1B ) , can cause hereditary myopathies [ 15 ] . In contrast , the bacterial actin homologs have diverged considerably in sequence , so much so that many of them are as different from each other as they are from actin [ 16 ] . While it is still an open question as to whether all or even most of these bacterial proteins form ﬁlaments , the ﬁlaments formed by all bacterial actin - like proteins studied thus far are signiﬁcantly different from F - actin [ 17 – 21 ] . If our hypothesis is correct , the bacterial actin - like ﬁlaments will not display the cooperativity and allostery observed for F - actin [ 6 ] . Some speciﬁc predictions can therefore be made in this review about how the bacterial actin - like ﬁlaments will behave differently from F - actin . A Finely Tuned Filament To explore this idea of a highly tuned actin ﬁlament that has emerged from extensive evolutionary selection , we must start by abandoning the notion that F - actin is merely a passive cable , existing in a single state , to which other pro - teins can bind . The notion that physical stresses on the actin ﬁlament might modulate the interaction with actin - binding proteins has appeared in a number of studies . A recent paper Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics , University of Virginia , Charlottesville , VA 22908 - 0733 , USA . E - mail : egelman @ virginia . edu on the interaction of formins with actin [ 22 ] concluded : ‘‘Our data have opened up the possibility that actin elongation and remodeling could be regulated by axial torsion in the ﬁla - ment . ’’ It has previously been shown that nucleation of an actin ﬁlament by formins can cause long - range conforma - tional changes in the actin ﬁlament [ 23 ] , just as nucleation of actin ﬁlaments by gelsolin has been shown to cause such long - range changes [ 24 , 25 ] . These long - range pertur - bations tell us that the different conformational states acces - sible by actin must be comparable energetically , so that nucleation by a particular protein is able to bias the distribu - tion of states . Nucleation of actin ﬁlaments by different pro - teins thus provides a means for the cell to differentiate one actin ﬁlament from another [ 3 ] . A less static and more active picture of the actin ﬁlament has arisen from new insights into the dynamic properties of actin ﬁlaments . Actin - based structures that were considered to be static , such as the core of the stereocilium ( responsible for the mechanotransduction of sound ) , have now been shown to be dynamic , at least in the sense that there is a continuous ﬂux of actin subunits through these ﬁlaments [ 26 ] . Consider muscle , where a passive view of actin has been dominant historically : the regulation of myosin heads binding to F - actin , and therefore the generation of force , has been viewed as being largely due to tropomyosin strands moving across a ﬁxed actin surface . But a number of papers have shown that actin can be modiﬁed , either chemically [ 27 – 30 ] , by mutation [ 31 ] or by proteolysis [ 32 ] , in a way that inhibits myosin force generation without inhib - iting either the binding of myosin to actin or the actin - induced activation of myosin’s ATPase activity . The simplest explanation for these observations is that actin must undergo structural transitions during actomyosin force generation , and these modiﬁcations of actin inhibit such structural transitions . Supporting the notion of structural transitions in F - actin , we have shown that naked actin ﬁlaments in vitro exist in a multiplicity of discrete structural states [ 5 ] . Reconciling Two Different Views A different picture of F - actin was presented in another recent paper [ 4 ] , where it was argued that F - actin is quite homoge - neous structurally , and that ‘‘F - actin is not so ﬂexible’’ in contrast to the large literature showing that the helical twist of F - actin can be quite variable [ 33 – 36 ] . For example , the protein coﬁlin changes the average twist of F - actin ( Figure 1 ) by w 5 (cid:1) per subunit [ 36 ] , while in bundles with the actin crosslinking protein scruin the twist of actin subunits ranged from 142 . 5 (cid:1) to 176 . 5 (cid:1) [ 35 ] , deviating widely from the average twist within these ﬁlaments of w 167 (cid:1) . In the actin angle - layered aggregate [ 37 ] , which is formed in solution prior to specimen preparation for EM , the angular disorder is locked into the structure , so specimen preparation can be dis - counted as a source of the variability in twist of actin . These aggregates yielded a root mean square ( rms ) deviation of w 6 (cid:1) per subunit [ 37 ] . Howcantheseverydifferentobservations , ofvariable twist and polymorphic ﬁlaments , versus relatively ﬁxed twist and a single structure , be reconciled ? We think that the answer lies in specimen preparation for cryo - EM , and that under - standing the differences between the results obtained is likely to have great biological signiﬁcance . In preparing a sample for cryo - EM , ﬁlaments in buffer are applied to a holey carbon ﬁlm on an EM grid , and then blotted so that a thin ﬁlm is formed prior to plunging into a cryostat for vitriﬁcation . In the process of creating this ﬁlm , the ﬁlaments can be sub - jected to very large forces due to both ﬂuid ﬂow and trans - verse compression . Fujii et al . [ 4 ] explicitly stated that the high resolution they achieved was due in part to the use of very thin ﬁlms which improved the signal to noise ratio , and that blotting conditions were chosen to make ‘‘F - actin as straight as possible . ’’ We normally think of the straightness Figure 1 . Structure of F - actin . ( A ) The highest resolution achieved to date for an F - actin reconstruction comes from Fujii et al . [ 4 ] . An atomic model ( PDB ID 3MFP ) is shown built into the electron density map . Each actin subunit is in a different color in this ribbon representation . Sequential sub - units in the ﬁlament are labeled from ‘n’ ( magenta ) to ‘n + 4’ ( red ) . The twist of the actin ﬁlament involves a rotation of w 167 (cid:1) between each successive subunit , and an axial rise of 27 . 6 A˚ . Coﬁlin , which rotates each actin sub - unit by w 5 (cid:1) [ 36 ] , would rotate subunit ‘n + 4’ by w 10 (cid:1) away from the position of subunit ‘n + 2’ . The four subdomains of the actin sub - unit are labeled ( SD1 – SD4 ) within subunit ‘n + 2’ . Subdomains 1 and 2 form one major domain , while subdomains 3 and 4 form the second major domain of actin . The contact between subdomain 2 of one protomer and subdomain 1 within the protomer above it accounts for the highest radius contact in the ﬁlament , and thus can modulate the ﬂex - ural rigidity of the actin ﬁlament [ 40 ] . This contact involves the DNase I - binding loop of actin in subdomain 2 , which forms the top right corner of the green subunit . ( B ) The amino terminus in actin ( red arrow ) has been seen by crystallography to be an unstructured region of the protein , but changes in three of these seven amino acids is the difference between life and death for yeast [ 50 ] . The H372R mutation ( blue spheres ) , fairly distant from the amino terminus , can rescue lethal changes in the amino terminus through a putative allosteric pathway [ 14 ] . Such a pathway could explain why mutations in buried residue 132 ( cyan spheres ) cause hereditary myopathies [ 15 ] . ( Figure reproduced with permission from [ 5 ] . ) Minireview R97 of ﬁlaments in solution , in the absence of external forces , as arising from only two physical parameters : the temperature of the solution ( T ) and the ﬂexural rigidity of the polymer ( a ) . Thus , the persistence length l for a ﬁlament is simply given by l = a / kT . If blotting conditions are changing the observed ﬂexibility or straightness of these ﬁlaments , it is a prima facie argument that forces are being introduced . The use of ﬂuid ﬂow to intentionally stretch and straighten polymers is not novel and has been used in many experi - ments involving DNA . But such straightening may also arise , in the case of F - actin , from the compressive forces perpen - dicular to the ﬁlament axis when the ﬁlament experiences the surface tension resulting from a very thin ﬁlm . Tomo - graphic reconstructions of axonemes in thin ice showed extreme ﬂattening , with the suggestion that the ﬂattening arose from this large surface tension [ 38 ] . Most importantly , observations have already been made by Greene et al . [ 39 ] on F - actin ﬁlaments conﬁned between two mica surfaces ( Figure 2 ) , which appear to be a good analog for the thin ﬁlms being used for cryo - EM . Surprisingly , these ﬁlaments become anomalously stiff under compression , which is consistent with the structural homogeneity and straight - ening of the actin ﬁlaments seen in Fujii et al . [ 4 ] . Greene et al . [ 39 ] proposed a two - state model for actin , and sug - gested that compression leads to the stress - stiffening of ﬁlaments by forcing subunits into a state that is stiffer than the one normally populated . This is consistent with all of the EM results . Pressure Motion Compression Well separated Growth F - actin nuclei Nucleation Diffusion A E B Repulsive force , F Adsorbedmonomer Actin monomer Repulsive force , F Mica R Motor Spring Translationalstage Light Mica C D Current Biology Figure 2 . Mechanical compression of actin ﬁlaments . An apparatus ( A ) was built to mechanically compress actin ﬁlaments between two mica surfaces [ 39 ] . These surfaces could be broughttogether ( B ) trappingactinmonomers in a small conﬁned region . This leads to a nucleation of actin ﬁlaments ( C ) . As the ﬁla - mentsgrow ( D ) , theyproducearepulsiveforce between the two surfaces . When fully sepa - rated ( E ) , the ﬁlaments remain stably bound to both surfaces . Surprisingly , the authors found actin ﬁlaments stiffened under compression , suggesting that the actin ﬁla - ment , in the absence of any other proteins , might function as a tension - sensing element incellularsystems . Givenapersistencelength for ‘normal’ F - actin of w 10 m m , when the two mica surfaces come close together ( to less than0 . 1 m m ) wewouldexpectthatallﬁlaments will be oriented nearly parallel to the mica surfaces , and not perpendicular as drawn . We thus think that this apparatus may be a good model for the ﬁlaments conﬁned to a thin ﬁlm in Fujii et al . [ 4 ] and explain why compression leads to a stiffening of actin ﬁla - ments . We see the stiffening as likely arising from mechanically forcing all actin subunits into one structural state , one in which subdo - main 2 is highly ordered . ( Figure reproduced from [ 39 ] with permission . ) We may extend the assumption of Greene et al . [ 39 ] to suggest that actin ﬁlaments may exist in at least three states of macroscopic ﬂexibility . When ﬁlaments are under axial tension or transverse compression there is a stiff state , while in the absence of forces there is an ensemble average over a number of states [ 5 ] that yields the persistence length for ‘normal’ F - actin . However , it has been shown that , under conditions where subdomain 2 of actin becomes disordered , theﬁlamentsbecomeanomalouslyﬂexible [ 40 ] , whichwecan treat as a third macroscopic state . As we have shown [ 8 ] , co - ﬁlin can both substantially displace subdomain 2 of actin as well as cause it to be disordered . One would thus expect that coﬁlin binding to F - actin might make it more ﬂexible , and the coﬁlin - induced increase in F - actin ﬂexibility has already been reported [ 41 ] . This change in F - actin ﬂexibility makes simple physical sense , since the resistance to bend - ing will scale as the fourth power of the radius of the mass withintheﬁlament , andsubdomain2formsthehighestradius contact in the actin ﬁlament ( Figure 1A ) . If one compares the 80orso crystal structures of actin that now exist , the greatest structuralvarianceisinsubdomain2andtheDNaseI - binding loop within subdomain 2 . Strikingly , subdomain 2 and the DNase I - binding loop are among the regions of lowest struc - tural variance in the EM reconstruction of Fujii et al . [ 4 ] , in keeping with our argument that the compressive thin ﬁlms are inducing this unusual structural homogeneity . The struc - tural homogeneity of subdomain 2 is what is giving these ﬁla - ments their anomalous rigidity . It is difﬁcult to reconcile such structural homogeneity with spectroscopic observations from ﬁlaments in solution suggesting large , and discrete , changes in the conformation of subdomain 2 [ 42 ] . Current Biology Vol 22 No 3 R98 What is the molecular mechanism that couples axial tension on a ﬁlament ( or transverse compression ) to a stabi - lization of subdomain 2 ? At this point we cannot answer the question , and we expect that this issue will motivate many studies in the future . However , it is tempting to speculate that , since the contact between subdomain 4 of one subunit and subdomain 3 of a subunit above is a relatively invariant interface in F - actin [ 5 ] , tension along subdomains 3 and 4 within a subunit may be communicated through the hinge region separating the two major domains of actin forcing subdomain 2 into a speciﬁc vertical orientation . Testable Predictions The hypothesis that we are proposing immediately leads to a number of testable predictions . One is that the elastic stiff - ening observed for F - actin [ 39 ] should not be seen for the ﬁlaments formed by bacterial actin - like proteins , such as ParM and AlfA . Another is that tension on an actin ﬁlament should be observable either biochemically or spectroscopi - cally , since this tension should change the distribution of structural states . Such a result has already been observed [ 43 ] , where a change in ﬂuorescence of a probe attached to the carboxyl terminus of actin was observed as a function of tension . The resulting labeled actin ﬁlament was therefore described as a ‘‘bio - nano strain gauge’’ . Our explanation for this effect arises from the fact that , in the absence of tension , the carboxy - terminal region of F - actin , like subdomain 2 , can exist in a number of discretely different states [ 5 ] . Under conditions where the ﬁlament is compressed in a thin ﬁlm [ 4 , 39 ] , we suggest that this region becomes structurally homogeneous . A third prediction is that proteins that change the twist of F - actin , such as coﬁlin / ADF [ 36 ] , should bind much less avidly to actin ﬁlaments under tension , since tension should greatly reduce the variability in twist within these ﬁlaments . A new paper has observed precisely this expected behavior [ 9 ] . We believe that we can explain the molecular basis for this observation and that it also provides insights into the coupling between multiple structural states and variable twist in F - actin . Just as Fujii et al . [ 4 ] have observed structurally homo - geneous actin ﬁlaments in contrast to the structural hetero - geneity that we observe in thicker ice , they observe a distribution of twist that can be parameterized as corre - sponding to a random angular disorder of w 2 . 5 (cid:1) per subunit , whereas our ﬁlaments have an observed distribution of w 6 (cid:1) per subunit ( Figure 3 ) , consistent with earlier estimates from both negatively stained single actin ﬁlaments [ 34 ] and angle - layered aggregates [ 37 ] . It has been shown that coﬁlin actu - ally stabilizes an existing twist of F - actin that is present in vitro in naked actin ﬁlaments , rather than imposing a twist that would never be seen in the absence of coﬁlin [ 44 ] . Several papers have suggested that the slow initial binding of coﬁlin / ADF to F - actin can be explained by the limited number of sites to which coﬁlin can initially attach [ 45 , 46 ] , as one would expect in a structurally heterogeneous F - actin ( while all actin subunits would be in identical environments in a homogeneous ﬁlament ) . Further , coﬁlin needs to shift sub - domain 2 of actin when it binds to the ﬁlament [ 8 ] . Since we suggest that tension on a ﬁlament or transverse compres - sion in a thin ﬁlm stabilizes subdomain 2 , tension should inhibit coﬁlin from binding to F - actin . Using both in vivo and in vitro assays , Hayakawa et al . [ 9 ] show that , when an actin ﬁlament is under tension , coﬁlin binding is reduced by a factor of two to three . They used optical tweezers to apply tension to single actin ﬁlaments in vitro , and used bundles of actin ﬁlaments in vivo which could be stretched by micromanipulation . As a consequence of the reduced binding , they show that the severing of F - actin by coﬁlin is decreased when a ﬁlament is under tension . This has great cell biological signiﬁcance , since such tension may regulate which actin ﬁlaments , whether in stress ﬁbers , ﬁlopodia or cleavage furrows , will be severed by coﬁlin . Figure 3 . Variability in twist within F - actin , as observed by cryo - EM . ( A ) The histogram for twist measured by Fujii et al . [ 4 ] is shown in grey , while a simulation involving 2 . 5 (cid:1) rms cumulative random angular disorder is shown in red . In both cases , segments of F - actin con - taining w 20 subunits are sorted by multi - reference alignment using 41 different atomic models of F - actin , having a twist from 162 . 6 (cid:1) to 170 . 6 (cid:1) . In the simulation , actin subunits are added to a previous subunit with a twist of 166 . 6 (cid:1) + d , where d is a random variable with zero mean and a standard deviation of 2 . 5 (cid:1) . The random disorder is thus cumulative , as deviations from the expected angular position build as the square root of the number of subunits . ( B ) The variability in twist measured for our ﬁlaments [ 5 ] using the same method described in ( A ) , where the real data are in gray . In contrast to Fujii et al . [ 4 ] where the ﬁlament segments contained around 20 actin subunits , our segments [ 5 ] contained around 17 subunits , and this has been used in the simulation . The reduction in box length from 20 to 17 subunits should introduce a broadening by around 8 % ( 20 ½ / 17 ½ ) . The simulation ( in red ) provides the best match when d has a standard deviation of 6 (cid:1) . Minireview R99 The opposite prediction can also be made , which is that proteinsthat bindtoandstretchF - actinshould show ahigher afﬁnity of binding to an actin ﬁlament under tension . Remark - ably , this has also now been observed [ 11 ] . It was shown by X - ray diffraction that the rise per subunit of actin increased by w 0 . 4 % when muscle goes into full tension [ 47 ] . It was subsequently shown that the binding of myosin heads in the absence of tension can elongate the actin ﬁlament by 0 . 2 % , explaining half of the extension observed [ 48 ] . We also know that the conformation of actin in the rigor complex ( in the absence of ATP ) with myosin is quite similar to the structure of the homogeneous naked actin ﬁlament under axial tension / transverse compression [ 4 ] . So the prediction is that , if an actin ﬁlament is under tension , myosin should bind more avidly , and that is exactly what Uyeda and colleagues [ 11 ] have now observed in vivo . As with the coﬁlin result [ 9 ] , this has enormous cell biological implications , creating another means for the cell to regulate the binding of myosin to F - actin , in addition to the regulation provided by a large repertoire of other proteins such as tropomyosin , troponin , calponin , myosin binding protein C , and so on . It also has implications for further understanding stretch - acti - vation of muscle [ 49 ] . Since actin ﬁlaments , in both muscle and non - muscle cells , are associated with a large number of actin - binding proteins , including nucleators , capping pro - teins and cross - linking proteins , it will be extremely inter - esting to understand how these other proteins modulate and regulate the response of an actin ﬁlament to tension . Conclusions We have proposed a hypothesis that tension on an actin ﬁla - ment can induce structural transitions from a multiplicity of states [ 5 ] to largely a single state [ 4 ] , and that this single state will have a higher afﬁnity for myosin than ‘normal’ F - actin [ 11 ] and a lower afﬁnity for coﬁlin [ 9 ] . This hypothesis can ex - plain spectroscopic observations made from actin ﬁlaments under tension [ 43 ] and begins to address how allosteric rela - tions in actin [ 14 ] mediate such conformational transitions . This hypothesis is testable , and we think that it will provide new understanding of why actin’s sequence has been anom - alously conserved over one billion years of eukaryotic evolution . References 1 . Mammoto , T . , and Ingber , D . E . ( 2010 ) . Mechanical control of tissue and organ development . Development 137 , 1407 – 1420 . 2 . Ehrlicher , A . J . , Nakamura , F . , Hartwig , J . H . , Weitz , D . A . , and Stossel , T . P . ( 2011 ) . Mechanical strain in actin networks regulates FilGAP and integrin binding to ﬁlamin A . Nature 478 , 260 – 263 . 3 . Michelot , A . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2011 ) . Building distinct actin ﬁlament networks in a common cytoplasm . Curr . Biol . 21 , R560 – R569 . 4 . Fujii , T . , Iwane , A . H . , Yanagida , T . , andNamba , K . ( 2010 ) . Directvisualization of secondary structures of F - actin by electron cryomicroscopy . Nature 467 , 724 – 728 . 5 . Galkin , V . E . , Orlova , A . , Schroder , G . F . , and Egelman , E . H . ( 2010 ) . Structural polymorphism in F - actin . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 17 , 1318 – 1323 . 6 . Egelman , E . H . ( 2001 ) . Actin allostery again ? Nat . Struct . Biol . 8 , 735 – 736 . 7 . Drummond , D . A . , Bloom , J . D . , Adami , C . , Wilke , C . O . , and Arnold , F . H . ( 2005 ) . Why highly expressed proteins evolve slowly . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 14338 – 14343 . 8 . Galkin , V . E . , Orlova , A . , Kudryashov , D . , Solodukhin , A . , Reisler , E . , Schroeder , G . N . , and Egelman , E . H . ( 2011 ) . Remodeling of actin ﬁlaments by ADF / coﬁlin proteins . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 20568 – 20572 . 9 . Hayakawa , K . , Tatsumi , H . , and Sokabe , M . ( 2011 ) . Actin ﬁlaments function as a tension sensor by tension - dependent binding of coﬁlin to the ﬁlament . J . Cell Biol . 195 , 721 – 727 . 10 . Suarez , C . , Roland , J . , Boujemaa - Paterski , R . , Kang , H . , McCullough , B . R . , Reymann , A . C . , Guerin , C . , Martiel , J . L . , De La Cruz , E . M . , and Blanchoin , L . ( 2011 ) . Coﬁlin tunes the nucleotide state of actin ﬁlaments and severs at bare and decorated segment boundaries . Curr . Biol . 21 , 862 – 868 . 11 . Uyeda , T . Q . , Iwadate , Y . , Umeki , N . , Nagasaki , A . , and Yumura , S . ( 2011 ) . Stretching actin ﬁlaments within cells enhances their afﬁnity for the myosin II motor domain . PLoS ONE 6 , e26200 . 12 . Suel , G . M . , Lockless , S . W . , Wall , M . A . , and Ranganathan , R . ( 2003 ) . Evolu - tionarily conserved networks of residues mediate allosteric communication in proteins . Nat . Struct . Biol . 10 , 59 – 69 . 13 . Feng , J . J . , and Marston , S . ( 2009 ) . Genotype - phenotype correlations in ACTA1 mutations that cause congenital myopathies . Neuromuscul . Disord . 19 , 6 – 16 . 14 . McKane , M . , Wen , K . K . , Boldogh , I . R . , Ramcharan , S . , Pon , L . A . , andRuben - stein , P . A . ( 2005 ) . A mammalian actin substitution in yeast actin ( H372R ) causes a suppressible mitochondria / vacuole phenotype . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 36494 – 36501 . 15 . Laing , N . G . , Dye , D . E . , Wallgren - Pettersson , C . , Richard , G . , Monnier , N . , Lillis , S . , Winder , T . L . , Lochmuller , H . , Graziano , C . , Mitrani - Rosenbaum , S . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Mutations and polymorphisms of the skeletal muscle alpha - actin gene ( ACTA1 ) . Hum . Mutat 30 , 1267 – 1277 . 16 . Derman , A . I . , Becker , E . C . , Truong , B . D . , Fujioka , A . , Tucey , T . M . , Erb , M . L . , Patterson , P . C . , and Pogliano , J . ( 2009 ) . Phylogenetic analysis identiﬁes many uncharacterized actin - like proteins ( Alps ) in bacteria : regulated poly - merization , dynamic instability and treadmilling in Alp7A . Mol . Microbiol . 73 , 534 – 552 . 17 . Galkin , V . E . , Orlova , A . , Rivera , C . , Mullins , R . D . , and Egelman , E . H . ( 2009 ) . StructuralpolymorphismoftheParMﬁlamentanddynamicinstability . Struc - ture 17 , 1253 – 1264 . 18 . Polka , J . K . , Kollman , J . M . , Agard , D . A . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2009 ) . The struc - ture and assembly dynamicsof plasmid actinAlfA imply a novel mechanism of DNA segregation . J . Bacteriol . 191 , 6219 – 6230 . 19 . Popp , D . , Narita , A . , Maeda , K . , Fujisawa , T . , Ghoshdastider , U . , Iwasa , M . , Maeda , Y . , and Robinson , R . C . ( 2010 ) . Filament structure , organization , and dynamics in MreB sheets . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 15858 – 15865 . 20 . Popp , D . , Narita , A . , Ghoshdastider , U . , Maeda , K . , Maeda , Y . , Oda , T . , Fuji - sawa , T . , Onishi , H . , Ito , K . , and Robinson , R . C . ( 2010 ) . Polymeric structures and dynamic properties of the bacterial actin AlfA . J . Mol . Biol . 397 , 1031 – 1041 . 21 . Popp , D . , Xu , W . , Narita , A . , Brzoska , A . J . , Skurray , R . A . , Firth , N . , Ghoshdas - tider , U . , Maeda , Y . , Robinson , R . C . , andSchumacher , M . A . ( 2010 ) . Structure andﬁlamentdynamicsofthepSK41actin - likeParMprotein : implicationsfor plasmid DNA segregation . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 10130 – 10140 . 22 . Mizuno , H . , Higashida , C . , Yuan , Y . , Ishizaki , T . , Narumiya , S . , andWatanabe , N . ( 2011 ) . Rotationalmovementofthe forminmDia1alongthedoublehelical strand of an actin ﬁlament . Science 331 , 80 – 83 . 23 . Papp , G . , Bugyi , B . , Ujfalusi , Z . , Barko , S . , Hild , G . , Somogyi , B . , and Nyitrai , M . ( 2006 ) . Conformational changes in actin ﬁlaments induced by formin binding to the barbed end . Biophys . J . 91 , 2564 – 2572 . 24 . Orlova , A . , Prochniewicz , E . , and Egelman , E . H . ( 1995 ) . Structural dynamics of F - actin . II . Co - operativity in structural transitions . J . Mol . Biol . 245 , 598 – 607 . 25 . Prochniewicz , E . , Zhang , Q . , Janmey , P . A . , and Thomas , D . D . ( 1996 ) . Coop - erativityinF - actin : bindingofgelsolinatthebarbedendaffectsstructureand dynamics of the whole ﬁlament . J . Mol . Biol . 260 , 756 – 766 . 26 . Schneider , M . E . , Belyantseva , I . A . , Azevedo , R . B . , and Kachar , B . ( 2002 ) . Rapid renewal of auditory hair bundles . Nature 418 , 837 – 838 . 27 . Prochniewicz , E . , and Yanagida , T . ( 1990 ) . Inhibition of sliding movement of F - actin by crosslinking emphasizes the role of actin structure in the mecha - nism of motility . J . Mol . Biol . 216 , 761 – 772 . 28 . Prochniewicz , E . , Katayama , E . , Yanagida , T . , and Thomas , D . D . ( 1993 ) . Cooperativity in F - actin : chemical modiﬁcations of actin monomers affect the functional interactions of myosin with unmodiﬁed monomers in the same actin ﬁlament . Biophys . J . 65 , 113 – 123 . 29 . Kim , E . , Bobkova , E . , Hegyi , G . , Muhlrad , A . , and Reisler , E . ( 2002 ) . Actin cross - linking and inhibition of the actomyosin motor . Biochemistry 41 , 86 – 93 . 30 . Kim , E . , Bobkova , E . , Miller , C . J . , Orlova , A . , Hegyi , G . , Egelman , E . H . , Muhl - rad , A . , and Reisler , E . ( 1998 ) . Intrastrandcross - linked actinbetweenGln - 41 and Cys - 374 . III . Inhibition of motion and force generation with myosin . Biochemistry 37 , 17801 – 17809 . 31 . Drummond , D . R . , Peckham , M . , Sparrow , J . C . , andWhite , D . C . ( 1990 ) . Alter - ation in crossbridge kinetics caused by mutations in actin . Nature 348 , 440 – 442 . 32 . Schwyter , D . H . , Kron , S . J . , Toyoshima , Y . Y . , Spudich , J . A . , and Reisler , E . ( 1990 ) . Subtilisin cleavage of actin inhibits In vitro siding movement of actin ﬁlaments over myosin . J . Cell Biol . 111 , 465 – 470 . 33 . Hanson , J . ( 1967 ) . Axial period of actin ﬁlaments : electron microscope studies . Nature 213 , 353 – 356 . 34 . Egelman , E . H . , and DeRosier , D . J . ( 1992 ) . Image analysis shows that varia - tions in actin crossover spacings are random , not compensatory . Biophys . J . 63 , 1299 – 1305 . 35 . Schmid , M . F . , Sherman , M . B . , Matsudaira , P . , andChiu , W . ( 2004 ) . Structure of the acrosomal bundle . Nature 431 , 104 – 107 . Current Biology Vol 22 No 3 R100 36 . McGough , A . , Pope , B . , Chiu , W . , and Weeds , A . ( 1997 ) . Coﬁlin changes the twist of F - actin : Implications for actin ﬁlament dynamics and cellular func - tion . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 771 – 781 . 37 . Egelman , E . H . , Francis , N . , and DeRosier , D . J . ( 1983 ) . Helical disorder and the ﬁlament structure of F - actin are elucidated by the angle - layered aggre - gate . J . Mol . Biol . 166 , 605 – 629 . 38 . McEwen , B . F . , Marko , M . , Hsieh , C . E . , andMannella , C . ( 2002 ) . Useoffrozen - hydrated axonemes to assess imaging parameters and resolution limits in cryoelectron tomography . J . Struct . Biol . 138 , 47 – 57 . 39 . Greene , G . W . , Anderson , T . H . , Zeng , H . , Zappone , B . , and Israelachvili , J . N . ( 2009 ) . Force ampliﬁcation response of actin ﬁlaments under conﬁned compression . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 445 – 449 . 40 . Orlova , A . , and Egelman , E . H . ( 1993 ) . A conformational change in the actin subunit can change the ﬂexibility of the actin ﬁlament . J . Mol . Biol . 232 , 334 – 341 . 41 . McCullough , B . R . , Blanchoin , L . , Martiel , J . L . , and De La Cruz , E . M . ( 2008 ) . Coﬁlin increases the bending ﬂexibility of actin ﬁlaments : implications for severing and cell mechanics . J . Mol . Biol . 381 , 550 – 558 . 42 . Kozuka , J . , Yokota , H . , Arai , Y . , Ishii , Y . , and Yanagida , T . ( 2006 ) . Dynamic polymorphism of single actin molecules in the actin ﬁlament . Nat . Chem . Biol . 2 , 83 – 86 . 43 . Shimozawa , T . , and Ishiwata , S . ( 2009 ) . Mechanical distortion of single actin ﬁlaments induced by external force : detection by ﬂuorescence imaging . Biophys . J . 96 , 1036 – 1044 . 44 . Galkin , V . E . , Orlova , A . , Lukoyanova , N . , Wriggers , W . , and Egelman , E . H . ( 2001 ) . Actin depolymerizing factor stabilizes an existing state of F - actin and can change the tilt of F - actin subunits . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 75 – 86 . 45 . Cao , W . , Goodarzi , J . P . , andDeLaCruz , E . M . ( 2006 ) . Energeticsandkinetics of cooperative coﬁlin - actin ﬁlament interactions . J . Mol . Biol . 361 , 257 – 267 . 46 . Blanchoin , L . , andPollard , T . D . ( 1999 ) . MechanismofinteractionofAcantha - moeba actophorin ( ADF / Coﬁlin ) with actin ﬁlaments . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 15538 – 15546 . 47 . Huxley , H . E . , Stewart , A . , Sosa , H . , and Irving , T . ( 1994 ) . X - ray diffraction measurementsof the extensibility of actin and myosin ﬁlaments in contract - ing muscle . Biophys . J . 67 , 2411 – 2421 . 48 . Tsaturyan , A . K . , Koubassova , N . , Ferenczi , M . A . , Narayanan , T . , Roessle , M . , and Bershitsky , S . Y . ( 2005 ) . Strong binding of myosin heads stretches and twists the actin helix . Biophys . J . 88 , 1902 – 1910 . 49 . Pringle , J . W . ( 1978 ) . The Croonian Lecture , 1977 . Stretch activation of muscle : function and mechanism . Proc . R . Soc . Lond B Biol . Sci . 201 , 107 – 130 . 50 . McKane , M . , Wen , K . K . , Meyer , A . , and Rubenstein , P . A . ( 2006 ) . Effectofthe substitution of muscle actin - speciﬁc subdomain 1 and 2 residues in yeast actin on actin function . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 29916 – 29928 . Minireview R101