1 of 5 © www . dailysudoku . com 2005 - 2007 How to solve Nurikabe www . dailysudoku . com The object of Nurikabe is to shade some squares in the grid black , and leave others white , based on a few simple rules . The following example walks through the solution of a simple Nurikabe puzzle . Nurikabe has 4 rules : Each group of white squares must contain exactly one number The number of squares in each white " island " must equal the number in that " island " The black squares must form a single connected unit ( the " stream " or " wall " ) 2x2 blocks of black squares are disallowed 1 . The 1 ' s First look at the number 1 close to the center of the puzzle . Remember , each island must contain just one number . The number 1 represents an island with only 1 white square , so we can shade the surrounding squares . The same is true for the number 1 in the top right corner . 2 . Shading between islands No group of white squares may contain more than one number . This means that numbers must be separated by shaded squares . When we have two numbers with one one square between them , that square must be shaded . For example , the 5 and 2 in the top left corner must be separated by a black square . 2 of 5 © www . dailysudoku . com 2005 - 2007 3 . Extending the wall Concentrate now on the bottom left corner of the grid . Every black square must be connected to form the " wall " . The black square in the bottom left corner must not be isolated . It only has one available neighbour , which must therefore be black . Where there is only one possibility , we must extend the wall . 4 . Extend the islands Take a look at the number 2 in the bottom left corner . This island is not yet complete - - it needs a second white square . The number now has only one available neighbour , which must therefore be white . We can put a dot in that square to show that it must be white . The " 2 " island is now full , and so must be surrounded by black squares . 5 . Isolation Take a look at the squares marked with ( a ) . These squares are surrounded , and therefore cannot be part of any island . They must be shaded . While we ' re there , we must extend the wall in the top right corner . Look for other spots where the wall must be extended . 3 of 5 © www . dailysudoku . com 2005 - 2007 6 . Again with the islands Take a look at the 5 in the top left corner . We need to extend the island . Use dots to show which squares must be white . Which other islands can be extended ? 7 . 2x2 blocks Rule 4 says that 2x2 blocks of filled squares are disallowed . The two squares marked ( a ) in the left center of the grid must be white , because shading them would violate this rule . Mark them with dots . 8 . Shading between islands II In step 2 , we filled squares that were separating two numbers . We can extend this logic to fill squares that separated growing islands . Look at the squares marked ( a ) . Do you understand why they must be shaded ? 4 of 5 © www . dailysudoku . com 2005 - 2007 9 . Wall and islands The most common mistake is to focus only on the wall , or only on the islands . You need to swicth from one to the other and back . See if you can extend parts of the wall to stop them becoming isolated , and extend islands and shade around them when they are full . 10 . Nearly there You ' re nearly done ! Note in the grid shown here , we must fill the squares marked ( a ) so as not to isolate chunks of the wall . 11 . Last squares The remaining islands can be extended in only one direction . The final shaded square links two large sections of wall into one continuous unit . 5 of 5 © www . dailysudoku . com 2005 - 2007 12 . Solution Well done ! Now take a look at some of the puzzles available on the puzzles page . Remember : Each puzzle has only one correct solutionThe solution can be reached purely logicallyDon ' t guess ; only fill in or dot a square when you know for sure whether it should be white or black If a square cannot be white , it must be black ! Have fun !