1 J . Gen . Physiol . © The Rockefeller University Press • 0022 - 1295 / 97 / 07 / 1 / 10 $ 2 . 00 Volume 110 July 1997 1 – 10 The Secretion - coupled Endocytosis Correlates with Membrane Tension Changes in RBL 2H3 Cells Jianwu Dai , * H . Ping Ting - Beall , ‡ and Michael P . Sheetz * From the * Department of Cell Biology and ‡ Department of Mechanical Engineering , Duke University Medical Center , Durham , North Carolina 27710 abstract Stimulated secretion in endocrine cells and neuronal synapses causes a rise in endocytosis rates to re - cover the added membrane . The endocytic process involves the mechanical deformation of the membrane to pro - duce an invagination . Studies of osmotic swelling effects on endocytosis indicate that the increased surface ten - sion is tightly correlated to a significant decrease of endocytosis . When rat basophilic leukemia ( RBL ) cells are stimulated to secrete , there is a dramatic drop in the membrane tension and only small changes in membrane bending stiffness . Neither the shape change that normally accompanies secretion nor the binding of ligand with - out secretion causes a drop in tension . Further , tension decreases within 6 s , preceding shape change and measur - able changes in endocytosis . After secretion stops , tension recovers . On the basis of these results we suggest that the physical parameter of membrane tension is a major regulator of endocytic rate in RBL cells . Low tensions would stimulate endocytosis and high tensions would stall the endocytic machinery . key words : membrane tension • membrane tether • laser tweezers • secretion • endocytosis i n t r o d u c t i o n Stimulation of secretion in neurons or other secretory cells is normally followed by an increase in the endocytosis rate . The rationale for the rise in endocytosis is to recover the secreted membrane , but the basis for the change is unclear . In some cases , endocytosis is extremely rapid af - ter a release , raising the possibility that endocytosis might be physically regulated ( Thomas et al . , 1994 ) . Such a phys - ical coupling between membrane tension and endocy - tosis has been observed for plant cells ( Kell and Glaser , 1993 ) and hypothesized for animal cells ( Sheetz and Dai , 1996 ) . In these studies we have examined the relation - ship between endocytosis rates and tension in the plasma membrane for rat basophilic leukemia ( RBL ) 1 cells fol - lowing stimulated secretion and hypotonic swelling . Mechanical regulation of enzymatic function is widely accepted in muscle contraction since myosin’s ATPase activity is affected by high tension ( Pybus and Tregear , 1975 ; Smith et al . , 1995 ) . However , mechanical regula - tion could affect other systems such as endocytosis . The formation of an endocytic vesicle requires considerable force to bend the membrane , to displace membrane - associated skeletal components , and to overcome the membrane tension . Therefore , these factors all could act to inhibit the mechanical steps in the endocytic pro - cess . As the endocytic machinery draws in membrane , bending stiffness would remain constant as would the association with the cytoskeleton , whereas the mem - brane tension must rapidly increase as the membrane is drawn down over the cytoskeleton . In spherical plant protoplasts , it has been shown that a mechanical ten - sion in the membrane can regulate the plasma mem - brane area through alterations in both exo - and en - docytosis rates . Changes in osmotic strength will alter plant spheroplast volume such that exocytosis will in - crease with hypotonic solutions while endocytosis will increase with hypertonic solutions ( Kell and Glaser , 1993 ; Glaser and Donath , 1988 ) . The similar observa - tions on animal cells and the known effects of mechani - cal force on the rates of enzymes such as motor ATPases led to the hypothesis that animal cell endo - and exocy - tosis rates as well as cell morphology and motile activity are regulated by membrane tension ( Sheetz and Dai , 1996 ) . In addition , hypoosmotic stress increases neu - ron volume and membrane exocytosis ( Morris et al . , 1989 ; Reuzeau et al . , 1995 ) , and cell stretch induces in - creased secretion ( Hagmann et al . , 1992 ) . Because of the fluid nature of cell membranes and their high resistance to surface stretch , membrane ten - sion is continuous over the whole cell . Since animal cells are not smooth spheres like plant protoplasts , par - ticularly neuroendocrine cells , not only a mechanical tension but also the adherence of the membrane to the cytoskeleton contributes to the membrane tension ( Sheetz and Dai , 1996 ) . In the past , direct measure - ment of membrane tension was difficult in animal cells and only through the surface deformation of mem - brane or the formation of thin membranous threads or tethers with micropipets was membrane tension exam - ined experimentally . However , the micropipet tech - Address correspondence to Dr . Michael P . Sheetz , Department of Cell Biology , Box 3709 , Duke University Medical Center , Durham , NC 27710 . Fax : 919 - 684 - 8592 ; E - mail mike _ sheetz @ cellbio . duke . edu 1 Abbreviations used in this paper : DIC , differential interference con - trast ; DNP , dinitrophenol ; RBL , rat basophilic leukemia . on J une 19 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published July 1 , 1997 2 Membrane Tension Regulates Endocytosis nique is mainly applicable to cells in suspension . The advent of the laser tweezers provides a very flexible method for estimating the tension of adherent cells by forming membrane tethers with beads attached to the cell surface ( Dai and Sheetz , 1995 a , b , c ; Hochmuth et al . , 1996 ) . To measure the membrane tension from a mem - brane tether , the laser tweezers are used to produce a force on a bead attached to the plasma membrane of a cell , which pulls the membrane into a tether , away from the cytoskeleton ( see Fig . 1 B for an example ) . Both the membrane – cytoskeleton adhesion and mem - brane in - plane tension will draw the tether membrane back onto the cell , thereby creating a tether force ( a force pulling the tether back to the cell ) on the bead that can be measured directly with the laser tweezers ( Dai and Sheetz , 1995 c ; Sheetz and Dai , 1996 ) . From the fluid behavior of the membrane in tethers , it is in - ferred that the tether membrane lacks cytoskeletal structures ( Berk and Hochmuth , 1992 ) . The mathe - matical relationship between the tether force and the membrane tension was tested on model lipid bilayer systems ( Waugh et al . , 1992 ; Evans and Yeung , 1994 ) . Both membrane bending stiffness and tension contrib - ute to the generation of a tether force ( Bo and Waugh , 1989 ; Hochmuth et al . , 1996 ) . When membrane ten - sions were estimated in living cells , the values were (cid:122) 1 % of the force needed to lyse the membrane . None - theless , the forces generated on membranes are large enough to alter enzyme activities ( Sheetz and Dai , 1996 ) . In this study we have examined the relationship be - tween endocytosis rates and tension in the plasma membrane for RBL cells following hypotonic swelling and stimulated secretion . The RBL cell was chosen to study stimulated secretion because the secretion pro - cess in this system is very well defined . Cross - linking of IgE - receptors by the binding of dinitrophenylated bo - vine serum albumin ( DNP - BSA ) to anti - dinitrophenol ( DNP ) IgE results in the release of cellular serotonin , histamine , and other chemical mediators of the aller - gic , asthmatic , and inflammatory responses ( Foreman et al . , 1993 ; Spudich , 1994 ; Holowka and Baird , 1996 ) . Following antigen stimulation , these cells undergo morphological changes that include extensive ruffling of the plasma membrane , fusion of the pergranules with the plasma membrane , and , finally , release of granule constituents ( Pfeiffer et al . , 1985 ; Ludowyke et al . , 1989 ) . m a t e r i a l s a n d m e t h o d s Cell Culture RBL 2H3 cells from Dr . T . Meyer’s lab ( Duke University ) were cultured in cell growth wells which were made by using silicone grease to secure a 10 - mm diameter cloning cylinder to a 20 (cid:51) 20 mm ( No . 1 ) glass coverslip ( Dai and Sheetz , 1995 a ) . The cells were maintained at 37 (cid:56) C , 5 % CO 2 in DMEM ( BioWhittaker , Walkersville , MD ) supplemented with the following : 15 % FBS , 2 mM l - glutamine , and gentamycin ( 10 (cid:109) g / ml ) . Bead Preparation To prepare IgG - coated beads , rat IgG ( Sigma Chemical Co . , St . Louis , MO ) was dissolved at a concentration of 2 . 0 mg / ml in PBS . Then , 50 (cid:109) l of covaspheres ( 0 . 5 mm , Duke Scientific , Palo Alto , CA ) was added to 50 (cid:109) l of the above IgG solution and was incubated at 4 (cid:56) C overnight . The beads were pelleted by centrifu - gation at 2 , 000 g and 4 (cid:56) C for 10 min . Then the beads were resus - pended in 1 mg / ml BSA - PBS solution , rinsed by pelleting and re - suspension with MEM medium three times , and resuspended in 100 (cid:109) l MEM medium . For experiments , the bead solution was di - luted 3 : 100 in medium . Laser Tweezers Manipulations Just before the laser trap manipulation , the cloning cylinder was removed and a flow chamber was formed . The IgG - covered latex beads were added to the cells through the flow chamber . The cells were imaged by a video - enhanced differential interference contrast ( DIC ) microscope ( IM - 35 microscope ; Zeiss , Ober - kochen , Germany ) with a fiber optic illuminator . The stage was maintained at 38 (cid:56) C using an air current incubator . The laser trap consisted of a polarized beam from an 11 W TEM00 - mode near - infrared ( 1 , 064 nm ) laser ( model C - 95 ; CVI Corp . , Albuquerque , NM ) that was expanded by a 3 (cid:51) beam expander then focused through an 80 - mm focal length achromatic lens ( Melles Griot , Irvine , CA ) into the epifluorescence port of the Zeiss IM - 35 mi - croscope . To form a tether from the RBL cell , an IgG - coated latex bead was held on the cell surface for several seconds , and the bead was pulled away from the cell surface by moving the sample with pi - ezoceramic - driven stage ( Wye Creek Instruments , Frederick , MD ) at a constant velocity . The laser power which reached the sample in all these experiments was below 200 mW . All the exper - iments were recorded onto video tapes for later analysis . Tether Force Measurement and Membrane Tension Calculation Presently there is no theory that can be used to directly calculate the trapping force for beads . All the forces must be determined empirically , and the forces are commonly calibrated against vis - cous drag exerted by fluid flow . The force on the bead can be ob - tained if we know the laser trap stiffness , because the force can be determined as a function of a displacement from the trap center . To measure the trap stiffness , a viscous force is generated by os - cillatory motion of the specimen by a piezoceramic - driven stage at a constant velocity . The position of the bead in the trap is tracked using the nanometer - level tracking program to analyze video records of the experiments ( Gelles et al . , 1988 ) . The vis - cous force on the bead can be calculated through Stokes’ Law . For a bead of radius of r , the drag force can be obtained from Stokes’ Law : F (cid:53) 6 (cid:112)(cid:104) rv . Here (cid:104) is the fluid viscosity , and v is the flow rate . The calibration shows a very linear force - displacement relationship for the optical tweezers and the slope of the linear fit gives the trap stiffness ( Dai and Sheetz , 1995 a ) . If the trap stiff - ness and the displacement of the particle position from the trap center are known , the force on the trap can be easily calculated . To measure the static tether force , a tether was formed and kept at a constant length . Then the bead position in the trap during tether formation was tracked using the nanometer - scale tracking on J une 19 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published July 1 , 1997 3 Dai et al . program ( Gelles et al . , 1988 ) . The tether force on the bead was calculated from the calibration of the laser trap . To measure the time course of the tether force , a bead was placed on an RBL 2H3 cell which had been incubated with 0 . 25 (cid:109) g / ml anti - DNP IgE and was washed three times with the extracellular buffer . The bead was held on the cell surface for several seconds with the la - ser tweezers and was pulled out at a constant velocity to form the tether . After the tether was formed ( average length was (cid:122) 15 (cid:109) m ) , the bead was held stationary and the DNP - BSA solution was added through the flow cell . The static tether force can be ob - tained from the calibration of the laser trap and bead position in the laser trap . We estimated the relative tether diameter by determining the tether intensity through orthogonal scans across the DIC image of the tethers from different cells . The intensity is related to the tether diameter ( Schnapp et al . , 1988 ) . The technique of tether formation with laser optical tweezers provides a unique way to measure membrane tension . The mem - brane tension term of the static tether force ( F 0 ) is complicated for cultured cells because there are two major factors that con - tribute to the static tether force ( F 0 ) : membrane bending stiffness ( B ) and cell surface tension ( T ) . Since the relationship among B , F 0 , and tether radius ( r t ) is B (cid:53) F (cid:63) r t / 2 (cid:112) ( Hochmuth et al . , 1982 ) , B is assumed to be constant , the tether thickness is inversely re - lated to F 0 . The membrane tension can then be estimated di - rectly from F 0 by using the following equation : F 0 (cid:53) 2 (cid:112) ( modified form Hochmuth et al . , 1996 ) . Cell Treatments To stimulate the RBL secretion , we incubated the cell with mono - clonal anti - DNP IgE ( 0 . 25 (cid:109) g / ml ) overnight and washed the cells three times with extracellular buffer ( 125 mM NaCl , 5 mM KCl , 20 mM Na - HEPES , 1 . 5 mM MgCl 2 , 1 . 5 mM CaCl 2 , pH 7 . 4 ) . The cells were stimulated with 1 or 2 (cid:109) g / ml DNP - BSA ( 0 . 1 mg / ml BSA was added in DNP - BSA solution ) shortly after washing ( Spu - dich , 1994 ) ( within 15 min ) . To make Ca 2 (cid:49) - free medium and buffer , we added 10 mM EGTA and adjusted pH value to 7 . 4 . To block the DNP - BSA – mediated release with DNP - lysine , RBL cells were first stimulated with DNP - BSA at the concentration of 1 (cid:109) g / ml . After 5 min , DNP - lysine at a concentration of 10 (cid:109) M was added to the cells , and the cells were incubated at 37 (cid:56) C for 10 – 15 min . To measure the time course of cell volume change during cell swelling in hypotonic buffer ( 50 % water / 50 % medium ) , RBL cells in suspension were placed in a microchamber with normal medium . A cell was transferred from a microchamber in normal buffer to the microchamber in hypotonic buffer by a glass mi - cropipet ( Ting - Beall et al . , 1993 ) . The image of the cell during the experiment was digitized and analyzed off line . Secretion and Endocytosis Measurement To measure [ 3 H ] serotonin release , cells were incubated over - night with [ 3 H ] serotonin ( 2 (cid:109) Ci / ml ) , washed by aspiration , and then incubated (cid:122) 5 h in fresh medium containing 0 . 25 (cid:109) g / ml anti – DNP - IgE . They were washed immediately before use . [ 3 H ] seroto - nin was measured by liquid scintillation counting in 4 ml EcoLite scintillation cocktail . The total serotonin content was determined from the supernatant radioactivity when 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 was added to the cells . The percentage of [ 3 H ] serotonin release was calculated from each condition . The endocytosis rate of RBL cells is accurately measured by flow cytometry to analyze the intensity of Lucifer yellow dye taken by the cells . Lucifer yellow was dissolved in the medium to a final concentration of 1 mg / ml ( pH 7 . 4 ) . Cells were incubated under different conditions with Lucifer yellow for different times , exter - nal dye was washed away , and cells were detached with trypsin - (cid:206) 2 BTm EDTA . Cells were suspended with cold PBS buffer , and the aver - age fluorescence intensity was measured by FACS analyzer . We obtained the signal from fluorescence channel 1 ( FL1 ) and ob - tained the mean value from 10 , 000 cells for each sample . Also , we obtained the information of cell side scattering and forward scattering which relates to cell morphology . r e s u l t s Osmotic Swelling and Shrinkage Modulates Membrane Tension and Membrane Endocytosis Coordinately In the case of plant spheroplasts subjected to changes in osmotic stress , there was an inverse correlation be - tween membrane tension and the rate of endocytosis . Because the RBL cells might behave similarly , we tested the effects of osmotic swelling and then recovery on membrane tension and endocytosis rate . When trans - ferred to a hypotonic medium , RBL cells rapidly swelled ( Fig . 1 A ) . To follow membrane tension changes , membrane tethers were formed from RBL cells by applying a force with the laser tweezers to a 0 . 5 micron rat IgG - coated latex bead attached to the plasma membrane . The rat IgG acts like a handle between membrane and the bead . The mechanism of the IgG - coated bead binding to cell surface is not clear . This binding could be non - specific or specific . Though the aggregation of IgG could activate RBL cells ( Benhamou et al . , 1994 ) , the rat IgG - coated bead did not cause any effects on the tether force and cell morphology under our experi - mental conditions . Also , when a ConA - coated bead was used to bind to the cell surface , the tether force was the same as that from rat IgG - coated beads ( data not shown ) . As shown in Fig . 1 B , tethers were formed from the side of RBL cells , well away from the glass surface . Video recordings of the bead position were digitally an - alyzed off - line to obtain the tether force . About 60 % of the beads bound to the membrane formed tethers when they were pulled away from the cell by movement of the specimen at a constant velocity with a piezoce - ramic - driven stage . When the trap was turned off , the beads rapidly ( (cid:44) 1 s ) returned to the cell surface as the membrane tether was resorbed , indicating that rigid cy - toskeletal elements were not part of the tether . During the extension of the tether , the force on the bead in - cluded viscous and static components and was very high ( Fig . 1 C ) . When the tether was held at constant length to remove the viscous component , the force re - mained at a value of 22 . 87 (cid:54) 2 . 96 pN over a measure - ment period of (cid:122) 30 s . ( Fig . 1 C ; see Fig . 3 B ) . This tether force was the same for tethers of 10 – 100 mi - crons in length as was previously observed ( Dai and Sheetz , 1995 a ) . The tether force was very constant be - tween different cells on different days , and no system - atic variation was observed in different regions of the cell surface . on J une 19 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published July 1 , 1997 4 Membrane Tension Regulates Endocytosis When RBL cells were placed in a hypotonic medium , there was a dramatic increase in tether force to very high levels in the first few minutes ( Fig . 1 D ; we could not trace the tether force all the time during swelling because the trap cannot produce enough force to keep the bead in the trap ) followed by a stabilization of the tether force at a level of (cid:122) 32 pN for the next (cid:122) 20 min ( see Fig . 1 E for the swollen cells ) . If isotonic media was restored after 30 min , the tension dropped dramati - cally to a value slightly below the control level before ul - timately recovering to the control level . To determine the rate of endocytosis during swelling and shrinking conditions , we used a fluorescence - acti - vated cell sorting ( FACS ) assay of soluble Lucifer yellow uptake , which showed a linear increase in fluorescence with time ( Fig . 1 F ) . When the cells were placed in hy - potonic media , there was a significant decrease in the endocytosis rate of swelling cells to about 70 % that of the controls ( Fig . 1 F ) . Thus , under hypotonic condi - tions which increase the membrane tension , endocyto - sis is decreased . After swollen cells were placed in iso - tonic medium , the membrane tension dropped below control levels , and the endocytosis rate was higher than controls ( data not shown ) . F igure 1 . ( A ) Time course of RBL cell volume change during cell swelling . An RBL cell was transferred from normal me - dium to hypotonic buffer ( 50 % water / 50 % medium ) by a mi - cropipet . The cell volume ( mea - sured from the cell diameter ) increased very fast ( within (cid:122) 2 min ) and then stayed constant . ( B ) Photomicrograph of a mem - brane tension measurement from a RBL cell using a tether . In the diagram , T is the in - plane membrane tension . The tether force ( F ) can be calcu - lated from the displacement of the bead in the laser trap ( (cid:68) r ) and the calibration of the trap . ( C ) Tether force is plotted ver - sus time and shows elongation and stationary periods . A tether was formed from a control RBL cell . The tether force reached (cid:122) 39 pN during the elonga - tion period , but it dropped to (cid:122) 21 pN when held at a con - stant length . ( D ) Time course of tether force during the RBL cell swelling . A tether was formed and kept at a constant length ( before (cid:122) 40 s ) , and the hypotonic buffer ( 50 % water / 50 % medium ) was introduced to the cell through the flow chamber ( during the time (cid:122) 44 – 53 s ) . The static tether force in - creased very fast before it reached the limit of the trap strength and the bead escaped from the trap . This time course of tether force is consistent with the time course of cell volume change ( A ) in that the time of most rapid swelling corresponds to the time of highest tether force . ( E ) Average static tether force of swollen RBL cells and after recovery from swollen to isotonicity . The static tether force of swollen cells ( 31 . 59 (cid:54) 0 . 63 pN , n (cid:53) 15 ) is significantly larger than the control cells ( 22 . 31 (cid:54) 1 . 41 pN , n (cid:53) 17 ) . The tether force was measured between 5 and 15 min after cells were put into hypotonic buffer . After the swollen cells were transferred to normal isotonic medium , the tether force decreased to 20 . 78 (cid:54) 0 . 63 pN ( n (cid:53) 11 ) slightly below the control value . The error bars are SEM . ( F ) RBL cell endocytosis rate mea - sured by Lucifer yellow uptake with flow cytometry . The average fluorescence intensity of 10 5 cells was measured as described in materials and methods . When the cells were incubated with hypotonic buffer , the endocytosis rate was inhibited . on J une 19 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published July 1 , 1997 5 Dai et al . Endocytosis Increased after Stimulated Secretion in RBL Cells Previous studies had shown that RBL cells would se - crete after stimulation with DNP - BSA and that endocy - tosis would be stimulated . To understand if these RBL cells responded similarly to cross - linking of bound IgE , we measured [ 3 H ] serotonin release ( Pfeiffer et al . , 1985 ) and Lucifer yellow uptake . Detectable serotonin was released within 30 s after addition of 1 (cid:109) g / ml DNP - BSA to cells that had been coated with anti – DNP - IgE ; and after (cid:122) 15 min , release was maximal . The release of serotonin was terminated rapidly by addition of an ex - cess of the monovalent , competitive ligand , DNP - lysine ( data not shown ) . This is consistent with the previous reports . An increase in endocytosis after secretion was also observed in RBL cells . Using the FACS assay of Lu - cifer yellow uptake , there was nearly a threefold in - crease in endocytosis rate at early times after DNP - BSA stimulated secretion for the adherent cells . This in - crease of endocytosis can be inhibited by removing ex - tracellular Ca 2 (cid:49) by using EGTA ( Fig . 2 ) . Thus , these RBL cells secrete normally and respond to secretion by increasing their endocytosis rate . Membrane Tension Is Decreased in Stimulated RBL Cells If membrane tension is an important factor in control - ling membrane endocytosis rate , then the increase in endocytosis that accompanies stimulated secretion of RBL cells should follow a decrease in membrane ten - sion . When the tether force was measured after stimula - tion of secretion , a dramatic decrease to 10 . 58 (cid:54) 2 . 64 pN with 1 (cid:109) g / ml or 8 . 40 (cid:54) 2 . 45 pN with 2 (cid:109) g / ml of DNP - BSA was observed ( Fig . 3 , A and B ) . If secretion was prevented by removing external Ca 2 (cid:49) with EGTA , the tension remained at the control level when 1 (cid:109) g / ml DNP - BSA was added ( 22 . 33 (cid:54) 3 . 30 pN ) ( see Fig . 6 B ) . Likewise , blocking secretion with DNP - lysine prevented the decrease in tension when DNP - BSA was added ( Fig . 3 B ) . Thus , a very significant drop in tether force corre - lated with secretion . To determine the time course of the force decrease , we measured the static tether force during stimulation ( see Fig . 4 for a representative trace ) . A tether was formed and held stationary for a short time before 2 (cid:109) g / ml DNP - BSA was added through a flow cell . The average tether static force decreased from (cid:122) 24 pN to 12 . 43 (cid:54) 1 . 56 ( n (cid:53) 4 ) pN within 10 s after the addition F igure 2 . RBL cell endocytosis rate is increased upon stimula - tion of secretion and can be inhibited by removing extracellular Ca 2 (cid:49) with EGTA . Endocytosis was measured by FACS analysis for 10 5 cells each sample after Lucifer yellow incubation for control cells or cells treated with 1 (cid:109) g / ml DNP - BSA or with 1 (cid:109) g / ml DNP - BSA and 10 mM EGTA . F igure 3 . ( A ) Tether force during tether formation after stimu - lation of secretion with DNP - BSA ( 1 (cid:109) g / ml ) . The tether force dur - ing the elongation was decreased ( (cid:122) 20 pN ) compared to control and it decreased further to (cid:122) 10 pN when held at a constant length ( see Fig . 1 C , legend ) . ( B ) The average static tether force for the RBL cells during stimulated secretion . The tether force decreased in cells stimulated to secrete by the addition of 1 and 2 (cid:109) g / ml DNP - BSA compared to the control cells . There is no substantial difference between the tether forces of nonsecreting cells , when secretion was blocked by DNP - lysine , and the control cells . The er - ror bars are SD . on J une 19 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published July 1 , 1997 6 Membrane Tension Regulates Endocytosis of the antigen . In the same experiments , changes in cell morphology such as the formation of projections followed after stimulation of secretion . However , shape changes were not seen for 20 – 30 s . Thus , the drop in tether force was very rapid and preceded the morpho - logical changes . From earlier analyses of tether formation , the tether force is dependent upon both the membrane tension and the membrane bending stiffness . To determine if the membrane bending stiffness was significantly al - tered during secretion , we measured the relative tether diameter from the contrast of the tethers in the DIC image ( Schnapp et al . , 1988 ; Hochmuth et al . , 1996 ) ( Fig . 5 A ) . In this figure , the trace in the white box is the grey scale scan across the tether image . For a con - stant bending stiffness , the tether diameter should be inversely related to the membrane tension ( Hochmuth et al . , 1982 , 1996 ) ; therefore , the tether diameter should increase upon secretion . We observed that the tether diameter increased by (cid:122) 35 % whereas the force decreased by (cid:122) 50 % ( Fig . 5 B ) in parallel studies on the same day . Using the equations described in materials and methods , the calculated membrane tension was reduced to 36 % of the control upon secretion stimu - lated with 1 (cid:109) g / ml DNP - BSA . Similar Shape Changes Do Not Affect Membrane Tension During secretion there is a dramatic change in mor - phology of the RBL cells that is characterized by an in - crease in actin - rich lamellipodia projections . An anti - body , AA4 , can cause a similar morphological change without stimulating secretion ( Oliver et al . , 1992 ) . We have also observed the similar results by scanning elec - tron microscopy ( data not shown ) . When AA4 - treated cells were analyzed , no significant change in tether force was observed ( data not shown ) . Further , when EGTA was used to remove extracellu - lar Ca 2 (cid:49) and block stimulated secretion , a dramatic shape change was also observed . Fig . 6 A shows the light scattering from cells treated with EGTA , which in - dicates that in the presence of EGTA , cross - linking IgE receptors with DNP - BSA increases light scattering from cells . Light scattering increases were shown to be caused by cell morphological changes such as mem - brane ruffling ( McNeil et al . , 1985 ) . This agrees with F igure 4 . Time course of the decrease in tether force during se - cretion . Extension of the tether started at the time of (cid:122) 8 . 5 s and ceased at (cid:122) 12 s . DNP - BSA ( 1 (cid:109) g / ml ) was added by flow at the time of (cid:122) 13 s . The stationary tether force started to decrease at (cid:122) 19 s , and this meant that the tether force dramatically decreased within 6 s after the addition of the antigen . In four repeats of this ex - periment , the average tether static force decreased from (cid:122) 24 pN to 12 . 43 (cid:54) 1 . 56 ( n (cid:53) 4 ) pN within 10 s after the addition of DNP - BSA . F igure 5 . ( A ) Photomicrograph showing the method of measur - ing the relative tether thickness from the DIC image . The intensity of the contrast is related to the tether thickness ( Schnapp et al . , 1988 ) . The relative tether contrast was determined through inte - gration of changes in intensity along orthogonal scans across the DIC image of the tether . ( B ) The comparison of tether force with the relative tether diameter . For the resting cells ( Control ) and se - creting cells ( 1 (cid:109) g / ml DNP - BSA ) the tether force decreased by (cid:122) 50 % , whereas the relative tether diameter increased by (cid:122) 35 % . on J une 19 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published July 1 , 1997 7 Dai et al . the observations of cell shape under microscope ( data not shown ) . This shape change is similar to the secret - ing cells but much more dramatic . When the tether force was measured , it is similar to that of the control cells ( Fig . 6 B ) . Thus , cell shape change can occur inde - pendently of tether force changes . d i s c u s s i o n In these studies , tether force was consistently inversely related to endocytosis rate in RBL cells . Over a nearly fivefold range in tether force , a corresponding inverse change in endocytosis rates of nearly tenfold was ob - served . Changes in tether force preceded the changes in the cell endocytosis rates when either the cells se - creted membrane or experienced changes in medium osmolarity . This is analogous to the plant spheroplasts , where modulating membrane tension above or below 0 . 1 mN / m results in a corresponding decrease or in - crease in endocytosis rate . However , plant cells are nor - mally spherical which enables tension to be measured and adjusted by micropipet aspiration . The convoluted nature of the RBL cell surface makes it necessary to uti - lize the tether force to measure membrane tension ( Sheetz and Dai , 1996 ) . In previous studies of model lipid systems and animal cells , a relationship between tether force and mem - brane tension was derived . From the model systems , the mechanical tension in a lipid bilayer was shown to be related to the square of the tether force assuming a constant membrane bending stiffness . For a similar re - lationship to hold in biological membranes , the tethers should not be supported by cytoskeletal elements and should be relatively uniform in composition . Because the tethers retracted rapidly ( (cid:44) 0 . 1 s ) and showed con - siderable flexibility , we believe that they contained no cytoskeletal elements as has been found for other teth - ers ( Berk and Hochmuth , 1992 ) . In both the cases of osmotic swelling and stimulated secretion , formed teth - ers showed changes in tension after addition of hypo - tonic medium or stimulation of secretion which argues against changes in tether composition . This supports the assumption that membrane bending stiffness is constant since bending stiffness is dependent upon membrane composition . Further , when bending stiff - ness changes were estimated from the apparent tether diameter changes , only small changes in stiffness were found , particularly when compared to the magnitude of changes in membrane tension . Thus , the changes in tether force with secretion were the result of changes in membrane tension . In healthy animal cells , the membrane is normally adherent to the cytoskeleton and the two components of the membrane tension , the in - plane tension and the membrane – cytoskeleton adhesion , are not separable ( Dai and Sheetz , 1995 c ; Sheetz and Dai , 1996 ; Hoch - F igure 6 . ( A ) The cell side scattering ( SSC ) and forward scatter - ing ( FSC ) measured by FACS . All cells were incubated with Lucifer yellow dye for 20 min ; ( a ) control , ( b ) cells with 1 (cid:109) g / ml DNP - BSA , ( c ) cells with 10 mM EGTA and 1 (cid:109) g / ml DNP - BSA . Cells in c have significant increase of SSC which indicates that more dramatic membrane ruffling occurs . ( B ) Membrane tether force was not af - fected by cell shape changes caused by the treatment with both EGTA and DNP - BSA . The DNP - BSA concentration is 1 (cid:109) g / ml and EGTA is 10 mM . The error bars are SD . on J une 19 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published July 1 , 1997 8 Membrane Tension Regulates Endocytosis muth et al . , 1996 ) . The other major parameter , mem - brane bending stiffness , stays relatively constant ; there - fore , it is clear that the membrane tension term de - creases dramatically upon secretion and increases upon swelling . If we assume that the tether force is only from in - plane tension and the bending stiffness is constant at a value of 2 . 7 (cid:51) 10 (cid:50) 19 N (cid:63) m ( Hochmuth et al . , 1996 ) , then we can calculate that the resting in - plane tension would maximally be 0 . 025 mN / m . During secretion , this drops to about 8 (cid:109) N / m , but while the cell is in the swollen state , it is high at 48 (cid:109) N / m . During the swelling phase , we find that the tension exceeds the force of the trap ( (cid:46) 500 (cid:109) N / m ) ; however , even these values are be - low the tensions needed to produce membrane lysis ( (cid:122) 10 mN / m ) but may cause opening of stretch - acti - vated channels ( 2 – 10 mN / m ) ( Gustin , 1991 ) . The tension changes cannot be explained simply as the consequence of addition or deletion of internal membrane to the plasma membrane ; because ( a ) a res - ervoir of membrane exists that buffers tension changes and ( b ) tension jumps between discreet values rapidly . Evidence for a membrane reservoir comes from the fact that increasing tether length from 10 to 100 microns causes no change in tether force ( Dai and Sheetz , 1995 a ) . For an RBL cell with a surface area of 2 , 000 (cid:109) m 2 and a normal elastic coefficient ( (cid:122) 600 mN / m ) , elastic expansion of the plasma membrane by 60 square microns ( the membrane area of a 100 micron tether ) would cause a 1 . 8 mN / m rise in tension ( Waugh and Evans , 1979 ) , whereas experimentally , there is no change in the 0 . 02 mN / m resting membrane tension with the formation of a 100 micron tether . Secondly , if the drop in tension with secretion was related to the amount of membrane secreted , then we would expect a more con - tinuous change in the tension with time of secretion . In fact , the decrease from the resting tension to the value of secreting cells occurs within seconds with little time at intermediate values , whereas secretion occurs over minutes . Thus , we suggest that the membrane tension is largely set by the membrane – cytoskeleton interaction and the enzymatic changes associated with secretion could alter the membrane – cytoskeleton interaction . We find that secretion decreases the membrane ten - sion and that the increase in endocytosis rate can re - cover the reduced tension . The drop in tether force fol - lowed closely the stimulation of secretion and occurred before endocytosis rate changes could be measured . When secretion was blocked by the removal of Ca 2 (cid:49) or addition of DNP - lysine , there was no change in tether force . Interestingly , here we found the stimulated en - docytosis is Ca 2 (cid:49) sensitive , and this is different from the previous report ( Pfeiffer et al . , 1985 ) . There are two reasonable explanations for this difference : ( a ) the effi - ciency of removing extracellular Ca 2 (cid:49) by EGTA or ( b ) the different effect of Ca 2 (cid:49) when cells are in suspension versus adhesion . Our results in this system do show a consistent inverse correlation between membrane ten - sion and endocytosis rate . IgE alone had no effect on tether force ( data not shown ) , and there was a constant value for the tether force among the control cells . The morphological change that accompanies secretion was also not corre - lated with the drop in tension since the AA4 antibody could produce a similar alteration in morphology with - out changing tension significantly , and EGTA and DNP - BSA together cause similar but much more dra - matic shape changes which do not change membrane tension . Thus , we suggest that the change in membrane tension correlates with cell secretion and endocytosis rate change and is not because of activation of other pathways such as the shape change , actin dynamics , or membrane activation by receptor cross - linking . There are other changes that occur in the RBL cells upon secretion , including changes in cell rigidity . In studies of RBL cell cytoskeleton deformation during se - cretion , the cross - linking of cell - surface IgE - receptors with multivalent ligands caused an increase in the cell or cytoskeletal rigidity ( Liu et al . , 1987 ) . Membrane tension and cell rigidity are quite different parameters in that the cell rigidity represents the integrated struc - tural characteristics of the cytoskeleton , whereas the membrane tension is a property of the membrane bi - layer and its cytoskeletal affinity . It is reasonable to ex - pect that an increase in cell rigidity would cause an in - crease in membrane tension since cytochalasin B causes a decrease in both cell rigidity and membrane tension . Thus , the effects are clearly separable in the case of secretion . Previous studies in plant spheroplasts indicate that the response to an increase in membrane tension in - volves an increase in plasma membrane area , which re - sults from both the decrease in endocytosis and an in - crease in exocytosis ( Kell and Glaser , 1993 ) . Such an area expansion will relieve the tension caused by swell - ing , and , in the RBL cell , there is also a decrease in en - docytosis and an increase in exocytosis ( Dai and Sheetz , unpublished results ) . Plant protoplasts have a smooth spherical surface which makes interpretation of mem - brane tension simpler than for RBL or other animal cells with complex morphologies ( see Sheetz and Dai , 1996 ) . Nevertheless , RBL cells and molluscan neurons ( Dai , Sheetz , and Morris , unpublished data ) have in - creased membrane tension upon osmotic swelling and decreased upon shrinking which correlates with the in - creased exocytosis upon swelling and increased endocy - tosis upon shrinking . Thus , it appears that osmotic - induced changes in membrane tension alter exocytosis and endocytosis rates in both plant and animal cells in a manner consistent with the hypothesis that tension is a physical regulator of membrane area . on J une 19 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published July 1 , 1997 9 Dai et al . The molecular mechanisms by which changes in membrane tension can be transduced into changes in membrane trafficking are unknown . Endocytosis rates could be regulated physically because of the large forces needed to form endocytic vesicles ( Sheetz and Dai , 1996 ) . Both the membrane invagination and the actual budding would be inhibited by membrane ten - sion . For endocytosis , the in - plane tension would resist the early endocytic steps such as membrane invagina - tion and fission . The isotropic nature of the in - plane tension will mean that a force of about 22 pN is re - quired to produce an endocytic pit with an even higher force needed to complete the fission process . Such a force is in excess of forces generated by 10 myosin mol - ecules ( Finer et al . , 1994 ) . Regardless of the actual mechanism that is used by cells to regulate the membrane tension , these studies clearly show that the secretion - coupled endocytosis cor - relates with a decrease in membrane tension and that endocytosis is a way to recover the reduced membrane tension . Endocytosis is a mechanical phenomenon and can be rapidly regulated by mechanical factors which would explain the rapid endocytic response ( Thomas et al . , 1994 ) . Because the membrane tether force on ex - isting tethers drops rapidly upon the stimulation of se - cretion and the membrane bending stiffness stays rela - tively constant , we suggest that a membrane tension de - crease causes the tether force decrease . Thus , we favor the hypothesis that membrane tension can regulate plasma membrane surface area through alterations in the rates of endocytosis and exocytosis . Further , we sug - gest membrane tension is a primary regulator of en - docytic rate through its mechanical effect on the pro - teins responsible for forming the endocytic vesicle . We thank Dr . T . Meyer for providing the RBL cells and [ 3 H ] serotonin ; Dr . R . P . Siraganian ( Yale University ) for kindly provid - ing AA4 monoclonal antibody . We also thank Drs . K . Wang ( University of Texas at Austin ) , R . M . Hochmuth , D . Felsenfeld , C . G . Galbraith , T . Meyer , T . Macintosh , and members in Sheetz’s Lab for helpful comments on this manuscript . This work was supported by grants from NIH , MDA , and HFSP . Original version received 16 October 1996 and accepted version received 15 April 1997 . r e f e r e n c e s Benhamou , M . , E . H . Berenstein , M . Jouvin , and R . P . Siraganian . 1994 . The receptor with high affinity for IgE on rat mast cells is a functional receptor for rat IgG2a . Mol . Immunol . 31 : 1089 – 1097 . Berk , D . A . , and R . M . Hochmuth . 1992 . Lateral mobility of integral proteins in red blood cell tethers . Biophys . J . 61 : 9 – 18 . Bo , L . , and R . E . Waugh . 1989 . Determination of bilayer membrane bending stiffness by tether formation from giant , thin - walled ves - icles . Biophys . J . 55 : 509 – 517 . Dai , J . , and M . P . Sheetz . 1995 a . Mechanical properties of neuronal growth cone membranes studied by tether formation with laser optical tweezers . Biophys . J . 68 : 988 – 996 . Dai , J . , and M . P . Sheetz . 1995 b . Axon membrane flows from the growth cone to the cell body . Cell . 83 : 693 – 701 . Dai , J . , and M . P . Sheetz . 1995 c . Regulation of endocytosis , exocyto - sis and shape by membrane tension . In Protein Kinesis : Dynamics of Protein Trafficking and Stability . Coldspring Harbor Labora - tory Press , Coldspring Harbor , NY . 567 – 571 . Evans , E . A . , and A . Yeung . 1994 . Hidden dynamics in rapid changes of bilayer shape . Chem . Phys . Lipids . 73 : 39 – 56 . Finer , J . T . , R . M . Simmons , and J . A . Spudich . 1994 . Single myosin molecule mechanics : piconewton forces and nanometer steps . Nature ( Lond . ) . 368 : 113 – 119 . Foreman , J . C . , J . L . Mongar , and B . D . Gomperts . 1973 . Calcium ion - ophores and movement of calcium ions following the physiologi - cal stimulus to a secretory process . Nature ( Lond . ) . 245 : 249 – 251 . Gelles , J . , B . J . Schnapp , and M . P . Sheetz . 1988 . Tracking kinesin - driven movements with nanometer - scale precision . Nature ( Lond . ) . 331 : 450 – 453 . Glaser , A . , and E . Donath . 1988 . Osmotically - induced vesicle - mem - brane fusion in plant protoplasts . Studia Biophysica . 127 : 129 – 138 . Gustin , M . C . 1991 . Single - channel mechanosensitive currents . Sci - ence ( Wash . DC ) . 253 : 800 . Hagmann , J . , D . Dagan , and M . M . Burger . 1992 . Release of endoso - mal content induced by plasma membrane tension : video image intensification time lapse analysis . Exp . Cell Res . 198 : 298 – 304 . Hochmuth , R . M . , J . Shao , J . Dai , and M . P . Sheetz . 1996 . Deforma - tion and flow of membrane into tethers extracted from neuronal growth cones . Biophys . J . 70 : 358 – 369 . Hochmuth , RM . , H . C . Wiles , E . A . Evans , and J . T . McCown . 1982 . Extensional flow of erythrocyte membrane from cell body to elas - tic tether . II . Experiment . Biophys . J . 39 : 83 – 89 . Holowka , D . , and B . Baird . 1996 . Antigen - mediated IgE receptor aggregation and signaling : a window on cell surface structure and dynamics . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 25 : 79 – 162 . Kell , A . , and R . W . Glaser . 1993 . On the mechanical and dynamic properties of plant cell membranes : their role in growth , direct gene transfer and protoplast fusion . J . Theor . Biol . 160 : 41 – 62 . Liu , Z . Y . , J . I . Young , and E . L . Elson . 1987 . Rat basophilic leukemia cells stiffen when they secrete . J . Cell Biol . 105 : 2933 – 2943 . Ludowyke , R . I . , I . Peleg , M . A . Beaven , and R . S . Adelstein . 1989 . An - tigen - induced secretion of histamine and the phosphorylation of myosin by protein kinase C in rat basophilic leukemia cells . J . Biol . Chem . 264 : 12492 – 12501 . McNeil , P . L . , A . L . Kennedy , A . S . Waggoner , D . L . Taylor , and R . F . Murphy . 1985 . Light - scattering changes during chemotactic stim - ulation of human neutrophils : kinetics followed by flow cytome - try . Cytometry . 6 : 7 – 12 . Morris , C . E . , B . Williams , and W . J . Sigurdson . 1989 . Osmotically - induced volume changes in isolated cells of a pond snail . Comp . Biochem . Physiol . 92A : 497 – 483 . Oliver , C . , N . Sahara , S . Kitani , A . R . Robbins , L . M . Mertz , and R . P . Siraganian . 1992 . Binding of monoclonal antibody AA4 to gan - gliosides on rat basophilic leukemia cells produces changes to those seen with Fc epsilon receptor activation . J . Cell Biol . 116 : 635 – 646 . Pfeiffer , J . R . , J . C . Seagrave , B . H . Davis , G . G . Deanin , and J . M . Ol - on J une 19 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published July 1 , 1997 10 Membrane Tension Regulates Endocytosis iver . 1985 . Membrane and cytoskeletal changes associated with IgE - mediated serotonin release from rat basophilic leukemia cells . J . Cell Biol . 101 : 2145 – 2155 . Pybus , J . , and R . T . Tregear . 1975 . The relationship of adenosine triphosphatase activity to tension and power output of insect flight muscle . J . Physiol . ( Lond . ) . 247 : 71 – 89 . Reuzeau , C . , L . R . Mills , J . A . Harris , and C . E . Morris . 1995 . Discrete and reversible vacuole - like dilations induced by osmo - mechani - cal perturbations of neurons . J . Membr . Biol . 145 : 33 – 47 . Schnapp , B . J . , J . Gelles , and M . P . Sheetz . 1988 . Nanometer - scale measurements using video light microscope . Cell Motil . Cytoskel . 10 : 47 – 53 . Sheetz , M . P . , and J . Dai . 1996 . Modulation of membrane dynamics and cell motility by membrane tension . Trends Cell Biol . 6 : 85 – 89 . Smith , P . G . , T . Tokui , and M . Ikebe . 1995 . Mechanical strain in - creases contractile enzyme activity in cultured airway smooth muscle cells . Am . J . Physiol . 268 : L999 – L1005 . Spudich , A . 1994 . Myosin reorganization in activated RBL cell cor - relates temporally with stimulated secretion . Cell Motil . Cytoskel . 29 : 345 – 353 . Thomas , P . , A . K . Lee , J . G . Wong , and W . Almers . 1994 . A triggered mechanism retrieves membrane in seconds after Ca ( 2 (cid:49) ) - stimu - lated exocytosis in single pituitary cells . J . Cell Biol . 124 : 667 – 675 . Ting - Beall , H . P . , D . Needham , and R . M . Hochmuth . 1993 . Volume and osmotic properties of human neutrophils . Blood . 81 : 2774 – 2780 . Waugh , R . E . , and E . A . Evans . 1979 . Thermoelasticity of red blood cell membrane . Biophys . J . 26 : 115 – 132 . Waugh , R . E . , J . Song , S . Svetina , and B . Zeks . 1992 . Local and non - local curvature elasticity in bilayer membrane by tether forma - tion from lecithin vesicles . Biophys . J . 61 : 974 – 982 . on J une 19 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published July 1 , 1997