Challenges and Strategies in Cross - Cultural NLP Daniel Hershcovich 1 Stella Frank 2 Heather Lent 1 Miryam de Lhoneux 1 , 3 , 4 Mostafa Abdou 1 Stephanie Brandl 1 Emanuele Bugliarello 1 Laura Cabello Piqueras 1 Ilias Chalkidis 1 Ruixiang Cui 1 Constanza Fierro 1 Katerina Margatina 5 Phillip Rust 1 Anders Søgaard 1 1 University of Copenhagen 2 University of Trento 3 Uppsala University 4 KU Leuven 5 University of Shefﬁeld dh @ di . ku . dk Abstract Various efforts in the Natural Language Pro - cessing ( NLP ) community have been made to accommodate linguistic diversity and serve speakers of many different languages . How - ever , it is important to acknowledge that speak - ers and the content they produce and require , vary not just by language , but also by cul - ture . Although language and culture are tightly linked , there are important differences . Anal - ogous to cross - lingual and multilingual NLP , cross - cultural and multicultural NLP consid - ers these differences in order to better serve users of NLP systems . We propose a princi - pled framework to frame these efforts , and sur - vey existing and potential strategies . 1 A Framework for Cultural Awareness Language technology is rapidly advancing for a minority of the world’s languages . At the same time , the majority of languages are falling behind ( Joshi et al . , 2020 ) . It is essential that language technology can serve the speakers of a wide variety of languages , who come from a wide variety of cultures . In this paper , we argue that doing so requires accommodating these speakers not only on a linguistic level , but also on a cultural level . Culture , like language , is a term that is hard to pin down , but generally describes the way of life of a collective group of people , and distinguishes them from other groups with other cultures ( Mora , 2013 ; Shweder et al . , 2007 ) . Culture encompasses both material as well as non - material aspects , such as beliefs and linguistic practices ( Kendall et al . , 2005 ) . Moreover , since “ [ c ] ulture is the acquired knowledge people use to interpret experience and generate behavior” ( Spradley , 1972 ) , it is also the lens through which people understand linguistic messages . Culturally maladapted messages can 💬 Linguistic Form and Style ⛰ Common Ground 💙 Aboutness 🧭 Objectives and Values Figure 1 : The role of culture in NLP , illustrated by four dimensions along which cultures vary , and for which NLP can be culturally biased : linguistic form and style , common ground , aboutness , and objectives ( values ) . and will be misinterpreted ; NLP must be culturally sensitive in order to avoid doing harm . Language and culture interact in a number of ways ( see Figure 1 ) . This paper aims to illuminate these connections , in order to motivate and inform future NLP work . Beyond linguistic form and style , how things are expressed in language , they include common ground , the shared knowledge based on which people reason and communicate ; aboutness , what information people care to con - vey ; and objectives or values , the goals people strive for ( e . g . , when developing language technol - ogy ) . Since language and culture are intertwined , the different dimensions may be difﬁcult to tease apart ( Hovy and Yang , 2021 ) : for example , the lexi - con is shaped both by the need to convey infor - mation people care about , and by the conceptual categories grounded in the environment . Style is related to values and societal structure : formality levels in Japanese , for example , reﬂect the hierar - chy of Japanese society ( Gao , 2005 ) . Nevertheless , language and culture are not interchangeable terms . Culture varies greatly within languages ( Lin et al . , a r X i v : 2203 . 10020v1 [ c s . C L ] 18 M a r 2022 2018 ) . For example , the assumption that “English” in and of itself carries a single set of worldviews , interests and norms is unjustiﬁed ( Paul and Girju , 2009 ; Wilson et al . , 2016 ) . On the other hand , a relatively homogeneous culture can span multiple languages , as in the Nordic countries ( Sahlgren et al . , 2021 ) . Contributions . We propose a framework for un - derstanding the challenges that cultural diversity poses for NLP to serve all users , as well as the opportunities that NLP creates to understand these differences better . We consider four elements : lin - guistic form , common ground , aboutness and val - ues . We then survey existing strategies in NLP to address these challenges . Highlighting limitations in current strategies , as well as successful exam - ples , we propose directions for future development of cross - cultural NLP . 2 Linguistic Form and Style Linguistic form refers to non - semantic questions of how to formulate an utterance . Most work on cross - lingual NLP has focused on how linguistic form varies between languages . However , the impact of social and cultural factors on linguistic form and stylistic variations is rarely discussed ( Hovy and Yang , 2021 ) . Variation within language . How to circum - scribe and deﬁne a particular language is a difﬁcult problem ( Eberhard et al . , 2021 ) . A language spo - ken in different countries often becomes standard - ized in slightly different ways ( e . g . , German in Aus - tria and Germany ) . Geo - cultural variation within a language also gives rise to dialects ( Zampieri et al . , 2020 ; Wolfram and Friday , 1997 ; Brown et al . , 2020 ) , which in turn operate as an important sign of cultural identity ( Falck et al . , 2012 ) . In ad - dition , sociolects vary across social groups , which can include subcultures ( McCormack et al . , 2011 ) . Due to these variations , treating “a language” as a homogeneous mass limits cultural adaptation , and runs the risk of privileging certain cultures over others . Zhang et al . ( 2021 ) ﬁnd that pre - trained language models ( PLMs ; see § 6 ) reﬂect certain sociolects more than others . For example , there are considerable morphosyntactic variations between Spanish spoken in Spain and Argentina ( Bentivoglio and Sedano , 2011 ) , but they are not considered separately in a Spanish PLM ( Cañete et al . , 2020 ) . A PLM speciﬁc to the Algerian di - alect of Arabic performs better than a multilingual or general Arabic one ( Antoun et al . , 2020 ) in sen - timent classiﬁcation ( Abdaoui et al . , 2021 ) . Stylistic variation . Factors such as directness and formality are often associated with different communicative styles across cultures . For example , the level of politeness and thus also how offensive something is perceived depends very much on com - municative norms ( Gao , 2005 ; Larina , 2015 ) . Mis - understandings that arise from different commu - nicative styles can occur in any interaction between people of different cultural backgrounds . Thomas ( 1983 ) refers to this as pragmatic failure , namely the “inability to understand ‘what is meant by what is said”’ , due to how it is being said . Compara - tive stylistics ( Vinay and Darbelnet , 1995 ) aims to characterise these differences . The same intention ( e . g . , to be polite ) can lead to different forms in different cultures . For exam - ple , an offer of help can be made in an imperative form in Polish , while in English speaking Anglo - Saxon cultures , this form would be considered rude and so an interrogative form would be used in - stead ( Wierzbicka , 2009 ) . Similarly , German na - tive speakers tend to use a high level of directness , which would be considered offensive in English ( House and Kasper , 2011 ) . Based on the observa - tion that such differences exist , Ringel et al . ( 2019 ) applied distant supervision by inducing labels for English formality and sarcasm detection based on language—in this case German and Japanese , re - spectively . The expression and perception of emotion also varies across cultures , both in text ( Kirmayer et al . , 2001 ; Ryder et al . , 2008 ) and in face - to - face com - munication ( Hareli et al . , 2015 ) . These differences are critical for cross - cultural sentiment analysis ( Bautin et al . , 2008 ) and for text - based recognition of medical conditions such as depression . For ex - ample , Loveys et al . ( 2018 ) ﬁnd clear differences in linguistic form across English speakers of different ethnic identities with self - reported depression ( e . g . , the ratio of positive to negative emotion expres - sion ) . Not understanding cross - cultural variation could lead to misclassiﬁcation of movies , or worse , mis - diagnosing people . 3 Common Ground A culture is in part deﬁned by a shared common ground : the shared body of knowledge that can be talked about and that can be assumed as known by others . This common ground varies from culture to culture , and thus cross - cultural language use has to take into account shifts in common ground . These cross - cultural shifts , often correlating with cross - lingual shifts , are neglected in NLP . An un - derlying assumption in many approaches to mul - tilingual NLP is that “different languages share a similar semantic structure” ( Miceli Barone , 2016 ) . However , the assumption that there is a cross - lingual , cross - culturally common semantics to pre - serve fails when the common grounding does not match between cultures . Two relevant aspects here are the set of relevant concepts , closely identiﬁed with problems of lexicalisation , and common sense , i . e . , the relevant propositional knowledge used in reasoning and entailment . Conceptualisation . People carve up the world using conceptual categories ( Margolis and Lau - rence , 2021 ) . While some general or even universal patterns exist ( Wierzbicka , 1996 ) , these categories can and do differ between languages and cultures : the domain of colour is a famous example ( Berlin and Kay , 1969 ) , but cross - cultural differences are also reﬂected in kinship systems ( the lexicaliza - tion of family structures Murdock , 1970 ) , spatial relations ( Bowerman and Choi , 2001 ) and basic ob - jects ( e . g . , where to draw the distinction between a ‘cup’ and a ‘mug’ , or the ‘hand’ and the ‘arm’ ; Majid et al . , 2015 ) . Translating between languages thus entails translating between conceptualisations , which can be impossible if the conceptual ground - ing is not available ( is this Danish “kop” an En - glish ‘cup’ or a ‘mug ? ’ ) —this is the motivation behind multimodal , i . e . , visually grounded , trans - lation ( Specia et al . , 2016 ) . Data collected from a single culture may contain concepts that do not easily map across cultures , as for example seen in the recent MarVL dataset ( Liu et al . , 2021 ) , in which about a quarter of concepts from a sample of non - Western cultures did not map to English concepts ( as represented by WordNet ) . Commonsense knowledge . “Common sense” is the knowledge that is held in common by a commu - nity and culture , the communal knowledge bank that can be presumed to be known by everyone . Common sense thus covers a diverse set of knowl - edge types , from physical and temporal reasoning to psychological , social and moral judgements ( Sap et al . , 2020 ) . Some aspects of common sense are fairly universal , in particular those that arise from inhabiting a grounded human body on earth ( drop - ping a glass of juice onto a hard surface is likely to cause a mess ; the baby might be crying because it’s hungry ) . On the other hand , axioms of social and moral common sense , for example the how and why of rituals such as marriages , vary between cultures ( Acharya et al . , 2021 ) . Moving between different banks of common sense can involve different strategies to either pro - vide missing background / common knowledge , or to transfer the content to a target - culture appropri - ate setting ( see § 6 . 3 ) . 4 Aboutness Cultures promote different topics and issues ( Seib - ert et al . , 2002 ) , sometimes by necessity , sometimes by accident . 1 Some of the domains commonly considered in ( English - speaking , Anglo - western ) NLP are irrelevant to some cultures , while others mean different things to different cultures , i . e . , they involve completely different practices . An exam - ple of the former is beer reviews , a go - to domain in sentiment analysis ( Zeng et al . , 2019 ; Ji et al . , 2020 ; Paranjape et al . , 2020 ) . Beer reviews are hardly meaningful in cultures with no beer con - sumption . An example of the latter , i . e . , a domain that is used differently across cultures and social groups , is Twitter ( Hine , 2020 ) . As an example of multi - domain sentiment analysis , Liu et al . ( 2018 ) consider cameras , laptops , restaurants , and movies , within the context of data from U . S . American web - sites . These domains , however , apply differently in other cultures : restaurants are more important in some cultures ( e . g . , Copenhagen hipsters ) than others ( e . g . , Sámi ) ; similarly , laptops have not pen - etrated cultures equally and have in fact been found to change culture ( Hansen et al . , 2014 ) . Beyond conceptualisation differences ( see § 3 ) , Liu et al . ( 2021 ) point out how the visual concepts at the core of many multimodal NLP tasks reﬂect a Northern American and Western European bias in the underlying data sources , from which im - ages were scraped . As an alternative , in their new 1 What we , as human beings , are interested in is , in part , a product of our group memberships . Our group member - ship determines conditions , e . g . , our dependence on weather , agriculture , livestock , etc . , making some topics vital , and pro - motes others e . g . , through fashion , trends , etc . Heidegger ( 1927 , 1953 ) refers to the former as the facticity aspect of our caring ; the latter as the fallenness aspect . Unbiased treatment of the facticity aspect of what cultures care about , has been argued to be particularly important from an ethical perspective ( Nelson , 2008 ) . dataset ( MarVL ) , they let the selection of both con - cepts and images be entirely driven by native speak - ers . This corrects for some existing asymmetries in what our evaluation data tends to be about . For example , Althoff et al . ( 2014 ) created a dataset en - tirely devoted to pizzas ; in Liu et al . ( 2021 ) , mod - els’ ability to recognise vadas , an Indian food , is evaluated . People describe the same events differently across cultures . News reports emphasise different goals , motivations , methods and content in differ - ent parts of the world ( Bandura , 1986 ; Li , 1997 ; Loo , 2019 ) . However , many news resources used in NLP research reﬂect only some cultures ( Breed , 1955 ; Galtung and Ruge , 1965 ; Marcus et al . , 1993 ) . As NLP technologies have been widely adopted to build multilingual news generators ( Zhang et al . , 2016 ; Xu et al . , 2020 ; Jin et al . , 2020 ) , it is impor - tant that these differences are taken into account in language generation . 5 Objectives and Values Common objectives in NLP include progress , accu - racy , fairness , robustness and interpretability . They are driven by the research community , and reﬂect the values of this community : novelty , for exam - ple , is highly esteemed , which is not a value held by more conservative , tradition - valuing cultures . Grounding these objectives explicitly in ethical values and norms , and acknowledging that these may differ across cultures , is essential for cross - cultural NLP . Jiang et al . ( 2021 ) , for example , in - troduce C OMMONSENSE N ORM B ANK and Delphi , a moral reasoning resource and model , respectively , reﬂecting “English - speaking cultures of the United States in the 21st century” . However , researchers , practitioners , regulators and users may belong to different cultures and have different objectives and values ( Talat et al . , 2021 ) . Another common goal in the NLP community is the eventual expansion of all NLP technologies to low - resource languages . However , as Bird ( 2020 ) points out , this goal must not overshadow , or be placed above , the speciﬁc desires and needs of a given language community , as every community will have their own objectives for what they do and do not want for their language with regards to technology . Without building relationships with the communities for which we aim to develop NLP , there is a serious risk for imposing our own objec - tives on the community . Importantly , entire categories of applications and tasks may be driven by cultural assumptions . For example , the main objective of text summarisation is brevity ( Jørgensen and Søgaard , 2021 ) . Likewise , while ﬂuency is a common objective of machine translation , it may in fact , be less important than comprehensibility for users ( Castilho et al . , 2018 ) . Values differ across cultures . Values are an im - portant part of non - materialistic culture , as these values deﬁne what a speciﬁc culture deems to be good or valuable , as opposed to bad and undesir - able ( Kendall et al . , 2005 ) . Accordingly , these values help inform what is accepted as normal and ethical behaviour , and shape common cultural atti - tudes . Aspects that clash against a culture’s values , norms , and ethics , may often be taboo or even ille - gal . As cultures around the world hold different val - ues , their norms and ethics are inevitably different , too ( Schäfer et al . , 2015 ; Hanel et al . , 2018 ) . For example , in some cultures , alcohol consumption is prohibited for religious reasons , and thus may not be normal or acceptable behaviour ; meanwhile drinking alcohol can be seen as normal behaviour by some cultures without this shared value . For this reason , beer reviews in an application , for example , may be seen not only as irrelevant ( see § 4 ) , but even as offensive . While these values can and do change greatly from culture to culture , end - users of NLP systems deserve technologies that are suitable to the culture that they belong to . To this end , the preservation of cultural values , norms , and ethics in models intended for users from different cultures , is another important aspect of cross - cultural NLP ( Solaiman and Dennison , 2021 ) . Fairness and combating biases . Many recent studies in NLP have explored strategies to counter - act unwanted biases ( according to the community’s values , see above ) in models , resulting from preju - dices present in society . These biases are implicit in the data used to train our models , and become baked into the models themselves ( Bolukbasi et al . , 2016 ; Sap et al . , 2019 ; Sun et al . , 2019 ; Blodgett et al . , 2020 ; Bender et al . , 2021 ) . Because NLP datasets are composed of utterances from members of a larger culture , the resulting biases constitute a partial reﬂection of that culture’s values , norms , and ethics . For example , work in NLP on gender bias demonstrate that there is a pervasive problem with sexism in models ( a direct result of sexist at - titudes present in society ) , and explore ways to remedy this ( Friedman et al . , 2019 ; Zhao et al . , 2019 ; Webster et al . , 2021 ; Baker Gillis , 2021 ) . Accordingly , just as members of any culture de - serve language technology that truly serves them , members of vulnerable groups and marginalised members in larger cultures deserve such as well . Current research in addressing fairness and com - bating biases in models demonstrates how NLP can be used to tackle the challenge of inequitable cultural attitudes . In other words , the goal of coun - tering bias in NLP can be seen as shifting existing cultures into hopefully more equitable ones . Conﬂicting objectives . With regards to cultural values , cross - cultural NLP lies at the intersection of the two important , but potentially conﬂicting , cross - roads of multicultural pluralism and societal equity : cultures will have different values , which should be respected and represented for end - users ; mean - while , cultures will also have some inequitable atti - tudes that hurt different end - users , and NLP should be part of the solution . Together , these conﬂicting aspects land cross - cultural NLP in the impossible position of needing to both preserve cultural val - ues , while also minimising harmful cultural biases . We acknowledge that these issues become increas - ingly difﬁcult to disentangle , especially for more difﬁcult or taboo aspects of culture . On the one hand , it is dangerous for members of one culture to impose values onto the others ( i . e . this would , in fact , contribute to NLP colonisation—see § 7 ) , and on the other hand , it is dangerous to leave marginalised groups vulnerable , when we can di - minish bias against them . While none of the strate - gies we discuss in § 6 offers a simple solution to this challenge , our goal is to bring this important conundrum in cross - cultural NLP to the commu - nity’s attention . To help navigate this convoluted space , and thus ensure end - users have access to rel - evant NLP systems , we encourage people working in this space to collaborate with members of the culture relevant to their work , as they are the best equipped to judge what cultural aspects can appro - priately be challenged . Additionally , new works in AI ethics should also be considered ( Nanayakkara et al . , 2021 ; Hagendorff , 2020 ; Prunkl et al . , 2021 ; Pitta et al . , 1999 ; Mohamed et al . , 2020 ) . An in - ternational regulatory instrument is essential for the responsible development of AI , a task that UN - ESCO is in the process of undertaking . 2 2 https : / / en . unesco . org / courier / 2018 - 3 / towards - global - code - ethics - artiﬁcial - intelligence - research 6 Strategies We have identiﬁed several challenges along four dimensions of culture . Here , we highlight gen - eral strategies for cross - cultural NLP . We identify three main areas where we could direct efforts to - wards mitigating cross - cultural disparities : data collection , model training , and translation . Data is the backbone of NLP and any efforts towards cross - cultural NLP needs to consider the strategies involved in collecting and annotating it . Transfer learning is central to cross - lingual NLP and can serve an important role in cross - cultural NLP . Fi - nally , translation is used to communicate between languages and will often be necessary when com - municating between cultures . We explain what can be done within each of these areas each in turn . 6 . 1 Data Collection The most fundamental issue is the representation disparity in our data , i . e . , not all cultures are ( equally ) represented . While the volume of multi - lingual datasets increases and multilingual NLU benchmarks are becoming available ( Hu et al . , 2020 ; Liang et al . , 2020 ; Ruder et al . , 2021 ) , this does not guarantee cross - cultural representation . There are two main factors : source of data ( e . g . , me - dia outlet ) and origin of annotations ( e . g . , auto - matic vs human - generated ) . To have truly diverse datasets , we should both ensure that they not only represent diverse sources , but also multiple per - spectives in terms of annotations , when applicable . Data selection and curation . Relevant to the im - pact of the source of data , Dodge et al . ( 2021 ) dis - cuss how the Colossal Clean Crawled Corpus ( C4 ; Raffel et al . , 2020 ) , an English web - based corpus , is skewed in favour of US governmental institu - tions and main - stream US media , while data ﬁlter - ing , which tries to remove slurs , or obscene words , disproportionately removes text from and about minorities ( e . g . , African American and LGBTQ + ) . Similarly , data from Wikipedia is heavily used in multilingual NLP even though it has been shown to be culturally biased ( Callahan and Herring , 2011 ) . To mitigate the risks associated with using cultur - ally biased data , data selection or curation methods should strive to use data sources that are appropri - ate for the target culture of downstream NLP ap - plications . Large , general - purpose datasets should be curated so as to be as unbiased as possible , and carefully documented ( Jo and Gebru , 2020 ; Bender et al . , 2021 ) . As examples of culturally diverse data collection , Liu et al . ( 2021 ) and Yin et al . ( 2021 ) recruit geo - diverse annotators from Africa , Asia and the Ameri - cas who are tasked with also providing the data ( the images ) along with the annotations ( image descrip - tions ) . However , these dataset are small and thus limited to evaluation only ; the cost and effort asso - ciated with collecting sufﬁcient data to train mod - ern NLP models means that ﬁnding culture - speciﬁc data to cover the enormous diversity of cultures rep - resented on earth remains a formidable challenge . A diverse and open community , however , facili - tates scalability in this regard . Examples for such communities include Universal Dependencies , ded - icated to manual annotation of morphosyntactic datasets for over one hundred languages , cover - ing the highest typological diversity to date among such datasets ( Nivre et al . , 2020 ) . As another exam - ple , the Masakhane community aims to strengthen NLP research for African languages . It has created MasakhaNER ( Adelani et al . , 2021 ) , a Named En - tity Recognition dataset for 10 African languages , collected by native speakers of these languages . Data annotation . With respect to annotation practices , a diverse pool of annotators reduces the risk of cultural bias . In the case of subjective tasks such as detecting affect , aggression , and hate speech , annotators may systematically disagree with one another due to cultural differences that are often reﬂected by their biases and values ( Da - vani et al . , 2021 ) . Annotator disagreements may capture important nuances in such tasks that are of - ten ignored while aggregating annotations to a sin - gle ( possibly hegemonic ) ground truth . Release of all annotations with each dataset , even disagreeing ones , allows training models that generalise better ( Plank et al . , 2014 ; Pavlick and Kwiatkowski , 2019 ; Prabhakaran et al . , 2021 ; Gordon et al . , 2022 ) . Careful documentation of the annotation process also plays an important role . In a recent survey of machine learning papers ( including NLP ones ) , Geiger et al . ( 2020 ) reported a wide divergence in the level of documentation about methodological practices in human annotation . They advocate for the importance of human annotation within the re - search process , arguing that it ought to be given as much attention , care , and concern as is currently placed on performance based metrics . When arguing for an increasingly diverse ‘par - ticipatory design’ ( Bodker et al . , 2009 ) , however , it is important to consider the values , ideologies , codes , narratives , and power relations which gov - ern the interaction between the assemblies of actors involved in data collection and annotation . This is the perspective of social - cultural studies and other critical viewpoints from the humanities ( Mainsah and Morrison , 2014 ; Gray and Suri , 2019 ) . Annotation projection . Of course , data collec - tion for many languages and cultures can be costly . Using parallel data and a word alignment tool , an - notation ( for example a syntactic tree ) in a source language can be transferred to a target language without extra annotation ( Yarowsky et al . , 2001 ; Hwa et al . , 2005 ) . A related method to create multi - lingual datasets is translating a dataset ( typically in English ) into other languages ( often using machine translation ) . While not usually called annotation projection , it can be considered a variation of this method , since the source annotation is ported to the translated data . For example , in XNLI ( Con - neau et al . , 2018 ) , the premise and hypothesis pair is translated from English to other languages and the label is reused for the translated pair . These methods help leverage data from high - resource lan - guages to create more data for low - resource lan - guages ( Agi´c , 2017 ) . However , these methods risk ignoring target culture complexity or forcing the source culture concepts on the target culture . For example , En - glish common sense datasets ( Singh et al . , 2021 ) include culture - speciﬁc concepts such as food in - gredients , 3 rituals and celebrations , 4 and societal expectations . 5 Translating this dataset into other languages will require making decisions about how , and whether , to modify these items to make them more intelligible in the target culture . Lin et al . ( 2021a ) use machine translation to translate two common - sense reasoning datasets from English into 14 other languages . They attempt to deal with difﬁcult cases by automatically ﬂagging and re - moving examples which contain ‘social keywords’ from the dataset , or that are ( again , automatically ) labeled as containing non - neutral sentiment . How - ever , these methods are unlikely to capture all ex - amples of social behaviour and cannot identify ex - amples of cultural over - speciﬁcity ( sports teams , 3 A hot sauce is going to be hotter if it uses jalapeño pep - pers rather than habanero . 4 Colt doesn’t have any kids . Finley has four kids . There - fore , Finley is more likely to go Trick or Treating . 5 Many people disapproved of the widow waiting one week after his [ sic ] wife’s death to start dating again , rather than one year . jalapeños ) . Automatically translated training data can lead to worse performance than native tar - get language data ( Liu et al . , 2021 ) . However , if evaluation data is automatically translated too , we have no trivial way of exposing cultural biases introduced by the projection process . Culturally - aware evaluation thus necessitates data annotated directly in the target language , or at least culturally - sensitive human translations . Ponti et al . ( 2020 ) point out that literal trans - lation of datasets is sometimes impossible or un - desirable due to culture - speciﬁc concepts in the source that may be missing or unnatural in the tar - get . In their multilingual extension of the English Choice of Plausible Alternatives ( COPA ; Roem - mele et al . , 2011 ) dataset , they therefore asked “carefully chosen” human translators to perform culturally - sensitive translation , and either para - phrase , substitute the original concepts with similar ones that exist in the target language , or leverage phonetically transcribed loan words . Human translation , or original data from the tar - get culture , is clearly the expensive option , but will often be the only way to avoid cultural bias . Only translating / generating high - quality evaluation data is becoming an attractive middle ground option ( Liu et al . , 2021 ; Ponti et al . , 2020 ; Yin et al . , 2021 ) that at least allows us to judge the success of cross - lingual transfer in a culturally appropriate way . 6 . 2 Model Training Models can be culturally biased even when trained on culturally diverse data . On the other end , di - verse cultural representation can in some cases be achieved with speciﬁc training strategies , not only data selection and annotation . Transfer learning and pre - training . A com - mon strategy in machine learning is to transfer the knowledge acquired for a task , domain or language to another . It is used extensively in the context of cross - lingual learning , motivated by similarities between languages and cultures : if only the form differs between languages , then models can learn to abstract away from it and transfer from resource - rich languages , obviating task - speciﬁc training data in many languages ( Agi´c , 2017 ; Wu and Dredze , 2019 ; Blloshmi et al . , 2020 ) . In this context , approaches for creating cross - lingual word embeddings ( Klementiev et al . , 2012 ; Ammar et al . , 2016 ) are based on the assumption that the semantic spaces of different languages are approximately isomorphic . However , this assump - tion is violated in practice ( Søgaard et al . , 2018 , 2019 ) . Among linguistic reasons , cultural factors ( e . g . , conceptualisation ) can play a role in the mis - match between the spaces . Though hardly ever considered when selecting the source language for model transfer , considering cultural factors im - proves performance on target languages in prag - matically motivated tasks ( Sun et al . , 2021 ) . In recent years , model transfer has been the mainstream paradigm with the advent of pre - trained language models ( PLMs ) , and speciﬁcally , multilingual PLMs such as mBERT ( Devlin et al . , 2019 ) and XLM - R ( Conneau et al . , 2020 ) . Lan - guage models require massive amounts of data to pre - train . Since corpora are largely skewed in favour of few languages , this leads to cross - lingual disparities . To mitigate this issue , Con - neau and Lample ( 2019 ) introduced an exponential smoothing of the language sampling rate leading to a less skewed data selection . Conneau et al . ( 2020 ) and Xue et al . ( 2021 ) further studied the effect of the language sampling rate , and found that more uniform sampling improves performance in low - resource languages , but hurts high - resource languages . The reliance on pre - training means that what PLMs encode has far - reaching consequences . Sev - eral works ﬁnd differences in culture - speciﬁc com - monsense knowledge in multilingual PLMs , de - pending on the language used to probe them . These include differences in factual knowledge ( Kass - ner et al . , 2021 ) , grounding of time - of - day expres - sions ( Shwartz , 2022 ) , and social value ( Lin et al . , 2021b ) . Understanding these differences better will facilitate cultural adaptation and debiasing of NLP systems . Training . The common methodology for train - ing machine learning models ( e . g . , empirical loss minimisation ) relies on maximising average perfor - mance across training examples ( instead of groups , e . g . , languages ) , which often leads to low minority performance , a phenomenon named representation disparity ( Hashimoto et al . , 2018 ) . Model perfor - mance for minorities is often disregarded in favour of majority groups , as shown for race ( Blodgett and O’Connor , 2017 ) , gender ( Jørgensen and Søgaard , 2021 ) , and age ( Zhang et al . , 2021 ) . Deriving fair models from biased data is a promising counter - measure ( Mehrabi et al . , 2021 ) . In a cross - cultural setting , methodologies that account for model up - dates for different groups ( Hashimoto et al . , 2018 ; Sagawa et al . , 2020 ; Levy et al . , 2020 ) could po - tentially reduce cultural biases . Most methods to balance for bias require access to protected demo - graphic attributes ( Sagawa et al . , 2020 ) , and these only partially reﬂect culture . In this direction , Zhou et al . ( 2021 ) and Ponti et al . ( 2021 ) propose using Group Distribution - ally Robust Optimisation ( group DRO ; Oren et al . , 2019 ) to optimise worst - case performance across languages . Similarly , de Lhoneux et al . ( 2022 ) used Worst - Case - Aware Curriculum Learning ( Zhang et al . , 2020 ) to improve group ( language ) perfor - mance parity in cross - lingual dependency parsing . However , Lent et al . ( 2021 ) ﬁnd that group DRO has no beneﬁt in a low - resource settings , namely for Creole languages . Such techniques can poten - tially be applied to pre - training multilingual lan - guage models with better cross - lingual parity , possi - bly in addition to improved data sampling . Further - more , a fairer model with respect to other attributes , besides the language dimension , can lead to less culturally biased models . While these measures are widely discussed in a multilingual framework , they are also applicable in a monolingual setting to favour a more equal representation of different cultures in a single language ( e . g . , a fairer rep - resentation of English - speaking communities for English NLP ) . Limitations . Nonetheless , cross - lingual counter - measures are culture - agnostic . In other words , even if we sample languages equally , cross - cultural dis - parity persists , as data for a given language is also not balanced in terms of sources , and hence cul - tures . However , one can directly target a more diverse cross - cultural representation by applying the same principles in terms of cultures instead of languages . Ideally , methods such as data sampling or group DRO should facilitate generalisation of universally - common knowledge from highly - represented cul - tures , while granting equal representation to minor - ity cultures . Overemphasising the former is prob - lematic as it contributes to cultural homogenisation , while the latter enables mitigation of cross - cultural biases present in the underlying training data and models . There is no substitute for a larger repre - sentation of minority cultures in the data used for training and evaluation . Finally , practical concerns include the level of granularity at which cultural groups are deﬁned and annotated in the data ( e . g . , as metadata attributes or criteria for splitting text corpora ) . There is a contin - uum from representing each individual separately ( which may raise privacy concerns ) to considering large , culturally diverse groups ( such as all Spanish speakers ) as a homogeneous mass . Again , NLP dataset creators as well as model developers must be aware of the trade - off between generalisation and adaptation here . 6 . 3 Translation Beyond NLP for various cultures , cross - cultural NLP can be used for bridging between cultures , investigating cross - cultural communication . The classic example is machine translation ( MT ) be - tween languages . In MT , semantic divergences are usually treated as noise , or in any case , as imperfect translations ( Briakou and Carpuat , 2021 ) . A com - monly accepted criterion for translation adequacy is that the semantics of the source are preserved in the output ( Carl , 1998 ; Sulem et al . , 2015 ) . How - ever , when applied for translation across cultures , translation may have different objectives . The same meaning may be inappropriate in the target culture , regardless of ﬂuency , and require adjustments : this is referred to as adaptation in the translation ﬁeld ( Vinay and Darbelnet , 1995 ) . Peskov et al . ( 2021 ) observed that translated sentences are often opaque without cultural context ( e . g . , “I saw Merkel eating a Berliner from Dietsch on the ICE” ) , and propose adapting entities to the target culture by substituting them with their approximate counterparts . As an al - ternative strategy , adding explanations , for example in the form of appositives ( Kementchedjhieva et al . , 2020 ) , can elucidate entities that are known in the source culture but not in the target culture . These are examples of cross - cultural translation ( Sper - ber et al . , 1994 ) . This kind of adaptation can also be helpful in culturally - situated dialogue , where some users may be less familiar with the common ground of a particular culture ; in such cases , Abou - Khalil et al . ( 2018 ) propose to explain by analogy to concepts from the user’s home culture . Cross - cultural translation is not necessarily al - ways between languages , but could take the form of style transfer within a language ( Shen et al . , 2017 ; Prabhumoye et al . , 2018 ) . For example , Jhamtani et al . ( 2017 ) transform text from modern English to Shakespearean English . Roy et al . ( 2015 ) approach personalised marketing by adapting the style of marketing messages for speciﬁc audience segments , deﬁned by geographic location and occupation . Evaluation of cross - cultural translation is chal - lenging , as the task is not always well - deﬁned . In particular , for style transfer , human evaluation is more reliable than automatic evaluation , but still suffers from non - standard evaluation proto - cols ( Briakou et al . , 2021a , b ) . Reference - based automatic evaluation methods are particularly un - reliable in this case , as the assumption that there is just one ( or a few ) correct translations is ostensibly violated ( Song et al . , 2013 ; Reiter , 2018 ) . This stresses the need for culture - sensitive human evalu - ation . 7 Conclusion In this paper , we have touched on a number of ways in which cultural knowledge , preferences and val - ues can affect NLP practices . It is important to acknowledge the breadth of culture in all of these aspects , if we should aspire to a more cross - cultural NLP . However , we do not pretend to cover all rel - evant aspects of culture in our taxonomy : many works in sociology posture frameworks to better explain and catalogue the speciﬁc elements that compose a culture ( Dant , 1999 ; Hofstede , 2001 ; Kendall et al . , 2005 ; Woodward , 2007 ) . We encour - age further investigation of their impact on NLP . Finally , present - day computational science have inherited colonising practices , which in NLP are realised as “homogenisation of perspectives” and “algorithmic monoculture” ( Kleinberg and Ragha - van , 2021 ; Bommasani et al . , 2021 ) . While there is general agreement in the NLP community that we need to represent cultures from outside Western , Educated , Industrialised , Rich , and Democratic ( WEIRD ) societies ( Henrich et al . , 2010 ) , represen - tation alone is not enough if we do not also allow them to prioritise their goals and values , rather than the goals and values held by the NLP community . Decolonisation ( Bird , 2020 ; Mohamed et al . , 2020 ; Birhane and Guest , 2021 ) aims to dismantle harm - ful power asymmetries and concepts of knowledge , turning us instead towards a “pluriversal episte - mology of the future” ( Mignolo , 2012 ) that unlike universalisms , acknowledges and supports a wider radius of socio - political , ecological , cultural , and economic needs ( Mohamed et al . , 2020 ) . Acknowledgements The authors thank Desmond Elliott and Vinit Ravishankar for participating in preliminary dis - cussions about the ideas presented in this paper . We are grateful to Omri Abend , members of the CoAStaL NLP group and the anonymous review - ers for their constructive feedback . This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Skłodowska - Curie grant agree - ment No 801199 ( Heather Lent and Emanuele Bugliarello ) . This work is also partly funded by the Innovation Fund Denmark ( IFD ) 6 under File No . 0175 - 00011A ( Ilias Chalkidis and Anders Sø - gaard ) . Miryam de Lhoneux was funded by the Swedish Research Council ( grant 2020 - 00437 ) . 8 Ethical Aspects and Broader Impact As discussed in § 5 , norms and ethics are culture - dependent , and in some cases there is a conﬂict between maintaining researchers’ and practition - ers’ ethical values ( such as social equity ) and mul - ticultural acceptance . It is not our place to settle this conﬂict or to provide answers , but we stress that asking the question , of which values should prevail in each case , is essential for cross - cultural NLP . Furthermore , language technology for local communities must involve the members of those communities in an active , participatory manner , in order to decolonise language technology and re - spect the sovereignty of local people over their data ( Bird , 2020 ; Mukhija et al . , 2021 ) . References Amine Abdaoui , Mohamed Berrimi , Mourad Oussalah , and Abdelouahab Moussaoui . 2021 . Dziribert : a pre - trained language model for the Algerian dialect . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2109 . 12346 . Victoria Abou - Khalil , Toru Ishida , Masayuki Otani , Brendan Flanagan , Hiroaki Ogata , and Donghui Lin . 2018 . Learning culturally situated dialogue strategies to support language learners . Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning , 13 ( 1 ) : 1 – 20 . Anurag Acharya , Kartik Talamadupula , and Mark A . Finlayson . 2021 . Toward an atlas of cultural com - monsense for machine reasoning . In Proceedings of the Workshop on Common Sense Knowledge Graphs ( CSKGs ) , Online . Held in conjunction with the 35th AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence ( AAAI 2021 ) . David Ifeoluwa Adelani , Jade Z . Abbott , Graham Neubig , Daniel D’souza , Julia Kreutzer , Constan - tine Lignos , Chester Palen - Michel , Happy Buza - 6 https : / / innovationsfonden . dk / en aba , Shruti Rijhwani , Sebastian Ruder , Stephen Mayhew , Israel Abebe Azime , Shamsuddeen Has - san Muhammad , Chris Chinenye Emezue , Joyce Nakatumba - Nabende , Perez Ogayo , Aremu An - uoluwapo , Catherine Gitau , Derguene Mbaye , Jesu - joba O . Alabi , Seid Muhie Yimam , Tajuddeen Gwad - abe , Ignatius Ezeani , Rubungo Andre Niyongabo , Jonathan Mukiibi , Verrah Otiende , Iroro Orife , Davis David , Samba Ngom , Tosin P . Adewumi , Paul Rayson , Mofetoluwa Adeyemi , Gerald Muriuki , Emmanuel Anebi , Chiamaka Chukwuneke , Nkiruka Odu , Eric Peter Wairagala , Samuel Oyerinde , Clemencia Siro , Tobius Saul Bateesa , Temilola Oloyede , Yvonne Wambui , Victor Akinode , Deb - orah Nabagereka , Maurice Katusiime , Ayodele Awokoya , Mouhamadane Mboup , Dibora Gebrey - ohannes , Henok Tilaye , Kelechi Nwaike , Degaga Wolde , Abdoulaye Faye , Blessing Sibanda , Ore - vaoghene Ahia , Bonaventure F . P . Dossou , Kelechi Ogueji , Thierno Ibrahima Diop , Abdoulaye Diallo , Adewale Akinfaderin , Tendai Marengereke , and Sa - lomey Osei . 2021 . MasakhaNER : Named entity recognition for African languages . In AfricaNLP workshop at EACL 2021 . Željko Agi ´ c . 2017 . Cross - lingual parser selection for low - resource languages . In Proceedings of the NoDaLiDa 2017 Workshop on Universal Dependen - cies ( UDW 2017 ) , pages 1 – 10 , Gothenburg , Sweden . Association for Computational Linguistics . Tim Althoff , Cristian Danescu - Niculescu - Mizil , and Dan Jurafsky . 2014 . How to ask for a favor : A case study on the success of altruistic requests . In Proceedings of the International Conference on We - blogs and Social Media ( ICWSM ) . Waleed Ammar , George Mulcaire , Yulia Tsvetkov , Guillaume Lample , Chris Dyer , and Noah A . Smith . 2016 . Massively multilingual word embeddings . ArXiv , abs / 1602 . 01925 . Wissam Antoun , Fady Baly , and Hazem Hajj . 2020 . AraBERT : Transformer - based model for Arabic lan - guage understanding . In Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Open - Source Arabic Corpora and Pro - cessing Tools , with a Shared Task on Offensive Lan - guage Detection , pages 9 – 15 , Marseille , France . Eu - ropean Language Resource Association . Noa Baker Gillis . 2021 . Sexism in the judiciary : The importance of bias deﬁnition in NLP and in our courts . In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Gen - der Bias in Natural Language Processing , pages 45 – 54 , Online . Association for Computational Linguis - tics . Albert Bandura . 1986 . Social Foundations of Thought and Action : A Social Cognitive Theory . Prentice - Hall series in social learning theory . Prentice - Hall . Mikhail Bautin , Lohit Vijayarenu , and Steven Skiena . 2008 . International sentiment analysis for news and blogs . In ICWSM . Emily M . Bender , Timnit Gebru , Angelina McMillan - Major , and Shmargaret Shmitchell . 2021 . On the dangers of stochastic parrots : Can language mod - els be too big ? . In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness , Accountability , and Trans - parency , FAccT ’21 , page 610 – 623 , New York , NY , USA . Association for Computing Machinery . Paola Bentivoglio and Mercedes Sedano . 2011 . Mor - phosyntactic variation in Spanish - speaking Latin America . The handbook of Hispanic sociolinguis - tics , pages 168 – 186 . Brent Berlin and Paul Kay . 1969 . Basic color terms : Their universality and evolution . University of Cali - fornia Press . Steven Bird . 2020 . Decolonising speech and lan - guage technology . In Proceedings of the 28th Inter - national Conference on Computational Linguistics , pages 3504 – 3519 , Barcelona , Spain ( Online ) . Inter - national Committee on Computational Linguistics . Abeba Birhane and Olivia Guest . 2021 . Towards de - colonising computational sciences . Kvinder , Køn & Forskning , 29 ( 2 ) : 60 – 73 . Rexhina Blloshmi , Rocco Tripodi , and Roberto Navigli . 2020 . XL - AMR : Enabling cross - lingual AMR pars - ing with transfer learning techniques . In Proceed - ings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ( EMNLP ) , pages 2487 – 2500 , Online . Association for Computational Linguistics . Su Lin Blodgett , Solon Barocas , Hal Daumé III , and Hanna Wallach . 2020 . Language ( technology ) is power : A critical survey of “bias” in NLP . In Pro - ceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso - ciation for Computational Linguistics , pages 5454 – 5476 , Online . Association for Computational Lin - guistics . Su Lin Blodgett and Brendan T . O’Connor . 2017 . Racial disparity in natural language processing : A case study of social media African - American En - glish . In Workshop on Fairness , Accountability , and Transparency in Machine Learning ( FAT / ML 2017 ) . Keld Bodker , Finn Kensing , and Jesper Simonsen . 2009 . Participatory IT design : Designing for busi - ness and workplace realities . MIT press . Tolga Bolukbasi , Kai - Wei Chang , James Y Zou , Venkatesh Saligrama , and Adam T Kalai . 2016 . Man is to computer programmer as woman is to homemaker ? Debiasing word embeddings . In Ad - vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 29 . Curran Associates , Inc . Rishi Bommasani , Drew A Hudson , Ehsan Adeli , Russ Altman , Simran Arora , Sydney von Arx , Michael S Bernstein , Jeannette Bohg , Antoine Bosselut , Emma Brunskill , et al . 2021 . On the opportunities and risks of foundation models . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2108 . 07258 . Melissa Bowerman and Soonja Choi . 2001 . Language acquisition and conceptual development , chapter Shaping meanings for language : Universal and language - speciﬁc in the acquisition of semantic cat - egories . Cambridge University Press . Warren Breed . 1955 . Social control in the newsroom : A functional analysis . Social Forces , 33 : 326 – 335 . Eleftheria Briakou , Sweta Agrawal , Joel Tetreault , and Marine Carpuat . 2021a . Evaluating the evaluation metrics for style transfer : A case study in multi - lingual formality transfer . In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 1321 – 1336 , Online and Punta Cana , Dominican Republic . Association for Computational Linguistics . Eleftheria Briakou , Sweta Agrawal , Ke Zhang , Joel Tetreault , and Marine Carpuat . 2021b . A review of human evaluation for style transfer . In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Natural Language Genera - tion , Evaluation , and Metrics ( GEM 2021 ) , pages 58 – 67 , Online . Association for Computational Lin - guistics . Eleftheria Briakou and Marine Carpuat . 2021 . Be - yond noise : Mitigating the impact of ﬁne - grained semantic divergences on neural machine translation . In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan - guage Processing ( Volume 1 : Long Papers ) , pages 7236 – 7249 , Online . Association for Computational Linguistics . Nina Brown , Thomas McIlwraith , and Laura Tubelle de González . 2020 . Perspectives : An Open Intro - duction to Cultural Anthropology , 2 edition , chapter 4 . Language . The American Anthropological Asso - ciation . Ewa Callahan and Susan C . Herring . 2011 . Cultural bias in Wikipedia content on famous persons . J . As - soc . Inf . Sci . Technol . , 62 : 1899 – 1915 . Michael Carl . 1998 . Meaning preservation in machine translation . 10th European summer school in logic , language and information ( ESSLI’98 ) . Sheila Castilho , Stephen Doherty , Federico Gaspari , and Joss Moorkens . 2018 . Approaches to Human and Machine Translation Quality Assessment , pages 9 – 38 . Springer International Publishing , Cham . José Cañete , Gabriel Chaperon , Rodrigo Fuentes , Jou - Hui Ho , Hojin Kang , and Jorge Pérez . 2020 . Span - ish pre - trained BERT model and evaluation data . In PML4DC at ICLR 2020 . Alexis Conneau , Kartikay Khandelwal , Naman Goyal , Vishrav Chaudhary , Guillaume Wenzek , Francisco Guzmán , Edouard Grave , Myle Ott , Luke Zettle - moyer , and Veselin Stoyanov . 2020 . Unsupervised cross - lingual representation learning at scale . In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso - ciation for Computational Linguistics , pages 8440 – 8451 , Online . Association for Computational Lin - guistics . Alexis Conneau and Guillaume Lample . 2019 . Cross - lingual language model pretraining . In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 32 . Curran Associates , Inc . Alexis Conneau , Ruty Rinott , Guillaume Lample , Ad - ina Williams , Samuel Bowman , Holger Schwenk , and Veselin Stoyanov . 2018 . XNLI : Evaluating cross - lingual sentence representations . In Proceed - ings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 2475 – 2485 , Brussels , Belgium . Association for Computational Linguistics . Tim Dant . 1999 . Material culture in the social world . McGraw - Hill Education ( UK ) . Aida Mostafazadeh Davani , Mark Díaz , and Vinod - kumar Prabhakaran . 2021 . Dealing with disagree - ments : Looking beyond the majority vote in subjec - tive annotations . Miryam de Lhoneux , Sheng Zhang , and Anders Sø - gaard . 2022 . Zero - shot dependency parsing with worst - case aware automated curriculum learning . In Proceedings of ACL . Jacob Devlin , Ming - Wei Chang , Kenton Lee , and Kristina Toutanova . 2019 . BERT : Pre - training of deep bidirectional transformers for language under - standing . In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics : Human Language Technologies , Volume 1 ( Long and Short Papers ) , pages 4171 – 4186 , Minneapolis , Minnesota . Associ - ation for Computational Linguistics . Jesse Dodge , Maarten Sap , Ana Marasovic , William Agnew , Gabriel Ilharco , Dirk Groeneveld , and Matt Gardner . 2021 . Documenting the English colossal clean crawled corpus . CoRR , abs / 2104 . 08758 . David M . Eberhard , Gary F . Simons , and Charles D . Fennig . 2021 . Ethnologue : Languages of the world . Oliver Falck , Stephan Heblich , Alfred Lameli , and Jens Südekum . 2012 . Dialects , cultural identity , and economic exchange . Journal of Urban Economics , 72 ( 2 ) : 225 – 239 . Scott Friedman , Sonja Schmer - Galunder , Anthony Chen , and Jeffrey Rye . 2019 . Relating word embed - ding gender biases to gender gaps : A cross - cultural analysis . In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Gender Bias in Natural Language Processing , pages 18 – 24 , Florence , Italy . Association for Computa - tional Linguistics . Johan Galtung and Mari Holmboe Ruge . 1965 . The structure of foreign news : The presentation of the Congo , Cuba and Cyprus crises in four Norwegian newspapers . Journal of Peace Research , 2 ( 1 ) : 64 – 90 . Fengping Gao . 2005 . Japanese : A heavily culture - laden language . Journal of Intercultural Communi - cation , 10 : 1404 – 1634 . R Stuart Geiger , Kevin Yu , Yanlai Yang , Mindy Dai , Jie Qiu , Rebekah Tang , and Jenny Huang . 2020 . Garbage in , garbage out ? Do machine learning ap - plication papers in social computing report where human - labeled training data comes from ? In Pro - ceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness , Ac - countability , and Transparency , pages 325 – 336 . Mitchell L Gordon , Michelle S Lam , Joon Sung Park , Kayur Patel , Jeffrey T Hancock , Tatsunori Hashimoto , and Michael S Bernstein . 2022 . Jury learning : Integrating dissenting voices into machine learning models . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2202 . 02950 . Mary L Gray and Siddharth Suri . 2019 . Ghost work : How to stop Silicon Valley from building a new global underclass . Eamon Dolan Books . Thilo Hagendorff . 2020 . The ethics of AI ethics : An evaluation of guidelines . Minds and Machines , 30 ( 1 ) : 99 – 120 . Paul H . P . Hanel , Gregory R . Maio , Ana K . S . Soares , Katia C . Vione , Gabriel L . de Holanda Coelho , Valdiney V . Gouveia , Appasaheb C . Patil , Shan - mukh V . Kamble , and Antony S . R . Manstead . 2018 . Cross - cultural differences and similarities in human value instantiation . Frontiers in Psychology , 9 : 849 . Nina Hansen , Tom Postmes , Annika Tovote , and An - nemarie Bos . 2014 . How modernization instigates social change : Laptop usage as a driver of cul - tural value change and gender equality in a develop - ing country . Journal of Cross - Cultural Psychology , 45 ( 8 ) : 1229— - 1248 . Shlomo Hareli , Konstantinos Kafetsios , and Ursula Hess . 2015 . A cross - cultural study on emotion ex - pression and the learning of social norms . Frontiers in psychology , 6 : 1501 . Tatsunori Hashimoto , Megha Srivastava , Hongseok Namkoong , and Percy Liang . 2018 . Fairness with - out demographics in repeated loss minimization . In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 80 of Proceedings of Ma - chine Learning Research , pages 1929 – 1938 , Stock - holmsmässan , Stockholm Sweden . PMLR . Martin Heidegger . 1927 , 1953 . Sein und Zeit , 16 . auﬂ . edition . Niemeyer , Tübingen . Joseph Henrich , Steven J Heine , and Ara Norenzayan . 2010 . The weirdest people in the world ? Behav - ioral and brain sciences , 33 ( 2 - 3 ) : 61 – 83 . Christine Hine . 2020 . The evolution and diversiﬁcation of Twitter as a cultural artefact in the British press 2007 – 2014 . Journalism Studies , 21 ( 5 ) : 678 – 696 . Geert Hofstede . 2001 . Culture’s consequences : Com - paring values , behaviors , institutions and organiza - tions across nations . Sage publications . Juliane House and Gabriele Kasper . 2011 . Politeness markers in English and German . In Conversational routine , pages 157 – 186 . De Gruyter Mouton . Dirk Hovy and Diyi Yang . 2021 . The importance of modeling social factors of language : Theory and practice . In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics : Human Language Tech - nologies , pages 588 – 602 , Online . Association for Computational Linguistics . Junjie Hu , Sebastian Ruder , Aditya Siddhant , Gra - ham Neubig , Orhan Firat , and Melvin Johnson . 2020 . XTREME : A massively multilingual multi - task benchmark for evaluating cross - lingual general - ization . CoRR , abs / 2003 . 11080 . Rebecca Hwa , Philip Resnik , Amy Weinberg , Clara I . Cabezas , and Okan Kolak . 2005 . Bootstrapping parsers via syntactic projection across parallel texts . Natural Language Engineering , 11 : 311 – 325 . Harsh Jhamtani , Varun Gangal , Eduard Hovy , and Eric Nyberg . 2017 . Shakespearizing modern language using copy - enriched sequence to sequence models . In Proceedings of the Workshop on Stylistic Varia - tion , pages 10 – 19 , Copenhagen , Denmark . Associa - tion for Computational Linguistics . Yunjie Ji , Hao Liu , Bolei He , Xinyan Xiao , Hua Wu , and Yanhua Yu . 2020 . Diversiﬁed multiple instance learning for document - level multi - aspect sentiment classiﬁcation . In Proceedings of the 2020 Confer - ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ( EMNLP ) , pages 7012 – 7023 , Online . As - sociation for Computational Linguistics . Liwei Jiang , Jena D . Hwang , Chandra Bhagavatula , Ro - nan Le Bras , Maxwell Forbes , Jon Borchardt , Jenny Liang , Oren Etzioni , Maarten Sap , and Yejin Choi . 2021 . Delphi : Towards machine ethics and norms . Di Jin , Zhijing Jin , Joey Tianyi Zhou , Lisa Orii , and Peter Szolovits . 2020 . Hooks in the headline : Learn - ing to generate headlines with controlled styles . In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso - ciation for Computational Linguistics , pages 5082 – 5093 , Online . Association for Computational Lin - guistics . Eun Seo Jo and Timnit Gebru . 2020 . Lessons from archives : Strategies for collecting sociocultural data in machine learning . In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness , Accountability , and Trans - parency , FAT * ’20 , page 306 – 316 , New York , NY , USA . Association for Computing Machinery . Anna Jørgensen and Anders Søgaard . 2021 . Evalua - tion of summarization systems across gender , age , and race . In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on New Frontiers in Summarization , pages 51 – 56 , Online and in Dominican Republic . Association for Computational Linguistics . Pratik Joshi , Sebastin Santy , Amar Budhiraja , Kalika Bali , and Monojit Choudhury . 2020 . The state and fate of linguistic diversity and inclusion in the NLP world . In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet - ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 6282 – 6293 , Online . Association for Computa - tional Linguistics . Nora Kassner , Philipp Dufter , and Hinrich Schütze . 2021 . Multilingual LAMA : Investigating knowl - edge in multilingual pretrained language models . In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin - guistics : Main Volume , pages 3250 – 3258 , Online . Association for Computational Linguistics . Yova Kementchedjhieva , Di Lu , and Joel Tetreault . 2020 . The ApposCorpus : a new multilingual , multi - domain dataset for factual appositive generation . In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Computational Linguistics , pages 1989 – 2003 , Barcelona , Spain ( Online ) . International Committee on Computational Linguistics . Diana Elizabeth Kendall , Rick Linden , and Jane Loth - ian Murray . 2005 . Sociology in our times . Thomson Wadsworth Belmont , CA . Laurence J Kirmayer et al . 2001 . Cultural variations in the clinical presentation of depression and anxiety : implications for diagnosis and treatment . Journal of clinical psychiatry , 62 : 22 – 30 . Jon Kleinberg and Manish Raghavan . 2021 . Algorith - mic monoculture and social welfare . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 118 ( 22 ) . Alexandre Klementiev , Ivan Titov , and Binod Bhat - tarai . 2012 . Inducing crosslingual distributed rep - resentations of words . In Proceedings of COLING 2012 , pages 1459 – 1474 , Mumbai , India . The COL - ING 2012 Organizing Committee . Tatiana Larina . 2015 . Culture - speciﬁc communica - tive styles as a framework for interpreting linguistic and cultural idiosyncrasies . International Review of Pragmatics , 7 ( 2 ) : 195 – 215 . Heather Lent , Emanuele Bugliarello , Miryam de Lhoneux , Chen Qiu , and Anders Søgaard . 2021 . On language models for creoles . In Pro - ceedings of the 25th Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning , pages 58 – 71 , Online . Association for Computational Linguistics . Daniel Levy , Yair Carmon , John C . Duchi , and Aaron Sidford . 2020 . Large - scale methods for distribution - ally robust optimization . In NeurIPS . D . Li . 1997 . New values in contrast : Western versus Chinese news reconstruction . Asia - Paciﬁc Media Educator , 1 : 66 – 77 . Yaobo Liang , Nan Duan , Yeyun Gong , Ning Wu , Fen - fei Guo , Weizhen Qi , Ming Gong , Linjun Shou , Daxin Jiang , Guihong Cao , Xiaodong Fan , Ruofei Zhang , Rahul Agrawal , Edward Cui , Sining Wei , Taroon Bharti , Ying Qiao , Jiun - Hung Chen , Winnie Wu , Shuguang Liu , Fan Yang , Daniel Campos , Ran - gan Majumder , and Ming Zhou . 2020 . XGLUE : A new benchmark datasetfor cross - lingual pre - training , understanding and generation . In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ( EMNLP ) , pages 6008 – 6018 , Online . Association for Computational Linguistics . Bill Yuchen Lin , Seyeon Lee , Xiaoyang Qiao , and Xiang Ren . 2021a . Common sense beyond En - glish : Evaluating and improving multilingual lan - guage models for commonsense reasoning . In Pro - ceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Associa - tion for Computational Linguistics and the 11th In - ternational Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing ( Volume 1 : Long Papers ) , pages 1274 – 1287 , Online . Association for Computational Lin - guistics . Bill Yuchen Lin , Frank F . Xu , Kenny Zhu , and Seung - won Hwang . 2018 . Mining cross - cultural differ - ences and similarities in social media . In Proceed - ings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics ( Volume 1 : Long Pa - pers ) , pages 709 – 719 , Melbourne , Australia . Asso - ciation for Computational Linguistics . Xi Victoria Lin , Todor Mihaylov , Mikel Artetxe , Tianlu Wang , Shuohui Chen , Daniel Simig , Myle Ott , Na - man Goyal , Shruti Bhosale , Jingfei Du , Ramakanth Pasunuru , Sam Shleifer , Punit Singh Koura , Vishrav Chaudhary , Brian O’Horo , Jeff Wang , Luke Zettle - moyer , Zornitsa Kozareva , Mona Diab , Veselin Stoy - anov , and Xian Li . 2021b . Few - shot learning with multilingual language models . Fangyu Liu , Emanuele Bugliarello , Edoardo Maria Ponti , Siva Reddy , Nigel Collier , and Desmond El - liott . 2021 . Visually grounded reasoning across lan - guages and cultures . In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan - guage Processing , pages 10467 – 10485 , Online and Punta Cana , Dominican Republic . Association for Computational Linguistics . Qi Liu , Yue Zhang , and Jiangming Liu . 2018 . Learning domain representation for multi - domain sentiment classiﬁcation . In Proceedings of the 2018 Confer - ence of the North American Chapter of the Associ - ation for Computational Linguistics : Human Lan - guage Technologies , Volume 1 ( Long Papers ) , pages 541 – 550 , New Orleans , Louisiana . Association for Computational Linguistics . Eric Loo . 2019 . Reading “Asian values” into journal - ism practices in Asia . Oxford Research Encyclope - dia of Communication . Kate Loveys , Jonathan Torrez , Alex Fine , Glen Mori - arty , and Glen Coppersmith . 2018 . Cross - cultural differences in language markers of depression on - line . In Proceedings of the Fifth Workshop on Computational Linguistics and Clinical Psychology : From Keyboard to Clinic , pages 78 – 87 . Henry Mainsah and Andrew Morrison . 2014 . Partici - patory design through a cultural lens : Insights from postcolonial theory . In Proceedings of the 13th Par - ticipatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Indus - try Cases , Workshop Descriptions , Doctoral Consor - tium papers , and Keynote abstracts - Volume 2 , pages 83 – 86 . Asifa Majid , Fiona Jordan , and Michael Dunn . 2015 . Semantic systems in closely related languages . Lan - guage Sciences , 49 : 1 – 18 . Mitchell P . Marcus , Beatrice Santorini , and Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz . 1993 . Building a large annotated corpus of English : The Penn Treebank . Computa - tional Linguistics , 19 ( 2 ) : 313 – 330 . Eric Margolis and Stephen Laurence . 2021 . Concepts . In Edward N . Zalta , editor , The Stanford Encyclope - dia of Philosophy , Spring 2021 edition . Metaphysics Research Lab , Stanford University . Jo McCormack , Murray Pratt , and Alistair Rolls Alis - tair Rolls . 2011 . Hexagonal variations : Diversity , plurality and reinvention in contemporary France , volume 359 . Rodopi . Ninareh Mehrabi , Fred Morstatter , Nripsuta Saxena , Kristina Lerman , and Aram Galstyan . 2021 . A sur - vey on bias and fairness in machine learning . ACM Comput . Surv . , 54 ( 6 ) . Antonio Valerio Miceli Barone . 2016 . Towards cross - lingual distributed representations without parallel text trained with adversarial autoencoders . In Pro - ceedings of the 1st Workshop on Representation Learning for NLP , pages 121 – 126 , Berlin , Germany . Association for Computational Linguistics . Walter D . Mignolo . 2012 . Local Histories / Global De - signs : Coloniality , Subaltern Knowledges , and Bor - der Thinking . Princeton University Press . Shakir Mohamed , Marie - Therese Png , and William Isaac . 2020 . Decolonial AI : Decolonial theory as so - ciotechnical foresight in artiﬁcial intelligence . Phi - losophy & Technology , 33 ( 4 ) : 659 – 684 . Cristina Mora . 2013 . Cultures and organizations : Soft - ware of the mind intercultural cooperation and its im - portance for survival . Journal of Media Research , 6 ( 1 ) : 65 . Namrata Mukhija , Monojit Choudhury , and Kalika Bali . 2021 . Designing language technologies for so - cial good : The road not taken . G . P . Murdock . 1970 . Kin term patterns and their dis - tribution . Ethnology , 9 ( 165 ) . Priyanka Nanayakkara , Jessica Hullman , and Nicholas Diakopoulos . 2021 . Unpacking the expressed conse - quences of AI research in broader impact statements . In Proceedings of the 2021 AAAI / ACM Conference on AI , Ethics , and Society , AIES ’21 , page 795 – 806 , New York , NY , USA . Association for Computing Machinery . Eric Nelson . 2008 . Heidegger and the Ethics of Factic - ity . SUNY Press . Joakim Nivre , Marie - Catherine de Marneffe , Filip Gin - ter , Jan Hajiˇc , Christopher D . Manning , Sampo Pyysalo , Sebastian Schuster , Francis Tyers , and Daniel Zeman . 2020 . Universal Dependencies v2 : An evergrowing multilingual treebank collection . In Proceedings of the 12th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference , pages 4034 – 4043 , Mar - seille , France . European Language Resources Asso - ciation . Yonatan Oren , Shiori Sagawa , Tatsunori B . Hashimoto , and Percy Liang . 2019 . Distributionally robust lan - guage modeling . In Proceedings of the 2019 Con - ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Confer - ence on Natural Language Processing ( EMNLP - IJCNLP ) , pages 4227 – 4237 , Hong Kong , China . As - sociation for Computational Linguistics . Bhargavi Paranjape , Mandar Joshi , John Thickstun , Hannaneh Hajishirzi , and Luke Zettlemoyer . 2020 . An information bottleneck approach for controlling conciseness in rationale extraction . In Proceed - ings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ( EMNLP ) , pages 1938 – 1952 , Online . Association for Computational Linguistics . Michael Paul and Roxana Girju . 2009 . Cross - cultural analysis of blogs and forums with mixed - collection topic models . In Proceedings of the 2009 Confer - ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 1408 – 1417 , Singapore . Associa - tion for Computational Linguistics . Ellie Pavlick and Tom Kwiatkowski . 2019 . Inherent disagreements in human textual inferences . Transac - tions of the Association for Computational Linguis - tics , 7 : 677 – 694 . Denis Peskov , Viktor Hangya , Jordan Boyd - Graber , and Alexander Fraser . 2021 . Adapting entities across languages and cultures . In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics : EMNLP 2021 , pages 3725 – 3750 , Punta Cana , Dominican Re - public . Association for Computational Linguistics . Dennis A . Pitta , Fung Hung - Gay , and Steven Isberg . 1999 . Ethical issues across cultures : Managing the differing perspectives of China and the USA . The Journal of Consumer Marketing , 16 ( 3 ) : 240 – 246 . Copyright - Copyright MCB UP Limited ( MCB ) 1999 ; Last updated - 2021 - 09 - 09 ; Subject - sTermNotLitGenreText - China ; United States – US . Barbara Plank , Dirk Hovy , and Anders Søgaard . 2014 . Learning part - of - speech taggers with inter - annotator agreement loss . In Proceedings of the 14th Confer - ence of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 742 – 751 , Gothen - burg , Sweden . Association for Computational Lin - guistics . Edoardo Maria Ponti , Rahul Aralikatte , Disha Shrivas - tava , Siva Reddy , and Anders Søgaard . 2021 . Mini - max and neyman – Pearson meta - learning for outlier languages . In Findings of the Association for Com - putational Linguistics : ACL - IJCNLP 2021 , pages 1245 – 1260 , Online . Association for Computational Linguistics . Edoardo Maria Ponti , Goran Glavaš , Olga Majewska , Qianchu Liu , Ivan Vuli´c , and Anna Korhonen . 2020 . XCOPA : A multilingual dataset for causal common - sense reasoning . In Proceedings of the 2020 Con - ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ( EMNLP ) , pages 2362 – 2376 , Online . As - sociation for Computational Linguistics . Vinodkumar Prabhakaran , Aida Mostafazadeh Davani , and Mark Diaz . 2021 . On releasing annotator - level labels and information in datasets . In Proceedings of The Joint 15th Linguistic Annotation Workshop ( LAW ) and 3rd Designing Meaning Representations ( DMR ) Workshop , pages 133 – 138 , Punta Cana , Do - minican Republic . Association for Computational Linguistics . Shrimai Prabhumoye , Yulia Tsvetkov , Ruslan Salakhut - dinov , and Alan W Black . 2018 . Style transfer through back - translation . In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com - putational Linguistics ( Volume 1 : Long Papers ) , pages 866 – 876 , Melbourne , Australia . Association for Computational Linguistics . Carina E . A . Prunkl , Carolyn Ashurst , Markus An - derljung , Helena Webb , Jan Leike , and Allan Dafoe . 2021 . Institutionalizing ethics in AI through broader impact requirements . Nature Machine Intelligence , 3 ( 2 ) : 104 – 110 . Colin Raffel , Noam Shazeer , Adam Roberts , Kather - ine Lee , Sharan Narang , Michael Matena , Yanqi Zhou , Wei Li , and Peter J . Liu . 2020 . Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a uniﬁed text - to - text transformer . Journal of Machine Learning Re - search , 21 ( 140 ) : 1 – 67 . Ehud Reiter . 2018 . A structured review of the validity of BLEU . Computational Linguistics , 44 ( 3 ) : 393 – 401 . Dor Ringel , Gal Lavee , Ido Guy , and Kira Radinsky . 2019 . Cross - cultural transfer learning for text classi - ﬁcation . In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natu - ral Language Processing ( EMNLP - IJCNLP ) , pages 3873 – 3883 , Hong Kong , China . Association for Computational Linguistics . Melissa Roemmele , Cosmin Adrian Bejan , and An - drew S . Gordon . 2011 . Choice of plausible alter - natives : An evaluation of commonsense causal rea - soning . In Logical Formalizations of Commonsense Reasoning , Papers from the 2011 AAAI Spring Sym - posium , Technical Report SS - 11 - 06 , Stanford , Cali - fornia , USA , March 21 - 23 , 2011 . AAAI . Rishiraj Saha Roy , Aishwarya Padmakumar , Guna Prasaad Jeganathan , and Ponnurangam Kumaraguru . 2015 . Automated linguistic person - alization of targeted marketing messages mining user - generated text on social media . In Interna - tional Conference on Intelligent Text Processing and Computational Linguistics , pages 203 – 224 . Springer . Sebastian Ruder , Noah Constant , Jan Botha , Aditya Siddhant , Orhan Firat , Jinlan Fu , Pengfei Liu , Junjie Hu , Graham Neubig , and Melvin John - son . 2021 . XTREME - R : Towards more challeng - ing and nuanced multilingual evaluation . CoRR , abs / 2104 . 07412 . Andrew G Ryder , Jian Yang , Xiongzhao Zhu , Shuqiao Yao , Jinyao Yi , Steven J Heine , and R Michael Bagby . 2008 . The cultural shaping of depression : Somatic symptoms in China , psychological symp - toms in North America ? Journal of abnormal psy - chology , 117 ( 2 ) : 300 . Shiori Sagawa , Pang Wei Koh , Tatsunori B . Hashimoto , and Percy Liang . 2020 . Distributionally Robust Neural Networks . In International Conference on Learning Representations . Magnus Sahlgren , Fredrik Carlsson , Fredrik Olsson , and Love Börjeson . 2021 . It’s basically the same language anyway : the case for a nordic lan - guage model . In Proceedings of the 23rd Nordic Conference on Computational Linguistics ( NoDaL - iDa ) , pages 367 – 372 , Reykjavik , Iceland ( Online ) . Linköping University Electronic Press , Sweden . Maarten Sap , Dallas Card , Saadia Gabriel , Yejin Choi , and Noah A . Smith . 2019 . The risk of racial bias in hate speech detection . In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com - putational Linguistics , pages 1668 – 1678 , Florence , Italy . Association for Computational Linguistics . Maarten Sap , Vered Shwartz , Antoine Bosselut , Yejin Choi , and Dan Roth . 2020 . Commonsense reason - ing for natural language processing . In Proceed - ings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics : Tutorial Abstracts , pages 27 – 33 , Online . Association for Computational Linguistics . Marie Schäfer , Daniel B . M . Haun , and Michael Tomasello . 2015 . Fair is not fair everywhere . Psychological Science , 26 ( 8 ) : 1252 – 1260 . PMID : 26115962 . P S Seibert , P Stridh - Igo , and C G Zimmerman . 2002 . A checklist to facilitate cultural awareness and sen - sitivity . Journal of Medical Ethics , 28 ( 3 ) : 143 – 146 . Tianxiao Shen , Tao Lei , Regina Barzilay , and Tommi Jaakkola . 2017 . Style transfer from non - parallel text by cross - alignment . In Advances in Neural Informa - tion Processing Systems , volume 30 . Curran Asso - ciates , Inc . Vered Shwartz . 2022 . Good night at 4 pm ? ! Time ex - pressions in different cultures . In Findings of ACL . Richard A Shweder , Jacqueline J Goodnow , Giyoo Hatano , Robert A LeVine , Hazel R Markus , and Peggy J Miller . 2007 . The cultural psychology of development : One mind , many mentalities . Hand - book of child psychology , 1 . Shikhar Singh , Nuan Wen , Yu Hou , Pegah Alipoormo - labashi , Te - lin Wu , Xuezhe Ma , and Nanyun Peng . 2021 . COM2SENSE : A commonsense reasoning benchmark with complementary sentences . In Find - ings of the Association for Computational Linguis - tics : ACL - IJCNLP 2021 , pages 883 – 898 , Online . Association for Computational Linguistics . Anders Søgaard , Sebastian Ruder , and Ivan Vuli´c . 2018 . On the limitations of unsupervised bilingual dictionary induction . In Proceedings of the 56th An - nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics ( Volume 1 : Long Papers ) , pages 778 – 788 , Melbourne , Australia . Association for Compu - tational Linguistics . Anders Søgaard , Ivan Vuli´c , Sebastian Ruder , and Man - aal Faruqui . 2019 . Cross - lingual word embeddings . Synthesis Lectures on Human Language Technolo - gies , 12 ( 2 ) : 1 – 132 . Irene Solaiman and Christy Dennison . 2021 . Process for adapting language models to society ( PALMS ) with values - targeted datasets . Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34 . Xingyi Song , Trevor Cohn , and Lucia Specia . 2013 . BLEU deconstructed : Designing a better MT evalu - ation metric . Int . J . Comput . Linguistics Appl . , 4 : 29 – 44 . Lucia Specia , Stella Frank , Khalil Sima’an , and Desmond Elliott . 2016 . A shared task on multi - modal machine translation and crosslingual image description . In Proceedings of the First Conference on Machine Translation : Volume 2 , Shared Task Pa - pers , pages 543 – 553 , Berlin , Germany . Association for Computational Linguistics . Ami D Sperber , Robert F Devellis , and Brian Boehlecke . 1994 . Cross - cultural translation : Methodology and validation . Journal of cross - cultural psychology , 25 ( 4 ) : 501 – 524 . James P . Spradley . 1972 . Culture and Cognition : Rules , Maps , and Plans . Chandler Publishing Company . Elior Sulem , Omri Abend , and Ari Rappoport . 2015 . Conceptual annotations preserve structure across translations : A French - English case study . In Pro - ceedings of the 1st Workshop on Semantics - Driven Statistical Machine Translation ( S2MT 2015 ) , pages 11 – 22 , Beijing , China . Association for Computa - tional Linguistics . Jimin Sun , Hwijeen Ahn , Chan Young Park , Yulia Tsvetkov , and David R . Mortensen . 2021 . Cross - cultural similarity features for cross - lingual transfer learning of pragmatically motivated tasks . In Pro - ceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin - guistics : Main Volume , pages 2403 – 2414 , Online . Association for Computational Linguistics . Tony Sun , Andrew Gaut , Shirlyn Tang , Yuxin Huang , Mai ElSherief , Jieyu Zhao , Diba Mirza , Elizabeth Belding , Kai - Wei Chang , and William Yang Wang . 2019 . Mitigating gender bias in natural language processing : Literature review . In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com - putational Linguistics , pages 1630 – 1640 , Florence , Italy . Association for Computational Linguistics . Zeerak Talat , Hagen Blix , Josef Valvoda , Maya In - dira Ganesh , Ryan Cotterell , and Adina Williams . 2021 . A word on machine ethics : A response to Jiang et al . ( 2021 ) . Jenny Thomas . 1983 . Cross - Cultural Pragmatic Fail - ure . Applied Linguistics , 4 ( 2 ) : 91 – 112 . Jean - Paul Vinay and Jean Darbelnet . 1995 . Compara - tive stylistics of French and English : A methodology for translation , volume 11 . John Benjamins Publish - ing . Kellie Webster , Xuezhi Wang , Ian Tenney , Alex Beu - tel , Emily Pitler , Ellie Pavlick , Jilin Chen , Ed Chi , and Slav Petrov . 2021 . Measuring and reducing gendered correlations in pre - trained models . arXiv preprint . Anna Wierzbicka . 1996 . Semantics : Primes and Uni - versals . Oxford University Press . Anna Wierzbicka . 2009 . Cross - cultural pragmatics . De Gruyter Mouton . Steven Wilson , Rada Mihalcea , Ryan Boyd , and James Pennebaker . 2016 . Disentangling topic models : A cross - cultural analysis of personal values through words . In Proceedings of the First Workshop on NLP and Computational Social Science , pages 143 – 152 , Austin , Texas . Association for Computational Linguistics . Walt Wolfram and William C . Friday . 1997 . The role of dialect differences in cross - cultural communica - tion : Proactive dialect awareness . Bulletin VALS - ASLA ( Association suisse de linguistique appliquée ) , 65 : 143 – 154 . Ian Woodward . 2007 . Understanding Material Culture . SAGE Publications . Shijie Wu and Mark Dredze . 2019 . Beto , bentz , be - cas : The surprising cross - lingual effectiveness of BERT . In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natu - ral Language Processing ( EMNLP - IJCNLP ) , pages 833 – 844 , Hong Kong , China . Association for Com - putational Linguistics . Runxin Xu , Jun Cao , Mingxuan Wang , Jiaze Chen , Hao Zhou , Ying Zeng , Yuping Wang , Li Chen , Xi - ang Yin , Xijin Zhang , Songcheng Jiang , Yuxuan Wang , and Lei Li . 2020 . Xiaomingbot : A Multi - lingual Robot News Reporter . In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu - tational Linguistics : System Demonstrations , pages 1 – 8 , Online . Association for Computational Linguis - tics . Linting Xue , Noah Constant , Adam Roberts , Mi - hir Kale , Rami Al - Rfou , Aditya Siddhant , Aditya Barua , and Colin Raffel . 2021 . mT5 : A massively multilingual pre - trained text - to - text transformer . In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computa - tional Linguistics : Human Language Technologies , pages 483 – 498 , Online . Association for Computa - tional Linguistics . David Yarowsky , Grace Ngai , and Richard Wicen - towski . 2001 . Inducing multilingual text analysis tools via robust projection across aligned corpora . In Proceedings of the First International Conference on Human Language Technology Research . Da Yin , Liunian Harold Li , Ziniu Hu , Nanyun Peng , and Kai - Wei Chang . 2021 . Broaden the vision : Geo - diverse visual commonsense reasoning . In Proceed - ings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 2115 – 2129 , Online and Punta Cana , Dominican Republic . Asso - ciation for Computational Linguistics . Marcos Zampieri , Preslav Nakov , and Yves Scherrer . 2020 . Natural language processing for similar lan - guages , varieties , and dialects : A survey . Natural Language Engineering , 26 ( 6 ) : 595 – 612 . Ziqian Zeng , Wenxuan Zhou , Xin Liu , and Yangqiu Song . 2019 . A variational approach to weakly super - vised document - level multi - aspect sentiment classi - ﬁcation . In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics : Human Language Tech - nologies , Volume 1 ( Long and Short Papers ) , pages 386 – 396 , Minneapolis , Minnesota . Association for Computational Linguistics . Jianmin Zhang , Jin - ge Yao , and Xiaojun Wan . 2016 . Towards constructing sports news from live text commentary . In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin - guistics ( Volume 1 : Long Papers ) , pages 1361 – 1371 , Berlin , Germany . Association for Computa - tional Linguistics . Sheng Zhang , Xin Zhang , Weiming Zhang , and An - ders Søgaard . 2020 . Worst - case - aware curriculum learning for zero and few shot transfer . CoRR , abs / 2009 . 11138 . Sheng Zhang , Xin Zhang , Weiming Zhang , and An - ders Søgaard . 2021 . Sociolectal analysis of pre - trained language models . In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 4581 – 4588 , Online and Punta Cana , Dominican Republic . Association for Computational Linguistics . Jieyu Zhao , Tianlu Wang , Mark Yatskar , Ryan Cot - terell , Vicente Ordonez , and Kai - Wei Chang . 2019 . Gender bias in contextualized word embeddings . In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computa - tional Linguistics : Human Language Technologies , Volume 1 ( Long and Short Papers ) , pages 629 – 634 , Minneapolis , Minnesota . Association for Computa - tional Linguistics . Chunting Zhou , Daniel Levy , Xian Li , Marjan Ghazvininejad , and Graham Neubig . 2021 . Distri - butionally robust multilingual machine translation .