Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) 1 3 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00216 - 021 - 03751 - 4 REVIEW Biochemistry strategies for label‑free optical sensor biofunctionalization : advances towards real applicability Maria Soler 1 · Laura M . Lechuga 1 Received : 15 September 2021 / Revised : 18 October 2021 / Accepted : 22 October 2021 © The Author ( s ) 2021 Abstract Label - free biosensors , and especially those based on optical transducers like plasmonic or silicon photonic systems , have positioned themselves as potential alternatives for rapid and highly sensitive clinical diagnostics , on - site environmental monitoring , and for quality control in foods or other industrial applications , among others . However , most of the biosensor technology has not yet been transferred and implemented in commercial products . Among the several causes behind that , a major challenge is the lack of standardized protocols for sensor biofunctionalization . In this review , we summarize the most common methodologies for sensor surface chemical modification and bioreceptor immobilization , discussing their advantages and limitations in terms of analytical sensitivity and selectivity , reproducibility , and versatility . Special focus is placed on the suggestions of innovative strategies towards antifouling and biomimetic functional coatings to boost the applicability and reliability of optical biosensors in clinics and biomedicine . Finally , a brief overview of research directions in the area of device integration , automation , and multiplexing will give a glimpse of the future perspectives for label - free optical biosensors . Keywords Surface plasmon resonance · Silicon photonics · Antibody immobilization · Biochemical cross - linking · Antifouling coating · Lipid membrane Abbreviations OEG Oligoethylene glycol pDOPA Poly ( dopamine ) PEG Polyethylene glycol pHEMA Poly ( hydroxyethylmethacrylate ) POC Point of care SAM Self - assembled monolayer SLB Supported lipid bilayer SPR Surface plasmon resonance Introduction Label - free optical biosensors are devices able to detect , quantify , and monitor the presence of analytes of interest with high sensitivity and specificity in just a few minutes of assay directly performed at the point of need [ 1 , 2 ] . Several optical biosensor nanotechnologies , either based on nano - plasmonics ( i . e . , surface plasmon resonance ( SPR ) biosen - sors ) or silicon nanophotonics ( e . g . , ring resonators , inter - ferometers ) , have been developed and even commercialized [ 3 – 6 ] . All these sensors rely on the same physical working mechanism , the evanescent field sensing principle [ 7 , 8 ] . To explain briefly , the evanescent field is an electromagnetic field generated at the interface between a surface where light propagates ( i . e . , plasmonic surface or waveguide ) and a die - lectric media ( Fig . 1a ) . It penetrates into the dielectric media with an exponentially decaying intensity , reaching up to sev - eral hundreds of nanometers ( 100 – 1000 nm ) . The evanes - cent field is extremely sensitive to minute changes of refrac - tive index occurring in the dielectric , such as those caused by a change of composition or change of mass on the surface of plasmonic or waveguide - based sensors . The refractive index changes induce a variation in the light propagation Published in the topical collection featuring Promising Early - Career ( Bio ) Analytical Researchers with guest editors Antje J . Baeumner , María C . Moreno - Bondi , Sabine Szunerits , and Qiuquan Wang . * Maria Soler maria . soler @ icn2 . cat 1 Nanobiosensors and Bioanalytical Applications Group ( NanoB2A ) , Catalan Institute of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology ( ICN2 ) , CSIC , BIST , and CIBER - BBN , Bellaterra , 08193 Barcelona , Spain / Published online : 4 November 2021 Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry ( 2022 ) 414 : 5071 – 5085 1 3 parameters , which can be readily measured through spectral peaks displacements , reflectance changes , or phase varia - tions , among others . Thereby , the evanescent field can serve as a probe to detect and analyze biomolecular interactions taking place onto the sensor surface , being monitored in real time and without the need for external tags or labels ( e . g . , fluorescent or colorimetric tags ) and providing a quantita - tive analysis . These capabilities have positioned label - free optical biosensors as potential technologies for point - of - care ( POC ) testing , with appealing applications in in vitro medical diagnosis , personalized therapy , or environmental control ( safety , pollution monitoring , etc . ) [ 9 – 12 ] . In fact , over the last few years , a significant number of publications are reporting label - free optical biosensors for early diagnosis of cancer and other diseases , rapid detection of infectious bacteria or viruses , analysis and monitoring of biomarkers or drug levels in patients during therapy , etc . [ 4 , 13 ] . The performance of these biosensors often proves excellent when compared to standard clinical diagnostics ( i . e . , enzyme - linked immunosorbent assays , ELISA , or polymerase chain Fig . 1 a Illustrative scheme of an optical biosensor system based on the evanescent field sensing mechanism : light is coupled to the transducer surface generating an electro - magnetic field that penetrates evanescently into the dielectric medium where the biological interaction takes place . The biointeraction changes the refractive index of the medium , which is translated in variations of certain optical properties of the output light ( intensity , wavelength , etc . ) . b Main opti - mization parameters in sensor surface biofunctionalization : bioreceptor orientation ( top ) , grafting density ( middle ) , and antifouling coating ( bottom ) 5072 Soler M . , L . M . Lechuga 1 3 reaction tests , PCR ) in small validation studies with patient samples . But still , the adoption of biosensors in clinical or environmental settings has not been accomplished . Among the several limitations , such as system automation or signal interpretation , an important challenge is the sensor biofunc - tionalization , which refers to the preparation and chemical modification of the sensor surface for attaching the specific bioreceptor and minimizing non - specific adsorptions [ 7 , 14 ] . The label - free analysis scheme of optical biosensors imposes critical requirements to the biorecognition inter - face , as main responsible for the reliability and accuracy of the assay ( Fig . 1b ) . Two aspects must be carefully studied and optimized : the selection of the biorecognition element , which provides the affinity and specificity for the target ana - lyte ; and its immobilization on the sensor surface . The bio - receptor immobilization strategy must ensure ( i ) a uniform coverage and proper biomolecule orientation , to maximize target accessibility and detectability ; ( ii ) stability and robust - ness , allowing flow - through assays or sequential measure - ment cycles ; and ( iii ) antifouling capabilities , to avoid or minimize the undesired binding of sample matrix compo - nents ( e . g . , proteins , lipids ) to the sensor surface , which can generate false positive signals . In this review , we provide an overview of the variety of sensor biorecognition interfaces developed and demonstrated in label - free optical biosensor technologies . After a brief analysis on the selection of the biorecognition element , we describe in detail the most suc - cessful and widely used surface chemistry and cross - linking procedures as well as innovative methodologies recently pro - posed to extend the applicability of biosensors , to improve its performance , or to boost the technology transfer , com - mercialization , and implementation in the clinical practice . Finally , current and future perspectives in this area are criti - cally discussed based on recent advances in nanotechnology , materials science , and bioengineering . Selection of the biorecognition element The most common and widely employed bioreceptors are antibodies . Antibodies can be produced towards virtually any type of molecule , including proteins , peptides , small organic molecules like drugs , and even large intact cells ( e . g . , bac - teria ) . Over the years , the antibody production process has been greatly optimized and improved , ensuring reliable and reproducible collections of high - affinity monoclonal antibod - ies but also generation of novel recombinant chimeric anti - bodies [ 15 ] or nanobodies [ 16 ] , which can be easily obtained at large scales with cost - effective procedures . To face certain limitations of antibodies , such as long - term stability , other rec - ognition molecules have been proposed as alternative . It is the case , for example , of molecularly imprinted polymers ( MIPs ) or aptamers . MIPs are synthetic polymers that are templated during production to selectively bind the target molecule by a “lock and key” mechanism [ 17 ] . They exhibit extreme robust - ness and can be obtained at a low cost , making them especially attractive for biosensors employed at remote locations or under harsh conditions , but their performance in terms of affinity and specificity usually is not sufficient for clinical or biomedical applications [ 18 ] . In recent years , a novel approach for nano - sized MIPs solid - phase synthesis has been proposed , showing superior affinities [ 19 ] . Although mainly applied in electro - chemical sensors , nanoMIPs could become a potential alterna - tive to antibodies also in optical biosensors [ 20 ] . Aptamers , on the other hand , are single - stranded oligonucleotides ( DNA or RNA ) with molecular recognition capabilities based on struc - tural folding [ 21 ] . They can be chemically synthesized with the desired sequence and functionalities , therefore avoiding animal immunization and cell culture procedures , and their affinity and specificity towards target analyte can be equivalent to monoclonal antibodies . However , the design and selection process for aptamer production can be long and tedious ( i . e . , SELEX procedure ) , and often results unsatisfactory for many types of molecules , especially small organic molecules [ 22 , 23 ] . On the other hand , genomic biomarkers such as micro - RNAs have arisen as promising indicators for early and highly accurate diagnostics . The detection of single - stranded nucleic acid molecules can be straightforward via direct hybridization assays , employing synthetic DNA probes with the comple - mentary sequence . Like aptamers , these DNA probes can be chemically synthesized and purified at relatively large scales and also can incorporate specific functionalities [ 24 ] . When addressing complex applications in genomic - based diagnos - tics , such as the analysis of epigenetic DNA markers or spe - cific DNA mutations , it might be necessary to capture dou - ble - stranded DNA . For that , a few bioengineering approaches have been proposed like the formation of triple helices ( i . e . , triplex ) using hairpin - shape DNA strands , which can be easily designed with bioinformatic tools and chemically synthesized [ 24 – 26 ] . Finally , it is worth mentioning that cell receptors can also be employed as biorecognition elements , particularly useful when targeting whole intact cells , like tumor cells or viruses , for example . These receptors are commonly produced as recombinant proteins and have been applied in biosen - sors for studying cell – cell or cell - pathogen interactions [ 27 ] . Table 1 summarizes the advantages and limitations of the main biorecognition elements commonly employed in label - free optical biosensors . Bioreceptor immobilization strategies The methodology for bioreceptor immobilization depends on the type of biorecognition element ( i . e . , protein , nucleic acid , etc . ) and its functionality , but also on the target analyte 5073 Biochemistry strategies for labelfree optical sensor biofunctionalization : advances towards… 1 3 ( e . g . , nature , dimensions ) , since it will eventually determine parameters such as the optimal density that minimizes steric hindrance effects during the interaction . Given the broad variety of biorecognition elements that can be used for bio - sensing , here we focus on the two main and most widely employed types : antibodies and oligonucleotides ( i . e . , single - stranded DNA probes and aptamers ) . In the follow - ing sections , we will present and discuss a wide variety of approaches to immobilize these bioreceptors onto sensor surfaces , analyzing their advantages and limitations in terms of simplicity and efficiency , uniformity and orientation , ver - satility , and robustness . Physical and chemical adsorption The simplest approach for sensor biofunctionalization is the physical adsorption , in which bioreceptors are attached directly to the sensor surface by electrostatic and hydro - phobic forces . This scheme is employed for microwell plate functionalization in ELISA , for example . But despite being rapid and straightforward , physisorption can lead to seri - ous reproducibility and stability problems in biosensors , and importantly , it may affect the recognition activity of the bioreceptor molecules , especially for antibodies that can be denaturalized in direct contact with metallic surfaces [ 28 ] . Another easy and widely used strategy is the direct chemisorption of bioreceptors , especially those carrying a thiol - functional group ( e . g . , thiolated DNA probes ) that can directly bind to gold sensor surfaces . This procedure is efficient and rapid , resulting in a stable receptor layer . To ensure layer uniformity and bioreceptor orientation , oligonu - cleotide probes can be synthesized incorporating a vertical spacer between the recognition sequence and the functional group , which can be either a 6 - or 12 - carbon chain [ 29 ] , or a poly - Thymine ( polyT ) sequence ( e . g . , polyT 10 or polyT 15 ) [ 30 ] . The vertical spacer aids in the upright positioning of the probe especially in gold - based sensors thanks to its low affinity for metallic surfaces , but it should be avoided when analyzing samples containing RNA polyA tails , which could bind to the polyT sequence and give rise to false positive sig - nals [ 31 ] . For the case of antibodies or other protein recep - tors , terminal Cysteine residues with reactive thiol groups could be employed for direct chemisorption on gold surfaces . Otherwise , an interesting strategy is to perform antibody fragmentation by enzyme digestion or chemical reduction , releasing sulfhydryl reactive groups that can be attached to the surface [ 32 , 33 ] . In all these approaches , adjustment of the bioreceptor grafting density is commonly done by add - ing competing thiolated molecules ( e . g . , mercaptohexanol , MCH ) to act as lateral spacers . This direct competition how - ever results in a relatively low control on the receptor graft - ing density , as their interaction with gold may be influenced by not only the initial concentration , but the molecular size , electrostatic interactions , etc . An interesting approach has been recently proposed in which the bioreceptor ( antibody or DNA probe ) is linked to a polyAdenine ( polyA ) tail , which Table 1 Advantages and limitations of common bioreceptors used in label - free optical biosensors Receptor Advantages Limitations Antibodies • High affinity and specificity • Well - established production process • Wide range of targets : protein , peptide , small mol - ecule , cells , etc • Long and complex production via animal immuni - zation • High production costs • Activity loss in long - term storage • Low reusability Bioengineered antibodies • High affinity and specificity • Wide range of targets : protein , peptide , small mol - ecule , cells , etc • No animal immunization required • Scalable and cost - effective production • Need to know the sequence , or find binding regions through phage display • Storage and reusability similar to conventional antibodies Cell receptors • High affinity and specificity • In vitro production • Sequence knowledge required • Storage and reusability similar or lower than anti - bodies • Limited range of targets Molecularly imprinted polymers • High robustness and stability • Scalable and cost - effective production • Moderate - low affinity and specificity • Limited range of targets DNA strands • High affinity and specificity • High stability and reusability • Versatile production via chemical synthesis • High production costs • Limited range of targets • Limited length subject to structural conformations Aptamers • High - moderate affinity and specificity • Production via chemical synthesis • Stability and long - term storage • Reusability • Long and complex selection procedure via SELEX • Moderate range of targets • Subject to structural conformations 5074 Soler M . , L . M . Lechuga 1 3 can be directly adsorbed on gold surfaces by high - affinity electrostatic interactions , and due to its flat positioning can act also as lateral spacer [ 34 , 35 ] . The polyA - based strategy has been demonstrated and evaluated in a SPR biosensor , showing comparable results to other widely used methodolo - gies , both in terms of analytical sensitivity and selectivity . Chemical cross‑linking to functional monolayers The sensor biofunctionalization procedures that have shown the best results in terms of robustness and versatility are those based on the formation of functional chemical mon - olayers . The sensor surface is chemically modified to pro - vide a homogeneous coating that extends up to 1 or 2 nm from the sensor surface , with terminal functional groups that can be used to tether the bioreceptors via covalent cross - linking or through high - affinity molecular systems . In this way , biorecognition elements are firmly attached to the sen - sor surface in a controlled and reproducible manner , can be slightly distanced from the surface , and it also allows to coat the entire sensor surface for preventing non - specific adsorptions . For gold plasmonic sensors , two major functional chem - ical scaffolds are used : dextran - based polymers and alka - nethiol self - assembled monolayers ( SAMs ) ( Fig . 2a ) . Func - tional polysaccharides , such as carboxymethylated dextran , are known to form highly stable , compact , and hydrophilic layers on gold surfaces , containing reactive groups ( e . g . , COOH ) that can be used for bioreceptor coupling [ 36 ] . This approach has become very popular especially for SPR bio - sensors , with dextran - modified sensor chips commercially available ( CM5 sensors , Biacore , GE ) . However , the random distribution of functional groups within the polymer layer might hamper the optimum and efficient cross - linking for bioreceptor binding . On the other hand , SAMs are formed by chemisorption of short - chain organic alkanethiols , i . e . , car - bon chains with terminal sulfur - reactive groups ( - SH ) [ 37 , 38 ] . These molecules generate a densely packed and highly ordered hydrophilic layer on the sensor surface , displaying functional reactive groups at the outer end of the scaffold , therefore being available for bioreceptor cross - linking . A myriad of different alkanethiols is commercially available , being relatively easy to synthesize them incorporating differ - ent chemical end functionalities , such as carboxyl ( COOH ) , amine ( NH 2 ) , and hydroxyl ( OH ) . Furthermore , SAMs can be formed as a mixture of different alkanethiols varying the reactive / inert group ratios of the monolayer , which offers the possibility to easily control and adjust the bioreceptor graft - ing density according to the target dimensions , minimizing steric hindrance issues . In silicon - based photonic biosensors , the most com - mon materials for sensor waveguide fabrication are either silicon oxide ( SiO 2 ) or silicon nitride ( Si 3 N 4 ) and chemical modification of these surfaces is generally done via silani - zation ( Fig . 2b ) [ 39 ] . Functional alkoxysilanes can form ordered and stable monolayers in silicon - derived substrates similar to alkanethiol SAMs . However , silanization is a more complex procedure than thiol chemisorption and there is currently no consensus on the optimum parameters to achieve a stable and homogeneous monolayer . The silaniza - tion process essentially consists in three main steps : surface activation , to release reactive hydroxyl groups ( - OH ) on the substrate ; silane binding , which can be done in liquid or vapor phase ; and finally , a curing step to cross - link the silane molecules and stabilize the monolayer . For this procedure , numerous protocols have been reported with different reac - tion times , temperatures , solvents , and even atmospheric conditions . The most common protocols employ amino - functional silanes , such as the ( 3 - aminopropyl ) triethox - ysilane ( APTES ) , which provide stable films through , for instance , vapor deposition at room temperature for 4 h [ 40 ] , or vapor deposition at 150 °C for 5 min [ 41 ] , or liquid depo - sition in anhydrous toluene [ 42 ] . These examples suggest that optimum silanization can either be achieved in different ways or it needs to be particularly and carefully studied for each specific material of the sensor surface . Moreover , as in the case of alkanethiols , different functional silanes can be employed for sensor surface modification ( e . g . , COOH - terminated silanes ) , and silanization procedure might be adjusted for each case . Once the functional scaffold is formed on the sensor sur - face , the subsequent step is the anchoring of the bioreceptor molecules , which is the most delicate and critical process to achieve the highest detection sensitivity and accuracy . To achieve a highly stable and robust bioreceptor tethering on the functional layer , the primary strategy is to chemically link their reactive functional groups forming a covalent bond ( Fig . 2c , d , e ) . This reaction generally requires the activation of certain groups and / or the use of cross - linkers . The car - boxyl - amine cross - linking is probably the most well - estab - lished strategy . Generally , this reaction is carried out through a well - known carbodiimide - based chemistry , employing a mixture of EDC ( 1 - ethyl - 3 - ( 3 - dimethylaminopropyl ) carbo - diimide ) and NHS ( N - hydroxysuccinimide ) as intermediate cross - linkers , and resulting in a highly stable amide bond between the biomolecule and the scaffold [ 43 ] . This reac - tion provides very good yields and good surface coverage with a high reproducibility . Another conventional approach is the amine – amine binding , for which several cross - linking methods can be employed [ 44 , 45 ] . The simplest is the use of glutaraldehyde , a small molecule with highly reactive car - bonyl groups ( - CHO ) that condense primary amines very efficiently via reductive amination or Mannich reactions . Homobifunctional NHS ester cross - linkers , like disuccin - imidyl suberate ( DSS ) or bis ( sulfosuccinimidyl ) suberate ( BS3 ) , are however the most popular ones , offering a better 5075 Biochemistry strategies for labelfree optical sensor biofunctionalization : advances towards… 1 3 control on the cross - linking reaction as well as the incor - poration of a spacer arm that can be customized in length . Other cross - linking strategies employed for primary amine coupling are based on epoxides , isocyanates , or imidoesters , among others , that results in either amide or amidine bonds , but with certain complexity in terms of side products , reac - tion time and conditions , etc . More sophisticated cross - link - ing reactions have also been studied and employed , like the click chemistry - based methods . Although several types of click reactions have been described , the most common one is the Cu - catalyzed azide - alkyne cycloaddition ( CuAAC ) that employs Cu I catalysis to efficiently couple azide groups to terminal alkynes ( Fig . 2e ) [ 46 ] . The advantages of click chemistry are its chemoselectivity , high yields , and no pro - duction of side products ; however , it usually requires previ - ous modification of the probe with an azide - functional tag . The versatility and robustness of covalent binding strat - egies have made them one of the most widely employed approaches in antibody immobilization for biosensing . How - ever , it does not offer any control over the orientation of the biomolecules , which is mandatory to maximize analyte detection capability . It is also important to carefully opti - mize the reaction parameters ( e . g . , pH , ionic strength , tem - perature ) to ensure maximum yields and efficiency , avoiding possible electrostatic repulsions between the monolayer and the bioreceptor . Affinity and linker‑mediated immobilization A proper orientation of the bioreceptors is essential for exposing the binding sites towards the analyte , and for achieving a uniformly distributed bioreceptor layer , which Fig . 2 a Schematics of chemical scaffolds for gold - based sen - sor functionalization : dextran - based polymeric layer ( e . g . , car - boxymethyl dextran ) ( left ) and mixed alkanethiol self - assembled monolayer ( e . g . , mercaptohexadecanoic acid / mercaptoundecanol , MHDA / MUOH ) ( right ) . b Schematics of chemical scaffold for sili - con - based sensor functionalization : alkoxysilane monolayer ( e . g . , 3 - aminopropyl ( triethoxysilane ) , APTES ) . c Schematics of different examples of cross - linking strategies for amine - functional biorecep - tors . d Schematics of different examples of cross - linking strategies for thiol - functional bioreceptors . e Schematics of cross - linking strategy based on click chemistry : copper ( I ) - catalyzed alkyne - azyde cycload - dition ( CuAAC ) . Antibodies and DNA strands are only used for illus - trative purposes ; any receptor carrying the desired functionality could be employed indistinctly 5076 Soler M . , L . M . Lechuga 1 3 would ensure higher recognition efficiency , selectivity , and reproducibility . This is especially relevant for antibodies , which cannot be custom synthesized and therefore require certain biochemical strategies to be immobilized in a suit - able orientation ( Fig . 3 ) . The classic example is the Protein A or Protein G approach [ 47 ] . These two proteins—and the recombinant combination of both ( Protein A / G ) —are able to selectively capture different types of immunoglobulins through their constant region without the need for chemical manipulation of the antibodies . The affinity protein can be covalently linked to the sensor surface monolayer , and anti - bodies are captured on them , resulting in a sterically acces - sible and perfectly orientated recognition interface ( Fig . 3a ) . However , the interaction between protein A / G and antibod - ies is not particularly strong and can be disrupted with a change of pH , which limits the stability of the biolayer and the use of the biosensors for sequential measurement cycles . Another common strategy employs the biotin - avidin sys - tem . These two molecules showed one of the highest affinity interactions known in biology ( k d ≈ 10 −14 mol / L ) ; thereby , the binding of a biotinylated - Ab to an avidin layer results in a highly stable recognition interface ( Fig . 3b ) [ 48 ] . If anti - bodies are conjugated to the biotin tag through a site - specific procedure ( i . e . , through the carbohydrate moieties of the Fc region ) , the immobilization will also be oriented . Another interesting approach would be the DNA - directed immobili - zation . It consists in conjugating the antibody to a DNA oli - gonucleotide strand—ideally through the constant region— and anchor it to the sensor surface via hybridization with the complementary sequence probe , previously immobilized on the sensor surface ( Fig . 3c ) [ 49 ] . These strategies provide oriented and stable recognition interfaces , but as a drawback , they require chemical modi - fication of antibodies for tag conjugation . In this regard , an innovative methodology was reported a few years ago based on calixarenes ( e . g . , ProLinker™ ) [ 50 ] . Monolayers formed with calixarene crown ethers on the sensor surface can serve as scaffolds to directly immobilize intact antibodies through their Fc region with a high stability and in a simple and rapid procedure ( Fig . 3d ) . Nonetheless , this line has not been further investigated in recent years because the commercial product was discontinued . The design and synthesis of novel similar calixarenes could lead to a promising strategy for oriented antibody immobilization . Finally , another attractive trend is to use genetic bioengineering procedures to directly produce recombinant Fab fragments , which can be tagged Fig . 3 Antibody orientation strategies . a Affinity - based immobiliza - tion of intact antibodies on Protein A / G . b Affinity - based immobiliza - tion of biotinylated antibodies on avidin protein ( e . g . , streptavidin or neutravidin ) . c Affinity - based immobilization through DNA hybridi - zation . d Immobilization of intact antibodies on a calixarene - based linker ( e . g . , Prolinker™ ) . e Immobilization of recombinant antibody fragments , i . e . , antigen - binding region ( Fab ) 5077 Biochemistry strategies for labelfree optical sensor biofunctionalization : advances towards… 1 3 with histidine or cysteine residues or fused to larger proteins that aid in the immobilization ( Fig . 3e ) [ 51 ] . This strategy has also been combined with other approaches , like biotin - avidin system or protein - binding formats . All over , a vast library of bioreceptor immobilization strategies has been proposed , studied , and employed in label - free optical biosensors . In order to achieve maxi - mum functionality , binding capacity , and assay reliability , the attachment procedure must ensure the correct antibody orientation together with an optimum surface coverage and interface stability . Comparative studies of different immobi - lization strategies reveal that oriented receptor layers provide a higher sensitivity and binding efficiency while random ori - entation approaches are simpler , faster , and provide higher density of receptors . Eventually , the selection of the most appropriate strategy will depend on the selected application of the biosensor and its performance requirements . Towards an antifouling surface Despite all the efforts in accomplishing stable , robust , uni - form , and oriented biorecognition interfaces , there is still an unresolved challenge : eliminating non - specific adsorp - tions from sample matrix components ( e . g . , proteins , lipids , cells ) . This undesired adsorption is mainly due to long - range electrostatic and Van der Waals interactions . Most efficient mechanisms to minimize it are directed to further increase the surface hydrophilicity , generating a hydration layer ( i . e . , organized water molecules layer at the sensor coating ) , and / or alter the effective surface charges of the chemical scaffold formed on the sensor surface to reduce the ionic interactions ( Fig . 4 ) . A popular approach is to form functional monolayers incorporating oligoethylene glycol ( OEG ) moieties ( Fig . 4a ) . OEG - terminated SAMs offer a high hydrophilicity and lat - eral packing density that increases resistance to protein foul - ing [ 52 , 53 ] , which have been successfully used to minimize adsorption of proteins from blood - related fluids , but insuf - ficient to completely avoid it when dealing with undiluted blood , plasma , or serum samples ( Table 2 ) [ 54 , 58 ] . It has been shown that the antifouling capacity improves with the number of EG molecules in the SAM ; therefore , surface coatings with different polyethylene glycol ( PEG ) com - pounds have also been candidates for functional low - fouling scaffolds [ 54 , 55 ] . Commonly used compounds include lin - ear PEGs , such as silane - PEG - R or thiol - PEG - R ( where R is a functional reactive group , e . g . , COOH , NH 2 ) for silicon and gold surfaces [ 59 , 60 ] , respectively , and also polymer brushes containing PEG chains grafted to a functional back - bone , such as poly ( L - lysine ) ( PLL - PEG ) [ 61 ] . Grafted poly - mers have proven higher resistance to protein fouling ; how - ever , if grafting density and position are not well controlled , these long - chain PEGylated compounds can form disordered scaffolds where the reactive functional group for bioreceptor immobilization becomes hindered [ 59 , 62 ] . Another effective antifouling functionalization strategy is the formation of zwitterionic layers ( Fig . 4b ) . This coating Fig . 4 Antifouling strategies . a Formation of a hydration layer with hydrophilic compounds , e . g . , incorporating polyethylene glycol or oligoethylene glycol moieties . b Formation of an effective charge - balanced layer with zwitterionic compounds Table 2 Adsorption from protein solutions and undiluted blood plasma on different surface coatings * Measurements performed by SPR and / or ellipsometry Coating Fouling ( pg / mm 2 ) * Ref Fibrinogen HSA Blood plasma OEG 2 300 105 1500 – 2500 [ 54 , 55 ] OEG 6 36 0 500 [ 54 , 55 ] PEG - SAM 30 0 900 [ 55 ] pDOPA 0 - 63 [ 56 ] pHEMA 0 0 30 – 35 [ 57 ] poly ( β - peptoid ) 0 2 97 [ 57 ] 5078 Soler M . , L . M . Lechuga 1 3 is characterized by containing both cationic and anionic groups that provide an effective charge balance on the sur - face , reducing adsorptions of proteins through electrostatic interactions [ 63 ] . Zwitterionic interfaces can attract water molecules via hydrogen bonds and ionic solvation , thereby more strongly than just hydrophilic compounds . Most com - mon examples of zwitterionic monolayers are terminated in carboxybetaine ( CB ) or phosphorylcholine ( PC ) groups [ 64 , 65 ] . These zwitterionic coatings have shown an excel - lent reduction of blood - related proteins , but again they failed when challenged to undiluted plasma or other media . Simi - lar to PEG / OEG compounds , the antifouling capacity can be improved grafting zwitterionic polymer brushes , such as the poly ( carboxybetaine methacrylate ) ( pCBMA ) , which generates functionalizable interfaces with ultralow fouling properties [ 66 – 68 ] . The drawback here is that during the preparation of these polymer brushes , there is a lack of con - trol on the thickness that could extend up to several hundreds of nanometers , distancing the target detection interaction from the sensor , where the evanescent field is most sensitive . Besides PEG / OEG and zwitterionic compounds , other polymers have also been studied as antifouling scaffolds for biosensors such as polydopamine ( pDOPA ) [ 69 – 71 ] , polyacrylamide [ 72 ] or poly - ( hydroxyethyl methacrylate ) brushes ( pHEMA ) [ 73 ] , or the more recently proposed , poly ( β - peptoid ) s [ 74 , 75 ] . Peptoids are structural isomers of peptides that differ in the linking position of the func - tional sidechains , which are located in the α - nitrogen instead of the α - carbon of the backbone . This sidechain rearrange - ment increases the conformation flexibility and hydration capacity , making them ideal biomimetic compounds to form hydrophilic brushes with elevated fouling resistance . All these strategies have shown very promising results towards total resistance to protein and cell adsorptions ( Table 2 ) ; however , the bioreceptor cross - linking onto these polymer brushes is not well controlled , which limits the final sensitiv - ity of the biosensor . More studies in the design of new functional and antifoul - ing surfaces are required to allow the desired application and implementation of optical label - free biosensors for direct and reliable analysis of untreated clinical samples like blood . Many research works have studied and reported the low - fouling behavior of different materials and surface chem - istry strategies , mainly analyzing the adsorption of serum proteins like albumin , fibrinogen , or immunoglobulins , to gold sensors ( i . e . , SPR ) . However , in most cases , the fouling resistance properties have resulted insufficient when dealing with whole blood plasma samples , or when comparing dif - ferent pooled plasma or clinical specimens from different individuals . On the other hand , it has been shown that rela - tively large coatings and polymer brushes offer the highest fouling resistance but paying little attention to the hindering of bioreceptor coupling or the biointeraction distancing from the sensor surface , which would decrease the overall ana - lytical sensitivity for biosensor application . In view of this , on - going research is directed to develop innovative grafting methods ( in - solution or on - chip ) that provide a precise con - trol of the layer structure , grafting density , polymer length , etc . , and ensure highly stable attachment to the sensor sur - face [ 76 – 78 ] . Towards a biomimetic microenvironment The sensor biofunctionalization approaches described and studied so far have been mostly applied for the detection and quantification of specific molecular targets ( i . e . , proteins , nucleic acids , pathogens , etc . ) with medical or environmen - tal diagnostic purposes , essentially . Label - free optical bio - sensors , however , can also monitor the biomolecular inter - actions in real time and in their native forms ( i . e . , without fluorescent tags ) , and this capability makes them greatly useful for pharmacokinetic analysis or fundamental biol - ogy studies , such as drug - receptor interactions or cell – cell interaction , for example . In this regard , surface bioengineer - ing strategies have been described in order to provide bio - mimetic scaffolds on the sensor surface that can simulate natural biological systems , in which membrane proteins and receptors can maintain their tertiary structure and flexibility for movement , clustering , etc . Lipid membrane interfaces offer a potential solution to this challenge . Three - dimensional ( 3D ) or bidimensional ( 2D ) lipid - based structures can be deposited , arrayed , or directly grown on sensor surfaces through versatile biochem - ical engineering procedures starting from relatively low - cost phospholipid molecules , which can be synthesized with the desired properties and functionalities . Mainly , two different lipid - based approaches have been studied for optical sen - sor biofunctionalization : liposome arrays and planar lipid bilayers ( Fig . 5a and b ) . Liposomes of different sizes can be formed in an aqueous solution by spontaneous self - assem - bling of phospholipid molecules , like phosphocholine and its derivatives [ 79 ] . The hydrophilic head of the phospho - lipid can be functionalized to incorporate chemical groups , tags , or linkers to facilitate their immobilization onto the sensor surface . The most common strategies for liposome tethering on the sensor surface are based on electrostatic or covalent interactions [ 80 , 81 ] , the biotin - avidin system [ 82 , 83 ] , or by DNA hybridization ( Fig . 5c ) [ 84 , 85 ] . The latter is especially interesting for high - throughput multiplex - ing array sensors ; different liposomes can be conjugated to different oligonucleotide sequences that will hybridize to their corresponding complementary sequence previously arrayed on the sensor surface [ 86 ] . Major challenges in 3D liposome array formation are closely related to surface antifouling properties and non - specific adsorptions . The 5079 Biochemistry strategies for labelfree optical sensor biofunctionalization : advances towards… 1 3 sensor surface must be completely passivated before lipo - some tethering to ensure precise site - selective attachment , to retain the liposome structure , and to avoid the non - specific binding of receptors or targets directly onto the sensor sur - face [ 87 ] . Upon liposome immobilization , the bioreceptor is either inserted or attached to the liposome membrane . As stated before , bioreceptor attachment to the lipid external surface can be done via covalent cross - linking methods or other linker - mediated systems as described previously in “Bioreceptor immobilization strategies . ” Nonetheless , when studying drug - cell interactions or ion channel biology , bio - receptors generally are intramembrane proteins that must be inserted in their native conformation . For that , two main approaches can work : using native or synthetic liposomes . Native liposomes can be extracted from cells by techniques as solvent - assistant extraction , sonication , extrusion , freeze / thaw processes , etc . [ 88 , 89 ] . These native liposomes would exactly mimic the native cell environment , in terms of fluidity and lipid order , but they offer poor control on the amount and type of receptors , and other membrane proteins and components , that can be eventually immobilized on the sensor surface . Conveniently , synthetic liposomes can be formed by directly mixing the bioreceptor molecule with the phospholipid mixture before rehydration [ 90 ] . The use of purified compounds eliminates possible interfering mol - ecules ( e . g . , other membrane proteins ) as well as to easily modify the number of receptors per liposome according to the sensor performance requirements or assay parameters . Moreover , liposomes reconstituted from pure components are most likely to have a higher stability for in vitro studies than native liposomes , which could be degraded by enzymes during preparation . As an alternative to liposome arrays , planar lipid mem - branes can also be assembled on the sensor to mimic cell surfaces . These thin - film coatings formed by phospholipid bilayers are commonly not chemically attached but sup - ported on the sensor surface [ 91 ] . Supported lipid bilayers ( SBL ) are formed mostly by the vesicle fusion method that consists in the spontaneous rupture of small lipid vesicles in contact with the solid surface and subsequent re - assembly in a planar bilayer architecture [ 92 , 93 ] . A necessary condi - tion for the vesicle rupture and fusion process to happen is to have a highly hydrophilic surface that attracts phospho - lipid heads and repeals their hydrophobic tails , aiding in the Fig . 5 Biomimetic lipid - based biofunctionalization . a Schematic illustration of liposome - based bioreceptor immobilization . b Sche - matic illustration of bioreceptor immobilization on a planar lipid bilayer . c Representative examples of liposome tethering strategies : electrostatic interactions ( left ) , biotin / avidin system ( middle ) , and DNA - directed ( right ) . d Representative examples of planar lipid bilayer formation strategies : supported lipid bilayer ( SLB ) on hydro - philic substrate ( i . e . , glass ) ( left ) , SLB on hydrophilic coating on gold surface ( middle ) , and hybrid lipid bilayer formed by hydrophobic SAM coating on gold and single lipid layer ( right ) 5080 Soler M . , L . M . Lechuga 1 3 vesicle disruption and bilayer formation ( Fig . 5d ) . Silicon - based sensor surfaces , and especially glass , have been suc - cessfully used for SBL formation ; however , manifold factors and parameters must be carefully controlled , including lipid properties ( e . g . , vesicle size , composition , and concentra - tion ) , surface properties ( e . g . , morphology , topography , and atomic composition ) , and environmental properties ( e . g . , temperature , ionic strength , buffer composition , pH ) [ 94 ] . Formation of SLB on gold surfaces results in even more complicated , as generally vesicles adsorb on the surface and remain intact mainly due to the loss of hydrophilic behavior . Some strategies have been developed to aid in this purpose , such as the coating of gold sensors with highly hydrophilic material ( e . g . , PEGylated polymer brushes ) , or the forma - tion of hybrid bilayers , in which gold is functionalized with a hydrophobic SAM that mimics the phospholipid tail , and vesicles disrupt to form a single layer on top of the SAM ( Fig . 5d ) [ 27 ] . Overall , lipid - based biofunctionalization strategies have been widely studied and a few innovative mechanisms for liposome arraying or planar bilayer formation have been proposed . It is the case , for instance , of liposome networks ( i . e . , liposome arrays interconnected through lipid nanotubes ) [ 95 ] , solvent - assistant on - chip SLB formation [ 96 ] , or patterning of SLB patches via microcontact printing [ 97 ] , among others . Nonetheless , the appli - cation of lipid bioengineered surfaces in label - free optical bio - sensing is still in its infancy and unfortunately far from industrial scalability and potential technology transfer [ 98 ] . Conclusions and future directions An optimum sensor biofunctionalization could be the key to accelerate the technology transfer and definitive implemen - tation of powerful optical label - free biosensors in clinical and environmental analysis practices . An endless number of surface coatings , cross - linking strategies , and innovative biochemical procedures have been proposed to achieve a fully reliable and reproducible protocol for immobilizing bioreceptors in an oriented and controlled manner , pursuing maximum assay sensitivity and selectivity . Among them , the covalent binding of bioreceptors to functional chemical matrices formed onto the sensor surface is the most popular and versatile approach . Self - assembled monolayers of alka - nethiols on gold or alkoxysilanes on silicon - based sensors provide organized scaffolds for biomolecule immobilization and can be easily adapted to modify the grafting density , to add affinity tags or linkers , and to increase fouling resist - ance . The latter is , in fact , the major challenge for biosensor application in point - of - care testing . It has been shown that generating a hydration layer on the coating through incor - poration of hydrophilic moieties ( e . g . , ethylene glycol ) is necessary for reducing non - specific protein adsorptions , but so far insufficient for completely avoiding fouling from undiluted media . Research in the field proposes new alterna - tives based on polymeric materials and combinations with zwitterionic compounds that alter the effective net charge of the sensor surface to prevent as well undesired electro - static interactions . However , the large variability found in real samples composition is still a handicap to success - fully eliminate sample pretreatment processes , like dilution or filtration . Current perspectives in this area rely on the controlled growth of novel materials with desired chemical composition and distribution of functional groups to accom - plish highly ordered scaffolds , with enhanced fouling resist - ance properties , that ensure an efficient , simple , and reliable immobilization of all types of bioreceptors . On the other hand , innovation in surface biofunctionaliza - tion could also expand the applicability of optical biosensors in pharmaceutics and molecular biology studies . By exploit - ing the label - free and real - time monitoring capabilities , these systems can greatly aid in the evaluation of novel drugs , the understanding of cell interactions , etc . To that , several strategies based on lipid bilayer coatings have been suggested to create a biomimetic microenvironment onto the sensor surface in which the bioreceptors behave as they are found in native conditions , increasing the accuracy and reliability of the biological assays . These bioengineered surfaces have shown promising results in model studies , but the functionalization procedure is delicate and complex , requiring sophisticated biochemical techniques that hamper the scalability and adoption in routine experiments . Here , the integration of lab - on - a - chip microfluidic systems that facilitate in - situ preparation or process automation would sup - pose an enormous boost for the demonstration and implementa - tion of novel biomimetic sensors . It is important to remark that surface chemistry cannot move forward without the accompaniment of technology and materials development . Potential final users of optical label - free biosensors expect automated and user - friendly systems able to detect and quantify several target analytes of interest in a sample , in a few minutes , with maximum sensitivity , and at affordable prices . Sensors should be delivered ready to use , which implies the industrialization of the biofunc - tionalization procedure plus packaging methods that protect and ensure the stability and biological activity of the coating and immobilized receptors . The multiplexing capability is nowadays thought of as an engineering challenge , but also surface biofunctionalization protocols must be prepared considering an extreme reduction of reaction volumes or the need of incorporating different functional groups for site - selective immobilization of different receptors . Over - all , it becomes clear that despite the vast knowledge and the myriad of strategies developed along the last years for sensor biofunctionalization , there is still a long research way ahead in which nanotechnology , biotechnology , and materials sci - ences might play the leading role . 5081 Biochemistry strategies for labelfree optical sensor biofunctionalization : advances towards… 1 3 Funding Financial support is acknowledged from the SensCELL pro - ject ( Ref . No . PGC - 2018 – 099870 ) , funded by the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation , the Spanish Research Agency ( AEI ) , and the European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) . The ICN2 is funded by the CERCA program / Generalitat de Catalunya . The ICN2 is supported by the Severo Ochoa Centers of Excellence program , funded by AEI ( Grant No . SEV - 2017 – 0706 ) . Declarations Conflict of interest The authors declare no competing interests . Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri - bution 4 . 0 International License , which permits use , sharing , adapta - tion , distribution and reproduction in any medium or format , as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author ( s ) and the source , provide a link to the Creative Commons licence , and indicate if changes were made . The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article ' s Creative Commons licence , unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material . If material is not included in the article ' s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use , you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder . To view a copy of this licence , visit http : / / creat iveco mmons . org / licen ses / by / 4 . 0 / . References 1 . Ligler FS , Gooding JJ . Lighting up biosensors : now and the dec - ade to come . Anal Chem . 2019 ; 91 : 8732 – 8 . 2 . Chen Y , Liu J , Yang Z , Wilkinson JS , Zhou X . Optical biosen - sors based on refractometric sensing schemes : a review . Biosens Bioelectron . 2019 ; 144 : 111693 . 3 . Lopez GA , Estevez M - C , Soler M , Lechuga LM . Recent advances in nanoplasmonic biosensors : applications and lab - on - a - chip inte - gration . Nanophotonics . 2017 ; 6 : 123 – 36 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1515 / nanoph - 2016 - 0101 . 4 . Fernández Gavela A , Grajales García D , Ramirez J , Lechuga L , Fernández Gavela A , Grajales García D , Ramirez JC , Lechuga LM . Last advances in silicon - based optical biosensors . Sensors . 2016 ; 16 : 285 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / s1603 0285 . 5 . Hill RT . Plasmonic biosensors . Wiley Interdiscip Rev Nanomed Nanobiotechnol . 2015 ; 7 : 152 – 68 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / wnan . 1314 . 6 . Rich RL , Myszka DG . Survey of the 2009 commercial optical biosensor literature . J Mol Recognit . 2011 ; 24 : 892 – 914 . 7 . Soler M , Lechuga LM . Principles , technologies , and applications of plasmonic biosensors . J Appl Phys . 2021 ; 129 : 111102 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1063 / 5 . 00428 11 . 8 . Luan E , Shoman H , Ratner DM , Cheung KC , Chrostowski L . Silicon photonic biosensors using label - free detection . Sensors ( Switzerland ) . 2018 ; 18 : 3519 . 9 . Masson J - F . Surface plasmon resonance clinical biosensors for medical diagnostics . ACS Sensors . 2017 ; 2 : 16 – 30 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acsse nsors . 6b007 63 . 10 . Khansili N , Rattu G , Krishna PM . Label - free optical biosensors for food and biological sensor applications . Sensors Actuators B Chem . 2018 ; 265 : 35 – 49 . 11 . Peltomaa R , Glahn - Martínez B , Benito - Peña E , Moreno - Bondi MC . Optical biosensors for label - free detection of small mol - ecules . Sensors ( Basel ) . 2018 ; 18 : 4126 . 12 . Chocarro - Ruiz B , Fernández - Gavela A , Herranz S , Lechuga LM . Nanophotonic label - free biosensors for environmental monitoring . Curr Opin Biotechnol . 2017 ; 45 : 175 – 83 . 13 . Soler M , Huertas CS , Lechuga LM ( 2019 ) Label - free plasmonic biosensors for point - of - care diagnostics : a review . Expert Rev Mol Diagn 19 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14737 159 . 2019 . 15544 35 14 . Estevez MC , Otte MA , Sepulveda B , Lechuga LM . Trends and challenges of refractometric nanoplasmonic biosensors : a review . Anal Chim Acta . 2014 ; 806 : 55 – 73 . 15 . Frenzel A , Hust M , Schirrmann T . Expression of recombinant antibodies . Front Immunol . 2013 ; 4 : 217 . 16 . Muyldermans S . Nanobodies : natural single - domain antibodies . Annu Rev Biochem . 2013 ; 82 : 775 – 97 . 17 . Belbruno JJ . Molecularly imprinted polymers . Chem Rev . 2019 ; 119 : 94 – 119 . 18 . Haupt K , Mosbach K . Molecularly imprinted polymers and their use in biomimetic sensors . Chem Rev . 2000 ; 100 : 2495 – 504 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / cr990 099w . 19 . Canfarotta F , Poma A , Guerreiro A . Piletsky S ( 2016 ) Solid - phase synthesis of molecularly imprinted nanoparticles . Nat Protoc . 2016 ; 113 ( 11 ) : 443 – 55 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2016 . 030 . 20 . Mazzotta E , Turco A , Chianella I , Guerreiro A , Piletsky SA , Malitesta C . Solid - phase synthesis of electroactive nanoparticles of molecularly imprinted polymers . A novel platform for indirect electrochemical sensing applications . Sensors Actuators B Chem . 2016 ; 229 : 174 – 80 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / J . SNB . 2016 . 01 . 126 . 21 . Song KM , Lee S , Ban C . Aptamers and their biological applica - tions . Sensors . 2012 ; 12 : 612 – 31 . 22 . Jayasena SD . Aptamers : an emerging class of molecules that rival antibodies in diagnostics . Clin Chem . 1999 ; 45 : 1628 – 50 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / clinc hem / 45 . 9 . 1628 . 23 . Zhou W , Jimmy Huang PJ , Ding J , Liu J . Aptamer - based biosen - sors for biomedical diagnostics . Analyst . 2014 ; 139 : 2627 – 40 . 24 . Carrascosa LG , Huertas CS , Lechuga LM . Prospects of optical biosensors for emerging label - free RNA analysis . TrAC - Trends Anal Chem . 2016 ; 80 : 177 – 89 . 25 . Aviñó A , Huertas CS , Lechuga LM , Eritja R . Sensitive and label - free detection of miRNA - 145 by triplex formation . Anal Bioanal Chem . 2016 ; 408 : 885 – 93 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00216 - 015 - 9180 - 6 . 26 . Huertas CS , Aviñó A , Kurachi C , Piqué A , Sandoval J , Eritja R , Esteller M , Lechuga LM . Label - free DNA - methylation detection by direct ds - DNA fragment screening using poly - purine hairpins . Biosens Bioelectron . 2018 ; 120 : 47 – 54 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bios . 2018 . 08 . 027 . 27 . Soler M , Li X , John - Herpin A , Schmidt J , Coukos G , Altug H . Two - dimensional label - free affinity analysis of tumor - specific CD8 T cells with a biomimetic plasmonic sensor . ACS Sensors . 2018 ; 3 : 2286 – 95 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acsse nsors . 8b005 23 . 28 . Jung Y , Jeong JY , Chung BH . Recent advances in immobi - lization methods of antibodies on solid supports . Analyst . 2008 ; 133 : 697 – 701 . 29 . Peterson AW , Heaton RJ , Georgiadis RM . The effect of sur - face probe density on DNA hybridization . Nucleic Acids Res . 2001 ; 29 : 5163 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / NAR / 29 . 24 . 5163 . 30 . Steel AB , Levicky RL , Herne TM , Tarlov MJ . Immobilization of nucleic acids at solid surfaces : effect of oligonucleotide length on layer assembly . Biophys J . 2000 ; 79 : 975 – 81 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0006 - 3495 ( 00 ) 76351 - X . 3 1 . Opdahl A , Petrovykh DY , Kimura - Suda H , Tarlov MJ , Whit - man LJ . Independent control of grafting density and conforma - tion of single - stranded DNA brushes . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2007 ; 104 : 9 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 06085 68103 . 32 . Crivianu - Gaita V , Thompson M . Aptamers , antibody scFv , and antibody Fab’ fragments : an overview and comparison of three 5082 Soler M . , L . M . Lechuga 1 3 of the most versatile biosensor biorecognition elements . Bios - ens Bioelectron . 2016 ; 85 : 32 – 45 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / J . BIOS . 2016 . 04 . 091 . 33 . Sharma H , Mutharasan R . Half antibody fragments improve biosensor sensitivity without loss of selectivity . Anal Chem . 2013 ; 85 : 2472 – 7 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / AC303 5426 . 34 . Huertas CS , Soler M , Estevez MC , Lechuga LM . One - step immobilization of antibodies and DNA on gold sensor sur - faces via a poly - adenine oligonucleotide approach . Anal Chem . 2020 ; 92 : 12596 – 604 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acs . analc hem . 0c026 19 . 35 . Schreiner SM , Shudy DF , Hatch AL , Opdahl A , Whitman LJ , Petrovykh DY . Controlled and efficient hybridization achieved with DNA probes immobilized solely through preferential DNA - substrate interactions . Anal Chem . 2010 ; 82 : 2803 – 10 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / AC902 765G . 36 . Mateescu A , Wang Y , Dostalek J , Jonas U . Thin hydrogel films for optical biosensor applications . Membranes ( Basel ) . 2012 ; 2 : 49 – 69 . 37 . Colangelo E , Comenge J , Paramelle D , Volk M , Chen Q , Lévy R . Characterizing self - assembled monolayers on gold nanoparticles . Bioconjug Chem . 2017 ; 28 : 11 – 22 . 38 . Strong L , Whitesides GM . Structures of self - assembled monolayer films of organosulfur compounds adsorbed on gold single crystals : electron diffraction studies . Langmuir . 1988 ; 4 : 546 – 58 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la000 81a009 . 39 . Bañuls MJ , Puchades R , Maquieira Á . Chemical surface modi - fications for the development of silicon - based label - free inte - grated optical ( IO ) biosensors : a review . Anal Chim Acta . 2013 ; 777 : 1 – 16 . 40 . Giraud L , Nadarajah R , Matar Y , Bazin G , Sun J , Zhu XX , Gias - son S . Amino - functionalized monolayers covalently grafted to silica - based substrates as a robust primer anchorage in aqueous media . Appl Surf Sci . 2016 ; 370 : 476 – 85 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . apsusc . 2016 . 02 . 141 . 41 . Zhang F , Sautter K , Larsen AM , Findley DA , Davis RC , Samha H , Linford MR . Chemical vapor deposition of three aminosilanes on silicon dioxide : surface characterization , stability , effects of silane concentration , and cyanine dye adsorption . Langmuir . 2010 ; 26 : 14648 – 54 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la102 447y . 42 . Moon JH , Shin JW , Kim SY , Park JW . Formation of uniform aminosilane thin layers : an imine formation to measure relative surface density of the amine group . Langmuir . 1996 ; 12 : 4621 – 4 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la960 4339 . 43 . Fischer MJE . Amine coupling through EDC / NHS : a practical approach . Methods Mol Biol . 2010 ; 627 : 55 – 73 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 60761 - 670 - 2 _ 3 . 44 . Farkaš P . Bystrický S ( 2010 ) Chemical conjugation of biomac - romolecules : a mini - review . Chem Pap . 2010 ; 646 ( 64 ) : 683 – 95 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2478 / S11696 - 010 - 0057 - Z . 45 . Mattson G , Conklin E , Desai S , Nielander G , Savage MD , Mor - gensen S . A practical approach to crosslinking . Mol Biol Rep . 1993 ; 17 : 167 – 83 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF009 86726 . 46 . Tolstyka ZP , Richardson W , Bat E , Stevens CJ , Parra DP , Dozier JK , Distefano MD , Dunn B , Maynard HD . Chemoselective immo - bilization of proteins by microcontact printing and bioorthogonal click reactions . ChemBioChem . 2013 ; 14 : 2464 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / CBIC . 20130 0478 . 47 . Seo J , Lee S , Poulter CD . Regioselective covalent immobilization of recombinant antibody - binding proteins A , G , and L for con - struction of antibody arrays . J Am Chem Soc . 2013 ; 135 : 8973 – 80 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / JA402 447G . 48 . Guesdon JL , Ternynck T , Avrameas S ( 2017 ) The use of avidin - biotin interaction in immunoenzymatic techniques . 27 : 1131 – 1139 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 27 . 8 . 90074 49 . Bano F , Fruk L , Sanavio B , Glettenberg M , Casalis L , Niemeyer CM , Scoles G . Toward multiprotein nanoarrays using nanograft - ing and DNA directed immobilization of proteins . Nano Lett . 2009 ; 9 : 2614 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / NL900 8869 . 50 . Soler M , Estevez M - C , Alvarez M , Otte MA , Sepulveda B , Lechuga LM . Direct detection of protein biomarkers in human fluids using site - specific antibody immobilization strategies . Sen - sors . 2014 ; 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / s1402 02239 . 51 . Zeng X , Shen Z . Mernaugh R ( 2011 ) Recombinant anti - bodies and their use in biosensors . Anal Bioanal Chem . 2011 ; 40210 ( 402 ) : 3027 – 38 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / S00216 - 011 - 5569 - Z . 52 . Harder P , Grunze M , Dahint R , Whitesides GM , Laibinis PE . Molecular conformation in oligo ( ethylene glycol ) - terminated self - assembled monolayers on gold and silver surfaces deter - mines their ability to resist protein adsorption . J Phys Chem B . 1998 ; 102 : 426 – 36 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / jp972 635z . 53 . Herrwerth S , Eck W , Reinhardt S , Grunze M . Factors that deter - mine the protein resistance of oligoether self - assembled monolay - ers - internal hydrophilicity , terminal hydrophilicity , and lateral packing density . J Am Chem Soc . 2003 ; 125 : 9359 – 66 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / ja034 820y . 54 . Benesch J , Svedhem S , Svensson SCT , Valiokas R , Liedberg B , Tengvall P . Protein adsorption to oligo ( ethylene glycol ) self - assembled monolayers : experiments with fibrinogen , heparinized plasma , and serum . J Biomater Sci Polym Ed . 2001 ; 12 : 581 – 97 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1163 / 15685 62013 16883 421 . 55 . Rodriguez - Emmenegger C , Brynda E , Riedel T , Houska M , Šubr V , Alles AB , Hasan E , Gautrot JE , Huck WTS . Polymer brushes showing non - fouling in blood plasma challenge the currently accepted design of protein resistant surfaces . Macromol Rapid Commun . 2011 ; 32 : 952 – 7 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / marc . 20110 0189 . 56 . Brault ND , Gao C , Xue H , Piliarik M , Homola J , Jiang S , Yu Q . Ultra - low fouling and functionalizable zwitterionic coat - ings grafted onto SiO2 via a biomimetic adhesive group for sensing and detection in complex media . Biosens Bioelectron . 2010 ; 25 : 2276 – 82 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / J . BIOS . 2010 . 03 . 012 . 57 . Zhao C , Li L , Wang Q , Yu Q , Zheng J . Effect of film thickness on the antifouling performance of poly ( hydroxy - functional meth - acrylates ) grafted surfaces . Langmuir . 2011 ; 27 : 4906 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / LA200 061H . 58 . Rodriguez - Emmenegger C , Houska M , Alles AB , Brynda E . Sur - faces resistant to fouling from biological fluids : towards bioactive surfaces for real applications . Macromol Biosci . 2012 ; 12 : 1413 – 22 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / MABI . 20120 0171 . 59 . Unsworth LD , Tun Z , Sheardown H , Brash JL . Chemisorption of thiolated poly ( ethylene oxide ) to gold : surface chain densities measured by ellipsometry and neutron reflectometry . J Colloid Interface Sci . 2005 ; 281 : 112 – 21 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / J . JCIS . 2004 . 08 . 022 . 60 . Feng W , Zhu S , Ishihara K , Brash JL . Adsorption of fibrinogen and lysozyme on silicon grafted with poly ( 2 - methacryloyloxye - thyl phosphorylcholine ) via surface - initiated atom transfer radi - cal polymerization . Langmuir . 2005 ; 21 : 5980 – 7 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / LA050 277I . 61 . Blättler TM , Pasche S , Textor M , Griesser HJ . High salt stability and protein resistance of poly ( l - lysine ) - g - poly ( ethylene glycol ) copolymers covalently immobilized via aldehyde plasma poly - mer interlayers on inorganic and polymeric substrates . Langmuir . 2006 ; 22 : 5760 – 9 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / LA060 2766 . 62 . Unsworth LD , Sheardown H , Brash JL . Protein resistance of sur - faces prepared by sorption of end - thiolated poly ( ethylene glycol ) to gold : effect of surface chain density . Langmuir . 2005 ; 21 : 1036 – 41 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la047 672d . 5083 Biochemistry strategies for labelfree optical sensor biofunctionalization : advances towards… 1 3 63 . Shao Q , Jiang S . Molecular understanding and design of zwit - terionic materials . Adv Mater . 2015 ; 27 : 15 – 26 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / adma . 20140 4059 . 64 . Holmlin RE , Chen X , Chapman RG , Takayama S , Whitesides GM . Zwitterionic SAMs that resist nonspecific adsorption of pro - tein from aqueous buffer . Langmuir . 2001 ; 17 : 2841 – 50 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la001 5258 . 65 . Chen S , Liu L , Jiang S . Strong resistance of oligo ( phosphorylcholine ) self - assembled monolayers to protein adsorption . Langmuir . 2006 ; 22 : 2418 – 21 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la052 851w . 66 . Ladd J , Zhang Z , Chen S , Hower JC , Jiang S . Zwitterionic poly - mers exhibiting high resistance to nonspecific protein adsorption from human serum and plasma . Biomacromology . 2008 ; 9 : 1357 – 61 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / bm701 301s . 67 . Zhang Z , Chen S , Jiang S . Dual - functional biomimetic materials : nonfouling poly ( carboxybetaine ) with active functional groups for protein immobilization . Biomacromology . 2006 ; 7 : 3311 – 5 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / bm060 750m . 68 . Vaisocherová H , Yang W , Zhang Z , Cao Z , Cheng G , Piliarik M , Homola J , Jiang S . Ultralow fouling and functionalizable surface chemistry based on a zwitterionic polymer enabling sensitive and specific protein detection in undiluted blood plasma . Anal Chem . 2008 ; 80 : 7894 – 901 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / ac801 5888 . 69 . Almeida LC , Frade T , Correia RD , Niu Y , Jin G , Correia JP , Viana AS . Electrosynthesis of polydopamine - ethanolamine films for the development of immunosensing interfaces . Sci Rep . 2021 ; 11 : 2237 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 021 - 81816 - 1 . 70 . Sileika TS , Do KH , Maniak P , Messersmith PB . Antibacterial performance of polydopamine - modified polymer surfaces contain - ing passive and active components . ACS Appl Mater Interfaces . 2011 ; 3 : 4602 – 10 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / am200 978h . 71 . Shi S , Wang L , Su R , Liu B , Huang R , Qi W , He Z . A polydopa - mine - modified optical fiber SPR biosensor using electroless - plated gold films for immunoassays . Biosens Bioelectron . 2015 ; 74 : 454 – 60 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bios . 2015 . 06 . 080 . 72 . Liu Q , Singh A , Lalani R , Liu L . Ultralow fouling polyacrylamide on gold surfaces via surface - initiated atom transfer radical polymeriza - tion . Biomacromology . 2012 ; 13 : 1086 – 92 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / bm201 814p . 73 . Mrabet B , Nguyen MN , Majbri A , Mahouche S , Turmine M , Bakhrouf A , Chehimi MM . Anti - fouling poly ( 2 - hydoxyethyl meth - acrylate ) surface coatings with specific bacteria recognition capabili - ties . Surf Sci . 2009 ; 603 : 2422 – 9 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . susc . 2009 . 05 . 020 . 74 . Saxena V , Merrilees MGL , Lau KHA ( 2020 ) Antifouling peptoid biointerfaces . In : Biointerface Engineering : Prospects in Medical Diagnostics and Drug Delivery . Springer Singapore , pp 55 – 73 75 . Damodaran VB , Murthy SN . Bio - inspired strategies for designing antifouling biomaterials . Biomater Res . 2016 ; 20 : 1 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s40824 - 016 - 0064 - 4 . 76 . Rodriguez - Emmenegger C , Hasan E , Pop - Georgievski O , Houska M , Brynda E , Alles AB . Controlled / living surface - initiated ATRP of antifouling polymer brushes from gold in PBS and blood sera as a model study for polymer modifications in complex biological media . Macromol Biosci . 2012 ; 12 : 525 – 32 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / MABI . 20110 0425 . 77 . Huang W , Kim J - B , Bruening ML , Baker GL . Functionalization of surfaces by water - accelerated atom - transfer radical polymerization of hydroxyethyl methacrylate and subsequent derivatization . Macro - molecules . 2002 ; 35 : 1175 – 9 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / MA011 159E . 78 . Paripovic D , Klok H - A . Improving the stability in aqueous media of polymer brushes grafted from silicon oxide substrates by surface - ini - tiated atom transfer radical polymerization . Macromol Chem Phys . 2011 ; 212 : 950 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / MACP . 20100 0729 . 79 . Qingtao Liu J , Boyd B . Liposomes in biosensors . Analyst . 2012 ; 138 : 391 – 409 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1039 / C2AN3 6140J . 80 . Zhang L , Hong L , Yu Y , Bae SC , Granick S . Nanoparticle - assisted surface immobilization of phospholipid liposomes . J Am Chem Soc . 2006 ; 128 : 9026 – 7 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / JA062 620R . 81 . Morita S , Nukui M , Kuboi R . Immobilization of liposomes onto quartz crystal microbalance to detect interaction between liposomes and proteins . J Colloid Interface Sci . 2006 ; 298 : 672 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / J . JCIS . 2005 . 12 . 043 . 82 . Losey EA , Smith MD , Meng M , Best MD . Microplate - based analy - sis of protein−membrane binding interactions via immobilization of whole liposomes containing a biotinylated anchor . Bioconjug Chem . 2009 ; 20 : 375 – 83 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / BC800 414K . 83 . Vermette P , Meagher L , Gagnon E , Griesser HJ , Doillon CJ . Immo - bilized liposome layers for drug delivery applications : inhibition of angiogenesis . J Control Release . 2002 ; 80 : 179 – 95 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0168 - 3659 ( 02 ) 00023 - 8 . 84 . Svedhem S , Pfeiffer I , Larsson C , Wingren C , Borrebaeck C , Höök F . Patterns of DNA - labeled and scFv - antibody - carrying lipid vesi - cles directed by material - specific immobilization of DNA and sup - ported lipid bilayer formation on an Au / SiO2 template . ChemBio - Chem . 2003 ; 4 : 339 – 43 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / CBIC . 20039 0055 . 85 . Pfeiffe I , Höök F . Bivalent cholesterol - based coupling of oli - gonucletides to lipid membrane assemblies . J Am Chem Soc . 2004 ; 126 : 10224 – 5 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / JA048 514B . 86 . Chaize B , Nguyen M , Ruysschaert T , le Berre V , Trévisiol E , Caminade A - M , Majoral JP , Pratviel G , Meunier B , Winterhalter M , Fournier D . Microstructured liposome array . Bioconjug Chem . 2005 ; 17 : 245 – 7 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / BC050 273P . 87 . Städler B , Bally M , Grieshaber D , Vörös J , Brisson A , Grandin HM . Creation of a functional heterogeneous vesicle array via DNA controlled surface sorting onto a spotted microarray . Biointerphases . 2007 ; 1 : 142 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1116 / 1 . 24341 78 . 88 . Mukherjee S , Maxfield FR ( 2004 ) Membrane domains , 20 : 839 – 866 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / ANNUR EV . CELLB IO . 20 . 010403 . 095451 89 . Simons K , Vaz WLC ( 2004 ) Model systems , lipid rafts , and cell membranes 33 : 269 – 295 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / ANNUR EV . BIOPH YS . 32 . 110601 . 141803 90 . Contino PB , Hasselbacher CA , Ross JB , Nemerson Y . Use of an ori - ented transmembrane protein to probe the assembly of a supported phospholipid bilayer . Biophys J . 1994 ; 67 : 1113 – 6 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0006 - 3495 ( 94 ) 80577 - 6 . 91 . Hirano - Iwata A , Niwano M , Sugawara M . The design of molecular sensing interfaces with lipid - bilayer assemblies . TrAC Trends Anal Chem . 2008 ; 27 : 512 – 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / J . TRAC . 2008 . 04 . 006 . 92 . Castellana ET , Cremer PS . Solid supported lipid bilayers : from bio - physical studies to sensor design . Surf Sci Rep . 2006 ; 61 : 429 – 44 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / J . SURFR EP . 2006 . 06 . 001 . 93 . Richter RP , Bérat R , Brisson AR . Formation of solid - supported lipid bilayers : an integrated view . Langmuir . 2006 ; 22 : 3497 – 505 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / LA052 687C . 94 . Reimhult E , Höök F , Bengt K . Intact vesicle adsorption and sup - ported biomembrane formation from vesicles in solution : influence of surface chemistry , vesicle size , temperature , and osmotic pressure . Langmuir . 2002 ; 19 : 1681 – 91 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / LA026 3920 . 95 . Nomura SIM , Mizutani Y , Kurita K , Watanabe A , Akiyoshi K . Changes in the morphology of cell - size liposomes in the presence of cholesterol : formation of neuron - like tubes and liposome networks . Biochim Biophys Acta - Biomembr . 2005 ; 1669 : 164 – 9 . https : / / doi . or g / 10 . 1016 / J . BBAMEM . 2005 . 02 . 005 . 96 . Jackman JA , Cho N - J . Supported lipid bilayer formation : beyond vesicle fusion . Langmuir . 2020 ; 36 : 1387 – 400 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / ACS . LANGM UIR . 9B037 06 . 5084 Soler M . , L . M . Lechuga 1 3 97 . Li KA , Kam L , Hovis JS , Boxer SG . Patterning hybrid surfaces of proteins and supported lipid bilayers . Langmuir . 2000 ; 16 : 6773 – 6 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / LA000 653T . 98 . Jonsson MP , Dahlin AB , Höök F . Nanoplasmonic sensing combined with artificial cell membranes . In : Nanoplasmonic Sensors . New York : Springer ; 2012 . p . 59 – 82 . Publisher ' s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . 5085 Biochemistry strategies for labelfree optical sensor biofunctionalization : advances towards…