HAL Id : hal - 00745660 https : / / hal . archives - ouvertes . fr / hal - 00745660 Submitted on 26 Jan 2013 HAL is a multi - disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci - entific research documents , whether they are pub - lished or not . The documents may come from teaching and research institutions in France or abroad , or from public or private research centers . L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL , est destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche , publiés ou non , émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français ou étrangers , des laboratoires publics ou privés . Ethological evaluation of Human - Robot Interaction : are children more efficient and motivated with computer , virtual agent or robots ? Céline Jost , Vanessa André , Brigitte Le Pévédic , Alban Lemasson , Martine Hausberger , Dominique Duhaut To cite this version : Céline Jost , Vanessa André , Brigitte Le Pévédic , Alban Lemasson , Martine Hausberger , et al . . Etho - logical evaluation of Human - Robot Interaction : are children more efficient and motivated with com - puter , virtual agent or robots ? . IEEE ROBIO 2012 - IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics2012 , Dec 2012 , Guangzhou , China . pp . 1368 - 1373 . ￿hal - 00745660￿  Abstract —Nowadays , robots and virtual agents become companions for humans . They seem to have distinct roles in the Human - Agent Interaction . Thus , when developing a new application , it is judicious to wonder which the better is . In the Robadom project , a homecare robot has to assist elderly at home . The robot provides cognitive stimulation game . We developed StimCards , a cognitive card - based game . The principle question is : is the robot the best interlocutor in this context ? This paper presents an evaluation of StimCards . Participants are children because French elderly is reluctant to robots and because they will be the future hypothetical users . I . I NTRODUCTION ORKING on robotic companions is a new challenge of this century . Some movies show the future “super robots” which will independently live with humans . But in reality , the technology is far from this result . Nowadays , searchers try to create homecare robots which can accompany people in their daily life . For example , the Robadom project [ 1 ] aims at designing a robot which assists elderly at home . Its role is to manage the shopping list , appointments , meetings , and medication taking . The robot could be an intermediate between the person and his / her family . Its specialty is to provide encouragements and coaching during cognitive stimulation exercises . This paper focuses on one of these missions : cognitive stimulation exercises . We develop an application which provides this kind of exercises : StimCards . This game is composed of cards , a webcam , a computer and a Graphical User Interface ( GUI ) and a computing interlocutor which orchestrates the game : the computer , a virtual agent , a robot . . . . The card contains a barcode which encodes a question , a set of suggested answers and the true answer . The webcam read the barcode and transmits data to the GUI which displays cards data for users . The game is completely configurable . It is possible to personalize questions and answers . Thus , this product is interesting because it can easily be adapted to numerous different people . This paper focuses on StimCards evaluation . Our work has two main concerns : StimCards acceptability and the choice of the best interlocutor for human . A focus  Manuscript received July 30 , 2012 . This work has been supported by French National Research Agency ( ANR ) through TecSan program ( project Robadom n°ANR - 09 - TECS - 012 ) . C . Jost , B . Le Pévédic and D . Duhaut are with the University of South Brittany in the Lab - STICC laboratory . Vannes , France . V . André , A . Lemasson and M . Hausberger are with the University of Rennes 1 in the “Ethologie Animale et Humaine” laboratory , Rennes , France . group , composed of French old people , showed a low level of acceptance concerning humanoid robots [ 2 ] . First , they only imagined interaction with small robots which look like a “teapot” . Second , they perceived the robot as a human substitute which makes them afraid . Their reluctance seemed to be a bias for this experimentation . In order to obtain a second point of view , we decided to experiment StimCards on 10 years children for two reasons . First , they are not reluctant to new technologies because they always knew it . Second , the current children are the future elderly and represent some possible future StimCards users . On the one hand , StimCards acceptability has been evaluated [ 3 ] . A questionnaire tested children interest , StimCards usability and capability of personalization . Results were positive . Children really liked this game and wanted to keep playing with it . They found it easy to use . And they urged to personalize the game . The results indicated that StimCards is an appropriate tool for human - computer interaction in an educational game context . On the other hand , the study introduced some interlocutors to children : the computer which displays cards data , a virtual agent , a metallic robot and a plush robot . Indeed , another challenge of this century deals with virtual character . It makes possible an interaction with human without a costly robot . Robots and Virtual characters have a distinct role and no one is better than others [ 4 ] . ( See a state of the art in [ 5 ] ) . Thus , it is important to check which interlocutors is the best for cognitive training exercises . A questionnaire asked children about their preference . The preliminary results [ 3 ] showed that robots are preferred by children . But it was not possible to determine either the metallic robot or the plush robot was the favorite one . To complete this preliminary study , the experimentation has been filmed . The films were given to ethologists to be analyzed in order to determine the favorite interlocutor . The ethology discipline is the study of animal behaviors ( including human beings ) . Thus ethologists can interpret movements , postures , facial expression and so on . Their study , which used questionnaire , observation and performance computation , determined that the metallic robot was the favorite one to improve children performance . This article presents the related work about comparison between virtual agent and robots . Then the section III presents the computing setting used in this experimentation . The section IV describes the experimentation while the section V details the results . Section VI gives discussion and conclusion . Ethological Evaluation of Human - Agent Interaction : are children more efficient and motivated with computer , virtual agent or robots ? C . Jost , V . André , B . Le Pévédic , A . Lemasson , M . Hausberger and D . Duhaut W ha l - 00745660 , v e r s i on 1 - 26 O c t 2012 Author manuscript , published in " IEEE ROBIO 2012 - IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics2012 , China ( 2012 ) " II . R ELATED WORK Concerning social robots , Kidd [ 6 ] showed the importance of physically presence . It makes the robot more trustable and altruistic . However there is no effect on engagement . With a lot of interaction , the robot is more credible and persuasive . It could be interesting to know in which context the robot is better than virtual character and vice versa . The literature shows six recent studies which compare real robot and virtual one . Table I gives a concise overview of each study . Three studies established that there is no difference between real and virtual . A study determined that virtual is better and two studies determined that real is better . Concerning equality between real and virtual , the first study [ 7 ] [ 8 ] made the comparison between a robot and a screen agent recommendation on decision’s making in the context of color - name selection task . This experimentation determined that there is no difference between real and virtual agent . But they showed that its effect depends on interaction environment . A 3D body has effect in a 3D environment ; a 2D body has effect in a 2D environment ; but a 2D body has no effect in a 3D environment and vice versa . The second experimentation [ 9 ] studied the effect of physical embodiment . Their results indicated that physical embodiment is evaluated more positively than disembodied one if people can touch objects . If people cannot touch the physical embodiment , this one is evaluated less positively than disembodied one . Tactile interaction is important . Moreover they highlighted that social agents are more attractive to lonely people . The third experimentation [ 10 ] studied the impression of real robot and virtual robot based on the personal space of people . They did not find any difference between real and virtual but established that people need more space with robot than with virtual agent . Concerning the case where virtual characters are better , the study [ 11 ] made the comparison between a real robot and a virtual one in a learning companion system . This study revealed that people were more concentrated with the virtual robot . Concerning the case where real robots were better , the first study [ 12 ] made the comparison between real and virtual robot and between young ( mean 20 . 6 years old ) and old ( mean 68 . 7 years old ) people . Results showed that the elderly take into account the robot more than the youth . The elderly impressions are more positive about the real robot . The young people have less attachment to the robot virtual . In general , the elderly have more attachment for virtual robot than the youth . The second experimentation [ 13 ] made the comparison between real robot and computer in the context of musical cognitive game . This study revealed that social interaction and task performance are improved thanks to interaction with the robot . TABLE I S TUDIES ON COMPARISON BETWEEN REAL AND VIRTUAL EFFECTS Study Year Location Participants Method Best interlocutor [ 7 ] [ 8 ] 2004 Japan Everyone O + Q R = V [ 9 ] 2006 USA Undergraduate Q R = V [ 10 ] 2009 Japan Young Q R = V [ 11 ] 2007 Taiwan Elementary Q V [ 12 ] 2009 Japan Elderly & Young O + Q R [ 13 ] 2009 USA Elderly with dementia O + Q R O = observation , Q = questionnaire , R = Real and V = Virtual . These results show that robot and virtual agents are both important and should be specialized to be more efficient . But it is not possible to conclude about human acceptance because of the Asiatic and American cultures . III . S TIM C ARDS A . Presentation StimCards is an interactive game which is composed of : cards with barcode , a webcam , a Graphical User Interface and , optionally , a virtual or real companion ( see Fig . 1 ) . To play , gamers must show a card to the camera which recognizes the card and displays its environment in the GUI . Gamers give their answers among suggested answers . Other digital devices can be added to the game , such as virtual character or robots . StimCards can be adapted with others questions . People only have to change the card file description which is a XML file . This configuration file contains : the question label and a associated picture ( optional ) , a question type ( multiple choice question , open question , yes / no question… ) , a card category ( entertainment , sciences , math… ) , colors ( GUI background , font ) , a set of clues which can help gamers , a set of suggested answers ( text and / or picture ) and the true answer . These data , except the true answer , are displayed in StimCards GUI . Fig . 2 shows an example of a loaded card . B . Tested environments The experimentation objective was to determine the favorite interlocutor for children . Thus we decided to compare four different environments , represented in Fig . 3 . In each environment , we added a tactile tablet to StimCards Fig . 1 . StimCards composition ha l - 00745660 , v e r s i on 1 - 26 O c t 2012 in order to give answer . A computer only displayed StimCards GUI and the camera view . Users did not be able to touch this computer . They were only able to communicate with the tactile tablet which displayed a specific answer frame . The first environment ( A ) was the control condition managed by the computer . The interaction was between the gamer and the computer . The second environment ( B ) was managed by an embodied conversational agent called GRETA [ 14 ] : the character . The third environment ( C ) introduced a small humanoid robot called Bioloïd : the robot . And the last environment ( D ) showed the same robot dressed up as a plush chicken : the animal . In each environment , the text synthesis used the same French voice in order to avoid bias : ScanSoft Virginie _ Dri40 _ 16kHz . We used Windows sapi api to make computer , agent and robots speak . C . Experimentation exercises Exercises were created with children teachers in order to have appropriate difficulty level . We chose mental computation exercises because they do not require specific cultivation and because each child had these skills . A session exercise had five difficulty levels . To create levels , we decided to use only one operator : addition because it was too difficult to create exercises with several operators . Which one was the most easy to use ? Table II shows the construction of the five levels . Progress is constant . TABLE II C ONSTRUCTION OF G AME LEVELS Level Construction Example 1 X + X , result < 10 5 + 3 ; 2 + 7 2 X + X , result > 10 8 + 7 ; 5 + 9 3 X + XX , result < 50 32 + 9 ; 27 + 6 4 XX + XX , result < 50 43 + 28 ; 37 + 16 5 XX + XX , result > 50 75 + 69 ; 64 + 57 X represents a one - digit number IV . E XPERIMENTATION A . Objective The experimentation objective was to use ethological methodology to evaluate human - robot interaction in order to determine which interlocutor is the most efficient in a cognitive task . In this study , several approaches were crossed to increase results reliability : questionnaire , observation and performance computation . The questionnaire asks questions concerning StimCards acceptability and concerning each environment [ 3 ] . Observation consisted to note each posture ( curved , relaxed , straight , and tense ) and each look . Performance computation consisted to note the response time and the numbers of mistakes made during the exercise . B . Participants Participants were pupils in the equivalent of the 4th English grade ( mean age : 10 . 27 years old ) . They came from two different schools from two different French cities . In this study , results of 51 children ( 26 girls and 25 boys ) were analyzed . In the previous study , 52 children were taken into account . It was not a problem for questionnaire analysis . But , this study includes observation analysis and we had to remove a child . It was not possible to analyze her behavior because of materials problems during a session . C . Global Setting The setting which has been described in [ 3 ] is written here too to make a good understanding of the work . To have a similar experimental setting in all conditions and with all participants , the experimentation was conducted in a 1 . 60 meters cubic room , closed by green curtains . Green has been chosen to increase luminosity in the room and because it is bright and calming . Fig . 4 . shows the organization in this room . Fig . 4 . Experimental setting - room Fig . 3 . Tested environments Fig . 2 . A loaded card example in StimCards GUI ha l - 00745660 , v e r s i on 1 - 26 O c t 2012 Fig . 5 . Experimental setting - desk Children were isolated in the room . The both lateral curtains have one way mirrors to make sure the experimentation went smoothly . Fig . 5 . illustrates the experimental setting . A desk and a chair were at the end of the room , back to the entrance . Two cameras filmed the interaction . The first one filmed children face . The second one filmed from head to knees in order to see legs and hands movements and general posture . A projector illuminated the room . A computer displayed the StimCards GUI . Game cards were placed in front of the computer . There were five packages corresponding to the five difficulty levels : light - yellow , dark yellow , light - green , dark green and blue . A tactile tablet was placed in front of children . A camera was fixed in a black box , on the left of the computer . Children had to put a card in the box slit . The card was placed in front of the camera which read the barcode and treated the question . When children finished playing with a card , they throw it away in the trash box . The interlocutor was always placed at the computer left . D . Procedure The experimentation was composed of four 10 minutes sessions related to the four different interlocutors . Each participant played with each interlocutor . The creation of the game scenario is described in [ 3 ] . We used a framework which is able to connect together all kinds of digital devices and allows programming easily the environment . A session started with the interlocutor speech which allows explaining the rules and starting the game . During the introduction part , the interlocutor ensured several times that the participant understood explanations . The participant had to answer “yes” or “no” . This part was controlled by a computing engineer who answered with an administration GUI by clicking “yes” or “no” buttons . It allows us simulating the vocal recognition without changing the scenario . The gamer was asked to begin the game with a first level card . He / She had to show the card to the webcam . Thus , the barcode was recognized and data were able to be displayed by the GUI . At the same time , the interlocutor asked the question to the participant who had to answer with the tactile tablet . Fig . 6 . shows the answer frame . Gamer had to type the addition result and then push the “VALIDER” button . If the result was good , the interlocutor congratulated the participant and invited him / her to take a higher level card . If the result was false , the interlocutor encouraged the participant and invited him / her to take a similar level card . The game was finished after 9 questions , which corresponds to the end of the fifth level cards if the participant gave only good results . After each session , participants had to answer a questionnaire composed of 13 questions , which asked their impression on the interlocutor . At the end of the four sessions , participants had to answer general questions about the game and to speak about their favorite interlocutor . To avoid a bias related to the order of interlocutors , sessions of both schools did not have the same order . V . R ESULTS These results present four main analysis based on questionnaires , observation and computation performances . Each participant filled 4 questionnaires and a set of outcome questions . It represented 204 questionnaires with 13 questions and 51 questionnaires with 8 outcome questions . Concerning recording , each participant attended four sessions which corresponds to 40 minutes , filmed by two movie cameras . The total represented 68 hours . This article presents main important results and does not detail the methodology . The whole results will be published in an ethologic journal . Four interlocutors are compared to determine which one is the best to encourage children to do exercises . Interlocutors are called : computer , character , animal and robot ( introduced in III . B ) . A . Questionnaire analysis A first analysis was based on the answers given by the questionnaires . Children classified the four interlocutors according their preference . The significant order of preference is : robot , animal , character and computer ( G tests , ddl = 1 , P < 0 , 012 ) . Fig . 6 . Answer frame ha l - 00745660 , v e r s i on 1 - 26 O c t 2012 B . Observation analysis : watching the computer This second analysis was based on the children behavior observed throughout the experimentation . The first part of this study consisted to analyze children’s look . The objective was to determine whether children had the same behavior in the presence of the computer , the character , the animal or the robot . Thus , we compared the time when children watched the computer in the four environments . Results indicated that this time decreased significantly in the presence of the character , the animal or the robot ( Wilcozon’s test , robot : Z = 5 . 849 , P < 0 . 0001 ; animal : Z = 4 . 602 , P < 0 . 0001 and character : Z = 5 . 005 , P < 0 . 0001 , Fig . 7 ) . Fig . 7 shows the percentage of the average time when children watched the computer according to the tested environment . Fig . 7 . Time watching the computer Wilcoxon’s test ( * : P < 0 . 012 ; * * : P < 0 . 0025 ; * * * : P < 0 . 00025 with Bonferroni’s corrections ) . N = 51 C . Observation analysis : smiles to interlocutors The second part of this study consisted to analyze children’s smiles . The objective was to determine whether the children smiled more or less frequently in the presence of the character , the animal or the robot in comparison of smiles in the presence of the computer . Results revealed that children smiled less frequently in the presence of the computer ( Wilcozon’s test , robot : Z = 3 . 78 , P < 0 . 001 , animal : Z = 4 . 3 , P < 0 . 0001 ; character : Z = 2 , 351 , P = 0 . 019 , Fig . 8 ) . The maximum number of smiles appeared in the presence of the character . Fig . 8 shows the average numbers of smiles per minute . Fig . 8 . Number of smiles Wilcoxon’s test ( * : P < 0 . 012 ; * * : P < 0 . 0025 ; * * * : P < 0 . 00025 with Bonferroni’s corrections ) . N = 51 We can notice that children showed more interest ( looks ) and more satisfaction ( smiles ) with robots and avatar than with computer . D . Performance analysis : time and mistakes The last analysis consisted to examine children’s performances in terms of response time and numbers of mistakes during mental arithmetic exercises . Comparing the computer to other environments , results indicated that there was no response time difference ( Wilcoxon’s tests , level 1 : Z = 0 . 825 , P = 0 . 409 ; level 2 : Z = 0 . 112 , P = 1 . 903 , level 3 : Z = 0 . 057 ; P = 0 . 910 ; level 4 : Z = 0 , 862 , P = 0 . 388 ; level 5 : Z = 0 . 526 , P = 0 . 599 ) . Moreover , there was no difference about the number of mistakes ( Chi - square test , ddl = 1 , P > 0 . 05 ) . Comparing the character to both robots , response times were longer when the children was in interaction with robots than with character , in levels 1 and 2 ( Wilcoxon’s tests , level 1 : Z = 2 . 419 , P = 0 . 016 and level 2 : Z = 2 . 418 , P = 0 . 007 ) . There were no significant difference in levels 3 , 4 and 5 ( Wilcoxon’s tests , level 3 : Z = 0 . 719 , P = 0 . 472 ; level 4 : Z = 0 . 028 , P = 0 . 978 and level 5 : Z = 1 . 627 , P = 0 . 104 ) . Comparing the character to the animal , response times were the longest when the children was in interaction with the animal in level 1 and 2 ( Wilcoxon’tests , level 1 : Z = 3 . 099 , P = 0 . 002 and level 2 : Z = 3 . 089 , P = 0 . 002 ) . Fig . 9 shows the average response times per level according to the tested environment . Concerning the number of mistakes , there were significantly no difference between the both robots and the character ( Chi - square , ddl = 1 , P < 0 . 05 ) . Fig . 9 . Response times per level Wilcoxon’s test ( * : P < 0 . 012 ; * * : P < 0 . 0025 ; * * * : P < 0 . 00025 with Bonferroni’s corrections ) . N = 51 ha l - 00745660 , v e r s i on 1 - 26 O c t 2012 Concerning mental arithmetic , the longest response times occurred when children were in interaction with the animal . According to Michael [ 15 ] , animals do not judge . That is the reason why they are often used in therapy as mediators between doctors and patients . In this case , patients stress and anxiety can decrease ( Martin & Farnum [ 16 ] , Bass et al [ 17 ] ) . It seems that children are more stressed when they are with the robot or the character ( which both have a human appearance ) than with the animal . The human appearance might increase concentration and / or motivation . VI . CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES New kinds of companions are growing : robots , virtual characters , learning software… It is essential to evaluate their humans’ acceptability and to develop techniques which improve the interaction . Our experimentation studied the influence of three animated objects whereas most of the others focused on one object ( Nabe et al [ 18 ] , Svenstrup et al [ 19 ] , Weiss et al [ 20 ] and Beran et al [ 21 ] ) . This study came from a coupling of two disciplines ( computing science and ethology ) and compiled three approaches : questionnaire , observation and performance . It gave three main results :  Children preferred the humanoid metallic robot first . The plush robot came in second place . The third favorite companion was the virtual character . And the last one was the computer .  Children showed more interest and more satisfaction in the presence of animated objects .  Children seemed to obtain better performances with anthropomorphic animated objects . But , even if others animated objects did not increase performances , they appeared to be beneficial for children in terms of interests and satisfaction . Analysis is currently being realized in order to study more precisely children’s behavioral reactions . Two perspectives seem interesting :  Studying specific periods of the interaction like uncertainty or doubts . It can reveal relevant attitudes .  Studying more precisely children’s reactions face to the different animated objects . Our study showed that robots were the favorite interlocutor in the context of cognitive exercises . It revealed that robots appearance was not a determining acceptability factor . Each companion had the same speech with the same voice and had a poor non verbal behavior . The next experimentation will compare two similar robots having two different behaviors in order to study attachment levels . The objective will be to determine whether a robot should have a specific personality to be better accepted . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] M . Chetouani , Y . H . Wu , C . Jost , B . Le Pevedic , C . Fassert , V . Cristancho - Lacroix , S . Lassiaille , C . Granata , A . Tapus , D . Duhaut , and others , “Cognitive Services for Elderly People : The ROBADOM project , ” 2010 . [ 2 ] Y . - H . Wu , C . Fassert , and A . - S . Rigaud , “Designing robots for the elderly : Appearance issue and beyond , ” Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics , vol . 54 , no . 1 , pp . 121 – 126 , Jan . 2012 . [ 3 ] C . Jost , B . Le Pevedic , and D . Duhaut , “Robot is best to play with human ! , ” presented at the 21st IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication , Paris , 2012 . [ 4 ] E . Hudlicka , S . Payr , R . Ventura , C . Becker - Asano , K . Fischer , I . Leite , and C . Von , “Social interaction with robots and agents : Where do we stand , where do we go ? , ” 2009 , pp . 1 – 6 . [ 5 ] M . Dragone , B . R . Duffy , and G . M . P . O’Hare , “Social interaction between robots , avatars & amp ; humans , ” pp . 24 – 29 . [ 6 ] C . D . Kidd , “Sociable robots : The role of presence and task in human - robot interaction , ” Massachusetts Institute of Technology , 2003 . [ 7 ] K . Shinozawa , F . Naya , J . Yamato , and K . Kogure , “Differences in effect of robot and screen agent recommendations on human decision - making , ” International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , vol . 62 , no . 2 , pp . 267 – 279 , Feb . 2005 . [ 8 ] J . Yamato , K . Shinozawa , F . Naya , and K . Kogure , “Evaluation of Communication with Robot and Agent : Are robots better social actors than agents , ” in Proc . of the 8th IFIP TC . 13 Int . Conf . on Human - Computer Interaction ( INTERACT’01 ) , 2001 , pp . 9 – 13 . [ 9 ] K . M . Lee , Y . Jung , J . Kim , and S . R . Kim , “Are physically embodied social agents better than disembodied social agents ? : The effects of physical embodiment , tactile interaction , and people’s loneliness in human – robot interaction , ” International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , vol . 64 , no . 10 , pp . 962 – 973 , Oct . 2006 . [ 10 ] K . Ohara , S . Negi , T . Takubo , Y . Mae , and T . Arai , “Evaluation of virtual and real robot based on human impression , ” 2009 , pp . 873 – 878 . [ 11 ] S . - H . Hsu , C . - Y . Chou , F . - C . Chen , Yuan - Kai , and T . - W . Chan , “An investigation of the differences between robot and virtual learning companions’ influences on students’ engagement , ” 2007 , pp . 41 – 48 . [ 12 ] T . Nomura and M . Sasa , “Investigation of differences on impressions of and behaviors toward real and virtual robots between elder people and university students , ” 2009 , pp . 934 – 939 . [ 13 ] A . Tapus , C . Tapus , and M . Mataric , “The role of physical embodiment of a therapist robot for individuals with cognitive impairments , ” 2009 , pp . 103 – 107 . [ 14 ] E . de Sevin , R . Niewiadomski , E . Bevacqua , A . M . Pez , M . Mancini , and C . Pelachaud , “Greta , une plateforme d’agent conversationnel expressif et interactif , ” Technique et Science Informatiques , vol . 29 , no . 7 , p . 751 , 2010 . [ 15 ] E . Michaels , “Pets and the elderly : a therapeutic friendship . , ” Canadian Medical Association Journal , vol . 127 , no . 1 , p . 70 , 1982 . [ 16 ] F . Martin and J . Farnum , “Animal - Assisted Therapy for Children with Pervasive Developmental Disorders , ” Western Journal of Nursing Research , vol . 24 , no . 6 , pp . 657 – 670 , Oct . 2002 . [ 17 ] M . M . Bass , C . A . Duchowny , and M . M . Llabre , “The Effect of Therapeutic Horseback Riding on Social Functioning in Children with Autism , ” Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders , vol . 39 , no . 9 , pp . 1261 – 1267 , Apr . 2009 . [ 18 ] S . Nabe , T . Kanda , K . Hiraki , H . Ishiguro , K . Kogure , and N . Hagita , “Analysis of human behavior to a communication robot in an open field , ” 2006 , p . 234 . [ 19 ] M . Svenstrup , T . Bak , O . Maler , H . J . Andersen , and O . B . Jensen , “Pilot Study of Person Robot Interaction in a Public Transit Space , ” in Research and Education in Robotics — EUROBOT 2008 , vol . 33 , A . Gottscheber , S . Enderle , and D . Obdrzalek , Eds . Berlin , Heidelberg : Springer Berlin Heidelberg , 2009 , pp . 96 – 106 . [ 20 ] A . Weiss , D . Wurhofer , and M . Tscheligi , “‘I Love This Dog’— Children’s Emotional Attachment to the Robotic Dog AIBO , ” International Journal of Social Robotics , vol . 1 , pp . 243 – 248 , Jun . 2009 . [ 21 ] T . N . Beran , A . Ramirez - Serrano , R . Kuzyk , S . Nugent , and M . Fior , “Would Children Help a Robot in Need ? , ” International Journal of Social Robotics , vol . 3 , pp . 83 – 93 , Sep . 2010 . ha l - 00745660 , v e r s i on 1 - 26 O c t 2012