RESEARCH IMPACT The dual frontier : Patented inventions and prior scientific advance Mohammad Ahmadpoor 1 , 2 and Benjamin F . Jones 1 , 2 , 3 * The extent to which scientific advances support marketplace inventions is largely unknown . We study 4 . 8 million U . S . patents and 32 million research articles to determine the minimum citation distance between patented inventions and prior scientific advances . We find that most cited research articles ( 80 % ) link forward to a future patent . Similarly , most patents ( 61 % ) link backward to a prior research article . Linked papers and patents typically stand 2 to 4 degrees distant from the other domain . Yet , advances directly along the patent - paper boundary are notably more impactful within their own domains . The distance metric further provides a typology of the fields , institutions , and individuals involved in science - to - technology linkages . Overall , the findings are consistent with theories that emphasize substantial and fruitful connections between patenting and prior scientific inquiry . S cientific research can propel both funda - mental understanding and practical appli - cation , but the extent to which scientific advances support technological progress is unclear ( 1 – 3 ) . According to the “ linear model ” of science , basic research , focused on understanding , provides a foundation for eventual technological applications ( 1 , 4 – 7 ) . For example , Riemanniangeometry , anabstractmathematical advance that was initially widely ignored , later proved essential to Einstein ’ s development of generalrelativityand , ultimately , totimedilation corrections in the Global Positioning System . In biology , basic research into extremophile bacteria later proved essential to the development of the polymerasechainreaction , theDNAamplification technique that is vital to modern biotechnology applications . Such examples illustrate the poten - tial value of the linear model as a conception of scientific and technological progress , a view that helps motivate the public case for supporting scientific research ( 1 , 8 , 9 ) . At the same time , many observers argue that basic research rarely pays off in practical appli - cation or that practical advances typically pro - ceed without any inspiration from basic research ( 10 – 14 ) . These views suggest a potentially sub - stantialdisconnectbetweentheknowledgeoutputsofpublicscienceinstitutions , such as research universities or government laboratories , and in - ventiveoutputsin theprivatesector . Otherschol - ars argue for a richer interplay between scientific and technological progress . Characterizing sci - entific progress as advances in understanding and technological progress as advances in use , a common theme emphasizes that investigators focused on questions of use , engaged in solving real problems , may in turn generate new under - standingsand progressin basicscience ( 2 , 15 – 17 ) . For example , Pasteur ’ s germ theory of disease was closely intertwined with his work on indus - trial fermentation and food safety applications , andthedevelopmentofthesecondlawofthermo - dynamics was inspired by Carnot ’ s practical in - terest in the efficiency limits of steam engines ( 2 , 7 ) . In these cases , new understandings of nature are seen less as independent exercises of human curiosity that pay off in unexpected , future applications than as insights that spring up along the technological frontier . Amid these diverse views of the interplay be - tween scientific and technological progress , there are many anecdotes but littlesystematic evidence . Our starting point is an integrated citation net - work that traces references from all 4 . 8 million patents issued by the U . S . Patent and Trademark Office ( USPTO ) from 1976 to 2015 to all 32 mil - lion journal articles published from 1945 to 2013 as indexed by the Web of Science ( WOS ) , the world ’ s largest collection of scientific research . The citation network begins by locating patents that directly cite journal articles , which defines a “ paper - patent boundary ” where practical inven - tions and scientific advances are linked ( 18 – 21 ) . The network further determines the minimum citation distance for all other papers and patents to this boundary , creating a measure of distance that can be applied across a broad landscape of scientific and technological progress . We fur - ther integrate information about fields , individ - uals , and institutions ( universities , government laboratories , and publicly traded firms ) for each paper and patent . The supplementary materials detail the underlying data sources and further discuss the use of citation networks to measure knowledge flows , including patent - to - paper cita - tions ( 22 – 26 ) . Figure 1A presents a schematic of the inte - gratedcitationnetworkandintroducesourmetric . Formally , we define the distance metric D i ∈ f 1 ; 2 ; 3 ; … g for each patent or paper i . When a patent directly cites a paper , both nodes receive D i ¼ 1 , representing patents and papers at the “ patent - paper boundary . ” For the set of all other paperand patents , werecursivelydetermine the minimum citation distance to this boundary . Namely , a paper i with D i ¼ n þ 1 is one that is citedby a paper j with D j ¼ n and is not cited by anypaper k with D k < n . Similarly , apatent i with D i ¼ n þ 1 isonethatcitesapatent j with D j ¼ n anddoesnotciteanypatent k with D k < n . Paper and patents that cannot be connected at any dis - tance to the paper - patent boundary are described as “ unconnected . ” Note that the graph is directed : We trace citations backward in time , using the references in each patent and paper and jump - ing from the patent to the paper domain where D i ¼ 1 . Ourfirstresultsconcernconnectivity , consider - ing the extent to which papers or patents exist in independent spheres . As shown in Fig . 1B , the patent - paper citation network has been domi - nated by a single connected component . A ma - jority of patents — 60 . 5 % — made references that could ultimately be traced to science and engi - neering papers . Similarly , among all science and engineering papers that received at least one ci - tation , 79 . 7 % could ultimately be connected to a patent . In short , we find majority connectivity , where the substantial majority of cited research articles can be linked to a future patent , and the modestmajorityofpatentscanbelinkedtopriorscientificresearch . At the boundary , 0 . 759 million patents directly cited 1 . 41 million papers , representing 21 % of all connectedpatentsand10 % ofallconnectedpapers ( Fig . 1C ) . Although these numbers are substan - tial , the broader picture that emerges in Fig . 1C is oneofindirectconnectivity . Themodalconnected science and engineering paper was 3 degrees from the nearest patent . The modal connected patent was 2 degrees from the nearest paper . Looking between 2 and 4 degrees of the patent - paper boundary captures 68 % of all connected patents and 79 % of all connected papers . Our second set of results applies the distance metric to characterize fields . We used 185 WOS field classifications for science and engineering papers and the 388 primary USPTO technology classes that contained at least 20 patents in the citation network . For each field or class , Fig . 2A presents the mean distance , D mean , among con - nected papers or patents as well as the percent - age connectivity ( i . e . , the percentage of papers or patents in that field for which D exists ) . Here we see theenormousvariation acrossfields . D mean ranged from 2 . 00 to 5 . 90 across science fields and from 1 . 17 to 5 . 65 across patent classes . Examiningpatents , thetechnologyclassesclosest to the paper - patent boundary include combina - torialchemistry , molecularbiology , superconduct - ing technology , and artificial intelligence , all of which had D mean < 1 : 50 . The most distant tech - nology classes concern subjects such as locks , buttons , fasteners , envelopes , fire escapes , and chairs , all of which had D mean > 4 : 75 . To further characterize this variation , we examined the full D distributionsforseveralmajortechnologyclasses ( Fig . 2B ) . For example , we see that D mode ¼ 1 for “ multicellular living organism ” patents , where 85 % directly cited papers , whereas D mode ¼ 5 for RESEARCH Ahmadpoor et al . , Science 357 , 583 – 587 ( 2017 ) 11 August 2017 1 of 5 1 Northwestern University , Kellogg School of Management , Evanston , IL 60208 , USA . 2 Northwestern University Institute on Complex Systems and Data Science , Evanston , IL 60208 , USA . 3 NBER , Cambridge , MA 02138 , USA . * Corresponding author . Email : bjones @ kellogg . northwestern . edu “ chairs and seats ” patents , for which only 0 . 3 % directly cited papers . Examining papers in Fig . 2A , we see that mathematics proved the field most distant from the patent frontier ( D mean ¼ 4 : 97 ) . Meanwhile , the fields closest to the patent frontier include nanoscience and nanotechnology , materials sci - ence and biomaterials , and computer science hardware and architecture , all with D mean < 2 : 35 . Figure 2B provides the full D distributions for several major fields . Connected papers in mathematics , often considered a basic field of inquiry but one that can also be applied , had D mode ¼ 4 but with high variance . Astronomy and astrophysics also had D mode ¼ 4 but with a sharper peak and typically greater proximity to the patent - paper boundary . By contrast , bio - chemistry and molecular biology papers had D mode ¼ 2 ; and computer science papers had D mode ¼ 1 , where 42 % of connected computer science papers were directly cited by patents . This application to scientific fields suggests the potential usefulness of the distance metric for quantifying and tightening traditional but loose descriptors around “ basic ” and “ applied ” scien - tific research . The supplementary materials show that the field ordering by distance to the patent - paper boundary is robust to differ - ent referencing tendencies across fields , to dropping patent - examiner citations in patents , and considers a null model ( figs . S1 , S8 , and S9 ) . Tables S1 and S2 provide the mean , mode , and standard deviation of the distance metric and percentage connectivity for all patent technology classes and all WOS fields . Figure S2 considers a related concept of dis - tance : time . We calculated the total time pe - riod , T i , in years along the shortest citation path between a paper and a patent . This time period is the difference between the patent ’ s application year and the paper ’ s publication year . At the boundary , where D ¼ 1 , there was a mean delay of 6 . 66 years . By D ¼ 6 , the mean delay was 19 . 62 years for papers and 22 . 70 years for patents . Figure S2 further shows that the temporal distance varied substantially across fields , commensurate with the citation distance variation in Fig . 2A . Figure 3 considers impact . A common mea - sure of impact for a scientific paper or patent is the number of citations it receives , and a transparent , field - independent metric considers the probability of a “ home run , ” defined as being in the upper 5 % of citations received in that field and year ( 27 – 29 ) . Figure 3A examines the prob - ability of such home - run papers and patents . Patents that drew directly on scientific papers ( i . e . , D ¼ 1 patents ) were found to be unusually heavily cited by other patents , appearing as home runs 7 . 62 % of the time , or 52 . 4 % more often than the background rate . Other connected patents ( i . e . , D ≥ 2 patents ) were home runs at approx - imately the background rate . Figure S3 shows more generally that impact decayed smoothly with distance from the patent - paper frontier . Meanwhile , patents whose cited prior art was disconnected from the corpus of papers were home runs at a rate of 3 . 74 % , or 25 . 2 % less often than the background rate . Looking at papers in Fig . 3A , journal articles directly cited by a patent ( i . e . , D ¼ 1 papers ) were 3 . 72 times more likely to be highly cited by other papers . In other words , the patent - paper boundary appears populated by advances that are especially im - pactful within their own domains : Patents that reference scientific papers were drawn on es - pecially heavily by future patents , and papers cited directly by patented inventions were es - pecially highly cited by other scientific papers . Meanwhile , patents or papers that were discon - nected from the other knowledge network were especially unlikely to be high impact within their own domains . The impact advantages are robust to numer - ous controls , including fixed effects for each year , field , number of authors ( paper ) or in - ventors ( patent ) , institution type , and each num - ber of references made by the paper or patent ( fig . S4 ) . Fixed effect regressions account in a flexible and nonparametric manner for these features ( seemethodsinsupplementarymaterials ) . Tables S3 and S4 present the underlying re - gression results and also show that these results are robust to alternative measures of citation impact . Wealsofindsimilarresultsusing patent maintenance fee payments rather than citations received ( table S5 ) . Maintenance fees , which are paid by the patent owner and prevent the patent from lapsing , provide a potentially more direct measure of market value ( 30 , 31 ) . Figure S5 further shows that D ¼ 1 patents did not simply cite established , popular papers ; rather , papers cited by a patent in the year the paper was published tended to become home runs within science over the ensuing years . We also find that D ¼ 1 patents and papers were far morelikelytobehomerunswhenlookingwithintheoutputsofagiveninventororauthor ( tables S6 and S7 ) . Examining individual fields , Fig . 3B shows that D ¼ 1 patents and papers were the most highly cited within their own do - mains for the majority of scientific areas and technology classes . In science , 99 % of fields , and in patenting , 86 % of fields showed that the highest - impact work within the field occurs at D ¼ 1 . Finally , we investigate the roles of institutions and individuals near the patent - paper boundary . Figure 4A considers institutions . For comparison , Ahmadpoor et al . , Science 357 , 583 – 587 ( 2017 ) 11 August 2017 2 of 5 Fig . 1 . Connectivity and distance . ( A ) The directed graph of the integrated citation network from patents toward papers defines a distance metric , D . ( B ) The share of papers that link forward to a future patent and the share of patents that link backward to a prior research article . ( C ) The distance distribution of connectivity . RESEARCH | REPORT wesorted relevant USPTO pat - ents and WOS papers into three different institutional set - tings : universities , U . S . govern - ment laboratories , and firms . Institutional affiliations are based on patent assignee for the patents and based on postal and email addresses of the journal article authors ( 32 , 33 ) . The supplementary materials provide additional details of this sorting process . Univer - sities and government labo - ratories were relatively more engaged in high - D research , whereas the research articles produced in firms shift toward D ¼ 1 ( Fig . 4A ) . These findings are consistent with and can help quantify long - standing ideas about the research out - puts that for - profit institu - tions are likely to undertake ( 34 ) . Table S8 provides asso - ciated regression analysis , in - cluding fixed effects for the number of references made , citations received , field , year , and number of authors or in - ventors . The regressions show that university papers were on average D ¼ 0 : 358further from thefrontierthanthefirmpapers . Decomposing this increased dis - tance among university pa - pers shows that approximately one - third of this increased dis - tance was due to field compo - sition ( e . g . , university researchers publish more in high - D fields such as mathematics than corporate researchers do ) and two - thirds ap - peared as institutional differences within a given field ( e . g . , university papers in mathe - matics have higher D than firms ’ papers in mathematics ) . Fully 57 % of university - assigned patents had D ¼ 1 , indicating the intensiveness of university patenting near the boundary ( Fig . 4A ) . Patents from firms peaked at D ¼ 2 , with only 19 % at D ¼ 1 . Patents by government laboratories ap - peared in between the other institutions . Table S9 provides associated regression analysis , show - ing that , compared to firms , approximately one - half of university patents ’ increased proximity to science was due to field composition ( university researchers patented in low - D technology classes ) and one - half appeared as institutional differences within a given field ( e . g . , university patents in materialssciencehadlower D thanfirms ’ patents in materials science ) . We next considered the institutional “ hand - off ” across the boundary where D ¼ 1 . For D ¼ 1 patents , 78 % were assigned to firms , yet 80 % of D ¼ 1 papers had university authors ( Fig . 4B ) . The prevalence of hand - offs from university papers to business patents is consistent with long - standing conceptions that consider university outputs as public goods upon which marketplace invention can draw ( 1 ) . Thus , although univer - sity patenting is particularly closely related to science ( Fig . 4A ) and can thus play a direct role in technology transfer ( 35 , 36 ) , the lion ’ s share of D ¼ 1 patentsstill comes from firms . Related , other patents typically connected to the patent - paper frontierthroughthese D ¼ 1firmpatents ( fig . S6 ) . Figure 4C examines the role of the same in - dividual in spanning the paper - patent bound - ary . We define these cases by matching the inventor names for the patent with the author names for the paper that the patent cites ( see supplementary materials for further discus - sion ) . For D ¼ 1 university patents , 55 . 4 % cited a paper written by an individual with the same name . A high percentage also appeared for government patents , but the percentage fell to 14 . 3 % for D ¼ 1 corporate patents . In Stokes ’ s theoretical characterization of “ Pasteur ’ s quad - rant ” ( 2 ) , where the same individual may be engaged in advancing both understanding and use , universities and government laboratories appear to be especially common homes for such individuals , whointurnappearhighlyproductive . Figure S7 and table S10 show that both the paper and the patent produced by such an individual were especially likely to be home runs in their respective domains . Contrary to conceptions in which technolog - ical and scientific progress operate in indepen - dentspheres , wefindmajorityconnectivitybetween thecorpusof patented inventions and thecorpus of scientific papers . However , these connections are typically indirect , and both scientific fields andpatentingtechnologyclassesvaryenormouslyintheirconnectivityandproximitytotheotherdomain . These findings are consistent with and can help quantify some features of the “ linear model ” of science , which imagines that scientists typically work to advance understanding but that such advances may underlie practical applica - tions , often in indirect or unexpected ways . The prevalence of private - sector patents linking back to the output of universities and government laboratories is further consistent with institu - tional views of the linear model . Although these features of the linear model appear to receive strong support , our data do not address poten - tially “ nonlinear ” reverse linkages where techno - logical advances , including new equipment and tools , may also drive scientific progress ( 7 , 11 , 17 ) . The distance metric further reveals facts that areconsistentwithandhelpquantifythefruitful , creative interplay between understanding and Ahmadpoor et al . , Science 357 , 583 – 587 ( 2017 ) 11 August 2017 3 of 5 Fig . 2 . Application to fields . ( A ) Distance metric . The mean distance , D mean , to the paper - patent boundary is presented for each field ( x axis ) together with the percentage of knowledge outputs in that field that are connected to the integrated citation network ( y axis ) . ( B ) The full D distribution for several fields . RESEARCH | REPORT application ( 2 , 19 , 21 ) . Patented inventions that drawdirectlyonscientificadvanceswereespeciallyimpactfulcomparedtootherpatents . Moreover , papers directly cited by patents were also the highest - impact papers within the scientific domain . These facts are consistent with a sharp complementaritybetweenunderstandinganduseandarealsoreflectedattheindividuallevel ; an individual scientist / inventor , especially in univer - sity and government laboratory settings , often personally spanned the boundary , working to advance both the scientific and technological frontiers and managing to hit “ home runs ” in both domains . Beyond loose classifications of “ basic ” or “ ap - plied ” research and related terminologies ( 6 , 7 ) , the distance metric provides a quantifiable typol - ogy to describe R & D outputs and the nature of their impacts . The typology can characterize the research outputs of not only fields but also journals , funders , research institutions , and in - dividuals themselves . Indices based on the D metric may thus present useful tools for under - standing and evaluating types of research , in - stitutional priorities , funding outcomes , and individual careers . While the distance metric in our application uses a directed graph , from patented invention to scientific advance , one may also deploy the metric on knowledge net - works built using other link definitions . For ex - ample , full text analyses might allow one to characterize “ necessary ” precursor knowledge as opposed to the standard of “ relevant ” pre - cursor knowledge that appears to be indicated by citation networks ( see supplementary ma - terials discussion ) . One might also build a metric that runs from scientific advances back to prior patentedtechnologies , givenappropriatereference information . And one might consider inventions or other applications outside patents . Such studies would further enrich our understanding of the interplay between scientific advance and tech - nological progress to engage additional theo - ries ( 11 , 17 ) . Ahmadpoor et al . , Science 357 , 583 – 587 ( 2017 ) 11 August 2017 4 of 5 Fig . 3 . Distance and impact . ( A ) Impact close to and far from the paper - patent boundary . A “ home run ” is defined as being in the upper 5 % of citations received in that field and year , for a patent or a research paper . ( B ) Home - run outcomes relative to distance for each field , when each field is analyzed separately . The supplementary materials examine alternative impact measures , including methods based on patent - renewal payments . Fig . 4 . Institutions and individuals . ( A ) The D distribution for different institutional settings , including universities , government laboratories , and firms . ( B ) Production of patents and papers by institutional type at the D ¼ 1boundary . ( C ) The share of D ¼ 1patents where a citing inventor and cited author have the same name , by patent assignee type . RESEARCH | REPORT REFERENCES AND NOTES 1 . V . Bush , Science the Endless Frontier , A Report to the President ( U . S . Government Printing Office , Washington , DC , July 1945 ) . 2 . D . Stokes , Pasteur ’ s Quadrant : Basic Science and Technological Innovation ( Brookings Press , Washington , DC , 1997 ) . 3 . J . Lane , S . Bertuzzi , Science 331 , 678 – 680 ( 2011 ) . 4 . J . Carty , The Relation of Pure Science to Industrial Research . Reprint and Circular Series , no . 14 , National Research Council ( 1916 ) . 5 . W . R . Maclaurin , Q . J . Econ . 67 , 97 – 111 ( 1953 ) . 6 . B . Godin , Sci . Technol . Human Values 31 , 639 – 667 ( 2006 ) . 7 . M . S . Balconi , S . Brusoni , L . Orsenigo , Res . Policy 39 , 1 – 13 ( 2010 ) . 8 . National Science Foundation , BasicResearch : A National Resource ( U . S . Government Printing Office , Washington , DC , 1957 ) . 9 . R . Nelson , J . Polit . Econ . 67 , 297 – 306 ( 1959 ) . 10 . U . S . Department of Defense , Project Hindsight Final Report . Office of the Director of Defense Research and Engineering , Washington , DC ( 1969 ) . 11 . S . J . Kline , N . Rosenberg , in The Positive Sum Strategy , R . Landau , N . Rosenberg , Eds . ( National Academy Press , Washington , DC , 1986 ) , pp . 275 – 306 . 12 . E . Mansfield , Res . Policy 20 , 1 – 12 ( 1991 ) . 13 . A . Klevorick , R . Levin , R . Nelson , S . Winter , Res . Policy 24 , 185 – 205 ( 1995 ) . 14 . E . Von Hippel , The Sources of Innovation ( Oxford Univ . Press , Oxford , 1988 ) . 15 . R . Nelson , in The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity : Economic and Social Factors . National Bureau of Economic Research ( Princeton Univ . Press , Princeton , NJ , 1962 ) , pp . 549 – 583 . 16 . N . Rosenberg , in Inside the Black Box : Technology and Economics ( Cambridge Univ . Press , Cambridge , 1982 ) , pp . 141 – 159 . 17 . H . Brooks , Res . Policy 23 , 477 – 486 ( 1994 ) . 18 . F . Narin , K . Hamilton , D . Olivastro , Res . Policy 26 , 317 – 330 ( 1997 ) . 19 . L . Fleming , O . Sorenson , Strateg . Manage . J . 25 , 909 – 928 ( 2004 ) . 20 . R . Gaetani , M . Li Bergolis , The economic effects of scientific shocks . Northwestern University working paper ( 2015 ) . 21 . B . Cassiman , R . Veugelers , P . Zuniga , Ind . Corp . Change 17 , 611 – 646 ( 2008 ) . 22 . A . B . Jaffe , B . Trajtenberg , Patents , Citations , and Innovations : A Window on the Knowledge Economy ( MIT Press , 2002 ) . 23 . M . Meyer , Res . Policy 29 , 409 – 434 ( 2000 ) . 24 . R . J . W . Tijssen , R . K . Buter , Th . N . Van Leeuwen , Scientometrics 47 , 389 ( 2000 ) . 25 . D . Hicks , T . Breitzman , D . Olivastro , K . Hamilton , Res . Policy 30 , 681 – 703 ( 2001 ) . 26 . J . Callaert , M . Pellens , B . Van Looy , Scientometrics 98 , 1617 – 1629 ( 2014 ) . 27 . S . Wuchty , B . F . Jones , B . Uzzi , Science 316 , 1036 – 1039 ( 2007 ) . 28 . B . F . Jones , S . Wuchty , B . Uzzi , Science 322 , 1259 – 1262 ( 2008 ) . 29 . D . Wang , C . Song , A . L . Barabási , Science 342 , 127 – 132 ( 2013 ) . 30 . M . Schankerman , A . Pakes , Econ . J . ( Oxf . ) 96 , 1052 – 1076 ( 1986 ) . 31 . D . Harhoff , F . Narin , F . M . Scherer , K . Vopel , Rev . Econ . Stat . 81 , 511 – 515 ( 1999 ) . 32 . A . Arora , S . Belenzon , Killing the golden goose ? The decline of science in corporate R & D . NBER Working Paper No . 20902 ( 2015 ) . 33 . K . Bryan , Y . Ozcan , The impact of open access mandates on invention . University of Toronto Working Paper ( 2016 ) . 34 . N . Rosenberg , R . Nelson , Res . Policy 23 , 323 – 348 ( 1994 ) . 35 . National Academy of Sciences , Managing University Intellectual Property in the Public Interest ( National Academy Press , Washington , DC , 2010 ) . 36 . J . G . Thursby , M . C . Thursby , Science 301 , 1052 ( 2003 ) . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We gratefully acknowledge support from the Alfred P . Sloan Foundation under award G - 2015 - 14014 and support from the Northwestern Institute on Complex Systems . We thank workshop participants at the National Academy of Sciences , the European Policy for Intellectual Property Association , the Northwestern Institute for Complex Research , the Institute for Policy Research , P . Azoulay , A . Jaffe , A . Marco , M . Trajtenberg , and B . Uzzi for helpful comments . We are especially grateful to R . Gaetani for help with patent data . The Web of Science data are available via Thomson Reuters . The patent data sets are available publicly as discussed in the supplementary materials . The constructed D metric variables are available from the authors : bjones @ kellogg . northwestern . edu ( corresponding author ) and mohammad . ahmadpoor @ kellogg . northwestern . edu . SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS www . sciencemag . org / content / 357 / 6351 / 583 / suppl / DC1 Materials and Methods Figs . S1 to S9 Tables S1 to S10 References ( 37 – 52 ) 9 February 2017 ; accepted 10 July 2017 10 . 1126 / science . aam9527 Ahmadpoor et al . , Science 357 , 583 – 587 ( 2017 ) 11 August 2017 5 of 5 RESEARCH | REPORT