146 | FEBRUARY 2004 | VOLUME 5 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro R E V I E W S With the exception of a small pathway in the hypo - thalamus 1 and the olfactory sensory projections within the olfactory bulb 2 , 3 , severed axons within long myeli - nated tracts of the central nervous system ( CNS ) are capable only of abortive sprouting that provides little functional recovery 4 , 5 . Injury to the CNS induces tissue damage , which creates barriers to regeneration . One of the main barriers is the glial scar , which consists pre - dominately of reactive astrocytes and proteoglycans . Axons cannot regenerate beyond the glial scar , and they take on a dystrophic appearance of stalled growth . Oligodendrocytes and degenerating myelin have also been identified as sources of regeneration failure in animals 6 , 7 , and this has been the subject of many other reviews ( for examples , see REFS 8 – 10 ) . Here , we will briefly consider myelin’s role in growth cone collapse and as an inhibitor of regeneration . However , we will focus largely on the environment of the glial scar and the cellular and molecular determinants of regeneration failure at the site of CNS injury , including a discussion of the behaviour of axons that are unable to regenerate past the lesion . We will conclude the review by consider - ing possible strategies to enhance the regenerative capabilities of the CNS . The glial scar and its formation In lesions that spare the DURA MATER , the scar is composed primarily of astrocytes , but in more severe lesions that open the meninges , astroglia become mixed with invad - ing connective tissue elements 11 – 15 ( FIG . 1 ) . The astrocyte response to injury is referred to as reactive gliosis ( more glia ) but in fact , in most types of injury , the actual amount of glial cell division is relatively small and confined to the immediate penumbra surrounding the lesion core 16 . Far more of the reactive glial response to injury is hypertrophy with increased production of INTERMEDIATE FILAMENTS 17 , 18 . One can identify hypertrophic reactive astrocytes by immunocytochemical methods that reveal increases in expression of glial fibrillary acidic protein ( GFAP ) 19 – 21 , as well as other intermediate filament proteins , such as vimentin ( reviewed by Yang 22 ) . Identification of enlarged and entangled reactive astrocytes surrounding dystrophic endballs at the tips of non - regenerating fibres led to the idea that the reactive glia are responsible for failed regeneration through the formation of a physical wall . Indeed , the glial scar does develop into a rubbery , tenacious , growth - blocking membrane , but this takes considerable time ( FIG . 2 ) . In addition to preventing regeneration , recent evi - dence indicates that the glial scar might provide several important beneficial functions for stabilizing fragile CNS tissue after injury . The Sofroniew laboratory 16 , 23 , used an ingenious combinatorial technique , involving avian herpes simplex viral infection of mammalian astrocytes and gancyclovir delivery , to produce targeted depletion of the subpopulation of reactive astrocytes that undergo mitosis immediately surrounding the core of the lesion . Their findings indicated that after injury , this component of the glial scar serves to repair the blood – brain barrier ( BBB ) , prevent an overwhelming inflammatory response and limit cellular degeneration . So , it is now clear that one role of the glial scar is to REGENERATION BEYOND THE GLIAL SCAR Jerry Silver and Jared H . Miller After injury to the adult central nervous system ( CNS ) , injured axons cannot regenerate past the lesion . In this review , we present evidence that this is due to the formation of a glial scar . Chondroitin and keratan sulphate proteoglycans are among the main inhibitory extracellular matrix molecules that are produced by reactive astrocytes in the glial scar , and they are believed to play a crucial part in regeneration failure . We will focus on this role , as well as considering the behaviour of regenerating neurons in the environment of CNS injury . DURA MATER The outermost and toughest of the three layers ofthe meninges . INTERMEDIATE FILAMENTS Cytoskeletal filaments , typically 10 nm in diameter , which occur in higher eukaryotic cells and contribute to their mechanical strength . Department of Neurosciences , School of Medicine , Case Western Reserve University , 10900 Euclid Avenue , Cleveland , Ohio 44106 , USA . Correspondence to J . S . e - mail : jxs10 @ cwru . edu doi : 10 . 1038 / nrn1326 © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 5 | FEBRUARY 2004 | 147 R E V I E W S Formation of the glial scar occurs after the introduc - tion of non - CNS molecules into the brain parenchyma as a result of BBB disruption 24 . The BBB remains porous to blood and serum components for up to 14 days after brain or spinal cord injury , and the areas of greatest glial scarring correlate well with areas of most extensive BBB seclude the injury site from healthy tissue , preventing a cascading wave of uncontrolled tissue damage 16 . Unfortunately , although the benefit of glial scarring is important to the overall survival of the animal , warm - blooded species have largely sacrificed the capacity for long - distance functional regeneration . b Contusive lesion • Blood – brain barrier is disrupted , but meninges are intact • Cavitation occurs at the lesion epicentre • Astrocyte alignment is altered at the lesion site • Astrocytes produce CSPGs and KSPGs in a gradient increasing from the penumbra towards the centre of the lesion • No fibroblast invasion of lesion core and therefore no fibroblast - expressed inhibitors are present ( see below ) • Macrophages invade the lesion and its core • Dystrophic axons approach the lesion before growth ceases c Large stab lesion • Blood – brain barrier is disrupted • Cavitation occurs at the lesion centre • Astrocyte alignment is altered at the lesion site • Astrocytes produce CSPG and KSPG in a gradient increasing towards the lesion • TGF , ephrin - B2 and Slit protein expression increases in reactive astrocytes adjacent to fibroblasts • Fibroblasts invade the lesion and express SEMA3 and the EPHB2 receptor • Macrophages invade the lesion and release inflammatory cytokines • Dystrophic neurons are highly repelled by the lesion core and express neuropilin 1 a Microlesion • Blood – brain barrier is minimally disrupted • Astrocytes maintain normal alignment , but produce CSPGs and KSPGs along the injury tract • Axons cannot regenerate beyond the lesion • Macrophages invade the lesion site Dystrophicaxon Astrocyte Macrophage Fibroblast Reactiveastrocyte Altered ECM of injury site Cavitation Figure 1 | Schematic representation of three stereotypical CNS lesions . In all examples , macrophages invade the lesion , and both chondroitin sulphate proteoglycans ( CSPGs ) and keratan sulphate proteoglycans ( KSPGs ) are upregulated . a | Microlesion in which astrocyte alignment is not altered by the injury process , but axons are unable to regenerate past the lesion site . b | Contusive injury that does not disrupt the meninges , but produces cavitation and proteoglycan deposition . Again , axons are unable to regenerate beyond the lesion , but spared axons can be found distal to the injury site . c | Stab lesion that penetrates the meninges and allows fibroblast invasion in addition to macrophages . Axons are highly repulsed by the increasing gradient of CSPGs and KSPGs . Several other inhibitory molecules are also made in this type of injury and are especially prevalent in the core of the lesion . ECM , extracellular matrix ; TGF , transforming growth factor . © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup 148 | FEBRUARY 2004 | VOLUME 5 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro R E V I E W S ( TGF β ) . In the injured brain and spinal cord , TGF β 1 expression increases immediately after injury , whereas TGF β 2 expression augments more slowly near the wound in astrocytes , endothelial cells and macrophages 26 . TGF β 2 has been shown to significantly increase the pro - duction of proteoglycans by astroglia 27 . When TGF β 1 and TGF β 2 activity is attenuated experimentally using antibodies 28 , glial scarring is reduced . However , this occurs without a reduction in macrophage invasion and is insufficient to allow long - distance regeneration . Another candidate family of scar inducers is the INTERLEUKINS . Injection of interleukin 1 , a protein that is produced by mononuclear phagocytes , helps to initiate the inflammatory response in various cells , including astrocytes , which take on the reactive state 29 . So , TGF β 1 and 2 and interleukin 1 have been implicated as media - tors of macrophage - induced glial scarring , but other factors might also be involved . The interactions between two inflammatory CYTOKINES — interferon - γ ( IFN γ ) and basic fibroblast growth factor 2 ( FGF2 ) — also have a role in the induction of the glial scar . In culture , preventing IFN γ activity reduces the mitogenic effects of activated T - lymphocytes , and the addition of recombinant IFN γ induces astrocyte pro - liferation 30 . Furthermore , administration of IFN γ to lesioned brains increases the extent of glial scarring . After injury , the levels of FGF2 increase in both the brain and spinal cord 31 , 32 , and FGF2 has also been shown to increase astrocyte proliferation in culture 109 . It has been proposed that IFN γ and FGF2 modulate one another after injury , with IFN γ antagonizing the pro - mitogenic effects of FGF2 ( REF . 33 ) . However , it should be reiterated that in the vicinity of BBB extravasation , much of the glial scar forms without astrocyte proliferation . Instead , there is a switch to the reactive state , followed by inhibitory ECM production and hypertrophy 34 . Although we are beginning to understand the complex role of inflammation in the induction of the glial scar , there is still much to learn . The response of axons to the scar When regenerating axons encounter the environment of the glial scar , so - called dystrophic endbulbs form , as first described by Ramón y Cajal 5 . For many years , these unusually shaped endbulbs were considered to be sterile , and therefore incapable of extending a growth cone . Dystrophic endings can form into various bizarre shapes , ranging from small globular clusters to huge multivesicular sacs 5 . More recent research has indicated that axons with dystrophic endings do not lose their ability to regener - ate , and that they can in fact return to active growth states . Chronically injured axons in the spinal cord can regenerate into implanted peripheral nerve grafts after four weeks of stagnation in the lesion environment 35 . More importantly , even in one - year - old lesions of the adult RUBROSPINAL TRACTS , cells that are treated in the vicinity of their bodies with brain - derived neurotrophic factor ( BDNF ) can restore the size of their soma 36 and can achieve new axon growth into peripheral nerve grafts with an accompanying upregulation of the breakdown , as well as the largest numbers of activated MACROPHAGES . Minimally invasive microinjection tech - niques 25 , using a non - toxic yeast wall preparation known as Zymosan to focally and aggressively stimulate macrophages , produced rapid astrocyte migration away from the inflammatory focus , and also caused CNS cavitation , glial scarring and intense proteoglycan upregulation around the cavity . Furthermore , astrocyte migration in vitro resulted in secondary axon stretching and axotomy in the region of inflammation , owing to aberrant neuron – glia associations . These studies indicate that blood ( or a serum component ) , along with activated macrophages , has a crucial role in secondary axotomy , as well as the upregulation of the inhibitory extracellular matrix ( ECM ) components and other phenomena related to formation of the glial scar . The search for the initial molecular inducer of inhibitory gliosis continues . One of the most interesting potential triggers is transforming growth factor β MACROPHAGES Cells ofthe mononuclear phagocyte system that are characterized by the ability to phagocytose foreign particulate and colloidal material . INTERLEUKINS A generic term for cytokines originally identified as products ofleukocytes . CYTOKINES In general terms , cytokines are proteins made by cells that affect the behaviour ofother cells . They are produced mainly by the immune system . a b c d b c EHG Figure 2 | The glial scar nine months after a spinal cord stab lesion . a | Sagittal section of the spinal cord illustrating astrocyte hypertrophy ( red ) and chondroitin sulphate proteoglycan ( CSPG ) upregulation ( blue , denoted by dashed lines ) . Note the longitudinal , thickened bands of reactive astrocytes forming an extremely dense wall of cells . b | High magnification of the banded reactive astrocytes , further demonstrating the extreme hypertrophy of astroglia at this late time point after the lesion . c | High magnification of the injury region clearly illustrates the presence of CSPG still remaining , along with the fibrous banding of reactive astrocytes . d | Regenerating axons from a microtransplanted dorsal root ganglion ( arrow ) can grow almost everywhere within the zone of Wallerian degeneration and reactive gliosis ( red ) rostral to the lesion , even at nine months after injury . However , the regrowing axons are excluded from a zone of extremely dense fibrous reactive astrocytes ( right of arrow ) . Note the lack of proteoglycans in this region of the scar . This form of axon repulsion seems to be caused by the mechanical constraints of the reactive tissue . EHG , extremely hypertrophic glia . © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 5 | FEBRUARY 2004 | 149 R E V I E W S phases in the progression of events that lead to growth cone dystrophy is unknown , but it is clear that the two phenomena are remarkably different . One important characteristic of dystrophic axons is that they can be stimulated to regenerate , as discussed earlier in the text . Inhibition of the glial scar : proteoglycans In addition to growth - promoting molecules 46 , 47 , astro - cytes produce a class of molecules known as proteo - glycans 48 , 49 . These ECM molecules consist of a protein core linked by four sugar moieties to a sulphated GLYCOSAMINOGLYCAN ( GAG ) chain that contains repeating disaccharide units . Astrocytes produce four classes of proteoglycan ; heparan sulphate proteoglycan ( HSPG ) , dermatan sulphate proteoglycan ( DSPG ) , keratan sul - phate proteoglycan ( KSPG ) and chondroitin sulphate proteoglycan ( CSPG ) 50 . The CSPGs form a relatively large family , which includes aggrecan , brevican , neuro - can , NG2 , phosphacan ( sometimes classed as a KSPG ) and versican , all of which have chondroitin sulphate side chains . They differ in the protein core , as well as the number , length and pattern of sulphation of the side chains 51 – 53 . Expression of these CSPGs increases in the glial scar in the brain and spinal cord of mature animals 54 – 56 . Proteoglycans have been implicated as barriers to CNS axon extension in the developing roof plate of the spinal cord 57 , 58 , in the midline of the rhombencephalon and mesencephalon 59 , 60 , at the dorsal root entry zone ( DREZ ) 61 , in retinal pattern development 62 , 63 , and at the optic chiasm and distal optic tract 64 , 65 . Extensive work has demonstrated that CSPGs are extremely inhibitory to axon outgrowth in culture . Neurites growing on alternating stripes of laminin and laminin / aggrecan had robust outgrowth on laminin , but at the sharp interface between the two surfaces , growth cones rapidly turned away ( unlike their stalled behaviour in a gradient , see above ) . The inhibitory nature of the pro - teoglycan - containing lanes can repel embryonic as well as adult axons , and the effect can last for more than a week in vitro . The turning behaviour is not usually mediated by collapse of the entire growth cone , but rather by selective retraction of FILOPODIA in contact with CSPG and enhanced motility of those on laminin 66 , 67 . CSPGs are potent inhibitors of a wide variety of other growth - promoting molecules , including fibronectin and L1 ( REFS 68 , 69 ) . In the early 1990s , the first evidence emerged that CSPGs might have a role in the failure of regeneration in the CNS after injury . In mature mammals , CSPGs are secreted rapidly ( within 24 hours ) after injury and can persist for many months 54 – 56 . It was shown that CSPGs are produced in excess by astrocytes when they are induced to become reactive in vivo after small lesions of the DREZ 61 . The upregulated CSPGs were present at the right time and place to inhibit sensory axons from regenerating in the dorsal columns or through the DREZ . With the exception of those few places in the hypothalamus where regeneration can occur among TANYCYTES 70 , CSPGs are now known to be upregulated and excreted extracellularly after a wide growth - associated protein GAP43 ( REF . 37 ) . Li and Raisman 4 examined dystrophic endings in the context of a chronic lesion . They found that even 13 weeks after injury , there was a persistence of large varicosities and swollen bulbs that resembled the classic dystrophic ending . Furthermore , even at these lengthy time periods post - injury , supposedly sterile dystrophic endings were capable of sprouting , and many of the sprouts were myelinated by migrating Schwann cells that slowly invade the CNS through the damaged root entry zones . Additional work by Houle and Yin has carefully examined the extent of axon retraction after spinal cord injury 38 . Cervical cord hemisection resulted in the for - mation of numerous dystrophic endbulbs . Previous studies indicated that considerable dieback occurs , but by using more modern tracing techniques , Houle and Yin showed that most of these endings actually remained close to the lesion site . The significance of the persistence of such unusual ‘growth cones’within the epicentre of the lesion implies that some type of cytoskeletal and / or membrane plastic - ity must be occurring to maintain axon viability and stability , even though the axons remain in one place without forming synapses . Recent work in our labora - tory has begun to elucidate , both in culture and in vivo , the behaviour of dystrophic endings 39 . Using a specially crafted gradient of aggrecan and LAMININ as a growth substrate , classically shaped dystrophic endings can be induced in adult DORSAL ROOT GANGLION ( DRG ) neurons as the fibres struggle up the gradient . Time - lapse analysis revealed the surprising fact that ‘dystrophic’ endings are highly active structures . Although they can remain stationary for days , they constantly turn over their distal membranes , alter their cytoskeleton and change the loca - tion of their complement of integrin receptors . Why or how they do this is unclear , but it can occur as a response to certain types of proteoglycan gradients . We have evidence that these dynamic phenomena also occur in vivo , so it is possible that the adult sensory neuron uses this form of aberrant growth cone to maintain itself in a hostile environment . In addition to dystrophy , growth cones can undergo a different stalled growth , which is referred to as collapse . Growth cone collapse occurs after injury when mature regenerating axons encounter mature oligodendrocytes and myelin products 40 , and it can also occur normally during development when axons move from one growth - supporting substrate to another 41 . Growth cone collapse has been well characterized in cell culture 42 – 45 and results in stalled forward progress with a shrunken , quiescent growth cone that can restart over time , only to collapse again following renewed contact with the collapsing agent . Mature growth cones maintain their morphology and extension on their supportive sub - strate until membrane – membrane contact occurs with oligodendrocytes or myelin . At this point , the growth cone arrests , collapses and often retracts . Evidence of growth cone collapse has been implicated in regenera - tion failure , and methods that enhance regeneration by blocking the effects of myelin will be discussed later . Whether growth cone collapse occurs during the earliest RUBROSPINAL TRACTS In the lateral quadrant ofthe spinal cord , the rubrospinal tracts are the main descending pathways from the brain stem . LAMININ A glycoprotein that is the main constituent ofbasement membranes . It mediates the attachment , migration and organization ofcells into tissues during development . DORSAL ROOT GANGLION The cell bodies ofsensory neurons are collected together in paired ganglia that lie alongside the spinal cord . These cell bodies are surrounded by satellite glial cells , which share much in common with the Schwann cells that ensheath peripheral axons . Few synapses have been observed in these ganglia . GLYCOSAMINOGLYCAN Any polysaccharide that contains a high proportion ofamino - monosaccharide residues ; that is , monosaccharides in which an alcoholic hydroxyl group is replaced by an amino group . FILOPODIA Long , thin protrusions that are present at the periphery of migrating cells and growth cones . They are composed largely ofF - actin bundles . TANYCYTES A type ofependymal cell found principally in the walls ofthe third ventricle ofthe brain . The tanycytes might have branched or unbranched processes , some ofwhich end on capillaries or neurons . © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup 150 | FEBRUARY 2004 | VOLUME 5 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro R E V I E W S reduced . These findings indicate that neurite extension might depend on a balance of growth - promoting and growth - inhibiting molecules at the site of injury , or that CSPGs might be inhibiting outgrowth indirectly by interfering with the growth - promoting effects of laminin or its receptors . Differential responses to CSPGs . Different populations of neurons respond to CSPGs with varying degrees of growth retardation in vitro 78 . Embryonic DRG neu - rons , retinal ganglion neurons or forebrain neurons were cultured on a gradient of laminin and CSPG , in which the concentration of CSPG increased gradually in a stepwise fashion while the concentration of laminin remained unchanged . Neurons were initially cultured on laminin alone , and the ability of each neuronal population to extend neurites up the step gradient was analysed . Interestingly , all neurons could extend neurites some distance up the gradient . Of the three neuronal subtypes , retinal ganglion cells could navigate the furthest , although they slowed their rate of outgrowth considerably as they negotiated each step . Not only does this work show that different popu - lations of neurons respond to CSPGs differently , but it also shows that neurons are capable of outgrowth on CSPGs ( in part , through their ability to gradually upregulate integrin receptors ) until a critical threshold level is reached . Furthermore , time - lapse microscopy of adult DRG growth cones on a more smoothly constructed spot gradient of CSPG indicates that growth cones can extend along a gradient of proteo - glycan until a highly inhibitory region is reached , which results in complete cessation of forward extension . Adult neurons , unlike their embryonic counterparts , cease growing and form an unusual type of dystrophic ending 39 . In the spinal cord , different neuronal populations also have differential abilities to regenerate into a proteoglycan - enriched lesion 79 . After injury , regener - ating motor axons were unable to enter the lesion directly , but could sprout in the region adjacent to the lesion . Serotonin - expressing neurons were also only capable of regenerating to the edge of the lesion , whereas sensory axons were capable of deeper penetra - tion , albeit not all the way through the lesion . These findings show that some neurons have a higher intrinsic threshold for dealing with a terrain that is laden with proteoglycans , especially when they are presented in a gradient . At some point , however , usually near the lesion epicentre , all regenerating fibres become dystrophic and finally succumb to their increasingly inhibitory environment . At the other extreme , there are instances in which neurite extension occurs in the presence of proteo - glycans . Developing thalamocortical axons traverse areas of CSPG deposition in the subplate on the way to their target , and these axons maintain a trajectory that is limited to CSPG - rich regions over much of their journey 80 . Furthermore , oversulphated DSPGs have been shown to promote , albeit minimally , neurite outgrowth from embryonic hippocampal neurons 81 . range of CNS injuries 21 , 71 , 72 . Importantly , pre - critical period embryonic reactive astroglia do not upregulate CSPGs after injury 73 , 74 ( BOX 1 ) , and there is minimal upregulation of CSPGs on reactive glia in cold - blooded species , with the exception of special regions where regeneration does not occur 64 ( BOX 2 ) . Several in vitro assays , in which mature astrocytes were induced to be highly reactive , have confirmed that upregulated proteoglycans within the complex ECM that is made by reactive astroglia inhibit axonal outgrowth 68 , 73 , 75 , 76 . To further demonstrate that the GAG portion of CSPGs is inhibitory to neurite out - growth , chondroitinase — an enzyme extracted from the bacterium Proteus vulgaris that selectively removes a large portion of the CSPG GAG side chain and renders CSPGs less inhibitory ( see later in text ) — was applied to mature glial ‘scar - in - a - dish’ explants ( see BOX 1 ) . Retinal ganglion cells cultured on the scar explants could only extend long neurites after the enzyme treat - ment , indicating that CSPGs were present in the glial scar and could potentially serve as potent inhibitors of neurite outgrowth in vivo 77 . Furthermore , when laminin ( which is also produced by astroglia in these scar explants ) was blocked with antibodies , the growth - enhancing effects of chondroitinase treatment was Box 1 | Immature reactive astrocytes promote regeneration Embryonic axon pathways in warm - blooded species resemble , in certain respects , the axon highways of amphibians , in that they too allow for regeneration 128 , 129 . Furthermore , when embryonic tissue is implanted into the spinal cord of adult rats , far better integration and regeneration of tissues is achieved 130 . Differences in the ability of axons to regenerate in very young and old mammals seems to be due partly to changes in the astroglial reaction to injury . When nitrocellulose is impaled into the brain of both young and old animals , it is possible to remove the tightly adherent reactive astrocytes , along with other cells that respond to and become embedded in the implant . The wound tissues that have reacted to the same insult , albeit at different ages , can then be harvested and used to examine the outgrowth of identified populations of neurons in vitro 131 . Hippocampal neurons cultured on ‘scar - in - a - dish’ explants from neonatal animals could extend neurites with much greater vigour than those cultured on explants from mature animals . The results indicated that scar tissues from younger animals were growth supportive , whereas scar tissue from older animals was inhibitory , at least in vitro . Similar results were obtained using astrocytes collected from the lesioned optic nerve . Retinal ganglion cells cultured on newborn reactive optic nerve astrocytes extended processes over greater distances and with greater velocity than retinal ganglion cells cultured on adult reactive astrocytes . In fact , adult reactive astrocytes completely inhibited growth of both embryonic and adult neurons in vitro , whereas young astrocytes promoted outgrowth from both embryonic and adult neurons 132 . Interestingly , adult reactive astrocytes 133 , as well as extracted adult scar tissues 73 , 131 , allow growth of dendrites but not axons in vitro . The reason for this differential effect is unknown , but it might reflect differences in susceptibility to scar - associated inhibitory molecules . In vivo studies further illustrate the differences between immature and mature astrocytes in the context of injury . Untreated Millipore implants placed in the brains of adult acallosal mice normally produce glial scarring and tissue degeneration 134 . When the implant was placed into young acallosal mice , highly reactive astrocytes integrated into the implant . Nevertheless , even in the reactive state , immature glia supported regeneration of callosal axons across the implant , at least until the critical period . Furthermore , immature , but not mature , reactive astrocytes transplanted into adult brains on nitrocellulose 135 , or directly as cell suspensions 136 , suppressed glial scar formation and could also modify the glial response of the adult . © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 5 | FEBRUARY 2004 | 151 R E V I E W S Excess proteoglycans prevent regeneration in vivo . The crucial role of inhibitory scar ECM in causing regenera - tion failure was revealed by microtransplantation experi - ments . Adult sensory neurons that were placed in the adult corpus callosum or lesioned spinal cord could regenerate their axons in intact or degenerating white matter , provided that minimal damage was created on placing the cells far rostral to a lesion . However , regenera - tion ceased as the growing axons approached the vicinity of the lesion . Here , proteoglycan upregulation occurs in a decreasing gradient , being highest in the centre of the lesion and diminishing gradually into the penumbra ( FIG . 3 ) . As regenerating fibres pass through the lesion penumbra , they alter their morphology and are strongly inhibited from moving further as they form ever increas - ing numbers of dystrophic endings near the core of the developing scar 83 , 84 ( FIG . 3 ) . Rather unexpectedly , trans - planted adult sensory neurons were capable of extending axons rapidly and robustly ( at the rate of 1 mm per day ) among oligodendrocytes , degenerating myelin and astrocytes that are intensely reactive owing to the accom - panying WALLERIAN DEGENERATION . However , it is important to reiterate that the site of transplantation must be far enough from the lesion to be beyond the zone of serum leakage through the ruptured BBB . Unknown factors that extravasate into the CNS parenchyma seem to trigger the intense , rapid upregulation of proteoglycans that occurs after injury ( see earlier in text ) . So , our experiments have revealed that in addition to immature astrocytes , reactive astroglia that are distal to a lesion are surprisingly growth supportive , even within purportedly inhibitory white matter . Although the molecular mechanisms through which reactive astro - cytes support axon growth in vivo are unknown , recent evidence from our laboratory indicates that extracellular fibronectin and the longitudinal geometric alignment of the intrafascicular astroglia might be two of several important factors 85 . The remarkable capacity for regen - eration distal to the lesion can last for many months , until the mechanically obstructive properties of glial hypertrophy come into play and block regeneration through more physical means ( FIG . 2 ) . Additional inhibitory molecules in the glial scar In addition to the inhibitory effects of CSPGs , several other molecules are now known to be upregulated in the core of the lesion and to contribute to the growth - retarding effects of the glial scar . One such molecule is the secreted protein semaphorin 3 ( SEMA3 ) , which acts as a chemorepellent through its high - affinity receptor neuropilin 1 . After lesions of the lateral olfactory tract 86 , cortex 86 or spinal cord 86 – 88 , SEMA3 expression increases in fibroblasts that penetrate the lesion deeply , and neuropilin 1 expression increases in neurons that project to the site of injury . Regenerating axons were excluded from areas of damage containing SEMA3 , essentially creating an exclusion zone at the heart of the lesion . These correlative results indicate that semaphorins help to prevent the penetration of regener - ating neurites past the centre of fibroblast - containing CNS lesions . These studies indicate that the role of CSPGs as growth inhibitors might not be a simple ‘all or none’ pheno - menon as was originally discussed in Snow et al 58 . However , one question remained : do axons grow differently in regions containing proteoglycans than in regions where proteoglycans are lacking ? Using relatively low concentrations of CSPGs that allow for intermittent neurite outgrowth on laminin , Snow and colleagues 82 have begun to identify the growth patterns of neurons on permissive levels of normally inhibitory CSPGs . Interestingly , axons growing on CSPG fasci - culated tightly ( as they do in the subplate ) , but returned to a defasciculated state when on laminin . These studies highlight the importance of proteoglycan concentrations and their balance with other molecules during their interactions with growth cones , and also indicate that particular mixtures can help regulate the overall patterning of axonal bundling or branching characteristics . WALLERIAN DEGENERATION Degenerative changes in the distal segment ofan axon and its myelin sheath that occur secondarily to proximal injury of the axon or cell body . Box 2 | Cold - blooded species can regenerate their axons Not all vertebrates suffer the same fate of failed regeneration with formation of an inhibitory glial scar . Evidence that the glial scar is differentially repulsive depending on the species was demonstrated most convincingly by Reier , who showed that regeneration can occur directly through a glial ‘scar’in amphibians 137 , 138 . In these studies , the optic nerve of Xenopus was repeatedly crushed and the dense reactive glial tissues that were induced were harvested and transplanted near the freshly severed optic stump of a recipient . Regenerating retinal ganglion cell axons were capable of extending through these densely formed glial tissues . Indeed , amphibian reactive glia ( as well as those of fish 139 , 140 ) can undergo plastic changes after injury , which includes the formation of new axon growth - promoting membrane and a channel - like arrangement for guiding the new fibres 141 , 142 . a b Transplant rostral L Figure 3 | Failure of regeneration of microtransplanted dorsal root ganglion axons on reaching a proteoglycan gradient . a | Double scanning confocal photomicrograph of transplanted adult dorsal root ganglion ( DRG ) neurons ( green ) extending axons into the periphery , but not the centre , of a spinal cord lesion ( L ) . Axons are present in areas of chondroitin sulphate proteoglycan ( CSPG ) deposition ( blue ) , but are unable to traverse regions of increasing CSPG deposition . b | High magnification of dystrophic axons extending from transplanted adult DRG neurons . Note the characteristic endballs 5 that form in the presence of high levels of CSPG ( arrow ) . Scale bars : a , 250 µ m ; b , 25 µ m . Figure reprinted from REF . 84  Society for Neuroscience . © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup 152 | FEBRUARY 2004 | VOLUME 5 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro R E V I E W S Treatment with chondroitinase after nigrostriatal tract lesioning enhanced the regeneration of dopaminer - gic neurons back to their desired targets 94 . Intrathecal application of chondroitinase to animals with bilateral dorsal column lesions resulted in degradation of CSPG at the lesion site , and allowed both ascending sensory and descending motor axon regeneration through , and perhaps even slightly past , the lesion 95 . Furthermore , this treatment resulted in recovery of certain locomotor and proprioceptive functions . Additional preliminary studies have shown that CSPG digestion can improve regenera - tion after spinal cord hemisection in the cat 96 , and also after a compressive injury to the spinal cord of rats 97 , which is a more relevant model for the typical human spinal cord injury . In another strategy , treatment with chondroitinase enhances the ability of regenerating axons to enter , as well as exit , peripheral nerve grafts transplanted into CNS lesions to provide a Schwann cell - laden highway and possible bypass of the injury site 98 – 100 . Last , preliminary results in our laboratory indicate that preventing the synthesis of CSPGs after injury by inhibiting the synthetic enzymes for GAG chain assem - bly also enhances regeneration 101 . So , work from many laboratories has shown that removal of CSPGs reduces the inhibitory environment of the glial scar in vivo and fosters some measure of functional regeneration . Furthermore , chondroitinase treatment has helped us to elucidate the role of CSPGs in normal inhibition of synaptic sprouting in the cortex ( BOX 3 ) . It is important to note that enhancement of regenera - tion after chondroitinase treatment is not without limitations . Recent work involving the implantation of a basement membrane matrix into the spinal cord illus - trates this point 102 . When the matrix alone is implanted , robust sensory axon regeneration into this substrate occurs , but the addition of aggrecan prevents regenera - tion into the matrix . Interestingly , when aggrecan is pre - digested with chondroitinase and the purified core is Recent work by Bundeson and colleagues 89 has also implicated ephrin - B2 and its receptor EPHB2 in the inhibition of regeneration after spinal cord transection . During normal development , this ligand - receptor pair - ing has diverse roles in cell migration , axon guidance and tissue patterning . The interaction of these partners becomes important again after injury , when ephrin - B2 expression increases in astrocytes and EPHB2 expression increases in fibroblasts . At first , astrocytes and fibro - blasts co - mingle , but then as ephrin - B2 and EPHB2 expression increase , they signal cell - type segregation , creating bands of fibroblasts and astrocytes , and more importantly , the cellular structure of the so - called glial / mesenchymal scar . Slit proteins , which are important regulators of axon guidance and cell migration ( reviewed by Brose and Tessier - Lavigne 90 ) , are also increased , along with their glypican 1 receptors 91 , in reactive astrocytes after corti - cal injury 92 . These observations have caused the Slit proteins to be implicated in regeneration failure . Together , SEMA3 , ephrin - B2 and Slit proteins add additional levels of complexity to the source of regener - ation failure in the adult CNS , especially after open injuries that allow mesenchymal cell infiltration . Overcoming inhibition Modification of sulphated proteoglycans . One strategy to overcome the inhibitory effects of CSPGs , and to further demonstrate that CSPGs inhibit regeneration , is to enzymatically digest them in vivo after injury to axonal pathways . The chondroitinase enzyme removes much , but not all , of the sugar chain from CSPGs , leaving the protein core and stub carbohydrate behind , and chondroitinase is effective at removing the inhibitory properties of CSPGs . In fact , a single injec - tion of chondroitinase into the brain results in decreased levels of intact CSPG that persist for up to four weeks 93 . STRABISMIC A term that describes animals with a condition in which the eyes are not straight or properly aligned . The misalignment reflects the failure ofthe eye muscles to work together . One eye might turn in ( crossed eyes ) , turn out ( wall eyes ) , turn up or turn down . Although some cats are congenitally strabismic , strabismus can also be achieved by cutting the tendon ofone of the eye muscles . Box 3 | Chondroitin sulphate proteoglycans ( CSPGs ) and synaptic plasticity Within the grey matter parenchyma of the brain and spinal cord , various proteoglycans related to the aggrecan family might form a kind of‘caulk’that encapsulates synapses 143 . Removal of this aspect of proteoglycan inhibitory function might be essential for the stimulation of neuritic sprouting and synaptic plasticity . In adult cortical and subcortical regions , neurons and synapses are surrounded by a lattice - like accumulation of extracellular matrix ( ECM ) that is thought to stabilize synapses , control ion homeostasis and provide neuroprotection ( reviewed by Steindler 44 and Celio et al . 145 ) . This ECM , which is known as the perineuronal net , consists mostly of CSPGs 146 , which are produced as the animal passes through critical periods of central nervous system maturation 147 , 148 . Interestingly , dark - rearing prolongs the duration of the critical period and , in turn , development of the perineuronal net , implicating sensory experience in maturation of the net 148 . During juvenile periods of visual cortex development , there is great plasticity in neuronal connections . As the animal matures and the perineuronal net increases , the potential for plasticity decreases and the synaptic connections made during development become ‘locked in’ . When this occurs , new experiences do not alter established neuronal connectivity , which is thought to result , in part , from CSPG - mediated sprouting inhibition . This is beneficial , because it confers the adult with protection against disturbances in functional connectivity that are brought about by aberrant experience . However , in other instances , and especially after injury , it might be beneficial to restore plasticity . Pizzorusso and colleagues 149 attempted just that by treating the adult visual cortex with chondroitinase . This treatment did indeed restore plasticity to the adult visual cortex , creating the same state of plasticity that is found in juvenile animals , and implicated CSPGs in limiting sprouting in an important sensory system . The ultimate goal will be to restore ocular dominance plasticity and possibly functional vision in adult STRABISMIC , otherwise monocularly deprived animals that have been made cortically blind in one eye from birth , but are allowed to mature for long periods before enzyme treatment . © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 5 | FEBRUARY 2004 | 153 R E V I E W S integrin receptors for growth - promoting molecules when mixed with inhibitory aggrecan 118 . Overexpression of integrins by viral transduction endows adult neurons with enhanced regenerative capability , on a par with that of young neurons . Peripheral conditioning lesions also enhance the ability of CNS neurons to regenerate into a lesion site , in part owing to increases in cyclic AMP ( cAMP ) levels in the neuron cell body 119 . Furthermore , this effect can be replicated without peripheral lesion by simply injecting the cell bodies of sensory neurons with cAMP 120 , which acts through protein kinase A - mediated pathways to affect cellular sprouting and outgrowth . These findings indicate that protein kinase A - mediated pathways could be exploited to enhance the ability of a neuron to overcome scar inhibitors as well as myelin inhibitors following injury . CSPGs in the glial scar impair neuronal outgrowth by signalling through the Rho / ROCK pathway , and specific inhibition of Rho GTPase enhances process out - growth 121 – 123 on proteoglycan - containing substrates , as well as on myelin - containing substrates 122 . Pharma - cologically blocking the downstream signalling from CSPGs might also enhance CNS regeneration . Last , certain reparative states of the inflammatory cas - cade , which must be different from those that influence glial scar formation , might also have pro - regenerative effects on neurons . Activation of macrophages ( outside the CNS compartment ) using Zymosan enhances retinal ganglion cell regeneration for short distances past the glial scar after optic nerve injury 124 and enhances process outgrowth of DRG neurons in a culture model of proteo - glycan contained in the glial scar 125 . Interestingly , a simple sugar , mannose , seems to be one mediator that stimulates neurons to increase their ability to regenerate 126 . Combinatorial strategies . Combinatorial strategies that take advantage of the pro - regenerative effects of chon - droitinase , along with strategies that foster stimulation of the intrinsic growth potential of adult neurons ( for example , exogenous neurotrophins ) , can also be under - taken to induce regeneration and sprouting . Lesions of the adult retina that denervate the superior colliculus produce some limited sprouting of uninjured fibres . However , this sprouting is often so minimal that it is not sufficient to restore function . Tropea and col - leagues 127 attempted to increase this sprouting response by treating the superior colliculus with chondroitinase combined with retinal ganglion cell body stimulation through application of BDNF . Chondroitinase and BDNF acted synergistically to enhance sprouting to a greater extent than either therapy alone . Furthermore , markers of synaptogenesis were also identified in the newly sprouting fibres , demonstrating the potential for functional recovery . This important work further demonstrates the potential therapeutic roles of chon - droitinase in enhancing functional regeneration through a sprouting response , and hints at the potential of combi - natorial therapies . It will be fascinating to learn whether the function that is restored through ectopic sprouting in the colliculus is beneficial or detrimental to the animal’s visually - guided behaviours . added to the matrix , regeneration is still inhibited , indi - cating that regions of the digested CSPG that are left behind after digestion still remain somewhat inhibitory to neurite outgrowth . In vitro work in our laboratory has also demonstrated that the protein and sugar stub remaining after chondroitinase treatment loses its inhibitory potency , but is still somewhat inhibitory to adult DRG process outgrowth 39 . Multiple regions of proteoglycans can inhibit neurite outgrowth 103 , so chondroitinase digestion might not remove all aspects of CSPGs that prevent regeneration , and other strategies that more thoroughly eliminate the GAG chains are desirable 104 . Blocking the effects of myelin . In addition to enhancing regeneration by removing the inhibitory effects of CSPGs , extensive work has shown that blocking Nogo , a myelin - associated inhibitor of regeneration , improves regenera - tion 105 . Antibodies directed against the Nogo receptor administered into spinal cord lesion sites 106 or even systemically 107 seem to enhance regeneration , although recent work 108 has disputed whether this is truly enhanced regeneration or merely local sprouting . Indeed , it is now being suggested that most of the functional recovery that is seen when inhibitors of myelin are used occurs as a result of remodelling of local circuits , such that functional recovery is mediated along uninjured long axons 108 . This proposal , in conjunction with work from our laboratory demonstrating rapid axon regrowth from adult neurons in the presence of degenerating white matter 83 , 84 , as well as the differences between growth cone collapse and dystrophy , indicates that myelin might not be acting fun - damentally to inhibit long - distance regeneration . In fact , it has even been suggested that myelin might facilitate axon growth under certain conditions 109 . Enhancing the intrinsic growth machinery . Removal of extrinsic inhibitory cues from the glial scar with treat - ments such as chondroitinase might aid regeneration , but this might not be sufficient for long - range re - growth . Neurotrophin 3 ( NT3 ) or nerve growth factor ( NGF ) , when delivered directly to transected neurons in the dorsal columns of animals treated with peripheral nerve graft transplants , enhances growth into the graft , out the opposite end and beyond the glial scar into host tissue 110 , 111 . Exogenous NGF administration also induces sprouting into the lesion of crushed dorsal columns 112 . Intrathecal or adenoviral application of NT3 or NGF to the injured DREZ induces DRG neurons to cross the peripheral nervous system / CNS barrier and penetrate some distance into the spinal cord 113 – 117 , where the regenerating fibres restore nocioceptive function . So , evidence from the injured spinal cord and DREZ indicates that regenerating axons can overcome proteo - glycan barriers after neurotrophin stimulation , perhaps through induction of growth enhancing genes , offering an additional therapeutic strategy . The intrinsic growth properties of mature neurons can be altered in other ways to enhance regeneration . Unlike mature neurons , embryonic neurons have a high capacity for regeneration and can rapidly upregulate © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup 154 | FEBRUARY 2004 | VOLUME 5 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro R E V I E W S enhance the ability of neurons to elongate and manipu - late the extrinsic inhibitors that block growth in the immediate environment of the glial scar . With this com - binatorial strategy , it might be possible to induce long distance and functional regeneration after CNS injury . Conclusions Our discussion of the glial scar has led us to conclude that to overcome the inhibitory environment of the glial scar , treatments should ideally provide a growth - supportive highway across the lesion cavity , intrinsically 1 . Chauvet , N . , Prieto , M . & Alonso , G . Tanycytes present in the adult rat mediobasal hypothalamus support the regeneration of monoaminergic axons . Exp . Neurol . 151 , 1 – 13 ( 1998 ) . 2 . Monti Graziadei , G . A . , Karlan , M . S . , Bernstein , J . J . & Graziadei , P . P . Reinnervation of the olfactory bulb after section of the olfactory nerve in monkey ( Saimiri sciureus ) . Brain Res . 189 , 343 – 354 ( 1980 ) . 3 . Morrison , E . E . & Costanzo , R . M . Regeneration of olfactory sensory neurons and reconnection in the aging hamster central nervous system . Neurosci . Lett . 198 , 213 – 217 ( 1995 ) . 4 . Li , Y . & Raisman , G . Sprouts from cut corticospinal axons persist in the presence of astrocytic scarring in long - term lesions of the adult rat spinal cord . Exp . Neurol . 134 , 102 – 111 ( 1995 ) . 5 . Ramón y Cajal , S . Degeneration and regeneration of the nervous system ( translated by R . M . May ) ( London , Oxford Univ . Press , 1928 ) . 6 . Caroni , P . , Savio , T . & Schwab , M . E . Central nervous system regeneration : oligodendrocytes and myelin as non - permissive substrates for neurite growth . Prog . Brain Res . 78 , 363 – 370 ( 1988 ) . 7 . Savio , T . & Schwab , M . E . Lesioned corticospinal tract axons regenerate in myelin - free rat spinal cord . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 87 , 4130 – 4133 ( 1990 ) . 8 . Filbin , M . T . Myelin - associated inhibitors of axonal regeneration in the adult mammalian CNS . Nature Rev . Neurosci . 4 , 703 – 713 ( 2003 ) . 9 . McGee , A . W . & Strittmatter , S . M . The Nogo - 66 receptor : focusing myelin inhibition of axon regeneration . Trends Neurosci . 26 , 193 – 198 ( 2003 ) . 10 . Schwab , M . E . Increasing plasticity and functional recovery of the lesioned spinal cord . Prog . Brain Res . 137 , 351 – 359 ( 2002 ) . 11 . Clemente , C . D . The regeneration of peripheral nerves inserted into the cerebral cortex and the healing of cerebral lesions . J . Comp . Neurol . 109 , 123 – 143 ( 1958 ) . 12 . Clemente , C . D . & Windle , W . F . Regeneration of severed nerve fibers in the spinal cord of the adult cat . J . Comp . Neurol . 101 , 691 – 731 ( 1954 ) . 13 . Windle , W . F . Regeneration of axons in the vertebrate central nervous system . Phys . Rev . 36 , 427 – 439 ( 1956 ) 14 . Windle , W . F . & Chambers , W . W . Regeneration in the spinal cord of the cat and dog . J . Comp . Neurol . 93 , 241 – 258 ( 1950 ) . 15 . Windle , W . F . , Clemente , C . D . & Chambers , W . W . Inhibition of formation of a glial barrier as a means of permitting a peripheral nerve to grow into the brain . J . Comp . Neurol . 96 , 359 – 369 ( 1952 ) . 16 . Faulkner , J . R . , Herrmann , J . E . , Woo , M . J . , Tansey , K . E . & Doan , N . B . Reactive astrocytes protect tissue and preserve function after spinal cord injury . J . Neurosci . ( in the press ) . 17 . Bignami , A . & Dahl , D . The astroglial response to stabbing . Immunofluorescence studies with antibodies to astrocyte - specific protein ( GFA ) in mammalian and submammalian vertebrates . Neuropathol . Appl . Neurobiol . 2 , 99 – 110 ( 1976 ) . 18 . Fitch , M . T . & Silver , J . in CNS Regeneration : Basic Science and Clinical Advances ( eds Tuszynski , M . H . & Kordower , J . H . ) 55 – 88 ( Academic , San Diego , 1999 ) . 19 . Barret , C . P . , Guth , L . , Donati , E . J . & Krikorian , J . G . Astroglial reaction in the gray matter of lumbar segments after midthoracic transection of the adult rat spinal cord . Exp . Neurol . 73 , 365 – 377 ( 1981 ) . 20 . Bignami , A . & Dahl , D . Astrocyte - specific protein and neuroglial differentiation . An immunofluorescence study with antibodies to the glial fibrillary acidic protein . J . Comp . Neurol . 153 , 27 – 38 ( 1974 ) . 21 . Eng , L . F . Glial fibrillary acidic protein ( GFAP ) : the major protein of glial intermediate filaments in differentiated astrocytes . J . Neuroimmunol . 8 , 203 – 214 ( 1985 ) . 22 . Yang , H . Y . , Lieska , N . , Shao , D . , Kriho , V . & Pappas , G . D . Proteins of the intermediate filament cytoskeleton as markers for astrocytes and human astrocytomas . Mol . Chem . Neuropathol . 21 , 155 – 176 ( 1994 ) . 23 . Bush , T . G . et al . Leukocyte infiltration , neuronal degeneration , and neurite outgrowth after ablation of scar - forming , reactive astrocytes in adult transgenic mice . Neuron 23 , 297 – 308 ( 1999 ) . 24 . Preston , E . , Webster , J . & Small , D . Characteristics of sustained blood – brain barrier opening and tissue injury in a model for focal trauma in the rat . J . Neurotrauma 18 , 83 – 92 ( 2001 ) . 25 . Fitch , M . T . , Doller , C . , Combs , C . K . , Landreth , G . E . & Silver , J . Cellular and molecular mechanisms of glial scarring and progressive cavitation : in vivo and in vitro analysis of inflammation - induced secondary injury after CNS trauma . J . Neurosci . 19 , 8182 – 8198 ( 1999 ) . 26 . Lagord , C . , Berry , M . & Logan , A . Expression of TGF β 2 but not TGF β 1 correlates with the deposition of scar tissue in the lesioned spinal cord . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 20 , 69 – 92 ( 2002 ) . 27 . Asher , R . A . et al . Neurocan is upregulated in injured brain and in cytokine - treated astrocytes . J . Neurosci . 20 , 2427 – 2438 ( 2000 ) . 28 . Moon , L . D . F . & Fawcett , J . W . Reduction in CNS scar formation without concomitant increase in axon regeneration following treatment of adult rat brain with a combination of antibodies to TGF β 1 and β 2 . Eur . J . Neurosci . 14 , 1667 – 1677 ( 2001 ) . 29 . Giulian , D . , Woodward , J . , Young , D . G . , Krebs , J . F . & Lachman , L . B . Interleukin - 1 injected into mammalian brain stimulates astrogliosis and neovascularization . J . Neurosci . 8 , 2485 – 2490 ( 1988 ) . 30 . Yong , V . W . et al . γ - Interferon promotes proliferation of adult human astrocytes in vitro and reactive gliosis in the adult mouse brain in vivo . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 88 , 7016 – 7020 ( 1991 ) . 31 . Logan , A . , Frautschy , S . A . , Gonzalez , A . M . & Baird , A . A time course for the focal elevation of synthesis of basic fibroblast growth factor and one if its high - affinity receptors ( flg ) following a localized cortical brain injury . J . Neurosci . 12 , 3828 – 3837 ( 1992 ) . 32 . Mocchetti , I . , Rabin , S . J . , Colangelo , A . M . , Whittemore , S . R . & Wrathall , J . R . Increased basic fibroblast growth factor expression following contusive spinal cord injury . Exp . Neurol . 141 , 154 – 164 ( 1996 ) . 33 . DiProspero , N . A . , Meiners , S . & Geller , H . M . Inflammatory cytokines interact to modulate extracellular matrix and astrocytic support of neurite outgrowth . Exp . Neurol . 148 , 628 – 639 ( 1997 ) . 34 . Miyake , T . , Hattori , T . , Fukuda , M . , Kitamura , T . & Fujita , S . Quantitative studies on proliferative changes of reactive astrocytes in mouse cerebral cortex . Brain Res . 451 , 133 – 138 ( 1988 ) . 35 . Houle , J . D . Demonstration of the potential for chronically injured neurons to regenerate axons into intraspinal peripheral nerve grafts . Exp . Neurol . 113 , 1 – 9 ( 1991 ) . 36 . Kobayashi , N . R . et al . BDNF and NT - 4 / 5 prevent atrophy of rat rubrospinal neurons after cervical axotomy , stimulate GAP - 43 and T α 1 - tubulin mRNA expression , and promote axonal regeneration . J . Neurosci . 17 , 9583 – 9595 ( 1997 ) . 37 . Kwon , B . K . et al . Survival and regeneration of rubrospinal neurons 1 year after spinal cord injury . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 3246 – 3251 ( 2002 ) . 38 . Houle , J . D . & Jin , Y . Chronically injured supraspinal neurons exhibit only modest axonal dieback in response to a cervical hemisection lesion . Exp . Neurol . 169 , 208 – 217 ( 2001 ) . 39 . Tom , V . J . , Doller , C . M . & Silver J . Promoting regeneration of dystrophic axons . Soc . Neurosci . Abstr . 635 . 14 ( 2002 ) . 40 . Kartje , G . L . , Schulz , M . K . , Lopez - Yunez , A . , Schnell , L . & Schwab , M . E . Corticostriatal plasticity is restricted by myelin - associated neurite growth inhibitors in the adult rat . Ann . Neurol . 45 , 778 – 786 ( 1999 ) . 41 . Burden - Gulley , S . M . , Payne , H . R . & Lemmon , V . Growth cones are actively influenced by the substrate - bound adhesion molecules . J . Neurosci . 15 , 4370 – 4381 ( 1995 ) . 42 . Bandtlow , C . , Zachleder , T . & Schwab , M . E . Oligodendrocytes arrest neurite growth by contact inhibition . J . Neurosci . 10 , 3837 – 3848 ( 1990 ) . 43 . Fawcett , J . W . , Rokos , J . & Bakst , I . Oligodendrocytes repel axons and cause axonal growth cone collapse . J . Cell Sci . 92 , 93 – 100 ( 1989 ) . 44 . Luo , Y . , Raible , D . & Raper , J . A . Collapsin : a protein in brain that induces the collapse and paralysis of neuronal growth cones . Cell 75 , 217 – 227 ( 1993 ) . 45 . Shibata , A . , Wright , M . V . , David , S . , McKerracher , L . & Kater , S . B . Unique responses of differentiating neuronal growth cones to inhibitory cues presented by oligodendrocytes . J . Cell Biol . 142 , 191 – 202 ( 1998 ) . 46 . Canning , D . R . , Höke , A . , Malemud , C . J . & Silver , J . A potent inhibitor of neurite outgrowth that predominates in the extracellular matrix of reactive astrocytes . Int . J . Dev . Neurosci . 14 , 153 – 175 ( 1996 ) . 47 . Wyss - Coray , T . et al . Increased central nervous system production of extracellular matrix components and development of hydrocephalus in transgenic mice overexpressing transforming growth factor - β 1 . Am . J . Pathol . 147 , 53 – 67 ( 1995 ) . 48 . Gallo , V . & Bertolotto , A . Extracellular matrix of cultured glial cells : selective expression of chondroitin 4 - sulfate by type - 2 astrocytes and their progenitors . Exp . Cell Res . 187 , 211 – 223 ( 1990 ) . 49 . Gallo , V . , Bertolotto , A . & Levi , G . The proteoglycan chondroitin sulfate is present in a subpopulation of cultured astrocytes and in their precursors . Dev . Biol . 123 , 282 – 285 ( 1987 ) . 50 . Johnson - Green , P . C . , Dow , K . E . & Riopelle , R . J . Characterization of glycosaminoglycans produced by primary astrocytes in vitro . Glia 4 , 314 – 321 ( 1991 ) . 51 . Grimpe , B . & Silver , J . The extracellular matrix in axon regeneration . Prog . Brain Res . 137 , 333 – 349 ( 2002 ) . 52 . Margolis , R . K . & Margolis , R . U . Nervous tissue proteoglycans . Experientia 49 , 429 – 446 ( 1993 ) . An important review of brain and spinal cord proteoglycans . 53 . Morgenstern , D . A . , Asher , R . A . & Fawcett , J . W . Chondroitin sulphate proteoglycans in the CNS injury response . Prog . Brain Res . 137 , 313 – 332 ( 2002 ) . 54 . Jones , L . L . , Margolis , R . U . & Tuszynski , M . H . The chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans neurocan , brevican , phosphacan , and versican are differentially regulated following spinal cord injury . Exp . Neurol . 182 , 399 – 411 ( 2003 ) . A thorough , descriptive study of the spatiotemporal sequence of proteoglycan upregulation after spinal cord injury . 55 . Tang , X . , Davies , J . E . & Davies , S . J . A . Changes in distribution , cell associations , and protein expression levels of NG2 , neurocan , phosphacan , brevican , versican , V2 , and tenascin - C during acute to chronic maturation of spinal cord scar tissue . J . Neurosci . Res . 71 , 427 – 444 ( 2003 ) . 56 . McKeon , R . J . , Jurynec , M . J . & Buck , C . R . The chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans neurocan and phosphacan are expressed by reactive astrocytes in the chronic CNS glial scar . J . Neurosci . 19 , 10778 – 10788 ( 1999 ) . 57 . Katoh – Semba , R . , Matsuda , M . , Kato , K . & Oohira , A . Chondroitin sulphate proteoglycans in the rat brain : candidates for axon barriers of sensory neurons and the possible modification by laminin of their actions . Eur . J . Neurosci . 7 , 613 – 621 ( 1995 ) . 58 . Snow , D . M . , Steindler , D . A . & Silver , J . Molecular and cellular characterization of the glial roof plate of the spinal cord and optic tectum : a possible role for a proteoglycan in the development of an axon barrier . Dev . Biol . 138 , 359 – 376 ( 1990 ) . This is the first paper to identify sulphated proteoglycans as a purported boundary mechanism for controlling the guidance of the commissural and dorsal column axon pathways . 59 . Cole , G . J . & McCabe , C . F . Identification of a developmentally regulated keratan sulfate proteoglycan that inhibits cell adhesion and neurite outgrowth . Neuron 7 , 1007 – 1018 ( 1991 ) . 60 . Wu , D . Y . , Schneider , G . E . , Silver , J . , Poston , M . & Jhaveri , S . A role for tectal midline glia in the unilateral containment of retinocollicular axons . J . Neurosci . 18 , 8344 – 8355 ( 1998 ) . 61 . Pindzola , R . R . , Doller , C . & Silver , J . Putative inhibitory extracellular matrix molecules at the dorsal root entry zone of the spinal cord during development and after root and sciatic nerve lesions . Dev . Biol . 156 , 34 – 48 ( 1993 ) . 62 . Brittis , P . A . , Canning , D . R . & Silver , J . Chondroitin sulfate as a regulator of neuronal patterning in the retina . Science 225 , 733 – 736 ( 1992 ) . 63 . Jhaveri , S . Midline glia of the tectum : a barrier for developing retinal axons . Perspect . Dev . Neurobiol . 1 , 237 – 243 ( 1993 ) . 64 . Becker , C . G . & Becker , T . Repellent guidance of regenerating optic axons by chondroitin sulfate glycosaminoglycans in zebrafish . J . Neurosci . 22 , 842 – 853 ( 2002 ) . © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 5 | FEBRUARY 2004 | 155 R E V I E W S 65 . Chung , K . , Shum , D . K . & Chan , S . Expression of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans in the chiasm of mouse embryos . J . Comp . Neurol . 417 , 153 – 163 ( 2000 ) . 66 . Hynds , D . L . & Snow , D . M . Neurite outgrowth inhibition by chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan stalling / stopping exceeds turning in human neuroblastoma growth cones . Exp . Neurol . 160 , 244 – 255 ( 1999 ) . 67 . Snow , D . M . , Lemmon , V . , Carrino , D . A . , Caplan , A . I . & Silver , J . Sulfated proteoglycans in astroglial barriers inhibit neurite outgrowth in vitro . Exp . Neurol . 109 , 111 – 130 ( 1990 ) . 68 . Dou , C . L . & Levine , J . M . Inhibtion of neurite growth by the NG2 chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan . J . Neurosci . 14 , 7616 – 7628 ( 1994 ) . 69 . Snow , D . M . , Brown , E . M . & Letourneau , P . C . Growth cone behavior in the presence of soluble chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan ( CSPG ) , compared to behavior on CSPG bound to laminin or fibronectin . Int . J . Dev . Neurosci . 14 , 331 – 349 ( 1996 ) . 70 . Prieto , M . , Chauvet , N . & Alonso G . Tanycytes transplanted into the adult rat spinal cord support the regeneration of lesioned axons . Exp . Neurol . 161 , 27 – 37 ( 2000 ) . 71 . Jones , L . L . , Yamaguchi , Y . , Stallcup , W . B . & Tuszynski , M . H . NG2 is a major chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan produced after spinal cord injury and is expressed by macrophages and oligodendrocyte progenitors . J . Neurosci . 22 , 2792 – 2803 ( 2002 ) . 72 . Moon , L . D . F . , Asher , R . A , Rhodes , K . E . & Fawcett , J . W . Relationship between sprouting axons , proteoglycans and glial cells following unilateral nigrostriatal axotomy in the adult rat . Neuroscience 109 , 101 – 117 ( 2002 ) . 73 . McKeon , R . J . , Schreiber , R . C . , Rudge , J . S . & Silver , J . Reduction of neurite outgrowth in a model of glial scarring following CNS injury is correlated with the expression of inhibitory molecules on reactive astrocytes . J . Neurosci . 11 , 3398 – 3411 ( 1991 ) . The seminal paper that first demonstrated the crucial role of proteoglycans in regeneration failure on the surface of the glial scar . 74 . Dow , K . E . , Ethell , D . W . , Steeves , J . D . & Riopelle , R . J . Molecular correlates of spinal cord repair in the embryonic chick : heparan sulfate and chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans . Exp . Neurol . 128 , 233 – 238 ( 1994 ) . 75 . Canning , D . R . et al . β - Amyloid of Alzheimer’s disease induces reactive gliosis that inhibits axonal outgrowth . Exp . Neurol . 124 , 289 – 298 ( 1993 ) . 76 . Smith - Thomas , L . C . et al . An inhibitor of neurite outgrowth produced by astrocytes . J . Cell Sci . 107 , 1687 – 1695 ( 1994 ) . 77 . McKeon , R . J . , Höke , A . & Silver , J . Injury - induced proteoglycan inhibit the potential for laminin - mediated axon growth on astrocytic scars . Exp . Neurol . 136 , 32 – 43 ( 1995 ) . 78 . Snow , D . M . & Letourneau , P . C . Neurite outgrowth on a step gradient of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan ( CS - PG ) . J . Neurobiol . 23 , 322 – 336 ( 1992 ) . 79 . Inman , D . M . & Steward , O . Ascending sensory , but not other long - tract axons , regenerate into the connective tissue matrix that forms at the site of a spinal cord injury in mice . J . Comp . Neurol . 462 , 431 – 449 ( 2003 ) . 80 . Bicknese , A . R . , Sheppard , A . M . , O’Leary , D . D . & Pearlman , A . L . Thalamocortical axons extend along a chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan - enriched pathway coincident with the neocortical subplate and distinct from the efferent path . J . Neurosci . 14 , 3500 – 3510 ( 1994 ) . 81 . Hikino , M . et al . Oversulfated dermatan sulfate exhibits neurite outgrowth - promoting activity toward embryonic mouse hippocampal neurons : implications of dermatan sulfatein neuritogenesis in the brain . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 43744 – 43754 ( 2003 ) . 82 . Snow , D . , Smith , J . D . , Cunningham , A . T . , McFarlin , J . & Goshorn , E . C . Neurite elongation on chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans is characterized by axonal fasciculation . Exp . Neurol . 182 , 310 – 321 ( 2003 ) . 83 . Davies S . J . A . et al . Regeneration of adult axons in white matter tracts of the central nervous system . Nature 390 , 680 – 683 ( 1997 ) . The potential for robust adult axonal regeneration within adult white matter was first demonstrated in this paper . 84 . Davies , S . J . A . , Goucher , D . R . , Doller , C . & Silver , J . Robust regeneration of adult sensory axons in degenerating white matter of the adult rat spinal cord . J . Neurosci . 19 , 5810 – 5822 ( 1999 ) . 85 . Tom , V . J . , Doller , C . M . & Silver , J . Fibronectin is critical for axonal regeneration in white matter . Soc . Neurosci . Abstr . 42 . 12 ( 2003 ) . 86 . Pasterkamp , R . J . et al . Expression of the gene encoding the chemorepellent semaphorinIII is induced in the fibroblast component of neural scar tissue formed following injuries of adult but not neonatal CNS . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 13 , 143 – 166 ( 1999 ) . 87 . De Winter , F . et al . Injury - induced class 3 semaphorin expression in the rat spinal cord . Exp . Neurol . 175 , 61 – 75 ( 2002 ) . 88 . Pasterkamp , R . J . , Anderson , P . N . & Verhaagen , J . Peripheral nerve injury fails to induce growth of lesioned ascending dorsal column axons into spinal cord scar tissue expressing the axon repellent Semaphorin3A . Eur . J . Neurosci . 13 , 457 – 471 ( 2001 ) . 89 . Bundeson , L . Q . , Scheel , T . A . , Bregman , B . S . & Kromer , L . F . Ephrin - B2 and EphB2 regulation of astrocyte - meningeal fibroblast interactions in response to spinal cord lesions in adult rats . J . Neurosci . 23 , 7789 – 7800 ( 2003 ) . 90 . Brose , K . & Tessier - Lavigne , M . Slit proteins : key regulators of axon guidance , axonal branching , and cell migration . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 10 , 95 – 102 ( 2000 ) . 91 . Ronca , F . , Anderson , J . S . , Paech , V . & Margolis , R . U . Characterization of slit protein interactions with glypican - 1 . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 29141 – 29147 ( 2001 ) . 92 . Hagino , S . et al . Slit and glypican - 1 mRNAs are coexpressed in the reactive astrocytes of the injured adult brain . Glia 42 , 130 – 138 ( 2003 ) . 93 . Brückner , G . et al . Acute and long - lasting changes in extracellular - matrix chondroitin - sulphate proteoglycans induced by injection of chondroitinase ABC in the adult rat brain . Exp . Brain Res . 121 , 300 – 310 ( 1998 ) . 94 . Moon , L . D . F . , Asher , R . A . , Rhodes , K . E . & Fawcett , J . W . Regeneration of CNS axons back to their target following treatment of adult rat brain with chondroitinase ABC . Nature Neurosci . 4 , 465 – 466 ( 2001 ) . 95 . Bradbury , E . J . et al . Chondroitinase ABC promotes functional recovery after spinalcord injury . Nature 416 , 636 – 640 ( 2002 ) . A crucial paper in the field of regeneration biology that showed for the first time that chondroitinase digestion of lesion - induced proteoglycans in the spinal cord can lead to regeneration and functional recovery . 96 . Tester , N . J . , Plass , A . H . & Howland , D . R . Chondroitin sulfate glycosaminoglycans and the effects of chondroitinase ABC on behavioral and anatomical recovery following spinal cord injury in the adult cat . Soc . Neurosci . Abstr . 744 . 17 ( 2003 ) . 97 . Caggiano , A . O . et al . Chondroitinase ABC I improves locomoter function after spinal cord contusion injury in the rat . Soc . Neurosci . Abstr . 744 . 5 ( 2003 ) . 98 . Chau , C . H . et al . Chondroitinase ABC enhances axonal regrowth through Schwann cell - seeded guidance channels after spinal cord injury . FASEBJ . ( 2003 Nov 20 ) . 99 . Mayes , D . A . & Houle , J . D . Combined use of matrix degrading enzymes and neurotrophic factors to facilitate axonal regeneration after spinal cord injury . Soc . Neurosci . Abstr . 245 . 11 ( 2003 ) . 100 . Xu , X . M . , Guenard , V . , Kleitman , N . & Bunge , M . B . Axonal regeneration into Schwann cell - seeded guidance channels grafted into transected adult rat spinal cord . J . Comp . Neurol . 351 , 145 – 160 ( 1995 ) . 101 . Grimpe , B . , Horn , K . , Lupa , M . , Bunge , M . B . & Silver , J . A DNA enzyme against the xt - 1 , the gag chain initiating enzyme , dramatically influences Schwann cell / astrocyte interactions . Soc . Neurosci . Abstr . 880 . 2 ( 2003 ) . 102 . Lemons , M . L . , Sandy , J . D . , Anderson , D . K . & Howland , D , R . Intact aggrecan and chondroitin sulfate - depleted aggrecan core glycoprotein inhibit axon growth in the adult rat spinal cord . Exp . Neurol . 184 , 981 – 990 ( 2003 ) . 103 . Ughrin , Y . M . , Chen , Z . J . & Levine , J . M . Multiple regions of the NG2 proteoglycan inhibit neurite growth and induce growth cone collapse . J . Neurosci . 23 , 175 – 186 ( 2003 ) . 104 . Grimpe , B . & Silver , J . A novel DNA - enzyme reduces glycosaminoglycan chains in the glial scar and allows microtransplanted DRG axons to regenerate beyond lesions in the spinal cord . J . Neurosci . ( in the press ) . 105 . Brösamle , C . , Huber , A . B . , Fiedler , M . , Skerra , A . & Schwab , M . E . Regeneration of lesioned corticospinal tract fibers in the adult rat induced by a recombinant , humanized IN - 1 antibody fragment . J . Neurosci . 20 , 8061 – 8068 ( 2000 ) . 106 . GrandPré , T . , Li , S . & Strittmatter , S . M . Nogo - 66 receptor antagonist peptide promotes axonal regeneration . Nature 417 , 547 – 551 ( 2002 ) . 107 . Li , S . & Strittmatter , S . M . Delayed systemic nogo - 66 receptor antagonist promotes recovery from spinal cord injury . J . Neurosci . 23 , 4219 – 4227 ( 2003 ) . 108 . Bareyre , F . M . et al . Spontaneous formation of a new axonal circuit in the injured rodent spinal cord . Soc . Neurosci . Abstr . 245 . 10 ( 2003 ) . 109 . Raisman , G . Myelin inhibitors : does NO mean GO ? Nature Rev . Neurosci . 5 , 157 – 161 ( 2004 ) . 110 . Oudega , M . & Hagg , T . Nerve growth factor promotes regeneration of sensory axons into adult rat spinal cord . Exp . Neurol . 140 , 218 – 229 ( 1996 ) . 111 . Oudega , M . & Hagg , T . Neurotrophins promote regeneration of sensory axons in the adult rat spinal cord . Brain Res . 818 , 431 – 438 ( 1999 ) . 112 . Bradbury , E . J . , Khemani , S . , King , V . R . , Priestly , J . V . & McMahon , S . B . NT - 3 promotes growth of lesioned adult rat sensory axons ascending in the dorsal columns of the spinal cord . Eur . J . Neurosci . 11 , 3873 – 3883 ( 1999 ) . 113 . Ramer , M . S . et al . Neurotrophin - 3 - mediated regeneration and recovery of proprioception following dorsal rhizotomy . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 19 , 239 – 249 ( 2002 ) . 114 . Ramer , M . S . , Duraisingam , I . , Priestley , J . V . & McMahon , S . B . Two - tiered inhibition of axon regeneration at the dorsal root entry zone . J . Neurosci . 21 , 2651 – 2660 ( 2001 ) . 115 . Ramer , M . S . , Priestly , J . V . & McMahon , S . B . Functional regeneration of sensory axons into the adult spinal cord . Nature 403 , 312 – 316 ( 2000 ) . 116 . Romero , M . I . , Rangappa , N . , Garry , M . G . & Smith , G . M . Functional regeneration of chronically injured sensory afferents into adult spinal cord after neurotrophin gene therapy . J . Neurosci . 21 , 8408 – 8416 ( 2001 ) . An impressive paper that shows the remarkable capacity for neurotrophins , when expressed at high levels within a target tissue , to attract sensory axons across a glial barrier . 117 . Zhang , Y . , Dijkhuizen , P . A . , Anderson , P . N . , Lieberman , A . R . & Verhaagen , J . NT - 3 delivered by an adenoviral vector induces injured dorsal root axons to regenerate into the spinal cord of adult rats . J . Neurosci . Res . 54 , 554 – 562 ( 1998 ) . 118 . Condic , M . L . Adult neuronal regeneration induced by transgenic integrin expression . J . Neurosci . 21 , 4782 – 4788 ( 2001 ) . 119 . Qiu , J . et al . Spinal axon regeneration induced by elevation of cyclic AMP . Neuron 34 , 895 – 903 ( 2002 ) . 120 . Neumann , S . , Bradke , F . , Tessier - Lavigne , M . & Basbaum , A . I . Regeneration of sensory axons within the injured spinal cord induced by intraganglionic cAMP elevation . Neuron 34 , 885 – 893 ( 2002 ) . 121 . Borisoff , J . F . et al . Suppression of Rho - kinase activity promotes axonal growth on inhibitory CNS substrates . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 22 , 405 – 416 ( 2003 ) . 122 . Dergham , P . et al . Rho signaling pathway targeted to promote spinal cord repair . J . Neurosci . 22 , 6570 – 6577 ( 2002 ) . 123 . Monnier , P . P . , Sierra , A . , Schwab , J . M . , Henke - Fahle , S . & Mueller , B . K . The Rho / ROCK pathway mediates neurite growth - inhibitory activity associated with the chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans of the CNS glial scar . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 22 , 319 – 330 ( 2003 ) . 124 . Yin , Y . et al . Macrophage - derived factors stimulate optic nerve regeneration . J . Neurosci . 23 , 2284 – 2293 ( 2003 ) . 125 . Steinmetz , M . P . et al . A novel combinatorial strategy which dramatically influences axon regeneration across a model of the glial scar in vitro . Soc . Neurosci . Abstr . 880 . 4 ( 2003 ) . 126 . Li , Y . , Irwin , N . , Yin , Y . , Lanser , M . & Benowitz , L . I . Axon regeneration in goldfish and rat retinal ganglion cells : differential responsiveness to carbohydrates and cAMP . J . Neurosci . 23 , 7830 – 7838 ( 2003 ) . 127 . Tropea , D . , Caleo , M . & Maffei L . Synergistic effects of brain - derived neurotrophic factor and Chondroitinase ABC on retinal fiber sprouting after denervation of the superior colliculus in adult rats . J . Neurosci . 23 , 7034 – 7044 ( 2003 ) . An important paper that gives validity to the concept of the use of multiple strategies to overcome proteoglycan barriers during sprouting in the visual system . 128 . Borisoff , J . F . , Pataky , D . M . , McBride , C . B . & Steeves , J . D . Raphe - spinal neurons display an age - dependent differential capacity for neurite outgrowth compared to other brainstem - spinal populations . Exp . Neurol . 166 , 16 – 28 ( 2000 ) . 129 . Saunders , N . R . et al . Development of walking , swimming and neuronal connections after complete spinal cord transection in the neonatal opossum , Monodelphis domestica . J . Neurosci . 18 , 339 – 355 ( 1998 ) . 130 . Reier , P . J . , Bregman , B . S . & Wujek , J . R . Intraspinal transplantation of embryonic spinal cord tissue in neonatal and adult rats . J . Comp . Neurol . 247 , 275 – 296 ( 1986 ) . 131 . Rudge , J . S . & Silver , J . Inhibition of neurite outgrowth on astroglial scars in vitro . J . Neurosci . 10 , 3594 – 3603 ( 1990 ) . The first paper to clearly show the capacity of the glial scar to inhibit axonal regeneration . 132 . Bahr , M . , Przyrembel , C . & Bastmeyer , M . Astrocytes from adult rat optic nerves are nonpermissive for regenerating retinal ganglion cell axons . Exp . Neurol . 131 , 211 – 220 ( 1995 ) . 133 . Le Roux , P . D . & Reh , T . A . Reactive astroglia support primary dendritic but not axonal outgrowth from mouse cortical neurons in vitro . Exp . Neurol . 137 , 49 – 65 ( 1996 ) . 134 . Smith , G . , Miller , R . H . & Silver , J . Changing role of forebrain astrocytes during development , regenerative failure , and induced regeneration upon transplantation . J . Comp . Neurol . 251 , 23 – 43 ( 1986 ) . 135 . Smith , G . & Silver , J . Transplantation of immature and mature astrocytes and their effect on scar formation in the lesioned central nervous system . Prog . Brain Res . 78 , 353 – 361 ( 1988 ) . © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup 156 | FEBRUARY 2004 | VOLUME 5 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro R E V I E W S 136 . Smith , G . & Miller , R . H . Immature type - 1 astrocytes suppress glial scar formation , are motile and interact with blood vessels . Brain Res . 543 , 111 – 122 ( 1991 ) . 137 . Reier , P . J . Penetration of grafted astrocytic scars by regenerating optic nerve axons in Xenopus tadpoles . Brain Res . 164 , 61 – 68 ( 1979 ) . An interesting article that showed the capacity for amphibian glial scars to promote regeneration through their territory . 138 . Reier , P . J . & Webster , H . Regeneration and remyelination of Xenopus tadpole optic nerve fibers following transection or crush . J . Neurocytol . 3 , 591 – 618 ( 1974 ) . 139 . Murray , M . A quantitative study of regenerative sprouting by optic axons in goldfish . J . Comp . Neurol . 209 , 352 – 362 ( 1982 ) . 140 . Murray , M . & Edwards , M . A . A quantitative study of the reinnervation of the goldfish optic tectum following optic nerve crush . J . Comp . Neurol . 209 , 363 – 373 ( 1982 ) . 141 . Brittis , P . A . & Silver , J . Multiple factors govern intraretinal axon guidance : a time - lapse study . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 6 , 413 – 432 ( 1995 ) . 142 . Singer , M . , Nordlander , R . H . & Egar , M . Axonal guidance during embryogenesis and regeneration in the spinal cord of the newt : a blueprint hypothesis of neuronal pathway patterning . J . Comp . Neurol . 185 , 1 – 21 ( 1979 ) . An important paper that first demonstrated the role of glial channels in providing a guidance highway for regenerating axons in the newt . 143 . Matthews , R . T . et al . Aggrecan glycoforms contribute to the molecular heterogeneity of perineuronal nets . J . Neurosci . 22 , 7536 – 7547 ( 2002 ) . 144 . Steindler , D . A . Glial boundaries in the developing nervous system . Ann . Rev . Neurosci . 16 , 445 – 470 ( 1993 ) 145 . Celio , M . R . , Spreafico , R . , De Biasi , S . & Vitellaro - Zuccarello , L . Perineuronal nets : past and present . Trends Neurosci . 21 , 510 – 515 ( 1998 ) . 146 . Brückner , G . , Bringmann , A . , Koppe , G . , Härtig , W . & Brauer , K . In vivo and in vitro labeling of perineuronal nets in rat brain . Brain Res . 720 , 84 – 92 ( 1996 ) . 147 . Köppe , G . , Brückner , G . , Brauer , K . , Härtig , W . & Bigl , V . Developmental patterns of proteoglycan - containing extracellular matrix in perineuronal nets and neuropil of the postnatal rat brain . Cell Tissue Res . 288 , 33 – 41 ( 1997 ) . 148 . Lander , C . , Kind , P . , Maleski , M . & Hockfield , S . A family of activity - dependent neuronal cell - surface chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans in cat visual cortex . J . Neurosci . 17 , 1928 – 1939 ( 1997 ) . An important paper that first demonstrated the effect of environmental experience during maturation of the proteoglycan component of the perineuronal net . The paper led to the subsequent testing of this hypothesis through the use of chondroitinase to restore synaptic plasticity . 149 . Pizzorusso , T . et al . Reactivation of ocular dominance plasticity in the adult visual cortex . Science 298 , 1248 – 1251 ( 2002 ) . An important paper showing that CSPGs in the perineuronal net are a crucial part of the mechanism that controls synaptic plasticity in the adult CNS . Acknowledgements We would like to thank D . I . Robbins for his comments on the man - uscript . Work in our laboratory is supported by a NINDS / NIH grant , The Daniel Heumann Fund and The Christopher Reeve Paralysis Foundation . Competing interests statement The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests . Online links DATABASES The following terms in this article are linked online to : LocusLink : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / LocusLink / ephrin - B2 | EPHB2 | FGF2 | GFAP | IFNg | neuropilin 1 | NGF | NT3 | SEMA3 | TGF β 1 | TGF β 2 | Access to this interactive links box is free online . © 200 4 Nature PublishingGroup