Individual Comparisons by Ranking Methods Author ( s ) : Frank Wilcoxon Source : Biometrics Bulletin , Vol . 1 , No . 6 ( Dec . , 1945 ) , pp . 80 - 83 Published by : International Biometric Society Stable URL : http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 3001968 . Accessed : 17 / 01 / 2011 14 : 10 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use , available at . http : / / www . jstor . org / page / info / about / policies / terms . jsp . JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use provides , in part , that unless you have obtained prior permission , you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles , and you may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal , non - commercial use . Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work . Publisher contact information may be obtained at . http : / / www . jstor . org / action / showPublisher ? publisherCode = ibs . . Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed page of such transmission . JSTOR is a not - for - profit service that helps scholars , researchers , and students discover , use , and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive . We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship . For more information about JSTOR , please contact support @ jstor . org . International Biometric Society is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize , preserve and extend access to Biometrics Bulletin . http : / / www . jstor . org INDIVIDUAL COMPARISONS BY RANKING METHODS Frank Wilcoxon American Cyanamid Co . The comparison of two treatments generally falls into one of the following two categories : ( a ) we may have a number of replications for each of the two treatments , which are unpaired , or ( b ) we may have a number of paired com ? parisons leading to a series of differences , some of which may be positive and some negative . The appropriate methods for testing the sig ? nificance of the differences of the means in these two cases are described in most of the textbooks on statistical methods . The object of the present paper is to indi - cate the possibility of using ranking methods , that is , methods in which scores 1 , 2 , 3 , . . . n are substituted for the actual numerical data , in order to obtain a rapid approximate idea of the significance of the differences in experiments of this kind . Unpaired Experiments . The following table gives the results of fly spray tests on two prep - arations in terms of percentage mortality . Eight replications were run on each prepara ? tion . Total 542 91 494 45 Rank numbers have been assigned to the re ? sults in order of magnitude . Where the mor ? tality is the same in two or more tests , those tests are assigned the mean rank value . The sum of the ranks for B is 45 while for A the sum is 91 . Reference to Table I shows that the probability of a total as low as 45 or lower , lies between 0 . 0104 and 0 . 021 . The analysis of variance applied to these results gives an F value of 7 . 72 , while 4 . 60 and 8 . 86 correspond to probabilities of 0 . 05 and 0 . 01 respectively . Paired Comparisons . An example of this type of experiment is given by Fisher ( 2 , sec ? tion 17 ) . The experimental figures were the differences in height between cross - and self - fertilized corn plants of the same pair . There were 15 such differences as follows : 6 , 8 , 14 , 16 , 23 , 24 , 28 , 29 , 41 , ? 48 , 49 , 56 , 60 , ? 67 , 75 . If we substitute rank numbers for these differ ? ences , we arrive at the series 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , ? 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , ? 14 , 15 . The sum of the nagative rank numbers is ? 24 . Table II shows that the probability of a sum of 24 or less is between 0 . 019 and 0 . 054 for 15 pairs . Fisher gives 0 . 0497 for the probability in this experi ? ment by the t test The following data were obtained in a seed treatment experiment on wheat . The data are taken from a randomized block experiment with eight replications of treatments A and B . The figures in columns two and three represent the stand of wheat The fourth column gives the differences and the fifth column the corresponding rank numbers . The sum of the negative rank numbers is ? 3 . Table II shows that the total 3 indicates a prob ? ability between 0 . 024 and 0 . 055 that these treat ? ments do not differ . Analysis of variance leads to a least significant difference of 14 . 2 between the means of two treatments for 19 : 1 odds , while the difference between the means of A and B was 17 . 9 . Thus it appears that with only 8 pairs this method is capable of giving quite accurate information about the significance of differences of the means . Discussion . The limitations and advantages of ranking methods have been discussed by Fried - 80 man ( 3 ) , who has described a method for test - ing whether the means of several groups differ significantly by calculating a statistic g2r from the rank totals . When there are only two groups to be compared , Friedman ' s method is equivalent to the binomial test of significance based on the number of positive and negative differences in a series of paired comparisons . Such a test has been shown to have an effi ? ciency of 63 percent ( 1 ) . The present method for comparing the means of two groups utilizes information about the magnitude of the differ ? ences as well as the signs , and hence should have higher efficiency , but its value is not known to me . The method of assigning rank numbers in the unpaired experiments requires little expla - nation . If there are eight replicates in each group , rank numbers 1 to 16 are assigned to the experimental results in order of magnitude and where tied values exist the mean rank value is used . TABLE I For Determining the Significance of Differences in Unpaired Experiments No . of replicates Smaller rank Probability In the case of the paired comparisons , rank numbers are assigned to the differences in order of magnitude neglecting signs , and then those rank numbers which correspond to negative differences receive a negative sign . This is necessary in order that negative differences shall be represented by negative rank numbers , and also in order that the magnitude of the rank assigned shall correspond fairly well with the magnitude of the difference . It will be re - called that in working with paired differences , the null hypothesis is that we are dealing with a sample of positive and negative differences normally distributed about zero . The method of calculating the probability of occurrence of any given rank total requires some explanation . In the case of the unpaired experiments , with rank numbers 1 to 2q , the possible totals begin with the sum of the series 1 to q , that is , q ( p + l ) / 2 ; and continue by steps of one up to the highest value possible , q ( 3q + l ) / 2 . The first two and the last two of these totals can be obtained in only one way , but intermediate totals can be obtained in more than one way , and the number of ways in which each total can arise is given by the number of g - part partitions of T , the total in question , no part being repeated , and no part exceeding 2q . These partitions are equinumerous with another set of partitions , namely the partitions of r , where r is the serial number of T in the pos ? sible series of totals beginning with 0 , 1 , 2 , . . . r , and the number of parts of r , as well as the part magnitude , does not exceed q . The latter partitions can easily be enumerated from a table of partitions such as that given by Whitworth ( 5 ) , and hence serve to enumerate the former . A numerical example may be given by way of illustration . Suppose we have 5 re ? plications of measurements of two quantities , and rank numbers 1 to 10 are to be assigned to the data . The lowest possible rank total is 15 . In how many ways can a total of 20 be ob ? tained ? In other words , how many unequal 5 - part partitions of 20 are there , having no part greater than 10 ? Here 20 is the sixth in the possible series of totals ; therefore r = 5 and the number of partitions required is equal to the total number of partitions of 5 . The one to one correspondence is shown below : Unequal 5 - part partitions Partitions of 20 of 5 1 - 2 - 3 - 4 - 10 5 1 - 2 - 3 - 5 - 9 14 1 - 2 - 3 - 6 - 8 2 - 3 1 - 2 - 4 - 5 - 8 1 - 1 - 3 1 - 2 - 4 ^ - 7 1 - 2 - 2 1 - 3 - 4 - 5 - 7 1 - 1 - 1 - 2 2 - 3 - 4 - 5 - 6 1 - 1 . 1 - 1 - 1 81 By taking advantage of this correspondence , the number of ways in which each total can be obtained may be calculated , and hence the prob ? ability of occurrence of any particular total or a lesser one . The following formula gives the probability of occurence of any total or a lesser total by chance under the assumption that the group means are drawn from the same population : r is the serial number of the total under con - sideration in the series of possible totals 0 , 1 , 2 , . . . , r , q is the number of paired differences . In this way probability tables may be readily M1 + S % n } - T [ ( ' - < - ? + i ) n ^ ] } / m [ nj represents the number of i - part partitions of * ' , r is the serial number of possible rank totals , 0 , 1 , 2 , ? ? ? r . q is the number of replicates , and n is an integer representing the serial number of the term in the series . In the case of the paired experiments , it is necessary to deal with the sum of rank numbers of one sign only , + or ? , whichever is less , since with a given number of differences the rank total is determined when the sum of + or ? ranks is specified . The lowest possible total for negative ranks is zero , which can happen in only one way , namely , when all the rank numb ? ers are positive . The next possible total is ? 1 , which also can happen in only one way , that is , when rank one receives a negative sign . As the total of negative ranks increases , there are more and more ways in which a given total can be formed . These ways for any totals such as ? r , are given by the total number of unequal par - titions of r . If r is 5 , for example , such parti . tions , are 5 , 1 - 4 , 2 - 3 . These partitions may be enumerated , in case they are not immediately apparent , by the aid of another relation among partitions , which may be stated as follows : The number of unequal i - part partitions of r , with no part greater than i , is equal to the number of j - part partitions of r ? ( 3 Y parts equal or unequal , and no part greater than i - j + 1 ( 4 ) . For example , if r equals 10 , / equals 3 , and i equals 7 , we have the correspondence shown below : Unequal 3 - part par ? titions of 10 1 - 2 - 7 1 - 3 - 6 1 - 4 - 5 2 - 3 - 5 3 - part partitions of 10 ? 3 , or 7 , no part greater than 5 1 - 1 - 5 1 - 24 1 - 3 - 3 2 - 2 - 3 The formula for the probability of any given total r or a lesser total is : TABLEn For Determining the Significance of Differences in Paired Experiments Number of Paired Sum of rank Probability Comparisons numbers , + of this total or ? , which - or less ever is less 82 prepared for the 1 percent level or 5 percent level of significance or any other level desired . Literature Cited 1 . Cochran , W . G . , The efficiencies of the binomial series tests of significance of a mean and of a correlation coefficient . Jour . Roy . Stat . Soc , 100 : 69 - 73 , 1937 . 2 . Fisher , R . A . The design of experiments . Third ed . , Oliver & Boyd , Ltd . , London , 1942 . 3 . Friedman , Milton . The use ranks to avoid the assumption of normality . Jour . Amer . Stat . Assn . 32 : 675 - 701 . 1937 . 4 . MacMahon , P . A . Combinatory analysis , Vol . II , Cambridge University Press 1916 . 5 . Whitworth , W . A . Choice and chance , G . E . Stechert & Co . , New York , 1942 . TEACHING AND RESEARCH AT THE STATISTICAL LABORATORY , UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA The Statistical Laboratory of the University of California , Berkeley , was established in 1939 as an agency of the Department of Mathe ? matics . The functions of the Laboratory in ? clude its own research , help in the research carried on in other institutions , and a cycle of courses and of exercises for students . The outbreak of the war soon after the establishment of the Statistical Laboratory in - fluenced the direction of its research to a con ? siderable extent . War problems were studied unomcially first and then under a contract with the National Defense Research Committee . These activities trained a considerable number of persons who were later absorbed by the Services . Also , the Laboratory acquired an efficient set of computing machines and other equipment . In the future , the Laboratory ' s own research will be concerned with developing statistical techniques on one hand and with analyses of applied problems on the other . Cooperation with other institutions is based on the principle of free choice and , therefore , care is taken to avoid anything suggesting a tendency to centralize statistical research in the Laboratory of the Department of Math ? ematics to the exclusion or the restraint of such research in other Departments of the Univer ? sity . The Statistical Laboratory has a hand in pieces of research for which the experimenter requests statistical help . The help offered consists primarily of advice . However , in cases where the numerical treatment of the problem is complex , computations are per ? formed in the Laboratory . Because of the voluntary basis of cooperation , contacts with institutions of experimental re ? search are not systematic . The closest and most fruitful contacts thus far have been with the California Forest and Range Experiment Station located on the Berkeley Campus . Per - haps unexpectedly , in addition to practical results , these contacts originated a purely theoretical paper in the Annals of Mathemat ? ical Statistics . Other theoretical papers are expected because it appears that forest and range experimentation involves specific and dif - ficult problems which require new statistical methods . Also , in contact with the Department of Entomology , some very interesting prob ? lems were found . The work done on them is also reflected in some publications . The teaching in the Statistical Laboratory is geared to train research workers and teachers of statistics . The cycle of courses and of laboratory work now offered is essentially that planned in 1939 , but some changes are under consideration . Both the original set - up and the reforms considered are based on the fol ? lowing premises . The first and generally admitted premise is that a university teacher must be a research worker , that is to say , must be effectively cap ? able of inventive work . As applied to sta ? tistics such inventive work may be of two kinds . First , inventiveness may express itself in developing new sections of the mathematical theory of statistics . In the present state of our science this requires not only the knowledge of the existing theory of statistics but also a con ? siderable mastery of the theory of functions and other branches of mathematics . Next , the inventiveness may concern the techniques in statistical design of experiments or of obser ? vation in relation to the already existing sta ? tistical tools . Here the success of the research depends on a thorough knowledge of the tools and also of the particular domain in which they have to be used . It is obvious that proficiency in the first of these items is especially desirable for a teacher 83