Sooner or Later ? – Immediate Feedback as a Source of Inspiration in Electronic Brainstorming * Veronika Gamper Technische Universität Munich Germany gamper @ cdtm . de Andreas Butz University of Munich ( LMU ) Germany butz @ ifi . lmu . de Klaus Diepold Technische Universität Munich Germany kldi @ tum . de ABSTRACT Idea generation platforms are increasingly striving to become truly collaborative . Prior research suggests that people are inspired when being exposed to ideas of others . While most platforms defer judgment and separate it from the idea generation phase , we hypothesized that asking participants to rate ideas in the idea generation phase , the increased exposure to other people’s ideas would serve as a source of inspiration and motivation and would therefore be preferred to a separate feedback phase . In an explorative study with 26 participants we found that preference on immediate versus deferred judgment of ideas very much diverged . The results of our study suggest that participants that feel already motivated and able are distracted by the integration of feedback , while to others it is highly beneficial in terms of facilitating their idea generation and motivating them further . 1 CCS CONCEPTS KEYWORDS H . 5 . 3 Group and Organization interfaces : Computer - supported cooperative work ACM Reference format : V . Gamper , A . Butz , and K . Diepold . 2017 . Sooner or Later ? Immediate Feedback as a Source of Inspiration in Electronic Brainstorming . In Proceedings of the 29th Australian Conference on Human - Computer Interaction , Brisbane , QLD , Australia , November 2017 ( OzCHI 2017 ) , 9 pages . https : / / www . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3152771 . 3152791 Produces the permission block , and copyright information 1It is a datatype . Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to distribute to lists , requires specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . OzCHI’17 , November 28 - December 1 2017 , Brisbane , QLD , Australia © 2017 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication right licensed to ACM . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5379 - 3 / 17 / 11 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / www . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3152771 . 3152791 1 INTRODUCTION In today’s dynamic economic environment , companies strive to be leading innovators in order to remain competitive [ 29 ] . They try to leverage internal knowledge and ideas and also reach out to external idea sources [ 6 ] . To capture the ideas of employees , both company - specific online platforms as well as third party solutions are being employed , and large companies , such as Audi , BMW and Siemens are developing their own ideation platforms to leverage ideas of their employees . These platforms are striving to be increasingly collaborative . Research shows that people benefit from the exposure to other people’s ideas and that the “lone inventor” is a myth [ 26 ] . Exposure to example ideas can inspire people to generate own ideas [ 12 , 15 , 11 ] . The timing of the exposure to example ideas has an impact on participants’ performance and should therefore be carefully examined [ 26 ] . Ideation platforms commonly follow the rules of traditional ( in - person ) brainstorming , the well - known creativity technique introduced by Osborn [ 21 ] . In a traditional brainstorming session , group members meet in person and speak out their ideas , following four rules proposed by Osborn : ( 1 ) Criticism is ruled out , ( 2 ) “free - wheeling” is welcomed , ( 3 ) quantity is wanted , ( 4 ) combination and improvement are sought . The same Figure 1 : Resulting proposition : People who feel motivated and able prefer deferred feedback , while the feedback mechanism serves as facilitator and / or motivator to others . OzCHI 2017 , Nov 28 - Dec 1 , Brisbane , Australia Human - Nature Long Papers 182 • Human - centered computing ~ Computer supported cooperative work • Human - centered computing ~ Collaborative interaction rules are also applied to general idea generation , the rule not to criticize often being referred to as the rule to “defer judgment” [ 21 , 22 ] . Rating on ideation platforms is mostly deferred ( e . g . [ 20 ] ) or limited to up - and downvoting or “following” ideas . We hypothesized that by preponing feedback to the idea generation phase , participants would be forcedly exposed to other people’s ideas , which in turn would inspire them to generate more and higher quality ideas . At the same time , they would be taking over the otherwise tedious task of rating ideas ( for the final evaluation or for a pre - selection for a subsequent rating by experts ) . When rating other ideas , we hypothesized they would reflect about the standards of creative output . Being able to reflect about other ideas , thereby identifying success factors or shortcomings , we believed that an immediate feedback mechanism would inspire and motivate them in their ideation . We let participants ideate in two conditions , one with immediate and one with delayed feedback , and opinions were highly divided : While approximately half of the participants ( the ones with less motivation and ability regarding the task ) preferred immediate feedback , the other half ( the higher motivated and able ) preferred delaying the feedback phase . With this paper , we make the following contribution :  We conducted an experiment to study the benefits of an immediate feedback mechanism as opposed to a separate , deferred feedback phase in online collaborative ideation . We analyzed preferences , reasons stated and connected these with performance in the two conditions as well as participants’ ( self - assessed ) ability and motivation .  Our study supports our hypothesis that immediate feedback can be preferable , but it also suggests that this is only the case for some participants .  Based on participants’ self - assessed motivation and ability , our proposition is that people that feel able and motivated prefer a separate feedback phase , as they do not want to be distracted , while others prefer immediate feedback as they benefit from inspiration and motivation ( see Fig . 1 ) . Our results can influence the design of collaborative idea generation platforms . One can , for example , purposefully suggest less motivated or less able participants to rate and thereby expose themselves to other people’s ideas , while allowing participants that are already motivated and able to concentrate during ideation , asking them to rate ideas later . 2 PRIOR WORK As organizations now operate or form strategic alliances across the globe , virtual teamwork becomes increasingly important [ 19 ] . Hence , electronic brainstorming is a promising alternative to brainstorming in real meetings . Empirical research has furthermore pointed out several problems of face - to - face brainstorming , such as production blocking [ 9 ] , evaluation apprehension [ 3 ] and social loafing [ 13 ] . In order to counteract these issues , electronic brainstorming has been proposed [ 8 ] . Electronic brainstorming systems are a subset of group support systems , in that they provide special purpose tools to support the exchange of ideas and comments in brainstorming sessions . Group support systems in turn are computer technology for group members to communicate by exchanging typed messages instead of or in addition to speaking [ 8 ] . The rule of “no criticism” or “deferred judgment” has been subject to discussion . While studies have found that participants who expected external evaluation were less creative [ 1 ] , other research found that the instruction to debate and criticize may even outperform a setting with the instruction not to criticize [ 16 ] . Zhou [ 29 ] examined feedback in an organizational environment and finds that feedback can even promote creativity : a ) Feedback can boost people’s intrinsic motivation . b ) Feedback can affect the mood state of a person . c ) Feedback can clarify the standards of creative output , and d ) it can help the recipient acquire creativity - relevant skills and strategies . The main reason behind the “defer feedback” rule is to counteract fear of evaluation . Cooper et al . [ 7 ] found that even non - anonymous electronic brainstorming resulted in more ideas than face - to - face brainstorming and participants reported less evaluation apprehension . Hence , we hypothesized that giving and receiving ratings in software - based ideation has less negative connotations than in face - to - face brainstorming . With regards to the effect of exposure to example ideas , prior work found both positive and negative effects , with timing playing an important role . Early exposure to example ideas has been suggested to improve the creativity of ideas [ 14 ] . The SIAM theory ( Search for Ideas in Associative Memory ) states that , depending on when example ideas are shown , both positive and negative effects can occur [ 17 , 18 ] . On the one hand , participants may get inspired [ 12 , 15 , 11 ] , on the other hand , participants may experience “functional fixedness” or “fixation” by the examples they read ideas of others , without even being aware of it [ 23 ] . Prior research on the best timing for example ideas suggests that people benefit from examples when they run out of ideas [ 26 ] . Recent work has found that expert facilitation , providing inspiration extracted from incoming ideas , resulted in more creative and a higher number of ideas [ 4 , 5 ] . We believe that even without expert facilitation , instead of giving mere up - or downvotes , rating and hence reflecting on the evaluation criteria while still in ideation phase and thereby extracting elements , may inspire participants in their own ideation . In this paper , we investigate the users’ acceptance of rating ideas during the idea generation phase in an electronic brainstorming system . We believe that while rating ideas during idea generation in a face - to - face brainstorming session may be detrimental , it could be a motivating and facilitating factor in an electronic brainstorming session . This contradicts the rule to defer judgment in divergent creative processes [ 21 ] , but supports findings that feedback and exposure to other ideas can have a positive impact on motivation and output [ 29 , 16 , 12 , 15 , 11 ] . The hypothesis of our investigation was that users would prefer immediate ratings over a separate rating phase as they would find the immediate feedback mechanism inspiring and motivating . Our exploratory study focuses on users’ satisfaction with delayed or immediate rating of ideas and on benefits or drawbacks of feedback throughout an ideation session . Long Papers OzCHI 2017 , Nov 28 - Dec 1 , Brisbane , Australia Human - Nature 183 3 METHOD We conducted our field experiment in a course on technology management . As part of the curriculum , students had to generate ideas from a startup perspective on how to get access to financial resources and how to satisfy human resource requirements . We followed the following approach : 1 . We developed a software prototype for computer - supported idea generation and evaluation and asked students to generate and evaluate ideas in two conditions : a ) giving and receiving ratings on ideas within the idea generation phase , the so - called “Feedback Now” condition b ) giving and receiving ratings on ideas at the end of idea generation , the so - called “Feedback Later” condition . We consequently evaluated the output generated by participants in the two conditions . 2 . After the sessions , participants were asked to fill a questionnaire . From this , we gathered information on preference and satisfaction with the two conditions as well as qualitative data on their reasons for preference . 3 . To verify our hypothesis resulting from steps 1 ) and 2 ) , in a post - hoc test we sent a questionnaire to participants , asking for participants’ self - assessed motivation and ability . The data , in combination with our findings from the previous steps , led to our proposition . 4 EXPERIMENTAL SETUP We chose a within - subject design in order to examine preference of one condition over the other and reasons behind the preference . The participants all participated in two sessions , with different conditions and different topics ( counterbalanced ) in their first and in their second ideation session ( see Table 1 ) . Table 1 : Counterbalancing conditions “Feedback Now” ( FBN ) and “Feedback Later” ( FBL ) and tasks ( Finance , HR ) . Session Team 1 Team 2 Team 3 Team 4 1 FBN Finance FBN HR FBL Finance FBL HR 2 FBL HR FBL Finance FBN HR FBN Finance 4 . 1 Participants For our study , we recruited 26 students ( ages 20 - 27 ) from an add - on study program on technology management , coming from mixed study backgrounds ( 9 Business Administration , 8 Computer Science , 3 Electrical Engineering , 1 Consumer Affairs , 1 Physics ) . They all had gone through the same recruiting process to be admitted to the program , consisting of a written application and two interviews on technological and business savviness in a case study and a personal interview on their motivation and drive , interest in entrepreneurship and previous work experience . The participants were all enrolled in a seven - week full time course and had already gotten to know each other during a three - day kick - off event . The experiment took place at the beginning of week four and at the beginning of week five , when students had already been working together in teams . Coming from various backgrounds , but knowing each other to a certain extent , our participants reflect the profile of employees in company - internal ideation processes . As part of the course , students had to come up with ideas in the field of entrepreneurship . The ideas generated in the study could serve for their final assignment . They had received input by experts on the topic . Two participants were present only in the first session , two only in the second . Hence each condition had 24 participants ( 4 teams , 6 participants per team ) . We took into account only the 22 participants that attended both , as they could give a valid opinion on which condition they preferred . 4 . 2 The Prototype We developed a software prototype , which lets teams collaborate on idea generation and evaluation . 4 . 2 . 1 Requirements . While there is a variety of tools allowing participants to enter and rate ideas , our specific setting ( immediate rating vs . delayed rating ) and the need to allow for a fast mastery of the software came with additional requirements :  Simple onboarding of participants so they could focus on their tasks ( and not the software )  Real - time feedback / display of user interactions of members of the same ( virtual ) team  Supporting two conditions , namely allowing rating during the idea generation phase versus delayed rating and displaying ratings immediately or at the very end . This corresponds to requirements for creativity support tools as elaborated by Shneiderman et al . [ 25 ] , which include a low threshold to use the software , support of many paths and styles as well as support of collaboration and open interchange . 4 . 2 . 2 Implementation . We built a web - based group ideation software prototype . The implementation is based on a Ruby - on - Rails Backend , Angular and a Redis database . To ensure an easy onboarding of users , we used well - known elements from Google material design . The Redis database allowed for real - time display of newly generated ideas and real - time visualization of ratings . 4 . 2 . 3 Implementing Immediate and Delayed Feedback . While in the “Feedback Now” condition participants could rate others’ ideas as soon as they were entered and see the average ratings of ideas displayed in the feedback matrix at all times , in the “Feedback Later” condition the rating was done in a separate phase after ideation and the feedback matrix was only displayed at the very end . In accordance with the definition of idea quality by [ 10 ] as a combination of originality and feasibility , we chose these as factors for idea evaluation , forming the axes of the feedback matrix ( see Fig . 2 and Fig . 3 ) . OzCHI 2017 , Nov 28 - Dec 1 , Brisbane , Australia Human - Nature Long Papers 184 Figure 2 . Rating Levers on idea , example . Figure 3 . Feedback matrix , example . Figure 4 . Idea generation phase in " Feedback Now " condition : Rating levers are displayed , the results matrix shows current average idea ratings . “Feedback Now” condition : The two rating levers and the results matrix were available all throughout the session , the matrix was updated any time a rating occurred and displayed the average idea ratings by all participants ( see Fig . 4 ) . “Feedback Later” condition : As rating was a separate phase , the rating levers were not shown during ideation ( see Fig . 5 ) , but only in the subsequent phase . Also the results matrix was only displayed in the rating phase . It displayed the own ratings of others’ ideas . At the end of the session , the average ratings of all participants were displayed in the matrix . Hence , feedback was given and received , but only at the end of the session . Figure 5 . Idea generation phase in " Feedback Later " condition : No rating levers or results matrix . Generating an idea consisted of entering a name for the idea and optionally adding a description . Participants could choose to add ideas in two ways : a ) They could select one or more inspirational questions by clicking the respective buttons and then select “save new idea” b ) They could build on ideas ( either their own or those of other participants ) by clicking a “build upon” button and adding their idea . The inspirational questions were the following : What are all the ways so… I get money / I can find out who can give money / I get money fast / I can borrow money / I can show I’m worth it ( for the task on Finance ) . What are all the ways so… I find the people I need / I find people fast / my people are qualified / people don’t leave / I make people learn faster ( for the task on HR ) . Rating of ideas was possible for all ideas except for the participant’s own ideas . Clicking on an information button , they could read the description of the idea . Rating was based on two criteria , originality and feasibility , each to be rated on a scale from 1 to 7 . The rating results were displayed in the feedback matrix . As described before , participants in the “Feedback Now” condition saw rating levers and could hence rate ideas during the ideation phase , and they could see the current idea ratings in the results matrix . Participants in the “Feedback Later” condition were not shown rating levers and feedback matrix during the ideation phase . They could rate in a subsequent phase and subsequently shown the results matrix . Participants could switch between the “My Ideas” and “All Ideas” tabs , where accordingly only the own ideas or all of their team’s ideas were displayed . In both conditions participants could see other people’s ideas . 4 . 3 The Experiment We held sessions with two teams ( 12 participants ) contemporarily . Participants sat interspersed across the room and could not see other participants’ screens . A moderator showed how ideas could be added and rated by means of an example and then presented the tasks . The goal was to generate ideas for a startup , specifically ideas to fulfill a startup’s needs in the field of finance and HR . On finance : “Imagine you are part of a startup team of five people . You are currently looking for Series A funding . You firmly believe in your idea , which is about an app that connects people in the new sports trend “Avalooning” and keeps track of their data . The goal of your ideation session is : To come up with new ideas on all the ways how you would solve the needs mentioned regarding Finance . ” Long Papers OzCHI 2017 , Nov 28 - Dec 1 , Brisbane , Australia Human - Nature 185 On HR : “Imagine you are part of a startup team of five people . You are currently looking for Series A funding . You firmly believe in your idea , which is about an app that connects people in the new sports trend “Avalooning” and keeps track of their data . The goal of your ideation session is : To come up with new ideas on all the ways how you would solve the needs mentioned rega rding HR . ” In the “Feedback Later” condition , we granted 20 minutes for idea generation plus 10 minutes to rate the ideas . In the “Feedback Now” condition we granted 30 minutes for the combined idea generation and rating phase to provide a comparable experience . Participants logged in with a user id , which allowed them to stay anonymous within their group . They were not allowed to talk , as the session was purely online . Depending on the condition , there was a separate or a combined idea generation and rating phase . After the experiment , participants answered a questionnaire on their experience . 5 RESULTS Based on the questionnaire , we evaluated participants’ preferences and found them to be highly divided across all teams . We further analyzed the reasons for preference and found that the feedback mechanism was considered motivating and facilitating by those preferring that condition , while it was considered distracting by the others . We then looked at the output ( number of ideas generated , originality and feasibility ) , which could influence the perception of the session . We report the results in the subsequent sections , starting with an analysis of team output , continuing with an analysis of individuals’ performance overall and subsequently by preference group . As performance data showed high variation , to clearly explain preferences we consequently sent out a post - hoc questionnaire , asking participants about their perceived level of ability and motivation regarding the task . The mapping on a graph and its analysis led to an interesting proposition , which will be presented at the end of this section . 5 . 1 Preferences and Reasons Stated Participants were asked to indicate their preferred condition ( “I preferred the rate later version / the rate now version / none , as I liked both the same” ) . Surprisingly , preference was highly divided among the two conditions , dividing participants into two large preference groups ( see Fig . 6 ) . Participants were also asked to rate their satisfaction with each condition ( ”I liked working with the version where I rated ideas during the idea generation phase ( rate now ) . ” / ”I liked working with the version where I rated ideas in a separate phase ( rate later ) . ” , on a 7 - point Likert - scale , 1 = strongly disagree , 7 = strongly agree ) . We excluded the two participants who stated their knowledge of the creativity rule of deferring feedback as the main and only reason for their preference . Out of the remaining 20 participants , only one was indifferent . 10 participants preferred “Feedback Later” with separate phases for idea generation and idea evaluation as suggested by Osborn [ 21 ] , while 9 preferred “Feedback Now” . Worthy of noting is the fact that participants’ preferences were mixed within each of the four teams . Figure 6 . Number of participants preferring the different conditions , entire group ( left ) vs . individual teams ( right ) . Fig . 7 depicts participants’ answers on liking to work with the two conditions . Satisfaction was overall higher with the FBL than with the FBN condition , with some participants’ satisfaction being quite high and some quite low for both conditions . Figure 7 . Distribution of participants’ ratings on how much they liked working with the two conditions , on a 7 - point Likert scale . Figure 8 . Participants on how much they liked working with the two conditions by preference group . Fig . 8 depicts the data by preference group : For both groups , the preference for a condition over the other was rather strong . Below , we summarize the main line of arguments . 5 . 1 . 1 Arguments of “Feedback - Later” preferrers The main line of argument in favor of separating the two phases ( the “Feedback Later” condition ) was better concentration / not being distracted ( “You could concentrate on your own ideas without getting bias” , “I can concentrate on one thing” , “less chaotic , concentrate more on generating many ideas” , “Gives one OzCHI 2017 , Nov 28 - Dec 1 , Brisbane , Australia Human - Nature Long Papers 186 more time to reflect and ret hink” , “Idea rating is distracting while you generate ideas . You should be completely free from distraction when you generate ideas . ” ) . Three participants referred to liking the structure of having two separate phases or missing it in the other condition , respectively ( “It was a more structured process . And the evaluation did not really deliver value during the idea generation . ” , “I think it makes sense to have a shorter ideation phase and then a dedicated amount of time to rate each idea . ” , “Mixes up the ideation” ) . 5 . 1 . 2 Arguments of “Feedback - Now” preferrers Participants that preferred the “Feedback Now” condition almost all stated that the feedback mechanism supported them by inspiring them , in general and also specifically when they ran out of ideas . Their main line of argument revolved around the feedback process inspiring them to come up with new ideas , by reflecting on existing ideas and building upon them ( “New ideas pop up while rating and get lost if creation is closed” [ authors’ annotation : ‘if creation is closed’ refers to the “Feedback Later” condition ] , “It gives you an idea about how your idea is doing or how any idea is doing and you can build on it accordingly . ” , “…feedback helps to think about new ideas” , “…Rating ideas directly made me think about other ideas , and if I rated them low , I could immediately come up with an alternative that I thought would be better . ” ) . Some participants mentioned running out of ideas and the feedback mechanism consequently motivating them to stay active ( “I like working interactively , so when you were running out of ideas for 5 minutes you could start ranking ideas , and when another idea hit you , you could continue with it . …” , “The generating - phase was much too long in the first version and I ended up doing nothing , after I used up my ideas . ” [ authors’ annotation : ‘the first version’ refers to the “Feedback Later” condition ] ) . Two participants mentioned efficiency ( “You have to read the information thing twice , first if you want to build your ideas on others and later when you vote on them” , “Didn ' t have to read ideas twice - once while generating ideas to see what is already there and then again when rating . ” ) . In sum , the reasons stated suggest that the same feedback mechanism was considered distracting by the FBL preferrers , while it was considered helpful by the FBN preferrers , who mentioned the following main benefits : Inspiration ( by reflecting and building upon other ideas and feedback ) , especially when running out of ideas and motivation to stay engaged on the task . According to the statements , these benefits were not considered relevant or actually considered disturbing by the FBL preferrers . 5 . 2 Analysis of Performance We analyzed performance mainly with regards to its influence on users’ satisfaction . Therefore , we base our performance analysis on the team - internal ratings , i . e . the information participants had access to , which could influence their satisfaction . We report the number of ideas and ratings on originality and feasibility , adding statistical test results where the number of observations was large enough for reliable statistical test results ( i . e . where the number of observations was equal or greater than 30 ) . For smaller samples , we report descriptive statistics and graphical representations of the data . We start with an overview of team performance , then report performance of individuals . 5 . 2 . 1 Performance on a Team - Level , Based on Team - Output As shown in Fig . 9 , two teams generated considerably more ideas in the “Feedback Later” condition . With regards to team - internal idea ratings , team 1 performed better in “Feedback Later” regarding originality ( M = 4 . 03 ) and feasibility ( M = 3 . 80 ) than in the other condition ( M = 3 . 42 , p = . 001 and M = 3 . 15 , p = . 000 , respectively ) . Team 4 performed better regarding feasibility in “Feedback Later” ( M = 4 . 32 ) than in “Feedback Now” ( M = 3 . 83 , p = . 011 ) . Other differences were not significant . Figure 9 . Average number of ideas , by team . As across all teams preferences were highly divided ( Fig . 6 ) , team - level performance by itself did not explain preference . Also the reasons of preference pointed towards decisions based on individual performance , which we hence analyzed . 5 . 2 . 2 Performance of Individual Participants Figure 10 . Comparison of individuals’ performance : Average number of ideas , originality , feasibility . Long Papers OzCHI 2017 , Nov 28 - Dec 1 , Brisbane , Australia Human - Nature 187 On an individual participant basis , we analyzed the scores of the 22 participants that attended both sessions . Although participants on average generated a higher number of ideas in the FBL condition , there was a high standard deviation ( Fig . 10 ) . Originality and feasibility did not differ much , however showing higher variability in the FBN condition . 5 . 2 . 3 Performance of Individual Participants by Preference Group Individual performance by preference group is depicted in Fig . 11 . On average , FBL preferrers created more ideas than FBN preferrers in both conditions , but standard deviation was very high , the high average number of ideas hence attributable to few highly active participants . FBL preferrers’ originality and feasibility showed a considerably higher variability in the FBN condition . This supports some FBL preferrers’ statements that they were distracted by the Feedback mechanism , although some must have benefitted from it with regards to originality and feasibility . FBN preferrers’ feasibility and originality varied less , with slightly lower scores in the FBN condition . Figure 11 . Comparison of preference groups in both conditions : Average no . of ideas , originality , feasibility . As mentioned before , participants’ reasons for preference suggest that the benefit of the feedback mechanism of being a source of inspiration and motivation was not relevant to FBL preferrers . This could be the case if they were more able and motivated at the task , hence they might not need as much motivation or facilitation . Our performance analysis by preference group was inconclusive about this , due to high variations among participants’ performance and number and quality of ideas potentially outweighing each other , while all possibly influencing satisfaction . We then conducted a post - hoc test , to verify whether FBL preferrers’ self - perception of their ability and motivation was higher , as this could explain why they stated a need for concentration ( thus relying mainly on their own ideation , being less open towards inspiration from outside ) and did not report running out of ideas . 5 . 3 Ability , Motivation and Preference Three weeks after the experiment , we sent participants a questionnaire on their motivation , their level of creativity and their knowledge about the topic – in accordance with Amabile’s three components of individuals’ creative insight : Task motivation , creativity - relevant processes and domain - relevant skills [ 2 ] . Additionally , next to motivation , we asked for creativity and / or knowledge as they were the abilities required to generate the desired output in terms of rating criteria : originality ( need for creativity ) and feasibility ( need for knowledge on the topic ) . We posed the following questions : a ) motivation regarding the task : “I am motivated to come up with ideas regarding the finance or hr needs of startups” , b ) creativity ( “I am a creative person” ) and c ) knowledge regarding the task ( “I feel knowledgeable about the field of finance / HR needs of startups” ( topic from their FBN condition ) , each on a 7 - point Likert scale from strongly disagree to strongly agree . We posed them in present tense to allow a general self - assessment of participants . Of the 20 answers we could map 18 , nine for each preference group . One participant did not answer and , as before , we excluded the two participants that had mentioned the rule of deferring feedback as only reason for their preference . We then mapped participants’ answers on a graph ( Fig . 12 ) . Figure 12 . Mapping participants’ ability and motivation with preference . Ability as average ( left ) and maximum ( right ) of creativity and knowledge . For clarity , we shifted overlapping dots by up to 0 . 1 units . We chose ability and motivation for the axes , as they correspond to the two main benefits of the Feedback mechanisms mentioned , namely inspiration ( thus impacting ability ) and motivation . We took the motivation score from the questionnaire for the y - axis ( see Fig . 12 ) . For the x - axis of the model ( “ability” ) , we show two versions ( thus two graphs ) : a ) left graph : We took the average of creativity and knowledge scores as the deciding factors for the ability to generate ideas of the desired quality ( original and feasible ) , hence for the ability to do well in the task . b ) right graph : The right graph represents the assumption that to be able to do the task at all , creativity or knowledge about the topic alone were sufficient ( although possessing both would result in higher scores ) . In fact , one could also merely come up with creative ideas or ideas based on factual knowledge . For the ability score in the right graph we therefore took the maximum of creativity and knowledge score . As the results could serve participants for their course deliverables , we assume most participants wanted to perform well both on originality and feasibility ( left graph ) , however we report the OzCHI 2017 , Nov 28 - Dec 1 , Brisbane , Australia Human - Nature Long Papers 188 right graph for the assumption that the overall quality of ideas was less relevant . As the graphs in Fig . 12 depict , the combination of high motivation and high ability highly coincided with preference of “Feedback Later” . Participants who felt less motivated and / or able preferred the “Feedback Now” condition . 6 SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION While electronic brainstorming becomes increasingly important , often the rules of traditional brainstorming are followed [ 21 ] , establishing separate phases for ideation and evaluation . We hypothesized that a feedback mechanism within the idea generation phase would be preferred over a separate feedback phase . Prior work suggests that exposure to others’ ideas inspires participants [ 12 , 15 , 11 ] , improving output and motivation [ 29 , 16 ] . We believe that participants could be enticed to reflect about the desired standard of output . However , this contradicts the rule of deferring judgment [ 21 , 22 ] , in addition to possible detrimental effects , such as fixation of the problem solution space or distraction from the task [ 23 , 24 ] . To investigate whether a feedback mechanism during idea generation may make sense , we conducted a field experiment in which users could experience ideation sessions with and without an immediate rating of ideas . We looked into users’ preference and their arguments . Preferences divided the group into two large fractions , one preferring immediate feedback , the other preferring deferred feedback , with notable differences in satisfaction between the preferred and the less preferred condition . While those in favor of mixed phases considered the rating mechanism a source of inspiration and motivation , especially when they ran out of ideas , the others were distracted by it . A mapping of perceived ability and motivation to preference suggests that people who preferred the “Feedback Later” condition considered themselves motivated and able regarding the task , while those who preferred “Feedback Now” regarded themselves as less able and less motivated . Our analyses suggest that the feedback mechanism can be facilitating and motivating , but not for everyone . It leads to our proposition that people that feel already motivated and able do not need to read and rate other people’s ideas for inspiration , but that they even find it distracting . Fig . 1 summarizes the resulting proposition . In line with prior work pointing out the importance of when examples are delivered to participants [ 26 , 17 , 18 , 24 , 23 ] , our study adds the importance of segmenting participants according to their ( self - assessed ) motivation and ability when including an immediate feedback mechanism . Prior research suggests that examples should be presented when the user is ready to make use of them , and that it is mostly beneficial when people run out of ideas , as then examples can act as external stimuli [ 26 ] . Our research supports this : Support when running out of ideas was a major reason for preferring immediate feedback . It goes in line participants deeming themselves less motivated and / or less able preferring the immediate feedback mechanism . We support the suggestion that participants should be able to decide for themselves when to expose themselves to other examples ( see “on - demand” condition in Siangliulue [ 26 ] ) and possibly be “nudged” to do so whenever the system detects that they run out of ideas , in a subtle way ( i . e . in a way that does not interrupt them in their ideation “flow” ) . This is furthermore in line with the request for the development of creativity support systems that “support many paths and styles” by Shneiderman et al . [ 25 ] . 7 LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK In this study , we focused on motivation for users and their preference for immediate versus deferred rating of ideas . The feedback mechanism served a double purpose : It made participants read and think about others’ ideas , thereby inspiring them , and it created the actual feedback . If the focus was on an objective measure of idea quality , external ratings would be required . Our participants were students , selected for their above average interest in entrepreneurship and innovation , hence some findings may not be generalizable . Our post - hoc questionnaire was sent out three weeks after the experiment . Our questions did not require recalling the exact condition at the time of the experiment , but rather ask for the person’s general motivation for the task , their self - assessed level of creativity and their knowledge of the topic , which we believe to have been quite stable between the two points in time . However , answers on the day of experiment might have differed . Due to a limited number of participants and the strong exploratory focus , we reported data mainly via descriptive statistics and graphical representations . Our findings however can point towards interesting avenues for future work . We propose to conduct a larger study in order to verify our proposition that immediate feedback can have a very different impact which may depend on the users’ perceived ability and motivation . This could influence the way idea generation is conducted in the future , e . g . determining the type and timing of feedback in ideation processes . 8 CONCLUSION In our study , we conducted an experiment to explore acceptance of an immediate feedback mechanism in idea generation , comparing it to idea generation with a separate rating phase and found highly diverging preferences . From our findings , we conclude that there is not one condition that largely outperforms the other in terms of user acceptance , but that both immediate and deferred ratings have benefits , and this may depend on the users’ perceived ability and motivation for the task . There are several recommendations for practitioners that could be derived : First of all , a feedback mechanism within the idea generation phase can work better for some individuals than for others . Individuals that already feel motivated and able may require undisturbed phases when they can concentrate and work by themselves , while others may be stimulated by being exposed to other people’s ideas . For the latter , a feedback mechanism such as the one in this study , and the well - timed encouragement to rate other people’s ideas , may be highly beneficial . Long Papers OzCHI 2017 , Nov 28 - Dec 1 , Brisbane , Australia Human - Nature 189 8 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This research was supported by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research ( BMBF ) , within the project „Software Campus ( TU München ) “ , grant identifier 01IS12056 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Teresa M . Amabile . 1979 . Effects of external evaluation on artistic creativity . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 37 , 2 : 221 - 233 . [ 2 ] Teresa M . Amabile . 1995 . Creativity in Context : Update to “The Social Psychology of Creativity” . Westview press . [ 3 ] L . Mabel Camacho and Paul B . Paulus . 1995 . The role of social anxiousness in group brainstorming . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 68 , 6 : 1071 – 1080 . [ 4 ] Joel Chan , Steven Dang , and Steven P . Dow . 2016 . IdeaGens : Enabling Expert Facilitation of Crowd Brainstorming . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing Companion ( CSCW 2016 ) , 13 - 16 . [ 5 ] Joel Chan , Steven Dang , and Steven P . Dow . 2016 . Improving Crowd Innovation with Expert Facilitation . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing Companion ( CSCW 2016 ) , 1223 - 1235 . [ 6 ] Henry W . Chesbrough , . 2006 . Open innovation : The new imperative for creating and profiting from technology . Harvard Business Press . [ 7 ] William H . Cooper , R . Brent Gallupe , Sandra Pollard , Jana Cadsby . 1998 . Some liberating effects of anonymous electronic brainstorming . Small Group Research 29 , 2 : 147 - 178 . [ 8 ] Alan R . Dennis and Mike L . Williams . 2003 . Electronic Brainstorming . In Group creativity : Innovation through collaboration , Paul B . Paulus and Bernard A . Nijstad ( eds . ) . Oxford University Press , New York , 160 - 178 . [ 9 ] Michael Diehl and Wolfgang Stroebe . 1987 . Productivity loss in brainstorming groups : Toward the solution of a riddle . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 53 , 3 : 497 – 509 . [ 10 ] Michael Diehl and Wolfgang Stroebe . 1991 . Productivity loss in idea - generating groups : Tracking down the blocking effect . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 61 , 3 : 392 – 403 . [ 11 ] Steven Dow , Julie Fortuna , Beth Altringer , Daniel L . Schwartz , and Scott R . Klemmer . 2011 . Prototyping dynamics : Sharing multiple designs improves exploration , group rapport , and results . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’11 ) , 2807 - 2816 . [ 12 ] Scarlett R . Herring , Chia - Chen Chang , Jesse Krantzler , and Brian P . Bailey . 2009 . Getting inspired ! : understanding how and why examples are used in creative design practice . In CHI ’09 : Proceedings of the 27 th international conference on Human factors in Computing systems ( CHI 2009 ) , 87 - 96 . [ 13 ] Steven J . Karau and Kipling D . Williams . 1993 . Social loafing : A meta - analytic review and theoretical integration . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 65 , 4 : 681 – 706 . [ 14 ] Chinmay Kulkarni , Steven P . Dow , and Scott R . Klemmer . 2013 . Early and repeated exposure to examples improves creative work . In Design Thinking Research . Springer , 49 – 62 . [ 15 ] Brian Lee , Savil Srivastava , Ranjitha Kumar , Ronen Brafman , and Scott R . Klemmer . 2010 . Designing with Interactive Example Galleries . In Proceedings of the SIGGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’10 ) , 2257 - 2266 . [ 16 ] Charlan J . Nemeth . 2004 . The liberating role of conflict in group creativity : A study in two countries . European Journal of Social Psychology 34 : 365 - 374 . [ 17 ] Bernard A . Nijstad , Wolfgang Stroebe , and Lodewijkx , Hein F . M . Lodewijkx . 2002 . Cognitive stimulation and interference in groups : Exposure effects in an idea generation task . In Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 38 , 6 : 535 – 544 . [ 18 ] Bernard A . Nijstad , and Wolfgang Stroebe . 2006 . How the group affects the mind : A cognitive model of idea generation in groups . In Personality and Social Psychology Review 10 , 3 : 186 – 213 . [ 19 ] Jay F . Nunamaker , Bruce A . Reinig , Robert O . Briggs . 2009 . Principles for effective virtual teamwork . Communications of the ACM 52 , 4 : 113 - 117 . [ 20 ] OpenIDEO . 2017 . How it works . Retrieved August 22 , 2017 from https : / / challenges . openideo . com / content / how - it - works [ 21 ] Alex F . Osborn . 1953 . Applied Imagination : principles and procedures of creative problem solving . Charles Scribner’s Sons . [ 22 ] Sidney J . Parnes . 1977 . Guiding Creative Action . The Gifted Child Quarterly 21 , 4 : 460 - 476 . [ 23 ] Andrea L . Patalano , and Colleen M . Seifert . 1994 . Memory for impasses during problem solving . In Memory & Cognition 22 , 2 : 234 – 242 . [ 24 ] Colleen M . Seifert , David . E . Meyer , Natalie Davidson , Andrea L . Patalano , and Ilan Yaniv . 1994 . Demystification of cognitive insight : Opportunistic assimilation and the prepared - mind hypothesis . In The Nature of Insight , Robert J . Sternberg , and Janet E . Davidson ( eds . ) . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 124 : 65 – 124 . [ 25 ] Ben Shneiderman , Gerhard Fischer , Mary Czerwinski , Mitch Resnick , Brad Myers , Linda Candy , Ernest Edmonds , Mike Eisenberg , Elisa Giaccardi , Tom Hewett , Pamela Jennings , Bill Kules , Kumiyo Najakoji , Jay Nunamaker , Randy Pausch , Ted Selker , Elisabeth Sylvan , and Michael Terry . 2006 . Creativity Support Tools : Report From a U . S . National Science Foundation Sponsored Workshop . In International Journal of Human - Computer Interaction 20 , 2 , 61 – 77 . [ 26 ] Pao Siangliulue , Joel Chan , Krzysztof Z . Gajos , and Steven P . Dow . 2015 . Providing timely examples improves the quantity and quality of generated ideas . In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and Cognition ( C & C 2015 ) , 83 - 92 . [ 27 ] Jasjit Singh , and Lee Fleming . 2010 . Lone inventors as sources of breakthroughs : Myth or reality ? Management Science 56 , 1 : 41 - 56 . [ 28 ] Eric Von Hippel . 2007 . The sources of innovation . Gabler . [ 29 ] Jing Zhou . 2007 . Promoting Creativity through Feedback . In Handbook of organizational creativity . Jing Zhou and Christina E . Shalley ( eds . ) . Taylor and Francis , 125 - 142 . OzCHI 2017 , Nov 28 - Dec 1 , Brisbane , Australia Human - Nature Long Papers 190