Acta Mechanica Sinica ( 2019 ) 35 ( 3 ) : 691 – 701 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10409 - 019 - 00839 - 0 RESEARCH PAPER Numerical study of clathrin - mediated endocytosis of nanoparticles by cells under tension Xinyue Liu 1 · Hongwei Yang 2 · Yunqiao Liu 1 · Xiaobo Gong 1 · Huaxiong Huang 3 Received : 3 September 2018 / Revised : 5 November 2018 / Accepted : 12 November 2018 / Published online : 11 March 2019 © The Chinese Society of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics and Springer - Verlag GmbH Germany , part of Springer Nature 2019 Abstract In this study , a three - dimensional mathematical model was used to study the contribution of clathrins during the process of cellular uptake of spherical nanoparticles under different membrane tensions . The clathrin - coated pit ( CCP ) that forms around the inward budding of the cell membrane was modeled as a vesicle with bending rigidity . An optimization algorithm was proposed for minimizing the total energy of the system , which comprises the deforming nanoparticle , receptor – ligand bonds , cell membrane , and CCP , in which way , the proﬁle of the system is acquired . The results showed that the CCP enable full wrapping of the nanoparticles at various membrane tensions . When the cell membrane tension increases , the total deformation energy also increases , but the ratio of CCP bending to the minimum value of the total energy of the system decreases . The results also showed that the diameter of the endocytic vesicles determined by the competition between the stretching of the cell membrane and conﬁnement of the coated pits are much larger than the nanoparticles , which is quit different as the results in passive endocytosis that is not facilitated by the CCPs . The present results indicate that variations of tension on cell membranes constitutes a biophysical marker for understanding the size distribution of CCPs observed in experiments . The present results also suggest that the early abortion of endocytosis is related to that the receptor – ligand bonds cannot generate adequate force to wrap the nanoparticles into the cell membrane before the clathrins respond to support the endocytic vesicles . Correspondingly , late abortion may relate to the inability of CCPs to conﬁne the nanoparticles until the occurrence of the necking stage of endocytosis . Keywords Endocytosis · Minimum energy method · Membrane tension · Clathrin - coated pit · Receptor – ligand bond 1 Introduction Endocytosis is a process in which cells absorb large molecules , which include hormones , growth factors , trans - ferrin , various antibodies [ 1 – 3 ] , or drugs in the form of nanoparticles coated with ligands , as in the case of cancer therapy [ 4 – 6 ] . The most common mechanism for this type of transport from outside to inside of the cell is the inward budding and formation of vesicles , as in clathrin - mediated B Xiaobo Gong x . gong @ sjtu . edu . cn 1 Key Laboratory of Hydrodynamics ( Ministry of Education ) , Department of Engineering Mechanics , School of Naval Architecture , Ocean and Civil Engineering , Shanghai Jiao Tong University , Shanghai 200240 , China 2 Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics , Fudan University , Shanghai 200433 , China 3 Department of Mathematics and Statistics , York University , Toronto , ON M3J 1P3 , Canada endocytosis . Clathrin is a cytosolic protein that is organized into cage - like coated pits inside the cell membrane to facili - tate the inward budding of the membrane . In recent decades , the structure of clathrin - coated pits ( CCPs ) and their size distributions and lifetimes have been intensively investigated and discussed from biological and biochemical perspectives [ 7 ] . However , quantitative analyses of the contribution of CCPs from the mechanical point of view are still lacking . As is commonly known , the cell membrane resists defor - mation owing to its bending rigidity and membrane tension [ 8 ] . Additionally , it is known that membrane tension dif - fers when cells are attached to substrates with different stiffness [ 9 ] . Therefore , the mechanism by which CCPs affect the endocytosis under different membrane tensions is worth investigating . The work of Boulant et al . [ 10 ] showed that membrane tension affects the actin dependence of the clathrin - coated assembly , and the engagement of actin mediated by light - chain - bound Hip1R is necessary for the membrane to deform into a coated pit in the presence of 123 692 X . Liu , et al . membrane tension owing to osmotic swelling or mechanical stretching . In the study by Tan et al . [ 11 ] , the authors found that cells with a large spreading area had more short - lived CCPs but a higher pit initiation rate . In addition , Wu et al . [ 12 ] reported that membrane tension increased by adjusting the osmolality - inhibitedendocytosisincalyx - typesynapseswith conventional active zones , and in neuroendocrine chromaf - ﬁn cells . A mechanical model that considered the bending , surface area conservation , and coat polymerization in the budding process of a membrane under tension was also pro - posed . The study found that an increase in membrane tension resulted in an increase in the energy barrier that prevented membrane budding . However , the contribution of the coated pits was not addressed in these studies . In recent years , models of endocytosis have been devel - oped in order to understand the mechanism and improve the success rate of nanoparticle uptake in drug delivery systems . In these models , endocytosis is often treated as a passive process such that the energy required for the budding of the membrane during the uptake of nanoparticles is assumed to be related to the receptor – ligand bonds only , and the contri - bution from clathrins is ignored . In these studies , the success or abortion of passive endocytosis is mainly determined by the particle size , stiffness of the membrane , and the energy that the receptor – ligand bonds provide , as discussed in Refs . [ 13 – 15 ] . A recent study by Liu et al . [ 16 ] showed that the spring force from the receptor – ligand bonds is as impor - tant as the energy requirement to guarantee the success of passive endocytosis . Even though these studies on passive endocytosis helped to examine the membrane deformation , receptor – ligand bond formation , and the diffusion of the receptors in facilitating successful endocytosis , the contribu - tion of clathrins as an extra yet important molecular scaffold has not been investigated . Effortshavebeenmaderecentlytomodelthemechanicsof the membrane around coated pits . Dmitrieff and Nédélec [ 17 ] considered membrane bending and hydrostatic pressure on the budding membrane . In their model , the point force gener - ated by coating proteins that pull the apex of the invagination wascalculated , andmembraneshapeswerepredictedbymin - imizing the deformation energy . Irajizad et al . [ 18 ] used the Helfrich model to estimate the energetic cost of clathrins required at different stages of vesicle formation . They found that the energy required was affected not only by the tension of the membrane , but also by the instantaneous geometry of the membrane during shape evolution . In another work , Liu et al . [ 19 ] calculated the extra force required for complet - ing endocytosis at the last ( necking ) stage , aided by special proteins in the cytoplasm , such as dynamin . In the present study , we investigate how CCPs assist the uptake of nanoparticles at various membrane tensions . The energy of the system consisting of nanoparticles , recep - tor – ligand bonds , cell membrane , and CCP ( NRMC ) was formulated . The minimum value of the total deformation energy of the NRMC system was calculated numerically at different wrapping stages , and the shapes of the deformed NRMC system were obtained accordingly . In this model , contributions from both receptor – ligand bonds and CCP are combined at various membrane tensions . 2 Method List of symbols B , C Membrane material property constants in Skalak model D , D c , D neck Diameter of nanoparticle , CCP , and bottle - neck of CCP , respectively c n , c c Spontaneous curvatures of nanoparticle and CCP d c Central layer distance of cell membrane to CCP shell E M Young’s modulus of cell membrane h c , h m Thicknesses of cell membrane and CCP shell G SK SK elastic constant of cell membrane I e Pre - extension rate of cell membrane I 1 , I 2 Principal strain invariants k b Bending modulus of cell membrane k s Spring constant of receptor – ligand bonds l 0 , (cid:2) l Free and maximum stretching length of receptor – ligand bonds l i Length of each receptor – ligand bond N , M , P Numbers of discrete elements of each of the constituent parts of the nano - particle , mem - brane , and coated - pit ( NMC ) , respectively r Radius of nanoparticle r m , 1 , r c , 1 Curvature radii corresponding to the cur - vatures of nanoparticle and cell membrane along the generatrix line s n 0 , s m 0 Arc length starting from the origin of nanoparticle and cell membrane for each of its constituent parts before deformation s n , s m , s c Arc length starting from the origin of NMC for each of its constituent parts after defor - mation S c 0 , S c Initial and deformed total arc length of CCP along the s direction V Volume of nanoparticle x n 0 , x m 0 x - coordinate of constituent parts of nanoparticle and cell membrane before deformation x n , x m , x c x - coordinate of constituent parts of NMC after deformation 123 Numerical study of clathrin - mediated endocytosis of nanoparticles by cells under tension 693 y n 0 , y m 0 y - coordinate of constituent parts of nanoparticle and cell membrane before deformation y n , y m , y c y - coordinate of constituent parts of NMC after deformation α Young’s modulus ratio of nanoparticle shell to cell membrane β Young’s modulus ratio of CCP shell to cell membrane ε n , 1 , ε m , 1 , ε c , 1 Extension ratios of constituent parts of NMC along the tangential direction ε n , 2 , ε m , 2 , ε c , 2 Extension ratios of constituent parts of NMC along the parallel of latitude κ n , 1 , κ m , 1 , κ c , 1 Curvatures of the constituent parts of NMC along the generatrix line κ n , 2 , κ m , 2 , κ c , 2 Curvatures of the constituent parts of NMC along the loxodromic line ρ Density of receptor – ligand bonds τ m Tension of cell membrane ψ n , ψ m , ψ c Tangential angles of constituent parts of NMC 2 . 1 Energy function and algorithm Figure 1a shows the geometry of the NRMC system in which a nanoparticle is colored in red , receptor – ligand bonds are in black , a cell membrane is in blue , and a CCP in green . In order to compute the deformation energy of the NRMC system , acurvilinearsystemisused , where ψ isthetangential angle , and s is the arc length from the origin , as shown in Fig . 1b . Figure 1c shows a discrete representation of the nanopar - ticle , cell membrane , and CCP , as well as how the bonds connect . In practice , nanoparticles are usually coated with ligands of high density on the surface through crosslink - ers with polyethylene glycol ( PEG ) spacers [ 20 ] . Therefore , we assume that the receptor – ligand bonds are vertical to the nanoparticle surface due to the van der Waals forces between the dense ligands . Figure 1d shows the CCP proﬁle around the budding mem - brane . It has been reported that the CCP can concatenate different receptors [ 21 ] and is connected to the cytoplas - mic part of the receptors by adaptor proteins [ 22 ] . The CCP structure was proposed as a shell rigidity model by Jin et al . [ 23 ] . We assume that the CCP shell and the budding mem - brane in the wrapping region are concentric , as shown in Fig . 1e . Different sliding displacements and strains are allowed between layers of the cell membrane and CCP . The relationships between curvilinear coordinates ( ψ , s ) and Cartesian coordinates ( x , y ) are given by x n (cid:2) S n (cid:2) 0 ε n cos ψ n d s n 0 , y n (cid:2) l 1 + S n (cid:2) 0 ε n sin ψ n d s n 0 , ( 1 ) x m (cid:2) S m (cid:2) 0 ε m cos ψ m d s m 0 , y m (cid:2) S m (cid:2) 0 ε m sin ψ m d s m 0 , ( 2 ) x c (cid:2) S c (cid:2) 0 ε c cos ψ c d s c 0 , y c (cid:2) − d c + S c (cid:2) 0 ε c sin ψ c d s c 0 , ( 3 ) where the extension rate is deﬁned as ε (cid:2) d s / d s 0 , d s 0 and d s are the inﬁnitesimal arc lengths before and after the defor - mation , respectively . In this work , the hyperelastic Skalak model [ 24 ] consid - ers the joint contribution of the lipid bilayer and the proteins immersed inside it that are used for the integrity of the cell membrane . The strain energy of the nanoparticles is described by a linear elastic model [ 25 ] , and a linear spring model is used to describe the receptor – ligand bonds [ 26 ] . The Helfrich model [ 27 ] is adopted for the NMC bending energy . The total energy of the NRMC system is given by E ( ψ n , ψ m , ε n , ε m , l 1 ) (cid:2) E em + E en + E rl + E bn + E bm + E ccp , ( 4 ) E em (cid:2) L 0 ∫ 0 G SK 4 (cid:3) I 21 + 2 I 1 + 2 I 2 + C I 22 (cid:4) 2 π x m 0 d s m 0 , ( 5 ) E en (cid:2) π r ∫ 0 α E M h 2 (cid:5)(cid:6) ε n , 1 − 1 (cid:7) 2 + (cid:6) ε n , 2 − 1 (cid:7) 2 (cid:8) 2 π x n 0 d s n 0 , ( 6 ) E rl (cid:2) s k ∫ 0 k s ρ 2 ( l i − l 0 ) 2 2 π x i d s i , ( 7 ) E bm (cid:2) L 0 ∫ 0 k b 2 (cid:6) κ m , 1 + κ m , 2 (cid:7) 2 2 π x m 0 d s m 0 , ( 8 ) E bn (cid:2) π r ∫ 0 α k b 2 (cid:6) κ n , 1 + κ n , 2 − 2 c n (cid:7) 2 2 π x n 0 d s n 0 , ( 9 ) E ccp (cid:2) s c ∫ 0 β k b 2 (cid:6) κ c , 1 + κ c , 2 − c c (cid:7) 2 2 π x c d s c . ( 10 ) Herein , E em and E bm , are the strain and bending energies of the cell membrane , respectively ; E en , E bn , are the strain and bending energies of the cell nanoparticle respectively ; E rl is the elastic energy of the receptor – ligand bonds ; and E ccp is the bending energy of the CCP using the classical Helfrich model . I 1 (cid:2) ε 2 m , 1 + ε 2 m , 2 − 2 and I 2 (cid:2) ε 2 m , 1 ε 2 m , 2 − 1 . More details about the modeling of the energy components can be found in our previous studies [ 16 , 28 ] . In Eqs . ( 8 ) – ( 10 ) , the spontaneous curvature of the cell membrane is set to zero because a ﬂat plane is assumed as the initial state for the cell membrane compared to the much smaller radius of a nanoparticle . The spontaneous curvature of the CCP is set to c c (cid:2) 1 / ( r + l 0 + d c ) at the instant when 123 694 X . Liu , et al . Fig . 1 Schematic illustrations of a NRMC system , b coordinate system , c discretization of the endocytosis system , d structure of cell membrane and CCP , e curvature radii of the cell membrane and CCP elements it wraps a nanoparticle with radius r , where l 0 is the free length of the receptor – ligand bonds , and d c is the distance from the central layer of the cell membrane to the CCP shell . The spontaneous curvature of the nanoparticle is c n (cid:2) 1 / r . In the curvilinear coordinates , the curvatures of the CCP and cell membrane along the s direction are formulated as κ c , 1 (cid:2) d ψ c d s c (cid:2) 1 r c , 1 (cid:2) 1 r m , 1 + d c and κ m , 1 (cid:2) d ψ m d s m (cid:2) 1 r m , where r c , 1 and r m , 1 are the curvature radii corresponding to κ c , 1 and κ m , 1 , respectively . As shown in Fig . 1e , the budding membrane and formed pit are concentric , i . e . , d ψ m (cid:2) d ψ c , which leads to ( 11 ) κ c , 1 κ m , 1 (cid:2) d ψ c / d s c d ψ m / d s m (cid:2) d s m d s c (cid:2) r m , 1 r c , 1 (cid:2) r m , 1 r m , 1 + d c (cid:2) 1 1 + κ m , 1 / r m , 1 (cid:2) 1 1 + d c κ m , 1 . The relationship between the curvatures of the membrane and CCP becomes κ c , 1 (cid:2) κ m , 1 1 + d c κ m , 1 . ( 12 ) Further constraint functions are imposed while estimating the minimal energy of the NRMC system . These include the volume conservation of the nanoparticles , the integrity of the nanoparticle geometry , and the ﬁnite computing domain of the deformed cell membrane Γ 1 (cid:2) π r ∫ 0 π x 2 n d y n / V − 1 (cid:2) 0 , ( 13 ) Γ 2 (cid:2) π r ∫ 0 ε n cos ψ n d s n 0 / r (cid:2) 0 , ( 14 ) Γ 3 (cid:2) L ∫ 0 ε m sin ψ m d s m 0 / L − 1 (cid:2) 0 , ( 15 ) where V is the volume of a nanoparticle , and L (cid:2) I e L 0 is the stretched length of the membrane . Because the size of the cell membrane is much larger than that of the nanoparticle , and the deformation occurs near the endocytosis region , we deﬁne a ﬁnite computational domain as L 0 (cid:2) 40 π r . When the bonds of receptor – ligand pairs are compressed to lengths that are smaller than their length limits l 0 − (cid:2) l , their repul - sive energies will increase to prevent the coming together of the nanoparticle and cell membrane . To present this effect , inequality constraint functions for the receptor – ligand bonds , with the index i to represent the individual bonds , are intro - duced as Γ bond , i (cid:2) 1 − l i l 0 − (cid:2) l ≤ 0 . ( 16 ) Newton’s method is applied to ﬁnd the min - imum value of the total energy . For the present NRMC system , the unknown vector is x (cid:2) (cid:5) ψ 1 , 2 , . . . , N n , ψ 1 , 2 , . . . , M m , ε 1 , 2 , . . . , N n , 1 , ε 1 , 2 , . . . , M m , 1 , d s 1 , 2 , . . . , P c , 0 , l 1 (cid:8) , and the deﬁnition domain is , (cid:3) ψ 1 , 2 , . . . , N n , ψ 1 , 2 , . . . , M m (cid:4) ∈ [ 0 , π ] , (cid:3) ε 1 , 2 , . . . , N n , 1 , ε 1 , 2 , . . . , M m , 1 , d s 1 , 2 , . . . , P c , 0 (cid:4) ∈ ( 0 , + ∞ ) , l 1 ∈ [ l − (cid:2) l , l + (cid:2) l ] . In our study , we do not consider the dynamic process of the forming of CCPs , and the NRMC system is presumed to have an initial shape and then converge to the shape that corresponds to the minimum energy of the whole system . The total arc length of the CCP depends on the arc length of the cell membrane in the wrapping region , as shown in Fig . 1c . The edge of the CCP is determined by the receptor located at the outer edge of the wrapping region within the initial shape . In order to keep the initial length constant in the calculation domain , another constraint function is introduced 123 Numerical study of clathrin - mediated endocytosis of nanoparticles by cells under tension 695 Fig . 2 Sketch of passive endocytosis without CCP and active endocytosis models Γ end (cid:2) (cid:9) d s 1 , 2 , . . . , P c , 0 / s c , 0 − 1 (cid:2) 0 , ( 17 ) where s c , 0 is the initial total arc length of the CCP along the s direction . The Taylor series expansion of the energy function at x is ( 18 ) E ( x + (cid:2) x ) ≈ E ( x ) + ∇ E ( x ) T (cid:2) x + 1 2 (cid:2) x T H ( x ) (cid:2) x + O (cid:3)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10) (cid:2) x 2 (cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:4) . The gradient of the energy is formulated as ∇ E ( x + (cid:2) x ) ≈ ∇ E ( x ) + H ( x ) (cid:2) x , ( 19 ) where H (cid:2) ∇ 2 E ( x ) is the Hessian matrix . For a positive deﬁnite Hessian matrix , when the gradient at point x j is 0 , the energy function reaches a local minimum ∇ E (cid:6) x j (cid:7) + H (cid:6) x j (cid:7) (cid:2) x (cid:2) 0 . ( 20 ) Assumingknowledgeoftheinitialproﬁle x 0 oftheNMRC system at any preset stage of endocytosis , the iteration of the discretized position x j converges to satisfy the minimum energy requirements in accordance with x j + 1 (cid:2) x j − H − 1 (cid:6) x j (cid:7) ∇ E (cid:6) x j (cid:7) . ( 21 ) The local minimum of the energy function E (cid:6) x j + 1 (cid:7) is considered to be converged subject to the criteria of ξ (cid:2) (cid:11)(cid:11) 1 − E (cid:6) x j + 1 (cid:7) / E (cid:6) x j (cid:7)(cid:11)(cid:11) < 10 − 3 and Γ 1 , 2 , . . . , end1 < 10 − 4 . 2 . 2 Geometric and mechanical parameters A 50 nm nanoparticle was chosen as the representative size in the present work , as Gao et al . [ 13 ] had found that the optimal diameter of a three - dimensional model was approx - imately this size , while Chithrani et al . [ 34 ] also showed that gold nanoparticles with a diameter of 50 nm yielded the high - est rate of endocytosis compared with other sizes . The spring constant k s (cid:2) 4 pN·nm − 1 is used for the binding of speciﬁc receptor – ligand bonds , such as transferrin and its receptor [ 34 ] . The rigidity of the nanoparticle relative to that of the cell membrane was measured by the ratio of their Young’s moduli α . Additionally , k b (cid:2) 20 k B T is the typical value of the membrane bending moduli in many simulation works [ 13 , 14 , 35 ] , and the bending modulus of CCP was mea - sured by atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) [ 23 ] to be equal to 285 ± 30 k B T . Moreover , the Young’s modulus ratio of the CCP shell to the cell membrane β (cid:2) 15 is adopted in this work . β (cid:2) 0 is used in a passive endocytosis model with - out the assistance of the CCP . The mechanical parameters adopted for the present study is listed in Table 1 . Figure 3 shows the nonlinear relationship between mem - brane tension τ m and the pre - extension rate I e using Skalak’s hyperelastic model τ m (cid:2) B 2 (cid:6) I 2 e − 1 (cid:7) + C 2 I 3 e [ 24 ] . In our study , the pre - extension is not caused by the nanoparticle wrapping ; it is a background tension introduced by cell activities such as migration and spreading . In this instance , I e (cid:2) 1 means that we assume no pre - extension exists in the cell membrane , such as a suspension cell in a static state . 3 Results Figure 4 shows the proﬁles of the endocytosis system in the symmetrical plane predicted by this optimization method at different wrapping stages from the ﬁrst to the sixth . The six wrapping stages are set up by dividing the generatrix of the nanoparticles into six equal parts , by which the nanoparticle 123 696 X . Liu , et al . Table 1 Physical constants adopted in this numerical study of active endocytosis with contributions of the CCP Symbol Physical property Numerical value Unit B Elastic modulus of cell membrane 5 × 10 − 6 [ 24 ] N·m − 1 C Surface dilation coefﬁcient 5 × 10 − 3 [ 24 ] N·m 1 D Diameter of nanoparticle 50 [ 13 ] nm d c Distance of cell membrane to CCP shell 20 [ 23 ] nm E M Young’s modulus of cell membrane 10 6 , 10 7 [ 24 ] Pa h m Thickness of cell membrane 5 [ 29 ] nm h c Thickness of CCP 5 [ 23 ] nm I e Pre - extension rate of cell membrane 1 , 1 . 05 , 1 . 1 , 1 . 2 , 1 . 5 , 2 , 2 . 5 l 0 Free length of receptor – ligand bonds 20 [ 30 ] nm ρ Maximum stretching of receptor – ligand bonds 5 [ 31 ] nm k b Bending modulus of cell membrane 20 [ 13 , 14 ] k B T k s Spring constant of receptor – ligand bonds 4 [ 16 , 31 ] pN·nm − 1 α Young’s modulus ratio of nanoparticle shell to cell membrane 100 [ 16 , 32 ] β Young’s modulus ratio of CCP shell to cell membrane 0 , 15 [ 23 ] ρ Density of receptor – ligand bonds 5000 [ 13 , 33 ] 1· μ m − 2 is wrapped gradually into the cell , as illustrated . Different from the passive endocytosis model where the driving forces that bend the cell membrane are considered to be the recep - tor – ligand binding forces [ 13 ] , in active endocytosis with clathrin , the bending of the cell membrane is driven by CCP structure formation , which is a biological cellular process that consumes the chemical energy supplied by Adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) and involves the contribution of different proteins [ 36 , 37 ] . In order to eliminate the effect of the initial value in the search for minimum energy , the initial shapes of the nanoparticle and cell membrane for all six stages are considered to be identical , as shown in Fig . 4a , d . The initial length of the receptor – ligand bonds is set to the free length l 0 , and new pairs of bonds are added symmetrically to rep - Fig . 3 Tension of cell membrane at different extension rates resent the progression of the wrapping process . As shown in Fig . 4b , c , the dashed line illustrates the rupture of the recep - tor – ligand bond owing to the limitation of the spring force , and endocytosis will abort these stages . When the recep - tor – ligand bonds rupture during wrapping , as depicted by the dashed line , a new equilibrium state of the system will be achieved at the new minimal energy . If the distance from the nanoparticle to the cell membrane at the new equilibrium state is still larger than l 0 + (cid:2) l , it means that even the bonds formed under the largest densities known for both receptors on the cell membrane and ligands on the nanoparticle , respec - tively , cannot avert the fate of rupture . We assume no new bonds can be formed thereafter under this condition , which leads to the termination of passive endocytosis . The nanopar - ticle uptake without the assistance of the CCP stops at the sixth stage without membrane pre - extension effects , which indicates that relying only on the binding energy and force providedbythereceptor – ligandbondsmaynotguaranteefull wrapping for successful passive endocytosis . As shown in Fig . 4c , under the tension condition with a pre - extension rate of I e (cid:2) 1 . 05 , the receptor – ligand bonds ruptured at the ﬁfth stage , earlier than at I e (cid:2) 1 , as shown in Fig . 4b . This suggests that pre - extension of the cell membrane makes nanoparticle wrapping more difﬁcult . Figure 4e and f shows that with the assistance of the CCP , full wrapping can be achieved at a pre - extension rate of I e (cid:2) 1 . 05 even if bonds rupture inside the wrapping region . Figure5comparesthesystemproﬁlesattheﬁnalwrapping stages at various cell membrane tensions and bonding con - 123 Numerical study of clathrin - mediated endocytosis of nanoparticles by cells under tension 697 Fig . 4 Proﬁles of the endocytosis system at selected wrapping stages with the Young’s modulus E M (cid:2) 1 × 10 6 Pa . The blue line shows the proﬁles of the cell membrane , while the red line indicates the nanoparticles , the green line indicates CCPs , and the black lines indicate receptor – ligand bonds . a Guessed initial shape of simulation without CCP , b without membrane pre - extension or CCP , c with a membrane pre - extension rate of I e (cid:2) 1 . 05 , but without CCP , d guessed initial shape of simulation with CCP , e without membrane pre - extension , but with CCP , d with a membrane pre - extension rate of I e (cid:2) 1 . 05 and with CCP ditions . Figure 5a shows that the increase in the membrane tension leads to an earlier abortion in passive endocytosis . When the pre - extension rate I e ≥ 1 . 2 , the cell membrane is too “tight” to start wrapping a nanoparticle with the energy provided by the receptor – ligand bonds only , and the proﬁle remains in a planar form . However , as shown in Fig . 5b , with the assistance of the CCP , full wrapping can be achieved even ifthemembraneundergoespre - extensionatanincreasedrate . Correspondingly , Fig . 5b also shows that the CCP structure is able to resist high membrane tensions , and the diameter of the CCP increases with the increase in the membrane’s pre - extension rate . More bonds rupture inside the CCP owing to the distance limitations of receptors and ligands when the size of the CCP increases . Figure 5a , b , d shows the result with the Young’s modulus E M (cid:2) 1 × 10 6 Pa , while Fig . 5c shows the result of E M (cid:2) 1 × 10 7 Pa . When the Young’s 123 698 X . Liu , et al . Fig . 5 Proﬁles of the endocytosis system achieved at the ﬁnal wrapping stage in our model at various pre - extension rates . a Without the assistance of CCP , b with the assistance of CPP , c when the Young’s modulus of the cell membrane is ten times larger than in plot b , d with CCP and the existence of only a single bond that keeps the nanoparticle attached modulus of the cell membrane increases tenfold , the CCP still helps to maintain the endocytic vesicles under various tension conditions . As shown in Fig . 5d , we further exam - ined the case where only one adherent bond remains to keep the nanoparticle attached . Initially , the shape of the CCP in these cases was set to engulf the whole particle , as is shown in Fig . 4d ( 6 ) , where the edge of the CCP was determined by the position of the receptor on the cell membrane at the engulf region . As we understand , receptor – ligand bond formation or rupture outside the cell is independent of the process of the receptors connected to the CCP by the adaptor proteins inside the cells . In these cases , we manually dissociate the bond formation process between the nanoparticle and the cell membrane in the simulation , and the nanoparticle and receptor – ligand bonds do not undergo any deformation . The results show that it is CCPs rather than the receptor – ligand bonds that predominantly maintain the endocytic vesicles under various tension conditions . The proﬁles in Fig . 5b , d present no obvious differences , which suggests that although the receptor – ligand bonds may play an important role in trig - gering the process of endocytosis from a biological point of view , except for facilitating the adherence of nanoparticles to the cell membrane , the energy and force contributions of the bonds in active endocytosis are not major requirements from a mechanical point of view . As shown in Fig . 6 , the deformation energies of the cell membrane and CCP play major roles in the total energy requirements of a successful endocytosis process , and the energy consumed by the elasticity of the cell membrane accounts for the largest part . Although the CCP is located inside a membrane whose curvature and total area are smaller than the budding cell membrane , the bending energies of the cellmembraneappearsmallerthanthatoftheCCPbecauseof the smaller bending modulus . As shown in Fig . 6a , the bend - ing energy of the CCP increases slightly with the increase in the pre - extension rate on the cell membrane owing to the increase in the total surface area of the CCP to form a larger coated pit , even though the curvature of the CCP decreases . Figure 6b illustrates the ratios of all deformation energies considered in the NRMC system during endocytosis . With the increase in the pre - extension rate of the cell membrane , the energy consumed by the CCP increases , but the ratio of the CCP bending energy to the total energy consumption decreases . As reported in the literature , Heuser [ 38 ] used rapid - freeze methods and found that the inner plasma membrane surface of various types of cells were adhered to substrates that con - tained various networks of CCPs in the range of 70 – 200 nm . However , quantitative experimental observations of the rela - tionshipbetweenCCPsizeandmembranetensionarestillnot available . As shown in Fig . 7a , the size of the CCP increases 123 Numerical study of clathrin - mediated endocytosis of nanoparticles by cells under tension 699 Fig . 6 Energy requirements of the NRMC system at different pre - extension rates . a A comparison of the variation in energy consumption between the deformations of the cell membrane and CCP , where k B is Boltzmann constant , and T is the temperature in Kelvin . b Ratio of the energy components at different pre - extension rates Fig . 7 Variations in the CCP size and the diameter of the opening at its outer end and at different membrane tensions . a CCP size is normalized by the initial size . b Bottleneck diameter of the CCP is normalized by the diameter of the nanoparticle nonlinearly with the increase in membrane tension , where D c 0 (cid:2) D + 2 l 0 + 2 d c is the initial size of the CCP in accor - dance with the iterative numerical estimation . The CCP size increases in our model owing to clathrin recruitment and the CCP bending deformation . It is interesting to review the size of the CCP in a different way . Although the CCP structure can maintain the wrapping proﬁles of cell membranes without the help of receptor – li - gand bonds from the energy point of view , an increase in the diameter of the outer end or bottleneck of the CCP at an increased cell membrane pre - extension rate causes a leak of nanoparticles owing to their thermal motion if they are not bonded to the cell membrane . When the size of the CCP bottleneck is too wide to conﬁne the nanoparticles , there is a possibility that the nanoparticles will escape if all the bonds rupture , as shown in Fig . 7b . In this case , the endocytosis 123 700 X . Liu , et al . process should still be considered successful and active , but drug uptake would fail . In other words , as long as the CCP can conﬁne the wrapped nanoparticle until the recruitment of actin and dynamin proteins to assist the necking and fusion steps , endocytosis can be completed even with a large varia - tion in membrane tension . 4 Discussion In this work , a direct Newton’s method was used to obtain the minimum deformation energy of the NRMC system , and proﬁles of the system were predicted . This approach was adopted for the static states and the quasi - static process of endocytosis at separate stages of uptake , for which the time scale was not considered . We examined whether the CCP could help the endocytic vesicle to achieve the full wrapping step , especially when the membrane tension increases from the mechanical point of view . In their experimental study , Raucher and Sheetz [ 39 ] proved that membrane expansion increases the endocytosis rate , and endocytosis is blocked primarily by the increase in the tension in the plasma membrane . The present results help to clarify that although the receptor – ligand bonds cannot pro - vide enough force to wrap the nanoparticle into the cell in the presence of tension in the passive endocytosis model , in the active endocytosis model , the CCP helps keep the inward budding structure stable , even when the total energy consumption increases nonlinearly with an increase in the membrane tension . It has been reported that endocytosis is randomly initiated and then stabilized by CCP [ 36 ] . The present study supports the idea that the CCP behaves as a mechanical reinforcement moiety in the wrapping region , which helps to fend off exter - nal forces during the process of uptake . Moreover , Weigel et al . [ 40 ] observed that cargos escape from a pit because the lifetime of the bonds between the cargo molecules and the cell membrane are shorter than the period of the endocytic process . As shown in the present study , the size of the CCP increases with the increase in tension on the cell membrane , as does the diameter at the opening end of the CCP . When the bond between the nanoparticles and the cell membrane breaks , the nanoparticles may escape from the open end of the CCP if the tension on the cell membrane is large enough . Thus , our approach predicts the extent to which the CCP is able to resist the increase in cell membrane tension and con - ﬁne the nanoparticles in the wrapping region . The present study shows that when the tension on the cell membrane is considered , the diameters of the endocytic vesicles are not only determined by the sizes of the nanoparticles , but also by the competition between the stretching of the cell membrane and the conﬁnement of the coated pits . This suggests that membrane tension may be used as a biophysical marker to explain the size distribution of the CCPs observed in differ - ent experiments . It has been reported that when endocytosis starts , clathrins are initially recruited to ﬂat membranes and they are subsequently reshaped , and that during this process the quantity of clathrins remains nearly constant [ 41 ] . Com - bining these results with our study , when the CPP size is too large because of increased tension , the quantity of clathrins may not guarantee the full wrapping stage of endocytosis . It was observed by Loerke et al . [ 42 ] that the abortion of endocytosis can be classiﬁed into early and late abortion , and Weigel et al . [ 40 ] further noted that the cargo can escape from a CCP before the complete formation of an endocytic vesi - cle , as the lifetime of bonds between cargo molecules and receptors on the cell membrane is sometimes much shorter than the period of a total endocytic process . Our results sup - port the notion that , from the viewpoint of mechanics , early abortions may occur because receptor – ligand bonds cannot provide enough force to wrap the nanoparticles into the cell membrane before the clathrin responds in an effort to support the endocytic vesicles , and late abortions may occur because the CCP cannot conﬁne the cargo until the emergence of actin and dynamin to assist the necking and pinching off of the endocytic vesicles . 5 Conclusions In this research , an axisymmetric model was established for an endocytosis process in which spherical nanoparticles were engulfed by a cell membrane . Using a direct New - ton’s method to minimize the energy of NRMC system , we obtained the proﬁles of the NRMC system with or without the assistance of the CCP at different pre - extension rates . Our results show that although the force provided by receptor – ligand bonds can hardly guarantee the full wrap - ping of the nanoparticles under tension conditions on the cell membrane , the presence of a CCP reinforces the inward bud - ding structures around the nanoparticles and helps achieve a full wrapping at various membrane tensions . Addition - ally , variation in tension on the cell membrane constitutes a mechanical biophysical marker for understanding the size distribution of CCPs observed in experiments . We can deduce from the present study that the energy and force provided by receptor – ligand bonds between the nanoparticle and cell membrane is not sufﬁcient to support full wrapping under tension conditions . Early abortion of endocytosis may occur because the receptor – ligand bonds that cannot provide adequate force to wrap the nanoparticles into the cell membrane before clathrins respond to support the endocytic vesicles . Correspondingly , late abortion could be due to the rupture of the receptor – ligand bonds , when the CCP cannot conﬁne the nanoparticles until the emergence of dynamin to assist the necking and pinching off of the 123 Numerical study of clathrin - mediated endocytosis of nanoparticles by cells under tension 701 endocytic vesicles . Therefore , the completion of endocytosis requires both receptor – ligand bonds and cytosolic proteins to provide energy and force to support the endocytic vesicles under tension conditions . Acknowledgements This work was supported by the National Natural ScienceFoundationofChina ( Grant11872040 ) andtheNaturalScience and Engineering Research Council of Canada . References 1 . Cann , A . J . : Principles of Molecular Virology : Trends in Biochem - ical Sciences . Academic Press , London ( 1993 ) 2 . Stahl , P . , Schwartz , A . L . : Receptor - mediated endocytosis . J . Clin . Invest . 77 , 657 – 662 ( 1986 ) 3 . Goldstein , J . L . , Anderson , R . G . W . , Brown , M . S . : Coated pits , coated vesicles and receptor - mediated endocytosis . Nature 279 , 679 – 685 ( 1979 ) 4 . Kihlström , E . , Nilsson , L . : EndocytosisofSalmonellatyphimurium 395 MS and MR10 by HeLa cells . Acta Pathol . Microbiol . Scand . Sect . B Microbiol . 85B , 322 – 328 ( 2009 ) 5 . Tortorella , S . , Karagiannis , T . C . : Transferrin receptor - mediated endocytosis : a useful target for cancer therapy . J . Membr . Biol . 247 , 291 – 307 ( 2014 ) 6 . Tanaka , T . , Shiramoto , S . , Miyashita , M . , et al . : Tumor targeting based on the effect of enhanced permeability and retention ( EPR ) and the mechanism of receptor - mediated endocytosis ( RME ) . Int . J . Pharm . 277 , 39 – 61 ( 2004 ) 7 . Kirchhausen , T . , Owen , D . , Harrison , S . C . : Molecular structure , function , and dynamics of clathrin - mediated membrane trafﬁc . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 6 , a016725 ( 2014 ) 8 . Diz - Muñoz , A . , Fletcher , D . A . , Weiner , O . D . : Use the force : mem - brane tension as an organizer of cell shape and motility . Trends Cell Biol . 23 , 47 – 53 ( 2013 ) 9 . Oh , M . J . , Kuhr , F . , Byﬁeld , F . , et al . : Micropipette aspiration of substrate - attached cells to estimate cell stiffness . J . Vis . Exp . 67 , e3886 ( 2012 ) 10 . Boulant , S . , Kural , C . , Zeeh , J . C . , et al . : Actin dynamics counteract membrane tension during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 , 1124 – 1131 ( 2011 ) 11 . Tan , X . , Heureaux , J . , Liu , A . P . : Cell spreading area regulates clathrin - coated pit dynamics on micropatterned substrate . Integr . Biol . 7 , 1033 – 1043 ( 2015 ) 12 . Wu , X . S . , Elias , S . , Liu , H . , et al . : Membrane tension inhibits rapid andslowendocytosisinsecretorycells . Biophys . J . 113 , 2406 – 2414 ( 2017 ) 13 . Gao , H . , Shi , W . , Freund , L . B . : Mechanics of receptor - mediated endocytosis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 102 , 9469 – 9474 ( 2005 ) 14 . Yi , X . , Shi , X . , Gao , H . : Cellular uptake of elastic nanoparticles . Phys . Rev . Lett . 107 , 098101 ( 2011 ) 15 . Decuzzi , P . , Ferrari , M . : The role of speciﬁc and non - speciﬁc interactions in receptor - mediated endocytosis of nanoparticles . Biomaterials 28 , 2915 – 2922 ( 2007 ) 16 . Liu , X . , Liu , Y . , Gong , X . , et al . : A numerical study of pas - sive receptor - mediated endocytosis of nanoparticles : the effect of mechanical properties . Comput . Model Eng . Sci . 116 , 281 – 300 ( 2018 ) 17 . Dmitrieff , S . , Nédélec , F . : Membrane mechanics of endocytosis in cells with turgor . PLoS Comput . Biol . 11 , e1004538 ( 2015 ) 18 . Irajizad , E . , Walani , N . , Veatch , S . L . , et al . : Clathrin polymeriza - tion exhibits high mechano - geometric sensitivity . Soft Matter 13 , 1455 – 1462 ( 2017 ) 19 . Liu , J . , Kaksonen , M . , Drubin , D . G . , et al . : Endocytic vesicle scis - sion by lipid phase boundary forces . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 103 , 10277 – 10282 ( 2006 ) 20 . Choi , C . H . J . , Alabi , C . A . , Webster , P . , et al . : Mechanism of active targeting in solid tumors with transferrin - containing gold nanopar - ticles . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 107 , 1235 – 1240 ( 2010 ) 21 . Marsh , M . : Clathrin - coated vesicles and receptor - mediated endo - cytosis . In : Zheng , Y . ( ed . ) Encyclopedia of Life Sciences . Wiley , Chichester ( 2001 ) 22 . Brett , T . J . , Traub , L . M . : Molecular structures of coat and coat - associated proteins : function follows form . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 , 395 – 406 ( 2006 ) 23 . Jin , A . J . , Prasad , K . , Smith , P . D . , et al . : Measuring the elasticity of clathrin - coated vesicles via atomic force microscopy . Biophys . J . 90 , 3333 – 3344 ( 2006 ) 24 . Skalak , R . , Tozeren , A . , Zarda , R . P . , et al . : Strain energy function of red blood cell membranes . Biophys . J . 13 , 245 – 264 ( 1973 ) 25 . David , F . , Leibler , S . : Vanishing tension of ﬂuctuating membranes . J . Phys . II 1 , 959 – 976 ( 1991 ) 26 . Dembo , M . : Onpeelinganadherentcellfromasurface . Lect . Math . Life Sci . Some Math . Probl . Biol . 24 , 51 – 77 ( 1994 ) 27 . Helfrich , W . : Elastic properties of lipid bilayers : theory and possi - ble experiments . Z . Naturforsch . C 28 , 693 – 703 ( 1973 ) 28 . Liu , X . , Liu , Y . , Gong , X . , et al . : A numerical study of pas - sive receptor - mediated endocytosis of nanoparticles : the effect of mechanical properties . Comput . Model . Eng . Sci . 116 , 281 – 300 ( 2018 ) 29 . Hochmuth , R . M . , Evans , C . A . , Wiles , H . C . , etal . : Mechanicalmea - surement of red cell membrane thickness . Science 220 , 101 – 102 ( 1983 ) 30 . Cheng , Y . , Zak , O . , Aisen , P . , et al . : Structure of the human trans - ferrin receptor - transferrin complex . Cell 116 , 565 – 576 ( 2004 ) 31 . Moy , V . T . , Florin , E . L . , Gaub , H . E . : Intermolecularforcesandener - gies between ligands and receptors . Science 266 , 257 – 259 ( 1994 ) 32 . Sun , J . , Zhang , L . , Wang , J . , et al . : Tunable rigidity of ( polymeric core ) - ( lipid shell ) nanoparticles for regulated cellular uptake . Adv . Mater . 27 , 1402 – 1407 ( 2015 ) 33 . Chou , T . : Stochasticentryofenvelopedviruses : fusionversusendo - cytosis . Biophys . J . 93 , 1116 – 1123 ( 2007 ) 34 . Chithrani , B . D . , Ghazani , A . A . , Chan , W . C . W . : Determining the size and shape dependence of gold nanoparticle uptake into mam - malian cells . Nano Lett . 6 , 662 – 668 ( 2006 ) 35 . Yi , X . , Gao , H . : Kinetics of receptor - mediated endocytosis of elas - tic nanoparticles . Nanoscale 9 , 454 – 463 ( 2017 ) 36 . Ehrlich , M . , Boll , W . , van Oijen , A . , et al . : Endocytosis by ran - dom initiation and stabilization of clathrin - coated pits . Cell 118 , 591 – 605 ( 2004 ) 37 . Schmid , S . L . : Clathrin - coated vesicle formation and protein sort - ing : an integrated process . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 66 , 511 – 548 ( 1997 ) 38 . Heuser , J . : Three - dimensional visualization of coated vesicle for - mation in ﬁbroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 84 , 560 – 583 ( 1980 ) 39 . Raucher , D . , Sheetz , M . P . : Membrane expansion increases endo - cytosis rate during mitosis . J . Cell Biol . 144 , 497 – 506 ( 1999 ) 40 . Weigel , A . V . , Tamkun , M . M . , Krapf , D . : Quantifying the dynamic interactions between a clathrin - coated pit and cargo molecules . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 110 , E4591 – E4600 ( 2013 ) 41 . Avinoam , O . , Schorb , M . , Beese , C . J . , etal . : Endocyticsitesmature bycontinuousbendingandremodelingoftheclathrincoat . Science 348 , 1369 – 1372 ( 2015 ) 42 . Loerke , D . , Mettlen , M . , Yarar , D . , et al . : Cargo and dynamin regu - late clathrin - coated pit maturation . PLoS Biol . 7 , e1000057 ( 2009 ) 123