Recommendations for Designing CS Resource Sharing Sites for All Teachers Mackenzie Leake Stanford University Computer Science Department Stanford , CA 94305 , USA mleake @ cs . stanford . edu Colleen M . Lewis Harvey Mudd College Computer Science Department Claremont , CA 91711 , USA lewis @ cs . hmc . edu ABSTRACT Many organizations have developed websites to support high school computer science ( CS ) teachers by providing them with collections of teaching resources . Yet rarely do these sites take into account the unique challenges of new CS teachers who often have not had formal training in CS . In response to a documented lack of teachers’ engagement on these sites , we interviewed 17 CS teachers to learn more about the ways in which these sites are and are not meet - ing teachers’ needs for curriculum resources . We discuss our ﬁndings about how teachers use , adapt , and share resources and then provide several suggestions for designing resource sharing sites that support teachers who have varying levels of experience teaching CS . Categories and Subject Descriptors K . 3 . 2 [ Computers and Education ] : Computer and Infor - mation Science Education— computer science education Keywords Resource repositories , Curriculum sharing , Online resources 1 . INTRODUCTION There is a stark imbalance in which students and com - munities have access to computing education [ 37 , 9 , 17 ] . In response , the US has launched the CS4All initiative [ 49 ] to provide all students in the US access to computer sci - ence ( CS ) instruction . With a similar goal , the National Science Foundation , Code . org [ 14 ] , and a variety of orga - nizations across the world have launched initiatives to train high school ( HS ) teachers to teach computer science ( CS ) [ 22 , 14 , 20 ] . Training these teachers is of vital importance to addressing inequities in access to CS instruction . To support these initiatives , many online platforms con - nect HS CS teachers by encouraging teachers to share re - sources , e . g . , lesson plans , activities , assignments , and tests . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM mustbehonored . Abstractingwithcreditispermitted . Tocopyotherwise , orrepublish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . SIGCSE ’17 , March 08 - 11 , 2017 , Seattle , WA , USA c (cid:13) 2017 ACM . ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4698 - 6 / 17 / 03 . . . $ 15 . 00 DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3017680 . 3017780 Sharing resources with other CS teachers is important be - cause high schools that oﬀer CS often have only a single CS teacher [ 12 ] . Unlike teachers in other subjects , CS teachers often do not have opportunities to have face - to - face inter - actions with others who teach the same subject and can feel isolated [ 42 ] . While in - person professional development ( PD ) has been shown to be eﬀective in supporting CS teach - ers [ 33 , 43 ] , PD workshops alone may not provide teachers with everything they need . Online resources are an impor - tant mechanism for providing teachers with additional sup - port [ 7 , 26 ] . The following 16 sites provide repositories of free educa - tional resources of interest to HS CS teachers 1 : • Alice Community [ 1 ] , • Blueroom [ 5 ] , • Canterbury QuestionBank [ 10 ] , • Code . org Forum [ 15 ] • College Board AP CS Teacher Community [ 16 ] , • Computational Science Education Reference Desk [ 18 ] , • Computer Science Open Educational Resources [ 19 ] , • Computing At School Community [ 20 ] , • CS10K Community [ 22 ] , • CSTA Source Online K - 12 Repository [ 23 ] , • Ensemble Computing Portal [ 25 ] , • Greenroom [ 28 ] , • MIT App Inventor Resources [ 38 ] , • NCWIT Engage CS Edu [ 41 ] , • Nifty Assignments [ 44 ] , and • ScratchEd [ 47 ] . Despite the presence of these and similar sites , it has been noted that many resource sharing sites that serve CS teach - ers are underutilized [ 24 , 26 , 30 , 39 ] . While prior research has developed explanations for the underutilization of exist - ing sites for CS teachers [ 24 , 26 , 39 ] , we focus on strategies for increasing participation on these sites in order to better serve teachers and ultimately students . We reviewed liter - ature regarding online CS teacher sites and interviewed 17 teachers to address the following research questions : • What are the barriers to CS teachers’ engagement with resource sharing sites ? • Which CS teacher needs are met and unmet with re - source sharing sites ? 1 Many of the repositories on this list include discussion and other community features that support informal forms of resource sharing . We have not listed the numerous online communities and social media outlets that are designed for HS CS teachers to communicate but do not include a repos - itory of resources . 357 During our interviews we learned that CS teachers want cohesive curricula to use and adapt ( Sections 4 . 1 , 4 . 2 ) and that they have concerns about sharing their resources and participating in online discussions ( Section 4 . 3 ) . Meeting ex - perienced teachers’ needs for resources and helping them overcome concerns about judgment is challenging . Address - ing the needs and concerns of new teachers is an even greater challenge . It has been documented that there are large gaps in knowl - edge and behavior among novice and experienced teachers in many subject areas [ 52 , 53 ] . Understanding how these gaps aﬀect the ways in which CS teachers locate , adapt , and share teaching resources is important for understand - ing how to support CS teachers with varying levels of ex - perience . In this paper we discuss our interview results and present a synthesis of research related more broadly to online resource sharing , communities , and discussion to provide in - sights into the design of online resources to support HS CS teachers with diﬀerent levels of experience 2 . 2 . PREVIOUS RESEARCH 2 . 1 New CS Teachers Prior research has reported that new teachers across do - mains spend a signiﬁcant amount of time searching for re - sources [ 29 ] . At ﬁrst they follow these curriculum materials closely , and , as they gain experience , they begin adjusting these materials to meet their speciﬁc students’ needs [ 29 ] . Although many CS teachers may have experience teaching other subjects [ 12 , 42 ] , in cases where teachers have not had formal CS training , it can be diﬃcult to know how to adapt CS resources to meet their students’ needs [ 8 , 31 ] . Respond - ing to teachers’ interest in using online resources , we discuss several design strategies for resource sharing sites to help new CS teachers ﬁnd the resources they need ( Section 4 . 1 ) . 2 . 2 Resource Adaptation Research has documented that CS teachers have diﬃ - culty ﬁnding high - quality teaching resources [ 24 , 39 ] . Teach - ers must adapt their materials for many reasons , including the constraints of their class schedules and the abilities of their students [ 3 ] . It has been reported that the resources developed by content experts are not ready for classroom use without a teacher’s modiﬁcations [ 45 , 50 ] . Adapting re - sources from an online repository is common practice for teachers in many subjects [ 6 ] , including CS [ 26 ] . Adapting teaching resources for use in the classroom requires teach - ers to have a signiﬁcant amount of background information about these materials [ 50 ] . However , many online reposito - ries of materials for K - 12 teachers provide fragmented col - lections of resources rather than cohesive units [ 11 ] . These fragmented collections can be particularly discouraging for new teachers so we consider additional strategies sites can use to help new teachers locate materials ( Section 4 . 2 ) . 2 . 3 Resource Sharing Motivating contributions to online knowledge repositories and online communities has been identiﬁed as a challenging 2 We will use the phrase , “new CS teachers , ”to refer to teach - ers who are both new to teaching CS and do not have deep CS content knowledge , which is independent of whether or not these teachers have experience teaching other subjects . Table 1 : Participant Backgrounds ID HS Type Only CS Teacher Years As CS Teacher T1 Rural Yes 1 - 3 T2 Rural Yes 7 + T3 Suburban No 1 - 3 T4 Suburban Yes 1 - 3 T5 Suburban No 1 - 3 T6 Suburban Yes 4 - 6 T7 Suburban No 7 + T8 Suburban Yes 7 + T9 Suburban Yes 7 + T10 Suburban Yes 7 + T11 Suburban Yes 7 + T12 Suburban * No 7 + T13 Suburban * Yes 7 + T14 Urban Yes 1 - 3 T15 Urban Yes 1 - 3 T16 Urban Yes 7 + T17 Urban Yes 7 + Entries with ( * ) are private schools . All others are public . problem [ 2 , 32 , 34 , 51 ] . Fear of criticism has been cited as one of the major concerns people have when deciding whether or not to contribute to an online community [ 2 ] . Previous re - search discusses the diﬃculties of convincing CS teachers to contribute to online resource sites [ 24 , 26 , 35 , 46 ] . CS teach - ers are often unmotivated to share because they receive too little recognition for their contributions [ 24 , 26 ] . In this pa - per we document further concerns CS teachers have about judgment from their peers and propose strategies for encour - aging sharing and participation within discussion forums on resource sharing sites ( Section 4 . 3 ) . 3 . METHODS To ﬁnd the names of HS CS teachers , we used the member - ship directory from the College Board AP Computer Science Teacher Community [ 16 ] . On teachers’ school websites we found contact information for 149 of these teachers within a geographic region and emailed them to request video inter - views . We also posted a request on a CS Teachers Associa - tion email list within the same region . Each participant was oﬀered $ 50 for participating in an interview . During semi - structured interviews [ 21 ] that lasted approx - imately one hour ( ranging from 35 to 72 minutes ) , 17 teach - ers were asked about their use of online teaching resources . A summary of participant backgrounds is provided in Table 1 . All participants consented to have their interviews recorded . We entered the interview transcripts into Saturate App , which is a qualitative data analysis application [ 48 ] . We used this program to tag quotations of interest in a process of open coding [ 21 ] . After 12 interviews we did not hear sub - stantially new ideas , i . e . , we reached saturation in our sample [ 21 ] , but we interviewed all 17 teachers who replied to our interview request . We used these tags to identify a set of pri - mary insights based upon the themes and variations among interview responses . The three main themes that emerged centered around new CS teachers , resource adaptation , and resource sharing . 358 Although the teachers we interviewed had similar levels of experience to those reported in the Building an Operating System for Computer Science ( OS4CS ) Teacher Capacity Study [ 12 ] , we suspect that many of the teachers we inter - viewed have more experience than the average CS teacher . Additionally , teachers who have experience with online re - source sharing platforms might have been more likely to elect to participate in our interviews . We recognize these biases in our sample , but based upon the consistency within our sam - ple and with previous research we believe our participants’ experiences with CS teaching resources are representative of many other teachers’ experiences . 4 . FINDINGS 4 . 1 New CS Teachers Many of our participants had several years of experience teaching CS ( Table 1 ) , but they talked about their percep - tions of their needs as a teacher both past and present . One participant , who is an experienced teacher , reﬂected on his improvement in teaching over time : I actually feel sorry for the students I was teaching , like , seven or eight years ago . . . The classes were not nearly as good . ( Q4 . 1 . a , T10 ) Many of our participants acknowledged the importance of having adequate support for new CS teachers : I think a lot of them are really deer in the headlights of , ‘Oh my goodness , my principal said I’ve got to teach computer science , and how do I possibly do that and do that well ? ’ I think any support that they can get would be greatly appreciated . . . It’s kind of hard to ask , ‘How do I best teach a for - loop ? ’ when you may not completely understand what a for - loop does yourself . ( Q4 . 1 . b , T13 ) Even new teachers with some background in CS seek cur - riculum resources . One participant , who majored in math in college and took only a single college - level CS class , dis - cussed the importance of accessing resources when he ﬁrst started teaching CS : For me it was very daunting to be , like , I taught math for four years , and I’m feeling okay about this . Now I have to teach a totally diﬀerent subject . . . so it was nice to have a lot of resources that ﬁrst year . ( Q4 . 1 . c , T4 ) Many of our participants described the value of accessing a full curriculum as “a starting point” : Especially when you’re starting a new class , a new language or whatever , having a curriculum available certainly makes the job a lot easier . . . You’re not go - ing to , like , copy somebody else’s curriculum , but having a starting point is pretty valuable . And then maybe you would change it , or add to it , rather than having to start from scratch . ( Q4 . 1 . d , T12 ) Having other teachers’ resources as “a starting point” can help new teachers plan their full courses and more experi - enced teachers incorporate new lessons and activities into their existing courses . 4 . 2 Resource Adaptation Experienced teachers appeared motivated to improve their curriculum through providing novel assignments and provid - ing diﬀerentiated instruction . One of the participants said , “I constantly am looking to see what’s out there . I Google and search and look around , and there’s an unbelievable amount of good stuﬀ out there” ( Q4 . 2 . a , T10 ) . Another participant discussed the goal of accessing resources for inspiration and did not expect to use these materials without modiﬁcation : I look at something [ and say ] , ‘Oh , that’s a cool idea . I wonder how I can modify that for my students and change it a little bit . ’ To me that’s very valuable . I’m not saying that I need to be able to take someone’s lab and just copy and paste it . I don’t really want to do that , but it’s nice to have a starting point and somewhere to jump oﬀ ’cause the daunting part is building from scratch . ( Q4 . 2 . b , T4 ) Participants reported that having a “starting point” from which to adapt resources can save time and provide the op - portunity to adjust materials to suit their students’ needs . Participants reported that a major barrier to ﬁnding good resources is the time it takes to determine whether a re - source is consistent with their curriculum . When examining resources , one participant said that he often has to make many adjustments to the materials he ﬁnds . He said , “It’s not like it’s out there that easy to ﬁnd . You know , not in the form that I want it ( Q4 . 2 . c , T13 ) . ”Participants said that assessing and modifying pre - existing resources can be chal - lenging and time consuming . Another participant discussed concerns about determining if a particular resource ﬁts into the sequence of topics covered in his class : So I see that that’s a good idea , but I have to tailor it for what the students are learning at the moment or what they have learned so far . . . It’s really hard to ﬁnd a lesson that will ﬁt your class at the moment . ( Q4 . 2 . d , T8 ) Another teacher said that having the syllabus to see the outline of topics is essential for evaluating the adaptability of another teacher’s resources : Let me take a look at the syllabus and see where they’re going with it and is this something that is going to be a real eﬀective set of resources for me . ( Q4 . 2 . e , T11 ) Our participants indicated that adaptation is time consum - ing because it is diﬃcult to ﬁnd resources that match their curriculum standards , the needs of their students , and the topic sequence within their course . 4 . 3 Resource Sharing Online resource sharing sites rely upon teachers to upload and share their materials . Many participants said that they would like to help others by sharing their resources but that they had concerns about sharing . One teacher said that al - though most people are friendly on the sites , condescending comments do sometimes appear : 359 Somebody who is new and is starting out , maybe they’ll ask , like , stupid questions , right , because they don’t know . They’re just ﬁguring it out . Sometimes you’d see some kind of snobby sort of responses , but it wasn’t so bad . ( Q4 . 3 . a , T12 ) While unsupportive comments may not be common , many teachers remain concerned that resources they share will re - ceive a judgmental response . One teacher indicated his con - cern about sharing his resources because of his lack of back - ground in CS : A lot of us teaching high school , if we don’t have a computer science degree , there might be a reluctance that maybe this isn’t really quality stuﬀ , and maybe I don’t want it out there for my colleagues to nitpick . ( Q4 . 3 . b , T13 ) Teachers without formal training in CS appeared partic - ularly concerned about revealing their lack of CS content knowledge through sharing resources . 5 . SITE DESIGN SUGGESTIONS Based upon our interview data , we propose a number of strategies for organizing the landing page , main content , and discussion forums on sites for HS CS teachers with varying levels of experience . 5 . 1 Landing Page The landing page , which welcomes site visitors , should rec - ognize users will seek diﬀerent content and will be coming from various backgrounds . We recommend that the land - ing page of CS teacher sites allow site visitors to identify their background and their interests in visiting the site . Sites should ask two questions : “What is your current role ? ” and “What course and grade level are you interested in ? ” Asking these questions will allow sites to serve two important roles : providing teachers with more relevant content and helping people feel welcome on the site . As T13 indicated ( Q4 . 1 . b ) , many new teachers are uncertain of where to turn for help and can feel lost . By providing an opportunity for teachers to give information about their backgrounds , the sites can accommodate their diﬀering needs and signal that the site can be of use to them regardless of their prior experiences . 5 . 2 Main Content The main content of the site comprises the resources teachers seek . A number of sites have been developed to pro - vide additional support , but the common format for many of these sites is to have individual units of curriculum that are not connected to other materials from the same course oﬀer - ing . This structure is likely inaccessible to new CS teachers , who , by deﬁnition , have not taught the course before and often lack formal training in CS [ 12 ] . We suggest that sites display all resources in the context of the author’s full course . For new CS teachers with little or no background in CS , resources provided within the context of other course materials can provide the necessary support to become more eﬀective teachers . Several participants , in - cluding T12 ( Q4 . 1 . d ) and T4 ( Q4 . 2 . b ) , discussed the value in seeing other people’s resources and adapting these ma - terials . T8 ( Q4 . 2 . d ) discussed the challenge of determining if a resource from another author ﬁts within the structure of his class , and T11 discussed using the syllabus to deter - mine whether another teacher’s set of resources matches the structure of his course ( Q4 . 2 . e ) . This essential contextual information for resources is missing from how current sites for CS teachers organize resources . We argue that organizing resources within the context of a full course can help teachers understand where the resources ﬁt within the structure of the course . New teachers can ben - eﬁt greatly from being able to have a full set of resources to use the ﬁrst time they teach a course . In addition , for more experienced teachers the burden of adapting resources can be minimized if they can ﬁnd other teachers’ complete course materials that meet the same standards , serve a sim - ilar population of students , and have an ordering of topics that is consistent with their course . Organizing content in the context of complete courses would make resources more accessible to a wider population of CS teachers . 5 . 3 Discussion Forum Many of the existing sites oﬀer discussion forums for site members [ 1 , 5 , 16 , 20 , 15 , 22 , 28 , 47 ] . Several of the teachers we interviewed discussed concerns about being judged by their peers within these forums . We believe these concerns can be alleviated by allowing for both anonymous and non - anonymous posts within discussion forums . Although concerns about judgment from their peers have not been documented in the previous literature on resource sharing among CS teachers , our interview results indicated that fears of showing gaps in their CS knowledge may dis - courage many teachers from sharing their course materials with other teachers . We expect that teachers in many sub - jects would share these concerns , but we suspect that these concerns are exacerbated among CS teachers because often even experienced CS teachers do not have a background in CS [ 12 ] . Although many online help - seeking tools , such as Piazza , support both anonymous and non - anonymous post - ing , the only site that our participants discussed that en - abled this capability was the Beauty and Joy of Computing Piazza forum . T13 discussed concerns about not having a background in computer science and facing judgment from his colleagues about the content of his resources ( Q4 . 3 . b ) . These concerns about judgment could be reduced by allow - ing teachers to post content anonymously . 6 . DISCUSSION Our review of prior literature and our interviews indicate that the diﬃculties that experienced CS teachers face ﬁnding and adapting resources are even more burdensome for new teachers without background experience and content knowl - edge in CS . Finding appropriate materials to adapt can be challenging because individuals with and without domain knowledge search for materials diﬀerently [ 54 , 4 ] . Search of - ten requires users to know relevant vocabulary to ﬁnd what they are looking for [ 54 ] , which is unrealistic for many new CS teachers [ 12 , 42 ] . Current sites largely ignore the diﬀer - ences between new and experienced teachers , which makes it diﬃcult for new teachers to locate teaching resources . Adding metadata to resources related to their “pedagogical function , ownership , version and access provisions”is critical for enabling teachers to search for materials eﬀectively [ 13 ] . Many existing sites provide spaces for CS teachers to par - ticipate in online discussions and help forums . While our participants acknowledged the importance of ﬁnding high 360 quality teaching resources , they indicated concerns about being judged by their peers within these online spaces . These concerns would be particularly prohibitive for new teachers without content knowledge and formal training in CS . The literature on motivating participation in online communities more broadly has made a number of recommendations for motivating participation . These include promoting a user’s unique value to the community [ 2 , 36 ] , identifying and rec - ognizing authors [ 40 ] , and using reputation and recommen - dation systems to promote high quality resources [ 40 ] . While implementing these strategies might help online communi - ties for CS teachers motivate more experienced teachers to participate , further research is needed to understand how to overcome new teachers’ concerns about judgment . 7 . CONCLUSION As additional organizations become involved in training and supporting CS teachers , greater numbers of sites for CS teachers will appear over the coming months and years . Cur - rent initiatives to train new CS teachers [ 14 , 22 , 27 ] likely have diﬀerent challenges than previous models of profes - sional development ( PD ) because , unlike in other subjects , in CS many teachers have experience teaching another sub - ject and do not have a background in CS [ 12 ] . While prior work on online resource sharing sites for CS teachers has largely not mentioned the frequent lack of for - mal CS training among CS teachers , in our analysis , we found it to be productive to consider the needs of new and experienced teachers separately . We believe that the diﬀer - ences between teachers with and without CS content knowl - edge have implications for designing and evaluating online CS teacher communities , PD for CS teachers , and CS edu - cation research . In a review of PD programs for CS teachers , PD providers frequently reported that a primary goal was enhancing“par - ticipants’ understanding of particular CS concepts” [ 12 ] . This suggests that in practice PD providers are responding to the lack of content knowledge among new CS teachers . However , central questions remain related to developing best practices for overcoming teachers’ lack of background in CS and preparing them to be eﬀective CS teachers . There is considerable research on knowledge and behav - ioral diﬀerences between novice and expert , i . e . , experienced , teachers in many subject areas [ 52 , 53 ] . However , these mod - els account only for teaching expertise and not for teachers’ content knowledge . How these gaps aﬀect the ways in which CS teachers locate , adapt , and share teaching resources is an important area of further inquiry for understanding how to support CS teachers . Building an eﬀective resource shar - ing site for CS teachers requires both design expertise and knowledge of the teachers who use the site . Understanding teachers’ experiences using these resource sharing sites is im - portant for supporting the growing number of CS educators , understanding how teachers adopt new teaching practices , and informing the design of new curriculum sharing sites . 8 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was funded by National Science Foundation grant # 1339404 . We thank our interview participants for their thoughtful insights and contributions . 9 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Alice Community Forums . http : / / www . alice . org / community . [ 2 ] A . Ardichvili , V . Page , and T . Wentling . Motivation and barriers to participation in virtual knowledge - sharing communities of practice . Journal of knowledge management , 7 ( 1 ) : 64 – 77 , 2003 . [ 3 ] D . L . Ball and D . K . Cohen . Reform by the book : What is : Or might be : The role of curriculum materials in teacher learning and instructional reform ? Educational researcher , 25 ( 9 ) : 6 – 14 , 1996 . [ 4 ] S . Bhavnani . Important cognitive components of domain - speciﬁc search knowledge . Ann Arbor , 1001 : 48109 – 1092 , 2001 . [ 5 ] Blueroom , 2011 . http : / / blueroom . bluej . org . [ 6 ] S . E . Booth and S . B . Kellogg . Value creation in online communities for educators . British Journal of Educational Technology , 46 ( 4 ) : 684 – 698 , 2015 . [ 7 ] N . C . C . Brown and M . K¨olling . A tale of three sites : Resource and knowledge sharing amongst computer science educators . In ICER ’13 , pages 27 – 34 , New York , NY , USA , 2013 . ACM . [ 8 ] M . Buchholz , M . Saeli , and C . Schulte . PCK and reﬂection in computer science teacher education . In Proceedings of the 8th Workshop in Primary and Secondary Computing Education , pages 8 – 16 . ACM , 2013 . [ 9 ] T . Camp . ‘Computing , we have a problem . . . ’ . ACM Inroads , 3 ( 4 ) : 34 – 40 , Dec . 2012 . [ 10 ] Canterbury QuestionBank . http : / / web - cat . org / questionbank / . [ 11 ] B . Carlson and S . Reidy . Eﬀective access : Teachers’ use of digital resources . In Merlot International Conference , Vancouver , BC , Canada , volume 1 , page 2006 , 2003 . [ 12 ] J . Century , M . Lach , H . King , S . Rand , C . Heppner , B . Franke , and J . Westrick . Building an Operating System for Computer Science : Landscape Study . University of Chicago with UEI , 2013 . http : / / outlier . uchicago . edu / computerscience / OS4CS . [ 13 ] J . Christiansen and T . Anderson . Feasibility of course development based on learning objects : Research analysis of three case studies . International Journal of Instructional Technology and Distance Learning , March 2004 . [ 14 ] Code . org , 2013 . https : / / code . org . [ 15 ] Code . org Forums , 2013 . http : / / forum . code . org . [ 16 ] College Board . AP Computer Science Teacher Community . http : / / apcommunity . collegeboard . org / web / apcompsci / home . [ 17 ] College Board . Program Summary Report , 2015 . https : / / secure - media . collegeboard . org / digitalServices / pdf / research / 2015 / Program - Summary - Report - 2015 . pdf . [ 18 ] Computational Science Education Reference Desk . http : / / www . shodor . org / refdesk / . [ 19 ] Computer Science Open Educational Resources . http : / / iiscs . wssu . edu / drupal / csoer . [ 20 ] CAS Community . http : / / community . computingatschool . org . uk / door . [ 21 ] J . M . Corbin and A . C . Strauss . Basics of Qualitative Research . SAGE , Thousand Oaks , CA , 2008 . [ 22 ] CS10K Community . http : / / cs10kcommunity . org / . 361 [ 23 ] CSTA Source Online K - 12 Repository . http : / / drupdev . csc . villanova . edu / csta7 / . [ 24 ] C . Dichev and D . Dicheva . Open educational resources in computer science teaching . In SIGCSE ’12 , pages 619 – 624 , New York , NY , USA , 2012 . ACM . [ 25 ] Ensemble Computing Portal . http : / / www . computingportal . org / . [ 26 ] S . Fincher , M . K¨olling , I . Utting , N . Brown , and P . Stevens . Repositories of teaching material and communities of use : Nifty Assignments and the greenroom . In ICER ’10 , pages 107 – 114 , New York , NY , USA , 2010 . ACM . [ 27 ] Google Computer Science for High School . http : / / www . cs4hs . com / . [ 28 ] Greenroom , 2010 . http : / / greenroom . greenfoot . org . [ 29 ] P . Grossman and C . Thompson . Learning from curriculum materials : Scaﬀolds for new teachers ? Teaching and Teacher Education , 24 ( 8 ) : 2014 – 2026 , 2008 . [ 30 ] S . Howard and J . McKeown . Online practice & oﬄine roles : A cultural view of teachers’ low engagement in online communities . AERA paper proposal , University of Wollongong , 2011 . [ 31 ] P . Hubwieser , J . Magenheim , A . M¨uhling , and A . Ruf . Towards a conceptualization of pedagogical content knowledge for computer science . In Proceedings of the ninth annual international ACM conference on International computing education research , pages 1 – 8 . ACM , 2013 . [ 32 ] A . Kankanhalli , B . Tan , and K . - K . Wei . Contributing knowledge to electronic knowledge repositories : An empirical investigation . MIS Q . , 29 ( 1 ) : 113 – 143 , Mar . 2005 . [ 33 ] K . H . Koh . Improving teachers’ assessment literacy through professional development . Teaching Education , 22 ( 3 ) : 255 – 276 , 2011 . [ 34 ] R . E . Kraut , P . Resnick , S . Kiesler , M . Burke , Y . Chen , N . Kittur , J . Konstan , Y . Ren , and J . Riedl . Building Successful Online Communities : Evidence - Based Social Design . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 2011 . [ 35 ] M . Leake and C . M . Lewis . Designing a new system for sharing computer science teaching resources . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing Companion , CSCW ’16 Companion , pages 321 – 324 , New York , NY , USA , 2016 . ACM . [ 36 ] K . Ling , G . Beenen , P . Ludford , X . Wang , K . Chang , X . Li , D . Cosley , D . Frankowski , L . Terveen , A . M . Rashid , P . Resnick , and R . Kraut . Using social psychology to motivate contributions to online communities . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication , 10 ( 4 ) : 00 – 00 , 2005 . [ 37 ] J . Margolis . Stuck in the Shallow End : Education , Race , and Computing . The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 2008 . [ 38 ] MIT App Inventor Resources . http : / / explore . appinventor . mit . edu / resources . [ 39 ] S . Mitchell and W . Lutters . Assessing the value of computer science course material repositories . In CSEETW ’06 , pages 2 – 2 , April 2006 . [ 40 ] S . Monge , R . Ovelar , and I . Azpeitia . Repository 2 . 0 : Social dynamics to support community building in learning object repositories . Interdisciplinary Journal of E - Learning and Learning Objects , 4 ( 1 ) : 191 – 204 , January 2008 . [ 41 ] NCWIT Engage CS Edu . https : / / www . engage - csedu . org / . [ 42 ] L . Ni and M . Guzdial . Who AM I ? : Understanding high school computer science teachers’ professional identity . In SIGCSE ’12 , pages 499 – 504 , New York , NY , USA , 2012 . ACM . [ 43 ] L . Ni , M . Guzdial , A . E . Tew , B . Morrison , and R . Galanos . Building a community to support HS CS teachers : The disciplinary commons for computing educators . In SIGCSE ’11 , pages 553 – 558 , New York , NY , USA , 2011 . ACM . [ 44 ] Nifty assignments . http : / / nifty . stanford . edu / . [ 45 ] M . B . Robertshaw , A . Walker , M . Recker , H . Leary , and L . Sellers . New Science of Learning : Cognition , Computers and Collaboration in Education , chapter Experiences in the Field : The Evolution of a Technology - Oriented Teacher Professional Development Model , pages 307 – 323 . Springer New York , New York , NY , 2010 . [ 46 ] K . Sanders , M . Ahmadzadeh , T . Clear , S . H . Edwards , M . Goldweber , C . Johnson , R . Lister , R . McCartney , E . Patitsas , and J . Spacco . The Canterbury QuestionBank : Building a repository of multiple - choice CS1 and CS2 questions . In ITiCSE - WGR ’13 , pages 33 – 52 , New York , NY , USA , 2013 . ACM . [ 47 ] ScratchEd . http : / / scratched . gse . harvard . edu / . [ 48 ] J . Sillito . Saturate App . http : / / www . saturateapp . com / . [ 49 ] M . Smith . Computer Science For All . https : / / www . whitehouse . gov / blog / 2016 / 01 / 30 / computer - science - all . [ 50 ] M . Sosteric and S . Hesemeier . When is a learning object not an object : A ﬁrst step towards a theory of learning objects . The International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning , 3 ( 2 ) , 2002 . [ 51 ] S . J . J . Tedjamulia , D . L . Dean , D . R . Olsen , and C . C . Albrecht . Motivating content contributions to online communities : Toward a more comprehensive theory . In Proceedings of the 38th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , pages 193b – 193b , Jan 2005 . [ 52 ] A . Tsui . Understanding expertise in teaching : Case studies of second language teachers . Ernst Klett Sprachen , 2003 . [ 53 ] D . A . Westerman . Expert and novice teacher decision making . Journal of teacher education , 42 ( 4 ) : 292 – 305 , 1991 . [ 54 ] R . W . White , S . T . Dumais , and J . Teevan . Characterizing the inﬂuence of domain expertise on web search behavior . In Proceedings of the Second ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining , WSDM ’09 , pages 132 – 141 , New York , NY , USA , 2009 . ACM . 362