AC 2009 - 107 : WHAT HAS FINS LIKE A WHALE , SKIN LIKE A LIZARD , AND EYES LIKE A MOTH ? THE FUTURE OF ENGINEERING Marjan Eggermont , University of Calgary Carla Gould , Ontario College of Art and Design Casey Wong , Ontario College of Art and Design Michael Helms , Georgia Institute of Technology Jeannette Yen , Georgia Institute of Technology Djordje Zegarac , University of Calgary Sean Gibbons , University of Montana Carl Hastrich , Ontario College of Art and Design Bruce Hinds , Ontario College of Art and Design Denise DeLuca , Biomimicry Institute jessica ching , Ontario College of Art and Design © American Society for Engineering Education , 2009 P age 14 . 1365 . 1 “What has fins like a whale , skin like a lizard , and eyes like a moth ? The future of engineering” 1 Abstract Four Universities collaborated on a biomimicry ( a relatively new science that studies nature , its models , systems , processes and elements and then imitates or takes creative inspiration from them to solve human problems sustainably 2 ) design project . The universities provided students from freshman to PhD level with backgrounds in engineering , biology , industrial design and art . The students ran the project with support from professors , a non - for - profit institute , and a business client . This paper will describe biomimicry as it is being taught in a first year engineering design and communication course , how four of the participating universities experienced this project and approach biomimicry , how the universities communicated and integrated their design ideas and process , and how the project ultimately resulted in a design prototype for the participating company . Introduction “Machines are an effect of art , which is nature’s ape , and they reproduce not its forms but the operation itself” 3 In our first year design course technical drawing components are developed as supporting elements to the evolution of ideas , rather than as an end in themselves . Biomimicry has become a permanent feature in our course . We explore its history and current research areas . Biomimicry allows students a lot of freedom in their design , but also links engineering concepts to tangible examples . To date , over 2500 biomimicry drawing projects have been created . One of the key features of a design course is that students study subjects in breadth rather than depth . In studying a wide variety of subjects , design courses employ a wider variety of specialists and this facilitates a cross - linking of cultures and perspectives . The conjoining of previously unrelated ideas , thoughts and concepts is well recognized as a feature of creative thinking . Introducing a full range of Figure 1 : The Biomimicry Design Spiral P age 14 . 1365 . 2 subjects allows students to practice and develop their integrative skills 4 . Biomimicry is integrative by nature . In January of 2008 a biomimicry project of a more international flavor was presented via e - mail . The e - mail asked for students and supportive instructors and professors who were interested in a collaborative , real - world biomimicry design project . One of our first year design students needed a flexible , but comparable first year design project and so , a collaboration begun . This paper is also collaborative in nature . Participants have each given their summery of the experience and , as the variety in design approaches , so the variety in approaches and experiences will follow below . This paper will conclude with a summery of the methods of communication the logistics , and the outcome of this North American collaborative design project . What is Biomimicry ? Janine Benyus coined the term “biomimicry” in 1997 when she published her book Biomimicry : Innovation Inspired by Nature . She created this term by combining bios , which refers to life or living things , and mimicry , which means to copy or emulate . So in it’s most simple terms biomimicry means copying life . Benyus , an ever - curious biologist and captivating storyteller , defines biomimicry as “the conscience emulation of nature’s genius . ” She uses the word ‘conscience’ to imply intent . When you use biomimicry as a design tool , you begin your design process with intent of Figure 3 : Student project based on frog’s feet P age 14 . 1365 . 3 emulating nature . She uses the word ‘emulation’ to suggest that biomimicry isn’t about just mimicking nature ; it is about extracting the best ideas and the strategies from nature and using them as the basis for our designs . She uses the phrase ‘nature’s genius’ because the forms , processes , and systems found in nature are fabulously ingenious compared to our own technologies . As Thomas Edison once said , “Until man duplicates a blade of grass , nature can laugh at his so - called scientific knowledge . ” A less eloquent but perhaps more pragmatic definition is that biomimicry is a sustainable design tool based on emulating strategies used by living things to perform functions that we want our technologies to perform – everything from creating color to generating energy . The goal of biomimicry is to design products and processes , companies and policies - - new ways of living - - that are well adapted to life on earth over the long haul . The Project and the Client One of the goals of The Biomimicry Institute ( TBI ) is to facilitate the integration of biomimicry into educational systems . At the university level , we are working with several universities in different settings to develop tools and systems to bring biology to the design table . One lesson we have learned in this effort is that biomimicry is best learned in an interactive and interdisciplinary setting . This means creating conditions for students to practice biomimicry with students from different disciplines , including engineering , design , biology , and business . For this project , TBI collaborated with a company called Pacific Outdoor Equipment ( POE ) ( http : / / www . pacoutdoor . com / 2008 / index . cfm ) to come up with the idea of creating an experimental on - line student - run biomimicry design project . POE , whose motto is “Good gear = less waste” , was willing to forego all IP issues in order to support its position of being leaders in sustainability with a focus on high quality innovative design . Discussions between TBI staff and POE designers led to the decision to have the students design a specialized tarp that could be used , nominally , as a bottomless ultra - light backpacking tent . But like all biomimicry design project , that was only the starting point of what a simple tarp could be . The following design brief requirements were added : Design elements : • Aerodynamics • Tautness • Ground connections • Exterior water shedding ability • Interior ventilation ( or condensation drainage ) [ could utilize peak vents ] • High strength edge and interior tie outs • Fabric - Polyurethane coated vs . Silicon coated 40D ripstop Opportunities : 1 ) We have the capability to both weld seams and stitch and seam tape to create waterproof products 2 ) Source color - morphing fabrics 3 ) 3D shaping to maximize ventilation and aerodynamics Constraints : 1 ) No PVC materials or coated materials ( PVC is present in current seam tapeable silicon materials ) 2 ) Current Polyurethane coated 40 denier rip - stop nylon stretches and shrinks in P age 14 . 1365 . 4 response to moisture and temperature . Relevant to use of tie - outs to secure shelters . With these new designs we are looking to do two things : 1 ) For the smaller single and two person shelters we are targeting customers looking for a durable , lightweight , aerodynamic shelter designed to act as part of an overall sleep system consisting of ground tarp , sleeping pad , sleeping bag and shelter . 2 ) On the larger four person tarp and pyramid we are looking more at customers who need to cover a larger area as might be found on river trips , car camping , backcountry skiing etc . Timeline : Finished designs or components are needed by March 31 , 2008 to provide time for POE factory prototyping , product photography to be completed by April 30 , 2009 and final catalog proofing , printing and delivery by June 1 , 2009 . The Approach and the Institution a . The Ontario College of Art and Design For the OCAD team , this project was a great opportunity to learn and experiment with the tools of Biomimicry in an interdisciplinary team , allowing us to better understand the role of the designer within this environment . This was a new experience for us , and we were excited and curious to work with scientists , engineers and manufacturers simultaneously . Interdisciplinary learning and studio models had been discussed many times within our educational environment , but we had not yet had the opportunity to work with professions outside the field of design . As students defining our identity as designers and our roles within creative teams of the future , we felt this would be further defined and shaped by these experiences . By working co - operatively within the alternative framework of Biomimicry , this project has begun to challenge our notion of where we as designers fit into creative teams for our future careers , as well as how we can best contribute to future Biomimetic projects . While the answer has yet to be concluded , the conversation has certainly been sparked within our team . These discussions have in a large part been possible due to the open approach to this project from other members , and the tools of communication available to us . We were impressed by the flexible , friendly and playful nature of the group environment , and found the ability to share thoughts vocally over Skype and visually through Basecamp indispensible . Identify The Biomimicry Design Spiral is parallel to our traditional Design Process , beginning with an “Identify” stage in which the problem is defined . After receiving an initial design brief ( to design an innovative , tarp / shelter system for over - night hiking and camping ) , the problem definition involves exhaustive research on the subject at hand , including the experience of the user and other analogous products on the market . This first step is vital for understanding the opportunities for design in areas of form , function , or system . Identifying these opportunities then allow us to discover and apply relevant biological models . In this project , we had the luxury of speaking with our client , POE , on several occasions to clarify our understanding of the design brief . We supplemented this information with camping and hiking research , market research of these systems , and user experience research . As a result of online and in - store observations and interactions , we noticed patterns emerging . Our findings indicated hikers and campers had common issues like tent stability , aerodynamics , and inconvenient external parts to the tent / shelter system . P age 14 . 1365 . 5 Based on the feedback through this process , we revisited the brief with a greater sense of understanding to the problems POE had identified . It was clear there were opportunities to extend the tent and shelter systems beyond the current offerings on the market . We felt the biggest potential direction was to steer away from the utilitarian shapes and aim for a more fluid , innovative , user friendly , and stable tent system . Translate The “Translate” stage in the design spiral is all about making the connection between the design problem and the natural world . A design problem is very specific and the world of nature is very broad , in effect we needed a tool to funnel every organism we know of into the most appropriate ones for our goal . We did this through asking ourselves questions outlining broad principles such as ; “How does nature manage drag ? ” These questions were intended to draw us towards organisms with applicable natural strategies ; and this stage was a big challenge for us , as designers . The problem lay mainly in the wording of these questions , which had a large impact on the direction in which we would search for suitable organisms and strategies . For instance , when exploring the issue of reducing drag , we started by asking the question , “How does nature use wind ? ” The example that resurfaced several times was the shape and function of wings . But when we delved further into the strategies of wings , such as the layering structure of feathers or the hollow bones of birds , we found the principles difficult to apply and unhelpful in trying to reduce drag in tents . We then started over with a different question , “How does nature manage drag ? ” This led us to completely different organisms such as the boxfish , whose body shape allows it to withstand turbulent tidal currents . Then were we able to arrive at the concept of maintaining stability in a tent through an aerodynamic form . In Figure 4 the orange text is a list of the issues from the Identify stage ; the blue branches are the organisms , systems and natural principles , which we associated ( ‘translated’ ) with each issue . P age 14 . 1365 . 6 In hindsight , one of our main weaknesses as designers in Biomimicry is our lack of knowledge in biology or natural systems ; therefore we should have extended the questions , which we were brainstorming , to our colleagues . This would have garnered a much larger pool of great organisms and strategies to work with , as well as more meaningful group interaction and effort . Figure 4 : An example of ' translation ' brainstorms . P age 14 . 1365 . 7 Apply One of the key contributions we felt that we could offer as designers was our ability to draw and communicate concepts , strategies and natural principles visually . In our studio , this is as important as speaking or writing . In the “Apply” phase of the Design Spiral our explorations were of a graphical / representational nature . We did this in a variety of ways from quick studies of forms or ideas , to more detailed diagrams of factual or theoretical understanding . Sketching provided us a means to be creative , curious and playful with testing new ideas . It allowed us to imagine how the strategies of an organism could be applied , what the physical object could be like , or how the object might behave . For this project , our explorations were mostly quite broad and investigated many things at a surface level but were not able to reach a more detailed solution due to lack of time . Diagramming was also a central tool for us . By drawing on paper what we understood the relations or functions of an organism or idea to be , we could better communicate our intentions and understanding to the scientists and engineers on the team . Any misunderstandings could be also clarified or debated , to the benefit of the group . Although other disciplines like science or engineering also use graphics heavily , they are often to illustrate hierarchies , taxonomies and systems . Our diagrams differ in their use to study the relations between materials , environment and performance . Diagrams also made information quickly accessible for reference . Figure 3 : Sketching during ' Apply ' phase . P age 14 . 1365 . 8 Evaluate The concepts that we developed never reached the “Evaluate” phase of the design spiral ; therefore we are unable to assess the validity of our ideas against life’s principles , we simply ran out of time . Conclusion In retrospect , the Biomimicry process is not removed from our experiences of a regular design process , which also uses a process of inquest , exploration and experimentation . However , using a focused and educated lens of Biomimicry in the design process / spiral opened us up to research and inspiration that may not have been explored otherwise . Additionally , the overarching criteria of Life’s Principles add a layer of meaning , function and success in each Biomimicry project . In order to accelerate and deepen the research better tools and processes need to be practiced to collaborate with the different disciplines . The collaborative Biomimicry process adds a great deal of breadth and depth of knowledge , perspective and feedback . Although we feel that in this project , we did not use the group resources in terms of knowledge and advice to the fullest extent , we recognize that having different disciplines present at the table is immensely valuable to any Biomimicry design project . Better dialogue and questions from our team could have given us the opportunity to find more inspirational models than those we had found and could have pushed the thinking further . In future studio work we are beginning to see how we could evolve our practices to make this possible . Figure 5 : Strain on grommets in relation to leaf vein structure . P age 14 . 1365 . 9 b . The University of Montana Our design team combined engineers , designers and biologists from across the U . S . and Canada , using an innovative web - based community design platform and SKYPE ( software that allows users to make telephone calls over the Internet . Calls to other users of the service and to free - of - charge numbers are free , while calls to other landlines and mobile phones can be made for a fee . Additional features include instant messaging , file transfer and video conferencing ) to collaborate . It was enlightening for me , as a biologist , to see how engineers and designers were trained to deconstruct a problem into functions , processes , constraints and solutions and then organize that decomposition into a visual framework . I feel like we were successful in merging engineering principals with the Biomimicry Design Spiral , which helped translate biological functions and adaptations into human designs . This project gave me a firmer footing in the design process , and I hope that my biological expertise helped my colleagues find inspiration from nature . This project assisted all of us to understand better the realities of the design process . We often found that certain ideas looked great on paper , but were not practical for our limited time frame and resources . I enjoyed working with students from different disciplines and locations , but it occasionally became difficult to collaborate with my co - designers without seeing them face - to - face . In the end , despite all difficulties and limitations , I was impressed to find that our group had actually produced deliverable concepts and ideas that were being incorporated into a real design . I am grateful to POE and TBI for organizing this pilot project and I hope it inspires future cross - disciplinary design collaborations . c . Center for Biologically Inspired Design at Georgia Institute of Technology ( CBID ) In the spring of 2007 the Center for Biologically Inspired Design at Georgia Institute of Technology ( CBID ) participated in a biologically inspired design exercise with the intent of Figure 6 : ' Basecamp ' message page . P age 14 . 1365 . 1 0 better understanding the cognitive processes involved in biologically inspired design . In our previously conducted in situ studies 5 , 6 , 7 of biologically inspired design in fall 2006 and 2007 , we observed biologically inspired design classes and semester long student projects . This study differed in four important ways : 1 ) it included professional , experienced designers and engineers as well as students , 2 ) it focused on a specific , real - world design project , 3 ) it was a collaborative effort across six different locations , and 4 ) we provided specific process guidance to gain deeper insight into some of the observations made in earlier studies . Here we summarize our key observations from the CBID location . Study Method Observations took place in three contexts : 1 ) local collaborative design of CBID designers , 2 ) remote collaborative design calls , and 3 ) observation of documents distributed through basecamp , described in the next section . Both Helms and Yen participated in all three contexts and were present for all of the local design sessions and more than 90 % of the remote collaborative design calls . Yen actively participated as a designer and as the primary biologist . Helms participated as an observer and to facilitate certain high - level design processes . Local collaborative design for CBID took place on the Georgia Institute of Technology campus , in Atlanta , GA . The initial design team of nine members met weekly for 90 minutes for the first four weeks . During these meetings , the team focused on understanding the process of biologically inspired design , on understanding the design problem , and on brainstorming useful potential design solutions . Helms observed and informally documented conversations and whiteboard drawings . A formal coding scheme was not developed or used for the documentation in this study , nor were audio or visual recordings used , other than by - hand transcription . The large CBID design team did not have a single leader , engaged in too much theoretical discussion , had conflicting opinions about design , and progressed slowly over the first four weeks . Six weeks into the process , the local CBID team was divided in two separate teams to pursue independent lines of design . Each group followed a different design trajectory : the first attempted to generate as many ideas as possible , using the design spiral technique . The second employed the more standard engineering techniques such as those found in Pahl and Beitz 8 . Teams were instructed not to communicate design ideas between teams , until a final design reconciliation session , the final week of the project . Key Observations While there were many interim designs , sketches , and ideas , three observations stand out . First , that problem understanding among individuals was a fluid , heterogeneous , and often tacit agglomeration of functional , structural and behavioral requirements and constraints . Second , following from the first , that individual understanding of the problem varied greatly , requiring a great deal of rationalization before a common problem description could be agreed upon . Third , through iterative design , ideas from biology influenced not just the design , but also the understanding of the problem , which in turn influenced which additional biological influences ( or other solutions ) were recalled next . This process we call compound analogical design 1 . Problem Understanding In our earlier work on compound analogical design , we developed a framework explaining the process of analogical design as a dynamic interaction between problem understanding and analogical design 5 . Briefly , we claim that as a problem is explored , the broader understanding P age 14 . 1365 . 1 1 provides access to new analogues . The understanding gained from new analogues , in turn informs further understanding of the problem . This process may iterate indefinitely , and is most certainly interleaved with other design processes , such as design draft , technical analysis , and testing . We acknowledge that this framework leaves many questions unanswered , many of which revolve around the elaboration of the problem . How are elaborations represented and organized ? How are they stored , accessed , retrieved ? What are the similarities and differences between the evolving problem understanding and the understanding of known solution ? What is the effect of “distant analogies” such as those from biology on the evolving problem understanding , versus “close analogies” , such as existing engineering solutions to similar problems 1 ? Pahl and Bietz use functional decomposition to represent manageable divisions of a design problem . This process is largely used to affect an engineering “divide and conquer” approach for creating a manageable design project . Pahl and Bietz use substance flow diagrams to determine and arrange primary and ancillary functions . Chandrasakaran 9 likewise describes the decomposition task of design as being either functional , or where components match to functions , as a part sub - part decomposition . In Goel’s Structure - Behavior - Function ( SBF ) theories 10 , 11 , functional decomposition is explained through an intervening behavior . In SBF functions are accomplished by complex behaviors , which can be explained as a series of states and transitions . Each complex behavior can be further broken down into more detailed functions . Each SBF model then , is a decomposition of F ( BF * ) , until some primitive level function is encountered , at which point the decomposition must stop . In the course of observing biologically inspired design teams at work in past research 7 , we note that functional decomposition plays a central role . Other problem decompositions are likewise possible , such as structural , system and assembly decompositions . The motion of a complex machine is often explained by the motion of the subcomponents of the system , which in turn is decomposed into ever smaller subcomponents , until some level of description is achieved beyond which further decomposition yields no further explanatory power . Furthermore , problem decompositions need not be composed of homogenous units . In practice , we see problem decompositions unfold as a complex interplay among , inter alia , structures , functions , past solutions and constraints . We leave the complex topic of problem decomposition to further studies . For purposes of our study , we documented problem decompositions at three points in the process . The first problem decomposition occurs with the initial design specification . Figure 7 graphically depicts the decomposition of the tent problem as a set of nine ( 9 ) performance characteristics . This “flat” description prepared by a senior engineer specializing in tent design describes characteristics of the desired tent , while leaving the implications and connections among characteristics unspecified . P age 14 . 1365 . 1 2 Subsequent to the delivery of the design specification , within ten days , designers from three separate locations , remote to the authors , provided input to the design problem in the form of brainstorming documents . These brainstorming documents further elaborate on the desired characteristics of the tent , offer solutions tied to specific characteristics , and elaborate on some of the constraints associated with current solutions used to solve the design problem . Figure 8 shows graphically the accumulation of design characteristics , solutions and constraints compiled Figure 7 : Initial Design Specification Figure 8 : A graphical representation of the combined results from individual brainstorming documents . P age 14 . 1365 . 1 3 from the initial design specification and the brainstorming documents . It is clear that some biological analogues have entered the design process . The solutions to the problem of wind / cold were all biologically inspired . Finally , we show a purely functional decomposition of the problem . During the second week of design , the authors Helms and Yen imposed a process of graphical functional decomposition on the local ( CBID ) design team . During a ninety minute design the CBID design team was instructed to work together to develop a functional decomposition of the design problem . Four unrelated examples of functional decomposition were provided for the team several days prior for review . Additionally , five of the team members were exposed to this process of functional decomposition during the biologically inspired design class held in the previous semester . Figure 10 graphically represents the results of that ninety - minute design session . Figure 9 : A graphical representation of the functional decomposition exercise from the . . . . design team . Shared Understanding The process of functional decomposition seeks to make explicit the sub - function relationships among functions . Starting from a known function , such as a function provided for in the requirements document , the design team asks : “What functions explain how this function is accomplished ? ” If an answer is available , the function is listed as a sub - function of the first . For instance , for “transport equipment” , the “reduce weight” and “reduce volume” functions both enable the transportation of the equipment ; the “how” sub - functions provide levels of additional detail . Also note that some sub - functions are related to more than one super - function , as in the case of “keep wind out” . Thus , when asking the question “how” , one should look at the functions already available in addition to new ones . If an impasse is reached , that is , no sub - function can be identified , the team may ask the question “What function explains why this function is necessary ? ” In this case , the team is looking for a higher level , more abstract super - function . Moving in this direction may expose new avenues to the designers in their decomposition . For instance , when the team realizes that reducing weight and reducing volume has a common super - function “transport tent” some radical adaptation for P age 14 . 1365 . 1 4 transporting the tent may arise , such as creating a modular design that folds into walking sticks for easy transportation . In fact , this is what happened in our tent design . All additional known functions of the design problem are addressed in this same way . Often requirements are presented in terms of known solutions , for example tautness and interior ventilation . These are in fact solutions to implicit functions , for example maintaining stability and preventing condensation respectively . The team , in this case , needed to use their knowledge of tents and the solutions described to ferret out the function , which they needed to attain . The process of functionally decomposing the problem was very challenging for the participants as a group . One engineer , who said after the exercise “that was a wholly unnatural act” , as they sought to integrate a comprehensive functional decomposition , expressed the frustration in the group best . Whereas such group exercises are challenging , individual functional decompositions progress much more quickly . This provides an interesting juxtaposition with creativity exercises such as brainstorming , where groups seem to enhance the exercise . To explain the difficulties groups have vs . individuals , we put forth two possible hypotheses . The first , we will call the representation effect , the second we will call the rationalization effect . In the representation effect , we speculate that the simplicity of our representation model - - functional boxes , connected by lines that represent only sub - function relationships - - is an open - ended and yet simplistic model that attempts to represent only the functional relationships of a design problem . It appears , however , when reasoning about the problem , that many more considerations are at play . Designers draw on their own experience , observed behaviors of systems , knowledge of materials , the environment , and their own goals and motivations to describe a problem , all of which seem to be connected to the functions being considered . For instance , the tent design problem called for a tent that operated in two separate modes : being transported and being used as shelter . While these different modes require different functionality , they are linked structurally , and impose competing constraints . Provided with such a sparse representation framework , it may be that group members had difficulty communicating their own , complex understanding of the problem to each other . Because the problem of group communication is eliminated when acting alone , the problem decomposition progresses more smoothly . A more robust external representation system may alleviate this problem , at least in part . In the rationalization effect , we speculate that each person in the group builds models of problem understanding piecemeal , on the fly , informed by their unique , individual experience . We have common world experiences that usually enable us to relate these models to each other , at least well enough to achieve some common goal ( common ground ) . However , what we sought was an explicit externalization of internal mental models . We further speculate that our large , complex internal mental models do not exist as explicit representations in long term memory , but are rather “compiled at run time” depending on context and goals . We often hear personal narratives such as “when I was camping I tripped on the guidelines all of the time , ” suggesting that internal models are being created on the fly from personal experiences . Making our own internal models explicit is an ongoing internal process of rationalizing our experience , knowledge , goals and “small bits of ossified models” with the current context in which the model is being built . This rationalization , when it occurs with just one individual , can usually be integrated with a minimum of internal conflict . However , in the context of group activity , where experience , knowledge and goals vary are varied , our models of problem understand are constantly forced to adapt to new input while they are being formed . That is , while we are busy rationalizing some bit of the model in our head , someone else is communicating bits of their P age 14 . 1365 . 1 5 partially formed model to us . These partially formed new models cause us to reformulate models mid - process . This seems to be particularly problematic when our experiences are drastically different ( biologists and engineers ) or our internal models in a particular design space are rather sparse . Of Whales , Bees , and Tents As described in our compound analogical design framework the process of design by analogy is iterative 5 . Solutions offered by one analogy offer new insights into problems , which in turn yield new analogies . In this study , we documented one specific instance of analogical reasoning . In this instance , a designer identified a new way of combining the functions for tautness and for the small volume needed for transportability . He conceived of a pneumatic system with variable and controllable rigidity properties . It could be inflated to increase rigidity , then deflated and rolled up for transportation . The new function “vary rigidity” ( fig . 10 step 1 ) , lead to an analogy to sperm whale spermaceti ( fig . 10 step 2 ) , a substance that varies from an oil - like liquid consistency to a butter - like solid when it is cooled . It was speculated that the sperm whale uses this difference in density to control buoyancy . Note that while the sperm whale uses the liquid - to - solid phase change to control buoyancy , the designer is thinking about the same phase change to control rigidity ( fig . 10 step 3 ) . This leap uses the related properties of density and rigidity of liquids and solids to make the connection between whale spermaceti and the tent design . Once the leap to “phase change” was made and incorporated into the problem understanding , this enabled a further analogy based on phase change to be made ( fig 10 step 4 ) . The wax in bees’ nests uses phase change to control temperature . The function of temperature control is not related to rigidity control in the problem understanding , but the mechanism , phase change , is the same . Thus one might use something like bees wax for rigidity , volume , and temperature control . This demonstrates problem understanding evolving as a direct result of the analogues examined , and how the evolving problem understanding likewise influences the analogues examined . P age 14 . 1365 . 1 6 Figure 10 : Compound analogical design framework Note the mechanism of phase change has at least three associated functions : control buoyancy , control temperature , control rigidity ( fig . 10 step5 ) . These functions are related by common properties and relationships between liquid and solid states of a given substance . This example provides a case where individuals search and recall analogies using a complex interaction between knowledge of the physical world , behaviors and functions . Functional analogy alone is not capable of duplicating such an example . d . The University of Calgary The engineering instructors of our design course developed an action based approached to design that is intended to better reflect the actions taken by successful design engineers . This action - based approach is based on the activities of design : familiarization , functionality and testing or Fft . Familiarization requires the students to seek many different points of view about the design problems from the people impacted by the design . They are urged to get out of the classroom and go talk to a wide variety of people who have interest in and knowledge about the design problem . Functionality refers to the determination of what the design has to do rather than what the design will look like . Testing , the third component requires that students develop tests at every stage of their design evolution . The act of familiarization , or learning how others think about the P age 14 . 1365 . 1 7 problem , ultimately leads to a clear problem statement . Designers are in agreement that developing a clear understanding of the problem is central to good design practice 12 . The goal of participating in this project was to give one of our design students exposure to a real world design problem using Fft in combination with the biomimicry design spiral . Figure 11 shows some of our initial thoughts during the familiarization stage . The familiarization stage during this project was seen as an umbrella stage that included three biomimicry spiral phases : “Identify : Develop a Design Brief of the human need : • Develop a Design Brief with specifics about the problem to be resolved • Break down the Design Brief to identify the core of the problems and the design specifications • Identify the function you want your design to accomplish : What do you want your design to do ? ( not “what do you want to design ? ” ) . Continue to ask why until you get to the bottom of the problem . • Define the specifics of the problem : • Target Market : who is involved with the problem and who will be involved with the solution ? • Location : where is the problem , where will the solution be applied ? Translate : Biologize the question ; ask the Design Brief from Nature ' s perspective : • Translate the design function into functions carried out in nature . Ask , “How does Nature do this function ? ” “How does Nature NOT do this function ? ” • Reframe questions with additional key words . • Define the Habitat / Location • Climate conditions • Nutrient conditions • Social conditions • Temporal conditions Observe : Look for the champions in nature who answer / resolve your challenges • Find the best Natural Models to answer your questions . • Consider Literal and Metaphorical • Find champion adapters by asking , “whose survival depends on this ? ” • Find organisms that are most challenged by the problem you are trying to solve , but are unfazed by it . • Look to the extremes of the habitat • Turn the problem inside out and on its head • Open discussions with Biologists and specialists in the field” 13 P age 14 . 1365 . 1 8 Figure 11 : Familiarization stage comparable with the Biomimicry Spiral ' Distill’ , ‘Translate ' , and ‘Observe’ phases We also explored existing designs and found an example that served both our collective inexperience with camping as Europeans ( the kind that do not camp due to lack of natural areas ) and a common problem with biomimetic design : abstraction . Figure 12 shows some interesting design ideas on the left and a motorized La - Z - Boy on the right . Figure 12 : Familiarization - existing ideas from the interesting to the absurd In past assignments most students had trouble understanding functional abstraction . They seemed to be unable to get away from the visual : bunny slippers and cheetah - patterned La - Z - Boys are therefore not uncommon in novice design courses . The next two phases in the biomimicry spiral address some of the abstraction difficulties and were very useful for our students , who during the ‘functionality’ phase of our design process do not always address these issues ( and often would not know what questions to ask in the first place ) . The phases comparable to the functionality stage of design are as follows : “Abstract : Find the repeating patterns and processes within nature that achieve success • Create taxonomy of life’s strategies P age 14 . 1365 . 1 9 • Select the champions with the most relevant strategies to your particular design challenge . • Abstract from this list the repeating successes and principles that achieve this success . Apply : Develop ideas and solutions based on the natural models • Develop concepts and ideas that apply the lessons from your Natural teachers . • Look into applying these lessons as deep as possible in your designs : • Mimicking Form : • Find out details of the morphology • Understand scale effects • Consider influencing factors on the effectiveness of the form for the organism • Consider ways in which you might deepen the conversation to also mimic process and / or ecosystem • Mimicking Function : • Find out details of the biological process • Understand scale effects • Consider influencing factors on the effectiveness of the process for the organism • Consider ways in which you might deepen the conversation to also mimic the ecosystem • Mimicking Ecosystem : • Find out details of the biological process • Understand scale effects • Consider influencing factors on the effectiveness of the process for the organism” 14 In our final design phase , we ask students to test against their familiarization and functionality . Fft is an iterative design process so students are never really done . The process is constantly asking questions and reevaluating the design itself . This testing phase is very similar to the ‘Evaluate’ phase in biomimicry : “Evaluate : How do your ideas compare to Life’s Principles , the successful principles of nature ? • Evaluate your design solution against Life’s Principles • Develop appropriate questions from Life’s Principles and continue to question your solution • Identify further ways to improve your design and develop new questions to explore . Questions may now be about the refinement of the concept : • Packaging , Manufacture , Marketing , Transport • New Products - additions , refinement , etc . ” 15 P age 14 . 1365 . 2 0 Ultimately our first year student summarized his experience as follows : “From the initial day and with just an idea of a tent - like structure inspired by nature , our project has gone through different stages . The design development can be followed from the design spirals and mind maps posted by all groups of the team . After a series of great ideas and creative thoughts , lot of reading and research we came up with something concrete . We now have a potential material used for this purpose , and alongside the color and texture of it . Being involved in this project I have developed a new way of thinking and a new interest for this field of engineering that I knew very little about . “Basecamp” as a means of communication and working platform was very user friendly and an excellent idea to enable communication and elaboration between the groups . It was a pleasure working with the whole team and a great experience . Biomimicry is a term maybe not so recognizable in our society but it is definitely the future of engineering . ” Methods of Communication a . Basecamp Messages , files , ideas , images and articles were shared during the project via Basecamp , an online collaboration tool . We were all able to see how each institution was progressing throughout the design process . Students and instructors would offer suggestions , books to read , movies to watch , and sources for further inquiry . The variety in educational level , discipline and time availability became quite clear using this communication hub , but as a first time effort to undertake such a multi - discipline , multi - institute project it was very successful . Figure 13 : Life ' s Principles as discussed in biomimicry 15 . P age 14 . 1365 . 2 1 b . Skype Weekly communication happened via Skype ( conference phone calls via the internet ) . Conversations between 5 to 10 people each week made sure we added a very necessary human touch and gave everyone the opportunity to explain ideas posted on Basecamp or to ask questions of people from either a different discipline or with a different level of knowledge . Outcome a . Client experience Our client was involved in the weekly Skype conversations and kept us on the right track on Basecamp . Universities are a great place for coming up with wild ideas and our client made sure once in a while we would step back into reality . The client summarized the experience : “On behalf of the team here at POE , I just want to say a big thank you to everyone who has donated their time , energy , and brainpower to this project . When Denise and I first kicked around the idea 6 months ago here in Montana , we weren’t quite sure what to expect but we’ve been thrilled with the results so far . Going forward , we’d like to tell this story on our website and in our 2009 catalog and also use the feedback to tweak the format going forward . If you have a few moments would you please answer the following questions : 1 . What surprised you about this project ? 2 . What could have gone better ? 3 . What did you learn ( biomimicry / outdoor industry / design ) ” Ultimately the client was able to extract various ideas from wide ranging research and turn them into practical applications with available technology . These ideas mainly centered on the surface of the fabric ( keeping moisture away ) and the pattern of the fabric ( keeping bugs away via an interesting camouflage pattern ) . b . How did synthesis happen / Did synthesis happen ? Synthesis happened in as far as narrowing the field of ideas . Institutions tended to work largely on their own with their own students . This was only natural in hindsight because of the wide range of educational levels . A mentoring system between students , a clearer expectation from institutions and ‘time’ could have made this project stronger . Considering this was in addition to everyone’s coursework , and in addition to everyone’s work commitments we could not have expected a better outcome . The client walked away with tangible ideas inspired by nature for a more sustainable product . Conclusion Biomimicry is the field that studies nature , its models , systems , processes and elements and then imitates or takes creative inspiration from them to solve human problems sustainably . It is a multi - disciplinary subject involving a wide diversity of domains like electronics , informatics , medicine , biology , chemistry , physics , mathematics , design , engineering and many others . Collaborative projects are a necessity in this field and a necessity for sustainable solutions to design problems . Where an idea in biology ends might be where an idea in engineering begins . This project brought together many disciplines ; many ideas and the sum of these ideas became greater than the individual parts . P age 14 . 1365 . 2 2 Bibliography 1 . Natinal Geographic , < http : / / ngm . nationalgeographic . com / 2008 / 04 / biomimetics / tom - mueller - text > , ( current September 19 , 1 : 45 p . m . , 2008 ) . 2 . Biomimicry , < http : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / Biomimicry > , ( current February 2 , 2009 ) 3 . Eco , U . , The Name of the Rose , Harcourt Brace Jovanovich : New York , p . 1 – 7 , 1983 . 4 . Morris , R . , Childs , P . , and Hamilton , T . , Sustainability by design : a reflection on the suitability of pedagogic practice in design and engineering courses in the teaching of sustainable design . European Journal of Engineering Education , 32 : 2 , 135 – 142 , 2007 . 5 . Helms , M . , Vattam , S . , & Goel , A . ( 2008 ) Compound Analogical Design , or How to Make a Surfboard Disappear . In B . C . Love , K . McRae , & V . M . Sloutsky ( Eds . ) Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 781 – 786 ) , Washington D . C . : Cognitive Science Society 6 . Vattam , S . , Helms , M . , Goel , A . , Yen , J . , & Weissburg , M . ( 2008 ) Learning About and Through Biologically Inspired Design . To appear in Proceeding from the 2nd Design Creativity Workshop Atlanta , GA . 7 . Vattam , S . , Helms , M . , & Goel , A . ( 2007 ) Biologically Inspired Innovation in Engineering Design : A Cognitive Study . Technical Report GIT - GVU - 07 - 07 , Graphics , Visualization and Usability Center , Georgia Institute of Technology . 8 . Pahl , G . , & W . Beitz . ( 1996 ) . Engineering Design : A Systematic Approach ( 2 ed . ) . London : Springer - Verlag . 9 . B . Chandrasekaran ( 1990 ) Design Problem Solving : A Task Analysis . AI Magazine 11 ( 4 ) : 59 – 71 . 10 . Goel , A . K . : 1997 , Design , Analogy , and Creativity . IEEE Expert , 12 ( 3 ) : 62 - 70 . 11 . Goel , A . , Vattam , S . & Rugaber , S . ( 2008 ) Structure , Behavior & Function of Complex Systems : The SBF Modeling Language . To appear in International Journal of AI in Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing , Special Issue on Developing and Using Engineering Ontologies . 12 . Caswell , D . , Douglas , D . , Eggermont , M . Including Inclusivity : The Inclusive Design Toolkit and 700 Engineers . Proceedings of the Include07 Conference , London , UK , April 5 – 8 . 13 . Biomimicry Institute , < http : / / www . biomimicryinstitute . org / about - us / biomimicry - a - tool - for - innovation . html > , ( current Jan . 30 , 2009 ) . 14 . Ibid . 15 . Ibid . P age 14 . 1365 . 2 3