Upper Echelons : The Organization as a Reflection of Its Top Managers Author ( s ) : Donald C . Hambrick and Phyllis A . Mason Source : The Academy of Management Review , Vol . 9 , No . 2 ( Apr . , 1984 ) , pp . 193 - 206 Published by : Academy of Management Stable URL : http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 258434 Accessed : 01 / 04 / 2010 11 : 00 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use , available at http : / / www . jstor . org / page / info / about / policies / terms . jsp . JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use provides , in part , that unless you have obtained prior permission , you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles , and you may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal , non - commercial use . Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work . Publisher contact information may be obtained at http : / / www . jstor . org / action / showPublisher ? publisherCode = aom . Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed page of such transmission . JSTOR is a not - for - profit service that helps scholars , researchers , and students discover , use , and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive . We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship . For more information about JSTOR , please contact support @ jstor . org . Academy of Management is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize , preserve and extend access to The Academy of Management Review . http : / / www . jstor . org ? Academy of Management Review , 1984 , Vol . 9 , No . 2 , 193 - 206 . Upper Echelons : The Organization as a Reflection of Its Top Managers1 DONALD C . HAMBRICK PHYLLIS A . MASON Columbia University Theorists in various fields have discussed characteristics of top manag - ers . This paper attempts to synthesize these previously fragmented litera - tures around a more general " upper echelons perspective . " The theory states that organizational outcomes - strategic choices and performance levels - are partially predicted by managerial background characteristics . Propositions and methodological suggestions are included . A question of key importance to organizational theorists is , Why do organizations act as they do ? Recently prevailing theories have tended to reify or - ganizations , variously viewing them as purposeful ( Pfeffer & Salancik , 1978 ) or hapless ( Hannan & Freeman , 1977 ) entities . In the field of strategy , ex - planations of ( and prescriptions for ) organizational moves have centered on techno - economic factors ( Hambrick , MacMillan , & Day , 1982 ; Harrigan , 1980 ; Porter , 1980 ) . Even when strategic " process " is studied , it typically is viewed as flows of informa - tion and decisions , detached from the people in - volved ( Aguilar , 1967 ; Allen , 1979 ; Bourgeois , 1980 ; Mintzberg , Raisinghani , & Theoret , 1976 ) . This paper argues for a new emphasis in macro - organizational research : an emphasis on the domi - nant coalition of the organization , in particular its top managers . Organizational outcomes - both strategies and effectiveness - are viewed as reflec - tions of the values and cognitive bases of powerful actors in the organization . It is expected that , to some extent , such linkages can be detected empirically . Anecdotal evidence in support of this view has al - ways abounded . The popular business press regu - larly cites linkages between , for example , a chief executive ' s background in operations and his or her pursuit of a cost - reduction strategy , or between a chief executive ' s long service in an industry and his or her hesitance to diversify from that industry . But , in general , the perspective proposed here has not been put to systematic or comprehensive test . One reason may be that inquiry into the linkages among individuals , organizations , and their compet - itive environments necessarily requires a multidis - ciplinary approach . A gulf , however , continues to separate psychologists , sociologists , and researchers with a strategy or economic orientation . It would be the rare researcher who could draw equally on all camps . The present writers recognize their own lim - itations in this respect : this paper takes a lopsidedly macro view while making relatively crude assump - tions about the psychological processes of top man - agers . It is hoped that future research on the topic will draw these disciplines together , allowing each to build on the others . Inquiry into the upper echelons perspective may provide three major benefits . For the scholar , it may offer substantially greater power to predict or - ganizational outcomes than current theories afford . A second benefit may come to those responsible for selecting and developing upper level executives . For example , light may be shed on the tendencies of or - ganizations led by older executives , those with for - mal management education , or those whose domi - nant career emphasis has been in a particular functional area . The effect of , say , management teams with long term , stable membership , as op - posed to teams with short lived membership , also may become more apparent . A third benefit may accrue to the strategist who is trying to predict a ' The authors gratefully acknowledge support from the Strat - egy Research Center of Columbia University . John Anderson , Ian MacMillan , William Newman , Max Richards , and Kirby Warren made helpful suggestions on earlier drafts . 193 competitor ' s moves and countermoves . Can it be demonstrated , for example , that a competing firm headed by a team of executives who rose primarily through operations will tend to be sluggish in re - sponding to a new product initiative ? Or that a chief executive brought in from outside the industry will tend to steer the firm into new businesses , thus making the core business relatively vulnerable in the short run ? This paper has three primary aims . The first is to propose a model of how upper echelon characteris - tics may become reflected in organizational out - comes . The second is to review literature that has addressed the upper echelons perspective . The third is to provide a foundation and stimulus for empiri - cal research into the links between managerial backgrounds and organizational outcomes . To meet this third aim , the paper identifies some major vari - ables of interest , propositions , and methodological suggestions . Development of the Model Reconciliation with the Inertial Perspective The view taken here is that top executives mat - ter . The contrary view - that large organizations are swept along by events or somehow run them - selves - has been argued directly by Hall ( 1977 ) and indirectly by the population ecologists ( Hannan & Freeman , 1977 ) . The most commonly cited empirical evidence of the inertial organization is Lieberson and O ' Connor ' s ( 1972 ) study of top executives in large corporations . Although an important study , it falls short of being a definitive test of the impact of dif - ferent types of chief executives . First , it sought to determine the different impacts of successive chief executives within firms . Because new chief execu - tives of large firms predominantly are promoted from within the firm and often are even " groomed " by the outgoing chief executive , it is not surprising that the authors found blurs between such eras . A research design that highlights differences across organizations would be a fairer test of whether dif - ferent types of managers are associated with differ - ent organizational outcomes . Second , the Lieberson and O ' Connor study employed a combination of de - pendent variables and data analysis that made it al - most impossible for the leadership variable to take a major role . Two of their three dependent vari - ables - dollar sales and earnings - are primarily in - dicators of the firm ' s size and the type of industry it is in . The third variable - return on sales - is closer to being a universal performance indicator , but it , too , carries a large industry - specific component and so is not as good a measure as return on investment or , even better , return on investment relative to the industry . In their data analysis , the authors sought first to explain variance in their performance mea - sures by using three independent variables : year , in - dustry , and company . Then the analysis was rerun with leadership - a set of dummy variables - in - cluded to determine how much additional variance could be explained . As might be expected , the first three independent variables were potent predictors ( as high as . 97 ) of the performance measures , so the apparent added effect of leadership was nil . Thus , Lieberson and O ' Connor ' s approach , which also was used by Salancik and Pfeffer ( 1977 ) in their study of the effect of mayors on city budgets , is not an appropriate test : ( 1 ) it does not allow lead - ership to enter earlier into the equation , and ( 2 ) the equation is almost tautological given the choice of independent and dependent variables . Weiner and Mahoney ( 1981 ) attempted to overcome these problems in a replication of Lieberson and O ' Connor ' s study and found that their " steward - ship " variable accounted for 44 percent of the vari - ance in profitability of major firms . The point here is not to denigrate earlier research , but rather to note the methodological complexities in such studies and to observe that definitive findings on the unim - portance of chief executives are not in hand . Human Limits on Choice Theorists of the Carnegie School have argued that complex decisions are largely the outcome of behavioral factors rather than a mechanical quest for economic optimization ( Cyert & March , 1963 ; March & Simon , 1958 ) . In their view , bound ' ed ra - tionality , multiple and conflicting goals , myriad op - tions , and varying aspiration levels all serve to limit the extent to which complex decisions can be made on a techno - economic basis . Generally , the more complex the decision , the more applicable this be - havioral theory is thought to be . So , for that class of choices called " strategic " - - complex and of ma - jor significance to the organization the behavioral theory is especially apt . The term " strategic choice " is used here in the 194 same way as it was by Child ( 1972 ) . It is intended to be a fairly comprehensive term to include choices made formally and informally , indecision as well as decision , major administrative choices ( e . g . , reward systems and structure ) as well as the domain and competitive choices more generally associated with the term " strategy . " Strategic choices stand in con - trast to operational choices such as inventory deci - sions and credit policies , which lend themselves more to calculable solution . If strategic choices have a large behavioral com - ponent , then to some extent they reflect the idiosyn - cracies of decision makers . As March and Simon ( 1958 ) argued , each decision maker brings his or her own set of " givens " to an administrative situa - tion . These givens reflect the decision maker ' s cog - nitive base : 1 . knowledge or assumptions about future events , 2 . knowledge of alternatives , and 3 . knowledge of consequences attached to alternatives . They also reflect his or her values : principles for ordering consequences or alternatives according to preference . These idiosyncratic givens are in place at the same time the decision maker is being exposed to an ongoing stream of potential stimuli both within and outside the organization . Thus , the givens are always being updated , but , more important for the argument here , the givens serve to filter and distort the decision maker ' s perception of what is going on and what should be done about it . As summarized in Figure 1 , the situation a stra - tegic decision maker faces is complex and made up of far more phenomena than he / she can possibly comprehend . The decision maker brings a cognitive base and values to a decision , which create a screen between the situation and his / her eventual percep - tion of it . The perceptual process can be conceptualized by taking a sequential view ( Hambrick & Snow , 1977 ) . First , a manager , or even an entire team of managers , cannot scan every aspect of the organiza - tion and its environment . The manager ' s field of vi - sion - those areas to which attention is directed - is restricted , posing a sharp limitation on eventual perceptions . Second , the manager ' s perceptions are further limited because one selectively perceives only some of the phenomena included in the field of vision . Finally , the bits of information selected for processing are interpreted through a filter woven by one ' s cognitive base and values . The manager ' s eventual perception of the situa - tion combines with his / her values to provide the ba - sis for strategic choice . Values are treated here as something that , on the one hand , can affect percep - tions ( Scott & Mitchell , 1972 ) but , on the other hand , can directly enter into a strategic choice , be - cause theoretically a decision maker can arrive at a set of perceptions that suggest a certain choice but discard that choice on the basis of values . Figure 1 Strategic Choice Under Conditions of Bounded Rationality Cognitive Limited Field Selective Inepeain Managerial Strategic Base of Vision Perception Inepeain Perceptions Choice The Situation ( all potential environmental and organizational stimuli ) s = 3 1 1V1lueI 195 Emphasis on Observable Managerial Characteristics In this paper , primary emphasis is placed on ob - servable managerial characteristics as indicators of the givens that a manager brings to an administra - tive situation . Examples of such characteristics are age , tenure in the organization , functional back - ground , education , socioeconomic roots , and financial position . In this approach , some important but complex psychological issues are bypassed in favor of an emphasis on broad tendencies that , if empirically confirmed , can be later held up to the psychologist ' s finer lens . Thus , this approach follows an encouragement from Weick : There are several places in the organizational litera - ture where investigators seem to resist defining their concepts in terms of observable actions by individu - als in the mistaken belief that , in doing so , they will have to explain the actions psychologically . If . . . properties can be defined in terms of observa - ble individual behaviors , there is a better chance that empirical research . . . can be made more cumula - tive ( 1969 , pp . 31 - 32 ) . Using background characteristics to predict both givens and behaviors has found favor in several ar - eas of research . In marketing research , for example , demographics often serve as indicators of consumer preferences , such as the selection of media and other leisure time activities ( Frank & Greenberg , 1979 ; Hornik & Schlinger , 1981 ) . Moreover , rela - tionships have been established between demo - graphic variables and such diverse topics as jury be - havior ( Mills & Bohannon , 1980 ) , type of city government ( Schnore & Alford , 1963 ) , and alcohol abuse ( Boscarino , 1979 ) . Coming closer to the pre - sent topic , background variables have been linked to values of graduate business students ( Kahalas & Groves , 1979 ) , job involvement ( Sekaran & Mowday , 1981 ) , preferences for nonmanagement jobs ( Ritchie & Beardsley , 1978 ) , participation in volunteer work ( Schram & Dunsing , 1981 ) , and to beliefs about work held by managers and bluecollar workers ( Buchholz , 1977 , 1978 ) . An emphasis on background characteristics , rather than on psychological dimensions , seems es - sential at this point in the development of an upper echelons perspective . First , the cognitive bases , val - ues , and perceptions of upper level managers are not convenient to measure or even amenable to di - rect measurement . Despite a few notable exceptions in the literature ( Guth & Taguiri , 1965 ; Miller , Kets de Vries , & Toulouse , 1982 ) , top executives probably are quite reluctant to participate in psy - chological batteries , at least in the numbers needed for an ongoing research program . Second , some of the background characteristics of greatest a priori interest ( e . g . , tenure and functional background ) do not have close psychological analogs . Restriction to standard psychological dimensions ( e . g . , locus of control , tolerance for ambiguity , or cognitive style ) could unnecessarily limit inquiries . Finally , eventual application of the upper echelons perspective in management selection / development and especially in competitor analysis would require observable background data on managers . True , demographic indicators may contain more noise than purer psychological measures . For exam - ple , a person ' s educational background may serve as a muddied indicator of socioeconomic background , motivation , cognitive style , risk propensity , and other underlying traits . But , given this weakness , if demographic data yield significant findings , then the upper echelons theory will have been put to a relatively stringent test . Unit of Analysis The limited research that has been done on the linkages between top managers and the strategies they pursue has focused almost entirely on the chief executive , generally in the context of managerial succession ( Carlson , 1972 ; Helmich & Brown , 1972 ) . No such research centering on characteris - tics of entire top management teams is known to the authors . Although it is true that in most firms the chief executive has the most power , it still is of interest to study management teams ( Bourgeois , 1980 ; Hamrick , 1981b ) . An entire team - say , the firm ' s officers - aligns well with Cyert and March ' s ( 1963 ) appealing , but little - studied , concept of the dominant coalition . At a more practical level , study of an entire team increases the potential strength of the theory to predict , because the chief executive shares tasks and , to some extent , power with other team members . For example , assume that two firms each have chief executives whose primary functional back - grounds are in production . In Firm A , three of four other key executives also rose primarily through production - oriented careers , even though they now are serving in nonproduction or generalist roles . In Firm B , the mix of executive backgrounds is more balanced and typical - one from production , one 196 from sales , one from engineering , and one from ac - counting . Knowledge about the central tendencies of the entire top management teams improves one ' s confidence in any predictions about the two firms ' strategies . Moreover , the study of an entire team has the addeJ advantage of allowing inquiry into dispersion characteristics , such as homogeneity and balance . Group indicators of this latter type are among those included in propositions set forth later . On Causality The theory states that organizational outcomes can be partially predicted from managerial back - grounds . As with most macro - organizational theo - ries , attention to causality is important . In fact , cer - tain managerial backgrounds are expected to be a result of previous organizational actions . Miles and Snow ( 1978 ) suggested that , over time , strategies are self - reinforcing . For example , an innovative " prospector " strategy calls for compe - tences , structures , and processes that support the firm ' s continuing search for new products and mar - kets ; therefore , executives in marketing and product development areas come to have great power ( Hambrick , 1981a ) . That these executives tend to choose innovative options in the future - which is the spirit of the theory - is as much a reflection of the ingrained character of the prospector strategy as of the volition of the executives . The industry environment similarly can affect the types of managers found in top ranks . For example , banking regulations require bank presidents to have significant banking experience . This serves to tighten the circle of who can be considered for a top post , thus eliminating much of the variance in ca - reer experiences of bank presidents . Industry growth also affects the types of executives found in firms . For example , the railroad industry has exper - ienced slow growth , offering little executive mobil - ity since the 1950s . As might be expected , there - fore , Harris ( 1979 ) reported that railroad executives are older than executives in other indus - tries and are more likely to have risen within the ranks of their organizations . In contrast , the dy - namic electronics industry is populated by younger executives with relatively short lengths of service in their firms . Any bold attempt to trace differences in organizational outcomes of railroads and electronics firms to managerial backgrounds will mask the un - derlying phenomenon of industry vitality . Because of the important effect of industry characteristics , all the propositions presented below should be thought to carry the implicit phrase , " within an industry . " The theory that managerial backgrounds impact strategic decisions is muddied further : Executives often are chosen precisely because they have the " right " background or temperament to carry out actions hoped for by the board of directors or other controlling parties . Prime examples are the finance executive who is selected as CEO to conglomeratize a firm , or an operations executive who is selected as CEO to retrench and rationalize a firm . These thoughts about causality should not de - tract from the theory . The authors continue to ar - gue that executive backgrounds are reflected in strategic outcomes . They only wish to note that the occurrence of a particular set of executive back - grounds in a firm is not a random process . Any re - search design must accommodate this , and interpre - tation of any research results must be tempered by it . The Model Portrayed Figure 2 portrays the overall upper echelons per - spective . It contains less detail on the perceptual process than did Figure 1 , but is more encompass - ing in the range of relationships it depicts . From left to right in Figure 2 , the primary relationships portrayed by the single horizontal arrows first sug - gest that upper echelon characteristics are in part a reflection of the situation that the organization faces . This is the same theme as addressed immedi - ately above , in which the effects of environment and strategy on executive selection were noted . More at the heart of the theory is the portrayal of upper echelon characteristics as determinants of strategic choices and , through these choices , of organiza - tional performance . The specific strategy and per - formance dimensions listed are prominent in the strategy literature and are the major dependent variables in the propositions presented below . More elaborate contingency relationships also are proposed . First , it is expected that the combination of certain situational conditions and upper echelon characteristics will lead to strategic choices that could not have been predicted as strongly by know - ing only one or the other . And the situation , upper echelon characteristics , and strategic choices inter - act to determine organizational performance levels . 197 Figure 2 An Upper Echelons Perspective of Organizations Upper Echelon Characteristics Strategic Choices Performance The Objective Psychological I Observable Situation Cognitive base I Age Product innovation Profitability ( external and internal ) Values I Functional tracks Unrelated diversification Variations in Other career experiences Related diversification profitability Education Acquisition Growth Socioeconomic roots Capital intensity Survival Financial position Plant and equipment newness I Group characteristics Backward integration l ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ Forward integration I lD ; r ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ Fnancial leveraen Development of Propositions In discussing each of the upper echelon charac - teristics presented irl Figure 2 , prior literature will be drawn on , but to some extent speculations will be made because this paper primarily is an attempt to build theory - even more to encourage theory building . The propositions presented should not be taken as the only propositions that could be drawn from past inquiry or reasoning . Rather , they are il - lustrative and appear to be some of the most sup - portabl and interesting . The propositions are presented as part of the paper ' s aim to stimulate empirical inquiry into upper echelons . Age The association between the age of top executives and organizational characteristics has not been the subject of many studies , but the few that exist yield strikingly consistent results : managerial youth ap - pears to be associated with corporate growth ( Child , 1974 , Hart & Mellons , 1970 ) . As Child notes , however , it is not possible , with the research designs used , to disentangle the extent to which growth leads to youth or vice versa . A related find - ing of these studies is that volatility of sales and earnings also is associated with managerial youth . So , what emerges is a picture of youthful managers attempting the novel , the unprecedented , taking risks . There are three possible explanations for the ap - parent conservative stance of older executives . The first is that older executives may have less physical and mental stamina ( Child , 1974 ) or may be less able to grasp new ideas and learn new behaviors ( Chown , 1960 ) . Managerial age has been nega - tively associated with the ability to integrate infor - mation in making decisions and with confidence in decisions , though it appears to be positively associ - ated with tendencies to seek more information , to evaluate information accurately , and to take longer to make decisions ( Taylor , 1975 ) . A second expla - nation is that older executives have greater psycho - logical commitment to the organizational status quo ( Alutto & Hrebiniak , 1975 ; Stevens , Beyer , & Trice , 1978 ) . Third , older executives may be at a point in their lives at which financial security and career security are important . Their social circles , their spending traits , and their expectations about retirement income are established . Any risky ac - tions that might disrupt these generally are avoided ( Carlsson & Karlsson , 1970 ) . In line with the research and reasoning laid out above , the following propositions might be set forth . ( Once again , all propositions should be understood to apply within an industry , but not necessarily across a diverse sample of organizations . ) P 1 : Firms with young managers will be more in - clined to pursue risky strategies than will firms 198 with older managers . Specific forms of risk in - clude unrelated diversification , product innova - tion , and financial leverage . P 2 : Firms with young managers will experience greater growth and variability in profitability from industry averages than will firms with older managers . Functional Track Although members of a firm ' s dominant coali - tion - especially the chief executive - are presumed to have a generalist ' s view , each brings to his or her job an orientation that usually has developed from experience in some primary functional area . This functional - track orientation may not dominate the strategic choices an executive makes , but it can be expected to exert some influence . For example , Dearborn and Simon ( 1958 ) found that when a group of executives from different functional areas was presented with the same problem ( a case study ) and asked to consider it from a company - wide per - spective , they defined the problem largely in terms of the activities and goals of their own areas . For purposes of building a parsimonious set of propositions , functional tracks have been classified into three categories , the first two of which are based on an open - systems view ( Katz & Kahn , 1966 ) and also align with the functional areas de - scribed as key in Miles and Snow ' s ( 1978 ) strategic typology . " Output functions " - marketing , sales , and product R & D - emphasize growth and the search for new domain opportunities and are re - sponsible for monitoring and adjusting products and markets . " Throughput functions " - production , pro - cess engineering , and accounting - work at improv - ling the efficiency of the transformation process . These two problem areas are somewhat distinct in their emphasis , and individuals who work within them are likely to develop distinctly different orien - tations to the firm and its environment ( Lawrence & Lorsch , 1967 ; Miles & Snow , 1978 ) , suggesting the following propositions : P 3 : There will be a positive association between the degree of output - function experience of top managers and the extent to which the firm em - phasizes outputs in its strategy . Indicators of an output emphasis include product innovation , re - lated diversification , advertising , and forward integration . P 4 : There will be a positive association between the degree of throughput - function experience of top managers and the extent to which the firm emphasizes throughputs in its strategy . Indica - tors of a throughput emphasis include automa - tion , plant and equipment newness , and backward integration . P 5 : The degree of output - function experience of top managers will be positively associated with growth . P 6 : In stable , commodity - like industries , throughput - function experience will be positively associated with profitability . P 7 : In turbulent , differentiable industries , out - put function experience will be positively associated with profitability . A third functional classification was suggested by Hayes and Abernathy ( 1980 ) , who documented that major firms are increasingly dominated by ex - ecutives whose backgrounds are in areas such as law and finance , which are not integrally involved with the organization ' s core activities . The sug - gested propositions about executives from these pe - ripheral functions follow from Hayes and Aberna - thy ' s concern that such executives pursue strategies that fit with their relative deficiencies in " hands - on " experience : P 8 : The degree of peripheral - function experience of top managers will be positively related to the degree of unrelated diversification in the firm . P 9 : The extent of peripheral - function experience of top managers will be positively related to ad - ministrative complexity , including thoroughness of formal planning systems , complexity of struc - tures and coordination devices , budgeting detail and thoroughness , and complexity of incentive - compensation schemes . Other Career Experiences Career experiences other than functional track also can be expected to have a significant effect on the types of actions taken by a manager or an en - tire top management team . For example , probably more research has been done on length of service and a related variable , inside versus outside succes - sion , than on any other characteristics of top man - agers . The primary and consistent conclusion com - ing from such studies is that chief executives brought in from the outside tend to make more changes in structure , procedures , and people than do chief executives promoted from within ( Carlson , 1972 ; Helmich & Brown , 1972 ; Kotin & Sharaf , 1967 ) . The behavioral reasons for the changes , as set forth by Carlson ( 1972 ) , are : less commitment by an outsider to the status quo , a desire to weaken those who resist or resent the new chief executive , and a desire to create new , loyal lieutenants . Of 199 course , outside succession is most likely when the organization is performing poorly , so the corre - sponding changes may reflect the situation as much as the background of the decision maker . Executives carry as part of their cognitive and emotional givens the experiences they have had dur - ing their careers . Executives who have spent their entire careers in one organization can be assumed to have relatively limited perspectives . If an entire top management team has risen solely through the organization , it is likely that it will have a very re - stricted knowledge base from which to conduct its " limited search " ( Cyert & March , 1963 ) when faced with an unprecedented problem such as a de - regulation , intensive competition from imports , or a radical technological shift . On the other hand , the in - depth industry familiarity and tested working re - lationships enjoyed by such a team might serve the organization well in periods of stability ( Kotter , 1982 ) . This reasoning leads to the following hypotheses : P 10 : Years of inside service by top managers will be negatively related to strategic choices involv - ing new terrain , for example , product innovation and unrelated diversification . P 11 : For an organization in a stable environment , years of inside service will be positively associ - ated with profitability and growth . P 12 : For an organization facing a severe environ - mental discontinuity , years of inside service will be negatively associated with profitability and growth . It is not only whether an executive has worked outside his or her present organization that is of in - terest . Of even greater relevance is the nature of the industries and companies with which he or she has been involved . For example , an executive who moves from an orderly industry into one in which rivalry is cutthroat may inadvertently allow the firm to fall behind in the unaccustomed hectic race . Or an executive with experience in a firm that tried unsuccessfully to diversify may be dissuaded from attempting diversification in another company . All these conditions are highly situational and , at this point , do not warrant specific propositions . What seems clear , though , is that executives ' career ex - periences partially shape the lenses through which they view current strategic opportunities and problems . Formal Education A person ' s formal educational background may yield rich but complex information . To some de - gree , education indicates a person ' s knowledge and skill base . A person educated in engineering gener - ally can be expected to have a somewhat different cognitive base from someone educated in history or law . Beyond that , if it is assumed that most people take seriously their decisions about education , then education serves to some extent as an indicator of a person ' s values , cognitive preferences , and so on . Granted , people make their educational decisions at a relatively early age , with incomplete information , and they sometimes later transcend those decisions . But , on average , it could be expected that students enrolled in an English literature curriculum are somewhat different from students enrolled in a bus - iness curriculum . Perhaps even students who choose to attend the Harvard Business School are somehow different from those who attended the University of Chicago Business School . Inclusion of the educational backgrounds of man - agers in macro - organizational research has been limited primarily to studies attempting to predict innovation . The consistent finding is that level of education ( either of the CEO or other central ac - tors ) is positively related to receptivity to innovation ( Becker , 1970 ; Kimberly & Evanisko , 1981 ; Rogers & Shoemaker , 1971 ) . These studies did not consist - ently include controls for age and so may be mask - ing the tendency toward increased education in re - cent years . Kimberly and Evanisko examined the type of educational curriculum ( administration vs . nonadministration degrees ) and found no associa - tions with the adoption of organizational innova - tions . This research suggests the following propositions : P 13 : The amount , but not the type , of formal ed - ucation of a management team will be positively associated with innovation . One theory of note is that education implies membership in a particular socioeconomic group ( Collins , 1971 ) . This theory has been strongly sup - ported by research in England , where class struc - tures are relatively pronounced . Channon ( 1979 ) and Stanworth and Giddens ( 1974 ) , studying two different samples of chief executives in the U . K . , each found that about 50 percent of their samples had been educated at Oxford or Cambridge . Chan - non noted the importance of this background for es - 200 tablishing strong interorganizational ties . It is un - likely that such strong findings would emerge in a U . S . sample , but there may be certain industries in which education , or even certain schools , is deemed important to business success . It is noted that there has been little research on the effects of formal professional education ( the MBA degree in particular ) on corporate outcomes . There certainly are plenty of offhand suspicions that MBAs are educated to pursue short term per - formance at the expense of innovation and asset building . A contrary view is that the degree does not have any substantive effect in the long run for either the holder or the company , but only serves as a filtering device for matching up individuals and jobs ( Pfeffer , 1981a ) . The present writers ' view is that professional edu - cation in management is associated with modera - tion . MBA candidates by their nature probably are not as innovative or risk - prone as more " self - made " executives ( Collins & Moore , 1970 ) ; and business schools are not particularly well inclined or equipped ( at least to date ) to develop innovative or risk - taking tendencies . The analytic techniques learned in an MBA program are geared primarily to avoiding big losses or mistakes . Thus , the follow - ing proposition might be set forth : P 14 : There is no relationship between the amount of formal management education of top manag - ers and the average performance ( either profit - ability or growth ) of their firms . However , firms whose managers have had little formal manage - ment education will show greater variation from industry performance averages than will firms whose managers are highly educated in management . Beyond this tendency toward moderation , profes - sional management education is expected to have an effect on the administrative complexity and so - phistication of firms , both because of the types of people who are drawn to business schools , that is , " organizers and rationalizers , " and because of the emphasis placed on complex administrative systems in business schools . P 15 . Firms whose top managers have had sub - stantial formal management education will be more complex administratively than will firms whose managers have had less such training . Specific forms of administrative complexity in - clude thoroughness of formal planning systems , complexity of structures and coordination devices , budgeting detail and thoroughness , and complex - ity of incentive - compensation schemes . Socioeconomic Background Although the socioeconomic backgrounds of sen - ior executives have been described in some detail ( Burck , 1976 ; Newcomer , 1955 ; Sturdivant & Ad - ler , 1976 ) , there has been almost no attempt in the organizational literature to relate socioeconomic background to organizational strategy or perform - ance . One reason for the lack of attention to this question may lie in the apparently high degree of homogeneity among socioeconomic backgrounds of executives . In 1975 , executives of major U . S . firms were almost exclusively male and white , and predominantly Protestant and Republican . Some - what more of them came from middle - class families and from the Midwest than was true earlier in this century ( Burck , 1976 ) , but they attended largely the same group of prestigious universities as did their predecessors ( Sturdivant & Adler , 1976 ) . Channon ( 1979 ) found some relationships be - tween the socioeconomic backgrounds of U . K . exec - utives and the growth strategies of their firms . First classifying firms as entrepreneur - run , family - run , and professionally managed , Channon found com - panies run by entrepreneurs to be the most widely diversified and to have the highest rate of acquisi - tions . Then Channon observed that the entrepre - neurs themselves were likely to come from rela - tively humble origins , receive an education through secondary school only , avoid military service ( many were refugees from Nazi persecution ) , and belong to few if any London clubs . At the other extreme were heads of professionally managed firms ( lowest acquisition rate ) and family - led firms ( least diversi - fied ) , who came from more traditional upper - class English backgrounds : public school , especially Eton ; university , usually Cambridge or Oxford ; military service , often in famous regiments ; and appropriate club membership . It is not possible to conclude whether it is the form of ownership ( e . g . , entrepreneurial ) or the humble backgrounds of the entrepreneurs that were causally linked to these firms ' strategies of growth and diversification . In a clinical study of entrepre - neurs , Collins and Moore ( 1970 ) concluded that a common pattern is for an entrepreneur from a rela - tively disadvantaged background to pursue aggres - sive , often flamboyant strategies , presumably in or - der to achieve recognition and esteem . These patterns may suggest the following : P 16 : Firms whose top managers come dispropor - 201 tionately from lower socioeconomic groups will tend to pursue strategies of acquisition and unre - lated diversification . P 17 : Such firms will experience greater growth and profit variability than will firms whose top managers come from higher socioeconomic groups . Financial Position The relationship between stock ownership of top executives and corporate performance has been studied at length by economists . Findings have been mixed , but they generally favor the conclusion that owner - managed firms do not outperform firms that are managed by nonowners . ( See Hay and Morris , 1979 and Kania and McKean , 1976 for summaries . ) Inquiry into the issue has been prompted largely by the Berle and Means ( 1932 ) thesis that owners have a greater stake in the firm than do nonowners and so will engage in more purely income - seeking behavior . Such reasoning ig - nores the fact , however , that many nonowner execu - tives derive their entire livelihood from the organi - zation and thus are quite dependent on its continuing health . Because of bonuses and other in - centive compensation plans , their income often var - ies with corporate performance ( Lewellyn , 1969 ; Lewellyn & Huntsman , 1970 ) , and they also run the risk of being fired if firm performance falls off - a risk that owner - managers do not face ( James & Soref , 1981 ; Salancik & Pfeffer , 1980 ) . It would seem that an improved argument lies in Masson ' s ( 1971 ) suggestion that managerial aspira - tions are due less to the proportion of a company ' s shares owned by management than to the propor - tion of the manager ' s income that is derived from the firm . Managers - be they owners or not - may be relatively inclined to pursue noneconomic objec - tives for the focal firm if they have ample income alternatives . This reasoning , when coupled with the available evidence about stock ownership , leads to the following proposition : P 18 : Corporate profitability is not related to the percent of shares owned by top managers , but is positively related to the percent of their total in - come that top managers derive from the firm through salaries , bonuses , options , dividends , and so on . Group Heterogeneity Also of relevance is the amount of dispersion , or heterogeneity , within a managerial group . Janis ( 1972 ) argued that homogeneity , as manifested in cohesiveness and insularity , leads to inferior deci - sion making . In his view , homogeneity is one of sev - eral conditions that bring on groupthink , which amounts to restricted generation and assessment of alternatives . A more two - sided view is offered by Filley , House , and Kerr ( 1976 ) in their summary of research on group heterogeneity and performance . They concluded that routine problem solving is best handled by a homogeneous group , and that ill - de - fined , novel problem solving is best handled by a heterogeneous group in which diversity of opinion , knowledge , and background allows a thorough air - ing of alternatives . This view may not be at odds with Janis ; the decisions he studied were strictly novel , nonroutine problems . Any discussion of group heterogeneity is aided by a concept drawn from the sociological literature : the cohort . A cohort is a group of individuals that have some relevant date in common : year of birth , year of marriage , entry into the job market , and so on . What categorizes a cohort is the societal exper - iences that have been imprinted on its members and have helped to shape their values and perceptions . McNeil and Thompson ( 1971 ) looked at the number of cohorts that make up complex organiza - tions and , specifically , at the ratio of older to newer members . The rate at which this ratio changes is a joint function of attrition and the growth or shrinkage of the organization , and it will vary among organizations and over time . In organiza - tions undergoing rapid regeneration , the tendency is for members of younger cohorts to move quickly through the hierarchy and become peers , rather than subordinates , of older - cohort members . When this happens , the increased heterogeneity at a given management level increases conflict . Similarly , Pfeffer ( 1981b ) noted that the existence of tenure gaps between cohorts sharpens the difference be - tween them and produces increased conflict . If the concept of demography can be applied to a total organization , it also can be applied to the or - ganization ' s dominant coalition . The effects of the homogeneity or heterogeneity of cohort membership and gaps between cohorts would be felt as much in a small group as in a large one . Additionally , if subgroups based on age or organizational tenure can be considered , then subgroups based on func - tional track , education , socioeconomic background , and financial position should be considered . As dis - 202 cussed earlier , marketing - oriented people have dif - ferent outlooks from those with production back - grounds . Professionally trained managers may view situations differently from those without a college degree , and so on . Indeed , for any variable that in - fluences an individual ' s strategic choice , it can be said that the range of the group ' s scores on that va - riable also influences strategic choice through its ef - fects on conflict and the generation of alternatives . The concepts outlined above suggest many pro - positions . Three of these are : P 19 : Homogeneous top management teams will make strategic decisions more quickly than will heterogeneous teams . P 20 : In stable environments , team homogeneity will be positively associated with profitability . P 21 : In turbulent , especially discontinuous , envi - ronments , team heterogeneity will be positively associated with profitability . Toward a Research Program This paper has attempted to convey that the up - per echelons perspective warrants systematic re - search and that it is , indeed , researchable . Some aspects of such a research program are relatively straightforward ; but there will be difficulties in at - tributing cause and effect , disentangling intercorre - lations , and other nettlesome factors . It is doubtful that this research stream can pro - gress far without greater attention to relevant liter - ature in related fields , especially psychology and so - cial psychology . This paper has not attempted such an in - depth foray , preferring to present a prelimi - nary statement based primarily on the authors ' backgrounds in organizational theory and strategy . Interdisciplinary research teams would seem espe - cially promising . It also would seem prudent to seek suggestions from executive recruiters before pro - ceeding too far with this research . Although the ex - ecutive - recruiting industry is known for its secrecy , the years of experience and possibly even systematic findings or data bases in recruiting firms cannot be disregarded . Both clinical and statistical studies are needed . Clinical studies might focus on how members of top management teams scan , transmit , analyze , and act on environmental information . They then might at - tempt to reconcile their findings with the managers ' backgrounds - an extension of the strategic - process literature , that apparently has not been attempted so far . Statistical studies may be fruitful for uncov - ering some broad relationships . Any such studies must control for industry , either through single in - dustry samples or matched pair designs . Data sources for statistical studies would seem to be abundant . Both Dun and Bradstreet and Standard and Poor publish annual directories of biographical data on officers of major firms . Corporate disclosure statements ( e . g . , lOKs and proxy statements ) pro - file officers ' backgrounds , their compensation , and shareholdings . Firms also generally maintain official biographical statements on officers , which accom - pany press announcements of promotions , major speeches , and so on . Finally , the possibility of ques - tionnaires administered to top management teams ( Bourgeois , 1980 ; Hambrick , 1981b ) should not be ruled out . Research on both corporate level and business level upper echelons is needed . Business level re - search , in particular , would shed important light on the relatively recent fashion of discussing the need for a match between the position of a business in the corporate portfolio and the characteristics of its top managers ( Wissema , Van Der Pol , & Messer , 1980 ) . In fact , access to a single firm with dozens of business units and detailed personnel records on key managers could make for a promising study . A final methodological concern , without much concrete advice about a universal solution , is that the researcher carefully attend to the issue of chro - nology . In the opening section of the paper , the rather persistent problem of dubious causality was discussed . Somehow , researchers need to design their studies and interpret their results in a way that acknowledges that : ( a ) certain strategies and performance levels " cause " managerial profiles , as well as the reverse ; ( b ) there are varying lag times for strategic outcomes to manifest themselves ; and ( c ) in some organizations , the membership of the top management team is always changing . It is doubtful that these problems can be dealt with fully , but the researcher must be advised of them . As research in this field progresses , it is expected that the general model presented in this paper will give rise to a more detailed and developed theory . Studies can be undertaken in a number of indus - tries , and the relative strengths of background vari - ables as predictors of outcomes can be asserted in each industry . Moreover , interactions between situ - ational and demographic variables undoubtedly are much more extensive than have been suggested in 203 Propositions , 6 , 7 , 11 , 12 , 20 , and 21 . These interac - tions need to be uncovered and examined to in - crease understanding of the effects of demographic characteristics of top managers on the strategy and performance of their organizations . The Possibility of Nonfindings That the theory at hand has not already been ex - plored at length raises the thought that the present authors may have missed the mark - that research on this theory will yield no significant results . If that should occur , which seems doubtful , its mean - ing still should be of interest . Nonfindings could mean any of the following : ( 1 ) Observable demographic factors simply do not pro - vide a reliable portrayal of a person ' s makeup . Peo - ple are more complex than that and must be stud - ied in a more clinical manner ( Zaleznik and Kets de Vries , 1975 ) . ( 2 ) Top managers in different firms are more homogeneous than their demo - graphic profiles might suggest . It takes a certain kind of person to rise to the top ranks of a firm , and along the way he / she undergoes an extensive social - ization process , such that he or she having risen , say , through marketing or been initially trained as an engineer is incidental . ( 3 ) To study only mana - gerial teams ignores the augmentation of such peo - ple ' s perceptions and judgments by board members , consultants , trade associations , and so on . That is , executives really do not have blinders on . What Hambrick ( 1982 ) calls " a common body of knowl - edge " exists in an industry and is transmitted through media that are available to and used about equally by executives throughout the industry . None of these possible interpretations can be con - sidered uninteresting . Thus it is argued that testing the upper echelons theory is a no - loss proposition for researchers . The contribution to organizational understanding will be positive whether the results are or not . It is expected that relatively straightforward de - mographic data on managers may be potent predictors of strategies and performance levels . This paper , which emphasizes the entire top manage - ment team , is intended as a foundation for future empirical research . References Aguilar , F . J . Scanning the business environment . New York : Macmillan , 1967 . Allen , S . A . Understanding reorganization of divisionalized com - panies . Academy of Management Journal , 1979 , 22 , 641 - 671 . Alutto , J . A . , & Hrebiniak , L . G . , Research on commitment to employing organizations : Preliminary findings on a study of managers graduating from engineering and MBA programs . Paper presented at Academy of Management meetings , New Orleans , 1975 . Becker , M . H . Sociometric location and innovativeness : Refor - mulation and extension of the diffusion model . American Soci - ological Review , 1970 , 35 , 267 - 304 . Berle , A . A . , Jr . , & Means , G . C . The modern corporation and private property . New York : Macmillan , 1932 . Boscarino , J . Alcohol abuse among veterans : The importance of demographic factors . Addictive Behaviors , 1979 , 4 , 323 - 330 . Bourgeois , L . J . , Ill . Performance and consensus . Strategic Management Journal , 1980 , 1 , 227 - 248 . Buchholz , R . A . The belief structure of managers relative to work concepts measured by a factor analytic model . Personnel Psychology , 1977 , 30 , 567 - 587 . Buchholz , R . A . An empirical study of contemporary beliefs about work in American society . Journal of Applied Psychol - ogy , 1978 , 63 , 219 - 227 . Burck , C . G . A group profile of the Fortune 500 chief execu - tives . Fortune , May 14 , 1976 , pp . 173 - 177 , 308 , 311 - 312 . Carlson , R . 0 . School superintendents : Career and performance . Columbia , Ohio : Merrill , 1972 . Carlsson , G . , & Karlsson , K . Age , cohorts and the generation of generations . American Sociological Review , 1970 , 35 , 710 - 718 . Channon , D . Leadership and corporate performance in the ser - vice industries . Journal of Management Studies , 1979 , 16 , 185 - 201 . Child , J . Organizational structure , environments and perform - ance : The role of strategic choice . Sociology , 1972 , 6 , 1 - 22 . Child , J . Managerial and organizational factors associated with company performance . Journal of Management Studies , 1974 , 11 , 13 - 27 . Chown , S . M . The Wesley rigidity inventory : A factor - analytic approach . Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology , 1960 , 61 , 491 - 494 . Collins , R . Functional and conflict theories of educational strati - fication . American Sociological Review , 1971 , 36 , 1002 - 1019 . Collins , O . , & Moore , D . G . The organization makers . New York : Appleton - Century - Crofts . 1970 . 204 Cyert , R . M . , & March , J . G . A behavioral theory of the firm . Englewood Cliffs , N . J . : Prentice - Hall , 1963 . Dearborn , D . C . , & Simon , H . A . Selective perceptions : A note on the departmental identification of executives . Sociometry , 1958 , 21 , 140 - 144 . Filley , A . C . , House , R . J . , & Kerr , S . Managerial process and organizational behavior . Glenview , Ill . : Scott Foresman , 1976 . Frank , R . E . , & Greenberg , M . G . Interest - based segments of TV audiences . Journal of Advertising Research , 1979 , 19 ( 5 ) , 43 - 52 . Guth , W . D . , & Taguiri , R . Personal values and corporate strat - egies . Harvard Business Review , 1965 , 43 ( 5 ) , 123 - 132 . Hall , R . H . Organizations , structure and process . 2nd ed . Engle - wood Cliffs , N . J . : Prentice - Hall , 1977 . Hambrick , D . C . Environment , strategy , and power within top management teams . Administrative Science Quarterly , 1981 a , 26 , 253 - 275 . Hambrick , D . C . Strategic awareness within top management teams . Strategic Management Journal , 1981 b , 2 , 263 - 280 . Hambrick , D . C . Environmental scanning and organizational strategy . Strategic Management Journal , 1982 , 3 , 159 - 174 . Hambrick , D . C . , MacMillan , 1 . C . , & Day , D . C . Strategic at - tributes and performance of businesses in the four cells of the BCG matrix - A PIMS - based analysis of industrial - product businesses . Academy of Management Journal , 1982 , 25 , 510 - 531 . Hambrick , D . C . , & Snow , C . C . A contextual model of strate - gic decision making in organizations . In R . L . Taylor , M . J . O ' Connell , R . A . Zawacki , & D . D . Warrick ( Eds . ) , Academy of Management Proceedings , 1977 , 109 - 112 . Hannan , M . T . , & Freeman , J . H . The population ecology of organizations . American Journal of Sociology , 1977 , 82 , 929 - 964 . Harrigan , K . R . Strategies for declining businesses . Lexington , Mass . : Heath , 1980 . Harris , R . G . The potential effects of deregulation upon corpo - rate structure , merger behavior , and organizational relations in the rail freight industry . Draft report . Washington , D . C . : Public Interest Economics Center , 1979 . Hart , P . , & Mellons , J . Management youth and company growth : A correlation ? Management Decision , 1970 , 4 ( 2 ) , 50 - 53 . Hay , D . A . , & Morris , D . J . Industrial economics : Theory and evidence . Oxford : Oxford University Press , 1979 . Hayes , R . H . , & Abernathy , W . J . Managing our way to eco - nomic decline . Harvard Business Review , 1980 , 58 ( 4 ) , 67 - 77 . Helmich , D . L . , & Brown , W . B . Successor type and organiza - tional change in the corporate enterprise . Administrative Sci - ence Quarterly , 1972 , 17 , 371 - 381 . Hornik , J . , & Schlinger , J . J . Allocation of time to mass media . Journal of Consumer Research , 1981 , 7 , 343 - 355 . James , D . R . & Soref , M . Profit constraints on managerial au - tonomy : Managerial theory and the unmaking of the corpora - tion president . American Sociological Review , 1981 , 46 , 1 - 18 . Janis , I . L . Victims of groupthink . Boston : Houghton Mifflin , 1972 . Kahalas , H . , & Groves , D . L . An exploration of graduate busi - ness students ' values . Journal of Industrial Psychology , 1979 , 6 , 18 - 24 . Kania , J . J . , & McKean , J . R . Ownership , control and the con - temporary corporation : A general behavior analysis , Kyklos , 1976 , 29 , 272 - 291 . Katz , D . , & Kahn , R . L . The social psychology of organiza - tions . New York : Wiley , 1966 . Kimberly , J . R . , & Evanisko , M . J . Organizational innovation : The influence of individual , organizational and contextual fac - tors on hospital adoption of technological and administrative innovations . Academy of Management Journal , 1981 , 24 , 689 - 713 . Kotin , J . , & Sharaf , M . Management succession and administra - tive style . Psychiatry , 1976 , 30 , 237 - 248 . Kotter , J . P . The general managers , New York : Free Press , 1982 . Lawrence , P . R . , & Lorsch , J . W . Organization and environ - ment . Homewood , III . : Irwin , 1967 . Lewellyn , W . Management and ownership in the large firm . Journal of Finance , 1969 , 24 , 299 - 322 . Lewellyn , W . , & Huntsman , B . Managerial pay and corporate performance . American Economic Review , 1970 , 60 , 710 - 720 . Lieberson , S . , & O ' Connor , J . F . Leadership and organizational performance : A study of large corporations . American Socio - logical Review , 1972 , 37 , 117 - 130 . McNeil , K . , & Thompson , J . D . The regeneration of social orga - nizations . American Sociological Review , 1971 , 36 , 624 - 637 . March , J . G . , & Simon , H . A . Organizations . New York : Wiley , 1958 . Masson , R . Executive motivation , earnings and consequent eq - uity performance . Journal of Political Economy , 1971 , 79 , 1278 - 1292 . Miles , R . E . , & Snow , C . C . Organization strategy , structure and process . New York : McGraw - Hill , 1978 . Miller , D . , Kets de Vries , M . F . R . , & Toulouse , J - M . Top exec - utive locus of control and its relationship to strategy - making , structure , and environment . Academy of Management Jour - nal , 1982 , 25 , 237 - 253 . Mills , C . J . , & Bohannon , W . E . Character structure and jury behavior : Conceptual and applied implications . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1980 , 38 , 662 - 667 . Mintzberg , H . , Raisinghani , D . , & Theoret , A . The structure of 205 unstructured decision processes . Administrative Science Quar - terly , 1976 , 21 , 246 - 275 . Newcomer , M . The big business executive . New York : Colum - bia University Press , 1955 . Pfeffer , J . Power in organizations . Marshfield , Mass . : Pitman Publishing Inc . , 1981a . Pfeffer , J . Some consequences of organizational demography : Potential impacts of an aging work force on formal organiza - tions . In S . B . Kiesler , J . N . Morgan , & V . K . Oppenheimer ( Eds . ) , Aging . Social change . New York : Academic Press , 1981b , 291 - 329 . Pfeffer , J . , & Salancik , G . R . The external control of organiza - tions . New York : Harper and Row , 1978 . Porter , M . E . Competitive strategy . New York : Free Press , 1980 . Ritchie , R . J . , & Beardsley , V . D . A market research approach to determining local labor market availability for non - manage - ment jobs . Personnel Psychology , 1978 , 31 , 449 - 459 . Rogers , E . M . , & Shoemaker , P . Communication of innovations . New York : Free Press , 1971 . Salancik , G . R . , & Pfeffer , J . Constraints on administrator dis - cretion : The limited influence of mayors on city budgets . Ur - ban Affairs Quarterly , 1977 , 12 ( 4 ) , 475 - 496 . Salancik , G . R . , & Pfeffer , J . Effects of ownership and perform - ance on executive tenure in U . S . corporations . Academy of Management Journal , 1980 , 23 , 653 - 664 . Schnore , L . F . , & Alford , R . R . Forms of government and socio - economic characteristics of suburbs . Administrative Science Quarterly , 1963 , 8 , 1 - 17 . Schram , V . R . , & Dunsing , M . M . Influences on married women ' s volunteer work participation . Journal of Consumer Research , 1981 , 7 , 372 - 379 . Scott , W . G . , & Mitchell , T . R . Organization theory : A struc - tural and behavioral analysis . Homewood , Ill . : Irwin , 1972 . Sekaran , U . , & Mowday , R . T . A cross - cultural analysis of the influence of individual and job characteristics on job involve - ment . International Review of Applied Psychology , 1981 , 30 , 51 - 64 . Stanworth , P . , & Giddens , A . An economic elite : A demographic profile of company chairmen . In P . Stanworth & A . Giddens ( Eds . ) , Elites and power in British society . Cambridge : Cam - bridge University Press , 1974 , 65 - 80 . Stevens , J . M . , Beyer , J . M . , & Trice , H . M . Assessing personal , role , and organizational predictors of managerial commitment . Academy of Management Journal , 1978 , 21 , 380 - 396 . Sturdivant , F . D . , & Adler , R . D . Executive origins : Still a gray flannel world ? Harvard Business Review , 1976 , 54 ( 6 ) , 125 - 132 . Taylor , R . N . Age and experience as determinants of managerial information processing and decision making performance . Academy of Management Journal , 1975 , 18 , 74 - 81 . Weick , K . E . The social psychology of organizing . Reading , Mass . : Addison - Wesley , 1969 . Weiner , N . , & Mahoney , T . A . A model of corporate perform - ance as a function of environmental , organizational , and lead - ership influences . Academy of Management Journal , 1981 , 24 , 453 - 470 . Wissema , J . G . , Van Der Pol , H . W . , & Messer , H . M . Strate - gic management archetypes . Strategic Management Journal , 1980 , 1 , 37 - 47 . Zaleznik , A . , & Kets de Vries , M . F . R . Power and the corpo - rate mind . Boston : Houghton Mifflin , 1975 . Donald C . Hambrick is Associate Professor of Business Policy in the Graduate School of Business , Columbia University . Phyllis A . Mason is a Ph . D . candidate in the Graduate School of Business , Columbia University . 206