54 Toward a Grassroots Culture of Technology Practice SUCHETA GHOSHAL , RISHMA MENDHEKAR , and AMY BRUCKMAN , Georgia Institute of Technology , USA Information and Communication Technologies ( ICTs ) can support grassroots social movements toward greater outreach and better day - to - day communication . In this paper , we present the results of action research with a large - scale grassroots social movement , the Southern Movement Assembly ( SMA ) , exploring their uses and perceptions of ICTs . We find that the ICTs chosen by the SMA are often at odds with their grassroots culture of inclusion and participation—which results in inequitable sociotechnical realities within the movement . For example , people with technical skills gain more power as they start to control organizational processes . As technical skills are most commonly associated with racial , gender , and socioeconomic privileges , this leads to inequitable participation . We conclude by calling for a grassroots culture of technology practice rooted in analyses of systemic exclusion with a continuous effort to center the marginalized voices and experiences with technology . CCS Concepts : • Human - centered computing → Computer supported cooperative work ; Empirical studies in collaborative and social computing ; HCI theory , concepts and models . Additional Key Words and Phrases : inclusivity , grassroots social movements , technocultural theory , action research ACM Reference Format : Sucheta Ghoshal , Rishma Mendhekar , and Amy Bruckman . 2020 . Toward a Grassroots Culture of Technology Practice . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 4 , CSCW1 , Article 54 ( May 2020 ) , 28 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3392862 1 INTRODUCTION Grassroots social movements have emerged out of people’s shared experiences of systemic inequity , marginalization , and exclusion [ 83 ] . Most of these movements are not about a single leader or an organization—they are driven by people at the front lines of political struggle against systemic oppression [ 74 ] . While a central goal of these movements is to demand equitable outcomes from societal power structures , it is equally important for them to be radically inclusive toward that goal [ 66 ] . At a practical level , grassroots culture calls for centering marginalized voices and experiences in every step of decision - making , self - governing , and strategizing . That said , even for groups who put the highest priority on participation and democracy , making it happen in practice poses considerable challenges . Notably , modern information communications technologies ( ICTs ) both support and hinder grassroots practices in complex ways . In this paper , we describe and critically reflect on the conflicted relationship between grassroots movements and their technologies to gain insights on how to design a grassroots culture of technology practice . Authors’ address : Sucheta Ghoshal , sucheta @ gatech . edu ; Rishma Mendhekar , rmendhekar @ gatech . edu ; Amy Bruckman , asb @ gatech . edu , Georgia Institute of Technology , School of Interactive Computing , Atlanta , Georgia , 30308 , USA . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . © 2020 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . 2573 - 0142 / 2020 / 5 - ART54 $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3392862 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW1 , Article 54 . Publication date : May 2020 . 54 : 2 Sucheta Ghoshal et al . In our research , we partner with a large - scale grassroots social movement , the Southern Move - ment Assembly ( SMA ) —both studying the movement and participating in it—to understand the role communications technologies play in their practices . SMA is a social movement consisting of 118 local grassroots organizations from all over Southeastern United States 1 . Emerging from the rich political history of the U . S . Social Forum [ 47 ] , SMA has been successfully building and sustaining a large - scale social movement for over eight years . The member organizations of SMA coordinate their efforts and share resources to help resist inequality and work for social justice across the region . This paper is a result of our action research with the SMA [ 42 ] . We report on sixteen months of detailed field notes from our participatory work with SMA , and eleven interviews with SMA members . As action researchers , our primary goal with SMA has been to support them in integrating ICTs into their grassroots culture . Toward understanding the role of ICTs in a grassroots culture , it is important to understand grassroots culture itself , especially the practice of grassroots politics . Thus , the first research question in our work is : How does the Southern Movement Assembly ( SMA ) practice grassroots politics ? ( RQ1 ) The second step to understanding the specific role of ICTs in grassroots culture is to examine the ways in which digital tools get used by members of the movement . This leads to our second research question : How does the SMA currently use and perceive Information and Communication Technolo - gies in their practice of grassroots politics ? ( RQ2 ) Toward answering RQ1 and RQ2 , we share the findings from our action research with SMA and our analysis of the existing challenges in SMA’s use of technology . We find that SMA depends on ICTs that are often at odds with their core values . SMA’s values and practices are rooted in a multitude of ideologies , which , according to our findings , converge to the notion of inclusivity . Inclusivity is seen by SMA as a political value and practice that focuses on not only the representation of marginalized people , but also a radical transformation of the power structures that enable systemic exclusion in the first place . Sustaining such a culture of radical inclusion translates to practical needs such as facilitating a meeting , note - taking , and making flyers and posters—needs that often require the use of ICT artifacts . SMA primarily uses popular centralized ICT solutions ( e . g . Google Drive , Facebook , Twitter ) for their communication needs ; particularly , the ones that are marketed as technical solutions for needs such as collaboration and inclusion . At the same time , they also explore choices in free and open source software ( FOSS ) . However , SMA’s use of ICTs leads to inequitable outcomes in their sociotechnical systems : technically competent people having more power and voice , technical expertise being associated with whiteness , masculinity , young age , and other normative characteristics , and value - driven technical choices ( i . e . adopting FOSS solutions ) coming with hard trade - offs such as finances , usability , and technical labor . Thus , while ICTs enable SMA to achieve their objectives in significant ways , SMA also acknowl - edges that their use of ICTs is non - conventional , and their choice of technologies is sometimes fundamentally at odds with what they believe . This dialectical relationship between a social move - ment and the technology it uses has contributions for broader questions [ 1 , 15 , 39 ] raised by past researchers in the domain of computer - supported cooperative work ( CSCW ) . These questions include : what happens when CSCW applications are used for values that they were not meant to support ? Whose values do CSCW applications mean to support in the first place ? How can the CSCW community effectively accommodate various more marginalized cultures of technology - use ? 1 http : / / southtosouth . org Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW1 , Article 54 . Publication date : May 2020 . Toward a Grassroots Culture of Technology Practice 54 : 3 In this paper , we contribute an analysis of how a large - scale regional grassroots social movement grapples with similar questions through their use of CSCW technologies . Through our findings , we show that the means of ICT production can have complex implications for power and marginal - ization in certain communities , including grassroots social movements . Furthermore , we do a systematic analysis toward understanding why these complex implications arise . Finally , we weave together our findings to derive lessons for both communities , i . e . , new means to design and produce technology in CSCW and HCI to better accommodate grassroots needs , and a localized culture of technology practice in grassroots communities that will hold ICTs accountable for the values they embody and promote . 2 BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK In this section , we first situate our work in the broader context of grassroots values in technology and show that the grassroots experience with technology has significant parallels with socially integrated technologies of the past . Second , we build on Critical Informatics , particularly technocultural theory [ 65 ] . Technocultural theory urges us to look at the cultural values from which technology is produced . This leads us to an examination not just of whether technologies embody values , but why . In each of the following sections , we discuss the contributions of our paper in relation to past work in that particular field . 2 . 1 Grassroots Values and Technology Grassroots social movements mobilize individuals at the local level toward collective action for the improvement of their own situation and that of broader society [ 56 , 74 ] . They have a bottom - up approach toward movement building that starts with addressing local issues , and further tries to effect change at the regional , national , and even international level [ 78 ] . At the core of grassroots strategy is the belief that every individual is capable of reflecting , conceptualizing , thinking crit - ically , making decisions , planning , and acting toward social change [ 32 , 33 ] . Therefore , with a bottom - up infrastructure of decision - making , grassroots movements strive to foster democratic participation by letting every individual exercise their power and voice . They further leverage the models of democratic decision - making ( e . g . , voting , consensus building , assemblies ) and practice self - organizing and self - governing [ 64 , 66 , 74 ] . Unlike power structures in traditional political institutions , grassroots movements are often governed with a non - hierarchical organizational structure [ 41 ] . Today in the western world , grassroots organizing has a distinctly technological character [ 48 , 82 ] . One might think that the ready availability of sophisticated communications tools ( e . g . , video conferencing platforms ) helps organizations to be more effective . Indeed , as we will see , these tools greatly expand these organizations’ ability to reach out and manage their day - to - day affairs . However , they also privilege the technologists within the organization . People fluent in technology end up having more of a voice , even when those people themselves passionately believe that should not be the case [ 37 ] . This tension between social values and technical feasibility is not new to CSCW scholarship . Past work in CSCW have looked into this paradox : despite the field’s focus on supporting cooperative practices with technology , in many instances , technical capabilities of our systems do not match the social requirements from technology [ 1 ] . These gaps often results in instances such as—creating more work for some users [ 39 ] , creating disparities between who has to do the “extra work” and who benefits [ 16 , 39 ] , and systems getting “less use than desired” [ 1 , 39 ] —to name a few . Identifying this tension as “the sociotechnical gap , ” Ackerman says that in order to produce more usable systems that live up to the social requirements from technology , “HCI and CSCW systems need Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW1 , Article 54 . Publication date : May 2020 . 54 : 4 Sucheta Ghoshal et al . to have at their core a fundamental understanding of how people really work and live in groups , organizations , communities , and other forms of collective life " [ 1 , p . 199 ] . In keeping with Ackerman , CSCW and HCI researchers have turned to designing technologies for social , moral , and political values . In one such design approach , HCI scholar Batya Friedman proposed the term value - sensitive design ( VSD ) suggesting that designers and technologists need to take more proactive measures in engaging with human values and social contexts of technology use [ 34 ] . VSD is defined as “a theoretically grounded approach to the design of technology that accounts for human values in a principled and comprehensive manner throughout the design process” [ 35 ] . While VSD suggests that one identify values and then design for them , in a notable critique , CSCW researchers Le Dantec et al . argue that the values themselves need to be discovered first [ 54 ] . They posit that conceptual understanding of values is not enough—discussing values in the abstract bars us from understanding them as lived experiences . As an alternative , they call for empirical investigations that “treat values as local phenomena , expressed in a local vocabulary” . Following LeDantec et . al . , recent CSCW research has explored grassroots values as lived experiences of a local movement—studying their use of technology in building up a movement from its inception [ 37 ] . This work notes that software tools developed for other purposes often do not fit comfortably with grassroots organizing and its values [ 37 ] . A grassroots approach believes in bottom - up leadership and decision by consensus . Existing tools fail to meet organizers’ goals of inclusivity and social translucence [ 25 ] , and may inadequately support security and privacy . The authors of this work found that inclusivity , privacy / security , and social translucence are three design values that sociotechnical practices of grassroots organizing can embody . Further , there is tension among these values—for example , privacy and security features may increase challenges for inclusivity . To design for these values of grassroots organizing , designers and researchers need not only study these values individually , but also study how they move in relation to one another [ 29 ] . While past work has focused on a single local grassroots organization , in this work we study a regional grassroots social movement that involves 118 grassroots organizations—therefore con - tributing to a richer understanding of grassroots values . Furthermore , in this paper we build on the notions of value - centered design and push that paradigm to include lessons from Critical Informatics . Most value - centered approaches in HCI such as VSD aim to “foreground the well - being of humans and the natural world” [ 34 , p . 3 ] . Toward this aim , it calls for and provides ways to “account for human values [ . . . ] throughout the technical design process” [ 34 , p . 4 ] . We share this commitment to well - being , and furthermore , we recognize the importance of accounting for human values in our practice and scholarship . That said , we argue in this paper that an accounting of values during technology design , while necessary , was not sufficient in the particular context of grassroots experience of technology . Instead , we needed to deconstruct the notion of technology itself . 2 . 2 CSCW and the Technocultural Theory Computer - supported cooperative work ( CSCW ) is committed to understanding how computer - based technologies can support the nature and characteristics of cooperative work [ 4 , 69 ] . In this mission , CSCW is fundamentally aligned with the sociotechnical view [ 59 ] of ICTs : it acknowledges that collaborative technologies ( and all ICTs ) are conceived , developed , configured , and / or used within nuanced social contexts [ 67 ] . The social and technical contexts of collaborative ICTs actively shape each other [ 8 , 63 ] . Grassroots use of collaborative ICTs is a similarly complex sociotechnical phenomenon that urges us to look closely at the context in which these technologies are being used . Recent work in Critical Informatics points out that a depoliticized application [ 13 ] of sociotech - nical systems theory can sometimes overlook the “cultural mediation of design , use , and meaning Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW1 , Article 54 . Publication date : May 2020 . Toward a Grassroots Culture of Technology Practice 54 : 5 of ICTs” [ 77 , p . 1 ] . They call for an application and understanding of sociotechnical systems that “positions culture and subject as interrelated , and thus demands an interrogation of technology as culture / ideology” ( p . 2 ) . For our context—grassroots social movements led by people of color in the U . S . South—this view of culture becomes indispensable . In experiencing grassroots beliefs , rituals , and practices in the U . S . South , we found that participants’ primary way of relating to the work of the movement and to one another is through shared cultural values . These cultural values are not bound by topological boundaries or normative structures [ 27 ] . For instance , SMA , which has a majority of working class African Americans would identify with the culture of blackness more than they would identify with the idea of a standard " American society " [ 11 ] . Given this , we recognize that we need to be careful with framing the grassroots context as merely sociotechnical especially since various scholars argue many qualitative analyses normalize a White Western cultural ICT context as the “social , ” while other cultural ICT usages are lost in that generalization [ 10 , 53 , 68 , 80 ] . To uncover and interpret the cultural tensions in SMA’s relationship with ICTs , we use theory from the field of Critical Informatics . One valuable theoretical framing from Critical Informatics is technocultural theory [ 65 ] . Technocultural theory , as formulated by Arnold Pacey , builds on the notion of sociotechnical systems , with an emphasis on technology as not just a societal phenomenon but also a cultural one . As with sociotechnical systems theory , technocultural theory sharply criticizes technologically deterministic and instrumentalist views in which modern technology is seen as something separate from society’s character [ 65 , 85 ] . Engaging with the social constructivist [ 8 ] approach of understanding how society is changed via technology , the theory of technoculture exercises a steady focus on interrogating the design of technology itself , asking why certain technologies lead to inequitable outcomes for certain cultures within a society . Technocultural theory suggests looking at elements such as social and economic beliefs leading up to the design and production of technology , values with which technology gets marketed , and ultimately , how the means of technology design and production shape the social , cultural , and political consequences of an artifact . This suggests that technology cannot be understood without understanding the cultural conditions driving the production of that technology . Technocultural theory further argues that ambiguity around the meaning of technology often leads it to be perceived as a neutral entity that only “experts” know how to operate . As an alternative , it offers us the lens of technology practice which lets us see that technology is nothing without the practices around it—therefore the argument about its neutrality is inherently flawed . Further , we see that seemingly neutral artifacts are also products of the practices and beliefs held by their makers and marketers . Within this framing , technology practice is “the application of scientific and other knowledge to practical tasks by ordered systems that involve people and organizations , living things and machines” [ 65 ] . This translates to a triad of cultural , organizational ( economic and industrial activity , professional activity , users and consumers , trade unions ) , as well as technical ( knowledge , skill , and technique ; tools , machines , chemicals , liveware ; resources , products and wastes ) aspects of a technology - practice ( Fig . 1 ) . Further , we see that many users ( especially users who belong to non - expert classes ) do not share the same values as that of technology ( values that primarily represent the expert culture ) . However , due to the immense power technology holds over people it has the ability to distort the organic cultures of its users . As a way of resolving the fundamental conflict of cultural values between " experts " and " users , " technocultural theory calls for a “cultural revolution [ 65 , p . 160 ] ” in technology against this—rooted in user values that will reform technology’s dominant culture set by experts . Our intention with this paper is to contribute to this idea of cultural revolution : by first understanding the culture of SMA ( grassroots " users " ) , followed by an understanding of the expert culture of ICTs , and finally with a formulation of countercultural ICT - practice rooted in grassroots Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW1 , Article 54 . Publication date : May 2020 . 54 : 6 Sucheta Ghoshal et al . Fig . 1 . Diagrammatic representation of culture of technology , as conceptualized by Pacey [ 65 ] . While technol - ogy in the popular meaning is often restricted to tools and machines that require expert skills and knowledge for their operation , Pacey urges us to look beyond this restricted view and understand technologies as cultural phenomena . Understanding technology in such totality entails critically engaging with its cultural and organizational aspects ( with an emphasis on its means of production and design ) along with the technical . values . Recent work in Critical Informatics has extended Pacey’s formulation of technology practice as a triad of social / organizational , cultural , and technical components [ 10 ] . Brock points out Pacey’s lack of consideration of ideologies in the making of technical artifacts , and further urges us to question the gendered and racialized character of technocultural ideology . He particularly notes how the beliefs and practices about the appropriate use of technology reproduce " the existing relations of production” [ 2 ] . Extending Pacey , Brock reformulates technocultural theory to examine technology with three categories : artifacts , practices , and beliefs [ 10 ] . Ideologies—those of the makers and marketers of ICTs as well as of the users of ICTs—are taken into consideration in each component of this formulation . 2 . 3 The Culture of Systemic Exclusion in ICTs Sasha Costanza - Chock explores how the culture of exclusion is often embodied in and reproduced through the design of technological artifacts . [ 15 ] . Technology—both in terms of designed artifacts and the process in which they are designed—embodies and reproduces the values of “the matrix of domination” ( white supremacy , heteropatriarchy , capitalism , and settler colonialism ) [ 14 , 15 ] . Although design is seen as a domain of paid experts , these paid experts—at least in U . S . Silicon Valley design firms—are primarily white and asian cisgender men . Women hold 25 % of these jobs ; Black women hold just 3 % of computer programming jobs , and Latinas , 1 % [ 3 ] . Although companies are trying to diversify their workforce , “diversifying the software workforce , unfortunately , will not automatically produce a more diverse default imagined user” [ 10 , 15 ] . Normative exclusions through technology are an important area of current HCI and CSCW research . CSCW researcher Os Keyes points out how the use of automatic gender recognition technologies has serious implications of excluding trans and non - binary people [ 49 ] . HCI researchers Schlesinger et al . observed similar patterns of gendered exclusion in HCI [ 70 ] , and further observed racial exclusions that happen through chatbots [ 71 ] . As past research shows , these raced , classed Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW1 , Article 54 . Publication date : May 2020 . Toward a Grassroots Culture of Technology Practice 54 : 7 [ 45 ] , and gendered exclusions perpetuated via technological artifacts have serious consequences [ 5 , 12 , 60 , 76 ] . The CSCW community has also purposefully designed against exclusion [ 20 , 46 ] and studied emancipatory cultures of technology - practice [ 19 , 28 ] . These studies are different in their methods and motivation but they all ultimately show that technology can and should be intentionally designed with values that adequately question systemic injustices [ 22 ] ( based on race [ 10 , 12 , 70 ] , gender [ 19 , 20 , 28 ] , class [ 45 , 46 ] , etc . ) that pervade our lives . We translate our knowledge of ICT’s culture of systemic exclusion in the follow into the triad of technoculture in Fig . 2 . This view helps with de - blackboxing the complex cultural phenomenon of ICTs . Opening the blackbox of technology has been a necessary step in cultural and political analysis of technology suggested by Critical Informatics . For us , in this paper and in our ongoing work with SMA , it works as an analytical tool that lets us look beyond the utility of popular ICTs . Fig . 2 . Adopting Brock’s reformulation of technocultural theory [ 10 ] , we unpack the culture of ICTs . With this formulation , we see , that the commonly used ICT artifacts pervading our digital existence are in fact products of a complex technoculture . The means of ICT production—predominantly driven by beliefs and practices of racial , gendered , classed exclusions—are structured in the design of the artifacts . In this paper , we build on past research , and further argue that while creating politically commit - ted technologies is a necessary step in the right direction , there are still practical challenges that remain in realities of technology - use . For example , as we will see , the most popular and “effective” solutions that “work” ( with significant implications in technological power ) in movement settings are centralized technologies made and marketed by corporations like Google or Facebook [ 37 ] . Even when value - driven technology choices are made , they come with hard trade - offs [ 37 ] . Therefore this work of creating progressive technologies will be incomplete without co - designing a culture of holding technology accountable for the values it promotes and transmits into the fabric of a movement . A critical part of designing this culture in movement spaces is going to be grounding ourselves in the diagnosis we offer in this paper : technology is made and marketed as neutral objects providing usability which then leads to a perception of technology being value - less and therefore devoid of political responsibilities . As a result , exclusion via ICTs is more normalized [ 21 ] and less questioned as a systemic injustice . Even for grassroots groups who typically perform a rigorous analysis of systemic injustices perpetuated by different social and political entities , technology is relatively less questioned for the part it plays in perpetuating such systemic exclusions . In this paper we discuss how ( and why ) ICTs are sometimes perceived to be devoid of political responsibilities , and further envision a grassroots culture of technology practice that critically questions the politics embodied in and reproduced through technological artifacts and practices . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW1 , Article 54 . Publication date : May 2020 . 54 : 8 Sucheta Ghoshal et al . 3 METHODS AND DATA The primary methods guiding us in our collaboration with the SMA are participatory action research and qualitative interviewing . Our work was approved by our Institutional Review Board ( IRB ) , and also by the Governance Council of SMA . 3 . 1 Participatory Action Research The first author of this paper is involved in the community of Southern Movement Assembly as an action researcher [ 42 ] : both participating in the organization , making tools for and with them , and simultaneously studying their use of technology . Action research is a participatory research method which uses “action disciplined by enquiry , a personal attempt at understanding while engaged in a process of improvement and reform” [ 44 ] . John Elliot , Dave Ebbutt , and James McKerman , three early practitioners of action research , describe a cyclical method of action research of starting with an initial problem definition , followed by a cycle of “fact - finding and analysis” [ 44 ] , creating and implementing a research plan , evaluating the results and action taken , revising the initial plan , and repeating the cycle . More recently , Hayes suggests action research as a method of inquiry that HCI researchers aiming to work with communities may choose [ 42 ] . As Hayes points out , action research aims to implement some constructive change in the community . Therefore , “AR researchers must understand the values they and their community partners bring to the project so as to interrogate explicitly what they hope to achieve , why they hope to achieve it , and what makes them believe the solutions they are attempting will do so” . Past work has used action research with a local grassroots organizations , and further found that action research can be a powerful method to study values as lived experiences of users [ 37 ] . With SMA , we took a similar approach . The first author continues to be involved in the community both as an activist and as a researcher . In this paper , she reflects on grassroots values as her own lived experience as well as that of other SMA members . 3 . 2 Researcher Self - Disclosure and Reflexivity Researcher self - disclosure and reflexivity are essential elements in action research [ 43 , 58 ] , allowing researchers to disclose their positionality in the world as well as their intellectual and political beliefs as related to the topic of research . In this work , the first author identifies to be politically aligned with the values of SMA , and believes that systemic injustice can be addresses by centering our social movements around the voices and experiences of people most excluded by traditional power structures . The first author has been involved in grassroots activism in the United States for over three years now , and in India for longer . The first author’s involvement with SMA began with attending SMA’s annual assembly , SMA 7 , in Whitakers , North Carolina in 2017 . During the three - day meeting , 300 SMA members from multiple organizations collectively decided on the organization’s goals for the next year . After attending SMA’s annual meeting in October 2017 , the first author committed to support them with their communication needs . This implied forming , participating , and contributing to a working group that would work on creating flyers , setting up video calls for monthly meetings , managing Google Drive and meeting notes , as well as training other people in the movement to use these technical artifacts . Beyond supporting with specific technical needs , the first author , along with other members of the working group , further uncovered the politics of the seemingly technical problems existing in the movement . For example , during a meeting in rural Mississippi organized by one of SMA’s partner organizations , SMA realized that the lowest registration count was from people and communities in rural Mississippi who were supposed to be at the center of the activities otherwise . Later in the meeting , the first author uncovered that there were several Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW1 , Article 54 . Publication date : May 2020 . Toward a Grassroots Culture of Technology Practice 54 : 9 people attending the meeting who could not manage to register using technological means due to issues of access and ability . SMA wanted to work toward a cohesive practice of communication across the movement that address incidental exclusions such as this . Toward this , the first author has been facilitating several gatherings that evolved as critical consciousness building workshops around ICTs—in SMA , these are known as “communication circles” . They are typically organized as a part of a broader movement meeting organized by the governing body of the SMA so as to make sure that these workshops travel to the various corners of the South instead of having people come to a more convenient urban location . So far , the workshops have taken place in Mississippi , South Carolina , Alabama , and Georgia . Driven by a need that was identified through these workshops , we are currently creating a “handbook” of movement communication ( handbooks are an established form of material communication in the SMA ) that will be available both digitally as a web - platform and physically to movement communities trying to build a similar culture of critical consciousness around ICTs . While our collaboration with the SMA has lasted for almost three years and counting , in this paper , we only report on the first sixteen months of our action research . The second and third author of this paper do not identify as members of the movement . Due to first author’s close involvement , the second and third author helped in minimizing bias in data collection and analysis . All authors are women . The first and second authors are of South Asian descent , and the third author is white . 3 . 3 Data Collection and Analysis Throughout our collaboration with the SMA , we took detailed notes of our own experiences and of others in the community over sixteen months ( at the time when this paper was written ) of action research starting October 2017 . Following a core value of action research , the first author was both a participant and an observer in the community of SMA . Through these observations , participation , and lived experiences as a prominent SMA member , the first author paid close attention to SMA’s relationship with technology ranging from people of color in the rural parts of US South feeling distant from technology due to lack of access to members enthusiastically posting SMA’s activities on social media . In addition to first author’s participation , to get more personal accounts of other members of the SMA , we did eleven semi - structured interviews with SMA members . The interview participants ( Table 1 ) vary in their degree of participation within SMA , as well as in their organizing backgrounds and experiences . They have varying degrees of comfort with technology . Because SMA members are part of the movement through their home organization ( we describe SMA’s structure in further detail in the next section ) , many participants were able to speak not only to their personal involvement in SMA , but the role of their home organization as well . Participants were recruited through connections made by the first author’s involvement in the movement . The interview questions centered around the participants’ history as an organizer , their involvement in SMA , SMA’s decision - making process and grassroots practices , and the technical artifacts used by SMA . Because some members have more experience with certain parts of the movement’s work , we made an effort to recruit participants who were bringing different skills to the organization ( for example : note taking , communication , or facilitation ) . In the recruitment process , we also actively looked for people who were situated in different positions of power within the movement ( e . g . while we recruited governance council members , we also looked for people who are more peripherally located in the movement ) . After transcribing the interviews , the authors conducted inductive and deductive coding to categorize and understand the emerging themes in the data [ 79 ] . The themes emerging from the coding process were analyzed with the lens of technocultural theory [ 65 ] . That is to say , we categorized the coded themes into two broad categories : SMA’s existing beliefs and practices , and the technology artifacts supporting the work of the movement . The first category of beliefs and Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW1 , Article 54 . Publication date : May 2020 . 54 : 10 Sucheta Ghoshal et al . Table 1 . List of participants in our study Participants Age Race and / or Ethnicity Role in organization P1 42 African - American Governance council member , SpiritHouse Represen - tative P2 19 African - American Member of Project South ( anchor organization of SMA ) P3 78 African - American Member of Southern Region National Council of El - ders ( participating organization of SMA ) P4 30 Haitian Member of political education and research work - team of SMA P5 24 Mixed - race Communications team member ; also represents par - ticipating orgs like : Miami Workers Center , Tree De - fenders member . P6 41 White Governance council member , co - director of anchor organization Project South P7 75 White Note taker , retired history educator P8 69 White Nurse and founding member of SMA P9 28 White Governance council member ; represents anchor or - ganization Concerned Citizens for Justice P10 26 White Youth advocate , Member of participating organiza - tion Power Shift Network P11 72 White Governance council member practices are presented as our findings on SMA’s culture of grassroots inclusivity . The themes categorized as technology artifacts are presented as our findings on both ways in which ICTs help the movement and cause conflict with its practices . 4 FINDINGS : SOCIOTECHNICAL REALITIES OF THE SMA In this section , we describe our findings of the different sociotechnical realities of the Southern Movement Assembly ( SMA ) . In the first subsection that follows , we answer our first research question ( RQ1 ) by sharing the key beliefs and practices that shape SMA’s politics . Next , we answer our second research question ( RQ2 ) by identifying the information communication technologies ( ICTs ) that support SMA in this process as well as the gaps that exist within the sociotechnical practices of grassroots politics . 4 . 1 Beliefs and Practices of SMA : The Culture of Inclusivity The Southern Movement Assembly ( SMA ) is a regional grassroots social movement made up of over 118 grassroots organizations from all over Southeastern United States . SMA is built on the foundational values of participatory democracy [ 66 , 75 , 81 ] , intersectionality [ 14 ] , black radical traditions [ 30 ] , and other political value systems that critically question systemic injustice . SMA also strongly identifies with the “southern heritage” of resistance since many of the founding members have also been deeply involved in questioning power and oppression in the southern states of the US through various social movements throughout history [ 30 , 66 , 83 ] . While SMA’s value system is informed by a multitude of radical values , a core value that all of our participants Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW1 , Article 54 . Publication date : May 2020 . Toward a Grassroots Culture of Technology Practice 54 : 11 mentioned in the interviews was inclusivity . Inclusivity , as a grassroots value , was discussed in almost all of SMA meetings we attended . The term “inclusivity” has found many meanings in the contemporary social and technological discourse—it represents different value systems and practices throughout . Toward answering our first research question , we wanted to first understand how SMA as a movement interprets and practices inclusivity . SMA defines the politics of “inclusivity” as an analysis of power and systemic oppression that not only questions the lack of diversity and representation [ 61 ] ) , but also aims to dismantle the institutional structures that continue to enable such exclusions . According to P1 : " What we mean by an inclusive grassroots movement space is more than the neoliberal understanding of diversity and inclusion . We believe that our people—poor people , black and brown folk , queer folk , disabled people etc . —have been ignored and oppressed for years by those in power . Institutional structures have been put in place to maintain this culture of exclusion . This is not going to be resolved with a few black and brown folk in those same institutions that ultimately thrive on the exclusion of poor people of color , you know ? We need to dismantle the structural exclusion with our radically inclusive practices , our movement has got to be governed differently than our country . " —P1 As P1 demonstrates , inclusivity in the sense practiced by SMA comes from a grassroots analysis of structural oppression . At the crux of this grassroots politics of inclusivity is the belief that “no one should be excluded from any form of governance that makes decisions about their lives” [ 36 ] . While they demand radical inclusion of voices , experiences , and opinions from traditional power structures of society , they also strive to practice the same notion of inclusivity through their own internal movement culture . Toward their goal of being inclusive and welcoming of the voices and experiences of all members of the movement , they have designed a unique governance structure that accommodates leaders of many local organizations , a decision - making model that goes beyond voting and centers the subjective experiences of people affected by systemic injustices , and finally a culture of holding societal power structures accountable . Two elements of social system are foundational to SMA’s practice of inclusivity : self - governance and participatory decision - making [ 66 ] . The governance structure of SMA is designed to distribute power among many leaders and organizations . Among the 118 organizations who form SMA , there are 18 “anchor” organizations . Anchor organizations are expected to bring in movement resources ( money , technology , labor , etc . ) . At the core of this structure is the “governance council . ” The governance council has representatives from each of the 18 anchor organizations . Each member and organization of SMA is bound by “the principles of unity”—a document that articulates shared practices , principles , and commitments . One of the key characteristics of SMA’s governance structure is that it is purposefully non - hierarchical . Power and resources are not controlled by a small group of leaders . This also speaks to the value of SMA as an “organization of organizations”—made up of 18 anchor organizations , the governance council represents a multitude of perspectives . P5 notes that this goal of building and sustaining “a movement of many” has both practical and philosophical motivations behind it . “In our meetings , we keep going back to this belief : we cannot do this alone , and we don’t want to . To me , grassroots approach is both at once a practicality and a desire . We can’t do it alone , that’s just the truth , it’s a practicality . But ‘we don’t want to’ speaks to this desire , that we want to be part of something broader ; we want to be part of something large , and something connected and something inclusive ; something that speaks to many people even if it doesn’t speak to me individually . ” – P5 P2 and P5 share their perspectives and experiences of building a communal sense of purpose for the movement of SMA . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW1 , Article 54 . Publication date : May 2020 . 54 : 12 Sucheta Ghoshal et al . “This country can get stuck at ‘me’ or ‘I’ sentences : like ‘I have to survive’ , ‘I have to be able to get out of this neighborhood’ . To me SMA says , ‘your I has to be a we . ’ Anything we need to do , it has to be for your people who you’re accountable to , who you’re going to back to at the end of the day , and who are you moving forward for . SMA is about getting rid of this individualistic sense and creating more of a community sense of problems and solutions . ” – P5 “Bringing so many people together [ through SMA ] immediately gives you that sense of ‘we’ . If you felt alienated , look around you : there are like 300 more people who are here and they’re all like you in many ways . Some of them are even from your hometown but because of our still segregated ways of living you don’t even get to know and support them . ” – P2 The 118 organizations that make up SMA each bring their own perspectives and resources which are carried through the movement by the bottom - up decision - making structure . The labor conducted within the movement is distributed between paid employees and volunteers . SMA believes that , to be able to voice their opinions , people who have been marginalized by traditional power structures first need to realize that their experiences are valued . To make sure all voices are heard , many grassroots groups use a consensus - based decision - making process [ 66 ] . However , there are a number of well - documented problems with this process . Consensus is vulnerable to manipulation by a well - organized subgroup , can be derailed by a single disagreeable individual , and does not scale well [ 72 ] . To address these limitations , SMA designed a participatory decision - making process that is called the Peoples’ Movement Assembly ( PMA ) . Its purpose is to not just include but truly center the voices and opinions of marginalized people who are most often excluded from political decisions that affect their life . The ultimate goal is to develop a regional social movement to foster systemic change . SMA’s website 2 says : “The assembly process is based on the facilitation methodology of collective critical thinking and analysis , resulting in a synthesis that represents the sum organic total of all of the ideas and commitments . ” In a typical PMA , there are two rounds of assemblies : the frontline assembly and general assembly . Each assembly is structured around three steps : consciousness ( discussing the lived experiences of a systemic issue ) , vision ( the systemic change that participants wish to see ) , and strategy ( actionable goals to make the vision a reality ) . SMA holds annual PMAs that involve all organizations of SMA . In the first round of this face - to - face event , the frontline assemblies host people who are the most affected by these issues , the general assembly is a participatory decision - making event that engages all members present . P1 ( one of the many leaders of SMA ) talks about what frontline assemblies mean to her : “It takes a strong sense of community to hold people in power accountable . When you’re ignored for so long you feel alone . Frontlines are where you get together with people with similar experiences , discuss , and then gather the strength to show up in numbers to say to people in power : “look , we see you . ” Whether you recognize it or not , we’re the ones bagging your groceries . We’re the ones who are taking your money when you pay for gas . We’re the ones serving you in the restaurants , you know . The ones working underneath the hood of your car . We are at the frontline of this struggle , and we are taking note . You cannot ignore us . ” – P1 Our participants describe how the core of the decision - making process is hearing the voice of every person in the room . More practically , these voices are documented through a practice that SMA 2 http : / / southtosouth . org Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW1 , Article 54 . Publication date : May 2020 . Toward a Grassroots Culture of Technology Practice 54 : 13 developed called " synthesis . " In each phase of a PMA , members split into smaller groups . Each group appoints a member to represent their views to the larger group . “Synthesis is an attempt to form a way of decision making that honors all voices and is also able to be expressed to all people or many people” – P6 During the frontline assemblies , synthesizers document every contribution , and during the general assembly , everyone in the room gains an understanding of each discussion that took place . P6 discusses the significance of every voice being represented both in terms of decision making and within the movement as a whole : “Well , there’s a real practical piece about it , around application . If you have three - fourths of the room , you only have three - fourths of the muscle . If you have the whole room , you have the whole power . . . If this movement is about everybody , and about everybody getting free , we’ve got to come at it together , even if there’s disagreements with them . ” – P6 The PMA process is complex . The design of PMA takes a political stance by centering the process around the frontlines of oppression , and so , as members would argue , PMAs are not neutral [ 36 ] . In an attempt to describe how a PMA looks like in practice we can take the example of the Climate Justice Assembly that happened in New Orleans in 2016 . This assembly , as well as other PMAs , are documented in a handbook produced by SMA [ 36 ] —what we describe next is a summary of the event description . Though we were not present at this particular assembly , the PMAs we attended were similar in structure 3 . The event , as described in the handbook , started on the note of community representatives connecting climate crisis to tribal sovereignty , body autonomy , public health , and immigrant rights . In the next phase of the assembly , there were two presentations : first , highlighting the concerns of the Gulf Coast frontline , describing the oil and gas leaks and its impact on communities , followed by a discussion on connecting these local realities to global examples ( Flint MI crisis , global draughts , etc . ) . In the following phase , as a part of frontline assembly , small groups discussed questions such as : “how does oil / gas drilling impact your community ? What would your community look like without oil / gas drilling ? What could our communities look like with renewable energy ? What should we do to ensure healthier communities in the next 90 days , in the next year , in the next 3 years ? ” Facilitators from each small group then reported back the “synthesis” from each group discussion to the large group . The group decided on tangible actions ( e . g . organized actions toward local legislative changes in the Gulf Coast ) to be taken in the community through another round of small group discussions . In the end , a list of action items were decided for the community , and each person selected 2 - 3 priorities they were willing to work on . In addition to their central role in PMAs , the structure of synthesis and report backs are applied to other meetings of SMA as well—offline or online—where facilitators take notes and report back to the entire community . They recognize the need to inform the people not in the room ( both in the offline sense of annual PMAs , and the Zoom calls ) to give them an opportunity to contribute to the final decision and participate in the collective actions . 4 . 2 Technology Artifacts of SMA and Their Consequences For a regional social movement with 118 organizations located all over the Southeastern U . S . , the processes and practice of their politics require SMA to depend on several material resources like : finances , political knowledge of members , volunteer labor , and also information and communication technologies ( ICTs ) . While communities of social movements have long been dealing with material forms of resources like volunteer labor and finances , ICTs are relatively new in the realm of 3 The three PMAs we have experienced are similar in structure . In this paper , we choose to use an example that SMA has chosen to make public [ 36 ] . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW1 , Article 54 . Publication date : May 2020 . 54 : 14 Sucheta Ghoshal et al . movement organizing . ICTs often enter the fabric of grassroots movements to serve functional needs . Although these functional needs existed before ICTs , these tools greatly expand what they can accomplish both in outreach and in efficient day - to - day operations . Toward answering our second research question , in this section , we will discuss the ways in which SMA uses and perceives ICTs for the purpose of their politics . SMA has chosen several ICTs for day - to - day organizing and internal communication . Since members are located in different parts of the Southeastern United States , SMA depends heavily on the video communication platform Zoom , which they use for all of their online meetings . Additionally , they have a website that hosts resources on the history and philosophy of SMA as well as information on different organizations that form the movement . This website is hosted by MayFirst 4 , a collective that strives to develop and maintain politically conscious technology . The website is also used to communicate monthly general assembly calls . SMA also maintains a public Facebook page , which is used to inform followers about their monthly meetings and to live stream some of their events . Their decision - making process relies heavily on Google Drive and Dropbox for documentation and archiving purposes . SMA has also designed several handbooks on movement research , most notable ones on People’s Movement Assemblies [ 36 ] , Movement Journalism [ 73 ] , and Immigrant Rights [ 7 ] . These handbooks are freely available and are both digitally and physically distributed among different grassroots social justice organizations [ 57 ] . They are intended to make their movement practices accessible and reproducible in other spaces . Our findings reveal that the technology - practice of making movement artifacts accessible is a practice that SMA inherited from one of their anchor organizations Project South . As P6 notes , “One thing that Project South believed was that nothing we create , and I think this was before the term open source had even been coined , but none of it would be copyrighted . The only thing we asked was that it be cited . Now that translates to creative commons , but that was something we’ve always practiced , in a technical sense . This is a tradition that SMA has also inherited . ” – P6 Let us now look at a practical example of how these communication technologies are used in the practice of grassroots politics . A notable outcome from the annual meeting of SMA in late 2017 was the inclusion of a Puerto Rican organization in the movement . At that annual meeting , representatives from a grassroots organization based in Puerto Rico shared their experience of organizing and recovering from the ongoing political and environmental crisis in the wake of Hurricane Maria , which struck the island in September 2017 [ 17 , 51 , 52 ] . SMA has been invested in organizing around climate disasters for several years , and although Puerto Rican organizations were not directly involved in SMA , the movement collectively decided that they wanted to support this organization in Puerto Rico . Although this act of inclusion happened in a physical meeting , the practices that followed were deeply technological . In the months that followed , the governance council members had multiple video conferences over Zoom with the organization’s representatives . The notes from those calls were recorded on a Microsoft Word document . The video recording of those calls and notes were reported back to the rest of SMA over emails . Finally in 2018 , SMA started planning a visit to Puerto Rico , strategizing which members within the movement who would be best fit to visit . As P5 shares , “Well we had to be careful to not let it become disaster tourism . All of us who went had experienced climate disaster in some way , and had experiences of recovering from it as well . It is about knowing who these people are , reaching out to them . And allocating finances 4 https : / / mayfirst . org / en / Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW1 , Article 54 . Publication date : May 2020 . Toward a Grassroots Culture of Technology Practice 54 : 15 to fund their travel too because often the people who need to be in the room most do not have the means to be there . ” – P5 Once the logistics of this event were arranged , the communications work team was given the task of making a graphic poster announcing their events across the southeastern United States , including the event in Puerto Rico . P5 and P1 share how designing the graphic poster ( Fig . 3 ) was both at once a technical and a political task . Fig . 3 . A poster—announcing SMA organizing drive across the southeastern United States—was designed by a member of the Communications Work Team of the SMA . Among other details , the poster shows a map connecting different southern regions including Puerto Rico . SMA’s collaboration with a Puerto Rico based organization had many important political significance , most importantly , the recognition that Puerto Rico is an integral part of the U . S . South . In this poster , the designer attempted to express the act of grassroots inclusivity acknowledging that a regional analysis of systemic issues of the South must include and center the experiences of Puerto Rican people . “We wanted the graphic to say the story of inclusion of Puerto Rico . The map and the line connecting the states was an intentional choice to say that we see Puerto Rico as a part of the South . ” – P5 “When so much of the disaster capitalism that is happening in Puerto Rico is rooted in exclusion of the place from rest of the US , the map makes a statement . ” – P1 Finally , in the summer of 2018 , several representatives from different organizations of SMA went to Puerto Rico , and helped with political strategizing as well as with manual labor like planting seeds in their community garden . The group came back and reported on their experience and discussed next steps over another Zoom call . SMA’s culture is rooted in political values , but the practice of grassroots politics has functional needs . All of the tasks that were mentioned in this section—keeping a record of people’s experiences , reaching out to people , regular meetings about finances , booking travel , making a graphic poster , etc . — point to regular , practical tasks that are usually addressed with some form of technical intervention . It is for these technical tasks that ICTs become an essential part of the movement . Although media technologies play a significant role in the practice of SMA’s politics , adoption of these artifacts manifests in various consequences for grassroots politics . While they open new opportunities for communication , they also create new barriers for the inclusion of marginalized voices that SMA tries to achieve . In our experience , indicate that most of these “technology - related” decisions in the SMA are made by a group of only four people ( including the first author ) who are Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW1 , Article 54 . Publication date : May 2020 . 54 : 16 Sucheta Ghoshal et al . identified as technically competent . The rest of the movement follows the suggestions of SMA’s communications team . With time , ICTs became more and more pervasive in SMA’s infrastructure . The more complicated it becomes to maintain these ICTs , the more distant members become from the technology . Technology , in the common understanding in SMA , is a task for the younger demographic . It requires expert knowledge , steady access , and a certain amount of racial and economic privilege . This results in a complicated relationship between the social and technical systems of SMA . As a member of the communications team and a participant of our study notes , “There is just a lot of hostility toward technology . ” – P9 For a community that is connected almost entirely via ICTs , these complicated sociotechnical realities have serious consequences for their politics . For example , P3 wanted to get involved in the communications work team but technological access and ability was a constraint for her . The bi - monthly communications calls get announced via a Google group . She was not receiving the bi - monthly notifications of the meetings since she could not sign up for the group . She shares , " I have been missing the notifications for your calls because I think my google group subscription is not functional , and I don’t know how to fix it " —P3 In our interview with her she notes that although she likes technology she is often challenged by it and relies on the help of technically adept people in her life . “I’ve always been in contact with a variety of younger people—they are like my nieces and my nephews . I have a couple of them who are really into technology and so they will help pull me out when I mess up something on my computer or I’m trying to load some software and I do something . Or if I get my passwords all lost and confused . So I’m blessed to have the support of a couple of people who know a lot more about technology . ” – P3 P3 further shared her concerns about the role of technology in grassroots movement as : “I think we have to be careful and that we don’t overvalue technology and undervalue the importance of relationship building . ” – P3 In a face - to - face meeting with P3 , the communications workgroup helped P3 set up a Gmail account , and further signed her up on the Google group , which enabled her to get the notification emails . Across our observations , a myriad of small barriers like this accumulate to create surprising degrees of exclusion in practice . We observed members struggle with similar issues throught our action research . For instance , in a workshop conducted by the first author in the Mississippi Delta , participants discussed varied mediums of movement communications and the opportunities and challenges that come with choosing them . A younger person pointed out that they firmly believe in social media’s power of “getting the word of movement out . ” An older person from rural Mississippi shared that most people in her neighborhood including herself have flip phones with unreliable internet connections . She further shared that online campaigns can sometimes make rural people feel isolated when the movement is also about them . In addition to technology access in rural vs . urban parts of U . S . South , participants attributed this particular dynamic to age as well . Members shared that disparities in comfort with technology can sometimes lead to an “inter - generational gap” in the movement . For example , the black and indigenous cultures many SMA members come from deeply value the wisdom of elders—their lived experiences of racism in the United States and beyond continue to inform the racial analysis of the movement [ 30 , 83 ] . However , in the current reality of movement organizing the elders ( with some exceptions ) often feel disconnected from the movement due to their relationship with technology . Following that discussion , we listed the different mediums of communication in use by different communities the participants were representing , and how we Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW1 , Article 54 . Publication date : May 2020 . Toward a Grassroots Culture of Technology Practice 54 : 17 can use online mediums in a way that does not undervalue the offline mediums of movement communications . While ICT artifacts do in fact simplify movement - related tasks , our findings suggest that perceived technical proficiency has implications for the internal power dynamic of a movement . P7 , a white historian of age 75 , identifies note - taking as a task that she could take up as a white person in a space that is centered around people of color . While she used to take notes by hand in the beginning , she realized note - taking for the purpose of SMA’s method of participatory decision - making requires a lot of technical freedom like : copy - pasting , referring to outside knowledge resources like Wikipedia , being able to compress a 32 page long document to a 4 page summary , etc . “I learned to type in eighth grade . We don’t have to go through all of that , but you’ll remember the reason , you’ll always remember the reason . And that meant that technically I could take notes . Although at first it was handwriting . Then eventually I discovered that having a laptop that I could take with me enabled me to be a part of a meeting where I don’t fit otherwise . Because I had skills and tools that those spaces needed and I could offer them that . ” – P7 P7’s access to a laptop and ability to type quickly , along with her knowledge about the history of the US South , made her feel more comfortable taking an active role , because she felt she had something valuable to contribute . P7’s story further points to the fact that technical skills and access to ICT artifacts enables the movement of SMA to practice new organizing techniques . While P7 sees her note taking as a service to the community , she recognizes that it also gives her a degree of power – her version of what was said is the official , archival version . P7 points out , note - taking in the context of SMA is not just typing up a conversation . It is an active work of interpretation , research , and analysis . “Note - taking has to happen knowing that the concept in the end is the synthesis , that , which is not the same thing as just outlining or typing up . It’s going to a new level of understanding that blends everything . It’s like how [ P6 ] always says “making a cake , you have the sugar and the eggs and the flour and then you mix them all together , but it’s the heat that causes the chemical reaction so you have something different . ” And that’s what the synthesis is supposed to be , the chemical reaction in which the notes are an essential element . ” – P7 Technical skills , knowledge , and access to a tool all contribute to a level of functionality and efficiency that P7 embodies . It is therefore natural for SMA to want P7 to be “the note - taker” of the movement . But , P7 further shared her concern about how this runs the risk of centralizing the power of documenting the movement to one human being who already identifies to not belong to the center of the movement . P11 notes that she had the same concern with SMA’s decision - making . She shares that she initially was concerned about the decision making process being so tied up in the knowledge and skills of the synthesis—the knowledge and skills were then tied to specific tools associated with the process . “Even though you’re people who are skilled in doing it . You’ve got to have it be a number of people who do it or who know how to do it , and constantly increase that number” – P11 SMA has been trying to " increase the number " of people who know how to use Google Drive with regular web - tutorials they organize over the video communication platform Zoom . But in our participation and observation of such web - tutorials , we saw that these efforts are not free of tension . In order to be able to successfully receive a training on Google Drive , members would need to be proficient in Zoom or need to join those calls through some tool other than an ordinary Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW1 , Article 54 . Publication date : May 2020 . 54 : 18 Sucheta Ghoshal et al . cellphone . Many members , especially those from less - advantaged backgrounds , have simple cell phones rather than smart phones . Furthermore , these ICT artifacts were chosen with a varying degrees of analysis of their politics . Politics can be embedded in functionality , and one might also worry that the politics of the organization that created a tool are expressed in its design . However , those politics are hard to access , as P1 notes : “Zoom is relatively new . We were using FreeConferenceCall . com for years . I mean , who even knows their politics ? We didn’t even look , but it was more just like , we know this is functional . We know this is useful . ” – P1 Some part of the Zoom account world is free , so people can download an app and then be part of it , but somebody’s got to pay the subscription . We realized that if we raised enough to pay the subscription , and that equals out to easier to our most affected people , or older people , or people that we’re trying to build relationship with , if that’s an easier forum , we will take the cost out . – P6 “The only encrypted form of communication that we have right now is on Zoom . I really made sure that we had that , and you can go play around with the encryption choices as well . ” – P5 P6 also reflects on how the cost of value - analysis is not always financial . SMA has chosen more value - driven technology choices in the past . SMA’s website is hosted by MayFirst—a radical technology collective whose values aligns with SMA’s beliefs . However , the maintenance of their web platform has required a significant amount of coordination between MayFirst and SMA . While value - driven and inclusive in the strictly technical sense , this technical choice was not the most efficient . As P8 reflects , “It slows down the process significantly , which makes it difficult to work with when all you need is to publicize the next general call through the website . ” – P8 As P6 describes this conundrum between choosing an open - source solution and paying for a managed service , “So , when we look at something like a Zoom , which is an account that costs money , as opposed to some kind of open source technology , we sort of always have to weigh out . We don’t do this super systematically , but we weigh out the amount of resources and time that it takes to understand and work with open source , versus the time it takes to just get a Zoom account . ” – P6 5 DISCUSSION : TOWARD GRASSROOTS CULTURE OF TECHNOLOGY PRACTICE To summarize what we have shown with our findings , grassroots organizations strive to make use of ICTs to further their agenda . However , ICTs do not work comfortably for grassroots purposes and , in fact , sometimes end up distorting grassroots values . For example , “technically competent” members end up having more power because of their knowledge about the technical artifacts . Technical competence is further associated with younger age , cis male gender , whiteness , socioeconomic privilege , and other normative characteristics . For a movement that is run mostly on volunteer capacity and has to overcome many systemic barriers , the choice of ICTs is driven by functional qualities with varying degrees of analysis of the politics of these artifacts . Moreover , when SMA has tried to make technical choices ( Zoom , Website , etc . ) with some form of value - analysis in mind , the choices have come with hard trade - offs—like finances , usability , technical labor , etc . We argue that the complex sociotechnical reality of SMA is indicative of the reproduction of cultural values Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW1 , Article 54 . Publication date : May 2020 . Toward a Grassroots Culture of Technology Practice 54 : 19 of the chosen ICT artifacts , and the tension we observe is a result of two contrasting technocultures coming together . SMA’s sociotechnical realities have interesting parallels with the historical studies of technology conducted by Arnold Pacey in his book “The Culture of Technology” [ 65 ] . Pacey studied the evolution of the snowmobile and showed how the same technological artifact led to different cultural implications for different places in the world , sometimes even leading to socially inequitable outcomes . Technocultural theory provides a helpful roadmap through which technology can be questioned in its totality , i . e . as a triad of artifacts , practices , beliefs leading to the formation of a technoculture . This framing also provides us with context for the experiences of SMA members : the moments of breakdown within SMA , when put in context of technocultural theory , reveal important insights about the design of ICTs used by this community . We argue that SMA’s sociotechnical system is a combination of two contrasting technocultures : the technoculture of inclusivity in grassroots movements and the technoculture of exclusion in ICTs . We graphically represent this system in Fig . 5 . Our ultimate goal is to find ways to resolve some of the conflicts between the two technocultures in an effort to design a technology practice that truly centers grassroots culture . In the view of technocultural theory , this conception of grassroots culture of technology questions the expert culture ( norms of design set by experts of technology ) that ICTs currently emerge from . Toward this , in the sections that that follow , we first establish SMA’s existing culture as an emerging technoculture of grassroots inclusivity . Second , we look at the contentions of the technoculture of ICTs with the technoculture of grassroots inclusivity . As past work argue , chosen ICTs are a product of a technoculture of systemic exclusion with radically different practices and beliefs . We connect our findings with past work to unpack the significance of ICTs existing in the intersection of two contrasting technocultures . We posit that the values , practices , beliefs from ICTs’ technoculture often bleed into the technoculture of grassroots inclusivity , leading the latter to show symptoms of systemic exclusion . Finally , we offer suggestions on how the relationship between ICTs and grassroots beliefs and practices can be harmonized toward a more equitable culture of technology practice . 5 . 1 Grassroots Inclusivity as an Emerging Technoculture Inclusivity as sociocultural value has been interpreted in different ways . In the dominant discourse around the ( Western ) workplace , inclusivity is broadly understood as synonymous to diversity of identities [ 3 ] . Inclusivity has also often been tokenized in social settings beyond the workplace [ 50 ] . Civil Rights leaders spoke about people of color being included as a symbolic effort to have representation of people from marginalized groups . However , in practice , they had little to no administrative power over making decisions that would actually affect their lives [ 30 ] . SMA actively challenges this version of inclusivity . As P1 points out , the common views of inclusivity tells us that the problem of systemic exclusion can be fixed with equal representation of marginalized people in power . While representation matters , according to SMA’s beliefs , inclusivity cannot be sustained without a transformation of the power structures that enabled such systemic exclusion for centuries . This belief is translated to novel practices of inclusivity such as the Peoples’ Movement Assembly ( PMA ) . The idea of the PMA is born out of the realization that if we are to demand the kind of democracy that serves the most marginalized of the society in an equitable way as it would serve the wealthiest , then we need to rethink the structure of our democratic practices , too . And so , with an analysis of voting and other democratic decision making in mind , PMAs were designed as a radically inclusive alternative that questions the very design of parliamentary democracy in the United States . These beliefs and practices of inclusivity require the support of certain communication Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW1 , Article 54 . Publication date : May 2020 . 54 : 20 Sucheta Ghoshal et al . Fig . 4 . SMA’s culture has shown to have set beliefs , practices , and artifacts , which leads us to present SMA’s culture as an emergent technoculture of Grassroots Inclusivity . While this formulation comes from our analyses of SMA , we offer the technoculture of grassroots inclusivity as a more generalized framework that can be used to build a technology practice committed to questioning power and systemic oppression . artifacts —both ICTs and non - digital artifacts . Grassroots inclusivity can therefore be conceptualized as : An emergent technoculture that strives to include marginalized voices in the uses of technology to resist systemic oppressions , while simultaneously working toward dismantling the broader structures that lie at the root of marginalization . Using our findings , through the lens of technocultural theory , the idea of grassroots inclusivity can be expressed as the triad of beliefs , practices , and artifacts as shown in figure 4 . This frame is useful in several ways . First , this representation can be seen in contrast with that of the dominant technoculture of ICTs in figure 2 . Making use of this contrast , in § 5 . 2 , we argue that the ICT artifacts used by SMA represent the intersection of these two triads ( figure 5 ) , leading to an uneasy fit for these artifacts within a grassroots culture of technology practice . Second , we argue in § 5 . 3 . 1 that beyond the specific application in this paper , this framing can be used to make sense of technology - practices in HCI in general—i . e . , beyond grassroots movements . Finally , though ICT artifacts form a small part of the rich and complex technoculture of SMA as represented in the triad , their uneasy existence in the grassroots fabric engenders a demand for a shift away from prioritizing established expert values in technology practice , which we discuss in § 5 . 3 . 3 . 5 . 2 The Culture of ICTs against Grassroots Inclusivity What happens when two separate technocultures collide ? Our findings show that the ICTs chosen to support SMA resist their practice of inclusivity in significant ways . As technocultural theory suggests , we can never separate technology from the practices it promotes and / or resists . Cultural experiences with technological artifacts can therefore provide us with useful insights on the Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW1 , Article 54 . Publication date : May 2020 . Toward a Grassroots Culture of Technology Practice 54 : 21 fundamental value - systems of the technology . Following Pacey’s lead , if we compare the two cultures of technology—the culture of ICTs as shown in Fig . 2 and the ( techno ) culture of grassroots inclusivity as shown in Fig . 4—we end up with the fact that ICTs are situated at the intersection of two contrasting cultures of technology within SMA ( as shown in Fig . 5 ) . ICTs’ positionality in the SMA , as well as the design of these artifacts , both make ICTs our objects of concern in this paper . We argue that the practices and beliefs embodied by the ICTs sometimes reproduce within a grassroots social movement . Though members of the SMA are “users” and not the producers of these artifacts , “mere” use of these artifacts , produced under a different technoculture leads to an erosion of the technoculture of grassroots inclusivity that SMA members aspire to . Furthermore , as Brock reminds us [ 10 ] in his reformulation of Pacey’s technocultural theory , even when we are considering a site of use far removed from the site of production , we cannot ignore the technoculture that is associated with the means and the site of production of the technological artifact . Fig . 5 . Comparing the culture of ICTs in Fig . 2 and technoculture of grassroots inclusivity in Fig . 4 we see that , in the sociotechnical system of the SMA , ICTs are situated at the intersection of two contrasting cultures of technology . This makes ICTs more prone to reproduce the values from technoculture of exclusion into the technoculture of grassroots inclusivity , which further leads to the inequitable outcomes described in this paper . For example , as we observed in the findings , for a movement overburdened with political analysis , SMA has had varying degrees of success in evaluating the politics of ICTs prior to adoption . There is also a general expectation within the movement for technologies to be value - free , efficient technical solutions for their problems . While this perceived neutral quality of technology is in itself a reproduction of the value - neutral position taken by the makers and marketers of ICT artifacts ( Facebook [ 55 ] , Twitter [ 23 ] , Google ) , adopting ICTs with less consciousness of the values they possess make them even more prone to reproduce their existing values in a community . We see more of this reproduction happen with values like functionality and efficiency . The culture of ICTs is often based on the assumption that efficiency is correlated with the value of productivity [ 18 , 21 , 84 ] . Therefore , the most efficient person in the room is the person who knows the technical artifact in use best and can get the task done fastest [ 18 , 21 ] . Adopting ICTs leads to a similar belief within the SMA landscape . Their choice of the same few people in the roles of facilitator and note - taker is indicative of productivity - driven choices . Functionality and efficiency , however , have different meanings for a grassroots social movement than they do for the makers and marketers of the ICTs used . To form a robust sociotechnical system for grassroots social movements , we need to further examine how we can integrate chosen technical solutions with adequate cultural and organizational practices that embody functionality and efficiency in the grassroots sense . If we look at the culture of SMA , we see that their understanding of a functional and efficient movement is not Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW1 , Article 54 . Publication date : May 2020 . 54 : 22 Sucheta Ghoshal et al . about being the simplest to manage , or the quickest in organizing a protest . The sociopolitical goal of SMA is to include the most marginalized voices , and in doing so , make decisions that improve the lives of the most marginalized . In P1’s words , that is accomplished by “moving at the speed of trust . ” Adopting tools like Google Drive enhances some needs of decision - making in the movement like documentation and archiving , while hindering the more sociopolitical goal of distributing the decision - making power to the most marginalized . Moreover , the values of functionality and efficiency in the production of ICTs , as prior work shows , are highly gendered [ 9 ] and racialized [ 21 , 24 ] values [ 21 ] . The primary workforce from which these artifacts emerge are white and / or Asian cis - gender males [ 3 ] . Proficiency in technology therefore is associated with whiteness [ 10 , 15 , 21 , 24 ] , masculinity [ 10 , 15 ] , socioeconomic status [ 10 , 15 , 45 ] , and , to some extent , specific ethnicities [ 3 , 15 ] . SMA’s sociopolitical culture organically resists such exclusionary practices , SMA being a movement primarily led by and centered around people of color . Yet , if we look at who is believed to be technically competent among just our interview participants it would be P5 ( Multi - racial , 24 ) , P6 ( white , 41 ) , P7 ( white , 75 ) , and P9 ( white , 28 ) . The communications workteam of SMA that the first author joined also shows similar racialized character . This association of technical efficiency with whiteness , socioeconomic privilege , and younger age is indicative of the gendered , classed , and racialized means of ICT production that prior work points out [ 3 , 15 , 26 , 40 , 45 , 49 ] . Finally , the culture of ICTs believes that social and political problems can have technical solutions [ 1 , 21 , 84 ] . For example , the ICT artifacts used by SMA such as Google Drive and Dropbox are made and marketed as technical solutions for the social needs of collaboration and cooperation . As a more alternative technical solution , SMA’s choice of hosting their website with MayFirst was also meant to be a more inclusive choice of technical artifact . All of these technical solutions fail to account for the more systemic exclusions that the politics of grassroots inclusivity fundamentally question . If SMA’s sociotechnical reality is any indication , we need to realize that problems that arise in the grassroots fabric do not have strictly technical solutions . In fact , adopting communication technologies as technical solutions can sometimes obscure our vision of the more structural gaps that may exist within a community . For example , the use of Zoom made it possible for SMA to have regular calls which played a crucial role in creating a sense of community for their regional movement . However , these calls are typically announced over emails and Facebook posts—tools that many SMA members have limited access to . This has the potential to exclude the most marginalized members of SMA who should otherwise be at the center of the movement . 5 . 3 Lessons from the Conflicting Technocultures Technocultural theory suggests that cultural conflicts in sociotechnical systems can highlight important truths about the fundamental assumptions underlying the design of technical artifacts . From the conflict between the technoculture of grassroots inclusivity and the technoculture of ICTs , we can infer important lessons about the future of ICT artifacts wanting to support inclusion ( and other social values ) , as well as grassroots communities wanting to form their own culture around technologies they have little control over . The problems we highlight in this paper need to resolved from both ends of the cultural spectrum . CSCW and HCI ( designers , practitioners , institutions ) have a responsibility to align and resolve some of the fundamental differences of this field with marginalized technocultures , leading to more value - aligned ICTs . On the other end , the marginalized technocultures will be exercising their voices in many ways—most importantly by holding the ICTs they use accountable for the values they promote . Following are some suggestions grounded in the findings and analysis of this paper . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW1 , Article 54 . Publication date : May 2020 . Toward a Grassroots Culture of Technology Practice 54 : 23 5 . 3 . 1 Expanding the Vision of Inclusivity in CSCW and broader HCI . The means of technology production ( e . g . , discriminatory beliefs and practices in the technology workforce ) have several consequences beyond the lives of workers involved in the making of technology . The means of production of CSCW technologies shape the values embodied in , practiced and reproduced through CSCW artifacts . Thus , we end up with value - laden technologies with serious implications for power and marginalization in the lives of “users” of these technologies . In what follows , we argue that the means of CSCW technology production can be evaluated with our formulation of the technocultural framework of grassroots inclusivity . Significant efforts have been made to make CSCW a diverse community , with the hope that that diversity would also be reflected on the artifacts and practices of the community . However , as past work points out , inclusivity often gets tokenized and limited in the discourse of representation [ 15 , 49 , 70 , 71 ] . With the conception of “grassroots inclusivity” as a distinguishable practice from the more tokenized version of inclusivity , we mean to provide a theoretical framing of inclusivity that is grounded in lived experiences of a large regional grassroots social movement . We posit that a substantive change is needed in how CSCW technologies interpret issues of inclusion , exclusion , marginalization , etc . Toward a sustainable shift , CSCW and HCI need to be more grounded in structural analysis of oppression , i . e . moving our investigation from “who is missing from technology discourse” to “why are they missing ? How are they missing ? What needs to be transformed structurally in order to dismantle this pattern of exclusion ? ” Through our description of SMA’s practices and beliefs around inclusivity , we suggest that grassroots inclusivity is a conceptual framework that can help CSCW , HCI , and other communities work towards centering the marginalized experiences of technology . For example , building on the practices ( Fig . 4 ) of grassroots inclusivity , CSCW designers , researchers , and practitioners working with / for marginalized experiences of computing ( through communities they work with , or have lived experiences themselves [ 6 ] ) can engage in critically reflecting on values carried through technologies they use , make , and study [ 38 ] . Aligning the technoculture of CSCW and broader HCI with grassroots inclusivity will have to be a continuous practice . We suggest two possible methods and practices for CSCW designers and practitioners in the following subsection . 5 . 3 . 2 Expanding Design Practices in CSCW and broader HCI . Our call for aligning the two techno - cultures echoes past research [ 37 ] and further point to the need for a kind of value - sensitive design work through collaboration that focuses on outcomes beyond design of technical solutions with communities . More practically , this would mean that designers and researchers doing community - centered design would stay sufficiently involved in the community before and after creating a technical artifact for and with them . This would enable researchers to not only study values as lived experiences of others , but also of lived experiences of themselves as members of the communities being studied . A close and holistic collaboration can uncover that a strictly technical solution for the problem of inclusivity , or any other sociopolitical value for that matter , does not exist . As we have seen in this paper a strictly technical solution will insufficiently address the structural exclusion that is often at the root of such problems . In reality , designing a culture of technology practice is messy work , and we , as designers , need to embrace that messiness . For example , one possible way to capture the messiness of designing a culture of technology practice is to consider that every community is heterogeneous and even the seemingly non - hierarchical communities will often have hidden power structures [ 31 ] . Questioning technology with a technology - practice would further acknowledge that the technical solutions we create may unequally favor community members in different power positions . The task of design therefore Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW1 , Article 54 . Publication date : May 2020 . 54 : 24 Sucheta Ghoshal et al . entails asking hard questions about whether the technical solutions we create possess the risk of becoming a solution that works for a selected few in the community . By identifying the members for whom the technical solutions do not work , and further centering their experiences , researchers can begin to explore effective sociopolitical practices that can accompany more technical solutions . Together , this will lead to a more politically integrated technology practice . Our suggestion for making value - driven design a more ongoing , reflective process rather than an one - off event that produces stabilized artifacts embodying desired values , echoes vast amount of work done in social and critical informatics . It is particularly aligned with the work of Orlikowski and her call to studying technology - in - practice as “identifying types of structures of technology use should help both researchers and practitioners better understand how and why people are likely to use their technologies and with what ( intended and unintended ) consequences in different condition” [ 62 ] . Sustaining a culture of value - sensitive technology practice will also mean that we stay vigilant for the reproduction of values of technical solutions . These technical artifacts could be from managed services like Google Drive or self - hosted solutions . CSCW researchers and designers in this space will have to try to involve the community to iteratively design around such reproductions . More concretely , this would entail having open conversations with community members about the the politics and value - risks of technical solutions we collaboratively create . There is a need to ensure that the communities stay aware of the possible means of reproductions of values , and further hold technical systems and their designers accountable for the values they promote . 5 . 3 . 3 Practicing a Grassroots Culture of Technology . There needs to be a change in the way we think about values in technology . While that can be a long - term goal for both makers and users of technology , in the meantime , resolution of conflict between the contrasting technocultures of grassroots inclusivity and ICTs can be done by de - centering the technoculture of ICTs in this arrangement . This would mean being conscious of the ways ICTs have a tendency to center the hegemonic values they come with , and then actively resisting such pattern with grassroots practices in an effort to create a truly grassroots culture of technology practice . In our future work with the SMA , we will build on the following principles toward that culture . Consciousness of the value - risks of ICT artifacts . A core belief of grassroots organizing is consciousness : knowing and acknowledging the lived experiences of systemic oppressions . In a similar way , they can leverage the lived experiences of technical artifacts centering the experiences of those who identify as uncomfortable with ICTs . Inclusion of varied technical knowledge and resources within the movement . Next , a grassroots technology - practice should carefully reflect on the social , cultural , and organizational resources that different organizations and individuals bring to the movement . For example , in SMA , an organization brings the knowledge of spiritual and cultural grounding , and another organiza - tion brings the skill resource of union organizing and an understanding of class relations in the Southeastern U . S . These seemingly non - technical resources should be considered as technological resources along with ones like knowledge of cybersecurity or skills of making a graphic poster . This will also re - emphasize the belief that technology used by a movement is not separate from a movement’s character . Therefore the skills and resources that shape a movement also has the power and ability to shape our technology - practices . Careful allocation of resources . In a grassroots technology - practice , the social and cultural resources should be mindfully allocated so that technical resources do not come at an unreasonable cost of more natural resources like volunteer labor . Allocation of resources should be a conversation among all members , not just the technologists in the room . Costs can be hidden – using a particular piece of software or collaborating with another organization’s platform may be more cumbersome than initially understood , so decisions need to be re - evaluated in light of new information . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW1 , Article 54 . Publication date : May 2020 . Toward a Grassroots Culture of Technology Practice 54 : 25 Participatory decision - making about technology . Finally , a core practice in grassroots so - cial movements is the participatory decision - making process that involves members with varied experiences of systemic exclusions in every step of determining the future of the movement . All the other suggestions we made above would not materialize if people with different experiences and access to technology do not make decisions about the technologies together . 6 FUTURE WORK AND CONCLUSION Imagine telling a grassroots organizer thirty years ago that in the future they would have low - cost or even free access to audio and video conferencing , shared document editing , and the means to publicize events to thousands of people with a few mouse clicks . They would , rightly , be amazed and excited . The existence of these technologies is what makes a regional movement like SMA possible . Technology has come a long way toward helping the voices of people be heard . However , these technologies also have unexpected consequences . It doesn’t much help to have a meeting via audio conferencing so people without computers can attend if the meeting is announced via email . Small barriers like this accumulate , making true democracy hard to achieve . Even grassroots organizations who rank democratic participation of the marginalized as a top value struggle to be fully inclusive in their daily practices . Awareness of the problem is an important first step , but not a sufficient one , since careful analysis of available technological tools often leads to hard trade offs . We suggest that there is work to be done in CSCW and broader HCI toward critically exam - ining both the fundamental values we produce and market our technologies with as well as the consequences of such value - laden technologies . As a possible shift in the means of ICT design and production , we suggest CSCW and HCI designers draw from the culture ( practices , beliefs , artifacts described throughout this paper ) of grassroots inclusivity—a vision of inclusivity grounded in a structural analysis of exclusion . While we envision a more integrated technology practice in CSCW ( and therefore more value - aligned ICTs ) that accommodates grassroots needs , we argue that grassroots movements too have a role to play in making such an integration happen . Thus , we call for a localized culture of technology practice in grassroots communities that is committed to holding the cultures of ICT accountable for the values they embody and promote . We envision that a grassroots culture of technology practice will be rooted in the grassroots analysis of systemic exclusion with a continuous effort to include and center the marginalized voices and experiences with technology . In future work , we are doing sociotechnical systems design ( both artifacts and social practices ) toward that culture of technology , prioritizing grassroots inclusivity and other grassroots values . Further , our ongoing work with SMA also aims to create a handbook of movement communications , which we hope will be useful to other groups who would like to reflect on their own practices . Ultimately , with our ongoing and future work in CSCW and in grassroots communities , we remain committed to help facilitate a grassroots culture of technology practice . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank the Southern Movement Assembly for being an incredible source of hope , joy , and grassroots change – this work would not exist , quite literally , without the SMA . We are grateful for the love and support received from Andre Brock , Lilly Irani , Megan Leach , and many others who supported this work throughout . We also thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable feedback to different iterations of this paper . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW1 , Article 54 . Publication date : May 2020 . 54 : 26 Sucheta Ghoshal et al . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Mark Ackerman . 2000 . The Intellectual Challenge of CSCW : The Gap Between Social Requirements and Technical Feasibility . Human - Computer Interaction 15 , 2 ( 2000 ) , 179 – 203 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 / S15327051HCI1523 _ 5 [ 2 ] Louis Althusser . 2006 . Ideology and ideological state apparatuses ( notes towards an investigation ) . The anthropology of the state : A reader 9 ( 2006 ) , 86 . [ 3 ] Catherine Ashcraft , Elizabeth Eger , and Michelle Friend . 2012 . Girls in iT : the facts . Technical Report . National Center for Women & Information Technology , Boulder , CO . 79 pages . https : / / www . ncwit . org / resources / girls - it - facts [ 4 ] Liam J Bannon and Kjeld Schmidt . 1989 . CSCW : Four characters in search of a context . In ECSCW 1989 : Proceedings of the First European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work . Computer Sciences Company , London . [ 5 ] Shaowen Bardzell . 2010 . Feminist HCI : Taking Stock and Outlining an Agenda for Design . Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( 2010 ) , 1301 – 1310 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753521 [ 6 ] Cynthia L . Bennett and Daniela K . Rosner . 2019 . The Promise of Empathy : Design , Disability , and Knowing the " Other " . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’19 . ACM Press , Glasgow , Scotland Uk , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300528 [ 7 ] Priyanka Bhatt , Priya Sreenivasan , Anthony Rivera , Daniel Yoon , Kevin Caron , and Azadeh Shahshahani . 2018 . Inside Atlanta’s Immigrant Cages A Report on the Conditions of the Atlanta City Detention Center . Technical Report August . https : / / projectsouth . org / wp - content / uploads / 2018 / 08 / InsideATL { _ } Imm { _ } Cages { _ } 8 { _ } DIG . pdf [ 8 ] Wiebe Bijker . 1995 . Toward a Theory of Sociotechnical Change . Elements for a Theory of ( 1995 ) . [ 9 ] Avtar Brah and Ann Phoenix . 2004 . Ain’t I A woman ? Revisiting intersectionality . Journal of international women’s studies 5 , 3 ( 2004 ) , 75 – 86 . [ 10 ] André Brock . 2018 . Critical technocultural discourse analysis . New Media & Society 2007 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1461444816677532 [ 11 ] André Brock Jr . 2019 . Distributed Blackness : African American Online Technoculture . [ 12 ] Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru . 2018 . Gender Shades : Intersectional Accuracy Disparities in Commercial Gender Classification . In Proceedings of the 1st Conference on Fairness , Accountability and Transparency ( Proceedings of Machine Learning Research ) , Sorelle A . Friedler and Christo Wilson ( Eds . ) , Vol . 81 . PMLR , New York , NY , USA , 77 – 91 . http : / / proceedings . mlr . press / v81 / buolamwini18a . html [ 13 ] Clifford G Christians . 2007 . Cultural continuity as an ethical imperative . Qualitative Inquiry 13 , 3 ( 2007 ) , 437 – 444 . [ 14 ] Hill Collins . 2011 . Truth and Method : Feminist Standpoint Theory Revisited . 22 , 2 ( 2011 ) , 341 – 365 . [ 15 ] Sasha Costanza - Chock . 2018 . Design Justice : Towards an Intersectional Feminist Framework for Design Theory and Practice . Proceedings of the Design Research Society 2018 in ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 21606 / dma . 2017 . 679 [ 16 ] Ruth Schwartz Cowan . 2011 . More work for mother : the ironies of household ; technology from the open hearth to the microwave . Basic Books , New York . [ 17 ] Catalina M de Onís . 2018 . Energy colonialism powers the ongoing unnatural disaster in Puerto Rico . Frontiers in Communication 3 ( 2018 ) , 2 . [ 18 ] John Dewey . 1916 . Progress . The International Journal of Ethics 26 , 3 ( 1916 ) , 311 – 322 . [ 19 ] Jill P . Dimond . 2012 . Feminist HCI for Real : Designing Technology in Support of a Social Movement . December ( 2012 ) , 153 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / mmi . 13650 [ 20 ] Jill P Dimond , Michaelanne Dye , Daphne Larose , and Amy S Bruckman . 2013 . Hollaback ! : The Role of Collective Storytelling Online in a Social Movement Organization . ( 2013 ) . [ 21 ] Joel Dinerstein . 2013 . Technology and Its Discontents : On the Verge of the Posthuman . 58 , 3 ( 2013 ) , 569 – 595 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1353 / aq . 2006 . 0056 [ 22 ] Lynn Dombrowski , Ellie Harmon , and Sarah Fox . 2016 . Social Justice - Oriented Interaction Design . Proceedings of the 2016ACMConferenceonDesigningInteractiveSystems - DIS’16 ( 2016 ) , 656 – 671 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2901790 . 2901861 [ 23 ] Jack Dorsey . 2018 . Testimony of Jack Dorsey ( Chief Executive Officer Twitter , Inc . ) . https : / / docs . house . gov / meetings / IF / IF00 / 20180905 / 108642 / HHRG - 115 - IF00 - Wstate - DorseyJ - 20180905 . pdf [ 24 ] Richard Dyer . 1997 . The matter of whiteness . In The matter of whiteness . Routledge , London . [ 25 ] Thomas Erickson , Wendy A Kellogg , and I B M T J Watson . 2000 . Social Translucence : An Approach to Designing Systems that Support Social Processes . 7 , 1 ( 2000 ) , 59 – 83 . [ 26 ] Will Evans and Sinduja Rangarajan . 2017 . Hidden figures : How Silicon Valley keeps diversity data secret . Reveal News ( October 26 , 2017 ) ( 2017 ) . [ 27 ] James Ferguson and Akhil Gupta . 2008 . Beyond ‘culture’ : space , identity , and the politics of difference . In The cultural geography reader . Routledge , 72 – 79 . [ 28 ] Casey Fiesler , Shannon Morrison , and Amy S . Bruckman . 2016 . An Archive of Their Own : A Case Study of Feminist HCI and Values in Design . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’16 . ACM Press , Santa Clara , California , USA , 2574 – 2585 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858409 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW1 , Article 54 . Publication date : May 2020 . Toward a Grassroots Culture of Technology Practice 54 : 27 [ 29 ] Mary Flanagan , Daniel C Howe , and Helen Nissenbaum . 2008 . Embodying values in technology : Theory and practice . Information technology and moral philosophy 322 ( 2008 ) . [ 30 ] Philip Sheldon Foner ( Ed . ) . 1995 . The Black Panthers speak ( 1st da capo press ed ed . ) . Da Capo Press , New York . [ 31 ] Jo Freeman . 1972 . The tyranny of structurelessness . Berkeley Journal of Sociology ( 1972 ) , 151 – 164 . [ 32 ] Paulo . Freire . 1970 . Pedagogy of the oppressed . Bloomsbury Publishing . [ 33 ] Paulo Freire . 1973 . Cultural Action for Freedom . ( 1973 ) , 1 – 12 . [ 34 ] Batya Friedman and David Hendry . 2019 . Value sensitive design : shaping technology with moral imagination . The MIT Press , Cambridge , Massachusetts . [ 35 ] Batya Friedman , Peter Kahn , and Alan Borning . 2002 . Value sensitive design : Theory and methods . University of Washington technical report 02 – 12 ( 2002 ) . [ 36 ] Ruben Solis Garcia , Seth Markle , Foluke Nunn , Emery Wright , and Stephanie Guillod . 2016 . Peoples Movement Assembly Organizing Handbook . Technical Report . [ 37 ] Sucheta Ghoshal and Amy S . Bruckman . 2019 . The Role of Social Computing Technologies in Grassroots Movement Building . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction [ Preprint ] ( 2019 ) . http : / / www . sucheta . net / wp - content / uploads / 2019 / 04 / sghoshal - grassroots - technology - preprint . pdf [ 38 ] Sucheta Ghoshal , Andrea Parker , Christopher A . Le Dantec , Carl Disalvo , Lilly Irani , and Amy Bruckman . 2019 . Design and the Politics of Collaboration : A Grassroots Perspective . In Companion of the 2019 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing - CSCW ’17 Companion . ACM Press , Austin , Texas , USA . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311957 . 3359438 Forthcoming . [ 39 ] Jonathan Grudin . 1988 . Why CSCW Applications Fail : Problems in the Design and Evaluation of Organizational Interfaces . Proceedings of the 1988 ACM conference on Computersupported cooperative work CSCW 88 4 ( 1988 ) , 85 – 93 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 62266 . 62273 [ 40 ] Aimi Hamraie . 2017 . Building access : Universal design and the politics of disability . U of Minnesota Press . [ 41 ] Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri . 2017 . Assembly . Oxford University Press , New York . [ 42 ] Gillian R . Hayes . 2011 . The relationship of action research to human - computer interaction . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 18 , 3 ( jul 2011 ) , 1 – 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1993060 . 1993065 [ 43 ] G . L . Herr , K . , & Anderson . 2014 . The action research dissertation : A guide for students and faculty . Sage Publications . [ 44 ] E . Hopkins , D . , Joyce , B . , & Calhoun . 2002 . A teacher’s guide to classroom research . Open University Press . [ 45 ] Lilly Irani . 2018 . CRITICAL PERSPECTIVES " Design Thinking " : Defending Silicon Valley at the Apex of Global Labor Hierarchies . Irani Catalyst 4 , 41 ( 2018 ) , 1 – 19 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 28968 / CFTT . V4I1 . 243 . G323 [ 46 ] Lily C . Irani and M . Six Silberman . 2013 . Turkopticon : Interrupting worker invisibility in amazon mechanical turk . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on . . . ( 2013 ) , 611 – 620 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2470742 [ 47 ] Marina Karides , Rose M Brewer , and Alice Lovelace . 2007 . The United States Social Forum : Perspectives of a Movement . ( 2007 ) . [ 48 ] L . A . Kauffman . 2017 . Direct action : protest and the reinvention of American radicalism . Verso , London ; New York . [ 49 ] Os Keyes . 2018 . The Misgendering Machines : Trans / HCI Implications of Automatic Gender Recognition . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 2 , CSCW ( Nov . 2018 ) , 1 – 22 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3274357 [ 50 ] Martin Luther King and Jesse Jackson . 2000 . Why we can’t wait . New American Library , New York . [ 51 ] Naomi Klein . 2005 . The rise of disaster capitalism . National Emergency Training Center . [ 52 ] Naomi Klein . 2018 . The battle for paradise : Puerto Rico takes on the disaster capitalists . Haymarket Books . [ 53 ] Jaron Lanier . 2010 . You are not a gadget : A manifesto . Vintage . [ 54 ] Christopher a . Le Dantec , Erika Shehan E . S . Poole , and S . P . Susan P . Wyche . 2009 . Values as lived experience : Evolving value sensitive design in support of value discovery . Proceedings of the 27th international conference on Human factors in computing systems ( CHI ’09 ) ( 2009 ) , 1141 – 1150 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1518875 [ 55 ] Sam Levin . 2018 . Is Facebook a publisher ? In public it says no , but in court it says yes . The Guardian ( July 2018 ) . https : / / www . theguardian . com / technology / 2018 / jul / 02 / facebook - mark - zuckerberg - platform - publisher - lawsuit [ 56 ] John Lofland . 1996 . Social movement organizations : guide to research on insurgent realities . Aldine de Gruyter , New York . [ 57 ] Seth Markle , Foluke Nunn , Emery Wright , Ruben Solis , and Stephanie Guilloud . 2016 . People’s Movement Assembly . http : / / www . peoplesmovementassembly . org / [ 58 ] Janet Masters . 1995 . The history of action research . Action research electronic reader 22 ( 1995 ) , 2005 . [ 59 ] Enid Mumford . 2000 . Socio - technical design : An unfulfilled promise or a future opportunity ? In Organizational and social perspectives on information technology . Springer , 33 – 46 . [ 60 ] Safiya Umoja Noble . 2018 . Algorithms of oppression : how search engines reinforce racism . New York University Press , New York . [ 61 ] Michael Omi and Howard Winant . 2015 . Racial formation in the United States ( third edition ed . ) . Routledge / Taylor & Francis Group , New York . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW1 , Article 54 . Publication date : May 2020 . 54 : 28 Sucheta Ghoshal et al . [ 62 ] Wanda J . Orlikowski . 2000 . Using Technology and Constituting Structures : A Practice Lens for Studying Technology in Organizations . Organization Science 11 , 4 ( Aug . 2000 ) , 404 – 428 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / orsc . 11 . 4 . 404 . 14600 [ 63 ] Wanda J Orlikowski and Jack J Baroudi . 1991 . Studying information technology in organizations : Research approaches and assumptions . Information systems research 2 , 1 ( 1991 ) , 1 – 28 . [ 64 ] Elinor Ostrom . 1990 . Governing the Commons : The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action . ( 1990 ) . [ 65 ] Arnold Pacey . 1983 . The Culture of Technology . The MIT Press . [ 66 ] Francesca Polletta . 2002 . Freedom is an Endless Meeting : Democracy in American Social Movements ( 2004 ed . ) . The University of Chicago Press . [ 67 ] Paul Resnick et al . 2001 . Beyond bowling together : Sociotechnical capital . HCI in the New Millennium 77 ( 2001 ) , 247 – 272 . [ 68 ] Howard Rheingold . 2007 . Smart mobs : The next social revolution . Basic books . [ 69 ] Tom Rodden . 1991 . A survey of CSCW systems . Interacting with computers 3 , 3 ( 1991 ) , 319 – 353 . [ 70 ] Ari Schlesinger , W Keith Edwards , and Rebecca E Grinter . 2017 . Intersectional HCI : Engaging identity through gender , race , and class . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 5412 – 5427 . [ 71 ] Ari Schlesinger , Kenton P . O’Hara , and Alex S . Taylor . 2018 . Let’s Talk About Race : Identity , Chatbots , and AI . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’18 . ACM Press , Montreal QC , Canada , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173889 [ 72 ] Carmen Sirianni . 2007 . Neighborhood planning as collaborative democratic design : The case of Seattle . Journal of the American Planning Association 73 , 4 ( 2007 ) , 373 – 387 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01944360708978519 [ 73 ] Project South . 2017 . Out of Struggle : Stregthening and expanding movement journalism in the U . S . South . Technical Report . https : / / projectsouth . org / wp - content / uploads / 2017 / 08 / Out - of - Struggle - 7 . 26 . pdf [ 74 ] Lee Staples . 2016 . Roots to power : a manual for grassroots organizing . 483 pages . https : / / vufind . carli . illinois . edu / all / vf - knx / Record / 15696699 / Description [ 75 ] Randy Stoecker . 1994 . Defending community : the struggle for alternative redevelopment in Cedar - Riverside . Temple University Press , Philadelphia . [ 76 ] Latanya Sweeney . 2013 . Discrimination in Online Ad Delivery . Queue 11 , 3 ( March 2013 ) , 10 : 10 – 10 : 29 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2460276 . 2460278 [ 77 ] Miriam E Sweeney and André Brock . 2014 . Critical informatics : New methods and practices . Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 51 , 1 ( 2014 ) , 1 – 8 . [ 78 ] Sidney G . Tarrow . 2011 . Power in movement : social movements and contentious politics . Cambridge Uni - versity Press . https : / / books . google . com / books ? hl = en { & } lr = { & } id = zpeVVfesY2AC { & } oi = fnd { & } pg = PR13 { & } dq = tarrow + power + in + movement { & } ots = rH2eR2Vzv2 { & } sig = RNH0tUXV3B5JoUbRDoTwstSwmjQ { # } v = onepage { & } q = tarrowpowerinmovement { & } f = false [ 79 ] David R Thomas . 2006 . A general inductive approach for analyzing qualitative evaluation data . American journal of evaluation 27 , 2 ( 2006 ) , 237 – 246 . [ 80 ] Sherry Turkle . 2017 . Alone together : Why we expect more from technology and less from each other . Hachette UK . [ 81 ] Ralph H . Turner and Lewis M . Killian . 1972 . Collective behavior ( 2 . ed ed . ) . Prentice - Hall , Englewood Cliffs / N . J . [ 82 ] Marlon Twyman , Brian C Keegan , and Aaron Shaw . 2017 . Black Lives Matter in Wikipedia : Collective memory and collaboration around online social movements . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing . ACM , 1400 – 1412 . [ 83 ] Hollis Watkins and C . Liegh McInnis . 2015 . Brother Hollis : the sankofa of a movement man . OCLC : 958707833 . [ 84 ] Langdon Winner . 1978 . Autonomous technology : Technics - out - of - control as a theme in political thought . Mit Press . [ 85 ] Langdon Winner . 2009 . Do Artifacts Have Politics ? Author ( s ) : Langdon Winner Published by : The MIT Press on behalf of American Academy of Arts & Sciences Stable URL : http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 20024652 Do Artifacts Have Politics ? 109 , 1 ( 2009 ) , 121 – 136 . Received October 2019 ; revised January 2020 ; accepted March 2020 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 4 , No . CSCW1 , Article 54 . Publication date : May 2020 .