Relative Microelastic Mapping of Living Cells by Atomic Force Microscopy Emad A - Hassan , * William F . Heinz , * Matthew D . Antonik , * Neill P . D’Costa , * Soni Nageswaran , * Cora - Ann Schoenenberger , # and Jan H . Hoh * * Department of Physiology , Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine , Baltimore , Maryland 21205 USA and # Mu¨ller Institute for Microscopy , Biozentrum , University of Basel , Basel CH - 4056 , Switzerland ABSTRACT The spatial and temporal changes of the mechanical properties of living cells reflect complex underlying physiological processes . Following these changes should provide valuable insight into the biological importance of cellular mechanics and their regulation . The tip of an atomic force microscope ( AFM ) can be used to indent soft samples , and the force versus indentation measurement provides information about the local viscoelasticity . By collecting force - distance curves on a time scale where viscous contributions are small , the forces measured are dominated by the elastic properties of the sample . We have developed an experimental approach , using atomic force microscopy , called force integration to equal limits ( FIEL ) mapping , to produce robust , internally quantitative maps of relative elasticity . FIEL mapping has the advantage of essentially being independent of the tip - sample contact point and the cantilever spring constant . FIEL maps of living Madine - Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) cells show that elasticity is uncoupled from topography and reveal a number of unexpected features . These results present a mode of high - resolution visualization in which the contrast is based on the mechanical properties of the sample . INTRODUCTION The structure of eukaryotic cells is controlled by a dynamic balance of mechanical forces . Intrinsic properties of the molecular components and the actively generated forces , such as the forces exerted by the cytoskeleton on the extra - cellular matrix ( ECM ) attachments , neighboring cells , and the substratum contribute to this force balance ( Ingber et al . , 1994 ; Li et al . , 1987 ) . When it is altered , integrated changes in cell form , cytoskeletal organization , and nuclear shape result . Growth , cell cycle progression , gene expression , and other cell behaviors are sensitive to changes in the cellular mechanical force balance or closely associated changes in the cytoskeleton , ECM mechanics , and nuclear structure ( Ingber , 1993 ; Ingber et al . , 1995 ; Mooney et al . , 1992 ; Singhvi et al . , 1994 ; Mitchison , 1995 ) . Hence , spatial and temporal modulations of cellular mechanical properties are intimately related to physiologically important processes . For instance , changes in local mechanical properties are thought to be vital for tissue pattern development , especially during embryonic morphogenesis ( Fung , 1988 ; Ingber and Folkman , 1989 ; Ingber and Jamieson , 1985 ) . Modulation of the tension - dependent cell shape is central to the process by which angiogenesis is regulated ( Ingber et al . , 1995 ) . Neu - rons also undergo growth and morphogenetic changes in response to mechanical tension ( Zheng et al . , 1991 ) . Mea - surements of the spatial distribution and changes in vis - coelastic properties of living cells will provide valuable insights into these processes . The mechanical properties of cells have been studied with various techniques . Among these methods , the cell poker was used to study cellular deformability based on the resis - tance of a cell to indentation with a flat - ended glass fiber ( Peterson et al . , 1982 ; Zahalak et al . , 1990 ) . Other tech - niques include the micropipette aspiration ( Young and Evans , 1989 ; Shao and Hochmuth , 1996 ) , flicker or dy - namic reflection interference contrast spectroscopy ( Zilker et al . , 1987 ; Zeman et al . , 1990 ) , scanning acoustic micros - copy ( Luers et al . , 1991 ; Bereiter - Hahn et al . , 1995 ) , infra - red laser traps ( optical tweezers ) ( Ashkin and Dziedzic , 1989 ; Svoboda et al . , 1992 ) , and various magnetometric analysis devices that use magnetic particles bound to extra - cellular receptors or introduced into intact living cells ( Val - berg and Feldman , 1987 ; Wang and Ingber , 1994 ; Maniotis et al . , 1997 ) . Most of these methods , however , average properties over relatively large areas and hence have very modest spatial resolution . The atomic force microscope ( AFM ; Binnig et al . , 1986 ) is emerging as a valuable tool for studying biological ma - terials ( Kasas et al . , 1997 ; Hansma and Hoh , 1994 ; Hend - erson , 1994 ) . It is well established that the AFM can be used to image living cells under physiological conditions in a nondestructive manner ( Schaus and Henderson , 1997 ; Schoenenberger and Hoh , 1994 ; Butt et al . , 1991 ; Hender - son et al . , 1992 ; Hoh and Schoenenberger , 1994 ; Haydon et al . , 1996 ) . The AFM can also be used to study material properties by collecting so - called force curves over a point on the sample surface ( for a review see Bottomley et al . , 1996 ) . A force curve is a plot of the force applied to the AFM tip as the sample is approached and pushed against the tip . In principle , this plot gives the force required to achieve Received for publication 4 August 1997 and in final form 20 November 1997 . Address reprint requests to Jan H . Hoh , Department of Physiology , Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine , 725 N . Wolfe Street , Baltimore , MD 21205 . Tel . : 410 - 614 - 3795 ; Fax : 410 - 614 - 3797 ; E - mail : jan . hoh @ jhu . edu . © 1998 by the Biophysical Society 0006 - 3495 / 98 / 03 / 1564 / 15 $ 2 . 00 1564 Biophysical Journal Volume 74 March 1998 1564 – 1578 a certain depth of indentation ( deformation ) from which viscoelastic parameters can be determined . For biological materials , the AFM force curves have been used to examine micromechanical properties of bones ( Tao et al . , 1992 ) , platelets ( Radmacher et al . , 1996 ) , magnetotactic bacteria ( Fritz et al . , 1994 ) , atrial myocytes ( Shroff et al . , 1995 ) , embryonic carcinoma cells ( Goldmann and Ezzell , 1996 ) , glial cells ( Haydon et al . , 1996 ) , epithelial cells ( Putman et al . , 1994 ; Hoh and Schoenenberger , 1994 ) , and cholinergic synaptic vesicles ( Laney et al . , 1997 ) . By collecting arrays of force curves , so - called force volumes , high - resolution 2 - D maps of mechanical properties can be produced . Despite these demonstrations of the utility of microme - chanical mapping with the AFM , there are several experi - mental difficulties in collecting and quantitatively analyzing the force curve data . One of the most vexing problems is accurate determination of the contact point between the tip and the sample . If a sample is soft relative to the detection sensitivity of the AFM , the sample will deform in response to the tip before the cantilever deflects measurably and the true contact point is not easily detected . Large uncertainty in the contact point leads to significant errors in the estimation of the indentation depth , elastic moduli , or any other pa - rameter defined by the contact point . In particular , errors occur when the force curve data are fitted to the commonly used Hertz model ( Weisenhorn et al . , 1992 ; Radmacher et al . , 1995 , 1996 ) . The determination of a Young’s modulus also requires accurate force measurement , which makes calibration of the AFM cantilever an additional essential parameter . However , cantilever calibration is relatively cumbersome and time consuming with many potential sources of errors . Finally , the wide range of AFM tip shapes and the small tip - sample contact area make the contact geometry poorly defined . These problems have motivated us to develop a set of experimental conditions and a new analytical approach for analyzing AFM force curves to produce robust and inter - nally quantitative micromechanical maps . In this report we describe this new approach and its application on Madine - Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) cells . MDCK cells are a well - characterized epithelial cell system ( Matlin and Caplan , 1992 ; Balkovetz et al . , 1997 ) that forms continuous monolayers . MDCK cells serve as a suitable model system to develop and demonstrate this new approach to mapping the relative microelastic properties of living cells with high spatial resolution . FIEL MAPPING To deal with the experimental difficulties described above we have developed a new analytical framework for deter - mining relative microelastic properties from force volumes of viscoelastic materials , called FIEL ( force integration to equal limits ) . FIEL mapping has the advantages of being independent of the tip - sample contact point , not requiring calibration of the AFM cantilever force constant , and re - ducing differences in probe geometry to a simple geometric scaling factor . It should be noted that the emphasis of FIEL mapping is to show differences and changes in local vis - coelastic properties . The following section describes the ex - perimental conditions and theoretical basis of FIEL mapping . Force - distance and force - time curves AFM force curves are collected by measuring the cantilever deflection ( d c ) as the sample is moved toward the tip . Fig . 1 A shows a typical approaching force curve collected on an MDCK monolayer as a plot of the change in cantilever deflection ( D d c ) versus the height position of the sample ( D Z p ) . This curve is collected in relative trigger mode ( RT - mode ) in which the sample is advanced until a preset cantilever deflection relative to the zero deflection position is reached . The sample is then retracted a predetermined distance . On a hard nondeformable surface , D d c is propor - tional to D Z p while the tip and the sample are in contact . However , soft samples deform with increasing cantilever deflection , resulting in a nonlinear contact region of the curve . This curve is a convolution of the viscoelastic prop - erties of the sample with the viscoelastic properties of the cantilever . Rather than using sample position ( Z p ) , it is more useful to use an absolute distance ( D ) that is relative to the sepa - ration between the tip and the sample surface ( for a soft sample this is the undeformed surface ) . The correction to produce a force - distance ( FD ) curve uses the relationship D 5 D Z p 2 D d c ( Ducker et al . , 1992 ; Butt et al . , 1995 ) ( Fig . 1 B ) . Because force and deflection are directly related through Hooke’s Law , F c 5 k c z D d c , where F c is the force on the cantilever and k c is the force constant of the canti - lever ; the word force is often used here to describe cantile - ver deflections even in the absence of measured k c . Note that it is essential to calibrate the optical lever sensitivity before every force measurement for accurate conversion of the photo diode response to cantilever deflection ( D’Costa and Hoh , 1995 ) . The FIEL theory described below requires that the force curve data are dominated by the elasticity of the sample and that the contribution of viscosity is minimized . To examine the relationship between elastic and viscous contributions we have used force - time ( FT ) curves that show the time - dependent relaxation of a viscoelastic sample in response to an applied force ( Fig . 1 C ) . In FT curves the tip is initially ( period A - B in Fig . 1 C ) not in contact with the cell , and the cantilever deflection signal is constant ( zero ) . At point B , a step voltage is applied to the piezo giving a rapid upward displacement in the z - direction only . Due to the viscosity of the fluid surrounding the sample , the tip will initially deflect to point C . The magnitude of that deflection will depend on the step size , step rate , distance between the tip and the sample before contact with the sample’s surface , and the viscosity of the fluid . The cantilever very rapidly relaxes to point D , which is in contact with the sample ; note that the A - Hassan et al . Relative Microelastic Mapping by AFM 1565 contact point D is ill - defined . The time required for the sample to deform in response to the applied force , during the period after point D , is related to the viscosity of the sample . The new equilibrium position of the cantilever is predominantly due to the elastic properties . This separation of viscous and elastic contributions based on time depen - dence is of course not complete , but is an adequate approx - imation at the present time . We further assume that there are no deformations that are effectively plastic , which will be shown below to be true for small deformations . Collecting arrays of force curves to produce microelastic maps typically requires at least 1024 curves ( 32 3 32 ) for producing a map with reasonable resolution and identifiable morphology . The large number of curves requires that each curve is collected as quickly as possible in order to produce a map in the least time possible . The FT curves yield what is most often the limiting factor to collecting force curves quickly ; i . e . , the separation of elasticity and viscosity . If scan rates that coincide with period ( period D - E in Fig . 1 C ) are used , the contribution of the viscous properties of the cells to the FD curve is significant . However , slower scan rates coinciding with the period [ E - F ] minimize the viscous contribution . Hence , it is important to consider the relax - ation time constant in determining the appropriate scan parameters . In particular , the scan parameters should be such that force curves are collected on the time scale many times larger than the relaxation time constant . The Hertz model The Hertz model ( Hertz , 1881 ; Johnson , 1985 ) describes the simple case of elastic deformation of two perfectly homo - geneous smooth surfaces touching under load . The model , which has been widely applied to AFM data , describes the relationship between the contact radius , the applied load , and the central displacement for isotropic or transversely isotropic linear elastic bodies ( Weisenhorn et al . , 1992 ; Radmacher et al . , 1995 ) . If the tip of an AFM is approxi - mated by a sphere , then the force on the cantilever ( F ) is given by F c 5 4 E ˛ R 3 ~ 1 2 n ! d 3 / 2 , ( 1 ) where d is the indentation , E is the elastic modulus , n is the Poisson ratio , and R is the radius of the probe sphere ( Radmacher et al . , 1995 ) . Although living cells do not meet the assumptions of the Hertz model ( in particular they are not isotropic ) , this model is likely to be adequate for a large number of applications in which absolute elasticity values are not required . One difficulty in using the Hertz model is that only two or three ( force , indentation depth , and some - times radius of the probe ) of the five variables are typically measured in an AFM experiment . One value that is not available , or easily measured for living cells , is the Poisson ratio . In order to determine an elastic modulus , the Poisson ratio is typically given a value of 0 . 5 , although this has not FIGURE 1 ( A ) The approaching ( extending ) trace of a force curve collected on an MDCK monolayer . The schematic drawings depict the relative positions of the AFM tip and the sample surface as related to the force curve . The horizontal axis shows the distance over which the piezo has been moved and the vertical axis records the change in photodiode output ( which is proportional to the cantilever deflection ) . The nonlinear response of the cantilever in the contact region is a result of the sample indentation and cantilever deflection . ( B ) The corresponding force versus tip - sample separation distance ( FD ) curve . ( C ) Schematic for the time - dependent relaxation measurements ( FT curves ) . The figure shows the position of the cantilever as a function of time . During period [ A - B ] , ( s1 ) , the tip is not in contact with the cell and the cantilever deflection is constant . At point B , a step voltage is applied to the piezo resulting in an upward displacement of the sample . Due to movement of the sample and the hydrodynamic drag , the cantilever will deflect to point C ( s2 ) before coming in contact with the cell surface ( s3 ) in the interval marked by D . The cell deforms due primarily to cellular viscosity ( s4 ) , during the period after point D , to a new equilibrium ( s5 ) , period [ E - F ] , where elastic properties dominate . 1566 Biophysical Journal Volume 74 March 1998 been measured for living cells and is likely to vary across the surface of a cell . In addition , it is not clear how useful a quantity of an elastic modulus of a living cell is . These concerns have led us to use an elastic constant k s , where k s 5 1 2 n p E ( 2 ) represents local elasticity of the sample . The use of k s has the advantage that it allows for an indeterminate and vary - ing ( in x , y ) Poisson ratio . It is also suitable for determining relative elasticity . We still assume that the Poisson ratio is uniform in Z over small deformations . Also , the sample is assumed to be much softer than the cantilever’s tip ( Si 3 N 4 tip with E tip 5 150 GPa ) and the k tip can be neglected . FIEL theory To allow for comparison of the elastic properties at different positions and times we have derived a simple relationship that relates the work done by the AFM cantilever during an indentation to the k s , which is FIEL . In FIEL mapping a pair of FD curves is collected at positions P 1 and P 2 using the relative trigger mode . Thus , imposing the condition F 1 5 F 2 at these positions results in 4 3 ˛ R p k 1 d 13 / 2 5 4 3 ˛ R p k 2 d 23 / 2 , ( 3 ) which reduces to S d 1 d 2 D 3 / 2 5 k 1 k 2 . ( 4 ) The area under an FD curve is the work done by the cantilever at each position and is given by w 1 5 E o d 1 4 3 ˛ R p k 1 d 3 / 2 d d5 8 15 ˛ R p k 1 d 15 / 2 , ( 5 ) and w 2 5 E o d 2 4 3 ˛ R p k 2 d 3 / 2 d d5 8 15 ˛ R p k 2 d 25 / 2 . ( 6 ) Thus , the relative work ( w 1 / w 2 ) , or the relative areas under the two force curves , is w 1 w 2 5 S d 1 d 2 D 5 / 2 k 2 k 1 . ( 7 ) From Eq . 4 S d 1 d 2 D 5 / 2 5 S k 1 k 2 D 5 / 3 , ( 8 ) substituting into Eq . 7 , we obtain w 1 w 2 5 S k 1 k 2 D 2 / 3 , ( 9 ) which directly relates the area under the two force curves to the ratio of the elastic constants at P 1 and P 2 . This approach also holds for other tip geometries with only a change in the scaling exponential ( Table 1 ) . This analytical approach has several important features . It is independent of the exact probe size as long as the same probe is used in both measurements . It is also independent of the sample topography and the sample drift ( in Z ) , and does not require absolute Z p measurements . Furthermore , it is independent of the cantilever spring constant and canti - lever deflection drift ( between individual FD curves ) . Fi - nally , and most importantly , it is essentially independent of the tip - sample contact point . To illustrate the latter point , Fig . 2 A shows a typical FD curve on an MDCK cell . As described earlier , there are three main regions of this curve ; the noncontact region ( a - b ) , the contact point ( anywhere in b - c ) , and the contact region ( c - d ) . Moving the contact point in or around ( b - c ) results in very small changes in the area . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell culture Maintenance of cell culture and preparation of cell samples for AFM imaging was done as described earlier ( Hoh and Schoenenberger , 1994 ) . Briefly , MDCK strain II epithelial cells were grown in Dulbecco’s modi - fied Eagle’s medium ( DMEM , GIBCO , BRL , Life Technologies , Gaith - ersburg , MD ) containing 5 % fetal bovine serum , 5 mM HEPES , and 1 % penicillin / streptomycin , at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 , in a humidified incubator . All cultures were fed 3 times a week with fresh medium . Confluent cells were released from culture flasks and passaged every 4 weeks using trypsin - EDTA ( GIBCO BRL ) . Cultures were discarded after 15 passages . Sample preparation and AFM imaging For AFM mounting , round ( 15 mm ) glass coverslips ( Ted Pella , Inc . , Redding , CA ) were glued with epoxy onto magnetic steel stubs of the same size , rinsed with ethanol , and autoclaved . The sterilized stubs were placed in tissue culture dishes . Confluent MDCK cells growing in plastic flasks were trypsinized and the cell suspension ( ; 1 . 6 3 10 6 cell / ml ) was plated on the mounted coverslips ( ; 150 m l / coverslip ) . Cells were allowed to attach for ; 2 h in the incubator before adding medium to the culture dish . TABLE 1 Comparison of loading force and relative area for several tip geometries Geometry Loading Force Relative Area Sphere , Parabolic F sphere 5 4 3 ˛ R p k d 3 / 2 w 1 w 2 5 S k 1 k 2 D 2 / 3 Conical F cone 5 1 2 tan ~ a ! k d 2 w 1 w 2 5 S k 1 k 2 D 1 / 2 Flat - end Cylinder F cylinder 5 2 R p k d w 1 w 2 5 S k 1 k 2 D * A - Hassan et al . Relative Microelastic Mapping by AFM 1567 Four days after plating , MDCK cells had reached saturation on the cover - slips and were used for imaging and force mapping . All measurements were done within 2 – 3 weeks of plating . AFM imaging was performed on a Nanoscope III atomic force micro - scope ( Digital Instruments Inc . , Santa Barbara , CA ) equipped with a J - type scanner ( maximum XY scan range of 150 3 150 nm with 5 m m vertical range ) . Silicon nitride cantilevers used ( Park Scientific Instruments , Sunnyvale , CA ) were either 220 3 22 m m with an estimated force constant of ; 0 . 03 N / m or 180 3 18 m m with a nominal force constant of ; 0 . 05 N / m . Imaging of cells was performed using a standard fluid cell without the o - ring in 1 3 Hanks’ balanced salt solution ( GIBCO BRL ) at room temperature or 37°C . For work at 37°C the AFM was placed in a warm room and allowed to equilibrate for many hours before use . Parameters were essentially as described previously by Hoh and Schoenenberger ( 1994 ) . Before force mapping , images of cells were taken with a low imaging force ( 2 – 5 nN ) and 1 – 4 Hz lateral frequency . For comparison , images were again taken after the completion of force mapping data acquisition . All forces reported are estimates based on the nominal spring constant values . Time - dependent relaxation curves The change in cantilever deflection ( D d c ) and the piezo - voltage ( D Z p ) around designated set points ( d o and Z o ) were recorded using a breakout box and a LabVIEW driven data acquisition system ( National Instruments , Austin , TX ) as the sample was moved vertically with the scan size set to zero . The piezo Z position was controlled by custom - built electronics such that the applied voltage moves the piezo a defined distance in the Z direction . The step voltage used for relaxation measurements had a rise time of 15 m s . Analog d c and Z p signals were recorded at 0 . 1 – 0 . 5 MHz sampling rates . Measurements were done with a standard silicon nitride tip or 10 m m in diameter polystyrene sphere attached to the end of a cantilever . Force volumes Acquisition of force volume data sets , or force mapping , is supported by current versions of the Nanoscope control software ( 4 . 23 b6 or higher ) . Force mapping involves the collection of force curves extending and retracting curves ) at each point in a two - dimensional ( X - Y ) scan . All measurements were done in relative trigger mode ; i . e . , all force plots have the same maximum cantilever deflection . This is done by moving the piezo vertically until the cantilever deflection has reached the trigger value : the preset maximum force . Data acquisition for the extending trace of the force curve is terminated at this point while that of the retracting trace is started . The piezo’s position at that deflection is recorded as the height at that position on the sample . This height image will be referred to as the force mapping height . It is not a true height image since it is recorded at arbitrary loading forces , which can cause variable and significant deformation of cells . The piezo is then retracted an amount equal to the vertical ( Z ) scan size giving the retracting trace of the curve . This process is then repeated for each point in the 2 - D ( X - Y ) scan of the sample . It is essential that the Z - scan size be large enough to pull the tip completely off the sample , but as small as possible to achieve best vertical force curve resolution . Most of our measurements were 64 3 64 force curves over the 2 - D scan and each force curve ( extended and retracted ) had 64 points per curve , which is an upper limit imposed by the current AFM control software . Some measure - ments were 32 3 32 force plots and 256 points per curve , in order to obtain a high vertical resolution in the force curves . Silicone standards Silicone polymer sheets of known stiffness were obtained from Specialty Manufacturing Inc . ( Saginaw , MI ) . The sheets had “Durometer” hardness test ( Shore A ) values of 20d , 40d , 60d , and 80d , as determined by the manufacturer . Force curves on the silicon standards were collected using standard single crystal silicone cantilevers with nominal spring constants in the range of 10 – 100 N / m ( TESP ; Digital Instruments Inc . , Santa Barbara , CA ) . Analysis software Analysis and display of force mapping measurements were done with a set of tools developed in our laboratory using the Interactive Data Language FIGURE 2 FIEL silicone polymer sheeting standards . ( A ) The work done by the cantilever is directly proportional to the area , shown in gray , under the FD curve . This is the area bounded by the zero deflection line ( d o ) and d at the trigger threshold . The noncontact region ( a – b ) , the contact point ( anywhere in b - c ) and the contact region ( c - d ) are denoted by their corresponding arrows . ( B ) FD curves for each of four different silicone standards and ( C ) the relationship between the FIEL area and the Durom - eter values for the standards is linear over the range of stiffness used . 1568 Biophysical Journal Volume 74 March 1998 ( IDL , Research Systems , Inc . , Boulder , CO ) programming environment , called IDEAS ( Image and Data Exploration and Analysis for SPM ) . The FIEL mapping approach has been automated in IDEAS . Corrections to produce FD curves use the measured cantilever sensitivity in the parameter file , and FIEL values are determined by simple numerical integration . The computations for a 4096 set of force curves take , 60 s on a 225 MHz Macintosh - compatible computer . The values are then scaled to a suitable color table , such that darker areas are more stiff , and displayed as a 2 - D map of relative elastic constants . The maps are not corrected for specific tip geometry unless noted , and hence the relative intensities are not linearly related to the elastic constants . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION FIEL on standards To test the validity of the FIEL approach , we examined silicone polymer sheets of known mechanical properties as defined by the Durometer hardness test . This test is an international standard for assessing elastic moduli of rubber and other elastomeric polymers , with low Young’s moduli as compared to ceramics ( Briscoe and Sebastian , 1993 ) . The test uses an indenter , spherical or truncated cone in shape , to examine the compliance behavior of elastic materials and relates the hardness to the materials’ elastic and viscous properties ( Casa et al . , 1995 ) . The custom - made silicon sheets used had durometer val - ues of 20d , 40d , 60d , and 80d . Over this range , the theo - retical , as described by the Hertz analysis of indentation , and the experimental relationship between the hardness number and the Young’s modulus has been determined ( Briscoe and Sebastian , 1993 ) . Fig . 2 B shows FD taken over these four standards with the AFM silicon tip as the indenter probe . By integrating under the FD curve for each sample , we obtain the area , or the work done by the canti - lever . Averaging the area for several measurements on a sample and plotting it against the durometer value , we obtain a linear relationship with the Durometer value ( Fig . 2 C ) . Therefore , the FIEL approach is in good agreement with a commonly used measure of polymer elasticity . Relaxation times of MDCK cells from FT curves FT curves showing the time - dependent relaxation of MDCK cells were collected at 37°C and at room temperature ( Fig . 3 A ) to identify viscous contributions . These FT curves show a smooth and reproducible relaxation with time . Upon initial application of stress by the AFM tip there is an instantaneous deflection of the cantilever after which the tip continues to deform the cell due to the viscous ( time - dependent ) element . The applied force , following the vis - cous relaxation , is supported by the elastic element of the cell ( E - F in Fig . 1 C ) . The FT curves show relaxation times that are in the range of hundreds of milliseconds for the sharp silicon nitride tip at 37°C to a few seconds for measurements at room tem - perature ( Fig . 3 A ) ; with the time constants ( t 1 / 2 ) 1 – 3 orders of magnitude larger at 22°C than at 37°C . There is also a dependence on probe geometry , as would be expected : i . e . , larger probes producing longer relaxation times , in the tens of seconds for a 10 - m m sphere ( results not shown ) . These results show that force curves collected at 37°C , with a sharp pyramidal tip at . 500 ms will be dominated by an elastic response , while at room temperature the collection time should be . 10 s . In practice , these times correspond to scan rates of 10 m m / s and 0 . 5 m m / s . The relaxation curves FIGURE 3 FT curves on MDCK monolayers using silicon nitride tips , produced by rapidly pressing the tip against the monolayer and recording the cantilever deflection with time . ( A ) At room temperature the cell relaxes in response to the AFM tip such that the curve becomes asymptotic in several seconds , while at 37°C it takes only several hundred millisec - onds . This shows a very strong temperature dependence of the time dependent ( viscous ) response of living cells to an applied stress . ( B ) The initial deflection of the cantilever after the piezo step results in a hydro - dynamic movement of the cantilever . This is seen here by stepping the sample without making contact , and recording the deflection , oscillation , and damping of the cantilever . A - Hassan et al . Relative Microelastic Mapping by AFM 1569 warrant a more detailed study in their own right , but the data presented here serve to demonstrate conditions that mini - mize the viscous contribution to the FD measurements . A close examination of the extremely fast early relaxation of the FT curve suggests that it results from hydrodynamic drag on the cantilever during the rapid Z step . The deflec - tion of the cantilever in response to the Z step is immedi - ately followed by a characteristic oscillation coupled with a rapid damping . This oscillation and rapid damping can be reproduced by the Z step in the absence of contact to a surface ( Fig . 3 B ) . Therefore , the instantaneous deflection value contains a large hydrodynamic component and is not useful for characterizing the cells . FD Curves on MDCK cells Individual force curves on MDCK cells are distinctly non - linear , as expected for viscoelastic materials . In this section we describe the behavior of individual curves under a va - riety of conditions including different scan rates and inden - tation depths . We also examine the effect of repeated force curve collection at one position and demonstrate heteroge - neity in force curves across the surface of a cell . Force curves on living cells are known to exhibit hyster - esis between the approaching and retracting curves , which is partly due to viscous effects ( Hoh and Schoenenberger , 1994 ) . Consistent with a viscous contribution , increasing the scan rate from 4 to 80 m m / s significantly increases the hysteresis to the point where at very high scan rates there is a negative deflection of the cantilever ( Fig . 4 ) . There are two separate effects that contribute to the shape of these curves . The large separation of the curves in their noncon - tact regions is due to the hydrodynamic drag on the canti - lever ( Hoh and Engel , 1993 ) , while the hysteresis in the contact region is the result of substantial viscous contribu - tions from the cells . The negative deflection at high scan rates has previously been reported ( Hoh and Schoenen - berger , 1994 ) , but is not understood . Repeated force curves were taken at the same position on a MDCK monolayer to examine the reproducibility of the curves . Nonreproducibility indicates plastic deformation or other effects that are not reversible on the time scale of the measurement ( Fig . 5 ) . The results show that the curves are highly reproducible at low scan rates ( 5 – 25 m m / s ) , while at higher scan rates some variation between curves begins to appear . This further supports the notion that elastic mapping should be performed at relatively low scan rates . To determine the effect of an increase in the maximal force applied we collected a series of FD curves over a single position on an MDCK monolayer with increasing trigger threshold ( Fig . 6 ) . These FD curves are aligned by their maximum deflection values . The curves are in good agreement at the two smaller deflections of 25 and 50 nm , while a small deviation at the 100 - nm deflection threshold , and a significant one at the 200 - nm deflection , are observed . This suggests that there is a deformation for the larger indentation , which is irreversible on the time scale of the experiment . Subsequent FD curves were collected at lower trigger values following the acquisition of the 200 - nm curve . These curves overlapped with the 200 - nm curve ( results not shown ) , suggesting that the deformation is long - lived . The premise for microelastic mapping using the AFM is based on the measurable variability in elasticity across the sample surface . AFM imaging of living MDCK cells shows the typical morphology of these cells ( Hoh and Schoenen - berger , 1994 ) . Several distinct regions of the cell can be identified from the height signal image ( Fig . 7 A ) . The large structure in the center of the cells appears to be the nucleus . Cell boundaries can be seen in some of these images , but are more distinct in the error signal image ( not shown ) . Fig . 7 B shows six FD curves obtained on different parts of the MDCK cells’ monolayer shown in Fig . 7 A . The curves collected over the nucleus differed markedly from those two curves over the cell boundaries and the ones over the cell body . FIEL Mapping of MDCK Cells FIEL mapping of monolayers of living MDCK cells pro - duces images with features that are independent of topog - raphy and trigger height images ( Fig . 8 ) . The topographic image is constructed from the force volume at the lowest detectable cantilever deflection ( Fig . 8 A 2 and B 2 ) , while FIGURE 4 FD curves taken over the same point on an MDCK mono - layer at different scan rates ( the top curves in each pair are the approaching trace , and the lower are the retracting trace ) . Due to hydrodynamic drag , there is an increase in separation of noncontact parts of the approach and retract curves as the scan rate is increased . At low Z scan rates , a hysteresis in the contact region can be seen between the approaching and retracting curves , which is related to viscous properties of the cell . As the scan rate is increased this hysteresis increases to the point that a negative deflection of the cantilever occurs . 1570 Biophysical Journal Volume 74 March 1998 the trigger height image is the Z piezo position at the cantilever trigger ( Fig . 8 A 3 and B 3 ) . The convention for topographic AFM imaging is that the light areas are higher than the dark areas . For FIEL mapping we have adopted the convention that light areas are less stiff than dark ones . The centers of the cells are relatively “soft , ” while the cell - cell boundaries are relatively stiff . Although the general mor - phology of the cells is the same in topographic and FIEL maps , cross - sections through the images show significant differences ( Fig . 8 , bottom ) and occasional contrast inver - sion ( arrow in Fig . 8 , B 1 and B 3 ) . Therefore , the FIEL maps show features that have a different basis for contrast . Fur - thermore , the theoretical basis for FIEL predicts that these maps are internally quantitative without calibration of the cantilever spring constant . However , in order to compare FIEL maps collected with different cantilevers the spring constants must be calibrated and the trigger force must be FIGURE 5 Consecutive pairs of force curves taken on the same position on an MDCK monolayer , with different scan rates . The lower box shows the result of subtraction of first curve from second curve within each pair . For the 4 and 25 m m / s pairs , the two force curves are identical , while there is a clear deviation between the 50 m m / s force curve pairs . FIGURE 6 Effect of increasing indentation depth of the monolayer by the tip . Several FD curves with different trigger values taken on the same spot are aligned by their maximum deflections ( triggers ) . At smaller indentations the curves overlap , while at the larger indentation the curves do not overlap , indicating the presence of a deformation that does not reverse on the time scale of the experiment . FIGURE 7 Variation of stiffness across the surface of MDCK cells , measured by individual FD curves . ( A ) The height image shows the surface morphology of MDCK cells . The nucleus is very prominent in this image , being the highest point on the cell . ( B ) Sample of six FD curves taken on different position on the MDCK monolayer shown in ( A ) . The arrows denote positions where the curves were collected . A - Hassan et al . Relative Microelastic Mapping by AFM 1571 FIGURE 8 FIEL maps of monolayers of living MDCK cells at ( A 1 ) 22°C and ( B 1 ) 37°C , and the corresponding topo - graphic maps of the MDCK monolayer reconstructed at ( A 2 and B 2 ) low and ( A 3 and B 3 ) high loading forces . The range of gray scales in the FIEL maps is from relatively stiff ( dark ) to soft ( light ) . Cross - sections through the topographic maps and the FIEL maps show varia - tions across the surface , with occasional contrast inversion ( arrows ) . 1572 Biophysical Journal Volume 74 March 1998 set to the same value for each map . Note that the maps presented here have not been scaled for tip geometry and thus are not linear . At higher resolutions , FIEL maps often show a great deal of intriguing fine detail ( Fig . 9 ) . One of the most readily identifiable structures seen in some FIEL maps is the nu - cleus , which is demarked by a change in stiffness between it and the cell body . Curiously , a structure that follows the nuclear boundary , or is the nuclear boundary itself , often appears to have a relatively low stiffness compared to the nucleus and cytoplasm ( Figs . 9 A and 11 D 2 ) . Such contrast appears to be slightly peri - nuclear and may arise from the organization of cytoskeletal components in the cytosol and around the nucleus . Contrast in stiffness at the cell bound - aries is clearly seen in Fig . 8 , and is highlighted at higher magnification in Fig . 9 B . Similar to the region around the nucleus there is often an unexpected pattern of stiffness , in which the boundary between the two cells is a stiff band that is divided by an irregular less stiff “line” ( denoted by the white arrows ) . The junctional complexes , in addition to their various physiological functions , impart mechanical strength to epithelial sheets ( Pasdar and Li , 1993 ; Wacker et al . , 1992 ; Armitage et al . , 1994 ) . One might speculate that the discontinuous appearance along the length of this cell boundary line is due to variable distribution of cell junctions along the cell boundaries . Fig . 9 C shows a less frequent observation , in which average stiffness varied greatly be - tween several neighboring cells in a MDCK monolayer . More often , MDCK cells show comparable differences in stiffness over their various parts . The reason for such large difference in contrast is not clear , although it may suggest a more general difference in the states of the cells . The question of which of the features in an image are real and which are the result of a spurious behavior of the cantilever during an individual FD curve is addressed by repeated imaging over the same area ( Fig . 10 ) . The FIEL maps are extremely consistent , with many detailed features persisting over the time scale of many hours . The details that do not persist may have been the result of an artifact or may simply have changed over time . Better understanding of this issue will come with more experience in FIEL mapping of cells . Furthermore , the persistent details provide an estimate of the lateral resolution of FIEL mapping . Several features on the order of 200 nm are stable , suggest - ing that the current resolution of FIEL mapping is compa - rable to that of optical microscopy . The image series in Fig . 10 also shows the temporal resolution of FIEL mapping . For a 64 3 64 image of MDCK cells the typical acquisition time is on the order of 2 h . This is limited by the rate of collecting individual FD curves such that the viscous contribution is minimized . While this time can easily be reduced by half through modifications in the data acquisition software , fur - ther improvements will be incremental with the current analytical approach and experimental tools . At present the most straightforward way to increase the temporal resolu - tion is to limit the number of FD curves collected by carefully defining the region of interest , in which case the limit is ; 0 . 5 s for a single FD curve . FIGURE 9 Unexpected features in FIEL maps of MDCK cells . ( A ) High magnification of the boundary of a nucleus show a region that is softer than the cytoplasm and nucleoplasm ( arrows ) . ( B ) A soft transition , bounded by stiff regions , is also seen in high magnification maps of cell - cell bound - aries . ( C ) Occasionally there is a very large variations in elastic properties of different cells within a monolayer ( compare cells marked 1 and 2 ) . A - Hassan et al . Relative Microelastic Mapping by AFM 1573 FIGURE 10 Repeated FIEL mapping on MDCK monolayers at ( A ) 30 3 30 m m and ( B ) 10 3 10 m m . The first two images correspond to the topography ( A 1 , B 1 ) , and the three consec - utive FIEL maps ( ; 2 h for each map ) for each monolayer are shown in the column below the topography . All volumes are 64 3 64 3 64 . The 30 3 30 m m and 10 3 10 m m scans are ex - tremely reproducible over the time scale of sev - eral hours . Many small features appear in se - quential maps ( arrows and double arrows ) , but change in the third map . That they remain after two hours , but change after four , suggests that these features reflect a real part of the cell . Very high resolution maps ( 1 3 1 m m ) are very noisy and have no obvious morphological features ( not shown ) . 1574 Biophysical Journal Volume 74 March 1998 The individual FD curves suggest that using the smallest deformations possible appears to give the most quantitative results . However , the contrast in the FIEL maps depends on the applied force , and hence on the degree of deformation ( Fig . 11 ) . At higher indenting forces new structures appear , while others become more well defined . This suggests , not unexpectedly , that as the indentation depth increases the sample represented in the individual FD curves , the sample becomes increasingly anisotropic in the Z direction . It should be noted that currently we do not have indepen - dent means of establishing the cellular or molecular origin of many of the morphological details seen in the FIEL maps . However , based on immunofluorescence microscopy stud - ies that show distinct localization patterns for several cy - toskeletal components ( Pasdar and Li , 1993 ; Dugina et al . , 1995 ; Huotari et al . , 1996 ) , and general morphological features of these cells , we have assigned identities to some of the features seen in the FIEL maps . With a new imaging technology such as the AFM , caution is also in order . It is likely that artifacts will emerge that have not yet been identified , such as complex geometric effects of tip sample interactions . The effect of viscosity can be seen in FIEL maps col - lected at different temperatures ( Fig . 8 ) and scan rates ( Fig FIGURE 11 Effect of indentation depth on contrast in FIEL maps of MDCK cells . ( A 1 ) shows topography and the corresponding FIEL map ( A 2 ) of an MDCK monolayer collected at a 1 . 5 nN trigger , while ( B 1 ) shows topography and FIEL map ( B 2 ) of the same monolayer collected at a 3 nN trigger . An increase in contrast of both ( B 1 ) and ( B 2 ) can be seen as a result of increasing indentation depths , and the larger indentations show more detailed structures such as the soft cell - cell boundary ( arrows ) . Similarly , ( C 1 ) shows topography and a FIEL map ( C 2 ) at a 1 . 5 - nN trigger , and a consecutive scan of the same monolayer , topography ( D 1 ) and FIEL map ( D 2 ) , at a 6 - nN trigger . Again , more details are seen in high - force maps , including a soft region that appears to be peri - nuclear ( white arrows ) . A - Hassan et al . Relative Microelastic Mapping by AFM 1575 12 ) . At 37°C the contrast is more pronounced than at room temperature . This is consistent with the analysis of the FT and FD curves , which predicts that viscous contributions would increase at lower temperatures . The viscous contri - bution is also seen in a comparison of FIEL maps collected at different scan rates . These show greater contrast in the slow scan rate maps ( Fig . 12 A ; 8 m m / s ) than the fast rate ones ( Fig . 12 B ; 80 m m / s ) . The time dependence of viscosity makes cells appear stiffer at faster scan rates . Thus the faster scan rate FIEL maps should have less contrast . In principle , disregarding the imaging fluid’s hydrodynamics , a scan rate that approaches infinity should produce a close to solid contact point and a perfectly “flat” FIEL map with no contrast . Limitations of FIEL mapping There are a number of obvious limitations and concerns with FIEL mapping on living cells . Cells move and change in response to mechanical stimuli , and thus the FD curves may contain active responses that do not reflect viscoelas - ticity . Cells are also highly anisotropic , and so the FIEL maps can not be absolutely quantitative . We defined elas - ticity as the time - independent component of the indentation measurements and viscosity as the time - dependent compo - nent . While this is not strictly correct , it is the only practical definition that could be currently used . However , our main goal is to visualize spatial and temporal changes in mechan - ical properties of living cells . The extent to which FIEL mapping will be useful for this , or which the concerns discussed above will limit its use , can only be determined with further experimentation . FIEL is also limited by cur - rent AFM designs . One particular problem that must be addressed is the relationship between the position of the tip ( or shape of the cantilever ) and the endslope measurement used in the optical lever detection system . CONCLUSIONS The spatial and temporal changes of the mechanical prop - erties of living cells reflect complex underlying physiolog - ical processes . We have developed an experimental ap - proach , using atomic force microscopy , called FIEL mapping , to produce robust maps of relative elasticity . FIEL mapping has the advantage over previous approaches of being essentially independent of the contact point and the cantilever spring constant . By collecting force - distance curves on a time scale where viscous contributions are small , the forces measured are dominated by the elastic properties of the sample . FIEL maps on MDCK cells show that the elasticity is uncoupled from the topography and reveal a number of unexpected features . These results present a mode of high - resolution visualization useful for living biological materials in which the contrast is based on the mechanical properties of the sample . We thank Dr . Elias Zerhouni for the use of his AFM , Dr . Frank Yin for helpful discussions , and D . Papageorgiou for help with the manuscript . This work was supported by grants from the Muscular Dystrophy Associ - ation and the Whitaker Foundation for Biomedical Engineering ( to J . H . H . ) . William F . Heinz was supported in part by National Institutes of Health Predoctoral Training Grant T32 GM - 08043 . REFERENCES Armitage , W . J . , B . K . Juss , and D . L . Easty . 1994 . Response of epithelial ( MDCK ) cell junctions to calcium removal and osmotic stress is influ - enced by temperature . Cryobiology . 31 : 453 – 460 . FIGURE 12 FIEL maps of MDCK cells collected at scan rates of ( A ) 8 m m / s and ( B ) 80 m m / s . In relationship to the FT curves shown in Fig . 1 C , measurements at high scan rates coincide with the early part of the period [ D - E ] , while the slow scan rates are closer to [ E ] . Therefore , the fast scan rate image has a significant viscous contribution , and appears flatter than the slow scan rate image . 1576 Biophysical Journal Volume 74 March 1998 Ashkin , A . , and J . M . Dziedzic . 1989 . Internal cell manipulation using infrared laser traps . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 86 : 7914 – 7918 . Balkovetz , D . F . , A . L . Pollack , and K . E . Mostov . 1997 . Hepatocyte growth factor alters the polarity of Madin - Darby canine kidney cell monolayers . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 3471 – 3471 . Bereiter - Hahn , J . , K . Ilonka , H . Luers , and M . Voth . 1995 . Mechanical basis of cell shape : investigations with the scanning acoustic micro - scope . Biochem . Cell Biol . 73 : 337 – 348 . Binnig , G . , C . F . Quate , and C . Gerber . 1986 . Atomic force microscope . Phys . Rev . Lett . 56 : 930 – 933 . Bottomley , L . A . , J . E . Coury , and P . N . First . 1996 . Scanning probe microscopy . Anal . Chem . 68 : 185R – 230R . Briscoe , B . J . , and S . K . Sebastian . 1993 . An analysis of the “durometer” indentation . Rubber Chemistry and Technology . 66 : 827 – 836 . Butt , H . - J . , M . Jaschke , and W . A . Ducker . 1995 . Measuring surface forces in aqueous electrolyte solution with the atomic force microscope . Bio - electrochem . Bioenerg . 38 : 191 – 201 . Butt , H . J . , E . K . Wolf , S . A . C . Gould , and P . K . Hansma . 1991 . Imaging cells with the atomic force microscope . J . Struct . Biol . 105 : 54 – 61 . Casa , F . , M . Fenzi , and L . Tontodonati . 1995 . Study of hardness drift : a method for investigating the viscous behavior of cured rubber . Polymer Testing . 14 : 355 – 367 . D’Costa , N . P , and J . H . Hoh . 1995 . Calibration of optical lever sensitivity for atomic force microscopy . Rev . Sci . Instr . 66 : 5096 – 5097 . Ducker , W . A . , T . J . Senden , and R . A . Pashley . 1992 . Measurement of forces in liquids using a force microscope . Langmuir . 8 : 1831 – 1836 . Dugina , V . B . , A . Y . Alexandrova , K . Lane , E . Bulanova , and J . M . Vasiliev . 1995 . The role of the microtubular system in the cell response to HGF / SF . J . Cell Sci . 108 : 1659 – 1667 . Fritz , M . , M . Radmacher , N . Peterson , and H . E . Gaub . 1994 . Visualization and identification of intracellular structures by force modulation micros - copy and drug induced degradation . J . Vac . Sci . Technol . B . 12 : 1526 – 1529 . Fung , Y . C . 1988 . Biomechanics : Mechanical Properties of Living Tissues . Springer - Verlag , New York . Goldmann , W . H . , and R . M . Ezzell . 1996 . Viscoelasticity in wild - type and vinculin - deficient ( 5 . 51 ) mouse F9 embryonic carcinoma cells examined by atomic force microscopy and rheology . Exp . Cell Res . 226 : 234 – 237 . Hansma , H . G . , and J . H . Hoh . 1994 . Biomolecular imaging with the atomic force microscope . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Chem . 23 : 115 – 139 . Haydon , P . G . , R . Lartius , V . Parpura , and S . P . Marchese - Ragona . 1996 . Membrane deformation of living glial cells using atomic force micros - copy . J . Microsc . 182 : 114 – 120 . Henderson , E . 1994 . Imaging of living cells by atomic force microscopy . Prog . Surface Sci . 46 : 39 – 60 . Henderson , E . , P . G . Haydon , and D . S . Sakaguchi . 1992 . Actin filament dynamics in living glial cells imaged by atomic force microscopy . Science . 257 : 1944 – 1946 . Hertz , H . 1881 . U¨ber den kontakt elastischer ko¨rper . J . Reine Angew . Mathematik . 92 : 156 . Hoh , J . H . , and A . Engel . 1993 . Friction effects in force curves . Langmuir . 9 : 3310 – 3312 . Hoh , J . H . , and C . - A . Schoenenberger . 1994 . Surface morphology and mechanical properties of MDCK monolayers by atomic force micros - copy . J . Cell Sci . 107 : 1105 – 1114 . Huotari , V . , J . Va¨a¨ra¨niemi , V . - P . Lehto , and S . Eskelinen . 1996 . Regula - tion of the disassembly / assembly of the membrane skeleton in Madin - Darby canine kidney cells . J . Cell . Physiol . 167 : 121 – 130 . Ingber , D . E . 1993 . Cellular tensegrity : defining new roles of biological design that governs the cytoskeleton . J . Cell Sci . 104 : 613 – 627 . Ingber , D . E . , L . Dike , L . Hansen , S . Karp , H . Liley , A . Maniotis , H . McNamee , D . Mooney , G . Plopper , J . Sims , and N . Wang . 1994 . Cellular tensegrity : exploring how mechanical changes in the cytoskel - eton regulate cell growth , migration , and tissue pattern during morpho - genesis . Int . Rev . Cytol . 150 : 173 – 224 . Ingber , D . E . , and J . Folkman . 1989 . Tension and compression as basic determinants of cell form and function : Utilization of a cellular tenseg - rity mechanism . In Cell Shape : Determinants Regulation and Regulatory Role . W . D . Stein and F . Bronner , editors . Academic Press , Orlando , Florida . 1 – 32 . Ingber , D . E . , and J . D . Jamieson . 1985 . Cells as tensegrity structures : Architectural regulation of hystodifferentiation by physical forces trans - duced over basement membrane . In Gene Expression during Normal and Malignant Differentiation . L . C . Anderson , C . G . Gahmberg , and P . Ekblom , editors . Academic Press , London , 13 – 32 . Ingber , D . E . , D . Prusty , Z . Sun , H . Betensky , and N . Wang . 1995 . Cell shape , cytoskeletal mechanics , and cell cycle control in angiogenesis . J . Biomechanics . 28 : 1471 – 1484 . Johnson , K . L . 1985 . Contact Mechanics . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . Kasas , S . , N . H . Thomson , B . L . Smith , P . K . Hansma , J . Miklossy , and H . G . Hansma . 1997 . Biological applications of the AFM : from single molecules to organs . Int . J . Imaging Systems and Technology . 8 : 151 – 161 . Laney , D . E . , R . A . Garcia , S . M . Parsons , and H . G . Hansma . 1997 . Changes in the elastic properties of cholinergic synaptic vesicles as measured by atomic force microscopy . Biophys . J . 72 : 806 – 813 . Li , M . , J . Ageller , D . A . Farson , C . Hatier , J . Hassell , and M . J . Bissell . 1987 . Influence of a reconstituted basement membrane and its compo - nents on casein gene expression and secretion in mouse mammary epithelial cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 84 : 136 – 140 . Luers , H . , K . Hillmann , J . Litniewski , and J . Berciter . 1991 . Acoustic microscopy of cultured cells : distribution of forces and cytoskeletal elements . Cell Biophys . 18 : 279 – 293 . Maniotis , A . J . , C . S . Chen , and D . E . Ingber . 1997 . Demonstration of mechanical connections between integrins , cytoskeletal filaments , and nucleoplasm that stabilize nuclear structure . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 94 : 849 – 854 . Matlin , K . S . , and M . J . Caplan . 1992 . Epithelial cell structure and polarity . In The Kidney : Physiology and Pathophysiology . D . W . Seldin and G . Giebisch , editors . Raven Press , New York . 447 – 473 . Mitchison , T . J . 1995 . Evolution of a dynamic cytoskeleton . Phil . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B . 349 : 299 – 304 . Mooney , D . , L . Hansen , J . Vacanti , R . Langer , S . A . Farner , and D . Ingber . 1992 . Switching from differentiation to growth in hepatocytes : control by extracellular matrix . J . Cell Physiol . 151 : 497 – 505 . Pasdar , M . , and Z . Li . 1993 . Disorganization of microfilaments and inter - mediate filaments interferes with the assembly and stability of desmo - somes in MDCK epithelial cells . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton . 26 : 163 – 180 . Peterson , N . O . , W . B . McConnaughey , and E . L . Elson . 1982 . Dependence of locally measured cellular deformability on position on the cell , temperature , and cytochalasin B . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 79 : 5327 – 5331 . Putman , C . A . , K . O . van der Werf , B . G . de Grooth , N . F . van Hulst , and J . Greve . 1994 . Viscoelasticity of living cells allows high resolution imaging by tapping mode atomic force microscopy . Biophys . J . 67 : 1749 – 1753 . Radmacher , M . , J . P . Cleveland , M . Fritz , H . G . Hansma , and P . K . Hansma . 1994 . Mapping interaction forces with the atomic force micro - scope . Biophys . J . 66 : 2159 – 2165 . Radmacher , M . , M . Fritz , and P . K . Hansma . 1995 . Imaging soft samples with the atomic force microscope : gelatin in water and propanol . Bio - phys . J . 69 : 264 – 278 . Radmacher , M . , M . Fritz , C . Racher , J . P . Cleveland , and P . K . Hansma . 1996 . Measuring the viscoelastic properties of human platelets with the atomic force microscope . Biophys . J . 70 : 556 – 567 . Schaus , S . S . , and E . R . Henderson . 1997 . Cell viability and probe - cell membrane interactions of XR1 glial cells imaged by atomic force microscopy . Biophys . J . 73 : 1205 – 1214 . Schoenenberger , C . - A . , and J . H . Hoh . 1994 . Slow cellular dynamics in MDCK and R5 cells monitored by time - lapse atomic force microscopy . Biophys . J . 67 : 929 – 936 . Shao , J . , and R . M . Hochmuth . 1996 . Micropipette suction for measuring piconewton forces of adhesion and tether formation from neutrophil membranes . Biophys . J . 71 : 2892 – 2901 . Shroff , S . G . , D . R . Saner , and R . Lal . 1995 . Dynamic micromechanical properties of cultured rat atrial myocytes measured by atomic force microscopy . Am . J . Physiol . 269 : C286 – C289 . Singhvi , R . , A . Kumar , G . Lopez , G . N . Stephanopoulos , D . I . C . Wang , G . M . Whitesides , and D . E . Ingber . 1994 . Engineering cell shape and function . Science . 264 : 696 – 698 . A - Hassan et al . Relative Microelastic Mapping by AFM 1577 Svoboda , K . , C . F . Schmidt , D . Branton , and S . M . Block . 1992 . Confor - mation and elasticity of the isolated red blood cell membrane skeleton . Biophys . J . 63 : 784 – 793 . Tao , N . J . , S . M . Lindsay , and S . Lees . 1992 . Measuring the microelastic properties of biological material . Biophys . J . 63 : 1165 – 1169 . Valberg , P . A . , and H . A . Feldman . 1987 . Magnetic particle motions within living cells . Biophys . J . 52 : 551 – 561 . Wacker , I . U . , J . E . Rickard , I . R . De Mey , and T . E . Kreis . 1992 . Accumulation of a microtubule - binding protein , pp170 , at desmosomal plaques . J . Cell Biol . 117 : 813 – 824 . Wang , N . , and D . E . Ingber . 1994 . Control of cytoskeletal mechanics by extracellular matrix , cell shape , and mechanical tension . Biophys . J . 66 : 2181 – 2189 . Weisenhorn , A . L . , P . Maivald , H . J . Butt , and P . K . Hansma . 1992 . Measuring adhesion , attraction , and repulsion between surfaces in liq - uids with an atomic force microscope . Phys . Rev . B ( Condensed Matter ) . 45 : 11226 – 11232 . Young , A . , and E . Evans . 1989 . Cortical shell - liquid core model for passive low of liquid - like spherical cells into micropipettes . Biophys . J . 56 : 139 – 149 . Zahalak , G . I . , W . B . McConnaughey , and E . L . Elson . 1990 . Determina - tion of cellular mechanical properties by cell poking , with an application to leukocytes . J . Biomechanical Eng . 112 : 283 – 294 . Zeman , K . , H . Engeljhardt , and E . Sackmann . 1990 . Bending undulations and elasticity of the erythrocyte membrane : effect of cell shape and membrane organization . Eur . Biophys . J . 18 : 203 – 219 . Zheng , J . , P . Lamoureux , V . Santiago , T . Dennerll , R . E . Buxbaum , and S . R . Heidemann . 1991 . Tensile regulation of axonal elongation and initiation . J . Neurosci . 11 : 1117 – 1125 . Zilker , A . , H . Engelhardt , and E . Sackmann . 1987 . Dynamic reflection interference contract ( RIC ) microscopy : a new method to study surface excitations of cells and to measure membrane bending elastic moduli . J . Phys . 48 : 2139 – 2151 . 1578 Biophysical Journal Volume 74 March 1998