Genes , BrainandBehavior ( 2012 ) 11 : 3 – 28 doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1601 - 183X . 2011 . 00752 . x Review Biological pathways to adaptability – interactions between genome , epigenome , nervous system and environment for adaptive behavior C . Wolf † and D . E . J . Linden ∗ , ‡ † CentreforTranslationalResearchinSystemsNeuroscience andClinicalPsychiatry , DepartmentofPsychiatryand Psychotherapy , GeorgAugustUniversity , von - Siebold - Straße5 , 37075G¨ottingen , Germany , and ‡ MRCCentrefor NeuropsychiatricGeneticsandGenomics , CardiffUniversity SchoolofMedicine , CardiffCF144XN , UK * Corresponding author : D . E . J . Linden , MRC Centre for Neu - ropsychiatricGeneticsandGenomics , CardiffUniversitySchool ofMedicine , CardiffCF144XN , UK . E - mail : lindend @ cardiff . ac . uk Because living systems depend on their environment , the evolution of environmental adaptability is insepara - ble from the evolution of life itself ( Pross 2003 ) . In ani - mals and humans , environmental adaptability extends further to adaptive behavior . It has recently emerged that individual adaptability depends on the interaction of adaptation mechanisms at diverse functional lev - els . This interaction enables the integration of genetic , epigenetic and environmental factors for coordinated regulation of adaptations . In this review , we ﬁrst present the basis for the regulation of adaptation mechanisms across functional levels . We then focus on neuronal activity - regulated adaptation mechanisms that involve the regulation of genes , noncoding DNA ( ncDNA ) , ncR - NAs and proteins to change the structural and functional properties of neurons . Finally , we discuss a selection of these important neuronal activity - regulated molecules and their effects on brain structure and function and on behavior . Most of the evidence so far is based on sampling of animal tissue or post - mortem studies in humans . However , we also present techniques that combine genetic with behavioral and neurophysiological measures in humans ( e . g . genetic imaging ) and discuss their potential and limitations . We argue that we need to understand how neuronal activity - dependent adap - tation mechanisms integrate genetic , epigenetic and experience - dependent signals in order to explain indi - vidual variations in behavior and cognitive performance . Keywords : Adaptability , cognition , imaging , immediate early genes , neuron , plasticity , regulation , transcription factors Received7July2009 , revised9November2010 , 8August 2011 , 27October2011 , acceptedforpublication1November 2011 On the origin of adaptability The evolution of adaptability was central for the evolution of life ( Pross 2003 ) because living systems depend on the environment to maintain their thermodynamic nonequilib - rium state . Adaptability is in itself a highly dynamic process and incompatible with stable systems in a state of ther - modynamic equilibrium . Adaptability requires self - regulated variation that relies on mechanisms for active change . Which mechanisms can generate such self - regulated variation ? Errors during self - replication ( Table 1 ) can produce expo - nential diversity as long as the net effect of replication is positive ( Lifson 1987 ) . Such an imperfect self - replication mechanism has been proposed to be at the origin of diversi - ﬁcation and selection of systems with teleonomic properties ( Lifson 1987 ) . Because imperfect self - replication creates self - variation , adaptability and individuality seem to owe their ori - gin to this mechanism . Self - replication forms less stable prod - ucts ( higher organized molecules ) from more stable chemical precursors ( lower organized molecules ) . This is a thermo - dynamically unfavorable reaction that is counterbalanced through its coupling with a dissipative reaction by exploiting some environmental source of energy ( Pross 2003 ) . Increasing structural and functional complexity of living sys - tems enhances their capability to replicate through a variety of catalytic effects and increases the energy demand ( Pross 2003 ) . Increasing complexity also increases the number of errors during self - replication leading to increased variability . The positive selection of changes that improve the energy gathering reaction thus enables the further increase of com - plexity , replication capability ( or reproduction ability ) as well as the variability during imperfect self - replication . This cir - cularity implies the coevolution of imperfect self - replication , energy gathering reaction and structural / functional complex - ity . For these reasons imperfect self - replication is a diversi - ﬁcation mechanism for natural selection that can explain the importance of the dynamic interaction between living sys - tems and their environment in the evolution of complexity and metabolism ( Lifson 1987 ; Pross 2003 ) . The evolution of multicellular complexity has been sup - ported by the superior energy yield of aerobic metabolism that evolved with the development of an oxygenic environ - ment ( Koch & Britton 2008 ) . This switch to the more efﬁcient aerobic metabolism in multicellular systems demonstrates how tightly the changes of living systems and environment are connected . Supported by improved energy supply , more © 2011TheAuthors 3 Genes , BrainandBehavior © 2011BlackwellPublishingLtdandInternationalBehaviouralandNeuralGeneticsSociety Wolf and Linden Table 1 : Glossary of key terms Chromatin remodeling : Changes in the interaction between DNA and histones by chromatin remodeling proteins , for example , by histone modiﬁcation enzymes and multiprotein chromatin remodeling complexes . Cis - acting element : ( e . g . CRE - element ) The target sequence of the regulated sequence / molecule ( e . g . BDNF gene promoter ) to which the regulator binds with its trans - acting element / sequence ( e . g . CREB ) . Complexity : Depends on the number and individual functions / structures of all units and their interactions . Biological complexity – structural , organizational and informational complexity , for example , genes that control each other and form networks → emergence of new properties . Dissipative reaction : The released free energy , when reactants change from a higher to lower energy state , can be used for the replication reaction , such reactions toward the equilibrium are thermodynamically preferred . The availability of reactants for the dissipative reaction from the environment limits the self - replication . Editing of DNA : Deamination of cytidine by AID or APOBECS results in uridine thus transforming C - G base pairs into U - G / T - G mispairs . In this way deamination can mediate DNA sequence changes if not detected and correctly repaired by DNA excision repair or mismatch repair pathways . Editing of RNA : Changes the nucleotide sequence of an RNA after its transcription but before its processing , there are various types of editing , for example , nucleotide substitutions ( common are adenosine - to - inosine ( decoded as guanosine ) and cytidine to uridine ( decoded as thymidine ) ) , editing targets are coding ( e . g . pre - mRNA ) as well as various noncoding sequences ( e . g . t - RNAs , pre - miRNA , UTR , transposon - driven RNA ) , RNA editing creates transcript diversity , likely counteracts RNA interference pathways and may contribute to heterochromatic silencing . AID , APOBECS , ADARs ( adenosine deaminases acting on RNA ) and ATARs ( adenosine deaminases acting on tRNA ) are capable of RNA editing . EVH1 domain : Binds proline - rich sequences acting as molecular adaptor . Neuroplasticity : The adaptability of neurons in response to signals for which they are receptive . Neuronal adaptations range from instant to long - lasting and from molecular to morphological / structural changes . Noncoding RNA ( ncRNA ) : RNA transcribed from DNA that does not encode amino acid sequences and instead serves as diverse types of RNA a variety of functions , for example , micro RNA . Positive rate of net replication : The number of replicating elements that are produced exceeds the number of those that are decomposed . Proteome : The total of proteins expressed . Selection : Persistence or survival of a speciﬁc functional or structural property ( phenotype , e . g . afﬁnity of an enzyme to its substrate ) or an entire living system ( individual , specie or group of species ) within its speciﬁc functional environment , the functional environment comprises interactions within one functional level , e . g . molecular interactions and interactions across functional levels , e . g . interactions between molecular , cellular , and systemic levels . Self - replication : Autocatalytic process whereby the self - replicating element accelerates its own reproduction , this process exhibits enormous kinetic power ( exponential growth ) , if the self - replication is imperfect the newly produced self - replicating element is a modiﬁed copy → mechanism for self - variation , the energy and material to produce more of the self - replicating element is supplied by reactants that leave the reaction as thermodynamically more stable waste → dissipative reaction ( toward the state of equilibrium ) , thus the replication reaction ( away from the thermodynamic equilibrium ) becomes possible and continues as long as enough reactants are available . Sumoylation : Post - translational covalent binding of small ubiquitin - like modiﬁer proteins ( SUMO ) directed by an enzymatic cascade , many functions including transcriptional regulation and regulation of nucleocytoplasmic transport ( e . g . by sumolyation of GTPase - activating proteins ) . Teleonomic : Character of life is manifest in its purposeful organization and behavior , for example , the replicating molecule has a structure that enables replication ( Lifson 1987 ; Pross 2003 ) . Ternary factors : Form three - molecule complexes . Transcriptome : The total of DNA transcribed into RNAs . Translatome : The total of mRNAs translated into amino acid sequences . complex organisms with diverse functional levels evolved and were capable of intra - and trans - generational adaptabil - ity via multiple self - variation mechanisms at each functional level . There is a difference between the ability to adapt and being well adapted . Complex organisms possess more and more complex regulatory mechanisms and thus increased adapt - ability . For example the nervous ( NS ) , immune , endocrine or cardio - vascular systems all possess adaptive mechanisms . Furthermore adaptations occur at multiple functional lev - els ( molecular , cellular , systemic and behavioral ) . A single cell organism possesses none of these complex regulatory systems and only a reduced number of functional levels . However , this reduced adaptive capacity or potential for adaptation does not imply that less complex systems are less adapted than more complex systems . The range of possible variations supported by adaptation mechanisms ( adaptive potential ) mirrors the range of condition changes possibly encountered by the system’s adaptation mechanisms . In short , adaptability aims at maintaining functionality of the system and its replication or reproduction by generating self - variation and by the regulation of this self - variation according to external and internal inﬂuences . Intra - generational adaptability is the ability of one individual to adapt ( e . g . regulation of gene expres - sion , cellular / systemic structure / function and behavior ) . 4 Genes , BrainandBehavior ( 2012 ) 11 : 3 – 28 Biological pathways to adaptability Trans - generational adaptability is the ability of individuals to adapt across generations / self - replications by genetic , epi - genetic , behavioral and cultural mechanisms . Self - variation mechanisms range from imperfect self - replication ( e . g . recombination , mutation or copy errors in DNA transmitted through replication ) to changes of the epigenome , protein expression , morphology , physiology and behavior . With increasing complexity and in particular with the increasing number of functional levels the need for the coordinated regulation of adaptations increased as well , leading to the evolution of adaptation systems that include regulatory noncoding ( nc ) DNA sequences , epigenetic mechanisms , intra - and extra - cellular signaling and nervous systems ( NSs ) . The coordinated regulation of adaptations at these different functional levels depends on the interactions between self - variation mechanisms that are responsive to internally or environmentally driven changes . Increased demand of energy during replication is an example of internal change , whereas increased competition for energy or space are examples of environmentally driven change . The response of self - variation ( adaptation ) mechanisms converts the change of an internal or external condition into a signal and entails modiﬁcations to maintain functionality ( achieve a speciﬁc goal ) under changing conditions . How adaptation mechanisms interact across functional levels to regulate adaptations and thus control the adaptability of an individual during its own lifetime and also across generations is a core question of contemporary research . Nervous systems – self - variation systems for the interaction with the environment The complexity of NSs correlates with the environmental complexity and diversity to which species are adapted ( Emes etal . 2008 ; Shumway 2008 ; Silk 2007 ) . NSs enable the temporal and spatial regulation of the interaction between individual and environment by coupling adaptation mechanisms at the organism’s molecular , cellular , neural network and behavioral levels . The regulation and variation mechanisms at those different functional levels as well as their interactions increase the adaptability of an individual . Gaining insight into these adaptation mechanisms and their interaction at the functional levels involved will help to unravel how interactions between heritable and environment - dependent differences between individuals lead to interindividual differences in behavior . Genetic and epigenetic adaptability Variations of the genome or epigenome can only affect phenotypic variation if they modify the genome’s output by changing the transcriptome and / or translatome . Such changes in gene expression can be initiated by variation of the genome via change of DNA sequence including single nucleotide polymorphisms ( SNPs ) , structural variation rang - ing from a few base pairs to whole genome sequence rear - rangement , deletion , insertion and repetition , DNA recoding by DNA repair / editing enzymes , as well as by variation of the epigenome via changes of DNA conﬁguration including chro - matin remodeling , DNA - methylation , histone modiﬁcations or genome output regulators including noncoding RNAs , transcription factors , hormones or enzymes . All these dif - ferent modes of change can interact with each other ( Ooi & Wood 2008 ) . Factors that regulate the genome’s out - put through these variation mechanisms can inﬂuence the timing and location of genetic and epigenetic changes and thus allow phenotypic adaptation in response to the speciﬁc selective pressure ( Rando & Verstrepen 2007 ) . In the follow - ing sections we will present evidence for the regulation of epigenetic and genetic adaptations in response to internally and environmentally driven signals . This evidence , some of which is still preliminary , supports the view that genetic and epigenetic changes are not purely random . Epigeneticadaptationmechanisms Epigenetics refers to anything exclusive of DNA sequence that could be passed on from mother to daughter cells dur - ing meiosis and / or mitosis ( Jaenisch & Bird 2003 ) . Such potentially heritable items include molecules [ e . g . RNAs ( Brennecke etal . 2008 ) , proteins ( Marmorstein 2001 ) ] and subcellular structures ( e . g . mitochondria ) ( Wallace & Fan 2010 ) as well as the dynamic spatial conﬁguration of DNA ( the conﬁguration of nucleotides , histones , nonhistone - chromatin proteins and chromatin ) ( Gibney & Nolan 2010 ) . Cells with the same gene sequence can thus have different epigenomes , which are more plastic and dynamic than genomes . The mechanisms involved in the mitotic and meiotic heritabil - ity of epigenomes are not well understood . Besides the role of epigenetic mechanisms in trans - generational adapt - ability epigenetic mechanisms also confer intragenerational adaptability ( Whitelaw & Whitelaw 2006 ) . The time , location and stability of epigenetic changes depends on the integra - tion of multiple internal ( e . g . genome , developmental state ) and environmental ( stress , toxins , social interactions ) sig - nals across the lifetime . Epigenetic changes are based on the switching of alternative functional or structural states ( see examples below ) and result in the adaptation of cellu - lar expression patterns during proliferation , differentiation or plastic changes in the adult organism ( Borrelli etal . 2008 ) . Epigenetic changes include the methylation / demethylation of cytosine ( Wu & Zhang , 2010 ) , modiﬁcations of histones ( Barth & Imhof 2010 ) and chromatin structure ( nucleosome structure and composition ) ( Li & Reinberg 2011 ) as well as various RNA - based mechanisms ( e . g . regulation of monoallelic expression of imprinted genes ( Royo & Cavaille 2008 ) , X - chromosome inactivation ( Chow & Heard 2009 ) , inhibition of translation and transcriptional gene silencing ( Collins & Penny 2009 ) ) . As we will explain below these epigenetic mechanisms are a toolbox for integrating internal and environmental signals that are important for the regulation of expression , processing , localization and degradation of transcripts and proteins . Epigenetic adaptations regulate the genome’s output and depend on the interactive effects of internally and environ - mentally driven signals . Internal signals are conditioned by the cellular genome ( Surani etal . 2007 ) , lineage ( Hemberger etal . 2009 ) , development ( Hirabayashi & Gotoh 2010 ) and Genes , BrainandBehavior ( 2012 ) 11 : 3 – 28 5 Wolf and Linden aging ( Fraga etal . 2005 ; Jaenisch & Bird 2003 ) . Environmen - tal signals are conditioned by various types of experiences encountered by an individual cell , cellular system or organ - ism , for example , nutrients ( Kaati etal . 2007 ) , pathogens ( De Santa etal . 2007 ) , stress ( Murgatroyd etal . 2009 ) , social interactions ( Fish etal . 2004 ; McGowan etal . 2009 ) and learning ( Alarcon etal . 2004 ) . Various epigenetic adaptation mechanisms like chromatin remodeling ( Schaefer etal . 2009 ) , histone modiﬁcations ( Alarcon etal . 2004 ; Bredy etal . 2007 ; Chwang etal . 2006 ) , DNA - de - / methylation ( Feng etal . 2010 ; Levenson etal . 2006 ; Miller & Sweatt 2007 ) and microRNA - based mechanisms ( Krol etal . 2010 ; Rajasethupathy etal . 2009 ; Schratt etal . 2006 ) are involved in the temporal , spatial , qualitative and quantitative regulation of transcripts and pro - teins in response to neuronal activity . These mechanisms support the functional and structural adaptation of neurons needed to adapt neural networks activated during learn - ing , memory , sensory and emotional experiences . Speciﬁc interactions between histone deacetylases ( HDACs ) , neu - rotrophic factors and Ca 2 + - dependent signaling proteins [ e . g . TrkB , mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) and Ca 2 + / calmodulin - dependent kinases ( CaMKs ) ] and neuronal activity - dependent transcription factors , such as myocyte enhancer factor 2 ( MEF2 ) , mediate neuroplasticity via epi - genetic regulation ( e . g . changes in chromatin structure and transcription of regulatory micro RNAs ) ( Fiore etal . 2009 ; Potthoff & Olson 2007 ) . In some cases it has been possible to unravel the entire cascade from environmental inﬂuences to behav - ioral adaptation , for example through linking changes in histone acetylation , hippocampal synaptic plasticity and spa - tial memory performance ( Fischer etal . 2007 ) . Furthermore pharmacological manipulations of histone acetylation and DNA - methylation have been used to regulate formation of long - term memory and fear conditioning responses ( Leven - son etal . 2006 ; Lubin etal . 2008 ; Sweatt 2009 ) . Another example is the link between maternal care and estro - gen receptor function . Methylation of estrogen receptor α promoter sites , transcriptional activity as well as brain region - speciﬁc expression of estrogen receptor α gene , estrogen sensitivity and maternal care behavior in adulthood have all been associated with the level of self - experienced maternal care during infancy ( Champagne 2008 ) . Another example is the activity - dependent regulation of growth factors in the adult hippocampus . Neuronal activity - dependent initialization of DNA excision repair - based demethylation of the brain - derived neurotrophic factor ( BDNF ) - IX and FGF1B promoters by 5 - methylcytosine hydroxylase ( TET1 ) and apolipoprotein B mRNA - editing enzyme complex 1 ( APOBEC1 ) has been demonstrated in dentate gyrus neurons ( Guo etal . 2011 ) . Demethylation of these two promoters correlated with increased levels of the respective mRNAs . These examples illustrate how diverse epigenetic mechanisms can integrate genetic and environmental signals to adapt the genome output and hence contribute to individual adaptation at the molecular , neuronal , neural systems and behavioral level . In this way epigenetic adaptability can generate individually adapted phenotypes ( e . g . cognitive and emotional behaviors ) from a single genotype ( Johnson & Tricker 2010 ) . Epigenetic variations are nonrandomly distributed within and between genomes ( Bock etal . 2008 ) . It has been suggested that epigenetic variations might precede genetic variations to facilitate the adaptation and evolution of pheno - types in response to selective pressures ( Johnson & Tricker 2010 ) . Moreover the regulating function of the epigenome may be particularly suited to facilitate the evolution of com - plex phenotypes ( Johnson & Tricker 2010 ) . However , the transgenerational inheritance of speciﬁc epigenetic adap - tations in mammals remains an open question and may depend on the type of epigenetic adaptation . Genome - wide DNA - methylation for example has been shown to be reduced to as little as 10 % in primordial germ cells of mice ( Popp etal . 2010 ) . Such elimination of the majority of previous DNA methylation might re - establish pluripotency . Geneticadaptationmechanisms The nonrandom distribution of SNPs in the genome suggests selection differences between regions , which may result from differences in selective pressures between phenotypes ( Rando & Verstrepen 2007 ) . Phenotypes under high selective pressure seem to be more variable than phenotypes under no or low selective pressure . Recent observations point to a correlation between genetic variation mechanisms , phenotypic variability and the variability of the acting selective pressures ( Rando & Verstrepen 2007 ) . For example DNA sequences that control the expression of cell - surface antigens in pathogenic micro - organisms are hypervariable , and hypermutation of immunoglobulin genes increases the diversity of an immune cell’s antigen - binding regions ( Rando & Verstrepen 2007 ) . Another example is the observation that a genetic change responsible for the adaptation of camouﬂage in mice coincided with the color change of the mice’s habitat ( Linnen etal . 2009 ) . This suggests the existence of genetic adaptation mechanisms to generate phenotypic variation in response to environmental change . Certain mutations show a higher frequency under positive selection as long as the selective pressure is nonlethal ( Shapiro 1995 ; Wood etal . 2009 ) . The spectrum of sequence changes differs during unselected and selected exponential growth in bacteria ( Rosenberg etal . 1994 ) . For example , amino acid - speciﬁc starvation of E . coli was associated with transcriptional activation and increased mutation rates of the genes involved in the synthesis of this amino acid ( Wright etal . 1999 ) . Such increased ﬁtness - affecting variability may support survival ( Perfeito etal . 2007 ) . The SOS signaling pathway inhibits cell division and activates DNA mutation , recombination and repair - related genes in starving cells ( McKenzieetal . 2000 ) . In addition , homologous recombination and plasmid gene transfer have been shown to induce genetic changes to adapt metabolic functions in response to the change of metabolic substrates in bacteria ( Foster & Trimarchi 1995 ; Radicella etal . 1995 ) . Hence cells are equipped with mechanisms to change their DNA in response to selective pressures on phenotypes like metabolism ( Shapiro 1995 ) . Theroleoftransposons A signiﬁcant part ( > 40 % ) of human DNA ( Lander etal . 2001 ) consists of the small , repetitive , mobile DNA control 6 Genes , BrainandBehavior ( 2012 ) 11 : 3 – 28 Biological pathways to adaptability elements ( transposons ) that were discovered by McClintock ( 1951 ) . Most of these transposons are retrotransposons ( Lander etal . 2001 ) that if transcribed and translated catalyze target - primed reverse transcription . This copy – modify – paste mechanism allows to copy and potentially modify a DNA segment via an RNA - intermediate ( involving formation of an RNA – protein complex ) that is transcribed into DNA before being pasted into a new position in the genome ( Ostertag & Kazazian 2001 ) . Those retrotransposons that encode all essential proteins required for retrotransposition are called autonomous ( Kazazian 2004 ) . Only about 80 – 100 of such retrotransposons that belong to the LINE - 1 ( long interspersed nuclear elements ) family are estimated to still be functional in any human genome today and transpositions occur at very low frequencies ( Babushok & Kazazian 2007 ; Ostertag & Kazazian 2001 ) . The remaining transposons ( including retro - and DNA transposons ) are considered to be genetic ‘fossils’ that have lost their functionality in the course of evolution ( Ostertag & Kazazian 2001 ) . If activated , LINE - 1 elements catalyze modiﬁcations ranging from small DNA sequence changes to large genomic rearrangements that could contribute to phenotypic diversity including individual variability in susceptibility to complex diseases ( Muotri etal . 2009 ; Ostertag & Kazazian 2001 ) . Retrotransposons do not only catalyze retrotransposition of the transcripts that encoded them but at lower frequency move several kilo bases of DNA sequence into other posi - tions by extending transcription of their own sequences into adjacent sequences ( Goodier etal . 2000 ; Moran etal . 1999 ; Ostertag & Kazazian 2001 ) . Although some of the LINE - 1 proteins ( RNA - binding protein , and protein with endonucle - ase and reverse transcriptase activity ) are more efﬁcient in catalyzing retrotransposition of mRNA that encoded them in the ﬁrst place , they sometimes target other coding and non - coding RNAs as template for reverse transcription ( Kazazian & Goodier 2002 ) . In this way , coding ( Esnault etal . 2000 ) as well as noncoding transcripts , including Alu elements ( short interspersed elements ) ( Dewannieux etal . 2003 ) , SVA ele - ments ( SINE - VNTR - Alu ) ( Ostertag etal . 2003 ) and uracil - rich small RNAs ( snRNAs ) ( Buzdin etal . 2002 ; Garcia - Perez etal . 2007 ) that may or may not include LINE - 1 sequence , can be reversely transcribed . So called pseudogenes result from retrotransposition of RNAs that lag retrotranscript sequence ( Esnault etal . 2000 ) . Combinations of retrotranscript and nonretrotransposon sequence are referred to as chimeric ( retro ) transcripts ( Buzdin etal . 2002 ) . Genetic innovations have been shown to arise via such sequence recombinations , for example , construction of a new gene family ( Xing etal . 2006 ) . It has been estimated that at least 35 % of human genome sequence has been generated by these LINE - 1 - dependent mechanisms ( Landeretal . 2001 ) . DenovoLINE - 1 retrotransposition predominantly occurs in somatic cells ( Kano etal . 2009 ) , suggesting that it contributes to intrain - dividual adaptability and interindividual variability . Although LINE - 1 RNA is transmitted from one generation of germ cells to the next the genome of these cells is rarely affected by LINE - 1 retrotransposition events ( Kano etal . 2009 ) . Instead LINE - 1 reintegration into the genome follows fertilization enabling mosaicism in somatic and germ line tissues ( Kano etal . 2009 ) . In this way , LINE - 1 retrotransposition can gen - erate differences between the genomes of individual cells that originated from a single zygote ( with a single genome ) . However , persistence of LINE - 1 RNA has been observed in embryonic cells after embryo implantation and at low level in adult tissues . Retrotransposon - mediated polymor - phisms thus represent a substantial source for intra - and interindividual genomic variability ( Ewing & Kazazian 2010 ) . Independent of retrotransposition effects on gene function or expression , LINE - 1 promoter - driven transcription has been shown to alter expression of cellular genes ( Speek 2001 ) . Otherwise retrotransposons have been shown to prevent changes in DNA - methylation at gene promoters thus preclud - ing changes in gene expression ( Estecio etal . 2010 ) . LINE - 1 dependent modiﬁcations vary in magnitude and frequency and comprise changes in quantity , stability and composition of DNA or RNA ( Cordaux & Batzer 2009 ) . Clusters of LINE - 1 and LINE - 1 - mediated reintegration into the genome that have been found more often than one would expect by chance may be related to the transcriptional state of their target sites ( Graham & Boissinot 2006 ) . Chromosome 4 and the X - chromosome have a particularly high frequency of recent LINE - 1 insertions . LINE - 1 elements might be important for the regulation of genes with monoallelic expression , which have been located in LINE - 1 element - rich regions ( Allenetal . 2003 ) . They may also function to increase the distance between loci in the absence of recombination , thus facilitating selection by reducing interference between genetic effects ( Graham & Boissinot 2006 ) . Another potential role for retrotransposons is in the regulation of gene silencing . Chow etal . found silent LINE - 1 regions to assist Xist RNA in forming a heterochromatic nuclear compartment and suggested a distinct set of transcribed LINE - 1 elements to play a role in the extension of X chromosome inactivation into active regions ( Chow etal . 2010 ) . This study gives an example for LINE - 1 - assisted regulation of gene silencing in differentiating cells during embryonic development and could explain why LINE - 1 density and its proximity to genes is correlated with the efﬁciency of gene silencing ( Bailey etal . 2000 ; Chow etal . 2010 ; Lyon 1998 ) . Cells possess multiple mechanisms to regulate LINE - 1 activity , with a trend to increase their activity in response to stressful conditions ( Farkash & Luning Prak 2006 ) . In bacteria the frequency of transpositions is regulated in response to environmental signals , which suggests an adaptive function ( Hall 1999 ) . Small interfering RNAs , another type of ncRNA , can be generated from transposons and convergent transcripts ( van Rij & Berezikov 2009 ) . These ncRNAs together with proteins contribute to the regulation of transposon mobility and gene expression in somatic and germ cells ( van Rij & Berezikov 2009 ) . Retrotransposon transcription can be activated through the regulation of histone phosphoacetylation dependent on the MAPK signaling pathway and HDAC activation ( Brunmeir etal . 2010 ) . The MAPK signaling pathway is also present in neurons and one of its downstream targets is methyl CpG binding protein 2 ( MeCP2 ) , a neuronal activity - regulated transcription factor involved in DNA and chromatin modiﬁcation . Neuronal activity has been shown to Genes , BrainandBehavior ( 2012 ) 11 : 3 – 28 7 Wolf and Linden activate LINE - 1 retrotransposition in neuronal progenitor cells suggesting a role of these elements in experience - dependent neuroplasticity ( Muotri etal . 2009 ) . Recently Muotri etal . have shown that MeCP2 contributes to the regulation of LINE - 1 activity in neurons ( Muotri etal . 2010 ) . LINE - 1 retrotransposons are active in humans during developmental and adult neurogenesis ( Singer etal . 2010 ) . Because environmental ( e . g . stress ) and internal ( e . g . hormones ) factors have been found to activate LINE - 1 retrotranspositions this mechanism for the generation of genetic variations could be important for individual adaptability ( Singer etal . 2010 ) . Although the understanding of the regulatory mechanisms involved in transposon - mediated variation of the genome and the transcriptome is still at its beginning the preliminary evidence available thus far supports our view of transposons as molecular adaptors involved in genetic and epigenetic adaptations that result in phenotypic variability in response to both internally and externally driven changes . RecodingofDNAorRNA Another mechanism that has been suggested to generate environmentally - driven DNA / RNA sequence variability in protein - coding and ncRNA - coding sequences of immune ( Hamilton etal . 2010 ) and NS cells is the editing or recoding of DNA or RNA ( Mattick & Mehler 2008 ) . After hydroxylation of 5 - methylcytosine ( 5 - mC ) by TET1 ( 5 - mC hydroxylase ) , 5 - hydroxymethylcytosine ( 5hmC ) is converted to 5 - hydroxymethyluracil ( 5hmU ) by APOBEC1 ( apolipoprotein B mRNA - editing enzyme complex 1 ) cyti - dine deaminase ( Guo etal . 2011 ) . In the ﬁnal step 5hmU is exchanged with unmethylated cytosine by 5hmU glycosylase - mediated base excision repair . Recent studies suggest that this DNA demethylation mechanism is regu - lated by neuronal activity and involved in the transcriptional regulation of plasticity - related genes in adult neurons ( Guo etal . 2011 ; Ma etal . 2009 ) . Absent or incorrect base exci - sion repair would leave base mispairs and thus lead to deamination - induced genetic mutations instead of epige - netic changes . These and similar DNA editing mechanisms mediated by cytidine deaminases thus either modify only the DNA methylation pattern ( if correctly repaired ) or addi - tionally change the DNA sequence ( Morgan etal . 2004 ) . Such modiﬁcations are known to be important for epigenetic remodeling , regulation of transposon activity , and immune functions ( Chahwan etal . 2010 ; Di Noia & Neuberger 2007 ; Hamilton etal . 2010 ; Muckenfuss etal . 2006 ) . Dysregu - lated or malfunctioning DNA editing has devastating effects including neoplasms , immunodeﬁciency and neurodegen - eration ( Pham etal . 2005 ; Smith 2011 ; Weissman etal . 2007 ) . Genes encoding DNA / RNA editing enzymes accord - ingly show signs of strong positive selection in the human genome ( Mattick & Mehler 2008 ) . RNA editing is most active in the brain , and humans show a twofold increase of editing compared to mice ( Mattick & Mehler 2008 ) . In a genome - wide analysis of RNA editing sites high levels of editing within coding sequences were identiﬁed for metabotropic glutamate and GABA receptor genes in human frontal cortex ( Li etal . 2009 ) . However identiﬁed editing sites of genes related to neuroplasticity , for example , VAMP4 , CaMKI and HTR2C were also located within noncoding RNA sequence . This ﬁnding points to the importance of noncoding sequences as targets for RNA - editing in neuroplasticity - related genes . For example , RNA editing at ﬁve sites generates numerous isoforms of the 5 - HT 2C receptor , which vary in serotonin binding afﬁnity and efﬁciency of receptor - G - protein interac - tion ( Nishikura 2010 ) . The glutamatergic AMPA receptor is also affected by RNA editing . Calcium permeability of neu - ronal AMPA receptors differs according to GluR2 subunit pre - mRNA editing at the Q / R site by the adenosine deam - inase acting on RNA 2 ( ADAR2 ) ( Geiger etal . 1995 ; Peng etal . 2006 ) . Such RNA editing - dependent adaptations of receptor properties appear to be particularly relevant dur - ing brain development ( Lomeli etal . 1994 ; Wahlstedt etal . 2009 ) . Expression of ADAR2 is regulated by cAMP response element binding protein ( CREB ) ( Peng etal . 2006 ) , a synaptic activity - regulated transcription factor ( Benito & Barco 2010 ) . Moreover ADAR1 - mediated RNA editing has been shown to regulate the activity of the glycosylase NEIL1 involved in DNA base excision repair ( Yeo etal . 2010 ) , with both enzymes apparently also active in human brain ( Simmons etal . 2010 ) . RNA editing could thus be an important molecu - lar mechanism for the regulation of neural development and plasticity , for example , by modifying sequences and biophys - ical properties of glutamate receptor subunits to modulate synaptic strength and neural network connectivity ( Mattick & Mehler 2008 ) . Through their connection with intracellu - lar signaling pathways , the activity of RNA editing enzymes appears to be inﬂuenced by environmental experience and behavior . This has led to the speculation that the coordi - nated coupling of RNA and DNA editing among synapses , neurons and neural networks through signaling would allow the genetic encoding of environmentally - driven changes in neural structure and function during brain development and cognitive plasticity ( Mattick & Mehler 2008 ) . In summary genetic and epigenetic adaptation mech - anisms are extraordinarily versatile and are regulated in response to internal and environmental signals . If genetic changes can be regulated , that is , induced or suppressed in response to the presence or absence of selective pres - sures , they belong into the ‘toolbox’ of complex individual adaptability . Interaction of adaptation mechanisms across functional levels Sensory , cognitive , emotional , social or motor experiences or behaviors that modulate the activity of speciﬁc neural networks can drive activity - dependent changes at the molec - ular , synaptic and cellular level ( Fig . 1 ) . Such reorganization processes are presumably required for the updating of past with new experiences , increasing processing efﬁciency and capacity for learning and memory ( Dudai 2004 ; Miyashita etal . 2008 ) . The ongoing adaptation process within individ - ual neurons as well as neural networks depends on the interaction between adaptation mechanisms at the molec - ular , cellular , network and behavioral level for the dynamic integration of signals driven by internal and / or environmental changes . How this interaction is coordinated at the molecular , 8 Genes , BrainandBehavior ( 2012 ) 11 : 3 – 28 Biological pathways to adaptability Figure 1 : Legend on next page . Genes , BrainandBehavior ( 2012 ) 11 : 3 – 28 9 Wolf and Linden cellular network and behavioral level to enable learning and memory processes is far from being understood ( Citri & Malenka 2008 ) . The regulation of the transcriptome , translatome and pro - teome contribute signiﬁcantly to neuroplasticity . Collectively the various cell types of the NS express 80 % of the coding genome , exceeding the gene expression of any other organ ( Ooi & Wood 2008 ) . The transcription - dependent neuroplas - ticity that occurs during learning and memory formation is regulated by RNAs and proteins involved in neuronal activity - dependent intracellular and intra - nuclear signaling and neuronal activity - dependent epigenetic mechanisms ( Flavell & Greenberg 2008 ) . Adaptation mechanisms involved in learning and memory like synaptic strength ( Barco etal . 2002 ; Plath etal . 2006 ) and dendritic growth ( Wayman etal . 2006 ; Yuste & Bonhoeffer 2004 ; Zhou etal . 2006 ) have been shown to depend on the coordinated expression of multiple genes in response to neuronal activity . Neuroplas - ticity that depends on DNA expression requires more time , energy and regulation but increases adaptability compared with neuroplasticity restricted to post - transcriptional or post - translational regulation . Rapidly induced post - translational modiﬁcation and trafﬁck - ing of pre - existing proteins and other functional molecules appear to be important for regulation and maintenance of molecular functions . Neuronal adaptation by regulation of pre - existing mRNA is limited to the type and quantity of available mRNAs . Fonseca etal . have suggested that the strength of neuronal activity determines the dependency of long - term potentiation ( LTP ) on protein synthesis ( Fonseca etal . 2006 ) . The neuronal activity - dependent regulation of trans - lation in dendrites is important for the rapid enhancement of neurotransmission ( Kang & Schuman 1996 ) , late - phase LTP ( Bradshaw etal . 2003 ; Kelleher etal . 2004 ) , LTD ( Huber etal . 2000 ) and morphological changes of synapses ( Bailey & Chen 1983 ; Vanderklish & Edelman 2002 ) . Protein synthesis - dependence appears to be limited to the time needed to synthesize the proteins and establish synaptic changes ( Sutton & Schuman 2006 ) . Whether and for how long these changes persist depends on interactions at the molecular , cellular and systems - levels ( Sutton & Schuman 2006 ) . The regulation of these molecular plasticity mechanisms in neurons is coordinated by intracellular signaling systems and depends on neuronal activity . Intracellular signaling sys - tems can amplify signals to operate as a biochemical switch from low to maximal activation , realize time and location - dependent integration of diverse extracellular signals , induce transient or long - lasting activation of effector molecules and respond to positive or negative feedback mechanisms ( Adams & Sweatt 2002 ) . Thus , intracellular signaling sys - tems can coordinate the type and duration of adaptations at the molecular , synaptic and neuronal level with high input - speciﬁcity . Functional and structural adaptation of neurons Developmental and activity - dependent adaptation of neu - ronal structure and function depends on the processing of extracellular signals ( conveyed mainly by neurotransmitters , neurotrophins , hormones and cytokines ) that regulate the adaptation of the neuronal protein network via intracellu - lar signaling systems . The coordination of speciﬁc signaling pathways mediates input - speciﬁc modiﬁcations . Intracellular signaling can have local effects on the function of pre - existing synaptic molecules ( e . g . mRNA , proteins ) or , if converted into an intranuclear signal , on gene expression . The conversion of an extracellular signal ( ﬁrst messenger ) into an intracel - lular signal ( second messenger ) depends on the signal and receptor properties . Receptors coupled to intracellular sec - ond messenger systems can regulate the activity of enzymes ( e . g . protein kinases / phosphatases , phospholipases ) , which regulate target proteins ( e . g . structural proteins , signaling enzymes , ion channels / pumps and transcription fac - tors / cofactors ) . For example the Ca 2 + - second messenger system involves Ca 2 + - binding proteins ( e . g . phospholipase C and A 2 , protein kinase A / C , calmodulin , calcineurin ) . These proteins can regulate Ca 2 + - dependent signaling enzymes , for example , CaMKs that can recruit transcription factors and cofactors to the promoters of neuronal activity - dependent genes ( Greer & Greenberg 2008 ; West etal . 2001 ) . Transcriptionfactorregulationofimmediateanddelayedresponsegenes Transcription factors that regulate activity - dependent gene expression , like CREB , MEF2 , nuclear factor of activated T cells ( NFAT ) , MeCP2 and serum response factor ( SRF ) , can be a part of the transcription machinery and / or involved in chromatin remodeling ( Cohen & Greenberg 2008 ; West etal . 2001 ) . Transcription factors can change the activity - dependent expression of their target genes within minutes . Such target genes include those coding for activity - induced transcription factors , like c - Fos and nerve growth factor - inducible protein A ( NGFI - A ) ( Cole etal . 1989 ) and for a large range of cellular function proteins , for example , Figure 1 : Extracellular stimuli activate intra - neuronal signaling proteins , mediated by Ca 2 + . Depending on the Ca 2 + - signal , signaling proteins regulate and coordinate the adaptation of neuronal properties by changing pre - existing proteins , mRNA translation and gene expression . Changes of gene expression require the regulation of transcription factors ( TR ) inside the nucleus . These neuronal activity - regulated transcription factors regulate immediate early genes ( IEGs ) that can encode other transcription factors or synaptic proteins . microRNAs can regulate the transport and translation of mRNA for transcription factors or synaptic proteins . De novosynthesis of IEG transcription factors is required to regulate the gene expression of delayed response genes ( DRGs ) that encode synaptic proteins . These molecular adaptation mechanisms lead to structural and functional changes of neurons , thus providing the basis for neuroplasticity and short - or long - lasting functional adaptations of neuronal properties . The adaptation of neuronal properties allows the functional adaptation of neural networks to regulate adaptations of the behavioral response , for example , the memorizing of certain stimuli . 10 Genes , BrainandBehavior ( 2012 ) 11 : 3 – 28 Biological pathways to adaptability activity - regulated cytoskeleton - associated protein ( Arc ) ( Link etal . 1995 ) , Homer 1a ( Brakeman etal . 1997 ) and BDNF ( Zafra etal . 1990 ) . Expression of these immediate - early genes ( IEGs ) is independent of de novo protein synthe - sis or transcription of other genes ( Miyashita etal . 2008 ) . Activity - induced IEGs that encode transcription factors in turn regulate the transcription of delayed response genes ( DRGs ) ( Miyashita etal . 2008 ) . DRGs encode proteins for long - term changes in neuronal functions , for example , neurotransmit - ter and hormone receptor genes . Activity - regulated genes are expressed with distinct kinetics , differences in stimulus - responsiveness , cell - type and region - speciﬁcity ( Chaudhuri etal . 1997 ; Guzowski etal . 1999 ; Vazdarjanova etal . 2002 ) and this activity - dependent regulation of gene expression pat - terns in neural networks has been found to distinguish stages of learning and memory ( Guzowski etal . 2001 ) . Furthermore the combined expression of learning state - independent and learning state - dependent IEGs ( Miyashita etal . 2008 ) may increase the range and thus the input - speciﬁcity of synap - tic modiﬁcations . Neuronal activity - regulated proteins play central roles in the adaptation of metabolism , cytoskeleton changes , signaling pathways , neurotransmitter exocytosis , neuronal morphology and survival , number and properties of synapses and receptors . These molecular , synaptic and cellular adaptations can modify the properties of neuronal networks to facilitate behavioral adaptability . GeneoutputregulationbynoncodingRNA In addition to regulatory proteins , various types of noncoding RNAs ( ncRNAs ) regulate genes and proteins involved in neuroplasticity ( Mehler & Mattick 2006 ) . These ncRNAs contain regulatory sequences instead of protein - coding sequences and are transcribed from DNA together with protein - coding sequences , mostly UTRs and introns or independently of protein - coding sequence , for example , from intergenic regions or antisense strands . Regulatory ncRNAs dispose of cis - and / or trans - acting elements to engage in RNA – RNA , RNA – DNA and RNA – protein interactions ( Mattick & Gagen 2001 ) . In this way they can regulate chromatin remodeling , transcription , mRNA processing , translation , mRNA stability and subcellular location , protein stability , activity and secretion ( Costa 2007 , Mattick & Makunin 2006 , Szyma´nski etal . 2003 ) . Among the numerous regulatory ncRNAs expressed in the brain recent investigations have started to unveil the functions of neuronal microRNAs ( miRNAs ) ( Klein etal . 2005 ) . Activity - regulated microRNAs are similar to IEGs in that they are expressed in response to synaptic activity . They regulate the translation of synaptic proteins involved in structural plasticity , for example dendritic growth ( Vo etal . 2005 ; Wayman etal . 2008a ) . By binding to cis - acting elements in 3 (cid:3) UTR with varying sequence compatibility , miRNAs can regulate the transport and translatability of mRNA targets in both developing and mature neurons ( Kosik 2006 ) . Information on the functional impact of neuronal ncRNAs is still extremely limited . Nevertheless the evidence for a role of microRNAs in various forms of neuroplasticity has certainly enhanced the interest in interactions between ncRNAs and neuronal structure and function . Neuronal activity - regulated proteins and microRNAs involved in neuroplasticity Signal processing at the molecular level underlies the neuronal adaptations that mediate neural network plasticity involved in learning and adaptive behavior . The following overview ( Fig . 2 ) summarizes the molecular adaptations through which genes , proteins and ncRNAs that can be regulated by neuronal activity inﬂuence the neuron’s structural and functional properties and hence behavior and neuropathology . We present in more detail ﬁve such regulatory genes , proteins and ncRNAs that are interconnected and relay adaptations between the molecular , neuronal , neural network and behavioral level . In addition we provide a table ( Table 2 ) and four ﬁgures ( Figs 3 – 6 ) to summarize this information . Activity - regulatedsynapticcytoskeletonprotein Neuronal - activity dependent transient transcription and translation of the IEG Arc / Arg3 . 1 ( Fig . 3 ) has been reported for many brain regions such as hippocampus , amygdala , neocortex and striatum ( Miyashita etal . 2008 ) . NMDA receptor - mediated LTP can initiate the transient expression of Arcwithin 1 – 2 min ( Guzowski etal . 1999 ) . Binding of the transcription factors SRF , MEF2 and CREB to the synaptic activity - responsive element ( SARE ) is required and sufﬁcient for activity - dependent Arc transcription ( Kawashima etal . 2009 ) . Newly synthesized , Arc mRNA is trans - located to activated excitatory post - synapses ( Steward etal . 1998 ; Steward & Worley 2001 ) for consecutive protein synthesis ( Moga etal . 2004 ) . Dendritic synthesis of Arc is up - regulated by BDNF ( Yin etal . 2002 ) . The neuronal activity - dependent synthesis of Arc protein involves the phosphorylation of translation factor eukaryotic initiation factor 4E ( eIF4E ) by MAPK integrating kinase - 1 ( MNK1 ) dependent on MAPK - signaling as well as phosphorylated elongation factor 2 ( eEF2 ) ( Bramham etal . 2010 ) . Arc protein situated in the postsynaptic density ( PSD ) of glutamatergic neurons interacts with signaling , cytoskeleton and endocytosis proteins ( Miyashita etal . 2008 ) thereby enhancing dendritic growth ( Donaietal . 2003 ) and restricting AMPA receptor numbers ( Chowdhury etal . 2006 ; Rial Verde etal . 2006 ; Shepherd etal . 2006 ) . Intriguingly , activation of AMPA receptors has been shown to down - regulate the activity - dependent expression of Arc without affecting Arc translation or Arc protein turnover ( Rao etal . 2006 ) . This indicates a mutual negative feedback mechanism that may serve homeostatic regulation of both AMPA receptor - dependent and Arctranscription - dependent changes . Arc protein has been associated with hippocampal late LTP and LTD - dependent memory formation ( Plath etal . 2006 ) . Brief activation of metabotropic glutamate receptors ( mGluRs ) in hippocampal neurons induces LTD associated with increased mGluR1 endocytosis and long - term increases in AMPA receptor endocytosis rate that both rely on dendritic de novo synthesis of Arc ( Waung etal . 2008 ) . Together these ﬁndings indicate the requirement of Arc synthesis for both the enhancement and the attenuation of synaptic contacts . Genes , BrainandBehavior ( 2012 ) 11 : 3 – 28 11 Wolf and Linden Figure 2 : Summary of the molecular mechanisms involved in the regulation of functional and structural neuroplasticity by neuronal activity - regulated genes , proteins and ncRNAs . The expression of Arcin mature neurons of primary visual cortex has been demonstrated to depend on the speciﬁc orientation of visual stimuli ( Wang etal . 2006b ) , which may indicate that Arc inhibits neurons responding with low orientation selectivity to enhance orientation - selective processing ( Wang etal . 2006b ) . Temporal and spatial regulation of Arc function involves targeting of intron sequences within 3 (cid:3) UTR of ArcmRNA by eukaryotic initiation factor 4AIII ( eIF4AIII ) , a core component of the exon junction complex during pre - mRNA splicing ( Georgi etal . 2007 ) . This complex mediates translation - dependent decay of Arc mRNA in cortical and hippocampal neurons after the ﬁrst round of ArcmRNA translation for the precise control of Arc protein synthesis ( Georgi etal . 2007 ) . Arc protein degradation is enhanced by E3 ubiquitin ligase ( Ube3A ) ( Greer etal . 2010 ) . Neuronal activity - dependent transcription of Ube3A may be under the inﬂuence of MEF2 ( Greer etal . 2010 ) . Because Arc facilitates AMPA receptor endocytosis , Ube3A expression thus enhances AMPA receptor numbers ( Greer etal . 2010 ) . Subregion - speciﬁc changes of hippocampal Arc transcription and Arc promoter methylation in response to novel environment experience have been reported to be age - dependent ( Penner etal . 2011 ) . In summary Arc transcription , mRNA localization and synthesis are regulated in response to neuronal activation changes to modulate AMPA receptor numbers , cytoskeletal dynamics involved in dendritic growth , and LTP and LTD thus contributing to sensory processing and learning . cAMPresponseelementbindingprotein ( CREB / CREB1 ) The transcription factor CREB ( Fig . 4 ) can bind to the cAMP response element ( CRE ) in promoter and enhancer sequences of DNA encoding proteins or miRNAs involved in neuroplasticity ( Kim etal . 2010a ; Montminy & Bilezikjian 1987 ; Sheng etal . 1990 ; Vo etal . 2005 ; Wayman etal . 2008a ) . Binding of CREB depends on chromatin conformation at CRE sites and the binding of cofactors to CRE ﬂanking sequences ( Cha - Molstad etal . 2004 ; Mayr & Montminy 2001 ; Mayr etal . 2005 ) . CREB binding can occur with and without CREB - activation ( Conkright etal . 2003 ; Mayr & Montminy 2001 ; Richards etal . 1996 ) , can vary with neuronal activation , and contributes to the recruitment of cofactors and protein complexes required for RNA synthesis ( Kim etal . 2010b ) . Activation of CREB , which can be modiﬁed at multiple sites , is regulated by Ca 2 + - , cAMP - and receptor tyrosine kinase - dependent signaling pathways and involves the regulation of CREB coactivators ( Johannessen etal . 2004 ; Lonze & Ginty , 2002 ; Meitzen etal . 2011 ) . For example CREB - binding protein ( CBP ) exhibits intrinsic histone acetyltransferase activity ( HAT ) to remodel chromatin , recruit and stabilize RNA polymerase II ( Flavell & Greenberg 2008 ) . The recruitment of mitogen - and stress - activated protein kinase 1 ( MSK1 ) to phosphorylate histone H3 at the c - Fospromoter for the induction of c - Fos transcription is CREB dependent ( Shimadaetal . 2010 ) . CREB and CaMK activity inﬂuence the transcription ofc - Fos , BDNF , CPG15 / neuritin , wnt - 2 and miR - 132 , which likely mediate 12 Genes , BrainandBehavior ( 2012 ) 11 : 3 – 28 Biological pathways to adaptability T a b l e 2 : A c t i v i t y - r egu l a t ed p r o t e i n s a nd m i R N A R e gu l a t o r ( s ub c e ll u l a r f un c t i on s a nd l o ca t i on s ca n d i ff e r be t w een p r o t e i n i s o f o r m s ) E x p r e ss i on i n t h e b r a i n ( ca n d i ff e r be t w een p r o t e i n i s o f o r m s ) N e u r on a l a d a p t a t i on s , a ff e c t e d b e h av i o r s , n e u r op a t ho l og i e s A r c – ac t i v i t y - r egu l a t ed I E G en c od i ng sy n a p t i c cy t o sk e l e t on p r o t e i n r egu l a t e s sy n a p t i c p r o t e i n s h i ppo ca m pu s , a m y d a l a , i n s u l a , en t o r h i n a l c o rt e x , a n t e r i o r c i ngu l a t e c o rt e x ( ACC ) , D L P F C , o r b i t a l fr on t a l c o rt e x , v en tr a l t eg m en t a l a r e a , s ub s t a n t i a n i g r a , ca ud a t e , pu t a m en , nu c l eu s acc u m ben s , s en s o r y a nd m o t o r c o rt i c e s – s tr u c t u r a l , f un c t i on a l , neu r on a l s u r v i va l – m e m o r y , l e a r n i ng , s tr e ss a d a p t a t i on – s tr e ss d i s o r de r s ( K o z l o vsky e t a l . 2008 ; M o l t en i e t a l . 2010 ) , dep r e ss i on ( de Foube rt e t a l . 2007 ) , a dd i c t i on ( B r a m h a m e t a l . 2010 ; P a nde y e t a l . 2008 ) , c ogn i t i v e ( W a ng e t a l . 20 0 6 a ) a nd e m o t i on a l m e m o r y i m p a i r m en t ( E r i kss on e t a l . 20 1 1 ) CR E B 1 / C R E B – ac t i v i t y - r egu l a t ed tr a n sc r i p t i on f ac t o r c A M P r e s pon s e e l e m en t b i nd i ng p r o t e i n 1 r egu l a t e s I E G s f o r tr a n sc r i p t i on f ac t o r s a n d sy n a p t i c p r o t e i n s h i ppo ca m pu s , a m y gd a l a , en t o r h i n a l c o rt e x , i n s u l a , P F C , o cc i p i t a l c o rt e x , nu c l eu s acc u m ben s , v en tr a l t eg m en t a l a r e a – s tr u c t u r a l , f un c t i on a l , p r o m o t e s neu r on a l s u r v i va l – m e m o r y , l e a r n i ng , e m o t i on , s tr e ss r e s pon s e – m a j o r dep r e ss i on ( Y u a n e t a l . 2010 ) , a dd i c t i on ( M c C l ung & N e s t l e r 2003 ) , a n x i e t y ( W a ll ac e e t a l . 2009 ) , c ogn i t i v e i m p a i r m en t ( B ou rt c hu l a d z e e t a l . 1994 ) , s e x u a l beh av i o r ( B a rr o t e t a l . 2005 ) , sc h i z oph r en i a ( K a w a n i s h i e t a l . 1999 ) , R ub i n s t e i n - T ay b i sy nd r o m e ( A l a r c on e t a l . 2004 ) , A l z he i m e r ’ s d i s e as e ( L i a ng e t a l . 2007 ; S m i t h e t a l . 2009 ) , H u n t i ng t on ’ s d i s e as e ( O ka m o t o e t a l . 2009 ) C a M K s – C a 2 + / ca l m odu li n - dependen t k i n as e s , ac t i v i t y - r egu l a t ed s i gn a li ng p r o t e i n i s o f o r m s , r egu l a t e m u l t i p l e p r o t e i n s i n sy n a p s e , cy t op l as m a nd n u c l eu s D L P F C , h i ppo ca m p a l f o r m a t i on , ACC , ca ud a t e , pu t a m en , t h a l a m u s , h y po t h a l a m u s , m i db r a i n a nd v i s u a l c o rt e x – s tr u c t u r a l , f un c t i on a l , p r o m o t e s neu r on a l s u r v i va l – m e m o r y , l e a r n i ng – A l z he i m e r ’ s d i s e as e ( G u e t a l . 2009 ; S t e i ne r e t a l . 1990 ; L y & S ong 2011 ) , a dd i c t i on ( L i ca t a & P i e r c e 2003 ; K i m e t a l . 20 0 9 ; M a r i n e t a l . 2009 ; P i e r c e & K a li vas 1997 ) NG F I - A – N e r v e G r o w t h F ac t o r - I ndu c i b l e p r o t e i n A = Z i f 2 6 8 / E G R - 1 / K r o x - 24 / T I S 8 / Z E N K , ac t i v i t y - r egu l a t ed I E G a nd c on t i nuou s l y e x p r e ss ed gene en c od i ng tr a n sc r i p t i on f ac t o r , r egu l a t e s e x p r e ss i on o f D R G s h i ppo ca m pu s , a m y gd a l a , b asa l g a ng li a , t h a l a m u s , h y po t h a l a m u s , v i s u a l c o rt e x , s o m a t o s en s o r y c o rt e x , c i ngu l a t e , b r a i n s t e m , c e r ebe ll u m , r a phe nu c l eu s , a nd a ud i t o r y c o rt i c e s – f un c t i on a l a nd s tr u c t u r a l a nd m ay neu r on a l s u r v i va l – s ho rt a nd l ong - t e r m m e m o r y , s en s o r y i n f o r m a t i on p r o c e ss i ng , a r ou sa l , m o t i va t i on , e m o t i on , s tr e ss r e s pon s e s , e x p l o r a t o r y beh av i o r – m a t e r n a l dep r e ss i on a ff e c t s NG F I - A - r egu l a t ed g l u c o c o rt i c o i d r e c ep t o r e x p r e ss i on a nd s tr e ss - r e s pon s e ( c o rt i s o l l e v e l ) i n ne o n a t e s ( O be r l a nde r e t a l . 2008 ) – do w n - r egu l a t i on o f NG F I - A m R N A i n h i ppo ca m pu s o f p a t i en t s w i t h m a j o r dep r e ss i on c o m p a r ed w i t h he a l t h y c o n tr o l s ( A l t e t a l . 2010 ) m i R - 134 - e x p r e ss i on t e m po r a ll y a nd s p a t i a ll y r egu l a t ed b y e x tr a - c e ll u l a r s i gn a l s , r egu l a t e s tr a n s l a t i on o f sy n a p t i c p r o t e i n s p r i m a r y c o rt e x , c e r ebe ll u m , h i ppo ca m pu s – s tr u c t u r a l – A l z he i m e r ’ s d i s e as e ( H ebe rt & D e S tr oope r 2009 ) – sc h i z oph r en i a ( S a n t a r e lli e t a l . 2011 ) Genes , BrainandBehavior ( 2012 ) 11 : 3 – 28 13 Wolf and Linden Figure 3 : Overview of the functions of Arc . The ﬁgure shows the pathways for the regulation of Arc transcription and the synthesis and degradation of its protein product , and their downstream consequences for neural plasticity . For abbreviations see Supporting Information : Appendix S1 . − / + signs refer to decrease or increase of function , for example , a minus sign next to an pointing arrow indicates decreased activation while a minus sign next to stumping arrow indicates decreased inhibition . Similar conventions are followed in Figs 4 – 6 . neuronal activity - dependent dendritic outgrowth ( Flavell & Greenberg 2008 ) . CREB has also been implicated in the stress response as one of the regulators of corticotropin - releasing hormone ( CRH ) gene transcription ( Liu etal . 2008 ) . Gene expression of two transcriptional regulators of defense genes , NR4A orphan nuclear receptor also called nerve growth factor - inducible protein B ( NGFI - B ) or Nur77 ( an activity - regulated IEG transcription factor that negatively regulates cell survival and growth ) and peroxisome proliferator - activated receptor gamma coactivator 1 - alpha ( PGC - 1 α ) , has been shown to depend on CREB activation to mediate neuronal survival in response to neuronal stresses ( Volakakis etal . 2010 ) . Nur77transcription can be repressed by sumoylated MEF2 protein binding to the MEF2 response elements ( MREs ) on the Nur77 promoter and recruiting of transcriptional repressors ( Lam etal . 2009 ) . The speciﬁcity of CREB regulated transcription thus depends on stimulus type , types of signaling proteins that interact or converge to regulate CREB activity ( various protein kinases and phosphatases ) and other transcription factors interacting with CREB or CREB targets . The translation of CREB mRNA is negatively regulated by miR - 134 ( Gao etal . 2010 ) . Because of its neuronal activity - dependent effects on the transcription of neuroplasticity - related genes CREB has been proposed as a major contributor to the molecular transition from short - to long - term plasticity through the regulation of intrinsic neuronal excitability ( e . g . membrane resistance , ﬁring rate , after - hyperpolarization via changes of number or function of voltage - gated ion channels ) ( Benito & Barco 2010 ) and by facilitating late - LTP at hippocampal synapses ( Barco etal . 2002 ) . Furthermore , the positive regulation of synaptic NMDA receptor numbers but not AMPA receptors 14 Genes , BrainandBehavior ( 2012 ) 11 : 3 – 28 Biological pathways to adaptability Figure 4 : The central position of CREB in the regulation of plasticity genes . The major second messenger pathways converge onto CREB , which in turn can regulate most of the other genes discussed in this paper . combined with increased spine density in the hippocampus induced through CREB over - expression resulted in neurons with new naïve synapses ( Marie etal . 2005 ) . Containing exclusively NMDA receptors , such synapses are activated at depolarized membrane potentials that drive LTP but not at hyperpolarized membrane potentials unless there has been LTP - dependent introduction of AMPA receptors . Although this addition of new naïve synapses was based on CREB over - expression and not directly CREB activation it suggests a contribution of CREB and its regulated genes to future circuit adaptations . The responsiveness of neurons in the nucleus accumbens is also modulated by CREB ; elevation of CREB activity enhances and reduction decreased activity of the nucleus accumbens ( Dong etal . 2006 ; Wallace etal . 2009 ) . Changes in CREB activity or expression have been implicated in object ( Hotte etal . 2006 ) and social recognition memory ( Kogan etal . 2000 ) , emotional reactions , reward processing , anxiety and depressive - like behaviors ( Barrot etal . 2002 , 2005 ; Carlezon etal . 2005 ; Dinieri etal . 2009 ) , and suicide risk ( Dwivedi etal . 2003 ) . Enhancement of glucocorticoid receptor stimulation subsequently increased phosphorylated CREB . CREB activation led to increased Genes , BrainandBehavior ( 2012 ) 11 : 3 – 28 15 Wolf and Linden Figure 5 : CaMK signaling pathways regulate activity - dependent transcription factors and proteins involved in function and structural neuroplasticity . histone acetylation that was shown to have positive effects on insular cortex - dependent long - term memory for object recognition and hippocampus - dependent long - term memory for object location ( Roozendaal etal . 2010 ) . This study underlines the importance of brain region - speciﬁc epigenetic regulation and its interaction with the CREB pathway for behavioral adaptations during learning . The levels of CREB as well as several proteins in one of the pathways that regulate CREB - dependent transcription – the ERK / MAPK signaling pathway – were diminished in the frontal cortex of patients with schizophrenia and major depression ( Yuan etal . 2010 ) . In conclusion both neuronal activity - dependent CREB binding to its DNA - targets and CREB activation contribute to the transcriptional regulation of IEGs , DRGs and miRNAs which are involved in functional and structural neuroplasticity in prefrontal , limbic ( Runyan & Dash 2005 ) and primary sensory cortical networks ( Hong etal . 2008 ) . Ca 2 + / calmodulin - dependentkinases Ca 2 + / calmodulin - dependent kinases ( Fig . 5 ) are Serine / Threonine protein kinases that phosphorylate Ser / Thr residues of their protein substrates ( Wayman etal . 2008b ; 16 Genes , BrainandBehavior ( 2012 ) 11 : 3 – 28 Biological pathways to adaptability Figure 6 : NGFI - A mediates interactions between endocrine and neuronal functions for the adaptation of behavior . White etal . 1998 ) . Because the recognition motifs of their substrates commonly overlap ( Lee etal . 1994 ) , the colocal - ization of CaMKs with their substrates within multiprotein signaling complexes like PSD or subcellular compartments like the nucleus or membranes determines their signaling speciﬁcity and activation kinetics ( Bayer etal . 2006 ; Enslen & Soderling 1994 ; Enslen etal . 1994 ; Inagaki etal . 2000 ; Tsui etal . 2005 ; Wayman etal . 2004 ) . Various CaMK - family members and their isoforms contribute to the temporal and spatial regulation of neuronal activity - dependent transcription and translation . Increased activation of CaMKII promotes the synaptic expression of AMPA receptors ( Rose etal . 2009 ) and the modulation of α - CaMKII activity by NMDA receptor NR2B subunit can modify AMPA receptor function involved in LTP ( Barriaetal . 1997 ; Zhouetal . 2007 ) . Mutation - induced interference with α - CaMKII function impairs N - methyl - D - aspartate receptor ( NMDAR ) - dependent LTP in a cell type - speciﬁc manner affecting pyramidal but not interneuron dependent pathways in the hippocampus ( Lamsa etal . 2007 ) . Successful short - term memory retrieval depends on the learning - induced transient stability of α - CaMKII activa - tion state that corresponds to its degree of phosphorylation ( Wang etal . 2008b ) . During this transient period following encoding , stability of α - CaMKII activation state is probably required to transiently stabilize the pattern of potentiated synapses and initiate short - term memory representation ( Wangetal . 2008b ) . The dynamic activity state of CaMKII can be regulated by autophosphorylation , hyperphosphorylation , dephosphorylation , autoinhibition and also involves NMDA receptor interactions ( Chao etal . 2011 ; Chin & Means 2002 ; Lisman & McIntyre 2001 ) . Rapid , neuronal activity - dependent translocation of α - CaMKII can also act as a scaffold to recruit proteasomes and stimulate protein degradation in dendritic spines to allow activity - dependent changes of PSD composition ( Bingol etal . 2010 ) . Dysbindin - 1 , a regulator of synaptic plasticity ( Papaleo & Weinberger 2011 ) , has been shown to positively affect CaMKII protein levels probably by restricting the number of dopamine D2 receptors in medial prefrontal cortex ( Iizuka etal . 2007 ; Papaleo etal . 2010 ) . Phosphorylation of LIM kinase 1 by CaMKK - CaMKIV sig - naling has been demonstrated to promote Ca 2 + - dependent neurite outgrowth in cultured neurons ( Takemura etal . 2009 ) . Dendritic growth has also been found to be pro - moted by CaMKIV - induced CREB phosphorylation ( Redmond etal . 2002 ) . CaMKK and CaMKI regulate axonal elongation or activity - dependent dendritic growth ( Wayman etal . 2008b ) . Ca 2 + - dependent CaMKK - CaMKI signaling stimulates MAPK / ERK signaling to induce NMDA receptor - dependent LTP ( Schmitt etal . 2005 ) . This involves the activation of CREB - dependent transcription of miR - 132 , which inhibits p250GAP ( GTPase - activating protein ) translation . The inhibition of p250GAP prevents GTP hydrolysis . This , in turn , promotes Rac1 , a small Rac GTPase and positive regulator of dendritic struc - ture ( Saneyoshi etal . 2010 ) . Distinct CaMKs regulate various guanine - nucleotide - exchange factors ( GEFs ) that regulate the small Rac GTPases ( Rac - GEFs ) through binding of either GTP or GDP ( Penzes etal . 2008 ) . Activation of CaMK - Rac - GEF pathways regulates structural neuroplasticity , for example spine density , synapse number , reorganization of actin cytoskeleton and interaction with scaffolding proteins . The output of a speciﬁc Rac - GEF pathway depends on the type of its activation ( Penzes etal . 2008 ) . It has been shown for example that activity - dependent activation and adhesion - dependent activation of a speciﬁc Rac - GEF pathway can have opposite effects on dendritic spine morphogenesis ( Saneyoshi etal . 2008 ) . CaMKs have also been indicated as regulators of activity - dependent neuronal survival . The activation of CaMK - mediated pathways results in the phosphorylation of HDAC4 ( histone deacetylase 4 ) and 5 that prevents HDAC4 / HDAC5 trafﬁcking from the cytoplasm to the nucleus ( Linsemanetal . 2003 ) . Hyperpolarization of the resting membrane potential or inhibition of CaMKs provokes the localization of HDAC4 and 5 in the nucleus . Inside the nucleus HDAC4 and 5 interrupt transcription dependent on the activity - regulated transcription factors MEF2 and CREB likely resulting in the repression of pro - survival genes in neurons , which are under the regulation of these transcription factors ( Bolger & Yao 2005 ; Linseman etal . 2003 ) . Translocation of HDAC4 into the nucleus can occur in response to excitotoxic glutamate conditions ( Bolger & Yao 2005 ) . The negative effects of HDAC4 activation on neuronal survival can be reduced by small interfering RNAs ( Bolger & Yao 2005 ) . Despite the strong evidence for the importance of neu - ronal CaMKs for brain structure and function from animal studies very few studies have reported effects in humans . These have linked variation in CAMK2 genes and cognitive functions in healthy humans ( de Quervain & Papassotiropou - los 2006 ; Rasetti etal . 2007 ) and patients with schizophrenia ( Need etal . 2009 ) . In sum , CaMKs are key regulators of neuronal activity - dependent intracellular signaling systems involved in tempo - ral , spatial integration and ampliﬁcation of signals . Through their interactions with ion channels , structural proteins and Genes , BrainandBehavior ( 2012 ) 11 : 3 – 28 17 Wolf and Linden other regulatory proteins or ncRNAs they can convert changes of neuronal activity into functional and structural adaptations of neurons to optimize the properties of neural networks required for learning and memory . NerveGrowthFactor - InducibleProteinA Transcription of the IEG NGFI - A ( Fig . 6 ) encoding the tran - scription factor NGFI - A , a zinc - ﬁnger protein , can be induced in response to neuronal activity or neurotrophic factors ( Knap - ska & Kaczmarek 2004 ) . The transcription of NGFI - Acan be up - regulated by the MAPK / ERK pathway . This requires the activation of CREB , ( SRF ) and Est Like gene 1 transcription factor ( Elk - 1 ) , which can bind to the NGFI - A promoter ele - ments CRE and SRE . Additional response elements in the promoter exist for the transcriptional regulation of NGFI - Aby estrogen ( Slade & Carter 2000 ) , auto - regulation by NGFI - A ( Sakamoto etal . 1991 ; Schwachtgen etal . 2000 ) and inhi - bition by , for example , NGFI - A binding protein 1 ( NAB1 ) ( Russo etal . 1995 ) . Temporal and local regulation of NGFI - A mRNA and protein expression contribute to the transcrip - tional regulation of multiple DRGs ( Knapska & Kaczmarek 2004 ) encoding , for example , glucocorticoid receptor ( GR ) ( Weaver etal . 2004 ) and the synaptic vesicle - cytoskeleton - associated proteins synapsin I and II ( Thiel , 1993 ) . NGFI - A also interacts with several other transcription factors , such as CBP ( Silverman etal . 1998 ) , c - Fos ( Dragunow etal . 1994 ; Gius etal . 1990 ) and NGFI - B ( Williams & Lau 1993 ) . NGFI - A protein is expressed throughout the brain , for example , in thalamus , hypothalamus , striatum , amygdala , hippocampus and sensory cortices ( Knapska & Kaczmarek 2004 ) . Up - regulation of NGFI - A expression in sensory cortices has been observed in response to sensory stimulation , for example , through environmental enrichment ( Pinaud etal . 2002 ; Wallace etal . 1995 ) . Region - speciﬁc dynamic regulation of NGFI - A mRNA expression has been observed in response to acute and repeated stress ( Girotti etal . 2006 ) . However the regulation of NGFI - A expression is inﬂuenced by a large spectrum of stimuli including seizures , hippocampal LTP - inducing stimuli and various types of learning ( Knapska & Kaczmarek 2004 ) . Naturally occurring variation in the degree of maternal care ( grooming and nursing behavior of rats ) has been shown to regulate the expression of the GR gene ( NR3C1 ) in the hippocampus of rat pups ( Weaver 2007 ; Weaver etal . 2006 , 2007 ) . This involves the regulation of genome conﬁgura - tion on the NGFI - A transcription factor response element of the GR promoter via acetylation / deacetylation of spe - ciﬁc histones and sequence methylation / demethylation . The methylation status of this promoter sequence appears to be mediated through serotonin signaling at hippocampal 5 - HT 7 receptors activated in response to maternal care . Additional activity - dependent transcription factors and cofactors are also likely to participate in the regulation of GR gene tran - scription . Binding of the transcription factor NGFI - A depends thus on histone ( s ) acetylation status and methylation status of its response element in the GR promoter sequence . NGFI - A binding regulates the transcriptional activity of the GR gene and thus alters the expression of hippocampal glucocorticoid receptor levels ( Weaver etal . 2007 ) . The early - life maternal care - induced methylation status of the GR gene promoter sequence has been shown to persist and inﬂuence behav - ior and hypothalamic – pituitary – adrenal stress response of the offspring in adulthood and to be reversible with cross - fostering ( Fish etal . 2004 ; Weaver etal . 2004 ) . The offspring of dams exhibiting a high degree of maternal care showed enhanced learning , memory , and exploratory behavior and less stress reactivity . In sum , NGFI - A is an IEG transcription factor that regulates genes involved in synaptic transmission and endocrine function directly or via interactions with other transcription factors . MicroRNA - 134 ( miR - 134 ) MicroRNA - 134 ( Fig . 5 ) is one of the small ( ca . 22 nucleotides long ) noncoding regulatory RNAs speciﬁcally expressed in the brain . One of the BDNF - regulated mRNAs that contains a binding site for miR - 134 within its 3 (cid:3) UTR is LIM - domain containing protein kinase 1 ( Limk1 ) ( Schratt etal . 2006 ) . Binding of miR - 134 contributes signiﬁcantly to the reduction of Limk1 mRNA translation thereby reducing Limk1 protein levels at synapses unless BDNF cancels these effects ( Schratt etal . 2006 ) . Limk1 targeted to excitatory postsynapses within dendrites of hippocampal neurons regulates actin ﬁlament dynamics , and decrease of Limk1 protein reduces dendritic spine size ( Schratt etal . 2006 ) . Thus , BDNF promotes and miR - 134 inhibits dendritic outgrowth that depends on Limk1 protein levels . Recently the translational downregulation of CREB in the hippocampus has been shown to involve the binding of miR - 134 to 3 (cid:3) UTR regulatory elements of CREB mRNA ( Gao etal . 2010 ) . Another target of miR - 134 is the mRNA of the translational repressor protein Pomilio 2 that promotes dendritogensis ( Fiore etal . 2009 ) . The two transcription factors silent information regulator of transcription ( Sirtuin 1 / SIRT1 ) and Yin Yang 1 ( YY1 ) restrict the transcription of miR - 134 ( Gaoetal . 2010 ) . Manipulation of the function of these transcription factors was accompanied by changes of hippocampal BDNF mRNA and protein levels , synaptophysin levels of presynapses , dendritic spine density of CA1 pyramidal neurons , LTP and memory ( Gao etal . 2010 ) . MEF2 induces the activity - dependent transcription of a miR - cluster that includes miR - 134 ( Fiore etal . 2009 ) . Increased levels of miR - 134 have been observed in the DLPFC of patients with schizophrenia compared with healthy controls ( Santarelli etal . 2011 ) , suggesting an involvement of this activity - regulated micro - RNA in altered neuronal structure and function in schizophrenia . This example demonstrates that neuronal activity - dependent micro - RNAs are integrated in signaling pathways and regulate the translation of activity - dependent transcrip - tion factors and proteins involved in synaptic plasticity . Future research directions on individual adaptability The heterogeneity of complex psychiatric disorders like schizophrenia is best accounted for by multifactorial models 18 Genes , BrainandBehavior ( 2012 ) 11 : 3 – 28 Biological pathways to adaptability that incorporate genetic , epigenetic and environmental inﬂuences . The dysregulation of gene expression , intra - and extra - neural signaling pathways , neural cell and neural network properties and behavior are common features of complex psychiatric disorders ( McClung & Nestler 2008 ; Ramocki & Zoghbi 2008 ; Ross etal . 2006 ) . The effects of genetic variability not only depend on the interactions with other genes , proteins , epigenetic and envi - ronmental factors but are also inﬂuenced by neuronal activity driven by sensory , cognitive , emotional , social or motor expe - riences / behaviors . In order to account for the inconsistency and heterogeneity observed in genetic studies of schizophre - nia we may therefore also require knowledge about how experience - driven neuronal activity contributes to changes in gene and protein expression to regulate neuroplasticity . Responsiveness of genetic , epigenetic and neuronal adap - tation mechanisms to environmental factors and individual experiences could also explain the impact of potential risk factors like stress , drugs , and infection in the manifestation of the genetic propensity to psychiatric disorders . Dysregu - lated adaptation mechanisms may thus be a common aspect of all complex psychiatric disorders . Whatfactorscontributetointerindividualvariabilityinneuralandcognitivefunctions ? Genetic variability is a key factor for the understanding of individual differences in behavioral or cognitive performance measures and their neurophysiological correlates ( Andoetal . 2001 ; Blokland etal . 2008 ; Wolf etal . 2011 ) . However , as described above genetic variability interacts with epigenetic variation and a large variety of regulatory factors that can mediate environmental inﬂuences and experience - dependent differences in neuronal activity . For example individual differences in working memory capacity likely depend on interactions between genetic , epigenetic and experience - dependent interindividual differences in neuronal activity that affect regulatory proteins and ncRNAs involved in short - term neuroplasticity . The total interindividual variability of the genome sequence in humans is estimated at 0 . 2 % , of which 40 % are nucleotide variations ( SNPs ) and 60 % structural changes ( Sebat 2007 ) . Structural variations contribute presumably at least 20 % to the variability of gene expression ( Hurles etal . 2008 ) . Only a small proportion of the total DNA sequence variability will alter protein coding sequences because these make up only about 1 % of the human genome ( Church etal . 2009 ) . Most of the interindividual genetic variability thus affects genome sequences that are transcribed into ncRNAs and untranscribed sequences that are presumably also regulatory . Adaptively evolving loci have been identiﬁed in noncoding sequence of the human genome that may also affect neuronal regulatory regions ( Kelley & Swanson 2008 ) . Genetic and epigenetic variation within regulatory non - coding sequence is thus expected to be the major source for genetically driven individual differences and in addition interacts with environmentally driven regulation . Changes in regulative ncRNA sequences could result in subtle changes that contribute to interindividual variability of quantitative traits ( Mattick & Makunin 2006 ) . In addition comparative genome analysis has revealed that most evolutionary con - served sequences in mammalian genomes are noncoding ( Lindblad - Toh etal . 2005 ) . These noncoding sequences are often found close to genes that encode transcription factors ( Canestro etal . 2007 ) and often contain cis - acting regulatory elements that regulate the transcription of adjacent genes ( Woolfe etal . 2005 ) . Through its cis - and trans - acting effects , nc - RNA is involved in gene and protein regulation . The vari - ation and conservation of noncoding sequence may thus reﬂect its role in the diversiﬁcation and maintenance of phe - notypes during evolution . Most genes give rise to multiple mRNA transcripts for the regulation of translation to adapt the isoform , quantity or location of a protein . Differences in the 3 (cid:3) and 5 (cid:3) UTRs are critical for mRNA processing as well as timing and location of translation via interaction with trans - acting factors . For example cytoplasmatic polyadenylation element binding protein 1 ( CPEP1 ) is part of a multipro - tein complex that binds to speciﬁc cis - acting elements of the 3 (cid:3) UTR to regulate mRNA transport , polyadenylation and translation of several synaptic plasticity proteins ( Wayman etal . 2008b ) . The length of 3 (cid:3) UTR sequence of BDNF mRNA is thus important for the regulation of its transport , which has been shown to affect spine morphology and synaptic plastic - ity in hippocampal neurons ( Anetal . 2008 ) . 3 (cid:3) UTR removal of α - CaMKII mRNA prevents its translocation , reduces protein expression in PSD , late - LTP stability and memory ( Wayman etal . 2008b ) . 3 (cid:3) UTR cis - acting elements signal the dendritic localization and translation of α - CaMKII mRNA ( Mayfordetal . 1996 ; Mori etal . 2000 ) . MicroRNA expression also modu - lates synaptic plasticity and can regulate mRNA translation in the human brain by interacting with target sequences in 3 (cid:3) UTR ( Zhang & Su 2008 ) . The variation of miRNAs them - selves and their target sequences may increase variability in gene expression and thus inﬂuence phenotypic adaptability ( Zhang & Su 2008 ) . In summary neuronal activity - regulated proteins and ncR - NAs that are organized in complex molecular networks can integrate extracellular ( neuronal activity - dependent ) and intracellular signals ( genetic , epigenetic ) to regulate neu - ronal adaptations . Adaptations at the molecular level ranging from post - translational to transcriptional modiﬁcations are the basis of the functional and structural adaptation of neu - ronal properties . The bidirectional interactions between the neuronal and molecular level are increasingly well under - stood . How these molecular and neuronal adaptations adapt neural network properties that translate into adaptations of perceptual , cognitive and behavioral functions still needs to be investigated in more detail . Howcangeneticallydrivenalternationsofbrainfunctionandbehaviorbedetected ? Methods interconnecting neuro - molecular , neuro - physiologi - cal and behavioral levels can reveal the impact of genetic variability to variations of brain functions and behavior . One technique with the capacity to cover this spectrum of functions is genetic neuroimaging , which combines neuroimaging technologies such as functional magnetic resonance imaging ( fMRI ) with molecular genetics . However Genes , BrainandBehavior ( 2012 ) 11 : 3 – 28 19 Wolf and Linden this technique is limited by two major constraints . First the analysis is restricted to DNA sequence variations because the genome is isolated from lymphocytes or other dispensable cells . For this reason genetic neuroimaging cannot provide information about the genome output variation in neurons . Functional MRI can localize and quantify the change of the hemodynamic signal at neural network level . By modeling the time course of the signal change as a function of the behavioral manipulation , for example , a memory task , this method provides a correlate of task - related neural activity . This , points to the second main limitation , which is the correlative nature of genetic neuroimaging . Prior knowledge regarding the effects of genetic variants on expression and function of neuronal activity - regulated proteins and ncRNAs is thus an advantage . Common genetic variants known to affect the expression or function of neuronal activity - regulated proteins and ncRNAs involved in neuroplasticity are rarely known . Mostly the genetic contribution to individual variation of neuronal network activity involved in cognitive functions has been investigated for genes encoding receptors or enzymes of several neurotransmitter systems as well as regulators of brain development ( Egan etal . 2003 ; Goldberg & Weinberger 2004 ) . The strengths of fMRI are its high sensitivity , reasonable spatial resolution and its capacity to provide maps of neural network plasticity of the whole brain in vivo . Moreover , the correlation between genetic and task - related imaging and performance data allows for the validation of effects across functional levels . There are high hopes for the identiﬁcation of neuroimaging endophenotypes of neuropsychiatric disorders and their subsequent use in gene discovery studies ( Glahn etal . 2007 ) . A ﬁrst application ( although not based on a formally identiﬁed endophenotype ) used the functional imaging signal from prefrontal cortex as quantitative traits for the genome - wide search for new candidate genes for schizophrenia ( Potkin etal . 2009 ) . This approach allows for the genome - wide discovery of genetic variants associated with imaged or otherwise quantiﬁed endophenotypes . Hence noninvasive genetic neuroimaging studies may help to quantify and specify the inﬂuence of genetic parameters on brain functions and behavior . However , in order to monitor signal changes dependent on genome output variation such approaches would require the application and measurement of noninvasive , reliable , short - lived and sequence - speciﬁc markers that are responsive to changes in neuronal activity - dependent genome expression . A different version of genetic imaging operates at the cellular level . Advanced invasive methods like cellular com - partment analysis of temporal activity by ﬂuorescent insitu hybridization ( catFISH ) can localize , quantify and identify mRNAs and proteins within neuronal networks activated for distinct stages of learning and memory ( Guzowskietal . 1999 ; Miyashita etal . 2008 ) . Another invasive way of investigating invivomolecular changes involved in the regulation of neu - ronal activity , synaptic and neuronal plasticity , for example , the regulation of IEG expression at the network level , is the transgenic or viral - introduction of neuronal activity - dependent ﬂuorescent sensors ( Barth 2007 ) . The induction of light - sensitive proteins combined with an effector function can also be used to manipulate molecules involved in neuronal signaling ( Deisseroth 2011 ) . These studies have provided new insight in the interactions between genes , neurons and behavior by showing neuronal activity - dependent initiation of new gene transcription . In vitro studies that use ﬂorescence makers to trace gene expression in combination with electrophysiology , for example , by time - lapse live - cell ﬂuorescence imaging can identify neuronal activity - dependent changes in gene transcription ( Kawashima etal . 2009 ) . The investigation of these mechanisms is crucial because they are involved in the regulation of neuroplasticity , such as neuronal activity - dependent synapse number ( Flavell etal . 2006 ) , dendritogenesis ( Fiore etal . 2009 ) or adult hippocampal neurogenesis ( Ma etal . 2009 ) . Genetic manipulation of activity - dependent transcription factors that induce the transcription of immediate early genes ( IEGs ) has been shown to impair learning and memory through their effects on structural synaptic plasticity ( Barbosa etal . 2008 ) . Impairments in these neuronal activity - dependent regulation mechanisms have been linked to genetically complex mental disorders ( Swanberg etal . 2009 ) . The regulation of activity - dependent gene expression has also been shown to play an important role during the development of GABAergic synapses ( Lin etal . 2008 ) , which could be relevant for the pathogenesis of schizophrenia . Neuronal activity - responsive IEGs and their transcription factors are expressed in regions important for emotion and cognition such as prefrontal , orbitofrontal , occipital cortex , hippocampus and amygdala . Outlook According to recent genome analysis results , protein - coding sequence makes up only about 1 % of human DNA ( Church etal . 2009 ) . The remaining , noncoding , sequence likely plays an important regulatory role for the adaptive use of genes ( in particular the regulation of gene expression ) . This suggests that variations in protein - coding sequences may be less relevant for phenotypic differences than variations in sequences that determine the when and where of gene expression ( Cubas etal . 1999 ) . At present the effects of genetic variability in noncoding sequence on the expression of neuronal activity - regulated noncoding RNAs or regulatory proteins are largely unknown . However , recent evidence suggests the importance of noncoding sequence for cis - and trans - binding interactions between RNAs and RNAs and proteins during the regulation of gene expression ( Wang etal . 2008a ) . Variability in noncoding sequence that affects regulation of gene expression has been related to psychiatric disorders ( Zhao etal . 2009 ) , normal variation of cognition ( Gosso etal . 2008 ) , emotional and social behaviors ( Hammock etal . 2005 ) . Hence it would be interesting to investigate variability particularly in noncoding regulatory sequences ( e . g . UTRs ) that affects synaptic activity - regulated genes and proteins with genetic neuroimaging also with respect to psychiatric disorders . Other interesting targets for future genetic imaging studies are activity - regulated microRNAs . Because these micro - RNAs , proteins and genes regulate synaptic plasticity , genetic variation affecting these regulators may contribute to interindividual variability in cognitive functions as well as their dysfunction in disorders like schizophrenia . A recent genome - wide analysis detected a 20 Genes , BrainandBehavior ( 2012 ) 11 : 3 – 28 Biological pathways to adaptability strong association between schizophrenia and a SNP within an intron probably encoding miRNA - 137 that is involved in neuronal development ( Ripke etal . 2011 ) . Furthermore , four genome - wide associated schizophrenia genes contain putative target sites for this miRNA . For one of these genes encoding the transcription factor 4 , miRNA - 137 effects were found on protein translation in neuronal culture . Presently no noninvasive invivo - technique is available to study neuronal activity and plasticity related genome output regulation during cognitive activities in humans . However interdisciplinary efforts that combine insights from invasive and noninvasive approaches to investigate the integration of adaptation mechanisms across functional levels have the power to elucidate the interplay between genome , epigenome , neurophysiology , behavior and environmental experiences for human adaptability and thus individuality . References Adams , J . & Sweatt , J . ( 2002 ) Molecular psychology : roles for the ERK MAP kinase cascade in memory . AnnuRevPharmacolToxicol 42 , 135 – 163 . Alarcon , J . M . , Malleret , G . , Touzani , K . , Vronskaya , S . , Ishii , S . , Kandel , E . R . & Barco , A . ( 2004 ) Chromatin acetylation , memory , and LTP are impaired in CBP + / - mice : a model for the cognitive deﬁcit in Rubinstein - Taybi syndrome and its amelioration . Neuron 42 , 947 – 959 . Allen , E . , Horvath , S . , Tong , F . , Kraft , P . , Spiteri , E . , Riggs , A . D . & Marahrens , Y . ( 2003 ) High concentrations of long interspersed nuclear element sequence distinguish monoallelically expressed genes . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA 100 , 9940 – 9945 . Alt , S . R . , Turner , J . D . , Klok , M . D . , Meijer , O . C . , Lakke , E . A . , Der - ijk , R . H . & Muller , C . P . ( 2010 ) Differential expression of gluco - corticoid receptor transcripts in major depressive disorder is not epigenetically programmed . Psychoneuroendocrinology 35 , 544 – 556 . An , J . , Gharami , K . , Liao , G . , Woo , N . , Lau , A . , Vanevski , F . , Torre , E . , Jones , K . , Feng , Y . , Lu , B . & Xu , B . ( 2008 ) Distinct role of long 3’ UTR BDNF mRNA in spine morphology and synaptic plasticity in hippocampal neurons . Cell 134 , 175 – 187 . Ando , J . , Ono , Y . & Wright , M . J . ( 2001 ) Genetic structure of spatial and verbal working memory . BehavGenet 31 , 615 – 624 . Babushok , D . V . & Kazazian , H . H . Jr . ( 2007 ) Progressinunderstanding the biology of the human mutagen LINE - 1 . Hum Mutat 28 , 527 – 539 . Bailey , J . A . , Carrel , L . , Chakravarti , A . & Eichler , E . E . ( 2000 ) Molec - ular evidence for a relationship between LINE - 1 elements and X chromosome inactivation : the Lyon repeat hypothesis . ProcNatl AcadSciUSA 97 , 6634 – 6639 . Bailey , C . H . & Chen , M . ( 1983 ) Morphological basis of long - term habituation and sensitization in Aplysia . Science 220 , 91 – 93 . Barbosa , A . C . , Kim , M . S . , Ertunc , M . , Adachi , M . , Nelson , E . D . , McAnally , J . , Richardson , J . A . , Kavalali , E . T . , Monteggia , L . M . , Bassel - Duby , R . & Olson , E . N . ( 2008 ) MEF2C , atranscriptionfactor that facilitates learning and memory by negative regulation of synapse numbers and function . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105 , 9391 – 9396 . Barco , A . , Alarcon , J . & Kandel , E . ( 2002 ) Expression of constitutively active CREB protein facilitates the late phase of long - term potentiation by enhancing synaptic capture . Cell 108 , 689 – 703 . Barria , A . , Muller , D . , Derkach , V . , Grifﬁth , L . C . & Soderling , T . R . ( 1997 ) Regulatory phosphorylation of AMPA - type glutamate receptors by CaM - KII during long - term potentiation . Science 276 , 2042 – 2045 . Barrot , M . , Olivier , J . , Perrotti , L . , DiLeone , R . , Berton , O . , Eisch , A . , Impey , S . , Storm , D . , Neve , R . , Yin , J . , Zachariou , V . & Nestler , E . ( 2002 ) CREB activity in the nucleus accumbens shell controls gating of behavioral responses to emotional stimuli . Proc Natl AcadSciUSA 99 , 11435 – 11440 . Barrot , M . , Wallace , D . , Bola˜nos , C . , Graham , D . , Perrotti , L . , Neve , R . , Chambliss , H . , Yin , J . & Nestler , E . ( 2005 ) Regulation of anxiety and initiation of sexual behavior by CREB in the nucleus accumbens . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA 102 , 8357 – 8362 . Barth , A . ( 2007 ) Visualizing circuits and systems using transgenic reporters of neural activity . CurrOpinNeurobiol 17 , 567 – 571 . Barth , T . K . & Imhof , A . ( 2010 ) Fast signals and slow marks : the dynamics of histone modiﬁcations . Trends Biochem Sci 35 , 618 – 626 . Bayer , K . U . , LeBel , E . , McDonald , G . L . , O’Leary , H . , Schulman , H . & De Koninck , P . ( 2006 ) Transition from reversible to persistent binding of CaMKII to postsynaptic sites and NR2B . JNeurosci 26 , 1164 – 1174 . Benito , E . & Barco , A . ( 2010 ) CREB’s control of intrinsic and synaptic plasticity : implications for CREB - dependent memory models . TrendsNeurosci 33 , 230 – 240 . Bingol , B . , Wang , C . F . , Arnott , D . , Cheng , D . , Peng , J . & Sheng , M . ( 2010 ) Autophosphorylated CaMKIIalpha acts as a scaffold to recruit proteasomes to dendritic spines . Cell 140 , 567 – 578 . Blokland , G . , McMahon , K . , Hoffman , J . , Zhu , G . , Meredith , M . , Martin , N . , Thompson , P . , de Zubicaray , G . & Wright , M . ( 2008 ) Quantifying the heritability of task - related brain activation and performance during the N - back working memory task : A twin fMRI study . BiolPsychol 79 , 70 – 79 . Bock , C . , Walter , J . , Paulsen , M . & Lengauer , T . ( 2008 ) Inter - individual variation of DNA methylation and its implications for large - scale epigenome mapping . NucleicAcidsRes 36 , e55 . Bolger , T . A . & Yao , T . P . ( 2005 ) Intracellular trafﬁcking of histone deacetylase 4 regulates neuronal cell death . JNeurosci 25 , 9544 – 9553 . Borrelli , E . , Nestler , E . J . , Allis , C . D . & Sassone - Corsi , P . ( 2008 ) Decoding the epigenetic language of neuronal plasticity . Neuron 60 , 961 – 974 . Bourtchuladze , R . , Frenguelli , B . , Blendy , J . , Ciofﬁ , D . , Schutz , G . & Silva , A . J . ( 1994 ) Deﬁcient long - term memory in mice with a targeted mutation of the cAMP - responsive element - binding protein . Cell 79 , 59 – 68 . Bradshaw , K . D . , Emptage , N . J . & Bliss , T . V . ( 2003 ) A role for dendritic protein synthesis in hippocampal late LTP . Eur J Neurosci 18 , 3150 – 3152 . Brakeman , P . R . , Lanahan , A . A . , O’Brien , R . , Roche , K . , Barnes , C . A . , Huganir , R . L . & Worley , P . F . ( 1997 ) Homer : a protein that selectively binds metabotropic glutamate receptors . Nature 386 , 284 – 288 . Bramham , C . R . , Alme , M . N . , Bittins , M . , Kuipers , S . D . , Nair , R . R . , Pai , B . , Panja , D . , Schubert , M . , Soule , J . , Tiron , A . & Wibrand , K . ( 2010 ) The Arc of synaptic memory . ExpBrainRes 200 , 125 – 140 . Bredy , T . W . , Wu , H . , Crego , C . , Zellhoefer , J . , Sun , Y . E . & Barad , M . ( 2007 ) Histone modiﬁcations around individual BDNF gene promoters in prefrontal cortex are associated with extinction of conditioned fear . LearnMem 14 , 268 – 276 . Brennecke , J . , Malone , C . D . , Aravin , A . A . , Sachidanandam , R . , Stark , A . & Hannon , G . J . ( 2008 ) An epigenetic role for mater - nally inherited piRNAs in transposon silencing . Science 322 , 1387 – 1392 . Brunmeir , R . , Lagger , S . , Simboeck , E . , Sawicka , A . , Egger , G . , Hagelkruys , A . , Zhang , Y . , Matthias , P . , Miller , W . J . & Seiser , C . ( 2010 ) Epigenetic regulation of a murine retrotransposon by a dual histone modiﬁcation mark . PLoSGenet 6 , e1000927 . Buzdin , A . , Ustyugova , S . , Gogvadze , E . , Vinogradova , T . , Lebe - dev , Y . & Sverdlov , E . ( 2002 ) A new family of chimeric retro - transcripts formed by a full copy of U6 small nuclear RNA fused to the 3’ terminus of l1 . Genomics 80 , 402 – 406 . Canestro , C . , Yokoi , H . & Postlethwait , J . H . ( 2007 ) Evolutionary developmental biology and genomics . NatRevGenet 8 , 932 – 942 . Genes , BrainandBehavior ( 2012 ) 11 : 3 – 28 21 Wolf and Linden Carlezon , W . J . , Duman , R . & Nestler , E . ( 2005 ) The many faces of CREB . TrendsNeurosci 28 , 436 – 445 . Cha - Molstad , H . , Keller , D . M . , Yochum , G . S . , Impey , S . & Good - man , R . H . ( 2004 ) Cell - type - speciﬁc binding of the transcription factor CREB to the cAMP - response element . ProcNatlAcadSci USA 101 , 13572 – 13577 . Chahwan , R . , Wontakal , S . N . & Roa , S . ( 2010 ) Crosstalk between genetic and epigenetic information through cytosine deamination . TrendsGenet 26 , 443 – 448 . Champagne , F . A . ( 2008 ) Epigenetic mechanisms and the transgen - erational effects of maternal care . Front Neuroendocrinol 29 , 386 – 397 . Chao , L . H . , Stratton , M . M . , Lee , I . H . , Rosenberg , O . S . , Levitz , J . , Mandell , D . J . , Kortemme , T . , Groves , J . T . , Schulman , H . & Kuriyan , J . ( 2011 ) A mechanism for tunable autoinhibition in the structure of a human Ca ( 2 + ) / calmodulin - dependent kinase II holoenzyme . Cell 146 , 732 – 745 . Chaudhuri , A . , Nissanov , J . , Larocque , S . & Rioux , L . ( 1997 ) Dual activity maps in primate visual cortex produced by different temporal patterns of zif268 mRNA and protein expression . Proc NatlAcadSciUSA 94 , 2671 – 2675 . Chin , D . & Means , A . R . ( 2002 ) Mechanisms for regulation of calmod - ulin kinase IIalpha by Ca ( 2 + ) / calmodulin and autophosphorylation of threonine 286 . Biochemistry 41 , 14001 – 14009 . Chow , J . C . , Ciaudo , C . , Fazzari , M . J . , Mise , N . , Servant , N . , Glass , J . L . , Attreed , M . , Avner , P . , Wutz , A . , Barillot , E . , Greally , J . M . , Voinnet , O . & Heard , E . ( 2010 ) LINE - 1 activity in facultative heterochromatin formation during X chromosome inactivation . Cell 141 , 956 – 969 . Chow , J . & Heard , E . ( 2009 ) X inactivation and the complexities of silencing a sex chromosome . CurrOpinCellBiol 21 , 359 – 366 . Chowdhury , S . , Shepherd , J . , Okuno , H . , Lyford , G . , Petralia , R . , Plath , N . , Kuhl , D . , Huganir , R . & Worley , P . ( 2006 ) Arc / Arg3 . 1 interacts with the endocytic machinery to regulate AMPA receptor trafﬁcking . Neuron 52 , 445 – 459 . Church , D . M . , Goodstadt , L . , Hillier , L . W . , Zody , M . C . , Gold - stein , S . , She , X . , Bult , C . J . , Agarwala , R . , Cherry , J . L . , DiCuc - cio , M . , Hlavina , W . , Kapustin , Y . , Meric , P . , Maglott , D . , Birtle , Z . , Marques , A . C . , Graves , T . , Zhou , S . , Teague , B . , Potamousis , K . , Churas , C . , Place , M . , Herschleb , J . , Runnheim , R . , Forrest , D . , Amos - Landgraf , J . , Schwartz , D . C . , Cheng , Z . , Lindblad - Toh , K . , Eichler , E . E . & Ponting , C . P . ( 2009 ) Lineage - speciﬁc biology revealed by a ﬁnished genome assembly of the mouse . PLoS Biol 7 , e1000112 . Chwang , W . B . , O’Riordan , K . J . , Levenson , J . M . & Sweatt , J . D . ( 2006 ) ERK / MAPK regulates hippocampal histone phosphorylation following contextual fear conditioning . LearnMem 13 , 322 – 328 . Citri , A . & Malenka , R . C . ( 2008 ) Synaptic plasticity : multiple forms , functions , and mechanisms . Neuropsychopharmacology 33 , 18 – 41 . Cohen , S . & Greenberg , M . ( 2008 ) Communication between the synapse and the nucleus in neuronal development , plasticity , and disease . AnnuRevCellDevBiol 24 , 183 – 209 . Cole , A . J . , Saffen , D . W . , Baraban , J . M . & Worley , P . F . ( 1989 ) Rapid increase of an immediate early gene messenger RNA in hippocampal neurons by synaptic NMDA receptor activation . Nature 340 , 474 – 476 . Collins , L . J . & Penny , D . ( 2009 ) The RNA infrastructure : dark matter of the eukaryotic cell ? TrendsGenet 25 , 120 – 128 . Conkright , M . D . , Canettieri , G . , Screaton , R . , Guzman , E . , Miraglia , L . , Hogenesch , J . B . & Montminy , M . ( 2003 ) TORCs : transducers of regulated CREB activity . MolCells 12 , 413 – 423 . Cordaux , R . & Batzer , M . A . ( 2009 ) The impact of retrotransposons on human genome evolution . NatRevGenet 10 , 691 – 703 . Costa , F . ( 2007 ) Non - coding RNAs : lost in translation ? Gene 386 , 1 – 10 . Cubas , P . , Vincent , C . & Coen , E . ( 1999 ) An epigenetic mutation responsible for natural variation in ﬂoral symmetry . Nature 401 , 157 – 161 . de Foubert , G . , O’Neill , M . J . & Zetterstrom , T . S . ( 2007 ) Acute onset by 5 - HT ( 6 ) - receptor activation on rat brain brain - derived neurotrophic factor and activity - regulated cytoskeletal - associated protein mRNA expression . Neuroscience 147 , 778 – 785 . de Quervain , D . J . & Papassotiropoulos , A . ( 2006 ) Identiﬁcation of a genetic cluster inﬂuencing memory performance and hippocampal activity in humans . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA 103 , 4270 – 4274 . De Santa , F . , Totaro , M . G . , Prosperini , E . , Notarbartolo , S . , Testa , G . & Natoli , G . ( 2007 ) The histone H3 lysine - 27 demethylase Jmjd3 links inﬂammation to inhibition of polycomb - mediated gene silencing . Cell 130 , 1083 – 1094 . Deisseroth , K . ( 2011 ) Optogenetics . NatMethods 8 , 26 – 29 . Dewannieux , M . , Esnault , C . & Heidmann , T . ( 2003 ) LINE - mediated retrotransposition of marked Alu sequences . NatGenet 35 , 41 – 48 . Di Noia , J . M . & Neuberger , M . S . ( 2007 ) Molecular mechanisms of antibody somatic hypermutation . AnnuRevBiochem 76 , 1 – 22 . Dinieri , J . A . , Nemeth , C . L . , Parsegian , A . , Carle , T . , Gurevich , V . V . , Gurevich , E . , Neve , R . L . , Nestler , E . J . & Carlezon , W . A . Jr . ( 2009 ) Altered sensitivity to rewarding and aversive drugs in mice with inducible disruption of cAMP response element - binding protein function within the nucleus accumbens . JNeurosci 29 , 1855 – 1859 . Donai , H . , Sugiura , H . , Ara , D . , Yoshimura , Y . , Yamagata , K . & Yamauchi , T . ( 2003 ) Interaction of Arc with CaM kinase II and stimulation of neurite extension by Arc in neuroblastoma cells expressing CaM kinase II . NeurosciRes 47 , 399 – 408 . Dong , Y . , Green , T . , Saal , D . , Marie , H . , Neve , R . , Nestler , E . & Malenka , R . ( 2006 ) CREB modulates excitability of nucleus accumbens neurons . NatNeurosci 9 , 475 – 477 . Dragunow , M . , Tse , C . , Glass , M . & Lawlor , P . ( 1994 ) c - fos antisense reduces expression of Krox 24 in rat caudate and neocortex . Cell MolNeurobiol 14 , 395 – 405 . Dudai , Y . ( 2004 ) The neurobiology of consolidations , or , how stable is the engram ? AnnuRevPsychol 55 , 51 – 86 . Dwivedi , Y . , Rao , J . , Rizavi , H . , Kotowski , J . , Conley , R . , Roberts , R . , Tamminga , C . & Pandey , G . ( 2003 ) Abnormal expression and functional characteristics of cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element binding protein in postmortem brain of suicide subjects . ArchGenPsychiatry 60 , 273 – 282 . Egan , M . , Kojima , M . , Callicott , J . , Goldberg , T . , Kolachana , B . , Bertolino , A . , Zaitsev , E . , Gold , B . , Goldman , D . , Dean , M . , Lu , B . & Weinberger , D . ( 2003 ) The BDNF val66met polymorphism affects activity - dependent secretion of BDNF and human memory and hippocampal function . Cell 112 , 257 – 269 . Emes , R . D . , Pocklington , A . J . , Anderson , C . N . , Bayes , A . , Collins , M . O . , Vickers , C . A . , Croning , M . D . , Malik , B . R . , Choudhary , J . S . , Armstrong , J . D . & Grant , S . G . ( 2008 ) Evolutionary expansion and anatomical specialization of synapse proteome complexity . Nat Neurosci 11 , 799 – 806 . Enslen , H . & Soderling , T . R . ( 1994 ) Roles of calmodulin - dependent protein kinases and phosphatase in calcium - dependent transcrip - tion of immediate early genes . JBiolChem 269 , 20872 – 20877 . Enslen , H . , Sun , P . , Brickey , D . , Soderling , S . H . , Klamo , E . & Soder - ling , T . R . ( 1994 ) Characterization of Ca2 + / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase IV . Role in transcriptional regulation . JBiolChem 269 , 15520 – 15527 . Eriksson , T . M . , Delagrange , P . , Spedding , M . , Popoli , M . , Mathe , A . A . , Ogren , S . O . & Svenningsson , P . ( 2011 ) Emotional mem - ory impairments in a genetic rat model of depression : involve - ment of 5 - HT / MEK / Arc signaling in restoration . Mol Psychiatry ; doi : 10 . 1038 / mp . 2010 . 131 . Esnault , C . , Maestre , J . & Heidmann , T . ( 2000 ) Human LINE retrotransposons generate processed pseudogenes . Nat Genet 24 , 363 – 367 . Estecio , M . R . , Gallegos , J . , Vallot , C . , Castoro , R . J . , Chung , W . , Maegawa , S . , Oki , Y . , Kondo , Y . , Jelinek , J . , Shen , L . , Hartung , H . , Aplan , P . D . , Czerniak , B . A . , Liang , S . & Issa , J . P . ( 2010 ) Genome architecture marked by retrotransposons modulates predisposition to DNA methylation in cancer . GenomeRes 20 , 1369 – 1382 . 22 Genes , BrainandBehavior ( 2012 ) 11 : 3 – 28 Biological pathways to adaptability Ewing , A . D . & Kazazian , H . H . Jr . ( 2010 ) High - throughput sequencing reveals extensive variation in human - speciﬁc L1 content in individual human genomes . GenomeRes 20 , 1262 – 1270 . Farkash , E . A . & Luning Prak , E . T . ( 2006 ) DNA damage and L1 retrotransposition . JBiomedBiotechnol 2006 , 37285 . Feng , J . , Zhou , Y . , Campbell , S . L . , Le , T . , Li , E . , Sweatt , J . D . , Silva , A . J . & Fan , G . ( 2010 ) Dnmt1 and Dnmt3a maintain DNA methylation and regulate synaptic function in adult forebrain neu - rons . NatNeurosci 13 , 423 – 430 . Fiore , R . , Khudayberdiev , S . , Christensen , M . , Siegel , G . , Flavell , S . W . , Kim , T . K . , Greenberg , M . E . & Schratt , G . ( 2009 ) Mef2 - mediatedtranscriptionofthemiR379 - 410clusterregulatesactivity - dependent dendritogenesis by ﬁne - tuning Pumilio2 protein levels . EMBOJ 28 , 697 – 710 . Fischer , A . , Sananbenesi , F . , Wang , X . , Dobbin , M . & Tsai , L . H . ( 2007 ) Recovery of learning and memory is associated with chromatin remodelling . Nature 447 , 178 – 182 . Fish , E . , Shahrokh , D . , Bagot , R . , Caldji , C . , Bredy , T . , Szyf , M . & Meaney , M . ( 2004 ) Epigenetic programming of stress responses through variations in maternal care . Ann N Y Acad Sci 1036 , 167 – 180 . Flavell , S . , Cowan , C . , Kim , T . , Greer , P . , Lin , Y . , Paradis , S . , Grifﬁth , E . , Hu , L . , Chen , C . & Greenberg , M . ( 2006 ) Activity - dependent regulation of MEF2 transcription factors suppresses excitatory synapse number . Science 311 , 1008 – 1012 . Flavell , S . & Greenberg , M . ( 2008 ) Signaling mechanisms linking neuronal activity to gene expression and plasticity of the nervous system . AnnuRevNeurosci 31 , 563 – 590 . Fonseca , R . , N¨agerl , U . & Bonhoeffer , T . ( 2006 ) Neuronal activity determines the protein synthesis dependence of long - term potentiation . NatNeurosci 9 , 478 – 480 . Foster , P . L . & Trimarchi , J . M . ( 1995 ) Adaptive reversion of an episomal frameshift mutation in Escherichia coli requires conjugal functions but not actual conjugation . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA 92 , 5487 – 5490 . Fraga , M . F . , Ballestar , E . , Paz , M . F . , Ropero , S . , Setien , F . , Ballestar , M . L . , Heine - Suner , D . , Cigudosa , J . C . , Urioste , M . , Benitez , J . , Boix - Chornet , M . , Sanchez - Aguilera , A . , Ling , C . , Carlsson , E . , Poulsen , P . , Vaag , A . , Stephan , Z . , Spector , T . D . , Wu , Y . Z . , Plass , C . & Esteller , M . ( 2005 ) Epigenetic differences arise during the lifetime of monozygotic twins . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA 102 , 10604 – 10609 . Gao , J . , Wang , W . Y . , Mao , Y . W . , Graff , J . , Guan , J . S . , Pan , L . , Mak , G . , Kim , D . , Su , S . C . & Tsai , L . H . ( 2010 ) A novel pathway regulates memory and plasticity via SIRT1 and miR - 134 . Nature 466 , 1105 – 1109 . Garcia - Perez , J . L . , Doucet , A . J . , Bucheton , A . , Moran , J . V . & Gilbert , N . ( 2007 ) Distinct mechanisms for trans - mediated mobi - lization of cellular RNAs by the LINE - 1 reverse transcriptase . GenomeRes 17 , 602 – 611 . Geiger , J . R . , Melcher , T . , Koh , D . S . , Sakmann , B . , Seeburg , P . H . , Jonas , P . & Monyer , H . ( 1995 ) Relative abundance of subunit mRNAs determines gating and Ca2 + permeability of AMPA receptors in principal neurons and interneurons in rat CNS . Neuron 15 , 193 – 204 . Georgi , A . , Jamra , R . A . , Klein , K . , Villela , A . W . , Schumacher , J . , Becker , T . , Paul , T . , Schmael , C . , Hofels , S . , Klopp , N . , Illig , T . , Propping , P . , Cichon , S . , Nothen , M . M . , Schulze , T . G . & Rietschel , M . ( 2007 ) Possibleassociationbetweengeneticvariants at the GRIN1 gene and schizophrenia with lifetime history of depressive symptoms in a German sample . PsychiatrGenet 17 , 308 – 310 . Gibney , E . R . & Nolan , C . M . ( 2010 ) Epigenetics and gene expression . Heredity 105 , 4 – 13 . Girotti , M . , Pace , T . W . , Gaylord , R . I . , Rubin , B . A . , Herman , J . P . & Spencer , R . L . ( 2006 ) Habituation to repeated restraint stress is associated with lack of stress - induced c - fos expression in primary sensory processing areas of the rat brain . Neuroscience 138 , 1067 – 1081 . Gius , D . , Cao , X . , Rauscher , F . r . , Cohen , D . , Curran , T . & Sukhatme , V . ( 1990 ) Transcriptional activation and repression by Fos are independent functions : the C terminus represses immediate - early gene expression via CArG elements . MolCellBiol 10 , 4243 – 4255 . Glahn , D . C . , Thompson , P . M . & Blangero , J . ( 2007 ) Neuroimaging endophenotypes : strategies for ﬁnding genes inﬂuencing brain structure and function . HumBrainMapp 28 , 488 – 501 . Goldberg , T . & Weinberger , D . ( 2004 ) Genes and the parsing of cognitive processes . TrendsCognSci 8 , 325 – 335 . Goodier , J . L . , Ostertag , E . M . & Kazazian , H . H . Jr . ( 2000 ) Transduc - tion of 3’ - ﬂanking sequences is common in L1 retrotransposition . HumMolGenet 9 , 653 – 657 . Gosso , M . F . , de Geus , E . J . , Polderman , T . J . , Boomsma , D . I . , Heutink , P . & Posthuma , D . ( 2008 ) Common variants underlying cognitive ability : further evidence for association between the SNAP - 25 gene and cognition using a family - based study in two independent Dutch cohorts . GenesBrainBehav 7 , 355 – 364 . Graham , T . & Boissinot , S . ( 2006 ) The genomic distribution of L1 elements : the role of insertion bias and natural selection . JBiomed Biotechnol 2006 , 75327 . Greer , P . & Greenberg , M . ( 2008 ) From synapse to nucleus : calcium - dependent gene transcription in the control of synapse development and function . Neuron 59 , 846 – 860 . Greer , P . L . , Hanayama , R . , Bloodgood , B . L . , Mardinly , A . R . , Lip - ton , D . M . , Flavell , S . W . , Kim , T . K . , Grifﬁth , E . C . , Waldon , Z . , Maehr , R . , Ploegh , H . L . , Chowdhury , S . , Worley , P . F . , Steen , J . & Greenberg , M . E . ( 2010 ) The Angelman Syndrome protein Ube3A regulates synapse development by ubiquitinating arc . Cell 140 , 704 – 716 . Gu , Z . , Liu , W . & Yan , Z . ( 2009 ) beta - Amyloid impairs AMPA receptor trafﬁcking and function by reducing Ca2 + / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II synaptic distribution . JBiolChem 284 , 10639 – 10649 . Guo , J . U . , Su , Y . , Zhong , C . , Ming , G . L . & Song , H . ( 2011 ) Hydroxyla - tion of 5 - methylcytosine by TET1 promotes active DNA demethy - lation in the adult brain . Cell 145 , 423 – 434 . Guzowski , J . , McNaughton , B . , Barnes , C . & Worley , P . ( 1999 ) Environment - speciﬁc expression of the immediate - early gene Arc in hippocampal neuronal ensembles . NatNeurosci 2 , 1120 – 1124 . Guzowski , J . F . , Setlow , B . , Wagner , E . K . & McGaugh , J . L . ( 2001 ) Experience - dependent gene expression in the rat hippocampus after spatial learning : a comparison of the immediate - early genes Arc , c - fos , and zif268 . JNeurosci 21 , 5089 – 5098 . Hall , B . G . ( 1999 ) Transposable elements as activators of cryptic genes in E . coli . Genetica 107 , 181 – 187 . Hamilton , C . E . , Papavasiliou , F . N . & Rosenberg , B . R . ( 2010 ) Diverse functions for DNA and RNA editing in the immune system . RNA Biol 7 , 220 – 228 . Hammock , E . A . , Lim , M . M . , Nair , H . P . & Young , L . J . ( 2005 ) Associa - tion of vasopressin 1a receptor levels with a regulatory microsatel - lite and behavior . GenesBrainBehav 4 , 289 – 301 . Hebert , S . S . & De Strooper , B . ( 2009 ) Alterations of the microRNA network cause neurodegenerative disease . TrendsNeurosci 32 , 199 – 206 . Hemberger , M . , Dean , W . & Reik , W . ( 2009 ) Epigenetic dynamics of stem cells and cell lineage commitment : digging Waddington’s canal . NatRevMolCellBiol 10 , 526 – 537 . Hirabayashi , Y . & Gotoh , Y . ( 2010 ) Epigenetic control of neural precursor cell fate during development . Nat Rev Neurosci 11 , 377 – 388 . Hong , E . J . , McCord , A . E . & Greenberg , M . E . ( 2008 ) A biological function for the neuronal activity - dependent component of Bdnf transcription in the development of cortical inhibition . Neuron 60 , 610 – 624 . Hotte , M . , Thuault , S . , Lachaise , F . , Dineley , K . T . , Hemmings , H . C . , Nairn , A . C . & Jay , T . M . ( 2006 ) D1 receptor modulation of memory retrieval performance is associated with changes in pCREB and pDARPP - 32inratprefrontalcortex . BehavBrainRes 171 , 127 – 133 . Genes , BrainandBehavior ( 2012 ) 11 : 3 – 28 23 Wolf and Linden Huber , K . M . , Kayser , M . S . & Bear , M . F . ( 2000 ) Role for rapid dendritic protein synthesis in hippocampal mGluR - dependent long - term depression . Science 288 , 1254 – 1257 . Hurles , M . , Dermitzakis , E . & Tyler - Smith , C . ( 2008 ) The functional impact of structural variation in humans . Trends Genet 24 , 238 – 245 . Iizuka , Y . , Sei , Y . , Weinberger , D . & Straub , R . ( 2007 ) Evidence that the BLOC - 1 protein dysbindin modulates dopamine D2 receptor internalization and signaling but not D1 internalization . JNeurosci 27 , 12390 – 12395 . Inagaki , N . , Nishizawa , M . , Arimura , N . , Yamamoto , H . , Takeuchi , Y . , Miyamoto , E . , Kaibuchi , K . & Inagaki , M . ( 2000 ) Activation of Ca2 + / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II within post - synaptic dendritic spines of cultured hippocampal neurons . JBiol Chem 275 , 27165 – 27171 . Jaenisch , R . & Bird , A . ( 2003 ) Epigenetic regulation of gene expres - sion : how the genome integrates intrinsic and environmental signals . NatGenet 33 ( Suppl . ) , 245 – 254 . Johannessen , M . , Delghandi , M . P . & Moens , U . ( 2004 ) What turns CREB on ? CellSignal 16 , 1211 – 1227 . Johnson , L . J . & Tricker , P . J . ( 2010 ) Epigenomic plasticity within populations : its evolutionary signiﬁcance and potential . Heredity 105 , 113 – 121 . Kaati , G . , Bygren , L . O . , Pembrey , M . & Sjostrom , M . ( 2007 ) Transgenerational response to nutrition , early life circumstances and longevity . EurJHumGenet 15 , 784 – 790 . Kang , H . & Schuman , E . M . ( 1996 ) A requirement for local protein synthesis in neurotrophin - induced hippocampal synaptic plasticity . Science 273 , 1402 – 1406 . Kano , H . , Godoy , I . , Courtney , C . , Vetter , M . R . , Gerton , G . L . , Ostertag , E . M . & Kazazian , H . H . Jr . ( 2009 ) L1 retrotransposition occurs mainly in embryogenesis and creates somatic mosaicism . GenesDev 23 , 1303 – 1312 . Kawanishi , Y . , Harada , S . , Tachikawa , H . , Okubo , T . & Shiraishi , H . ( 1999 ) Novel variants in the promoter region of the CREB gene in schizophrenic patients . JHumGenet 44 , 428 – 430 . Kawashima , T . , Okuno , H . , Nonaka , M . , Adachi - Morishima , A . , Kyo , N . , Okamura , M . , Takemoto - Kimura , S . , Worley , P . F . & Bito , H . ( 2009 ) Synaptic activity - responsive element in the Arc / Arg3 . 1 promoter essential for synapse - to - nucleus signaling in activated neurons . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA 106 , 316 – 321 . Kazazian , H . H . Jr . ( 2004 ) Mobile elements : drivers of genome evolution . Science 303 , 1626 – 1632 . Kazazian , H . H . Jr . & Goodier , J . L . ( 2002 ) LINE drive . retrotransposi - tion and genome instability . Cell 110 , 277 – 280 . Kelleher , R . J . III , Govindarajan , A . & Tonegawa , S . ( 2004 ) Translational regulatory mechanisms in persistent forms of synaptic plasticity . Neuron 44 , 59 – 73 . Kelley , J . & Swanson , W . ( 2008 ) Positive selection in the human genome : from genome scans to biological signiﬁcance . AnnuRev GenomicsHumGenet 9 , 143 – 160 . Kim , S . M . , Ahn , S . M . , Go , B . S . , Wang , J . Q . & Choe , E . S . ( 2009 ) Alterations in AMPA receptor phosphorylation in the rat striatum following acute and repeated cocaine administration . Neuroscience 163 , 618 – 626 . Kim , A . H . , Reimers , M . , Maher , B . , Williamson , V . , McMichael , O . , McClay , J . L . , van den Oord , E . J . , Riley , B . P . , Kendler , K . S . & Vladimirov , V . I . ( 2010a ) MicroRNA expression proﬁling in the prefrontal cortex of individuals affected with schizophrenia and bipolar disorders . SchizophrRes 124 , 183 – 191 . Kim , T . K . , Hemberg , M . , Gray , J . M . , Costa , A . M . , Bear , D . M . , Wu , J . , Harmin , D . A . , Laptewicz , M . , Barbara - Haley , K . , Kuersten , S . , Markenscoff - Papadimitriou , E . , Kuhl , D . , Bito , H . , Worley , P . F . , Kreiman , G . & Greenberg , M . E . ( 2010b ) Widespread transcription at neuronal activity - regulated enhancers . Nature 465 , 182 – 187 . Klein , M . , Impey , S . & Goodman , R . ( 2005 ) Role reversal : the regulation of neuronal gene expression by microRNAs . CurrOpin Neurobiol 15 , 507 – 513 . Knapska , E . & Kaczmarek , L . ( 2004 ) A gene for neuronal plasticity in the mammalian brain : Zif268 / Egr - 1 / NGFI - A / Krox - 24 / TIS8 / ZENK ? ProgNeurobiol 74 , 183 – 211 . Koch , L . G . & Britton , S . L . ( 2008 ) Aerobic metabolism underlies complexity and capacity . JPhysiol 586 , 83 – 95 . Kogan , J . H . , Frankland , P . W . & Silva , A . J . ( 2000 ) Long - term memory underlying hippocampus - dependent social recognition in mice . Hippocampus 10 , 47 – 56 . Kosik , K . ( 2006 ) The neuronal microRNA system . NatRevNeurosci 7 , 911 – 920 . Kozlovsky , N . , Matar , M . A . , Kaplan , Z . , Kotler , M . , Zohar , J . & Cohen , H . ( 2008 ) The immediate early gene Arc is associated with behavioral resilience to stress exposure in an animal model of posttraumatic stress disorder . EurNeuropsychopharmacol 18 , 107 – 116 . Krol , J . , Busskamp , V . , Markiewicz , I . , Stadler , M . B . , Ribi , S . , Richter , J . , Duebel , J . , Bicker , S . , Fehling , H . J . , Schubeler , D . , Oertner , T . G . , Schratt , G . , Bibel , M . , Roska , B . & Filipowicz , W . ( 2010 ) Characterizing light - regulated retinal microRNAs reveals rapid turnover as a common property of neuronal microRNAs . Cell 141 , 618 – 631 . Lam , B . Y . , Zhang , W . , Ng , D . C . , Maruthappu , M . , Roderick , H . L . & Chawla , S . ( 2009 ) CREB - dependent Nur77 induction following depolarization in PC12 cells and neurons is modulated by MEF2 transcription factors . JNeurochem 112 , 1065 – 1073 . Lamsa , K . , Irvine , E . , Giese , K . & Kullmann , D . ( 2007 ) NMDA receptor - dependent long - term potentiation in mouse hippocampal interneurons shows a unique dependence on Ca ( 2 + ) / calmodulin - dependent kinases . JPhysiol 584 , 885 – 894 . Lander , E . S . , Linton , L . M . , Birren , B . , etal . ( 2001 ) Initial sequencing and analysis of the human genome . Nature 409 , 860 – 921 . Lee , J . C . , Kwon , Y . G . , Lawrence , D . S . & Edelman , A . M . ( 1994 ) A requirement of hydrophobic and basic amino acid residues for substrate recognition by Ca2 + / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase Ia . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA 91 , 6413 – 6417 . Levenson , J . M . , Roth , T . L . , Lubin , F . D . , Miller , C . A . , Huang , I . C . , Desai , P . , Malone , L . M . & Sweatt , J . D . ( 2006 ) Evidence that DNA ( cytosine - 5 ) methyltransferase regulates synaptic plasticity in the hippocampus . JBiolChem 281 , 15763 – 15773 . Li , G . & Reinberg , D . ( 2011 ) Chromatin higher - order structures and gene regulation . CurrOpinGenetDev 21 , 175 – 186 . Li , J . B . , Levanon , E . Y . , Yoon , J . K . , Aach , J . , Xie , B . , Leproust , E . , Zhang , K . , Gao , Y . & Church , G . M . ( 2009 ) Genome - wide identi - ﬁcation of human RNA editing sites by parallel DNA capturing and sequencing . Science 324 , 1210 – 1213 . Liang , Z . , Liu , F . , Grundke - Iqbal , I . , Iqbal , K . & Gong , C . X . ( 2007 ) Down - regulation of cAMP - dependent protein kinase by over - activated calpain in Alzheimer disease brain . JNeurochem 103 , 2462 – 2470 . Licata , S . C . & Pierce , R . C . ( 2003 ) The roles of calcium / calmodulin - dependent and Ras / mitogen - activated protein kinases in the development of psychostimulant - induced behavioral sensitization . JNeurochem 85 , 14 – 22 . Lifson , S . ( 1987 ) Chemical selection , diversity , teleonomy and the second law of thermodynamics . Reﬂections on Eigen’s theory of self - organization of matter . BiophysChem 26 , 303 – 311 . Lin , Y . , Bloodgood , B . L . , Hauser , J . L . , Lapan , A . D . , Koon , A . C . , Kim , T . K . , Hu , L . S . , Malik , A . N . & Greenberg , M . E . ( 2008 ) Activity - dependentregulationofinhibitorysynapsedevelopmentbyNpas4 . Nature 455 , 1198 – 1204 . Lindblad - Toh , K . , Wade , C . M . , Mikkelsen , T . S . , etal . ( 2005 ) Genome sequence , comparative analysis and haplotype structure of the domestic dog . Nature 438 , 803 – 819 . Link , W . , Konietzko , U . , Kauselmann , G . , Krug , M . , Schwanke , B . , Frey , U . & Kuhl , D . ( 1995 ) Somatodendritic expression of an immediate early gene is regulated by synaptic activity . ProcNatl AcadSciUSA 92 , 5734 – 5738 . Linnen , C . R . , Kingsley , E . P . , Jensen , J . D . & Hoekstra , H . E . ( 2009 ) On the origin and spread of an adaptive allele in deer mice . Science 325 , 1095 – 1098 . 24 Genes , BrainandBehavior ( 2012 ) 11 : 3 – 28 Biological pathways to adaptability Linseman , D . A . , Bartley , C . M . , Le , S . S . , Laessig , T . A . , Bouchard , R . J . , Meintzer , M . K . , Li , M . & Heidenreich , K . A . ( 2003 ) Inactivation of the myocyte enhancer factor - 2 repressor histone deacetylase - 5 by endogenous Ca ( 2 + ) / / calmodulin - dependent kinase II promotes depolarization - mediated cerebellar granule neuron survival . JBiol Chem 278 , 41472 – 41481 . Lisman , J . E . & McIntyre , C . C . ( 2001 ) Synaptic plasticity : a molecular memory switch . CurrBiol 11 , R788 – 791 . Liu , Y . , Kamitakahara , A . , Kim , A . & Aguilera , G . ( 2008 ) Cyclic adenosine 3’ , 5’ - monophosphate responsive element binding protein phosphorylation is required but not sufﬁcient for activation of corticotropin - releasing hormone transcription . Endocrinology 149 , 3512 – 3520 . Lomeli , H . , Mosbacher , J . , Melcher , T . , Hoger , T . , Geiger , J . R . , Kuner , T . , Monyer , H . , Higuchi , M . , Bach , A . & Seeburg , P . H . ( 1994 ) Control of kinetic properties of AMPA receptor channels by nuclear RNA editing . Science 266 , 1709 – 1713 . Lonze , B . E . & Ginty , D . D . ( 2002 ) Function and regulation of CREB family transcription factors in the nervous system . Neuron 35 , 605 – 623 . Lubin , F . D . , Roth , T . L . & Sweatt , J . D . ( 2008 ) Epigenetic regulation of BDNF gene transcription in the consolidation of fear memory . JNeurosci 28 , 10576 – 10586 . Ly , P . T . & Song , W . ( 2011 ) Loss of activated CaMKII at the synapse underlies Alzheimer’s disease memory loss . J Neurochem 119 , 673 – 675 . Lyon , M . F . ( 1998 ) X - chromosome inactivation : a repeat hypothesis . CytogenetCellGenet 80 , 133 – 137 . Ma , D . K . , Jang , M . H . , Guo , J . U . , Kitabatake , Y . , Chang , M . L . , Pow - Anpongkul , N . , Flavell , R . A . , Lu , B . , Ming , G . L . & Song , H . ( 2009 ) Neuronal activity - induced Gadd45b promotes epigenetic DNA demethylation and adult neurogenesis . Science 323 , 1074 – 1077 . Marie , H . , Morishita , W . , Yu , X . , Calakos , N . & Malenka , R . C . ( 2005 ) Generation of silent synapses by acute in vivo expression of CaMKIV and CREB . Neuron 45 , 741 – 752 . Marin , M . T . , Berkow , A . , Golden , S . A . , Koya , E . , Planeta , C . S . & Hope , B . T . ( 2009 ) Context - speciﬁc modulation of cocaine - induced locomotor sensitization and ERK and CREB phosphorylation in the rat nucleus accumbens . EurJNeurosci 30 , 1931 – 1940 . Marmorstein , R . ( 2001 ) Protein modules that manipulate histone tails for chromatin regulation . NatRevMolCellBiol 2 , 422 – 432 . Mattick , J . & Gagen , M . ( 2001 ) The evolution of controlled multitaskedgenenetworks : theroleofintronsandothernoncoding RNAs in the development of complex organisms . MolBiolEvol 18 , 1611 – 1630 . Mattick , J . & Makunin , I . ( 2006 ) Non - coding RNA . HumMolGenet 15 Spec No 1 , R17 – R29 . Mattick , J . S . & Mehler , M . F . ( 2008 ) RNA editing , DNA recoding and the evolution of human cognition . TrendsNeurosci 31 , 227 – 233 . Mayford , M . , Baranes , D . , Podsypanina , K . & Kandel , E . ( 1996 ) The 3’ - untranslated region of CaMKII alpha is a cis - acting signal for the localization and translation of mRNA in dendrites . ProcNatlAcad SciUSA 93 , 13250 – 13255 . Mayr , B . M . , Guzman , E . & Montminy , M . ( 2005 ) Glutamine rich and basic region / leucine zipper ( bZIP ) domains stabilize cAMP - response element - binding protein ( CREB ) binding to chro - matin . JBiolChem 280 , 15103 – 15110 . Mayr , B . & Montminy , M . ( 2001 ) Transcriptional regulation by the phosphorylation - dependent factor CREB . NatRevMolCellBiol 2 , 599 – 609 . McClintock , B . ( 1951 ) Chromosome organization and genic expres - sion . ColdSpringHarbSympQuantBiol 16 , 13 – 47 . McClung , C . A . & Nestler , E . J . ( 2003 ) Regulation of gene expression and cocaine reward by CREB and DeltaFosB . Nat Neurosci 6 , 1208 – 1215 . McClung , C . A . & Nestler , E . J . ( 2008 ) Neuroplasticity mediated by altered gene expression . Neuropsychopharmacology 33 , 3 – 17 . McGowan , P . O . , Sasaki , A . , D’Alessio , A . C . , Dymov , S . , Labonte , B . , Szyf , M . , Turecki , G . & Meaney , M . J . ( 2009 ) Epigenetic regulation of the glucocorticoid receptor in human brain associates with childhood abuse . NatNeurosci 12 , 342 – 348 . McKenzie , G . J . , Harris , R . S . , Lee , P . L . & Rosenberg , S . M . ( 2000 ) The SOS response regulates adaptive mutation . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97 , 6646 – 6651 . Mehler , M . & Mattick , J . ( 2006 ) Non - coding RNAs in the nervous system . JPhysiol 575 , 333 – 341 . Meitzen , J . , Luoma , J . I . , Stern , C . M . & Mermelstein , P . G . ( 2011 ) beta1 - Adrenergic receptors activate two distinct signaling path - ways in striatal neurons . JNeurochem 116 , 984 – 995 . Miller , C . & Sweatt , J . ( 2007 ) Covalent modiﬁcation of DNA regulates memory formation . Neuron 53 , 857 – 869 . Miyashita , T . , Kubik , S . , Lewandowski , G . & Guzowski , J . ( 2008 ) Networks of neurons , networks of genes : an integrated view of memory consolidation . NeurobiolLearnMem 89 , 269 – 284 . Moga , D . , Calhoun , M . , Chowdhury , A . , Worley , P . , Morrison , J . & Shapiro , M . ( 2004 ) Activity - regulated cytoskeletal - associated protein is localized to recently activated excitatory synapses . Neuroscience 125 , 7 – 11 . Molteni , R . , Calabrese , F . , Chourbaji , S . , Brandwein , C . , Racagni , G . , Gass , P . & Riva , M . A . ( 2010 ) Depression - prone mice with reduced glucocorticoid receptor expression display an altered stress - dependent regulation of brain - derived neurotrophic factor and activity - regulated cytoskeleton - associated protein . J Psychopharmacol 24 , 595 – 603 . Montminy , M . R . & Bilezikjian , L . M . ( 1987 ) Bindingofanuclearprotein to the cyclic - AMP response element of the somatostatin gene . Nature 328 , 175 – 178 . Moran , J . V . , DeBerardinis , R . J . & Kazazian , H . H . Jr . ( 1999 ) Exon shufﬂing by L1 retrotransposition . Science 283 , 1530 – 1534 . Morgan , H . D . , Dean , W . , Coker , H . A . , Reik , W . & Petersen - Mahrt , S . K . ( 2004 ) Activation - induced cytidine deaminase deam - inates 5 - methylcytosine in DNA and is expressed in pluripotent tissues : implications for epigenetic reprogramming . JBiolChem 279 , 52353 – 52360 . Mori , Y . , Imaizumi , K . , Katayama , T . , Yoneda , T . & Tohyama , M . ( 2000 ) Two cis - acting elements in the 3’ untranslated region of alpha - CaMKII regulate its dendritic targeting . Nat Neurosci 3 , 1079 – 1084 . Muckenfuss , H . , Hamdorf , M . , Held , U . , Perkovic , M . , Lower , J . , Cichutek , K . , Flory , E . , Schumann , G . G . & Munk , C . ( 2006 ) APOBEC3 proteins inhibit human LINE - 1 retrotransposition . JBiol Chem 281 , 22161 – 22172 . Muotri , A . R . , Marchetto , M . C . , Coufal , N . G . , Oefner , R . , Yeo , G . , Nakashima , K . & Gage , F . H . ( 2010 ) L1retrotranspositioninneurons is modulated by MeCP2 . Nature 468 , 443 – 446 . Muotri , A . R . , Zhao , C . , Marchetto , M . C . & Gage , F . H . ( 2009 ) Environ - mental inﬂuence on L1 retrotransposons in the adult hippocampus . Hippocampus 19 , 1002 – 1007 . Murgatroyd , C . , Patchev , A . V . , Wu , Y . , Micale , V . , Bockmuhl , Y . , Fis - cher , D . , Holsboer , F . , Wotjak , C . T . , Almeida , O . F . & Spengler , D . ( 2009 ) Dynamic DNA methylation programs persistent adverse effects of early - life stress . NatNeurosci 12 , 1559 – 1566 . Need , A . C . , Keefe , R . S . , Ge , D . , Grossman , I . , Dickson , S . , McEvoy , J . P . & Goldstein , D . B . ( 2009 ) Pharmacogenetics of antipsychotic response in the CATIE trial : a candidate gene analysis . EurJHum Genet 17 , 946 – 957 . Nishikura , K . ( 2010 ) Functions and regulation of RNA editing by ADAR deaminases . AnnuRevBiochem 79 , 321 – 349 . Oberlander , T . F . , Weinberg , J . , Papsdorf , M . , Grunau , R . , Misri , S . & Devlin , A . M . ( 2008 ) Prenatal exposure to maternal depression , neonatal methylation of human glucocorticoid receptor gene ( NR3C1 ) and infant cortisol stress responses . Epigenetics 3 , 97 – 106 . Okamoto , S . , Pouladi , M . A . , Talantova , M . , Yao , D . , Xia , P . , Ehrnhoefer , D . E . , Zaidi , R . , Clemente , A . , Kaul , M . , Graham , R . K . , Zhang , D . , Vincent Chen , H . S . , Tong , G . , Hayden , M . R . & Lipton , S . A . ( 2009 ) Balance between synaptic versus extrasynaptic NMDA receptor activity inﬂuences inclusions and neurotoxicity of mutant huntingtin . NatMed 15 , 1407 – 1413 . Genes , BrainandBehavior ( 2012 ) 11 : 3 – 28 25 Wolf and Linden Ooi , L . & Wood , I . ( 2008 ) Regulation of gene expression in the nervous system . BiochemJ 414 , 327 – 341 . Ostertag , E . M . , Goodier , J . L . , Zhang , Y . & Kazazian , H . H . Jr . ( 2003 ) SVA elements are nonautonomous retrotransposons that cause disease in humans . AmJHumGenet 73 , 1444 – 1451 . Ostertag , E . M . & Kazazian , H . H . Jr . ( 2001 ) Biology of mammalian L1 retrotransposons . AnnuRevGenet 35 , 501 – 538 . Pandey , S . C . , Zhang , H . , Ugale , R . , Prakash , A . , Xu , T . & Misra , K . ( 2008 ) Effector immediate - early gene arc in the amygdala plays a critical role in alcoholism . JNeurosci 28 , 2589 – 2600 . Papaleo , F . & Weinberger , D . R . ( 2011 ) Dysbindin and Schizophrenia : it’s dopamine and glutamate all over again . Biol Psychiatry 69 , 2 – 4 . Papaleo , F . , Yang , F . , Garcia , S . , Chen , J . , Lu , B . , Crawley , J . N . & Weinberger , D . R . ( 2010 ) Dysbindin - 1 modulates prefrontal cortical activity and schizophrenia - like behaviors via dopamine / D2 pathways . MolPsychiatry ; doi : 10 . 1038 / mp . 2010 . 106 . Peng , P . L . , Zhong , X . , Tu , W . , Soundarapandian , M . M . , Molner , P . , Zhu , D . , Lau , L . , Liu , S . , Liu , F . & Lu , Y . ( 2006 ) ADAR2 - dependent RNA editing of AMPA receptor subunit GluR2 determines vulnerabilityofneuronsinforebrainischemia . Neuron 49 , 719 – 733 . Penner , M . R . , Roth , T . L . , Chawla , M . K . , Hoang , L . T . , Roth , E . D . , Lubin , F . D . , Sweatt , J . D . , Worley , P . F . & Barnes , C . A . ( 2011 ) Age - related changes in Arc transcription and DNA methylation within the hippocampus . NeurobiolAging 32 , 2198 – 2210 . Penzes , P . , Cahill , M . E . , Jones , K . A . & Srivastava , D . P . ( 2008 ) Convergent CaMK and RacGEF signals control dendritic structure and function . TrendsCellBiol 18 , 405 – 413 . Perfeito , L . , Fernandes , L . , Mota , C . & Gordo , I . ( 2007 ) Adaptive mutations in bacteria : high rate and small effects . Science 317 , 813 – 815 . Pham , P . , Bransteitter , R . & Goodman , M . F . ( 2005 ) Reward versus risk : DNA cytidine deaminases triggering immunity and disease . Biochemistry 44 , 2703 – 2715 . Pierce , R . C . & Kalivas , P . W . ( 1997 ) Repeated cocaine modiﬁes the mechanismbywhichamphetaminereleasesdopamine . JNeurosci 17 , 3254 – 3261 . Pinaud , R . , Tremere , L . , Penner , M . , Hess , F . , Robertson , H . & Currie , R . ( 2002 ) Complexity of sensory environment drives the expression of candidate - plasticity gene , nerve growth factor induced - A . Neuroscience 112 , 573 – 582 . Plath , N . , Ohana , O . , Dammermann , B . , Errington , M . , Schmitz , D . , Gross , C . , Mao , X . , Engelsberg , A . , Mahlke , C . , Welzl , H . , Kobalz , U . , Stawrakakis , A . , Fernandez , E . , Waltereit , R . , Bick - Sander , A . , Therstappen , E . , Cooke , S . , Blanquet , V . , Wurst , W . , Salmen , B . , B¨osl , M . , Lipp , H . , Grant , S . , Bliss , T . , Wolfer , D . & Kuhl , D . ( 2006 ) Arc / Arg3 . 1 is essential for the consolidation of synaptic plasticity and memories . Neuron 52 , 437 – 444 . Popp , C . , Dean , W . , Feng , S . , Cokus , S . J . , Andrews , S . , Pellegrini , M . , Jacobsen , S . E . & Reik , W . ( 2010 ) Genome - wide erasure of DNA methylation in mouse primordial germ cells is affected by AID deﬁciency . Nature 463 , 1101 – 1105 . Potkin , S . G . , Turner , J . A . , Fallon , J . A . , Lakatos , A . , Keator , D . B . , Guffanti , G . & Macciardi , F . ( 2009 ) Genediscoverythroughimaging genetics : identiﬁcation of two novel genes associated with schizophrenia . MolPsychiatry 14 , 416 – 428 . Potthoff , M . J . & Olson , E . N . ( 2007 ) MEF2 : a central regulator of diverse developmental programs . Development 134 , 4131 – 4140 . Pross , A . ( 2003 ) The driving force for life’s emergence : kinetic and thermodynamic considerations . JTheorBiol 220 , 393 – 406 . Radicella , J . P . , Park , P . U . & Fox , M . S . ( 1995 ) Adaptive mutation in Escherichia coli : a role for conjugation . Science 268 , 418 – 420 . Rajasethupathy , P . , Fiumara , F . , Sheridan , R . , Betel , D . , Puthanveet - til , S . V . , Russo , J . J . , Sander , C . , Tuschl , T . & Kandel , E . ( 2009 ) Characterization of small RNAs in aplysia reveals a role for miR - 124 in constraining synaptic plasticity through CREB . Neuron 63 , 803 – 817 . Ramocki , M . B . & Zoghbi , H . Y . ( 2008 ) Failureofneuronalhomeostasis results in common neuropsychiatric phenotypes . Nature 455 , 912 – 918 . Rando , O . & Verstrepen , K . ( 2007 ) Timescales of genetic and epigenetic inheritance . Cell 128 , 655 – 668 . Rao , V . R . , Pintchovski , S . A . , Chin , J . , Peebles , C . L . , Mitra , S . & Finkbeiner , S . ( 2006 ) AMPA receptors regulate transcription of the plasticity - related immediate - early gene Arc . Nat Neurosci 9 , 887 – 895 . Rasetti , R . , Malone , C . , Mattay , V . , Rivero , O . , Callicot , J . , Meyer - Lindenberg , A . , Rujescu , D . , Straub , R . & Weinberger , D . ( 2007 ) Genetic variation in CAMK2A affects brain structure and function in normal individuals , In 37th annual meeting of the Society for Neuroscience . San Diego , CA . Reese , L . C . , Laezza , F . , Woltjer , R . & Taglialatela , G . Dysregulated phosphorylation of Ca ( 2 + ) / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II - alpha in the hippocampus of subjects with mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease . JNeurochem 119 , 791 – 804 . Redmond , L . , Kashani , A . H . & Ghosh , A . ( 2002 ) Calcium regulation of dendritic growth via CaM kinase IV and CREB - mediated transcription . Neuron 34 , 999 – 1010 . Rial Verde , E . , Lee - Osbourne , J . , Worley , P . , Malinow , R . & Cline , H . ( 2006 ) Increased expression of the immediate - early gene arc / arg3 . 1 reduces AMPA receptor - mediated synaptic transmis - sion . Neuron 52 , 461 – 474 . Richards , J . P . , Bachinger , H . P . , Goodman , R . H . & Brennan , R . G . ( 1996 ) Analysis of the structural properties of cAMP - responsive element - binding protein ( CREB ) and phosphorylated CREB . JBiol Chem 271 , 13716 – 13723 . Ripke , S . , Sanders , A . R . , Kendler , K . S . , etal . ( 2011 ) Genome - wide association study identiﬁes ﬁve new schizophrenia loci . NatGenet . Roozendaal , B . , Hernandez , A . , Cabrera , S . M . , Hagewoud , R . , Mal - vaez , M . , Stefanko , D . P . , Haettig , J . & Wood , M . A . ( 2010 ) Membrane - associated glucocorticoid activity is necessary for modulation of long - term memory via chromatin modiﬁcation . JNeurosci 30 , 5037 – 5046 . Rose , J . , Jin , S . X . & Craig , A . M . ( 2009 ) Heterosynaptic molecular dynamics : locally induced propagating synaptic accumulation of CaM kinase II . Neuron 61 , 351 – 358 . Rosenberg , S . M . , Longerich , S . , Gee , P . & Harris , R . S . ( 1994 ) Adaptive mutation by deletions in small mononucleotide repeats . Science 265 , 405 – 407 . Ross , C . , Margolis , R . , Reading , S . , Pletnikov , M . & Coyle , J . ( 2006 ) Neurobiology of schizophrenia . Neuron 52 , 139 – 153 . Royo , H . & Cavaille , J . ( 2008 ) Non - coding RNAs in imprinted gene clusters . BiolCell 100 , 149 – 166 . Runyan , J . D . & Dash , P . K . ( 2005 ) Distinct prefrontal molecular mechanisms for information storage lasting seconds versus minutes . LearnMem 12 , 232 – 238 . Russo , M . , Sevetson , B . & Milbrandt , J . ( 1995 ) Identiﬁcation of NAB1 , a repressor of NGFI - A - and Krox20 - mediated transcription . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA 92 , 6873 – 6877 . Sakamoto , K . , Bardeleben , C . , Yates , K . , Raines , M . , Golde , D . & Gasson , J . ( 1991 ) 5’ upstream sequence and genomic structure of the human primary response gene , EGR - 1 / TIS8 . Oncogene 6 , 867 – 871 . Saneyoshi , T . , Fortin , D . A . & Soderling , T . R . ( 2010 ) Regulation of spine and synapse formation by activity - dependent intracellular signaling pathways . CurrOpinNeurobiol 20 , 108 – 115 . Saneyoshi , T . , Wayman , G . , Fortin , D . , Davare , M . , Hoshi , N . , Nozaki , N . , Natsume , T . & Soderling , T . R . ( 2008 ) Activity - dependent synaptogenesis : regulation by a CaM - kinase kinase / CaM - kinase I / betaPIX signaling complex . Neuron 57 , 94 – 107 . Santarelli , D . M . , Beveridge , N . J . , Tooney , P . A . & Cairns , M . J . ( 2011 ) Upregulation of dicer and microRNA expression in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex Brodmann area 46 in schizophrenia . Biol Psychiatry 69 , 180 – 187 . Schaefer , A . , Sampath , S . C . , Intrator , A . , Min , A . , Gertler , T . S . , Surmeier , D . J . , Tarakhovsky , A . & Greengard , P . ( 2009 ) Control of cognition and adaptive behavior by the GLP / G9a epigenetic suppressor complex . Neuron 64 , 678 – 691 . Schmitt , J . M . , Guire , E . S . , Saneyoshi , T . & Soderling , T . R . ( 2005 ) Calmodulin - dependent kinase kinase / calmodulin kinase I activity 26 Genes , BrainandBehavior ( 2012 ) 11 : 3 – 28 Biological pathways to adaptability gates extracellular - regulated kinase - dependent long - term potenti - ation . JNeurosci 25 , 1281 – 1290 . Schratt , G . , Tuebing , F . , Nigh , E . , Kane , C . , Sabatini , M . , Kiebler , M . & Greenberg , M . ( 2006 ) A brain - speciﬁc microRNA regulates dendritic spine development . Nature 439 , 283 – 289 . Schwachtgen , J . , Campbell , C . & Braddock , M . ( 2000 ) Full promoter sequence of human early growth response factor - 1 ( Egr - 1 ) : demonstration of a ﬁfth functional serum response element . DNA Seq 10 , 429 – 432 . Sebat , J . ( 2007 ) Major changes in our DNA lead to major changes in our thinking . NatGenet 39 , S3 – 5 . Shapiro , J . A . ( 1995 ) Adaptive mutation : who’s really in the garden ? Science 268 , 373 – 374 . Sheng , M . , McFadden , G . & Greenberg , M . ( 1990 ) Membrane depo - larizationandcalciuminducec - fostranscriptionviaphosphorylation of transcription factor CREB . Neuron 4 , 571 – 582 . Shepherd , J . , Rumbaugh , G . , Wu , J . , Chowdhury , S . , Plath , N . , Kuhl , D . , Huganir , R . & Worley , P . ( 2006 ) Arc / Arg3 . 1 mediates homeostatic synaptic scaling of AMPA receptors . Neuron 52 , 475 – 484 . Shimada , M . , Nakadai , T . , Fukuda , A . & Hisatake , K . ( 2010 ) cAMP - response element - binding protein ( CREB ) controls MSK1 - mediated phosphorylation of histone H3 at the c - fos promoter in vitro . JBiolChem 285 , 9390 – 9401 . Shumway , C . A . ( 2008 ) Habitat complexity , brain , and behavior . Brain BehavEvol 72 , 123 – 134 . Silk , J . B . ( 2007 ) Social components of ﬁtness in primate groups . Science 317 , 1347 – 1351 . Silverman , E . , Du , J . , Williams , A . , Wadgaonkar , R . , Drazen , J . & Collins , T . ( 1998 ) cAMP - response - element - binding - protein - binding protein ( CBP ) and p300 are transcriptional co - activators of early growth response factor - 1 ( Egr - 1 ) . BiochemJ 336 ( Pt 1 ) , 183 – 189 . Simmons , M . , Meador - Woodruff , J . H . & Sodhi , M . S . ( 2010 ) In - creased cortical expression of an RNA editing enzyme occurs in major depressive suicide victims . Neuroreport 21 , 993 – 997 . Singer , T . , McConnell , M . J . , Marchetto , M . C . , Coufal , N . G . & Gage , F . H . ( 2010 ) LINE - 1 retrotransposons : mediators of somatic variation in neuronal genomes ? TrendsNeurosci 33 , 345 – 354 . Slade , J . & Carter , D . ( 2000 ) Cyclical expression of egr - 1 / NGFI - A in the rat anterior pituitary : a molecular signal for ovulation ? JNeuroendocrinol 12 , 671 – 676 . Smith , D . L . , Pozueta , J . , Gong , B . , Arancio , O . & Shelanski , M . ( 2009 ) Reversal of long - term dendritic spine alterations in Alzheimer disease models . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA 106 , 16877 – 16882 . Smith , H . C . ( 2011 ) APOBEC3G : a double agent in defense . Trends BiochemSci 36 , 239 – 244 . Speek , M . ( 2001 ) Antisense promoter of human L1 retrotransposon drives transcription of adjacent cellular genes . Mol Cell Biol 21 , 1973 – 1985 . Steiner , B . , Mandelkow , E . M . , Biernat , J . , Gustke , N . , Meyer , H . E . , Schmidt , B . , Mieskes , G . , Soling , H . D . , Drechsel , D . , Kirschner , M . W . etal . ( 1990 ) Phosphorylation of microtubule - associated protein tau : identiﬁcation of the site for Ca2 ( + ) - calmodulin dependent kinase and relationship with tau phosphorylation in Alzheimer tangles . EMBOJ 9 , 3539 – 3544 . Steward , O . , Wallace , C . , Lyford , G . & Worley , P . ( 1998 ) Synaptic activation causes the mRNA for the IEG Arc to localize selectively near activated postsynaptic sites on dendrites . Neuron 21 , 741 – 751 . Steward , O . & Worley , P . ( 2001 ) Selective targeting of newly synthesized Arc mRNA to active synapses requires NMDA receptor activation . Neuron 30 , 227 – 240 . Surani , M . A . , Hayashi , K . & Hajkova , P . ( 2007 ) Geneticandepigenetic regulators of pluripotency . Cell 128 , 747 – 762 . Sutton , M . A . & Schuman , E . M . ( 2006 ) Dendritic protein synthesis , synaptic plasticity , and memory . Cell 127 , 49 – 58 . Swanberg , S . E . , Nagarajan , R . P . , Peddada , S . , Yasui , D . H . & LaSalle , J . M . ( 2009 ) Reciprocal co - regulation of EGR2 and MECP2 is disrupted in Rett syndrome and autism . Hum Mol Genet 18 , 525 – 534 . Sweatt , J . D . ( 2009 ) Experience - dependent epigenetic modiﬁcations in the central nervous system . BiolPsychiatry 65 , 191 – 197 . Szyma´nski , M . , Barciszewska , M . , Zywicki , M . & Barciszewski , J . ( 2003 ) Noncoding RNA transcripts . JApplGenet 44 , 1 – 19 . Takemura , M . , Mishima , T . , Wang , Y . , Kasahara , J . , Fukunaga , K . , Ohashi , K . & Mizuno , K . ( 2009 ) Ca2 + / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase IV - mediated LIM kinase activation is critical for calcium signal - induced neurite outgrowth . JBiol Chem 284 , 28554 – 28562 . Thiel , G . ( 1993 ) Synapsin I , synapsin II , and synaptophysin : marker proteins of synaptic vesicles . BrainPathol 3 , 87 – 95 . Tsui , J . , Inagaki , M . & Schulman , H . ( 2005 ) Calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II ( CaMKII ) localization acts in concert with substrate targeting to create spatial restriction for phosphory - lation . JBiolChem 280 , 9210 – 9216 . van Rij , R . P . & Berezikov , E . ( 2009 ) Small RNAs and the control of transposons and viruses in Drosophila . Trends Microbiol 17 , 163 – 171 . Vanderklish , P . W . & Edelman , G . M . ( 2002 ) Dendritic spines elongate after stimulation of group 1 metabotropic glutamate receptors in cultured hippocampal neurons . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99 , 1639 – 1644 . Vazdarjanova , A . , McNaughton , B . L . , Barnes , C . A . , Worley , P . F . & Guzowski , J . F . ( 2002 ) Experience - dependent coincident expres - sion of the effector immediate - early genes arc and Homer 1a in hippocampal and neocortical neuronal networks . JNeurosci 22 , 10067 – 10071 . Vo , N . , Klein , M . E . , Varlamova , O . , Keller , D . M . , Yamamoto , T . , Good - man , R . H . & Impey , S . ( 2005 ) A cAMP - response element binding protein - induced microRNA regulates neuronal morphogenesis . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA 102 , 16426 – 16431 . Volakakis , N . , Kadkhodaei , B . , Joodmardi , E . , Wallis , K . , Panman , L . , Silvaggi , J . , Spiegelman , B . M . & Perlmann , T . ( 2010 ) NR4A orphan nuclear receptors as mediators of CREB - dependent neuroprotection . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA 107 , 12317 – 12322 . Wahlstedt , H . , Daniel , C . , Enstero , M . & Ohman , M . ( 2009 ) Large - scale mRNA sequencing determines global regulation of RNA editing during brain development . GenomeRes 19 , 978 – 986 . Wallace , D . C . & Fan , W . ( 2010 ) Energetics , epigenetics , mitochon - drial genetics . Mitochondrion 10 , 12 – 31 . Wallace , D . L . , Han , M . H . , Graham , D . L . , Green , T . A . , Vialou , V . , Iniguez , S . D . , Cao , J . L . , Kirk , A . , Chakravarty , S . , Kumar , A . , Krish - nan , V . , Neve , R . L . , Cooper , D . C . , Bolanos , C . A . , Barrot , M . , McClung , C . A . & Nestler , E . J . ( 2009 ) CREB regulation of nucleus accumbens excitability mediates social isolation - induced behav - ioral deﬁcits . NatNeurosci 12 , 200 – 209 . Wallace , C . , Withers , G . , Weiler , I . , George , J . , Clayton , D . & Greenough , W . ( 1995 ) Correspondence between sites of NGFI - A induction and sites of morphological plasticity following expo - sure to environmental complexity . Brain Res Mol Brain Res 32 , 211 – 220 . Wang , X . , Arai , S . , Song , X . , Reichart , D . , Du , K . , Pascual , G . , Tempst , P . , Rosenfeld , M . G . , Glass , C . K . & Kurokawa , R . ( 2008a ) Induced ncRNAs allosterically modify RNA - binding proteins in cis to inhibit transcription . Nature 454 , 126 – 130 . Wang , H . , Feng , R . , Phillip Wang , L . , Li , F . , Cao , X . & Tsien , J . Z . ( 2008b ) CaMKII activation state underlies synaptic labile phase of LTP and short - term memory formation . Curr Biol 18 , 1546 – 1554 . Wang , D . C . , Chen , S . S . , Lee , Y . C . & Chen , T . J . ( 2006a ) Amyloid - beta at sublethal level impairs BDNF - induced arc expression in cortical neurons . NeurosciLett 398 , 78 – 82 . Wang , K . H . , Majewska , A . , Schummers , J . , Farley , B . , Hu , C . , Sur , M . & Tonegawa , S . ( 2006b ) In vivo two - photon imaging reveals a role of arc in enhancing orientation speciﬁcity in visual cortex . Cell 126 , 389 – 402 . Waung , M . W . , Pfeiffer , B . E . , Nosyreva , E . D . , Ronesi , J . A . & Huber , K . M . ( 2008 ) Rapid translation of Arc / Arg3 . 1 selectively mediates mGluR - dependent LTD through persistent increases in AMPAR endocytosis rate . Neuron 59 , 84 – 97 . Genes , BrainandBehavior ( 2012 ) 11 : 3 – 28 27 Wolf and Linden Wayman , G . , Davare , M . , Ando , H . , Fortin , D . , Varlamova , O . , Cheng , H . , Marks , D . , Obrietan , K . , Soderling , T . , Goodman , R . & Impey , S . ( 2008a ) An activity - regulated microRNA controls den - dritic plasticity by down - regulating p250GAP . ProcNatlAcadSci USA 105 , 9093 – 9098 . Wayman , G . , Lee , Y . , Tokumitsu , H . , Silva , A . & Soderling , T . ( 2008b ) Calmodulin - kinases : modulators of neuronal development and plasticity . Neuron 59 , 914 – 931 . Wayman , G . , Impey , S . , Marks , D . , Saneyoshi , T . , Grant , W . , Derkach , V . & Soderling , T . ( 2006 ) Activity - dependent dendritic arborization mediated by CaM - kinase I activation and enhanced CREB - dependent transcription of Wnt - 2 . Neuron 50 , 897 – 909 . Wayman , G . A . , Kaech , S . , Grant , W . F . , Davare , M . , Impey , S . , Tokumitsu , H . , Nozaki , N . , Banker , G . & Soderling , T . R . ( 2004 ) Regulation of axonal extension and growth cone motility by calmodulin - dependentprotein kinase I . JNeurosci 24 , 3786 – 3794 . Weaver , I . ( 2007 ) Epigenetic programming by maternal behavior and pharmacological intervention . Nature versus nurture : let’s call the whole thing off . Epigenetics 2 , 22 – 28 . Weaver , I . , Cervoni , N . , Champagne , F . , D’Alessio , A . , Sharma , S . , Seckl , J . , Dymov , S . , Szyf , M . & Meaney , M . ( 2004 ) Epigenetic programming by maternal behavior . NatNeurosci 7 , 847 – 854 . Weaver , I . , D’Alessio , A . , Brown , S . , Hellstrom , I . , Dymov , S . , Sharma , S . , Szyf , M . & Meaney , M . ( 2007 ) The transcription factor nerve growth factor - inducible protein a mediates epigenetic pro - gramming : altering epigenetic marks by immediate - early genes . JNeurosci 27 , 1756 – 1768 . Weaver , I . , Meaney , M . & Szyf , M . ( 2006 ) Maternal care effects on the hippocampal transcriptome and anxiety - mediated behaviors in the offspring that are reversible in adulthood . ProcNatlAcadSci USA 103 , 3480 – 3485 . Weissman , L . , Jo , D . G . , Sorensen , M . M . , de Souza - Pinto , N . C . , Markesbery , W . R . , Mattson , M . P . & Bohr , V . A . ( 2007 ) Defective DNA base excision repair in brain from individuals with Alzheimer’s diseaseandamnesticmildcognitiveimpairment . NucleicAcidsRes 35 , 5545 – 5555 . West , A . , Chen , W . , Dalva , M . , Dolmetsch , R . , Kornhauser , J . , Shay - witz , A . , Takasu , M . , Tao , X . & Greenberg , M . ( 2001 ) Calcium regulation of neuronal gene expression . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA 98 , 11024 – 11031 . White , R . R . , Kwon , Y . G . , Taing , M . , Lawrence , D . S . & Edelman , A . M . ( 1998 ) Deﬁnition of optimal substrate recognition motifs of Ca2 + - calmodulin - dependent protein kinases IV and II reveals shared and distinctive features . JBiolChem 273 , 3166 – 3172 . Whitelaw , N . C . & Whitelaw , E . ( 2006 ) How lifetimes shape epigeno - type within and across generations . HumMolGenet 15 Spec No 2 , R131 – 137 . Williams , G . & Lau , L . ( 1993 ) Activation of the inducible orphan receptor gene nur77 by serum growth factors : dissociation of immediate - early and delayed - early responses . Mol Cell Biol 13 , 6124 – 6136 . Wolf , C . , Jackson , M . C . , Kissling , C . , Thome , J . & Linden , D . E . ( 2011 ) Dysbindin - 1 genotype effects on emotional working memory . Mol Psychiatry 16 , 145 – 55 . Wood , N . , Bhattacharya , T . , Keele , B . F . , Giorgi , E . , Liu , M . , Gaschen , B . , Daniels , M . , Ferrari , G . , Haynes , B . F . , McMichael , A . , Shaw , G . M . , Hahn , B . H . , Korber , B . & Seoighe , C . ( 2009 ) HIV evolution in early infection : selection pressures , patterns of insertion and deletion , and the impact of APOBEC . PLoSPathog 5 , e1000414 . Woolfe , A . , Goodson , M . , Goode , D . K . , Snell , P . , McEwen , G . K . , Vavouri , T . , Smith , S . F . , North , P . , Callaway , H . , Kelly , K . , Wal - ter , K . , Abnizova , I . , Gilks , W . , Edwards , Y . J . , Cooke , J . E . & Elgar , G . ( 2005 ) Highly conserved non - coding sequences are asso - ciated with vertebrate development . PLoSBiol 3 , e7 . Wright , B . E . , Longacre , A . & Reimers , J . M . ( 1999 ) Hypermutation in derepressed operons of Escherichia coli K12 . ProcNatlAcadSci USA 96 , 5089 – 5094 . Wu , S . C . & Zhang , Y . ( 2010 ) Active DNA demethylation : many roads lead to Rome . NatRevMolCellBiol 11 , 607 – 620 . Xing , J . , Wang , H . , Belancio , V . P . , Cordaux , R . , Deininger , P . L . & Batzer , M . A . ( 2006 ) Emergence of primate genes by retrotransposon - mediated sequence transduction . ProcNatlAcad SciUSA 103 , 17608 – 17613 . Yeo , J . , Goodman , R . A . , Schirle , N . T . , David , S . S . & Beal , P . A . ( 2010 ) RNA editing changes the lesion speciﬁcity for the DNA repair enzyme NEIL1 . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA 107 , 20715 – 20719 . Yin , Y . , Edelman , G . M . & Vanderklish , P . W . ( 2002 ) The brain - derived neurotrophic factor enhances synthesis of Arc in synaptoneurosomes . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA 99 , 2368 – 2373 . Yuan , P . , Zhou , R . , Wang , Y . , Li , X . , Li , J . , Chen , G . , Guitart , X . & Manji , H . K . ( 2010 ) Altered levels of extracellular signal - regulated kinasesignalingproteinsinpostmortemfrontalcortexofindividualswithmooddisordersandschizophrenia . JAffect Disord 124 , 164 – 169 . Yuste , R . & Bonhoeffer , T . ( 2004 ) Genesis of dendritic spines : insights from ultrastructural and imaging studies . NatRevNeurosci 5 , 24 – 34 . Zafra , F . , Hengerer , B . , Leibrock , J . , Thoenen , H . & Lindholm , D . ( 1990 ) Activity dependent regulation of BDNF and NGF mRNAs in the rat hippocampus is mediated by non - NMDA glutamate receptors . EMBOJ 9 , 3545 – 3550 . Zhang , R . & Su , B . ( 2008 ) MicroRNA regulation and the variability of human cortical gene expression . Nucleic Acids Res 36 , 4621 – 4628 . Zhao , C . , Xu , Z . , Wang , F . , Chen , J . , Ng , S . K . , Wong , P . W . , Yu , Z . , Pun , F . W . , Ren , L . , Lo , W . S . , Tsang , S . Y . & Xue , H . ( 2009 ) Alternative - splicing in the exon - 10 region of GABA ( A ) receptor beta ( 2 ) subunit gene : relationships between novel isoforms and psychotic disorders . PLoSONE 4 , e6977 . Zhou , Z . , Hong , E . , Cohen , S . , Zhao , W . , Ho , H . , Schmidt , L . , Chen , W . , Lin , Y . , Savner , E . , Grifﬁth , E . , Hu , L . , Steen , J . , Weitz , C . & Greenberg , M . ( 2006 ) Brain - speciﬁc phosphorylation of MeCP2 regulates activity - dependent Bdnf transcription , dendritic growth , and spine maturation . Neuron 52 , 255 – 269 . Zhou , Y . , Takahashi , E . , Li , W . , Halt , A . , Wiltgen , B . , Ehninger , D . , Li , G . D . , Hell , J . W . , Kennedy , M . B . & Silva , A . J . ( 2007 ) Interactions between the NR2B receptor and CaMKII modulate synaptic plasticity and spatial learning . JNeurosci 27 , 13843 – 13853 . Acknowledgments We thank Dr M . C . Jackson and Prof . M . Korte as well as two anonymous reviewers for detailed comments on the manuscript . We are also grateful to Mitchell Cowell for designing Fig . 1 and to LorraineWoodsforhelpwithFigs . 2 – 6 . Thisworkwassupported by the Wales Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience and the North West Wales NHS Trust . Supporting Information Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article : Appendix S1 : Abbreviations of molecule and disease termsAsa service to our authors and readers , this journal provides supporting information supplied by the authors . Such materials are peer - reviewed and may be re - organized for online delivery , but are not copy - edited or typeset . Technical support issues arising from supporting information ( other than missing ﬁles ) should be addressed to the authors . 28 Genes , BrainandBehavior ( 2012 ) 11 : 3 – 28