Histochem Cell Biol ( 2004 ) 122 : 1 – 5 DOI 10 . 1007 / s00418 - 004 - 0656 - 2 O R I G I N A L P A P E R Rollin W . Robinson · Judith A . Snyder An innovative fixative for cytoskeletal components allows high resolution in colocalization studies using immunofluorescence techniques Accepted : 29 April 2004 / Published online : 8 June 2004 (cid:1) Springer - Verlag 2004 Abstract Using a new fixation solution , CytoSkelFix , it is now possible to obtain superior fixation and thus res - olution of cytoskeletal components using immunofluo - rescence and fluorescence microscopy . This fixative com - bines rapid cell penetration and cellular crosslinking of proteins such that both preservation and resolution of cellular proteins can be detected . The cytoskeleton has proven very difficult to preserve , partly because of the lability of one of the filament systems ( microtubules ) , and one single fixative is incapable of properly preserving microtubules , microfilaments , and intermediate filaments for localization in the same cell . Further , the motor pro - teins associated with the cytoskeletal elements are even more difficult to preserve , particularly simultaneously with the fiber system with which they associate . We present evidence that CytoSkelFix is a superior preser - vative and would be useful in fixation for all types of immunofluorescence colocalization studies where supe - rior preservation is required . Keywords Cytoskeleton · Fixation · Immunofluores - cence · Microtubules · Microfilaments · Motor proteins Introduction Intracellular localization of the cytoskeleton and its as - sociated proteins was made possible by advances in im - munocytochemistry over the past several decades . Im - provement in the specificity of antibodies to the proteins that constitute the cytoskeleton allowed for visualization of the entire cytoskeletal network , particularly in cultured cells . Other improvements in the images of antibody – fluorochrome conjugates , particularly in colocalization studies ( where fluorochromes of different wavelengths must be used ) , were enhanced by improvements in the chromatic filters used in the fluorescence microscope ( Reichman 2000 ) . At present the limiting factor in reso - lution of cellular components using immunofluorescence resides in the quality of the fixation . Two of the most commonly used fixatives for immu - nocytochemistry are paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) and cold methanol ( MeOH ) , and each of these fixatives has their advantages . PFA crosslinks with amino groups of pro - teins , thus preserving their location in the cell . It has the added advantage that the fixation process itself does not change the tertiary structure of the protein , such that the epitopes of the antigen remain recognizable by the spe - cific antibodies to these proteins ( Sato et al . 1976 ; Fuji - wara and Pollard 1980 ) . MeOH preserves proteins by precipitating them in situ , penetrates membranes rapidly , permeabilizes the cell , and also does not affect most an - tigen – antibody interactions ( Connolly et al . 1977 ; Osborn and Weber 1977 ) . However , it is a poor fixative for some cytoskeletal proteins , such as microfilaments ( MFs ) , in that it does not preserve the organization of this filament system . A third fixative , glutaraldehyde , has also been used in low concentrations ( compared to that used in electron microscopy ) , and usually reduced with sodium borohy - dride , to remove free aldehydes which could bind primary antibody non - specifically ( Cande et al . 1977 ; Weber et al . 1978 ) . This works well in some cases , however , the major obstacles with this type of fixation are its slow rate of penetration and that glutaraldehyde changes the tertiary structure of the protein such that epitopes of the antigen are not recognized by antibodies to their respective anti - gen ( Bozzola and Russell 1999 ) . When the antigen of choice is pretreated with glutaraldehyde prior to injection into rabbits it can identify glutaraldehyde - treated micro - tubules ( MTs ) in cultured cells ( Eckert et al . 1980 ) . This process has not been proven to be commercially suc - cessful . When attempting to preserve cytoskeletal elements none of these fixatives has the ability to preserve all fiber systems and their associated proteins such that they pro - vide superior immunofluorescence images . It is well known that MTs preserve well with cold MeOH , and R . W . Robinson · J . A . Snyder ( ) ) University of Denver , 2190 E . Iliff Avenue , Denver , CO 80208 , USA e - mail : jusnyder @ du . edu poorly with PFA . The conundrum with fixatives is that MFs preserve well with PFA , but not with cold MeOH . Thus the quality of preservation of these individual fix - atives presents severe limitations when the object of any study is the colocalization of proteins using double label immunofluorescence , particularly those of cytoskeletal fibers and their associated proteins . Here we compare the typical cytoskeletal fixation methods of cold MeOH and PFA with a new fixa - tive , CytoSkelFix , which preserves both MTs and MFs and their associated motor proteins . By fixing cultured cells with CytoSkelFix it is possible to perform double label and triple label experiments that include MTs , MFs , and associated motor proteins , such as dynein , kinesin , and myosin , thus allowing images with higher resolution to be obtained . With this new fixative , researchers will be able to improve resolution of cellular components using immunofluorescence microscopy and preserve images of the highest quality . With the recent availability of CytoSkelFix , we demonstrate that all cytoskeletal ele - ments can be extremely well preserved , such that colo - calization studies can be performed with greater clarity . Materials and methods Cell culture Rat kangaroo cells ( PtK 1 ; American Type Culture Collection , Manassas , VA ) were grown in monolayer cultures in Hams F - 12 medium ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) and 10 % fetal bovine serum ( Atlanta Biologicals , Norcross , GA ) in a 5 % CO 2 incubator at 37(cid:2)C . For immunofluorescence staining experiments , cells were harvested from stock cultures and subcultured onto 22 - mm 2 glass microscope coverslips at 70 – 80 % confluency after 48 h . For ex - perimentation , the monolayer was adhered to the coverslip with a fibrinogen – thrombin clot ( Forer 1982 ) . Microscopy Conventional immunofluorescence microscopy was carried out on a Zeiss Axioplan 2 equipped with a 100(cid:3) Plan - NEOFLUAR ob - jective 1 . 3 NA ( Zeiss , Thornwood , NY ) . Micrographs were recorded using a Hamamatsu CCD camera ( Hamamatsu Photonics , Hamamatsu City , Japan ) controlled by Slidebook software ( Intel - ligent Imaging Innovations , Denver , CO ) . All images were cropped using Adobe PhotoShop 7 . 0 ( Adobe Systems , Mountain View , CA ) . Figure assembly was also carried out in Adobe Photo - Shop 7 . 0 . Immunocytochemistry Cells were cultured onto glass coverslips as previously described . Cultures were fixed with either (cid:4)20(cid:2)C anhydrous methanol ( VWR , Bristol , CT ) for 10 min , 3 . 7 % paraformaldehyde ( Electron Mi - croscopy Sciences , Fort Washington , PA ) for 10 min at 25(cid:2)C , or CytoSkelFix ( R & D Enterprises , http : / / www . cytoskelfix . com ) for 4 min at (cid:4)20(cid:2)C . Coverslips were rehydrated in Dulbecco’s phos - phate - buffered saline ( PBS ; Sigma , St . Louis , MO ) for 10 min , lysed with 1 % Triton X - 100 ( Sigma ) in PBS for 1 min , and washed in PBS for 10 min . Monoclonal anti - b - tubulin ( clone TUB 2 . 1 ; Sigma # T4026 ) , monoclonal anti - kinesin ( clone IBII ; Sigma # K1005 ) , monoclonal anti - dynein ( clone 440 . 4 ; Sigma # D1667 ) , and polyclonal anti - myosin ( skeletal and smooth ; Sigma # M7648 ) was applied to separate coverslips containing monolayer cultures and then incubated for 45 min at 37(cid:2)C and rinsed three times in PBS . Alexa Fluor 488 ( FITC conjugate ) goat anti - mouse IgG or IgM ( Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) was used as the secondary antibody . Coverslips were incubated for 45 min in the secondary antibody at 37(cid:2)C , DAPI ( Molecular Probes ) was applied ( to stain DNA ) for 3 min at 37(cid:2)C , and then coverslips were rinsed three times in PBS and once in dH 2 O , and mounted with Gel / Mount ( Biomeda , Foster City , CA ) mounting medium . To stain MFs Alexa Fluor 568 phalloidin ( Molecular Probes ) was applied to coverslips containing monolayer cultures , incubated for 45 min at 37(cid:2)C . DAPI ( diluted to 300 nM ) was applied for 3 min at 37(cid:2)C and coverslips were rinsed three times in PBS and once in dH 2 0 . They were mounted in Gel / Mount following experimental protocols . Results Microtubules with DAPI Microtubules preserved very well with cold MeOH . In - terphase cells revealed a localization of MTs emanating from the centrosome near the nucleus ( Fig . 1A ; Robinson and Snyder 2003 ) . However , when cells were fixed with PFA the MT array appeared fragmented with shorter and fewer MTs ( Fig . 1B ) . Few MTs were seen ending in the cortical region of the cell . The pattern of MT disruption in these cells indicates that the antigen is not preserved by this fixation procedure . CytoSkelFix preserved MTs without their fragmentation or depolymerization and im - proved resolution . MTs can be identified particularly clearly in the cortical region of the cell ( compare Fig . 1C with A ) . Microfilaments with DAPI Cells fixed with cold MeOH and then stained with fluo - rescently labeled phalloidin showed MFs bundled to - gether and fragmented ( Fig . 1D ) . The MF network was no longer arranged with the typical striations of MFs when fixed with PFA ( compare Fig . 1D with E ) . However , when comparing CytoSkelFix to cells fixed with PFA , the MF networks were well preserved with no disruption in the organization of the system ( compare Fig . 1E with F ) . CytoSkelFix preserved MFs slightly better than PFA . This was evident by the increased resolution of individual fi - bers , particularly evident over the nucleus in Fig . 1F . Microtubules and microfilaments with DAPI Cells were labeled with anti - tubulin to localize MTs and fluorescently labeled phalloidin for actin localiza - tion . DNA was stained with DAPI . Figure 1G showed cells fixed with cold MeOH and then labeled for MFs and MTs . Most of the differences occurred in the lack of preservation of the MF network similar to that seen in cells fixed in cold MeOH and single labeled for actin . PFA fixation preserved the MF cytoskeleton well but not the MT cytoskeleton . MTs appeared fragmented and 2 bundled ( Fig . 1H ) . However , cells fixed with CytoSkelFix preserved both the MT and MF cytoskeleton ( Fig . 1I ) with increased resolution . MTs were well preserved with no morphological changes in MT length or distribution . Both MF and MT networks were simultaneously well preserved ( Fig . 1I ) . Motor proteins with DAPI Figure 2 displays interphase PtK 1 cells labeled with anti - dynein , anti - kinesin , and anti - myosin antibodies and fixed with cold MeOH , PFA , and CytoSkelFix . Figure 2A shows anti - dynein - stained cells fixed in cold MeOH . Antibody localization of dynein revealed its widely dis - tributed punctate staining dispersed throughout the nu - cleus and cytoplasm . Figure 2B was fixed in PFA and revealed a loss of punctate staining when compared to Fig . 2A , C . PFA fixation failed to properly preserve the dynein antigen . Antibody localization no longer revealed the punctate staining patterns observed in Fig . 2A , C , instead the loss of punctate staining and the loss of a clear staining pattern of the dynein antigen was observed . However , fixation with CytoSkelFix revealed that the dynein antigen was well preserved ( Fig . 2C ) . Antibody localization revealed dynein dispersed throughout the cell in a punctate staining pattern with the antigen re - maining intact . The punctate staining pattern and disper - sal throughout the cell was the same as cells fixed with cold MeOH ( compare Fig . 2A with C ) . The punctate staining pattern was presumed to be due to the localiza - tion of dynein to Golgi and vesicles . Anti - kinesin antibody localization revealed a punctate staining pattern throughout the cytoplasm when the cells were fixed in cold MeOH ( Fig . 2D ) . Kinesin antigens remained intact when fixed with cold MeOH . Fixation with PFA failed to preserve antigenicity ( Fig . 2E ) . When comparing Fig . 2E with Fig . 2D , F , it was obvious that antibody localization had been compromised . The PFA has significantly affected kinesin antigenicity , therefore , Fig . 1 A Interphase cells fixed with (cid:4)20(cid:2)C methanol ( MeOH ) and stained with anti - tubulin ( green ) and DAPI ( blue ) . B In - terphase cells fixed with 3 . 7 % paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) and stained with anti - tubulin ( green ) and DAPI ( blue ) . C Interphase cells fixed with CytoSkelFix and stained with anti - tubulin ( green ) and DAPI ( blue ) . D In - terphase cells fixed with (cid:4)20(cid:2)C MeOH and stained with fluo - rescently labeled phalloidin for actin ( red ) and DAPI ( blue ) . E Interphase cells fixed with 3 . 7 % PFA and stained with fluores - cently labeled phalloidin for actin ( red ) and DAPI ( blue ) . F Interphase cells fixed with CytoSkelFix and stained with fluorescently labeled phalloidin for actin ( red ) and DAPI ( blue ) . G Interphase cells fixed with (cid:4)20(cid:2)C MeOH and stained with anti - tubulin ( green ) , fluores - cently labeled phalloidin for actin ( red ) , and DAPI ( blue ) . H Interphase cells fixed with 3 . 7 % PFA and stained with anti - tubulin ( green ) , fluores - cently labeled phalloidin for actin ( red ) , and DAPI ( blue ) . I Interphase cells fixed with CytoSkelFix and stained with anti - tubulin ( green ) , fluores - cently labeled phalloidin for actin ( red ) , and DAPI ( blue ) . Bar 5 m m 3 nearly a total loss of antibody labeling was observed and punctate staining was no longer present ( Fig . 2E ) . However , cells fixed with CytoSkelFix ( Fig . 2F ) revealed identical preservation of antigenicity when compared to Fig . 2D . Antibody localization in Fig . 2F revealed a punctate staining pattern throughout the cytoplasm ( com - pare Fig . 2D with F ) . Where the intensity of DAPI stain - ing was the same with all three fixation protocols , the intensity of anti - kinesin staining was more pronounced with CytoskelFix . Anti - myosin smooth and skeletal muscle antibody lo - calization after fixation with cold MeOH revealed a dif - fuse punctate staining pattern throughout the cytoplasm . The myosin antigens remained intact and evenly dispersed ( Fig . 2G ) . When cells were fixed with PFA ( Fig . 2H ) and localized with myosin antibody we conclude that the an - tigenicity has been disrupted in such a way that the punctate staining pattern , observed in Fig . 2G , I , was no longer present . Figure 2I had been fixed with CytoSkelFix . Antibody localization to myosin was identical in the punc - tate staining patterns observed in MeOH - fixed cells ( com - pare Fig . 2G with I ) . Discussion In this paper we compare the quality of preservation of MTs , MFs , and their associated motor proteins after fix - ation with the ‘standard’ fixatives for immunofluores - cence studies and introduce a new fixative that allows us to simultaneously preserve the integrity of the cytoskel - eton . The new fixative , CytoSkelFix , is able to preserve MTs , MFs , and associated motor proteins of the cyto - skeleton allowing researchers to study the interactions of these systems simultaneously in the same cell in a way that has not been possible with the use of ‘standard’ fix - atives previously used . Until now , the fixatives that were available limited researchers particularly interested in Fig . 2 A Interphase cells fixed with (cid:4)20(cid:2)C MeOH and stained with anti - dynein ( green ) and DAPI ( blue ) . B Interphase cells fixed with 3 . 7 % PFA and stained with anti - dynein ( green ) and DAPI ( blue ) . C Interphase cells fixed with CytoSkelFix and stained with anti - dynein ( green ) and DAPI ( blue ) . D In - terphase cells fixed with (cid:4)20(cid:2)C MeOH and stained with anti - kinesin ( green ) and DAPI ( blue ) . E Interphase cells fixed with 3 . 7 % PFA and stained with anti - kinesin ( green ) and DAPI ( blue ) . F Interphase cells fixed with CytoSkelFix and stained with anti - kinesin ( green ) and DAPI ( blue ) . G Interphase cells fixed with (cid:4)20(cid:2)C MeOH and stained with anti - myosin ( green ) and DAPI ( blue ) . H In - terphase cells fixed with 3 . 7 % PFA and stained with anti - myosin ( green ) and DAPI ( blue ) . I Interphase cells fixed with CytoSkelFix and stained with anti - myosin ( green ) and DAPI ( blue ) . Bar 5 m m 4 colocalization studies of antigens that preserved well with different fixation protocols . As previously reported we have demonstrated that cold MeOH is good at preserving the MT cytoskeleton and its associated motor proteins ( Connolly et al . 1977 ; Osborn and Weber 1977 ) but not good at preserving MFs . In contrast PFA is good at pre - serving MFs but not MTs and motor proteins . PFA affects the antigenicity of motor proteins and fragments MTs . With CytoSkelFix we can now colocalize both the MT and MF cytoskeletons and their associated motor proteins in the same tissue preparation . With the superior preser - vation of CytoSkelFix , researchers have a tool that will allow them to pursue the study of the interactions of the MT and MF cytoskeleton and their associated motor proteins for immunocytochemistry and immunofluores - cence microscopy research . Given the intrinsic lability of MTs , CytoSkelFix may well be a superior fixative for all applications requiring routine light and immunofluores - cence microscopy . Acknowledgements We thank R & D Enterprises for access to CytoSkelFix ( http : / / www . cytoskelfix . com ) . Support from the Bar - ton L . Weller Endowment to J . A . S is acknowledged . References Bozzola JJ , Russell LD ( 1999 ) Electron microscopy ; principles and techniques for biologists , 2nd edn . Jones and Bartlett , Sudbury , MA , pp 20 – 21 Cande WZ , Lazarides E , McIntosh JR ( 1977 ) A comparison of the distribution of actin and tubulin in the mammalian mitotic spindle as seen by indirect immunofluorescence . J Cell Biol 72 : 552 – 567 Connolly JA , Kalnins VI , Cleveland DW , Kirschner MW ( 1977 ) Immunofluorescent staining of cytoplasmic and spindle mi - crotubules in mouse fibroblasts with antibody to tau protein . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 74 : 2437 – 2440 Eckert BS , Snyder JA , Repasky E ( 1980 ) Immunoferritin labeling of tubulin in glutaraldehyde - fixed cells . Cell Biol Int Rep 4 : 851 – 858 Forer A ( 1982 ) Crane - fly spermatocytes and spermatids : a system for studying cytoskeletal components . Methods Cell Biol 25 : 227 – 250 Fujiwara K , Pollard TD ( 1980 ) Techniques for localizing contrac - tile proteins with fluorescent antibodies . In : Friedlander M ( ed ) Current topics in developmental biology , vol 14 . Immunolog - ical approaches to embryonic development and differentiation , part II . Academic , New York , pp 271 – 296 Osborn M , Weber K ( 1977 ) The display of microtubules in trans - formed cells . Cell 12 : 561 – 571 Reichman J ( 2000 ) Handbook of optical filters for fluorescence . Chroma Technology , Brattleboro , VT , pp 10 – 20 Robinson RW , Snyder JA ( 2003 ) Redistribution of motor proteins by cytochalasin J treatment . Cell Biol Int 27 : 665 – 673 Sato H , Ohnuki Y , Fujiwara K ( 1976 ) Immunofluorescent anti - tubulin staining of spindle microtubules and critique for the technique . In : Goldman R , Pollard T , Rosenbaum J ( eds ) Cell motility . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory , Cold Spring Harbor , pp 419 – 433 Weber K , Rathke PS , Osborn M ( 1978 ) Cytoplasmic microtubular images in glutaraldehyde - fixed tissue culture cells by electron microscopy and by immunofluorescence microscopy . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 75 : 1820 – 1824 5