Insights on Older Adults’ Willingness , Motives and Experiences regarding Participation in HCI research Karolin Marzi Media Department , University of Applied Science Düsseldorf karoline . marzi @ vodafone . com Holger Klapperich Media Department , University of Applied Science Düsseldorf holger . klapperich @ hs - duesseldorf . de Alina Huldtgren Media Department , University of Applied Science Düsseldorf alina . huldtgren @ hs - duesseldorf . de ABSTRACT User - centered and Participatory Design approaches have become widespread within HCI , also when designing digital media for older adults . These methodologies are seen as crucial to adapt technol - ogy design to older people’s needs and increase their acceptance of digital technology . Nevertheless , it is often difficult to reach a diverse group of older people , for instance , people with limited technology skills , limited mobility , or cognitive issues . In addition , gerontologists criticized lately how older people’s participation unfolds in technology design projects , e . g . that people are pushed into the role of users . Little is known about the motivations and needs of older adults regarding their participation in HCI research . To close this gap , we conducted an online survey ( N = 46 ) and semi - structured interviews ( N = 8 ) focusing on motivations , willingness and experiences regarding participation . Results show that peo - ple are generally willing to participate due to interest in the topic , learning new things and social bonding . However , despite the con - ceptions within HCI that long - term engagement is crucial within participatory design , older people in the study preferred less com - mitment and more open formats . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered Computing ; • Interaction Design ; • Inter - action design process and methods ; KEYWORDS elderly people , participatory design , participatory research , user - centered design , user requirements , voluntary activities ACM Reference Format : Karolin Marzi , Holger Klapperich , and Alina Huldtgren . 2023 . Insights on Older Adults’ Willingness , Motives and Experiences regarding Participation in HCI research . In Mensch und Computer 2023 ( MuC ’23 ) , September 03 – 06 , 2023 , Rapperswil , Switzerland . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 5 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3603555 . 3608540 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , topostonserversortoredistributetolists , requirespriorspecificpermission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . MuC ’23 , September 03 – 06 , 2023 , Rapperswil , Switzerland © 2023 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 979 - 8 - 4007 - 0771 - 1 / 23 / 09 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3603555 . 3608540 1 INTRODUCTION Involving potential users in technology design processes fosters digital media to be designed more functional , usable , and meaning - ful to humans [ 2 ] . In addition , when interests of the general public or specific users are taken into account [ 2 ] , anxiety associated with new technologies can be reduced and technologies become more acceptable to the public [ 7 ] . In participatory design ( PD ) future users are seen as design partners and not merely as subjects of HCI research . They participate directly and proactively in the technol - ogy development process . However , PD does not always adequately involve certain groups of society [ 9 , 14 ] . Especially older people encounter challenges . One barrier to participation could be a lack of digital media literacy [ 33 ] . Moreover , older people encounter barriers of mobility , cognitive resources , or technical knowledge [ 6 ] . Only few specific participatory approaches for older adults are found in literature [ 10 ] . One of them is the " OASIS " approach , which is based on a friendly welcoming culture for participants , accepting them as co - researcher and enabling participation , for ex - ample , through low - fidelity prototyping sessions . The approach has yet to be validated [ 22 ] . Another issue is that older adults are often unaware of existing participation opportunities , such as neighborly networking [ 18 ] ; they are unfamiliar with participatory research in general and rarely participate in it [ 29 ] . Therefore , the interests and special needs of older people often remain understudied in HCI research and design . To understand how to facilitate participation of older people that are not being reached to date , this work raises the question : How do older adults prefer to be involved in HCI research and PD ? An answer to this question requires the study of people’s will - ingness , motives , and interests towards participation . Experiences that people have gained with participatory formats can positively influence attitudes and thereby their willingness to participate in technological development processes [ 1 ] . Research on volunteering shows , that volunteers are more satisfied and stay involved longer when they feel that their primary motivations are addressed [ 7 ] . In addition , while initial engagement can be motivated by fulfilling self - directed motives , such as a personal interest in the topic under study , a desire to learn more or to discover something new , and socializing , addressing altruistic motives , such as the need to help , can motivate longer [ 30 ] . A lot of research reflects on motives of the entire population , but motives of older people may vary by project , from person to person and over time [ 1 ] . However , explicitly un - derstanding older adults’ interests and challenges in participating in technology development is important for several reasons . First , it helps researchers designing technologies that are more acces - sible , and reducing the barriers they face in participating in PD activities . Additionally , involving older adults in PD research can 432 MuC ’23 , September 03 – 06 , 2023 , Rapperswil , Switzerland Karoline Marzi et al . address age - related stereotypes and biases , promoting a more in - clusive approach to technology development . Last , engaging older adults in PD taps into their knowledge and insights , leading to the development of technologies that cater to their diverse needs and preferences , making them more likely to adopt and use them effectively . This paper provides insights into older people’s motiva - tions , willingness , and experiences to participate in HCI research , based on results from a mixed - method study using a survey and semi - structured interviews . 2 PARTICIPATORY DESIGN WITH OLDER ADULTS PD [ 16 ] has gained popularity within HCI , also when designing systems for older people . While PD originally followed humanistic and democratic values , it is today mainly seen as an approach to involve future users in the design process of technology [ 1 , 5 , 31 ] . It has been pointed out that the current practice of user participa - tion in gerontechnology has little in common with the humanistic , democratic and utopian ideal of PD . Rather , users are considered as a “good thing” because their participation would lead to an improve - ment of the technical artefact [ 11 ] . According to current research , target audience involvement ideally occurs throughout the project lifecycle , from early conceptualization through the technology de - velopment process and evaluation [ 10 ] . Baranyi and colleagues recognized that the initial phase of the participatory process with older people is particularly important to get to know them well [ 27 ] . Co - design projects with older people may consist of a variety of conversational formats ( e . g . neighborhood meetings , focus groups , interviews ) [ 27 ] and visual representations of research topics [ 28 ] . To ensure greater adoption and successful implementation of dig - ital technologies , studies showed that it is important to apply so - ciotechnical approaches and methods meeting the needs of users in their daily lives [ 27 ] . LivingLabs have been proposed as one such approach [ 27 ] . Nevertheless , as argued by critical gerontologists , UCD and participatory approaches currently fail to involve older people adequately [ 21 , 23 , 29 ] . Critique points include that partici - pation is used to legitimize technological development or to foster market success through matching user requirements and systems [ 12 , 26 , 29 ] . Furthermore , socially deprived or educationally disad - vantaged older people are often left out of participatory processes [ 4 , 9 , 20 ] . Research on the perspectives of older people regarding their involvement in PD projects is lacking , but highly needed . While some previous research [ 24 ] suggested that longer - term involve - ment is beneficial for the projects success it is , for instance , an open question whether this requirement corresponds to older people’s perception of how participation should unfold over time . In the following , we describe an online survey and semi - structured inter - views to gain insights into older people’s motivations , willingness and experiences regarding participation as a first step to close this gap in literature . 3 ONLINE SURVEY 3 . 1 Study Design and material An online survey was conducted using the SoSci - Survey platform to collect data from participants aged 55 or older regarding their possible participation in HCI research . The age group beginning at 55 years old was selected due to its prevalence in German volunteer groups , where individuals who are still engaged in employment are often included . This demographic typically exhibits higher levels of digital literacy and a closer affinity to technology . Prior to the survey , participants were provided with information about the sur - vey’s content , purpose , conditions , requirements , and process . 46 participants ( 20 male , 25 female , and 1 diverse ) , with an average age of 67 years were recruited . The survey gathered sociodemographic information such as age , gender , and educational background . Mo - tives for participation were assessed using adapted items from the Scales of Attitudinal Structure of Volunteers ( SEEH ) [ 3 ] , with a reliability coefficient ranging from 0 . 52 to 0 . 85 . Participants rated their agreement with motive - related items on a five - point Likert scale . The survey also assessed participants’ experience with vol - unteering and their interest in digital media , using self - designed questions and multiple - choice responses . Participants were asked about their interest in specific areas of digital media on a five - point Likert scale . The willingness to participate in research activities related to digital media was measured using the Willingness to Participate Questionnaire [ 17 ] , consisting of five items and rated on a five - point Likert scale . Digital literacy was assessed using the DigCompSAT Annex 3 Sampling Questionnaire [ 8 ] , which included ten items related to internet usage and troubleshooting . After com - pleting the survey , participants were debriefed and thanked for their participation without receiving any compensation . 3 . 2 Survey Results Interests in digital media : Participants were mostly interested in topics like “media - psychology” ( M = 3 . 30 , SD = 1 . 13 ) and “media and technology ( M = 3 . 30 , SD = 1 , 08 ) followed by the topics of “human - computer - interaction ( M = 3 . 07 , SD = 1 . 07 ) and “computer science” ( M = 2 . 93 , SD = 0 , 97 ) . In general , interest in those topics was high ( M = 3 . 15 , SD = 0 . 18 ) . Experience of volunteering and participation : 48 % of the participants volunteer regularly ( N = 22 of 46 ) , while 26 % ( N = 12 of 46 ) volunteered in the past . About 20 % ( N = 9 of 46 ) did not volunteer . When it comes to participation within design processes 39 % ( N = 18 of 46 ) do not participate , another 33 % ( N = 15 of 46 ) participate from time to time and 28 % ( N = 13 of 46 ) participate regularly . For those , who do participate ( N = 28 ) , ( online ) surveys play a bigger role for 68 % ( N = 19 of 28 ) , only 32 % of participation was in workshops ( N = 9 of 28 ) and 29 % in interviews ( N = 8 of 28 ) . Only 7 % ( N = 2 of 28 ) participated in open spaces formats . As a motivation 50 % indicated that participate to learn about the topic and to contribute their point of view ( N = 14 of 28 ) . Another 25 % said they did not benefit from participation ( N = 7 of 28 ) . Motives of participation : As seen in Fig . 1 personal interest in the topic as well as learning or discovering new things were the main motivators for participation , followed by social bonding and self - development . Self - worth ( M = 2 . 46 , SD = 0 . 97 ) , and social 433 Insights on Older Adults’ Willingness , Motives and Experiences regarding Participation in HCI research MuC ’23 , September 03 – 06 , 2023 , Rapperswil , Switzerland Figure 1 : Mean Ratings of Participation Motives on 5 - point Likert Scale influence ( M = 2 . 45 , SD = 1 . 23 ) were minor motives . Overall , altruis - tic motives to participate ( M = 3 . 36 , SD = 0 . 87 ) were moderate and slightly rated higher than self - serving motives ( M = 3 . 13 , SD = 0 . 77 ) . Willingness to participate : Willingness to participate in digi - tal media research was moderate ( M = 2 . 64 , SD = 1 . 04 ) . Participants tended to believe that their skills necessary to participate were not sufficient ( M = 2 . 33 , SD = 1 . 08 and M = 2 . 49 , SD = 1 . 08 , respec - tively ) . The time required to participate in digital media research was moderately important ( M = 2 . 52 , SD = 1 . 19 ) . To sum up , while around 80 % of the survey respondents vol - unteer regularly , only 61 % has participated in research activities . Only a small number has experience in open spaces or workshop formats . Interestingly respondents were interested digital media topics , which was also a main motivator to participate , but believed that they lack skills to participate in digital media research and rated the expected time to participate as important . Main motivators for participating besides interest in the topic were learning / discovering new things and social bonding . 4 INTERVIEWS 4 . 1 Participants and procedure Eight people ( male : 4 , female : 4 , between 57 - 70 years of age ) were interviewed . Six participants were retired and two were still em - ployed . An additional six participants had previously participated in the online survey and were consequently provided with a briefing on the subject of engagement in development processes . Seven par - ticipants had an academic degree . Topics included in the interview guide were experience with participating , relationship to digital me - dia and motives to participate . The interview guide was constantly adapted on the results of the previous interview insights . Before the interviews started , informed consent was collected via an online form . The interviews were audio - recorded and after conducting all the interviews , they were transcribed and anonymized . A content analysis was then performed using the method outlined by Mayring [ 23 ] . Categories were assigned based on a coding system , initially derived from the structure of the interview guide . Subsequently , a sub - coding method was employed to focus on specific details , following the guidelines proposed by Gibbs [ 25 ] and Huberman et al . [ 15 ] . 4 . 2 Interview Results Retirement : Retirement is accompanied by various emotions among the participants . P2 highlighted that retirement brings about a " change in life that should not be underestimated . " Participants P1 , P7 , and P8 mentioned the newfound freedom in retirement , with P8 stating , " Since I am a pensioner , I can get away with anything . " However , they also expressed a sense of loss of social contact . P4 reported , " Social contacts that I used to have on a daily basis at my workplace , I no longer have . " Additionally , P2 shared that as an older person , " you have to ask yourself how much time you actually have left in your life . " Relationship to digital media : Participants identified typical problems and challenges with digital media , which evoked certain emotions . P4 explained that younger people find digital media easy to use , but for older individ - uals it is completely different . P7 mentioned low self - confidence , stating , " Some people don’t even dare to do it anymore and say I can’t handle it . " P3 expressed fascination and skepticism towards digital media , while P8 admitted " I am skeptical there , although I find it fascinating " . Several participants ( P2 , P3 , P4 , P6 , P7 ) men - tioned experiencing exclusion through digital media . P4 emphasized the importance of dealing with digital media to avoid disconnection from shaping one’s life . Many participants ( P1 , P5 , P6 , P8 ) men - tioned frustration with digital media . P6 specifically revealed not wanting to engage with digital media , stating , " No , because I don’t want to ! I don’t want that on principle . " Participation experience : Among the interviewees , only three participants ( P2 , P4 , P8 ) had previous experience with participation . P2 , P4 , and P5 had participated in research surveys . P8 had expe - rience with a double - blind medical trial . P2 additionally attended a workshop for older adults , because P2 liked the looseness and the tasks during the creative work : " So this playful phase before , it is fun , it is a loosening and that also releases the tension " . While some participants ( P2 , P5 ) enjoyed their participation in university research , they also noticed a lack of expertise and basic knowledge 434 MuC ’23 , September 03 – 06 , 2023 , Rapperswil , Switzerland Karoline Marzi et al . among the researchers : " I sometimes had the impression that they were not so far advanced with the project and that I basically had more basic knowledge , which they actually need for their platform [ . . . ] . Maybe they were technically more advanced , but [ . . . ] maybe they lacked a bit of everyday experience in dealing with dementia patients " . Needs : Different needs could be identified from the interviews . P4 " [ . . . ] like to go one step at a time " , while P5 wants to " [ . . . ] listen and look first . " when it comes to participating . This fits with the statement that they do not want to commit to anything in their retirement ( P2 , P4 , P6 , P7 ) . Here P2 stated critically " [ . . . ] to be part of an organization and to make sure to be available , that’s what you don’t want at all as a retiree . " . P1 and P8 also thematized that they liked to prepare or follow up on topics . P2 reported " [ . . . ] a big problem with the age group [ . . . ] " is that they mainly consume , no longer take responsibility and " [ . . . ] actually just want to go along for the ride " . Interest : Personal interest is highly relevant to participants’ participation . Most of the interviewees have interest and desire to participate in HCI research ( P2 , P5 , P6 , P7 , P8 ) , P2 said " Something like that [ is ] of course highly interesting , because they are forced outside of your normal daily routine to deal with things " , while P7 could " [ . . . ] basically imagine it . " P8 stated that elderly people " [ are ] happy that [ they ] are allowed to participate [ . . . ] as an affected age group " . Reasons why the interviewees have not yet participated in university research are described in chapter ‘Willingness to participate and barriers to participation’ . Interaction : When asked about the extent of interaction , a ma - jority of participants ( P1 , P4 , P5 , P6 , P8 ) expressed reluctance to - ward long - term participation due to considerations of their age and health . So P8 reported " You never know how you’re going to be and I’m already of a certain age " . They also mentioned a lack of interest or time . P6 stated that participation should no longer be on a large scale , as they can’t commit to it anymore . Many participants expressed a desire to find solutions through their participation and valued open discussions . P6 highlighted the importance of informal gatherings and events for fostering a relaxed atmosphere , " If [ . . . ] you [ want to ] come together , then [ you ] have to be able to interact on an interpersonal level " . Willingness to participate and barriers to participation : Participants considered feasibility and their own capabilities when deciding to participate . Age - related illnesses and inertia were per - ceived as significant hurdles . P2 expressed concerns about their health , stating , because " everyone should [ only ] seek intellectual challenges in old age within their means " . Participants mentioned the lack of awareness about opportunities to participate in univer - sity research and the need for greater transparency and accessibility . Time management and the desire to make intentional choices about how to spend their time were also factors affecting willingness to participate . To sum up retirement was seen as a significant life change , offer - ing newfound freedom but also leading to a loss of social contact . Participants lacked prior participation experience . This could be grounded in their mixed feelings about digital media , with some expressing low confidence and skepticism , while others were fasci - nated but fatigued by it . Here the uncertainty might lead to their preferences to observing before committing when it comes to partic - ipatory design processes , . Interaction preferences varied due to age , health considerations , and time constraints . Barriers to participa - tion included age - related illnesses , inertia , lack of awareness about opportunities , and the need for transparency and accessibility . 5 DISCUSSION Despite using a mixed method approach with complementary data from the survey and interviews , the number of participants limits representative results . Moreover , the online survey was not in - clusive enough , as only older people who had already access to digitality in form of a device with an internet connection could participate . There is a bias in people being interested in taking part in online surveys . Nevertheless , we could derive interesting insights and directions for adapting PD , as explained next . The findings suggest that , on the one hand , there is a genuine personal interest in digital media , which serves as a motivator for participation . On the other hand , retirees face challenges and nega - tive emotions when using digital media , such as low self - confidence , skepticism , fear , and feelings of exclusion . While they have interest in participating in digital media research , overall willingness to participate is influenced by factors like age - related illnesses , iner - tia , perceived lack of skills , and the desire to avoid commitments during retirement . This is an interesting point when it comes to the discourse in PD around long - term engagements . While it is often considered beneficial to the design process to involve the same people throughout , the people in our study preferred to avoid long - term commitments . Retirees prefer activities that allow them to go at their own pace , observe first , and avoid rigid commitments . They value opportunities for reflection , interaction , and the chance to contribute their perspectives and ideas . This is in line with Vines et al . ’s [ 32 ] call for reflection on how participation can unfold , e . g . , people can and already do participate in ways that are “witting , unwitting , spectator - like , as a reflexive commentator or as creator” ( p . 433 ) . Another interesting point that came up was the perception that the researchers were less knowledgeable than the participant ( on the topic of dementia ) . This reveals a mismatch between the understanding of the participant’s reason to be part of the study and the researcher’s goal to involve her to retrieve first - hand ex - perience on dementia . In PD participants are involved as experts on their daily experiences , but this is maybe not clear to them . To increase engagement and participation among older adults , it is important to address practical barriers and provide support . This includes bridging digital literacy gaps , offering flexible participation opportunities , and considering the unique needs and preferences of retirees . By providing inclusive and meaningful participation experiences , older adults can be encouraged to engage with digital media research and contribute their valuable insights . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank all seniors that took part in the study . This research was funded by the German federal ministry of education and research . Funding code : 01WJ2227A . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Elliot Aronson , Wilson , Robin . 2014 . Eigenart und Ursprung von Einstellungen , ” in Sozialpsychologie , Pearson Deutschland GmbH . 435 Insights on Older Adults’ Willingness , Motives and Experiences regarding Participation in HCI research MuC ’23 , September 03 – 06 , 2023 , Rapperswil , Switzerland [ 2 ] Liam Bannon , J . Bardzell , and S . Bödker . 2018 . Reimagining Participatory Design . Interactions , 26 ( 1 ) , pp . 26 - 32 . [ 3 ] Hans - Werner Bierhoff , Schülken , T . , Hoof , M . 2012 . SEEH Skalen der Einstel - lungsstruktur ehrenamtlicher Helfer . [ 4 ] Peter Biniok , Menke , I . and Selke , S . 2016 . Social Inclusion of Elderly People in Rural Areas by Social and Technological Mechanisms . In E . Domińguez - Rué and L . Nierling ( eds . ) , Ageing and Technology : Perspectives from the Social Sciences , Bielefeld , transcript Verlag , pp . 93 - 117 . [ 5 ] Susanne Bødker , Ehn , P . , Knudsen , J . , Kyng , M . und Madsen , K . 1988 . Computer Support for Cooperative Design . In : Proceedings of the 1988 ACM Conference on Computer - supported Cooperative Work , S . 377 - 394 . [ 6 ] Bundesministerium für Familie , Senioren , Frauen und Jugend . 2020 . Achter Altersbericht – Ältere Menschen und Digitalisierung . Retrieved 19 . 01 . 2023 from https : / / www . achter - altersbericht . de / fileadmin / altersbericht / pdf / aktive _ PDF _ Altersbericht _ DT - Drucksache . pdf . [ 7 ] Gil E . Clary , M . Synder , R . D . Ridge , J . Copeland , A . A . Stukas , J . Haugen and P . Miene . 1998 . Understanding and assessing the motivations of volunteers : a functional approach . Journal of personality and social psychology , 1998 , vol . 74 , no . 6 , pp . 1516 . [ 8 ] Ian Clifford , Jakobsone , M . , Vuorikari , E . R . , & Punie , Y . 2020 . DigCompSAT A Self - reflectionToolfortheEuropeanDigitalCompetenceFrameworkforCitizens . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2760 / 77437 [ 9 ] Diego Compagna . 2012 . Lost in Translation ? The Dilemma of Alignment within Participatory Technology Developments . In “Poiesis & Praxis : International Jour - nal of Ethics of Science and Technology Assessment” , 9 ( 1 - 2 ) , pp . 125 - 143 . [ 10 ] Ezequiel Duque , G . Fonseca , H . Vieira , G . Gontijo , and L . Ishitani . 2019 . A sys - tematic literature review on user centered design and participatory design with older people . IHC 2019 - Proc . 18th Brazilian Symp . Hum . Factors Comput . Syst . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3357155 . 3358471 . [ 11 ] Cordula Endter . 2021 . User Participation as a Matter of Care . The Configuration of Older Users in the Design of Assistive Technologies . TECNOSCIENZA : Italian Journal of Science & Technology Studies , 11 ( 2 ) , 93 - 116 . [ 12 ] Cordula Endter . 2016 . Skripting Age – The Negotiation of Age and Aging in Ambient Assisted Living . In E . Domińguez - Rué and L . Nierling ( eds . ) , Ageing and Technology : Perspectives from the Social Sciences , Bielefeld , transcript Ver - lag , pp . 121 - 140 . [ 13 ] Joan Greenbaum & Kyng , M . 1991 . Design at Work : Cooperative Design of Computer Systems . Hillsdale : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc . [ 14 ] Eric von Hippel . 2006 . Democraticing Innovation . the MIT Press . [ 15 ] Matthew MB , Huberman AM , Saldana J ( 2014 ) Qualitative data analysis : a meth - ods sourcebook . Sage , London [ 16 ] Victor Kaptelinin & Bannon , L . J . 2012 . Interaction Design Beyond the Product : Creating Technology - Enhanced Activity Spaces . Human - Computer Interaction , 27 ( 3 ) , S . 277 - 309 [ 17 ] Madelon Kroneman , Van Erp , K . , & Groenewegen , P . 2018 . Community partici - pation in primary care : Willingness to participate , a web survey in the Nether - lands . Primary Health Care Research and Development . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S1463423618000695 [ 18 ] Kooperationsverbund Gesundheitliche Chancengleichheit . 2012 . Gute Praxis konkret : Partizipation im Alter . Retrieved 20 . 01 . 2023 https : / / www . gesundheitliche - chancengleichheit . de / gesundheitsfoerderung - bei - aelteren / gute - praxis / partizipation / . [ 19 ] Sarah Kuhn & Michael J . Muller . 1993 . Participatory Design . Communications of the ACM . 36 ( 6 ) , S . 24 - 28 . [ 20 ] Harrald Künemund & Tanschus , N . 2013 . Gero - Technology : Old Age in the Electronic Jungle . In K . Komp and M . Aartsen ( eds . ) , Old Age in Europe , Dor - drecht , Springer Netherlands , pp . 97 – 112 . [ 21 ] Aske Juul Lassen , Bønnelycke , J . & Otto , L . 2015 . Innovating for ‘Active Age - ing’ in a Public - Private Innovation Partnership : Creating Doable Problems and Alignment . In “Technological Forecasting and Social Change” , 93 , pp . 10 - 18 . [ 22 ] Stephen Lindsay , D . Jackson , G . Schofield , & P . Olivier . 2012 . Engaging Older People using Participatory Design . pp . 1199 – 1208 . [ 23 ] Mayring , Philipp . " Qualitative content analysis . " A companion to qualitative research 1 . 2 ( 2004 ) : 159 - 176 . [ 24 ] Sebastian Merkel & Kucharski , Alexander 2019 . Participatory Design in Geron - technology : A Systematic Literature Review . In “The Gerontologist” , 59 ( 1 ) , pp . 16 - 25 . [ 25 ] Gibbs G ( 2018 ) Analyzing qualitative data , vol 6 . Sage , London [ 26 ] Louis Neven . 2010 . But obviously not for me’ : Robots , Laboratories and The Defi - ant Identity of Elder Test Users . In “Sociology of Health & Illness” , 32 ( 2 ) , pp . 335 - 347 . [ 27 ] Leena Norros , E . Kaasinen , J . Plomp & P . Rämä . 2003 . Human - technology inter - action research and design : VTT roadmap . VTT Tied . - Valt . Tek . Tutkimusk . , no . 2220 , pp . 3 – 118 [ 28 ] Quinton , Sarah , Daniela Treveri Gennari , and Silvia Dibeltulo . " Engaging older peoplethroughvisualparticipatoryresearch : Insightsandreflections . " Qualitative Research ( 2022 ) : 14687941221110163 . [ 29 ] Alexander Peine , Rollwagen , I . & Neven , L . 2014 . The Rise of the “Innosumer” - Rethinking Older Technology Users . In “Technological Forecasting and Social Change” , 82 , pp . 199 - 214 . [ 30 ] DanaRotman , J . Hammock , J . Preece , D . Hansen , andC . Boston . 2014 . Motivations AffectingInitialandLong - TermParticipationinCitizenScienceProjectsinThree Countries . doi : 10 . 9776 / 14054 . [ 31 ] Douglas Schuler & Namioka , A . ( Eds . ) . 1993 . Participatory design : Principles and practices . CRC Press . [ 32 ] Vines , J . , Clarke , R . , Wright , P . , McCarthy , J . , & Olivier , P . ( 2013 , April ) . Config - uring participation : on how we involve people in design . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( pp . 429 - 438 ) . [ 33 ] Daniel Wyler and M . Haklay . 2019 . Integrating citizen science into university . Citizen Science , UCL Press , , pp . 168 – 182 . 436