The Centromere - Kinetochore Complex : A Repeat Subunit Model R . P . Zinkowski , * J . Meyne , * and B . R . Brinkley * * Department of Cell Biology , University of Alabama at Birmingham , Birmingham , Alabama 35294 ; and ~ Genetics Group , Los Alamos National Laboratory , Los Alamos , New Mexico 87545 Abstract . The three - dimensional structure of the ki - netochore and the DNA / protein composition of the centromere - kinetochore region was investigated using two novel techniques , caffeine - induced detachment of unreplicated kinetochores and stretching of kinetochores by hypotonic and / or shear forces generated in a cyto - centrifuge . Kinetochore detachment was confirmed by EM and immunostaining with CREST autoantibodies . Electron microscopic analyses of serial sections dem - onstrated that detached kinetochores represented frag - ments derived from whole kinetochores . This was es - pecially evident for the seven large kinetochores in the male Indian muntjac that gave rise to 80 - 100 frag - ments upon detachment . The kinetochore fragments , all of which interacted with spindle microtubules and progressed through the entire repertoire of mitotic movements , provide evidence for a subunit organiza - tion within the kinetochore . Further support for a re - peat subunit model was obtained by stretching or un - coiling the metaphase centromere - kinetochore complex by hypotonic treatments . When immunostained with CREST autoantibodies and subsequently processed for in situ hybridization using synthetic centromere probes , stretched kinetochores displayed a linear array of fluo - rescent subunits arranged in a repetitive pattern along a centromeric DNA fiber . In addition to CREST anti - gens , each repetitive subunit was found to bind tubulin and contain cytoplasmic dynein , a microtubule motor localized in the zone of the corona . Collectively , the data suggest that the kinetochore , a plate - like structure seen by EM on many eukaryotic chromosomes is formed by the folding of a linear DNA fiber consisting of tan - demly repeated subunits interspersed by DNA linkers . This model , unlike any previously proposed , can ac - count for the structural and evolutional diversity of the kinetochore and its relationship to the centromere of eukaryotic chromosomes of many species . T HE kinetochore is a highly differentiated structure lo - cated at the centromere ( primary constriction ) of chro - mosomes and serves as an attachment site for spindle microtubules . Recent evidence suggests that kinetochores capture and stabilize microtubules that grow from the spin - dle poles ( 23 , 36 ) and participate in the generation of forces necessary for chromosome movement in mitosis and meiosis ( 39 , 49 ) . In electron micrographs , the kinetochore typically appears as a triple - layered plate or disc situated at the sides of the centromere . Notable structural variations include the " bail and cup " kinetochores of many plant chromosomes and diffuse kinetochores of some plant and insect chromosomes ( reviewed in references 12 and 48 ) . Although many reports in the literature have described the ultrastructure of the ki - netochore , considerable confusion still exists in the use of the terms centromere and kinetochore and how the structure and molecular composition of one relates to the other . Since the inner layer of the trilaminar kinetochore plate is juxta - posed to and intimately associated with centromeric chro - matin fibers , this region of the chromosome appears to be integrated into a functional complex that ensures proper dis - tribution of the genetic material . Moroi et al . ( 38 ) have shown that serum from individuals with the CREST ~ ( calcinosis , Raynaud ' s phenomenon , esoph - ageal dysmotility , sclerodactyly , and telangiectasia ) variant of scleroderma contains autoantibodies that bind to com - ponents of the centromere . This seminal discovery opened the way for the first significant immunocytochemical and biochemical analyses of the centromere - kinetochore region of eukaryotic chromosomes . Subsequently , immunoblots of nuclear proteins using CREST sera led to the discovery of several new centromeric polypeptides , including CENP - A ( 18 kD ) , CENP - B ( 80 kD ) , and CENP - C ( 140 kD ) ( 20 , 57 ) . Using immunoperoxidase at the electron microscopic level , these proteins were detected on the inner and outer kineto - chore plates and subjacent chromatin of mammalian chro - mosomes ( 4 ) . More recently using immunogold EM probes , label was localized to the heterochromatin of human centro - meres ( 19 ) . Masumoto et al . ( 28 ) demonstrated that the al - phoid DNA of the centromere contains specific sequences that interact with CENP - B . Earlier histocytochemical evi - dence indicates that kinetochores are composed of DNA ( 40 , 1 . Abbreviations used in this paper : CREST , calcinosis , Raynaud ' s phenom - enon , esophageal dysmotility , sclerodactyly , and telangiectasia ; HU , hydroxy - urea ; MUG , mitotic cells with unreplicated genomes . © The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 91 / 06 / 1091 / 20 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 113 , Number 5 , June 1991 1091 - 1110 1091 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 113 , 1991 1092 46 ) , protein ( 57 ) , and possibly RNA ( 47 ) , although the pre - cise relationships of how these macromolecules relate to kinetochore ultrastructure is not well understood . Based largely on EM evidence , the kinetochore has been described as a proteinaceous plate formed or deposited near the centro - mere ( 13 , 17 , 51 ) , a fiber composed of DNA complexed to protein ( 5 , 6 , 44 , 46 , 50 ) , or a combination of both ( 50 ) . Knowledge of centromeric DNA and its contribution to the function and structure of the centromere - kinetochore comes largely from molecular genetics studies of yeast chro - mosomes . The centromeres of the budding yeast Saccharo - myces cerevisiae are contained within a 220 - bp nuclease re - sistant core region that is folded into a particle of 15 - 20 nm in diameter , which is capable of binding a single microtubule ( reviewed in references 2 and 15 ) . Within this core exists three regions of conserved homology , called centromere DNA elements , or CDE I , II , and HI . CDE I ( 8 bp ) and HI ( 25 bp ) consist of regions of conserved homology that are separated by CDE II ( 78 - 86 bp ) that is composed primarily of A + T base pairs . All three CDEs are necessary for prop - er centromere function , and two of these elements , CDE I and IlI , associate with DNA binding proteins as demon - strated by gel retardation studies in vitro ( 21 ) . Thus , the chromatin - protein complex that exists is S . cerevisiae cen - tromeres may represent a primitive kinetochore . In contrast , the centromeres of the distantly related fission yeast Schizo - saccharomyces pombe are larger and more complex . The smallest restriction fragments containing active centromeres are 65 - 150 kb in length and contain blocks of repetitive , het - erochromatin - like , untranscribed DNA arranged in tandem arrays flanking a 7 - kb central core ( 15 , 16 ) . Thus , centro - meres of S . pombe more closely resemble their counterparts in higher eukaryotes such as mammals that contain hetero - chromatin and repetitive DNA , the major class being u - satel - lite , that extends for several megabases along the centromere ( 59 , 60 ) . Although the centromeres of S . cerevisiae and S . pombe are well characterized at the DNA and genetic levels , details concerning proteins and ultrastructure are generally lacking in yeasts ; the reciprocal is true of higher eukaryotic chromo - somes . Here a discrete ultrastructure is observed and some of the proteins can be detected and analyzed by antikineto - chore antibodies . Relatively little is known , however , about chromatin and DNA of the centromere - kinetochore region of higher eukaryotic chromosomes . In the present study we have used two novel approaches , one involving caffeine - induced kinetochore detachment and the other , centromere stretching to investigate the three - dimensional structure and composition of the centromere - kinetochore region and its relationship to the rest of the chromosome . Our study has demonstrated that kinetochore organization mirrors the pattern of repetitive DNA found in the centromeres of higher eukaryotes . Evidence is presented that the kinetochore is assembled from repetitive subunits tandemly arranged on a continuous DNA / protein fiber . Each subunit is a complex of constitutive and facultative proteins and DNA that can function autonomously when experimen - tally detached from the chromosome . This model , which we term the repeat subunit model , can account for the structural and evolutional diversity of the kinetochore and its relation - ship to the centromere of eukaryotic chromosomes of many species . Materials and Methods Cell Culture Chinese hamster ovary ( CHO ) ceils were grown in McCoys 5A ( Iwakata and Grace modification ) supplemented with 10 % CPSR - 4 ( Sigma Chemical Co . , St . Louis , MO ) . Both Indian muntjac ( Muntiacus muntjac vaginalis ) and Chinese muntjac ( Muntiacus reevesi ) were grown in Ham ' s F - 10 me - dium supplemented with 15 % FBS ( Gibco Laboratories , Grand Island , NY ) . HeLa cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10 % FBS . All growth media were supplemented with 100 U / ml of penicillin , 100 # g / ml streptomycin ( C - ibco Laboratories ) , 2 mM L - glutamine , and 1 mM sodium pyruvate . The cells were maintained in a humidified 37°C incubator with an air - 5 % C02 atmosphere . Generation of MUGs The generation of mitotic cells with unreplicated genomes ( MUGs ) has been described in detail previously ( 11 , 62 , 63 ) . Briefly , confluent CHO cells arrested in Gt by contact inhibition and nutrient depletion were re - plated to a density of I x I06 cells / 28 mm 2 in fresh media containing 2 mM hydroxyurea ( HU ) . After 20 h , the media was replaced with fresh media containing 2 mM HU and 5 mM caffeine . Cells entered mitosis within 2 - 6 h and were harvested by mitotic shake - off which usually resulted in a mitotic index of 90 - 96 % MUGs . The generation of Chinese and Indian muntjac MUGs required longer treatments with HU and caffeine due to their longer cell cycles . After replat - ing the confluent cells to a density of I x 10 s cells / 28 mm 2 , the cells were incubated in fresh media containing 2 mM HU for 40 h . The media was then replaced with media containing 2 mM HU and 5 mM caffeine . Chinese muntjac MUGs usually appeared in sufficient quantities within 2 - 6 h ; how - ever , Indian muntjac MUGs required 12 - 20 h in the HU - caffeine mixture before enough cells were obtained for slide preparations . In both cases , the MUGs were selectively detached by mitotic shake - off . Mitotic Cell Preparation Chromosomes from cultured cells were obtained by exposing the cultures to 0 . 1 / ~ g / rnl colcemid ( Gibco Laboratories ) or nocodazole ( Sigma Chemi - cai Co . ) for 4 - 16 h . Mitotic cells were selectively detached from the sub - strate by lightly tapping the side of the flask . The cells were pelleted in a tabletop centrifuge at 1 , 000 g for 5 rain and washed twice in PBS ( 0 . 14 M NaCl , 2 . 5 mM KCI , 8 mM Na2HPO4 , 1 . 6 mM KH2PO4 ; pH 7 . 4 ) . Centromere Stretching Stretching of centromeres of metaphase chromosomes was achieved by me - chanicai or hypotonic treatments . Mechanical stretching of chromosomes was achieved by resuspending the cell pellet in 1 - 2 nfl of PBS . In some ex - periments , the cells were lysed by rtmnin ~ the suspension forcibly through a 26 - gang¢ syringe needle three times . In these instances , the cell suspen - sion contained a protease inhibitor cocktail consisting of 0 . 1 mM PMSF and 1 / ~ g / ml each of chymostatin , leupcptin , antipain , and pepstatin ( P - CLAP ) . Approximately 100 / ~ 1 of the cell suspension was placed into a cytocen - Figure L Immunofluorescence and EM micrographs of CHO MUGs . Double - label immunofluorescence of a MUG stained with ( A ) Hoechst 33258 for DNA , ( B ) TU - 27B for microtubules , and ( C ) CREST for kinetochores . The highly fragmented chromatin was typically found in the periphery of the cell , whereas detached kinetochores were aligned on the spindle . ( D ) EM micrograph of a cell similar to the one in , 4 - C . The detached kinetochores ( K , arrows ) interacted with spindle microtubules ( MT ) , that are continuous with the centrosome ( Ce ) . Chromatin fragments ( Ch ) seen in the vicinity of the detached kinetochores lacked microtubule attachments as determined by serial section EM . ( E ) A kinetochore still partially attached to a large chromatin fragment . The kinetochore " plate " appears broken and discon - tinuous ( arrows ) . Arrowheads in D and E point to the corona . Bars : ( C ) 5 # m ; ( D and E ) 1 tzm . Zinkowski et al . Kinetochore Structure 1093 Figure 2 . Kinetochores of normai and MUG muntjacs . Normal kinetochores visualized by CREST staining are shown for the Indian muntjac ( A ) and the Chinese muntjac ( E ) . ( B - D ) Indian muntjac MUG stained for ki - netochores ( B ) , microtubules ( C ) , and DNA ( D ) . ( F - H ) A Chinese muntjac MUG stained for kinetochores ( F ) , microtubules ( G ) , and DNA ( H ) . Both species of MUGs displayed 80 - 100 kinetochore fragments ( B and F ) , that interacted with spindle microtubules ( C and G ) and contained pulverized chromatin ( D and H ) that was displaced to the periph - ery of the cell . Bar , 10 / zm . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 113 , 1991 1094 trifuge cup and spun onto a clean glass microscope slide or coverslip at 2 , 000 rpm for 2 min using a Cytospin ( Shandon Instruments , Inc . , Pitts - burgh , PA ) set at high acceleration . Hypotonic stretching of chromosomes was achieved by resuspendiag the cell pellet in deionized dH20 containing P - CLAP for times ranging from 1 to 9 rain and then cytospun onto glass slides as described above . Gener - ally , the longer the chromosomes were exposed to hypotonic solution , the more they were stretched . Endosperm chromosomes from the plant Haemanthus katherinae Bak . were prepared as previously described ( 37 ) . Some of the chromosomes in these preparations fortuitously became " mechanically " stretched due to shear forces generated during cytocentrifugation . Tubulin Purification Tubulin was purified by phosphoceLlulose chromatography from twice - cycled bovine brain microtubules as originally described by Mitchison and Kirschner ( 34 ) . The critical concentration for spontaneous assembly of the purified 6S tubulin was 2 . 5 mg / ml , as determined by recording absorbance changes at 320 nm as the samples in microtubnie assembly buffer PEM ( 80 mM Pipes , 1 mM EGTA , 1 mM MgCI2 , pH 7 . 2 ) with 1 mM GTP ( PEM - G ) were warmed from 4°C to 37°C as previously described ( 40 ) . Tubulin Lamination Of Kinetochores For these experiments , exogenous bovine brain 6S tubulin protein was used . Colcemid - arrested cells that were washed free of the drug were resuspended in PBS supplemented with P - CLAP , lysed by passing the cells three times through a 26 - gauge syringe needle , and then cytocentrifuged onto 20 × 10 - mm glass coverslips as described above . The coverslips were subsequently immersed in PEM , followed by 0 . 05 % Triton X - 100 in PEM for 90 s , and then washed in three rinses of PEM . Lamination of kinetochores with tubu - lin was achieved by incubating the coverslips with 6S tubulin in PEM - G using concentrations at or below the critical concentration required for spontaneous assembly for 15 rain at 37°C . The coverslips were then briefly rinsed three times in PEEM ( 0 . 1 M Pipes , pH 6 . 9 , 1 mM MgSO4 , 0 . 1 mM EDTA , and 2 mM EGTA ) at 37°C to remove the unpolymerized tubulin and stabilize the bound tubulin and microtubules . The coverslips were then im - mersed in 100 % methanol at - 20°C for 7 rain or alternatively , in 2 % EM grade formaldehyde ( Tousimis Research Co . , Rockville , MD ) in PBS for 45 rain at room temperature . The coverslips were then transferred to PBS and processed for indirect immunofluorescence as described below . Metha - nol fixation was preferred since it resulted in less background immuno - fluorescence . Indirect lmmunofluorescence To visualize the centromere - kinetochore region of chromosomes , prepara - tions were incubated with CREST serum SH diluted 1 : 100 in PBS , with the exception of Haemanthus endosperm , which was incubated with CREST serum EK at a dilution of 1 : 10 in PBS . Preparations were then stained with goat anti - human IgG conjugated to FITC ( 1 : 20 dilution ; Boehringer Mann - helm , Indianapolis , IN ) . For double - label indirect immunofluorescence , formaldehyde - fixed prep - arations were blocked in 0 . 5 ~ g / ml NaBH4 in PEM for 10 min , then TBS ( 0 . 05 M Tris base , 0 . 9 % NaCI , pH 8 . 2 ) for 2 min and finally in PBS with 1 % BSA ( wt / vol ) for 30 rain . Methanol - fixed preparations were blocked in the PBS - BSA mixture only . The following combinations of antibodies were used in sequential order : Kinetochore / tuhulin staining : SH CREST ( 1 : 100 ) , goat anti - human IgG conjugated to biotin ( 1 : 20 ; Boehringer Mannbeim ) , streptavidin Texas Red ( 1 : 200 ; Boehringer Mannheim ) , microtubule anti - body Tu 2718 ( 1 : 40 , a gift from L . I . Binder , University of Alabama at Birm - ingham ) , sheep anti - mouse IgG - FITC ( Accurate Chemical and Scientific Corp . , Westhury , NY ) , rabbit anti - sheep IgG FITC ( Accurate Chemical and Scientific Corp . ) . Kinetochore / dynein staining : Anti - dynein 70 . 1 ( 1 : 4 , a gift from E . R . Steuer and M . P . Sheetz , Washington University School of Medi - cine , St . Louis , MO ) , goat anti - mouse IgM F1TC ( Boehriager Maunheim ) , rabbit anti - goat IgG F ( ah ) 2 ( Fisher Scientific , Pittsburgh , PA ) , SH CREST , goat anti - human IgG biotin , avidin Texas Red . In all cases , antibodies were diluted in PBS containing 1 % BSA and antibody incubations were for 30 rain at 37°C . Each incubation was followed by three washes in PBS - BSA for 5 rain each . All preparations were counterstained with 1 ~ g / ml Hoechst 33258 ( Sigma Chemical Co . ) in PBS for 5 rain , rinsed in PBS , mounted in 1 mg / mlp - phenylenediamine in a 1 : 10 ( vol / vol ) mixture of PBS : glyeerol , and sealed with nail polish . In Situ Hybridization and CREST Staining Cytospin preparations of normal or hypotonically stretched chromosomes were prepared , fixed , and CREST - stained by indirect immunofluorescence as described above . The preparations were photographed , and the micro - scope stage coordinates of each cell were recorded . The coverslips were re - moved and the slides were rinsed in 5 washes of PBS for 3 rain each . The cells were post - fixed for 30 min in a 3 : 1 mixture ( vol / vol ) of methanol / gla - cial acetic acid and air dried . The cells were processed for in situ hybridiza - tion and the same cells were relocated and photographed . In situ hybridization on HeLa cells was performed using a synthetic con - sensus sequence probe for alpha satellite DNA ( 30 ) . In situ hybridization on CHO cells was performed using the telomere probe ( TTAGC ~ ) n , which also hybridizes to tandem repeats of this sequence at the centromeres of most CHO chromosomes ( 31 , 32 ) . All in situ preparations were counter - stained with 0 . 5 / ~ g / ml propidium iodide and 0 . 06 # m / ml 4 ' 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ( DAPI ) in antifade solution . Electron Microscopy Cultured cells were harvested and collected as pellets or fixed in situ for 1 . 5 h in 3 % glutaraldehyde in Millonig ' s phosphate buffer . The pellet or monolayer was washed three times in buffer and postfixed in 1 % OsO4 for 1 . 0 h . Subsequently , the cells were washed in 30 % ethanol and stained en bloc with 2 % uranyl acetate in 30 % ethanol and dehydrated through a series of graded alcohols . The pellet was embedded in Spurts plastic resin in BEEM capsules while cell monolayers were flat - embedded according to the procedure of Brinldey and Chang ( 7 ) . Serial sections were cut on a diamond knife using an Ultracut E microtome ( Reichert , Vienna , Austria ) , collected on formvar - coated slot grids ( Ted Pella , Reading , CA ) and stained with ura - nyl acetate followed by lead citrate . Care was taken to select ribbons of sec - tions that were contiguous and displaying refractive colors of gray silver . Electron micrographs were taken on a Hitachi H - 7000 electron microscope operated at 75 IN and images were recorded on Kodak sheet film for EM . EM Morphometrics Computer - assisted analysis of serial sections of chromosomes and kincto - chores was accomplished using a PC - based software package described by Young ct ai . ( 61 ) . Micrographs of serial sections were traced so that the digitizing tablet generated a digital image of each chromosome or kineto - chore and morphometric data was recorded automatically as each structure was digitized . Computer - enhanced V ' uleo Microscopy and Image Analysis Computer - enbanced video microscopy and image analysis was performed using a Nikon Optiphot microscope equipped with epifluorescence and a DAGE MTI series 65 SIT video camera ( Dage - MTI , Michigan City , IN ) coupled to an Image 1 - AT ( Universal Imaging , Media , PA ) image analysis system . Specially constructed filter cubes manufactured by Omega Optical , Inc . ( Brattleboro , VT ) for FITC ( excitation filter = 485 rim , barrier filter = 530 rim ) and Texas Red ( excitation filter = 560 rim , barrier filter = 635 nm ) eliminated the detection of false signals between the two fluorochromes . For image enhancement , gain and black level were set both on the camera and computer to provide an optimal signal . Then 128 video frames were summed into the foreground buffer , the image was defocused , and an addi - tional 128 frames were summed into the background buffer . The background buffer was subtracted from the foreground buffer , subjected to contrast en - hancement , and stored on the computer hard drive . Overlays of double fluo - rescence staining were achieved by aligning discernable fiduciary points within the images using the " subtract with shear " function . After alignment , the images in the frame buffers were superimposed using the " display RGB image " function , which pseudocolors images in the foreground and back - ground buffers as red and green , respectively . Image 1 - AT was calibrated in the x and y axis using a stage micrometer . Lengths of CREST - stained kinetochores were measured using the " measure curvature length " function . The fluorescence areas of kinetochores were measured by summing 128 video frames using the ~ acquire image " function , the image was defocused and 128 frames were summed using the ~ acquire reference image " function , which was automatically subtracted from the ac - quired image . The image was then enlarged 2 x using the " zoom " function and manually thresholded ; the area was measured using the object measure - ment mode . All data was recorded to the hard drive and statistics were per - formed using Signmplot ( Jandel Sciences , Cone Madera , CA ) . Zinkowski et al . Kinetochore Structure 1095 A 12o 100 ! . o : 3 Z CliO INTACT KINETOCHORE ~ 4O 20 - ' N - 202 o ~ I 0 . 00 0 . 05 0 . 10 0 . 15 0 . 20 0 . 25 0 . 30 0 . 35 0 . ~ 10 0 ) , 5 0 . 50 0 . , . 2 ) B : 2 i l Z 40 . ClIO DETACHED KINETOCI - IORES N , , , 200 20 : 0 0 . 00 0 . 05 O . lO o . 15 o ~ o o . ~ o . ~ o o . ~ , o . ~ o o . ; , s o . 5o 0 , ~ 2 ) C 12o ~ 100 ~ Z 402 CHINESE MUNTJAC INTACT KINETOCHORES N , - 255 2O " O ' I 0 . 00 0 . ~ 0 . ~ 0 0 . 15 0 . 20 0 . 25 o2o 0 . 35 0 . 40 0 . ~ , 0 . ~ 0 Anm Oan 2 ) D 120 . 100 . BO . i E 60 . z 40 . 20 . CHINESE MUNTJAC DETACHED KINETOCHORES N - 205 o I , 0 . 00 0 . 05 0 . 10 0 . 15 0 . 20 0 . 25 0 . 30 0 . 35 0 . ~ 10 0 . ~ 0 . 50 Are 0 ~ 2 ) F " 120 . INDI / ~ MUNTJAC DETACHED KINETOCHORES INDIAN MUNTJAC INTACT KINETOCHORES F 12o ~ 100 . N - 22B 100 - N - 193 80 ' 8O " J ~ E 60 ; 80 Z , ' ~ 4o : , , 40 : o ' o I I 0 . 00 0 . 15 0 . , . 30 0 . 45 0 . 80 0 . 75 0 . 90 1 . 05 1 . 20 1 . 35 1 : 50 0 . 00 0 . 05 0 . 10 0 . 15 0 . 20 0 . 25 0 . 30 0 . 35 0 . ~ , 0 0 . ~ , 0 . 50 Area O , m2 ) ~ 0 , , . 2 ) Figure 3 . Digital image analysis of fluorescence areas of intact and detached kinetochores . Histograms of the distributions of fluorescent areas of CREST - stained intact kinetochores ( A , C , and E ) and detached kinetochores ( B , D , and F ) in CHO , Chinese muntjac , and Indian muntjac , respectively . Due to the large size of the Indian muntjac kinetochores the abscissa in E has been expanded . Photography and Photomicroscopy Computer - enhanced video microscope images were obtained using either a Kodak SV - 65 or Sony UP - 5000 color video printer . Photomicroscopy was performed using a Leitz Orthoplan epifluorescence microscope equipped with a Vario - orthomat 2 camera . Kodak T - Max 400 film was shot at ASA 1600 and push - processed in Kodak T - Max developer ( 9 rain at 70°F ) . Patient Sera CREST sera S . H . and E . K . were obtained from the Comprehensive Ar - thritis Center at the University of Alabama at Birmingham ; these sera have been previously characterized elsewhere ( 1 , 33 , 37 ) . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 113 , 1991 1096 Results Detached Kinetochores of CHO MUGs The mitotic apparatus ( centrosomes , chromosomes , and spin - die microtubules ) is essential for the partitioning of genetic material to the daughter cells during mitosis and has been subject to detailed investigations by those studying cell divi - sion . Certain mammalian cell lines including Chinese ham - ster ovary ( CHO ) can be chemically induced to enter mitosis prematurely ( 53 ) . We were interested in the mitotic appara - tus of these cells and hence used immunofluorescence and EM techniques to study their morphology . When CHO cells were synchronized at the GJS bound - ary of the cell cycle with 2 mM hydroxyurea ( HU ) for 20 h and subsequently exposed to 5 mM caffeine , the ceils prema - turely entered mitosis in the absence of DNA replication as previously reported ( 11 , 53 , 54 ) . Since these cells entered mitosis without completing DNA synthesis , we refer to them as mitotic cells with u _ nreplicated genomes ( MUGs ) . When CHO MUGs were stained by indirect immunofluorescence using CREST autoantibodies , tubulin antibodies and Hoechst 33258 , highly fragmented chromosomes were found dis - persed throughout the cell ( Fig . 1 A ) , whereas the kineto - chores ( Fig . 1 C ) , now detached from the rest of the genome , were found associated with the spindle microtubules ( Fig . 1 B ) . As shown by Hoechst or propidium iodide staining , the detached kinetochores contained a residual amount of DNA ( compare Figs . 1 , A and C ) . The kinetochores on CHO metaphase chromosomes are similar to other mammalian kinetochores and display a char - acteristic trilaminar morphology that has been extensively described in the recent literature ( reviewed in 10 , 12 , 48 ) . When MUGs were sectioned and examined by transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) , numerous profiles of kineto - chores were morphologically similar to their counterparts on normal metaphase chromosomes . The striking difference , of course , was that kinetochores of MUGs were detached and displaced from the chromatin mass ( Fig . 1 D , arrows ) . In most ceils , kinetochores were attached to microtubules and aligned on the metaphase spindle ( Fig . 1 D ) . Most of the chromatin fragments , however , remained displaced in the cytoplasm . In most profiles , individual kinetochores consisted of a single - layered " plate " encompassing an electron dense chro - matin core ( Fig . 1 D , arrows ) . The structure of the plate was much like that described for the outer layer of intact ki - netochores ( 5 , 6 , 17 , 50 ) , often appearing in individual sec - tions as a pair of cohelically wound filaments ~ 5 - 10 nm in thickness . The plate was separated from the underlying chro - matin by a less dense space of 25 - 30 um in thickness . A fibrous corona extending from the kinetochore plate formed a fuzzy coat along the cytoplasmic surface of the detached kinetochores ( Fig . 1 , D and E , arrowheads ) . In both un - treated or colcemid - arrested MUGs , most of the kineto - chores were detached and completely displaced from the rest of the chromatin . In a few cells , however , kinetochores were still partially attached to large chromatin fragments and the kinetochore plate appeared to be broken and discontinuous ( Fig . 1 E , arrows ) . Movement and alignment of detached kinetochores re - quired intact microtubules that extended from the centro - somes and attached to kinetochores in much the same way as in normal mitosis ( Fig . l D ) . Microtubules usually termi - nated at the outer surface of the kinetochore plate as seen in serial section TEM . At metaphase , detached kinetochores were either bi - or mono - oriented within the same cell . When microtubules were attached to opposite sides of a detached kinetochore , it became bi - oriented to opposite poles , where - as kinetochores with microtubules extending from only one pole were mono - oriented . Kinetochore Number Paradox of CHO MUGs We were interested in determining the period of the cell cycle when CHO kinetochores became duplicated . If this event oc - curred at the GdS border , then cells blocked at this phase of the cell cycle with HU would be expected to possess repli - cated kinetochores . To determine when kinetochores in CHO cells became duplicated , immunofluorescence staining with CREST autoantibodies for kinetochore detection and single cell cytometry to measure DNA content of Hoechst 33258 - stained cells was performed . It was found that kinetochores of CHO cells were duplicated when the DNA content was near or equal to 4C , thus indicating that the kinetochores replicated in late S or G2 of the cell cycle ( data not shown ) . This is in agreement with previous reports that demonstrate kinetochore duplication in late S or G2 of the cell cycle in the cell lines of PtK2 ( male rat kangaroo ) ( 4 ) and GLC1 ( human tumor ) ( 22 ) , as well as the fungus Saprolegnia ( 24 ) . As we have shown previously , MUGs have a 2C DNA con - tent and fail to progress through S phase ( I1 ) , a prerequisite for normal kinetochore duplication . However , when the num - ber of kinetochores were counted in each cell , most CHO MUGs were found to have a quasidiploid complement of ki - netochores as detected by CREST immunofluorescence . This finding , although somewhat unexpected , suggested one of three possible explanations : ( a ) most of the cells were tetra - ploid , or ( b ) centromere - kinetochore DNA replication was resistant to the HU block and was completed before mitosis , or ( c ) kinetochores became fragmented into smaller func - tional subunits . A simple analysis of the karyotype of the CHO cells used in our experiments ruled out the possibility of tetraploidy . Therefore , we investigated the possibility that the DNA of the centromere - kinetochore region in MUGs could undergo replication in the presence of the HU block . To achieve this , CREST indirect immunofluorescence was combined with in situ autoradiography to detect tritiated thy - midine incorporation in the detached kinetochores and asso - ciated chromosome fragments . This technique permitted the simultaneous observation of kinetochores by fluorescence and DNA replication as evidenced by exposed silver grains in the photographic emulsion . The results indicated little or no kinetochore associated DNA replication ; a finding that was confirmed using BrdU incorporation and anti - BrdU an - tibodies ( data not shown ) . Kinetochore Fragmentation in MUGs Since our investigation with CHO MUGs suggested that un - replicated kinetochores had been fragmented upon detach - ment from the chromosomes , we examined this further by analyzing MUGs in a cell with a low diploid chromosome complement . Chromosomes of the male Indian muntjac ( 2N = 7 ) display pairs of large compound kinetochores ( Fig . 2 Zinkowski et al . Kinetochore Structure 109 " 7 Figure 4 . Serial sections of intact and detached kinetochores . ( A - L ) Serial sections of the centromere region of a normal Indian muntjac chromosome . In 9 of the 12 sections shown , the plate emerged from a condensed chromatin mass on one side of the primary constriction ( C - K , arro ~ heads ) , extended laterally along the centromere and reinserted into the chromatin on the opposite side of the constriction . Serial sections cut through detached kinetochores ( M - P , arrowheads and Q - S ) show a familiar plate ( N , O , and R , arrowheads ) that can be followed in only one or two sections . Entire detached kinetochores can be accounted for in three to four adjacent sections . A centriole ( Ce ) can be seen in M - P . Arrows in S point to microtubules traversing to the kinetochore . Bars , 0 . 5 / ~ m . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 113 , 1991 1098 A ) which presumably evolved through multiple centric and tandem chromosomal fusions from a more primitive karyo - type , such as seen in the Chinese muntjac ( 2N = 46 ) ( Fig . 2 E ) ( 9 ) . When Indian muntjac cells were induced to become MUGs and examined by immunofluorescence using CREST antibodies , as many as 80 - 100 smaller fluorescent spots were seen instead of the seven kinetochores ( Fig . 2 B ) , indicating extensive fragmentation of each kinetochore . A similar situ - ation was seen when Chinese muntjac cells were induced to become MUGs . Again , as many as 80 - 100 smaller fluores - cent kinetochore foci were detected ( Fig . 2 F ) in each mitotic cell . As in CHO MUGs , the kinetochore fragments in both of these species were observed to interact with microtubules of the mitotic spindle ( Fig . 2 , C and G ) , whereas the highly fragmented chromatin was found dispersed peripherally in the cell ( Fig . 2 , D and H ) . Examination of muntjac MUGs by EM revealed the same characteristic kinetochore mor - phology seen in CHO MUGs ( see Fig . 4 , M - S ) . Further evidence for kinetochore fragmentation in MUGs was obtained through digital image analysis of the respective areas of fluorescence of detached and intact kinetochores . We reasoned that if the fluorescent kinetochores seen in MUGs represented fragments and not whole kinetochores , their areas of fluorescence should be proportionately smaller than that of normal kinetochores on intact metaphase chromo - somes . The fluorescent areas of intact and detached kineto - chores on CHO , Chinese , and Indian muntjac chromosomes are shown in Figs . 3 , A - F as measured by video microscopy and computer morphometrics . The mean fluorescent areas of kinetochores on CHO and Chinese muntjac chromosomes were determined to be 0 . 22 ( range 0 . 09 - 0 . 35 / ~ m : ) and 0 . 24 / zm 2 ( range 0 . 15 - 0 . 38 / ~ m2 ) , respectively ( Fig . 3 , A and C ) . These values agree well with previously published areas of kinetochores as determined by immunofluorescence and EM ( 9 , 14 ) and demonstrate the uniformity of size of these kineto - chores from one chromosome to the next . When CHO and Chinese muntjac cells were induced to become MUGs , the kinetochore fragments displayed proportionately smaller mean fluorescent areas of 0 . 12 # m 2 ( range 0 . 05 - 0 . 19 / ~ m 2 for CHO MUGs ; range = 0 . 05 - 0 . 23 / zm 2 for Chinese munt - jac MUGs ) ( Fig . 3 , B and D ) . Thus , the fluorescent areas of MUG kinetochores were approximately one - half the fluores - cent areas ofkinetochores on intact metaphase chromosomes . The evolution of Indian muntjac chromosomes by multiple centric fusions has resulted in compound kinetochores with up to a six fold variation in size ( 9 ) . The characteristic mor - phology of the elongated kinetochore of the X chromosome makes it easy to identify in mitotic cells . Thus , it was possi - ble to specifically measure the fluorescent area of this ki - netochore and compare it with the other kinetochores in the genome . The mean fluorescent area of the X chromo - some was 0 . 86 / zm ~ ( range = 0 . 63 - 1 . 24 # m2 ) , whereas the other chromosomes of the genome had a mean fluorescent area of 0 . 35 tzm 2 ( range = 0 . 20 - 0 . 57 t ~ m 2 ) ( Fig . 3 E ) . The data demonstrate the heterogeneity of kinetochore sizes ob - served on Indian muntjac chromosomes . When Indian munt - jac cells were induced to become MUGs , the kinetochore fragments had a significantly smaller mean area of fluores - cence of 0 . 14 / zm 2 ( range = 0 . 07 - 0 . 23 # m 2 , Fig . 3 F ) . These areas were over six times smaller than the mean areas measured for the X chromosome , and over 2 . 5 times smaller than the mean areas measured for the rest of the genome , in - dicating that these large compound kinetochores became ex - tensively fragmented . Surprisingly , the fluorescent areas and overall intensity of MUG kinetochores from all three species were very similar . This and the EM morphometric data presented below show that kinetochores from various spe - cies fragment into units of similar dimensions . Analysis of Serial EM Sections of Intact and Detached Kinetochores Several interesting features were seen when serial sections of metaphase chromosomes were digitized and analyzed by computer - assisted reconstruction . Shown in Fig . 4 , A - L , are 12 contiguous 70 - nm sections cut through the longitudi - nal axis of a metaphase chromosome of an Indian muntjac cell . In 9 of the 12 sections shown , a distinct electron - dense element , usually called the outer plate or layer can be de - tected . The plate emerges from a condensed chromatin mass on one side of the primary constriction ( arrowheads , Fig . 4 , C - K ) , extends laterally along the centromere and reinserts into the chromatin on the opposite side of the constriction . The plate has been described as a cohelical filament ( 5 , 6 , 17 , 50 ) and in several of these sections , the element does resemble a helix , x , 5 - 10 nm wide . A prominent corona is ob - served on the outer surface of the plate and a thin electron - translucent zone (cid:127)25 - 30 nm wide separates the plate from the underlying centromeric chromatin . Since the sections were from a colcemid - arrested cell , no microtubules are as - sociated with the kinetochore . Serial sections cut through kinetochores of colcemid - ar - rested cells , such as the ones shown in Fig . 4 , A - L , are dif - ficult to interpret in three dimensions . In individual sections , the plate along with the corona has the appearance of a lamp - brush - like filament as originally described by Brinkley and Stubblefield ( 5 , 6 ) . However , since the plate can be seen in several adjacent sections , computer - assisted reconstructed images resembled a disk ( data not shown ) as originally de - scribed by Jokelalnen ( 26 ) and others ( reviewed in references 12 and 48 ) . When serial thin sections of detached kineto - chores from MUGs were so analyzed , however , a different interpretation was possible . Serial sections cut through detached kinetochores are shown in Fig . 4 , M - P and Q - S . In Fig . 4 , M - P a distinct plate is seen in only two out of four sections cut completely through a detached kinetochore . In some cases , the plate is seen in only a single section ( Fig . 4 R , arrowheads ) and the entire kinetochore , including corona and associated chromatin , is accounted for in three adjacent sections ( Fig . 4 , Q - S ) . It was often easy to detect the " free ends " of a plate in a single sec - tion ( Fig . 4 R , arrowheads ) , or by analyzing two adjacent sections ( Fig . 4 , N and O ) . Such obvious boundaries allowed us to precisely measure the " length " dimension of detached kinetochores as presented below . In almost every case , the plate enclosed a central chromatin mass as described earlier . Cross - section of plates appeared as dense cores surrounded by less dense fibrils presumed to be the corona ( data not shown ) . Sections cut along the longitudinal axis of chromosomes , such as the ones shown in Fig . 4 , A - L , allowed us to measure the length of the plate of intact kinetochores . The plate of Indian and Chinese muntjacs were digitized from micro - graphs of serial sections as described in Materials and Meth - Zinkowski et al . Kinetochore Structure 1099 2o Z LE ~ S OF PERIODIC KINETOCHORE SEGMENTS INDIAN MUNTJAC o f 0 • . . . . o 0 . 0 0 . 5 Nm168 t E 21 z 1 . 0 1 . 5 20 . 10 . o I 0 . 0 OF INTACT KINETOCHO ~ CHINESE MUNTd , AC N - 152 1 . 0 1 . 5 0 . 5 OF DETACHED KINETOO . tORI ~ C 40 . INDIAN MUNTJAC D 40 . 30 - N - 118 30 . ; " ~ 20 . j ' ° ( ' ° ' 0 - - , - . . . . - - - - : : , 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 0 . 0 ~ , . ngth ( ~ ) OF DETACHED K I N ~ CHINESE MUNTJAC 0 . 5 N , , 112 1 . 0 1 . 5 E6o , 50 . 40 , l E 30 , z , ° I 10 ' 0 ~ - 0 WIDTHS OF " INDIAN MUNTJAC KINETOCHORES r - ~ Intact n - 23 m Det ~ : l ~ ld n - aO F25 , l 20 . I 15 10 WIO ' TI , ' IS OF CHINESE : MUNTJAC K I N ~ r - ~ intact n - lg m Oetached n - , 50 5 . 0 - ~ 1 2 3 4 5 0 7 B 9 10 11 12 1 , 3 0 1 2 3 4 5 8 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 Width ( number of 7Ohm m ~ tJonl ) Wldth ( number of 7Ohm mL ~ lons ) Figure 5 . Lengths and widths of kinetochore plates measured by EM morphometrics . Distributions of the lengths of the electron - dense elements of intact kinetochores ( A and B ) and detached kinetochores ( C and D ) in Chinese muntjac ( B and D ) and Indian muntjac ( A and C ) . The same general distributions of plate lengths were observed for both intact and detached kinetochores . ( E and F ) Histograms of the widths ( number of 70 - urn serial sections the kinetochore spans ) of intact and detached kinetochores in Indian muntjac ( E ) and Chinese muntjac ( F ) . The widths were determined from the same serial sections used in A - D to determine the plate length . ods . Unlike the Chinese muntjac , the compound kinetochores of the Indian muntjac were unusually long but often displayed periodic discontinuities along the plate . In the case of Indian muntjac chromosomes , we measured the length of the peri - odic segments and not the entire compound kinetochore . As a result , the lengths of plates of intact kinetochorcs of the two muntjac species were very similar ( Fig . 5 , A and B ) . The mean length of the plate of Indian muntjac kinetochorcs was The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 113 , 1991 1100 Figure 6 . Hypotonic stretching of Indian muntjac kinetochores . ( A ) Normal CREST stained kinetochore on the X chromo - some . ( B - F ) Hypotonically distended , CREST stained kinetochores on the X chromosome showing progressive de - grees of stretching . Stretched kineto - chores displayed a punctate subunit struc - ture which became more discontinuous as the kinetochores were further stretched ( arrowheads ) . The array of fluorescent subunits , such as those seen in F were positioned along a continuous thread of DNA as observed by Hoechst staining ( G ) . Bars , 5 / ~ m . Zinkowski et al . Kinetochore Structure 1101 0 . 59 / zm ( SD = 0 . 20 ) , while the mean plate length of Chinese muntjac was 0 . 54 / zm ( SD = 0 . 20 ) . When the same method - ology was used to measure the plates of detached kineto - chores from Indian and Chinese muntjac MUGs , it was found that their lengths were also similar ( Fig . 5 , C and D ) , with the mean lengths being 0 . 61 / ~ m ( SD = 0 . 20 ) and 0 . 57 / ~ m ( SD = 0 . 20 ) respectively . Moreover , the lengths of the plates of detached kinetochores were essentially the same as their intact counterparts . The striking difference between intact and detached kinetochores was not in the length of their plates , but in the number of 70 - nm serial sections it took to completely cut through a kinetochore as shown in Fig . 5 , E - E We refer to this dimension as the width . Thus , on the average , intact kinetochores of Indian muntjac occupied six sections ( mean = 5 . 9 ) , whereas the detached kinetochores of the MUGs were accounted for in one to two sections ( mean = 1 . 4 ) ( Fig . 5 E ) . A similar situation existed for Chi - nese muntjac , with intact kinetochores spanning an average of six sections ( mean = 5 . 6 ) , whereas the MUG kineto - chores were contained within an average of one to two sec - tions ( mean = 1 . 8 ) ( Fig . 5 F ) . Thus , when kinetochores be - came detached and fragmented , the plates retained their characteristic length , however , their widths were consider - ably smaller than that of the intact kinetochores . The data demonstrate that kinetochores in MUGs become fragmented into smaller units of relative uniform size . Kinetochore Stretching Thus far , all of our results from the analysis of detached ki - nctochores of MUGs suggests that the kinctochores of intact metaphase chromosomes contain repetitive subunits . More - over , each subunit appears to be composed of DNA , as de - tected by Hoechst or propidium iodide staining , and protein as indicated by CREST immunofluorescence . Since caffeine alone , or in combination with , HU is known to produce DNA lesions in mammalian chromosomes ( 25 , 52 ) , we surmised that the detached kinetochores of MUGs arose by fragmen - tation of a linear DNA / protein filament that may fold into a plate - or disc - like structure . Thus , we reasoned that manually stretching the centromeres may " unfold " the kinetochore and allow us to detect linear stretches of DNA and tandem kincto - chore repeats with CREST antibodies and centromeric DNA probes . We attempted to stretch kinctochores mechanically by taking advantage of shear forces generated in a cytocentri - fuge , or alternatively , unraveled chromosomes by using hypo - tonic treatments . The results ofhypotonic induced distention ofkinetochores on the X chromosomes of Indian muntjac are shown in Fig . 7 . For comparison , a normal CREST - stained kinetochore ( Fig . 6 A ) and kinctochores displaying various degrees of stretching ( Fig . 6 , B - F ) are shown . As can be seen in this panel , the stretched kinetochores displayed a punctate sub - unit structure which became more discontinuous as the ki - netochores were further distended ( Fig . 6 , B - F , arrowheads ) . Furthermore , stretched pairs of sister kinctochorcs showed very similar if not identical subunit organization , as expected . In every case , when the same CREST - stained kinetochores ( Fig . 6 F ) were counter - stained with Hoechst ( Fig . 6 G ) , the DNA appeared to extend continuously throughout the stretched region . Kinetochores of the other chromosomes in the muntjac genome had a similar intermittent CREST stain - ing pattern , although due to their smaller size , attenuation resulted in kinetochores of proportionately smaller lengths . To assess the degree of stretching produced by the hypo - tonic method , the lengths of normal and distended metaphase kinetochores of the Indian muntjac X chromosome were measured on immunofluorescence preparations . The mean length of normal kinetochores was 1 . 87 # m ( range 1 . 51 - 2 . 64 # m ) , whereas the mean length of stretched kinetochores was 21 . 69 / ~ m ( range 9 . 9 - 39 . 42 / ~ m ) indicating that , on the aver - age , the kinetochores were being stretched ll . 6 - fold . We ac - tuaUy observed that some kinetochores could be stretched > 20 times their normal metaphase length . We were also successful in stretching the centromeres of several other mammalian chromosomes , revealing a consis - tent repetitive pattern of subunit organization as shown in Fig . 7 . For comparison , a display of normal and stretched ki - netochores of CHO ( Fig . 7 , A - C ) and Chinese muntjac ( Fig . 7 , D - F ) are shown . We noted that the repetitive subunits of CHO kinetochores ( Fig . 7 , B and C ) were generally more uniform in size than those seen in other species . The stretched kinetochores of Chinese muntjac chromosomes displayed a subunit pattern characteristic of Indian muntjac kinetochores , but with fewer subunits per kinetochore ( Fig . 7 , E and F ) . A somewhat different organization was noted when HeLa chromosomes were analyzed by stretching as shown in Fig . 7 , G - I . The distended centromeres displayed a repetitive staining pattern as seen in other species . However , partially extended centromeres displayed discrete staining of the inner centromere region between the two parallel fluorescent lines ( Fig . 7 H , arrow ) . In more fully stretched centromeres the inner centromere staining pattern disappeared ( Fig . 7 I ) . In an earlier report , we demonstrated that the kinetochores of plant chromosomes were specifically stained using CREST autoantibodies ( 37 ) . The staining pattern of metaphase chro - mosomes of Haemamhus indicated that each kinetochore was organized from several smaller units ( Fig . 7 J , arrows ) ( 27 ) . Mechanical stretching and CREST staining of Hae - manthus centromeres revealed that these kinetochores , like those of their mammalian counterparts , were also made up of a series of small fluorescent subunits positioned along a continuous thread of DNA ( Fig . 7 , K and L ) . The number of fluorescent subunits observed in distended CHO kinetochores increases linearly with increased stretch - ing of the kinetochore ( Fig . 8 ) . Since normal , unstretched CHO kinetochores are fairly uniform in size and show a sin - gle fluorescent spot when stained with autoantibodies , an in - crease in the length of the region and the number of stained spots per unit length argues favorably for a compact , highly folded fiber with multiple overlapping subunits being linear - ized by the stretching process . A similar phenomenon can be seen in Giemsa - banded metaphase chromosomes where a major chromosomal band on a highly condensed chromo - some is actually composed of two or more minor bands when viewed in a less condensed state ( 56 ) . We were concerned that the hypotonic treatments needed to stretch the kinetochores might extract or alter the CREST autoantigens present in this region . However , comparative immunoblots of normal and hypotonically stretched chromo - somes demonstrated the retention of the CREST antigens in the stretched chromosomes ( data not shown ) . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 113 , 1991 1102 Figure 7 . Hypotonic stretching of CREST stained kinetochores of CHO ( A - C ) , Chinese muntjac ( D - F ) , and HeLa ( G - l ) , showing progres - sive degrees of distension . Normal kinetochores ( A , D , and G ) are shown for each of the three species . As the kinetochores became increas - ingly stretched the fluorescent subunits became more obvious . In partially stretched HeLa kinetochores / centromeres , discrete staining was also detected in the inner centromere region between the two parallel fluorescent lines ( H , arrow ) which disappeared as this region became more distended ( I ) . Endosperm chromosomes from the lily Haemanthus katherinae Bak . stained with CREST serum displayed kineto - chores that appeared to be organized from several smaller units ( J , arrows ) . Mechanically stretched Haemanthus kinetochores displayed a repetitive series of small fluorescent subunits positioned along a continuous thread of chromatin ( K and L ) . Bars , 5 # m . 12 . = = o 3 . I I I [ I I I 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Length of K [ netochoreO ~ ' n ) Figure 8 . Subunit number versus length of stretched kinetochores : The number of fluorescent subunits observed in stretched CHO kinetochores ( ordinate ) increases linearly with increased disten - sion of the kinetochore ( abscissa ) . In Situ Hybridization of Synthetic DNA Probes to Kinetochores and Centromeres To establish the relationship between stretched kinetochores and their associated centromeric DNA , we combined the techniques of CREST indirect immunofluorescence with in situ hybridization using probes that recognize this class of DNA on HeLa and CHO chromosomes . HeLa chromosomes were processed for CREST immunofluorescence ( Fig . 9 A ) , photographed , and then processed for in situ hybridization using a consensus sequence DNA probe that selectively hy - bridizes to the alphoid sequences located at the centromeres of human chromosomes ( Fig . 9 B ) ( 30 ) . CREST - stained ki - netochores displayed paired fluorescence spots at the lateral regions of the centromeres ( Fig . 9 A , arrows ) . In many in - stances these foci were connected by a fainter band of fluores : Zinkowski et al . Kinetochore Structure 1103 Figure 9 . CREST immunofluorescence and in situ hybridization of synthetic centromere probes to HeLa and CHO chromosomes . In situ hybridization was performed using a consensus sequence DNA probe ( GTTTTGAAACACTCTTTTTGTAGAATCTGC ) that selectively hybridizes to the alphoid sequences located at the centromeres of human chromosomes . Normal chromosomes were stained with CREST serum ( A ) and subsequently hybridized to the biotinylated alphoid DNA probe ( B ) . CREST staining produced a paired ( A , arrows ) or barbell appearance ( A , arrowheads ) . Arrows and arrowheads in ( B ) correspond to those in A . Stretched centromere - kinetochore complexes revealed a linear array of CREST - positive subunits ( C , arrowheads ) , with the alpboid DNA probe extending along the array ( D ) . Arrow - heads in D correspond to those in C . A combination of CREST indirect immunofluorescence and in situ hybridization was performed using the telomere probe ( TTAGC ~ ) n that recognizes this sequence in most of the CHO centromeres . On control chromosomes , the kinetochores appeared as discrete paired dots on the lateral edges of the primary constriction ( E , arrowheads ) , whereas the DNA probe displayed a strong signal that spanned the entire centromere ( iv , , arrowheads ) . Many of the large metacentric chromosomes stained with CREST antibodies ( E , arrow ) , hybridized weakly or not at all with the telomere probe ( F , , arrow ) . Stretched centromere - kinetochore com - plexes immunostained with CREST displayed fluorescent subunits ( G , arrowheads ) that contained the telomere sequence as identified by in situ hybridization ( H ) . In most cases the telomere probe flanked the CREST positive areas ( H , arrows ) . Bar , 5 ~ m . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 113 , 1991 1104 cence producing a barbell appearance ( Fig . 9 A , arrowheads ) . In situ hybridization to the same chromosomes ( Fig . 9 B ) showed the centromere - kinetochore regions contained al - phoid DNA that spanned an area which was inclusive of , but much larger than the area stained by CREST antibodies ( com - pare Fig . 9 , A with B ) . Hypotonically stretched chromosomes displayed several consistent patterns when the CREST staining ( Fig . 9 C ) was compared with the in situ hybridization ( Fig . 9 D ) . Kineto - chores that became stretched revealed a linear array of sub - units as seen with the CREST autoantibodies ( Fig . 9 C , ar - rowheads ) , with the alphoid DNA probe extending along the array ( Fig . 9 D , arrowheads ) . A similar pattern of staining was observed in HeLa by Masumoto et al . ( 29 ) . We performed essentially the same experiments on the ki - netochore / centromere regions of normal and hypotonically stretched CHO chromosomes using the telomere probe ( TTA - GGG ) , . This sequence is also present in . the centromeres of most CHO chromosomes ( 31 , 32 ) . Both CREST immunoflu - orescence ( Fig . 9 E ) and in situ hybridization ( Fig . 9 F ) are shown for comparison on the same set of normal metaphase chromosomes . Whereas the kinetochores appeared as dis - crete paired dots on the lateral edges of the primary constric - tion ( Fig . 9 E , arrowheads ) , in situ hybridization displayed a strong signal that spanned the entire centromere region of most chromosomes ( Fig . 9 F , , arrowheads ) . Many of the large metacentric chromosomes stained with the CREST antibod - ies ( Fig . 9 E , arrow ) hybridized weakly or not at all with the DNA probe ( Fig . 9 F , arrow ) as previously reported ( 31 , 32 ) . When CHO kinetochores were hypotonically stretched , the CREST staining again revealed a beaded pattern of fluo - rescence along their lengths ( Fig . 9 G , arrowheads ) . In situ hybridization using the DNA probe showed this area to be rich in the DNA sequence ( TTAGGG ) , that in most cases , was found in the area consisting of and flanking the CREST kinetochore probe ( Fig . 9 H , arrows ) . We have also used this telomeric probe on CHO MUGs , and as expected , the probe localized to most of the kineto - chore - associated DNA on the metaphase plate ( data not shown ) . Thus , most of the detached and fragmented kineto - chores in CHO MUGs contained the ( TTAGGG ) DNA se - quence . Together , the above data demonstrate that stretched cen - tromere - kinetochore complexes , which display a linear ar - ray of repetitive subunits as detected by CREST immnnoflu - orescence , also contain an intact linear DNA molecule spanning the entire CREST - stained region . Moreover , the DNA we have identified with our probes not only spans the kinetochore , but generally flanks it as well . Thus , not all of the centromeric DNA was associated with kinetochore pro - teins detected by our CREST antiserum . Localization of Accessory Proteins to Kinetochore Subunits Several proteins , other than the CENP antigens , have been found associated with kinetochores in recent years . Two such proteins , tubulin and cytoplasmic dynein , have been previ - ously reported to interact with the kinetochore during mi - tosis ( 1 , 35 , 36 , 40 , 41 , 43 , 55 ) . The relationship of these pro - teins to the CENP antigens was investigated on both normal and stretched kinetochores using double - label immunofluo - rescence . Kinetochores on isolated chromosomes from Indian mum - jac cells were laminated with purified bovine 6S tubulin in a microtubule assembly buffer , fixed , and processed for dou - ble - label indirect immunofluorescence using CREST and anti - tubulin antibodies . The CREST stain was confined to the outer portion of the centromere ( Fig . 10 A ) as was the tubulin stain ( Fig . 10 B ) . When these computer - enhanced video microscope images were superimposed and pseudo - colored ( Fig . 10 C ) , tubulin ( green ) was found situated distal to the CREST stained kinetochores ( red ) . Tubulin has previ - ously been localized by EM ( 40 , 41 , 50 ) and immtmo - EM ( 35 ) to the outermost portion of the kinetochore , the corona , whereas immnno - EM using CREST antibodies showed these antigens to be confined to the outer and inner electron dense layers of the kinetochore plate in nonhuman species ( 4 , 58 ) . Thus , when compared with previous EM observations , these results demonstrate that our CREST antibodies stain the kinetochore domain rather than the chromatin associated with the inner centromere region . Moreover , this technique allows us to map the relative location of proteins within the kinetochore domain of the chromosome . The relationship of tubulin to the CREST antigens was also determined on mechanically stretched kinetochores of the Indian muntjac that were laminated with 6S tubulin . As shown earlier , these CREST - stained kinetochores displayed the characteristic punctate staining indicative of a subnnit morphology ( Fig . 10 D ) . Although the tubulin fluorescence was somewhat weaker than the CREST fluorescence , the kinetochore subunits were found to be associated with tubu - lin in an almost one - on - one correspondence ( Fig . 10 E ) . As with normal kinetocbores , superimposed computer en - hanced video microscope images demonstrated that the tu - bulin laminating the corona ( green ) of these stretched kineto - chores was distal to the CREST stained ( red ) kinetochores ( Fig . 10 F ) . The association of the motor protein cytoplasmic dyne - in with kinetoehores on Indian muntjac chromosomes was studied next . The anti - dynein mAb 70 . 1 recognized a triplet of70 - kD polypeptides ofthelight chainofcytoplasmic dynein on immunoblots of Indian muntjac whole cell lysate ( data not shown ) , as was previously reported for CHO cells ( 55 ) . Double - label immnnofluorescenee with the anti - dynein ( Fig . 10 H ) and CREST antibodies ( Fig . 10 G ) localized the cyto - plasmic dynein to the kinetochores . Steuer et al . ( 55 ) made a similar observation although the study did not employ the same methods of immunofluorescence . Upon superimposing the two images with the computer , cytoplasmic dynein ( green ) was found distal to the CREST stained kinetochores ( red , Fig . 10 I ) . Double - label experiments performed using the anti - dynein and anti - tubulin antibodies demonstrated the per - feet colocalization of these two proteins ( data not shown ) . It has been proposed that the motor for poleward chromosome movement is in or near the kinetochore ( 39 ) . These experi - ments localized cytoplasmic dynein in the outer portion of the kinetochore domain that may represent the corona , the most likely site for a kinetochore associated motor ( 49 ) . Mechanically attenuated kinetochores were also double stained with CREST and anti - cytoplasmic dynein antibod - ies . As expected , the CREST positive subunits of the kineto - chore ( Fig . 10 J ) showed a one - to - one relationship with the punctate staining pattern produced with the anti - dynein anti - body ( Fig . 10 K ) . This is also evident when the computer - enhanced video images are superimposed and pseudocolored ( Fig . 10 L ) . Furthermore , the dynein stain ( green ) was distal Zinkowski ¢t al . Kinetochore Structure 1105 ~ gure la Localization of cytoplasmic dynein and tubulin in normal and stretched CREST - stained kinetochores . Kinetochores of chromo - somes of the Indian muntjac were . stained by double indirect immunofluorescence for the presence of CREST antigens and tubulin or cyto - plasmic dynein and visualized with the aid of computer - enhanced video microscopy . ( A ) CREST - stained normal kinetochores . ( B ) The same kinetochores stained with tubulin antibody TU - 27B . ( C ) Computer overlay of the two stains . ( Red ) CREST ; ( green ) tubulin ; ( yellow ) areas of overlap between the two stains . Stretched kinetochores stained with CREST antibodies ( D ) and TU - 27B ( E ) . Computer overlay of the two stains ( F ) . In both cases the tubulin stain was located distal to the kinetochore stain . ( G ) CREST - stained kinetochores of a normal cell . ( H ) Kinetochores stained with the anti - dynein 70 . 1 antibody to cytoplasmic dynein . ( I ) Computer overlay of the two stains . ( red ) CREST ; ( green ) cytoplasmic dynein ; ( yellow ) areas of overlap . ( J ) CREST - stained stretched kinetochore . ( K ) Anti - dynein stained stretched kinetochore . ( L ) Computer overlay of the two stains . The cytoplasmic dynein stain , like the tubulin stain , was localized distal to the kinetochore stain . Bar , 5 ~ m . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 113 , 1991 1106 to the CREST stain ( red ) indicating the presence of cyto - plasmic dynein in the outer portion of the kinetochore do - main . Hence , cytoplasmic dynein is probably associated with the corona of kinetochore subunits . Discussion A Common Thread in Kinetochore Evolution Generally , kinetochores of various eukaryotic chromosomes have similar functions but vary considerably in appearance at metaphase . Mammalian chromosomes , as well as those of many other eukaryotic species have kinetochores that are lo - calized to a single specific site , usually the primary constric - tions , and display a disc or plate - like organization at meta - phase . This highly conserved design is found in organisms as phylogenetically diverse as diatoms and humans . Other organisms , including chromosomes of higher plants and some insects , have localized kinetochores which depart from the trilaminar plate design and appear as a " ball and cup " at the primary constriction ( 12 , 48 ) . In round worms , orthopte - ran insects and monocotyledonous plants , the chromosomes lack a primary constriction and have diffuse or " holocentric " kinetochores extending from one end of the chromosome to the other ( 12 , 48 ) . In some organisms such as the budding yeast , kinetochores are not visible on mitotic or meiotic chro - mosome and spindle microtubules appear to attach directly to a chromatin fiber ( 42 ) . Given the diversity of structural patterns in nature , it is difficult to envision a common design that could explain the evolution of the various kinetochore types on eukaryotic chro - mosomes . It is equally difficult to visualize how kinetochores with such diverse morphologies are integrated into the gen - eral scheme of chromatin organization of the centromere and chromosome arms . Is the kinetochore a separate and distinct entity organized as a proteinaceous interface between spindle microtubules and chromatin , or is it integrated into and continuous with a chromatin fiber which organizes the chromosomes of all eukaryotic cells ? The data obtained in the present study sup - port the latter interpretation . That is , regardless of its design as a condensed , localized plate or ball or linear fiber dis - persed along the entire length of the chromosome , the kineto - chores of all species examined thus far can be identified as short functional fragments or microtubule - binding segments arranged as discontinuous repeats along a continuous DNA fiber . Thus , the organization of kinetochores of various spe - cies appears to be a product of the degree and pattern of con - densation and folding of a unit chromatin fiber that organizes the kinetochore protein into a contiguous functional mass . How many repetitive segments exist and how they are brought into register to form the various kinetochore types on eukary - otic chromosomes remains to be determined . The Repeat Subunit Model The sum of our evidence leads inevitably to the view that the kinetochore of higher eukaryotic chromosomes is assembled by the condensation of functionally similar , repetitive sub - units arranged along a continuous DNA fiber . This modular design could explain the organization of various types of ki - netochores seen in nature . The model illustrated in Fig . 11 represents the localized , plate - like kinetochore of mammalian chromosomes . Here , the duplicated G2 centromere is shown as a pair of 30 - nm DNA fibers that consist of multiple , tan - demly arranged dements ( depicted in the drawing as a series of spheres ) that are interspersed by linker DNA segments of an undetermined length . Since these elements are capable of binding tubulin and microtubules and display the morphol - ogy of metaphase kinetochore plates by EM , we have labeled them microtubule ( MT ) - binding segments . When chromo - some condensation occurs in mitosis , these repetitive MT - binding segments are folded and aligned into parallel register to form the outer layer of the kinetochore . These linear re - petitive MT - binding segments also contain the fibrous corona , depicted as hair - like projections in the diagram . As described already , tubulin and cytoplasmic dynein were found in the kinetochore domain and are most likely associated with the corona . For simplicity , only the outer layer is shown in this model . However , additional folding would bring repeated seg - ments destined to form the inner layer of the trilaminar struc - ture into register . The middle translucent layer as seen by EM may represent a space between the two layers . Thus , the kinetochore could be formed from a fiber that was previously interpreted as being a solid plate or disc as described by some authors . The familiar pattern of satellite DNA organized into fam - ilies of tandem repeats throughout the centromere of most eukaryotic chromosomes thus actually reflects the underlying organization of the kinetochore , a domain of the centromere . Each repetitive block or module of the kinetochore is self - contained with a unit complement of microtubule - binding proteins and motor molecules . Individually , each module is capable of undergoing the full litany of mitotic movements . When linked in tandem and folded into a parallel series , the modules collectively form the kinetochore plate seen on many metaphase chromosomes . This compound module pro - vides a concentrated focus for both chromosome attachment to the spindle and force production needed to assure proper chromosome segregation in mitosis and meiosis . Several earlier studies also concluded that the kinetochore is fibrous in design . In the initial EM descriptions of Brink - ley and Stubblefield ( 5 , 6 ) , the kinetochore was described as an axial filament with lampbrush - like loops . Comings and Okada ( 17 ) proposed that the inner layer of the kinetochore was composed of chromatin , but concluded that the outer layer represented a protein disk of nonchromatin composi - tion . Ris and Wit ( 50 ) , on the other hand , concluded that the outer layer was composed of multiple hairpin loops of 10 - nm chromatin originating from the inner disk that were stacked together to form a solid outer disk 30 nm in diameter . Ratt - ner ( 44 - 46 ) proposed a model based on EM studies where the inner and outer plates of the kinetochore were composed of a 30 - nm fiber that was continuous with the body of the chromosome . Although these earlier models share a few similarities to our own , they fail to account for the repetitive subunit organization of the kinetochore fiber . Our model can easily account for the ability of an intact kinetochore to be - come detached into functional fragments by drug treatments . We believe that HU in combination with caffeine in the MUG system cause breaks in the linker segments interspersed be - tween the microtubule - binding segments . Breaks flanking a single MT - binding segment produces a " single " fragment of unit length that associates with microtubules and becomes oriented to one pole of the spindle ( mono - oriented ) , whereas Zinkowski et al . Kinetochore Structure 1107 Figure II . Model for kinetochore structure . At left , the centromere - kinetochore of a fully replicated chromosome is shown as it would appear in the G ~ - phase of the cell cycle after chromosome replication . The centromere of each chromatid consists of a core 30 - nm chro - matin fiber which extends through the centromere and is continuous into the chromosome arms . For simplicity , the 30 - nm fibers are drawn separately but in life , they would probably be bound together by inner centromere proteins ( INCENPS ) ( 18 ) . The plates ( MT - binding seg - ments ) are arranged as tandem repetitive domains of uniform length connected by linker segments of unknown length . Presumably , satellite DNA would form the core of this chromatin segment and a subset of nucleotide sequences would bind kinetochore proteins . In the model each globular subunit of the MT - binding segment is a complex of DNA , MT - binding proteins , and corona that might serve as an attachment site for a single microtubule . At the beginning of mitosis as shown in the center of the diagram , chromosome condensation and folding would bring the MT - binding segments together in parallel register forming a plate or disc at the primary constriction . The linker segments are folded inward to form the inner centromere . An inner plate seen on many chromosomes is not shown here but could form by additional folding or by domains associated with the underlying linker segment . Caffeine produces breaks in the DNA of the linker segments forming single or double kinetochore fragments as seen in MUGs . Double fragments can bind microtubules from each pole and become aligned and bi - oriented on the metaphase plate , resembling sister kinetochores . Single fragments appear to be mono - oriented to one pole or the other . breaks involving two or more segments produce double frag - ments that become bioriented on the spindle . The bi - oriented double fragments behave as sister kinetochores and may un - dergo further breakage during poleward movement at ana - phase , as shown in Fig . 1 I . Therefore , in the repeat subunit model , the length of the plate ( MT - binding segment ) as seen in intact metaphase kinetochores , is preserved in the detached fragments . However , the width of the kinetochore fragments is considerably reduced in comparison to the width of an in - tact kinetochore as would be predicted by the model . Our model also can account for other aspects of the kineto - chore region . For example , interphase kinetochores ( pre - kinetochores [ 4 ] ) can be visualized as fluorescent spots using CREST autoantibodies , but are not normally seen by EM in thin sections . Additionally , the prekinetochores in the male Indian muntjac nucleus are not visible as seven discrete spots , but instead as multiple fluorescent spots arranged in long thread - like arrays ( 9 ) . A similar situation occurs for pre - kinetochores in Chinese muntjac ( 9 ) , and the GLC1 human cell line ( 22 ) . These interphase kinetoehore staining patterns probably represent decondensed centromeric DNA where MT - binding segments are no longer held in precise register . This accounts for the failure to detect plate - like kinetochores in interphase nuclei by serial thin section EM or by immuno - peroxidase ( 4 ) or immunogold ( 19 ) EM . Moreover , the model proposed herein can account for ex - perimental manipulations that bring about loss of the plate - like morphology of the kinetochore . For example , hypotonic treatment of kinetoehores results in a reversible loss of the plate - like morphology ( 8 , 50 ) , most likely due to the swell - ing ofchromatin fibers and disruption of MT - binding segment organization . If mammalian chromosomes are returned to an isotonic condition , they recondense and the kinetochore re - turns as a plate - like structure , probably due to the realign - ment of MT - binding segments . Additionally , chromosomes briefly treated with DNase I display a partially degraded plate composed of fibrillar material ( 41 ) . The remaining por - tions of the plate are able to nucleate microtubules . However , prolonged treatment with DNase I abolishes both the kineto - chore plate and its microtubule nucleation capability . Thus , The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 113 , 1991 1108 brief treatments with DNase I probably severed the linker re - gions while prolonged treatment destroyed both the linker segments and the microtubule binding segments . In short , the repeat subunit model for kinetochore structure put forth here integrates the kinetochore into the accepted pattern of chromatin organization of eukaryotic chromosomes and ac - counts for many previously published observations . The model proposed herein also addresses several key as - pects of chromosome evolution . The centromere - kinetochore region has been a principle site of breakage , recombination , and chromosomal rearrangement during the evolution of modern karyotypes . The present - day bi - armed chromosomes are thought to be the products of extensive centric or Robert - sonian fusions between primitive telocentric elements . A highly redundant kinetochore organization involving one lin - ear DNA molecule along the centromere could facilitate ex - tensive breaks and exchanges , deletions , duplications , and inversions and still retain the capacity to organize into a functional kinetochore . The resilience of the centromere - kinetochore to the rigors of evolution and chromosome re - arrangements may be due to the inherent redundancy of the kinetochore organizing DNA of this region . Kinetochores of eukaryotic chromosomes may have evolved from smaller ' ~ lnits " that have been added by recombination throughout the course of time . If so , the evolutionary history of each eu - karyotic chromosome may be recorded in the number and distribution of microtubule - binding domains distributed along the centromeric DNA . We gratefully acknowledge the efforts of medical students Jay Carpenter and Steve McCune who assisted in collecting and analyzing morphometric data in this study . We thank Ed Phillips for assistance with the EM and photography and Ric Villani for maintaining the cell cultures . Paula Gregory ' s assistance and advice with initial in situ investigations is also gratefully acknowledged . Appreciation is extended to Albert l ' ousson for technical assistance , proofreading , and helpful comments . Thanks are also extended to Changqing Zeng , Da Chang lie , Ilya Uspensky , and Ron Balc - zon for advice and helpful discussions . We appreciate the kindness of L . I . Binder for providing TU - 27B antibody against / $ - tubulin and Eric Steur and Mike Sheetz for their generous gift of antibody 70 . 1 against cytoplas - mic dynein . We are grateful to William Koopman and Graciela Alarcon of the Comprehensive Arthritis Cemer for providing senna from sclercderma CREST patients . Special thanks are also extended to Ann Harrell for editorial assistance and Sherry Crittenden for typing the manuscript . This research is supported by National Institutes of Health grant CA 41424 to B . R . Brinkley , and Department of Energy Contract F518 / 1304718 to J . Meyne . Received for publication 1 February 1991 and in revised form 28 February 1991 . References 1 . Balczon , R . D . , and B . R . Brinldey . 1987 . Tubulin interaction with kinetochore proteins : analysis by in vitro assembly and chemiea / cross - linking . J . Celt Biol . 105 : 855 - 862 . 2 . Bloom , K . , and E . Yeh . 1989 . Centromeres and telomeres : structural ele - ments of eukaryotic chromosomes . Cure . Op . Cell Biol . 1 : 526 - 532 . 3 . Bodand , L . , G . Harauz , G . Bahr , and M . van Heel . 1988 . Packing of the 30 nm chromatin fiber in the human m . etaphase chromosome _ Chromo - soma ( Berl . ) . 97 : 159 - 163 . 4 . Brenner , S . , D . Pepper , M . W . Berns , E . Tan , and B . R . Brinkley . 1981 . Kinetochore structure , duplication , and distribution in mammalian cells : analysis by human autoantibod , ies from sclero ~ erma patients . J . Cell Biol . 91 : 95 - 102 . 5 . Brin / dey , B . R . , and E . Stubblefield . 1966 . The fine structure of the kinetochore of a mammalian cell in vitro . Chromosoma ( Berl . ) . 19 : 28 - 43 . 6 . Brinldey , B . R . , and E . Stubblefield . 1970 . Uhrastructure and interaction of the kinetochore and centriole in mitosis and meiosis . Adv . Cell Biol . 1 : 119 - 185 . 7 . Brirddey , B . R . , andl . p . Chang . 1973 . Embedding in situ . In Tissue Cul - ture : Methods and Applications . Academic Press , New York . pp . 438 - 443 . 8 . Brinldey , B . R . , S . M . Cox , and D . A ~ Pepper . 1980 . Structure of the mi - totic apparatus and chromosomes after hypotonic treatment of mam - malian ceils in vitro . Cytogenet . Cell Genet . 26 : 165 - 174 . 9 . Brinldey , B . R . , M . M . Valdivia , A . Tousson , and $ . L . Brenner . 1984 . Compound kinetochores of the Indian muntjac : evolution by linear fusion of unit ldnetochores . Chromosoma ( Berl . ) . 91 : 1 - 11 . 10 . Brinldey , B . R . , A . Tousson , and M . M . Valdivia . 1985 . The kinetochore of mammalian chromosomes : structure and function in normal mitosis and aneuploidy . In Aneuploidy . V . L . Dellarco , P . E . Voytek , and A . Hollaender , editors . Plenum Publishing Corp . , New York . 243 - 267 . 11 . Brinkley , B . R . , R . P . Zinkowski , W . L . Mollon , F . M . Davis , M . Pisegna , M . Pershouse , and P . N . Rao . 1988 . Movement and segregation of kinetochores experimentally detached from mammalian chromosomes . Nature ( Load . ) . 336 : 251 - 254 . 12 . Brinldey , B . R . , M . M . Valdivia , A . Tousson , and R . 13 . Balczon . 1989 . The kinetochore : structure and molecular characterization . In Mitosis : Molecules and Mechanisms . J . Hyams and B . R . Brinkley , editors . Aca - demic Press , New York . pp . 77 - 118 . 13 . Broccoli , D . , N . Paweletz , and B . K . Vig . 1989 . Sequence of centrOmere separation : separation in a quasi - stable mouse - human somatic cell hybrid . Chromosoma ( Berl . ) . 98 : 167 - 173 . 14 . Cherry , L . M . , A . J . Fanlkner , L . A . Grossberg , and R . Balczon . 1989 . K ' metochore size in mammalian chromosomes : an image analysis study with evolutionary implications . J . Cell Sci . 92 : 281 - 289 . 15 . Clarke , L . 1990 . Centromeres of budding and fission yeasts . Trends Genet . 6 : 150 - 154 . 16 . Clarke , L . , and M . P . Baum . 1990 . Functional analysis of a centromere from fission yeast : a role for centromere - specific repeated DNA sequences . Mot . Cell . Biol . 10 : 1863 - 1872 . 17 . Comings , D . E . , and T . A Okada . 1971 . Fine structure of the kinetochore in Indian muntjac . Exp . Cell Res . 67 : 97 - 110 . 18 . Cooke , C . A . , M . M . S . Heck , and W . C ~ Earnshaw . 1987 . The inner cen - tromere protein ( INCENP ) antigens : movement from the inner centro - mere to midbody during mitosis . J . Cell Biol . 105 : 2053 - 2067 . 19 . Cooke , C . A . , R . B . Bernat , and W . C . Earnshaw . 1990 . CENP - B : a major human centromere protein located beneath the kinetochore . J . Cell Biol . 110 : 1475 - 1488 . 20 . Earnshaw , W . C . , and N . Rothfield . 1985 . Identification of a family of hu - man centromere proteins using autoimmune sera from patients with sclero - derma . Chromosoma ( BerL ) . 9l : 313 - 321 . 21 . Fitzgerald - Hayes , M . 1987 . Yeast centromeres . Yeast . 3 : 187 - 200 . 22 . Haaf , T . , and M . Schmid . 1989 . Centromeric association and non - random distribution of centromeres in human minor cells . Hum . Genet . 81 : 137 - 143 . 23 . Hayden , J . H . , S . S . Bowser , and C . L . Rieder . 1990 . Kinetochores capture astral microtubules during chromosome attachment to the mitotic spindle : direct visualization in live new ~ lung cells . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 1039 - 1045 . 24 . Heath , I . B . 1980 . Behavior of kinetochores during mitosis in the fungus S ~ prolegniferax . J . Celt Biol . 84 " 531 - 546 . 25 . Ishida , R . , M . Kozaki , and T . Takahashi . 1985 . Caffeine alone causes DNA damage in Chinese hamster ovary cells . Cell Struct . Funct . 10 : 405 - 409 . 26 . Jokelalnen , P . T . 1967 . The ultrastructure and spatial organization of the metaphase kinetochore in mitotic rat ceils . J . Ultrastruct . Res . 19 : 19 - - 44 . 27 . Lima de Faria , A . 1956 . The role of the kinetochore in chromosome organi - zation . Hereditas . 42 : 85 - 160 . 28 . Masumoto , H . , H . Masuioata , Y . Muro , N . Nozaki , and T . Okazaki . 1989 . A human centromere antigen ( CENP - B ) interacts with a short specific se - quence in alphoid DNA , a human centromeric satellite . J . Cell Biol . 109 : 1963 - 1973 . 29 . Masumoto , H . , K . Sugimoto , andT . Okazaki . 1989 . Alphoid satellite DNA is tightly associated with centromere antigens in human chromosomes throughout the cell cycle . Exp . Cell Res . 181 : 181 - 196 . 30 . Meyne , J . , G . Littlefield , and R . K . Moyzis . 1989 . Labeling of human een - tromeres using an alphoid DNA consensus sequence : application to the scoring of chromosome aberrations . Mutut . Res . 226 : 75 - 79 . 31 . Meyne , J . , R . L . Rafliff , and R . K . Moyzis . 1989 . Conservation of the human telomere sequence ( TTAGGG ) , among vertebrates . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 89 : 7049 - 7053 . 32 . Meyne , J . , R . J . Baker , H . H . Hobart , T . C . Hsu , O . A . Ryder , O . G . Ward , J . E Wiley , D . H . Warster - Hitl , T . L . Yules , and R . K . Moyzis . 1990 . Distribution of non - t¢lomeric sites of the ( TTAGGG ) n telomeric sequence in vertebrate chromosomes . Chromosoma ( Berl . ) . 99 : 3 - 10 . 33 . Miller , J . M . , W . Wang , R . Balczon , and W . L . Dentler . 1990 . Ciliary microtubule capping structures contain a mammalian kinetochore anti - gen . J . Cell Biol . t 1 . 0 : 703 - 714 _ 34 . Mitehison , T . , and M . Kirschner . 1984 . Microtubule assembly nucleated by isolated centrosomes . Nature ( Load . ) . 312 : 232 - 237 . 35 . Mitchison , T . J . , and M . W . Kirschner . 1985 . Properties of the kinetochore in vitro . I . Mierorabule nucleation and tubulin binding . J . Celt Biol . 101 : 755 - 765 . Zinkowski et al . Kinetochore Structure 1109 36 . Mitchison , T . J . , and M . W . Kirschner . 1985 . Properties of the kinetochore in vitro . II . Microtubule capture and ATP - dependent translocation . J . Cell Biol . 101 : 766 - 777 . 37 . Mole - Bajer , J . , A . S . Bajer , R . P . Zinkowski , R . D . Balczon , and B . R . Brinldey . 1990 . Autoantibodies from a patient with scleroderma CREST recognized kinetochores of the higher plant Haemanthus . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 87 : 3599 - 3603 . 38 . Moroi , Y . , C . Pecbles , M . J . Fritzler , J . Steigerwald , and E . M . Tan . 1980 . Autoantibody to the centromere ( kinetochore ) in scleroderma sera . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 17 : 1627 - 1631 . 39 . Nicldas , R . B . 1989 . The motor for poleward chromosome movement in anaphase is in or near the kinetochore . J . Cell Biol . 109 : 2245 - 2255 . 40 . Pepper , D . A . , and B . R . Brinldey . 1979 . Microtubule initiation at kineto - chores and centrosomes in lysed mitotic cells : inhibition of site - specific nucleation by tubulin antibody . J . Cell Biol . 82 : 585 - 591 . 41 . Pepper , D . A . , and B . R . Brinkley . 1980 . Tubulin nucleation and assembly in mitotic cells : evidence for nucleic acids in kinetocbores and centro - somes . Cell Motil . 1 : 1 - 15 . 42 . Peterson , J . B . , and H . Ris . 1976 . Electron - microscopic study of the spindle and chromosome movement in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Cell Sci . 22 : 219 - 242 . 43 . Pfarr , C . M . , M . Cour , P . M . Grissom , T . S . Hays , M . E . Porter , and J . R . McIntosh . 1990 . Cytoplasraic dynein is localized to kinetochores during mitosis . Nature ( Lond . ) . 345 : 263 - 265 . 44 . Rattner , J . B . 1986 . Organization within the mammalian kinetochore . Chro - mosoma ( Bed . ) . 93 : 515 - 520 . 45 . Rattner , J . B . 1987 . The organization of the mainmalian kinetocbore : a scan - ning electron microscope study . Chromosoma ( Berl . ) . 95 : 175 - 181 . 46 . Ratmer , J . B . , and D . P . Bazett - Jones . 1989 . Kinetochore structure : elec - tron spectroscopic imaging of the kinetochore . J . Cell Biol . 108 : 1209 - 1219 . 47 . Rieder , C . L . 1979 . Localization of ribonucleoprotein in the trilaminar ki - netochore of PtK . J . Ultrastruct . Res . 66 : 109 - 119 . 48 . Rieder , C . L . 1982 . The formation , structure , and composition of the mam - malian kinetochore and kinetochore fiber . Int . Rev . Oytol . 29 : 1 - 58 . 49 . Rieder , C . L . , S . P . Alexander , andG . Rupp . 1990 . Kinetochores are trans - ported poleward along a single astral microtubule during chromosome at - tachment to the spindle in newt lung ceils . J . Cell Biol . 110 : 81 - 95 . 50 . Ris , H . , and P . L . Witt . 1981 . Structure of the mammalian kinetochore . Chromosoma ( Berl . ) . 82 : 153 - 170 . 51 . Roos , U . - P . 1973 . Light and electron microscopy of rat kangaroo ceils in mitosis . H . Kinetochore structure and function . Chromosoma ( Berl . ) . 41 : 195 - 220 . 52 . Sawecha , J . , B . Goos , and J . Malec . 1987 . Modification by caffeine of acute cytotoxic response of cultured L5178Y cells to hydroxyurea treatment . Neoplasma . ( Berl . ) . 23 : 369 - 377 . 53 . Schlegel , R . , and A . B . Pardee . 1986 . Caffeine - induced uncoupling of mi - tosis from the completion of DNA replication in mammalian cells . Sci - ence ( Wash . DC ) . 232 : 1264 - 1266 . 54 . Schlegel , R . , and A . B . Pardee . 1987 . Periodic mitotic events in the absence of DNA replication . Proc . Natl . dcad . Sci . USA . 84 : 9025 - 9029 . 55 . Steuer , E . R . , L . Wordeman , T . A . Schroer , and M . P . Sheetz . 1990 . Lo - calization of cytoplasmic dynein to mitotic spindles and kinetochores . Na - ture ( Lond . ) . 345 : 266 - 268 . 56 . Sumner , A . T . 1976 . Banding as a level of chromosome organization . In Current Chromosome Research . K . Jones , P . E . Brandham , editors . El - sevier / North Holland Biomedical Press , Amsterdam . 17 - 22 . 57 . Valdivia , M . M . , and B . R . Brinldey . 1985 . Fractionation and characteriza - tion of the kinetochore from mammalian metaphase chromosomes . J . Cell Biol . 101 : 1124 - 1134 . 58 . Valdivia , M . M . , A . Tousson , andB . R . Brinkley . 1986 . Human antibodies and their use for the study of chromosome organization . Methods Achiev . Exp . Pathol . 12 : 200 - 223 . 59 . Waye , J . S . , and H . F . Willard . 1989 . Concerted evolution of alpha satellite DNA : evidence for species specificity and a general lack of sequence con - servation among alphoid sequences of higher primates . Chromosoma ( Berl . ) . 98 : 273 - 279 . 60 . Willard , H . F . , and J . S . Waye . 1987 . Hierarchical order in chromosome - specific human alpha satellite DNA . Trends Genet . 3 : 192 - 198 . 61 . Young , S . J . , S . M . Royer , P . M . Groves , and J . C . Kinnamon . 1987 . Three - dimensional reconstructions from serial micrographs using the IBM - PC . J . Electr . Microsc . Techn . 6 : 207 - 217 . 62 . Zinkowski , R . P . , S . McCune , R . D . Balczon , P . N . Rao , andB . R . Brink - ley . 1989 . The centromere and aneuploidy . I . Caffeine - induced detach - ment and fragmentation of kiuetochores of mammalian chromosomes . In Mechanisms of Chromosome Distribution and Aneuploidy . M . Resnick , and B . K . Vig , editors . Alan R . Liss , Inc . , New York . pp . 43 - 60 . 63 . Zinkowski , R . P . , S . L . McCune , R . D . Balczon , P . N . Rao , and B . R . Brinldey . 1990 . The centromere and anenploidy . H . Drug induced detachment and fragmentation of kinetochores of mammalian chromo - somes . In Mutation and the Environment . Part B . Metabolism , Testing Methods , and Chromosomes . M . L . Mendelsohn and R . J . Albertini , edi - tors . Alan R . Liss , Inc . , New York . 223 - 236 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 113 , 1991 1110