Cell mechanics control rapid transitions between blebs and lamellipodia during migration Martin Bergert a , b , Stanley D . Chandradoss a , b , 1 , Ravi A . Desai a , and Ewa Paluch a , b , 2 a Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics , 01307 Dresden , Germany ; and b International Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology , 02 - 109 Warsaw , Poland Edited by Alexander B . Verkhovsky , Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne , Switzerland , and accepted by the Editorial Board June 7 , 2012 ( received for review May 14 , 2012 ) Protrusion formation is an essential step during cell migration . Cells migrating in three - dimensional environments and in vivo can form a wide variety of protrusion types , including actin polymerization - driven lamellipodia , and contractility - driven blebs . The ability to switch between different protrusions has been proposed to facil - itate motility in complex environments and to promote cancer dissemination . However , plasticity in protrusion formation has so far mostly been investigated in the context of transitions between amoeboid and mesenchymal migration modes , which involve sub - stantial changes in overall cell morphology . As a result , the minimal requirements of transitions between blebs and lamellipodia , as well as the time scales on which they occur , remain unknown . To address these questions , we investigated protrusion switching dur - ing cell migration at the single cell level . Using cells that can be induced to form either blebs or lamellipodia , we systematically assessed the mechanical requirements , as well as the dynamics , of switching between protrusion types . We demonstrate that shifting the balance between actin protrusivity and actomyosin contracti - lity leads to immediate transitions between blebs and lamellipodia in migrating cells . Switching occurred without changes in global cell shape , polarity , or cell adhesion . Furthermore , rapid transitions between blebs and lamellipodia could also be triggered upon changes in substrate adhesion during migration on micropatterned surfaces . Together , our data reveal that the type of protrusion formed by migrating cells can be dynamically controlled indepen - dently of overall cell morphology , suggesting that protrusion for - mation is an autonomous module in the regulatory network that controls the plasticity of cell migration . S tudies of cell migration in three - dimensional environments indicate a high level of heterogeneity in cellular morphology and protrusive activity . Tumor cells in matrices and tissues can adopt a mesenchymal migration mode , characterized by elongated cell shape , or display amoeboid motility with rounded cell mor - phologies ( 1 ) . A variety of protrusion types have been associated with these different migration modes , including lamellipodia , dri - ven by actin polymerization , and membrane blebs , which grow as a result of intracellular pressure generated by actomyosin contrac - tions ( 2 , 3 ) . Plasticity in cell shape and protrusion formation is thought to enable cells to adapt their migration mode to their environment and to favor cancer dissemination ( 4 – 6 ) . Thus , it is essential to understand the mechanisms by which migrating cells can dynamically modulate specific features of their morphology . Migration plasticity has been so far mostly investigated in the context of regulation of global cell morphology . Studies in cancer cells have identified the small GTPases Rac and Rho as central determinants of a cell ’ s migration mode ( 1 , 6 ) . Cells with high activity of Rac1 , a key regulator of protrusive actin polymerization , often display mesenchymal motility , while high Rho activity , which promotes actomyosin contractility , correlates with amoeboid migration . Interfering with the activity of these small GTPases has been shown to induce transitions between migration modes in a number of cell types ( 7 – 9 ) . Furthermore , adhesion has been proposed to influence the migration mode of a cell ( 1 , 10 , 11 ) . Amoeboid migration correlates with low traction forces and hence low cellular adhesion , whereas cells displaying mesenchymal migration are usually strongly adherent ( 5 ) . Taken together , these studies led to the proposal that the balance of Rac - driven actin protrusivity , of Rho - regulated actomyosin contractility , and of cell adhesion determines the migration mode displayed by a cell ( 11 ) . Transitions between amoeboid and mesenchymal migration modes are often associated with changes in protrusive activity . Indeed , mesenchymal migration usually correlates with lamelli - podia formation , whereas amoeboid motility frequently corre - lates with blebbing ( 1 ) . However , nonadhesive cells can display amoeboid migration with lamellipodia - like protrusions rather than blebs ( 11 – 13 ) , and adhesive cells can form blebs rather than lamellipodia ( 14 ) . Thus , it is unclear how protrusion formation can be dynamically controlled independently of the complex mesenchymal - amoeboid transitions . Moreover , the morphologi - cal changes underlying conversions between migration modes have not been investigated within individual cells . As a result , the minimal requirements for switching protrusion types and the time scales on which these transitions occur are not known . Here , we used Walker 256 carcinosarcoma ( henceforth Walker ) cells , which can form either blebs or lamellipodia , to systematically explore transitions between protrusion types at the single cell level . We showed that shifting the balance between actin protrusivity and actomyosin contractility , as well as changes in substrate adhesion , are sufficient to trigger switches between blebs and lamellipodia . Live imaging of the switches within indi - vidual cells revealed that transitions occur instantaneously and do not require any change in cell shape and polarity . Our findings reveal a high level of flexibility in the control of protrusion for - mation , suggesting that dynamic fine - tuning of protrusive activity could be rapidly achieved during migration in complex and chan - ging environments . Results Sublines of Walker Cells Can Form Either Lamellipodia or Blebs During Migration . By selecting for or against adhesion we obtained two sublines of Walker cells : a suspension subline ( suspSL ) and an adherent subline ( adhSL ) ( Fig . 1 A , ( 15 , 16 ) ) . Cells of both sub - lines displayed spontaneous polarization and formed protrusions at their leading edge . In order to characterize the nature of these protrusions , we expressed Lifeact , a marker of filamentous actin ( 17 ) , and analyzed protrusion dynamics in living cells . We found that adhSL cells predominantly formed flat , actin - filled protru - Author contributions : M . B . and E . P . designed research ; M . B . , S . D . C . , andR . A . D . performed research ; M . B . analyzed data ; and M . B . and E . P . wrote the paper . The authors declare no conflict of interest . This article is a PNAS Direct Submission . A . B . V . is a guest editor invited by the Editorial Board . Freely available online through the PNAS open access option . 1 Present address : Delft University of Technology , Department of BioNanoScience , 2628 CJ Delft , The Netherlands . 2 To whom correspondence should be addressed . E - mail : paluch @ mpi - cbg . de . This article contains supporting information online at www . pnas . org / lookup / suppl / doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1207968109 / - / DCSupplemental . 14434 – 14439 ∣ PNAS ∣ September 4 , 2012 ∣ vol . 109 ∣ no . 36 www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1207968109 sions ( Fig . 1 B and C ) . The presence of filamentous actin and the localization of components of the Arp2 / 3 complex to the lead - ing edge of these protrusions ( Fig . S1 A ) identified them as lamel - lipodia . In contrast , suspSL cells almost exclusively formed spherical membrane blebs initially devoid of filamentous actin ( Fig . 1 B and C ) . Thus , Walker cells can be induced to form either lamellipodia or blebs by varying their culture conditions . We then analyzed the ability of the cells from the two sub - lines to migrate in different environments . AdhSL cells could migrate efficiently on two - dimensional ( 2D ) substrates ( Fig . 1 D and Movie S1 ) , as suggested by previous studies ( 16 ) . In contrast , suspSL cells were nonadherent and displayed uncoordinated , random movements when placed on 2D substrates ( Movie S2 ) , but were able to migrate in confined environments , such as inside a micropipette or when placed between glass and agarose ( Fig . 1 D and Movies S3 and S4 ) . Thus , the two Walker sublines represent a good model system to investigate how transitions between protrusion types can be induced during cell migration . Lamellipodia - Forming Cells Have a Lower Cortical Tension than Bleb - Forming Cells . Cortical tension generates the intracellular pressure driving bleb growth , and a threshold tension is required for bleb expansion ( 18 ) . We thus asked if adhSL cells did not form blebs because their cortical tension was too low . We measured tension in the sublines by micropipette aspiration ( 19 ) and found that suspSL cells had a cortical tension about two times higher than adhSL cells ( Fig . 2 A and Table S1 ) . Tension measurements were performed on detached , rounded adhSL cells ( 19 ) . Earlier work on fibroblasts showed that spreading leads to a slight decrease in cortical tension ( 20 ) , therefore the difference in tension mea - sured here is likely to be an underestimate of the actual differ - ence . Treating cells with the Rho kinase ( ROCK ) inhibitor Y27632 or with blebbistatin , an inhibitor of myosin II activity , sig - nificantly decreased tension in both sublines ( Table S1 ) . Upon myosin inhibition , tension decreased to the same basic value in the two sublines , indicating that differences in myosin activity could explain the difference in cortical tension between adhSL and suspSL cells . In summary , we found that myosin - driven cor - tical tension was significantly lower in adhSL than in suspSL cells . Increasing Cortical Tension Induces Bleb Formation in Lamellipodia - Forming adhSL Cells . We then investigated if the observed differ - ence in cortical tension was responsible for the absence of bleb formation in adhSL cells . To this aim , we first performed laser ablations of the cortex , which induce bleb expansion if cortical tension exceeds a threshold value ( 18 ) . Cortex ablation in the front part of polarized cells induced bleb formation in 90 % of suspSL cells and in 14 % of adhSL ( Fig . 2 B ) , indicating that most adhSL cells cannot form blebs even upon induced rupture of the actin cortex . However , ablation may fail to trigger bleb formation in adhSL cells because of their spread morphology , as lamelli - podia extension and substrate adhesions might limit cortical contractions necessary for bleb formation . We thus repeated the ablation experiments on adhSL detached from the substrate , which displayed a round shape with no protrusions , morpho - logically identical to unpolarized , round suspSL . Cortex ablation effectively induced bleb formation in round suspSL cells but not in detached , round adhSL cells ( 63 % vs . 15 % , Fig . 2 B ) . Taken together , our ablation experiments suggest that adhSL Walker cells cannot form blebs . We then investigated whether increasing cortical tension is sufficient to induce bleb formation in adhSL cells or if other factors limit bleb extension in these cells . We transfected adhSL cells with a constitutively active version of the kinase ROCK , ROCK - Δ 3 , which increases myosin regulatory light chain phos - phorylation , and thus myosin activity , and enhances blebbing in the parental Walker cell line ( 21 ) . Expression of ROCK - Δ 3 resulted in a rounder morphology of adhSL cells . Some cells spontaneously formed blebs and almost all displayed bleb forma - tion upon ablation ( Fig . 2 B and C ) . Thus , the limited ability of adhSL cells to form blebs appears to be due to their low cortical tension , and increasing contractility is sufficient to trigger bleb formation in these cells . Expression of ROCK - Δ 3 in adhSL cells also reduced lamelli - podia formation ( Fig . 2 C ) . Therefore , we asked whether contrac - tility limits lamellipodia extension . We reduced cortical tension in adhSL cells with the ROCK inhibitor Y27632 , or with the myosin inhibitor blebbistatin and found that the size of lamellipodia was significantly increased ( Fig . 2 D and E ) . Thus , cortical tension Fig . 1 . Protrusion formation in the sublines of Walker cells . ( A ) Sche - matic description of subline selec - tion . ( B ) Example of DIC and fluo - rescent images of cells of the two sublines : AdhSLcellsformthin , actin - filled lamellipodia ( arrow ) . SuspSL cells show polarized blebbing at their leading edge ( arrowheads ) . Newly formed blebs do not contain F - actin ( asterisk ) . An actin cortex reassembles at the bleb membrane over time ( bottom row ) . [ Scale bars , 10 μ m ( top and middle row ) , 5 μ m ( bottom row ) ] . ( C ) Quantification of the protrusions formed by adhSL cells on a 2Dsubstrate and by suspSL cells placed under agarose . n : num - ber of cells analyzed in two inde - pendent experiments . ( D ) Time lapses of migrating adhSL and suspSL cells . AdhSL cells migrate on flat 2D substrates ( Movie S1 ) , whereas suspSL cells need confined environments ( e . g . , placed under agarose , Movie S4 ) . Arrows : lamelli - podia ; arrowhead : bleb . ( Scale bars , 10 μ m . ) . Bergert et al . PNAS ∣ September 4 , 2012 ∣ vol . 109 ∣ no . 36 ∣ 14435 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y appears to limit lamellipodia extension , suggesting that the pro - trusive mechanisms leading to the formation of blebs and lamel - lipodia are mutually exclusive . Decreasing Arp2 / 3 Activity Induces Switching from Lamellipodia to Blebs . We next investigated the contribution of protrusive actin polymerization to protrusion formation in the two sublines . The Arp2 / 3 complex is a major nucleator of actin filaments in the la - mellipodium ( 22 ) . We thus inhibited Arp2 / 3 activity using the small molecule inhibitor CK - 666 ( 23 ) . Treatment with CK - 666 led to an instantaneous and dose - dependent decrease of the per - centage of adhSL cells forming lamellipodia , and strongly in - creased bleb formation ( Fig . 3 A and B and Movie S5 ) . To rule out nonspecific effects of the inhibitor , we decreased Arp2 / 3 le - vels using siRNA . Upon depletion of the Arp3 subunit in adhSL cells , we observed a switch from lamellipodia to blebs , similar to what was observed after treatment with CK - 666 ( Fig . S1 B and C , and Movie S6 ) . These results indicate that inhibiting Arp2 / 3 func - tion is sufficient to induce rapid transitions from lamellipodia to blebs in adhSL cells . Interestingly , interference reflection micro - scopy , which can be used to estimate the distance between the cell and the substrate ( 24 ) , indicated that the transitions from lamel - lipodia to blebs occurred with no apparent change in adhesion to the substrate ( Fig . 3 A ) . Moreover , blebs formed at the locations where lamellipodia were previously formed ( Movie S5 ) , suggest - ing that the mechanisms underlying cell polarity are similar in bleb - and lamellipodia - forming cells . The increase in blebbing upon Arp2 / 3 inhibition seemed inconsistent with the hypothesis that cortical tension was too low for bleb formation in adhSL cells ( Fig . 2 ) . We therefore measured tension in CK - 666 treated adhSL cells and found that it was higher than in control cells ( Table S1 ) . Interestingly , previous studies in Caenorhabditis elegans show a cortical localization of the Arp2 / 3 complex , and depletion of Arp2 / 3 subunits results in bleb formation ( 25 , 26 ) . Similarly , an Arp2 mutant strain of Dictyostelium shows enhanced blebbing ( 27 ) . These data suggest that in addition to controlling actin protrusivity and lamellipodia extension , Arp2 / 3 activity influences bleb formation via control - ling the cellular actin cortex and cortical tension . As tension appears to limit lamellipodia extension ( Fig . 2 D and E ) , we asked whether the decrease in lamellipodia upon CK - 666 treatment was the result of decreased actin protrusivity or increased tension . We decreased contractility in adhSL cells with Y27632 prior to CK - 666 treatment . We found that blocking Arp2 / 3 activity in Y27632 treated cells rapidly decreased lamel - lipodia outgrowth and resulted in round cells without any protru - sions ( Fig . 3 C ) . Taken together , our results indicate that Arp2 / 3 inhibition decreases lamellipodia formation independently of the increase in tension , while the tension increase is essential for bleb formation . We then asked whether the Arp2 / 3 complex plays any role in bleb formation and blebbing - based migration . We quantified the protrusions and analyzed the migration of suspSL cells treated with CK - 666 , and found no significant differences between trea - ted and untreated cells ( Fig . S2 ) . These observations indicate that the activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex is not required for bleb formation and blebbing - based migration of suspSL cells . Rac1 Activation Triggers Switching from Blebs to Lamellipodia . Next , we investigated if enhancing actin polymerization could induce switching from bleb to lamellipodia formation in suspSL cells . To address this question , we expressed a constitutively active , photo - activatable version of the small RhoGTPase Rac1 ( PA - Rac1 ) in Walker cells ( 28 ) . Rac1 is a major activator of the Arp2 / 3 complex and enhances actin polymerization ( 28 , 29 ) . Activation of Rac1 in adhSL cells increased lamellipodia formation and membrane ruffling , demonstrating that this construct promotes actin protru - sivity in Walker cells ( Movie S7 ) . In suspSL cells , global activation of Rac1 led to two related phenotypes : 50 % of the cells with inter - mediate expression levels of PA - Rac1 immediately stopped bleb - bing ( Fig . 3 D top and Table S2 and Movie S8 ) , the remaining 50 % of the cells stopped blebbing and formed one or more lamellipodia at the location where blebs were previously formed ( Fig . 3 D middle and Table S2 and Movie S9 ) . Lamellipodia formation was depen - dent on Arp2 / 3 activity as Rac1 activation in suspSL cells pre - Fig . 2 . Contractility favors bleb formation and limits lamellipodia outgrowth . ( A ) Cortical tension in the sublines probed by micropipette aspiration . P - Value : Welch ’ s two - sided T - Test ; n : number of cells measured in three independent experiments . ( B ) Quantification of the response to cortex ablation in suspSL and adhSL cells . n : number of cells ablated in two to four independent experiments . ( Scale bars , 2 μ m . Images : examples of response to ablation in Walker cells expressing Lifeact - mCherry ) . ( C ) DIC and fluorescent images of adhSL cells transfected with pEGFP - ROCK - Δ 3 . Cells show a rounder morphology and spontaneously form blebs ( arrowhead ) . ( Scale bars , 10 μ m . ) . ( D ) Time lapse of adhSL cells treated with 10 μ M Y27632 . t ¼ 0 s : drug addition . ( Scale bar , 10 μ m . ) . ( E ) Quantification of the change in lamellipodia area upon Y27632 and blebbistatin treatments . Lamellipodia area was measured for at least three frames before and after drug treatment and the ratio of the mean values were plotted . P - Value : Welch ’ s two - sided T - Test ; n : number of cells measured in two independent experiments . 14436 ∣ www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1207968109 Bergert et al . treated with the Arp2 / 3 inhibitor CK - 666 did not result in lamelli - podia growth ( Table S2 and Movie S10 ) . Substrate adhesions were not required for Rac1 - induced switching from blebs to lamellipo - dia , as lamellipodia formation could also be triggered in suspSL cells placed between agarose and PEG - coated glass , which pre - cludes substrate attachment ( Fig . 3 D bottom and Table S2 ) . In summary , PA - Rac1 activation was sufficient to trigger the forma - tion of lamellipodia in suspSL cells that normally form blebs , and the formation of lamellipodia occurred without changes in cell po - larity or substrate adhesiveness . Interestingly , Rac1 activation resulted in an increase of the cell cross - sectional area , which then rapidly decreased when acti - vation was stopped ( Movie S9 ) . This observation suggests that ac - tive Rac1 may decrease cortical tension , which would in turn lead to a reduction in bleb formation . Such a tension decrease could be caused by a reduction in RhoA activity , as PA - Rac1 activation has been shown to globally inhibit RhoA ( 28 ) . As contractility limits lamellipodia extension in adhSL cells ( Fig . 2 D and E ) , we checked whether decreasing contractility alone would be sufficient to switch from blebs to lamellipodia in suspSL cells . We inhibited RhoA activity with a cell permeable version of the exoenzyme C3 Transferase , or blocked Myosin II activity with blebbistatin . Both treatments induced a strong decrease in blebbing but no sig - nificant increase in lamellipodia formation ( Fig . S3 ) . Thus , inhibi - tion of RhoA or Myosin II was not sufficient to change the protrusion type of Walker cells from blebs to lamellipodia . Taken together , our results indicate that activation of Rac1 causes both an increase in Arp2 / 3 - driven actin protrusivity and a decrease in contractility . This dual effect results in an immedi - ate switch from bleb to lamellipodia formation in suspSL cells . Changes in Substrate Adhesion Can Induce Dynamic Changes in Pro - trusion Formation . Our data suggest that modulating the relative magnitudes of actin protrusivity and actomyosin contractility is sufficient to induce transitions between blebs and lamellipodia in migrating cells ( Fig . 4 ) . These transitions could be triggered without any changes in cell adhesion to the substrate ( Fig . 3 A and D ) . However , substrate adhesiveness has been proposed to be a major factor influencing cell shape and migration mode ( 1 , 10 , 11 ) . We thus asked whether abrupt changes in substrate adhesion could induce switches between blebs and lamellipodia in Walker cells , and on what time scales such changes would occur . Detaching lamellipodia - forming adhSL cells from the sub - strate did not result in bleb formation even upon cortex ablation ( Fig . 2 B ) . Therefore , we focused on exploring the effect of in - creasing substrate attachment in bleb forming suspSL cells . We first analyzed the protrusions formed by supSL cells migrating in confinement on adhesive , fibronectin coated , surfaces . We found an increased proportion of cells forming both blebs and lamellipodia compared to suspSL cells on glass or a nonadhesive substrate ( Fig . 5 A and B ) , indicating that adhesive substrates trig - ger lamellipodia formation in these cells . We then investigated how such transitions occur at the single cell level and observed cells migrating over substrates with changing adhesiveness . To this aim , we engineered micropatterned surfaces with alternating adhesive and nonadhesive regions , using microcontact printing Fig . 3 . Actin polymerization promotes lamellipodia formation at the expense of blebs . ( A ) DIC , fluorescent and interference reflection microscopy ( IRM ) images of adhSL cells treated with DMSO or 100 μ M CK - 666 . Blocking Arp2 / 3 activity switches the protrusion type formed by adhSL cells from lamellipodia ( arrows ) to blebs ( arrowheads ) , with no apparent change in cell adhesion ( IRM ) . ( B ) Quantification of the protrusions formed by adhSL cells upon CK - 666 treatment . n : number of cells analyzed in two independent experiments . ( C ) Time lapse of adhSL cells treated with Y27632 and CK - 666 . The cells stop forming lamellipodia upon Arp2 / 3 inhibition but do not bleb . 10 μ M Y27632 was added at t ¼ 0 sec and 100 μ M CK - 666 was added at t ¼ 700 sec . Arrow : small lamellipodia . ( D ) Rac1 activation in suspSL cells under agarose . Upon activation with a 458 nm laser , cells stopped blebbing ( upper box series , Movie S8 ) or stopped blebbing and formed at least one lamellipodium ( middle box series , Movie S9 ) . Lamellipodia formation was also observed on PEG - coated glass ( lower box series ) . Arrows : lamellipodia . ( Scale bars , 10 μ m . ) . Bergert et al . PNAS ∣ September 4 , 2012 ∣ vol . 109 ∣ no . 36 ∣ 14437 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y ( for details see SI Text ) . We observed that blebbing suspSL cells crossing region boundaries formed lamellipodia immedi - ately after contacting adhesive areas ( 50 % of the cells , n ¼ 18 , Fig . 5 C – E and Movie S11 ) . Lamellipodia disappeared quickly when cells moved onto a nonadhesive region . Interestingly , bleb formation seemed unaffected by changes in substrate adhesion ( Fig . 5 D ) , suggesting that adhesion mainly influences actin poly - merization . Taken together , our data indicate that changes in substrate adhesiveness can induce immediate and reversible changes in protrusion types . Discussion In this report , we investigated the minimal requirements and the dynamics of switching between blebs and lamellipodia in mi - grating cells . By systematically perturbing actin polymerization and actomyosin contractility , we directly demonstrate that shift - ing the balance between protrusive forces is sufficient to induce transitions between blebs and lamellipodia ( Fig . 4 ) . Interestingly , our observations suggest that the mechanisms leading to the formation of these two protrusion types are mutually exclusive , as high tension not only favors blebs but also limits lamellipodia extension , while Arp2 / 3 activity favors lamellipodia and decreases tension . The formation of both blebs and lamellipodia can nevertheless be observed when none of the two mechanisms dom - inate ; e . g . , upon incomplete inactivation of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Fig . 3 B ) . Thus , protrusive forces must be precisely balanced in systems where individual cells simultaneously form blebs and lamellipodia , as frequently observed in developing embryos ( 30 , 31 ) . Consistent with this hypothesis , Dictyostelium discoideum cells , which in wild type conditions form a combination of blebs and lamellipodia - like protrusions , form mainly blebs when actin polymerization is inhibited ( 27 , 32 ) , and mainly lamellipodia when myosin activity is reduced ( 13 , 27 ) . How the balance of protrusive forces is controlled in specific cell types to determine whether cells form exclusively blebs or lamellipodia , or both pro - trusions simultaneously , remains to be investigated . In addition to protrusive forces , the strength of substrate adhesion has been proposed to be an important factor in the control of cellular migration modes ( 1 , 10 , 11 ) . Consistently , the two sublines used in this study were selected based on cellular adhesive properties , with cells from the adherent subline forming lamellipodia and cells from the suspension subline forming blebs . However , the generation of sublines was conducted over several weeks . On shorter time scales , detachment from the substrate was not sufficient to induce bleb formation in adhSL cells ( Fig . 2 B ) . Moreover , switches between blebs and lamellipo - dia induced by modulating protrusive forces occurred with no apparent change in cell adhesion ( Fig . 3 A and D ) . Yet , blebbing suspSL cells immediately formed lamellipodia when put in contact with an adhesive substrate ( Fig . 5 ) . These observations Fig . 4 . Changing the balance between polymerization and contractility leads to immediate switching between blebs and lamellipodia . Schematic summary of the effects of various treatments performed ( arrows ) . Red color indicates treatments where immediate transitions could be observed . Fig . 5 . Adhesion can trigger immediate formation of lamellipodia in blebbing cells . ( A ) Examples of protrusions formed by suspSL cells placed between agarose and fibronectin coated PDMS 30 min be - fore imaging . Arrows : lamellipodia ; ar - rowheads : blebs . ( B ) Quantification of protrusions formed by suspSL cells placed between agarose and substrates with varying adhesiveness . FN : fibronectin ; F127 : nonadhesive coating . n : number of cells analyzed in two to three indepen - dent experiments . ( C ) SuspSL cells migrat - ing under agarose on a PDMS layer with microcontact printed adhesive regions ( fi - bronectin , red ) and nonadhesive regions ( F127 - coated ) . Asterisk : Cell migrating across boundaries . ( D ) Quantification of protrusions formed by suspSL cells that crossed boundaries between regions and formed lamellipodia when contact - ing adhesive areas ( 9 out of 18 cells , three independent experiments ) . The other 9 cells displayed continuous blebbing . Frequencies of lamellipodia and blebs formed on FN and F127 normalized to the mean frequency on F127 were deter - mined . Data points corresponding to the samecell on F127 and FN are labeled with the same color . P - Value : Welch ’ s two - sided , paired T - Test . ( E ) Examples of pro - trusions of the cell tracked in box ( C ) ( marks on track correspond to displayed image frames ) . Arrows : lamellipodia ; arrowheads : blebs . ( Scale bars , 10 μ m . ) . 14438 ∣ www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1207968109 Bergert et al . suggest that , even though switches between protrusions do not require changes in adhesion , modulating adhesion can trigger immediate transitions between protrusion types . Thus , variations in substrate properties can dynamically modulate cellular protru - sive activity . Real - time observation of transitions between blebs and lamel - lipodia in single cells allowed us to uncover essential features of the mechanisms underlying protrusion plasticity . First , switching events occurred on time scales of seconds ( Fig . 3 , Movie S5 , Movie S6 , Movie S7 , Movie S8 , and Movie S9 ) , demonstrating that protrusion adjustment to the environment can be rapidly achieved . Fast transitions are likely to be important for migration plasticity , because , in order to be effective , protrusion adjustment upon changes in the environment must occur quickly compared to the time scales of migration . Second , the instantaneous transi - tions between protrusion types occurred without extensive changes in overall cell shape ( Figs . 2 and 3 and Movie S5 ) . Thus , switching between lamellipodia and blebs can occur indepen - dently from the complex changes associated with mesenchymal - amoeboid transitions . Third , upon rapid changes in protrusion types , the new protrusion always formed at the same location as the previous one ( Fig . 3 D and Movies S5 and S9 ) . This obser - vation indicates that even though the growth of blebs and lamel - lipodia is driven by fundamentally different protrusive machi - neries , cell polarity is governed by the same mechanisms for both protrusion types . Such a common polarity mechanism would indeed be important during embryonic development , where a number of cell types simultaneously form blebs and lamellipodia ( 30 , 31 ) . It will be interesting to investigate how cellular struc - tures , such as the cell cortex , reorganize during cell polarization to accommodate the formation of both actomyosin contraction driven blebs and actin polymerization driven lamellipodia . Walk - er cells will be a valuable system for such studies , as they are one of the rare cultured cell lines displaying polarized formation of both blebs and lamellipodia . In summary , our findings demonstrate that the type of protru - sion formed by a cell can be fine - tuned in response to intracel - lular or extracellular cues , and that switching between protrusions can occur within seconds , as the cell migrates , and independently of any other aspect of cell morphology . Future studies will have to investigate to what extent and by which mechanisms cells adjust their protrusion types upon environmental changes during migration in vivo . Materials and Methods Culture , Transfection , and Treatment of Cells . Walker 256 carcinosarcoma cells were a gift from V . Niggli . Cells were grown in RPMI 1640 medium supple - mented with 10 % FCS , 1 % penicillin - streptomycin and 2 mM glutamine ( all GIBCO , Invitrogen ) at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 . Selection of the sublines was done as described in ref . 16 , except that nonadherent suspSL cells were grown in ultra - low - attachment surface flasks ( Corning Life Sciences ) to pre - vent any substrate adhesion . Reagents and plasmids , cell preparation for microscopy , cell transfection , treatments , and microcontact printing are de - scribed in the SI Text . Laser Ablation , Photoactivation , Imaging , and Tension Measurements . Laser ablation experiments were performed on a scanning confocal microscope ( Olympus FV1000 , UPlanSApo 60x NA 1 . 35 Oil Objective ) using a 405 nm picosecond pulsed laser as described previously ( 18 ) . Photoactivation of the activatable Rac1 construct ( 28 ) was done using the same system , either with a 458 nm laser for global activation or with the 405 nm ablation laser ( set to minimal power ) to locally activate a spot in the cell . For differential interfer - ence contrast ( DIC ) and fluorescence imaging a 488 nm or a 561 nm laser was used as a light source . Interference reflection microscopy was performed as described previously ( 24 ) using the Olympus FV1000 system described above . Phase contrast observations and Histone2B - GFP imaging were performed on an inverted Zeiss Axiovert 200M wide - field microscope using a Zeiss LD Achroplan 20x 0 . 40 Ph2 or a Zeiss Ph2 Plan Neofluar 40x 0 . 75 objective . Environmental control ( 37°C , 5 % CO 2 ) was applied for all imaging setups . Image processing and cell tracking are described in the SI Text . Cortical ten - sion was measured by micropipette aspiration as described previously ( 18 ) . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . We thank M . Biro , M . Bovellan , G . Charras , A . G . Clark , A . Diz - Muñoz , S . W . Grill , C . - P . Heisenberg , J . - L . Maître , E . Müllers , C . Norden , and A . C . Oates for discussions and commentsonthemanuscript , theMPI - CBG Light Microscopy Facility for technical help , and V . Niggli for the Walker cells . R . A . D . is funded by a Whitaker International Fellowship and a European Re - search Council grant under the European Communities Seventh Framework Programme ( FP7 / 2007 - 2013 ) to A . C . Oates . This work was supported by the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education ( 454 / N - MPG / 2009 / 0 ) , the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft ( PA 1590 / 1 - 1 ) , the HumanFrontier Science Program ( RGY 67 / 2008 ) , and the Max Planck Society . 1 . FriedlP , WolfK ( 2010 ) Plasticityofcellmigration : amultiscaletuningmodel . JCellBiol 188 : 11 – 19 . 2 . Ridley AJ ( 2011 ) Life at the leading edge . Cell 145 : 1012 – 1022 . 3 . Charras G , Paluch E ( 2008 ) Blebs lead the way : how to migrate without lamellipodia . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9 : 730 – 736 . 4 . WolfK , etal . ( 2003 ) Compensationmechanismintumorcellmigration : mesenchymal - amoeboid transition after blocking of pericellular proteolysis . J Cell Biol 160 : 267 – 277 . 5 . Friedl P , Wolf K ( 2003 ) Tumour - cell invasion and migration : diversity and escape mechanisms . Nat Rev Cancer 3 : 362 – 374 . 6 . Sanz - Moreno V , Marshall CJ ( 2010 ) The plasticity of cytoskeletal dynamics underlying neoplastic cell migration . Curr Opin Cell Biol 22 : 690 – 696 . 7 . SahaiE , MarshallCJ ( 2003 ) Differingmodesoftumourcellinvasionhavedistinctrequire - ments for Rho / ROCK signalling and extracellular proteolysis . Nat Cell Biol 5 : 711 – 719 . 8 . Sanz - MorenoV , etal . ( 2008 ) Racactivationandinactivationcontrolplasticityoftumor cell movement . Cell 135 : 510 – 523 . 9 . Palamidessi A , et al . ( 2008 ) Endocytic trafficking of Rac is required for the spatial restriction of signaling in cell migration . Cell 134 : 135 – 147 . 10 . Barnhart EL , Lee KC , Keren K , Mogilner A , Theriot JA ( 2011 ) An adhesion - dependent switch between mechanisms that determine motile cell shape . PLoS Biol 9 : e1001059 . 11 . Lämmermann T , Sixt M ( 2009 ) Mechanical modes of ‘ amoeboid ’ cell migration . Curr Opin Cell Biol 21 : 636 – 644 . 12 . Lämmermann T , et al . ( 2008 ) Rapid leukocyte migration by integrin - independent flowing and squeezing . Nature 453 : 51 – 55 . 13 . Yoshida K , Soldati T ( 2006 ) Dissection of amoeboid movement into two mechanically distinct modes . J Cell Sci 119 : 3833 – 3844 . 14 . Kardash E , et al . ( 2010 ) A role for Rho GTPases and cell - cell adhesion in single - cell motility in vivo . Nat Cell Biol 12 : 47 – 53 . 15 . Elvin P , Wong V , Evans CW ( 1985 ) A study of the adhesive , locomotory and invasive behavior of Walker 256 carcinosarcoma cells . Exp Cell Biol 53 : 9 – 18 . 16 . Sroka J , von Gunten M , Dunn GA , Keller HU ( 2002 ) Phenotype modulation in non - adherent and adherent sublines of Walker carcinosarcoma cells : the role of cell - substratum contacts and microtubules in controlling cell shape , locomotion and cytoskeletal structure . Int J Biochem Cell Biol 34 : 882 – 899 . 17 . Riedl J , et al . ( 2008 ) Lifeact : a versatile marker to visualize F - actin . Nat Methods 5 : 605 – 607 . 18 . TinevezJY , etal . ( 2009 ) Roleofcorticaltensioninblebgrowth . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA 106 : 18581 – 18586 . 19 . Hochmuth RM ( 2000 ) Micropipette aspiration of living cells . J Biomech 33 : 15 – 22 . 20 . Thoumine O , Cardoso O , Meister JJ ( 1999 ) Changes in the mechanical properties of fibroblasts during spreading : a micromanipulation study . Eur Biophys J 28 : 222 – 234 . 21 . Gutjahr MC , Rossy J , Niggli V ( 2005 ) Role of Rho , Rac , and Rho - kinase in phosphoryla - tion of Myosin light chain , development of polarity , and spontaneous migration of Walker 256 carcinosarcoma cells . Exp Cell Res 308 : 422 – 438 . 22 . Pollard TD , Borisy GG ( 2003 ) Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin filaments . Cell 112 : 453 – 465 . 23 . Nolen BJ , et al . ( 2009 ) Characterization of two classes of small molecule inhibitors of Arp2 / 3 complex . Nature 460 : 1031 – 1034 . 24 . Barr VA , Bunnell SC ( 2009 ) Interference reflection microscopy . Curr Protoc Cell Biol Chapter 4 , Unit 4 . 23 . 25 . SeversonAF , BaillieDL , BowermanB ( 2002 ) AForminhomologyproteinandaprofilin are required for cytokinesis and Arp2 / 3 - independent assembly of cortical microfila - ments in C . elegans . Curr Biol 12 : 2066 – 2075 . 26 . Roh - Johnson M , Goldstein B ( 2009 ) In vivo roles for Arp2 / 3 in cortical actin organiza - tion during C . elegansgastrulation . J Cell Sci 122 : 3983 – 3993 . 27 . Langridge PD , Kay RR ( 2006 ) Blebbing of dictyostelium cells in response to chemoat - tractant . Exp Cell Res 312 : 2009 – 2017 . 28 . Wu YI , et al . ( 2009 ) A genetically encoded photoactivatable Rac controls the motility of living cells . Nature 461 : 104 – 108 . 29 . Hall A ( 1998 ) Rho GTPases and the actin cytoskeleton . Science 279 : 509 – 514 . 30 . Trinkaus JP ( 1973 ) Surface activity and locomotion of Fundulus deep cells during blastula and gastrula stages . Dev Biol 30 : 69 – 103 . 31 . Diz - Muñoz A , et al . ( 2010 ) Control of directed cell migration in vivo by membrane - to - cortex attachment . PLoS Biol 8 : e1000544 . 32 . Yoshida K , Inouye K ( 2001 ) Myosin II - dependent cylindrical protrusions induced by quinine in Dictyostelium : antagonizing effects of actin polymerization at the leading edge . J Cell Sci 114 : 2155 – 2165 . Bergert et al . PNAS ∣ September 4 , 2012 ∣ vol . 109 ∣ no . 36 ∣ 14439 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y