Introduction On thin and ﬂexible ﬁlms , tissue cells visibly contract and induce wrinkles , doing so without a loss of attachment ( Harris , 1984 ; Harris et al . , 1980 ; Leader et al . , 1983 ) . Implications for cell phenotype are presently uncertain , but traction forces are clearly transmitted to the matrix , occuring primarily through specialized adhesion and cytoskeletal linkages . The cellular forces generate substrate displacements , but only if allowed by the softness of the substrate ( Stamenovic et al . , 2002 ) . Cytochalasin disruption of F - actin moderates such cell tractions as does 2 , 3 - butanedione monoxime ( BDM ) , which inhibits myosin ( Pelham and Wang , 1997 ) . BDM also inhibits the development of striations or myoﬁbrillogenesis in skeletal muscle differentiation , which suggests a need for actomyosin crossbridge cycling in differentiation ( Ramachandran et al . , 2003 ) . However , calcium regulation is also affected by BDM ( Turvey et al . , 2003 ) , and calcium has a key role in mechanosensory processes ( Munevar et al . , 2004 ) . Additional pharmacological probes are therefore needed to test and distinguish myosin contributions and other mechanisms in contractility and differentiation . Although tissue cells are generally found to spread and organize classical focal adhesions on stiff or rigid substrates ( Pelham and Wang , 1997 ; Wong et al . , 2003 ) , once the cells are maximally spread and immobilized , their contractions are necessarily more isometric than on a softer substrate . On softer substrates , which could in principle include an underlayer of soft cells , typical tissue cells such as smooth muscle cells are often more rounded and display more dynamic adhesions ( Engler et al . , 2004a ) . In principle , this should allow for ﬁnite contractions , and should foster differentiation of myocytes . Additionally , stress ﬁbers that predominate in cells growing on rigid substrates are largely missing in cells growing on soft substrates ( Engler et al . , 2004a ) . A sustained balance between a compliant type of adhesion and contractility thus implies that cells ‘feel’ their substrate and feedback in response to it . Because of the highly organized cytoskeletal structure of fully differentiated myotubes , skeletal muscle cells provide a relatively well - deﬁned , even geometric system for evaluating contractile prestress and relating it to structure . In differentiating skeletal muscle , non - muscle myosin II is increasingly replaced by muscle - speciﬁc myosin II , which assembles with F - actin into sarcomeres that run the length of the multinucleated myotube and clearly deﬁne the contractile axis of these cells . However , classical cultures present a problem in distinguishing the effects of myotube adhesion versus contraction . This is because myotubes typically form complex , branched networks with uncontrolled myotube - myotube adhesion and substrate detachment occurring uncontrollably . In order to foster a more physiological and linear form to the myotube , we separated cells here from each other by using micropatterned substrates . Myoblasts can be constrained to line up and fuse into well - deﬁned geometries on patterned substrates that provide limited or long - term cell - 5855 Tissue cells generally pull on their matrix attachments and balance a quasi - static contractility against adequate adhesion , but any correlation with and / or inﬂuence on phenotype are not yet understood . Here , we begin to demonstrate how differentiation state couples to actomyosin - based contractility through adhesion and substrate compliance . Myotubes are differentiated from myoblasts on collagen - patterned coverslips that allow linear fusion but prevent classic myotube branching . Post - fusion , myotubes adhere to the micro - strips but lock into a stress ﬁber - rich state and do not differentiate signiﬁcantly further . In contrast , myotubes grown on top of such cells do progress through differentiation , exhibiting actomyosin striations within one week . A compliant adhesion to these lower cells is suggested to couple to contractility and accommodate the reorganization needed for upper cell striation . Contractility is assessed in these adherent cells by mechanically detaching one end of the myotubes . All myotubes , whether striated or not , shorten with an exponential decay . The cell - on - cell myotubes relax more , which implies a greater contractile stress . The non - muscle myosin II inhibitor blebbistatin inhibits relaxation for either case . Myotubes in culture are thus clearly prestressed by myosin II , and this contractility couples to substrate compliance and ultimately inﬂuences actomyosin striation . Supplementary material available online at http : / / jcs . biologists . org / cgi / content / full / 117 / 24 / 5855 / DC1 Key words : Myotube , Differentiation , Prestress , C2C12 cells , Substrate compliance Summary Adhesion - contractile balance in myocyte differentiation Maureen A . Griffin , Shamik Sen , H . Lee Sweeney and Dennis E . Discher * Biophysical Engineering Laboratory , 112 Towne Building , and Pennsylvania Muscle Institute , University of Pennsylvania , D - 700 Richards Building , 3700 Hamilton Walk , Philadelphia , PA 19104 , USA * Author for correspondence ( e - mail : discher @ seas . upenn . edu ) Accepted 17 August 2004 Journal of Cell Science 117 , 5855 - 5863 Published by The Company of Biologists 2004 doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 01496 Research Article 5856 shape deﬁnition ( Griffin et al . , 2004 ; Ra et al . , 1999 ) . In addition , as these cells differentiate further with striation in classic culture conditions , they stiffen , as measured using atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) ( Collinsworth et al . , 2002 ) . Stiffness of smooth muscle cells ( measured by twisting magnetic beads ) also increases linearly with contractile stress ( Wang et al . , 2002 ) . An increased stiffening of myotubes with differentiation thus leads to a prediction , demonstrated here , that contractile prestress ( a basal tensile stress carried by the contractile apparatus ) increases as muscle striates . Here we identify the role of non - muscle myosin II in the contractility of skeletal myotubes , both striated and non - striated , by perturbing the adhesion and allowing partial relaxation of the cells . Prestress might be related to the tissue - level twitch tension typically measured in muscle cells ( Carlson , 1974 ; Hack et al . , 1999 ) . This prestress probably has a signiﬁcant earlier role during cell differentiation : maturation of the actomyosin cytoskeleton ( myoﬁbrillogenesis ) appears to be fostered by a compliant substrate that accommodates , thereby signaling perhaps , reorganization within the cell . Although striation increases cellular prestress , the process of striation in a nascent myotube surprisingly requires that the cell is not too focally attached to an overly rigid substrate during post - fusion differentiation . Factoring substrate compliance into the nature of cell adhesion , the adhesion - contractile balance of skeletal muscle cells has wide implications . If adhesion is inadequate , as is likely in many muscular dystrophies , even basal levels of contractile stress can be damaging and impact differentiation . On the other hand , hyper - contractile muscle might detach itself from its matrix in the absence of adequate adhesion and thus inﬂuence apoptotic or other pathways . The study here is thus an initial investigation into contractile prestress and its effect ( s ) on adherent myotubes . Materials and Methods Cell culture C2C12 skeletal myocytes ( CRL - 1772 , ATCC , Rockville , MD ) were maintained in 75 - cm 2 tissue culture ﬂasks ( Corning Glass Works , Corning , NY ) at 37 ° C and 5 % CO 2 . Cells were grown in 10 ml DMEM ( Gibco Laboratories , Grand Island , NY ) supplemented with 20 % fetal bovine serum ( Gibco ) , 0 . 5 % chick embryo extract ( US Biological , Swampscott , MA ) and 0 . 5 % penicillin / streptomycin at 10 , 000 U / ml and 10 , 000 µ g / ml , respectively ( Gibco ) . Cells were passaged every 2 - 3 days by detaching with trypsin - EDTA ( Gibco ) . Substrate characterization Glass slides or coverslips were patterned as previously described ( Griffin et al . , 2004 ) . Brieﬂy , glass slides were cleaned , spin - coated with photoresist ( Shipley , Marlborough , MA ) , exposed to 2400 Joules of 300 - to 500 - nm UV light through a mask and the exposed photoresist was developed away . This process produced slides patterned with photoresist surrounding rectangles , or strips , of untreated glass 20 µ m wide by 200 - 1000 µ m long ( Fig . 1A ) . The newly exposed glass strips were then coated with allyltrichlorosilane ( Sigma , St Louis , MO ) and covalently bound to an interpenetrating polymer network ( IPN ) of polyacrylamide and polyethylene glycol ( Polysciences , Warrington , PA ) , resulting in p ( AAm - co - EG ) IPN - patterned slides . Next , the untreated glass rectangles were grafted with 3 - aminopropyltriethoxysilane ( Sigma ) and coated with rat tail collagen - I ( BD Biosciences , Palo Alto , CA ) by overnight incubation at 4 ° C . The complete pattern consisted of glass strips coated with collagen and surrounded by IPN ( Fig . 1A ) . Cells plated on IPN - patterned slides remained patterned with high pattern recognition for up to 14 days . The effectiveness of the patterning is due in part , we believe , to the compliance contrast between the IPN and the collagen - coated glass . Apparent elastic moduli of the IPN and the collagen - coated glass were measured by AFM ( Engler et al . , 2004a ) . Brieﬂy , the apparent elastic modulus was obtained by ﬁtting a thin - ﬁlm Hertz model ( Dimitriadis et al . , 2002 ) to the ﬁrst 5 - 50 nm of indentation proﬁles of the collagen - coated glass strips and the surrounding IPN . The measurements were performed with an Asylum Epi - Force AFM ( Santa Barbara , CA ) . Although the materials were too thin ( ~ 10 - 50 nm ) for accurate determination of the exact moduli , there was a signiﬁcant difference in their relative stiffnesses and the collagen - coated glass appeared at least twice as stiff as the IPN . The long - term quality of the patterning is also a result of the non - fouling nature of the IPN : proteins do not readily adsorb to the IPN . We tested the longevity of this resistance to protein deposition by adsorbing ﬂuorescently labeled collagen ( Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) onto IPN patterns for 2 - 4 weeks and comparing the intensity of Journal of Cell Science 117 ( 24 ) Fig . 1 . Nascent C2C12 skeletal myotubes on collagen patterns . ( A ) Patterns of collagen - coated rectangles , 20 µ m wide and 200 - 1000 µ m long , surrounded by interpenetrating polymer network ( IPN ) . Even after 14 days of incubation with ﬂuorescent collagen , the IPN shows no signiﬁcant adsorption based on intensity . In addition , when measured by AFM , the apparent elastic modulus of the IPN is approximately half that of the collagen - coated glass . Scale bar , 200 µ m . ( B ) Myoblasts plated onto the patterned coverslips were either stained for vinculin ( and imaged by TIRF for clarity ) or triple - stained for actin ( red ) myosin ( green ) and nuclei ( blue ) . The cells invariably fuse to form multinucleated myotubes . The arrow points to the vinculin clustered at the edges of the patterned myotube , indicative of classical focal adhesion structures . The actin and myosin images show no striations and are of the same nascent myotube at day 6 . Bars : in A 200 µ m ; in B 10 µ m . 5857 Adhesion - contractile balance in myotubes the IPN ( I IPN ) at day 14 to the baseline I IPN at day 1 . The intensity at day 1 was used as the baseline for comparison because Healy and co - workers have shown with XPS ( X - ray photoelectron spectroscopy ) that the IPN completely resists protein deposition after 24 hours incubation in protein solution ( Bearinger et al . , 1997 ) . Fluorescently labeled collagen on patterned slides was observed with a Nikon TE300 inverted microscope ( Optical Apparatus , Aardmore , PA ) using a 40 × objective ( N . A . 0 . 45 ) and images were recorded with a liquid nitrogen - cooled CCD camera ( Model CH360 , Photometrics , Tuscon , AZ ) . After 14 - 28 days of incubation in collagen solution , there was no signiﬁcant increase in ﬂuorescence compared to day 1 , leading to the conclusion that no collagen adsorbed to the IPN even after incubation for 28 days . Relaxation experiments In preparation for relaxation experiments , ~ 10 4 cells were plated onto fully patterned IPN substrates . The media was changed to differentiation media [ DM ; DMEM supplemented with 10 % horse serum ( Gibco ) and 0 . 5 % penicillin / streptomycin ] on the ﬁrst day after plating and changed every other day . Relaxation experiments were performed after a total of 6 days in culture . Before beginning the relaxation experiments , the medium was changed for one of three control ( solutions 1 - 3 in Table 1 ) or three experimental solutions ( solutions 4 - 6 in Table 1 ) . The cells were then incubated for 20 minutes at 37 ° C and 5 % CO 2 ( this 20 - minute incubation period was skipped for a subset of control cells in unaltered DM ) . To initiate relaxation , one end of a cell was mechanically detached with a glass micropipette ( pre - incubated with BSA ( Sigma ) in order to minimize cell - pipette interaction ) . The cell was then allowed to relax for up to 6 minutes . The process was observed with a Nikon TE300 inverted microscope using a 10 × ( N . A . 0 . 17 ) phase objective and recorded onto video through a video - rate camera ( model JE8242 , Javelin Systems , Torrance , CA ) . When necessary , the stage was repositioned in order to keep the cell within the ﬁeld of view . Cell - on - cell experiments For experiments where cells were grown on top of other cells , ~ 10 4 C2C12 myoblasts were plated onto IPN - patterned slides . On day 1 after plating , a second layer of ~ 10 4 myoblasts was plated on top of the cells . The media was changed to DM 2 days after plating of the bottom layer of cells and every other day thereafter . Control samples were also prepared by plating a single layer of ~ 10 4 cells both onto IPN patterns as well as onto Aclar sheets ( Ted Pella , Redding , CA ) pre - adsorbed with 0 . 2 mg / ml collagen I . Although the pattern recognition began to deteriorate after 14 days , we readily distinguished cells growing on other cells from cells growing directly on glass . Fluorescent staining Cells were stained for actin , myosin , vinculin and nuclei as previously described ( Griffin et al . , 2004 ) . Brieﬂy , cells grown on patterned coverslips were ﬁxed with formaldehyde ( Fisher Scientiﬁc , Atlanta , GA ) permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton - X 100 ( Fisher ) and blocked with 0 . 5 % BSA in PBS for 1 hour at 37 ° C . Next , the cells were permeabilized and incubated overnight at 4 ° C in 1 : 50 mouse antibody to skeletal myosin heavy chain ( Zymed , San Francisco , CA ) or 1 : 200 in mouse anti - vinculin ( Sigma ) in PBS . Cells treated with 50 µ m blebbistatin in 0 . 5 % DMSO were also stained in parallel for vinculin . The cells were then incubated with secondary antibody ( 1 : 100 FITC - conjugated anti - mouse IgG , Sigma ) and cells stained for myosin were also incubated in 60 µ g / ml TRITC - phalloidin ( Sigma ) . Before mounting , the nuclei were stained with 1 : 100 Hoechst 33342 in PBS ( Molecular Probes ) . Fluorescently labeled cells were examined under epiﬂuorescence using a Nikon TE300 inverted microscope with a 60 × ( 1 . 4 N . A . ) objective . Total internal reﬂectance microscopy ( TIRF ) images were obtained with an Olympus IX71 microscope ( B & B Microscopes , Warrendale , PA ) . Images were recorded with a cascade CCD camera ( Photometrics , Tucson , AZ ) . Confocal microscopy was performed on Nikon TE300 inverted microscope ﬁtted with a Bio - Rad Radiance 2000 MP3 system ( Bio - Rad Laboratories , Inc . , Hercules , CA ) . Images were observed through a 60 × objective ( N . A . 1 . 45 ) , and recorded with the software Lasersharp 2000 ( Bio - Rad Laboratories , Inc . ) . Results Cell patterning and ridgidity - inhibited differentiation The patterned substrates here consist of cell - adhesive rectangular strips of glass - adsorbed collagen ( Fig . 1A ) . The strips prove stable for the weeks of culture required for myotube differentiation . The thin ﬁlm of polymer gel surrounding the collagen - coated strips contributes to the long - term efficiency of the cell patterning ( Fig . 1B ) not only by inhibiting protein deposition , but also perhaps by its soft and compliant nature , which tends to inhibit cell spreading ( Engler et al . , 2004a ; Pelham and Wang , 1997 ; Wang et al . , 2000 ; Wong et al . , 2003 ) . Within 1 - 2 days , motile myoblasts have crawled onto the micropatterned collagen strips and initiated differentiation . After one week in culture , the C2C12 cells on the strips have invariably fused to form syncytial , multi - nucleated myotubes ( Fig . 1B ) . These cells do not generate sarcomeres , however . Even after one month in culture , no actin - myosin striations are seen . Instead , F - actin maintains a network of stress - ﬁbers , and the skeletal - muscle myosin remains diffusely distributed within the cell . The ﬂuorescence intensity ( indicative of differentiation ) seen in nascent myotubes is higher than that typically seen in myoblasts . Cell - on - cell and asymmetric differentiation Full differentiation to striated myotubes is seen only with C2C12 cells growing on top of a lower layer of cells ( Fig . 2A - C ) . This is achieved by adding myoblasts one day after the ﬁrst plating . Within one week in culture , these upper cells not only fuse into a myotube separate from the lower cell , but the upper myotubes also show a very strong tendency to striate . In the cells on top of cells , skeletal muscle myosin is clearly upregulated and often organized into sarcomeric striations by day 6 . F - actin begins to striate as well . Multiple experiments conﬁrm striation for a majority of cells - on - cells at this early time point ( Fig . 2D ) . In comparison , none of the cells in direct contact with the patterned coverslips , including cells underneath other cells , show striations . By day 24 , the percentage of cells - on - cells showing sarcomeres increases to 80 - 90 % , and for these upper cells , the actin is also fully striated . No cells in direct contact with the coverslip at day 24 appear striated . Substrate compliance may have a direct inﬂuence in the cell - on - cell differentiation . Although the upper cell sees only a soft Table 1 . Experimental setup Controls Experiments 1 . Unaltered DM 4 . 50 µ M blebbistatin in 0 . 1 % DMSO 2 . 0 . 1 % DMSO in DM 5 . 50 µ M blebbistatin in 0 . 5 % DMSO 3 . 0 . 5 % DMSO in DM 6 . 5 µ M latrunculin - A in 0 . 5 % DMSO 5858 cell below it , the lower cell always sees rigid substrate below it in spite of the soft cell above . The elastic modulus of early - stage myotubes has been determined previously by AFM indentation ( Collinsworth et al . , 2002 ) and proves remarkably similar to elastic moduli reported for the passive elasticity of skeletal muscle tissue . Separate studies of our own with C2C12 cells grown on collagen - coated polyacrylamide gels conﬁrm that a tissue - like substrate modulus is indeed optimal for myotube differentiation ( see Fig . S1 in supplementary material ) ( Engler et al . , 2004b ) . These comparisons therefore suggest that the collagen - coated glass is too stiff and locks stress - ﬁber - rich nascent myotubes into tightly adherent , early differentiation states . An important role for substrate compliance in the differentiation of contractile cells such as C2C12s ( Portier et al . , 1999 ) is understandable . Fully differentiated myotubes in vivo show vinculin organized into striated structures known as costameres ( Pardo et al . , 1983 ) . Although costameres have been observed in C2C12 cells in culture by day 11 ( Belkin et al . , 1996 ) , costameric vinculin has not been reported in vitro . We found that by day 6 , myotubes growing either directly on the collagen - coated glass or on top of other cells , show vinculin either in classical focal adhesion structures ( Burridge and Connell , 1983 ; Katoh et al . , 1995 ) or diffusely distributed ( Fig . 1B , Fig . 2C ) . The same is true for C2C12 cells grown on collagen - coated , unpatterned plastic Aclar even after 2 weeks in culture ( data not shown ) . TIRF microscopy of vinculin - stained cells grown on patterned glass reveals vinculin clusters at the edges of the cells ( arrow in Fig . 1B ) , a phenomenon we have reported previously ( Griffin et al . , 2004 ) . Vinculin organization and associated adhesion mechanisms in C2C12 cells up to two weeks thus seem relatively similar across the various cultures here . For the cell length relaxation studies presented below , these adhesions are probably a source of drag as the bonds are broken during myotube relaxation . Lastly , although it is difficult to clearly focus even in confocal microscopy on the interface between the upper myotube and the lower myotube ( Fig . 2B ) , by raising the focal plane only 1 . 2 µ m , we can nevertheless see in cell - on - cell arrangements that what appears to be a bright but out - of - focus actin ﬁlament running down the center of the bottom cell , is in fact the actin - rich cell membrane cortex of the top cell . Journal of Cell Science 117 ( 24 ) Fig . 2 . Myotube striation occurs only on top of nascent myotubes . ( A ) Schematic showing that myotubes striate on top of other cells but not directly on IPN - patterned coverslips . Myoblasts plated on top of day 1 - 3 cells generate distinct cell - on - cell arrangements : in the upper myotube , actin and myosin will striate , whereas the lower myocyte bound to glass remains unstriated . ( B ) Confocal micrographs of the upper cell in a 2 - week cell - on - cell system stained for actin and myosin . The actin shows a hint of striation , particularly near the arrow . The lower cell is wider , as in the middle sketch , and shows more isotropically oriented stress ﬁbers . There is a 1 . 2 µ m difference in height between the two actin images . The dashed lines represent the edges of the bottom myotube . Although the bottom cell is a fused myotube , the actin and myosin are striated in the top cell only . Bars , 10 µ m . ( C ) Vinculin staining appears diffuse in both upper ( n = 15 ) and lower cells ( n = 15 ) in conventional ﬂuorescence microscopy . A nucleus in the lower cell is not visible in the upper cell ( dashed oval ) . The actin and myosin images show striation only in the upper cell ( ~ 6 µ m higher focal plane ) and again a nucleus ( asterisk ) is visible in one cell but not the other . Bars , 10 µ m . ( D ) After 1 week in culture , 68 % of cells ( n = 34 ) growing on top of other cells exhibit striated myosin compared to 0 % ( n = 25 ) of cells growing directly on collagen - coated glass . By 4 weeks , more upper cells have striated with no evidence of lower cell striation . 5859 Adhesion - contractile balance in myotubes Examination of confocal images indeed conﬁrms that striations occur only in the top cell . In addition , the relaxation experiments discussed below show that the upper cell relaxes rapidly off the lower cell , consistent with the conclusion that the upper and lower myotubes are distinct : membrane fusion between the two layers has not occurred . The lack of ‘vertical’ fusion might reﬂect mechanistic limits to lateral fusion or more probably reﬂects the time delay between platings , with the lower myotube , plated ﬁrst , perhaps being past the stage of ready fusion . Relaxation of contractile stress Cells treated for 20 minutes with the myosin II - speciﬁc inhibitor blebbistatin appear visually unaffected ( Fig . 3B , C ) . Latrunculin - A ( lat - A ) exposure for 20 minutes shows dramatic effects , however : myotubes treated with lat - A detach almost completely from the substrate . As the lat - A - treated cells detach , they also bleb extensively ( Fig . 3D ) . Because of these severe effects , cells treated with lat - A could not be studied further in the relaxation measurements below . Quantitative studies of myotube relaxation were carried out with various control cells to compare to blebbistatin - treated cells . When mechanically detached slightly at one end , a myotube tends to shorten with a relative length change that decays exponentially ( Fig . 4 ) . We have previously shown that by using a simple viscoelastic model for relaxation , the decrease in myotube length generally ﬁts well to the equation : L / L init = 1 – A ( 1 – e – t / τ ) , where L is the cell length , L init is the initial length , A is the shortening amplitude , and τ is the characteristic time ( Griffin et al . , 2004 ) . Together with typical relaxation curves , snapshots of the relaxation processes at two different time points are shown in Fig . 4 . The cells generally slow and stop relaxing upon reaching what must be a strong adhesion , which seems likely to be a collection or cluster of focal adhesions ( see Fig . 1B ) . The location of this strong adhesion relative to the forces driving relaxation is indicated by the amplitude , A , of the ﬁt ( see equation ) . This decay amplitude varies with both the type of perturbation applied and the nature of the cell . Compared to control cells ( Fig . 4A ) , cells treated with blebbistatin relax to a lesser extent ( Fig . 4B ) . Myotubes relaxing off a lower layer of cells also show slower relaxation dynamics but reach equilibrium at a much smaller L / L init than control cells ( Fig . 4C ) . Note that in the image of the cell - from - cell relaxation ( Fig . 4C ′ ) , an unperturbed bottom layer of cells is exposed once the upper myotube has peeled back . From this we conclude that , as described earlier , cells growing on top of other cells have not fused with the bottom layer to form a single thick myotube . The two cell layers are mechanically as well as morphologically distinct . In order to determine the effect of the carrier solvent DMSO , the relaxation dynamics of the different control cells were also compared ( solutions 1 - 3 in Table 1 ) . DMSO and several other organics have been noted by Sheetz and co - workers to reduce membrane surface tension ( Dai and Sheetz , 1995 ; Hochmuth et al . , 1996 ) , and so we tested whether DMSO has an effect on the relaxation dynamics . By binning and averaging the relaxation data sets , we found that cells treated with 0 . 1 % and 0 . 5 % DMSO ( solutions 2 and 3 in Table 1 ) showed no signiﬁcant difference in relaxation dynamics . We then compared the data from DMSO - treated cells with the data from cells exposed only to unaltered media ( solution 1 in Table 1 ) . The L / L init data sets from two separate experiments were each binned by time , averaged ( Fig . 5A ) , and compared . Again , no difference was seen between the DMSO - treated cells and the untreated cells , and experiments in the three control solutions ( 1 - 3 in Table 1 ) are therefore grouped as ‘Controls’ in Fig . 5B . Relaxation dynamics for blebbistatin in 0 . 1 % and 0 . 5 % DMSO ( solutions 4 and 5 in Table 1 ) also do not differ signiﬁcantly , and so these cells are grouped together as ‘Blebbistatin’ in Fig . 5B . Thus , DMSO in relevant concentrations here does not affect myotube relaxation dynamics . Based on this and other observations ( Dai and Sheetz , 1995 ; Hochmuth et al . , 1996 ) , membrane tension seems not to be a major contributor to the prestress seen here . Binned relaxation lengths for control cells ( ±DMSO ) were ﬁtted to the equation ( Fig . 5A ) , and then contrasted with cells relaxing off other cells and blebbistatin - treated cells grown on glass or on other cells ( Fig . 5B ) . Based on the amplitude , A , for each ﬁt , the blebbistatin - treated cells reach an equilibrium that is 4 % smaller than their initial length , L init . Control cells relax by 9 % . Cell - from - cell relaxation is greatest after initial detachment , reaching equilibrium at a length 27 % smaller than L init , but cells - on - cells pre - treated with blebbistatin reach equilibrium after relaxing 8 % . The extremely small error bars shown in the plots for the control and blebbistatin - treated cells reinforce the signiﬁcance of the different relaxation Fig . 3 . Cell attachment response to actin depolymerization and myosin II inhibition . Cell - substrate attachment is inﬂuenced by lat - A but not by blebbistatin . ( A ) Before treatment , myotubes are fused and ﬁrmly attached to the substrate . ( B , C ) Control cells and cells incubated in 50 µ M blebbistatin for 20 minutes exhibit no visually observable change . ( D ) After a 20 minute incubation in 5 µ M lat - A , however , cells bleb and self - peel off the substrate . The dotted lines indicate the location of the collagen - patterned strip in the IPN . Bars , 20 µ m . 5860 amplitudes . The untreated cell - from - cell results are also clearly below controls but show more variability . Fitted values for both A and τ are compared in Fig . 5C , D . Typical of damped elastic systems , low initial loading or prestress , and / or more drag is expected to give a larger value for τ and a smaller value for A . Relative to control myotubes , blebbistatin decreases A ( by 56 % ) and dramatically slows the relaxation ( τ increases 190 % ) . Blebbistatin therefore either decreases the intracellular prestress or it increases the drag on the cells , or both . However , as this drag in all likelihood represents the disruption of receptor - ligand bonds along the length of the cell , and as blebbistatin is known to target myosin II motor activity ( Straight et al . , 2003 ) , we examined the effects of blebbistatin on focal adhesions . In thresholded TIRF images of vinculin - stained cells , we found that blebbistatin affected Journal of Cell Science 117 ( 24 ) Fig . 4 . Myotube relaxation after initial detachment . Representative length - relaxation of control cells ( A ) , cells treated with 50 µ M blebbistatin ( B ) and cells relaxing off other cells ( C ) . The data are ﬁtted to the equation L / L init = 1 – A ( 1 – e – t / τ ) , where A is the amplitude and τ is the time constant . The respective images in A ′ , B ′ and C ′ are snapshots of the relaxation with cells outlined by dotted lines . In the case of untreated cells relaxing off other cells ( C , C ′ ) , the relaxation is so large that the stage is moved to the right 140 µ m . The arrow points to the lower cell that is left unperturbed after relaxation of the upper cell . Bars , 10 µ m . 0 . 84 0 . 88 0 . 92 0 . 96 1 0 100 200 300 400 A Time ( sec ) L / L ti n i Media alone , N = 20 DMSO , N = 9 Average Fit ( R 2 = 0 . 94 ) Controls n it a t s i bb e l B + ll e C m o rf ll e C 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 1 0 100 200 300 400 L / L ti n i Time ( sec ) Controls : N = 29 ( R 2 = 0 . 94 ) Blebbistatin : N = 17 ( R 2 = 0 . 97 ) Blebbistatin cell from cell : N = 6 , ( R 2 = 0 . 99 ) Cell from cell : N = 8 ( R 2 = 0 . 90 ) 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 n it a t s i bb e l B + l o r t no C ll e C m o rf ll e C ll e C m o rf ll e C , n it a t s i bb e l B + Amplitude C n it a t s i bb e l B + l o r t no C ll e C m o rf ll e C , n it a t s i bb e l B + ll e C m o rf ll e C τ ( sec ) 0 50 100 150 200 D B Fig . 5 . Cumulative relaxation dynamics of the various myotubes . The results show that cells relax more quickly and to a greater extent when grown on top of other cells ; and less so when treated with blebbistatin . ( A ) No signiﬁcant difference is seen in the relaxation dynamics of cells exposed to DMSO ( three cultures ) compared to cells exposed only to media ( ﬁve cultures ) . Data are time - binned averages all cells , with error bars representing the standard error of the mean . The bold line is the exponential ﬁt for all 29 cells , R 2 = 0 . 94 . ( B ) Control cells relax to an average equilibrium length that is A = 90 % of their initial length . Blebbistatin - treated cells ( three cultures ) relax signiﬁcantly less , whereas cells relaxing off other cells ( three cultures ) relax more . Blebbistatin - treated cells relaxing off other cells ( two cultures ) also relax more than blebbistatin - treated cells on glass . ( C ) The amplitudes , A , of each ﬁt , indicate clear differences in the fraction of cell relaxation at equilibrium . ( D ) In all cases , the time constant for relaxation is greater when the cell is perturbed ; but the slowest relaxation occurs in blebbistatin cells - on - glass . 5861 Adhesion - contractile balance in myotubes neither the fraction of cell area covered by focal adhesions nor the edge clustering of the focal adhesions . In contrast , the adhesions of lat - A - treated cells ( Fig . 3D ) , were clearly undermined , probably because F - actin depolymerization disrupts focal adhesions and stress ﬁbers . Therefore , the reciprocal changes in τ and A caused by blebbistatin probably result from a decrease in cellular prestress . Relaxation parameters for cells - on - cells also seem to support the conclusions above . Compared to blebbistatin - treated cells - on - glass , A is higher ( by 100 % ) for blebbistatin - treated cells - on - cells whereas τ is lower ( by 60 % ) . Untreated cells growing on other cells , however , have both a larger average relaxation amplitude ( by 200 % ) and a larger time constant ( by 95 % ) than those of control cells . The majority of cells growing on other cells were shown to be striated ( Fig . 2 ) and therefore had more of a contractile phenotype . Contractile prestress is therefore reasonably assumed to have increased in these cells and thereby drives cell relaxation . In comparing blebbistatin - treated and untreated cells - on - cells , we ﬁnd that blebbistatin signiﬁcantly decreases the relaxation amplitude , consistent with decreased prestress in the treated cells . Discussion Cells on matrix - like gels reveal contractile stresses that are visible in gel displacements , which increase with activation and decrease with disruption of the actomyosin cytoskeleton ( Stamenovic et al . , 2002 ) . Likewise , experiments here with blebbistatin and lat - A reveal that the cytoskeleton also plays a key role in cellular prestress . In mechanical relaxation studies of a related type by Wang and coworkers ( Pourati et al . , 1998 ) , adherent endothelial cells were cut or partially detached with a microneedle and were then seen to retract . Retraction occurred unless the actin cytoskeletal network was ﬁrst disrupted with cytochalasin D . Recent studies of our own with GFP - ( unpublished ) and GFP - paxillin - ( Griffin et al . , 2004 ) transfected cells show that cells maintain their membrane integrity during cell peeling . Based on such ﬁndings and the results here , it can be concluded that the cytoskeleton imposes a contractile prestress on the cell and its bounding membrane . Prestress is considerably relieved here in cells treated with blebbistatin ( for both cell - on - cell and cell - on - glass systems ) . However , cells treated with lat - A collapse in upon themselves without the need for forced detachment from the substrate . The difference is undoubtedly due to the contribution of F - actin to adhesion complexes : disrupting the actin - myosin network inhibits focal adhesion assembly ( Engler et al . , 2004a ) . The dramatic increase in shortening amplitude for cells relaxing off other cells is indicative of the prestress in myoﬁbrillogenesis . In normal muscle tissue , myotubes bind through integrins and dystroglycans to a basement membrane sheath of ECM molecules such as laminin and collagen ( Clark et al . , 1997 ; Lyles et al . , 1993 ) and myoblasts bind to other cells through cell adhesion molecules such as NCAM ( Dickson et al . , 1990 ) . Actomyosin striations generally begin to appear 4 - 10 days after the introduction of differentiation medium ( van der Ven et al . , 1992 ) . The immunoﬂuorescence studies here indeed revealed that by one week , the skeletal muscle myosin in cells - on - cells has begun organizing into sarcomeres . Because the actin in these cells does not appear as organized as the myosin , and because spontaneous contraction was not observed in these cells ( rare even in classical overgrown cultures of C2C12s ) , we cannot say that the upper cells are functionally differentiated . Nevertheless , it is clear that the upper cells have progressed beyond the differentiation state of the lower cells , and there are probably muscle - like contraction forces contributing to the prestress that cause these upper cells to relax . However , relaxation amplitudes ( A ) , of cells - on - cells , as well as qualitative observations , suggest that the upper cells have adhesive properties that are different from cells growing directly on the substrate . Unlike substrate - bound cells , cells - on - cells seem to act like tensed strings ‘pinned down’ at a few focaladhesions T FA Σ T FA = P M + P A P M P A myoblastfusion reorganization = striation tightly bound state motilestate y g r e n E no i se hd A e t a r t s bu S A B Nascent myotube rigid substrate soft substrate ( e . g . cell - on - cell ) B’ no i s n e T ev i se hd A r o sse r t S e li t ca r t no C soft substrate ( e . g . cell - on - cell ) Time Myoblast Striated myotube high prestress actin myosin Fig . 6 . Myotube adhesion versus prestress . ( A ) Schematic of a sectioned myotube illustrates the balance between the prestress imposed by the actomyosin cytoskeleton ( P A , P M ) , and the adhesive tension of the focal adhesions ( T FA ) . ( B , B ′ ) Schematic of the adhesive energetics , contractile stress , and adhesive tension during differentiation . After fusion , myotubes growing on rigid substrates progress to a tightly bound state with high adhesive tension . Cells growing on soft substrates , including other cells , exhibit a reduced adhesive tension and a shallower adhesion energy at this nascent myotube phase . This allows the latter to progress to a fully striated state of high prestress . 5862 discrete points along their lengths , with particularly strong attachment at the ends . Although the unstriated cells will have predominantly ( or exclusively ) non - muscle myosin II , differentiated cells ( on cells ) are expected to express muscle myosin II in their assembled sarcomeres . Consistent with this , the relaxation of blebbistatin - treated cells - on - glass is minimal compared to the signiﬁcant , blebbistatin - resistant relaxation of treated cells - on - cells . Nonetheless , given the signiﬁcant decrease in A ( 70 % ) for blebbistatin - treated cells - on - cells versus a 50 % decrease for cells - on - glass , and the speciﬁcity of blebbistatin for non - muscle myosin II ( Straight et al . , 2003 ) , there is evidently considerable non - muscle myosin II in the upper , striated cells . This is consistent with continued myoﬁbrillogenesis and incomplete differentiation , despite clear striation . It is not a trivial matter to fully separate the effects of adhesive drag and contractile prestress on the upper layer of cells - on - cells , but the present approaches are applicable to cells grown on substrates of cell - like compliance with better controlled ligand concentration . Preliminary data indeed shows that C2C12 cells will form striations when grown directly on suitable synthetic gels ( see Fig . S1 in supplementary material ) ( Engler et al . , 2004b ) . Such a system removes the possibility of complex signaling between the cells in the two cell layers . It also creates a more controllable system where prestress and adhesion can be probed independently . Finally , although the C2C12 cells used here are well recognized for displaying much of the differentiation of primary cells , we have also studied primary cells from mice , including cells derived from γ - sarcoglycan - deﬁcient mice ( unpublished results ) . Similar results to the C2C12 cells have been observed , including a deﬁnitive increase in the degree of myoﬁbrillogenesis achieved in cells - on - cells versus cells - on - glass . Exploiting some of the adhesion defects and perhaps contractility defects , possibly in combination with inhibitors such as blebbistatin , should also add insight into the adhesion - contractile balance and its relationship to differentiation . Indeed , preliminary results show that γ - sarcoglycan - deﬁcient myotubes striate more than normal , are more contractile when allowed to relax and have the same adhesion strength ( when forcibly peeled ) , but clearly tend to apoptose in culture , which is consistent with reported observations in vivo ( Hack et al . , 1999 ) . In Fig . 6 , we present a schematic diagram to help conceptualize time courses of the prestress and energetics of a differentiating myotube . The combined data resulting from the lat - A and blebbistatin studies led to the conclusion that the contractile prestress generated within the cell by actin and myosin ( P A and P M , respectively ) are balanced by the cumulated adhesive tension ( T A ) for substrate resistance to compression . Given the dynamic balance of the stresses that must reﬂect myosin as well as adhesion kinetics , compliant substrates would tend to contract with similar dynamics as Harris and coworkers visualized many years ago ( Harris , 1984 ) . In contrast , cells growing on rigid substrates become highly prestressed , seemingly in order to match the compliance of the substrate . Because of the high adhesive tension ( T A ) , ﬁrmer adhesion is needed to prevent the cell from detaching . Cells on rigid or stiff substrates thus become very tightly bound upon becoming fused , nascent myotubes . Fig . 6B attempts to convey the energetics of the summed adhesive interactions . Motile myoblasts seem likely to weaken their substrate interactions as they fuse into myotubes that , on glass and other rigid substrates , leads to ﬁrmly adherent myotubes , but on top of other cells leads to more superﬁcial adhesion . The latter , importantly , allows the sort of cytoskeleton reorganization evident in striation as more complete differentiation . Fig . 6B ′ depicts the related or conjugate pathway in the context of prestress . In summary , when grown on rigid substrates with non - ideal compliance , skeletal muscle cells lock into a fused , non - striated , early differentiation state . ‘Anchorage dependence’ thus seems likely to mean far more than a simple distinction of ﬂuid versus solid in describing the effects on a cell in adhesion . This is most likely associated with a shift in the balance between adhesion and prestress . In isolated myotubes , this prestress is quantiﬁable through mechanically induced relaxation . Also , if the actin is depolymerized , isolated myotubes will bleb and detach from the substrate because of the disruption in the prestress and the adhesive network , rendering relaxation studies impossible . When only myosin II is inhibited , however , the relative length change of relaxation is signiﬁcantly decreased compared to that of untreated cells . Because the myosin of nearly all cells - on - cells is striated , we conclude that it plays a critical role in establishing the prestress of a myocyte cell . We thank Alina Popescu - Hategan and Adam Engler of the University of Pennsylvania for their help with AFM measurements and for Adam Engler’s work with ﬂexible substrates for cell culture . We are also grateful to Andrew Griffin ( Bell Laboratories ) for his help with substrate patterning and to Gladys Gray - Board ( University of Pennsylvania ) for assistance with confocal microscopy . Finally , we thank Timothy Mitchison ( MIT ) and Aaron Straight ( Stanford University ) for providing us with blebbistatin , and Aaron Straight , Bhagavathi Ramamurthy ( University of Pennsylvania ) and Chris Yengo ( University of Pennsylvania ) for their help with the blebbistatin protocols . This work was funded by the NIH , MDA , AHA and NSF - PECASE . References Bearinger , J . P . , Castner , D . G . , Golledge , S . L . , Rezania , A . , Hubchak , S . and Healy , K . E . ( 1997 ) . P ( AAm - co - EG ) interpenetrating polymer networks grafted to oxide surfaces : surface characterization , protein adsorption , and cell detachment studies . Langmuir 13 , 5175 - 5183 . Belkin , A . M . , Zhidkova , N . I . , Balzac , F . , Altruda , F . , Tomatis , D . , Maier , A . , Tarone , G . , Koteliansky , V . E . and Burridge , K . ( 1996 ) . Beta 1D integrin displaces the beta 1A isoform in striated muscles : localization at junctional structures and signaling potential in nonmuscle cells . J . Cell Biol . 132 , 211 - 226 . Burridge , K . and Connell , L . ( 1983 ) . A new protein of adhesion plaques and ruffling membranes . J . Cell Biol . 97 , 359 - 367 . Carlson , F . D . ( 1974 ) . Muscle Physiology . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Clark , P . , Coles , D . and Peckham , M . ( 1997 ) . Preferential adhesion to and survival on patterned laminin organizes myogenesis in vitro . Exp . Cell Res . 230 , 275 - 283 . Collinsworth , A . M . , Zhang , S . , Kraus , W . E . and Truskey , G . A . ( 2002 ) . Apparent elastic modulus and hysteresis of skeletal muscle cells throughout differentiation . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 283 , C1219 - C1227 . Dai , J . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 1995 ) . Mechanical properties of neuronal growth cone membranes studied by tether formation with laser optical tweezers . Biophys . J . 68 , 988 - 996 . Dickson , G . , Peck , D . , Moore , S . E . , Barton , C . H . and Walsh , F . S . ( 1990 ) . Enhanced myogenesis in NCAM - transfected mouse myoblasts . Nature 344 , 348 - 351 . Dimitriadis , E . K . , Horkay , F . , Maresca , J . , Kachar , B . and Chadwick , R . Journal of Cell Science 117 ( 24 ) 5863 Adhesion - contractile balance in myotubes S . ( 2002 ) . Determination of elastic moduli of thin layers of soft material using the atomic force microscope . Biophys . J . 82 , 2798 - 2810 . Engler , A . , Bacakova , L . , Newman , C . , Hategan , A . , Griffin , M . and Discher , D . ( 2004a ) . Substrate compliance versus ligand density in cell on gel responses . Biophys . J . 86 , 617 - 628 . Engler , A . J . , Griffin , M . A . , Sen , S . , Bonnemann , C . G . , Sweeney , H . L . and Discher , D . E . ( 2004b ) . Myotubes differentiate optimally on substrates with tissue - like stiffness : pathological implications of stiff or soft muscle . J . Cell Biol . 156 , 877 - 887 . Griffin , M . A . , Engler , A . J . , Barber , T . A . , Healy , K . E . , Sweeney , H . L . and Discher , D . E . ( 2004 ) . Patterning , prestress and peeling dynamics of myocytes . Biophys . J . 86 , 1209 - 1222 . Hack , A . A . , Cordier , L . , Shoturma , D . I . , Lam , M . Y . , Sweeney , H . L . and McNally , E . M . ( 1999 ) . Muscle degeneration without mechanical injury in sarcoglycan deﬁciency . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 10723 - 10728 . Harris , A . K . , Jr ( 1984 ) . Tissue culture cells on deformable substrata : biomechanical implications . J . Biomech . Eng . 106 , 19 - 24 . Harris , A . K . , Wild , P . and Stopak , D . ( 1980 ) . Silicone rubber substrata : a new wrinkle in the study of cell locomotion . Science 208 , 177 - 179 . Hochmuth , F . M . , Shao , J . Y . , Dai , J . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 1996 ) . Deformation and ﬂow of membrane into tethers extracted from neuronal growth cones . Biophys . J . 70 , 358 - 369 . Katoh , K . , Masuda , M . , Kano , Y . , Jinguji , Y . and Fujiwara , K . ( 1995 ) . Focal adhesion proteins associated with apical stress ﬁbers of human ﬁbroblasts . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 31 , 177 - 195 . Leader , W . M . , Stopak , D . and Harris , A . K . ( 1983 ) . Increased contractile strength and tightened adhesions to the substratum result from reverse transformation of CHO cells by dibutyryl cyclic adenosine monophosphate . J . Cell Sci . 64 , 1 - 11 . Lyles , J . M . , Amin , W . , Bock , E . and Weill , C . L . ( 1993 ) . Regulation of NCAM by growth factors in serum - free myotube cultures . J . Neurosci . Res . 34 , 273 - 286 . Munevar , S . , Wang , Y . L . and Dembo , M . ( 2004 ) . Regulation of mechanical interactions between ﬁbroblasts and the substratum by stretch - activated Ca 2 + entry . J . Cell Sci . 117 , 85 - 92 . Pardo , J . V . , Siliciano , J . D . and Craig , S . W . ( 1983 ) . A vinculin - containing cortical lattice in skeletal muscle : transverse lattice elements ( “costameres” ) mark sites of attachment between myoﬁbrils and sarcolemma . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 80 , 1008 - 1012 . Pelham , R . J . , Jr and Wang , Y . ( 1997 ) . Cell locomotion and focal adhesions are regulated by substrate ﬂexibility . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 13661 - 13665 . Portier , G . L . , Benders , A . G . , Oosterhof , A . , Veerkamp , J . H . and van Kuppevelt , T . H . ( 1999 ) . Differentiation markers of mouse C2C12 and rat L6 myogenic cell lines and the effect of the differentiation medium . In vitro Cell Dev . Biol . Anim . 35 , 219 - 227 . Pourati , J . , Maniotis , A . , Spiegel , D . , Schaffer , J . L . , Butler , J . P . , Fredberg , J . J . , Ingber , D . E . , Stamenovic , D . and Wang , N . ( 1998 ) . Is cytoskeletal tension a major determinant of cell deformability in adherent endothelial cells ? Am . J . Physiol . 274 , C1283 - C1289 . Ra , H . J . , Picart , C . , Feng , H . , Sweeney , H . L . and Discher , D . E . ( 1999 ) . Muscle cell peeling from micropatterned collagen : direct probing of focal and molecular properties of matrix adhesion . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 1425 - 1436 . Ramachandran , I . , Terry , M . and Ferrari , M . B . ( 2003 ) . Skeletal muscle myosin cross - bridge cycling is necessary for myoﬁbrillogenesis . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 55 , 61 - 72 . Stamenovic , D . , Liang , Z . , Chen , J . and Wang , N . ( 2002 ) . Effect of the cytoskeletal prestress on the mechanical impedance of cultured airway smooth muscle cells . J . Appl . Physiol . 92 , 1443 - 1450 . Straight , A . F . , Cheung , A . , Limouze , J . , Chen , I . , Westwood , N . J . , Sellers , J . R . and Mitchison , T . J . ( 2003 ) . Dissecting temporal and spatial control of cytokinesis with a myosin II Inhibitor . Science 299 , 1743 - 1747 . Turvey , M . R . , Laude , A . J . , Ives , E . O . , Seager , W . H . , Taylor , C . W . and Thorn , P . ( 2003 ) . Modulation of IP ( 3 ) - sensitive Ca ( 2 + ) release by 2 , 3 - butanedione monoxime . Pﬂugers Arch . 445 , 614 - 621 . van der Ven , P . F . , Schaart , G . , Jap , P . H . , Sengers , R . C . , Stadhouders , A . M . and Ramaekers , F . C . ( 1992 ) . Differentiation of human skeletal muscle cells in culture : maturation as indicated by titin and desmin striation . Cell Tissue Res . 270 , 189 - 198 . Wang , H . B . , Dembo , M . and Wang , Y . L . ( 2000 ) . Substrate ﬂexibility regulates growth and apoptosis of normal but not transformed cells . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 279 , C1345 - C1350 . Wang , N . , Tolic - Norrelykke , I . M . , Chen , J . , Mijailovich , S . M . , Butler , J . P . , Fredberg , J . J . and Stamenovic , D . ( 2002 ) . Cell prestress . I . Stiffness and prestress are closely associated in adherent contractile cells . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 282 , C606 - C616 . Wong , J . , Velasco , A . , Rajagopalan , P . and Pham , Q . ( 2003 ) . Directed movement of vascular smooth muscle cells on gradient - compliant hydrogels . Langmuir 19 , 1908 - 1913 .