The Nature of Insight STUART G . SHANKER Department of Philosophy , Atkinson College , York University , North York , ONT M3J 1P3 Canada Abstract . The Greeks had a ready answer for what happens when the mind suddenly finds the answer to a question for which it had been searching : insight was regarded as a gift of the Muses , its origins were ' divine ' . It served to highlight the Greeks ' belief that there are some things which are not meant to be scientifically explained . The essence of insight is that it comes from some supernatural source : unpredicted and unfettered . In other words , the origins of insight are unconscious , and hence , unexplainable . Wittgenstein felt that , as long as there continues to be a noun expression like ' to have a moment of insight ' which functions in the same way as the expression ' to have a hunger pang ' , thereby inducing us to treat ' moment of insight ' as the name of an experience , then " people will keep stumbling over the same puzzling difficulties and find themselves staring at something which no explanation seems capable of clearing up . " To the founders of AI , this argument reeked of obscurantism . The moment of insight , they felt , is indeed a mystery , but it is one that begs to be explained in causal terms . Indeed , the problem of insight served as one of the leading problems in the evolution of AI . Hence anyone interested in the foundations of AI is compelled to examine the manner in which the early pioneers of the field sought to explain the ' eureka experience ' . In this paper I will look at some of the key conceptual developments which paved the way for Newell and Simon ' s theory of GPS : the fundamental changes in the notion of the unconscious - the emergence of the ' cognitive unconscious ' - which took place in the nineteenth - and early twentieth - century . In so doing , I hope to clarify what Wittgenstein may have had in mind in his strictures against mechanist attempts to analyse the nature of insight . Key words . Cognitive unconscious , discovery , insight . 1 . The ' Eureka Experience ' It was Vitruvius who first told the story of how , " While Archimedes was considering the matter [ of how to ascertain the amount of gold in Hiero ' s crown ] he happened to go to the baths . When he went down into the bathing pool he observed that the amount of water which flowed outside the pool was equal to the amount of his body that was immersed . Since this fact indicated the method of explaining the case , he did not linger , but moved with delight he leapt out of the pool , and going home naked , cried aloud that he had found exactly what he was seeking . For as he ran he shouted in Greek : heure ' ka heure ' ka " ( Vitruvius 1934 ) . This story has epitomised Western attitudes towards insight for two millenia : the fortuitous occurrence of events , the sudden burst of inspiration , the exhilaration and distraction that comes with an unexpected discovery , and above all , the utter mystery of the ' eureka experience ' . How did Archimedes make the connection between the overflowing water when he stepped into the bath and the problem which Hiero II had set him ? How is it that no one else had ever seen that the volume of an irregular solid could be measured by the displacement of water ? And then there is ' Eureka ' : more than just an avowal , it has become the emblem for one of the mind ' s most deeply kept secrets . Minds and Machines 5 : 561 - 581 , 1995 . © 1995 Kluwer Academic Publishers . Printed in the Netherlands . 562 STUART G . SHANKER The Greeks had a ready answer for what happens when the mind suddenly finds the answer to a question for which it had been searching : insight was regarded as a gift of the Muses , its origins were ' divine ' . Of course , that explains nothing ; but then , this was certainly not intended as a folk theory of insight . If anything , it served to highlight the Greeks ' belief that there are some things which are not meant to be scientifically explained . The essence of insight is that it comes from some supernatural source : unpredicted and unfettered . " The poet , " Socrates tells Ion , " is a light and winged and holy thing , and there is no invention in him until he has been inspired and is out of his senses , and the mind is no longer in him . " In other words , the origins of insight are unconscious , and hence , unexplainable . The nature of insight is very much the sort of problem that Wittgenstein had in mind when he pondered how it is that we are " still occupied with the same philosophical problems as were the Greeks " ( Wittgenstein 1980 : 15 ) . To para - phrase what he says in Culture and Value , Wittgenstein felt that , as long as there continues to be a noun expression like ' to have a moment of insight ' which functions in the same way as the expression ' to have a hunger pang ' - thereby inducing us to treat ' moment of insight ' as the name of an experience - then " people will keep stumbling over the same puzzling difficulties and find them - selves staring at something which no explanation seems capable of clearing up " ( Ibid ) . To the founders of AI , this argument reeked of obscurantism . The moment of insight , they felt , is indeed a mystery , but it is one that begs to be explained in causal terms . Indeed , the problem of insight served as one of the leading problems in the evolution of AI . Hence anyone interested in the foundations of AI is compelled to examine the manner in which the early pioneers of the field sought to explain the ' eureka experience ' . In this paper , I will look at some of the key conceptual developments which paved the way for Newell and Simon ' s theory of GPS : the fundamental changes in the notion of the unconscious - the emer - gence of the ' cognitive unconscious ' - which took place in the nineteenth - and early twentieth - century . In so doing , I hope to clarify what Wittgenstein may have had in mind in his strictures against mechanist attempts to analyse the nature of insight . 2 . The Emergence of the ' Cognitive Unconscious ' The continuity to which Wittgenstein draws attention in the passage from Culture and Value quoted in Section 1 lies in the perception of the problem of insight , not the various theories whereby different schools have sought to explain it . And here there is a striking constancy in the psychology of thinking ; for B / ihter ' s attempt to account for the fact that we are able to recognize and identify things prior to putting a name to them , Selz ' reflections on the ' linear chain of operations ' that must lead up to the solution of a problem , K6hler ' s efforts to explain what went on in a chimpanzee ' s brain when it suddenly saw how to obtain some fruit , and THE NATURE OF INSIGHT 563 the AI scientist hopping to demonstrate how a problem - transformation emerges from a series of trial - and - error attempts at solution , all spring from the same source . That is , the continuity in mechanist theories of insight lies in the fundamental assumption that an explanation of the ' eureka experience ' must be in terms of modelling the unconscious processes leading up to its apparently sudden onset . Herein lies a major reason why AI theorists are unfazed by philosophical objections that dwell on violations of logical grammar . For the fact that there are any number of AI theorists who , following in Helmholtz ' footsteps , speak of the brain as making inferences , is , from the AI point - of - view , completely beside the point . This is merely a fafon de parler ; what these theories are really concerned with are , as Helmholtz putatively demonstrated , the cognitive processes em - bodied in the CNS that make what we call a ' sudden moment of insight ' ( or ' inference ' , ' consciousness ' , ' perception ' , etc . ) possible . Gregory goes so far as to credit Helmholtz with the idea that theseprocesses are computational ( Gregory 1986 : 54 ) . This is taking exegetical license too far . But Gregory is making an important point : both for our understanding of the relation between between pre - and post - computational mechanism , and for our understanding of mechanist attitudes towards the cognitive unconscious . Gregory would be the last person to dismiss the differences between Helmholtz ' and information - processing approaches to perception ; but by directing us to clarify the continuities as well as the contrasts between pre - and post - computa - tional conceptions of the unconscious , he forces us to come to terms with some of the most basic issues underlying the Mechanist Thesis . This should not be regarded as an invitation to read Helmholtz anachronistically ; for Helmholtz ' conception of ' unconscious inference ' was firmly rooted in nineteenth - century empiricism . This is perhaps most clearly borne out by the fact that Helmholtz was forced to renounce the terms of his original argument by the idealist response to the first edition of Physiological Optics ( see yon Hartmann 1931 : 40 ) . While the argument which Helmholtz presented in the ' The Facts of Perception ' ( 1878 ) is not quite the ' recantation ' which James suggested ( see James 1890 : II 111n ) , it was certainly the ' qualification ' which Schlick and Klein described ( see Helmholtz 1977 : 175f , Klein 1977 : chapter 3 ) . Disturbed by the manner in which his argument was being exploited by the proponents of a ' noumenal unconscious ' , ~ Helmholtz carefully " avoided " ( as he phrased it ) the terms of his earlier argument . 2 His problem , as he saw it , was to account for the cognitive abilities of the unconscious without opening the door to a Transcendental Ego . Helmholtz was not about to assign those powers to the ' automatic unconscious ' ( so called because of the Cartesian overtones ) which were deemed to lie irrevocably beyond the capacities of reasoning machines : viz , creativity and adaptativeness . After all , Helmholtz ' unconscious was so stupid that even when experience had demonstrated that something was a visual illusion it persisted in its fallacious ' reasoning ' . In any event , it is clear that he was only 564 STUART G . SHANKER abandoning the phrase unbewusster Schluss : not the underlying theory of unconscious cognitive processes . Thus , in the second edition of Physiological Optics ( 1894 ) he insisted that he " even now finds the name up to a certain limit , to be still admissible and significant " ( Helmholtz 1977 : 176 ) . Helmholtz had merely backed off from his initial strong position of treating the unconscious processes underlying ' perceptual judgment ' as literally a species of inference ; but he was still prepared to describe them as analogous to the steps which occur in ( conscious ) inference . Both the differences and the similarities between Helmholtz ' ' cognitive unconscious ' and that of postcomputational mechanism come out most clearly here ; for what Helmholtz had in mind was shaped by the associationist framework in which his argument was couched . Thus , his intention appears to have been to synthesize the prevailing mechanist equation of unconscious processes with reflex movements , with the nineteenth - century conception of reasoning as a " psychic activity " ( in which we see in our mind ' s eye how judgments are related to one another ) . His argument proceeds from the standard Hartleian theme that , through habituation , processes which were initially conscious can become ' secondarily automatic ' . But Helmholtz insists that this applies to all conscious experiences : i . e . to reasoning as much as perception . Hence the theory supplies an answer to the question of what happens in the mind when one is suddenly aware of the solution to a problem . Strictly speaking the answer is : solely that . But since the solution to a problem must always be the end - result of an inference , it follows that a sudden moment of insight must be the culminating point of unconscious - i . e . cerebral - processes which are isomorphic with , and can thus be inferred from , the corresponding steps which would have occurred had the inference been conscious . The fact that these " habits of the brain " are cognitive does not , however , entail that they are autonomous ; on the contrary , the whole point of the associationist framework was to exclude such a premise ( which was seen as bolstering metaphysics ) . Helmholtz ' argument was thus directly opposed to the dynamic theory that there are two separate and independent mental realms . His point was rather that the " basic process which underlies all that can truly be called thinking " occurs both with and without awareness ( Warren & Warren 1968 : 220 ) . That is , the association of ideas leading up to the conclusion of an inference can be sublimated so that only the last link in this causal chain is present to conscious - ness . This was just the sense in which Carpenter ( following the lead set down by Laycock in ' Reflex Actions of the Brain ' ) had coined the phrase ' unconscious cerebration ' to refer to the processes analogous to reasoning that are performed by the cerebrum . To understand how this argument works , we have to enter the murky waters of the Empiricist conception of consciousness and the bearing which this had on their understanding of the nature of reasoning ( and , thence , ' reasoning mach - ines ' ) . The basic themes in the Empiricist theory of mind were : THE NATURE OF INSIGHT 565 ( 1 ) to be mental is not necessarily to be volitional but it is ipso facto to be conscious ( i . e . transmitted to the Sensorium ) ( 2 ) unconscious processes are those which occur in the nervous system that are not transmitted to the Sensorium ; hence to be unconscious is to be neither volitional nor mental ( 3 ) reflex actions must be involuntary but they need not be unconscious ; hence there can be automatic mental changes : reflex actions that are not initiated by the Will but are transmitted to the Sensorium ( 4 ) to be volitional is necessarily to be mental ( conscious ) ; hence there can be no ' unconscious Will ' ( such as had been championed by Schopenhauer and von Hartmann ) . The key to understanding the impact of this theory on the mechanist attitude towards the notion of ' unconscious inference ' is that reasoning was regarded by Empiricists as a volitional , and thus a mental ( conscious ) activity . That is , reasoning was seen as consisting of two elements : rigidly following rules , and choosing premises or hypotheses . The latter activity was seen as the hallmark of volition ; hence , insofar as the Will plays a crucial role in reasoning , the operations of the cerebrum " can scarcely be designated as Reasoning processes , since ' unconscious reasoning ' seems a contradiction in terms " ( Carpenter 1891 : 517 ) . Yet the former aspect of reasoning can certainly be executed mechanically : i . e . without awareness . To be sure , when learning how to reason ( or when learning a skill , such as playing the piano ) each of the steps involved will be conscious ; with practice , however , attention can be focussed elsewhere while the cerebrum continues on with the activity . Thus , we can infer the steps which the cerebrum has gone through from an appropriate proof or calculation . This still was not thought to constitute unconscious reasoning proper , however , nor was it thought to support Huxley ' s strong determinism ; for even though it may be possible to explain " the mechanism of thought " as far as ' automatic acts ' are concerned , mechanists concluded that we are still left with the mystery of what the Will is and how it sets the cerebrum into motion . At a time when the mechanist / vitalist debate over the theory of reflexes was shifting to the problem of the unconscious , this argument was clearly intended to be read as an endorsement of scientific materialism ; but only partially , for while " the brain can sometimes think without us , " the conscious self can also controH thought ( Cobbe 1883 : 353 ) . This argument represented an attempt to find a middle ground between scientific materialism and vitalism by maintaining that the problem with the former is that it denied the importance of the Will , and with the latter , that it misconstrued the unconscious as an independent mental realm . It was in order to counter the excesses which theories of an autonomous uncon - scious afforded that empiricists insisted that " What was once pure intelligence now becomes mechanism " ( Baldwin 1889 : 57 ) . Helmholtz ' argument thus conformed with - and contributed to - the basic mechanist thesis that we infer the 566 STUART G . SHANKER nature of unconscious cerebral processes from what would have to have occurred in consciousness for the same results to have obtained . Far from being thought of as the " machinery that makes consciousness possible " ( Johnson - Laird 1988 : 15 ) , the unconscious was believed to be constrained ( and conditioned ) by the conscious . As far as psychology was concerned , this meant that introspection still remained supreme in the study of the mind . To be sure , psychologists were beginning to worry that it may in principle be impossible to eliminate the effects of ' self - observation ' on ' inner perception ' . Hence the need espoused by Wundt for trained subjects , and his demand for stringent experimental checks . For introspec - tive reports were now thought to be every bit as fallible , and fallible in the same way , as ordinary perceptions . But that is no reason to suppose that Helmholtz , or any of the other late nineteenth - century mechanists , were in any way uncomfort - able with the Wundtian conception of psychology ( bearing in mind that Wundt himself had subscribed to the theory of unconscious inference and had come to share Helmholtz ' qualms ( see Klein 1977 : 57f ) ) . Clearly further developments were needed to prepare the scene for AI . 3 . ' The Processes of Unconscious Selection ' One of the most substantial differences between pre - and post - computational conceptions of the ' cognitive unconscious ' lies in the latter ' s claim that we could not be aware of the preconscious processes that underpin conscious experience . These are said to be processes which , in de Groot ' s words , lie " under the threshold of the subject ' s awareness ( de Groot 1965 : 81 ) . In this respect , Helmholtz should be seen as a precursor rather than a progenitor of AI ; for AI does not regard unconscious processes as secondarily automatic , and it certainly is not tethered to the halter of introspection . But the fact that Helmholtz did not foresee the rise of information theory ( which , interestingly , can be traced back to his discovery of the principle of the conservation of energy ) does not mitigate where his greater significance for this issue lies . In a fundamental sense , what matters here is not so much whether Helmholtz fits comfortably into the modern mechanist fold as the reasons why computationalists have been drawn into treating him in this fashion . The appeal of Helmholtz ' argument for inferential theories of judgment and perception - especially for those who regard illusions as " fallacies of unconscious inference " ( Gregory 1986 : 55 ) - is clear : Helmholtz ' conception of ' unconscious inference ' served as a paradigm for the computational premise that , contra Carpenter , " To hold that ' unconscious inference ' is a self - contradictory notion now appears as mere semantic inertia " ( Ibid : 51 ) . Helmholtz ' model of inferring the nature of these ' unconscious processes ' from an external model is central to the early AI theory of problem - solving and its proposed method for explaining moments of insight . As striking as the swing from tachistoscopes to computers THE NATURE OF INSIGHT 567 may be , what remained constant were the assumptions that problem - solving is a ' psychic activity ' , and that the ' moment of illumination ' is caused by an antecedent ( unbroken ) chain of unconscious processes , the nature of which can be inferred from some mathematical or computational model : be it a calculation , a proof , or a computer program . This last remark is crucial for our understanding of both the continuity and the divergence between pre - and post - computational mechanism . One of the most striking features in early mechanist writings on the ' cognitive unconscious ' is the manner in which syllogisms and calculations served as the paradigms for the ' hidden processes ' that lead up to sudden solutions in inference and mental arithmetic ( see Montmasson 1931 : 48f , 78f ) . It was felt at the time , however , that while such models could supply a satisfactory account of the unconscious processes leading up to the solution of a problem , they could not provide an explanation of how the conscious mind works , and afortiori , could not sub - stantiate what would now be described as a strong version of the Mechanist Thesis . For none of this accounts for the role which the highest intellectual operations play in reasoning : not just the Will ( although it is paramount ) , but also such arcane phenomena as imagination , insight , and intuition . The constant theme here is that the power of a proof lies in the inspired selection of its premises , and ' cognitive unconscious ' than ' calculating machines ' were ' automatic unconscious ' was this is a capacity that can no more be assigned to the to ' reasoning machines ' . Indeed , the very fact that seen as simulating the mechanical actions of the cited as both justifying , and at the same time , as limiting the claim that they could be described as ' reasoning machines ' . Thus , Peirce explained that " the value of logical machines seems to lie in their showing how far reasoning is a mechanical process " : that is , how much of the mind ' s activity consists in rigidly following the rules of classical logic such that these processes could be carried out in unconscious cerebration . But mechanists must not exaggerate the significance of this achievement , for " Even syllogistic reason - ing in its higher varieties . . , requires a living act of choice based on discernment , beyond the powers of any conceivable machine ; and this sufficiently refutes the idea that man is a mere mechanical automaton endowed with an idle conscious - ness " ( quoted in Ketner 1988 ) . This is the point which Poincar6 seized on in ' Mathematical Discovery ' . In both his review of Hilbert ' s Grundlagen , and in his attacks on logicism , Poincar6 made clear where his antimechanist sympathies lay as far as the foundations of mathematics were concerned . The purpose of his Memoir was to take this campaign a step further by entering the psychological arena as well , in order to challenge the mechanist interpretation of the ' cognitive unconscious ' . Poincar6 ' s intention was not just to highlight the mechanist failure to account for the fact that " Discovery is discernment , selection " ; more importantly , it was to make clear his conviction that such a function must indeed be assigned to the unconscious : a view which , as can be seen in Hadamard ' s Psychology of Invention 568 STUART G . SHANKER in the Mathematical Field , was greatly enhanced by both the Wiirzburg emphasis on the dynamic character of thought and Freud ' s theory of the autonomous unconscious . To be sure , how the " subliminal ego " should have chosen from the myriad possibilities available just that combination of ideas which is most interesting or useful " is most mysterious . How can we explain the fact that , of the thousand products of our unconscious activity , some are invited to cross the threshold , while others remain outside ? " ( Poincar6 1913 : 58 ) Clearly this could not be by brute force alone ( Poincar6 refers to Eratosthenes ' sieve ) , for " The combinations so obtained would be extremely numerous , useless , and encumbering . " The only thing we can say with any certainty is that " The real work of the discoverer consists in choosing between those combinations with a view to eliminating those that are useless , or rather not giving himself the trouble of making them at all " ( Ibid : 57 ) : a point which applies just as forcefully to the unconscious as to the conscious mind . And even if one argues that the conscious Ego delimits the number of permutations which the subliminal Ego examines , we are still left with the mystery of the ' aesthetic sensibility ' displayed by the processes of ' unconscious selection ' . This , in essence , sums up the stalemate in which the debate over reasoning stood at the beginning of this century , with psychologists and psychiatrists divided over the merits of ' cerebral ' versus ' dynamic ' models of the unconscious ( see Mfinsterberg et al . 1910 ) ; psychologists of thinking united in their opposition to associationism but uncertain how ' insight ' was to be explained ; and behaviourists insistent that such issues were at best irrelevant and at worst unanswerable . But the seeds for the post - computational resolution of this issue had actually been laid half a century before , as comes out in the very next lines in Poincar6 ' s argument : The rules which must guide this choice are extremely subtle and delicate , and it is practically impossible to state them in precise language ; they must be felt rather than formulated . Under these conditions , how can we imagine a sieve capable of applying them mechanically ? ( Poincar6 t913 : 57 ) But what if those rules could be formulated in a precise mathematical language ? Were the unconscious mind confined to the trial - and - error models with which Poincar6 was familiar , his ' mystery ' would , according to the canons of AI , have remained unsolvable : as can easily be demonstrated with a brute force approach to mechanical chess . Only with the introduction of means - end analysis , heuristics , and self - modifying algorithms can we begin to see how ' the real work of the [ unconscious mind ] consists in choosing between [ combinations ] with a view to eliminating those that are useless ' ( Poincar6 19t3 ) . 4 . GPS On Poincar6 ' s neo - Romantic account , the subconscious mind is constantly engaged in joining ideas in ways which , in most cases , are patently absurd , but THE NATURE OF INSIGHT 569 should it chance upon an important combination , this is instantly recognized by the faculty of consciousness . As can be clearly seen in ' The Processes of Creative Thinking ' , a similar idea constitutes the starting - point for Newell and Simon ' s theory of General Problem Solving ( GPS ) . That is , the theory was designed to explain the nature of " the unconscious processes that are supposed to occur during ' incubation ' , the imagery employed in creative thinking and its significance for the effectiveness of the thinking , and above all , the phenomenon of ' illumination ' , the sudden flash of insight that reveals the solution of a problem long pursued " ( Newell , Shaw & Simon 1959 : 1 ) . GPS was attacked on several different levels . To begin with , there were those who were sympathetic to Newell and Simon ' s format but worried about the various heuristics which they employed or the weight they attached to means - end analysis and satisficing . Within this camp there were also those who questioned their model of short and long - term memory , and even the information - processing mechanisms which they postulated ( viz , familiarizing and selective forgetting ) . Then there were those who wished to see a paradigm - revolution within the information - processing framework , and thus challenged Newell and Simon ' s serial and / or hierarchical approach . There were the psychologists of a different stripe who worried that GPS left no room for motivation or personality traits . There were the humanists who saw this as a challenge ( or threat ) to the sovereignty of the imagination . And , of course , a small group of philosophers who saw in all this a return to the Homunculus Fallacy . Newell and Simon saw their basic task as that of establishing that " the processes that show up in relatively simple and humdrum forms of human problem solving are also the ones that show up when great scientists try to describe how they do their work " ( Simon 1966 : 288 , 9 ) . They set out to show that the ordinary mechanisms of problem - solving suffice to account for discoveries at whatever level of abstraction these might occur . The key to their argument lay in the claim that while STM is confined to approximately seven pieces of in - formation , this can refer to chunks as much as singular items . Hence it is irrelevant that the ' magical number seven ' cannot be substantially increased through practice or training ( see Chase & Ericsson 1981 ) . For by ' chunking ' " a total structure of unlimited size can be assembled without the need for holding more than a few symbols in immediate memory at any given moment " ( Simon 1966 : 295 ) . Incubation leading to illumination can then be explained in terms of ' selective forgetting ' . That is , in our first run ( s ) at a problem we build up ever more complex higher - level circuits through the problem - space which are stored in chunks that constitute the starting - point for subsequent attempts to solve the problem . Eventually , given sufficiently powerful maps , the problem - solver will experience a ' moment of insight ' . This theory , according to Newell and Simon , represents a successful attempt to dispense with the ' noumenal unconscious ' to which Hadamard had resorted in order to account for the mysterious ' processes of selection ' that occur during 570 STUART G . SHANKER incubation ; for no Hartmannian species of ' unconscious reasoning ' is necessary to account for what , in folk terminology , is described as a ' sudden flash of insight ' . Rather , we can explain the differing abilities of problem - solvers ( child versus adult , low versus high I . Q . , fluid versus crystallized intelligence ) , up to and including genius , in terms of structural features ( e . g . the size of a subject ' s knowledge base , or the more sophisticated heuristics embodied in his brain ) . But a place has still been reserved for effort ; for the individual who abandons his attempt to solve a difficult problem at too early a stage will not have built up a sufficiently advanced search - procedure from which to proceed much further on a subsequent attempt ( rather like someone who sets aside a difficult crossword puzzle after failing to solve any of the clues and finds himself unable to advance any further on a later try ) . It is highly significant that , when he came to explain how the theory works , Simon resorted to his favoured example of chess theory . Both the search rules which he cites and the weighted tree structure on which these are to operate are directly culled from chess programming . On one heuristic , the mind / program proceeds from any given node to search the sub - branch with the highest value , while on the other rule the mind / program erases nodes as soon as sub - nodes have been generated and then proceeds to the next node of highest value . Un - fortunately , problems rarely come equipped with pre - weighted nodes . In fact , the gifted thinker is distinguished by his ability to find - and forge - connections that no one else had seen : to explore undetected possibilities ( whether this be in terms of discovering new methods for solving familiar problems or discovering entirely new and significant problems ) . This is the reason why so many have argued that what is missing on computational theories of creativity is the originality of discovery : the individual ' s desire not to be bound by rules . Newell and Simon ' s response was that there is a perfectly simple mechanist answer to the familiar complaint that programs cannot account for the unpredic - tability of discovery : viz , all knowledge is the - possibly fortuitous - result of applying established heuristics in new situations , modifying these heuristics to generate novel solutions , and in certain contexts , activating some form of random choice generator . All that is needed to implement these possibilities is some form of program capable of reassigning node weightings , restructuring trees , or creating entirely new trees : perhaps from scratch , perhaps by bridging what were previously regarded as disparate trees . But then , does such a response actually counter , or does it rather serve to highlight the problem that arises here ? That is , does it serve to elucidate , or does it rather distort , what is meant by the ' heuristic processes ' involved in problem - solving and discovery ? GPS may well offer a favourable vantage - point from which to view the psychology of problem - solving in terms of the role which plans or heuristics may play in problem - solving , or the manner in which we try out a strategy for solving a problem and then revise this according to the inadequacies that emerge . But a theory of creativity which , in essence , denies the existence of insight , is problematic to say the least . THE NATURE OF INSIGHT 571 According to GPS , problem - solving is rather like finding one ' s way through a maze in which one knows where to start from , and approximately where to end up , but has no clear idea as to how to get there . You cannot get from a to o ~ without going through / 3 , 7 , 6 . . . ; the very notion that a and w lie on a continuous plane seems to demand this . But when it would require 10 9o years just to compute the first move on a brute force approach , it is clear that some process must be involved that enables the mind to bypass trivial intermediary steps and go directly from a to ~ : . For pre - computational mechanists this was indeed a mystery that invited Romatic myths about the mind ' s ability to leap across these gaps . With heuristics , however , the post - computational mechanist could keep his feet on the terra firma of mechanical procedures . On this theory , the ' sudden moment of insight ' consists in the experience of seeing the last link in a continuous chain from a to w fall into place . That is , ' insight ' is that mental state which obtains when these antecedent causal operations are completed . A significant part of the processes that bring about a moment of insight lie beneath the ' threshold of introspection ' : i . e . they can only be inferred from ' accompanying ' behaviour , now construed as signs of underlying cognitive processing . And we can only postulate the actual mechanisms involved by mapping key steps in the model - e . g , the end - results of nested sub - routines - onto what are identified as ' fragments ' of the thinking - process which are accessible to a subject ' s consciousness ( as displayed in his verbal reports ) . The accuracy of these models can only be tested in the same manner as applies to any process - modeh viz , by their ability to predict the actual behaviour of the subject . To see what the problem with this theory is , we need first to clarify what it is not . To begin with , there is no reason to challenge the claim that invention is a rule - governed activity , nor the possibility of devising self modifying algorithms that are capable of generating interesting discoveries ( pace BACON or Lenat ' s AM ) , Moreover , there need be no objection here to the heavy reliance on trial - and - error in such generative procedures ( although it is somewhat worrying to see what an orderly affair this becomes on computational models ) . There is no reason to deny the importance of causal factors influencing insight ( e . g . Poincar6 ' s late - night cup of coffee ) , nor to confine psychological investigations of creativity to autobiographical sources . And finally , there is nothing forcing us to deny that much of the process of discovery may be mechanical , and no reason to follow Wertheimer in the charge that drill only serves to destroy creativity . On the contrary , part of the significance of training may well lie in the fact that this enables us to execute many of the basic tasks involved in solving a problem automatically , thereby freeing the mind for larger concerns . But Newell and Simon ' s argument goes much further . On their account , whatever is involved in the process of creation , from preparation through incubation to ' illumination ' and verification , must be such that : ( a ) it is pre - conscious , and ( b ) it can be mechanically simulated . As Newell and Simon conceive it , no one is about to attribute a special process of insight to chess 572 STUART G . SHANKER programs , and no more should we think that this ' vacuous concept ' ( viz , insight ) plays an explanatory role in psychology proper . But does their argument amount to anything more than a method of automating problem - solving procedures ; or rather , a method of creating problem - solving procedures such that they can be automated ? Indeed we might even ask , does it really explain or does it rather presuppose insight ? At the level at which Newell and Simon ' s argument is operating , the questions that most need to be answered are : how does the program know how to ( re ) assign node weightings or create new search trees ; how does it know in advance which branches offer the most promising routes to discovery ; how does it avoid storing unlimited amounts of useless information ( since , presumably , the value of a selection is contingent upon the completion of a solution ) ; and most important of all , how does it know what constitutes a discovery ? Do not each of these acts depend in some basic way on insight ? And what about the different levels at which insight may be involved in the solution of a problem ? As Sternberg has shown , the great insights are sometimes simply that a problem is ' significant ' , sometimes that an existing problem can be redefined in such a way that , not only can it be solved , but it opens up an entirely new line of research in the process , and sometimes all that matters is the novel technique that is created ( see Sternberg 1988 ) . ( On rare occasions , as in the case of G6det ' s incompleteness theorem , it can be all of the above . ) Weisberg argues convincingly that many of the famous stories about a ' leap of insight ' can actually be shown to have proceeded in a systematic step - by - step manner which , for various reasons , the subject may not have been aware of or might have forgotten ( Weisberg 1986 ) . But this important fact is categorially different from the computational thesis ; for the argument that there could not be such a thing as a ' leap of insight ' amounts to an a priori , not an a posteriori claim . Weisberg dismisses Sternberg ' s elucidation of insight in terms of the abilities to pick out the salient and ignore the irrelevant information in a problem , to seize on just the right way to combine information , or to bring together diverse kinds of information , as merely serving to isolate " a mode of thinking that could be called insight " ( Weisberg 1988 : 169 ) . But in fact , Sternberg ' s argument is just the opposite : it is to show how many different ways insight can be involved in problem - solving ( see Sternberg 1988 ) . Or indeed , the many different methods that have been proposed by psychologists to study the many different aspects of insight ( that are involved in grasping a joke , understanding a dream , a painting , a string quartet , someone ' s motives , their past , their future , etc . , not to mention insights into one ' s own personality , the meaning of life , the nature of philosophy , etc . ) . For that matter , the computational argument does not even seem able to account for insight in rote problem - solving : e . g . for the moment of insight that comes to every student of geometry when the significance of a proof that has been repeated ad nauseam suddenly crystallizes , or the insight which can occur when a student suddenly grasps the ' point ' of an algorithm . The thrust of Newell and Simon ' s thesis is that , however limited current models THE NATURE OF INSIGHT 573 of discovery might be , the fact that we can devise programs capable of delivering novel results in such a way that , were they followed by human subjects they would demand no insight at any single step , is proof of the possibilities that arise here . Hence the immediate demand on GPS is merely to show that insight does not remain a mysterious process residing at the atomic level of the program ; the more exotic manifestations of ' insight ' can be expected to succumb to computa - tional analysis in due course . Through experience ( personal or evolutionary ) , information - processing mechanisms have been built up which rely on heuristics to assign weightings . But these can only be assessed in light of their efficacy in leading us toward a pre - established goal . Hence the appeal of chess ; for it provides the classic example of how a strategy must be built up which takes as its starting - point a single goal - state with nested sub - goals whose weightings will be a function of their importance in the overall scheme . That is , a search tree whose basic problem is how to get from ~ to w as quickly ( in as few moves ) as possible . Chess thus constitutes the paradigm ' well - defined problem ' : there is a clearly - demarcated goal - state from the start , a pre - defined problem - space , stable trans - formation rules , and a combinatorial explosion of sufficient dimensions that the success of a program depends on the construction of a look - ahead approach that selects the most promising move from the multiple options available at every step , can alter its search depth according to the demands of each new situation , and can abandon or modify previously adopted sub - goals . The program should also be capable of storing successful strategies and drawing on this constantly growing knowledge - base in new situations . Most importantly , the nature of the tree is such that we can actually compute the ' heuristic power ' of whatever procedure is adopted ( in terms of the amount of search - time required as measured against the problem - solving effectiveness which it yields ) . The obvious question is then : how do we get from this highly formalized situation to a conception of problem - solving simpliciter ? First , great emphasis must be placed on the fact that chess is an ' interactional activity ' ( that an opponent ' s moves always have to be taken into account ) ; for on this basis the computationalist can seek to simulate the ' ill - structured ' character of real - life problem - solving ( the fact that problems are continually changing as new factors are introduced , or that in many instances the most we can strive for is a ' best possible position ' ) . Furthermore , the notion of ' checkmate ' ( or more generally , of winning ) must be broadened so as to prevent the argument from collapsing into a form of Platonism ( which assumes that for all discoveries there exists ab initio a pre - defined route waiting to be discerned ) . Hence the ' goal ' for problem - solving per se must be defined in larger terms : e . g . as some form of deep - seated biological drive . Thus Simon insisted from the start that " A human being is able to think because , by biological inheritance and exposure to a stream of experience in the external world , he has acquired a program that is effective for guiding thought processes . If we wish to seek an efficient cause for his behavior , it lies in that program in its interaction with ongoing stimuli " ( Simon 1966 : 283 ) . This marriage of Darwin with Turing enabled Newell and Simon to take the 574 STUART G . SHANKER continuum picture a step further : not only is there a continuum of experience and purposive behaviour ( ranging from adaptation through habituation to learning and concept - mastery ) , there is also a problem - solving continuum . For the ' selection - processes ' whereby Nature evolves are the same as those whereby the brains of animals and man determine how to respond to their environment . To be sure , this undermines the categorial distinction between cause and volition ; it severs the internal relation between selection and intention ; and consciousness is rendered epiphenomenal , or perhaps , in Dennett ' s phrase , the director of public relations ( Dennett 1983 ) . The ' act of choice ' is subjected to causal analysis , and there is an overriding need to establish that what appear to be reasoned decisions are actually the products of ' cognitive heuristics ' ( cf . Johnson - Laird and Byrne 1991 ) . It is fascinating ( and instructive ) to see the extent to which this argument marks an attempt to resolve the fundamental issue which dominated the mechanist / vitalist debate over the scope of ' reasoning machines ' a century ago : viz , the assumption that " Even syllogistic reasoning in its higher varieties . . . requires a living act of choice based on discernment , beyond the powers of any conceivable machine ; and this sufficiently refutes the idea that man is a mere mechanical automaton endowed with an idle consciousness " ( Ketner 1988 ) . One can well appreciate , given the terms in which this argument is phrased , why Turing should have laid such stress on the conceptual evolution of ' machine ' , and more importantly , why he was so concerned to establish that " at each stage when one is using a logical system , there is a very large number of alternative steps , any of which one is permitted to apply , so far as obedience to the rules of a logical system is concerned . These choices make the difference between a brilliant and a footling reasoner , not the difference between a sound and a fallacious one " ( Turing 1950 : 29 ) . But what Turing ' s response to the attacks on ' reasoning machines ' really comes down to is the claim that the emphasis on volition is a product of vitalism ; the ' Will ' merely refers to the observational role played by consciousness : i . e . to the manner in which we become aware of the choices exercised by our information . - processing apparatus . Of course insight had to be explained away on this account : the whole point of the computational thesis is to show how the ' inspired selection of premises ' does not depend on any special faculty but rather , that the " processes that occur in human problem solving can be compounded out of elementary information processes , and hence . . . can be carried out by mechanisms " ( Newell , Shaw & Simon 1958 : 152 ) . 5 . The Metaphor is the Message The one thing we have learnt from protocol analysis is just how easy it is for an agent to overlook the intermediary stages whereby he has solved a problem . Given the persisting charm of the Romantic conception of genius , it is little wonder that a subject should seize on intuition to explain his or her sudden THE NATURE OF INSIGHT 575 moment of insight . The proof that the solution of the problem had proceeded in an orderly manner , or was cued by some external stimulus , is somehow deflating when seen from this perspective . But the supposition that we can give a fairly complete explanation of the cognitive processes resulting in insight does not mean that the agent did not experience a sudden moment of insight ( or as is more likely the case , many such moments ) , nor does it mean that the notion of a ' creative leap ' is vacuous . What it does tell us , however , is just how different ' thinking ' and ' problem - solving ' are from standard process - verbs , and thus , how different ' insight ' and ' illumination ' are from process - nouns . The type of ' cognitive processes ' which we are concerned with here are simply those that have been charted by psychologists of thinking : viz , the processes of reflecting , remembering , imagining , guessing , observing , noticing , considering , searching , evaluating , testing , etc . These are not processes going on inside the agent ' s head ; they are the processes through which the agent goes when solving a problem . But this is not at all the manner in which the mechanist interprets ' cognitive process ' . Classical mechanism resorted to association and apperception to explain the nature of mental processes . It was because they were unequipped to deal with this problem that behaviourists quite naturally sought to bypass it . But this confined psychology to the description of molar regularities ; and the very notion of a ' black box ' is a challenge which no mechanist can afford to ignore . Thus , by redefining ' cognitive process ' as the underlying information - transforming operations which bring about these conscious mental states , postcomputational mechanism stands to pre - computational mechanism as Kepler stands to Coper - nicus , not as Copernicus stands to Plotinus . This argument illustrates what Wittgenstein had in mind when he warned about " the philosophical problem about mental processes and states " ( Wittgenstein 1953 : § 308 ) . The very premise that programs provide a means of ' learning to know these processes better ' proceeds from the " misleading parallel that psychology treats of processes in the psychical sphere , as does physics in the physical " ( Ibid : § 571 ) , and thus results in the mechanist conception of insight as the termination of a causal chain . To be sure , there is a sense in which insight is the ' end - result ' of cognitive processes ; for as Gruber explains in Darwin on Man , The fact that the formation of a new synthesis must be seen as a creative process rather than as a sudden creative act has a deep significance for the relation between the thinker and the intellectual and social milieu in which he works . An isolated and sudden act might conceivably be thought of as occurring out of all time and place . But a long growth process must be seen as rooted in its total human context ( Gruber 1981a : 6 ) . Darwin ' s ' great insight ' ( of September 28 , 1838 ) exemplifies Gruber ' s central theme ; for he shows that it was really a " re - cognition of what Darwin already knew or almost knew . Second the moment is historic more in hind - sight than it was at the time . . . . Third , the idea when it came did not represent a rupture with his past , but a fulfillment of his own abiding purposes " ( Ibid : 42 ) . A similar point applies to the humbler and different species of insight ; or rather , to the ' different 576 STUART G . SHANKER activities in which this expression swims ' . For to speak of different ' kinds ' of insight immediately suggests different types of mental process ; but what we are really concerned with here are the different uses of ' insight ' , which are highly context - and individual - relative . The very question ' What is Insight ? ' is a product of the mechanist / vitalist debate . It was in order to forestall the confusions that result from trying to define the ' essence of insight ' ( in terms of a distinctive process or experience ) that Wittgenstein warned : " The question what happens when one suddenly under - stands something is badly framed . If it is a question about the meaning of the expression " sudden understanding " , the answer is not to point to a process that we give this name to " ( Wittgenstein 1953 : § 321 ) . Rather , we use the term to indicate an agent ' s ability or intention to proceed in a given manner . But this use is defeasible ; for the common experience of false or forgotten insights ( which is conspicuously missing on the computational account ) serves as a reminder that the concept must be seen against the background of an agent ' s " doubts , retreats , detours , and impasses . . . impulsive moments of decision , leaps into the dark from points of no return . . . reasonable mistakes , non - essentials , and foolish blunders " ( Gruber 1981b : 4 ) . If anything , what we should point to here are the archetypal myths about genius and creativity that we have inherited . This , of course , is the central target of computational theories . Cognitivist attitudes are exemplified by Weisberg ' s Creativity : Genius and other Myths , where the various topics surveyed ( e . g . the " creativity myth , " the " myth of the unconscious , " the " ' Aha ! ' myth " ) are all meant to illustrate the scientific naivety of these ' inchoate theories ' . The alternative , however , is to treat these myths as just that : i . e . as conventions which assign an established meaning to certain forms of behaviour , and not as folk theories . The reason why we find the Romantics saying similar things to the Greeks about insight and creativity is not because both groups lived prior to the age of Turing . More to the point ( given the prominence which it has received in cognitive writings on creativity ) , there is a way to read Coleridge ' s preface to ' Kubla Khan ' other than as a ( deliberate or inadvertant ) fabrication . Drawing on Elizabeth Schneider ' s research , many cognitivists have seized on Coleridge ' s supposed duplicity to illustrate the manner in which Romantic preconceptions lead one to distort psychological reality . But it is clear that something very different is going on in the poem . For the Preface to ' Kubla Khan ' should be seen as just that : i . e . it is part of the poem and not a brief excursion into psychological theory . To understand why Coleridge presents ' Kubla Khan ' in this manner we have to look at the genre in which he hereby intended the poem to be read . Coleridge is identifying himself as a descendant of Tieresias , and the poem we are offered is supposed to provide a glimpse into a transcendental world , inaccessible to ordinary experience , but nonetheless immediately recognizable for what it is ( a vision of the City of God ? ) . THE NATURE OF INSIGHT 577 Similarly , when Poincar6 maintained that " Discovery is discernment , selec - tion , " he was not formulating a hypothesis ; rather , his remark is a manifestation of the conventions guiding his understanding of creativity : not the product of introspection or inference . He frames his memoir with archetypal images of creativity : he is concerned , he tells us , with the genesis of mathematical knowledge , with the manner in which his mind was able to divine mathematical truths . There then follows a succession of metaphors , each chosen to convey some aspect of the creative experience . For we are dealing here with an extended period during which Poincar6 moved ever closer to ' illumination ' . At the beginning the metaphors reflect the preliminary , ' problem - minding ' state of his thinking . Ideas are being canvassed , they are surging and jostling in his semi - conscious state . The general impression conveyed is one of uncertainty and a slight feeling of helplessness . As his thinking progresses the metaphors become more dynamic ( e . g . he speaks of verifying his finding ) , perceptual ( e . g . he recognizes an identity between two mathematical transformations ) , and physical ( e . g . he struggles to work out the implications of his earlier insights ) . The over - arching metaphor of choice signifies his feeling that many possible methods of solution lay open to him and that the key to his success lay in his having - unconsciously - picked the most appropriate . Are the varying stages of metaphor through which Poincar6 progresses descriptions of his ' cognitive processing ' , or are they rather expressions of his evolving mastery of the problem and his changing moods , expectations , and intentions as this proceeds ? There is a tendency to suppose that the role of metaphors in scientific writings is always heuristic : i . e . that they guide and are displaced by scientific theories . But there are also cases where the metaphor is the message . What those who would dismiss Poincar6 ' s memoir on the grounds that he succumbs to Romanticism fail to appreciate is how these conventions serve to create a picture of discovery . The reason why these myths are of such importance is not because we are committed to some folk psychological theory of the ' inner workings of the mind ' ( itself a metaphor from another era ) , but because it is these pictures which have shaped the criteria which govern applications of ' insight ' . According to these conventions , an agent must first and foremost be able to continue in a manner which in some way marks ( or promises ) an advance over his previous actions . In the case of problem - solving , it is also important that he should have been searching for the solution to a problem . The change in view which brings him at least partly closer to solving this may appertain to his definition of the problem or to the proper method of solving it ; but mere change of view is not sufficient to attribute insight . For the agent may have been randomly searching through a series of solutions , in which case we shall say that he ' chanced upon ' the correct answer . ( Thus , transitions in the protocol may but need not be a criterion of insight . ) There must also be some evidence of a progression in his thought : some sort of order in his successive attempts at solution . But this too is not a sufficient 578 STUART G . SHANKER condition ; for we might also speak here of the solution ' slowly dawning on him ' . ( Hence insight may but need not occur in a flash . ) Some element of creativity is frequently vital ; but it is questionable whether this should be seen as an added factor or a mere restatement of the problem . It is clear that some evidence of excitement , recognition , or surprise is significant , but it is neither necessary nor sufficient ; for we have to reckon here both with false starts and with the realization that what at the time seemed an ordinary decision turned out subsequently to have been a moment of great insight . When all of these factors combine , the pressures for attributing insight are clearly pronounced , but only when seen against the background of the agent ' s abilities and intentions . What all of these criteria tell us is that , while there is no ' special process ' of insight , there is no ' uniform process ' either ; rather , there are special and familiar circumstances in which the term is applied . We must be careful not to overstate this point , however , for fear of missing out on what may be an important element in each of these themes . The ' special process ' school is commonly associated with vitalism , but there have also been influential empiricists who subscribed to this doctrine . Mill , for example , pursued such a goal in his writings on literary theory in the 1830s ; for the suddenly awakened Romantic in him could not bear to see Coleridge in the same terms as Bentham , yet the empiricist in him could not accept that the special processes of association enjoyed by philosopher - poets ( i . e . associations formed under the influence of strong emotions ) could not be ' logically ' explained . The alternative empiricist gambit is to argue that what is ' special ' about these processes is simply that the gifted individual enjoys abnormal powers of con - centration or memory . ( There is a strong hint of this in cognitive explanations of expertise . ) In recent years , this idea has been subjected to careful scrutiny , with the result that it too would appear to be a product of Romanticism . In studies on gifted individuals and autistic savants , psychologists are discovering that what is so unusual about their abilities is not that they possess e . g . an eidetic memory but rather , that what is missing is the normal balance of cognitive skills , thereby resulting in the overdevelopment of particular interests and abilities ( see Howe 1989 ) . Similarly , there is a growing scepticism about such engaging stories as that of the occasion on which the young Mozart wrote out Allegri ' s Miserere after having heard it performed twice . Apart from the possibly unreliable source of this story ( it was reported in a letter by Leopold ) , John Sloboda has attempted to show how such a feat would be well within the capabilities of a virtuoso musician ( see Sloboda 1985 ) . The point in all this is not to vanquish the metaphors of genius , but only , to document the actual cognitive processes in which these are embedded . Herein lies the essential reason why the computational metaphor has exerted such influence on contemporary psychologists of thinking . It is quite striking to see how references to the computational metaphor are rarely accompanied by any genuine concern with its mechanics . Even those who write on the abilities of calculating prodigies from a supposedly information - processing perspective sel - THE NATURE OF INSIGHT 579 dom draw on the details of chess or theorem - proving programs . For what appeals to cognitive psychologists is primarily the fact that , by emphasizing the step - by - step manner whereby agents typically solve problems , computationalism has been highly effective at encouraging the detailed scrutiny of the cognitive processes constituting problem - solving behaviour . But these are ' cognitive processes ' as traditionally conceived : not as redefined by Turing . That is , the value of the computational metaphor is seen to lie in the fact that is has led to a deeper understanding of the transfer of strategies to new situations , and the highly structured interplay between knowledge and problem - solving strategies . Overall , what progress has been made in the psychology of creativity is largely the result of the increased attention that has been paid to the development of a repertoire of cognitive skills . For insight is a phenomenon whose proper explanation demands careful investigation of an agent ' s knowledge , purposes and affects , thus " requiring probing hermeneutical interpretation in order to recon - struct the events we hope to understand " ( Gruber 1981b : 245 ) . Hence the greatest advances in our understanding of creative problem - solving have been made in real - life and biographical , as opposed to laboratory studies ( including - and especially - computer ' simulations ' ) . But such a verdict is not only directly contrary to computationalism : it violates the very principles and objectives of mechanism . For it places the emphasis on the individual as opposed to the universal , on the intentional as opposed to the automatic , on the cognizable as opposed to the ' inaccessible ' , on the cultural as opposed to the neurophysiologi - cal , on the descriptive as opposed to the predictive . Moreover , it insists on the inclusion of insight in any explanation of problem - solving and creativity : on the gradual or sudden acquisition of an ability which may come about through natural endowments , practice , perseverance , reflection , or observation , on the acquisition of subsidiary skills , strong intrinsic motivation , personality traits , on well - placed encouragement and education , or perhaps simply , on curiosity and a sense of wonder . And most important of all , it recognizes that mythical explanations belong to a completely different order than scientific : as Vitruvius realised when he recounted how Pythagoras discovered the Pythagorean Theorem because " the Muses had advised him . " Notes 1 Helmholtz only mentions the resurgence of interest in Schopenhauer ' s Ur - will , but he must have been highly distressed by von Hartmann ' s The Philosophy of the Unconscious . z We can get some idea of how serious an issue this must have appeared to Helmholtz from James ' remark ( in 1879 ) that " We find the Kantian philosophers everywhere hailing Helmholtz as the great experimental corroborator of their master ' s views " ( James 1879 : 10 ) . References Baldwin , James Mark ( 1889 ) , Handbook of Psychology . New York , Henry Holt and Company . Carpenter , William ( 1891 ) , Principles of Mental Physiology . New York , D . Appleton and Company . 580 STUART G . SHANKER Chase , W . G . and Ericsson , K . A . ( 1981 ) , ' Skilled Memory ' , in J . R . Anderson ( ed . ) Cognitive Skills and Their Acquisition . Hillsdale , New Jersey , Erlbaum . Cobbe , Frances Power ( 1883 ) , ' Unconscious Cerebration ' , in Darwinism in Morals . Boston , George H . Ellis . De Groot , Adriaan D . ( 1965 ) , Thought and Choice in Chess . The Hague , Mouton Publishers . Dennett , Daniel ( 1983 ) , ' Artificial Intelligence and the Strategies of Psychological Investigation ' in Jonathan Miller ( ed . ) States of Mind . New York , Pantheon Books . Ellenberger , Henri ( 1970 ) , The Discovery of the Unconscious . New York , Basic Books . Gregory , R . L . ( 1986 ) , Odd Perceptions . London , Routledge . Gruber , Howard E . ( 1981a ) , Darwin on Man , 2nd edn . Chicago , The University of Chicago Press . Gruber , Howard E . ( 1981b ) , ' On the relation between " Aha Experiences " and the construction of ideas ' , History of Science , vol . xix . Hadamard , Jacques ( 1945 ) , The Psychology of Invention in the Mathematical Field . New York , Dover Publications , Inc . Helmholtz , Hermann von ( 1971 ) , Selected Writings of Hermann yon Helmholtz , Russell Kahl ( ed . ) . Middletown , Connecticut , Wesleyan University Press . Helmholtz , Hermann von ( 1977 ) , Epistemological Writings , R . S . Cohen and Y . Elkana ( eds ) , Malcolm F . Lowe ( trans . ) . Dordrecht , D . Reidel Publishing Company . Howe , Michael J . A . ( 1989 ) , Fragments of Genius . London , Routledge . James , William ( 1879 ) , ' Are We Automata ' , Mind , no . 13 . James , William ( 1890 ) , Principles of Psychology . London , Constable & Co . Johnson - Laird , P . N . ( 1988 ) , The Computer and the Mind . London , Fontana Press . Johnson - Laird , P . N . and Ruth M . J . Byrne ( 1991 ) , Deduction . Hillsdale Lawrence Erlbaum As - sociates , Publishers . Ketner , Kenneth Laine ( 1988 ) , ' Peirce and Turing : Comparisons and Conjectures ' , Semiotica 68 , pp . 33 - 61 . Klein , D . B . ( 1977 ) , The Unconscious : Invention or Discover ? . Santa Monica , California Goodyear Publishing Company , Inc . Montmasson , Joseph - Marie ( 1931 ) , Invention and the Unconscious , H . Stafford Hatfield ( trans ) . London , Kegan Paul , Trench , Trubner & Co . Ltd . M / insterberg , Hugo et al . ( 1910 ) , Subconscious Phenomena . Boston , Richard G . Badger , The Gorham Press . Newell , Allen and Herbert A . Simon ( 1957 ) , ' The Logic Theory Machine : A Complex Information Processing System ' , Transactions on Information Theory ( Institute of Radio Engineers ) . Newell , Allen and Herbert A . Simon ( 1956 ) , Problem - Solving in Humans and Computers . Santa Monica , California , RAND Corporation Paper P - 987 . Newell , Allen and Herbert A . Simon ( 1961a ) , ' Computer Simulation of Human Thinking ' , Science , vol . 134 . Newell , Allen and Herbert A . Simon ( 1961b ) , ' GPS , A Program that Simulates Human Thought ' , in Edward A . Feigenbaum ( ed . ) , Computers and Thought . New York : McGraw - Hill , 1963 . Newell , Allen and Herbert A . Simon ( 1961c ) , ' The Simulation of Human Thought ' , in Current Trends in Psychological Theory . Pittsburgh , University of Pittsburgh Press . Newell , Allen and Herbert A . Simon ( 1962 ) , ' The Processes of Creative Thinking ' , in Simon 1979 . Newell , Allen , J . C . Shaw , and Herbert A . Simon ( 1958 ) , ' Elements of a Theory of Human Problem Solving ' , Psychological Review , vol . 65 . Newell , Allen , J . C . Shaw , and Herbert A . Simon ( 1959 ) , ' The Processes of Creative Thinking ' , P - 1320 ( Santa Monica , California , The Rand Corporation , September 16 , 1958 , Revised January 28 , 1959 ) . Poincarr , Henri ( 1913 ) , ' Mathematical Creation ' , in The Foundations of Science , G . Bruce Halsted ( trans ) . New York : The Science Press . Shevrin , Howard and Scott Dickman ( 1980 ) , ' The Psychological Unconscious ' , American Psycho - logist , vol . 35 . Simon , Herbert A . ( 1961 ) , ' Modelling Human Mental Processes ' , in Proceedings of the Western Joint Computer Conference , May 9 - 11 , 1961 . Simon , Herbert A . ( 1966 ) , ' Scientific discovery and the psychology of problem solving ' , in Simon 1977 . THE NATURE OF INSIGHT 581 Simon , Herbert A . ( 1977 ) , Models of Discovery . Dordrecht : D . Reidel Publishing Company . Simon , Herbert A . ( 1978 ) , ' Information processing theory of human problem solving ' , in W . K . Estes ( ed . ) , Handbook of Learning and Cognitive Processes , vol . 5 . Hillsdale , New Jersey , Erlbaum . Simon , Herbert A . ( 1979 ) , Models of Thought . New Haven , Yale University Press . Sloboda , John A . ( 1985 ) , The Musical Mind . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Sternberg , Robert J . ( 1988 ) , The Nature of Creativity . Cambridge , Cambridge University Press . Turing , Alan ( 1950 ) , ' Computing Machinery and Intelligence ' , in Alan Ross Anderson ( ed . ) , Minds and Machines . Englewood Cliffs , New Jersey , Prentice - HaU Inc . Vitruvius ( 1934 ) , On Architecture , Frank Granger ( trans ) . Cambridge , Mass , Harvard University Press . von Hartmann , Eduard ( 1931 ) Philosophy of the Unconscious . New York , Harcourt , Brace and Company . Wallas , Graham ( 1926 ) The Art of Thought . London , Jonathan Cape . Warren , Richard M . and Roslyn P . Warren ( eds . ) ( 1968 ) , Helmholtz on Perception . New York , John Wiley and Sons . Weisberg , Robert W . ( 1986 ) , Creativity : Genius and Other Myths . New York : Freeman . Weisberg , Robert W . ( 1988 ) , ' Problem solving and creativity ' , in Robert J . Sternberg , The Nature of Creativity . Cambridge , Cambridge University Press . Wittgenstein , Ludwig ( 1953 ) , Philosophical Investigations , G . E . M . Anscombe ( trans . ) , 3rd edition . Basil Blackwell , Oxford . Wittgenstein , Ludwig ( 1980 ) , Culture and Value , G . H . von Wright ( ed . ) , Peter Winch ( trans . ) . Oxford , Basil Blackwell .