R ESEARCH A RTICLE N ATURE AND N URTURE : T HE I MPACT OF A UTOMATICITY AND THE S TRUCTURATION OF C OMMUNICATION ON V IRTUAL T EAM B EHAVIOR AND P ERFORMANCE Valerie L . Bartelt Management , Marketing and Information Systems Department , Texas A & M University – Kingsville , Kingsvile , TX 78363 U . S . A . { valerie . bartelt @ tamuk . edu } Alan R . Dennis Operations and Decision Technologies Department , Indiana University – Bloomington , Bloomington , IN 47405 U . S . A . { ardennis @ indiana . edu } Appendix Perceived Time Pressure Measure ( Cronbach’s Alpha = 0 . 91 ) Concerning discussions for each round , did you : Have as Much Time as You Needed Neutral / Undecided Want More Time 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Did you have enough time to review other comments and suggestions ? Have as Much Time as You Needed Neutral / Undecided Want More Time 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Did you feel rushed when making comments ? Have as Much Time as You Needed Neutral / Undecided Want More Time 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Considering all the comments you made , did you : Have as Much Time as You Needed Neutral / Undecided Want More Time 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 MIS Quarterly Vol . 38 No . 2—Appendix / June 2014 A1 Bartelt & Dennis / Automaticity and the Structuration of Communication on Virtual Teams Perceived Effectiveness Measure ( Items were reverse coded for analysis , so that higher values meant higher perceived effectiveness ; Cronbach’s Alpha = 0 . 91 ) How effective was your group at making decisions ? Very Effective Neutral / Undecided Not at All Effective 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 How effective was your group at evaluating decisions ? Very Effective Neutral / Undecided Not at All Effective 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Enjoyment Measure ( Items were reverse coded for analysis , so that higher values meant higher enjoyment ; Cronbach’s Alpha = 0 . 92 ) How much fun was this discussion ? Very Enjoyable Neutral / Undecided Not at All Enjoyable 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Overall , how enjoyable did you find your experience in this group ? Very Enjoyable Neutral / Undecided Not at All Enjoyable 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 To what extent did you enjoy participating in this discussion ? Very Enjoyable Neutral / Undecided Not at All Enjoyable 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Social Communication Behaviors during Tool Use Measure ( Cronbach’s Alpha = 0 . 92 ) Please consider a situation where you are using [ IM , DF ] to discuss a homework assignment with three or four of your friends who are taking the same course . How likely would you do the following ( 1 = Not at all likely ; 4 = Neutral ; 7 = Very likely ) : • Make a humorous comment • Tell a joke • Mention a current event ( e . g . , news , politics , sports ) • Mention an event on campus ( e . g . , basketball , movies ) • Mention your social plans for the weekend • Invite someone to party • Mention how you feel ( e . g . , tired , hungry ) • Ask someone else how they feel • Mention work in another class • Have a side conversation • Discuss something not directly related to the homework assignment • If two members of the group started talking about something not related to the homework assignment , reply to their comments A2 MIS Quarterly Vol . 48 No . 3—Appendix / June 2014 Bartelt & Dennis / Automaticity and the Structuration of Communication on Virtual Teams Non - Task Comments Coding Rules Comments about the game play are to be coded as on - task , including • Comments about where to move during each other’s turn including speculation on where the campers might be • Comments on individual findings after each round , including definite , possible evidence , or no evidence , that each participant received from the facilitator and were asked to share with one another • Encouraging comments to one another specifically related to the game play ( e . g . , “Good job , team ! We found 2 missing campers so far . ” ) • Comments about participants’ role that were related to the game play ( e . g . , “Ranger – why don’t u and ur search dogs go a bit closer to the water ? ” ) Comments that are not relevant to the game play are considered to be off - task , including • Comments about participants’ role or the game play that had nothing to do with the task and appeared to be intended as humor ( i . e . , “Sasquatch may be better at finding these kids than us . What color do you think Sasquatch is ? ” ) • Comments about where participants were going after the experiment • Comments about current events outside of the experiment ( e . g . , sports teams , politics ) • Comments about the experiment itself ( e . g . , “Do we have to do a survey after the missing camper task is done ? ” ) If one comment contains multiple thoughts , some of which are on - task and some off - task , it should be coded as on - task , unless it triggered subsequent related comments that were off - task . Finding a Tipping Point There is no continuous relationship between the proportion of non - task - focused comments and decision quality . Instead , it is a discontinuous relationship that has two separate and distinct means . Below a certain tipping point , the team discussion is task focused and results in task performance that is distributed around some mean decision quality . Above the tipping point , a contagion effect occurs and the non - task - focused discussion drives out the ability to reach good quality decisions ; the discussion is not adequately task - focused and performance is distributed around a different , much lower mean decision quality . In both cases , the distribution around the mean decision quality is not related to the proportion of non - task - related comments by any specific function . Thus , to find this tipping point beyond which contagion ensues , we should not examine the relationship between non - task - focused comments and decision quality , because there is no functional relationship . Instead , we examined the proportion of non - task - focused comments to see if we could identify a point at which it grew faster than would otherwise be expected . We began by converting the proportion of non - task - focused comments into a 0 to 1 scaled variable ; we divided the number of non - task - focused comments by its maximum ( 41 % ) to produce a non - task - focused comments variable ranging from 0 to 1 . We then sorted the teams based on the proportion of non - task - focused comments from lowest to highest and assigned all 39 data points an ordinal number from one to 39 representing their order from lowest to highest . We then mean - centered this ordinal data ( i . e . , subtracted 20 ) and then divided by the maximum ( 20 ) to give a uniform ordinal distribution from - 1 to + 1 , centered on zero . We used the SPSS regression curve estimation procedure to find the best fitting curve between the ordinal placement of the team and its proportion of non - task - focused comments . The best fit curve was a cubic function , with an R 2 of . 98 and all four terms significant ( see Figure A1 ) . The function is : f ( x ) = . 089 + . 231 x + . 420 x 2 + . 322 x 3 , where x is the mean - centered ordinal value on the - 1 to + 1 scale and f ( x ) is the non - task - focused comments variable on the 0 to 1 scale . This function shows how the amount of non - task - focused comments increases over the sample . We see that below the median ( x = 0 ) , there is a slow , gradual increase in the amount of non - task - focused comments from one ordinal position to the next . After the median , non - task - focused comments begin to increase at an increasing rate . What slope should we consider a potential tipping point ? We believe that a key tipping point could be when the slope first exceeds 1 ( i . e . , a 45 degree tangent line ) . At this point , the amount of non - task - focused comments is increasing at a noticeably faster rate . The first derivative provides the slope at any given point . The first derivative is f N ( x ) = . 231 + . 840 x + . 966 x 2 . Solving for x when f N ( x ) = 1 , gives x = . 559 , or the 31 st ordinal data point ( at which point the percent of non - task comments equals 16 % ) . This partitions the data into two sets : ( 1 ) 30 teams below this point ; and ( 2 ) 9 teams above this point . This has some face - value appeal as it divides the data into close to a 75 - 25 split . MIS Quarterly Vol . 38 No . 2—Appendix / June 2014 A3 Bartelt & Dennis / Automaticity and the Structuration of Communication on Virtual Teams Figure A1 . The Relationship between Ordinal Position and Relative Non - Task Comments A4 MIS Quarterly Vol . 48 No . 3—Appendix / June 2014