CHARACTERIZING THE DYNAMICS AND FUNCTION OF CLATHRIN DURING ENDOCYTOSIS IN YEAST by THOMAS M NEWPHER Submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology CASE WESTERN RESERVE UNIVERSITY May 2006 CASE WESTERN RESERVE UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES We hereby approve the dissertation of _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ candidate for the Ph . D . degree * . ( signed ) _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ( chair of the committee ) _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ( date ) _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ * We also certify that written approval has been obtained for any proprietary material contained therein . DEDICATION To my wife , Leslie , For all your love and support , To my parents , Robert and Suzanne Newpher For all your love , guidance , and encouragement . i TABLE OF CONTENTS Dedication Table of Contents i List of Tables iv List of Figures v Acknowledgements vii Abbreviations x Abstract xii Chapter 1 : Introduction 1 The Endocytic Pathway 3 Coat Proteins : Structure and Function 6 AP - 2 Function in Endocytosis 7 Accessory Adaptors in Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis 10 Clathrin Adaptors in TGN / Endosomal Sorting 13 Functions of the Clathrin Light Chain 16 Functions of the Actin Cytoskeleton during Endocytosis 17 Dynamics of the Endocytic Pathway in Higher and Lower Eukaryotes 20 Dynamics of Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis in Animal Cells 20 Dynamics of Endocytosis in Budding Yeast 21 The Coat Module 26 The Actin Module 27 The WASP / Myo and Amphiphysin Modules 28 Clathrin Functions in Yeast 29 Rationale and Research Aims 30 Chapter 2 : In vivo Dynamics of Clathrin and Adaptor - Dependent Recruitment to the Actin - Based Endocytic Machinery in Yeast Introduction 33 Methods and Materials 36 Supplemental Movie Legends 41 Results Localization of Clathrin In Vivo 42 Clathrin Accumulates at the Cortex in the Absence 45 of Sla2p and in the Presence of Latrunculin A Clathrin Accumulates at the Cortex in Some , but Not All , 49 Endocytic Mutants Endocytic Cargo Accumulate in Arrested Cortical Clathrin 52 Patches Clathrin Co - localizes with Actin - Associated Cortical Proteins 55 Transient Association of Clathrin and Cortical Actin Patches 57 Cortical Recruitment of Clathrin by Endocytic Adaptors 61 ii Discussion Localization of Clathrin In Vivo 66 Distinct Functions of Endocytic Factors 68 Dynamics of Cortical Clathrin Patches 70 Yeast Epsins and AP180s as Endocytic Adaptors for Clathrin 71 Chapter 3 : Clathrin is Important for Normal Actin Dynamics and Progression of Sla2p Containing Patches during Endocytosis in Yeast Introduction 73 Methods and Materials 77 Supplemental Movie Legends 84 Results Clathrin LC Mediates HC Interaction with Sla2p 85 Clathrin LC Chain and Sla2p Directly Interact through the 88 Sla2p Coiled - coil Domain Clathrin HC Terminal Domain does Not Bind Sla2p 91 Sla2p is Not Associated with Clathrin - Coated Vesicles 92 Clathrin is Recruited to Cortical Patches Prior to Sla2p 92 Clathrin is Required for Normal Progression of Sla2p 96 Patches and Cortical Actin Dynamics Actin Comet Tails and Cortical Patches in Clathrin Mutants 101 Contain Endocytic Membrane Sla1p , but not Sla2p Shows Reduced Cortical Recruitment 101 And Patch Lifetime in Clathrin Mutants The Sla2p Coiled - coil Domain is Important for Normal 105 Turnover of Clathrin , Sla2p , and Abp1p Discussion Physical Interactions Between Sla2p and the Clathrin Subunits 108 Clathrin is Recruited Prior to Sla2p at Endocytic Patches 109 Clathrin’s Roles in Cortical Patch Dynamics and Endocytosis 110 Sla1p and Sla2p Dynamics are Distinct 111 Role of the Clathrin - Sla2p Interaction 113 Chapter 4 : Clathrin Light Chain Interaction with the Hip1 / R Homologue , Sla2p , Regulates Turnover of Endocytic Patches in Yeast Introduction 116 Methods and Materials 118 Supplemental Movie Legends 123 Results The N - terminus of Clathrin Light Chain Interacts Directly 125 with the Sla2p Coiled - coil Domain The N - terminus of Clathrin Light Chain is Not Required 127 For Growth , TGN Sorting , or CCV Assembly iii HC Binding is Required for Normal Localization 131 of Clathrin Light Chain The N - terminus of Clathrin Light Chain is Not Required 133 for Endocytosis The N - terminus of LC Suppresses Endocytosis in the Absence 136 of Clathrin Heavy Chain Discussion Physical Interactions Between Sla2p and Clathrin Light Chain 140 Role of the LC N - terminus 141 Novel Endocytic Function for Clathrin Light Chain In Vivo 142 Chapter 5 : Conclusions and Future Directions Conclusions 145 Model for Sla2p - Clathrin Function during Endocytosis 151 Future Directions Clathrin Adaptors and Plasma Membrane Domains 156 CCV Uncoating 158 CCV Scission 160 Phosphoregulation of Endocytosis 160 Tracking the Internal Population of Clathrin 162 References 163 iv LIST OF TABLES Chapter 1 : Introduction Table 1 : Proteins Involved in Yeast Endocytosis 22 Chapter 2 : In Vivo Dynamics of Clathrin and Adaptor - Dependent Recruitment to the Actin - Based Endocytic Machinery in Yeast Table 2 : Chapter 2 Strain List 40 Chapter 3 : Clathrin is Important for Normal Actin Dynamics and Progression of Sla2p Containing Patches during Endocytosis in Yeast Table 3 : Chapter 3 Strain List 83 Chapter 4 : Clathrin Light Chain Interaction with the Hip1 / R Homologue , Sla2p , Regulates Turnover of Endocytic Patches in Yeast Table 4 : Chapter 4 Strain List 122 v LIST OF FIGURES Chapter 1 : Introduction 1 . 1 : Membrane Trafficking Pathways 2 1 . 2 : Endocytic Pathways 5 1 . 3 : Structure of a Clathrin Triskelion and Lattice 8 1 . 4 : Domains of Clathrin Light Chain 15 1 . 5 : Dynamics of Yeast Endocytosis 25 Chapter 2 : In Vivo Dynamics of Clathrin and Adaptor - Dependent Recruitment to the Actin - Based Endocytic Machinery in Yeast 2 . 1 : Clathrin Localization in WT and chc1 (cid:1) Cells 44 2 . 2 : GFP - LC Accumulates at the Cell Cortex in sla2 Mutants 47 - 48 and in the Presence of LAT - A 2 . 3 : GFP - LC Accumulates at the Cortex in Some , but Not All , 51 Endocytic Mutants 2 . 4 : Clathrin Localizes to Cortical Sites Containing Cargo and 54 - 60 Components of the Actin - Based Endocytic Machinery 2 . 5 : Colocalization of HC with Ent1 / 2p and Yap1801 / 2p 62 in sla2 (cid:1) 2 . 6 : Recruitment of Clathrin to the Cortex by Yeast Epsins and 65 AP180 / CALM Chapter 3 : Clathrin is Important for Normal Actin Dynamics and Progression of Sla2p Containing Patches during Endocytosis in Yeast 3 . 1 : Clathrin LC is Important for the Sla2p - HC Interaction , but 87 Clathrin HC is Not Required for Sla2p - LC Binding 3 . 2 : Clathrin LC and Sla2p Interact Directly in a Region 90 Containing the Coiled - coil Domain of Sla2p , but the HC Terminal Domain does Not Interact with Sla2p 3 . 3 : Clathrin is Recruited Prior to Sla2p during Endocytic 94 Patch Formation in WT Cells 3 . 4 : Clathrin is Required for Progression of Sla2p Patches 98 and Normal Actin Dynamics 3 . 5 : Actin Comet Tails and Patches in Clathrin Mutants 100 Contain Endocytic Membrane 3 . 6 : Sla1p , but Not Sla2p , Shows Decreased Patch Lifetime 103 and Cortical Recruitment in Clathrin Mutants vi 3 . 7 : sla2 (cid:1) cc has Increased Abp1p , Sla2p , and Clathrin 107 Cortical Patch Lifetime Chapter 4 : Clathrin Light Chain Interaction with the Hip1 / R Homologue , Sla2p , Regulates Turnover of Endocytic Patches in Yeast 4 . 1 : The N - terminus of Clathrin Light Chain Interacts Directly 126 with the Sla2p Coiled - coil Domain 4 . 2 : Clc1p Truncation and Internal Deletion Mutants 128 Characterized In Vivo 4 . 3 : The N - terminus of Clathrin Light Chain is Not Required 130 for Normal Growth , TGN Sorting , or Formation of CCVs 4 . 4 : Binding to Clathrin HC , but Not Sla2p is Required for 132 Normal Localization of Clathrin Light Chain 4 . 5 : The N - terminus of LC is Not Required for Endocytosis , 135 but is Sufficient to Restore Sla2p Patch Mobility 4 . 6 : The Sla2p - binding Region of LC Suppresses Clathrin HC 139 Deficiency Growth and Endocytic Phenotypes Chapter 5 : Conclusions and Future Directions 5 . 1 : The Previous Model for Endocytic Patch Formation 147 and Vesicle Internalization 5 . 2 : The New Model for Clathrin - Based Endocytosis 148 in Yeast 5 . 3 : Different Types of Sla2p Patches Observed in Clathrin 150 Mutants 5 . 4 : Model for Sla2p Driven Vesicle Internalization 152 5 . 5 : Model for Sla2p Activation during Endocytosis 154 5 . 6 : Model for Vesicle Internalization in chc1 (cid:1) 155 vii ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS There are many people to thank for all of the support , kindness , and excellent training I have received as a graduate student . I especially thank my advisor , Sandra Lemmon , for realizing my potential early on , despite my less than desirable resume six years ago . I can honestly say that I have never met a more enthusiastic or passionate scientist . Working under someone who truly loves what they do is contagious , and has helped me to remain an optimistic and curious scientist . Sandy is also very thorough and critical . Although young graduate students do not always appreciate these qualities , she has given me excellent training and provided me with the confidence to survive as an independent scientist . After arriving at CWRU with very little research experience , I was lucky to work side by side with Ken Henry during my first rotation . In those ten weeks of scientific “boot camp” , Ken patiently taught me nearly everything I needed to know about molecular biology . More than that , Ken helped me to become a critical scientist . Jisuk Chang was also very helpful upon joining the lab and later became and good friend after the move to Miami . Jisuk set an excellent example with her strong work ethic and helped me to become focused and not afraid to push ahead with my experiments . I thank everyone at CWRU who helped me during my early years of graduate school . Not only did I learn so much from my teachers and coursework , but also , other graduate students were very helpful . Laura Lackner , Jay Johnson , Alexis Nagangast and members of nearly every lab in the department were subjected to numerous questions viii concerning protocols and the use of equipment . I also thank my committee for their help and the interest they have shown in my project and career . Living in Miami the last three years has been the best time of my life . The people in the department have been very welcoming and I especially thank Sara Pizano for all of her help and communication with CWRU . I am also very grateful to Vance Lemmon and Robin Smith for the assistance with their TIRF microscope . Their help allowed me to make novel observations that were hugely important in the acceptance of my first paper . It has been a lot of fun working with Teresa Torres , “The Lady” , the last three years . The conversations with her have been an endless source of entertainment . She is also a kind person who has helped create a pleasant and friendly work atmosphere . Regla , “Mi Hermana” , has always made me laugh and makes the lab feel like home . I also thank her for the never - ending baskets of plates that she pours for us . It has also been nice getting to know John Collette , my fellow gringo in the lab . The daily discussions over lunch about politics , Texas , the lab , South Park , etc… have been a lot of fun . My parents have always stressed the importance of education and have shown great interest in all of my academic accomplishments . From an early age they taught me to work hard and always do my best . I am very lucky to have been given their support in all stages of my education , from elementary school through the writing of my dissertation . Last and most important , I thank my wife , Leslie . I realize that being married to a graduate student is not a glamorous lifestyle . Leslie has always looked past the present situation and realized that my education is an investment in our future . She has been so supportive and is always willing to listen to my science talk , whether or not it makes ix sense . I also appreciate her education and hard work , both of which have allowed us to live a comfortable life while I finish graduate school . Leslie has made many sacrifices professionally for the benefit of my career and has unselfishly quit her job several times to allow me to continue my education . I am very grateful for her support , understanding and constant optimism . x ABBREVIATIONS aa Amino acid AAK1 Adaptor associated kinase 1 ANTH AP180 N - terminal homology ARK Actin regulating kinase CALM Clathrin assembly lymphoid myeloid CCP Clathrin - coated pit CCS Clathrin - coated structure CCV Clathrin - coated vesicle CFP Cyan fluorescent protein C - URA - LEU - ADE Complete synthetic medium lacking uracil , leucine and adenine EE Early endosome EGF Epidermal growth factor EH Eps15 homology EM Electron microscopy ENTH Epsin N - terminal homology GAD Gal4p activation domain GAK Cyclin - G associated protein kinase / auxilin 2 GAL Galactose GBD Gal4p binding domain GFP Green fluorescent protein GGA Golgi localized gamma ear containing Arf - binding proteins GPCR G protein coupled receptor xi GPI Glycosyl - phosphatidyl - inositol GST Glutathione S - transferase HC Clathrin heavy chain HIP1 / R Huntingtin interacting protein / related Hrs Hepatocyte growth factor regulated tyrosine kinase substrate LAT - A Latrunculin A LC Clathrin light chain LDL Low - density lipoprotein LE Late endosome MVB Multi - vesicular body mRFP Monomeric red fluorescent protein PIP 2 Phosphatidyl - inositol ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate PMSF Phenyl methyl sulfonyl fluoride PVC Prevacuolar compartment RME Receptor - mediated endocytosis TD Clathrin HC terminal domain TGN Trans - Golgi Network TIRFM Total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy UIM Ubiquitin interaction motif WASP Wiskott Aldrich syndrome protein YEPD Yeast extract peptone dextrose YFP Yellow fluorescent protein xii Characterizing the Dynamics and Function of Clathrin During Endocytosis in Yeast Abstract By Thomas M Newpher Clathrin is a major vesicle coat protein which functions in receptor - mediated endocytosis ( RME ) as well as in sorting and retention of cargo at the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) and endosomal system . Clathrin triskelions are recruited to membranes by cargo / lipid - binding adaptors , resulting in the formation of polygonal lattices . Three clathrin heavy chains ( HCs ) comprise the structural backbone of the triskelion and are each bound by a clathrin light chain ( LC ) . LCs are believed to exert regulatory effects on the assembly of clathrin lattices ; however , in vivo evidence of such a role is still lacking . In addition , LCs interact with the actin - associated endocytic proteins , Hip1 / Sla2p , thus providing a link between clathrin and actin . In budding yeast the importance of a dynamic actin cytoskeleton in endocytosis has long been appreciated ; however , direct visual evidence for the involvement of clathrin at the plasma membrane has been lacking . Here I demonstrate the existence of cortical clathrin in yeast and show that its recruitment precedes a burst of actin polymerization during endocytosis . In addition , its recruitment to the cell surface is dependent upon endocytic adaptors , but not the polymerization of actin or the function of Sla2p ; rather , they are required for its turnover . xiii The role of clathrin at the yeast plasma membrane is likely to organize early endocytic patches and the actin polymerization machinery during vesicle internalization , as the early ( Sla2p ) and late ( Abp1p ) stage endocytic markers show increased patch lifetime and size during both stages of endocytosis in clathrin mutants . To better understand LC - Sla2p function during the early stage of endocytosis , the interactions between these proteins were mapped . Similar to their animal homologues , the coiled - coil domain of Sla2p interacts directly with the N - terminus of yeast LC . This interaction appears to be important for the ability of LC overexpression to suppress the endocytic defect of HC deficient yeast and likely occurs during the early stage of endocytosis by increasing the number of functional Sla2p patches and their turnover rate . Importantly these results demonstrate that the LC has an endocytic specific function and may serve to regulate Sla2p’s functions in promoting cortical patch maturation . 1 Chapter 1 Introduction A common theme among all eukaryotic cells is the presence of membrane - bound organelles , which allow a variety of specialized functions to be carried out in separate cellular locations . The ability of these organelles to maintain a unique chemical composition and assortment of lipids and proteins is critical for their proper function . Organelles participating in the biosynthetic and endocytic pathways have the added challenge of maintaining homeostasis , while at the same time actively exchanging their contents with each other . For example , biosynthetic cargo destined for the secretory pathway are first translocated into the endoplasmic reticulum and eventually delivered to the Golgi complex , where further modification and sorting of cargo occurs . Sorting at the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) determines the destination of the cargo ; either secretion to the plasma membrane , via secretory vesicles , or delivery to compartments such as the endosome and / or lysosome / vacuole . In addition , cargo from the plasma membrane are internalized and converge with the endosomal system ( Figure 1 . 1 ) . In order for these organelles to maintain their identity , resident proteins must be retained and / or continually retrieved , while at the same time allowing other cargo to proceed . The selective trafficking of cargo between cellular compartments relies on the use of membrane - bound transport vesicles or vesicular tubules and their associated coat proteins . The formation , cargo selection , and targeting of these transport vesicles is a highly regulated process which involves the coordinated efforts many proteins . 2 Figure 1 . 1 . Membrane Trafficking Pathways 3 The Endocytic Pathway One major function of transport vesicles is for the uptake of lipid and protein cargo from the plasma membrane during endocytosis . Endocytosis is important for the internalization of nutrients , growth factors , and pathogens , as well as the down - regulation of membrane receptors and the recycling of membrane proteins and lipids . These endocytic functions are critical as they allow the cell to maintain homeostasis and actively communicate with its environment . During endocytosis cargo are internalized from the plasma membrane and delivered by endocytic transport vesicles to the early endosome ( EE ) and eventually the late endosome ( LE ) . The LE / multi - vesicular body ( MVB ) is a major sorting station , as some cargo are recycled back to the plasma membrane for further use , while others enter into MVBs for transport to the lysosome , where degradation by resident lysosomal enzymes occurs ( Figure 1 . 1 ) . There are several different types of endocytosis , which are defined by the cargo and variety of accessory and regulatory proteins they employ ( Figure 1 . 2 ) . One type , phagocytosis ( cell eating ) , involves specialized cells such as macrophages and neutrophils , which engulf large particles including bacteria , yeast , or apoptotic cells ( Aderem and Underhill , 1999 ) . In the presence of antibody bound particles , receptors on the surface of macrophages are activated and set off a signaling cascade to promote actin assembly by Rho - family GTPases . This causes the formation of large membrane extensions which allow the particle to be engulfed ( Chimini and Chavrier , 2000 ) . A second major type of endocytosis is pinocytosis ( cell drinking ) , also known as fluid - phase endocytosis , and includes macropinocytosis , clathrin / caveolin independent , caveolin - mediated , and clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Conner and Schmid , 2003 ) . 4 During macropinocytosis , large membrane ruffles extend out to surround fluids for internalization and form structures called pinosomes . Marcropinocytosis is similar to phagocytosis with respect to the activation of Rho GTPases and subsequent actin assembly driving membrane extensions , but can occur constitutively or when stimulated by ligand ( Figure 1 . 2 ) ( Cardelli , 2001 ; Nobes and Marsh , 2000 ) . Very little is known about the cargo or proteins involved in clathrin / caveolin independent endocytosis ; however , in cells where clathrin and caveolin - mediated endocytosis are inhibited , fluid - phase endocytosis does occur and is even upregulated ( Damke et al . , 1995 ) . This independent endocytic pathway may rely on lipid rafts ( lipid microdomains consisting of sterols and sphingolipids ) as it is sensitive to cholesterol depletion and contains glycosyl - phosphatidyl - inositol ( GPI ) anchored proteins ( Kirkham and Parton , 2005 ) . A third type of pinocytosis , caveolin - mediated , involves the flask shaped structures termed caveolae , which contain the integral membrane proteins caveolin - 1 / 2 and caveolin - 3 in muscle cells ( Rothberg et al . , 1992 ) . Caveolae are present in cholesterol and sphingolipid rich domains and may be important for selective delivery of cholesterol , serum albumin , toxins , nonenveloped viruses , and GPI anchored proteins ( Le Lay and Kurzchalia , 2005 ) . Surprisingly , Cav - 1 - / - / - 3 - / - null mice , which are defective in the formation of caveolae , are viable and fertile , thus caveolin function is not essential , although in the absence of this pathway compensation could occur through other endocytic routes ( Park et al . , 2002 ) . Similar to clathrin - mediated endocytosis , 5 Figure 1 . 2 . Endocytic Pathways . The cartoon shows the engulfment of a particle by phagocytosis and the multiple types pinocytosis . Clathrin is shown in red , caveolin in black , and dynamin in purple . 6 caveolin - mediated internalization requires dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton ; however , the exact mechanism of internalization is not well understood ( Kirkham and Parton , 2005 ) . The most extensively studied type of pinocytosis is clathrin - mediated , which is important for selective internalization of membrane - bound receptors / cargo and involves the coat protein clathrin and its associated adaptors ( Brodsky et al . , 2001 ) . Several examples of commonly studied cargo / receptors captured by clathrin mediated - endocytosis include : G protein coupled receptors ( GPCR ) , epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) , transferrin , low - density lipoprotein ( LDL ) , and several viruses ( Brodsky et al . , 2001 ; Daecke et al . , 2005 ; Sun et al . , 2005a ) . Coat Proteins : Structure and Function There are different types of coat proteins used throughout the cell , but all of them share a general role in mediating cargo selection and vesicle formation . Some coat proteins are recruited to a single organelle , while others function in multiple pathways and locations . For example , COPII coats function at the ER in the trafficking of vesicles en route to the cis - Golgi , while COPI coats function in retrograde trafficking from the Golgi to ER as well as between Golgi cisternae . Sorting in the TGN / endosomal systems and at the plasma membrane uses the major coat protein clathrin ( McMahon and Mills , 2004 ) . Clathrin carries out its functions by the use of membrane - associated adaptors , which recognize sorting signals in the cytosolic tails of membrane receptors , thus providing cargo selectivity ( Brodsky et al . , 2001 ) . The binding of clathrin to these adaptors and their assembly into polyhedral lattices may help to organize and concentrate 7 adaptors / cargo at endocytic pits . Initially , clathrin triskelions form the planar lattices of clathrin - coated pits ( CCPs ) , but as vesicle invagination proceeds , they develop into the curved lattices of clathrin - coated vesicles ( CCVs ) ( Figure 1 . 3B ) . After vesicle formation and scission , the clathrin / adaptor coat is released and the vesicle is transported to the endosomal compartment . The coat can then be used for further rounds of endocytosis . Clathrin lattices are comprised of individual clathrin triskelions , consisting of three heavy chains ( HCs ) oligomerized at their C - terminus , each bound by a clathrin light chain ( LC ) . The HC , which makes up the structural backbone of the triskelion , consists of three major domains : the proximal , distal , and terminal ( TD ) . The proximal domain of the HC contains the C - terminal region required for trimerization and its interaction with clathrin LC ( Figure 1 . 3A ) ( Chen et al . , 2002 ) . The TD of HC is needed for its interactions with membrane - associated adaptors and other endocytic factors , all of which contain clathrin - binding motifs ( Lafer , 2002 ) . AP - 2 Function in Endocytosis Clathrin does not contact membrane or cargo directly ; rather , clathrin - binding adaptors carry out this important function . During endocytosis , AP - 2 is the major adaptor involved . The modular “strings and knots” design of AP - 2 allows for flexibility while making multiple interactions with clathrin , lipid , cargo , and other endocytic factors ( Owen et al . , 2004 ) . AP - 2 is a heterotetramer consisting of two large subunits , ( (cid:2) 2 and (cid:1) ) , a medium subunit ( (cid:1) 2 ) and a small subunit ( (cid:3) 2 ) . The (cid:2) 2 subunit of AP - 2 binds clathrin through its LLDLD - type clathrin box motif ( Shih et al . , 1995 ) , while the (cid:1) appendage and the μ 2 subunit allow for its plasma membrane recruitment via direct 8 Figure 1 . 3 . Structure of a Clathrin Triskelion and Assembled Lattice . ( A ) A clathrin triskelion with the major domains shown . HC is blue and LC is yellow . ( B ) Subnanometer resolution of clathrin barrel taken by electron cryomicroscopy . Note the LCs on the surface ( Fotin et al . , 2004 . ) . 9 phosphatidyl - inositol ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate ( PIP 2 ) binding ( Rohde et al . , 2002 ) , a major phosphatidyl - inositol species at the plasma membrane . In addition , Arf6 - GTP is implicated in recruiting AP - 2 to membranes ( Paleotti et al . , 2005 ; Zhang et al . , 1994 ) . The (cid:1) 2 subunit is also important for cargo binding , through recognition of tyrosine sorting motifs ( Yxx (cid:1) ) in the cytosolic tail of membrane receptors . The YTRF motif in the cytosolic tail of the transferrin receptor is one commonly studied example ( Traub , 2005 ) . There is also evidence that either the (cid:2) 2 or (cid:1) 2 subunits of AP - 2 recognize [ DE ] xxxL [ LI ] motifs , although the precise binding sites have not been resolved ( Owen , 2004 ) . The (cid:1) 2 subunit is made accessible to cargo binding following its phosphorylation on Thr156 by the ARK family kinase AAK1 ( adaptor - associated kinase 1 ) ( Conner and Schmid , 2002 ) . The other ARK family member , GAK / auxilin 2 ( cyclin G - associated protein kinase ) also phosphorylates the (cid:1) 2 subunit of AP - 2 ( Umeda et al . , 2000 ) and additionally is important for uncoating of CCVs by recruiting Hsc70 ( Lee et al . , 2005 ) . Until recently , AP - 2 was widely believed to play a broad role in the clathrin - mediated uptake of most cargo ; however , RNAi knockdown experiments directed against AP - 2 have challenged this view . Although transferrin endocytosis was ablated in the absence of AP - 2 , EGF and LDL internalization were not affected ( Motley et al . , 2003 ) . These results suggest that AP - 2 may be a cargo specific adaptor , which is not required for all clathrin - based endocytic events . 10 Accessory Adaptors in Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis In addition to AP - 2 , there are numerous “accessory” adaptors , which provide further diversity in cargo recognition and endocytic function . Many of these adaptors bind to AP - 2 through DP ( FW ) or FxDxF motifs and have other interactions with clathrin and PIP 2 . Examples of these adaptors include : the epsins , AP180 / CALM , Dab2 , ARH , (cid:1) - arrestin , Hip1 , and the amphiphysins ( Owen et al . , 2004 ) . The epsins are a family of accessory adaptors that have several specialized functions in membrane trafficking . The lipid binding ENTH ( epsin N - terminal homology ) ( Itoh and Takenawa , 2004 ) domain of epsin 1 binds directly to PIP 2 and may be important for inducing membrane curvature ( Ford et al . , 2002 ) . The epsins also have UIMs ( ubiquitin interaction motif ) and thus serve as clathrin adaptors that may recognize mono - ubiquitinated cargo ( Shih et al . , 2002 ) . The mono - ubiquitination of lysine side chains in the cytosolic tails of membrane receptors is an important sorting signal to target cargo for delivery into the MVB and eventual degradation in the lysosome ( Dupre et al . , 2004 ) . Many plasma membrane receptors and permeases in yeast are internalized and down - regulated by mono - ubiquitination ; including Ste2p and Ste3p ( mating pheromone receptors ) , Fur4p ( uracil permease ) , and Gap1p ( general amino acid permease ) ( Galan et al . , 1996 ; Hicke and Riezman , 1996 ; Soetens et al . , 2001 ) . A variety of receptors in animal cells have also been shown to follow this pathway , such as the epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) , transforming growth factor ( TGF (cid:1) ) receptor , G protein coupled receptors ( GPCR ) , MHC class 1 molecules , and the T cell antigen receptor ( TCR ) ( Dupre et al . , 2004 ; Sigismund et al . , 2005 ) . What controls whether a given receptor utilizes mono - ubiquitination or other sorting signals in its cytosolic tail ? There is evidence that 11 the concentration of ligand can determine the fate of the receptor , as high EGF concentrations result in mono - ubiquitination of EGFR and its subsequent degradation , while low EGF concentrations allow clathrin - mediated endocytosis and recycling of receptors back to the plasma membrane ( Sigismund et al . , 2005 ) . CALM ( clathrin assembly lymphoid myeloid ) is the ubiquitously expressed form of the neuronal clathrin adaptor AP180 , both of which are considered to be lipid - binding adaptors . These clathrin adaptors bind to PIP 2 through their ANTH ( AP180 N - terminal homology ) domains ( Mao et al . , 2001 ) , although they may also serve as cargo specific adaptors for the v - SNARE synaptobrevin or the EGFR ( Huang et al . , 2004 ; Nonet et al . , 1999 ) . Both the epsins and AP180 / CALM interact with the EH ( Eps15 homology ) domain containing protein Eps15 through their NPF motifs ( de Beer et al . , 1998 ) . Eps15 also binds AP - 2 and may serve an important scaffolding role with these adaptors ( Benmerah et al . , 1996 ) . Both Dab2 ( Disabled - 2 ) and ARH ( autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia ) are cargo specific clathrin adaptors that have an important role in regulating serum cholesterol levels . Dab2 and ARH recognize the [ FY ] xNPxY motif present in the cytosolic tail of the low - density lipoprotein ( LDL ) receptor and bind PIP 2 containing lipid through their N - terminal PTB domains ( Mishra et al . , 2002a ; Mishra et al . , 2002b ) . The (cid:1) - arrestins play an important role in down - regulating GPCR signaling . GPCRs make up the largest family of membrane receptors in mammals and are important for transmitting signals from a number of stimuli , including hormones , neurotransmitters , olfactory and visual cues ( Lefkowitz and Shenoy , 2005 ) . One major function of GPCRs and their associated heterotrimeric G proteins is to activate adenylyl cyclase , thus 12 increasing the levels of the second messenger cAMP ( Baillie and Houslay , 2005 ) . Activated GPCRs are phosphorylated by GRKs ( G - protein coupled receptor kinase ) leading to (cid:1) - arrestin recruitment and desensitization , which occurs by either blocking the ability of the GPCR to activate G proteins or by down - regulating the GPCR via clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Owen et al . , 2004 ) . There is also evidence that (cid:1) - arrestins act as signal transducers themselves , thus adding an additional function for these clathrin adaptors ( Lefkowitz and Shenoy , 2005 ) . The amphiphysins and endophilin are important for scission of clathrin - coated vesicles by the recruitment of dynamin through their C - terminal SH3 ( Src homology 3 ) domains . In addition they contain N - terminal bar domains , which may induce membrane curvature or act as sensors for curved membrane ( Peter et al . , 2004 ) . The SH3 domains of amphiphysins and endophilin also bind to synaptojanin , an inositol phosphatase implicated in vesicle uncoating ( Cestra et al . , 1999 ) . The amphiphysins interact more tightly with clathrin terminal domain ( TD ) than other adaptors because they contain both the “LLDLD” and “W box” clathrin - binding motifs ( Miele et al . , 2004 ) . It has been proposed that the higher affinity of amphiphysins for clathrin TD would favor their incorporation at the edge of clathrin lattices , which would also be important for their other role in recruiting dynamin during CCV scission . Huntingtin interacting protein 1 , Hip1 is an unique clathrin / AP - 2 adaptor , as it binds directly to F - actin and clathrin LC , suggesting that it may have functions on the cytosolic face of clathrin lattices that involve the actin cytoskeleton ( Engqvist - Goldstein and Drubin , 2003 ) . Hip1 will be discussed in further detail later . 13 Aside from the above - mentioned accessory adaptors , several other clathrin HC - TD binding proteins exist with specialized roles in the CCV lifecycle . The dnaJ containing protein auxilin binds to the HC - TD and recruits Hsc70 to promote uncoating of CCVs ( Fotin et al . , 2004a ) . GAK / auxilin 2 also shares this uncoating function ( Umeda et al . , 2000 ) . In addition to auxilin / Hsc70 , the HC - TD binding inositol phosphatase synaptojanin , stimulates CCV uncoating by dephosphorylating PIP 2 , presumably creating a less favorable environment for AP - 2 and accessory adaptor binding ( Legendre - Guillemin et al . , 2004 ; McPherson et al . , 1996 ; Verstreken et al . , 2003 ) . Clathrin Adaptors in TGN / Endosomal Sorting Aside from its functions at the plasma membrane , clathrin is also involved in sorting of cargo at the TGN and endosomal systems . Much like AP - 2 and the accessory adaptors at the plasma membrane , AP - 1 , GGAs ( Golgi localized , (cid:2) ear containing , Arf - binding proteins ) and others perform a similar function at the TGN / endosomes . AP - 1 is a heterotetrameric complex comprised of two large subunits ( (cid:2) and (cid:1) 1 ) , a medium ( (cid:1) 1 ) , and a small ( (cid:3) 1 ) ( Traub , 2005 ) . AP - 1 is recruited to membranes by ADP - ribosylation factor 1 ( ARF1 ) in its GTP bound state ( Weaver et al . , 2001 ) and by direct PtdIns ( 4 ) binding ( Wang et al . , 2003b ) . AP - 1 recognizes [ DE ] xxxL [ LI ] sorting motifs and its (cid:1) 1 subunit binds to Yxx (cid:4) motifs present in mannose 6 - phosphate receptors ( MPRs ) ( Ghosh and Kornfeld , 2004 ) . Similar to the (cid:1) 2 subunit of AP - 2 , the (cid:1) 1 subunit of AP - 1 is phosphorylated by GAK and AAK1 , and phosphorylation regulates AP - 1’s association with cargo ( Ghosh and Kornfeld , 2003 ) . 14 The GGAs are monomeric adaptors with similar structure to the gamma appendage ear of AP - 1 , which allows for flexible binding to clathrin , cargo , and membrane . GGAs are also recruited to membranes by Arf1 - GTP through their GAT ( GGA and Tom1 ) domain ( Puertollano et al . , 2001b ) and sort dileucine ( DxxLL ) ( different than DxxxLL ) containing cargo such as cation dependent or independent mannose 6 - phosphate receptors ( MPRs ) through their VHS ( Vps27 , Hrs , STAM ) domain ( Puertollano et al . , 2001a ) . GGAs may also have an addition role in sorting mono - ubiquitinated cargo at the TGN and early endosome ( Puertollano and Bonifacino , 2004 ; Scott et al . , 2004 ) . Clathrin may also be involved in sorting mono - ubiquitinated cargo during MVB formation . Bilayered clathrin coats have been identified on the surface of early endosomes and are recruited by Hrs ( hepatocyte growth factor - regulated substrate ) , through its C - terminal clathrin box motif ( Raiborg et al . , 2001 ) . Hrs is the animal homologue of yeast Vps27p , which also binds clathrin and is important for establishing the ESCRT - I complex during MVB formation in yeast ( Katzmann et al . , 2003 ) . Clathrin may be important for retention of cargo and sorting into intraluminal vesicles of MVBs , instead of its traditional role in outward vesicle budding ( Raiborg et al . , 2003 ) . Further supporting a role for clathrin in MVB formation is that the epsinR yeast homologues , Ent3 / 5p , associate with clathrin and Vps27p and are required for proper sorting into MVBs ( Eugster et al . , 2004 ; Friant et al . , 2003 ) . 15 Figure 1 . 4 . Domains of Clathrin Light Chains . The domains of clathrin LCa and LCb ( from bovine ) are compared to yeast LC . 16 Functions of the Clathrin Light Chain The overall function of clathrin in RME and TGN / endosomal sorting is well understood ; however , the role that the clathrin LC plays in these processes is still uncertain . Clathrin LCs bind to the proximal and trimerization domains of HC and are present on the cytosolic face of clathrin lattices ( Figure 1 . 3 ) ( Fotin et al . , 2004b ) . Two different isoforms of light chain exist in animal cells ( LCa and LCb ) and there are alternative splice forms in neuronal tissue ( Wong et al . , 1990 ) , while invertebrates all have one LC ( Figure 1 . 4 ) . In vitro studies of clathrin LCs have suggested a regulatory role , as their presence can prevent spontaneous assembly of HC proximal hubs at physiological pH ( Ungewickell and Ungewickell , 1991 ) . In addition , the presence of a Ca + + binding EF - Hand and a C - terminal calmodulin - binding site suggest that local calcium concentrations may regulate LC function ( Figure 1 . 4 ) ( Nathke et al . , 1990 ; Pley et al . , 1995 ) . An additional function of LC may be to uncoat CCVs by its binding to and stimulation of Hsc70 ATPase activity ( Schmid et al . , 1984 ) , although the clathrin HC - TD binding protein auxilin acts as a cofactor for Hsc70 and is believed to contribute to the majority of CCV uncoating ( Ungewickell et al . , 1995 ) . A high resolution structure of clathrin barrels taken by electron cyromicroscopy showed LCs sit on the outside of the lattice , while their C - termini wrap inward toward the trimerization domain of clathrin vertices ( Figure 1 . 3B ) ( Fotin et al . , 2004b ) . Consistent with this structure , our lab has shown that the LC is required for trimerization of the HC , which remains the only known in vivo function ( Chu et al . , 1996 ; Huang et al . , 1997 ) . In addition , all LCs interact with the Hip1 / R family of actin - binding endocytic proteins , suggesting that LCs may have a 17 specific function during endocytosis involving the actin cytoskeleton ( Chen and Brodsky , 2005 ; Henry et al . , 2002 ; Legendre - Guillemin et al . , 2002 ; Legendre - Guillemin et al . , 2005 ) . Functions of the Actin Cytoskeleton during Endocytosis In addition to coat proteins a dynamic actin cytoskeleton is also important for endocytosis . The best evidence for the involvement of actin in endocytosis comes from work in yeast . The yeast actin cytoskeleton contains three types of filamentous actin structures ; the actin - myosin contractile ring , cables , and cortical patches , the distribution of which is polarized throughout the cell cycle ( Pruyne and Bretscher , 2000 ) . Cortical actin patches associate with endocytic proteins and are present at sites of endocytosis ( Engqvist - Goldstein and Drubin , 2003 ; Huckaba et al . , 2004 ) . In addition , mutations in many endocytic proteins result in depolarization and general instability of the actin cytoskeleton and treatment of yeast with the actin polymerization inhibitor Latrunculin A ( LAT - A ) causes a strong block in endocytosis ( Ayscough et al . , 1997 ; Engqvist - Goldstein and Drubin , 2003 ) . Evidence from mammalian systems has not been as conclusive as the yeast system , as actin polymerization is not always important for endocytosis depending on the cell type used and , in some cases , it is required at the apical surface , but not the basolateral surface ( Apodaca , 2001 ) . Nonetheless , there are multiple lines of evidence demonstrating that actin is important for phagocytosis , macropinocytosis , caveolin , and clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Kirkham and Parton , 2005 ) . In cell types where actin is involved in endocytosis , cortical actin patches appear transiently at internalizing clathrin - 18 coated pits , strikingly similar to cortical actin patches in yeast ; therefore , the actin cytoskeleton appears to play an important role in endocytosis ( Merrifield et al . , 2002 ) . Several mechanisms for actin’s function in endocytosis have been proposed ( Qualmann et al . , 2000 ) . One important function of the actin cytoskeleton may be to spatially organize the endocytic machinery . For example , AP - 2 is aligned in linear arrays between stress fibers in Hela cells suggesting that actin can mark or establish domains for endocytosis ( Bennett et al . , 2001 ) . Actin may also be needed to generate force during vesicle invagination and scission from the plasma membrane and may later help drive its movement into the cell . These proposed models are based on actin’s transient assembly during CCP internalization / scission and its requirement for these processes ( Yarar et al . , 2005 ) . Further supporting a link between endocytosis and the actin cytoskeleton has been the identification of proteins that physically interact with actin and the endocytic machinery . One example , dynamin , is a “pinchase” , which assembles into polymers that spiral around the constricted necks of membrane invaginations ( De Camilli et al . , 1995 ) . The GTPase activity of dynamin is thought to drive this constriction ultimately resulting in vesicle scission . The proline rich domain ( PRD ) of dynamin binds to a number of SH3 domain containing proteins , which can serve as a direct link between dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton . For example both mAbp1 and cortactin share C - terminal SH3 domains that bind to dynamin , and also have F - actin binding domains at their N - termini ( Cao et al . , 2003 ) . Cortactin also has an N - terminal acidic domain , which acts as an Arp2 / 3 activator ( Weaver et al . , 2001 ) . The close association of dynamin with the actin polymerization machinery suggests that actin filament assembly may play an important 19 role in vesicle scission ( Cao et al . , 2003 ; Schafer , 2004 ) . Note , the use of dynamin during vesicle scission is not an exclusive property of clathrin - mediated endocytosis , as dynamin function is required for caveolin - mediated and clathrin / caveolin independent pathways ( Kirkham and Parton , 2005 ) . Another link between actin and endocytosis is the actin binding motor protein , myosin VI , which is present at clathrin - coated pits . Myosin VI is required for the internalization step of endocytosis , possibly by deforming the membrane or by pulling CCVs away from the plasma membrane ( Buss et al . , 2001 ) . HIP1 ( Huntingtin Interacting Protein ) and the closely related HIP1R are examples of endocytic proteins that directly bind the clathrin subunits and actin . HIP1 was identified by a two - hybrid screen as a huntingtin interacting protein ( Wanker et al . , 1997 ) . This interaction is strongly reduced following polyglutamine expansion of huntingtin , possibly implicating loss of this interaction in causation of Huntington disease ( Kalchman et al . , 1997 ) . Both HIP1 and the related HIP1R interact , co - localize with markers of endocytosis , are enriched on clathrin - coated vesicles , and through their talin - like domains interact with F - actin ( Engqvist - Goldstein et al . , 2001 ; Legendre - Guillemin et al . , 2002 ) . EM immunogold labeling of Hip1R shows localization at the surface of clathrin - coated vesicles , clathrin - coated pits , actin filaments , and at the junction of clathrin - coated pits and actin filaments , suggesting it may help to coordinate the interactions between actin and clathrin lattices ( Engqvist - Goldstein et al . , 2001 ) . The ability of HIP1 / R to bind directly to actin and clathrin strongly supports a role for actin in endocytosis . 20 Dynamics of the Endocytic Pathway in Higher and Lower Eukaryotes Our previous understanding of CCP formation and maturation during endocytosis relied heavily on static images taken by electron and fluorescence microscopy . Although these images have provided excellent resolution of CCPs and the accessory proteins contained within , the dynamic nature of these structures was not appreciated . Recent time - lapse video microscopy of endocytic events in yeast and animal cells has revolutionized our understanding of this highly coordinated and temporal process . Studies using components of the endocytic machinery tagged with green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) derivatives have allowed examination of the dynamics of clathrin - mediated endocytosis in vivo , including measurements of the timing of endocytic events and the order of machinery and cargo recruitment at endocytic sites ( Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ; Merrifield et al . , 2002 ; Rappoport et al . , 2004 ; Yarar et al . , 2005 ) . Dynamics of Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis in Animal Cells In animal cells at least two populations of clathrin - coated structures ( CCS ) have been identified . Static CCSs , also known as non - terminal CCSs , remain immobile at the cell surface , although they are active and do repeatedly release cargo - containing CCVs ( Merrifield et al . , 2005 ) . These static CCSs may correspond to the large flat clathrin lattices observed by EM in fibroblasts , where occasional CCVs are observed budding off from a large lattice at the plasma membrane ( Heuser and Anderson , 1989 ) . Non - terminal CCSs can also give rise to the second type of clathrin - coated structure , terminal CCSs , in which the entire CCSs is released from the cell surface during an endocytic event . Terminal CCSs also arise de novo , at sites previously unoccupied and recruit dynamin 21 and AP - 2 in parallel with clathrin ( Merrifield et al . , 2002 ) . Recruitment or capture of cargo may be important for stabilizing early de novo pits so that they continue to grow and complete coated vesicle formation ( Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ) . Also , the size of the cargo influences the size of the CCV and length of time it takes to form . Coated pits that do not stabilize undergo collapse and uncoat without budding . Finally , vesicle release is accompanied by a burst of dynamin recruitment , followed by transient actin polymerization involving Arp2 / 3 complex and its activators cortactin and N - WASP , which presumably act together to propel vesicles into the cell ( Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ; Merrifield et al . , 2002 ; Merrifield et al . , 2004 ) . The use of TIRF ( total internal reflection fluorescence ) microscopy , which allows selective viewing of a focal field about 100 nm deep at the interface of the plasma membrane and coverslip , was an important tool which demonstrated that CCSs internalize and move into the cell . Further work with pH sensitive fluorescent cargo found that vesicle scission occurs after the CCSs has moved about 70 nm into the cell , just after the actin machinery is recruited ( Merrifield et al . , 2005 ) . These time - lapse studies have provided a basic understanding of the kinetics of CCV internalization in animal cells . However , the yeast model system has proven the most powerful tool to uncover the function and temporal recruitment of proteins in the endocytic pathway . Dynamics of Endocytosis in Budding Yeast In Saccharomyces cerevisiae the actin cytoskeleton plays a central role in endocytosis . Many factors required for proper cortical actin organization are also 22 Table 1 . Yeast Endocytic Proteins and their Proposed Functions . Yeast Protein Homologue Proposed Functions Abp1p mAbp1p Binds actin , Arp2 / 3 activator Act1p actin Assembles into F - actin AP - 2 complex AP - 2 complex Endocytic adaptor Arp2 / 3 complex Arp2 / 3 complex Nucleates actin assembly Aux1p / Swa1p Auxilin / GAK Uncoats CCVs Bbc1p SH3 domain Inhibits Arp2 / 3 activation Chc1p Clathrin heavy chain Structural component of clathrin lattice Clc1p Clathrin light chain Regulates clathrin assembly Ede1p Eps15 Binds ubiquitin / epsins End3p EH domain Component of Pan1p complex Ent1 / 2p Epsins Putative adaptors / bind ubiquitin Las17p WASP Arp2 / 3 activator Myo3 / 5p Myosin I Arp2 / 3 activators Pan1p EH domain Pan1p complex / activates Arp2 / 3 Prk1p / Ark1p / Akl1p GAK / AAK1 Phosphorylates Pan1p complex Rsp5p Nedd4 E3 ubiquitin ligase Rvs161 / 167p Amphiphysins Vesicle scission Sac6p Fimbrin Actin bundling Scd5p LxxTxTG motifs Targeting subunit for PP1 , counters Ark1p / Prk1p Sjl1 / Sjl2 / Sjl3 Synaptojanin Inositol polyphosphate - 5 phosphatases Sla1p SH3 domains Adaptor for NPFX ( 1 , 2 ) D motif , Pan1p complex Sla2p / End4p Hip1 / R Binds clathrin / actin Vrp1p WIP Binds to actin / WASP Yap1801 / 2p AP180 / CALM Putative adaptor 23 important for endocytosis and are homologues of proteins involved in clathrin - mediated uptake in other organisms ( Engqvist - Goldstein and Drubin , 2003 ) . These include the epsins Ent1p and Ent2p , the AP180 / CALM homologues Yap1801 / 2p , the EH domain proteins End3p and Eps15 homologue Ede1p , amphiphysins / endophilin Rvs161p and Rvs167p , the intersectin - like Pan1p - Sla1p complex , the Hip1 / R homologue Sla2p , the WASP like Las17p , the type 1 myosins Myo3 / 5p , and the actin - regulating kinases Ark1p and Prk1p homologues of animal AAK1 and GAK ( Table 1 ) ( Engqvist - Goldstein and Drubin , 2003 ) . In addition , many of these proteins associate transiently with cortical actin patches at sites of endocytosis ( Huckaba et al . , 2004 ; Jonsdottir and Li , 2004 ; Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ) . There are several different assays used to measure endocytosis in yeast . Typically , fluid - phase endocytosis is detected by lucifer yellow uptake , while receptor - mediated endocytosis is measured by radio - labeled alpha factor internalization . However , both types of endocytosis appear to use a similar set of proteins ; therefore , it is not clear whether two separate pathways exist , or all cargo are internalized through one common pathway in yeast ( Engqvist - Goldstein and Drubin , 2003 ) . Receptor - mediated endocytosis can be further divided into ubiquitin or NPFX ( 1 , 2 ) D dependent internalization ( Engqvist - Goldstein and Drubin , 2003 ) . Ubiquitin - mediated endocytosis is important for the down - regulation of plasma membrane permeases and the commonly studied GPCR , Ste2p . In the case of Ste2p , binding of alpha factor to the receptor allows its cytosolic tail to become phosphorylated . Presumably this occurs by the kinases Yck1 / 2p ( Feng and Davis , 2000 ) . Once phosphorylated , Ste2p can then be mono - ubiquitinated by the E3 ubiquitin ligase Rsp5p ( Dunn and Hicke , 2001 ) . Mono - ubiquitinated Ste2p could then be 24 recognized by the UIMs of the yeast epsins Ent1 / 2p or the UBA ( ubiquitin - associated ) domain of Ede1p to allow internalization ( Aguilar et al . , 2003 ) . Redundant with the mono - ubiquitination dependent sorting is NPFX ( 1 , 2 ) D mediated internalization ( Tan et al . , 1996 ) . Sequences similar to NPFX ( 1 , 2 ) D in Ste2p and Ste3p are recognized for internalization by their putative adaptor Sla1p ( Howard et al . , 2002 ) . Thus there are at least two different sorting signals important for receptor - mediated endocytosis in yeast . Real time microscopy of fluorescently labeled endocytic / cortical patch proteins has provided novel insight into the dynamics of these factors during endocytosis in yeast ( Huckaba et al . , 2004 ; Jonsdottir and Li , 2004 ; Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ) . Initially the early endocytic factors Sla1p , Sla2p , Pan1p , and Las17p are recruited to cortical sites during the immobile phase ( Figure 1 . 5 ) . This is later followed by the assembly of actin , Arp2 / 3 complex and Abp1p . As vesicles / patches begin their slow mobile phase and inward movement , the early patch proteins are released and the actin / Abp1 patch moves rapidly away from the cortex ( Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ) . Prior to inward patch mobility , the type I myosins , Myo3p and Myo5p , and Rvs161 / 167p are recruited and are hypothesized to function in vesicle scission ( Jonsdottir and Li , 2004 ) . Finally , internalized vesicles labeled with the lipophilic dye FM4 - 64 and Abp1p have been observed moving from the bud cortex into the mother cell along actin cables ( Huckaba et al . , 2004 ) . Further analysis of cortical patch dynamics in 60 different endocytic mutants allowed the characterization of four separate endocytic modules during the sequential stages of yeast endocytosis ( Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ) . These modules were assigned based on similar or cooperative functions of proteins , rather than their actual time of recruitment and disappearance from the cortex . 25 Figure 1 . 5 . Dynamics of Yeast Endocytosis . The four endocytic modules are labeled by different colored boxes . During the immobile phase , members of the coat module ( red ) are recruited to the plasma membrane . Coinciding with the recruitment of the actin module ( brown ) , the slow mobile phase begins . Finally the fast mobile phase begins and the coat module is released . The WASP / Myo ( green ) and Amphiphysin module ( purple ) remain at the plasma membrane during vesicle internalization . The duration of each phase is shown in seconds . 26 The Coat Module The first module to arrive at sites of endocytosis consists of the early stage factors making up the endocytic coat ( Figure 1 . 5 , shown in the red box . Note clathrin is also included in this module based on the work presented in later chapters ) . These proteins are the first to arrive at the plasma membrane and all share 200 nm of inward movement from the cortex before their disassembly . The coat module consists of Sla1p , Sla2p , Pan1p , and End3p ( Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ) . Although unconfirmed , the adaptors Ent1 / 2p and Yap1801 / 2p are likely recruited early on , based on their lipid binding properties and interactions with other members of this coat module ( Newpher et al . , 2005 ) . The similar cortical lifetimes of these proteins are consistent with their known physical interactions . For example , the EH domain containing Pan1p is an essential protein which may have a critical scaffolding function via its interactions with Ent1 / 2p , Ap1801 / 2p , Sla1p , and End3p ( Aguilar et al . , 2003 ; Tang et al . , 2000 ; Wendland and Emr , 1998 ) . The association of these adaptors / factors is important for endocytic progression and is regulated by phosphorylation . This occurs by the ARK family of kinases ( Watson et al . , 2001 ; Zeng et al . , 2001 ) , whose homologues regulate clathrin - mediated endocytosis in animal cells . The three ARK family kinases in yeast ( Akl1p , Ark1p and Prk1p ) are important for endocytosis and actin organization ( Cope et al . , 1999 ; Zeng and Cai , 1999 ) . It has not been determined when these kinases are active or recruited during the sequential stages of endocytosis , although it is thought that following vesicle internalization , phosphorylation of the Pan1p complex members would help drive dissociation of the coat ( Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ; Zeng et al . , 2001 ) . Before these factors could be reused for another round of endocytosis , they must be dephosphorylated , which 27 could occur by protein phosphatase 1 and its targeting subunit Scd5p ( Chang et al . , 2002 ) . Aside from the coat module proteins similar cortical lifetimes and interactions with each other , their mutant phenotypes are also similar . Excluding the epsins and AP180s , mutants of any of the coat module members strongly reduces RME and fluid - phase endocytosis , and severely delays the progression of early stage patches ( Engqvist - Goldstein and Drubin , 2003 ; Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ; Newpher et al . , 2005 ) . The Actin Module As the early immobile coat module matures and progresses into the slow mobile phase , the late actin - based endocytic machinery is recruited , which drives the vesicle into the cell ( Figure 1 . 5 , shown in the brown box ) . The proteins of the actin module , which consist of Sac6 , Abp1p , Arp2 / 3p and actin , presumably all work to together to provide force for actin - based internalization . Sac6p is a homologue of the actin bundling fimbrin and in its absence endocytic complexes fail to invaginate , suggesting that actin bundling is important to provide integrity to the filaments within the actin patch ( Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ) . Electron micrographs of cortical actin patches in yeast , found that they consist of a branched network of actin filaments ( Rodal et al . , 2005 ) , which require the function of Sac6p for their proper assembly ( Young et al . , 2004 ) . Finally , the internalization of vesicles is believed to occur by Arp2 / 3 mediated actin nucleation , as mutants of the Arp2 / 3p complex have elongated patch lifetimes at all stages of endocytosis , indicative of an internalization defect ( Martin et al . , 2005 ) . 28 The WASP / Myo and Amphiphysin Modules During the actin module recruitment , the WASP / Myo module consisting of Myo3 / 5p , Bbc1p and Las17p act to drive and regulate Arp2 / 3p mediated actin polymerization ( Figure 1 . 5 , shown in the green box ) . Previous in vitro data demonstrated that Myo3 / 5p and Las17p function to activate Arp2 / 3 mediated actin polymerization ( Evangelista et al . , 2000 ; Winter et al . , 1999 ) , while Bbc1p and Sla1p function together to inhibit Las17p activation of Arp2 / 3 ( Rodal et al . , 2003 ) . Unlike the actin module , which moves into the cell along with the vesicle , the WASP / Myo module remains fixed at the membrane . This is to be expected , as actin polymerization occurs at the plasma membrane were new monomers are added to the barbed ends of actin filaments ( Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ) . Las17p is present at the cortex for about 40 s , while Myo5p and Bbc1p are only present for about 13 s during actin recruitment . Thus it is possible that theses Arp2 / 3p activators function at different time points during internalization ( Jonsdottir and Li , 2004 ; Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ) . Las17p may be needed to prime the initial actin polymerization events , which could be tightly regulated by Bbc1p , and later Myo3 / 5p may be important for actin polymerization as the vesicle is internalized and undergoes scission . It should be noted that although not assigned to this module , Pan1p also binds to and activates Arp2 / 3 to promote actin polymerization ( Duncan et al . , 2001 ) . Similar to the WASP / Myo module , the amphiphysin module consisting of Rvs161 / 167p , is recruited during the late stage of endocytosis and does not undergo the long - range movement of the actin module ( Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ) ( Figure 1 . 5 , shown in the purple box ) . In deletions of the amphiphysins , endocytic vesicles are partially defective in vesicle release and sometimes snap back to the cortex , strongly implicating 29 them as factors involved in vesicle scission . Rvs167p has a C - terminal SH3 domain , which in the animal homologues serves to recruit the GTPase dynamin . However , the yeast dynamin homologue , Vps1p , is involved in TGN sorting and has not been shown to function in the internalization step of endocytosis ( Nothwehr et al . , 1995 ) . Finally , the synaptojanin homologue , Sjl2p , is recruited by Abp1p during vesicle formation ( Stefan et al . , 2005 ) , and may function in vesicle uncoating by dephosphorylating PdtIns ( 4 , 5 ) 2 . In addition , Sjl2p plays a role during or before vesicle invagination , as sjl2 (cid:1) yeast develop large abnormal membrane invaginations ( Stefan et al . , 2005 ) . Clathrin Functions in Yeast Though details of the dynamics of endocytosis are emerging from yeast and animal studies , in yeast the role of clathrin in endocytosis remains unclear . As with many proteins involved in vesicular transport , clathrin HC and LC are conserved among yeast and mammals . In yeast , clathrin is encoded by the CHC1 ( HC ) and CLC1 ( LC ) genes . Deletion of the clathrin subunits ( chc1 (cid:1) or clc1 (cid:1) ) result in slowed temperature sensitive growth , abnormal morphology and genetic instability ( Lemmon and Jones , 1987 ; Silveira et al . , 1990 ) . In addition , clathrin is important for TGN sorting , as mutants cause a delay in invertase secretion ( Payne et al . , 1988 ) , missort carboxy peptidase Y ( CPY ) ( Seeger and Payne , 1992a ) , and the alpha factor protease , Kex2p . Supporting a role for clathrin in endocytosis are the partial defects in RME and cortical actin organization shown by clathrin mutants ( Henry et al . , 2002 ; Huang et al . , 1997 ; Tan et al . , 1993 ) . In addition , yeast clathrin interacts directly with a number of cortical patch components such as 30 Yap1801 / 2p , the epsins Ent1 / 2p , and the actin binding protein Sla2p ( Henry et al . , 2002 ; Wendland and Emr , 1998 ; Wendland et al . , 1999 ) . Despite many lines of evidence supporting an endocytic role for clathrin , plasma membrane - associated clathrin has never been observed in yeast ( Baggett and Wendland , 2001 ) and deletion of either the AP180s or the yeast AP - 2 complex subunits lack endocytic defects ( Huang et al . , 1999 ) . Unlike animal cells , yeast AP - 2 does not bind clathrin and yeast plasma membrane cargo apparently lack tyrosine and di - leucine based sorting signals ( Yeung et al . , 1999 ) . Therefore , the role that clathrin plays in yeast endocytosis has remained controversial . Rationale and Research Aims It is clear that many yeast endocytic proteins have similar roles as their animal homologues involved in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Kinetic studies of the endocytic pathway in yeast and animal cells are also beginning to demonstrate surprising similarities . Most obvious is the involvement of the actin machinery during vesicle internalization . Despite all of the accomplishments in recent years characterizing the yeast endocytic pathway , the lack of evidence implicating clathrin at the plasma membrane has hindered our understanding of this process . The work presented in the following chapters characterizes the dynamics of clathrin at the yeast plasma membrane and its functions during endocytosis . Aim I : Characterize the in vivo dynamics of clathrin and its recruitment to the plasma membrane in yeast . In Chapter two , which was previously published ( Newpher et al . , 31 2005 ) , the role of clathrin in budding yeast is examined by use of fluorescent fusions of the clathrin subunits . Consistent with the function of clathrin in TGN sorting , GFP - LC was found in internal structures labeled by markers of the TGN and endosomes . An additional population of clathrin was also found at the cell cortex , which accumulated under conditions that block endocytosis . Using total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy ( TIRFM ) , which selectively allows visualization of proteins near the plasma membrane , the lifetime of cortical clathrin was measured . Similar to other early endocytic patch proteins , the disassembly of clathrin at the cortex coincided with recruitment of cortical actin . Finally these studies show that clathrin is recruited to the cortex by the yeast epsins and AP180s . Aim II . Determine the role of clathrin during the yeast endocytic pathway . Besides the epsins and AP180s , yeast clathrin also interacts with the Hip1 / R related protein Sla2p at the cortex . The studies in Chapter 3 map the domain on Sla2p that binds clathrin LC , and shows that both proteins are early endocytic factors , although clathrin is recruited to the membrane prior to Sla2p and Sla1p . The importance of clathrin in yeast endocytosis was then examined by measuring the patch lifetimes of early ( Sla2p and Sla1p ) and late ( Abp1p ) endocytic factors in clathrin mutants . In the absence of either LC or HC , the size and lifetime of Sla2p patches increases , suggesting that clathrin is important for organizing early endocytic patches and limiting their size to allow patch progression . Clathrin mutants also show delayed turnover of Abp1p / actin patches , which may occur due to improper organization of the actin polymerization machinery . Interestingly , the other early patch marker protein , Sla1p , is not present in the immobile cortical patches of 32 clathrin mutants , but instead shows an increased rate of turnover and reduced cortical recruitment . Further analysis in WT cells found that Sla1p is recruited to the cortex after Sla2p , thus demonstrating an additional step during the early stage of endocytosis . Finally these studies show that a mutant of Sla2p , which does not bind clathrin LC , is defective in the early and late stages of endocytosis , suggesting that clathrin LC and Sla2p function together for endocytic progression . Aim III : Characterize the domains of clathrin light chain and their importance for endocytosis and TGN sorting . In vitro studies of the clathrin light chain have implicated it as a regulatory subunit which controls of the assembly of clathrin lattices . However its only known role in vivo is for the trimerization of clathrin HCs . The studies in Chapter 4 demonstrate an additional role for clathrin LC as a regulator of Sla2p patch turnover during endocytosis . In addition , these data show that the N - terminus of clathrin LC is not required for regulating clathrin HC lattice assembly in vivo , as was previously shown by in vitro studies . Taken together these studies will demonstrate the existence of a clathrin - based endocytic pathway in yeast . Similar to animal cells , yeast clathrin is recruited to the cortex by adaptors and its turnover from the cortex requires the actin - based endocytic machinery . The function of clathrin is likely to organize early endocytic patches and properly assemble the actin polymerization machinery , which ultimately is important for endocytic patch progression . Finally , I demonstrate a novel endocytic function for the clathrin light chain , as a regulator of Sla2p patch lifetime , which helps promote vesicle internalization 33 Chapter 2 In Vivo Dynamics of Clathrin and Adaptor - Dependent Recruitment to the Actin - Based Endocytic Machinery in Yeast Introduction Clathrin is a major vesicle coat protein involved in receptor - mediated endocytosis ( RME ) ( Brodsky et al . , 2001 ) . Sorting into clathrin - coated pits ( CCP ) and coated vesicle ( CCV ) formation are mediated through adaptors , which directly bind cargo or bridge interactions of clathrin to other endocytic factors and inositol phospholipid - containing membrane . The globular N - terminal domain ( TD ) of clathrin heavy chain ( HC ) is important for binding to membrane - associated adaptors , including AP - 2 , AP180 / CALM , amphiphysin , epsin , Hip1 , ARH , and Dab2 ( Traub , 2003 ) . Also , actin and actin - associated factors play a role in the clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Engqvist - Goldstein and Drubin , 2003 ) . Recent studies in animal cells using components of the endocytic machinery tagged with green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) derivatives have allowed examination of the dynamics of clathrin - mediated endocytosis in vivo , including measurements of the timing of endocytic events and the order of machinery and cargo recruitment at endocytic sites ( Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ; Merrifield et al . , 2002 ; Rappoport et al . , 2004 ; Yarar et al . , 2005 ) . Newly forming clathrin - coated pits accumulate dynamin and AP - 2 in parallel with clathrin . Recruitment or capture of cargo may be important for stabilizing early pits so that they continue to grow and complete coated vesicle formation ( Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ) . Also , the size of the cargo influences the size and length of time it takes to form a CCV . 34 Coated pits that do not stabilize undergo collapse and uncoat without budding . Finally , vesicle release is accompanied by a burst of dynamin recruitment , followed by transient actin polymerization which is thought to propel vesicles away from the surface ( Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ; Merrifield et al . , 2002 ) . Additionally , actin is implicated at other stages of endocytosis , including organization of sites of coated pit formation , coated pit assembly , constriction and / or scission of CCV ( Bennett et al . , 2001 ; Engqvist - Goldstein et al . , 2004 ; Gaidarov et al . , 1999 ; Yarar et al . , 2005 ) . In Saccharomyces cerevisiae a dynamic actin cytoskeleton plays a central role in endocytosis ( Engqvist - Goldstein and Drubin , 2003 ) . Treatment of yeast with actin polymerization inhibitors dramatically blocks internalization ( Ayscough , 2000 ; Lappalainen and Drubin , 1997 ) . In addition , many factors required for proper cortical actin organization are also important for endocytosis and are homologues of proteins involved in clathrin - mediated uptake in other organisms ( Engqvist - Goldstein and Drubin , 2003 ) . These include the epsins Ent1p and Ent2p , the EH domain proteins End3p and Pan1p , amphiphysins Rvs161p and Rvs167p , the SH3 domain protein Sla1p , the Hip1 / R homologue Sla2p , and kinases such as Ypk1 / 2 , related to PKB and SGK , and actin - regulating kinases Ark1 and Prk1 homologues of animal AAK1 and GAK ( Engqvist - Goldstein and Drubin , 2003 ) . Many of these proteins associate transiently with cortical actin patches , which are believed to form at sites of endocytosis ( Engqvist - Goldstein and Drubin , 2003 ; Huckaba et al . , 2004 ; Jonsdottir and Li , 2004 ; Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ) . Recent real time microscopy of fluorescently labeled endocytic / cortical patch proteins has provided novel insight into the dynamics of these factors during endocytosis in yeast ( Huckaba et al . , 2004 ; Jonsdottir and Li , 2004 ; Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ) . Initially 35 Sla1p , Sla2p , Pan1p , and Las17p are recruited to cortical sites , which is later followed by the assembly of actin , Arp2 / 3 complexes and Abp1 . As vesicles / patches appear to pinch off , the early patch proteins are released and actin / Abp1 patches move rapidly away from the cortex ( Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ) . This late event is accompanied by recruitment of type I myosins , Myo3p and Myo5p , which are hypothesized to function in vesicle fission ( Jonsdottir and Li , 2004 ) . Finally , internalized vesicles labeled with the lipophilic dye FM 4 - 64 and containing Abp1p have been observed moving from the bud cortex into the mother cell along actin cables ( Huckaba et al . , 2004 ) . Though details of the dynamics of endocytosis are emerging from yeast and animal studies , in yeast the role of clathrin in endocytosis remains unclear . Previous work has shown that yeast clathrin plays a role in RME , but clathrin mutations only cause partial defects ( Huang et al . , 1997 ; Tan et al . , 1993 ) . These mutations also affect cortical actin organization , and clathrin interacts directly with a number of cortical patch components ( Gourlay et al . , 2003 ; Henry et al . , 2002 ; Rodal et al . , 2005 ; Tan et al . , 1993 ; Wendland and Emr , 1998 ; Wendland et al . , 1999 ) ; however , plasma membrane - associated clathrin has never been seen in yeast cells ( Mulholland et al . , 1999 ; Pishvaee et al . , 2000 ; Rodal et al . , 2005 ) . In this study we report the existence of cortical clathrin in yeast and investigate the in vivo dynamics of its association with cortical actin patches , providing the first visual evidence for clathrin associated with endocytic structures in yeast . 36 Methods and Materials Strains used in this study are listed in Table 2 . Cells were grown at 30 ° C except where indicated . Plasmids pKH1 ( CLC1 , CEN , TRP1 ) was made by ligating a Not1 / EcoR1 CLC1 insert from pJT1 ( Huang et al . , 1997 ) into Not1 / EcoR1 cut pRS314 ( Sikorski and Hieter , 1989 ) . The plasmids with CFP - CLC1 ( pTMN34 ) or GFP - CLC1 ( pTMN17 ) under the control of the CLC1 promoter were constructed in two steps . First an Nco1 site was introduced into pKH1 ( CLC1 , CEN , TRP1 ) just downstream of the CLC1 ATG . His3MX6 with flanking Nco1 sites and CLC1 coding sequence to allow integration following the ATG was PCR amplified from pFA6a - His3MX6 ( Longtine et al . , 1998 ) and gap repaired into pKH1 in yeast by selection on C - HIS plates . Next , pKH1 - His3MX6 was Nco1 digested and self ligated to remove the His3MX6 cassette generating pTMN42 . Second , the GFP or CFP coding sequences with flanking CLC1 homology were PCR amplified from pFA6a - GFP ( S65T ) - TRP1 ( Longtine et al . , 1998 ) or pDH3 ( CFP , kanMX6 ) obtained from the Yeast Resource Center ( YRC ) ( http : / / depts . washington . edu / ~ yeastrc / fm _ home1 . htm ) and gap repaired into pTMN42 linearized at the Nco1 site to generate pTMN17 ( GFP - CLC1 , CEN , TRP1 ) and pTMN34 ( CFP - CLC1 , CEN , TRP1 ) . pTMN37 ( GFP - CLC1 , CEN , URA3 ) was generated by linearizing pTMN17 with Sca1 and gap repairing with a URA3 fragment from Pvu1 cut pRS316 ( Sikorski and Hieter , 1989 ) . pGFP - YAP1801 , pGFP - YAP1802 ( Wendland and Emr , 1998 ) , pBW54 ( ENT1 - GFP ) , pBW56 ( ENT2 - GFP ) ( Watson et al . , 2001 ) , pYAP1801 . 426 , pYAP1802 . 426 , pENT1 . 426 and pENT2 . 426 were 37 a generous gift from Beverly Wendland . pRS423 - STE2 - GFP was from Kenneth Blumer . All plasmids generated from PCR fragments were verified by sequencing . Integration Constructs To generate null alleles the methods and marker cassettes of ( Longtine et al . , 1998 ) were used . For CLC1 replaced by KanMX6 the PCR product was amplified using pFA6a - kanMX6 as a template and transformed into SL4755 . To generate cells expressing Abp1 with RFP at the C - terminus , a PCR product was amplified using pFA6a - mRFP : KanMX6 ( from Roger Tsien / Erin O’Shea ) as a template and oligonucleotides with 5’ ends homologous to the region of ABP1 flanking the stop codon . The PCR product was transformed into SL4655 to generate SL5090 . Microscopy Fluorescent fusion proteins were visualized in live cells from cultures grown overnight to mid - log phase in synthetic media . All fusions complemented function well when expressed as the sole source of protein . LAT - A experiments were performed by incubating cells from early - log phase cultures in 250 (cid:1) M LAT - A dissolved in DMSO for 20 min . In Figures 2 . 2 , 2 . 3 & 2 . 6 , cortical clathrin accumulation was classified as “strong” when the cortex showed intense patch or rim localization or was present over the whole surface , “weak” when smaller cortical patches were visible and “none” in the absence or near absence of clathrin accumulation . From ~ 50 to 200 cells were counted for each strain and condition . Data are from 2 - 4 experiments . 38 For co - localization of F - actin and GFP - LC , cells were treated as in Henry et al . ( 2002 ) , except that fixation was reduced to 30 min and cells were stained with Alexa 594 - Phalloidin ( Molecular Probes ) . For co - localization of Ste2p - GFP and HC - RFP , 250 (cid:1) l of early log phase cells were incubated for 2 min with (cid:1) - factor ( 5 (cid:1) g / ml ) , then pelleted and resuspended in 25 (cid:1) l of medium containing 250 (cid:1) M LAT - A . Cells were viewed after 30 min . Wide field fluorescence microscopy was performed using an Olympus fluorescence BX61 microscope equipped with Nomarski differential interference contrast ( DIC ) optics , a Uplan Apo 100x objective ( NA 1 . 35 ) , a Roper CoolSnap HQ camera , and Sutter Lambda 10 - 2 excitation and emission filter wheels , and a 175 watt Xenon remote source with liquid light guide . Images were acquired using SlideBook TM 4 . 01 ( Intelligent Imaging Innovations ) and prepared with Adobe (cid:2) Photoshop (cid:2) 7 . Kymographs were generated from 5 (cid:1) m single pixel lines taken during two - minute movies . FLIP ( Fluorescence Loss in Photobleaching ) was performed at the University of Miami Analytical Imaging Core on a Zeiss Confocal LSM 510 microscope equipped with a 100x objective ( NA 1 . 4 ) , using LSM 510 acquisition and image analysis software . Regions of interest were photobleached repeatedly every 15 s with 5 iterations using the 458 , 488 , and 514 nm lasers to 100 % . Images were captured every 6 s during a 560 s time course . Mean intensity values from cortical regions in bleached and unbleached cells were corrected for background intensity . The corrected fluorescence at each time point after bleaching was divided by the prebleach intensity to give the percent initial fluorescence . Average half - lives of fluorescence were calculated by plotting data from 39 nine separate experiments on an exponential decay curve generated by Graph Pad Prism v4 . 0 statistical software . For Total Internal Reflection Fluorescence Microscopy ( TIRFM ) a 5 ul drop of culture was spotted onto a poly - L - lysine - coated LabTek II chambered coverglass system ( Nunc ) and sealed using a coverslip and vacuum silicone grease . TIRFM was performed using an Olympus IX - 81 inverted microscope with a 60X / 1 . 45NA Plan - Apo objective and a 1 . 6X Optivar magnifier . Samples were illuminated using a 488nm argon krypton and a 543nm helium neon laser line coupled to the microscope using a single mode fiber . Images were acquired using a 3 - color CCD camera ( Hamamatsu , Model C7780 ) sequentially shuttering Abp1 - RFP and then GFP - LC each with 500 ms exposures . Data were collected and analyzed with Slidebook 4 . 01 . The critical angle for total internal fluorescence was calculated to be 65 . 4 ° , given an interface between glass ( index of refraction of 1 . 518 ) and cytosol ( index of refraction of 1 . 38 ) . We determined that the maximum possible angle of incidence for the lasers is 73 ° . We estimate the angle was midway between these two values ( i . e . 68 ° - 71 ° ) , so the penetration depth of the evanescent field was 100 - 150 nm . 40 Table 2 . Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains Strain Genotype Source a BWY1989 MAT a leu2 - 3 ura3 - 52 his3 - (cid:1) 200 trp1 - 901 lys2 - 801 suc2 - (cid:1) 9 ent1 : : LEU2 5 ent1 (cid:1) CBM : : HIS3 ent2 : : HIS3 yap1801 : : HIS3 yap1802 : : LEU2 SL4655 MAT (cid:1) leu2 - 3 , 112 ura3 - 52 trp1 his3(cid:31)200 clc1 (cid:1) : : HIS3 pTMN17 [ CEN , TRP1 , GFP - CLC1 ] SL4776 MAT (cid:1) leu2 ura3 his3 trp1 pTMN17 [ CEN , TRP1 , GFP - CLC1 ] SL4778 MAT (cid:1) leu2 ura3 his3 trp1 sla2 (cid:1) : : LEU2 clc1(cid:31) : : KanMX6 pTMN17 4 SL4779 MAT a leu2 ura3 his3 trp1 sla2 (cid:1) : : LEU2 pTMN17 4 SL4829 MAT (cid:1) leu2 ura3 his3 trp1 KEX2 - YFP clc1 (cid:1) : : KanMX6 pTMN34 [ CEN , TRP1 , CFP - CLC1 ] 1 SL4838 MAT (cid:1) leu2 ura3 - 52 his3 trp1 chc1 (cid:1) : : LEU2 clc1 (cid:1) : : HIS3 pTMN37 [ CEN , URA3 , GFP - CLC1 ] SL4862 MAT a / MAT (cid:1) leu2 / leu2 (cid:1) 0 ura3 / ura3(cid:31)0 his3 / his3(cid:31)1 trp1 / + + / lys2 (cid:1) 0 + / CHC1 - RFP : KanMX6 clc1 (cid:1) : : HIS3 / + pTMN17 3 SL4905 MATa / MAT (cid:1) leu2 - 3 , 112 / leu2 (cid:1) 0 ura3 - 52 / ura3 (cid:1) 0 his3(cid:31)200 / his3 (cid:1) 1 lys2 - 801 / lys2 (cid:1) 0 + / CHC1 - RFP : KanMX6 SLA2 - GFP : KanMX6 2 , 3 SL4906 MAT a / MAT (cid:1) leu2 - 3 , 112 / leu2 (cid:1) 0 ura3 - 52 / ura3 (cid:1) 0 his3 (cid:1) 200 / his3 (cid:1) 1 + / lys2 (cid:1) 0 3 + / SNF7 - RFP : KanMX6 clc1 (cid:2) : : HIS3 / + pTMN37 SL4934 MAT (cid:1) leu2 ura3 lys2 ABP1 - GFP : HIS3 CHC1 - RFP : KanMX6 sla2 (cid:1) : : LEU2 2 , 3 , 4 SL4939 MAT (cid:1) leu2 ura3 lys2 CHC1 - RFP : KanMX6 sla2 (cid:1) : : LEU2 3 , 4 SL4941 MAT (cid:1) leu2 - 3 , 112 ura3 - 52 his3 (cid:1) 200 lys2 - 801 ark1 (cid:1) : : HIS3 prk1 (cid:1) : : LEU2 pTMN37 2 SL4975 MAT (cid:1) leu2 ura3 trp1 his3 end3 (cid:1) : : HisMX6 pTMN17 SL5010 MAT (cid:1) leu2 ura3 lys2 rvs161 (cid:1) : : LEU2 pTMN37 SL5012 MAT (cid:1) leu2 ura3 trp1 lys2 suc2 - (cid:1) 9 pan1 - 20 pTMN17 SL5015 MAT a leu2 ura3 trp1 his3 ypk1 (cid:1) : : TRP1 pTMN37 SL5016 MAT (cid:1) leu2 ura3 trp1 his3 rvs167 (cid:1) : : TRP1 pTM37 SL5090 MAT (cid:1) leu2 ura3 - 52 trp1 his3 - (cid:1) 200 clc1 (cid:1) : : HIS3 ABP1 - mRFP : KanMX6 pTMN17 SL5091 MAT a leu2 ura3 his3 - (cid:1) 200 CHC1 - mRFP : KanMX6 pRS423 - STE2 - GFP [ 2 (cid:1) , HIS3 , STE2 - GFP ] a Strains were generated by our laboratory , except where indicated . Several strains were derived from crosses or transformations into strains from other sources . 1 , Yeast Resource Center ; 2 , David Drubin ; 3 , Erin O’Shea ; 4 , Howard Riezman . ; 5 , Beverly Wendland 41 Supplemental Movie Legends Supplemental Movie S1 . clc1 (cid:2) expressing GFP - LC ( SL4655 ) . Thirty frames ( 500 ms exposures ) were acquired during 120 s with 4 s between frames . Supplemental Movie S2 . clc1 (cid:1) expressing GFP - LC ( SL4655 ) treated with 250 (cid:1) M LAT - A for 20 min . Thirty frames ( 500 ms exposures ) were acquired during 120 s with 4 s between frames . Supplemental Movie S3 . clc1 (cid:1) sla2 (cid:1) expressing GFP - LC ( SL4778 ) . Thirty frames ( 500 ms exposures ) were acquired during 120 s with 4 s between frames . Supplemental Movie S4 . Wide - field fluorescence microscopy of a WT cell expressing GFP - LC and Abp1p - mRFP ( SL5090 ) . Thirty frames of each channel ( 500 ms exposures ) were acquired during 120 s with 4 s between frames . Blue bars point to clathrin patches where Abp1 is later recruited . Supplemental Movie S5 . TIRFM imaging of a WT cell expressing GFP - LC and Abp1p - mRFP ( SL5090 ) . Thirteen frames of each channel ( 500ms exposures ) were acquired during 65 s with 5 . 3 s between frames . Blue bars point to examples of clathrin patches where Abp1 is later recruited . 42 Results Localization of Clathrin In Vivo To better understand clathrin function and dynamics in vivo , the GFP coding region was inserted in frame upstream of the clathrin light chain ( LC ) coding sequence ( CLC1 ) and expressed under control of the CLC1 promoter . GFP - LC was dispersed throughout mother and daughter cells in an apparently non - polarized fashion consisting of patches and puncta ranging in size from ~ 200 nm ( arrow ) to ~ 600 nm in diameter ( arrowhead ) ( Figure 2 . 1A ) . Larger structures were often detected , but consisted of multiple smaller patches clustered together . The smaller 200 nm patches were seen both internally and at the cortex ( Figure 2 . 1A , inset ) . Though the diameter of yeast CCVs is 60 - 100 nm ( Lemmon et al . , 1988 ) , it is likely that some of the small spots are CCVs given the diffraction limit of the light microscope of 200 nm . Previously we showed that overexpression of LC could rescue the temperature sensitive growth defect of chc1 (cid:1) ( Huang et al . , 1997 ) , which suggested that LC might have HC independent function ( s ) . However , complete co - localization between LC and HC was observed when GFP - LC and HC tagged with mRFP ( Huh et al . , 2003 ) were co - expressed in cells ( Figure 2 . 1B ) . In addition , GFP - LC was completely delocalized and diffuse in a strain lacking CHC1 ( Figure 2 . 1A ) , showing Chc1p is required for the observed patch - like localization of LC . Thus , no significant LC exists separate from the HC or vice versa in normal cells , even though genetic data suggested LC might have a HC - independent function ( Huang et al . , 1997 ) . Importantly , since fluorescent LC and HC completely overlap , either reporter can be used for clathrin localization analysis . 43 The large internal clathrin structures appear similar to those of other trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) / early endosomal ( EE ) markers in yeast , such as Kex2p , DPAP - A , and Sft2p ( Lewis et al . , 2000 ; Redding et al . , 1991 ; Wooding and Pelham , 1998 ) . Because clathrin is important for TGN sorting and retention ( Seeger and Payne , 1992a ; Seeger and Payne , 1992b ) , we determined whether LC co - localizes with Kex2p , a pro - alpha factor processing enzyme that cycles between the TGN and endosomes ( Brickner and Fuller , 1997 ; Lewis et al . , 2000 ) . In a strain expressing Kex2p - YFP and CFP - LC as the sole source of each protein , 62 % of clathrin patches overlapped with Kex2p , while 78 % of Kex2 patches overlapped with LC ( n = 250 ) ( Figure 2 . 1C ) . However , the overlapping regions did not coincide perfectly , with clathrin usually appearing at the edge of the Kex2p structures . It was possible that the imperfect co - localization of Kex2p - YFP and CFP - LC resulted from TGN / EE movement in the live cells between exposures . However , the superimposition of HC - mRFP and GFP - LC patches using similar exposures ( Figure 2 . 1B ) argues against this , and suggests that these are regions where CCV are budding from the TGN / EE . The patches and puncta of clathrin that did not co - localize with Kex2p were detected at the interior of the cell and at the cortex ( Figure 2 . 1C ) . To determine whether the internal Kex2p - independent fluorescence is associated with the late endosome ( LE ) / prevacuole compartment ( PVC ) , we co - localized GFP - LC with the LE / PVC marker , Snf7p - mRFP ( Babst et al . , 2002 ; Huh et al . , 2003 ) . In general LC patches were separate and distinct from the Snf7p - mRFP , although 38 % of cells ( n = 42 ) had at least one patch containing both proteins ( Figure 2 . 1D ) . Thus clathrin may mediate some 44 Figure 2 . 1 . Clathrin Localization in WT and chc1 (cid:1) Cells . ( A ) Localization of GFP - LC in clc1 (cid:2) and chc1 (cid:1) . Box is magnified 2 . 5 times . SL4655 ( clc1 (cid:2) with pTMN17 [ GFP - LC ] ) and SL4838 ( clc1 (cid:1) chc1 (cid:1) with pTMN37 [ GFP - LC ] ) . ( B ) Co - localization of LC and HC in WT cells : SL4862 ( clc1 (cid:1) / + CHC1 - RFP / + with pTMN17 [ GFP - LC ] ) . ( C ) Localization of Kex2p and LC : SL4829 ( clc1 (cid:1) KEX2 - YFP with pTMN34 [ CFP - LC ] ) . ( D ) Localization of Snf7p and LC : SL4906 ( clc1 (cid:1) / + SNF7 - RFP / + with pTMN17 ) . Arrows point to regions of co - localization and arrowheads point to regions without co - localization . Bar = 5 (cid:1) m . 45 function at the LE / PVC in yeast ; however , this represents a small portion of the total cellular clathrin . Clathrin Accumulates at the Cortex in the Absence of Sla2p and the Presence of LAT - A Recent studies have shown that cortical patches containing endocytic proteins become immobilized at the cortex in LAT - A or in sla2 cells ( Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ) . Because we saw small cortical spots of clathrin ( Figure 2 . 1 ) , we tested whether clathrin also becomes immobilized or accumulates under these conditions . Following treatment with LAT - A , 77 % of cells showed intense cortical clathrin accumulation , especially in the buds ( Figure 2 . 2B & 2 . 2H ) , compared with 4 % in untreated cells ( Figure 2 . 2A & 2 . 2H ) . The cortical clathrin was in patches or in many cases seen as a continuous rim underlying the cell surface . In sla2 (cid:1) , 62 % of cells had intense patch accumulation all over the surface of both daughters and mothers ( Figure 2 . 2C & 2 . 2H ) . The cortical accumulation of clathrin was not the result of mislocalization of TGN / endosomal cargo to the plasma membrane , since Kex2p showed no detectable cortical association and was completely independent of cortical LC in cells treated with LAT - A ( Figure 2 . 2J ) . Time - lapse movies were used to examine the dynamics of clathrin in wild type ( WT ) as compared to sla2 (cid:1) or LAT - A treated cells ( Supplemental Movie S1 - 3 ) . In WT cells , clathrin patches displayed rapid , random movements and often divided and fused . To better assess mobility of patches , kymographs were generated across a single pixel wide line . Both internal patches and small weakly fluorescent cortical patches appeared and disappeared over the course of two minutes ( Figure 2 . 2D ) . In contrast , cortical 46 Figure 2 . 2 . GFP - LC Accumulates at the Cell Cortex in sla2 Mutants and in the Presence of LAT - A . ( A ) clc1 (cid:1) + pTMN17 [ GFP - LC ] ( SL4655 ) ; ( B ) clc1 (cid:1) + pTMN17 ( SL4655 ) treated with 250 (cid:1) M LAT - A for 20 min ; ( C ) sla2 (cid:1) clc1 (cid:1) + pTMN17 ( SL4778 ) . Arrowheads point to cortical GFP - LC . ( D - F ) Kymographs of cells shown in A - C generated from two minute time - lapse videos showing the cortical and internal mobility of GFP - LC : ( D ) WT ; ( E ) LAT - A treated cells ; and ( F ) sla2 (cid:1) . ( G ) FLIP of sla2 (cid:2) cells ( SL4778 ) photobleached in area indicated by (cid:2) every 15 s ; images were captured every 6 seconds . ( H ) Quantification for cells shown in ( A - C ) , expressed as percent of cells with “strong” , “weak” , or “no” cortical accumulation . ( I ) Exponential decay curve derived from one representative experiment showing loss of cortical GFP - LC fluorescence during FLIP . Bar = 5 (cid:1) m . 47 Figure 2 . 2 48 J Figure 2 . 2 Continued . LC , but Not Kex2p , Localizes to the Cortex in the Presence of LAT . ( J ) clc1 (cid:1) KEX2 - YFP + pTMN34 [ CFP - LC ] ( SL4829 ) was treated with 250 (cid:1) M LAT - A for 20 min . 49 clathrin was mostly immobilized at the cortex in LAT - A - treated and sla2 (cid:1) cells , while internal clathrin structures continued rapid movement ( Figure 2 . 2E & F ) . To address whether the immobilized cortical clathrin patches were still actively exchanging triskelions , FLIP ( fluorescence loss in photobleaching ) was performed on sla2 (cid:1) cells . The interior of the cell , excluding the cortex was repeatedly photobleached every 15 s ( Figure 2 . 2G & I ) . Relative to the surface of nonbleached cells , the cortical fluorescence of bleached cells decreased exponentially with a half - time of 75 s + / - 39 s ( n = 9 ) ( Figure 2 . 2I ) . Overall these results indicate that Sla2p and actin assembly are required for normal dynamics of clathrin patches at cortical locations , similar to a number of other endocytic factors ( Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ) . However , cortical clathrin actively exchanges with the internal pool of triskelions , even though the patches are arrested and endocytic vesicles are not pinching off . Clathrin Accumulates at the Cortex in Some , but Not All , Endocytic Mutants The clathrin accumulation in sla2 (cid:1) could be specific to loss of Sla2p function or reflect a general role for endocytosis in cortical turnover of clathrin . To examine this , GFP - LC was expressed in several additional endocytic mutants , including end3 (cid:1) , pan1 - 20 , rvs161 (cid:1) , rvs167 (cid:1) , sla2 (cid:1) and ypk1 (cid:1) ( Figure 2 . 3 ) . Since all of these mutants contained endogenous CLC1 , CLC1 cells were transformed with GFP - CLC1 to confirm LC localization was similar to clc1 (cid:1) cells transformed with GFP - CLC1 ( compare Figures 2 . 2H & 3E ) . Both pan1 - 20 ( shifted to 37 ° C ) and end3 (cid:1) ( at 30 ° C ) accumulated cortical clathrin ( Figure 2 . 3C , 3E , and not shown ) ; however , the effect was not as severe 50 Figure 2 . 3 . GFP - LC Accumulates at the Cortex in Some , but Not All , Endocytic Mutants . ( A ) sla2 (cid:1) + pTMN17 [ GFP - LC ] ( SL4779 ) ; ( B ) ypk1 (cid:1) + pTMN37 [ GFP - LC ] ( SL5015 ) ; ( C ) end3 (cid:1) + pTMN17 ( SL4975 ) ; ( D ) rvs167 (cid:2) + pTMN37 ( SL5016 ) . ( E ) Quantification of cells with “strong” , “weak” , and “no” cortical accumulation of clathrin for strains shown in ( A - D ) and for WT + pTMN17 ( SL4776 ) ; pan1 - 20 + pTMN17 ( SL5012 ) and rvs161 (cid:1) + pTMN37 ( SL5010 ) . Cells were grown at 30 o C , except pan1 - 20 was shifted to 37 o for two hours . Arrowheads indicate areas of cortical accumulation . Bar = 5 (cid:1) m . 51 Figure 2 . 3 52 as seen for sla2 (cid:1) ( Figure 2 . 3A & 3E ) . In contrast rvs161 (cid:1) , rvs167 (cid:1) and ypk1 (cid:1) did not accumulate significant surface - associated clathrin at 30 ° C or 37 ° C ( Figure 2 . 3B , D , E and not shown ) . These results demonstrate that the cortical clathrin accumulation is not simply a result of a block in endocytosis , but is specific to the function of a subset of endocytic components and polymerization of the actin cytoskeleton . Endocytic Cargo Accumulate in Arrested Cortical Clathrin Patches Upon binding of ligand , the (cid:1) - factor receptor Ste2p is phosphorylated , ubiquitinated and internalized by the actin - based internalization machinery ( Engqvist - Goldstein and Drubin , 2003 ; Hicke et al . , 1998 ) . Efficient endocytosis of Ste2p also involves binding of its cytoplasmic tail to Sla1p and the function of clathrin ( Howard et al . , 2002 ; Huang et al . , 1997 ; Tan et al . , 1993 ) . To determine whether clathrin is associated with internalizing cargo at the cortex , we imaged cells expressing HC - mRFP and Ste2p - GFP . Cells were treated with (cid:1) - factor for two minutes , and then endocytosis was rapidly arrested by addition of LAT - A . Although there was a prominent GFP signal in the vacuole from previously internalized receptor , surface Ste2p - GFP was at the cortex in patches containing clathrin , particularly in the bud where surface clathrin initially accumulates in LAT - A ( Figure 2 . 4A ) . If cells were treated with (cid:1) - factor and then chased without LAT - A all of the Ste2p - GFP was cleared from the surface and accumulated in the vacuole ( not shown ) . Also , there was some Ste2p - GFP in patches containing clathrin in LAT - A even without (cid:1) - factor , presumably because of Ste2p’s constitutive ligand - independent internalization ( data not shown ) . 53 Figure 2 . 4 . Clathrin Localizes to Cortical Sites Containing Cargo and Components of the Actin - Based Endocytic Machinery . ( A ) Colocalization of clathrin and Ste2p . SL5091 ( CHC1 - RFP + pRS423 - Ste2 - GFP ) was treated with (cid:1) - factor for 2 min , washed and incubated with LAT - A for 30 minutes . ( B - C ) Colocalization of clathrin with Sla2p . SL4905 ( CHC1 - mRFP / + SLA2 - GFP / + ) was treated with DMSO ( B ) or 250 (cid:1) M LAT - A ( C ) for 20 minutes . ( D ) Co - localization of Abp1 - GFP and Chc1 - mRFP in sla2 (cid:1) cells ( SL4934 ) . 54 Figure 2 . 4 55 Clathrin Co - localizes with Actin - Associated Cortical Proteins As clathrin localization is perturbed in sla2 (cid:1) and Sla2p directly interacts with LC ( ( Henry et al . , 2002 ) ; T . N . , unpublished ) , we tested whether cortical clathrin co - localizes with Sla2p . In normal cells co - expressing HC - mRFP and Sla2p - GFP partial overlap of fluorescence at the cell surface was observed with 21 % of cells displaying at least one co - localizing patch ( Figure 2 . 4B ) . As expected , Sla2p - GFP was largely separate from the internal pool of HC - mRFP ( Figure 2 . 4B ) . Upon treatment with LAT - A , Sla2p retained its cortical localization , as seen previously ( Ayscough et al . , 1997 ) , and increased co - localization between Sla2p and clathrin at the surface was observed ( > 73 % of cells had one or more co - localizing patches ) ( Figure 2 . 4C ) . This was particularly noticeable in daughter cells and at the neck of the bud . We also examined clathrin in an ark1 (cid:1) prk1 (cid:1) mutant , which accumulates large actin aggregates containing known clathrin - binding proteins such as Ent1p , Ent2p and Sla2p , as well as other cortical patch / endocytic factors ( Cope et al . , 1999 ; Watson et al . , 2001 ) . GFP - LC was also found in Alexa - 594 - phalloidin - stained F - actin actin clumps of ark1 (cid:1) prk1 (cid:1) cells ( Figure 2 . 4H ) , further demonstrating that clathrin is associated with cortical patch proteins and actin . Abp1 can be used as a marker to follow the dynamics of actin during cortical patch formation ( Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ) . Since sla2 mutants form cortical actin comet tails containing Abp1p ( Gourlay et al . , 2003 ; Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ; Yang et al . , 1999 ) , we examined whether clathrin is associated with these structures in sla2 (cid:1) . In our strains Abp1p was often found in large clusters of actin comet tails , also seen by others 56 H Figure 2 . 4 Continued . Localization of Clathrin with Cortical Actin Aggregates in ark1 (cid:1) prk1 (cid:1) Cells . ( H ) ark1 (cid:1) prk1 (cid:1) + pTMN37 [ GFP - LC ] ( SL4941 ) was stained with Alexa - 594 - phalloidin . 57 ( Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ; Yang et al . , 1999 ) . Clathrin was present all over the cortex , but formed a bright rim at the junction of the cortex and these actin structures ( Figure 2 . 4D ) . This behavior of clathrin is similar to other endocytic factors recruited early to cortical patches , such as Sla1p , Las17p and Pan1p ( Gourlay et al . , 2003 ; Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ) . Transient Association of Clathrin and Cortical Actin Patches To determine if actin patches associate with cortical clathrin in untreated WT cells , ABP1 - mRFP was integrated into the GFP - LC - expressing strain . Using wide - field microscopy we detected occasional overlapping patches of cortical clathrin and Abp1 , but the strong internal TGN / EE GFP - LC signal often obscured the cortical clathrin signal , preventing effective imaging of clathrin and actin / Abp1p at the surface by this method ( Figure 2 . 4E and Supplemental Movie S4 ) . Therefore we applied TIRFM ( Total Internal Reflection Fluorescence Microscopy ) to selectively examine cortical clathrin and Abp1p dynamics ( Figure 2 . 4F & 2 . 4G ) . Movies acquired by TIRFM revealed that most clathrin patches at the surface were immediately followed by a burst of Abp1p recruitment ( 73 % , n = 107 ) , and 82 % of all Abp1p patches appeared at sites occupied by cortical clathrin ( n = 107 ) ( Supplemental Movie S5 ) . The average lifetime of cortical clathrin patches was 45 s ± 20 s for those that received actin , although the duration of clathrin lifetime varied from 26 s to as long as several minutes giving a median lifetime of 37 s ( n = 78 patches ) . This is similar to the reported lifetimes of Sla1p and Pan1p patches , as well as lifetimes reported for mammalian clathrin ( Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ; Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ) . Abp1 - mRFP appeared for ~ 11 s and was consistently recruited during the decline of clathrin 58 Figure 4 Continued . ( E ) Co - localization of Abp1 - mRFP and GFP - LC in WT cells ( SL5090 ) by wide field fluorescence microscopy . ( F ) Examples of Abp1 - mRFP recruitment to a cortical clathrin patch ( GFP - LC ) in WT cells using TIRFM ; frames shown every 5 . 3 s . ( G ) Plot of normalized intensity of four separate clathrin / Abp1 events with similar lifetimes from TIRFM . Arrows point to patches of colocalization . Bar = 5 (cid:1) m ( A - E ) . 59 Figure 4 . 4 Continued 60 I Figure 2 . 4 Continued . Examples Showing Reoccurring Clathrin and Abp1 / actin Patch Formation . ( I ) Time - lapse imaging from TIRFM of ABP1 - mRFP clc1 (cid:1) + pTMN17 ( GFP - LC ) ( SL5090 ) with frames shown every 5 . 3 s ( 500 ms exposures ) . Graphic representation of fluorescence intensity of GFP - LC and Abp1 - RFP patch shown in A . 61 intensity . Our measurement is shorter than the 15 s reported by Kaksonen et al . ( 2003 ) using wide field microscopy . However , since Abp1 undergoes inward movement of 500 - 1000 nm from the cortex during the late stage of endocytosis ( Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ) , the time it would be visible in the evanescent field is expected to be shorter . Occasionally multiple rounds of clathrin and Abp1p recruitment occurred at the same site ( Figure 2 . 4I ) , but the majority of newly forming cortical clathrin patches occurred at sites not previously occupied . Overall these results strongly support a role for clathrin in endocytosis in yeast Cortical Recruitment of Clathrin by Endocytic Adaptors Yeast clathrin interacts with Ent1 / 2p and Yap1801 / 2p ( Wendland et al . , 1998 ; Wendland et al . , 1999 ) , which are related to the mammalian clathrin endocytic adaptors , epsin and AP180 / CALM , respectively , and localize to cortical patches in yeast . These proteins contain phosphatidyl - inositol binding ENTH or ANTH modules at their N - termini and clathrin TD binding motifs at their C - termini . To determine if the yeast adaptors associate with clathrin at the cortex , we imaged cells expressing HC - mRFP and GFP fusions to Ent1p , Ent2p , Yap1801p , or Yap1802p . The low signal intensity of the fluorescent reporters at the cell cortex prevented visualization of clathrin and these proteins at the same time in WT cells ( data not shown ) ; however , simultaneous adaptor and clathrin localization was feasible in sla2 (cid:1) cells , where all accumulated strongly at the cell surface ( Figure 2 . 5 ) . The localization pattern for each adaptor in sla2 (cid:1) was distinct , but all showed some co - localization with clathrin at cortical regions . Ent2p - GFP 62 Figure 2 . 5 . Colocalization of HC with Ent1 / 2p and Yap1801 / 2p in sla2 (cid:1) . CHC1 - mRFP sla2 (cid:1) ( SL4939 ) transformed with ( A ) pBW54 [ Ent1p - GFP ] , ( B ) pBW56 [ Ent2p - GFP ] , ( C ) pGFP - YAP1801 and ( D ) pGFP - YAP1802 . Arrows point to regions of colocalization . Bar = 5 (cid:1) m . 63 almost completely overlapped with cortical clathrin ( Figure 2 . 5B ) . In contrast , Ent1p - GFP resembled the large cortical actin comet tails seen with Abp1p in sla2 (cid:1) cells , and clathrin was seen at the rims of Ent1p structures ( Figure 2 . 5A ) . These observations support previous data that Ent1p and Ent2p may reside in distinct cellular locations and have only partially overlapping functions ( Watson et al . , 2001 ) . The AP180’s showed fine cortical puncta , as well as rim structures in sla2 (cid:1) , which often co - localized with clathrin ( Figure 2 . 5C & D ) . In all cases , some cortical clathrin was detected independent of each protein , suggesting the existence of multiple classes of endocytic / cortical patch complexes or that adaptors in these patches are normally dynamic in composition . Because we found association between clathrin and these adaptors in vivo , we tested their importance for the recruitment of clathrin . A previous genetic screen to identify novel endocytic adaptors utilized the epsin / AP180 multiple knock out strain ent1 (cid:1) CBM ent2 (cid:1) yap1801 (cid:1) yap1802 (cid:1) ( referred to as ent1 (cid:1) CBM triple - (cid:1) ) ( Baggett et al . , 2003 ) . This strain contains deletions of YAP1801 , YAP1802 and ENT2 , and expresses Ent1p lacking its clathrin - binding motif ( Ent1p - (cid:1) CBM ) . We expressed GFP - LC in ent1 (cid:1) CBM triple - (cid:1) and treated with LAT - A to determine if clathrin could still be recruited to cortical locations in the absence of the adaptors . LAT - A was chosen to examine cortical accumulation , as mutations in SLA2 cause synthetic lethality in the ent1 (cid:1) CBM triple - (cid:1) mutant ( Baggett et al . , 2003 ) . Following LAT - A treatment , only 5 % of ent1 (cid:1) CBM triple - (cid:1) cells accumulated strong cortical clathrin , and those that did had a single patch rather than a continuous cortical outline of patches or rims seen in WT cells transformed with GFP - LC ( Figure 2 . 6 B , D & F ) . 64 Figure 2 . 6 . Recruitment of Clathrin to the Cortex by Yeast Epsins and AP180 / CALM . Cells were treated with DMSO carrier or 250 (cid:1) M LAT - A for 20 minutes . WT + pTMN17 [ GFP - LC ] ( SL4776 ) in ( A ) DMSO or ( B ) LAT - A . ent1 (cid:1) CBM triple - (cid:1) ( BWY1989 ) + pTMN17 in ( C ) DMSO or ( D ) LAT - A . ( E ) ent1 (cid:1) CBM triple - (cid:1) + pTMN17 + p ENT 2 in LAT - A ( F ) Percent cells with strong cortical accumulation in WT + pTMN17 or ent1 (cid:1) CBM triple - (cid:1) + pTMN17 transformed with p ENT1 , p ENT2 , p YAP1801 or p YAP1802 treated ( - ) or ( + ) LAT - A . Bar = 5 (cid:1) m . 65 Figure 2 . 6 66 To determine which adaptor ( s ) is responsible for clathrin recruitment to the cortex in LAT - A , the ent1 (cid:1) CBM triple - (cid:1) strain with pGFP - LC was transformed with plasmids expressing ENT1 , ENT2 , YAP1801 or YAP1802 . We found reconstitution of each adaptor on its own partially restored clathrin recruitment to the surface in the presence of LAT - A Figure 2 . 6E & F ) . However , Ent2p seemed to have the strongest effect , consistent with it having the most colocalization with clathrin in the sla2 (cid:1) strain . Discussion Localization of Clathrin In Vivo In this study we set out to visualize the localization of clathrin in live cells . Clathrin was found in large internal patches and smaller patches at the cortex and interior . The internal patches of clathrin were highly mobile and 200 - 600 nm in size , similar to that seen previously for the TGN protein Sft2p ( Wooding and Pelham , 1998 ) . As expected many of these larger clathrin structures overlapped with the TGN / EE marker Kex2p . However , Kex2p and clathrin did not completely co - localize , with clathrin often forming patches on the edge of Kex2p containing structures . These may represent clathrin transport intermediates budding from the TGN / EE membrane , similar to what has been observed in animal cells at the TGN ( Puertollano et al . , 2003 ) . In addition , our studies indicate some internal patches with clathrin are associated with the LE / PVC . Recruitment of clathrin to the LE could occur via Vps27p , which is involved in trafficking into the LE / multivesicular bodies ( MVB ) and contains a clathrin box motif of the LLDLD type found in many proteins that bind clathrin through the HC - TD ( Dell ' Angelica , 2001 ; Shih et al . , 2002 ) . Indeed , Hrs , the animal homologue of Vps27p , 67 binds and recruits clathrin to endosomal structures ( Raiborg et al . , 2003 ) . Also , another yeast epsin , Ent3p , is involved in MVB formation and binds clathrin ( Friant et al . , 2003 ) , so it could target clathrin to the LE . We also observed for the first time cortical patches of clathrin in association with other endocytic / actin patch components and with endocytic cargo . Despite the lack of previous data localizing clathrin at the PM in yeast ( Pishvaee et al . , 2000 ; Rodal et al . , 2005 ) , several lines of evidence have supported an endocytic function . First , mutation of either clathrin HC or LC results in a moderate defect in RME of the Ste2 or Ste3 receptors ( Huang et al . , 1997 ; Tan et al . , 1993 ) . Second , Ste3p has been reported to be associated with CCVs ( Pishvaee et al . , 2000 ) , although it was not ruled out that Ste3p in CCV was on a secretory trajectory . Third , yeast clathrin binds to known cortical patch / endocytic factors such as the epsins Ent1 / 2p and AP180 / CALM - related proteins Yap1801 / 2p , as well as Sla2p ( Henry et al . , 2002 ; Wendland and Emr , 1998 ; Wendland et al . , 1999 ) . Finally , actin , Abp1p , Sla2p and clathrin co - fractionate in a large complex on sucrose density gradients ( Gourlay et al . , 2003 ) . Our data clearly indicate that cortical clathrin is associated with and behaves like other cortical patch components believed to be in endocytic structures ( Jonsdottir and Li , 2004 ; Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ) and makes up a population distinct from the internal TGN / EE - associated clathrin . First , although LAT - A treatment caused cortical accumulation of clathrin , Kex2p - YFP remained on internal patches . Also , sla2 (cid:1) is normal for processing and sorting of vacuolar hydrolases ( Raths et al . , 1993 ) and secretion of mature (cid:1) - factor ( T . N . , unpublished results ) . Therefore , cortical recruitment of clathrin is not caused by mislocalization of TGN cargo to the surface . It is also 68 unlikely that the cortical clathrin seen in LAT - A was on secretory vesicles near the cell surface , since in LAT - A secretory vesicles are not polarized to the bud ( Ayscough et al . , 1997 ) . Clathrin was found at the junction of actin comet tails and the cortex in sla2 (cid:1) , similar to other cortical patch factors , Sla1p , Las17p and Pan1p , whose release is dependent on a dynamic cortical actin cytoskeleton ( Gourlay et al . , 2003 ; Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ) . Furthermore , clathrin partially co - localized at the cortex with Sla2p and with internalizing Ste2p in LAT - A - treated cells and with adaptors Ent1 / 2p and AP180s in sla2 (cid:1) . It also accumulated in the large actin aggregates of the ark1 (cid:1) prk1 (cid:1) strain like other actin patch - associated proteins ( Cope et al . , 1999 ; Watson et al . , 2001 ) . Finally , we found that clathrin transiently associates with cortical actin patches in WT cells , showing dynamics similar to other early endocytic factors . Collectively , these results provide direct evidence that clathrin can be recruited to locations enriched in cortical patch proteins , supporting its role in the endocytic process . Distinct Functions of Endocytic Factors We found that cortical accumulation of clathrin was not unique to the sla2 (cid:1) mutation , but occurred in other endocytic mutants , such as end3 (cid:1) and pan1 - 20 . We expect these mutations would similarly affect other endocytic / cortical patch factors , such as Sla1p , Las17 and Pan1p , that arrest at the cortex in sla2 (cid:1) ( Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ) . Since rvs161 (cid:1) , rvs167 (cid:1) and ypk1 (cid:1) did not accumulate cortical clathrin , it is unlikely that the dramatic appearance of clathrin at the cell cortex is an indirect effect of an endocytic block . Accumulation in some endocytic mutants , but not all , more likely reflects contributions of these proteins at distinct steps of endocytosis . So while End3p , Pan1p 69 and Sla2p are not required for cortical association of clathrin , they seem to function in regulating endocytic progression and / or release of clathrin and actin / endocytic patches from the surface . In contrast , the yeast amphiphysins ( Rvs161p and Rvs167p ) and Ypk1p may be important for clathrin recruitment or to stabilize newly forming pits . Alternatively , they could act after Sla2p , Pan1p and End3p when clathrin has regained its potential to be released or is no longer being recruited . Of the endocytic mutants giving rise to cortical clathrin , sla2 caused the most severe accumulation . Thus , Sla2p might play a direct role in clathrin patch release , while Pan1p and End3p exert their effects indirectly through Sla2p . That Sla2p binds actin and clathrin LC directly ( Henry et al . , 2002 ; McCann and Craig , 1999 ) ; T . N . , unpublished results ) is consistent with this . However , the association of clathrin at sites of cortical actin does not require Sla2p , as co - localization between clathrin and Abp1p / actin still occurred at the base of the actin comet tails in sla2 (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3) similar to arrested structures seen upon depletion of HIP1R by RNAi in mammalian cells ( Engqvist - Goldstein et al . , 2004 ) . Although clathrin accumulated at the cortex in sla2 (cid:1) , it still cycles on and off the surface , with ~ 50 % of cortical clathrin exchanging within ~ 75 s . Continued cycling of clathrin independent of vesicle formation also occurs at the TGN and the plasma membrane of animal cells ( Blanpied et al . , 2002 ; Moskowitz et al . , 2003 ; Puertollano et al . , 2003 ; Wu et al . , 2001 ; Wu et al . , 2003 ) . Thus , our results support the idea that Hip1 family members are not clathrin assembly factors ( Engqvist - Goldstein et al . , 2001 ; Legendre - Guillemin et al . , 2002 ; Mishra et al . , 2001 ) , but they regulate progression into productive endocytic structures and their subsequent release ( Engqvist - Goldstein et al . , 2004 ) . 70 Dynamics of Cortical Clathrin Patches In order to examine the dynamics of cortical clathrin in WT cells , we used TIRFM to visualize events restricted to the cell surface . We estimate that the evanescent field had a depth of 100 - 150 nm . Since the yeast cell wall is ~ 90 - 100 nm thick ( Smith et al . , 2000 ) , we are confident that we were observing clathrin assembly at the plasma membrane . When clathrin was compared to Abp1p , a marker for actin dynamics during cortical patch formation , Abp1p appeared for a lifetime of ~ 11 s at locations that had previously formed a clathrin patch . However , actin assembled just as clathrin was disappearing . This resembles the recruitment of actin to endocytic complexes containing Las17p , Sla1p , Pan1p and Sla2p towards the end of patch lifetime ( Jonsdottir and Li , 2004 ; Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ) and suggests that a burst of actin polymerization follows or coincides with clathrin release or CCV budding during endocytosis . The effects of LAT - A imply that actin polymerization is actually required for clathrin release . Thus far we have not been able to determine whether vesicles containing clathrin pinch off from the cell surface or whether clathrin disassembles before vesicle budding . Particle tracking of other early patch proteins , Sla1p , Pan1p and Sla1p , showed they move about 200 nm from the surface before their signal disappears , while actin patches move about 500 - 1000 nm into the interior of the cell ( Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ) . Likely actin patches are associated with vesicles moving away from the surface , while the early patch proteins have been released . Since the intense internal clathrin fluorescence seen by wide field microscopy obscured our ability to evaluate dynamics of cortical clathrin , we used TIRFM to restrict our analysis to surface events . Therefore , we do not know if the clathrin disassembled or a vesicle ( or bud ) containing clathrin moved away from the 71 surface out of view . Further studies will be required to distinguish between these possibilities . Yeast Epsins and AP180s as Endocytic Adaptors for Clathrin The presence of clathrin at cortical locations , even in the absence of Sla2p , led us to investigate what proteins are responsible for its recruitment . The clathrin - TD binding motifs present on the epsins Ent1 / 2p and AP180s made them likely candidates . These proteins also contain N - terminal phosphoinositide binding regions and NFP motifs , which bind Pan1p , an activator of Arp2 / 3p mediated actin assembly ( Duncan et al . , 2001 ; Wendland and Emr , 1998 ; Wendland et al . , 1999 ) . Taking advantage of clathrin’s cortical association in sla2 (cid:1) , we found that clathrin co - localizes with all of these adaptors , but to varying degrees and with distinct patterns . Furthermore , each of these clathrin - binding adaptors can recruit clathrin to the cortex in LAT - A . Ent2p may be the major clathrin adaptor since it showed the strongest co - localization with clathrin in sla2 (cid:1)(cid:3) and it reconstituted cortical clathrin accumulation the best in the ent1 (cid:1) CBM triple - (cid:1) strain treated with LAT - A . Evidence from animal systems has also highlighted the importance of multiple adaptor involvement in clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Traub , 2003 ) . For example , knock down of AP - 2 by RNAi ablated transferrin endocytosis , but did not significantly effect uptake of the EGF and LDL receptors ( Motley et al . , 2003 ) . Similarly it is possible that the yeast epsins and AP180’s serve as adaptors that bind different cargo , leading to sorting into distinct CCSs , thereby explaining their distinct localization patterns . Furthermore , the occasional observed residual cortical patches in the LAT - A - treated 72 ent1 (cid:1) CBM triple - (cid:1) strain ( see Figure 2 . 6 ) , suggests that there may be additional endocytic clathrin adaptors in yeast . In summary , our studies demonstrate that clathrin localizes to the cell cortex with the actin - based endocytic machinery in yeast and recruitment to these sites is dynamic and adaptor - dependent , involving the epsins Ent1 / 2p and AP180 / CALM . This is the first visual evidence that clathrin functions in endocytosis in yeast , similar to its well - defined role in animal cells . 73 Chapter 3 Clathrin is Important for Normal Actin Dynamics and Progression of Sla2p Containing Patches During Endocytosis in Yeast Introduction Clathrin , a major vesicle coat protein , functions in receptor - mediated endocytosis ( RME ) as well as in sorting and retention of cargo at the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) and endosomal system . Clathrin triskelions are recruited to membranes by cargo / lipid - binding adaptors , resulting in formation of the polygonal lattices of clathrin coated pits ( CCP ) and vesicles ( CCV ) . Three clathrin heavy chains ( HCs ) comprise the structural backbone of the triskelion and are each bound by a clathrin light chain ( LC ) . The HC has an N - terminal globular domain ( HC - TD ) , distal leg , proximal leg that binds LC , and a trimerization region near the C - terminus ( Brodsky et al . , 2001 ; Chen et al . , 2002 ; Pishvaee et al . , 1997 ) . The HC - TD is important for clathrin’s interactions with membrane - associated factors , such as the adaptors AP - 1 and AP - 2 , AP180s , amphiphysins , epsins , and others , involved in sorting into CCPs and CCV formation ( Brodsky et al . , 2001 ) . These proteins all contain variations of the LLDLD - type clathrin - box motif or the ( W box ) clathrin - binding motif PWXXW , which mediate their interaction with the HC - TD ( McPherson and Ritter , 2005 ) . Biochemical studies have suggested several direct roles for LC , including uncoating of CCVs , prevention of lattice assembly , or trimerization of HCs ( Brodsky et al . , 2001 ; Brodsky et al . , 1991 ; DeLuca - Flaherty et al . , 1990 ; Liu et al . , 1995 ; Ungewickell and Ungewickell , 1991 ; Ybe et al . , 2003 ) . But the only in vivo evidence for 74 a direct LC function comes from work in yeast , where the LC ( Clc1p ) is required for HC ( Chc1p ) trimerization and stability . Due to this requirement , the phenotypes of clc1 (cid:1) cells mimic what is observed in HC - deficient ( chc1 (cid:1) ) yeast ( Chu et al . , 1996 ; Huang et al . , 1997 ) . These phenotypes include defects in TGN / endosomal protein sorting / retention and RME ( Chu et al . , 1996 ; Gall et al . , 2002 ; Gurunathan et al . , 2002 ; Harsay and Schekman , 2002 ; Huang et al . , 1997 ; Seeger and Payne , 1992a ; Seeger and Payne , 1992b ; Tan et al . , 1993 ; Valdivia et al . , 2002 ) , as well as increased cell size , polyploidy , temperature sensitive growth , and aberrant actin organization ( Henry et al . , 2002 ; Huang et al . , 1997 ; Lemmon et al . , 1990 ; Lemmon and Jones , 1987 ) . Deletion of the LC gene in Dictyostelium also causes severe phenotypes , affecting development , cytokinesis and osmoregulation ( Wang et al . , 2003a ) . Surprisingly , siRNA directed against clathrin light chains A and B in Hela cells does not reduce EGF and transferrin receptor endocytosis , while a similar depletion of HC has a significant effect on RME ( Huang et al . , 2004 ) . Possibly , LCs are less critical in some animal cells , since the stoichiometry of LC to HC in liver is 5 fold less than that found in neuronal cells ( Girard et al . , 2005 ) . Alternatively , the phenotypic differences between higher and lower eukaryotes upon depletion of clathrin LC could reflect the degree of effectiveness of gene knockouts vs . siRNA techniques . Aside from LC’s role in clathrin HC trimerization in vivo , another proposed function for clathrin LC comes from studies showing that LC interacts with mammalian Hip1 and Hip1R and its yeast homologue , Sla2p ( Chen and Brodsky , 2005 ; Henry et al . , 2002 ; Legendre - Guillemin et al . , 2002 ; Legendre - Guillemin et al . , 2005 ) . This family of endocytic proteins all share an AP180 N - terminal homology ( ANTH ) domain found in 75 proteins that interact with membrane inositol phospholipids , a C - terminal actin - binding talin - like domain and a central coiled - coil domain , which binds to clathrin LC ( Chen and Brodsky , 2005 ; Engqvist - Goldstein et al . , 1999 ; Henry et al . , 2002 ; Hyun et al . , 2004 ; Legendre - Guillemin et al . , 2002 ; Legendre - Guillemin et al . , 2005 ; Legendre - Guillemin et al . , 2004 ; McCann and Craig , 1997 ; Sun et al . , 2005b ) . Like sla2 (cid:1) yeast , Hela cells subjected to Hip1R RNAi or neurons derived from Hip1 ( - / - ) mice display reduced endocytosis ( Engqvist - Goldstein et al . , 2004 ; Metzler et al . , 2003 ) . Furthermore Hip1R RNAi cultures accumulate arrested endocytic structures containing actin cytoskeletal proteins , clathrin , endocytic cargo and other endocytic factors ( Engqvist - Goldstein et al . , 2004 ) . This has led to the conclusion that the animal Sla2p homologues regulate the interaction between actin and the clathrin endocytic machinery . Recently we demonstrated for the first time the existence of plasma membrane - associated clathrin in yeast ( Newpher et al . , 2005 ) , which was debated for many years because clathrin mutants only show partial endocytic phenotypes ( Baggett and Wendland , 2001 ) . We also found that recruitment of yeast clathrin to the cortex involves the epsin and AP180 homologues Ent1 / 2p and Yap1801 / 2p ( Newpher et al . , 2005 ) . As the later stages of endocytosis follow , clathrin disappears from the cell surface coinciding with a burst of actin polymerization , which presumably provides the force for vesicle fission and / or internalization ( Newpher et al . , 2005 ) . This sequence of assembly of clathrin and actin resembles what has been observed in animal cells ( Merrifield et al . , 2002 ; Yarar et al . , 2005 ) , and was also reported for yeast in another recent study ( Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ) . 76 Other early endocytic factors present at the cortex include Sla2p , the SH3 domain protein Sla1p , an Eps15 homology domain protein Pan1p , and the N - Wasp homologue Las17p ( Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ) . These early proteins , including clathrin , become immobile at the cortex upon LAT - A treatment or in sla2 (cid:1) cells , demonstrating important roles for Sla2p and the actin cytoskeleton during endocytic patch progression and vesicle internalization ( Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ; Newpher et al . , 2005 ) . However , the relationship between clathrin and Sla2p during the maturation and progression of endocytic cortical patches remains unclear . In this report we show that the coiled - coil region of Sla2p interacts directly with LC , as seen for Hip1 / R and LC in mammalian cells ( Chen and Brodsky , 2005 ; Legendre - Guillemin et al . , 2002 ; Legendre - Guillemin et al . , 2005 ) . By live cell imaging of cortical patch dynamics we find clathrin is recruited prior to Sla2p , which is then followed by Sla1p , demonstrating there are at least three stages of early endocytic factor assembly . Furthermore , clathrin depletion dramatically affects the organization and turnover of endocytic patches containing Sla2p , Sla1p and Abp1p , having a distinct effect on the dynamics of each protein . Finally , removal of the Sla2p region that binds to LC results in delayed progression of endocytic cortical patches , suggesting this interaction is critical to promote efficient vesicle internalization . 77 Methods and Materials Strains , Media , and Genetic Methods Strains used in this study are listed in Table 3 . YEPD and synthetic dropout medium were prepared as described in ( Nelson and Lemmon , 1993 ) . Yeast mating , sporulation , and tetrad analysis were performed as described in ( Guthrie and Fink , 1991 ) . Yeast were transformed using the method of ( Gietz et al . , 1995 ) and cells were cultured at 30 ° C . Plasmids Plasmids pGAD - C1 [ GAD empty , LEU2 , 2 (cid:1) ] and pGBDU - C1 [ GBD empty , URA3 , 2 (cid:1) ] are described in ( James et al . , 1996 ) . p31 - 2 [ GAD - sla2 - 292 - 520 , LEU2 , 2 (cid:1) ] , pKH31 [ GBD - CLC1 , URA3 , 2 (cid:1) ] , pKH49 [ GBD - sla2 - 292 - 968 , URA3 , 2 (cid:1) ] , pKH47 [ GBD - sla2 - 292 - 501 , URA3 , 2 (cid:1) ] , and pKH24 [ GAD - chc1 - 655 - 1653 , LEU2 , 2 (cid:1) ] are described in ( Henry et al . , 2002 ) . p31 - 6 [ GAD - sla2 - 289 - 583 , LEU2 , 2 (cid:1) ] and p31 - 10 [ GAD - sla2 - 292 - 968 , LEU2 , 2 (cid:1) ] , were isolated from the LC two - hybrid screen ( Henry et al . , 2002 ) . pTMN17 [ GFP - CLC1 , TRP1 , CEN ] and pTMN37 [ GFP - CLC1 , URA3 , CEN ] are described in Newpher et al . ( Newpher et al . , 2005 ) . YEp24 - CHC1 and pKH2 [ CLC1 , URA3 , 2 (cid:1) ] were previously described in ( Huang et al . , 1997 ) . p111 - SLA2 - GFP [ CEN , TRP1 , LEU2 ] was a gift from María Isabel Geli and Fatima Idrissi . Plasmids pTMN1 [ GST - CLC1 ] and pTMN3 [ 6xHis - CLC1 for bacterial expression ] were constructed by PCR - amplifying the Clc1p coding sequence flanked by BamH1 and EcoR1 restriction sites and subcloning into pGEX - 2T ( Amersham Biosciences , Piscataway , NJ ) and pRSET - A ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) , respectively . In - frame fusions of SLA2 were 78 generated by subcloning the SLA2 open reading frame ( ORF ) on a BamH1 / Sal1 fragment into pGEX - 4T - 1 ( Amersham Biosciences ) and pGBDU - C1 , generating pTMN5 [ GST - SLA2 for bacterial expression ] and pTMN9 [ GBD - SLA2 , URA3 , 2 (cid:1) ] , respectively . The HC terminal domain two - hybrid prey was constructed by subcloning the CHC1 ORF encoding amino acids 1 - 500 on a BamH1 / Sal1 fragment into pGAD - C1 generating pTMN8 [ GAD - CHC1 - TD , LEU2 , 2 (cid:1) ] . pTMN13 [ GST - sla2 - (cid:2) 376 - 573 for bacterial expression ] was generated by cutting pWA30 ( Wesp et al . , 1997 ) with Nsi1 and ligating the sla2 - (cid:2) 376 - 573 fragment into Nsi1 cut pTMN5 . pTMN38 [ GBD - ENT1 , URA3 , 2 (cid:1) ] was generated by PCR amplification of the ENT1 ORF with primers to allow gap repair into pGBDU - C1 . GST - sla2 - 289 - 583 and GST - sla2 - 292 - 968 bacterial expression plasmids were generated by subcloning EcoR1 / Sal1 SLA2 fragments from p31 - 6 and p31 - 10 ( Henry et al . , 2002 ) , respectively , into pGEX - 4T1 . pTMN52 was constructed by cutting p111 - SLA2 - GFP with Nsi1 and gap repairing off the chromosomal sla2 (cid:2) 376 - 573 internal deletion in HR3399 ( SL3671 ) . YEplac195 - SLA2 , GST - BMH1 , and GST - ETLLDLDF were generous gifts from Howard Riezman , Mike Yaffe , and Linton Traub respectively . All plasmids generated from PCR fragments were verified by sequencing . Gene Deletions and Integrations To generate deletions of CLC1 ( SL4410 ) and CHC1 ( SL4409 ) in the two - hybrid reporter strain , the complete coding sequences were replaced with the TRP1 gene . Plasmid pFA6a - TRP1 ( Longtine et al . , 1998 ) was amplified with primers extended by DNA flanking the CLC1 or CHC1 ORFs and the PCR were products transformed into YPJ96 - 4 ( James et al . , 1996 ) . All knockouts were verified by colony PCR . 79 SLA2 - mRFP : : KanMX6 cells were generated by integrating a PCR product amplified from pFA6a - mRFP : : KanMX6 using primers flanked by sequences surrounding the SLA2 stop codon . SLA1 - GFP : : TRP1 was generated amplifying a PCR product from pFA6a - GFP : : TRP1 using primers flanked by sequences surrounding the SLA1 stop codon , and then integrating into a clc1 (cid:1) : : HIS3 SLA2 - mRFP : : KanMX6 double heterozygote . SLA1 - GFP : : TRP1 spore segregants were derived from this transformant . Two - hybrid Interaction Analysis For analysis of two - hybrid interactions , log phase cultures were diluted to 0 . 5 x 10 6 cells / ml for reporter strain ( YPJ96 - 4 ) and 1 . 0 x 10 7 cells / ml for chc1 (cid:2) ( SL4409 ) and clc1 (cid:2) ( SL4410 ) reporters and spotted on C - LEU - URA plates to test general growth and C - ADE - LEU - URA plates to score induction of the GAL2 - ADE2 reporter . Plates were grown 3 - 5 days at 30 ° C . Biochemical Procedures To purify GST fusion proteins from bacteria , 500 mL of log phase cells were induced for expression with 1 mM IPTG . After 5 hrs of induction cells were lysed by sonication in phosphate buffered saline ( PBS ) pH 8 . 0 containing 1 % Triton X - 100 and a protease inhibitor cocktail made as described in ( Stepp et al . , 1995 ) . Lysates were spun at 20 , 000g for 30 minutes and the supernatant was absorbed onto a column containing 500 (cid:1) l of glutathione sepharose . Following three washes with bacterial lysis buffer , GST fusions were eluted with 20 mM glutathione in 50 mM Tris pH 8 . 0 , and centrifuged through VIVASCIENCE concentrators ( Hannover , Germany ) . Concentrated samples 80 were diluted to (cid:2) 4mg / mL in PBS with 50 % glycerol and stored at – 20ºC . Recombinant 6xHis - tagged fusion proteins were expressed and purified following the QIAexpressionist (cid:1) protocols from Qiagen (cid:2) ( Valencia , CA ) and stored as described above for GST fusions . GST pull downs from yeast lysates were performed by prebinding bacterially purified GST fusions ( 200 nM ) to 50 (cid:1) L of glutathione sepharose beads for 1 hour in 1 ml of HEKT buffer ( 20 mM Hepes pH 7 . 4 , 1 mM EDTA , 50 mM KCl , 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 + protease inhibitors ) . Yeast extracts were prepared by glass bead lysis of 2 x 10 8 cells in 1 mL HEKT buffer for 3 minutes in a Braun homogenizer . Lysates were spun for 10 minutes at 10 , 000g and 1 mL of supernatant was incubated for 1 hour at 4 ° C with the prebound GST fusions . Following incubation , the beads were washed 3 times with 1 ml of HEKT buffer and eluted in 120 (cid:1) l HEKT buffer plus 30 (cid:1) l of 5x SDS sample buffer , and boiled 5 min at 95 ° C . Thirty (cid:1) L were analyzed by SDS - PAGE and immunoblot analysis . Clathrin HC was detected using mouse monoclonal antibodies to Chc1p ( Lemmon et al . , 1988 ) and the GST fusions were detected using rabbit anti - GST antibodies at 1 : 5000 ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Santa Cruz , CA ) . Clathrin LC was detected using rabbit polyclonal anti - Clc1p antibodies at 1 : 1000 , a gift from Greg Payne . Goat anti - rabbit ( Zymed / Invitrogen ) and goat anti - mouse ( Kirkegaard and Perry Labs , Gaitherburg , MD ) antibodies conjugated to horseradish peroxidase were used at 1 : 5000 and detected using enhanced chemiluminescence ( Amersham ) . For testing direct interactions , purified 6xHis - tagged Clc1p was added at 200 nM in 1 ml of HEKT buffer to GST fusions prebound to glutathione - agarose and complexes 81 were affinity purified as described above . Histidine - tagged Clc1p was detected with 6xHis mouse monoclonal antibodies at 1 : 1000 ( Clonetech , Mountain View , CA ) . Clathrin coated vesicles were purified from yeast as described in ( Lemmon et al . , 1988 ) . Clathrin rich fractions were concentrated 50 fold using VIVASPIN concentrators and analyzed by SDS - PAGE and immunoblotted with rabbit anti - Sla2p C - terminal antibodies at 1 : 1000 , a gift from Howard Riezman . For yeast extracts shown in Figure 3 . 2E , lysates were prepared by glass bead homogenation in 50mM Tris - HCl pH 7 . 5 , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 1 % sodium deoxycholate , 0 . 1 % SDS , 1mM sodium pyrophosphate , 150mM NaCl plus protease inhibitors at 2 . 0 x 10 8 cells / mL and were spun at 10 , 000g for 10 minutes . Supernatants were fractionated by SDS - PAGE and immunoblotted with anti - Sla2p C - terminal and rabbit anti - Clc1p antibodies . Microscopy Fluorescent fusion proteins were visualized in live cells by growing cultures overnight to mid - log phase in synthetic media . To track FM4 - 64 with Abp1 - GFP in clc1 (cid:2) , cells were incubated with 40 (cid:1) M FM4 - 64 for 2 minutes , washed in synthetic medium and viewed after 20 minutes of incubation at room temperature . Microscopy was performed using an Olympus fluorescence BX61 microscope equipped with Nomarski differential interference contrast ( DIC ) optics , a 100x objective ( numerical aperture 1 . 35 ) , a Roper CoolSNAP HQ camera , Sutter Lambda 10 + 2 automated excitation and emission filter wheels and a 175 watt Xenon remote source lamp with liquid light guide . Images were acquired and processed using the Intelligent Imaging 82 Innovations ( Denver , CO ) SlideBook TM image analysis software and prepared with Adobe (cid:1) Photoshop (cid:1) 7 . TIRFM was performed as described in Newpher et al . ( Newpher et al . , 2005 ) for Abp1 - mRFP / GFP - LC and Sla2p - mRFP / GFP - LC . For acquisition of GFP - LC and Abp1 - mRFP in sla2cc (cid:1) cells a dual 488 / 543 excitation filter was used to acquire images simultaneously . In Figure 3 . 3A and 3 . 7B the clathrin signal was intensified in Adobe (cid:1) Photoshop (cid:1) 7 for better viewing of cortical clathrin . Kymographs were generated from single pixel lines taken during four - minute time - lapse videos . Exposure times of 500 ms were used for all wide - field and TIRFM images , except for Sla2p - mRFP in Figure 3 . 3B & 3 . 3D , which used a 2000 ms exposure . Patch lifetimes of clathrin , Sla2p , and Abp1p were displayed as the mean ± the standard deviation in seconds ( s ) . Patch numbers were quantified from Z stacks collected at 0 . 25 (cid:1) m intervals . In most cases total patches / cell were counted from maximum intensity projections of large budded and nonpolarized cells . In the case of SL4782 , total patches per cell were counted from individual Z stacks , manually filtering out recounts of patches that bridged more than one section . The cell surface area was calculated by measuring the average diameter of the cell at 0 ° and 90 ° . The total number of patches / cell was divided by the surface area to calculate patches / (cid:1) m 2 . 83 Table 3 . Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains Strain Genotype Source a HR1965 MAT a his4 leu2 ura3 his4 lys2 bar1 sla2 (cid:2) : : LEU2 d HR3399 MAT a leu2 ura3 his3 sla2 (cid:2) : : LEU2 sla2 (cid:2) 376 - 573 : : TRP1 d SL1463 MAT (cid:1) leu2 ura3 - 52 trp1 his3 - (cid:2) 200 SL1628 MAT a leu2 ura3 - 52 trp1 his3 - (cid:2) 200 clc1 (cid:2) : : HIS3 YEp24 - CHC1 [ 2 (cid:1) , URA3 , CHC1 ] SL1629 MAT a leu2 ura3 - 52 trp1 his3 - (cid:2) 200 YEp24 - CHC1 SL1927 MAT (cid:1) leu2 ura3 - 52 ade6 chc1 (cid:2) : : LEU2 pKH2 [ 2 (cid:1) , URA3 , CLC1 ] SL4409 MAT a leu2 - 3 , 112 ura3 - 52 his3 - (cid:2) 200 trp1 - 901 gal4 (cid:2) ade2 gal80 (cid:2) GAL2 - ADE2 LYS2 : : GAL1 - HIS3 met2 : : GAL7 - lacZ chc1 (cid:2) : : TRP1 b SL4410 MAT a leu2 - 3 , 112 ura3 - 52 his3 - (cid:2) 200 trp1 - 901 gal4 (cid:2) ade2 gal80 (cid:2) GAL2 - ADE2 LYS2 : : GAL1 - HIS3 met2 : : GAL7 - lacZ clc1 (cid:2) : : TRP1 b SL4781 MAT (cid:1) leu2 ura3 his3 - (cid:2) 200 trp1 sla2 (cid:2) : : LEU2 p111 - SLA2 - GFP [ CEN , LEU2 , TRP1 , SLA2 - GFP ] SL4782 MAT a leu2 ura3 his3 - (cid:2) 200 trp1 clc1 (cid:2) : : KanMX6 sla2 (cid:2) : : LEU2 p111 - SLA2 - GFP SL5090 MAT (cid:1) leu2 ura3 - 52 trp1 his3 - (cid:2) 200 clc1 (cid:2) : : HIS3 ABP1 - mRFP : : KanMX6 pTMN17 [ CEN , TRP1 , GFP - CLC1 ] SL5101 MAT a leu2 ura3 his3 ABP1 - GFP : : HIS3 clc1 (cid:2) : : KanMX6 pRS426 [ 2 (cid:1) , URA3 ] c SL5121 MAT (cid:1) leu2 - 3 , 112 ura3 - 52 trp1 his3 - (cid:31)200 clc1(cid:31) : : HIS3 SLA2 - mRFP : : KanMX6 pTMN17 SL5185 MAT (cid:1) leu2 ura3 trp1 his3 - (cid:2) 200 sla2(cid:31) : : LEU2 ABP1 - mRFP : : KanMX6 p111 - Sla2 - GFP SL5186 MAT (cid:1) leu2 ura3 trp1 his3 - (cid:2) 200 sla2(cid:31) : : LEU2 ABP1 - mRFP : : KanMX6 pTMN52 [ CEN , LEU2 , sla2 (cid:2) cc - GFP : : TRP1 ] SL5198 MAT a leu2 ura3 his3 clc1 (cid:2) : : HIS3 sla2(cid:31) : : HIS3 sla2 (cid:2) cc : : TRP1 ABP1 - mRFP : : KanMX6 pTMN37 [ CEN , URA3 , GFP - CLC1 ] d SL5226 MAT a leu2 ura3 his3 - (cid:2) 200 trp1 chc1 (cid:2) : : LEU2 sla2(cid:31) : : LEU2 ABP1 - mRFP : : KanMX6 p111 - Sla2 - GFP SL5240 MAT a leu2 ura3 his3 - (cid:2) 200 trp1 clc1 (cid:2) : : HIS3 sla2(cid:31) : : LEU2 ABP1 - mRFP : : KanMX6 p111 - Sla2 - GFP SL5317 MAT (cid:1) leu2 ura3 - 52 trp1 his3 - (cid:2) 200 clc1 (cid:2) : : HIS3 SLA2 - mRFP : : KanMX6 SLA1 - GFP : : TRP1 SL5318 MAT (cid:1) leu2 ura3 - 52 trp1 his3 - (cid:2) 200 SLA2 - mRFP : : KanMX6 SLA1 - GFP : : TRP1 YPJ96 - 4 MAT a leu2 - 3 , 112 ura3 - 52 his3 - (cid:2) 200 trp1 - 901 gal4 (cid:2) ade2 gal80 (cid:2) GAL2 - ADE2 LYS2 : : GAL1 - HIS3 met2 : : GAL7 - lacZ b a Strains were generated by our laboratory , except where indicated . Several strains were derived from crosses or transformations into strains from other sources . b Derived from YPJ96 - 4 ( James et al . , 1996 ) c SL5101 was generated by crossing in an ABP1 - GFP : : HIS3 strain from D . Drubin ( Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ) d HR1965 and HR3399 are described in Wesp et al . , 1997 . SL5198 was generated by a cross to the sla2 (cid:2) cc mutant from Wesp et al . , 1997 . 84 Supplemental Movie Legends Supplemental Movie S6 . ABP1 - mRFP sla2 (cid:1) expressing Sla2p - GFP ( SL5185 ) . 120 frames ( 500 ms exposures ) were acquired during 240 s with 2 s between frames . Note the stepwise of recruitment of Sla2p - GFP followed by Abp1p - mRFP . Supplemental Movie S7 . chc1 (cid:1) ABP1 - mRFP sla2 (cid:1) expressing Sla2p - GFP ( SL5240 ) . 120 frames ( 500 ms exposures ) were acquired during 240 s with 2 s between frames . Note actin comet tail and periodic shedding of Sla2p patches . 85 Results Clathrin LC Mediates HC Interaction with Sla2p Previously a two - hybrid screen in our lab found that clathrin LC interacts with Sla2p ( Henry et al . , 2002 ) . The two - hybrid analysis also showed an interaction between the central coiled - coil domain of Sla2p and a fragment containing the clathrin HC proximal arm ( 655 - 1653 ) , although this interaction was weaker than the interaction seen between LC and Sla2p ( Figure 3 . 1A , upper panel ) . To determine if Sla2p interacts directly with the HC or the LC , deletions of CLC1 or CHC1 were generated in the two - hybrid reporter strain so the interactions of baits and preys of Sla2p with HC ( 655 - 1653 ) or LC could be assayed in the absence of genomically encoded LC or HC , respectively . In the clc1 (cid:1) reporter strain the interaction between HC and Sla2p ( 292 - 502 ) was ablated ( Figure 3 . 1A , middle panel ) . This indicates that the Sla2p coiled - coil domain interaction with HC is likely mediated through LC . In contrast , the interaction between LC and Sla2p ( 292 - 520 ) still occurred in the absence of CHC1 ( Figure 3 . 1A , lower panel ) . In addition , the known dimerization of Sla2p via the central coiled - coil domain ( Wesp et al . , 1997 ; Yang et al . , 1999 ) does not require the presence of either clathrin subunit ( Figure 3 . 1A ) . To further confirm that HC interaction with the Sla2p coiled - coil domain is indirect , a bacterially purified GST - Sla2p fusion ( 289 - 583 ) was incubated with wild type ( WT ) , clc1 (cid:1) and chc1 (cid:1) yeast extracts . GST - Sla2p ( 289 - 583 ) was able to pull down clathrin HC from a WT yeast extract ( Figure 3 . 1B , lane 5 ) . However , GST - Sla2p ( 289 583 ) did not pull down HC in an extract derived from a clc1 (cid:1) strain ( Figure 3 . 1B , lane 9 ) , 86 Figure 3 . 1 . Clathrin LC is Important for Sla2p - HC Interaction , but Clathrin HC is Not Required for Sla2p - LC Binding . ( A ) WT ( YPJ96 - 4 ) , clc1 (cid:2) ( SL4410 ) , and chc1 (cid:2) ( SL4409 ) two - hybrid reporter strains were transformed with GAL4 binding domain ( GBD ) bait plasmids pGBDU ( GBD empty ) , pKH19 ( GBD - CLC1 ) , or pKH47 ( GBD - sla2 - 292 - 501 ) in combination with GAL4 activation domain ( GAD ) prey plasmids pGAD ( GAD empty ) , pKH24 ( GAD - chc1 - 655 - 1653 ) , or p31 - 2 ( GAD - sla2 - 292 - 502 ) . Equal numbers of cells from transformants were spotted on complete synthetic medium lacking leucine and uracil ( C - LEU - URA ) and medium lacking adenine , leucine , and uracil ( C - ADE - LEU - URA ) and grown for 5 days to score for ADE2 reporter expression . ( B ) Bacterially purified GST fusions prebound to glutathione sepharose beads were incubated with yeast extracts from WT ( SL1629 ) or clc1 (cid:2) ( SL1628 ) to pull down clathrin HC . GST - Bmh1p was used as a control for non - specific binding . ( C ) Same as ( B ) except GST fusions were incubated with yeast extract from WT ( SL1463 + pKH2 ) or chc1 (cid:2) ( SL1927 ) to pull down clathrin LC . ( B & C ) Blots were probed with indicated antibodies . Ten (cid:1) l of cell lysates were run as input controls ( lanes 1 & 6 ) . 87 Figure 3 . 1 88 once again showing the dependence of the Sla2p coiled - coil / HC interaction on clathrin LC . GST - Clc1p could not pull down HC from a WT extract ( Figure 3 . 1B , lane 4 ) , but readily pulled down HC from a clc1 (cid:1) strain ( Figure 3 . 1B , lane 8 ) , showing that the HC in WT cells is prebound with LC . Consistent with the two - hybrid analysis , GST - Sla2p ( 289 - 583 ) associated with LC from a yeast extract in the presence or absence of HC ( Figure 3 . 1C , lanes 5 & 9 ) . Taken together , the two - hybrid and GST pull down data demonstrate a dependence on LC for an interaction between the Sla2p coiled - coil domain and the clathrin HC , while HC is not required for the interaction between Sla2p and LC . Clathrin Light Chain and Sla2p Directly Interact through the Sla2p Coiled - coil Domain The interaction of LC with the Sla2p coiled - coil domain in the two - hybrid analysis and pull down from yeast extracts could be indirect . Therefore we tested for direct interactions by incubating a bacterially expressed 6xHis - Clc1p fusion with several bacterially expressed GST - Sla2p truncation and deletion fusions . GST - Sla2p ( 292 - 968 ) and GST - Sla2p ( 289 - 583 ) interacted with 6xHis - Clc1p ( Figure 3 . 2A , lanes 4 & 5 ) , showing that the smaller fragment containing the Sla2p coiled - coil domain is sufficient to bind LC . Next , to determine if any region outside of the coiled - coil domain bound the LC , pull downs with a GST - Sla2p fusion deleting amino acids 376 - 573 was compared to a GST - Sla2p full - length fusion . The GST - Sla2p - (cid:1) 376 - 573 did not interact with 6xHis - Clc1p , unlike the full length GST - Sla2p ( Figure 3 . 2A , lanes 6 & 7 ) . Therefore , Sla2p and LC interact directly , and the central region of Sla2p containing the coiled - coil domain is necessary and sufficient for binding to LC . 89 Figure 3 . 2 . Clathrin LC and Sla2p Interact Directly in a Region Containing the Coiled - coil Domain of Sla2p , but the HC Terminal Domain does Not Interact with Sla2p . ( A ) Bacterially expressed GST fusions prebound to glutathione sepharose beads were used to pull down bacterially expressed 6xHis - Clc1p . GST - Bmh1p was used as a control for non - specific binding . Blots were probed with indicated antibodies . ( B ) Bacterially expressed GST fusions prebound to glutathione sepharose beads were incubated with WT ( SL1629 ) yeast extract to pull down clathrin HC . ( C ) YPJ96 - 4 was transformed with GBD bait plasmids pTMN9 ( GBD - SLA2 ) , pKH49 ( GBD - sla2 - 292 - 968 ) , pKH47 ( GBD - sla2 - 292 - 501 ) , pTMN38 ( GBD - ENT1 ) or pGBDU ( GBD empty ) in combination with GAD prey plasmids pGAD ( GAD empty ) and pTMN8 ( GAD - chc1 - 1 - 500 ) . Equal numbers of cells from transformants were spotted on complete synthetic medium lacking leucine and uracil ( C - LEU - URA ) and medium lacking adenine , leucine , and uracil ( C - ADE - LEU - URA ) and grown for 3 days . ( D ) Coomassie blue stained gel of fractions ( 31 - 47 ) from a Sephacryl S - 1000 column derived from CCV purification of WT ( SL1463 ) yeast . ( E ) Western blots of yeast extracts from WT + pSLA2 2 (cid:1) ( SL1463 + YEplac195 - SLA2 ) , WT ( SL1463 ) , and sla2 (cid:1) ( HR1965 ) , and fraction # 35 from S - 1000 CCV preparation shown in D concentrated 50 fold . Blots were probed with (cid:1) Sla2p and (cid:1) Clc1p antibodies . 90 Figure 3 . 2 91 Clathrin HC Terminal Domain does Not Bind Sla2p Many proteins containing the clathrin - box motif related to LLDLD are known to interact with the HC - TD . Hip1 , but not Hip1R , interacts with mammalian HC via this type of motif ( Engqvist - Goldstein et al . , 2001 ; Legendre - Guillemin et al . , 2002 ; Metzler et al . , 2001 ; Mishra et al . , 2001 ) . Two related sequences exist in Sla2p ( amino acids 152 - 156 ( ILDLM ) and 573 - 577 ( ILDAI ) . To examine whether Sla2p lacking the LC binding region interacts with the HC - TD , we tested whether GST - Sla2p - (cid:1) 376 - 573 was capable of interacting with HC from a yeast extract . As a positive control GST - LLDLD was used to pull down HC from a WT extract ( Figure 3 . 2B , lane 4 ) . The Sla2p coiled - coil domain deletion construct interacted very weakly with clathrin HC in the presence ( Figure 3 . 2B , lane 5 ) or absence of endogenous LC ( data not shown ) . This weak interaction left open the possibility of other indirect interactions between Sla2p and HC , or that Sla2p binds to HC - TD through the LLDLD - like motifs or other sequences . To test if the HC - TD interacts with Sla2p , two - hybrid analysis of Sla2p ( 292 - 501 ) , Sla2p ( 292 - 968 ) , and full length Sla2p baits were tested with a HC - TD ( Chc1p - 1 - 500 ) prey . None of the Sla2p baits interacted with the TD prey ; however , an Ent1p bait , which contains the C - terminal clathrin box motif LIDL * did bind the TD , verifying that the HC - TD prey was functional ( Figure 3 . 2C ) . Since neither the potential clathrin - box motifs nor other Sla2p sequences interact with the HC - TD by two - hybrid analysis , the weak HC interaction with Sla2p seen in Figure 2B may occur indirectly through proteins other than the LC . 92 Sla2p is not Associated with CCVs Since Hip1 / R are associated with mammalian CCVs ( Legendre - Guillemin et al . , 2002 ; Metzler et al . , 2001 ; Mishra et al . , 2001 ) , we examined whether Sla2p is a stable component of yeast CCVs . A 100 , 000g pellet was generated from cell lysates by differential centrifugation and fractionated over a Sephacryl S - 1000 column ( Lemmon et al . , 1988 ) ; however , Sla2p could not be detected in CCV fractions , even after peak clathrin - containing fractions were concentrated 50 fold ( Figure 3 . 2D & E ) . Therefore Sla2p is not a stable component of yeast CCVs or endocytic CCVs are short - lived due to rapid uncoating . Alternatively , Sla2p association with clathrin LC may only occur prior to vesicle budding . Clathrin is Recruited to Cortical Patches Prior to Sla2p Previous studies showed that Sla2p or clathrin are recruited to the cortex during endocytosis prior to the burst of Abp1p / actin accumulation , indicating they are both early endocytic patch components ( Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ; Newpher et al . , 2005 ) . To determine if clathrin and Sla2p share similar cortical lifetimes , GFP - LC and Sla2p - mRFP were coexpressed in cells . Using wide - field fluorescence microscopy we found that patches of cortical clathrin and Sla2p only partially overlapped , similar to what we saw previously with Sla2p - GFP with HC - mRFP ( Newpher et al . , 2005 ) ( Figure 3 . 3A ) . To be sure we were selectively observing cortical clathrin , and that the signal was not from internal patches of clathrin on Golgi / endosomal structures , we used total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy ( TIRFM ) ( Newpher et al . , 2005 ) . Again , we saw some clathrin 93 Figure 3 . 3 . Clathrin is Recruited Prior to Sla2p During Endocytic Patch Formation in WT Cells . GFP - CLC1 SLA2 - mRFP strain SL5121 was viewed by wide - field ( A ) and TIRF microscopy ( B ) . Note many cortical patches of clathrin do not contain Sla2p , consistent with earlier recruitment of clathrin . ( C ) Time - lapse video of a representative cortical clathrin patch at 3 s intervals visualized by wide - field imaging . The white line is a reference for the starting point of the clathrin patch when it is still at the cortex . The clathrin patch moves upwards in the video (cid:2) 200 nm , illustrating its movement away from the cell surface . ( D ) Time - lapse videos of patches with GFP - LC and Sla2p - mRFP shown at 6 . 9 s intervals by TIRFM . Note clathrin recruitment prior to Sla2p and simultaneous disappearance of Sla2p and clathrin . In videos with longer Sla2p / clathrin lifetimes fluctuations in signal intensities were observed , possibly due to photobleaching . The video in the top panel in ( D ) was started after clathrin already appeared . Clathrin patch lifetimes cannot be calculated from such examples , but these events clearly demonstrate earlier recruitment of clathrin . ( E ) Bar graph showing the average patch lifetimes of Sla2p - mRFP and GFP - LC by TIRFM . Lifetimes of Sla2p and LC were significantly different ( P < . 001 ) . Scale bar = 5 (cid:1) m . 94 Figure 3 . 3 95 patches overlapping with , while others were independent of , Sla2p ( Figure 3 . 3B ) . Time - lapse images from the TIRF microscopy found that 90 % of Sla2p patches are recruited to sites already containing clathrin ( n = 38 ) . Therefore , most of the Sla2p - independent clathrin patches represent early clathrin patches that have not yet received Sla2p . The clathrin patches ranged in lifetime from 30 s to several minutes with an average lifetime of 53 s ± 16 s , while Sla2p patches had shorter lifetimes of 29 s ± 12 s ( Figure 3 . 3D & E , n = 34 patch events ) . On average , Sla2p was recruited 25 s ± 16 s after the initial recruitment of clathrin , while both proteins disappeared from the cortex simultaneously ( Figure 3 . 3D & E ) . The lifetime of Sla2p patches observed by TIRFM was shorter than originally reported by wide - field microscopy ( Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ) , since it would not be visible as it moved 200 nm away from the cell surface . TIRFM should only penetrate (cid:1) 60 nm deep into the cell , assuming an average cell wall thickness of (cid:1) 90 nm ( Smith et al . , 2000 ) . Using wide - field microscopy , we found that clathrin also undergoes (cid:1) 200 nm of inward movement from the cortex just before its disappearance ( Figure 3 . 3C , n = 12 patch events ) , like Sla1p , Pan1p and Sla2p ( Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ) . These data show that clathrin is an early endocytic patch protein , which is recruited to the cortex prior to Sla2p , and disappears from the cortex simultaneously with Sla2p after 200 nm of inward movement . 96 Clathrin is Required for Normal Progression of Sla2p Patches and Cortical Actin Dynamics Since clathrin is recruited prior to Sla2p , we examined whether the absence of HC or LC would affect Sla2p - GFP recruitment and / or dynamics using wide - field microscopy . As a marker for cortical actin we examined Abp1 - mRFP . As described by Kaksonen et al . ( Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ) , in wild type cells Sla2p was recruited to the cortex prior to Abp1p , and as the Sla2p signal declined , the Abp1p signal intensified and disappeared soon after ( Supplemental Movie S6 ) . Sla2p patches in our WT cells had a lifetime of 38 s ± 9 s by wide - field imaging ( as compared to 29 s by TIRFM ) and temporally overlapped with Abp1 patches , which displayed lifetimes of 13 s ± 3 s ( Figure 3 . 4A . 1 , B . 1 , n = 42 events ) . To our surprise and in contrast to results we published previously ( Henry et al . , 2002 ) , we found strong cortical recruitment of Sla2p - GFP in clathrin HC ( chc1 (cid:1) ) and LC ( clc1 (cid:1) ) mutant cells ( Figure 3 . 4A ) . We suspect we did not observe cortical Sla2p in clathrin HC - depleted cells previously because of technical problems with the immunofluorescence techniques and antibody reagents available at the time . Clathrin mutants have a severely thickened cell wall and fixation and penetration of antibodies may have been inefficient . We observed at least four different types of Sla2p patch structures and dynamics in chc1 (cid:1) and clc1 (cid:1) cells by wide - field live cell imaging ( Figure 3 . 4A . 2 & A . 3 , 4B ) . The first class had immobile Sla2p patches that were usually large and / or clustered in zones along the cell surface . These Sla2p patches showed highly elongated lifetimes extending four minutes or longer ( Figure 3 . 4B . 2 & B . 6 ) . In addition , the patches never received 97 Figure 3 . 4 . Clathrin is Required for Progression of Sla2p Patches and Normal Actin Dynamics . ( A1 - 3 ) . WT ABP1 - mRFP SLA2 - GFP ( SL5185 ) , chc1 (cid:2) ABP1 - mRFP SLA2 - GFP ( SL5240 ) , and clc1 (cid:1) ABP1 - mRFP SLA2 - GFP ( SL5226 ) cells were viewed by wide - field microscopy . ( B1 - 9 ) Kymographs generated from single pixel wide lines placed through cortical patches from cells described in ( A ) . Images were collected at two - second intervals and viewed up to four minutes . Note different types of patch dynamics in clathrin mutants : ( B2 & 6 ) immobile Sla2p patches without actin assembly ; ( B3 & 7 ) Sla2p patches with actin comet tails and repeated patch internalization from the same site ; ( B4 & 8 ) Sla2p and Abp1p patches with extended lifetimes that do mature and internalize ; ( B5 & B9 ) relatively normal Sla2p lifetimes with extended Abp1p lifetimes . ( C & D ) Bar graphs showing average patch lifetimes of Sla2p - GFP and Abp1p - mRFP in WT and clathrin mutants for relatively normal internalization events ( n = 30 ) . ( C ) Patch lifetimes of Sla2p in WT and clathrin mutants ( B5 & 9 ) were not significantly different ( P > . 05 ) . ( D ) Patch lifetimes of Abp1p were slowed almost two fold in clathrin mutants ( P < . 001 ) ( B5 & 9 ) Scale bar = 5 (cid:1) m . 98 Figure 3 . 4 99 cortical actin during the four - minute time course , demonstrating a complete failure in recruitment of cortical actin . The second class of Sla2p patches seen in clathrin mutants were also large and immobile , but developed long actin containing structures , resembling actin comet tails ( Figure 3 . 4B . 3 & B . 7 ) . These large immobile Sla2p patches randomly released smaller Sla2p patches at their tips in intervals of (cid:1) 20 s to several minutes ( Supplemental Movie S7 ) . As each smaller Sla2p patch budded off it was accompanied by a cortical actin patch , which eventually elongated into an actin comet tail , waving into the cytosol for up to one minute . The actin comet tail often appeared to hold onto the smaller Sla2p patch up to 1500 nm away from the cortex until they both dissipated . The actin comet tail structures formed by Abp1 - mRFP were also confirmed by Alexa - phalloidin staining ( data not shown ) . The third class seen in clathrin mutants had Sla2p patches that were more normal in size and which completely budded off from the cortex along with cortical actin ( Figure 3 . 4B . 4 & B . 8 ) . However , these Sla2p patches persisted at the cortex for about 1 - 4 minutes before recruitment of Abp1 . Finally , in the fourth class , Sla2p patches were similar to those seen in WT cells ( Figure 3 . 4B . 5 & B . 9 ) . The Sla2p signal had an average lifetime of about 41 s ± 10 s ( chc1 (cid:2) and clc1 (cid:2) cells ) , although the actin / Abp1 fluorescence persisted for 26 s ± 10 s in chc1 (cid:2) and 23 s ± 8 s in clc1 (cid:2) ( Figure 3 . 4C & D , n = 30 each ) , almost twice as long as seen in WT cells . All four classes of Sla2p patch events were well represented in the cell population and no differences were observed between chc1 (cid:2) and clc1 (cid:2) cells in the frequency of these events . These data demonstrate an important role for clathrin in the organization and normal turnover of endocytic cortical patches . 100 Figure 3 . 5 . Actin Comet Tails and Patches in Clathrin Mutants Contain Endocytic Membrane . ( A ) clc1 (cid:2) ABP1 - GFP ( SL5101 ) cells stained with 40 (cid:1) M FM4 - 64 and incubated for 20 minutes before viewing by wide - field microscopy . Note patches of Abp1p associated with FM4 - 64 seen as yellow in the merge . ( B ) Two examples of time - lapse videos showing concentration of FM4 - 64 into de novo actin patches ( top panel ) and actin comet tails ( bottom panel ) from clc1 (cid:2) cells . Note first three frames in the top left corner of B , top panel show a residual disappearing Abp1p patch different than the de novo patch that appears in the middle of frame number 3 . Scale bar = 5 (cid:1) m . 101 Actin Comet Tails and Cortical Patches in Clathrin Mutants Contain Endocytic Membrane The aberrant actin structures observed in the clathrin mutants could represent completely failed or elongated endocytic events . To test if the clathrin mutants internalized membrane into these actin structures , clc1 (cid:2) cells were stained with the lipophillic dye FM4 - 64 for 2 minutes , washed and resuspended in fresh medium , and viewed after 20 min incubation . The wash helped deplete the strong band of FM4 - 64 from the plasma membrane , allowing better visualization of the dye at de novo cortical patches . Not only did clc1 (cid:2) cells take up the FM4 - 64 into newly forming cortical patches ( Figure 3 . 5A & B , top panel ) , FM4 - 64 was also present in actin comet tails ( Figure 3 . 5B , bottom panel ) . These data show that clathrin mutants do internalize plasma membrane at cortical actin patches and both normal looking and aberrant actin structures contain invaginating membrane . Sla1p , but Not Sla2p , Shows Reduced Cortical Recruitment and Patch Lifetime in Clathrin Mutants A recent report showed that clathrin mutants have a reduced number of Sla1p and Las17p patches per cell ( Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ) . To determine if there is a similar effect on Sla2p , the number of Sla2p and Sla1p patches / (cid:1) m 2 were compared in our WT and clc1 (cid:2) strains . Similar to the 69 % reduction reported by Kaksonen et al . ( Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ) , Sla1p patches decreased from 0 . 6 ± 0 . 26 patches / (cid:1) m 2 in WT to 0 . 2 ± 0 . 06 patches / (cid:1) m 2 in our clc1 (cid:2) cells ( Figure 6A - B ) . In contrast , the number of Sla2p patches 102 Figure 3 . 6 . Sla1p , but Not Sla2p Shows Decreased Patch Lifetime and Cortical Recruitment in Clathrin Mutants . ( A ) WT SLA1 - GFP ( SL5318 ) , clc1 (cid:1) SLA1 - GFP ( SL5317 ) , WT SLA2 - GFP ( SL4781 ) , and clc1 (cid:1) SLA2 - GFP ( SL4782 ) were viewed by wide - field microscopy . Z stacks were collected at an interval of 0 . 25 (cid:1) m and the maximum intensity projection is shown in all panels , except for clc1 (cid:1) SLA2 - GFP , as the presence of large Sla2p - GFP patches led to the exclusion of weak intensity Sla2p - GFP patches in the projection image . In this case a single plane from the Z - axis focused on the cell surface is shown . ( B ) Quantification of Sla1p - GFP and Sla2p - GFP patches / (cid:1) m 2 in WT and clc1 (cid:2) cells from ( A ) . Note the difference between WT and clc1 (cid:2) for Sla1p - GFP ( P < 0 . 001 ) but not Sla2p - GFP ( P > 0 . 2 ) ( n (cid:1) 17 cells per strain ) . ( C - D ) WT SLA1 - GFP SLA2 - mRFP ( SL5318 ) and clc1 (cid:1) SLA1 - GFP SLA2 - mRFP ( SL5317 ) were viewed by wide - field microscopy and time - lapse images were collected every 2 s . Note different types of patch dynamics in clathrin mutants : ( D1 ) Sla2p and Sla1p in WT cells ; ( D2 ) immobile Sla2p patches without Sla1p ; ( D3 ) Sla2p patches recruiting Sla1p and repeated patch internalization from the same site ; ( D4 ) Sla2p patches with extended lifetimes that acquire Sla1p and internalize ; ( D5 ) relatively normal Sla2p lifetime with shortened Sla1p lifetime . ( E ) Bar graph showing difference in patch lifetimes of Sla1p - GFP between WT ( SL5318 , n = 30 ) and clc1 (cid:2) ( SL5317 , n = 37 ) ( P < 0 . 005 ) . Scale bar = 5 (cid:1) m . 103 Figure 3 . 6 104 did not significantly change between WT ( 0 . 88 ± 0 . 12 ) and clc1 (cid:1) ( 0 . 83 ± 0 . 19 ) ( Figure 3 . 6A - B ) . The greater number of Sla2p than Sla1 patches per cell in the clathrin mutant , suggested that many Sla2p patches would not contain Sla1p . To confirm this , we co - expressed Sla2p - mRFP and Sla1p - GFP in a clc1 (cid:1) strain and found that there were Sla2p patches all around the cortex , but they only occasionally overlapped with Sla1p patches ( Figure 3 . 6C ) . Time - lapse videos of the overlapping patches revealed that Sla2p was recruited to the cortex prior to Sla1p in clc1 (cid:1) cells ( Figure 3 . 6D ) . As seen for Sla2p / Abp1p ( see Figure 3 . 4 ) , at least four distinct classes of Sla2p / Sla1p events were observed in the clathrin mutant ( Figure 3 . 6D ) . Some Sla2p patches remained immobile and never received Sla1p ( Figure 3 . 6D2 ) , while others were immobile and periodically shed patches containing Sla1p ( D3 ) . Longer - lived Sla2p patches that eventually internalized also recruited Sla1p , but towards the end of their lifetime ( D4 ) ; likewise the Sla2p patches with normal lifetimes also recruited Sla1p ( D5 ) . Overall , Sla1p was only recruited to sites containing pre - existing Sla2p , and all sites where the Sla2p patch matured and internalized received Sla1p prior to inward movement . The previous study of patch dynamics in clathrin mutants also found that Sla1p patch lifetime was accelerated ( Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ) . In our clc1 (cid:1) cells Sla1p - GFP patch lifetime also decreased , from 32 s ± 7 s in WT to 27 s ± 7 s ( Figure 3 . 6E , n = 30 events ) , and nearly all of the Sla1p patches were mobile and internalized . In contrast , as described above ( Figure 3 . 4 ) , many of the Sla2p patches were large and immobilized at the cell surface , and even in patches that completed internalization , the Sla2p lifetimes were slower or at best similar to wild type . Furthermore , even in WT cells the lifetime of 105 Sla1p ( 32 s + 7s ; Figure 3 . 6E ) was significantly shorter than Sla2p ( 38 s ± 9 s ; Figure 3 . 4C ) ( P < 0 . 01 , n = 30 patch events ) , which is also reflected by the fact that there are more patches with Sla2p than Sla1p ( Figure 3 . 6B ) . Therefore , Sla2p is recruited to the cortex prior to Sla1p in both WT and clathrin mutant cells . The Sla2 Coiled - coil Domain is Important for Normal Turnover of Clathrin , Sla2p and Abp1p Since the Sla2 (cid:1) coiled - coil ( cc ) mutant protein does not interact with clathrin LC ; we tested the effects of this mutation on the dynamics of clathrin , Sla2p , and Abp1p . To examine Sla2p / Abp1p dynamics in the sla2 (cid:1) cc mutant , Abp1p - mRFP was co - expressed with Sla2p (cid:1) cc - GFP as the sole source of each protein . Unlike WT , sla2 (cid:1) cc cells displayed elongated patch lifetimes of 79 s ± 23 s for Sla2p (cid:1) cc - GFP and 32 s ± 12 s for Abp1p - mRFP ( Figure 3 . 7A . 1 , A . 2 , A . 3 & C , n = 30 events ) . This increase in patch lifetime for Sla2p (cid:1) cc and Abp1p is consistent with the reduced rate of alpha factor uptake by Ste2p in sla2 (cid:1) cc cells ( Wesp et al . , 1997 ) . To observe the effect of sla2 (cid:1) cc cells on cortical clathrin , the lifespan of GFP - LC along with Abp1p - mRFP was measured by TIRFM . Consistent with the elongation of Sla2p and Abp1p lifespan , GFP - LC lifetime increased from 49 s ± 22 s ( n = 61 ) to 180s ± 106 s ( n = 13 ) ( Figure 3 . 7B . 1 , B . 2 , B . 3 , & C ) . Although the clathrin lifespan was increased in the sla2 (cid:1) cc mutant , Abp1p was still recruited to clathrin patches , with 91 % ( n = 58 ) of Abp1p patches forming at sites containing GFP - LC . These results show that the Sla2p coiled - coil domain is not required for its own recruitment or that of Abp1p and 106 Figure 3 . 7 . sla2 (cid:1) cc has Increased Abp1 , Sla2p , and Clathrin Cortical Patch Lifetime . ( A ) sla2 (cid:1) cc - GFP ABP1 - mRFP ( SL5186 ) ( A1 & 3 ) and SLA2 - GFP ABP1 - mRFP ( SL5185 ) ( A2 ) cells were visualized by wide - field microscopy . ( A1 ) Single frame and ( A2 - 3 ) kymographs generated from single pixel lines through individual cortical patches collected from time - lapse videos at two - second intervals . Note elongated patch lifetimes of cells expressing Sla2p (cid:2) cc and Abp1p . ( B ) sla2 (cid:1) cc ABP1 - mRFP GFP - CLC1 ( SL5198 ) cells imaged by wide - field ( B1 ) and TIRFM time - lapse at 6 s intervals ( B3 ) . ( B2 ) WT ABP1 - mRFP GFP - CLC1 ( SL5090 ) cells imaged by TIRFM at 5 . 3 s intervals . ( C ) Bar graphs showing the average patch lifetimes for Sla2p - GFP , Abp1p - mRFP , and GFP - LC in WT and sla2 (cid:1) cc cells . Note dramatic increase in patch lifetimes in the sla2 (cid:1) cc mutant ( P < . 001 for all ) . Scale bar = 5 (cid:1) m . 107 Figure 3 . 7 108 clathrin ; however , loss of this Sla2p domain affects the normal dynamics of both early and late endocytic factors . Discussion Physical Interactions Between Sla2p and the Clathrin Subunits In this study we show that the interaction between yeast clathrin LC and the Sla2p coiled - coil domain is direct and occurs independently of clathrin HC . This interaction is conserved , as mammalian LCs interact directly with the coiled - coil domain of the Sla2p homologues , Hip1 and Hip1R ( HIP12 ) ( Chen and Brodsky , 2005 ; Legendre - Guillemin et al . , 2002 ; Legendre - Guillemin et al . , 2005 ) . In addition to the LC interaction , Hip1 , but not Hip1R , also interacts with the HC - TD through its clathrin box motif ( Legendre - Guillemin et al . , 2002 ; Metzler et al . , 2001 ; Mishra et al . , 2001 ) . We did detect a weak interaction between yeast HC and Sla2p (cid:1) cc , which suggested Sla2p might interact with HC - TD through its two sequences related to the LLDLD - like clathrin box motif . By two - hybrid analysis we found TD does not interact with these motifs under conditions where Ent1p bound strongly . This suggests that Sla2p is more similar to Hip1R , which lacks clathrin - binding motifs and an AP - 2 binding site ( Legendre - Guillemin et al . , 2002 ) . However , we cannot completely rule out a TD - Sla2p interaction , because HIP1 also does not bind mammalian TD by two - hybrid analysis ( Chen and Brodsky , 2005 ) . Still , the weak association between HC and Sla2p - (cid:1) cc could be mediated by multivalent interactions between endocytic factors that can bridge Sla2p and clathrin HC even in the absence of LC - Sla2p binding . For example , Sla2p binds to Sla1p , which interacts directly with Pan1p ( Gourlay et al . , 2003 ; Tang et al . , 2000 ) . Pan1p EH domains , in turn , 109 bind Ent1 / 2p and Yap1801 / 1802p , which have clathrin TD binding motifs ( Wendland and Emr , 1998 ; Wendland et al . , 1999 ) . Clathrin is Recruited Prior to Sla2p at Endocytic Patches The direct interaction between LC and Sla2p suggested that these proteins function together at the cortex during endocytosis . To better understand this interaction , we followed their dynamics simultaneously by live cell imaging . Previously it was shown that both clathrin and Sla2p are early endocytic patch factors , relative to the late stage components , such as Abp1p or Arp2 / 3 complex proteins , present during actin recruitment and vesicle internalization ( Huckaba et al . , 2004 ; Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ; Newpher et al . , 2005 ) . Here , using TIRF microscopy , we found that clathrin is recruited to the cortex on average 25s prior to Sla2p , suggesting a role for clathrin during the earliest stages of endocytosis . This is consistent with findings that clathrin is also recruited prior to Las17p ( Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ) . In addition , both clathrin and Sla2p disappear from the cortex at the same time , after the initial recruitment of Abp1p . By wide - field microscopy we found that clathrin undergoes inward movement from the cortex of about 200 nm before its disappearance . This 200 nm inward movement ( also seen by Kaksonen et al . ( Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ) ) is identical to that of Sla2p , Sla1p and Pan1p during the end of their patch lifetimes , but is a much shorter distance than the 500 - 1000 nm movement reported for the later Abp1p / actin - containing patches as they move into the cell ( Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ) . It is not clear whether the slight inward movement of patches containing Sla2p , Sla1p , Pan1p , and clathrin represent completely budded CCVs or deeply invaginated 110 CCPs at the plasma membrane . Although Hip1 / R are highly abundant on mammalian CCVs , we could not detect Sla2p on purified yeast CCVS . If we assume Sla2p exits / uncoats along with clathrin , this result argues that endocytic CCVs may not exist in yeast , or only do so for several seconds , preventing purification in significant amounts relative to TGN / endosomal derived CCVs . Whether or not true endocytic CCVs exist in yeast , it is clear that Sla1p / Sla2p / Pan1p and clathrin uncoat / disassemble prior to the actin - associated long - range movement . Clathrin’s Roles in Cortical Patch Dynamics and Endocytosis Whether clathrin plays a direct role during endocytosis in yeast was debated for some time ( Baggett and Wendland , 2001 ) , due to the partial alpha factor uptake defect of clathrin mutants ( Tan et al . , 1993 ) . However , our recent studies clearly showed clathrin is a dynamic component of the endocytic machinery in yeast ( Newpher et al . , 2005 ) . Thus , the partial endocytic defect in clathrin mutants might be manifested by a similar partial effect on all endocytic sites , or , alternatively , only a subset of endocytic sites is still relatively functional . Our identification of at least four types of Sla2p patch populations and aberrant actin structures in cells lacking HC or LC helps to clarify this issue . Some Sla2p patches in the clathrin mutants were abnormally large and immobile , while others completed internalization , albeit often with slower kinetics . There were also major defects in cortical patch mobility and unusual patterns of assembly and disassembly of actin in clathrin mutants , including actin comet tails pluming inward from some Sla2p patches . This could be caused by improper activation , arrangement , or recruitment of the Arp2 / 3 activators Las17p , Pan1p , Abp1p , and Myo3 / 5p ( Duncan et al . , 111 2001 ; Evangelista et al . , 2000 ; Goode et al . , 2001 ; Lechler et al . , 2000 ; Winter et al . , 1999 ) . Nevertheless , even in endocytic patch events with relatively normal Sla2p timing , Abp1 patch lifetimes were delayed ~ 2 fold in clathrin mutants , and both Abp1p and Sla2p seemed to move deeper into the cell and persisted together longer than normal ( compare Figure 3 . 4B . 1 to 3 . 4B . 5 & 4B . 9 ) . Even though these internalization events seem abnormal , the delay in Abp1 / actin release may not actually contribute to the alpha factor endocytosis defects observed . The extended Abp1 phase could occur late after sequestration of alpha factor and vesicle pinching off . Therefore the slowed maturation of Sla2p patches and the fewer sites that complete internalization , likely account for the partial endocytic defect seen in clathrin mutants . It is still possible that without clathrin , fluid - phase endocytosis or another endocytic pathway is up regulated , as was seen in dominant negative dynamin - expressing animal cells ( Damke et al . , 1995 ) . However , these pathways would have to be actin independent , as nearly all clathrin patches progress to the actin / Abp1 phase and mutations or drugs that directly perturb actin function have strong endocytic phenotypes ( Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ; Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ; Newpher et al . , 2005 ) . Sla1p and Sla2p Dynamics are Distinct Recent studies of Kaksonen et al . ( Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ) examining Sla1p dynamics in clathrin - deficient cells were remarkably different from what we observed for Sla2p . They also observed that Abp1p lifetimes are slowed in the clathrin mutants , but they found that Sla1p patches are fewer in number and their lifetimes are shorter than normal . They suggested that the accelerated Sla1p dynamics accounted for the 56 - 73 % 112 reduction in the number of endocytic sites , which in turn caused the partial internalization defect seen in the absence of clathrin . Our examination of both Sla1p and Sla2p leads to a different interpretation of these findings . We also found that the number of cortical Sla1p patches / (cid:1) m 2 is greatly decreased in clc1 (cid:2) , but the number of Sla2p patches is essentially the same in WT and the clathrin mutant . One possibility that could account for this difference is that Sla2p can bind lipid via its ANTH domain , which may allow for normal cortical recruitment in the absence of clathrin . Similar results have also been seen with clathrin adaptors in animal cells . RNAi directed against clathrin HC showed no effect on the number of endocytic patches present at the plasma membrane , based on localization studies of AP - 2 , AP180 / CALM , Eps15 , and epsin ( Hinrichsen et al . , 2003 ; Motley et al . , 2003 ) . Therefore , adaptor recruitment to the plasma membrane does not require clathrin . Not only do Sla2p and Sla1p differ in that the lifetime of Sla1p patches is shortened , but nearly all Sla1p patches acquire Abp1 / actin and are internalized in clathrin mutants . In contrast , many Sla2p patches are large and immobile . Interestingly , the Sla2p patches that do internalize in clathrin mutants , always receive Sla1p ( and presumably Abp1p ) prior to their internalization . This suggests that Sla1p is only recruited to those Sla2p patches that are competent or primed to complete endocytosis . Alternatively , recruitment of Sla1p could be less efficient without clathrin , but once recruited it could trigger the rapid movement seen . The more rapid patch lifetime of Sla1p supports the idea that other steps needed for rapid internalization have been completed prior to Sla1p arrival at endocytic sites . Importantly , this sequential assembly appears to be a normal event , as we found that Sla1p is recruited after Sla2p even in wild 113 type cells . Taken together , our results demonstrate that without clathrin there is not decrease in the number of potential endocytic sites , rather there is a reduction in the number of competent endocytic sites that can recruit Sla1p and Abp1p to complete internalization . Role of the Clathrin - Sla2p Interaction Sla2p - deficient cells accumulate immobile cortical patches containing Sla1p , Pan1p , Las17p , clathrin , as well as AP180 and epsin adaptors , and they often develop wide actin comet tails spread over a large domain of the cell surface ( Gourlay et al . , 2003 ; Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ; Newpher et al . , 2005 ) . These large patches are unable to progress to endocytic pits and vesicles . This suggests that Sla2p plays a central regulatory role to promote maturation of the early patch stage to the invagination step . In contrast , the actin comet tails that develop in the clathrin mutants are very narrow and extend only as a single patch , rather than from a broad region of the cell surface . These actin comet tails are invaginating membrane as they are labeled with the lipophillic dye FM4 - 64 . Furthermore , many of the sites marked by Sla2p do eventually acquire Sla1p and Abp1 , which is a prerequisite for completion of endocytosis . Therefore , clathrin may act as a scaffold to properly establish the early endocytic patches . If all other factors are available , endocytic sites can still assemble and mature , although the process is less efficient . What might then be the function of the clathrin LC - Sla2p interaction ? The sla2 (cid:1) cc mutant completely disrupts LC binding in vitro and strongly reduces the interaction with clathrin HC in a yeast lysate . The near doubling in patch lifetime for 114 Abp1p , clathrin and Sla2p in the coiled - coil mutant indicates that in the absence of LC - Sla2p association , overall patch progression to and during the mobile late phase is delayed . Sla2p - LC interaction could promote patch mobility by serving as a signal for clathrin triskelions to rearrange or release and reassemble during membrane curvature and vesicle internalization . This model is supported by the ability of the Sla2p homologues , Hip1 and Hip1R , to promote clathrin assembly into clathrin cages , while perturbation of LC - Hip1 / R interaction reduces lattice assembly ( Chen and Brodsky , 2005 ; Legendre - Guillemin et al . , 2005 ) . Alternatively , LC itself could stimulate Sla2p - mediated progression of endocytic patches to the mobile actin phase . Note , we cannot rule out that the coiled - coil region of Sla2p , which is also a dimerization domain , has other interactions that contribute to the observed phenotypes . However , taken together , our data and the previous in vitro assembly studies ( Chen and Brodsky , 2005 ; Legendre - Guillemin et al . , 2005 ) suggest that the Sla2p - LC interaction is a critical step regulating the progression of endocytic events in both yeast and animal cells . In conclusion , we have shown that clathrin is an early endocytic factor , arriving at endocytic sites prior to Sla2p , which is followed by recruitment of Sla1p ; establishing at least three temporal stages of early endocytic patch assembly . Our previous studies found that clathrin recruitment is dependent on the epsin and AP180 adaptors ( Newpher et al . , 2005 ) , so these proteins are likely recruited to early patches before or along with clathrin . Both clathrin and Sla2p uncoat / disappear at the onset of intense Abp1 recruitment , which is when endocytic vesicles complete their internalization and move away from the cell surface . We propose that clathrin provides an early scaffolding or regulatory function for proper endocytic patch formation and efficient priming of Sla2p 115 containing patches , a necessary step for recruitment of Sla1p and , ultimately , Abp1p / Actin . Furthermore , our data support a direct in vivo role of clathrin LC - Sla2p interaction for endocytic vesicle formation . Future studies will be necessary to determine how LC binding regulates Sla2p’s role in this process . 116 Chapter 4 Clathrin Light Chain Interaction with the Hip1 / R Homologue , Sla2p , Regulates Turnover of Endocytic Patches in Yeast Introduction Clathrin LCs have been proposed to control the assembly and uncoating of clathrin - coated pits and vesicles through several domains ( Brodsky et al . , 1991 ) . For example , clathrin LCs bind calcium through an EF - Hand motif and to calmodulin in their C - terminus ( Figure 4 . 1A ) ( Nathke et al . , 1990 ; Pley et al . , 1995 ) . Therefore , clathrin LCs may regulate triskelion assembly , by acting as a sensor of local calcium concentration . LCa may also play a role in uncoating of clathrin lattices by its interaction with the molecular chaperone , Hcs70 ( DeLuca - Flaherty et al . , 1990 ) ; however , the HC - TD binding protein auxilin , along with Hsc70 , are able to function in CCV uncoating in the absence of LC ( Ungewickell et al . , 1995 ) . The N - terminal conserved sequence of LC ( Figure 4 . 1A ) contains several acidic residues shown to prevent spontaneous assembly of clathrin hub fragments in vitro ( Ybe et al . , 1998 ) . Finally , clathrin LC has a central region that interacts with the HC proximal domain and there is an additional interaction of the LC C - terminus with the HC trimerization domain ( Chen et al . , 2002 ; Pishvaee et al . , 1997 ; Ybe et al . , 2003 ) , thus implicating LC as a potential regulator of HC trimerization . In fact , in vivo studies from yeast have shown that LCs are required to trimerize HCs ( Chu et al . , 1996 ; Huang et al . , 1997 ) , consistent with a high resolution structure taken by electron cryomicroscopy of a clathrin hexagonal barrel , which found that the C - termini of LCs reach around toward the hub of triskelions ( Fotin et al . , 2004b ) . 117 In addition to LC’s proposed role as a regulator of clathrin lattice assembly , both yeast and mammalian LCs interact with the Hip1 / R family of endocytic proteins ( Henry et al . , 2002 ; Legendre - Guillemin et al . , 2002 ) . These actin and phosphoinositol lipid - binding proteins are important for endocytosis and are components of clathrin - coated pits ( Engqvist - Goldstein et al . , 1999 ; Hyun et al . , 2004 ) . Both Hip1 and Hip1R promote clathrin assembly in vitro and binding of Hip1 / R to clathrin LC is required for this assembly property ( Chen and Brodsky , 2005 ; Engqvist - Goldstein et al . , 2001 ; Legendre - Guillemin et al . , 2005 ; Metzler et al . , 2001 ; Mishra et al . , 2001 ; Waelter et al . , 2001 ) . In addition , the coiled - coil domains of Hip1 / R bind directly to the acidic residues in the LC conserved sequence , which are critical for LCs inhibition of clathrin hub fragment assembly ( Chen and Brodsky , 2005 ; Legendre - Guillemin et al . , 2005 ) . Therefore , Hip1 / R are thought to promote clathrin assembly by modulating clathrin LC’s inhibition of spontaneous hub domain assembly . In yeast , clathrin LC also interacts directly with the coiled - coil domain of the Hip1 / R homologue Sla2p ( Chapter 3 ) . Deletion of the coiled - coil domain blocks Sla2p’s interaction with clathrin LC and leads to a reduced rate of receptor - mediated endocytosis ( Wesp et al . , 1997 ) . In addition , sla2 (cid:1) cc cells show delayed progression of early and late stages of endocytosis , suggesting that this interaction is important for endocytic vesicle internalization ( Chapter 3 ) . Further supporting a role for clathrin / Sla2p function is that clathrin mutants develop immobile Sla2p patches with increased lifetimes . This is in contrast to the dynamics of Sla1p and Las17p , both of which have an increased rate of patch turnover in clathrin mutants . These specific effects on Sla2p , upon depletion of LC or HC , suggest 118 that clathrin / Sla2p interaction may be important for endocytic patch organization and promoting vesicle internalization . To better understand the importance of this interaction we have generated mutants of LC that maintain binding to HC , but no longer interact with Sla2p . Our results define an important endocytic specific function for clathrin LC and suggest that LC regulates the progression of early endocytic patches through direct binding to Sla2p . Methods and Materials Strains , Media , and Genetic Methods Strains used in this study are listed in Table 4 . YEPD and synthetic dropout medium were prepared as described in ( Nelson and Lemmon , 1993 ) . Yeast mating , sporulation , and tetrad analysis were performed as described in Guthrie and Fink ( 1991 ) . Yeast were transformed using the method of ( Gietz et al . , 1995 ) and cells were cultured at 30 ° C . Plasmids Plasmids pTMN17 [ GFP - CLC1 , TRP1 , CEN ] and pTMN37 [ GFP - CLC1 , URA3 , CEN ] are described in Newpher et al . , 2005 . YCp50 - CHC1 was described in Lemmon and Jones , 1987 . YEp24 - CHC1 , pKH4 [ CLC1 , CEN , URA3 ] , and pKH2 [ CLC1 , URA3 , 2 (cid:1) ] were previously described in ( Huang et al . , 1997 ) . p111 - SLA2 - GFP [ CEN , TRP1 , LEU2 ] was described in Chapter 3 . Plasmids pTMN1 [ GST - CLC1 for bacterial expression ] , pTMN3 [ 6xHis - CLC1 for bacterial expression ] , pTMN10 [ 6xHis - clc1 - ( 77 - 233 ) ] , pTMN11 [ 6xHis - clc1 - ( 77 - 155 ) ] , pTMN12 [ 6xHis - clc1 - ( 1 - 155 ) ] , pTMN14 [ 6xHis - 119 clc1 - ( 41 - 233 ) ] , pTMN15 [ 6xHis - clc1 - ( 19 - 233 ) ] were constructed by amplifying with CLC1 primers and subcloning into pGEX - 2T ( Amersham Biosciences ) or pRSET - A ( Invitrogen ) , using BamH1 / EcoR1 restriction sites . pTMN16 [ GST - chc1 - 1062 - 1653 ] was constructed by amplifying CHC1 coding sequence with primers containing flanking Not1 and Sal1 restriction sites for subcloning into pGEX - 4T1 ( Amersham Biosciences ) . pTMN18 [ CEN , TRP1 , clc1 - ( 77 - 233 ) ] , pTMN19 [ CEN , TRP1 , clc1 - ( 41 - 233 ) ] , pTMN20 [ CEN , TRP1 , clc1 - ( 1 - 143 ) ] , pTMN35 [ CEN , TRP1 , clc1 (cid:2) ( 20 - 40 ) ] , pTMN36 [ CEN , TRP1 , clc1 (cid:2) ( 20 - 76 ) ] , pTMN39 [ CEN , TRP1 , clc1 (cid:2) ( 41 - 76 ) ] , pTMN45 [ 2 (cid:1) , TRP1 , clc1 (cid:2) ( 20 - 76 ) ] , pTMN46 [ 2 (cid:1) , TRP1 , clc1 (cid:2) ( 20 - 40 ) ] , and pTMN47 [ 2 (cid:1) , TRP1 , clc1 (cid:2) ( 41 - 76 ) ] were made in a two step process . First His3MX6 with flanking Nco1 sites was amplified from pFA6a - His3MX6 with CLC1 primers containing sequence flanking the truncation or internal deletion sequences and gap repaired into pKH1 [ CEN , TRP1 , CLC1 ] . Plasmids from His + Trp + transformants were digested with Nco1 to remove the His3MX6 cassette and self ligated to generate the above truncation and internal deletion mutants . pTMN27 [ 2 (cid:1) , URA3 , clc1 - ( 77 - 233 ) ] , pTMN28 [ 2 (cid:1) , URA3 , clc1 - ( 1 - 143 ) ] , and pTMN29 [ 2 (cid:1) , URA3 , clc1 - ( 41 - 233 ) ] were generated by PvuII digestion of pTMN18 , pTMN20 , and pTMN19 , respectively , and gap repairing into BamH1 cut pRS426 [ 2 (cid:1) , URA3 ] . pTMN51 [ 2 (cid:1) , TRP1 , clc1 - 1 - ( 143 (cid:2) 20 - 76 ) ] was made by amplifying the His3MX6 cassette from pFA6a - His3MX6 containing flanking LC truncation sequence and gap repairing into pTMN45 [ 2 (cid:1) , TRP1 , clc1 (cid:2) ( 20 - 76 ) ] placing a stop codon after codon 143 of LC . pTMN42 was made by integrating the His3MX6 cassette flanked by Nco1 sites directly after the CLC1 start codon of pKH1 . The His3MX6 cassette was removed by digestion with Nco1 and religation . pTMN44 [ CEN , TRP1 , GFP - clc1 - ( 77 - 120 233 ) ] was made by amplifying the GFP coding sequence from pFA6a - GFP ( S65T ) - TRP1 with ends upstream of the CLC1 start codon and downstream of the truncation sequence and gap repairing into Nco1 cut pTMN42 . pTMN48 was made by integrating a stop codon into pTMN17 [ CEN , TRP1 , GFP - CLC1 ] after codon 143 using the His3MX6 cassette amplified from pFA6a - His3MX6 . GST - sla2 - ( 289 - 583 ) was described in Chapter 3 . GST - BMH1 , was a generous gift from Mike Yaffe . All plasmids generated by PCR of coding sequences were verified by DNA sequencing . Biochemical Procedures GST fusions were purified from bacteria as described in Chapter 3 . Recombinant 6xHis - tagged fusion proteins were expressed and purified following the QIAexpressionist (cid:1) protocols from Qiagen (cid:2) . GST pull downs using 6xHis - tagged fusions were performed as above described in Chapter 3 . Clathrin - coated vesicles were purified from yeast as described in ( Lemmon et al . , 1988 ) and clathrin HC was detected by immunoblots using mouse monoclonal antibodies at 1 : 10 . For immunoblots of clathrin LC , extracts were prepared by lysis of cells in RIPA ( 150 mM NaCl , 1 . 0 % NP - 40 , 0 . 5 % deoxycholate , 0 . 1 % SDS , 50 mM Tris ( pH 8 . 0 ) ) buffer at 2 . 0 x 10 8 cells / mL . Extracts were spun at 10 , 000g for 10 minutes to remove debris , boiled for 5 min , analyzed by SDS - PAGE and immunoblotting with rabbit anti - Clc1p antibodies at 1 : 1000 ( gift from Greg Payne ) . 121 Alpha Factor Uptake Assay For endocytosis assays , 35 S - labeled alpha - factor uptake was monitored as described in ( Dulic et al . , 1991 ) . Microscopy Fluorescent fusion proteins were visualized in live cells by growing cultures overnight to mid - log phase in synthetic media . Microscopy was performed using an Olympus fluorescence BX61 microscope equipped with Nomarski differential interference contrast ( DIC ) optics , a 100x objective ( numerical aperture 1 . 35 ) , a Roper CoolSNAP HQ camera , Sutter Lambda 10 + 2 automated excitation and emission filter wheels and a 175 watt Xenon remote source lamp with liquid light guide . Images were acquired and processed using the Intelligent Imaging Innovations SlideBook TM image analysis software and prepared with Adobe (cid:1) Photoshop (cid:1) 7 . Exposure times of 500 ms were used for all wide - field images . Patch lifetimes of Sla2p and Abp1p were displayed as the mean ± the standard deviation in seconds ( s ) . 122 Table 4 . Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains Strain Genotype Source a BJ3556 MAT a sst1 - 2 ade2 - 1 his6 met1 cyh2 rme1 ura1 can1 RC665 ( Chan and Otte , 1982 ) SL350 MAT a leu2 ura3 - 52 trp1 his3 - (cid:1) 200 ade6 GAL1 : : CHC1 ( Nelson et al . , 1993 ) SL1462 MAT a leu2 ura3 - 52 trp1 his3 - (cid:1) 200 SL1463 MAT (cid:1) leu2 ura3 - 52 trp1 his3 - (cid:1) 200 SL1620 MAT (cid:1) leu2 ura3 - 52 trp1 his3 - (cid:1) 200 clc1 (cid:1) : : HIS3 SL1929 MAT a leu2 ura3 - 52 trp1 his3 - (cid:1) 200 clc1 (cid:1) : : HIS3 bar1 - 1 SL3593 MAT a leu2 ura3 - 52 trp1 bar1 - 1 chc1 (cid:1) : : LEU2 SL4838 MAT (cid:1) leu2 ura3 - 52 trp1 his3 - (cid:1) 200 clc1 (cid:1) : : HIS3 chc1 (cid:1) : : LEU2 pTMN37 [ CEN , URA3 , GFP - CLC1 ] SL5185 MAT (cid:1) leu2 ura3 trp1 his3 sla2(cid:31) : : LEU2 ABP1 - mRFP : KanMX6 p111 - Sla2 - GFP [ CEN , LEU2 , TRP1 , SLA2 - GFP ] SL5226 MAT (cid:1) leu2 ura3 his3 trp1 chc1 (cid:1) : LEU2 sla2(cid:31) : : LEU2 ABP1 - mRFP : KanMX6 p111 - Sla2 - GFP SL5239 MAT (cid:1) leu2 ura3 his3 trp1 clc1 (cid:1) : : HIS3 sla2(cid:31) : : LEU2 ABP1 - mRFP : KanMX6 p111 - Sla2 - GFP a Strains were generated by our laboratory , except where indicated . 123 Supplemental Movie Legends Supplemental Movie S8 . clc1 (cid:2) sla2 (cid:2) ABP1 - mRFP expressing Sla2p - GFP and pKH4 [ CLC1 , CEN ] ( SL5239 ) . 120 frames ( 500 ms exposures ) were acquired during 240 s with 2 s between frames . Note the turnover of all Sla2p patches and the stepwise recruitment of Sla2p - GFP followed by Abp1p - mRFP . Supplemental Movie S9 . clc1 (cid:2) sla2 (cid:2) ABP1 - mRFP expressing Sla2p - GFP and pTMN27 [ clc1 - ( 77 - 233 ) , 2 (cid:1) ] ( SL5239 ) . 120 frames ( 500 ms exposures ) were acquired during 240 s with 2 s between frames . Note the similar patch mobility to WT cells . Supplemental Movie S10 . clc1 (cid:2) sla2 (cid:2) ABP1 - mRFP expressing Sla2p - GFP and pTMN28 [ clc1 - ( 1 - 143 ) , 2 (cid:1) ] ( SL5239 ) . 120 frames ( 500 ms exposures ) were acquired during 240 s with 2 s between frames . Note the greater proportion of mobile Sla2p patches relative to clc1 (cid:1) cells ( Supplemental Movie S11 ) . Supplemental Movie S11 . clc1 (cid:2) sla2 (cid:2) ABP1 - mRFP expressing Sla2p - GFP and pRS426 [ empty , CEN ] ( SL5239 ) . 120 frames ( 500 ms exposures ) were acquired during 240 s with 2 s between frames . Note the presence of actin comet tails and immobile Sla2p patches . Supplemental Movie S12 . chc1 (cid:2) sla2 (cid:2) ABP1 - mRFP expressing Sla2p - GFP and YCp50 - CHC1 [ CHC1 , CEN ] ( SL5226 ) . 120 frames ( 500 ms exposures ) were acquired 124 during 240 s with 2 s between frames . Note the turnover of all Sla2p patches and the stepwise recruitment of Sla2p - GFP followed by Abp1p - mRFP . Supplemental Movie S13 . chc1 (cid:2) sla2 (cid:2) ABP1 - mRFP expressing Sla2p - GFP and pKH2 [ CLC1 , 2 (cid:1) ] ( SL5226 ) . 120 frames ( 500 ms exposures ) were acquired during 240 s with 2 s between frames . Note the increased mobility of Sla2p - GFP patches relative to chc1 (cid:1) cells ( Supplemental Movie S15 ) . Supplemental Movie S14 . chc1 (cid:2) sla2 (cid:2) ABP1 - mRFP expressing Sla2p - GFP and pTMN28 [ clc1 - ( 1 - 143 ) , 2 (cid:1) ] ( SL5226 ) . 120 frames ( 500 ms exposures ) were acquired during 240 s with 2 s between frames . Notice the increased Sla2p patch mobility relative to chc1 (cid:1) . Supplemental Movie S15 . chc1 (cid:2) sla2 (cid:2) ABP1 - mRFP expressing Sla2p - GFP and pRS426 [ empty , CEN ] ( SL5239 ) . 120 frames ( 500 ms exposures ) were acquired during 240 s with 2 s between frames . Note the presence of actin comet tails and immobile Sla2p patches . 125 Results The N - Terminus of Clathrin Light Chain Interacts Directly with the Sla2p Coiled - coil Domain Previously we found that Clc1p interacts directly with the coiled - coil domain of Sla2p and that loss of the interaction results in delayed progression of endocytic patches ( Chapter 3 ) . To address which region ( s ) of yeast LC mediates the interaction with Sla2p and HC , GST pull downs with bacterial expressed proteins were carried out . N - terminal and C - terminal deletion constructs of 6xHis - tagged Clc1p were first incubated with GST fused to the HC proximal region ( GST - Chc1p - ( 1062 - 1653 ) , Figure 4 . 1A - B ) . Deletion of the first 18 ( Clclp - ( 19 - 233 ) ) , 40 ( Clc1p - ( 41 - 233 ) ) , or 76 ( Clc1p - ( 77 - 233 ) ) residues of LC did not prevent the interaction with the clathrin HC proximal domain ; however , deletion of the last 78 residues of Clc1p ( Clc1p - ( 77 - 155 ) or Clc1p - ( 1 - 155 ) ) , which removes a large portion of the C - terminal HC binding site , did prevent HC interaction ( Figure 4 . 1A - B ) . We next incubated the same 6xHis - tagged Clc1p truncations with a GST construct containing the coiled - coil domain of Sla2p ( GST - Sla2p - ( 289 - 583 ) ) . The first 18 residues of Clc1p are not required for Sla2p binding ; however , deletion of the first 40 residues of Clc1p strongly reduced the interaction , while deletion of the first 76 residues completely eliminated binding ( Figure 4 . 1A - B ) . Importantly , Clc1p - ( 1 - 155 ) maintained its interaction with Sla2p , showing that the N - terminus of LC is necessary and sufficient for Sla2p interaction . These results demonstrate that the region involved in the Sla2p interaction is contained within amino acids 19 - 76 of Clc1p ( Figure 4 . 1A ) , which are distinct from the HC - binding region of clathrin LC . 126 Figure 4 . 1 . The N - terminus of Clathrin Light Chain ( residues 19 - 76 ) Interacts Directly with the Sla2p Coiled - coil Domain . ( A ) 6xHis - Clc1p truncations used for pull down experiments . ( B ) Indicated 6xHis tagged Clc1p truncations were incubated with and pulled down by GST - Chc1p - ( 1062 - 1653 ) or GST - Sla2p - ( 289 - 583 ) prebound to glutathione sepharose beads . GST pull downs were immunoblotted with the indicated primary antibodies . Note , the 6xHis - Clc1p ( 1 - 155 ) fragment runs aberrantly on SDS - PAGE . 127 The N - Terminus of Clathrin Light Chain is Not Required for Growth , TGN Sorting , or CCV Assembly We next examined the phenotypes of cells carrying truncation or deletions mutations of CLC1 in place of the WT protein . Five different mutations that completely or partially removed the Sla2p - binding region ( clc1 - ( 41 - 233 ) , clc1 - ( 77 - 233 ) , clc1 (cid:2) ( 20 - 76 ) , clc1 (cid:2) ( 41 - 76 ) , and clc1 (cid:2) ( 20 - 40 ) ) and an N - terminal LC fragment ( clc1 - ( 1 - 143 ) ) which completely lacks the HC binding region , were transformed on plasmids into a clc1 (cid:1) strain ( Figure 4 . 2 ) . All of the LC mutant proteins were expressed and could be detected by immunoblotting with anti - Clc1p antibodies , however ; clc1 - ( 41 - 233 ) , clc1 - ( 77 - 233 ) , and clc1 - ( 1 - 143 ) , were only detected after overexpression on 2 (cid:1) plasmids ( Figure 4 . 3A ) . Cells expressing clc1 - ( 41 - 233 ) and clc1 - ( 77 - 233 ) were slightly temperature sensitive for growth at 37 ° C when expressed from CEN plasmids ( data not shown ) , but showed normal WT growth at 37 ° C when overexpressed from 2 (cid:1) vectors ( Figure 4 . 3B ) , therefore these mutants were expressed from 2 (cid:1) vectors in later experiments , unless otherwise stated . The LC mutants clc1 (cid:2) ( 20 - 76 ) , clc1 (cid:2) ( 41 - 76 ) , and clc1 (cid:2) ( 20 - 40 ) also restored WT growth at 37 ° C ( Figure 4 . 3A ) when expressed from CEN or 2 (cid:1) plasmids . Surprisingly , overexpression of the LC N - terminal fragment ( clc1 - ( 1 - 143 ) ) , which lacks the HC - binding site , was capable of partially restoring temperature sensitive growth at 37 ° C when compared to clc1 (cid:1) ( Figure 4 . 3B ) . To further test the effects of Sla2p or HC binding deficiency , clc1 - ( 77 - 233 ) ( 2 (cid:1) ) , clc1 - ( 41 - 233 ) ( 2 (cid:1) ) , and clc1 - ( 1 - 143 ) ( 2 (cid:1) ) were assayed for their ability to rescue the 128 Figure 4 . 2 . Clc1p Truncation and Internal Deletion Mutants characterized In Vivo . From N - terminus to C - terminus , LC contains an N - terminal conserved sequence ( 22 - 38 ) , a calcium binding EF - Hand motif ( 80 - 91 ) , a HC binding site ( 144 - 194 ) , and a calmodulin binding site ( 212 - 225 ) . 129 Figure 4 . 3 . The N - terminus of Clathrin Light Chain is Not Required for Normal Growth , TGN Sorting , or Formation of CCVs . ( A ) Immunoblot of SL1620 transformed with pRS316 [ empty , CEN ] , pKH4 [ CLC1 , CEN ] , pKH2 [ CLC1 , 2 (cid:1) ] , pTMN36 [ clc1 (cid:2) ( 20 - 76 ) , CEN ] , pTMN35 [ clc1 (cid:2) ( 20 - 40 ) , CEN ] , pTMN26 [ clc1 - ( 41 - 233 ) , CEN ] , pTMN29 [ clc1 - ( 41 - 233 ) , 2 (cid:1) ] , pTMN23 [ clc1 - ( 77 - 233 ) , CEN ] , pTMN27 [ clc1 - ( 77 - 233 ) , 2 (cid:1) ] , pTMN24 [ clc1 - ( 1 - 143 ) , CEN ] , and pTMN28 [ clc1 - ( 1 - 143 ) , 2 (cid:1) ] detected with anti - Clc1p antibodies . ( B ) clc1 (cid:2) ( SL1620 ) was transformed with pKH4 , pTMN27 , pTMN29 , pTMN28 , pTMN35 , pTMN39 [ clc1 (cid:2) ( 41 - 76 , CEN ) ] , pTMN36 , or pRS316 and grown for 3 days on YEPD at 30˚C or 37˚C . C . Halo assay of MAT (cid:1) strains from ( A ) ( SL1620 ) transformed with pKH4 , pRS316 , pTMN29 , pTMN27 , pTMN28 and WT controls ( SL1463 , MAT (cid:1) and SL1462 , MATa ) patched over a MATa lawn ( BJ3556 ) . D . Clathrin coated vesicle preparation of WT ( SL1463 ) and clc1 (cid:2) ( SL1620 ) transformed with pTMN23 . Fractions 29 - 49 were immunoblotted with anti - Chc1p antibodies . 130 Figure 4 . 3 131 TGN sorting defect of clc1 (cid:1) cells . Wild type MAT (cid:1) cells secrete the mature form of alpha factor , while clathrin mutants secrete an inactive precursor form of alpha factor due to mislocalization of the pro - alpha factor processing enzyme , such as Kex2p , from the TGN to the cell surface ( Payne and Schekman , 1989 ) . Thus MAT (cid:1) clc1 (cid:1) or chc1 (cid:1) cells are not competent to arrest growth of MAT a cells , in a halo assay ( Figure 4 . 3C ) . The Sla2p binding mutants clc1 - ( 77 - 233 ) and clc1 - ( 41 - 233 ) generated strong halos , indicating alpha factor processing was restored , while the N - terminal HC binding mutant ( clc1 - ( 1 - 143 ) ) was defective . LC is required for HC trimerization , and failure to do so causes destabilization of the HC . We found that clc1 - ( 77 - 233 ) ( 2 (cid:1) ) , but not clc1 - ( 1 - 143 ) ( 2 (cid:1) ) , rescued clathrin HC steady state levels ( data not shown ) . Furthermore , clathrin - coated vesicles were isolated from clc1 - ( 77 - 233 ) cells even at CEN level expression ( Figure 4 . 3D ) . Therefore the N - terminal Sla2p binding region of LC ( residues 1 - 76 ) is not required for growth at high temperature , TGN sorting , maintaining steady state levels of clathrin HC , or CCV production . HC Binding is Required for Normal Localization of Clathrin Light Chain Previously we examined the localization of GFP - LC and found multiple populations of clathrin patches overlapping with markers of the TGN / early endosome , late endosome and endocytic cortical patches ( Newpher et al . , 2005 ) . The localization of GFP - LC - ( 77 - 233 ) and GFP - LC - ( 1 - 143 ) were compared to GFP - LC . Similar to WT GFP - LC , GFP - LC - ( 77 - 233 ) was present at the cortex ( Figure 4 . 4 , arrows ) and in larger internal patches . In contrast , GFP - LC - ( 1 - 143 ) was completely diffuse , similar to 132 Figure 4 . 4 Binding to clathrin HC , but Not Sla2p is Required for Cortical Localization of Clathrin LC . clc1 (cid:2) ( SL1620 ) cells were transformed with pTMN37 [ GFP - LC ] , pTMN44 [ GFP - LC - ( 77 - 233 ) ] , and pTMN48 [ GFP - LC - ( 1 - 143 ) ] or chc1 (cid:1) clc1 (cid:1) cells ( SL4838 ) were transformed with pTMN37 and viewed by wide - field fluorescent microscopy . Note , arrows point to cortical clathrin patches . Scale bar equals 5 (cid:1) m . 133 the localization of GFP - LC in chc1 (cid:1) cells ( Figure 4 . 4 ) . These results show that LC binding to clathrin HC is required for the observed patch - like localization of GFP - LC and that binding to Sla2p is not required for cortical localization of clathrin . The N - Terminus of Clathrin Light Chain is not Required for Endocytosis in the Presence of HC Deletion mutants of either clathrin HC or LC are partially defective in receptor - meditated endocytosis ( Chu et al . , 1996 ; Huang et al . , 1997 ; Tan et al . , 1993 ) . Further analysis of endocytic patch dynamics found that clathrin mutants contain many immobile early endocytic patches labeled with Sla2p and also develop aberrant actin comet tails ( Chapter 3 ) . In addition , deletion of the Sla2p coiled - coil domain , which completely disrupts binding to clathrin LC , reduces uptake of alpha factor ( Wesp et al . , 1997 ) , and causes delayed progression of endocytic cortical patches ( Chapter 3 ) . Therefore , we tested whether deletion of the Sla2p binding region on LC caused a similar defect in alpha factor uptake ; however , clc1 - ( 77 - 233 ) ( 2 (cid:1) ) and CLC1 ( CEN ) cells showed an identical rate of alpha factor uptake ( Figure 4 . 5A ) . We also tested if the N - terminal fragment of LC was able to rescue the clc1 (cid:1) endocytic defect , as it could partially restore growth at high temperature ; however , the rate of uptake was not significantly different between clc1 (cid:1) ( 2 . 9 + / - 0 . 6 ) and clc1 - ( 1 - 143 ) ( 3 . 0 + / - 0 . 3 ) ( P > 0 . 5 ) ( Figure 4 . 5A ) . To better resolve the function of the clc1 - ( 1 - 143 ) and clc1 - ( 77 - 233 ) mutants during endocytosis , we examined the dynamics and distribution of Sla2p along with the cortical actin patch marker , Abp1p . Similar to observations in WT cells ( Chapter 3 ) , cells expressing CLC1 ( CEN ) or clc1 - ( 77 - 233 ) ( 2 (cid:1) ) in clc1 (cid:1) had average Sla2p patch 134 Figure 4 . 5 . The N - Terminus of LC is Not Required for Endocytosis , but is Sufficient to Restore Sla2p Patch Mobility . ( A ) Alpha - factor uptake at 30˚C was measured at the indicated times . The data shown are the average percentage of pre - bound (cid:1) - factor internalized from four independent experiments ± the SD . Strain shown : clc1 (cid:2) bar1 - 1 ( SL1929 ) transformed with pKH4 [ CLC1 , CEN ] , pTMN27 [ clc1 - ( 77 - 233 ) , 2 (cid:1) ] , pTMN28 [ clc1 - ( 1 - 143 ) , 2 (cid:1) ] and pRS426 [ empty , 2 (cid:1) ] . B - C . Average lifetimes of Sla2p - GFP / Abp1p - mRFP patches from images in ( F ) in clc1 (cid:2) ( SL5239 ) cells transformed with the above plasmids and images acquired at two second intervals during a four - minute time course . D . Percentage of cells from the above strains in which all Sla2p patches are mobile ( Mobile ) , nearly all of the Sla2p patches are immobile ( Immobile ) , or some of the Sla2p patches are mobile ( Partial ) . E . Percentage of cells displaying at least one or more actin comet tail during the four - minute time course . Scale bar equals 5 (cid:1) m . 135 Figure 4 . 5 136 lifetimes of about 36 s , transiently overlapping with Abp1p - mRFP patches which appeared for about 16 s ( Figure 4 . 5B & C , n = 40 patch events , Supplemental Movie S8 - 9 ) . As reported previously ( Chapter 3 ) , clc1 (cid:1) cells showed delayed Abp1p - mRFP lifetimes of about 25 s and the presence of actin comet tails ( Figure 4 . 5F , arrows ) . Also , there were different types of Sla2p patch dynamics . Some cells had immobile Sla2p patches , while others periodically shed smaller Sla2p patches from large Sla2p patches , and finally some patches displayed relatively normal lifetimes of about 40 s ( n = 52 patch events ) . Similar to clc1 (cid:1) , cells expressing clc1 - ( 1 - 143 ) ( 2 (cid:1) ) cells had elongated Abp1p - mRFP lifetimes of about 25 s and formed actin comet tails ( Figure 4 . 5C , E , & F , arrows , n = 40 patch events ) . clc1 - ( 1 - 143 ) cells also showed a heterogeneous cell population with varying Sla2p patch lifetimes . However , unlike clc1 (cid:1) , where only 27 % of the population consisted of cells in which all the Sla2p patches were mobile ( Supplemental Movie S11 ) , 74 % of clc1 - ( 1 - 143 ) cells exhibited mobile Sla2p patches ( Figure 4 . 5D , Supplemental Movie S10 ) . Therefore , consistent with its improved growth , clc1 - ( 1 - 143 ) cells have a large increase in the proportion of cells in which all Sla2p patches are mobile , suggesting this region might have an endocytic function . The N - terminus of LC Suppresses Endocytosis in the Absence of Clathrin HC Previously we identified clathrin LC as a multicopy suppressor of the growth phenotype of clathrin HC deficient yeast ( Huang et al . , 1997 ) . This suggested that clathrin LC could function in the absence of HC or that LC has a HC independent function . Therefore we examined which region on LC is required for this suppression . 137 Clathrin HC was expressed under control of the GAL1 promoter by growing cells on galactose medium and was depleted by shifting to glucose . As shown previously , CLC1 overexpression partially suppressed the temperature sensitive growth of HC depleted cells . Similarly , the N - terminal domain fragment of LC ( 1 - 143 or clc1 (cid:1) 20 - 40 ) partially suppressed growth . However , the LC alleles that cannot bind Sla2p ( Clc1p - ( 77 - 233 ) , Clc1p (cid:1) ( 20 - 76 ) , or Clc1p (cid:1) ( 41 - 76 ) ) could not rescue growth ( Figure 4 . 6A ) . Since the LC - Sla2p binding domain is required for growth suppression of HC depleted cells , we tested whether overexpression of LC or Clc1p - ( 1 - 143 ) could suppress the chc1 (cid:1) alpha factor internalization defect . Surprisingly , overexpression of Clc1p or the N - terminus of LC ( Clc1p - 1 - 143 ) suppressed the endocytic defect of chc1 (cid:1) cells , while similar overexpression of the C - terminal HC binding region ( Clc1p - ( 77 - 233 ) or Clc1p - ( 1 - 143 (cid:1) 20 - 76 ) had no effect on endocytosis ( Figure 4 . 6B ) . These data demonstrate that the LC can function during endocytosis in the complete absence of clathrin HC and this suppression requires the Sla2p binding region on LC . To better define which stage of endocytosis in chc1 (cid:1) was suppressed by overexpression of Clc1p or Clc1p - ( 1 - 143 ) , we examined dynamics of Sla2p - GFP and Abp1 - mRFP . Overexpression of Clc1p or Clc1p - ( 1 - 143 ) increased the turnover rate of the mobile pool of Sla2p - GFP from 40 s in chc1 (cid:1) to about 28 s ( Figure 4 . 6C & F , P < . 001 , n = 60 patch events ) , while overexpression of the HC binding region ( Clc1p - ( 77 - 233 ) ) had no effect . In addition , the proportion of cells in which all of the Sla2p - GFP patches were mobile increased from 38 % in chc1 (cid:1) ( Supplemental Movie S15 , compare to WT cells in Supplemental Movie S12 ) to 62 % , when LC was overexpressed 138 Figure 4 . 6 . The Sla2p - binding Region of LC Suppresses Clathrin HC Deficiency Growth and Endocytic Phenotypes . ( A ) GAL1 : : CHC1 strain ( SL350 ) transformed with either YCp50 - CHC1 [ CHC1 , CEN ] , pKH2 [ CLC1 , 2 (cid:1) ] , pTMN28 [ clc1 - ( 1 - 143 ) , 2 (cid:1) ] , pTMN27 [ clc1 - ( 77 - 233 ) , 2 (cid:1) ] , pTMN46 [ clc1 (cid:2) ( 20 - 40 ) , 2 (cid:1) ] , pTMN47 [ clc1 (cid:2) ( 41 - 76 ) , 2 (cid:1) ] , pTMN45 [ clc1 (cid:2) ( 20 - 76 ) , 2 (cid:1) ] , and pRS426 [ empty , 2 (cid:1) ] were struck on YEP - galactose ( left ) at 37ºC or preshifted to glucose for two days at 30ºC to turn off CHC1 expression and then struck on YEP - dextrose plates and grown for five days at 37ºC . ( B ) Alpha - factor uptake at 25˚C was measured at the indicated time . The data shown are the average percentage of pre - bound (cid:1) - factor internalized from four independent experiments ± the SD . Strain shown : chc1 (cid:2) bar1 - 1 ( SL3593 ) transformed with YEp24 - CHC1 ( CHC1 , 2 (cid:1) ) , pKH2 , pTMN28 , pTMN27 , pTMN51 [ clc1 - ( 1 - 143 (cid:2) 20 - 76 ) , 2 (cid:1) ] , and pRS426 . ( C - D ) Average lifetimes of Sla2p - GFP / Abp1p - mRFP patches from images in ( F ) in chc1 (cid:2) ( SL5226 ) cells transformed with YCp50 - CHC1 ( CHC1 , CEN ) , pKH2 , pTMN28 , pTMN27 , pTMN51 , and pRS426 and images acquired at two second intervals during a four - minute time course . ( E ) Percentage of cells from the above strains in which all Sla2p patches are mobile ( Mobile ) , nearly all of the Sla2p patches are immobile ( Immobile ) , or some of the Sla2p patches are mobile ( Partial ) and percentage of cells displaying at least one or more actin comet tail ( Comet tail ) during the four - minute time course . Scale bar equals 5 (cid:1) m . 139 Figure 4 . 6 140 ( Supplemental Movie S13 ) , while the percentage of cells containing immobile Sla2p patches decreased from 35 % in chc1 (cid:1) to 5 % when LC was overexpressed ( Figure 4 . 6E ) . Similar changes were observed with the N - terminal fragment of LC ( Supplemental Movie S14 ) . The lifetime of Ab1p - mRFP was not suppressed by overexpression of Clc1p - ( 1 - 143 ) ( Figure 4 . 6D , P > . 1 ) , but was suppressed by overexpression of Clc1p ( Figure 4 . 6D , P < . 001 ) ; however , the actin comet tail defect was present when overexpressing either LC or its N - terminal fragment , although it was less severe with full length LC ( Figure 4 . 5E & F , arrows ) . These differences may be due to the higher level of protein expression for the full length LC as compared to Clc1p - ( 1 - 143 ) ( See Figure 4 . 3 ) . Taken together , these data suggest that the N - terminus of clathrin LC suppresses the endocytic phenotype of chc1 (cid:1) yeast through its direct interaction with Sla2p . In addition , the suppression by LC occurs during the early stage of endocytosis by decreasing Sla2p patch lifetime and increasing the proportion of cells in which all Sla2p patches are mobile . Discussion Physical Interactions Between Sla2p and Clathrin Light Chain In this study we show that the N - terminus of clathrin LC directly interacts with the coiled - coil domain of Sla2p . Our findings are similar to the interactions observed between mammalian LCs and Hip1 / R ( Legendre - Guillemin et al . , 2002 ) . Mammalian studies further showed that a triplicate of acidic residues in the N - terminal conserved sequence of LC are responsible for binding to a motif in Hip1 / R comprised of residues LLR ( Chen and Brodsky , 2005 ; Legendre - Guillemin et al . , 2005 ) . Our mapping 141 experiments do implicate the N - terminal conserved sequence of LC as a major contributor to Sla2p interaction ; however , we also detect weak binding to Sla2p in the absence of the conserved sequence . Thus , the Sla2p binding site appears to span a region between residues 19 - 76 , and is not limited to a set of residues in the conserved sequence . We also note that Sla2p does not contain the LLRK motif present in the coiled - coil domain of Hip1 and Hip1R , but instead contains LLPR in a similar region . Potentially the right shifted arginine residue in Sla2p could contribute to the binding of acidic residues in the LC N - terminus . Role of the LC N - terminus In vitro studies have shown that the N - terminal conserved sequence of the LC is important for its ability to prevent spontaneous HC hub assembly ( Ungewickell and Ungewickell , 1991 ; Ybe et al . , 1998 ) . To test the importance of the LC N - terminus in vivo , we characterized yeast which expressed an N - terminal truncation ( Clc1p - ( 77 - 233 ) ) . Surprisingly the N - terminus of LC was not required for clathrin function in yeast . Cells expressing clc1 - ( 77 - 233 ) showed normal growth , alpha factor uptake , TGN sorting , localization of clathrin LC , and CCV formation . The absence of any noticeable phenotype in clc1 - ( 77 - 233 ) cells , suggests that LC prevention of lattice assembly is not required for clathrin function in vivo . The other surprising result of the clc1 - ( 77 - 233 ) mutant is the normal endocytic phenotype , despite its inability to bind Sla2p . Previously we found that the Sla2p (cid:1) ( coiled - coil ) could not interact with LC and causes delayed progression of the early and late stages of endocytosis . This led us to believe that this interaction is critical for endocytosis ( Chapter 3 ) . However , in addition to LC binding , 142 the Sla2p coiled - coil domain is required for dimerization and possibly its direct interaction with Sla1p ( Gourlay et al . , 2003 ; Wesp et al . , 1997 ) . Therefore , the normal endocytic phenotype of clc1 - ( 77 - 233 ) cells could result from functional redundancy between LC and other Sla2p - binding factors . Novel Endocytic Function for Clathrin Light Chain In Vivo Previously we identified clathrin LC as a multicopy suppressor of clathrin HC deficiency ( SCD4 ) ( Huang et al . , 1997 ; Nelson and Lemmon , 1993 ) . These studies demonstrated that in the complete absence of clathrin HC , the LC was capable of restoring viability , potentially through other unknown interactions . A two - hybrid screen we performed with LC as a prey only identified two interacting partners , clathrin HC and Sla2p ( Henry et al . , 2002 ) . Further studies confirmed Sla2p / LC binding is direct ( Chapter 3 ) . Here we show that the Sla2p binding region on LC is required for its ability to suppress clathrin deficiency . In addition , this suppression is specific to endocytosis , as LC overexpression does not rescue the TGN sorting defects of HC deficient yeast ( Huang et al . , 1997 ) . How does LC suppress the endocytic defect of chc1 (cid:1) cells ? Because the Sla2p binding region of LC is responsible for its suppressor activity , we measured the lifetimes of Sla2p patches during the early stage of endocytosis . Interestingly , chc1 (cid:1) yeast overexpressing Clc1p or Clc1p - ( 1 - 143 ) increased the turnover rate of mobile Sla2p - GFP cortical patches from 40 s in chc1 (cid:1) to about 28 s and increased the percentage of cells in which all of the Sla2p patches are mobile . These data suggest that LC acts to decrease Sla2p patch lifetime and ultimately increases the rate of endocytosis . Direct LC binding 143 to Sla2p could activate Sla2p , allowing for a conformational change , which may be more favorable for progression into the late mobile actin based stage of endocytosis . Previously Yang et al . , 1998 found that sequences within the Sla2p talin - like domain self - associate with residues 567 - 767 and that this self - association masks the actin - binding site . We propose that binding of clathrin LC or other factors to the coiled - coil domain could prevent Sla2p self - association and favor Sla2p’s interaction with actin , thus driving actin - based vesicle internalization . In the absence of clathrin and its organizational functions at the early patch , loss of LC or other Sla2p binding factors to the cytosol could favor Sla2p self - association . Conversely , overexpression of LC would increase the chances of Sla2p - LC interaction , preventing Sla2p self - association and thereby favor Sla2p - actin interaction . As Clc1p or Clc1p - ( 1 - 143 ) overexpression can increase the rate of endocytosis and turnover of Sla2p - GFP in chc1 (cid:1) , one might expect that similar overexpression in CHC1 cells would also increase the rate of endocytosis . However , this was not the case ( data not shown ) . One possible explanation is that Hip1 / R have higher affinity for HC - LC than they do free LCs ( Chen and Brodsky , 2005 ) . Therefore , the HC bound to endogenous Clc1p would out compete Clc1p - ( 1 - 143 ) or excess Clc1p for binding to Sla2p and therefore not have a detectable effect on endocytosis . In agreement with this result is the observation that overexpression of Clc1p - ( 1 - 143 ) in clc1 (cid:1) showed suppression of temperature sensitive growth and an increase in the proportion of cells where all Sla2p patches were mobile , as compared to clc1 (cid:1) alone . Therefore in the absence of endogenous Clc1p , Sla2p is accessible to Clc1p - 1 - 143 and can be affected by it . Interestingly , overexpression of Clc1p - ( 1 - 143 ) in clc1 (cid:1) did not significantly increase 144 the rate of alpha factor uptake ; however , the rate of uptake for Clc1p - ( 1 - 143 ) was similar in clc1 (cid:1) ( slope = 3 . 0 + / - 0 . 3 ) and chc1 (cid:1) yeast ( slope = 3 . 2 + / - 0 . 1 ) . Thus the reason the Clc1p - ( 1 - 143 ) did not significantly suppress alpha factor uptake was because the clc1 (cid:1) control strain ( slope = 2 . 9 + / - 0 . 6 ) had a faster rate of uptake than the chc1 (cid:1) strain ( slope = 1 . 9 + / - 0 . 1 ) . The variability in alpha factor uptake between chc1 (cid:1) and clc1 (cid:1) cells has been shown previously and likely occurs due to the genetic instability of clathrin mutants ( Huang et al . , 1999 ; Lemmon et al . , 1990 ) . Despite this instability , the strong suppression of endocytosis seen in chc1 (cid:1) cells by overexpression of the LC N - terminus strongly supports a role for Sla2p - LC function in vivo . In conclusion , we have identified a novel endocytic specific function for clathrin LC . This endocytic function likely occurs by direct interaction between the N - terminus of LC and the coiled - coil domain of Sla2p . Potentially LC binding to Sla2p prevents Sla2p self - association and allows Sla2p binding to actin , thus leading to vesicle internalization . Our data indicate that N - terminus of LC may not play an essential role in the regulation of clathrin HC assembly in vivo , but instead serves an endocytic specific function by regulating the rate of Sla2p turnover and endocytic progression during the early stage of endocytosis . 145 Chapter 5 Conclusions and Future Directions The identification of clathrin at the cell surface in budding yeast has provided a powerful genetic system to study clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Not only are many yeast endocytic proteins the homologues of proteins involved in clathrin - mediated endocytosis in animal cells , but also , the overall dynamics and temporal recruitment of these proteins during endocytosis appear to be similar . This chapter will discuss the discoveries that have been made about clathrin dynamics and its function in yeast . In addition , important future experiments will better characterize this pathway using yeast as a model system . 5 . 1 Conclusions The studies presented here have provided a general characterization of clathrin localization and function in yeast . The work presented in Chapter 2 showed that fluorescent clathrin fusions are present at the TGN / EE , the late endosome , and the cell surface . These cellular localities correlate well with the localization of known clathrin binding proteins , and the fact that clathrin mutants are partially defective in endocytosis and TGN / endosomal sorting . Most interesting was the presence of clathrin at the cell surface in patches that disappeared coinciding with a burst of actin polymerization . This sequence of events is similar to the endocytic pathway characterized by Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ( Figure 5 . 1 ) . Importantly , my studies demonstrate that the yeast endocytic pathway is a clathrin - based event , and has similar dynamics to clathrin - mediated endocytosis in animal cells . However , unlike animal cells , the powerful genetic techniques available in yeast allow us to directly assign functions to proteins in this endocytic pathway . Figure 146 5 . 2 illustrates the advances my studies have made on the previous model . First , at least three different steps have been discovered during the early stage of endocytosis . The earliest protein to arrive at the cortex is clathrin , followed by Sla2p and finally Sla1p . These cortical clathrin patches also overlap with cargo ( Ste2p - GFP ) and the yeast endocytic adaptors ( Ent1 / 2p and Yap1801 / 2p ) , which appear to be the major clathrin recruiting factors . This recruitment presumably occurs through their C - terminal clathrin box motifs . The adaptor requirement for cortical clathrin recruitment implies that these proteins arrive prior to or along with clathrin . Finally , as clathrin patches mature and undergo 200 nm of inward movement , the actin patch marker , Abp1p is recruited . Additionally , the function of actin and actin - associated endocytic proteins ( Sla2p , End3p , and Pan1p ) are important for the release of these clathrin patches from the cell surface . In Chapter 3 , clathrin function was accessed during endocytosis by measuring the dynamics of other endocytic markers in the absence of HC or LC . The early endocytic patch marker Sla2p was chosen because it interacts directly with clathrin LC . In deletions of the HC or LC many Sla2p patches were larger than normal and became immobilized at the cell surface ( Figure 5 . 3 ) . This result strongly argues for an organizational role of clathrin in limiting the size of cortical patches and that this organizational function is important for patch turnover and endocytosis . Consistent with the partial endocytic defect of the clathrin mutants , there were patches of Sla2p that behaved normally ; therefore clathrin is not essential for endocytosis . The patches of Sla2p that did internalize , always received Sla1p , later followed by Abp1p , suggesting that Sla1p is only recruited to Sla2p patches that are competent to internalize . To 147 Figure 5 . 1 . The Previous Model for Endocytic Patch Recruitment and Vesicle Internalization . 148 Figure 5 . 2 . The New Model for Clathrin - Based Endocytosis in Yeast . The three sequential stages of protein recruitment during the early immobile phase are shown . Initially clathrin / adaptors are recruited to the cortex ( 1 ) , followed by Sla2p ( 2 ) and later the Pan1p / Sla1p / End3p complex ( 3 ) . The epsins ( Ent1 / 2p ) and AP180s ( Yap1801 / 2p ) are probably recruited along side clathrin , based on their requirement for clathrin cortical localization . Clathrin patch internalization from the cortex requires Sla2p , End3p , Pan1p and polymerization of actin . Finally , clathrin along with Sla2p and the Pan1p complex are uncoated following 200 nm of inward movement during the slow mobile phase . 149 determine if events downstream of Sla2p were affected during endocytosis , the late stage marker Abp1p was also tracked . Without clathrin , the lifetime of Abp1p was significantly increased in the patches that did internalize . A second population of Abp1p also appeared , forming large actin comet tails that periodically arose from the large immobile Sla2p patches . The presence of excessive actin polymerization suggests that the early stage functions of clathrin may help to organize factors , which regulate actin assembly . Alternatively clathrin may have a direct role in regulating actin polymerization . The function of clathrin LC with Sla2p during endocytosis was also investigated in Chapters 3 and 4 . GST pull down mapping experiments showed that the central coiled - coil domain of Sla2p interacts directly with the N - terminus of LC , similar to observations in animal cells . Deletion of the Sla2p coiled - coil domain blocked the interaction with LC and also caused a delay in turnover of patches containing LC , Abp1p and Sla2p (cid:1) cc . This result suggested that LC - Sla2p interaction is important for endocytic progression . Surprisingly , deletion of the Sla2p - binding N - terminus of LC , did not cause a similar effect . Therefore the interaction is not essential for endocytosis , and may be redundant with other Sla2p binding proteins . However , a different set of experiments demonstrated that the LC may serve to regulate the turnover of Sla2p during endocytosis in vivo . Previously clathrin LC was identified as SCD4 in a screen for multicopy suppressors of clathrin deficiency . It remained a mystery how overexpression of the LC could suppress clathrin HC deficiency , as the HC is the major structural backbone of the clathrin lattice . Mapping experiments found that the Sla2p binding site on clathrin LC is 150 Figure 5 . 3 . Different Types of Sla2p Patches Observed in Clathrin Mutants . ( 1 ) Clathrin mutants contain large immobile Sla2p patches which lack other early patch proteins such as Sla1p or Las17p , which instead are partially mislocalized to the cytosol . ( 2 ) Some of the large Sla2p patches release smaller patches containing Sla2p and Sla1p , which coincides with the formation actin comet tails . ( 3 ) Clathrin mutants also have events where Sla2p patches internalize on a normal or delayed time scale , but do not develop actin comet tails . In the cases where internalization occurs , Sla1p is recruited prior to internalization , suggesting the patch is primed for endocytosis . 151 responsible for this suppressor activity . In addition , overexpression of the LC or its Sla2p binding region in a HC deletion suppressed the endocytic defect , but not the TGN sorting functions of clathrin . Finally , the lifetime of Sla2p - GFP cortical patches was dramatically decreased when LC was overexpressed in a HC deletion . These results suggest that the LC serves to regulate the progression of endocytosis through its interaction with Sla2p . Model for Sla2p / Clathrin Function during Endocytosis Figure 5 . 4 illustrates the proposed function of Sla2p during vesicle internalization . In this model , Sla2p serves as an anchor for actin - based vesicle internalization . When actin polymerization is initiated at the plasma membrane , actin filaments contact the vesicle coat through an interaction with the Sla2p talin - like domain . Sla2p could then serve to anchor actin to the clathrin coat through Sla2p’s interactions with lipid and clathrin LC / Sla1p . As actin polymerization continues at the cell surface , the force generated towards the Sla2p anchor pushes the developing vesicle into the cell and helps drive internalization . This model is consistent with the phenotypes of sla2 (cid:1) yeast ( Figure 5 . 4 , bottom ) , where endocytic patches fail to internalize and actin comet tails wave into the cytosol , presumably unable to make productive contacts with the clathrin coat . In the Sla2p anchoring model , the role of clathrin LC and / or other Sla2p binding proteins would be to prevent self - association of the Sla2p talin - like domain with residues ( 567 - 767 ) and therefore allow Sla2p to contact actin and drive vesicle 152 Figure 5 . 4 . Model for Sla2p - Mediated Vesicle Internalization . ( Top ) In WT cells Sla2p may act to anchor actin filaments polymerized at the cell surface to the developing vesicle coat . This anchoring could provide the force needed to drive vesicle internalization . Binding of clathrin LC and members of the Pan1p complex to the Sla2p coiled - coil domain may place Sla2p in a conformation favorable for actin binding . ( Bottom ) In the absence of Sla2p , actin filaments treadmill into the cytosol and vesicle internalization does not proceed , presumably due to the absence of actin filament anchoring to the vesicle coat . 153 internalization ( Figure 5 . 5 ) . This model is based on studies by Yang et al . , 1998 , which found that Sla2p self - association prevents its interaction with actin . In the absence of clathrin HC , organizational defects in the vesicle coat lead to mislocalization of clathrin LC , Sla1p , Las17p and potentially other factors ( Figure 5 . 6 ) . The reduced presence of these proteins at cortical patches results in Sla2p self - association and failure to internalize , as seen by the presence of immobile Sla2p patches defective in endocytosis . Similar to chc1 (cid:1) cells , the absence of LC also causes mislocalization of Sla1p and Las17p ( Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ) , presumably due to the inability of HCs to trimerize . How does LC overexpression suppress chc1 (cid:1) endocytic defects ? Upon overexpression of clathrin LC , increased interactions between Sla2p - LC prevent self - association of Sla2p , and Sla2p - actin binding leads to vesicle internalization ( Figure 5 . 6 ) . This model also explains why clc1 - ( 77 - 233 ) cells lack endocytic defects , as binding of Sla1p or other factors to Sla2p could serve a redundant function with LC in prevention of Sla2p self - association . 5 . 2 Future Directions Important details concerning the function of clathrin in yeast endocytosis have been answered by this work ; however , many more questions remain concerning this endocytic pathway and its similarity to animal cells . For example , how are sites of endocytosis selected and initiated , what other types of cargo use this pathway , when and how does 154 Figure 5 . 5 . Model for Sla2p Activation during Endocytosis . In the absence of clathrin LC or Sla1p binding , the Sla2p talin - like domain self - associates with sequences downstream of the coiled - coil domain , remains in the closed conformation , and cannot bind to actin . In the presence of clathrin LC or Sla1p , the Sla2p talin - like domain does not self - associate . The open conformation of Sla2p allows binding of the talin - like domain to actin and drives vesicle internalization . 155 Figure 5 . 6 . Model for Vesicle Internalization in chc1 (cid:1) . ( Top ) In chc1 (cid:1) cells improper organization of the cortical patch proteins causes inefficient vesicle internalization . Improper patch organization may not allow the conditions favorable for the Sla2p talin - like domain to bind actin , as mislocalization of clathrin LC and members of the Pan1p complex to the cytosol reduces their binding to Sla2p . Sla2p inaccessible to actin binding is shown with its talin - like domain folded over . ( Bottom ) Upon overexpression of clathrin LC , the Sla2p coiled domain - LC interaction allows Sla2p to open in a conformation favorable for actin binding , thus increasing the number of functional cortical patches and their rate of turnover . 156 vesicle scission / uncoating occur , and what role does phosphorylation of endocytic proteins play during the early and late stages of endocytosis ? Clathrin Adaptors and Plasma Membrane Domains Currently little is known about the earliest stages of endocytosis . For example , how are sites of endocytosis selected and what are the factors recruited to the early endocytic patch . So far clathrin is the earliest known endocytic protein recruited . The work in Chapter 2 showed that patches containing the epsins and AP180s overlap with cortical clathrin patches to varying degrees and they all play a role in recruiting clathrin to the cortex . Based on this requirement , it is likely that they are recruited to the cortex prior to or along with clathrin . Future experiments should be directed at determining the timing of adaptor arrival relative to clathrin . The functions of these adaptors may not be identical and they could function at different or multiple stages of endocytosis . For example , in sla2 (cid:1) cells Ent1p was contained within the actin comet tails that develop from the cortex , but neither Ent2p , Yap1801p or Yap1802p were found in these structures ( Newpher et al . , 2005 ) . This result strongly argues that these adaptors have distinct roles during endocytosis and may function at different stages of endocytosis . Aside from the AP180s and epsins , the yeast Eps15 homologue , Ede1p , may play an important role in organizing the early patch . The phenotype of Ede1p mutants is strikingly similar to clathrin mutants , as they both show reduced recruitment of Sla1p to the cortex ( Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ) . This similar phenotype suggests that Ede1p may function along side with clathrin . The EH domains of Ede1p interact with the NPF motifs of Ent1p ( Aguilar et al . , 2003 ) , and along with clathrin could contribute to the 157 organization of adaptors at the early patch . To further assess Ede1p’s role with these adaptors , mutants in the EH domain of Ede1p or mutants of the NPF motifs in the adaptors should be generated and tested for defects in endocytic patch progression . It is also unknown how sites of endocytosis are marked or initiated in yeast ( prior to adaptor / clathrin recruitment ) . All of the above mentioned yeast adaptors interact with phosphatidyl - inositol containing lipid through their ENTH and ANTH domains ( Legendre - Guillemin et al . , 2004 ) . This might imply that there are lipid microdomains / clusters at the yeast plasma membrane which are enriched in PIP 2 , as demonstrated in animal cells ( Laux et al . , 2000 ) . In addition to PIP 2 microdomains , it is known that membrane proteins such as Pma1p localize to ergosterol rich lipid rafts in budding yeast ( Malinska et al . , 2003 ) . In S . Pombe , the type I myosin Myo1 , is present at endocytic / actin patches and localizes to sterol rich domains ( Takeda and Chang , 2005 ) . Therefore , it should be investigated whether endocytic patches in budding yeast are recruited to lipid rafts and / or PIP 2 microdomains , which could establish hot spots of endocytosis . It is also unknown at what point during cortical patch formation receptors like Ste2p become incorporated . Alternatively , clusters of Ste2p may recruit the endocytic machinery to form cortical patches . In addition , what effect does the presence of ligand ( alpha factor ) have on the dynamics of Ste2p patches ? Experiments using fluorescent ligands , such as FITC labeled alpha factor , in combination with Ste2p or other endocytic patch proteins may help to address this issue . A major weakness in our field has been the lack of fluorescently labeled cargo and our limited knowledge of additional cargo and receptors used in yeast . To date , most 158 studies resort to tracking fluorescently labeled membrane with dyes such as FM4 - 64 . Although an excellent tracer of the endocytic pathway , using this dye to track the formation of de novo endocytic sites in wt cells is difficult . A second marker , lucifer yellow , is a soluble dye taken up into the yeast endosomal system and eventually the vacuole . Lucifer yellow has not been successfully used to track single endocytic events and is generally used as a marker for overall endocytic function in the cell . Finally , fluorescently tagged receptors such as Ste2p - GFP have been useful , as they do co - localize with the endocytic machinery ( Newpher et al . , 2005 and Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ) . Unfortunately , imaging the plasma membrane population of Ste2p - GFP is difficult and is largely masked by the bright signal in the vacuole . The best way to view endocytosis would be to follow the internalization of fluorescently labeled cargo , as is typically done in animal cells with fluorescent Tfn , LDL , and other cargo ( Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ) . Although there has been some success with ligands such as fluorescently labeled alpha factor ( personal communication with the Drubin Laboratory ) , this technology is young and is not widely used . To increase our array of endocytic tracers , it may be necessary to identify new cargo / receptors through proteomics approaches , or to express mammalian receptors or chimeras in yeast to allow tracking with their fluorescently labeled ligands . CCV Uncoating Assuming that the lifecycle of endocytic clathrin - coated vesicle is similar in yeast and in animal cells , it would be expected that the machinery exists to uncoat these vesicles . The obvious candidate , Swa2 / Aux1 is the yeast homolog of auxilin . Indeed Swa2 plays a role in CCV uncoating in yeast and general clathrin function ( Gall et al . , 159 2000 ; Pishvaee et al . , 2000 ) . Although Swa2p was previously shown to be important for turnover of Ste3p , future work should be directed at examining the internalization step of endocytosis and the dynamics of early and late endocytic patches in auxilin mutants . This may have a dramatic effect on the timing of clathrin disassembly , as well as Sla1p , Sla2p , Pan1p , and End3p , all of which normally uncoat after 200 nm of inward movement . In addition , the dynamics of auxilin should be characterized during vesicle internalization . Presumably auxilin is found at the cell cortex as well as the TGN / EE , therefore TIRF microscopy may be needed to verify the existence of this cortical population . Assuming auxilin acts after vesicle scission , it may only localize to endocytic patches during the period of clathrin disassembly . Aside from auxilin , the synaptojanins are also thought to drive coat disassembly through their PIP 2 phosphatase activity ( Stefan et al . , 2005 ) . Interestingly , the yeast plasma membrane synaptojanin , Sjl2p , is recruited to cortical patches around the same time clathrin uncoats . Potentially , Sjl2p drives vesicle uncoating by its lipid phosphatase activity and it’s binding to clathrin TDs , which may out compete adaptors for binding to clathrin . Aside from vesicle uncoating , the phosphatase activity of Sjl2p may be important during all stages of endocytosis , considering the important role that PIP 2 plays in adaptor recruitment . To better understand the role of Sjl2p during endocytosis , sjl2 mutants should be characterized for the ability to recruit adaptors , uncoat vesicles following scission , and for global effects on the establishment of endocytic patches . Mss4p is a phosphatidyl - inositol kinase which counters Sjl2p and converts phosphatidyl - inositol ( 4 ) - phosphate into phosphatidyl - inositol ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate PIP 2 ( Desrivieres et al . , 1998 ) . mss4 mutants are defective in actin organization which is typically indicative 160 of an endocytic defect ; however , the stage ( s ) of endocytosis affected remain unknown ( Desrivieres et al . , 1998 ) . Potentially , mss4 mutants have defects in adaptor recruitment and may not establish functional endocytic patches . In addition , overexpression of Mss4p may cause excessive adaptor recruitment and may also prevent normal uncoating of endocytic vesicles . CCV Scission Scission of vesicles in animal cells involves the GTPase dynamin and proteins like amphiphysins and endophilin ( Cestra et al . , 1999 ; Grabs et al . , 1997 ) . A major difference between yeast and animal cells , is that the yeast dynamin homologue ( Vps1p ) is involved in TGN sorting , but is not known to function in endocytosis ( Nothwehr et al . , 1995 ) . To thoroughly address this issue , Vps1p - GFP should be viewed by TIRF microscopy and vps1 mutants should be carefully examined for defects in release of endocytic patches . The yeast amphiphysins / endophilin homologue Rvs167p is recruited during the late stage of endocytosis and is important for vesicle scission . Rvs167p shares the same C - terminal SH3 domains as the amphiphysins ( Colwill et al . , 1999 ) , which function with dynamin . Therefore , it is possible that Rvs167p scission function utilizes a GTPase such as dynamin . Phosphoregulation of Endocytosis The ARK family of kinases are thought to regulate the association of proteins during endocytosis ( Smythe and Ayscough , 2003 ) . It remains unknown at which stages of endocytosis these kinases are present and exert their regulatory affects . Known 161 substrates of Ark1 / Prk1 include Scd5p , Pan1p , Sla1p , Ent1p , and Ent2p ( Cope et al . , 1999 ; Henry et al . , 2003 ; Watson et al . , 2001 ; Zeng and Cai , 1999 ) . Other potential substrates which contain Prk1p / Ark1p consensus sites , include Sla2p , Yap1802p , and Ede1p ( Huang et al . , 2003 ) . The phosphorylation and subsequent dissociation of these factors probably occurs during or after vesicle internalization when these proteins are known to uncoat . Reality may not be this simple , and the ARK kinases could function at all stages of endocytosis by regulating the exchange of factors at cortical patches . Excessive recruitment of endocytic factors to cortical patches could be inhibitory , therefore a major role of the ARKs may be to limit the incorporation of factors into endocytic patches . Alternatively , phosphorylation could help drive the association of these proteins , although this has not yet been demonstrated . Future experiments should focus on the timing of the ARK family kinase recruitment during endocytosis and the effects on early and late stage factors in their absence . When and how do the ARK substrates become dephosphorylated during endocytosis ? Glc7p is the catalytic subunit of protein phosphatase 1 ( PP1 ) in yeast . Studies in our lab have shown that Scd5p may be the targeting subunit of PP1 , as Scd5p binds to PP1 through a consensus PP1 binding motif and has interactions with several other endocytic patch proteins ( Chang et al . , 2002 ; Henry et al . , 2002 ) . Localization studies of Scd5p have found that the protein is still functional in mutants that fail to localize to cortical patches , therefore , dephosphorylation of substrates may occur in the cytosol ( Chang et al . , 2006 ) . Nonetheless , Scd5p and Glc7p are present at the cell cortex and could function to dephosphorylate substrates at cortical patches . Further work should 162 be focused on studying the dynamics of Scd5p and Glc7p during endocytosis and the phenotypes of endocytic patches in mutants where Scd5p and Glc7p fail to interact . Tracking the Internal Population of Clathrin The use of GFP clathrin fusions has allowed us to characterize clathrin’s role and dynamics during endocytosis ; however , we have not began to study the internal clathrin population ( TGN / EE ) and the valuable information it can reveal . A difficulty in studying the large internal clathrin patches of the TGN / EE is their random mobility in all directions . During time - lapse videos these patches normally move in and out of the focal plane ( Supplemental Movie S1 ) . To overcome this problem , experiments should be done using 4 - D microscopy , where time - lapse videos are generated from Z stacks collected at different time points . The ability to track the 3 - D movement of these internal patches over time will provide much needed valuable information . For example , how often do CCVs bud from the TGN / EE ? Is the sequence of patch assembly at the TGN / EE similar to clathrin at the plasma membrane ? What is the patch lifetime of clathrin at these compartments in relation to known clathrin adaptors ( AP - 1 and GGAs ) and cargo , at the TGN / EE ? In addition , what are the individual contributions of these adaptors in recruiting clathrin to the TGN / EE during vesicle budding ? 163 References Aderem , A . , and D . M . Underhill . 1999 . Mechanisms of phagocytosis in macrophages . Annu Rev Immunol . 17 : 593 - 623 . Aguilar , R . C . , H . A . Watson , and B . Wendland . 2003 . The yeast Epsin Ent1 is recruited to membranes through multiple independent interactions . J Biol Chem . 278 : 10737 - 43 . Apodaca , G . 2001 . Endocytic traffic in polarized epithelial cells : role of the actin and microtubule cytoskeleton . Traffic . 2 : 149 - 59 . Ayscough , K . R . 2000 . Endocytosis and the development of cell polarity in yeast require a dynamic F - actin cytoskeleton . Curr Biol . 10 : 1587 - 90 . Ayscough , K . R . , J . Stryker , N . Pokala , M . Sanders , P . Crews , and D . G . Drubin . 1997 . High rates of actin filament turnover in budding yeast and roles for actin in establishment and maintenance of cell polarity revealed using the actin inhibitor latrunculin - A . J Cell Biol . 137 : 399 - 416 . Babst , M . , D . J . Katzmann , E . J . Estepa - Sabal , T . Meerloo , and S . D . Emr . 2002 . Escrt - III : an endosome - associated heterooligomeric protein complex required for mvb sorting . Dev Cell . 3 : 271 - 82 . Baggett , J . J . , K . E . D ' Aquino , and B . Wendland . 2003 . The Sla2p talin domain plays a role in endocytosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Genetics . 165 : 1661 - 74 . Baggett , J . J . , and B . Wendland . 2001 . Clathrin function in yeast endocytosis . Traffic . 2 : 297 - 302 . Baillie , G . S . , and M . D . Houslay . 2005 . Arrestin times for compartmentalised cAMP signaling and phosphodiesterase - 4 enzymes . Curr Opin Cell Biol . 17 : 129 - 34 . 164 Benmerah , A . , B . Begue , A . Dautry - Varsat , and N . Cerf - Bensussan . 1996 . The ear of alpha - adaptin interacts with the COOH - terminal domain of the Eps 15 protein . J Biol Chem . 271 : 12111 - 6 . Bennett , E . M . , C . Y . Chen , A . E . Engqvist - Goldstein , D . G . Drubin , and F . M . Brodsky . 2001 . Clathrin hub expression dissociates the actin - binding protein Hip1R from coated pits and disrupts their alignment with the actin cytoskeleton . Traffic . 2 : 851 - 8 . Blanpied , T . A . , D . B . Scott , and M . D . Ehlers . 2002 . Dynamics and regulation of clathrin coats at specialized endocytic zones of dendrites and spines . Neuron . 36 : 435 - 49 . Brickner , J . H . , and R . S . Fuller . 1997 . SOI1 encodes a novel , conserved protein that promotes TGN - endosomal cycling of Kex2p and other membrane proteins by modulating the function of two TGN localization signals . J Cell Biol . 139 : 23 - 36 . Brodsky , F . M . , C . Y . Chen , C . Knuehl , M . C . Towler , and D . E . Wakeham . 2001 . Biological basket weaving : formation and function of clathrin - coated vesicles . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . 17 : 517 - 68 . Brodsky , F . M . , B . L . Hill , S . L . Acton , I . Nathke , D . H . Wong , S . Ponnambalam , and P . Parham . 1991 . Clathrin light chains : arrays of protein motifs that regulate coated - vesicle dynamics . Trends Biochem Sci . 16 : 208 - 13 . Buss , F . , S . D . Arden , M . Lindsay , J . P . Luzio , and J . Kendrick - Jones . 2001 . Myosin VI isoform localized to clathrin - coated vesicles with a role in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Embo J . 20 : 3676 - 84 . 165 Cao , H . , J . D . Orth , J . Chen , S . G . Weller , J . E . Heuser , and M . A . McNiven . 2003 . Cortactin is a component of clathrin - coated pits and participates in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Mol Cell Biol . 23 : 2162 - 70 . Cardelli , J . 2001 . Phagocytosis and macropinocytosis in Dictyostelium : phosphoinositide - based processes , biochemically distinct . Traffic . 2 : 311 - 20 . Cestra , G . , L . Castagnoli , L . Dente , O . Minenkova , A . Petrelli , N . Migone , U . Hoffmuller , J . Schneider - Mergener , and G . Cesareni . 1999 . The SH3 domains of endophilin and amphiphysin bind to the proline - rich region of synaptojanin 1 at distinct sites that display an unconventional binding specificity . J Biol Chem . 274 : 32001 - 7 . Chang , J . S . , K . Henry , M . I . Geli , and S . K . Lemmon . 2006 . Cortical Recruitment and Nuclear - Cytoplasmic Shuttling of Scd5p , a Protein Phosphatase - 1 - targeting Protein Involved in Actin Organization and Endocytosis . Mol Biol Cell . 17 : 251 - 62 . Chang , J . S . , K . Henry , B . L . Wolf , M . Geli , and S . K . Lemmon . 2002 . Protein phosphatase - 1 binding to scd5p is important for regulation of actin organization and endocytosis in yeast . J Biol Chem . 277 : 48002 - 8 . Chen , C . Y . , and F . M . Brodsky . 2005 . Huntingtin - interacting protein 1 ( Hip1 ) and Hip1 - related protein ( Hip1R ) bind the conserved sequence of clathrin light chains and thereby influence clathrin assembly in vitro and actin distribution in vivo . J Biol Chem . 280 : 6109 - 17 . 166 Chen , C . Y . , M . L . Reese , P . K . Hwang , N . Ota , D . Agard , and F . M . Brodsky . 2002 . Clathrin light and heavy chain interface : alpha - helix binding superhelix loops via critical tryptophans . Embo J . 21 : 6072 - 82 . Chimini , G . , and P . Chavrier . 2000 . Function of Rho family proteins in actin dynamics during phagocytosis and engulfment . Nat Cell Biol . 2 : E191 - 6 . Chu , D . S . , B . Pishvaee , and G . S . Payne . 1996 . The light chain subunit is required for clathrin function in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J Biol Chem . 271 : 33123 - 30 . Colwill , K . , D . Field , L . Moore , J . Friesen , and B . Andrews . 1999 . In vivo analysis of the domains of yeast Rvs167p suggests Rvs167p function is mediated through multiple protein interactions . Genetics . 152 : 881 - 93 . Conner , S . D . , and S . L . Schmid . 2002 . Identification of an adaptor - associated kinase , AAK1 , as a regulator of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J Cell Biol . 156 : 921 - 9 . Conner , S . D . , and S . L . Schmid . 2003 . Regulated portals of entry into the cell . Nature . 422 : 37 - 44 . Cope , M . J . , S . Yang , C . Shang , and D . G . Drubin . 1999 . Novel protein kinases Ark1p and Prk1p associate with and regulate the cortical actin cytoskeleton in budding yeast . J Cell Biol . 144 : 1203 - 18 . Daecke , J . , O . T . Fackler , M . T . Dittmar , and H . G . Krausslich . 2005 . Involvement of clathrin - mediated endocytosis in human immunodeficiency virus type 1 entry . J Virol . 79 : 1581 - 94 . Damke , H . , T . Baba , A . M . van der Bliek , and S . L . Schmid . 1995 . Clathrin - independent pinocytosis is induced in cells overexpressing a temperature - sensitive mutant of dynamin . J Cell Biol . 131 : 69 - 80 . 167 de Beer , T . , R . E . Carter , K . E . Lobel - Rice , A . Sorkin , and M . Overduin . 1998 . Structure and Asn - Pro - Phe binding pocket of the Eps15 homology domain . Science . 281 : 1357 - 60 . De Camilli , P . , K . Takei , and P . S . McPherson . 1995 . The function of dynamin in endocytosis . Curr Opin Neurobiol . 5 : 559 - 65 . Dell ' Angelica , E . C . 2001 . Clathrin - binding proteins : got a motif ? Join the network ! Trends Cell Biol . 11 : 315 - 8 . DeLuca - Flaherty , C . , D . B . McKay , P . Parham , and B . L . Hill . 1990 . Uncoating protein ( hsc70 ) binds a conformationally labile domain of clathrin light chain LCa to stimulate ATP hydrolysis . Cell . 62 : 875 - 87 . Desrivieres , S . , F . T . Cooke , P . J . Parker , and M . N . Hall . 1998 . MSS4 , a phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase required for organization of the actin cytoskeleton in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J Biol Chem . 273 : 15787 - 93 . Dulic , V . , M . Egerton , I . Elguindi , S . Raths , B . Singer , and H . Riezman . 1991 . Yeast endocytosis assays . Methods Enzymol . 194 : 697 - 710 . Duncan , M . C . , M . J . Cope , B . L . Goode , B . Wendland , and D . G . Drubin . 2001 . Yeast Eps15 - like endocytic protein , Pan1p , activates the Arp2 / 3 complex . Nat Cell Biol . 3 : 687 - 90 . Dunn , R . , and L . Hicke . 2001 . Domains of the Rsp5 ubiquitin - protein ligase required for receptor - mediated and fluid - phase endocytosis . Mol Biol Cell . 12 : 421 - 35 . Dupre , S . , D . Urban - Grimal , and R . Haguenauer - Tsapis . 2004 . Ubiquitin and endocytic internalization in yeast and animal cells . Biochim Biophys Acta . 1695 : 89 - 111 . 168 Ehrlich , M . , W . Boll , A . Van Oijen , R . Hariharan , K . Chandran , M . L . Nibert , and T . Kirchhausen . 2004 . Endocytosis by random initiation and stabilization of clathrin - coated pits . Cell . 118 : 591 - 605 . Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . , and D . G . Drubin . 2003 . Actin assembly and endocytosis : from yeast to mammals . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . 19 : 287 - 332 . Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . , M . M . Kessels , V . S . Chopra , M . R . Hayden , and D . G . Drubin . 1999 . An actin - binding protein of the Sla2 / Huntingtin interacting protein 1 family is a novel component of clathrin - coated pits and vesicles . J Cell Biol . 147 : 1503 - 18 . Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . , R . A . Warren , M . M . Kessels , J . H . Keen , J . Heuser , and D . G . Drubin . 2001 . The actin - binding protein Hip1R associates with clathrin during early stages of endocytosis and promotes clathrin assembly in vitro . J Cell Biol . 154 : 1209 - 23 . Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . , C . X . Zhang , S . Carreno , C . Barroso , J . E . Heuser , and D . G . Drubin . 2004 . RNAi - mediated Hip1R silencing results in stable association between the endocytic machinery and the actin assembly machinery . Mol Biol Cell . 15 : 1666 - 79 . Eugster , A . , E . I . Pecheur , F . Michel , B . Winsor , F . Letourneur , and S . Friant . 2004 . Ent5p is required with Ent3p and Vps27p for ubiquitin - dependent protein sorting into the multivesicular body . Mol Biol Cell . 15 : 3031 - 41 . Evangelista , M . , B . M . Klebl , A . H . Tong , B . A . Webb , T . Leeuw , E . Leberer , M . Whiteway , D . Y . Thomas , and C . Boone . 2000 . A role for myosin - I in actin 169 assembly through interactions with Vrp1p , Bee1p , and the Arp2 / 3 complex . J Cell Biol . 148 : 353 - 62 . Feng , Y . , and N . G . Davis . 2000 . Akr1p and the type I casein kinases act prior to the ubiquitination step of yeast endocytosis : Akr1p is required for kinase localization to the plasma membrane . Mol Cell Biol . 20 : 5350 - 9 . Ford , M . G . , I . G . Mills , B . J . Peter , Y . Vallis , G . J . Praefcke , P . R . Evans , and H . T . McMahon . 2002 . Curvature of clathrin - coated pits driven by epsin . Nature . 419 : 361 - 6 . Fotin , A . , Y . Cheng , N . Grigorieff , T . Walz , S . C . Harrison , and T . Kirchhausen . 2004a . Structure of an auxilin - bound clathrin coat and its implications for the mechanism of uncoating . Nature . 432 : 649 - 53 . Fotin , A . , Y . Cheng , P . Sliz , N . Grigorieff , S . C . Harrison , T . Kirchhausen , and T . Walz . 2004b . Molecular model for a complete clathrin lattice from electron cryomicroscopy . Nature . 432 : 573 - 9 . Friant , S . , E . I . Pecheur , A . Eugster , F . Michel , Y . Lefkir , D . Nourrisson , and F . Letourneur . 2003 . Ent3p Is a PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P2 effector required for protein sorting to the multivesicular body . Dev Cell . 5 : 499 - 511 . Gaidarov , I . , F . Santini , R . A . Warren , and J . H . Keen . 1999 . Spatial control of coated - pit dynamics in living cells . Nat Cell Biol . 1 : 1 - 7 . Galan , J . M . , V . Moreau , B . Andre , C . Volland , and R . Haguenauer - Tsapis . 1996 . Ubiquitination mediated by the Npi1p / Rsp5p ubiquitin - protein ligase is required for endocytosis of the yeast uracil permease . J Biol Chem . 271 : 10946 - 52 . 170 Gall , W . E . , N . C . Geething , Z . Hua , M . F . Ingram , K . Liu , S . I . Chen , and T . R . Graham . 2002 . Drs2p - dependent formation of exocytic clathrin - coated vesicles in vivo . Curr Biol . 12 : 1623 - 7 . Gall , W . E . , M . A . Higginbotham , C . Chen , M . F . Ingram , D . M . Cyr , and T . R . Graham . 2000 . The auxilin - like phosphoprotein Swa2p is required for clathrin function in yeast . Curr Biol . 10 : 1349 - 58 . Ghosh , P . , and S . Kornfeld . 2003 . AP - 1 binding to sorting signals and release from clathrin - coated vesicles is regulated by phosphorylation . J Cell Biol . 160 : 699 - 708 . Ghosh , P . , and S . Kornfeld . 2004 . The cytoplasmic tail of the cation - independent mannose 6 - phosphate receptor contains four binding sites for AP - 1 . Arch Biochem Biophys . 426 : 225 - 30 . Gietz , R . D . , R . H . Schiestl , A . R . Willems , and R . A . Woods . 1995 . Studies on the transformation of intact yeast cells by the LiAc / SS - DNA / PEG procedure . Yeast . 11 : 355 - 60 . Girard , M . , P . D . Allaire , P . S . McPherson , and F . Blondeau . 2005 . Non - stoichiometric Relationship between Clathrin Heavy and Light Chains Revealed by Quantitative Comparative Proteomics of Clathrin - coated Vesicles from Brain and Liver . Mol Cell Proteomics . 4 : 1145 - 54 . Goode , B . L . , A . A . Rodal , G . Barnes , and D . G . Drubin . 2001 . Activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex by the actin filament binding protein Abp1p . J Cell Biol . 153 : 627 - 34 . Gourlay , C . W . , H . Dewar , D . T . Warren , R . Costa , N . Satish , and K . R . Ayscough . 2003 . An interaction between Sla1p and Sla2p plays a role in regulating actin dynamics and endocytosis in budding yeast . J Cell Sci . 116 : 2551 - 64 . 171 Grabs , D . , V . I . Slepnev , Z . Songyang , C . David , M . Lynch , L . C . Cantley , and P . De Camilli . 1997 . The SH3 domain of amphiphysin binds the proline - rich domain of dynamin at a single site that defines a new SH3 binding consensus sequence . J Biol Chem . 272 : 13419 - 25 . Gurunathan , S . , D . David , and J . E . Gerst . 2002 . Dynamin and clathrin are required for the biogenesis of a distinct class of secretory vesicles in yeast . Embo J . 21 : 602 - 14 . Harsay , E . , and R . Schekman . 2002 . A subset of yeast vacuolar protein sorting mutants is blocked in one branch of the exocytic pathway . J Cell Biol . 156 : 271 - 85 . Henry , K . R . , K . D ' Hondt , J . Chang , T . Newpher , K . Huang , R . T . Hudson , H . Riezman , and S . K . Lemmon . 2002 . Scd5p and clathrin function are important for cortical actin organization , endocytosis , and localization of sla2p in yeast . Mol Biol Cell . 13 : 2607 - 25 . Henry , K . R . , K . D ' Hondt , J . S . Chang , D . A . Nix , M . J . Cope , C . S . Chan , D . G . Drubin , and S . K . Lemmon . 2003 . The actin - regulating kinase Prk1p negatively regulates Scd5p , a suppressor of clathrin deficiency , in actin organization and endocytosis . Curr Biol . 13 : 1564 - 9 . Heuser , J . E . , and R . G . Anderson . 1989 . Hypertonic media inhibit receptor - mediated endocytosis by blocking clathrin - coated pit formation . J Cell Biol . 108 : 389 - 400 . Hicke , L . , and H . Riezman . 1996 . Ubiquitination of a yeast plasma membrane receptor signals its ligand - stimulated endocytosis . Cell . 84 : 277 - 87 . Hicke , L . , B . Zanolari , and H . Riezman . 1998 . Cytoplasmic tail phosphorylation of the alpha - factor receptor is required for its ubiquitination and internalization . J Cell Biol . 141 : 349 - 58 . 172 Hinrichsen , L . , J . Harborth , L . Andrees , K . Weber , and E . J . Ungewickell . 2003 . Effect of clathrin heavy chain - and alpha - adaptin - specific small inhibitory RNAs on endocytic accessory proteins and receptor trafficking in HeLa cells . J Biol Chem . 278 : 45160 - 70 . Howard , J . P . , J . L . Hutton , J . M . Olson , and G . S . Payne . 2002 . Sla1p serves as the targeting signal recognition factor for NPFX ( 1 , 2 ) D - mediated endocytosis . J Cell Biol . 157 : 315 - 26 . Huang , B . , G . Zeng , A . Y . Ng , and M . Cai . 2003 . Identification of novel recognition motifs and regulatory targets for the yeast actin - regulating kinase Prk1p . Mol Biol Cell . 14 : 4871 - 84 . Huang , F . , A . Khvorova , W . Marshall , and A . Sorkin . 2004 . Analysis of clathrin - mediated endocytosis of epidermal growth factor receptor by RNA interference . J Biol Chem . 279 : 16657 - 61 . Huang , K . M . , K . D ' Hondt , H . Riezman , and S . K . Lemmon . 1999 . Clathrin functions in the absence of heterotetrameric adaptors and AP180 - related proteins in yeast . Embo J . 18 : 3897 - 908 . Huang , K . M . , L . Gullberg , K . K . Nelson , C . J . Stefan , K . Blumer , and S . K . Lemmon . 1997 . Novel functions of clathrin light chains : clathrin heavy chain trimerization is defective in light chain - deficient yeast . J Cell Sci . 110 ( Pt 7 ) : 899 - 910 . Huckaba , T . M . , A . C . Gay , L . F . Pantalena , H . C . Yang , and L . A . Pon . 2004 . Live cell imaging of the assembly , disassembly , and actin cable - dependent movement of endosomes and actin patches in the budding yeast , Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J Cell Biol . 167 : 519 - 30 . 173 Huh , W . K . , J . V . Falvo , L . C . Gerke , A . S . Carroll , R . W . Howson , J . S . Weissman , and E . K . O ' Shea . 2003 . Global analysis of protein localization in budding yeast . Nature . 425 : 686 - 91 . Hyun , T . S . , D . S . Rao , D . Saint - Dic , L . E . Michael , P . D . Kumar , S . V . Bradley , I . F . Mizukami , K . I . Oravecz - Wilson , and T . S . Ross . 2004 . HIP1 and HIP1r stabilize receptor tyrosine kinases and bind 3 - phosphoinositides via epsin N - terminal homology domains . J Biol Chem . 279 : 14294 - 306 . Itoh , T . , and T . Takenawa . 2004 . Regulation of endocytosis by phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate and ENTH proteins . Curr Top Microbiol Immunol . 282 : 31 - 47 . James , P . , J . Halladay , and E . A . Craig . 1996 . Genomic libraries and a host strain designed for highly efficient two - hybrid selection in yeast . Genetics . 144 : 1425 - 36 . Jonsdottir , G . A . , and R . Li . 2004 . Dynamics of yeast Myosin I : evidence for a possible role in scission of endocytic vesicles . Curr Biol . 14 : 1604 - 9 . Kaksonen , M . , Y . Sun , and D . G . Drubin . 2003 . A pathway for association of receptors , adaptors , and actin during endocytic internalization . Cell . 115 : 475 - 87 . Kaksonen , M . , C . P . Toret , and D . G . Drubin . 2005 . A modular design for the clathrin - and actin - mediated endocytosis machinery . Cell . 123 : 305 - 20 . Kalchman , M . A . , H . B . Koide , K . McCutcheon , R . K . Graham , K . Nichol , K . Nishiyama , P . Kazemi - Esfarjani , F . C . Lynn , C . Wellington , M . Metzler , Y . P . Goldberg , I . Kanazawa , R . D . Gietz , and M . R . Hayden . 1997 . HIP1 , a human homologue of S . cerevisiae Sla2p , interacts with membrane - associated huntingtin in the brain . Nat Genet . 16 : 44 - 53 . 174 Katzmann , D . J . , C . J . Stefan , M . Babst , and S . D . Emr . 2003 . Vps27 recruits ESCRT machinery to endosomes during MVB sorting . J Cell Biol . 162 : 413 - 23 . Kirkham , M . , and R . G . Parton . 2005 . Clathrin - independent endocytosis : New insights into caveolae and non - caveolar lipid raft carriers . Biochim Biophys Acta . 1745 : 273 - 86 . Lafer , E . M . 2002 . Clathrin - protein interactions . Traffic . 3 : 513 - 20 . Lappalainen , P . , and D . G . Drubin . 1997 . Cofilin promotes rapid actin filament turnover in vivo . Nature . 388 : 78 - 82 . Laux , T . , K . Fukami , M . Thelen , T . Golub , D . Frey , and P . Caroni . 2000 . GAP43 , MARCKS , and CAP23 modulate PI ( 4 , 5 ) P ( 2 ) at plasmalemmal rafts , and regulate cell cortex actin dynamics through a common mechanism . J Cell Biol . 149 : 1455 - 72 . Le Lay , S . , and T . V . Kurzchalia . 2005 . Getting rid of caveolins : Phenotypes of caveolin - deficient animals . Biochim Biophys Acta . Lechler , T . , A . Shevchenko , and R . Li . 2000 . Direct involvement of yeast type I myosins in Cdc42 - dependent actin polymerization . J Cell Biol . 148 : 363 - 73 . Lee , D . W . , X . Zhao , F . Zhang , E . Eisenberg , and L . E . Greene . 2005 . Depletion of GAK / auxilin 2 inhibits receptor - mediated endocytosis and recruitment of both clathrin and clathrin adaptors . J Cell Sci . 118 : 4311 - 21 . Lefkowitz , R . J . , and S . K . Shenoy . 2005 . Transduction of receptor signals by beta - arrestins . Science . 308 : 512 - 7 . Legendre - Guillemin , V . , M . Metzler , M . Charbonneau , L . Gan , V . Chopra , J . Philie , M . R . Hayden , and P . S . McPherson . 2002 . HIP1 and HIP12 display differential 175 binding to F - actin , AP2 , and clathrin . Identification of a novel interaction with clathrin light chain . J Biol Chem . 277 : 19897 - 904 . Legendre - Guillemin , V . , M . Metzler , J . F . Lemaire , J . Philie , L . Gan , M . R . Hayden , and P . S . McPherson . 2005 . Huntingtin interacting protein 1 ( HIP1 ) regulates clathrin assembly through direct binding to the regulatory region of the clathrin light chain . J Biol Chem . 280 : 6101 - 8 . Legendre - Guillemin , V . , S . Wasiak , N . K . Hussain , A . Angers , and P . S . McPherson . 2004 . ENTH / ANTH proteins and clathrin - mediated membrane budding . J Cell Sci . 117 : 9 - 18 . Lemmon , S . , V . P . Lemmon , and E . W . Jones . 1988 . Characterization of yeast clathrin and anticlathrin heavy - chain monoclonal antibodies . J Cell Biochem . 36 : 329 - 40 . Lemmon , S . K . , C . Freund , K . Conley , and E . W . Jones . 1990 . Genetic instability of clathrin - deficient strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Genetics . 124 : 27 - 38 . Lemmon , S . K . , and E . W . Jones . 1987 . Clathrin requirement for normal growth of yeast . Science . 238 : 504 - 9 . Lewis , M . J . , B . J . Nichols , C . Prescianotto - Baschong , H . Riezman , and H . R . Pelham . 2000 . Specific retrieval of the exocytic SNARE Snc1p from early yeast endosomes . Mol Biol Cell . 11 : 23 - 38 . Liu , S . H . , M . L . Wong , C . S . Craik , and F . M . Brodsky . 1995 . Regulation of clathrin assembly and trimerization defined using recombinant triskelion hubs . Cell . 83 : 257 - 67 . Longtine , M . S . , A . McKenzie , 3rd , D . J . Demarini , N . G . Shah , A . Wach , A . Brachat , P . Philippsen , and J . R . Pringle . 1998 . Additional modules for versatile and 176 economical PCR - based gene deletion and modification in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Yeast . 14 : 953 - 61 . Malinska , K . , J . Malinsky , M . Opekarova , and W . Tanner . 2003 . Visualization of protein compartmentation within the plasma membrane of living yeast cells . Mol Biol Cell . 14 : 4427 - 36 . Mao , Y . , J . Chen , J . A . Maynard , B . Zhang , and F . A . Quiocho . 2001 . A novel all helix fold of the AP180 amino - terminal domain for phosphoinositide binding and clathrin assembly in synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Cell . 104 : 433 - 40 . Martin , A . C . , X . P . Xu , I . Rouiller , M . Kaksonen , Y . Sun , L . Belmont , N . Volkmann , D . Hanein , M . Welch , and D . G . Drubin . 2005 . Effects of Arp2 and Arp3 nucleotide - binding pocket mutations on Arp2 / 3 complex function . J Cell Biol . 168 : 315 - 28 . McCann , R . O . , and S . W . Craig . 1997 . The I / LWEQ module : a conserved sequence that signifies F - actin binding in functionally diverse proteins from yeast to mammals . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 94 : 5679 - 84 . McCann , R . O . , and S . W . Craig . 1999 . Functional genomic analysis reveals the utility of the I / LWEQ module as a predictor of protein : actin interaction . Biochem Biophys Res Commun . 266 : 135 - 40 . McMahon , H . T . , and I . G . Mills . 2004 . COP and clathrin - coated vesicle budding : different pathways , common approaches . Curr Opin Cell Biol . 16 : 379 - 91 . McPherson , P . S . , E . P . Garcia , V . I . Slepnev , C . David , X . Zhang , D . Grabs , W . S . Sossin , R . Bauerfeind , Y . Nemoto , and P . De Camilli . 1996 . A presynaptic inositol - 5 - phosphatase . Nature . 379 : 353 - 7 . 177 McPherson , P . S . , and B . Ritter . 2005 . Peptide motifs : building the clathrin machinery . Mol Neurobiol . 32 : 73 - 87 . Merrifield , C . J . , M . E . Feldman , L . Wan , and W . Almers . 2002 . Imaging actin and dynamin recruitment during invagination of single clathrin - coated pits . Nat Cell Biol . 4 : 691 - 8 . Merrifield , C . J . , D . Perrais , and D . Zenisek . 2005 . Coupling between clathrin - coated - pit invagination , cortactin recruitment , and membrane scission observed in live cells . Cell . 121 : 593 - 606 . Merrifield , C . J . , B . Qualmann , M . M . Kessels , and W . Almers . 2004 . Neural Wiskott Aldrich Syndrome Protein ( N - WASP ) and the Arp2 / 3 complex are recruited to sites of clathrin - mediated endocytosis in cultured fibroblasts . Eur J Cell Biol . 83 : 13 - 8 . Metzler , M . , V . Legendre - Guillemin , L . Gan , V . Chopra , A . Kwok , P . S . McPherson , and M . R . Hayden . 2001 . HIP1 functions in clathrin - mediated endocytosis through binding to clathrin and adaptor protein 2 . J Biol Chem . 276 : 39271 - 6 . Metzler , M . , B . Li , L . Gan , J . Georgiou , C . A . Gutekunst , Y . Wang , E . Torre , R . S . Devon , R . Oh , V . Legendre - Guillemin , M . Rich , C . Alvarez , M . Gertsenstein , P . S . McPherson , A . Nagy , Y . T . Wang , J . C . Roder , L . A . Raymond , and M . R . Hayden . 2003 . Disruption of the endocytic protein HIP1 results in neurological deficits and decreased AMPA receptor trafficking . Embo J . 22 : 3254 - 66 . Miele , A . E . , P . J . Watson , P . R . Evans , L . M . Traub , and D . J . Owen . 2004 . Two distinct interaction motifs in amphiphysin bind two independent sites on the clathrin terminal domain beta - propeller . Nat Struct Mol Biol . 11 : 242 - 8 . 178 Mishra , S . K . , N . R . Agostinelli , T . J . Brett , I . Mizukami , T . S . Ross , and L . M . Traub . 2001 . Clathrin - and AP - 2 - binding sites in HIP1 uncover a general assembly role for endocytic accessory proteins . J Biol Chem . 276 : 46230 - 6 . Mishra , S . K . , P . A . Keyel , M . J . Hawryluk , N . R . Agostinelli , S . C . Watkins , and L . M . Traub . 2002a . Disabled - 2 exhibits the properties of a cargo - selective endocytic clathrin adaptor . Embo J . 21 : 4915 - 26 . Mishra , S . K . , S . C . Watkins , and L . M . Traub . 2002b . The autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia ( ARH ) protein interfaces directly with the clathrin - coat machinery . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 99 : 16099 - 104 . Moskowitz , H . S . , J . Heuser , T . E . McGraw , and T . A . Ryan . 2003 . Targeted chemical disruption of clathrin function in living cells . Mol Biol Cell . 14 : 4437 - 47 . Motley , A . , N . A . Bright , M . N . Seaman , and M . S . Robinson . 2003 . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis in AP - 2 - depleted cells . J Cell Biol . 162 : 909 - 18 . Mulholland , J . , J . Konopka , B . Singer - Kruger , M . Zerial , and D . Botstein . 1999 . Visualization of receptor - mediated endocytosis in yeast . Mol Biol Cell . 10 : 799 - 817 . Nathke , I . , B . L . Hill , P . Parham , and F . M . Brodsky . 1990 . The calcium - binding site of clathrin light chains . J Biol Chem . 265 : 18621 - 7 . Nelson , K . K . , and S . K . Lemmon . 1993 . Suppressors of clathrin deficiency : overexpression of ubiquitin rescues lethal strains of clathrin - deficient Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol Cell Biol . 13 : 521 - 32 . 179 Newpher , T . M . , R . P . Smith , V . Lemmon , and S . K . Lemmon . 2005 . In vivo dynamics of clathrin and its adaptor - dependent recruitment to the actin - based endocytic machinery in yeast . Dev Cell . 9 : 87 - 98 . Nobes , C . , and M . Marsh . 2000 . Dendritic cells : new roles for Cdc42 and Rac in antigen uptake ? Curr Biol . 10 : R739 - 41 . Nonet , M . L . , A . M . Holgado , F . Brewer , C . J . Serpe , B . A . Norbeck , J . Holleran , L . Wei , E . Hartwieg , E . M . Jorgensen , and A . Alfonso . 1999 . UNC - 11 , a Caenorhabditis elegans AP180 homologue , regulates the size and protein composition of synaptic vesicles . Mol Biol Cell . 10 : 2343 - 60 . Nothwehr , S . F . , E . Conibear , and T . H . Stevens . 1995 . Golgi and vacuolar membrane proteins reach the vacuole in vps1 mutant yeast cells via the plasma membrane . J Cell Biol . 129 : 35 - 46 . Owen , D . J . 2004 . Linking endocytic cargo to clathrin : structural and functional insights into coated vesicle formation . Biochem Soc Trans . 32 : 1 - 14 . Owen , D . J . , B . M . Collins , and P . R . Evans . 2004 . Adaptors for clathrin coats : structure and function . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol . 20 : 153 - 91 . Paleotti , O . , E . Macia , F . Luton , S . Klein , M . Partisani , P . Chardin , T . Kirchhausen , and M . Franco . 2005 . The small G - protein Arf6GTP recruits the AP - 2 adaptor complex to membranes . J Biol Chem . 280 : 21661 - 6 . Park , D . S . , S . E . Woodman , W . Schubert , A . W . Cohen , P . G . Frank , M . Chandra , J . Shirani , B . Razani , B . Tang , L . A . Jelicks , S . M . Factor , L . M . Weiss , H . B . Tanowitz , and M . P . Lisanti . 2002 . Caveolin - 1 / 3 double - knockout mice are viable , 180 but lack both muscle and non - muscle caveolae , and develop a severe cardiomyopathic phenotype . Am J Pathol . 160 : 2207 - 17 . Payne , G . S . , D . Baker , E . van Tuinen , and R . Schekman . 1988 . Protein transport to the vacuole and receptor - mediated endocytosis by clathrin heavy chain - deficient yeast . J Cell Biol . 106 : 1453 - 61 . Payne , G . S . , and R . Schekman . 1989 . Clathrin : a role in the intracellular retention of a Golgi membrane protein . Science . 245 : 1358 - 65 . Peter , B . J . , H . M . Kent , I . G . Mills , Y . Vallis , P . J . Butler , P . R . Evans , and H . T . McMahon . 2004 . BAR domains as sensors of membrane curvature : the amphiphysin BAR structure . Science . 303 : 495 - 9 . Pishvaee , B . , G . Costaguta , B . G . Yeung , S . Ryazantsev , T . Greener , L . E . Greene , E . Eisenberg , J . M . McCaffery , and G . S . Payne . 2000 . A yeast DNA J protein required for uncoating of clathrin - coated vesicles in vivo . Nat Cell Biol . 2 : 958 - 63 . Pishvaee , B . , A . Munn , and G . S . Payne . 1997 . A novel structural model for regulation of clathrin function . Embo J . 16 : 2227 - 39 . Pley , U . M . , B . L . Hill , C . Alibert , F . M . Brodsky , and P . Parham . 1995 . The interaction of calmodulin with clathrin - coated vesicles , triskelions , and light chains . Localization of a binding site . J Biol Chem . 270 : 2395 - 402 . Pruyne , D . , and A . Bretscher . 2000 . Polarization of cell growth in yeast . J Cell Sci . 113 ( Pt 4 ) : 571 - 85 . Puertollano , R . , R . C . Aguilar , I . Gorshkova , R . J . Crouch , and J . S . Bonifacino . 2001a . Sorting of mannose 6 - phosphate receptors mediated by the GGAs . Science . 292 : 1712 - 6 . 181 Puertollano , R . , and J . S . Bonifacino . 2004 . Interactions of GGA3 with the ubiquitin sorting machinery . Nat Cell Biol . 6 : 244 - 51 . Puertollano , R . , P . A . Randazzo , J . F . Presley , L . M . Hartnell , and J . S . Bonifacino . 2001b . The GGAs promote ARF - dependent recruitment of clathrin to the TGN . Cell . 105 : 93 - 102 . Puertollano , R . , N . N . van der Wel , L . E . Greene , E . Eisenberg , P . J . Peters , and J . S . Bonifacino . 2003 . Morphology and dynamics of clathrin / GGA1 - coated carriers budding from the trans - Golgi network . Mol Biol Cell . 14 : 1545 - 57 . Qualmann , B . , M . M . Kessels , and R . B . Kelly . 2000 . Molecular links between endocytosis and the actin cytoskeleton . J Cell Biol . 150 : F111 - 6 . Raiborg , C . , K . G . Bache , A . Mehlum , E . Stang , and H . Stenmark . 2001 . Hrs recruits clathrin to early endosomes . Embo J . 20 : 5008 - 21 . Raiborg , C . , T . E . Rusten , and H . Stenmark . 2003 . Protein sorting into multivesicular endosomes . Curr Opin Cell Biol . 15 : 446 - 55 . Rappoport , J . , S . Simon , and A . Benmerah . 2004 . Understanding living clathrin - coated pits . Traffic . 5 : 327 - 37 . Raths , S . , J . Rohrer , F . Crausaz , and H . Riezman . 1993 . end3 and end4 : two mutants defective in receptor - mediated and fluid - phase endocytosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J Cell Biol . 120 : 55 - 65 . Redding , K . , C . Holcomb , and R . S . Fuller . 1991 . Immunolocalization of Kex2 protease identifies a putative late Golgi compartment in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J Cell Biol . 113 : 527 - 38 . 182 Rodal , A . A . , L . Kozubowski , B . L . Goode , D . G . Drubin , and J . H . Hartwig . 2005 . Actin and septin ultrastructures at the budding yeast cell cortex . Mol Biol Cell . 16 : 372 - 84 . Rodal , A . A . , A . L . Manning , B . L . Goode , and D . G . Drubin . 2003 . Negative regulation of yeast WASp by two SH3 domain - containing proteins . Curr Biol . 13 : 1000 - 8 . Rohde , G . , D . Wenzel , and V . Haucke . 2002 . A phosphatidylinositol ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate binding site within mu2 - adaptin regulates clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J Cell Biol . 158 : 209 - 14 . Rothberg , K . G . , J . E . Heuser , W . C . Donzell , Y . S . Ying , J . R . Glenney , and R . G . Anderson . 1992 . Caveolin , a protein component of caveolae membrane coats . Cell . 68 : 673 - 82 . Schafer , D . A . 2004 . Regulating actin dynamics at membranes : a focus on dynamin . Traffic . 5 : 463 - 9 . Schmid , S . L . , W . A . Braell , D . M . Schlossman , and J . E . Rothman . 1984 . A role for clathrin light chains in the recognition of clathrin cages by ' uncoating ATPase ' . Nature . 311 : 228 - 31 . Scott , P . M . , P . S . Bilodeau , O . Zhdankina , S . C . Winistorfer , M . J . Hauglund , M . M . Allaman , W . R . Kearney , A . D . Robertson , A . L . Boman , and R . C . Piper . 2004 . GGA proteins bind ubiquitin to facilitate sorting at the trans - Golgi network . Nat Cell Biol . 6 : 252 - 9 . Seeger , M . , and G . S . Payne . 1992a . A role for clathrin in the sorting of vacuolar proteins in the Golgi complex of yeast . Embo J . 11 : 2811 - 8 . 183 Seeger , M . , and G . S . Payne . 1992b . Selective and immediate effects of clathrin heavy chain mutations on Golgi membrane protein retention in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J Cell Biol . 118 : 531 - 40 . Shih , S . C . , D . J . Katzmann , J . D . Schnell , M . Sutanto , S . D . Emr , and L . Hicke . 2002 . Epsins and Vps27p / Hrs contain ubiquitin - binding domains that function in receptor endocytosis . Nat Cell Biol . 4 : 389 - 93 . Shih , W . , A . Gallusser , and T . Kirchhausen . 1995 . A clathrin - binding site in the hinge of the beta 2 chain of mammalian AP - 2 complexes . J Biol Chem . 270 : 31083 - 90 . Sigismund , S . , T . Woelk , C . Puri , E . Maspero , C . Tacchetti , P . Transidico , P . P . Di Fiore , and S . Polo . 2005 . Clathrin - independent endocytosis of ubiquitinated cargos . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 102 : 2760 - 5 . Sikorski , R . S . , and P . Hieter . 1989 . A system of shuttle vectors and yeast host strains designed for efficient manipulation of DNA in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Genetics . 122 : 19 - 27 . Silveira , L . A . , D . H . Wong , F . R . Masiarz , and R . Schekman . 1990 . Yeast clathrin has a distinctive light chain that is important for cell growth . J Cell Biol . 111 : 1437 - 49 . Smith , A . E . , Z . Zhang , C . R . Thomas , K . E . Moxham , and A . P . Middelberg . 2000 . The mechanical properties of Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 97 : 9871 - 4 . Smythe , E . , and K . R . Ayscough . 2003 . The Ark1 / Prk1 family of protein kinases . Regulators of endocytosis and the actin skeleton . EMBO Rep . 4 : 246 - 51 . 184 Soetens , O . , J . O . De Craene , and B . Andre . 2001 . Ubiquitin is required for sorting to the vacuole of the yeast general amino acid permease , Gap1 . J Biol Chem . 276 : 43949 - 57 . Stefan , C . J . , S . M . Padilla , A . Audhya , and S . D . Emr . 2005 . The phosphoinositide phosphatase Sjl2 is recruited to cortical actin patches in the control of vesicle formation and fission during endocytosis . Mol Cell Biol . 25 : 2910 - 23 . Stepp , J . D . , A . Pellicena - Palle , S . Hamilton , T . Kirchhausen , and S . K . Lemmon . 1995 . A late Golgi sorting function for Saccharomyces cerevisiae Apm1p , but not for Apm2p , a second yeast clathrin AP medium chain - related protein . Mol Biol Cell . 6 : 41 - 58 . Sun , X . , V . K . Yau , B . J . Briggs , and G . R . Whittaker . 2005a . Role of clathrin - mediated endocytosis during vesicular stomatitis virus entry into host cells . Virology . 338 : 53 - 60 . Sun , Y . , M . Kaksonen , D . T . Madden , R . Schekman , and D . G . Drubin . 2005b . Interaction of Sla2p ' s ANTH domain with PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 is important for actin - dependent endocytic internalization . Mol Biol Cell . 16 : 717 - 30 . Takeda , T . , and F . Chang . 2005 . Role of fission yeast myosin I in organization of sterol - rich membrane domains . Curr Biol . 15 : 1331 - 6 . Tan , P . K . , N . G . Davis , G . F . Sprague , and G . S . Payne . 1993 . Clathrin facilitates the internalization of seven transmembrane segment receptors for mating pheromones in yeast . J Cell Biol . 123 : 1707 - 16 . Tan , P . K . , J . P . Howard , and G . S . Payne . 1996 . The sequence NPFXD defines a new class of endocytosis signal in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J Cell Biol . 135 : 1789 - 800 . 185 Tang , H . Y . , J . Xu , and M . Cai . 2000 . Pan1p , End3p , and S1a1p , three yeast proteins required for normal cortical actin cytoskeleton organization , associate with each other and play essential roles in cell wall morphogenesis . Mol Cell Biol . 20 : 12 - 25 . Traub , L . M . 2003 . Sorting it out : AP - 2 and alternate clathrin adaptors in endocytic cargo selection . J Cell Biol . 163 : 203 - 8 . Traub , L . M . 2005 . Common principles in clathrin - mediated sorting at the Golgi and the plasma membrane . Biochim Biophys Acta . 1744 : 415 - 37 . Umeda , A . , A . Meyerholz , and E . Ungewickell . 2000 . Identification of the universal cofactor ( auxilin 2 ) in clathrin coat dissociation . Eur J Cell Biol . 79 : 336 - 42 . Ungewickell , E . , and H . Ungewickell . 1991 . Bovine brain clathrin light chains impede heavy chain assembly in vitro . J Biol Chem . 266 : 12710 - 4 . Ungewickell , E . , H . Ungewickell , S . E . Holstein , R . Lindner , K . Prasad , W . Barouch , B . Martin , L . E . Greene , and E . Eisenberg . 1995 . Role of auxilin in uncoating clathrin - coated vesicles . Nature . 378 : 632 - 5 . Valdivia , R . H . , D . Baggott , J . S . Chuang , and R . W . Schekman . 2002 . The yeast clathrin adaptor protein complex 1 is required for the efficient retention of a subset of late Golgi membrane proteins . Dev Cell . 2 : 283 - 94 . Verstreken , P . , T . W . Koh , K . L . Schulze , R . G . Zhai , P . R . Hiesinger , Y . Zhou , S . Q . Mehta , Y . Cao , J . Roos , and H . J . Bellen . 2003 . Synaptojanin is recruited by endophilin to promote synaptic vesicle uncoating . Neuron . 40 : 733 - 48 . Waelter , S . , E . Scherzinger , R . Hasenbank , E . Nordhoff , R . Lurz , H . Goehler , C . Gauss , K . Sathasivam , G . P . Bates , H . Lehrach , and E . E . Wanker . 2001 . The huntingtin 186 interacting protein HIP1 is a clathrin and alpha - adaptin - binding protein involved in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Hum Mol Genet . 10 : 1807 - 17 . Wang , J . , V . C . Virta , K . Riddelle - Spencer , and T . J . O ' Halloran . 2003a . Compromise of clathrin function and membrane association by clathrin light chain deletion . Traffic . 4 : 891 - 901 . Wang , Y . J . , J . Wang , H . Q . Sun , M . Martinez , Y . X . Sun , E . Macia , T . Kirchhausen , J . P . Albanesi , M . G . Roth , and H . L . Yin . 2003b . Phosphatidylinositol 4 phosphate regulates targeting of clathrin adaptor AP - 1 complexes to the Golgi . Cell . 114 : 299 - 310 . Wanker , E . E . , C . Rovira , E . Scherzinger , R . Hasenbank , S . Walter , D . Tait , J . Colicelli , and H . Lehrach . 1997 . HIP - I : a huntingtin interacting protein isolated by the yeast two - hybrid system . Hum Mol Genet . 6 : 487 - 95 . Watson , H . A . , M . J . Cope , A . C . Groen , D . G . Drubin , and B . Wendland . 2001 . In vivo role for actin - regulating kinases in endocytosis and yeast epsin phosphorylation . Mol Biol Cell . 12 : 3668 - 79 . Weaver , A . M . , A . V . Karginov , A . W . Kinley , S . A . Weed , Y . Li , J . T . Parsons , and J . A . Cooper . 2001 . Cortactin promotes and stabilizes Arp2 / 3 - induced actin filament network formation . Curr Biol . 11 : 370 - 4 . Wendland , B . , and S . D . Emr . 1998 . Pan1p , yeast eps15 , functions as a multivalent adaptor that coordinates protein - protein interactions essential for endocytosis . J Cell Biol . 141 : 71 - 84 . Wendland , B . , S . D . Emr , and H . Riezman . 1998 . Protein traffic in the yeast endocytic and vacuolar protein sorting pathways . Curr Opin Cell Biol . 10 : 513 - 22 . 187 Wendland , B . , K . E . Steece , and S . D . Emr . 1999 . Yeast epsins contain an essential N - terminal ENTH domain , bind clathrin and are required for endocytosis . Embo J . 18 : 4383 - 93 . Wesp , A . , L . Hicke , J . Palecek , R . Lombardi , T . Aust , A . L . Munn , and H . Riezman . 1997 . End4p / Sla2p interacts with actin - associated proteins for endocytosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol Biol Cell . 8 : 2291 - 306 . Winter , D . , T . Lechler , and R . Li . 1999 . Activation of the yeast Arp2 / 3 complex by Bee1p , a WASP - family protein . Curr Biol . 9 : 501 - 4 . Wong , D . H . , M . J . Ignatius , G . Parosky , P . Parham , J . Q . Trojanowski , and F . M . Brodsky . 1990 . Neuron - specific expression of high - molecular - weight clathrin light chain . J Neurosci . 10 : 3025 - 31 . Wooding , S . , and H . R . Pelham . 1998 . The dynamics of golgi protein traffic visualized in living yeast cells . Mol Biol Cell . 9 : 2667 - 80 . Wu , X . , X . Zhao , L . Baylor , S . Kaushal , E . Eisenberg , and L . E . Greene . 2001 . Clathrin exchange during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J Cell Biol . 155 : 291 - 300 . Wu , X . , X . Zhao , R . Puertollano , J . S . Bonifacino , E . Eisenberg , and L . E . Greene . 2003 . Adaptor and clathrin exchange at the plasma membrane and trans - Golgi network . Mol Biol Cell . 14 : 516 - 28 . Yang , S . , M . J . Cope , and D . G . Drubin . 1999 . Sla2p is associated with the yeast cortical actin cytoskeleton via redundant localization signals . Mol Biol Cell . 10 : 2265 - 83 . Yarar , D . , C . M . Waterman - Storer , and S . L . Schmid . 2005 . A dynamic actin cytoskeleton functions at multiple stages of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Mol Biol Cell . 16 : 964 - 75 . 188 Ybe , J . A . , B . Greene , S . H . Liu , U . Pley , P . Parham , and F . M . Brodsky . 1998 . Clathrin self - assembly is regulated by three light - chain residues controlling the formation of critical salt bridges . Embo J . 17 : 1297 - 303 . Ybe , J . A . , N . Ruppel , S . Mishra , and E . VanHaaften . 2003 . Contribution of cysteines to clathrin trimerization domain stability and mapping of light chain binding . Traffic . 4 : 850 - 6 . Yeung , B . G . , H . L . Phan , and G . S . Payne . 1999 . Adaptor complex - independent clathrin function in yeast . Mol Biol Cell . 10 : 3643 - 59 . Young , M . E . , J . A . Cooper , and P . C . Bridgman . 2004 . Yeast actin patches are networks of branched actin filaments . J Cell Biol . 166 : 629 - 35 . Zeng , G . , and M . Cai . 1999 . Regulation of the actin cytoskeleton organization in yeast by a novel serine / threonine kinase Prk1p . J Cell Biol . 144 : 71 - 82 . Zeng , G . , X . Yu , and M . Cai . 2001 . Regulation of yeast actin cytoskeleton - regulatory complex Pan1p / Sla1p / End3p by serine / threonine kinase Prk1p . Mol Biol Cell . 12 : 3759 - 72 . Zhang , J . Z . , B . A . Davletov , T . C . Sudhof , and R . G . Anderson . 1994 . Synaptotagmin I is a high affinity receptor for clathrin AP - 2 : implications for membrane recycling . Cell . 78 : 751 - 60 .