Cell migration at a glance Miguel Vicente - Manzanares , Donna J . Webb and A . Rick Horwitz * Department of Cell Biology , University of Virginia , Charlottesville , VA 22908 , USA * Author for correspondence ( e - mail : horwitz @ virginia . edu ) Journal of Cell Science 118 , 4917 - 4919 Published by The Company of Biologists 2005 doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 02662 Cell migration is a fundamental process , from simple , uni - cellular organisms such as amoeba , to complex multi - cellular organisms such as mammals . Whereas its main functions comprise mating and the search for food in simple organisms ( Manahan et al . , 2004 ) , complexity brings a requirement for specialization , which necessitates cell migration - mediated tissue organization , organogenesis and homeostasis ( Ridley et al . , 2003 ) . The past 15 years have witnessed enormous advances in our understanding of the complexities and subtleties underlying the regulation of cell migration . This now includes the generation of temporal - spatial cues that result in cell adhesion , asymmetric polarization and individual and layered cell motility . A key discovery was the involvement of the actin cytoskeleton and its ﬁne regulation in the maintenance of cellular integrity and the dynamic responses that drive migration . Such regulation requires multi - nodal control to ensure coordinated migration , which the organism can turn off and on depending on the requirements of a given situation . It also allows highly specialized modes of cell migration in different tissues . However , the overall process exhibits so many regulatory steps that any deﬁciency , either ectopic activation or hijacking by pathogens , can impair or enhance cell migration and have catastrophic consequences that include vascular disease , chronic inﬂammation , cancer , mental retardation , and virus and bacterial infection and dissemination . Thus , a thorough understanding of the mechanisms underlying cell migration will facilitate development of therapies for the treatment of migration - related disorders . In the poster , we try to convey the overﬂow of information pertinent to the regulation of cell migration . It is based on a classical model of cell migration , an individual ﬁbroblast - like cell migrating on a 2D environment . Other cell types adopt different morphologies during migration , such as leukocytes , which display amoeba - like movement and morphology , keratocytes , which display a gliding motion , and cells that retain cell - cell contacts during motility , such as epithelial monolayers during gastrulation and wound healing . In addition , there is a nascent but increasing literature on cells migrating in 3D environments ; although little is known about the molecular details , there appears to be differences ( Beningo et al . , 2004 ; Gunzer et al . , 2000 ; Knight et al . , 2000 ) . Although each of these modes of 4917 Cell Science at a Glance ( See poster insert ) Cell Migr a tion a t a Gl a nce Mig u el Vicente - M a nz a n a re s , Donn a J . We bb a nd A . Rick Horwitz Abbreviations : APC , ; CAS , p130CAS ( Crk - associateds u bstrate ) ; Crk , CT10re gu latorofkinase ; Eb1 , endbindin g protein1 ; Ena / VASP , / Vasodilator - activatedphosphoprotein ; ERK , extracell u lar - re gu latedkinase ; FAK , focaladhesionkinase ; GIT , G - protein - co u pled - receptor - Adenomatouspoliposiscoli Enabled MRCK , myotonicdystrophykinase relatedCdc42bindin g kinase ; PAK , p21 - activatedkinase ; Par , partition - defectiveprotein ; PKC , proteinkinaseC ; WASP , Wiskott - Aldrichsyndromeprotein ; WAVE / Scar , WASP - verprolinhomolo g / S u ppressorofcAMPreceptor . © Jo u rn a l of Cell S cience 2005 ( 11 8 , pp . 651 - 654 ) PAK MLC phosphatase Paxillin Crk FAK Src ERK C a 2 + CALCINEURIN Rhokinase RhoA AIN GTP RhoA GTP Rac MLCkinase N u c l e u s MTOC Golgi a pp a r a t us Adhe s ion p19 Arp3 p14 p18 p35 Arp2 p40 70 ° GTP Rac MLCkina s e PAK LIMK GTP RhoA MLC pho s phata s e Cofilin EnaVASP mDia1 C o f ili n LIMK WASP WAVE / Scar mDia2 Gel s olin A c t i npo l y m e r i z a t i on Rhokina s e Cdc42 GTP Rac T r a ili ng edge r e t r a c t i on N u c l e u s MTOC P a r3 P a r6 MRCK Dynein - dyn a ctin complex PKC (cid:2) Cdc42 GTP GSK - 3 M T O C r eo r i en t a t i on a nd n u c l e a r po s i t i on i ng PAK MLC pho s phata s e EB1 APC ? ERK C a 2 + Calcineurin Rhokina s e Dyn a min RhoA GTP RhoA GTP Rac MLCkina s e Paxillin Paxillin CAS Crk FAK Src ERK PAK MLC pho s phata s e Rhokina s e GTP RhoA GTP Rac MLCkina s e mDia1 EB1 APC Glu GIT Vinculin Talin T e n s i n Dyn a min ERK PAK MLC pho s phata s e Rhokina s e GTP RhoA GTP Rac MLCkina s e Vinculin T e n s i n Turnover Inte g rin Focal adhe s ion Na s cent adhe s ion ECM MLC - MHC complex M i c r o f il a m en t s M i c r o t ubu l e s Talin Paxillin Paxillin CAS Crk FAK Src GIT A dhe s i on d y n a m i c s PROFILIN Thymo s in4 Paxillin Paxillin CAS Crk FAK Src ? mDia1 α - A c t i n i n Vinculin Talin T e n s i n PAK ERK MLCkinase WASP WAVE / Scar RhoGTPa s efamilyGEF s Rac Cdc42 PI3K LIMK ROCK MLCphosphatase MEK Gprot INTEGRIN S GPCR RTK GRK Ras G I T 1 Paxillin CASCrk FAK Src Talin Raf MHC MLC C o f ili n MTOC RhoARhoA mDia1 PFN P a r3 P a r6 PKC ζ CLIP170 Dynein - dynactin complex APC GSK - 3 APCAPC IQGAP1 p19 Arp3 p14 p18 p35 Arp2 p40 mDia2 PFN EB1 APC Glu Node map WIP TOCA HSPC300 S r a - 1 N a p125 A b i S t a thmin MRCK Tr a iling edge C a lp a in Le a ding edge Stabilization jc s . b iologi s t s . org © Jo u rn a l of Cell S cience 2005 ( 11 8 , pp . 4917 - 4919 ) LIMK , LIMkinase ; MHC , myosinheavychain ; MLC , myosinli g htchain ; interactin g protein ; mDia , mo u seDiaphano u s ; α - A c t i n i n J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 4918 motility exhibits some unique features , they also have much in common , which is the focus of this poster . The model shown represents a polarized cell that has distinct leading and trailing edges . This is a common feature of both ﬁbroblastic and amoeboid motility . The leading edge points in the direction of movement and is driven by actin - polymerization - mediated protrusion . Red spots represent points of interaction of the cell with the substrate . The larger spots represent stable adhesions ( a classic feature of ﬁbroblastic motility that is absent in faster - moving cells ) , and smaller spots at the periphery represent nascent adhesion complexes . Colour gradients within the spot represent the dynamics of adhesion turnover ( at the front ) and disassembly ( at the back ) . Other structures depicted include the nucleus ( light brown ) , the Golgi apparatus ( dark brown ) and the microtubule - organizing center ( MTOC ) , from which the microtubule network ( grey ) radiates , as well as an actin - rich lamellipodium at the front . Insets show speciﬁc features within the migrating cell , such as the regulation of actin polymerization at the protrusion sites , adhesion dynamics , MTOC - and nucleus - based cell polarity and tail retraction , as well as a node map depicting some of the key molecules involved in regulation of the process . Actin polymerization Actin polymerization controls protrusion of the cell in the current paradigm for cell migration ( P ollard and Borisy , 2003 ) . There are two main types of nucleator of actin polymerization : the Arp2 / 3 complex and the formins mDia1 and mDia2 ( other formins have described in different cellular systems ) . Arp2 / 3 binds to the sides of existing actin ﬁlaments and promotes the extension of a new actin ﬁlament from its pointed end , forming a 70° angle with the pre - existing ﬁlament ( Weaver et al . , 2003 ) . Arp2 / 3 regulation is controlled by WAVE / Scar , WAS P and N - WAS P proteins , whose mutation or truncation is related to the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome immune disease . WAVE / Scar is part of a multimeric complex including Abi , Nap125 , Sra - 1 and HS P C - 300 . This complex is under the control of the small GT P ase Rac , which induces the dissociation of Abi , Nap125 and Sra - 1 from WAVE , thus mediating its activation . WAS P and N - WAS P are regulated by Cdc42 . These proteins are also regulated by phosphorylation , phosphoinositides and other molecules , such as WI P and TOCA , which also negatively regulate WI P ( Vartiainen and Machesky , 2004 ) . Unlike the Arp2 / 3 complex , formins bind to the barbed end of actin ﬁlaments and promote actin growth in a linear fashion . Formins are regulated by small GT P ases ( RhoA and Cdc42 for mDia1 and mDia2 , respectively ) and require interaction with G - actin - bound proﬁlin to promote actin polymerization ( Watanabe and Higashida , 2004 ) . P roﬁlin is also required for Ena / VAS P - mediated actin polymerization at the barbed end , although its mode of action seems more related to anti - capping activity ( Krause et al . , 2003 ) . Both proﬁlin and thymosin (cid:3) 4 are G - actin - binding proteins . Whereas proﬁlin can bind to different actin nucleators , thymosin (cid:3) 4 cannot , and thus is regarded as a G - actin reservoir that can shuttle G - actin to proﬁlin to promote actin ﬁlament growth ( dos Remedios et al . , 2003 ) . Actomyosin - based contraction is controlled by the small Rho GT P ases Cdc42 , Rac and RhoA ( Jaffe and Hall , 2005 ) . Regulation by these GT P ases is antagonistic . RhoA activates Rho - kinase ( also called ROCK ) , which in turn phosphorylates and inactivates the phosphatase that dephosphorylates MLC , resulting in increased contractility . A similar mechanism has been shown for Cdc42 , acting through MRCK . Conversely , Rac activates P AK , which phosphorylates and inactivates MLC kinase , thus leading to decreased contractility and promoting spreading . However , P AK may also phosphorylate MLC directly , which would increase contractility . The predominance of the ﬁrst or the second mechanism seems to be regulated by spatial considerations or differential regulation of P AK activity . In addition , P AK also regulates cell polarity , through the activation of a P IX / P AK complex that is targeted to the leading edge during G - protein - coupled receptor - dependent migration ( Li et al . , 2003 ) . Finally , P AK regulates microtubules through stathmin phosphorylation , which results in decreased microtubule catastrophe ( Wittmann et al . , 2004 ) . Capping proteins such as gelsolin block actin polymerization at the barbed end and are mainly regulated by phosphoinositides ( Zigmond , 2004 ) . Finally , coﬁlin severs actin ﬁlaments , and its activity is regulated by phosphorylation induced by LIMK , which is in turn regulated by P AK - or Rho - kinase - mediated Ser / Thr phosphorylation ( Maciver and Hussey , 2002 ) . Adhesion dynamics Adhesions are points of molecular interaction between the cell and the substrate . They assemble and disassemble in response to extracellular cues and regulate cell motility . During migration , adhesions assemble at the leading edge and disassemble at the trailing edge . However , adhesions also disassemble at the front during protrusion and feed components to nascent adhesions at the leading edge in a process called adhesion turnover ( Webb et al . , 2004 ) . Thus , in protruding regions of cells , as new adhesions form , they can dissemble ( adhesion turnover ) or stabilize and grow into more mature , larger adhesions . Most highly motile cells , especially those in vivo , do not have the large adhesions that characterize less motile cells in 2D cultures . The molecular components of stable and nascent adhesions are similar , although there are molecules present in one type that are absent in the other . Among the structural molecules , talin directly links integrins to actin and also activates them ( Nayal et al . , 2004 ) . Many actin - and signal - transduction - related molecules have also been reported to bind to integrins , regulating signalling from integrins to the actin cytoskeleton and also integrin activation . For example , zyxin binds (cid:4) - actinin and regulates Ena / VAS P function on neighbouring actin barbed ends ( Zaidel - Bar et al . , 2004 ) . The molecular mechanisms underlying the ‘decision’ of an adhesion to mature or turnover are unclear . Rho GT P ases are critical effectors in this process . They in turn are controlled by signals Journal of Cell Science 118 ( 21 ) J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e emanating from adhesion - related signalling modules , such as a multi - protein complex that includes FAK , Src , paxillin , Crk , CAS , P AK and GIT . Cleavage of adhesion components by proteases , such as calpain , also regulates disassembly at the front , although its role has been established more clearly in rear adhesions during detachment ( Franco et al . , 2004 ) . Finally , relaxation signals emanating from the tips of microtubules that target adhesions , probably involving dynamin , are also implicated in adhesion disassembly ( Ezratty et al . , 2005 ) . MTOC reorientation and nuclear positioning Cell polarity , which is essential for directed migration , is deﬁned not only by actin - mediated protrusion and trailing edge retraction but also by positioning of the nucleus and reorientation of the Golgi apparatus and MTOC towards the leading edge . Different sets of molecules regulate these processes . The small Rho GT P ase Cdc42 regulates MTOC positioning through P ar proteins and P KC (cid:2) , which regulate the dynein - dynactin complex , probably by phosphorylation ( Jaffe and Hall , 2005 ) . Recent data support the notion that MTOC reorientation depends on nuclear movement and that the P ar / P KC pathway is involved in keeping the MTOC immobile with respect to the moving nucleus . Nuclear repositioning occurs through myosin - dependent actin rearward ﬂow and is catalyzed by Cdc42 acting through MRCK ( Gomes et al . , 2005 ) . Trailing edge retraction For cells to translocate forward , adhesions at the rear must disassemble and the trailing edge retract , otherwise tension would rip the cell apart . Several mechanisms promote disassembly ; these include microtubule - dependent targeting of dynamin and subsequent endocytosis of some adhesion components ( Ezratty et al . , 2005 ) ; myosin - mediated contractility contributes through regulation of MLC phosphorylation by RhoA and Rac acting through Rho - kinase and P AK . Finally , dissolution of the adhesive contacts at the rear edge is also achieved through affinity downregulation by phosphorylation by phosphatases , such as calcineurin , or simply by proteolysis of molecules such as talin by proteases , for example , calpain ( Franco et al . , 2004 ) . Calcium is a key modulator in rear edge retraction , probably acting through its regulation of calpain and calcineurin . The authors apologize for the very large number of important articles that were not cited owing to space restrictions . We thank Keith Burridge , Martin Schwartz , Tom P arsons and Francisco Sánchez - Madrid for their helpful suggestions . This work was supported by NIH grant GM23244 and the Cell Migration Consortium , GM064346 . References Beningo , K . A . , Dembo , M . a nd W a ng , Y . L . ( 2004 ) . Responses of ﬁbroblasts to anchorage of dorsal extracellular matrix receptors . Proc . N a tl . Ac a d . Sci . USA 101 , 18024 - 18029 . dos Remedios , C . G . , Chh a br a , D . , Kekic , M . , Dedo va , I . V . , Tsub a kih a r a , M . , Berry , D . A . a nd Nosworthy , N . J . ( 2003 ) . Actin binding proteins : regulation of cytoskeletal microﬁlaments . Physiol . Rev . 83 , 433 - 473 . Ezr a tty , E . J . , P a rtridge , M . A . a nd Gundersen , G . G . ( 2005 ) . Microtubule - induced focal adhesion disassembly is mediated by dynamin and focal adhesion kinase . N a t . Cell Biol . 7 , 581 - 590 . Fr a nco , S . J . , Rodgers , M . A . , Perrin , B . J . , H a n , J . , Bennin , D . A . , Critchley , D . R . a nd Huttenlocher , A . ( 2004 ) . Calpain - mediated proteolysis of talin regulates adhesion dynamics . N a t . Cell Biol . 6 , 977 - 983 . Gomes , E . R . , J a ni , S . a nd Gundersen , G . G . ( 2005 ) . Nuclear movement regulated by Cdc42 , MRCK , myosin , and actin ﬂow establishes MTOC polarization in migrating cells . Cell 121 , 451 - 463 . Gunzer , M . , Sch a fer , A . , Borgm a nn , S . , Gr a bbe , S . , Z a nker , K . S . , Brocker , E . B . , K a mpgen , E . a nd Friedl , P . ( 2000 ) . Antigen presentation in extracellular matrix : interactions of T cells with dendritic cells are dynamic , short lived , and sequential . I mmun ity 13 , 323 - 332 . J a ffe , A . B . a nd H a ll , A . ( 2005 ) . RHO GT P ases : Biochemistry and Biology . A nnu . Rev . Cell . Dev . Biol . 21 , 247 - 269 . Knight , B . , L a uk a itis , C . , Akht a r , N . , Hotchin , N . A . , Edlund , M . a nd Horwitz , A . R . ( 2000 ) . Visualizing muscle cell migration in situ . C u rr . Biol . 10 , 576 - 585 . Kr a use , M . , Dent , E . W . , Be a r , J . E . , Loureiro , J . J . a nd Gertler , F . B . ( 2003 ) . Ena / VAS P proteins : regulators of the actin cytoskeleton and cell migration . A nnu . Rev . Cell . Dev . Biol . 19 , 541 - 564 . Li , Z . , H a nnig a n , M . , Mo , Z . , Liu , B . , Lu , W . , Wu , Y . , Smrck a , A . V . , Wu , G . , Li , L . , Liu , M . et a l . ( 2003 ) . Directional sensing requires G beta gamma - mediated P AK1 and P IX alpha - dependent activation of Cdc42 . Cell 114 , 215 - 227 . M a ci v er , S . K . a nd Hussey , P . J . ( 2002 ) . The ADF / coﬁlin family : actin - remodeling proteins . Ge n o m e Biol . 3 , reviews3007 . M a n a h a n , C . L . , Iglesi a s , P . A . , Long , Y . a nd De v reotes , P . N . ( 2004 ) . Chemoattractant signaling in dictyostelium discoideum . A nnu . Rev . Cell . Dev . Biol . 20 , 223 - 253 . N a y a l , A . , Webb , D . J . a nd Horwitz , A . F . ( 2004 ) . Talin : an emerging focal point of adhesion dynamics . C u rr . Opi n . Cell Biol . 16 , 94 - 98 . Poll a rd , T . D . a nd Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments . Cell 112 , 453 - 465 . Ridley , A . J . , Schw a rtz , M . A . , Burridge , K . , Firtel , R . A . , Ginsberg , M . H . , Borisy , G . , P a rsons , J . T . a nd Horwitz , A . R . ( 2003 ) . Cell migration : integrating signals from front to back . Scie n ce 302 , 1704 - 1709 . V a rti a inen , M . K . a nd M a chesky , L . M . ( 2004 ) . The WAS P - Arp2 / 3 pathway : genetic insights . C u rr . Opi n . Cell Biol 16 , 174 - 181 . W a t a n a be , N . a nd Hig a shid a , C . ( 2004 ) . Formins : processive cappers of growing actin ﬁlaments . Exp . Cell Res . 301 , 16 - 22 . We av er , A . M . , Young , M . E . , Lee , W . L . a nd Cooper , J . A . ( 2003 ) . Integration of signals to the Arp2 / 3 complex . C u rr . Opi n . Cell Biol 15 , 23 - 30 . Webb , D . J . , Don a is , K . , Whitmore , L . A . , Thom a s , S . M . , Turner , C . E . , P a rsons , J . T . a nd Horwitz , A . F . ( 2004 ) . FAK - Src signalling through paxillin , ERK and MLCK regulates adhesion disassembly . N a t . Cell . Biol . 6 , 154 - 161 . Wittm a nn , T . , Bokoch , G . M . a nd W a term a n - Storer , C . M . ( 2004 ) . Regulation of microtubule destabilizing activity of Op18 / stathmin downstream of Rac1 . J . Biol . Che m . 279 , 6196 - 6203 . Z a idel - B a r , R . , Cohen , M . , Add a di , L . a nd Geiger , B . ( 2004 ) . Hierarchical assembly of cell - matrix adhesion complexes . Bioche m . Soc . Tr an s . 32 , 416 - 420 . Zigmond , S . H . ( 2004 ) . Beginning and ending an actin ﬁlament : control at the barbed end . C u rr . Top . Dev . Biol . 63 , 145 - 188 . Cell Science at a Glance 4719 Cell S cience at a Glance on the Web Electronic copies of the poster insert are available in the online version of this article at jcs . biologists . org . The JPEG images can be downloaded for printing or used as slides . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e