Voronoi Diagrams — A Survey of a Fundamental Geometric Data Structure FRANZ AURENHAMMER Institute fur Informationsverarbeitung Technische Universitat Graz , Sch iet ! stattgasse 4a , Austria This paper presents a survey of the Voronoi diagram , one of the most fundamental data structures in computational geometry . It demonstrates the importance and usefulness of the Voronoi diagram in a wide variety of fields inside and outside computer science and surveys the history of its development . The paper puts particular emphasis on the unified exposition of its mathematical and algorithmic properties . Finally , the paper provides the first comprehensive bibliography on Voronoi diagrams and related structures . Categories and Subject Descriptors : F . 2 . 2 [ Analysis of Algorithms and Problem Complexity ] : Nonnumerical Algorithms and Problems – geometrical problems and computations ; G . 2 . 1 [ Discrete Mathematics ] : Combinatorics— combinatorial algorithms ; I . 3 . 5 [ Computer Graphics ] : Computational Geometry and Object Modeling—geometric algorithms , languages , and systems General Terms : Algorithms , Theory Additional Key Words and Phrases : Cell complex , clustering , combinatorial complexity , convex hull , crystal structure , divide - and - conquer , geometric data structure , growth model , higher dimensional embedding , hyperplane arrangement , k - set , motion planning , neighbor searching , object modeling , plane - sweep , proximity , randomized insertion , spanning tree , triangulation INTRODUCTION Computational geometry is concerned with the design and analysis of algo - rithms for geometrical problems . In add - ition , other more practically oriented , areas of computer science— such as com - puter graphics , computer - aided design , robotics , pattern recognition , and opera - tions research—give rise to problems that inherently are geometrical . This is one reason computational geometry has at - tracted enormous research interest in the past decade and is a well - established area today . ( For standard sources , we refer to the survey article by Lee and Preparata [ 19841 and to the textbooks by Preparata and Shames [ 1985 ] and Edelsbrunner [ 1987bl . ) Readers familiar with the literature of computational geometry will have no - ticed , especially in the last few years , an increasing interest in a geometrical con - struct called the Voronoi diagram . This trend can also be observed in combinato - rial geometry and in a considerable num - ber of articles in natural science journals that address the Voronoi diagram under different names specific to the respective area . Given some number of points in the plane , their Voronoi diagram divides the plane according to the nearest - neighbor Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage , the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear , and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery . To copy otherwise , or to republish , requires a fee and / or specific permission . @ 1991 ACM 0360 - 0300 / 91 / 0900 - 0345 $ 01 . 50 ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 346 l Franz A urenhammer CONTENTS INTRODUCTION 1 . HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE 11 The Natural Scientist’s Viewpoint 1 , 2 The Mathematician’s Viewpoint 13 The Computer Scientist’s Viewpoint 2 . ALGORITHMIC APPLICATIONS 2 1 Closest - Site Problems 2 , 2 Placement and Motion Planning 23 Triangulating Sites 2 , 4 Connectivity Graphs for Sites 2 , 5 Clustering Point Sites 3 , SELECTED TOPICS 3 . 1 The Geometry of Voronol Diagrams , Them Relatlon to Higher Dimensional ObJects . 3 . 2 The Topology of Planar Diagrams : Divide - and - Conquer ConstructIon and its Variants . 33 A Deformation of the Voronoi Diagram : The Plane - Sweep Technique REFERENCES rule : Each point is associated with the region o ~ the plane closest to it ; ( Figure 1 ) . Why do Voronoi diagrams receive so much attention ? What is special about this easily defined and visualized con - struct ? It seems three main reasons are responsible . First , Voronoi diagrams arise in nature in various situations . In - deed , several natural processes can be used to define particular classes of Voronoi diagrams . Human intuition is often guided by visual perception . If one sees an underlying structure , the whole situation may be understood at a higher level . Second , Voronoi diagrams have in - teresting and surprising mathematical properties ; for instance , they are related to many well - known geometrical struc - tures . Thifi has led several authors to believe that the Voronoi diagram is one of the most fundamental constructs de - fined by a discrete set of points . Finally , Voronoi diagrams have proved to be a powerful tool in solving seemingly un - related computational problems and therefore have increasingly attracted the attention of computer scientists in the last few years . Efficient and reasonably simple techniques have been developed for the computer construction and representation of Voronoi diagrams . The intention of this survey is three - fold : First , motivated by the fact that Voronoi diagrams have been ( reinvented and studied fairly independently in the applied natural sciences , in mathemat - its , and in computer science , it presents sketches of their historical development in these three areas . Second , it surveys the literature on Voronoi diagrams and related structures , with particular em - phasis on the unified exposition of their mathematical and computational proper - ties and their applications in computer science . Finally , it provides the first comprehensive bibliography on Voronoi diagrams . Basic Properties of the Voronoi Diagram We begin with a description of elemen - tary , though important , properties of the Voronoi diagram that will suggest some feeling for this structure . We also intro - duce notation used throughout this pa - per . See also Preparata and Shames [ 1985 ] or Edelsbrunner [ 1987 ] for sources on this material . We first give a usual generic definition of the Voronoi diagram . Let S denote a set of n points ( called sites ) in the plane . For two distinct sites p , q e S , the domi - nance of p over q is defined as the sub - set of the plane being at least as close to p as to q . Formally , dom ( p , q ) = { x ~ l ? zl ~ ( x , p ) < b ( x , q ) } , for 6 denoting the euclidean distance function . Clearly , dom ( p , q ) is a closed half plane bounded by the perpendicuhm bisector of’ p and q . This bisector sepa - rates all points of the plane closer to p from those closer to q and will be termed the separator of p and q . The region of a site p e S is the portion of the plane ly - ing in all of the dominances of p over the remaining sites in S . Formally reg ( p ) = , e ~ ~ { P1 dom ( p , q ) . ACM Computmg Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 Voronoi Diagrams l 347 Figure 1 . Voronoi diagram for eight sites in the plane . Since the regions are coming from in - tersecting n – 1 half planes , they are convex polygons . Thus the boundary of a region consists of at most n – 1 edges ( maximal open straight - line segments ) and vertices ( their endpoints ) . Each point on an edge is equidistant from exactly two sites , and each vertex is equidistant from at least three . As a consequence , the regions are edge to edge and vertex to vertex , that is to say , they form a polygonal partition of the plane . This partition is called the Voronoi diagram , V ( S ) , of the finite point - set S ( Figure 1 ) . Note that a region , say reg ( p ) , cannot be empty since it contains all points of the plane at least as close to p as to any other sites in S . In particular , p e reg ( p ) . It follows that V ( S ) contains exactly n regions . Some of them are necessarily unbounded . They are defined by sites ly . ing on the boundary of the convex hull of S because just for those sites there exist points arbitrarily far away but still clos - est . 1 No vertices occur if and only if all sites in S lie on a single straight line . Such degenerate configurations also im - ply the existence of regions with only one ( unbounded ) edge . Otherwise , three or more edges meet at a common vertex . It lThe conuex hull of S is the smallest convex polY - gon that contains S . should be observed that each vertex is the center of a circle that passes through at least three sites but encloses no site . Although n sites give rise to ( ) ; = 0 ( n2 ) separators , only linearly many separators contribute an edge to V ( S ) . This can be seen by viewing a Voronoi diagram as a planar graph with n re - gions and minimum vertex degree 3 . Each of the e edges has two vertices , and each of the u vertices belongs to at least three edges . Hence , 2 e > 3 U . Euler’s re - lation n + v – e ? 2 now implies e < 3n – 6 and u s 2 n – 4 , Thus , for example , the average number of edges of a region does not achieve six ; there are less than 3n edges , and each of them belongs to exactly two of the n regions . The linear behavior of the size of the Voronoi diagram in the plane means that , roughly speaking , this structure is not much more complex than the underlying configuration of sites . This is one of the main reasons for the frequent use of Voronoi diagrams . A second reason is that V ( S ) comprises the entire proximity information about S in an explicit and computationally useful manner . For ex - ample , its applicability to the important post - office problem ( see below ) is based on the trivial observation that a point x falls into the region of a site p if and only if p is closest to x among all sites in S . Moreover , if site p is closest to site q , then reg ( p ) and reg ( q ) share a common edge . This particularly implies that the closest pair of sites in S gives rise to some edge of V ( S ) . Applications in Computer Science To substantiate the usefulness of the Voronoi diagram in computer science , we briefly describe four situations where this structure is used . The practicality y and diversity of these applications will impart the appeal of Voronoi diagrams . Associative File Searching Consider some file of n two - attribute records referring , for example , to latitude and longitude of a city or to age and ACM Computmg Surveys , Vol . 23 , No 3 , September 1991 348 l Franz Aurenhammer income of a person . Suppose we are given an additional target record R and we quickly want to retrieve that record of the file that matches R the best . If re - trieval occurs frequently on the same file , a supporting data structure is called for . This associative file searching problem was first posed by Knuth [ 1973 ] as a two - dimensional generalization of the usual ( one - attribute ) file - searching prob - lem . It possibly is best known in its geo - metric version under the name post - office problem : Given a set S of n sites in the plane ( post offices ) , report a site closest to a given query point q ( the location of a person ) . Note that there exists a trivial 0 ( n ) - time solution by computing all n distances . There are various algorithms in computational geometry that need the post office problem as a subroutine [ Preparata and Shames 1985 ] . Shames [ 1975a ] first observed the relevance of Voronoi diagrams to this problem . A site p is closest to q if and only if q falls into the region of p . In a preprocessing step the Voronoi diagram of S is computed . To report a site closest to q , it now suffices to determine the region that contains q . For this so - called point - location problem , efficient solutions have been developed by Kirkpatrick [ 19831 , Edahiro et al . [ 1984 ] , and Edels - brunner et al . [ 1986 ] . In particular , point location in a Voronoi diagram with n regions is supported in O ( log n ) time and 0 ( n ) storage overhead . This shows that the post - office problem can be solved by means of Voronoi diagrams in logarith - mic query time and without increasing the order of space , which is well known to be optimal already for usual file searching . Cluster Analysis The problem of automatically clustering data arises frequently [ Hartigan 19751 . Finding clusters means determining a partition of the given set of data into subsets whose in - class members are simi - lar and whose cross - class members are dissimilar according to a predefined simi - larity measure . In the case of two - Fig ure 2 . Voronoi diagram for two dense clusters . attribute data , similarity is reflected by the proximity of sites in the plane . Prox - imity , in turn , is revealed by properties of the Voronoi diagram for these sites . For instance , dense subsets of sites give rise to Voronoi regions of small area ; regions of sites in a homogeneous cluster will have similar geometric shape ; for clusters having orientation - sensitive density , the shapes of the regions will exhibit a corresponding direction sensi - tivity . Figure 2 gives an example . Ahuja [ 19821 showed how to use these proper - ties for clustering and matching sites . Voronoi diagrams support various clustering techniques used in practice . What is required at any stage of the clustering process is often little more than the retrieval of the nearest - neighbor sites of specified sites . They can be reported easily by examining the edges of the regions of the specified sites . This applies to several hierarchical methods [ Murtagh 1983 ] , partitional methods [ Asano et al . 1988 ] , and meth - ods involving cluster selection [ Aggarwal et al . 1989 ] . Scheduling Record Accesses Consider a mass storage system repre - sented by a two - dimensional array of grid points , each capable of storing one record . The time for the read / write head to move from point ( x , y ) to the point ( u , U ) is proportional to I x – u I + I y – u 1 , the distance between these points measured ACM Computing Surveys , Vol 23 , No 3 , September 1991 Voronoi Diagrams l 349 Figure 3 . Voronoi diagram and minimum span - ning trees in the LI - metric , in the L1 - metric ( i . e . , Manhattan dis - tance ) . One problem that arises in ac - cessing batched requests is the following : How is the head movement to be sched - uled in order to retrieve the requested records in minimum time ( distance ) ? Finding an exact solution was shown to be NP - complete by Lee and Wong [ 19801 . A satisfactory approximate solu - tion can be obtained quickly by means of Voronoi diagrams . In an initial step , the Voronoi diagram induced under the Ll - metric is computed in 0 ( n log n ) time by taking the n requested grid points as sites . Now the minimum - Ll - length tree spanned by the sites can be constructed quickly : An edge of the tree can only connect sites whose regions are neigh - bored in the Voronoi diagram [ Hwang 1979 ; Lee and Wong 1980 ] . Figure 3 il - lustrates this diagram ( solid ) and the corresponding spanning tree ( dashed ) . To obtain a head movement whose length is within a factor of 2 of the optimum , each tree edge is traversed twice to access all the sites . Collision Detection An important topic in controlling the mo - tion of robot systems is that of collision detection . For a robot moving in an ob - stacle environment , one needs to deter - mine collisions between moving robot subparts and stationary obstacles or be - tween two separately moving subparts of the robot . In particular , proximity detec - tion is important in order to be able to . - . . . . . . jgcJytj ? JrJ” Figure 4 . Power diagram for seven circles stop the system before a collision will have occurred . The robot system and the environment of obstacles are usually modeled by polygonal objects . For the sake of prox - imity detection , collision - critical points on the boundary of these objects may be circumscribed by circles whose radii cor - respond to the tolerance threshold of the system . This reduces the problem to de - tecting the intersection of circles . Colors may be assigned to the circles in order to distinguish between “harmless” inter - sections ( among circles stemming from the same moving robot part or the same obstacle ) and others . Sharir [ 1985 ] pointed out that there will be no inter - section between circles of different colors if all the connected components formed by the circles are uncolored . Finding connected components and checking col - ors seem to involve an inspection of each pair of circles . The problem becomes easy , however , if the power diagram ( the Voronoi diagram where the power lines of the circles are taken as separators ) is available ; see Aurenhammer [ 1988a ] where this problem is solved in O ( n log n ) time for n colored circles . The crucial property that can be exploited is that the points of intersection of two circles lie on their common power line ( Figure 4 ) . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 350 “ Franz Aurenhammer 1 . HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE The history of’ Voronoi diagrams can be traced back to the middle of the nine - teenth century . Although the spectrum of scientific disciplines that include in - terest in Voronoi diagrams is broad , three aspects have been emphasized : ( 1 ) Their use in modeling natural phe - nomena ( 2 ) The investigation of their mathemat - ical , in particular , geometrical , com - binatorial , and stochastic properties ( 3 ) Their computer construction and representation Accordingly , Voronoi diagrams are useful in three respects : As a structure per se that makes explicit natural pro - cesses , as an auxiliary structure for in - vestigating and calculating related mathematical objects , and as a data structure for algorithmic problems that are inherently geometric . In all three applications , efficient and practical algo - rithms for computing Voronoi diagrams are required . Since the first application bears the initial seed for their investiga - tion , let us consider the role that Voronoi diagrams play in the natural sciences first . 1 . 1 Natural Scientist’s Viewpoint To visualize the appearance of a Voronoi diagram in nature , one could think of the three - dimensional space being subdi - vided into a manifold of crystals : From several sites fixed in space , crystals start growing at the same rate in all directions and without pushing apart but stopping growth as they come into contact . The crystal emerging from each site in this process is the region of space closer to that site than to all others . In other words , the regions form a Voronoi diagram in three - space . 1 . 1 . 1 Don - rams of Action Most of the early work on Voronoi dia - grams was motivated by crystallography . l Figure 5 . Cubic crystal structure . The objective in this respect was the study of regions arising from regularly placed sites . Figure 5 illustrates some of the regions defined by 15 cubically or - dered sites . In his comprehensive article on crystal structures , Niggli [ 1927 ] calls them Wirkungsbereiche ( domains of ac - tion ) , a term widely used nowadays and used , with many synonyms , even in the 1930s as demonstrated in the clarifying note by Nowacki [ 1933 ] . Much effort has been devoted to the fundamental crystal - lographical question : Which types of do - mains of action are capable of filling the plane or three space completely if only congruent copies ( and certain motions ) are to be used ? Significant work was done , among others , by Niggli [ 1927 ] , Delaunay ( Delone ) [ 1932 ] , Nowacki [ 19761 , and by Koch [ 19751 . In fact , the question is a deep mathematical one , and we will come back to it in the discussion of mathematical aspects of Voronoi diagrams . 1 . 1 . 2 Wigner - Seitz Zones A physiochemical system consists of a number of distinct sites , typically molecules , ions , or atoms . Equilibrium and other properties of the system de - pend on the spatial distribution of the ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 sites , which can be conveniently repre - sented by dividing the space between them according to the nearest - neighbor rule . The resulting Voronoi regions are often called Wigner - Seitz zones after Wigner and Seitz [ 1933 ] , who were the first to use them in metallurgy . Frank and Kasper [ 1958 ] use these zones in the investigation of complex alloy structures ; Loeb [ 1970 ] bases his survey of cubic crystal structures on an intimately re - lated concept , Allotting zones to sites is of interest to molecular physicists , bio - chemists , material scientists , and physi - cal chemists . Via this approach Brostow and Sycotte [ 1975 ] estimate the coordina - tion number of liquid argon , David and David [ 1982 ] study certain solvation structures , Brumberger and Goodisman [ 19831 interpret the small - angle scatter - ing of catalysts , and Augenbaum and Peskin [ 1985 ] treat large - scale hydro - dynamic codes—just to name a few . 1 . 1 . 3 Johnson - Mehl and Apollonius Model The nearest - neighbor rule ( or equiva - lently , the crystal growth model men - tioned earlier ) forces the Voronoi regions to be convex polyhedra . Allowing the crystals to start their growth at different times gives rise to hyperbolically shaped regions . The resulting Johnson - Mehl model was proposed by Johnson and Mehl [ 1939 ] as a more realistic model of struc - ture for minerals . Figure 6 gives an il - lustration ; crystals are augmented with their date of birth . crystals growing simultaneously but at different rates give rise to spherically shaped regions forming the Apollonius model . This structure can also be ob - served as cell structures of plants or in foams made out of soap bubbles [ Matzke and Nestler 1946 ; Smith 1954 ; Williams 1968 ] . It further appears as covering ar - eas of plants and as areas of best - received transmitters [ Sakamoto and Takagi 1988 ] . Weaire and Rivier [ 1984 ] give a comprehensive survey and various statistical data . Interestingly , the equi - librium state of a spider web constitutes a generalized , although still polygonal , Voronoi Diagrams l 351 Voronoi diagram . This follows from in - vestigations by Maxwell [ 1864 ] . Figure 7 shows sites for a spider web such that the distance between neighborhood sites cor - responds to the tension of the edge they define . 1 . 1 . 4 Thiessen Polygons Geographical interest in Voronoi dia - grams originates with the climatologist Thiessen [ 1911 ] , who assigned proximity polygons to observation sites in order to improve the estimation of precipitation averages over large areas . His method was worked out in detail by Horton [ 19171 who proposed the name Thiessen poly - gons , crediting Thiessen with the idea . As reported in Boots [ 1979 ] , Thiessen polygons play four roles in geographical research : As models for spatial processes , as nonparametric techniques in point - pattern analysis , as organizing struc - tures for displaying spatial data , and for calculating individual probabilities in point patterns . In particular , we mention Tuominen [ 1949 ] and Snyder [ 1962 ] ( ap - plications to urban planning ) , Gambini [ 19661 and Boots [ 1979 ] ( market areas ; generalized Thiessen polygons are used there , in particular , the Johnson - Mehl and Apollonius models ) , l ~ ollison [ 1977 ] ( ecological contact models ) , McLain [ 19761 ( spatial interpolation ) , Arnold and Milne [ 1984 ] ( cartography ) , and Okabe et al . [ 1988 ] ( facility location ) . For surveys of Thiessen polygons from a geographical and economic point of view , see Boots [ 1986 ] , Eiselt and Pederzoli [ 1986 ] , and Sibson [ 1979 ] . Suzuki and Iri [ 1986 ] report on the importance of recovering the sites from a given subdivision of a geographical area . This inverse process of constructing Thiessen polygons arises in the optimal outline of school districts or of voting precincts . In geographical variation analysis , connectivity graphs for sites are a valuable tool [ Matula and Sokal 1980 ] . Among them are the minimum spanning tree or Prim shortest connection network ( Figure 8 ) , the ~ elaunay triangulation , and the Gabriel graph . These three ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 352 l Franz Aurenhammer \ \ \ ‘ \ \ \ \ \ e53 / / / / ’ concepts Thiessen later . \ / ‘i \ \ Figure 6 . Johnson - Mehl model . eo — - l Lo - - \ - % \ \ \ \ \ \ are intimately related to contours obtained in this way with per - polygons as will be discussed ceptual boundaries studied by Gestalt psychologists . As pointed out by Blum 1 . 1 . 5 Blum’s ( Medial Axis ) Transform Yet another name for the Voronoi dia - gram is popular in the natural sciences : Blum’s transform of a set of sites . Con - cerned with biological shape and visual science , Blum [ 1967 ] used it for modeling new descriptors of shape . In general , the main problem in pattern recognition is to extract characterizing elements from a given ( site ) pattern . When no geometri - cal model of the pattern is available , its structural description may be based on the notion of neighborhood of a site and thus , in particular , on Blum’s transform . Fairfield [ 1979 ] successfully compared t1973 ] , curvature properties of a given contour correspond to topological proper - ties of its transform ( compare Figure 9 ) . The smooth pieces of the contour ( solid ) should be viewed as sites of generalized shape . By definition , each point of the transform ( dashed ) is equidistant from at least two sites . In this context , the trans - form often is called the medial axis or skeleton of the contour . The medial axis of digitized contours was exploited in image processing by Philbrick [ 19681 , Montanari [ 1968 ] , and Lantuejoul and Maisonneuve [ 1984 ] . Although the foregoing list of applica - tions of Voronoi diagrams in the natural ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 Voronoi Diagrams “ 2a e 26 88 L3 e 55 e Figure 7 . Figure 8 . Minimum spanning tree for the nine state capitals of Austria . sciences is not complete , we refrain from further details and turn now to their role in the mathematical environment . 1 . 2 Mathematician’s Viewpoint The very earliest motivation for the study of Voronoi diagrams stems from the the - ory of quadratic forms . Gauss [ 18401 observed that quadratic forms have an interpretation in terms of Voronoi diagrams for sites that are parallelohe - drally ordered in space . His idea was Spider web 353 e 1’ Figure 9 . Contour and its medial axis [ Philbrick 19681 . exploited by Dirichlet [ 18501 to establish , among other results , a simple proof of the unique reducibility of quadratic forms . A careful generalization to higher dimensions was provided by Voronoi [ 1908 ] . To honor the pioneering work of these mathematicians , the construct has been referred to as the Dirichlet tessell - ation or the Voronoi diagram , and indeed ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 354 “ Franz Aurenhammer these terms are the most popular ones in the vast body of literature . The following review provides basic mathematical properties of Voronoi dia - grams and their generalizations ( many of them will also be crucial in the under - standing of their algorithmic properties and applications ) , as well as points out certain features of Voronoi diaqams that have potential applications but may be not familiar to computational geometry researchers . 1 . 2 . 1 Regularly Placed Sites Mathematical interest in Voronoi dia - grams can be divided according to whether regularly or irregularly placed sites are involved . A main area where Voronoi diagrams for regularly placed sites have been used for a long time is geometrical crystallography . Let R d denote the d - dimensional Cartesian s ace . A tiling of Rd is a cov - Y ering of R by closed sets whose interi - ors are pairwise disjoint . Tilings of R d by convex polyhedra with the property that the group of motions mapping the tiling onto itself is a crystallographic group [ Bieberbach 1912 ] are of particular interest . Their polyhedra are necessarily congruent and were called stereohedra by Federoff [ 1885 ] and fundamental domains by Schonflies [ 1891 ] . One of the central questions of geometrical crys - tallography has been to enumerate all stereohedra and to classify them according to their crystallographic groups . Most progress was made for the sub - class of plesiohedra . They can be inter - preted as Voronoi regions and were called special fundamental domains by Schonflies [ 1891 ] and domains of action by Niggli [ 1927 ] . Laves [ 1930 ] and Delaunay et al . [ 1978 ] enumerated all plesiohedra in R2 . Applying a refined classification scheme , Delaunay [ 1932 ] distinguished among 24 types of plesio - hedra in R3 . A complete list of planar stereohedra was given by Grunbaum and Shephard [ 1987 ] . Delaunay [ 1932 ] showed that the num - ber of facets ( faces of dimension d – 1 ) of Figure 10 . Plesiohedron with 18 facets [ Griinbaum and Shephard 1980 ] . a stereohedron in R d is finite ; for in - stance , 390 is an upper bound for d = 3 . So , by Tarski’s [ 19511 decidability theo - rem , all spatial stereohedra can be “ef - fectively” determined . In spite of this fact , their enumeration is still incom - plete . Also , an enumeration method for plesiohedra mentioned in Delaunay [ 19631 does not yield a practical algo - rithm . Among others , Nowacki [ 1976 ] , Koch [ 1973 ] , and Engel [ 1981 ] discovered spatial plesiohedra with 18 , 23 , and 38 facets , respectively . Figure 10 depicts a plesiohedron with many facets . It seems surprising that its congruent copies are capable of filling three - space completely . The methods used to obtain plesio - hedra with large numbers of facets are probably as interesting as the numbers themselves . After carefully choosing a set of regularly placed sites ( dependent of several variable parameters ) , certain parts of its Voronoi diagram are con - structed via computer [ Engel 1981 ] . For excellent sources on tilings , refer to Grunbaum and Shephard [ 1980 , 1987 ] , It is worthwhile to mention that Voronoi diagrams for regularly placed sites also find other applications in mathematics . They apply to numerical integration [ Babenko 1977 ] , to packing ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 Voronoi Diagrams l 355 and covering problems for congruent spheres [ Rogers 1964 ] , and to statistical investigations of lattice systems [ Besag 1974 ; Mollison 1977 ; Conway and Sloane 1982 ] . 1 . 2 . 2 Irregularly Placed Sites Let us now turn our attention to Voronoi diagrams arising from sets of irregularly placed sites . A tiling of R d by polyhedra is called a cell complex in R d if the tiling is facet to facet , that is , each facet of a polyhedron is also a facet of some other polyhedron in that tiling . 2 Every tiling of Rd by plesiohedra is a cell complex . The Voronoi diagram for irregularly placed sites is still a cell complex although its regions are no longer congruent polyhedra . This fact gives rise to various ques - tions . Motivated by the problem of find - ing densest sphere packings , Rogers [ 19641 posed the following extremal prob - lem : How big is the smallest possible Voronoi region with t facets and defined by sites with minimum distance two ? Es - timates of this and related quantities were derived by Muder [ 1988a , 1988b ] for planar regions . Much work on general Voronoi dia - grams is concerned with their combinato - rial properties and , in particular , with their size , that is , their numbers of faces of various dimensions as a function of the number n of sites considered . The size of a Voronoi diagram is an important quan - tity since it relates the amount of space needed to store this structure to the in - put size . Answering Crum’s problem , Dewdney and Vranch [ 1977 ] exhibit an arbitrarily large set of Voronoi polyhedra in R 3 each pair of which shares a facet . The example they give shows that the size of a Voronoi diagram in R3 is 0 ( n2 ) ; this was also observed by Preparata [ 1977 ] . As already mentioned , a Voronoi diagram in the plane has size 0 ( n ) since its edges and vertices form a planar 2 In fact , a tiling if facet to facet if and only if it is face to face for faces of any dimensions less than d [ Gruber and Ryskov 19871 . / . , ? ‘I , ( – ) lfl’ , ’1”111 l , \ 4 , , 11 , , 1 , , 1 , , 1 / ’ I . \ : ‘ . ’” Figure 11 . Voronoi diagrams are related to convex hulls graph . The size of higher dimensional diagrams has only recently been ana - lyzed completely . Klee [ 1980 ] and Brown [ 19801 showed that Voronoi diagrams in R d are equivalent to certain convex polyhedral surfaces in R ‘f 1 in a strong sense . Hence , known results on the size of polyhedra carry over , in particular , the so - called upper and lower bound the - orems [ Brondsted 19831 . Exploiting this relationship , exact bounds on the num - bers of individual faces of d - dimensional Voronoi diagrams were derived by Seidel [ 1982 ] and by Paschinger [ 1982 ] . Fig - ure 11 illustrates Brown’s original trans - form that relates the Voronoi diagram in R2 to a convex hull in R3 via stereographical projection . 1 . 2 . 3 Generalized Voronoi Diagrams Interestingly , not every convex polyhe - dral surface in R‘ + 1 is related to a Voronoi diagam in R ~ . For a more gen - eral class , a one - to - one correspondence can be established . Paschinger [ 1982 ] and Aurenhammer [ 1987a ] showed that power o ! iagrams are equivalent to the boundary projection of convex polyhedral surfaces . 3 This generalization assigns a particular weight w to each of the given sites p and replaces the euclidean dis - tance 6 ( x , p ) between a point x and p by 3 Such projections are commonly called Schlegel diagrams in discrete geometry [ Griinbaum 19671 , ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No 3 , September 1991 356 l Franz Aurenhammer Figure 12 . Apollomus model [ Aurenhammer and Edelsbrunner 1984 ] . 62 ( x , p ) – w . Intuitively speaking , w ex - presses the capability of p to influence its neighborhood . In particular , the pair ( p , w ) may be interpreted as a sphere with center p and radius ~ if w > 0 . As an important property , the separator defined by two weighted sites in R2 is still a straight line : the power line of two circles . Figure 4 shows a power diagram in the plane . Power diagrams already appeared in Dirichlet [ 18501— therefore , often being called generalized Dirich let cell complexes— and continued to be objects of interest , especially in sphere packing [ Rogers 1964 ] , illumin - ating spheres [ Linhart 19811 , and the geometry of numbers [ Gruber and Lekkerkerker 1988 ] . The concept of weighting the sites gives rise to several other useful types of dia - grams . Weighting the euclidean distance by a multiplicative constant yields the Apollonius model , investigated by Aurenhammer and Edelsbrunner [ 1984 ] . The separator of two sites in the plane describes their Apollonius circle . From Figure 12 it can be seen that regions may be disconnected and may partition the plane into G ( n2 ) connected compo - nents . Additiue weights give rise to the Johnson - Mehl model ( compare Figure 6 ) . For many additional types , see Ash and Bolker [ 1986 ] . At this point , let us modify the concept of Voronoi diagram in another way . The order - h Voronoi diagram of n sites is a partition of R d into regions such that any point within a fixed region has the same k closest sites . Its regions are con - vex polyhedra that form a cell complex in R‘ . For k = 1 , the classical Voronoi diagram is obtained . In the case of k = Figure 13 . Planar order - 2 Voronoi diagram [ Shames 19781 . n – 1 , the structure is often referred to as the furthest site Voronoi diagram since now the region of a site contains all points in space furthest from it . Figure 13 shows an order - 2 Voronoi diagram for 8 sites in the plane . Note that only 15 of the 28 pairs of sites define a region and that a separator may yield more than one edge . ( An example of a furthest site Voronoi diagram is given in Figure 24 . ) Early treatments of order - k diagrams are found in Miles [ 1970 ] and in Shames and Hoey [ 1975 ] . Lee [ 1982al succeeded in proving exact upper bounds on the maximum numbers of regions , edges , and vertices of a planar order - k Voronoi diagram . Asymptotically these num - bers are @ ( k ( n – k ) ) . The fascinating relationship between Voronoi dia - grams , weighted diagrams , order - k dia - grams , and other geometric objects was worked out by Edelsbrunner et al . [ 19861 , Aurenhammer [ 1987 al , and ACM Computing Surveys , Vol 23 , No 3 , September 1991 Voronoi Diagrams l 357 Aurenhammer and Imai [ 1988 ] . Within this context , the concepts of power dia - gram and hyperplane arrangement play a central role . Section 3 . 1 is devoted to a detailed description of this material . In particular , various results on the size and on the computational complexity of con - structing such diagrams are obtained . However , still little is known on the size of the order - k Voronoi diagram in higher dimensions ; consult [ Edelsbrunner and Seidel 1986 ] . Only for the furthest - site diagram exact upper bounds are avail - able [ Seidel 1987 ] . The number of re - gions of an order - k Voronoi ( or power ) diagram is closely related to the num - ber of k - sets of a finite point set . Deter - mining these numbers belongs to the main open problems in combinatorial geometry . Once the usefulness of known types of Voronoi diagrams had been realized , fur - ther generalizations were attempted . Motivation mostly came from applica - tions in computational geometry . In or - der to meet practical needs , general distance functions like the LP - metrics [ Lee 1980a ] or convex metrics [ Chew and Drysdale 1985 ] were taken to define a Voronoi diagram . Also , the shape of sites was varied while using a canonical extension of the euclidean distance func - tion . Line segments [ Kirkpatrick 1979 ] , curve segments [ Yap 1987 ] , and disks or general convex sites [ Leven and Sharir 1986 , 1987 ] have been considered . If the segments form a closed curve , their dia - gram is just the medial axis of a contour ( compare Figure 9 ) . Disks can be viewed as centers weighted additively by their radii , thus giving rise to the Johnson - Mehl model . This list is not meant to be exhaustive ; we shall be concerned with mathematical and computational proper - ties of varous generalized Voronoi diagrams in later sections . Let us mention one more way of gener - alization : changing the underlying space . Ehrlich and Im Hof [ 1979 ] investigated the behavior of Voronoi regions in Riemann manifolds . Brown [ 1980 ] , Paschinger [ 1982 ] , and Yap [ 1987 ] ob - served that Voronoi diagrams on the sphere and on the torus , respectively , are closely related to their equivalents in the euclidean space of the same dimension . Diagrams on three - dimensional poly - hedral surfaces and on the three - dimensional cone have been treated by Mount [ 1985 ] and by Dehne and Klein [ 19871 , respectively . 1 . 2 . 4 Delaunay Triangulations Hand in hand with the investigation of Voronoi diagrams goes the investigation of related constructs . Among them , the Delaunay triangulation is most promi - nent . It contains a ( straight - line ) edge connecting two sites in the plane if and only if their Voronoi regions share a common edge . The structure was intro - duced by Voronoi [ 1908 ] for sites that form a lattice and was extended by Delaunay [ 1934 ] to irregularly placed sites by means of the empty - circle me - thod : Consider all triangles formed by the sites such that the circumcircle of each triangle is empty of other sites . The set of edges of these triangles gives the Delaunay triangulation of the sites . The planar Voronoi diagram and the Delaunay triangulation are duals in a graphtheoretical sense , Voronoi vertices correspond to Delaunay triangles , Voronoi regions correspond to sites , and edges of both types correspond by defini - tion . From Figure 14 it can be seen that Delaunay edges ( solid ) are orthogonal to their corresponding Voronoi edges ( dashed ) – but do not necessarily inter - sect them— and that the boundary of the convex hull of the sites consists of Delaunay edges . The duality immedi - ately implies upper bounds of 3 n – 6 and of 2 n – 4 on the number of Delaunay edges and triangles , respectively ( com - pare Introduction ) . The Delaunay tri - angulation and its duality to Voronoi diagrams generalize to higher dimen - sions in an obvious way . By results by Dewdney and Vranch [ 1977 ] , the Delaunay triangulation in R3 may already be the complete graph on ( ) n n sites , thus having 2 edges . For a ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 358 l Franz Aurenhammer \ / ‘i \ / / ‘ . / ’ I / e 1’ / / \ / ‘Y’ \ / ’ \ _ - A - - ! , - . - - - - \ ~ y / ‘ . \ \ ’ ~ x . ‘ . Y’ \ . . / ’ \ / \ / \ / \ Figure 14 . Voronoi diagram and Delaunay trian - gulation are duals , catalog of properties of higher dimen - sional Delaunay triangulations arising from site lattices see Gruber and Lekkerkerker [ 19881 . Several interesting properties are known for the Delaunay triangulation in the plane . It was first observed by Sibson [ 1977 ] that this triangulation is locally equiangular . This property holds when , for any two triangles whose union is a convex quadrilateral , the re - placement of their common edge by the alternative diagonal does not increase the minimum of the six interior angles con - cerned . Actually , the Delaunay triangu - lation is the only one with this property that particularly shows its uniqueness . For sites being in general position ( the Delaunay triangulation may contain more - sided faces if four sites are cocircu - lar ) , Edelsbrunner [ 19871 showed that lo - cal equiangularity is equivalent to global equiangularity . The triangles define the lexicographically largest list of sorted angles . A similar result holds if only the smallest angle of each triangle is consid - ered [ Lawson 1977 ] . Note that the Delau - nay triangulation thus maximizes the minimum angle over all triangulations of a given set of sites . On the other hand , a simple example shows that the maxi - mum angle is not minimized . It is inter - esting to note that , by the empty circle property , any triangulation without obtuse angles must be Delaunay . Tri - angulations without “extreme” an - gles are desirable in finite element and interpolation methods . Lawson [ 1972 ] gave a counterexample to Shames and Hoey’s [ 1975 ] conjecture that the Delaunay triangulation has minimum total edge length . It does not even approximate the shortest triangula - tion [ Manacher and Zobrist 1979 ] , and in fact it may be as long as any triangula - tion [ Kirkpatrick 1980 ] . It is , however , close to optimal on the average [ Lingas 1986a ] . A different criterion of optimal - ity is mentioned in McLain [ 1976 ] . For each triangle , all its points should be at least as close to one of its defining sites as to any other site . This property is not shared by the Delaunay triangulation , as is claimed there . As an important fact , the Delaunay triangulation is a supergraph of several well - known and widely used graphs spanned by a set of sites in the plane . Among them are the minimum spanning tree ( or Prim shortest connection net - work ) introduced by Kruskal [ 1956 ] and Prim [ 1957 ] , the Gabriel graph intro - duced by Gabriel and Sokal [ 1969 ] , and the relative neigh borhood graph intro - duced by Toussaint [ 19801 . Section 2 . 4 gives definitions of these graphs and describes their interrelations . The Delaunay triangulation can be ex - ploited to find certain linear combina - tions among its defining sites . Each site not on the convex hull can be repre - sented as a weighted mass center of the sites adjacent in the triangulation ; see Sibson [ 1980 ] who mentions applications to surface smoothing . Aurenhammer [ 1988b ] generalized this result to power diagrams and their order - k modifica - tions . In particular , Gale transforms of the sites may be derived in this way [ Aurenhammer 1990bl . Gale transforms are a versatile tool in the investigation of high - dimensional convex polyhedra [ Grunbaum 19671 . The generalized Delaunay triangula - tion obtained from power diagrams gains in importance from the following recog - nition problem : Given some cell complex , can it be interpreted as a Voronoi dia - gram ? A cell complex in R d may be ACM Computmg Surveys , Vol . 23 , No 3 , September 1991 viewed as a power diagram if and only if the cell complex admits a certain dual construct , called the reciprocal figure by Maxwell [ 1864 ] , Crapo [ 1979 ] , Whiteley [ 1979 ] , and Ash and Bolker [ 1986 ] . The reciprocal figure is completely character - ized by the properties of the Delaunay triangulation for power diagrams . Using reciprocal figures as a criterion , Aurenhammer [ 1987b ] showed that sev - eral well - known types of cell com - plexes are power diagrams . Moreover , Voronoi diagrams can be recognized and their defining sites can be re - stored in an efficient way using recip - rocal figures [ Aurenhammer 1987c ] . For a nice survey on reciprocal figures , see Ash et al . [ 1988 ] . Essentially distinct criteria for cell complexes to be classical or to be multiplicatively or additively weighted , Voronoi diagrams were pro - posed by Ash and Bolker [ 1985 , 1986 ] . Blum [ 1967 ] first suggested that gener - ally shaped sites could be reconstructed from the shape of the regions they de - fine . Calabi and Hartnett [ 1968 ] elabo - rated on this question in some detail . Recognition problems of this kind find applications , aside from geography and economics , in statics and in computer science . This list of geometric and combina - torial properties of Delaunay triangu - lations is not complete . We shall see various others while discussing applications in computational geometry . 1 . 2 . 5 Stochastic Properties So far , we have surveyed a good deal of research on geometric and combinatorial . aspects of Voronoi diagrams . Another significant stream of investigations con - cerns the determination of statistical data about the diagrams obtained from ran - dom distributions of sites . One of the earliest and strongest motivations for studying stochastic properties of Voronoi diagrams stems from their practical rele - vance to physical and chemical processes , especially in metallurgy and crystallog - raphy [ Johnson and Mehl 19391 . Accord - ingly , most efforts concentrated on sites distributed in R2 and in R3 . In his valu - Voronoi Diagrams l 359 able paper , Meijering [ 1953 ] derived means for the volume , the total boundary area , and the total edge length of the regions of a Voronoi diagram in R 3 aris - ing from a Poisson field of sites , as well as the average number of vertices , edges , and facets . Several of these quantities are also given for the Johnson - Mehl model . Further progress was made by Gilbert [ 19611 who determined the vari - ances for the volumes of such Voronoi regions . He also found some variances associated with plane or line section through regions . Based on experimental results , Kiang [ 19661 gave a formula for the random size distribution of Voronoi regions in R 1 , along with a conjecture for its generalization to R2 and R3 . The conjecture is , however , incorrect accord - ing to results in Gilbert [ 1961 ] . Figure 15 shows his obtained density functions in R1 ( solid ) , in R2 ( dashed ) , and in R3 ( dotted ) . Observed volume over mean volume is scaled . Miles [ 1970 ] made a thorough study of Voronoi diagrams induced by a planar homogeneous site process . Expectations of the edge number , edge length , perimeter , and area of the regions are given . Further results concern the Delaunay triangulation and the order - k family of diagrams . Relevant experimental data can be found in Crain [ 19781 . His ob - served frequencies of edges per polygon are of particular interest since no theo - retical results are presently available . An important result by Dwyer [ 1989 ] shows that the expected number of ver - tices of the classical ( closest or furthest site ) Voronoi diagram in d dimensions is only 0 ( n ) if the n sites are uniformly drawn in a hyperball . At this place , we mention only marginally that several re - suits have been obtained that concern the behavior of Voronoi diagrams for sites being introduced in random order rather than being drawn by some probability distribution . We shall see such results in Section 1 . 3 . Space constraints preclude mentioning all related work . To name a few authors , we refer to Newman et al . [ 19831 ( num - ber of nearest neighbors in d di - mensions ) , Weaire and Rivier [ 19841 ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 360 . Franz Aurenhammer Figure 15 . Empirical density function of the volume of regions [ Kiang 19661 . ( generalized diagrams ) , Besag [ 19741 , Mollison [ 19771 , Cruz Orive [ 19791 , Conway and Sloane [ 1982 ] ( site lattices ; applications to spread of epidemics and to coding theory are given ) , and Aurenhammer et al . [ 19911 ( probabilistic distance functions ) . The reader interested in geometrical probability in general and stochastic properties of cell complexes in particular may consult the expository papers by Moran [ 1966 , 19691 , Little [ 19741 , and Baddeley [ 1977 ] . 1 . 3 Computer Scientist’s Viewpoint We have documented the remarkable role that Voronoi dia ~ ams play in the math - ematical and applied natural sciences . Yet for a long time their practical useful - ness suffered from the absence of reason - ably simple and efficient methods for their computation . This section reviews methods for the computer construction and representation of Voronoi diagrams . Algorithmic applications of Voronoi dia ~ ams and of related structures are discussed in Section 2 . 1 . 3 . 1 Early Algorithms Since Voronoi diagrams have been used for decades by natural scientists , many intuitive construction rules were pro - posed . The earliest diagrams were drawn with pencil and ruler ; see Horton [ 1917 ] or Kopec [ 19631 who mentions problems of ambiguity if many sites lie on a com - mon circle . Probably the most obvious approach is to delineate the diagram in the plane region by region , by singling out those separators that contribute to edges of the current region . A provi - sional and admittedly inefficient version of such an algorithm was described by Rhynsburger [ 19731 . Other early algo - rithms build up the diagram vertex by vertex [ Brassel and Reif 1979 ] or by in - cremental insertion of sites ( i . e . , of their regions ) [ Green and Sibson 19771 . Figure 16 illustrates the insertion of a site p that involves two tasks . First , we need to find the current region in which p falls . Let q be the site defining this region ; the separator of p and q then will contribute an edge , e , to p’s region . Second , the boundary of p’s region ( bold ) is created edge by edge , starting with e . During this process , the parts of the old diagram closest to p ( dashed ) are traversed and deleted . These parts are specified by lying on p’s side of the separators of p and its new neigh - bors . If appropriately implemented , the second task requires time proportional to ACM Computing Surveys , Vol 23 , No 3 , September 1991 Voronoi Diagrams l 361 \ \ \ \ , “ \ e e Figure 16 . Inserting a Voronoi region . the number of edges deleted . This num - ber is 0 ( i ) in the worst case ( i denotes the number of sites inserted so far ) since we have to delete a planar graph with at most i regions . The first task requires 0 ( i ) time in the worst case , but a simple heuristic will achieve 0 ( V ) expected time . Experimental results showed that this method is quite efficient and thus is applicable to rather large sets of sites . As for the other algorithms mentioned above , however , the worst - case behavior is 0 ( nz ) for n given sites . Several intuitive methods are also available for the Voronoi diagram in R 3 . They compute the induced cell complex facet by facet [ Brostow et al . 1978 ] , ver - tex by vertex [ Finney 1979 ] , or via its dual , the Delaunay triangulation [ Tanemura et al . 19831 . Potentially , they require 0 ( n4 ) time in the worst case , although they may perform quite well for various distributions of sites . For d > 4 dimensions , insertion strategies working directly [ Bowyer 19811 or based on the Delaunay triangulation [ Watson 1981 ] have been used to construct a suitable combinatorial representation of the Voronoi diagram . Their time complexity is O ( nl + ll ~ ) and 0 ( n2 – I [ d ) , respectively , provided the sites are “well distributed . ” This should be contrasted , however , against the maximal size of a Voronoi diagram in R d that grows exponentially with d . A three - dimensional implemen - tation of Watson’s algorithm is discussed in Field [ 1986 ] . Avis and Bhattacharya [ 1983 ] propose an O ( n rdlzl ‘1 ) time algo - rithm for determining all vertices of the d - dimensional diagram . They also out - line a linear programming method for calculating the d - dimensional Delaunay triangulation but give no concrete complexity analysis . Only recently have optimal or near - optimal algorithms for constructing Voronoi diagrams been devised . The rea - son is that only in the last few years have powerful algorithmic techniques been fully developed and exploited for computational geometry purposes . 1 . 3 . 2 Speeding Up Insertion The process of building a Voronoi dia - gram in the plane by incremental inser - tion of sites stands out by its simplicity . Originally having an 0 ( n ~ ) expected performance , the Green - Sibson algorithm may be polished up to run faster for sev - eral distributions of the sites . By intro - ducing suitable orderings of the sites , the expected time for finding the region the next site falls in and for integrating the new region can be lowered to O ( 1 ) [ Ohya et al . 1984a , 1984b ] . 4 This gives an ex - pected runtime of 0 ( n ) . Clearly this is the best we can hope for because the size of the diagram is a trivial lower bound for the time needed to compute it . An alternative approach to speeding up insertion is randomization . Based on a general result by Clarkson and Shor [ 19881 , Mehlhorn et al . [ 19901 showed that inserting the sites in random order yields an 0 ( n log n ) - time performance with high probability . This complexity is inde - pendent of the distribution of the sites ; expectation is taken over all possible permutations of the sites . The algorithm extends to the class called abstract 4 Recall in this context that the average number of edges of a region is less than six . ACM Computmg Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 362 * Franz Aurenhammer Voronoi diagrams by Klein [ 1989 ] with - out increase of runtime . This general concept includes power diagrams and di - agrams defined by line segments or by LP - metrics . Guibas et al . [ 1990 ] propose an even more practical version of ran - domized incremental construction of the classical Voronoi diagram . As with other geometrical algorithms , the problem of numerical errors arises in the construction of Voronoi diagrams . For example , sites nearly lying on a common circle define vertices that tend to ap - proach arbitrarily close . A proposal for making the strategy of insertion robust against numerical errors is outlined in Sugihara and Iri [ 1988 ] . The process of inserting Voronoi re - gions extends nicely to R3 . Regions are convex polyhedra that can be constructed facet by facet by intersecting existing regions with separators that are planes in this case . A region cannot have more than n – 1 facets ( one for each different site ) and thus by Euler’s relation , has 0 ( n ) edges and vertices . Therefore , one needs 0 ( n + t ) time per region if t facets , edges , or vertices are deleted during its insertion ; see Aurenhammer and Edelsbrunner [ 1984 ] who treat insertions in a more general cell complex in R3 . Since each component deleted has to be constructed first , an 0 ( n2 ) - time algo - rithm results . This is worst - case optimal since a Voronoi diagram in R3 may have a size of 61 ( n2 ) . 1 . 3 . 3 Divide and Conquer A widely used method to design fast al - gorithms is divide and conquer . Shames and Hoey [ 19751 observed that this method applies well to problems in com - putational geometry and , in particular , to the construction of a Voronoi diagram in the plane : The given set of n sites is divided into two subsets by a vertical line . The diagrams for these subsets are computed recursively and are then “merged” in the conquer step to form the total diagram . Figure 17 shows the chain of edges ( bold ) to be constructed during the process of merging the diagram for e “ { ! - l “ . / : . - . , , , . . , - - - - - - - - - - I , . - . . . : . ’ - - - , ‘ , l > . : 0 ‘ . / / . , . ‘y . ’ . , . . - . . , “ ) - - : ‘1 / . - { , * . : ! “ ‘“ . , / ’ . ’ / / , { , , , Figure 17 . Merging two Voronoi diagrams [ Shames 19781 . left sites ( dashed ) with the diagram for right sites ( dotted ) . Section 3 . 2 is devoted to a detailed description of the method and its gener - alizations . In particular , two diagrams can be merged in 0 ( n ) time , which im - plies an 0 ( n log n ) time algorithm if the divide step is carried out in a balanced way . This is worst - case optimal since any algorithm that constructs an explicit de - scription of a Voronoi diagram may be used to sort : Interpret an input sequence of n real numbers as a set of sites on the x - axis and construct their Voronoi dia - gram . Regions of sites for consecutive numbers will share an edge , so the sorted sequence can be obtained in 0 ( n ) time by scanning through the regions . 5 Although theoretically fast and ele - gant , the divide - and - conquer approach has certain disadvantages . Implementa - tion details are somewhat complicated , and numerical errors are likely by 5 Voronoi diagrams do not help for sorting general sets of sites . Seidel [ 19851 proved that sorting n sites in the plane with respect to their x - coordi - nates takes Q ( n log n ) worst - case time even when their Voronoi diagram is part of the input . It is unclear whether sorting helps for Voronoi dia - grams Fortune [ 1988 ] , however , pointed out that presorting the sites in two different directions low - ers the additional time for constructing the diagram in the L1 - metric to 0 ( n log log n ) , ACM Computing Surveys , Vol 23 , No 3 , September 1991 construction : Dividing the plane into narrow slabs forces the vertices defined by sites within a slab to approach infin - ity . Moreover , the expected behavior is still 0 ( n log n ) . An 0 ( n ) - expected - time algorithm that applies divide and con - quer to a certain subset of sites was outlined by Bentley et al . [ 1980 ] . Divide and conquer is the basis of a large class of algorithms for computing generalized Voronoi diagrams in the plane . Let us briefly list some of them in order to give credit to the authors who considered them first . Shames and Hoey [ 19751 reported that their algorithm also applies to the furthest site Voronoi dia - gram in the plane . Hwang [ 1979 ] , Lee and Wong [ 1980 ] , and Lee [ 1980 ] consid - ered point sites under the LP - metrics , whereas even more general distance functions were treated by Widmeier et al . [ 1987 ] , Chew and Drysdale [ 1985 ] , and Klein and Wood [ 19881 . Imai et al . [ 1985 ] treated sites under the Laguerre dis - tance ; that is , their power diagram . Concerning the divide - and - conquer con - struction of Voronoi diagrams for sites more general than points , we refer to Kirkpatrick [ 1979 ] ( line segments ) , Lee and Drysdale [ 1981 ] ( line segments or nonintersecting discs ) , Sharir [ 1985 ] ( arbitrary disks ) , Leven and Sharir [ 19871 ( planar convex bodies ) , Yap [ 1987 ] ( curve segments ) , and Lee [ 1982b ] ( medial axis of a simple polygon ) . It should be noted that most of the algorithms just men - tioned are worst - case optimal . 1 . 3 . 4 Higher Dimensional Embedding Transforming geometrical problems into more easily understood and solved ones plays an important role in computational geometry ( e . g . , see [ Edelsbrunner 19871 ) . Brown [ 1979 ] first perceived the possibil - ity of transforming Voronoi diagrams in R2 into convex hulls in R3 : The sites are mapped , via stereographical projection , into points lying on a sphere ( compare Figure 11 ) . This takes 0 ( n ) time . The convex hull of the resulting three - dimensional point set is computed using the algorithm by Preparata and Hong Voronoi Diagrams l 363 [ 19771 that requires O ( n log n ) time . The convex hull is dual to the Voronoi dia - gram of the given sites in a geometrical sense . Hence 0 ( n ) additional time suf - fices for deriving the latter . This elegant approach matches the optimal 0 ( n log n ) time bound , although it suffers from the problem of processing three - dimensional objects . G An important feature of the embedding method is its easy generalization to higher dimensions . Methods for deter - mining higher dimensional convex hulls are well established [ Seidel 1981 , 19861 , hence efficient worst - case algorithms for computing the d - dimensional Voronoi di - agram become available . Their runtime , however , increases exponentially with d according to the maximal size of a dia - gram . This should be contrasted with a recent result by Dwyer [ 1989 ] , showing that 0 ( n ) expected time suffices for com - puting the Voronoi diagram in constant dimensions d for uniformly distributed sites . Brown’s idea was further developed by Edelsbrunner et al . [ 1986 ] for construct - ing the order - k Voronoi diagram family and by Aurenhammer [ 1987al for con - structing the power diagram and its order - k family in general dimensions . See also Edelsbrurmer [ 19861 , Aggarwal et al . [ 1989a ] , and Aurenhammer [ 1990al where order - k diagrams are obtained in different ways from their higher dimen - sional embeddings . We refrain from any details here and refer to Section 3 . 1 for a comprehensive discussion of this mate - rial . For different approaches to the com - putation of order - k diagrams in the plane consult Lee [ 1982al and Chazelle and Edelsbrunner [ 19871 . Clarkson [ 19871 speeds up a combined version of these approaches using random sampling , achieving O ( knl” ) expected time and 6 In fact , since Preparata and Hong construct con - vex hulls by divide and conquer , this is just a three - dimensional translation of a divide - and - conquer construction . By Brown’s result , simple convex hull algorithms [ Clarkson and Shor’s 1988 ] lead to simple Voronoi diagram algorithms , however . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 364 l Franz Aurenham mer space ( for any c > O ) that is nearly optimal . Embedding in higher dimensions yields algorithms for various different types of diagrams . See Aurenhammer and Edelsbrunner [ 1984 ] for the multipli - catively weighted Voronoi diagram , Aggarwal et al . [ 1989a ] for the medial axis of a convex polygon , Edelsbrunner et al . [ 19891 for cluster Voronoi dia - grams , and Aurenhammer and Stockl [ 1988 ] for the peeper’s diagram . 1 . 3 . 5 Plane - Sweep Construction Another powerful technique in Voronoi computa - tional ge ~ metry is the pjane - sweep ‘tech - nique [ Preparata and Shames 19851 . In contrast to the embedding method , this technique decreases the dimension of the problem . Intuitively speaking , the static problem of computing a Voronoi diagram in the plane is reduced to the dynamic problem of maintaining the cross section of the diagram with a straight line . The algorithm simulates sweeping a line across the plane from below . At any point in time , the portion of the diagram below the sweep line is complete ( Figure 18 ) . Fortune [ 1985 , 1987 ] first observed that updates on the sweep line can be imple - mented to cost O ( log n ) time if a certain continuous deformation of the diagram is treated . From this deformation , the orig - inal diagram can be constructed in 0 ( n ) time . The method , its application , and its modification for generalized Voronoi diagrams are described in detail in Section 3 . 3 . The plane - sweep approach to Voronoi dia ~ ams combines simplicity and effi - ciency . It achieves the optimal 0 ( n log n ) time and 0 ( n ) space bounds for the clas - sical type , the additively weighted type , and the dia ~ am for line segments [ Fortune 1987 ] . The method has been successfully applied by Seidel [ 1988 ] to Voronoi diagrams with line segment obstacles joining sites ( and their con - strained Delaunay triangulations ) . This type had been previously attacked by means of rather involved divide - and - Figure 18 . Maintaining the intersection with a line . conquer algorithms [ Lee and Lin 1986 ; Lingas 1986b ; Chew 1989a ; and Wang and Schubert 19871 . As was reported by Rosenberger [ 19881 , plane sweep also performs well for planar order - k dia - grams even when the sites are weighted additively . 1 . 3 . 6 Delaunay Triangulation Algorithms Since the Voronoi diam - am and the Delaunay triangulation ‘are duals , the combinatorial structure of either struc - ture is com ~ letelv determined from its dual . Conse ~ uentfy , the Delaunay trian - gulation of n sites in the plane can be obtained in O ( n ) time after an 0 ( n log n ) - time precomputation of the Voronoi diagram . Several practical ap - plications , however , solely exploit combi - natorial properties of the Delaunay triangulation . This has led to the investigation of methods for constructing this structure directly , thus avoiding the need to calculate and store the coordinates of Voronoi vertices . Lawson [ 1972 ] proposed an algorithm for constructing locally equiangular tri - angulations by local improvement . Start - ing with an arbitrary triangulation of the sites , edges are “flipped” according to the equiangularity criterion ( stated in Section 1 . 2 . 4 ) until no more such ex - changes are required . Sibson [ 19771 suc - ceeded in proving that this procedure ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 Voronoi Diagrams w 365 Figure 19 . Equiangularity and empty circle prop - erty . actually constructs the Delaunay tri - angulation . Lawson’s original method was somewhat speeded up by Lee and Schachter [ 1980 ] who proceed incremen - tally and apply the edge flipping proce - dure after each insertion of a new site . McLain [ 19761 uses the empty circle property to construct the Delaunay trian - gulation by successively adding triangles whose circumcircles are empty of sites . In fact , Figure 19 illustrates the equiva - lence of the empty circle property and the equiangularity criterion . Although being simple to implement , all these al - gorithms have an 0 ( nz ) - time behavior in the worst case . On the other hand , Maus [ 19841 reports that a modification of McLain’s algorithm based on preparti - tioning exhibits an 0 ( n ) expected run - ning time for uniformly distributed sites , Lee and Schachter [ 1980 ] gave an 0 ( n log rz ) - time Delaunay triangulation algorithm ; it uses divide and conquer and is similar to Shames and Hoey’s primal Voronoi algorithm . A modified imple - mentation using prepartitioning was shown by Dwyer [ 19871 to run in O ( n log log n ) expected time while re - taining the optimal 0 ( n log n ) worst - case time ; it generalizes to the LP - metrics for p > 2 . Drysdale [ 19901 modifies the divide - and - conquer approach to compute , in 0 ( n log n ) time , Delaunay triangula - tions generated by general convex dis - tance functions . A recent algorithm by Guibas et al . [ 19901 inserts ( point ) sites in random order . Using a structure simi - lar to the Delaunay tree [ Boissonnat and Teillaud 19861 , earlier versions of the triangulation are maintained to facili - tate the determination of the triangle covering the next site to be inserted . This practical algorithm exhibits a random - ized running time of 0 ( n log n ) and is similar in spirit to Clarkson and Shor’s [ 1988 ] convex hull algorithm . The question arises as to which of the planar Delaunay algorithms can be ex - tended to higher dimensions . We have already seen some early ( although widely used ) algorithms at the beginning of this section . It should be further observed that the method of higher dimensional em - bedding actually first constructs the Delaunay triangulation ( via a convex hull ) , then derives the Voronoi dia - gram via dualization . Recently , Rajan [ 19911 proved a property of d - dimensional Delaunay triangulations re - lated to equiangularity . It implies an incremental algorithm that makes the triangulation locally Delaunay after each insertion of a new site by applying a triangle - flipping procedure similar to Lawson’s method in the plane . The algo - rithm is worst - case optimal for odd d . Whether every d - dimensional triangula - tion can be made Delaunay by local improvement remains open . 1 . 3 . 7 Storage Representation and Dynamization The Voronoi diagram maybe viewed as a data structure that organizes its defining sites in a prescribed manner . A host of applications of this data structure in computational geometry will be given in Section 2 . Out of a number of possibili - ties to store the planar Voronoi diagram or , equivalently , its dual , the Delaunay triangulation , the quad - edge structure proposed by Guibas and Stolfi [ 19851 is particularly practical , Essentially , each edge is stored as a pair of directed edges . Each directed edge , in turn , stores the vertex it originates from and pointers to the previous and to the next ( directed ) edge of the region to its left , The quad - edge data structure provides a clean separation between topological and geo - metrical aspects and supports the imple - mentation of standard techniques for ACM Computing Surveys , Vol 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 366 0 Franz Aurenhammer computing Voronoi diagrams , such as di - vide and conquer or incremental inser - tion . The structure has been generalized to higher dimensions by Dobkin and Laszlo [ 19891 ( facet - edge structure in R3 ) and by Brisson [ 1989 ] ( cell - tuple structure in R ~ ) . These data struc - tures represent the incidence and ordering information in a cell com - plex in a simple uniform way . See also Aurenhammer and Edelsbrunner [ 1984 ] and Edelsbrunner et al . [ 1986 ] for different data structures representing cell complexes . Like any data structure , the Voronoi diagram can be dynamized , that is , maintained for a set of sites that varies over time by insertion or deletion . The case of site insertion is covered by the algorithms mentioned before that build up the diagram on line by introducing new sites . Integration of a new region into the Voronoi diagram for n sites in the plane clearly costs 0 ( n ) time in the worst case since the region may have n edges . Gowda et al . [ 1983 ] handle inser - tions and deletions of sites in 0 ( n ) time by means of the so - called Voronoi - tree that occupies 0 ( n log log n ) space . This tree records the history of a divide - and - conquer construction of the diagram ( Figure 20 ) . Its leaves hold the sites in lexicographical order . Each inner node is associated with the diagram that comes from combining its sons’ subdiagrams . The idea originates with Overmars [ 1981 ] who , however , did not give details of the method or its storage requirement . By a result by Aggarwal et al . [ 1989a ] , dele - tion of a given site can be performed in time proportional to the number of edges of its region . Using the Delaunay triangulation , a planar set of sites can be organized into a hierarchical data structure , called the Delaunay tree by Boissonnat and Teillaud [ 1986 ] . This structure is semidy - namic ; it allows the insertion of sites and supports the retrieval of the triangle in which a given point falls in efficient expected and worst - case time . The Delaunay tree reflects the history of an incremental construction of the Delaunay triangulation ( Figure 21 ) . Any triangle T destroyed by insert - ing a new site gets as sons ( solid pointers ) the new triangles sharing an edge with T . Remaining triangles ad - jacent to T in such an edge get the re - spective new triangle as a stepson ( dotted pointers ) . Guibas et al . [ 19901 further developed this structure . Among other results , they showed that the expected number of structural changes of the Delaunay tree is 0 ( n ) if n sites are inserted in random order into an ( ini - tially empty ) Delaunay triangulation . A different way of dynamiting Voronoi diagrams or Delaunay triangulations is to allow movement of sites ( continuous updates ) rather than their insertion or deletion ( discrete updates ) . The Voronoi diagram of continuously moving sites will change its shape continuously , although only at “critical” points in time will the combinatorial structure of the diagram change . Aside from degenerate cases , such combinatorial changes always are local ( Figure 22 ) . An edge between two regions ( here 2 and 4 ) collapses to a ver - tex and reappears between two others ( 1 and 3 ) just in the moment when the four sites involved get cocircular . In the dual environment , this process corre - sponds to flipping the diagonals of the quadrilateral spanned by these four sites , which is the union of two Delaunay tri - angles . This suggests the definition of the Delaunay history of a set of moving sites as the chronologically ordered list of edge flips in their Delaunay triangula - tion . Tokuyama [ 1988 ] considered the case of two rigidly moving sets of n and m sites , respectively . Their Delaunay history has length 0 ( nm ) and can be computed and preprocessed in 0 ( nm log nm ) time in order to retrieve the Delaunay triangulation ( and the Voronoi diagram ) in 0 ( n + m ) time at any given moment . For n sites moving in fixed but individual directions and with constant individual velocity , the Delaunay history has length 0 ( n3 ) . This result by Imai et al . [ 1989 ] should be contrasted with the intuitive argument that ( ) : cocircularities may ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 Voronoi Diagrams “ 367 k ~ L l le * 3 . 5 97 e’ 2° 6° A B ( - ) c . . _ _ _ ‘ - - - - - \ \ \ c \ ‘ ) - - ’ ) \ \ \ ~ F ( \ \ 6 \ \ ‘ - - - “ . . El El Figure 20 . Voronoi tree [ Gowda et al . 19831 . occur among n sites . Guibas et al . [ 19911 showed that the bound remains nearly cubic if the sites are moving continu - ously along rather general trajectories . See also Aonuma et al . [ 1990 ] for related results . 1 . 3 . 8 Computing Voronoi Diagrams in Parallel Parallelizing algorithms in computa - tional geometry usually is a complicated task since many of the techniques used ( incremental insertion or plane sweep , for instance ) seem inherently sequential , Since it is one of the fundamental struc - tures in this area , the Voronoi diagram has been among the first geometrical structures whose construction has been parallelized . The underlying model of computation mostly has been the CREW PRAM ( concurrent - read , exclusive - write parallel random access machine ) , where ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No 3 , September 1991 368 “ Franz Aurenhammer . . . < . . . \ ‘ . > Figure 21 . Delaunay tree . I I - - - : ! $ - - - “ ; + . . . / 3 / / I Figure 22 . Combinatorial change . processors share a common memory that allows concurrent reads but no simultaneous writes to the same cell . As has been mentioned , ! 2 ( n log n ) is a lower time bound for sequentially con - structing the Voronoi diagram for n sites in the plane . Therefore , O ( log n ) parallel time is the best that can be achieved when only 0 ( n ) processors are to be used . In her pioneering work , Chow [ 1980 ] showed that convex hulls in three space can be computed in 0 ( log3 n ) time using 0 ( n ) processors . By their duality to planar Voronoi diagrams , the complexity carries over . Aggarwal et al . [ 1988 ] im - proved the Voronoi diagram construction to 0 ( log2 n ) parallel time by applying divide and conquer . Their approach criti - cally depends on restricting the domain that can contain the “merge chain” ( compare Figure 17 ) and has been im - proved recently by Cole et al . [ 1990 ] using a tailor - made data structure . An optimal parallel construction of Voronoi diagrams is still outstanding , however . Goodrich et al . [ 1989 ] construct the Voronoi diagram for line segment sites in 0 ( log2 ) time using 0 ( n ) processors . Their approach to constructing this im - portant generalization is similar in spirit to Yap’s [ 1987 ] curve segment algorithm . AS a related question , Schwarzkopf ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 [ 1989 ] addresses the problem of comput - ing the digitized image of a planar Voronoi diagram using certain processor networks . 2 . ALGORITHMIC APPLICATIONS The precomputation of a Voronoi dia - gram is the initial step of various algo - rithms in computational geometry . We have already mentioned some of them in the Introduction , In this part of the survey we demonstrate the broad scope of algorithmic applications of Voronoi diagrams and of closely related structures . 2 . 1 Closest - Site Problems According to their definition , Voronoi di - agrams apply naturally to various prox - imity problems . Determining closest sites plays a dominant role in this context since it appears as a subroutine of many geometric algorithms . Applications in - clude clustering and contouring and var - ious other problems whose relation to proximity may not be so obvious . 2 . 1 . 1 Nearest - Neighbor Queries Probably the most popular problem in this area is the post - office problem . How should a fixed set of n sites in the plane be preprocessed in order to determine quickly the site closest to an arbitrarily chosen point ( the query point ) ? The post - office problem is motivated in the Introduction as a two - dimensional file - searching problem . Another impor - tant application stems from a common data classification rule that requires as - signment of new data points to the same class in which their nearest neighbor lies . An early solution yielding O ( log n ) query time but requiring 0 ( nz ) storage was provided by Dobkin and Lipton [ 19761 . Shames [ 19751 pointed out that the Voronoi diagram of the sites divides the plane into regions of equal answer with respect to the post - office problem : By def - inition , the region of a site contains all points closer to this site than to all other Voronoi Diagrams “ 369 sites . This reduces the problem to finding the region that contains the query point , an approach that became powerful once efficient data structures were developed for the latter problem : point location in planar straight - line graphs [ Kirkpatrick 1983 ; Edahiro et al . 1984 ; and Edelsbrunner et al . 1986 ] . Actually , logarithmic query time and linear storage are achieved . This is asymp - totically optimal since it matches the information - theoretical lower bound . Shames’ approach in conjunction with Kirkpatrick’s was worked out in a geo - metrically dual setting by Edelsbrunner and Maurer [ 1985 ] . Usage of a structure related to Boissonnat and Teillaud’s [ 19861 Delaunay tree even obviates the need of postprocessing the Voronoi dia - gram for point location ; Guibas et al , [ 1990 ] show that post - office queries are supported in 0 ( log2 n ) expected time by this structure . An off - line solution to the post - office problem ( all query points are given in advance rather than being spec - ified on line ) was presented by Lee and Yang [ 19791 . In principle , higher dimensional vari - ants of the post - office problem may be solved via the Voronoi diagram , too . Their practical relevance is evident from the equivalent file - searching problem for multiattribute data mentioned in the In - troduction . Although Chazelle [ 1985 ] showed that point - location in a Voronoi diagram in R3 can be performed effi - ciently , the approach suffers from a con - siderable storage overhead of @ ( n2 ) that comes from the worst - case size of the dia - gram . In d > 3 dimensions , the pro - hibitively large size of the diagram may be reduced to some extent for that purpose [ Dewdney 1977 ] . Generalizations of the post - office prob - lem for nonpoint sites or for modified distance functions may be solved by means of an appropriate Voronoi dia - gram as well . We particularly mention Mount [ 1986 ] ( geodesic distance on a polyhedral surface ) and Aurenhammer et al . [ 19911 ( probabilistic distances in the plane ) as two generalizations leading to interesting types of diagrams . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No 3 , September 1991 370 “ Franz Aurenhammer 2 . 1 . 2 k - Nearest - Neighbor Queries An obvious and important generalization of the post - office problem is to ask for the k closest sites for a query point . It was observed by Shamos and Hoey [ 1975 ] that the order - k Voronoi diagram divides the plane into regions of equal answer with respect to this problem . Postprocessing the diagram for point - location yields a data structure that handles queries in O ( log n + k ) time and requires O ( k2 n ) storage . [ The diagram may contain @ ( k ( n – k ) ) regions for each of which the k closest sites are stored . ] If k is specified in the input , an 0 ( n3 ) - space data structure yielding the same query time was obtained by Edelsbrunner et al . [ 19861 via embedding the whole family of order - k Voronoi diagrams for the sites into an arrangement of planes . A tech - nique for compacting order - k Voronoi di - agrams recently developed by Aggarwal et al . [ 19901 drastically reduces the stor - age requirement of these approaches [ to 0 ( n ) for fixed k and to 0 ( n log n ) if k is in the input ] while still achieving the optimal O ( log n + k ) query time . A related problem is the circular re - trieval problem that requires a report of all sites covered by a given query disk . In facility location , for example , one might be interested in all sites being influenced by a new facility of given ra - dius of attraction . First steps toward a satisfactory solution were undertaken by Bentley and Maurer [ 19791 . Their method is based on a certain sequence of order - k Voronoi diagrams of the given sites and has been refined by Chazelle et al . [ 1986b ] and recently by Aggarwal et al . [ 19901 . The latter refinement yields a data structure using 0 ( n log n ) space and achieving O ( log n + t ) query time , where t is the number of sites in the query disk . 2 . 1 . 3 Closest Pairs Finding the closest pair among n sites certainly belongs to the most fundamen - tal proximity problems . One obvious ap - plication arises in collision detection ; the two closest sites are in the greatest dan - @ / 1 , / I 1 , / / 1’ / / \ \ v’ < “ ‘1 i > - - - - - - - + “ = . . l’ , ‘ . - . I \ I 1 \ ; \ 1 / ’ I I Figure 23 . All closest pairs and the largest empty circle . ger of collision , In other applications , for example , in clustering , one needs to find the closest site for each of the sites . The straightforward approach clearly results in calculating 6 ( nz ) distances . In the planar case , both questions were settled in optimal time 0 ( n log n ) by Shamos and Hoey [ 19751 by precomputing the Voronoi diagram of the sites . See Figure 23 depicting all closest pairs by bold seg - ments . Since the region of a site and the region of its closest site always share an edge , one only needs to visit each edge and calculate the distance between the two sites whose separator yields that edge . This clearly takes 0 ( n ) time once the diagram is available . Recently , Hinrichs et al . [ 1988a , 1988bl showed that it suffices to maintain certain parts of the diagram during a plane sweep rather than to compute the diagram ex - plicitly in order to solve both problems in optimal time . Curiously , the furthest pair of sites cannot be derived directly from the furthest site Voronoi diagram but requires some additional point - location [ Toussaint and Bhattacharya 19811 . Finding the furthest pair means de - termining the diameter of the under - lying set of sites and thus has several applications . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 Voronoi Diagrams l 371 2 . 2 Placement and Motion Planning Voronoi diagrams have the property that each point on a Voronoi edge maximizes the distance to the closest sites . Al - though being straightforward , this prop - erty is essential for the usefulness of Voronoi diagrams in placement and motion planning problems . 2 . 2 . 1 Largest Empty Figures The largest empty figure problem is the following : Given n point sites in the plane , where should a figure of pre - scribed shape be placed so that its area is maximized but no site is covered ? If the figure is a circle , the problem can be reformulated as finding a new site being as far as possible from n existing ones . Shames and Hoey [ 1975 ] mentioned the relevance of this facility location problem to operations research and industrial en - gineering . They also showed how to find a largest empty circle in 0 ( n log n ) time : The center of such a circle is either a vertex of the Voronoi diagram of the sites or the intersection of a Voronoi edge and the boundary of the convex hull of the sites ; see Figure 23 illustrating the oc - currence of the latter case . Thus atten - tion can be restricted to 0 ( n ) possible placements of the circle , The smallest enclosing circle of the sites is obtainable in 0 ( n log n ) time in a similar manner . Shames [ 1978 ] claimed that this circle always will be centered at a vertex of the furthest site Voronoi dia - gram . This was proved true by Toussaint and Bhattacharya [ 19811 . From Figure 24 it can be seen that the edges of this diagram form a tree structure . This re - stricts the maximum number of vertices , and thus of placements of the circle , to n – 2 . 7 On both problems , there exists 7 It is easily seen that the regions of the furthest site diagram are either unbounded or empty , The corresponding furthest site Delaunay triangulation thus is an outer planar graph ( with at most n sites as vertices ) , which is well known to contain at most 2 n – 3 edges and n – 2 triangles . \ / / “ / \ \ \ Figure 24 . Furthest site Voronoi diagram and smallest enclosing circle . a considerable literature [ Preparata and Shames 1985 ] . In particular , the problems are solvable in 0 ( n ) time by means of linear programming as was demonstrated by Megiddo [ 1983 ] . The Voronoi diagram approach gener - alizes—while still achieving the 0 ( n log n ) - time bound—to other figures provided these are “circles” with respect to the underlying distance function . For example , the largest empty axis - parallel square can be found using the Voronoi diagram in the L ~ - metric . Chew and Drysdale [ 1985 ] find largest empty homothetic copies of generally shaped convex figures via diagrams that are induced by a rather general class of distance functions . The determination of the largest empty axis - parallel rectangle turns out to be somewhat more compli - cated ; the aspect ratio of the rectangle , and thus the distance function to be used , is not known in advance . This problem has an obvious application . If we are given a piece of fabric or sheet metal and the sites are flaws , what is the largest area rectangular piece that can be sal - vaged ? Chazelle et al . [ 1986a ] gave an 0 ( n log3 n ) - time solution . They use an interesting type of Voronoi diagram that can be intepreted as the power diagram of a certain set of circles [ Edelsbrunner and Seidel 1986 ; Aurenhammer and Imai 1988 ] . The running time above was ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No , 3 , September 1991 372 “ Franz Aurenhammer improved to 0 ( n log n ) by Aggarwal and Suri [ 1987 ] using different methods . The properties of the Voronoi diagram for line segment sites have been exploited by Chew and Kedem [ 1989 ] to find the largest similar copy of a convex polygon such that no segment is overlapped . As a re - lated question , Aonuma et al . [ 1990 ] place a given convex polygon inside and as far as possible from the boundary of an arbitrary polygon . Their algorithm relies on Voronoi diagrams dynamized with respect to certain site movements . 2 . 2 . 2 Translational Motions Voronoi diagrams are an aid in the plan - ning of collision - free motions of a figure in the presence of obstacle sites . Prob - lems of this kind arise in robotics . The Voronoi diagram approach plays an im - portant role in this area and is called the retraction method . Intuitively speaking , when moving on the edges of the Voronoi diagram the robot always keeps as far as possible from the neighboring ob - stacles . This was first perceived by Rowat [ 19791 ; several authors pursued this idea further . For many applications it is feasible to approximate the scenario of obstacles by polygonal sets . O’Dunlaing and Yap [ 19851 plan the motion of a disk between two given points in this environment . In a preprocessing step , the Voronoi dia - gram of the obstacles is computed by tak - ing their n boundary segments as its defining sites . The graph formed by the 0 ( n ) straight or parabolic edges of the diagram can be computed in 0 ( n log n ) time [ Kirkpatrick 1979 ; Fortune 19871 . Figure 25 depicts the graph ( dashed ) for four line segment obstacles ( bold ) . Ob - serve that each point on an edge is equidistant from its two closest obsta - cles . Therefore , for each edge , it is easy to compute the minimum clearance when moving on it . To produce a collision - free motion ( if it exists ) , one first finds the edges e and e’ closest to the center of the disk in initial and final position , respec - tively , and then searches the graph start - ing with e until either e’ is reached or , - . - , ~ — . _ - - - – / > - —— - - —— / ’ / . ’ / , ’ / / / / “ ; - L . . . — - - - - - - - - - / ’ - _ / ’ - - - / / ’ . / / ’ . Figure 25 . Voronol diagram for line segments . the clearance falls short of the disk radius . All of that can be done in additional 0 ( n ) time . Compared to others , this simple ap - proach has the additional advantage that the disk radius need not be known dur - ing the preprocessing phase . Extending the approach , Leven and Sharir [ 19871 plan translational motions of a convex planar robot in 0 ( n log n ) time . Note that generally shaped robots may be cir - cumscribed by a convex figure , and paths feasible for the figure will do for the robot as well . 2 . 2 . 3 Rotational Motion Allowing the robot to rotate adds a third degree of freedom to the problem . Much attention has been paid to moving— amidst polygonal obstacles— a line segment that is allowed to rotate . The position of a segment ( of given length ) in the plane is determined by the triple p = ( x , y , p ) indicating the coordinates of one endpoint and the orientation . The set of all triples p such that the corresponding segment L ( p ) does not collide with any obstacle is a subset of the underlying three - dimensional configuration space . Within this subset , we may define a Voronoi diagram as the set of all p such that - L ( p ) is equidistant from its two closest obstacles ; closeness is with re - spect to the minimum distance between segment and obstacle . O’Dunlaing et al . [ 1986 , 1987 ] pro - vided a thorough analysis of this dia - gram ( which seems to belong to one of the most complex types ) . In particular , they showed that the diagram can be ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No 3 , September 1991 Voronoi Diagrams “ 373 constructed , and a motion be planned in 0 ( n2 log n log * n ) time , thus being a sig - nificant improvement over earlier tech - niques . Sifrony and Sharir 11986 ] speeded up the method—by introducing a related graph - to run in O ( t log n ) time , where t = 0 ( n2 ) is a parameter dependent on the segment length . Canny and Donald [ 19881 simplified the method by relaxing the definition of the diagram . There are several other versions of the motion planning problem to which Voronoi diagrams apply [ Rohnert 19881 . An axiomatic characterization of the boundary properties of a generally shaped three - dimensional scenaro in order to de - fine a Voronoi diagram suited to motion planning was proposed by Stifter [ 19891 . For a more detailed introduction and re - view of the use of Voronoi diagrams in motion planning , the interested reader may consult Schwartz and Yap [ 1986 ] or Alt and Yap [ 19901 . 2 . 2 . 4 Path Planning A special case of planning collision - free motions , where the robot is taken to be a single moving point , is path planning . Finding euclidean shortest paths in the presence of polygonal ( or polyhedral ) ob - stacles has received particular interest . For example , consider the problem of determining that location , for each of m fixed locations within a polygonal factory floor , reachable on the shortest path . This problem can be solved in 0 ( n + m ) log2 ( n + m ) time by first constructing the Voronoi diagram of n sites under the geodesic metric interior to a simple poly - gon with m edges [ Aronov 1989 ] . The site yielding the shortest path to a par - ticular site defines a neighboring region in the diagram . This improves an earlier result by Asano and Asano [ 19861 . Re - lated questions can be solved by means of the furthest site geodesic Voronoi dia - gram inside a polygon ; Aronov et al . [ 1988 ] showed how to construct this structure efficiently . The following important question is still unsolved . Is it possible to compute the geodesic Voronoi diagram for n sites - - - - - - T - . 9 - - / . ‘ \ ‘ . . ‘ \ \ , / - - - - - / ’ - . - . % - . . . . Figure 26 . Geodesic separator . and a collection of disjoint and con - vex polygons with a total of m edges in 0 ( n + m ) log ( n + m ) time ? The main problem in this respect is that com - puting geodesic distances is not a constant - time operation , Figure 26 shows the separator ( dashed ) of two sites under the geodesic distance among two convex polygons ( bold ) . It is composed of straight line and hyperbola segments meeting at intersections with visibility lines ( solid ) . Path - planning problems in three - dimensional polyhedral spaces have been studied , by among other authors , Mount [ 19861 , Mitchell et al . [ 1987 ] , and Baltsan and Sharir [ 1988 ] . For example , finding shortest paths lying entirely on a ( generally nonconvex ) polyhedral surface is of interest in areas like autonomous vehicle navigation , where hilly terrains are being modeled . Efficient solutions are obtained by using Voronoi diagrams de - fined in such spaces . Moreover , since finding shortest paths is closely related to determining visibility between obsta - cles , Voronoi diagrams involving visibil - ity constraints have been exploited in this context . An example is the peeper’s Voronoi diagram used by Baltsan and Sharir [ 1988 ] and by Aronov [ 1989 ] . Each point in the plane is assigned to the clos - est visible site , and visibility is con - strained to a segment on a line avoiding the convex hull of the sites ( see Figure 36 ) . This structure can attain a size of @ n2 ) and is constructible in 0 ( TL2 ) time [ Aurenhammer and St6ckl 1988 ] . 2 . 3 Triangulating Sites Intuitively speaking , triangulating n sites in the plane means partitioning the ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 374 “ Franz Aurenhammer plane into triangles whose vertices are all and only the sites . Triangulations are important because they ( as being planar graphs ) on the one hand have only linear size and , on the other hand , establish connectivity information among the sites that suffices for many applications . 2 . 3 . 1 Equiangular Triangulations An early and major application is the interpolation of functions of two vari - ables , where function values initially are known only at irregularly placed sites . Practical evidence stems from finite element methods or from processing graphical data , for example , in terrain modeling . Given a triangulation of the sites , the function value at an arbi - trary point can be computed by interpo - lation within the triangle containing that point . Lawson [ 1972 ] and McLain [ 1976 ] have reported that a triangulation is well suited to interpolation if its triangles are nearly equiangular . The Delaunay trian - gulation is the unique triangulation that is optimum in this sense [ Sibson 1977 ] . Sibson [ 19801 further suggests the use of local coordinates obtained from sites be - ing adjacent in this triangulation in or - der to compute smooth surfaces . There might , however , occur more - sided poly - gons ( rather than triangles ) if various sites are cocircular . Mount and Saalfeld [ 19881 showed how to triangulate such polygons in order to retain equiangular - ity . This process does not affect the 0 ( n log n ) time needed for constructing the Delaunay triangulation . Given a set of sites and a particular function value ( height ) at each site , any triangulation of the sites defines a trian - gular surface in space . The “roughness” of such a surface T may be measured by the Sobolev seminorm where I A I denotes the area of the spa - tial triangle A , and a ~ and 6A denote the slopes of the plane containing A . By ex - ploiting equiangularity , Rippa [ 1990 ] showed that the Sobolev seminorm is Figure 27 . Constrained Delaunay triangulation . minimized if the underlying triangula - tion of the sites is Delaunay . This re - sult is somewhat surprising since the Delaunay triangulation – although itself clearly being independent of the height at each site —optimizes a quantity that depends on these heights . 2 . 3 . 2 Constrained Triangulations In a constrained Delaunay triangulation , prescribed edges are forced in as part of the triangulation . See Section 3 . 3 for a formal definition . Figure 27 depicts such a triangulation with two prescribed edges ( bold ) , This structure can be constructed in 0 ( n log n ) time [ Seidel 1988 ] and has two major applications . First , it provides a more realistic approach to modeling terrain surfaces since salient elements like mountain ridges or valleys may be prescribed . Lee and Lin [ 1986 ] showed that the equiangularity criterion is still fulfilled by constrained Delaunay trian - gulations , Since triangles with small an - gles produce a poor computer graphics display , the best possible visualization is achieved . Triangulations inside a simple polygon are an important special case . The boundary edges of the polygon will not be edges of the ( unconstrained ) Delaunay triangulation of the polygon vertices , in general , and thus have ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 Voronoi Diagrams l 375 to be prescribed . 8 Chew [ 1989b ] used constrained Delaunay triangula - tions to generate triangular meshes inside polygons where all angles are between 30° and 120° . Second , constrained Delaunay triangu - lations are an aid in path planning . In order to plan a path from A to B that avoids a set of n line segment obstacles ( and thus arbitrarily shaped polygonal regions , for instance ) one might con - struct this triangulation - by taking A and B and the segment endpoints as sites and the segments as prescribed edges— and then search the graph formed by triangulation edges . This was ob - served by Chew [ 19861 , who also proved the following interesting result : Between any two sites there is a path in this triangulation whose length is at most ~ times the geodesic distance between them , provided the L1 - metric ( instead of the euclidean ) is taken to define the tri - angulation . This yields an 0 ( n log n ) - time algorithm for approximating the optimal path , which is a significant improvement over exact methods . Dobkin et al . [ 1990 ] proved a factor of about 5 for ( nonconstrained ) euclidean Delaunay triangulations and the eu - clidean distance . Their result has been improved to a factor of about ~ by Keil and Gutwin [ 19891 . Results of this kind are rather surprising since they show the existence of a sparse graph being almost as “good” as the complete graph on n sites , independently of n . Let us mention another application . Given n sites and some prescribed ( non - crossing ) edges between them , a diagonal is a new edge that does not cross any prescribed one . A popular heuristic for triangulations with minimum total edge length is the greedy method . This method 6 It is an interesting question how many new sites have to be placed on the polygon boundary in order to force it in as a subgraph of the Delaunay trian - gulation . Schwarzkopf ( personal communication , 1990 ) observed that ! l ( nz ) sites may be necessary for an n - vertex polygon . A known upper bound is 2 o ( mlog ~ ) , The O ( ~ ) bound ~ laimed in Boissonnat [ 19881 involves a constant depending on the angles of the polygon . iteratively adds shortest diagonals by considering the current ( and initially empty ) set of edges as prescribed . Lingas [ 19891 reports that a shortest diagonal can be found in 0 ( n ) time given the constrained Delaunay triangulation . This gives an 0 ( n2 log n ) - time and 0 ( n ) - space algorithm for constructing such greedy triangulations . Previous methods re - quired 0 ( n2 ) space . Whether a minimum length triangulation for n sites in the plane can be computed in polynomial time is an important open question . 2 . 3 . 3 3D Triangulations The problem of “triangulating” point sites in three - space arises in the decom - position of three - dimensional objects , for example , of computer - generated solid models or of objects specified by planar cross sections . Field [ 19861 , Boissonnat [ 1988 ] , and others report on advantages of tetrahedral decompositions and pro - pose the use of the Delaunay triangula - tion . Although there is some evidence for the quality of thus produced tetrahedral , some important properties of the two - dimensional Delaunay triangulation do not carry over . First , the number of tetrahedral maybe E ) ( n2 ) , hence leading to a storage re - quirement that is prohibitive for many applications . This fact suggests the use of postprocessing . ~ hazelle et al . [ 1990 ] showed the following somewhat counter - intuitive result : The number of tetrahe - dra may always be lowered to about n G by adding about & new sites . This pro - cess will also eliminate elongated ( and thus undesirable ) tetrahedral , In fact , adding 0 ( n ) ( well - chosen ) sites will al - ways reduce the size of the triangulation to 0 ( n ) , with the additional effect that only constantly many edges emanate from each site [ Bern et al . 19901 . Second , the question of finding a three - dimensional analog to the equian - gularity property is still unsettled . Rajan [ 19911 , however , recently succeeded in proving a related property . The three - dimensional Delaunay triangulation minimizes the largest containment ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 376 * Franz Aurenhammer radius of the tetrahedral ; that is , the ra - dius of the smallest sphere containing a tetrahedron . This sphere coincides with the circumsphere if and only if its center lies within the tetrahedron . Note that the containment radius measures the te - trahedron size more appropriately than the circumradius since small but elon - gated tetrahedral may have arbitrarily large circumradii . The Delaunay trian - gulation is the most compact triangu - lation in this sense . This property is quite remarkable as—unlike the two - dimensional situation—the number of te - trahedral is not independent of the way of triangulating the given sites but may vary from linear to quadratic . There is another property of Delaunay triangulations that turns out to be useful in three - dimensions . For a set of trian - gles in three - space , an in - front / behind relation may be defined with respect to a fixed viewpoint . Generalizing a result by De Floriani et al . [ 19881 , Edelsbrunner [ 19891 proved that this relation is acyclic for the triangles in a three - dimensional Delaunay triangulation , no matter where the viewpoint is chosen . This is relevant to a popular algorithm in computer graphics that eliminates hidden surfaces by first ordering the three - dimensional objects with respect to the in - front / behind relation and then drawing them from back to front , thus over - painting invisible parts . For Delaunay triangles , such an ordering always will exist , which is quite important in view of their frequent use in practice . In particular , so - called a - shapes are made of such triangles . a - shapes have been used by Edelsbrunner et al . [ 19831 to model the shape of point sets . 2 . 4 Connectivity Graphs for Sites The Delaunay triangulation contains , as subgraphs , various structures with far - ranging applications . We will briefly discuss some of them in the sequel . 2 . 4 . 1 Spanning Trees Given n point sites in the plane , a ( euclidean ) minimum spanning tree is a straight - line connection of the sites with minimum total edge length . See Figure 8 for an illustration . Not surprisingly , this structure plays an important role in transportation problems , pattern recog - nition , and cluster analysis . Construc - tion methods working on general weighted graphs have been known for a long time ; see Kruskal [ 19561 , Prim [ 19571 , and , more recently , yao [ 19751 whose algorithm works in 0 ( m log log n ) time for a graph with m edges . All these algorithms use a basic fact : For any par - tition of the sites into two subsets , the shortest edge ( edge of minimum weight ) between the subsets will be present in the tree . Applying Yao’s algorithm di - rectly to the complete euclidean distance graph for the sites results in an Q ( nz ) running time , however . Shames and Hoey [ 19751 recognized that the edges of a minimum spanning tree must be Delaunay edges . This inter - esting and important property holds since , by the fact mentioned above , each tree edge is the diameter of a disk empty of sites and , by definition , each triangu - lation edge is a chord of some disk empty of sites . From the computational view - point , Yao’s algorithm just needs to be applied to the Delaunay triangulation— a graph with 0 ( n ) edges . In fact , 0 ( n ) time suffices to derive the minimum spanning tree from the Delaunay triangulation [ Preparata and Shames 19851 . This gives an 0 ( n log n ) - time algorithm , which is optimal by reduction to sorting n real numbers . 9 The relationship above extends to more general metrics . For example , Hwang [ 1979 ] extends it to the L1 - metric ( com - pare Figure 3 ) . One may be tempted to conjecture that the ( euclidean ) maximum spanning tree can be obtained from the furthest site Delaunay triangulation of the sites ( the dual of the furthest site 9 The minimum spanning tree should not be con - fused with the minimum Steiner tree of a set of sites , a concept where the addition of new points is allowed in order to minimize the total edge length . The problem of constructing a minimum Steiner tree is NP - complete [ Garey et al . 1976 ] . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 Voronoi Diagrams l 377 Voronoi diagram ) . Shames [ 1978 ] showed that this conjecture is erroneous . Eppstein [ 1990 ] , however , pointed out that two sites are connected in one of the k smallest spanning trees only if both belong to the same subset of sites defining a region of the order - ( k + 1 ) Voronoi diagram . This leads to an improved algorithm for finding the k smallest spanning trees . The efficient construction of the mini - mum spanning tree in three space has turned out to be a diffkult problem . Pre - computation of the Delaunay triangula - tion does not help in general since the complete graph may be the output in the worst case . Efficient approximation and expected - time algorithms were given , among other authors , by Vaidya [ 1988a ] and Clarkson [ 1989 ] . The first algorithm running in subquadratic worst - case time is due to Yao [ 1982 ] ; it can be speeded up to run in 0 ( n log n ) 15 time by using Voronoi diagrams of carefully chosen grOUpS of sites . By exploiting—in addi - tion—an interesting relation to a certain closest point problem , Agarwal et al . [ 19901 were able to bring down the com - plexity to 0 ( n413 log4 / 3 n ) . It still re - mains open whether an algorithm matching the best currently known lower bound of ! 2 ( n log n ) can be developed . 2 . 4 . 2 Spanning Cycles A graph connecting n sites is called Hamiltonian if it contains some cycle passing through all the sites . The ques - tion of whether the Delaunay triang - ula - tion in the plane is Hamiltonian arose in pattern recognition problems where a reasonable simple curve through the given sites is desired . Although counter - examples were given by Kantabutra [ 19831 and Dillencourt [ 1987a , 1987b ] , Delaunay triangulations have been used with success for this problem . This gives evidence that this graph is Hamiltonian with high proba - bility . Dillencourt [ 1987cI supports this thesis by proving a result concerning the connectivity of Delaunay triangulations . A ( euclidean ) traveling salesman tour is a minimum - length cycle spanned by n Figure 28 . Delaunay triangulation and salesman tour [ Dillencourt 1987 ] . sites . Constructing traveling salesman tours is a prominent problem of combina - torial optimization . Papadimitriou [ 1977 ] showed its NP - completeness . The prob - lem becomes tractable for tours being close to optimal . It follows from the above discussion that the Delaunay triangula - tion will not contain a traveling sales - man tour , in general . 10 See also Fig - ure 28 where the triangulation and the tour are drawn solid and dashed , re - spectively . Rosenkrantz et al . [ 19771 , however , observed that traversing the minimum spanning tree twice will pro - duce a tour that is within a factor of 2 of the optimum : Since removing an edge from the traveling salesman tour leaves a spanning tree of the sites , this tour must be longer than the minimum spanning tree . Note that this approxima - tion algorithm takes only 0 ( n log n ) time . By partitioning the minimum spanning tree into paths , then construct - ing a minimum - length matching of their endpoints , Christofides [ 1976 ] improved this to a factor of 1 . 5 , with the expense of an 0 ( n2 A log4 n ) construction time due 10 This is even true for special traveling salesman tours called necklace tours that are cycles realiz - able as the intersection graph of disks around the sites . Necklace tours can be found in polynomial time in case of their existence [ Edelsbrunner et al . 1987 ] . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 378 l Franz Aurenhammer Figure 29 . Relative neighborhood graph and Gabriel graph . to the best known matching algorithm by Vaidya [ 1988bl . 11 2 . 4 . 3 Relative Neighborhood and Gabriel Graph It is worth mentioning two graphs that are “in between” the minimum spanning tree and the Delaunay triangulation in the sense of making explicit more prox - imity information than does the former and less than does the latter . Among them is the relative neighborhood grap ~ that connects two sites provided no other site is closer to both of them than their interpoint distance . In Figure 29 , the edges of the relative neighborhood graph are shown solid . Toussaint [ 19801 re - ported the usefulness of this structure in pattern recognition , and Supowit [ 19831 succeeded in constructing it in 0 ( n log n ) time , given the Delaunay triangulation . Yao ( personal communication , 1988 ) an - nounced that 0 ( n ) time suffices for de - riving the relative neighborhood graph from the latter . Interestingly , this graph retains its linear size in higher dimen - sions ( provided a general placement of the sites ) . This stresses the importance of its rapid construction , especially in three dimensions , since it would imply fast minimum spanning tree algorithms . Un - 11A minimum - length matching of 2 n sites is a graph with n edges joining pairs of sites , such that the pairs are distinct and the total edge length is minimized . Akl [ 19831 showed that a minimum - length matching is not necessarily a subgraph of the Delaunay triangulations of the sites . fortunately , no algorithm with signifi - cantly subquadratic running time is known . A similarly defined construct is the Gabriel graph . It contains an edge be - tween two sites if the disk having that edge as its diameter is empty of sites . This concept proved useful in processing geographical data [ Gabriel and Sokal 1969 ; Matula and Sokal 19801 . Howe [ 1978 ] observed that the Gabriel graph consists of just those Delaunay edges that intersect their dual Voronoi edges . Based on the same observation , Urquhart [ 19801 gave an 0 ( n log n ) time algorithm for its construction . It is easily seen that the Gabriel graph is a supergraph of the rel - ative neighborhood graph . The edges of the former are shown solid or dashed in Figure 29 . 2 . 5 Clustering Point Sites Clustering a set of n point sites in the plane means determining partitions of the set that optimize some predefine clustering measure . This measure usu - ally is a function of the interpoint distances of the set to be clustered . 2 . 5 . 1 Hierarchical Methods A single linkage clustering [ Hartigan 19751 hierarchically clusters the sites as follows . Initially , the sites are considered to be clusters themselves . As long as there is more than one cluster , the two closest clusters are merged . The distance of two clusters is defined as the mini - mum distance between any two sites , one from each cluster . This process can be carried out in a total of 0 ( n log n ) time by maintaining , at each stage , the fol - lowing Voronoi diagram : Each point of the plane belongs to the region of the closest cluster , and closeness is with re - spect to the closest site within a cluster . The regions of the two closest clusters will always have a common edge in the diagram . That edge corresponds to an edge of the minimum spanning tree of the entire set of sites [ Shames and Hoey 1975 ] . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 Voronoi Diagrams l 379 / / / / \ \ . , \ ‘ \ / ’ / \ \ \ T \ \ \ \ \ I ‘ . Figure 30 . Complete linkage Voronoi diagram . The model of complete linkage cluster - ing is similar , except that the distance of two clusters is defined as the maximum distance between any pair of sites , one from each cluster . The corresponding Voronoi diagram , where closeness of a point in the plane is with respect to the furthest site in a cluster , deserves special attention . Its size is fI ( rzz ) for general clusters and 0 ( n ) provided the convex hulls of the clusters are pairwise disjoint [ Edelsbrunner et al . 1989 ] . Figure 30 shows the diagram induced by four two - site clusters , indicated by bold segments . For each cluster , the portion of the bisec - tor of its two sites that lies within its region is drawn dashed , The diagram can be constructed in 0 ( n log n ) random - ized time for convex - hull disjoint and constant - sized clusters and— in this setting— applies to the retrieval of expected - nearest sites [ Aurenhammer et al . 1991 ] . Efficient maintenance of the diagram during the clustering process would lead to an improved clustering al - gorithm but remains open . 2 . 5 . 2 Partitional Strategies As another example , consider the prob - lem of partitioning a set of n sites into a fixed number of t clusters such that the minimum of the ( single linkage ) dis - tances between clusters is maximized . The following elegant 0 ( n log rz ) - time so - lution was proposed by Asano et al . [ 19881 . Construct the minimum spanning tree of the sites and remove its t – 1 longest edges . The resulting t subtrees already give the desired clustering . Us - ing similar methods , Asano et al . [ 19881 obtain an equally efficient algorithm for partitioning the sites into two clusters so that their maximum diameter is mini - mized . This problem becomes consider - ably harder if partitions into more than two clusters are sought . 12 Partitions into separable clusterings have been investi - gated by Dehne and Noltemeier [ 19851 and Heusinger and Noltemeier [ 19891 , who exploited the fact that clusters of k sites being separable from the remaining sites by a straight line define unbounded regions in the associated order - k Voronoi diagram . 2 . 5 . 3 Optimum Cluster Selection The k - variance problem asks for select - ing , from a given set S of n sites , a cluster of k sites with minimum vari - ance , the sum of squares of all intersite distances in the cluster . Aggarwal et al . [ 1989b ] , who cite applications in pattern recognition , observed the following inter - esting fact . If C is k - cluster of minimal variance , then the region of C in the order - k Voronoi diagram of S is nonempty , Thus it suffices to examine the variances of sets of k sites associated with Voronoi regions . This can be done in time proportional to the number , O ( k ( n – k ) ) , of regions by exploiting the fact that sets of neighbored regions differ in exactly two sites . Thus , the most time - consuming step is the precomputa - tion of a higher order Voronoi diagram . A similar approach leads to improve - ments if the cluster measure to be mini - mized is not variance but diameter . If C is a k - cluster with minimum diameter , then C is contained in some set of 3k – 3 sites whose region in the order - ( 3k – 3 ) Voronoi diagram of S is nonempty ; 12Asano et al . [ 1988 ] claimed its NP - completeness . Rote ( personal communication , 1990 ) , announced a polynomial algorithm in the case of three clusters . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 380 * Franz Aurenhammer see Aggarwal et al . [ 1989bl where an 0 ( k2 n ~ k log n ) - time selection algorithm is obtained in this way . Several other clustering algorithms that rely on Voronoi diagrams have been described in the literature ; some of them are mentioned in the Introduction . 3 . SELECTED TOPICS A thorough understanding of the geomet - ric , combinatorial , and topological prop - erties of Voronoi diagrams is crucial for the design of efficient construction algo - rithms . This third part of the survey presents these properties in a unified manner and discusses their algorithmic implications . We start with a description of the various relationships of Voronoi diagrams to objects in one more dimen - sion . We continue with some topological properties that are particularly useful for the divide - and - conquer construction of a large class of Voronoi diagrams in the plane . Finally , we investigate a continu - ous deformation of the planar Voronoi diagram being well suited to construc - tion by the plane - sweep technique and extend it to generalized Voronoi diagrams . 3 . 1 Geometry of Voronoi Diagrams : Their Relationship to Higher Dimensional Objects Voronoi diagrams are intimately related to several central structures in discrete geometry . This section exhibits these re - lationships in a comprehensive manner and discusses some of their geometric and algorithmic consequences . Although our main interest is in the classical type of Voronoi diagram , it is advantageous to base the discussion on the more general concept of power diagram since the geo - metric correspondences to be described extend to that type in a natural way . We shall refer to d dimensions in order to point out the general validity of the results . 3 . 1 . 1 Convex Polyhedral Surfaces Consider a set S of n point sites in R d such that each site p G S is assigned an Figure 31 . Power line of two circles . individual real number w ( p ) called its weight . ‘I’he power function of a point x e Rd with respect to p is specified by pow ( x , p ) = ( . x - p ) T ( x - p ) - w ( p ) . For W ( p ) > 0 , one may think of the weighted site p as a sphere in R d with radius - around p ; for a point x outside this sphere , pow ( x , p ) > 0 , and v“ - expresses the distance of x to the touching point of a line tangent to the sphere and through x . In the plane , the locus of equal power with respect to two weighted sites p and q is commonly called the power line of the correspond - ing circles . If the circles are nondisjoint , their power line passes through their points of intersection ; see Figure 31 . In general dimensions , the locus of equal power is a hyperplane in R‘ , called the chordale of p and q or chor ( p , q ) , for short . chor ( p , q ) is orthogonal to the straight line connecting p and q but does not necessarily separate p from q , For W ( p ) = w ( q ) , chor ( p , q ) degenerates to the symmetry hyperplane of p and q . Let h ( p , q ) denote the closed halfspace bounded by chor ( p , q ) and containing the ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 Voronoi Diagrams “ 381 / Figure 32 . Spatial interpretation of chordale [ Aurenhammer 1987a ] . points of less power with respect The power cell of p is given by cell ( p ) = , E ~ ~ fP } h ( p , q ) . to p . thehyperplane 7r ( p ) : Xd + l = 2xTp – pTp + w ( p ) in R‘ + 1 [ Aurenhammer 1987a ] . This fact is best explained by reference to Fimre In analogy to classical Voronoi regions , the power diagram of S , PD ( S ) is the convex polyhedral complex defined in R d by these cells ; see Figure 4 for the case d = 2 . PD ( S ) coincides with the classical Voronoi diagram of S in the case of equally weighted sites . Note that power cells may be empty if general weights are used . For technical reasons let us identify R d with the linear subspace of Rd + 1 orthogonal to the ( d + l ) s ~ coordinate axis xd + ~ . The key observation for the existence of objects in R‘ + 1 that are re . lated to power diagrams is that the power function pow ( x , p ) can be expressed by 32 . Let p and q - be two sites in - R2 whose weights are indicated by circles . Projecting the circles onto the paraboloid 2 defines two of revolution xs = x ; + X2 planes T ( p ) and T ( g ) that intersect the paraboloid in these projections . It is an easy analytical exercise to prove that the line T ( p ) fl x ( q ) projects orthogonally to the chordale chor ( p , q ) in the xl xz - plane . This correspondence holds for arbitrary dimensions . As an immediate conse - quence , PD ( S ) is the orthogonal projec - tion of the boundary of the polyhedron that comes from intersecting the half - spaces of Rdw ~ above m ( p ) , for all p c S . In fact , m is a bijective mapping between ACM Computing Surveye , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 382 l Franz Aurenhammer weighted sites in R d and hyperplanes in R‘ + 1 . Thus , for any intersection of upper half - spaces there exists a corresponding power diagram in one dimension lower and vice versa . This general result has far - reaching implications . Most important , it shows that power diagrams are in a geometric and combinatorial sense equivalent to unbounded convex polyhedra or , more precisely , to their boundaries , that is , to convex polyhedral surfaces . Convex poly - hedra are well - understood objects in discrete geometry , hence so are power diagrams . Exact upper and lower bounds on the numbers of their faces of various dimensions are known . In particular , PD ( S ) in Rd realizes at most n cells , L j - dimensional faces ( 1 = j < d – 1 ) , and f . – 1 vertices , for n – d + i – 2 ~ = ~ o ( ~ ) ( i ) ‘io ( d - ~ + l ) ( n - d : i - 2 ) This follows from the so - called upper bound theorem [ Brondsted 19831 . The numbers ~ are O ( n Fdlzl ) for O < j s d – 1 . As for the facets of a convex polyhe - dron , the power cells are convex but pos - sibly unbounded polyhedra . Not every half - space within a given set needs to contribute to a facet , so power cells may be empty or degenerate . d + 1 or more hyperplanes in R d + 1 intersect in a com - mon point ( unless parallelism occurs ) , so at least d + 1 power cells meet at each vertex of PD ( S ) . In particular , there are no vertices if the cardinality n of S does not exceed d . These and many other properties of PD ( S ) can be read off con - veniently from its ( d + 1 ) - dimensional embedding , 3 . 1 . 2 Hyperplane Arrangements In order to exploit the situation fully , we turn our attention to diagrams of higher order [ Edelsbrunner 1987 ] ; Aurenhammer [ 1987a ] . To this end , the concept of a power cell is generalized to more than one site , Let T be a subset of k sites in S . The power cell of T is defined as cell ( T ) = o h ( p , q ) . PGT , q = S – T The complex of all ( nonempty ) power cells arising from the ( ) ~ subsets of S with fixed cardinality k . is known as the order - k power diagram of S , k - PD ( S ) . Clearly 1 - PD ( S ) = PD ( S ) holds . Note that k - PD ( S ) is just the order - k Voronoi diagram of S provided all sites in S are equally weighted . ( n – 1 ) - PD ( S ) is also called the furthest site power diagram of s . Now let Z denote the intersection of the half - spaces below the hyperplanes T ( p ) for all p e T and above the hyper - planes x - ( q ) for all q e S – T . Due to the foregoing reasoning , Z projects or - thogonally onto cell ( T ) in R‘ . This observation draws the connection between order - k power diagrams and so - called hyperplane arrangements . The lat - ter are cell complexes that arise from dissecting the space by a finite number of hyperplanes . Each cell in an arrange - ment is the intersection of some half - spaces below or above its defining n hy - perplanes . If we let a k - level consist of all cells lying below k and above n – k hy - perplanes , we can conclude that the k - level induced by { T ( p ) I p = S } projects to the cells of k – PD ( S ) for each k be - tween 1 and n – 1 . This shows that each arrangement in R‘ ~ 1 corresponds to a complete family of higher order power diagrams in R ~ and vice versa . The cor - respondence between order - 1 power dia - grams and convex polyhedral surfaces discussed earlier is a special case of this situation . Figure 33 depicts a cell ( left ) being the intersection of five upper and three lower half - spaces , that is , a three - level cell . Its orthogonal projection onto the xl xz - plane is an order - 3 power cell among eight sites ( right ) whose boundary is indicated by bold lines . Note that the power cell is ACM Computmg Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 Voronoi Diagrams * 383 e . “ l . . / “ . / - O“’’’’ & ’’’’ : + p ~ o” I i i i i ; i Figure 33 . Projecting an arrangement cell [ Aurenhammer 1987a ] . l carved into subcells by the furthest site power diagram of the three emphasized sites and by the power diagram of the remaining five sites . The correspondence to arrangements straightforwardly yields an upper bound on the overall size of all higher order power diagrams of a fixed set of n sites : the maximal number of faces of an ar - rangement of n hyperplanes in Rd + 1 . This number is precisely , = 2 : + 1 ( “ ) ( : ) d – ~ + 1 for faces of dimension j , which is in O ( n ~ + l ) for 0 = j < d + 1 [ Alexanderson and Wetzel 1978 ] . Edelsbrunner et al . [ 1986a ] developed an algorithm for con - structing such arrangements in 0 ( nd + 1 ) time . Consequently , the complete family of higher order power ( or Voronoi ) dia - grams of a given set of sites can be computed in optimal time and space . Edelsbrunner [ 1986 ] showed how to con - struct the k - level of an arrangement in R 3 , and thus a single order - k power ( or Voronoi ) diagram in the plane , at a cost of 0 ( 6 log n ) per edge . Recently , Mulmuley [ 19911 proposed a randomized algorithm for constructing levels of order 1 to k in d > 4 dimen - sions in worst - case optimal time . We state another interesting conse - quence . Let w’ ( p ) denote the image of reflection of the hyperplane T ( p ) through Rd . The cells in the k - level of { w’ ( p ) I p e S } correspond bijectively to the cells in the ( n – k ) - level of { r ( p ) I p c S } by re - versing “upper” and “lower” for their supporting half - spaces . Clearly , any two corresponding cells yield the same or - thogonal projection onto Rd . That is to say , they yield the same power cell that is simultaneously of order - k and order - ( n – k ) for fixed k . This shows that any order - k power diagram for n sites can be interpreted as some order - ( n – k ) power diagram . In particular , the furthest site power diagram of S is the order - 1 power diagram of some set of sites ( distinct from S , in general ) . We point out that this is not true for the subclass of classical Voronoi diagrams , as can be seen from the maximal size of their closest site and furthest site counterparts that differ even in R2 ; see the Introduction and Section 2 . 2 . 1 . Finally , let us mention a result on power cells in R2 . Let T c S and I T I = k . By definition , cell ( T ) is the intersec - tion of k ( n – k ) half planes and thus might have that many edges . On the other hand , cell ( T ) is the projection of a polyhedron in R3 that has at most n facets and thus only 0 ( n ) edges by ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 384 l Franz Aurenhammer Euler’s relation . It follows that cell ( Z’ ) has O ( n ) edges and can be constructed in 0 ( n log n ) time by intersecting n half - spaces of R3 . 3 . 1 . 3 Convex Hulls The convex hull of a finite point set is the intersection of all half - spaces con - taining this set . Next , we study the dual - ity of ( order - 1 ) power diagrams and convex hulls [ Aurenhammer 1987al . Duality is usually defined for con - vex polyhedra . Let Z and Z’ be two convex polyhedra in R‘ + 1 . Z and Z’ are said to be dual if there is a bijective mapping ~ between the j - dimensional faces of Z and the ( d – j ) - dimensional faces of Z’ such that f G g , for any two faces f and g of Z if and only if ~ ( g ) ~ 4 ( f ) . Since power diagrams in Rd are projections of convex polyhedral surfaces in Rd + 1 , the notion of duality carries over in a natural manner . We now consider , for each site p E S with weight W ( p ) , a point in Rd + 1 : ( P A ( p ) = ) PTP – W ( P ) From the formula expressing the hyper - plane T ( p ) it can be seen that A ( p ) and T ( p ) are related via polarity with re - spect to the paraboloid of revolution . A ( p ) is the pole of m ( p ) and x ( p ) is the polar hyperplane of A ( p ) . If T ( p ) happens to intersect the paraboloid , then polarity has the geometric interpretation dis - played in Figure 34 . The hyperplanes touching the paraboloid at its points of intersection with 7 ( p ) all concur at A ( p ) . Recall that the intersection , Z , of the half - spaces above ~ ( p ) , for all p e S , pro - jects to PD ( S ) . Take an arbitrary j - dimensional face of Z that lies in the intersection of , say , T ( pi ) , . . , 7r ( pn ) , m 2 d — ~ “ + 1 . That is , there exists some point on these but below all other hyper - planes defined by S . Since polarity pre - serves the relative position between points and hyperplanes , there is a hyper - plane with A ( pl ) , . . . . A ( p ~ ) on it and A ( q ) above it , for all remaining sites \ / Figure 34 . Polarity between points and lines . q ~ s . This , however , means that ‘ ( PI ) , . . . , ~ ( P ~ ) span a ( d – j ) - dimensional face of the 10 wer part of the convex hull of the point - set { A ( p ) I p e S } . This lower part consists of all boundary faces of the hull that are visible from the point on the xd + ~ - axis at – co . In other words , we have shown the duality of Z , and thus of PD ( S ) , to that lower convex hull part . By the same reasoning , the duality of the furthest site power diagram of S and the upper part of the convex hull of { A ( p ) I p e S } can be established . This reveals another interesting link between closest site and furthest site power dia - grams and , particularly , classical Voronoi diagrams . Most important , these dia - grams become constructible in general dimensions d via convex - hull algo - rithms . Running times of 0 ( n log n ) for d = 2 and of 0 ( nrdi21 ) for odd d are achieved , both of which are worst - case optimal ; see Preparata and Hong [ 19771 and Seidel [ 1981 ] , respectively . For even d > 4 , these diagrams can be computed at logarithmic time per face [ Seidel 1986 ] . By projecting down the edges of the lower and upper part of the convex hull that arises from a Voronoi diagram , one obtains the closest site and furthest site Delaunay triangulation , respectively . In such a triangulation , each edge is orthog - onal to its dual facet . Conversely , the existence of some set of sites allowing a ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 Voronoi Diagrams 9 385 triangulation whose edges are orthogo - nal to the facets of a given cell complex in R ~ is a necessary and sufficient condi - tion for that cell complex to be a power diagram or , equivalently , to be the pro - jection of a convex polyhedral surface [ Aurenhammer 1987b , 1987cI . If the given cell complex is simple ( i . e . , exactly d + 1 cells meet at each vertex ) , a projec - tion surface can be reconstructed , if it exists , in time proportional to the num - ber of facets of that cell complex . It is well known that such a surface always exists except for d = 2 . This implies that any simple complex of n cells in d > 3 dimensions , which might have a large number of lower dimensional faces , can be specified by storing only n half - spaces of Rd ~ ~ . Surprisingly , even higher order power diagrams are dual to some convex hull in Rd + 1 [ Aurenhammer 1990a ] . For any subset T of S with k sites let A ( T ) denote the point in Rd + 1 whose ortho - gonal projection onto Rd and whose ( d + l ) S’ coordinate are ~ p and ~ ’ [ pup - W ( P ) ] , PET respectively . This definition conforms to the case k = 1 since A ( T ) = A ( p ) when T = { p ] . Using arguments similar as for k = 1 , one may verify that the lower part of the convex hull of the point - set Sk = { A ( T ) l TcS , l Tl = k } is dual to k - PD ( S ) . As one corollary , that very lower part has to be dual to the intersection of some corresponding upper half - spaces and hence to an order - 1 power diagram . To be more precise , k - PD ( S ) coincides with PD ( S & ) , for S & being the ( accordingly weighted ) orthogonal projec - tion of S’h onto R‘ . This implies that the class of power diagrams is closed under order - k modification— another result that is not true for the more restrictive class of classical Voronoi diagrams . From the algorithmic viewpoint , k - PD ( S ) becomes constructible via convex hull algo - rithms . For example , the planar Voronoi diagram of order - k can be obtained from its order - ( k – 1 ) predecessor in O ( kn log n ) time by simply computing a convex hull in R 3 . Insertions and dele - tions of sites in an order - k Voronoi dia - gram also amount to computing certain convex hulls ; these operations even can be handled on - line in an efficient manner [ Aurenhammer and Schwarzkopf 19911 . 3 . 1 . 4 k - Sets Let Q be a set of n points in Rd + l . A k - set of Q is a subset of k points of Q that can be separated from the remain - ing n – k points by some hyperplane of Rd + 1 . The discussion in the foregoing section reveals a correspondence between k - sets and order - k power diagrams . By polarity , points in Q can be trans - formed into hyperplanes ; each point q e Q bijectively corresponds to a weighted site p in R d such that A ( p ) = ~ and thus to the hyperplane T ( p ) in R + 1 . Now , let M be a k - set of Q , and consider a hyper - plane h that separates M from Q – M . Without loss of generality , M lies below h . Equivalently , the pole of h lies below all polar hyperplanes of the points in M and above all polar hyperplanes of the points in Q – M . Hence the intersection of the corresponding lower and upper half - spaces of R ‘ + ~ bounded by these polar hyperplanes is nonempty . This in - tersection , being a cell in the k - level of a hyperplane arrangement , projects to a cell of the order - k power diagram of a set of weighted sites , { p e Rd I A ( p ) c Q } . We have obtained a one - to - one corre - spondence between k - sets in R d + 1 and power cells in R‘ . This allows us to ap - ply known results on the number of k - sets to the analysis of the size of order - k power diagrams . Let fd ( k , n ) denote the maxi - mum number of k - sets of any set of n points in Rd . Known asymptotic values of this function are fz ( k , n ) = Q ( n log k ) and fz ( k , n ) = 0 ( n ~ ) [ Edelsbrurmer and Welzl 1985 ] , f ~ ( k , n ) = Q ( nk log k ) and fa ( k , n ) = 0 ( ns13 log5 / 3 n ) [ Edelsbrunner et al . 1986 ; Aronov et al . 1990 , respectively ] . Not surprisingly , a ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 386 l Franz Aurenhammer better understood quantity is Chazelle and Preparata [ 1986 ] showed g ~ ( k , n ) = O ( nk5 ) and Clarkson [ 19871 showed g ~ ( k , n ) = O ( nl + ’k2 ) , for an ~ e > 0 . Note that g ~ ( n – 1 , n ) = O ( n ) according to the maximum number of cells of a hyperplane arrangement in Rd . Recently , Clarkson and Schor [ 1989 ] succeeded in proving g ~ ( k , n ) = @ ( n L ~ / zJ k FW21 ) as n / k ~ m for fixed d . Determining exact or at least asymp - totically tight bounds on ~ d ( k , n ) still remains an important open problem . 3 . 1 . 5 Related Diagrams The central role of power diagrams within the context of Voronoi diagrams becomes even more apparent by the observations described below [ Aurenhammer and Imai 1988 ] . Let p , q , and r denote three weighted sites . For the three chordales they define , chor ( p , q ) fl chor ( q , r ) C chor ( p , r ) necessarily holds . It is not dif - ficult to see that this condition is also sufficient for three hyperplanes to be the chordales defined by three sites if we keep in mind the relationship between chordales in R d and intersections of hy - d + I On the other hand , perplanes in R . the condition is trivially fulfilled by the separators for any Voronoi diagram with polyhedral regions since the regions would not form a cell complex otherwise . We thus conclude that any Voronoi dia - gram whose separators are hyperplanes is a power diagram . This result applies to diagrams defined by the general quadratic - form distance Q ( x , p ) = ( ~ - p ) % ( x - p ) - ZO ( p ) , with M a nonsingular and symmetric ( d x d ) - matrix and thus to many partic - ular distance functions considered in the literature . Note that Q equals the power function if M is the identity matrix . One is tempted to believe that power diagrams are related solely to objects in higher dimensions . Below we will show that a certain rather general type of Voronoi diagram in Rd - 1 can be embed - ded into a power dia end we identify RFy % h ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ sub ; pace Xd = O of R‘ . Let p be some point site in R‘ - 1 and consider an arbi - trary distance function f ( x , p ) for p . For some strictly increasing function F on R , we define the cone of p with respect to F as cone ~ ( p ) —— { ( : @ Rd - ’ , xd = F ( f ( x , p ) ) } . A Voronoi diagram for point sites in R‘ - 1 under the distance function f is termed transformable if there exists an F that forces the affine hull , U ( p , q ) , of cone ~ ( p ) n cone ~ ( q ) to be a hyperplane in R d for any distinct sites p and q . Transformable diagrams represent pro - jected sections of power diagrams in R‘ . A point x c Rd - ~ satisfies f ( x , p ) < f ( X , q ) if and only if its projection , x’ , onto cone ~ ( p ) lies in a fixed ( open ) half - space , h ( p , q ) , bounded by Q ( P , q ) . As a consequence , x belongs to p’s region exactly if x’ ~ z = ( 1 ~ ( P , ~ ) , qes – { p } for S being the underlying set of sites in Rd - 1 . But the d - dimensional polyhedron Z is a power cell since a ( p , q ) n cr ( q , r ) c a ( p , r ) holds so that these affine hulls can be interpreted as chordales . In con - clusion , the boundary of p’s region is the orthogonal projection onto Rd - 1 of cone ~ ( p ) intersected with a power cell in Rd . Transformable Voronoi diagrams occur for the additively weighted distance , a ( x , p ) = ~ ( x , p ) – w ( p ) with F ( a ) = a , and the multiplicatively weighted dis - tance , 6 ( X , p ) m ( x , p ) = with F ( m ) = 2 m2 . w ( p ) ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 Voronoi Diagrams 0 387 _ . - — — - — — - - . . A “i i - - - - _ _ _ _ — . y - — —B J - f - \ N , ~ , ——— — - ——— — ‘ + \ / / “q \ , \ v / v \ Figure 35 . Cones for two distance functions . The former gives rise to hyperbolically bounded and star - shaped regions ( the Johnson - Mehl model , Figure 6 ) , whereas the latter induces spherically bounded regions ( the Apollonius model , Fig - ure 12 ) . Its regions are disconnected , in general , which already reflects the major complexity of the latter type . Figure 35 displays cones for the addi - tively weighted distance ( above ) and the multiplicatively weighted distance ( be - low ) . They are cones of revolution in the former case—intersecting in a hyper - bola that projects down to a hyperbolic separator— and paraboloids of revolution in the latter case— intersecting in an el - lipsis that projects down to a circular separator . In both cases , the affine hull of cone intersections is a plane . Upper bounds on the size of both types of diagram in d dimensions can be de - rived from the maximum size of a power diagram in R ~ + 1 . Concerning the algo - rithmic aspects of this relationship , the only known algorithms for constructing these diagrams in d > 3 dimensions are obtained . The Apollonius model in the plane can be computed in 0 ( n2 ) time and ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 388 e Franz Aurenhammer space , which is worst - case optimal . We mention that the notion of embeddability generalizes nicely to order k . 3 . 1 . 6 Upper Envelopes Let fl , . . . , f , be piecewise linear d - variate functions on Rd . In the follow - ing , we will not distinguish between a function on Rd and its graph in Rd + 1 . Consider the pointwise maximum , U , of these functions : u ( x ) = mm , f , ( x ) . U is called the upper envelope Of f , , . . . > L . We have already observed that certain upper envelopes are related to power diagrams . For any set S of weighted sites in R‘ , the upper envelope of the hyperplanes T ( p ) , p ~ S , projects to PD ( S ) . Below we briefly consider two types of Voronoi diagrams where this re - lationship generalizes particularly well . Let S be a set of n point sites in the plane , and consider a partition of S into subsets Cl , . . . . C ~ called clusters . The Hausdorff distance of a point x to the cluster C , is defined as h is also called the complete linkage dis - tance ; compare Section 2 . 5 . 1 . Each clus - ter C , may be associated with a convex polyhedral surface cap ( C , ) in R3 , being the boundary of the polyhedron that comes from intersecting the half - spaces below T ( p ) for all p e C , . Easy argu - ments show the following . For any point x in the plane , h ( x , C , ) < h ( x , C ~ ) if and only if the vertical line through x inter - sects cap ( Ci ) in a point lying above cap ( C7 ) . This implies that the upper en - velope of cap ( C , ) , . . . , cap ( CJ projects to the Voronoi diagram induced by cl , . . . , Ct and h . For an illustration of the Voronoi diagram for two - site clusters see Figure 30 . 13 To obtain another example , assume that visibility of the sites is constrained 13Observe that the upper envelope of cap ( T ) , for all subsets 2’ of k sites of S , consists of faces of the k - level of { T ( p ) I p c S } and thus projects to the order - k Voronoi diagram of S . to a window , W , a segment on a line avoiding the convex hull of S . A site p G S and a point x are called visible if the line segment joining x and p inter - sects W . The peeper’s Voronoi diagram of S and W assigns each point in the plane to the region of the closest site visible from it . See Figure 36 where the window is shown between two bold line segments . The diagram is composed of perpendicular bisectors of sites ( dashed ) and of rays through sites and window endpoints ( solid ) . Each site p may be associated with an unbounded convex polygon plate ( p ) in R3 , being the projection onto T ( p ) of the set of all points visible from p . Again it is easy to see that a point x falls into the region of a site p just if the vertical line through x intersects plate ( p ) in a point that lies above plate ( q ) for all q e S – { p } . We conclude that the upper enve - lope of plate ( p ) , p e S , projects to the peeper’s Voronoi diagram of S . Upper envelopes of piecewise linear functions on R2 are well - studied geomet - ric objects . Path and Sharir [ 1989 ] showed that they can attain a size of @ ( n2a ( n ) ) , where n is the total number of triangles needed in partitioning the linear pieces of these functions and where a denotes the inverse of Ackermann’s function . Construction algorithms exist that run in time proportional to their worst - case size ; see Edelsbrunner et al . [ 19891 who also give a lower bound of fl ( n2 ) on the size of a cluster Voronoi diagram , Re - cent results on upper envelopes by Huttenlocher et al . [ 1991 ] imply that the diagram for t clusters with a total of n sites has a size of O ( tna ( tn ) ) . The upper envelope arising from the peeper’s Voronoi diagram has a worst case size of 0 ( n2 ) [ Aurenhammer and Stockl 1988 ] . Note that the superlinear size of a diagram implies the existence of disconnected regions . 3 . 2 Topology of Planar Diagrams : Divide - and - Conquer Construction and Its Variants By far not all types of Voronoi diagrams considered in the literature can be ACM Computmg Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 Voronoi Diagrams l 389 - - . - \ \ \ \ \ \ 9 - - - - Pa — . - 0 l - ’ \ a \ - - — - —— . ——— - P b - - . , . . - - . _ ~ Figure 36 . Peeper’s Voronoi diagram . brought into connection with geometric objects having nice algorithmic proper - ties , like convex hulls or hyperplane ar - rangements . So there is need for finding features common to such “ungeometric” diagrams . We do this by extracting topo - logical properties , being guided by their relevance to the divide - and - conquer con - struction of Voronoi diagrams . Attention is restricted to the plane as the instance of most applications and easiest analysis . The concept of diagram we are inter - ested in here may be characterized as follows . The n sites are points in R2 . The distance function varies by different shapes of its “circles” that may depend on local properties of R2 . It thus may vary for the individual sites . 3 . 2 . 1 Convex Distance Functions An important type fitting into the con - cept above is generated by the convex distance function or the Minkowski dis - tance [ Chew and Drysdale 1985 ] . Let C denote the boundary of some compact and convex subset of R2 with the origin o in its interior . The distance with respect to C of o to some point x e R2 is given by 6 ( X , o ) dc ( x , O ) = fs ( x’ , o ) for x’ being the point of intersection of C and the ray from o to x . Clearly dc can be defined with respect to any site q of a given set S by translating C so that q occupies the former position of o , Ob - serve that dc ( x , q ) depends on the eu - clidean distance ti ( x , q ) as well as on the direction of the ray from q to x . Convex distance functions include , among others , the general LP - metric ~ p ( ~ , ~ ) = vlql - x , lp + lqz - xglp , ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 390 “ Franz Aurenhammer with ( ) 91 ( ) xl ‘ = 92 and x = X2 ‘ whose most important instances are for p = 1 ( the Manhattan metric ; C is a square rotated by 450 ) , p = 2 ( the eu - clidean distance ; C is a circle ) , and p = co ( the Maximum metric ; C is an axis - parallel square ) . Note that dc is a met - ric only if C is point - symmetric with respect to q since dc ( q , r ) might differ from dc ( r , q ) otherwise . However , the triangle inequality dc ( q , r ) + d ~ ( r , s ) ~ dc ( q , s ) can easily be shown to hold even if C is not point - symmetric . Let us now investigate the Voronoi di - agram defined by dc and a set S of n sites in R2 . From the classical type we adopt the notions of separator sep ( q , r ) of q and r , dominance dom ( q , r ) of q over r , and region reg ( q ) of q ; compare the Introduction . Clearly sep ( q , r ) need not be a straight line as is the case for euclidean distance . An even more un - pleasant phenomenon is that sep ( q , r ) fails to be one dimensional in general . To remedy this shortcoming , the notions above may be redefined slightly by refer - ring to the lexicographical order ( sym - bolized by < ) of the sites in S [ Klein and Wood 19881 . The dominance of q over r is redefked as Dom ( q , r ) { dom ( q , r ) – sep ( q , r ) , ifq < r —— dom ( q , r ) , otherwise . The new separator , Sep ( q , r ) , is the in - tersection of the boundaries of Dom ( q , r ) and Dom ( r , q ) , which is obviously one - dimensional . Figure 37 shows a two - dimensional separator in the L1 - metric ( left ) and its redefined version ( right ) . For a Voronoi diagram in the L1 - metric , see Figure 3 . The region of a site q now can be rewritten as Reg ( q ) = , e ~ ~ { , } Dom ( q , r ) . J * q * r Figure 37 . Redefining a separator . That is , each point in R2 belongs to the region of the lexicographically least site among its closest sites in S . This ensures that the interiors of the regions cover the plane up to a set of Lebesgue measure zero . Defined in this way , the Voronoi dia - gram , VC ( S ) , for a convex distance func - tion dc has the nice property that its regions are star shaped ; Reg ( q ) contains the straight - line segment between q and x for each x e Reg ( q ) , To prove this by contradiction , assume the existence of a point y on this segment with dc ( y , q ) > dc ( q , r ) , for r ~ S – { q } . This implies dc ( x , q ) = dc ( x , y ) + dc ( y , q ) > dc ( x , y ) + dc ( y , r ) . By the triangle inequality , the latter sum is greater than or equal to dc ( x , r ) so that dc ( x , q ) > dc ( x , r ) , that is , x # Reg ( q ) , follows . The star shapedness of the regions im - plies their simple connectedness . Clearly , regions cannot vanish since q ~ Reg ( q ) holds for all q c S . So VC ( 5’ ) can be viewed as a planar graph with exactly n regions . Since vertex degrees are at least three , there are 0 ( n ) edges and vertices . We conclude a linear bound on the size of Vc ( s ) . 3 . 2 . 2 Divide - and - Conquer Construction Our next aim is to show that Voronoi diagrams for convex distance functions can be constructed efficiently by a diuide - and - conquer algorithm . Divide and conquer splits the problem at hand into two smaller subproblems , computes their solutions recursively ( unless they ACM Computing Surveys , Vol 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 Voronoi Diagrams “ 391 are very small and can be solved by trivial methods ) , and finally combines the partial solutions to the global one . The Vc type of diagram is well suited to at - tack by this strategy . The underlying set S of sites is partitioned into two subsets S’l and S2 of nearly equal cardinal - ity . VC ( SI ) and VC ( S2 ) are computed recursively and are then merged to Vc ( s ) . The merge step deserves the main at - tention since it actually constructs the diagram . We will discuss this process in some detail and under the simplifying but computationally unrestrictive as - sumption that S1 and S2 are separable by a vertical line . Since VC ( SI ) as well as VC ( S . J defines a partition of R2 , any point x ~ R2 falls into the region Regl ( q ) of VC ( SI ) for some site q e S1 and into the region Reg2 ( r ) of VC ( S2 ) for some site rs S2 . Now observe that x e Reg ( q ) of VC ( S ) if dc ( x , q ) < CZc ( x , r ) , and x c Reg ( r ) of VC ( S ) otherwise . So we have to cut off some part from Regl ( q ) and from Reg2 ( r ) by means of Sep ( q , r ) in order to obtain Reg ( q ) and Reg ( r ) . Carrying out this task for all relevant pairs of sites constitutes the merge process . The union of the newly integrated pieces of separa - tors will be called the merge chain , M ( Sl , S2 ) . The efficiency of an implementation of the merge process critically depends on the topological properties of the merge chain . We first show that M ( SI , S2 ) be - haves well if the euclidean distance 8 is taken for dc [ Shames and Hoey 1975 ] . As a matter of fact , each horizontal line intersects M ( SI , S2 ) in exactly one point in this case , that is to say , M ( SI , S2 ) is ( vertically ) monotone . M ( SI , S2 ) is a polygonal line composed of edges of the classical diagram V ( S ) that are portions of perpendicular bisectors of sites in S1 and S2 , respectively . Figure 17 gives an illustration . If there were a horizontal line intersecting the merge chain in two or more points , some site q l SI would be forced to have a larger xl - coordinate than a site r ~ S2 . This contradicts the as - sumption that S’l and S2 are separable by a vertical line ; compare Figure 38 . \ \ \ + e \ \ - - - - - - “q e e r III Figure 38 . Impossible merge chain The monotonicity of M ( SI , S2 ) implies its connectedness and unfoundedness . Hence the merge chain may be con - structed edge by edge , starting with an unbounded one . As is mentioned in the Introduction , unbounded edges separate sites on the convex hull of S . So it suf - fices to determine a site in S1 and a site in S2 that are neighbors on the boundary of the convex hull of S . This can be accomplished in 0 ( n ) time by finding a line tangent to the convex hulls of re - spective S1 and S2 . Each further edge of M ( SI , S2 ) is found by tracing the bound - aries of the current regions of V ( SI ) and V ( S2 ) in an appropriate direction until they intersect the actual separator . Easy counting arguments show that only 0 ( n ) edges are processed in total : Each edge traced is either discarded or shortened to a new edge of V ( S ) . This implies an overall runtime of 0 ( n ) for the merge process . By the recurrence relation l“ ( n ) = 2T ( n / 2 ) + O ( n ) that results from using divide and conquer , the time complexity T ( n ) for computing a classical Voronoi diagram is 0 ( n log n ) . Let us now come back to the distance dc for general convex shapes C [ Chew and Drysdale 1985 ] . As in the euclidean case , M ( SI , S2 ) is composed of those parts of the boundaries of regions of VC ( S ) that separate sites in S1 from sites in S2 . Thus M ( SI , S2 ) is one dimensional . Po - tentially , this merge chain may consist of cyclic and acyclic ( but then necessarily unbounded ) topological curves in R2 . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 392 * Franz Aurenhammer Examples show that M ( SI , SQ ) is in fact disconnected in general . Its connected components all , however , are acyclic and thus unbounded . Let us prove that there are no cycles by assuming the existence of some cycle M and deducing a contra - diction . Without loss of generality , M encircles a subset T of sites in SI . Clearly , then M does not encircle any site in Sz . Furthermore , there exists a leftmost point x e M with x e Sep ( r , s ) for some r , s e Sz . Since the regions of VC ( S ) are star shaped , the three open line segments from x to r , s , and some q e T , respectively , do not intersect M . Thus , as r and s lie to the right of q , x has to lie to the left of q . This , however , contradicts the convexity of the underly - ing shape . C encircles x and passes through q , r , and s since the last three points are equidistant from x with re - spect to dc . Figure 39 illustrates this situation ; M and C are shown bold and dashed , respectively . In order to construct the acyclic merge chain M ( S1 , S2 ) , one needs to detect some unbounded edge of each of its connected components . The previously described procedure of tracing boundaries of re - gions may then be applied . Unfortu - nately , the convex - hull method that works successfully in the euclidean case fails to be correct for dc . To get an alter - native method , we observe that each un - bounded edge has to be contained in the intersection of two unbounded regions of VC ( SI ) and VC ( S2 ) , respectively . By a circular scan through these regions , each relevant pair Regl ( q ) and Regz ( r ) can be found and intersected with Sep ( q , r ) in a total of 0 ( n ) time . If Regl ( q ) fl Regz ( r ) n Sep ( q , r ) extends to infinity , then this edge is taken as the starting edge for a connected component of M ( SI , S2 ) . The linear - time behavior of the merge process thus can be maintained for gen - eral convex distance functions dc . Con - sequently , VC ( S ) requires O ( n log n ) time and 0 ( n ) space for construction . Of course , the complexity analysis is based on the assumption that dc is computa - tionally simple . That is , dc ( q , x ) can be calculated in O ( 1 ) time for all q e S and / / / / 0 , / I \ x \ \ \ \ \ , Figure 39 . Cycles do not occur . x ~ R2 , and , in addition , its separators can be computed and intersected in 0 ( 1 ) time . This may not be the case for complex shapes C , however . 3 . 2 . 3 Nice Metrics We have seen that divide and conquer is a powerful approach to the construction of generalized Voronoi diagrams . It also applies well to sites more general than points ; see Section 1 . 3 . 3 . We do not pur - sue these modifications here , however , since they do not fit into the present concept of a diagram . Instead , we at - tempt to characterize metrics in Rz that preserve the two main properties of a Voronoi diagram exploited in the pre - ceding discussion [ Klein 1989 ; Klein and Wood 1988 ] : the connectedness of regions ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 Voronoi Diagrams “ 393 that implies an 0 ( n ) size and the ab - sence of cycles in the merge curve that allows an 0 ( n log n ) time construction . Let d be any metric in R2 that in - duces the euclidean topology . A curve ~ in R2 is termed d - straight if , for any three consecutive points x , y , z on - y , the equality d ( x , y ) + d ( ~ , Z ) = d ( X , Z ) holds . Clearly & straight curves are straight - line segments , for ~ being the euclidean metric . By arguments similar to that used for convex distance functions ( namely using the triangle inequality ) , it can be verified that any Voronoi region Reg ( p ) for d is d - star - shaped : y c Reg ( p ) holds for the d - straight curve - y from p to any x e Reg ( p ) . The d - star - shapedness of Reg ( p ) does not necessarily imply its connectedness since d - straight curves do not always exist . If , however , for any two points x , z e R2 there is some y distinct from x , z with d ( x , y ) + d ( y , z ) = d ( x , z ) , then the existence of - y is guar - anteed . Hence the Voronoi regions under those metrics are connected . Posing an additional restriction on the metric d makes the Voronoi diagram even more well behaved : Assume that , for any point m e R2 and for any positive number r , the generalized disk D = { xc R21d ( x , m ) < r } with center m and radius r under the metric d is a simply connected set . For fixed r , the shape of D may vary with the position of m provided D remains simply connected . Symmetric convex dis - tance functions dc ( i . e . , with point - symmetric shape C ) constitute a special case of translation - invariant disks . And , indeed , the proof that merge chains are acyclic can be extended from convex dis - tance functions to d . To underline the usefulness of this con - cept , let us give some examples for d . Let K be any point in R2 . The Moscow met - ric with respect to K induces d - straight curves composed of pieces straight to - ward K or radially around K of minimal total euclidean length . Figure 40 depicts a d - straight curve ( dashed ) between two points x and y and a Voronoi diagram ( solid ) for eight sites in this metric . For the geodesic distance among polygonal obstacles , d - straight curves are the mini - mum euclidean length connections avoid - ing any edge of the polygons ( compare Figure 26 ) . Also of interest are composite metrics where , for instance , distances are measured in the L1 - metric in some por - tion of R2 and in the L2 - ( i . e . , euclidean ) metric in the complement . Here , d - straight curves are composed of those in LI and L2 such that curve length is min - imized . In all three examples , the respec - tive disks are simply connected . As a consequence , the resulting Voronoi dia - grams - except for the geodesic distance function that fails to be computationally simple— can be computed in optimal 0 ( n log n ) time and 0 ( n ) space by divide and conquer . Thereby , the underlying set of point sites has to be divided into sub - sets by curves whose intersections with any disk for d is either connected or empty . Consult Klein [ 1989 ] for further details . We pose it as an open question to find equivalent characterizations for metrics whose Voronoi diagrams are constructible by divide and conquer in optimal time . 3 . 3 Deformation of the Voronoi Diagram : Plane - Sweep Technique The variety of techniques that can be used for constructing Voronoi diagrams is possibly as fascinating as the diagrams themselves . The construction of the classical planar Voronoi diagram by means of divide and conquer or via three - dimensional convex hulls are well - investigated algorithmic problems . Although the achieved complexity bounds are worst - case optimal , researchers con - tinued considering alternative methods of construction . Aside from the incre - mental insertion strategy described in Sections 1 . 3 . 1 and 1 . 3 . 2 , the plane - sweep technique to be discussed now stands out by its conceptual and computational sim - plicity . It extends nicely to various generalized types of Voronoi diagrams . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 394 l Franz Aurenhammer e ‘ ~ e @ ‘ ) / / Figure 40 . Voronoi diagram in the Moscow metric [ Klein 1989 ] . 3 . 3 . 1 Deformation Let S denote a set of n point sites in R2 and let V ( S ) be their Voronoi diagram . As we will see , there are serious reasons for refraining from a direct construction of V ( S ) via the plane - sweep technique . Therefore , first we introduce a continu - ous deformation of V ( S ) [ Fortune 19871 . Then , we describe the plane - sweep tech - nique and its use for computing this deformation . To explain the mechanism of deforma - tion , the euclidean distance function with respect to the sites is interpreted in the following way . With each site p G S , a cone cone ( p ) = { ( X , Z ) GR31X ~ R2 , Z = 8 ( X , p ) } is associated . Cone ( p ) is an upwardly di - rected cone in R 3 with vertical axis of revolution , with apex p , and with an interior angle of m / 2 . 14 Cones may be viewed as bivariate functions on R2 . We define the lower envelope of { cone ( p ) I 14 Note that the definition of cone ( p ) agrees with that of coneF ( p ) used for transformable Voronoi diagrams in Section 3 . 1 . 5 ; F is the identity function . p c S } as the pointwise minimum of these functions or , equivalently , as the surface composed of that portion of each cone that lies below all other cones . From the definition of cone ( p ) it is evident that this lower envelope projects vertically to V ( S ) onto R2 . For our purposes it is preferable to project the envelope onto R2 in a differ - ent way , namely under an angle of T / 4 in positive xz - direction . This already gives the desired deformation V * ( S ) of V ( S ) . To be more precise , the deforma - tion * maps each point x e reg ( p ) , say ( ) xl ( xl x = X2 ‘ into x * = ) x2 + a ( x , p ) “ Let us study what happens in this pro - cess . Clearly , sites are invariant under * . Each separator sep ( p , q ) is deformed into a hyperbola with bottommost point p if p is below q and bottommost point q , otherwise . ( This hyperbola degenerates to a vertical half line if p and q have the same xz - coordinate . ) Consequently , the deformed region reg * ( p ) of p is the in - tersection of hyperbolically bounded half planes of R2 . Reference to the upper en - velope model shows that * preserves the topological properties of a Voronoi dia - gram . For instance , the interiors of the ACM Computing Surveys , Vol 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 \ I + ’ \ \ \ , f . , . * , . ) , . ’ . . . . , / ” , / - - - . . - . * . ‘ . * . . ‘ . \ . . . ~ _ _ - — - Figure 41 . Deforming a Voronoi diagram [ Fortune 1987 ] . deformed regions cover R2 up to a set of Lebesgue measure zero . The algorithmic advantage of the deformation over the original is that the bottommost point of each region is its defining site . Excep - tions are regions for the bottommost sites in S that necessarily are unbounded . Figure 41 shows the Voronoi diagram of six sites ( left ) and its deformation ( right ) . 3 . 3 . 2 Plane - Sweep Technique The properties of V * ( S ) are now ex - ploited for its construction using the plane - sweep technique . Generally , this technique proceeds as follows . A horizon - tal line L is swept across the object to be constructed from below by keeping the invariant that the portion of the object below L is complete at any point in time . During the plane sweep , the cross section of L with this object has to be updated at certain critical points . We thus have to handle a one - dimensional dynamic prob - lem instead of a two - dimensional static problem . The applicability of the plane - sweep technique crucially depends on whether the “critical points” can be predicted . This is , for example , not the case if the Voronoi diagram of S is to be constructed in its original : A site p e S might lie above L while its region reg ( p ) already extends to below L . And it is important to know when regions begin to intersect L in order to integrate them properly into the cross section . We do not run into such problems when constructing V * ( S ) , however , since the bottommost point of a deformed region is just its defining site . Voronoi Diagrams “ 395 Initially , when L is below S , the por - tion of V * ( S ) below L contains no de - formed edge . Hence the cross section is empty . As L moves upward the cross section has to be updated , either by start - ing a new region when L hits a site or by starting a new edge when L hits a vertex that comes from intersecting two de - formed separators . The properties of V * ( S ) described above will ensure the correctness of this method . Efficiency is gained by organizing points of intersec - tion of L with edges of V * ( S ) ( the cross section ) in a dictionary ordered by xl - coordinates and by organizing sites and already detected vertices ( the critical points ) in a priority queue ordered by xz - coordinates . There are at most n + ( 2 n - 4 ) critical points since V ( S ) , and thus V * ( S ) , has at most 2 n – 4 vertices ; compare the Introduction . Further , there are at most n – 1 points in the cross section since L cannot intersect a region of V * ( S ) twice . An update causes only a constant number of operations on both data structures each of which cost O ( log n ) time . In conclusion , V * ( S ) is computed in 0 ( n log n ) time and 0 ( n ) space . It is clear that the original diagram V ( S ) can be derived from its deformation in 0 ( n ) time . Fortunately , this simple construction method extends to several generalized Voronoi diagrams [ Fortune 1987 ] . It nat - urally applies to the additively weighted type since the correspondence to lower envelopes extends provided cone ( p ) is translated downward by the weight W ( p ) for each site p . The intersection of cone ( p ) with R2 is then a circle with center p and radius w ( p ) , and indeed this type may be interpreted as the Voronoi diagram for circles under the euclidean distance function ( Johnson - Mehl model , Figures 6 and 35 ) . The time bound of 0 ( n log n ) and the space bound of 0 ( n ) clearly remains unaffected . An important type suited for a plane - sweep attack is the Voronoi diagram for noncrossing straight - line segments in R2 . The distance of a point x from a segment s is measured by min { ~ ( x , y ) I y e S } . The region of a segment can be deformed so ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 396 l Franz Aurenhammer as to have the lower endpoint of that segment as its bottommost point . Al - though details are more complicated , a reasonably simple 0 ( n log n ) time and 0 ( n ) space algorithm is obtained . In par - ticular , the medial axis of a simple poly - gon is constructible via plane - sweep : The edges of the polygon are taken as line segment sites , and the parts of the dia - gram outside of the polygon are ignored . Note that the separator of two segments consists of portions of straight lines and parabolas ; compare Figure 25 . 3 . 3 . 3 Constrained Voronoi Diagrams A further type of Voronoi diagram , and one to which the plane - sweep technique applies particularly nicely , is the classi - cal diagram constrained by a set of line segments [ Seidel 1988 ] . Let S denote a set of n point sites in R2 and let T be a set of m noncrossing line segments with their endpoints in S . Note that m = O ( n ) since the segments form a planar graph . We view the segments in T as obstacles and define the bounded distance between two points x , y ~ R2 as b ( x , y ) { a ( x , y ) , if ~ fl T . Ql , —— co , otherwise . The b - regions reg ~ ( ~ ) = { xe R21b ( x , p ) = b ( x , q ) , qeS } for all sites p l S define the bounded Voronoi diagram , V ~ ( S , T ) , of S and T . b - regions of endpoint sites are generally nonconvex ( near the corresponding ob - stacle ) , whereas b - regions of nonendpoint sites have to be convex . Both types of b - regions , and necessarily the former type , might have portions of obstacles rather than of perpendicular bisectors as edges . Clearly , V ~ ( S , T ) is a polygonal cell complex in R2 . The bounded Voronoi diagram is now modified to the constrained Voronoi diagram , VC ( S , T ) , of S and T by modi - fying , for each obstacle t ~ T , the b - regions it supports . Let t support ‘egb ( pl ) , . . . . reg ~ ( p ~ ) frOm the left and reg ~ ( ql ) , . . . , reg ~ ( ql ) from the right . The former b - regions are extended to the left of t as if only sites pl , . . . , ph were pres - ent , and the latter b - regions are ex - tended to the right of t as if only sites ql , . . > ql were present , Note that p , = qj has to occur twice , namely , for the end - points r and s of t . So reg ~ ( r ) and reg ~ ( s ) are extended to both sides of t . The c - re - gion , reg . ( p ) , of a site p e S is defined as the union of reg ~ ( p ) and its extensions with respect to all obstacles . c - regions clearly may overlap , so they fail to define a cell complex and the graph defined by their edges is nonplanar . See Figure 42 illustrating the bounded Voronoi dia - gram ( solid ) and the constrained Voronoi diagram ( solid or dashed or dotted ) for 11 sites and 2 obstacles ( bold ) . The significance of VC ( S , T ) is due to its dual structure , the constrained Delaunay triangulation of S and T . Intuitively , this triangulation is as simi - lar as possible to the classical Delaunay triangulation but integrates the obsta - cles in T , a structure with several practi - cal applications . Formally , it consists of the obstacle segments in T and , in addi - tion , of all edges between sites p , q e S that have b ( p , q ) < m and that lie on a circle enclosing only sites r ~ S with at least one of b ( r , p ) , b ( r , q ) = m . The in - terested reader may verify that two sites are connected in this triangulation if and only if their perpendicular bisector con - tributes an edge to the constrained Voronoi diagram . Note that the bisector of the endpoint sites of an obstacle may contribute two edges ( on either side of the obstacle ) rather than only one . Since S contains n sites , T contains m obsta - cles , and no triangulation of n points can have more than 3 n – 6 edges , we conclude that VC ( S , T ) realizes at most 3 n + m – 6 edges and thus has a size of 0 ( n ) . Figure 27 shows the constrained Delaunay triangulation that corresponds to the constrained Voronoi diagram in Figure 42 . Let us now come to the plane - sweep construction of VC ( S , T ) . To aid the ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No 3 , September 1991 I . . ” . / Figure 42 . Bounded gram [ Seidel 1988 ] . and constrained Voronoi dia - intuition , we think of VC ( S , T ) as being embedded into m + 1 parallel planes in the following way . One plane , call it Ho , contains the bounded Voronoi diagram V ~ ( S , T ) . Each of the m planes , 11 ~ , for the obstacle t e T contains the diagram , Vt , induced by the extensions with re - spect to t for all b - regions supported by t . Clearly , this embedding comprises the same information as is inherent in VC ( S , T ) . The idea now is to sweep HO and all Ht simultaneously by ( essen - tially one and the same ) horizontal line L in order to construct Vb ( S , T ) and all Vt , for tE T , separately . Again these m + 1 diagrams are not constructed di - rectly but via their deformations V : ( S , T ) and V ~ * that come from map - ping upward , within the respective plane , each point ~ inside an ( extension of a ) b - region reg ~ ( p ) by 8 ( x , p ) . Since an ex - tended b - region is just a classical Voronoi region , its deformation has the defining site as the bottommost point ( unless the site itself is bottommost for the respec - tive plane ) . In analogy to the classical Voronoi diagram , regions are created as sites are hit by L , and edges are created as L hits intersections of deformed bisec - tors . One must , however , take care that edges are assigned correctly to their em - bedding planes . When a deformed edge in Ho meets a deformed obstacle t * , then its construction is continued within Ht and vice versa . The number of critical Voronoi Diagrams l 397 points arising during the construction of V $ ( S , T ) and all V , * is proportional to the size of VC ( S , T ) and thus is 0 ( n ) . Using appropriate data structures sup - porting the m + 1 plane - sweeps allows us to implement the operations at each critical point in O ( log n ) time so an 0 ( n log n ) time and 0 ( n ) space algo - rithm for computing VC ( S , T ) is obtained . In particular , the constrained Delaunay triangulation of S and T is computable within these bounds since it can be ob - tained in O ( n ) time from VC ( S , T ) by exploiting duality . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This survey was completed while the author was at the Institut fur Informatik , Freie Universitat Berlin , Germany . Work was partially supported by the ESPRIT II Basic Research Program of the EC under contract no . 3075 ( project ALCOM ) . REFERENCES AGARWAL , P . K . , EDELSBRUNNER , H . , SCHWARZKOPF , O . , AND WELZL , E , 1990 . Euclidean minimum spanning trees and bicromatic closest pairs . In Proceedings of the 6th Annual ACM Sympo - sium on Computational Geometry , pp . 203 - 210 , AGGARWAL , A . , AND SURI , S . 1987 . Fast algo - rithms for computing the largest empty rectan - gle . In Proceedings of the 3rd Annual ACM Symposium on Computational Geometry , pp . 278 - 290 . AGGARWAL , A . , HANSEN , M . , ANDLEIGHTON , T . 1990 . Solving query retrieval problems by compact - ing Voronoi diagrams . In Proceedings of the 22nd Annual ACM Symposium on STOC , pp . 331 - 340 . AGGARWAL , A . , GUIBAS , L . J . , SAXE , J . , AND SHOR , P . W . 1989a . A linear time algorithm for computing the Voronoi diagram of a convex polygon . Discrete Comput . Geometry 4 , 591 - 604 . AGGARWAL , A . , IMAI , H . , KATOH , N . , AND SURL S . 1989b . Finding k points with minimum di - ameter and related problems . In Proceedings of the 5th Annual ACM Symposium on Computa - tional Geometry , pp . 283 - 291 . AGGARWAL , A . , CHAZELLE , 13 . , GUIBAS , L . J . , O’DUNLAING , C . , AND YAP , C . K . 1988 . Paral - lel computational geometry . Algorithmic 3 , 293 - 327 . AHUJA , N . 1982 . Dot pattern processing using Voronoi polygons as neighborhoods . IEEE Trans . Putt . Anal . Mach . Int . PAMI - 4 , 336 - 343 . AKL , S . 1983 A note on Euclidean matchings , tri - angulations , and spanning trees . J . Comb . Infi Syst . Sci . 8 , 169 - 174 . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 398 “ Franz Aurenhammer ALEXANDERSON , G . L . , AND WETZEL , J . E . 1978 . Simple partition of space . Math . Magazine 51 , 220 - 225 . ALT , H . , AND YAP , C . K . 1990 . Algorithmic as - pects of motion planning A tutorial ( part 2 ) . Algorithms Rev . 1 , 61 - 77 . AONUMA , H . , IMAI , H . , IMAI , K . , AND TOKUYAMA , T . 1990 . Maximin location ofconvexobjects ina polygon and related dynamic Voronoi dia - grams . In Proceedings of 6th Annual ACM Symposium on Computational Geometry . pp . 225 - 234 . ARNOLD , D . B . , AND MILNE , W . J . 1984 . The use of Voronoi tessellations in processing soil survey results . IEEE Comput . Graph . Appl . 4 , 22 - 30 . ARONOV , B . 1989 . On the geodesic Voronoi dia - gram of point sites in a simple polygon . Algo - rithmic 4 , 109 – 140 . ARONOV , B . , FORTUNE , S . , AND WILFONG , G . 1988 . The furthest - site geodesic Voronoi diagram . In Proceedings of the 4th Annual ACM Sympo - sium on Computational Geometry . pp . 229 - 240 . ARONOV , B . , CHAZELLE , B . , EDELSBRUNNER , H . , GUIBAS , L . J . , SHARIR , M . , AND WENGER , R . 1990 . Points and triangles in the plane and halving planes in space . In Proceedings of the 6th Annual ACM Symposium on Computa - tional Geometry . pp . 112 - 115 . ASANO , T . , AND ASANO , T . 1986 . Voronoi diagram for points in a simple polygon . In Perspectives in Computing 15 , D . S . Johnson , T . Nishizeki , A . Nozaki , H . S . Wilf , Eds . Academic Press , New York , pp . 51 - 64 . ASAFJO , T . , BHATTACHARYA , B . , KEIL , M . , AND YAO , F . 1988 . Clustering algorithms based on minimum and maximum spanning trees . In Proceedings of the 4th Annual ACM Sympo - sium on Computational Geometry , pp . 252 - 257 . ASH , P . F . , AND BOLKER , E . D . 1985 . Recognizing Dirichlet tessellations . Geometriae Dedicata 19 , 175 - 206 . ASH , P . F . , AND BOLKER , E . D . 1986 . Generalized Dirichlet tessellations . GeometrLae Dedicata 20 , 209 - 243 . ASH , P . F . , BOLKER , E . D . , CRAPO , H . , AND WHITE - LEY , W . 1988 . Convex polyhedra , Dirichlet tessellations , and spider webs . In Shaping Space : A Polyhedral Approach , M . Senechal and G . Fleck , Eds . Birkhauser , Boston , pp . 231 - 250 . AUGENBAUM , J . M . , AND PESKIN , C . S . 1985 . On the construction of the Voronoi mesh on a sphere . J . Comput . Phys . 59 , 177 - 192 . AUEEN ~ A ~ MER , F . 1987a . Power diagrams : Prop - erties , algorithms , and applications . SIAM J . Comput . 16 , 78 - 96 . AURENHAMMER , F . 1987b . A criterion for the aftine equivalence of cell complexes in R d and convex polyhedra in R d + ~ , Discrete Comput . Geometry 2 , 49 - 64 . AUREI - JHAIWER , F . 1987c . Recognizing polytopical cell complexes and constructing projection polyhedra . J . Symbolic Comput . 3 , 249 - 255 . AURENHAMMER , F . 1988a . Improved algorithms for discs and balls using power diagrams . J . Algo - rithms 9 , 151 - 161 . AURENEIAM ~ ER , F . 1988b . Linear combinations from power domains . Geometriae Dedicata 28 , 45 - 52 . AURENHAMMER , F . 1990a . A new duality result concerning Voronoi diagrams . Discrete Com - put . Geometry 5 , 243 - 254 . AURENHAMMER , F , 1990b . A relationship between Gale transforms and Voronoi diagrams . Dis - crete Appl . Math . 28 , 83 - 91 . AUEENIiA ~ ~ ER , F . , AND EDELSBRUNNER , H . 1984 . An optimal algorithm for constructing the weighted Voronoi diagram in the plane . Pattern Recognition 17 , 251 - 257 . AURENHAMMER , F . , AND IMAI , H . 1988 . Geometric relations among Voronoi diagrams . Geometriae Dedicata 27 , 65 - 75 . AUKENHAMMER , F . , AND SCHWARZKOPF , O . [ 1991 ] . A simple on - line randomized incremental algo - rithm for computing higher - order Voronoi dia - grams . In Proceedings of the 7th Annual ACM Symposium on Computational Geometry . pp . 142 - 151 . AURENHAMMER , F . , AND STOCKL , G . 1988 . On the peeper’s Voronoi diagram . Rep . 264 , IIG - TU Graz , Austria . AURENHANtMER , F . , STOCKL , G . , AND WELZL , E . 1991 . The post - ofllce problem for fuzzy point sets , Rep . 91 - 07 , FU Berlin , Germany . AVIS , D . , AND BHATTACHARYA , B . K . 1983 . Algo - rithms for computing d - dimensional Voronoi diagrams and their duals . Adu . Comput . Res . 1 , 159 - 180 . BABENKO , V . F . 1977 . On the optimal cubature formulae on certain classes of continuous func - tions . Analysw Math . 3 , 3 - 9 . BADDELEY , A . 1977 . A fourth note on recent re - search in geometrical probability . Adu . Appt . Probab . 9 , 824 - 860 . BALTSAN , A . , AND SHARIR , M . 1988 . On shortest paths between two convex polyhedra . J . ACM 35 , 267 - 287 . BENTLEY , J . L . , AND MAURER , H . A . 1979 . A note on Euclidean near neighboring searching in the plane . Infi Process . Lett . 8 , 133 - 136 . BENTLEY , J . L . , WEIDE , B . W . , AND YAO , A . C . 1980 . Optimal expected - time algorithms for closest - point problems . ACM Trans . Math . Sof % w . 6 , 563 - 580 . BERN , M . W . , EPPSTEIN , D . , AND GILBERT , J . 1990 . Provably good mesh generation . Manuscript , XEROX Palo Alto Research Center , Palo Alto , Calif . BESAG , J . 1974 . Spatial interaction and the statis - tical analysis of lattice systems . J . Roy . Statist . SOC . B 36 , 192 - 236 . ACM Computmg Surveys , Vol . 23 , No 3 , September 1991 Voronoi Diagrams l 399 BIEBERBACH , L . 1912 . fier die Bewegnngsgrup - pen der euldidischen Raume I , II . Math . Ann . 72 , 400 - 412 . BLUM , H . 1967 . A transformation for extracting new descriptors of shape . In Proceedings of the Symposium on Models for the Perception of Speech and Visual Form . Weiant Whaters - Dunn , Ed . MIT Press , Cambridge , Mass . , pp . 362 - 380 . BLUM , H . 1973 . Biological shape and visual sci - ence ( Part 1 ) . J . Theor . Biol . 38 , 205 - 287 . BOE + SONNAT , J . - D . 1988 . Shape recognition from planar cross sections . Comput . Vision Graph . and Image Process . 44 , 1 – 29 . BOISSONNAT , J . - D . , AND TEILLAUD , M . 1986 . A hi - erarchical representation of objects : The Delau - nay tree . In Proceedings of 2nd Annual ACM Symposium on Computational Geometry , pp . 260 - 268 . BooTs , B . N , 1979 . Weighting Thiessen polygons . Econ . Geography , 248 - 259 . BOOTS , B . N . 1986 . Voronoi ( Thiessen ) polygons . In CATit40G 45 , Geo Books , Norwich , Corm . BOWYER , A . 1981 . Computing Dirichlet tessella - tions . Computer J . 24 , 162 - 166 . BRASSEL , K , E . , AND REIF , D . 1979 . A procedure to generate Thiessen polygons . Geograph . Anal . 11 , 289 - 303 . BRISSON , E . 1989 . Representing geometric struc - turesin dimensions : Topology and order . In Proceedings of the 5th Annual ACM Sympo - sium on Computational Geometry . pp . 218 - 227 . BRONDSTED , A . 1983 . An Introduction to Convex Polytopes . Springer , New York , Heidelberg , Berlin . BROSTOW , W . , AND SICOTTE , Y . 1975 . Coordination number in liquid argon . Physics A 80 , 513 - 522 . BROSTOW , W . , DUSSAULT , J . P . , AND Fox , B . L . 1978 . Construction of Voronoi polyhedra . J . Comput . Phys . 29 , 81 - 92 . BROWN , K . Q . 1979 . Voronoi diagrams from con - vex hulls . Znfi Process . Lett . 9 , 223 - 228 . BROWN , K . Q . 1980 . Geometric transforms for fast geometric algorithms . Ph . D . dissertation , Carnegie - Mellon Univ . , Pittsburgh , Penn . BRUMBERGER , H . AND GOODISMAN . 1983 . Voronoi cells : An interesting and potentially useful cell model for interpreting the small angle scatter - ing of catalysts . J . Appl . Crystallogr . 16 , 83 - 88 . CALABI , L . , AND HARTNETT , W . E . 1968 . Shape recognition , prairie tires , convex deficiencies , and skeletons . Am . Math . Monthly 75 , 335 - 342 . CANNY , J . , AND DONALD , B . 1988 . Simplified Voronoi diagrams . Discrete Comput . Geom . 3 , 219 - 236 . CHAZELLE , B . 1985 . How to search in history . Inf Control 64 , 77 - 99 . CHAZELLE , B . , AND Emmsmmmmm , H . 1987 . An improved algorithm for constructing k th - order Voronoi diagrams . IEEE Trans . Comput . C - 36 , 1349 - 1354 . CHAZELLE , B . , AND PREPARATA , F . P . 1986 . Half - space range search : an algorithmic application of k - sets . Discrete Comput . Geom . 1 , 83 - 94 . CHAZELLE , B . , DRYSDALE , R . L . , LEE , D . T . 1986a . Computing the largest empty rectangle . SIAM J . Comput . 15 , 300 - 315 . CHAZELLE , B . , COLE , R . , PREPARATA , F . P . , AND YAP , C . K . 1986b . New upper bounds for neighbor searching . Znf Control 68 , 105 - 124 . CHAZELLE , B . , EDELSBRUNNER , H . , GUIBAS , L . J . , HERSHBERGER , J . E . , SEIDEL , R . , AND SHARIR , M . 1990 . Slimming down by addin ~ selecting heavily covered points . In Proceedings of the 6th Annual ACM Symposium on Computa - tional Geometry , pp . 116 - 127 . CHERITON , D . , AND TARJAN , R . E . 1976 . Finding minimum spanning trees . SIAM J . Comput . 5 , 724 - 742 . CHEW , L . P . 1986 . There is a planar graph almost as good as the complete graph . In Proceedings of the 2nd Annual ACM Symposium on Compu - tational Geometry . pp . 169 - 177 . CHEW , L . P . 1989a . Constrained Delaunay trian - gulations . Algorithmic 4 , 97 - 108 . CHEW , L . P . 1989b . Guaranteed - quality triangu - lar meshes . Rep . TR 89 - 983 , Dept . Comput . Sci . , Cornell Univ . , Ithaca , N . Y . CHEW , L . P . , AND DRYSDALE , R . L . 1985 . Voronoi diagrams based on convex distance functions . In Proceedings of the 1st Annual ACM Sympo - sium on Computational Geometry . pp . 235 - 244 . CHEW , L . P . , AND KEDEM , K . 1989 . Placing the largest similar copy of a convex polygon among polygonal obstacles . In Proceedings of the 5th Annual ACM Symposium on Computational Geometry . pp . 167 - 174 . CHOW , A . 1980 . Parallel algorithms for geometric problems . Ph . D . dissertation . Dept . Comput . Sci . , Univ . of Illinois , Urbana , Ill . CHRISTOFIDES , N . 1976 . Worst - case analysis of a new heuristic for the traveling salesman prob - lem . Symposium on Algorithms and Complex - ity , Carnegie - Mellon Univ . , Penn . CLARKSON , K . L . 1987 . New applications of ran - dom sampling to computational geometry . Discrete Comput . Geom . 2 , 195 - 222 . CLARKSON , K . L . 1989 . An algorithm for geomet - ric minimum spanning trees requiring nearly linear expected time . Algorithmic 4 , 461 - 468 . CLARKSON , K . L . , AND SHOR , P . W . 1988 . Algo - rithms for diametral pairs and convex hulls that are optimal , randomized , and incremen - tal . In Proceedings of the 4th Annual ACM Symposium on Computational Geometry . pp . 12 - 17 . CLARKSON , K . L . , AND SHOR , P . W . 1989 . Applica - tions of random sampling in computational ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 400 e Franz Aurenhammer geometry , II . Discrete Comput . Geom . 4 , 387 - 421 . COLE , R . , GOODRICH , M . T . , AND O’DUNLAING , C . 1990 . Merging free trees in parallel for effi - cient Voronoi diagram construction . Springer LNCS 443 , pp . 432 - 445 . CONWAY , J . M . , AND SLOANE , N . J . A . 1982 . Voronoi regions of lattices , second moments of polytopes , and quantization . IEEE Trans . Inf Theory IT - 28 , 211 - 226 . CRAIN , L . K . 1978 . The Monte Carlo generation of random polygons . Comput . Geosci . 4 , 131 - 141 . CRAPO , H . 1979 , Structural rigidity , Struct . Topol . 1 , 13 - 45 . CRUZ ORIVE , L . - M . 1979 . Distortion of certain Voronoi tessellations when one particle moves . J . Appl . Probab . 16 , 95 - 103 . DAVID , E . E . , AND DAVID , C . W . 1982 . Voronoi polyhedra as a tool for studying solvation structure . J . Chem . Phys . 76 , 4611 – 4614 . DE FLORIANI , L . , FALCIDIENO , B , , PIENOVI , C . , AND NAGY , G . 1988 . On sorting triangles in a De - launay tessellation . Rep . Inst . Mat . Appl . , Consiglio Nazionale dells Richerche , Geneva , Italy . DEHNE , F . , AND KLEIN , R . 1987 . An optimal algo - rithm for computing the Voronoi diagram on a cone . Rep . SCS - TR - 122 , School Comput . Sci . , Carleton Univ . , Ottawa , Canada . DEHNE , F . , AND NOLTEMEIER , H . 1985 . A computa - tional geometry approach to clustering prob - lems . In Proceedings of the Ist Annual ACM Symposium on Computational Geometry . pp . 245 - 250 . DELAUNAY , B . N . 1932 . Neue Darstellung der ge - ometrischen Kristallographie . Z . Kristallo - graph . 84 , 109 - 149 . DELAUNAY , B . N . 1934 . Sur la sphere vide , Bull . Acad . Science USSR VII : Class . Sci . Math . , 793 - 800 . DELAUNAY , B . N . 1963 . Theorie der regularen Dirichletschen Zerlegungen des n - dimensiona - len euklidischen Raumes . SchriftenreLhe Int . Math . Dtsch . Akad . Wiss . Berlin 13 , 27 - 31 . DELAUNAY , B . N . , DOLBILIN , N . P . , AND STOGRIN , M . I . 1978 . Combinatorial and metric theory of planigons . Trudy Mat . Inst . Steklov 148 , 109 - 140 . DEWDNEY , A . K . 1977 . Complexity of nearest neighbour searching in three and higher di - mensions . Rep . 28 , Univ . of Western Ontario , London , Ontario . DEWDNEY , A . K . , AND VRANKXI , J . K . 1977 . A convex partition of R 3 with applications to Crum’s problem and Knuth’s post - oftlce prob - lem . Util . Math . 12 , 193 - 199 . DILLENCOURT , M . B . 1987a . Traveling salesman cycles are not always subgraphs of Delaunay triangulations . Infi Process . Lett . 24 , 339 - 342 . DILLENCOURT , M . B . 1987b . A non - Hamiltonian , nondegenerate Delaunay triangulation . Infi Process . Lett . 25 , 149 - 151 . DILLENCOURT , M . B . 1987c . Toughness and Delau - nay triangulations . In Proceedings of the 3rd Annual ACM Symposium on Computational Geometry . pp . 186 - 194 . DIBICHLET , G . L . 1850 . Uber die Reduction der positiven quadratischen Formen mit drei unbestimmten ganzen Zahlen . J . Reme u . Angew . Math . 40 , 209 - 227 , DOBKIN , D . P . , AND LASZLO , M . J . 1989 . Primi . tives for the manipulation of three - dimensional subdivisions . Algorithmic 4 , 3 - 32 . DOBKIN , D . P . , AND LIPTON , R . J . 1976 . Multidi - mensional searching problems . SIAM J . Com - put . 5 , 181 - 186 . DOBKIN , D . P . , FRIEDMAN , S . , AND SUPOWIT , K . 1990 . Delaunay graphs are almost as good as complete graphs . Discrete Comput . Geom . 5 , 399 - 407 . DRYSDALE , R . L . 1990 . A practical algorithm for computing the Delaunay triangulation for con - vex distance functions . In Proceedings of the 1st Annual ACM - SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms . pp . 159 - 168 . DWYER , R . A . 1987 . A faster divide - and - conquer algorithm for constructing Delaunay triangula - tions . Algorithmic 2 , 137 - 151 . DWYER , R . A . 1989 . Higher - dimensional Voronoi diagrams in linear expected time . In Proceed - ings of the 5th Annual ACM Symposium on Computational Geometry . pp 326 - 333 . EDAHIRO , M . , KOKUBO , I . , AND ASANO , T . 1984 . A new point - location algorithm and its practical efficiency : Comparison with existing algo - rithms . ACM Trans . Graph . 3 , 86 - 109 . EDELSBRUNNER , H 1986 Edge - skeletons in ar - rangements with applications . AlgorLthmica 1 , 93 - 109 , EDELSBRUNNER , H . 1987 . Algorithms in Combina - torial Geometry . Springer , Berlin - Heidelberg . EDELSBRUNNER , H . 1989 . An acyclicity theorem for cell complexes in d dimensions . In Proceed - ings of the 5th Annual ACM Symposium on Computational Geometry . pp . 145 - 151 . EDELSBRUNNER , H . , AND MAURER , H . A . 1985 . Finding extreme points in three dimensions and solving the post - office problem in the plane . Inf Process . Lett . 21 , 39 - 47 . EDELSBRUNNER , H . , AND SEIDEL , R . 1986 . Voronoi diagrams and arrangements . Discrete Comput . Geom . 1 , 25 - 44 . EDELSBRUNNER , H . , AND WELZL , E . 1985 . On the number of line separations of a finite set in the plane . J . Combin . Theory Ser . A , 15 - 29 . EDELSBRUNNER , H . , GUIBAS , L . J . , AND SHARIR , M . 1989 . The upper envelope of piecewise linear functions : algorithms and applications . Discrete Comput . Geom . 4 , 311 - 336 . EDELSBRUNNER , H . , GUIBAS , L . J . , STOLFI , J . 1986 . Optimal point location in a monotone subdivi - sion . SIAM J . Comput . 15 , 317 - 340 . EDELSBRUNNER , H . , KIRKPATRICK , D . G . , AND SEIDEL , R . 1983 . On the shape of a set of ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 Voronoi Diagrams l 401 points in the plane . IEEE Trans . Znf Theory IT - 29 , 551 - 559 . EDELSBRUNNER , H . , O’ROURKE , J . , AND SEIDEL , R . 1986 . Constructing arrangements oflines and hyperplanes with applications . SZAMJ . Com - put . 15 , 341 - 363 . EDELSBRUNNER , H . , ROTE , G . , AND WELZL , E . 1987 . Testing the necklace condition for shortest tours andoptimal factors inthe plane . Springer LNCS 267 , 364 - 375 . EHRLICH , P . E . , AND IMHOF , H . C . 1979 . Dirichlet regions in manifolds without conjugate points . Comment . Math . Helvet . 54 , 642 - 658 . EISELT , H . A . , AND PEDERZOLI , G . 1986 . Voronoi diagrams andtheir use : A survey . Part I : The - OrY ; Part 11 : Applications . In S . Goyal , Ed . Proceedings of the ASAC 7 , 2 . pp . 98 - 115 . ENGEL , P . 1981 . ~ er Wirkungsbereichsteilungen mit kubischer Symmetrie . Z . Kristallograph . 154 , 199 - 215 . EPPSTEIN , D . 1990 . Finding the k smallest span - ning trees . Springer LNCS447 , 38 - 47 . FAIRFIELD , J . 1979 . Contoured shape generation : Forms that people seeindot patterns . In Proc - eedings of the IEEE Conference on Systems Man Cybernetics . pp . 60 - 64 . FAIRFIELD , J . 1983 . Segmenting dot patterns by Voronoi diagram concavity . IEEE Trans . Patt . Anal . Mach . Znt . PAMZ - 5 , 104 - 110 . FEDEROFF , E . S . 1885 . Elemente der Lehre von den Fignren . Verb . Russ Min . Ges . St . Peters - burg 21 , 1 - 279 . FIELD , D . A . 1986 . Implementing Watson’s algo - rithm in three dimensions . In Proceedings of the 2nd Annual ACM Symposium on Computa - tional Geometry . pp . 246 - 259 . FINNEY , J . L . 1979 . Procedure for the construction of Voronoi polyhedra . Note . J . Comput . Phys . 32 , 137 - 143 . FORTUNE , S . 1985 . A fast algorithm for polygon containment by translation . Springer LNCS 194 , 189 - 198 . FORTUNE , S . 1987 . A sweepline algorithm for Voronoi diagrams . Algorithmic 2 , 153 - 174 . FORTUNE , S . 1988 . Sorting helps for Voronoi dia - grams . Manuscript , ATT Bell Lab . , Murray Hill , N . J . FRANK , F . C . , AND KASPER , J . S . 1958 . Complex alloy structures regarded as sphere packings . Acts Crystallogr . 11 , 184 - 190 . GABRIEL , K . R . , AND SOKAL , R . R . 1969 . A new statistical approach to geographic variation analysis . Syst . Zoology 18 , 259 - 278 . GAMBINI , R . 1966 . A computer program for calcu - lating lines of equilibrium between multiple centers of attraction . Manuscript , Center of Re - gional Studies , Univ . of Kansas , Lawrence , Kan . GAREY , M . R . , GRAHAM , R . L . , AND JOHNSON , D . S . 1976 . Some NP - complete geometric prob - lems . In Proceedings of the 8th Annual ACM Symposium on STOC . pp . 10 - 22 . GAUSS , C . F . 1840 . Recursion der ‘Untersuchun - gen iiber die Eigenschaften der positiven ternaren quadratischen Formen von Ludwig August Seeber . J . Reine Angew . Math . 20 , 312 - 320 . GILBERT , E . N . 1962 . Random subdivisions of space into crystals . Ann . Math . Stat . 33 , 958 - 972 . GOODRICH , M . T . , O’DUNLAING , C . , AND YAP , C . K . 1989 . Constructing the Voronoi diagram of a set of line segments in parallel . Springer LNCS 382 , 12 - 23 . GOWDA , I . G . , KIRKPATRICK , D . G . , LEE , D . T . , AND NAAMAD , A . 1983 . Dynamic Voronoi dia - grams . IEEE Trans . Infi Theory IT - 29 , 724 - 731 . GREEN , P . J . , AND SIBSON , R . 1977 . Computing Dirichlet tessellations in the plane . Comput . J . 21 , 168 - 173 . GRUBER , P . M . , AND LEKKERKERKER , C . G . 1988 . Geometry of Numbers . North - Holland Publish - ing Co . , Amsterdam . GRUBER , P . M . , AND RYSKOV , S . S . 1987 . Facet - to - facet implies face - to - face . Manuscript . GRUNBAUM , B . 1967 . Convex Polytopes . Inter - science , New York . GRtiNBAUM , B . , AND SHEPHARD , G . C . 1980 . Tilings with congruent tiles . Bull . Am . Math . Sot . 3 , 951 - 973 . GRUNBAUM , B . , AND SHEPHARD , G . C . 1987 . Tilings and Patterns . Freeman and Co . , New York . GUIBAS , L . J . , AND STOLFI , J . 1985 . Primitives for the manipulation of general subdivisions and the computation of Voronoi diagrams . ACM Trans . Graph . 4 , 74 - 123 . GUIBAS , L . J . , KNUTH , D . E . , AND SHARIR , M . 1990 . Randomized incremental construction of Delaunay and Voronoi diagrams . Springer LNCS 443 , 414 - 431 . GUIBAS , L . J . , MITCHELL , J . S . B . , AND Roos , T . 1991 . Voronoi diagrams of moving points in the plane . Springer LNCS . In press . HARTIGAN , J . A . 1975 . Clustering Algorithms . John Wiley , New York . HEUSINGER , H . , AND NOLTEMEIER , H . 1989 . On separable clusterings . J . Algorithms 10 , 212 - 227 . HINRICHS , K . , NIEVERGELT , J . , SCHORN , P . 1988a . Plane - sweep solves the closest pair problem el - egantly . In ~ Process . Lett . 26 , 255 - 261 . HINRICHS , K . , NIEVERGELT , J . , SCHORN , P . 1988b . A sweep algorithm for the all - nearest - neighbors problem . Springer LNCS 333 , 43 – 54 . HORTON , R . E . 1917 . Rational study of rainfall data makes possible better estimates of water yield . Eng . News - Record , 211 - 213 . HOWE , S . E . 1978 . Estimating regions and clus - tering spatial data Analysis and implementa - tion of methods using the Voronoi diagram . Ph . D . dissertation , Brown Univ . , Providence , R . I . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 402 “ Franz Aurenhammer HUTTENLOCHER , D . P . , KEDEM , K . , AND SHARIR , M . 1991 . Theupper envelope of Voronoi surfaces and its applications . In Proceedings of the 7th Annual ACM Symposium on Computational Geometry , 194 - 203 . HWANG , F . K . 1979 . An O ( nlogn ) algorithm for rectilinear minimal spanning trees . ~ . ACM 26 , 177 - 182 . IMAI , H . , IRI , M . , AND MUROTO , K . 1985 . Voronoi diagram in the Laguerre geometry and its ap - plications . SIAM J . Comput . 14 , 93 - 105 . IMAI , K . , SUMmO , S . , IMAI , H . 1989 . Minimax geo - metric fitting of two corresponding sets of points . In Proceedings of the 5th Annual ACM Symposium on Computational Geometry . pp . 266 - 275 . JOHNSON , W . A . , AND MEHL , R . F . 1939 . Reaction kinetics in processes of nucleation and growth . Trans . Am . Instit . Mining Metall . A . I . M . M . E . 135 , 416 - 458 . KANTABUTEA , V . 1983 . Traveling salesman cycles are not always subgraphs of Voronoi duals . Znfi Process . Lett . 16 , 11 - 12 . KEIL , J . M . , AND GUTWIN , C . A . 1989 . The Delau - nay triangulation closely approximates the complete Euclidean graph . Springer LNCS 382 , 47 - 56 . KLANG , T . 1966 . Random fragmentation in two and three dimensions . Z . Astrophysik 64 , 433 - 439 . KDtKPATRICK , D . G . 1979 . Efi - lcient computation of continuous skeletons . In Proceedings of the 20th Annual IEEE Symposium on FOCS . pp . 18 - 27 . KmKPATRICK , D . G . 1980 . A note on Delaunay and optimal triangulations . Inf Process . Lett . 10 , 127 - 128 . KIRKPATRICK , D . G . 1983 . Optimal search in pla - nar subdivisions . SIAM J . Comput . 12 , 28 - 35 . KLEE , V . 1980 . On the complexity of d - dimen - sional Voronoi diagrams . Archiu Math . 34 , 75 - 80 . KLEIN , R . 1989 . Concrete and Abstract Voronoi D ~ agrams . Springer LNCS 400 . KLEIN , R . , AND WOOD , D . 1988 . Voronoi diagrams based on general metrics in the plane . Springer LNCS 294 , pp . 281 - 291 , KNUTH , D . 1973 . The Art of Computer Program - ming III : Sorting and Searching . Addison - Wesley , Reading , Mass . KOCH , E . 1973 . Wirkungsbereichspolyeder und Wirkungsbereichsteilungen zu kubischen Git - terkomplexen mit weniger als drei Freiheits - graden . Z . Kristallograph . 138 , 196 - 215 . KOPEC , R . J . 1963 . An alternative method for the construction of Thiessen polygons . Professional Geographer 15 , 24 - 26 . KRUSKAL , J . B . 1956 . On the shortest spanning subtree of a graph and the traveling salesman problem . Problem . Am . Math . Sot . 7 , 48 - 50 . LANTUEJOUL , C . , AND MAISONNEUVE , F . 1984 . Geodesic methods in quantitative image analy - sis . Pattern Recogn . 17 , 177 - 187 . LAVES , F . 1930 . Ebeneneinteilung in Wirkungs - bereiche . Z . Kristallograph . 76 , 277 - 284 . LAWSON , C . L . 1972 . Generation of a triangular grid with applications to contour plotting . Tech . Memorandum 299 , California Inst . Tech . Jet Propulsion Lab . LAWSON , C . L . 1977 . Software for Cl surface interpolation . In Mathematical Software III , J . Rice Ed . , Academic Press , New York . LEE , D . T . 1980 . Two - dimensional Voronoi dia - grams in the Lp - metric . J . ACM 27 , 604 - 618 . LEE , D . T . 1982a . On k - nearest neighbor Voronoi diagrams in the plane . IEEE Trans . Comput . ( X31 , 478 - 487 . LEE , D . T . 1982b . Medial axis transform of a pla - nar shape . IEEE Trans . Putt . Anal . Mach . Intell . PAM14 , 363 - 369 . LEE , D . T . , AND DRYSDALE , R . L . 1981 . General - ization of Voronoi diagrams in the plane . SIAM J . Comput . 10 , 73 - 87 . LEE , D . T . , AND LIN , A . K . 1986 . Generalized Delaunay triangulation for planar graphs . Dis - crete Comput . Geom . 1 , 201 - 217 . LEE , D . T . , AND PREPARATA , F . P . 1984 . Computa - tional geometry—A eurvey . IEEE Trans . Com - put . C33 , 12 , 1072 - 1101 . LEE , D . T . , AND SCHACHTER , B . J . 1980 . Two algo - rithms for constructing a Delaunay triangula - tion . Int . J . Comput . Inf Sci . 9 , 219 - 242 . LEE , D . T . , AND WONG , C . K . 1980 . Voronoi diagrams in the Ll ( La ) metrics with 2 - dimensional storage applications . SIAM J . Comput . 9 , 200 - 211 . LEE , D . T . , AND YANG , C . C . 1979 . Location of multiple points in a planar subdivision . Znf Process . Lett . 9 , 190 - 193 . LEVEN , D . , AND SHARIR , M . 1986 . Intersection and proximity problems and Voronoi diagrams . Adu . Robotics 1 , 187 - 228 . LEVIN , D . , AND SHARIR , M . 1987 . Planning a purely translational motion of a convex robot in two - dimensional space using Voronoi dia - grams . Discrete Comput . Geom . 2 , 9 - 31 . LINGAS , A . 1986a . The greedy and Delaunay tri - angulations are not bad in the average case . Infi Process . Lett . 22 , 25 - 31 . LINGAS , A . 1986b . A fast algorithm for the gener - alized Delaunay triangulation . Manuscript , Univ . of Linkoping , Sweden . LINGAS , A . 1989 . Voronoi diagrams with barriers and the shortest diagonal problem . lnfi Pro - cess . Lett . 32 , 191 - 198 . LINHART , J . 1981 . Die Beleuchtung von Kugeln . Geom . Dedicata 10 , 145 - 154 . LITTLE , D , V . 1974 . A third note on recent re - search in geometric probability . Adu . Appl . Probab . 6 , 103 - 130 . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 Voronoi Diagrams “ 403 LOEB , A . L . 1970 . A systematic survey of cubic crystal structures . J . Solid State Chem . 1 , 237 - 267 . MANACHER , G . K . , AND ZOBRIST , A . L . 1979 . Nei - ther the greedy nor the Delaunay triangula - tion of a planar point set approximates the optimal triangulation . lnfi Process . Lett . 9 , 31 - 34 . MATULA , D . W . , AND SOKAL , R . R . 1980 . Proper - ties of Gabriel graphs relevant to geographic variation research and the clustering of points in the plane . Geograph . Anal . 12 , 205 - 221 . MATZKE , E . B . , AND NESTLER , J . 1946 . Volume - ehape relationships in variant foams . Am . J . Botcmics 33 , 130 - 144 . MAUS , A . 1884 . Delaunay trianwlation and the convex hull of n point ; in expected linear time . BZT24 , 151 - 163 . MAXWELL , J . C . 1864 . On reciprocal diagrams and diagrams of forces . Phil . Mug . 4 , 27 , 250 - 261 . MCLAIN , D . H . 1976 . Two dimensional interpola - tion from random data . Comput . J . 19 , 178 - 181 . MEGIDDO , N . 1983 . Linear time algorithms for lin - ear programming in R 3 and related problems . SIAM J . Comput . 12 , 759 - 776 . MEHLHORN , K . , O’DUNLAING , C . , AND MEISER , S . 1990 . On the construction of abstract Voronoi diagrams . Springer LNCS 415 , 227 - 239 . MEIJERING , J . L . 1953 . Interface area , edge length , and number of vertices in crystal aggregates with random nucleation . Philips Res . Rept . 8 , 270 - 290 . MILES , R . E . 1970 . On the homogeneous planar Poisson process . Math . Biosci . 6 . 85 - 127 . MITCHELL , J . S . B . , MOUNT , D . M . , AND PAPADIMITRIOU , C . H . 1987 . The discrete geodesic problem . SIAM J . Comput . 16 , 647 - 668 . MOLLISON , D . 1977 . Spatial contact models for ecological and epidemic spread . J . Roy . Stat . SOC . B 39 , 283 - 326 . MONTANARI , U . 1968 . A method for obtaining skeletons using a quasi . Euclidean distance . J . ACM 15 , 600 - 624 . MORAN , P . A . P . 1966 . A note on recent research in geometric probability . J . Appl . Probab . 3 , 453 - 463 . MORAN , P . A . P . 1969 . A second note on recent research in geometrical probability . Adu . Appt . Probab . 1 , 73 - 89 . MOUNT , D . M . 1985 . Voronoi diagrams on the surface of a polyhedron . Rep . 1496 , Univ . of Maryland . MOUNT , D . M . 1986 . Storing the subdivision of a polyhedral surface . In Proceedings of the 2nd Annual ACM Symposium on Computational Geometry . pp . 150 - 158 . MOUNT , D . , AND SAALFELD , A . 1988 . Globally - equiangular triangulation of co - circular points in O ( n log n ) time . In Proceedings of the 4th Annual ACM Symposium on Computational Geometry . pp . 143 - 152 . MUDER , D . J . 1988a . How big is an n - sided Voronoi polygon ? Manuscript , MITRE Corp . , Bedford , Mass . MUDER , D . J . 1988b . Putting the best face on a Voronoi polyhedron . Proc . London Math . Sot . 56 , 329 - 348 . MULMULEY , K . 1991 . On levels in arrangements and Voronoi diagrams . Discrete Comput . Geom . In press . MURTAGH , F . 1983 . A survey of recent advances in hierarchical clustering algorithms . Com - puter J . 26 , 354 - 359 . NEWMAN , C . M . , RINOTT , Y . , AND TVERSKY , A . 1983 . Nearest neighbor and Voronoi regions in cer - tain point processes . Adv . Appl . Probab . 15 , 726 - 751 . NIGGLI , R . 1927 . Die topologische Strukturanal . yse . Z . Kristallograph . 65 , 391 - 415 . NOWACKI , W . 1933 . Der Begriff ‘Voronoischer Bereich’ . Z . Kristallograph . 85 , 331 - 332 . NOWACKI , W . 1976 . Uber allgemeine Eigen - schaften von Wirkungsbereichen . Z . Kristallo - graph . 143 , 360 - 368 . O’DUNLAING , C . , AND YAP , C . K . 1985 . A “retrac - tion” method for planning the motion of a disc . J . Algorithms 6 , 104 - 111 . O’DUNLAING , C . , SHARIR , M . , AND YAP , C . K . 1986 . Generalized Voronoi diagrams for moving a ladder : I . Topological analysis . Comm . Pure Appl . Math . 39 , 423 - 483 . O’DUNLAING , C . , SHARIR , M . , AND YAP , C . K . 1987 . Generalized Voronoi diagrams for moving a ladde ~ II . Eftlcient construction of the dia - gram . Algorithmic 2 , 27 - 59 . OHYA , T . , IRI , M . , AND MUROTA , K . 1984a . A fast Voronoi diagram algorithm with quaternary tree bucketing . Infi Process . Lett . 18 , 227 - 231 . OHYA , T . , I . RI , M . , AND MUROTA , K . 1984b . Im - provements of the incremental methods for the Voronoi diagram with computational compari - son of various algorithms . J . Operations Res . Sot . Japan 27 , 306 - 337 . OKABE , A . , YOSHIKAWA , T . , FUJII , A . , AND OIKAWA , K . 1988 . The statistical analysis of a distribu . tion of active points in relation to surface - like elements . Environ . Plan . A 20 , 609 - 620 . OVERMARS , M . 1981 . Dynamization of order de - composable set problems . J . Algorithms 2 , 245 - 260 . PACH , J . , AND SHARIR , M . 1989 . The upper enve - lope of piecewise linear functions and the boundary of a region enclosed by convex plates . Discrete Comput . Geom . 4 , 291 - 310 . PAPADIMITRIOU , C . H . 1977 . The Euclidean travel - ing salesman problem is NP - complete . ‘lheor . Comp . Sci . 4 , 237 - 244 . PASCHINGER , I . 1982 . Konvexe Polytope und ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 404 “ Franz Aurenhammer Dirichletsche Zellenkomplexe . Ph . D . Disserta - tion , Inst . f . Math . , Univ . Salzburg , Austria . PHILBRICK , O . 1968 . Shape recognition with the medial axie transform . In Pzctorial Pattern Recognition , G . C . Cheng , R . S . Ledley , D . K Pollock , and A . Rosenfeld , Eds . Washington , D . C . PREPARATA , F . P . 1977 . Steps into computational geometry . Rep . R - 760 , Coordinated Science Lab . , Univ . of Illinois , Urbana , Ill . , pp . 23 - 24 . PREPARATA , F . P . , AND HONG , S . J . 1977 . Convex hulls of finite sets of points in two and three dimensions . Commun . ACM 20 , 87 - 93 . PREPARATA , F . P . , AND SHAMOS , M . I . 1985 . Com - putational Geometry : An Introduction . Springer , New York . PRIM , R . C . 1957 . Shortest connection networks and some generalizations Bell Syst . Tech . J . 36 , 1389 - 1401 . RAJAN , V . T , 1991 . 0 timality of the Delaunay 1 triangulation in R In Proceedings of the 7th Annual ACM Symposmm on Computat ~ onal Geometry , pp . 357 - 372 . RHYNSBURGER , D . 1973 . Analytical delineation of Thiessen polygons . Geograph . Anal . 5 , 133 - 144 . RIPPA , S . 1990 . Minimal roughness property of the Delaunay triangulation . Comput . Aided Geom . Des ~ gn 7 , 489 - 49’7 . ROGERS , C . A . 1964 . Packing and Covering . Cam - bridge University Press , London , New York . ROHNERT , H . 1988 . Moving discs between poly - gons . Springer LNCS 317 , 502 - 515 . ROSENBERGER , H . 1988 . Order - k Voronoi dia - grams of sites with additive weights in the plane . Rep . UIUCDCS - R - 88 - 1431 , Dept . Com - put . Sci . , Univ . Illinois , Urbana , Ill . ROSENKRANTZ , D . J . , STEARNS , R . E . , AND LEWIS , P . M . 1977 . An analysis of several heuristics for the traveling salesman problem . SIAM J . Comput . 6 , 563 - 581 . ROWAT , P . F . 1979 . Representing spatial experi - ence and solving spatial problems in a simu - lated robot environment . Ph . D . dissertation , Univ . of British Columbia , Canada . SAKAMOTO , M . , AND TAKAGI , M . 1988 . Patterns of weighted Voronoi tessellations . Scl . Form 3 , 103 - 111 . SCHONFLIES , A . 1891 . Kristallsysteme und Kirstallstruktur . Teubner , Leipzig . SCHWARTZ , J . , AND YAP , C . K . 1986 . Advances in Robotics . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Hill - side , N . J . SCHWARZKOPF , O . 1989 . Parallel computation of discrete Voronoi diagrams . Springer LNCS 349 , 193 - 204 . SEIDEL , R . 1981 . A convex hull algorithm optimal for point sets in even dimensions . Rep . 81 - 14 , Univ . of Britmh Columbia , Vancouver , Canada . SEIDEL , R . 1982 The complexity of Voronoi dia - grams in higher dimensions . In Proceedings of the 20th Annual Allerton Conference on CCC . pp . 94 - 95 . SEIDEL , R . 1985 A method for proving lower bounds for certain geometric problems . In Computational Geometry , G . T . Toussaint Ed . pp . 319 - 334 . SEIDEL , R . 1986 . Constructing higher - dimensional convex hulls at logarithmic cost per face . In Proceedings of the 18th Annual ACM Sympo - sium on STOC . pp . 404 - 413 . SEIDEL , R . 1987 . On the number of faces in higher - dimensional Voronoi diagrams . In Pro - ceedings of the 3rd Annual Symposium on Computational Geometry . pp . 181 - 185 . SEIDEL , R . 1988 . Constrained Delaunay triangula - tions and Voronoi diagrams with obstacles . In Rep . 260 , IIG - TU Graz , Austria , pp . 178 - 191 . SHAMOS , M . I . 1975 . Geometric complexity . In Proceedings of the 7th Annual ACM Sympo - . sLum on STOC . pp . 224 - 233 . SHAMOS , M . I . 1978 . Computational geometry . Ph . D . dissertation , Yale Univ . , New Haven , Corm . SHAMOS , M . I . , AND HOEY , D . 1975 . Closest - point problems . In Proceedings of the 16th Annual IEEE Sympostum on FOCS pp . 151 - 162 . SHARIR , M . 1985 . Intersection and closest - pair problems for a set of planar discs . SIAM J . Comput . 14 , 448 - 468 . SIBSON , R . 1977 . Locally equiangular triangula - tions . Comput . J . 21 , 243 - 245 . SIBSON , R . 1979 . The Dirichlet tessellation as an aid in data analysis . Scandinavian J . Stat . 7 , 14 - 20 . SIBSON , R . 1980 . A vector identity for the Dn - ich - let tessellation . Math . Proc . Carob . Phil . Sot . 87 , 151 - 155 . SmRONY , S . , AND SHARIR , M . 1986 . A new efficient motion - planning algorithm for a rod in polygo - nal space . In Proceedings of the 2nd Annual ACM Symposium on Computational Geometry . pp . 178 - 186 . SMITH , C . S , 1954 . The shape of things . Sci . Am . 58 - 64 . SNYDER , D . E . 1962 . Urban places in Uruguay and the concept of a hierarchy . Festschrift : C . F . Jones . Northwestern University Studies in Geography 6 , 29 - 46 . STIFTER , S . 1989 . An axiomatic approach to Voronoi diagrams in 3D . Manuscript , RISC , Univ . of Linz , Austria . SUGIHARA , K . , AND IRI , M . 1988 . Geometric algo - rithms in finite - precision arithmetic . Research Memorandum RMI 88 - 10 , Faculty of Engineer - ing , Univ . of Tokyo , Japan . SUPOWIT , K . J . 1983 . The relative neighborhood graph , with an application to minimum span - ning trees . J . ACM 30 , 428 - 448 . SUZUKI , A . , AND IRI , M . 1986 . Approximation of a ACM Computing Surveys , Vol 23 , No . 3 , September 1991 Voronoi Diagrams l 405 tessellation of the plane by a Voronoi diagram . J . Operations Res . Sot . Japan 29 , 69 - 96 . TANEMURA , M . , OGAWA , T . , AND OGITA , N . 1983 . A new algorithm for three - dimensional Voronoi tessellation . J . Comput , l % ys . 51 , 191 - 207 , TARSKI , A . 1951 . A decision method for elemen - tary algebra and geometry . Univ . of California Press , Berkeley , Calif . THIESSEN , A . H . 1911 . Precipitation average for large area . Monthly Weather Rev . 39 , 1082 - 1084 . TOKUYAMA , T . 1988 . Deformation of merged Voronoi diagrams with translation . Rep . TR - 88 - 0049 , IBM Tokyo Research Lab . TOUSSAINT , G . T . 1980 . The relative neighborhood graph of a finite planar set . Pattern Recogn . 12 , 261 - 268 . TOUSSAINT , G . T . , AND BHATTACHARYA , B . K . 1981 . On geometric algorithms that use the furthest - point Voronoi diagram . Rep . 81 - 3 , McGill Univ . , Montreal , Quebec , Canada . TUOMINEN , O . 1949 . Das Einflu13gebeit der Stadt Turku ins System der Einflut3gebiete SW – Finnlands . Fennia 71 - 5 , 1 - 138 . URQUHART , R . 1980 . A note on the computation of subgraphs of the Delaunay triangulation . Rep . , Univ . of Glasgow , U . K . VAIDYA , P . M . 1988a . Minimum spanning trees in k - dimensional space . SIAM J . Comput . 17 , 572 - 582 . VAIDYA , P . M . 1988b . Geometry helps in match - ing . In Proceedings of the 20th Annual ACM Symposium on STOC . pp . 422 - 425 . VORONOI , M . G . 1908 . Nouvelles applications des parametres continus a la theorie des formes quadratiques . J . Reine Angew . Math . 134 , 198 - 287 . WANG , C . A . , AND SCHUBERT , L . 1987 . An optimal algorithm for constructing the Delaunay trian - gulation of a set of line segments . In Proceed - ings of the 3rd Annual ACM Symposium on Computational Geometry . pp . 223 - 232 . WATSON , D . F . 1981 . Computing the n - dimen - sional Delaunay tessellation with application to Voronoi polytopes . Comput . J . 24 , 167 - 172 . WEAIRE , D . , AND RIVIER , N . 1984 . Soap , cells , and statistics—random patterns in two dimensions . Contemp . Phys . 25 , 59 - 99 . WHITELEY , W . 1979 . Realizability of polyhedra . Structural Topol . 1 , 46 - 58 . WIDMEIER , P . , Wu , Y . F . , AND WONG , C . K . 1987 . On some distance problems in fixed orienta - tions . SIAM J . Comput . 16 , 728 - 746 . WIGNER , E . , AND SEITZ , F . 1933 . On the constitu - tion of metallic sodium . Phys . Rev . 43 , 804 - 810 . WILLIAMS , R . E . 1968 . Space - filling polyhedron : Its relation to aggregates of soap bubbles , plant cells , and metal crystalites . Science 161 , 276 - 277 . YAO , A . C . 1975 . An O ( E loglog V ) algorithm for finding minimum spanning trees . Znfi Process . Lett . 4 , 21 - 23 . YAO , A . C . 1982 . On constructing minimum span - ning trees in k - dimensional spaces and related problems . SIAM J . Comput . 11 , 721 - 736 . YAP , C . K . 1987 . An 0 ( n log n ) algorithm for the Voronoi diagram of a set of simple curve seg - ments . Discrete Comput . Geom . 2 , 365 - 393 . Received February 1989 , final rewslon accepted January 1991 . ACM Computing Surveys , Vol . 2 . 3 , No . 3 , September 1991