A Membrane Microdomain - Associated Protein , Arabidopsis Flot1 , Is Involved in a Clathrin - Independent Endocytic Pathway and Is Required for Seedling Development C W Ruili Li , a , b , 1 Peng Liu , a , b , 1 Yinglang Wan , a Tong Chen , a Qinli Wang , a Ursula Mettbach , c Franti š ek Balu š ka , c Jozef (cid:1) Samaj , d Xiaohong Fang , e William J . Lucas , 1 , f and Jinxing Lin a , 2 a Key Laboratory of Plant Molecular Physiology , Institute of Botany , Chinese Academy of Sciences , Beijing 100093 , China b Graduate School of Chinese Academy of Sciences , Beijing 100039 , China c Institute of Cellular and Molecular Botany , Rheinische Friedrich - Wilhelms - University Bonn , Department of Plant Cell Biology , D - 53115 Bonn , Germany d Centre of the Region Hana for Biotechnological and Agricultural Research , Faculty of Science , Palacky University , 78301 Olomouc , Czech Republic e Key Laboratory of Molecular Nanostructures and Nanotechnology , Institute of Chemistry , Chinese Academy of Sciences , Beijing 100190 , China f Department of Plant Biology , College of Biological Sciences , University of California , Davis , California 95616 Endocytosis is essential for the maintenance of protein and lipid compositions in the plasma membrane and for the acquisition of materials from the extracellular space . Clathrin - dependent and - independent endocytic processes are well established in yeast and animals ; however , endocytic pathways involved in cargo internalization and intracellular traf ﬁ cking remain to be fully elucidated for plants . Here , we used transgenic green ﬂ uorescent protein – ﬂ otillin1 ( GFP - Flot1 ) Arabidopsis thaliana plants in combination with confocal microscopy analysis and transmission electron microscopy immunogold labeling to study the spatial and dynamic aspects of GFP - Flot1 – positive vesicle formation . Vesicle size , as outlined by the gold particles , was ; 100 nm , which is larger than the 30 - nm size of clathrin - coated vesicles . GFP - Flot1 also did not colocalize with clathrin light chain - mOrange . Variable - angle total internal re ﬂ ection ﬂ uorescence microscopy also revealed that the dynamic behavior of GFP - Flot1 – positive puncta was different from that of clathrin light chain - mOrange puncta . Furthermore , disruption of membrane microdomains caused a signi ﬁ cant alteration in the dynamics of Flot1 - positive puncta . Analysis of arti ﬁ cial microRNA Flot1 transgenic Arabidopsis lines established that a reduction in Flot1 transcript levels gave rise to a reduction in shoot and root meristem size plus retardation in seedling growth . Taken together , these ﬁ ndings support the hypothesis that , in plant cells , Flot1 is involved in a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway and functions in seedling development . INTRODUCTION Endocytosis occurs at the cell surface and involves the formation of membrane invaginations , followed by vesicle separation ( pinching off ) from the plasma membrane . This process plays a central role in the maintenance of the protein and lipid composition within the plasma membrane ; endocytosis also mediates in the removal or recycling of materials from the apoplasm or extra - cellular space ( Conner and Schmid , 2003 ; Dhonukshe et al . , 2008 ; Tanaka et al . , 2009 ; Chen et al . , 2011 ) . During the past decade , cell biologists have focused a con - siderable amount of effort toward elucidating the molecular mechanisms underlying the process of endocytosis . Based on these studies , several distinct pathways have been characterized , including clathrin - mediated and clathrin - independent endocytosis ( Pelkmans and Helenius , 2003 ; Benmerah and Lamaze , 2007 ; Dhonukshe et al . , 2007 ) . The latter pathway is a broad term used to describe a number of endocytic pathways that internalize ex - ternal cargos . Here , membrane rafts , speci ﬁ c plasma membrane microdomains that facilitate protein recruitment in cellular traf - ﬁ cking events , have also been shown to participate in clathrin - independent endocytosis and signaling ( Brown and London , 2000 ; Simons and Toomre , 2000 ; Simons and Gerl , 2010 ) . In mammalian cells , arguably the best characterized protein in the microdomains is the integral membrane protein caveolin ; this protein is associated with specialized pit - forming regions termed caveolae ( Kurzchalia and Parton , 1999 ) . Caveolae are thought to play important roles in signaling , transendothelial transport , and lipid regulation ( Drab et al . , 2001 ; Razani et al . , 2002a , 2002b ) . The reggie / ﬂ otillin family of proteins also repre - sent common markers for microdomains in animal cells ( Morrow et al . , 2002 ) . In recent studies , ﬂ otillins were shown to induce membrane curvature , an event necessary for the formation of plasma membrane invaginations ( Glebov et al . , 2006 ; Frick et al . , 2007 ; Langhorst et al . , 2008 ) . 1 These authors contributed equally to this work . 2 Address correspondence to linjx @ ibcas . ac . cn . The author responsible for distribution of materials integral to the ﬁ ndings presented in this article in accordance with the policy described in the Instructions for Authors ( www . plantcell . org ) is : Jinxing Lin ( linjx @ ibcas . ac . cn ) . C Some ﬁ gures in this article are displayed in color online but in black and white in the print edition . W Online version contains Web - only data . www . plantcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1105 / tpc . 112 . 095695 This article is a Plant Cell Advance Online Publication . The date of its ﬁrst appearance online is the ofﬁcial date of publication . The article has been edited and the authors have corrected proofs , but minor changes could be made before the ﬁnal version is published . Posting this version online reduces the time to publication by several weeks . The Plant Cell Preview , www . aspb . org ã 2012 American Society of Plant Biologists . All rights reserved . 1 of 18 Detergent - resistant membranes ( DRMs ) are thought to be the biochemical counterpart of membrane rafts ( Raffaele et al . , 2009 ) . Even though the membrane raft hypothesis is still a matter of debate , few researchers doubt the existence of large - scale lateral membrane compartmentalization ( Keinath et al . , 2010 ) . In the past few years , numerous studies have demonstrated a close corre - lation between the association of membrane components with DRMs and their speci ﬁ c localization in membrane microdomains in vivo ( Raffaele et al . , 2009 ; Mongrand et al . , 2010 ; Carmona - Salazar et al . , 2011 ) . Although the concept of membrane microdomains and their potential roles in cellular processes have been widely studied in yeast and mammalian systems ( Simons and Toomre , 2000 ; Garcia et al . , 2003 ; Parton , 2003 ; Falk et al . , 2004 ; Lafont et al . , 2004 ; Salaün et al . , 2004 ; Hansen et al . , 2005 ; Lajoie and Nabi , 2010 ; Lingwood and Simons , 2010 ; Simons and Gerl , 2010 ) , current knowledge on the composition and roles of such membrane mi - crodomains remains sparse in plant cells ( Bhat et al . , 2005 ) . A number of studies have been performed on Arabidopsis thali - ana ( Borner et al . , 2005 ) , tobacco ( Nicotiana tabacum ; Mongrand et al . , 2004 ; Morel et al . , 2006 ) , Sinapis alba ( Shahollari et al . , 2004 ) , and Medicago truncatula ( Lefebvre et al . , 2007 ; Haney and Long , 2010 ) . However , generally , these studies have focused on the analysis of protein and lipid components within membrane micro - domains , using a variety of biochemical and cytological tools . Recent studies reported that misexpression of the membrane raft protein remorin altered virus propagation ( Borner et al . , 2005 ; Raffaele et al . , 2009 ; Titapiwatanakun et al . , 2009 ) , and plant ﬂ otillins appear to play a critical role in symbiotic bacterial infection in M . truncatula ( Haney and Long , 2010 ; Haney et al . , 2011 ) . Arabidopsis ﬂ otillin1 ( Flot1 ) , a protein ﬁ rst identi ﬁ ed in DRMs using subcellular fractionation , two - dimensional electrophoresis , and mass spec - trometry , is considered to be one such membrane microdomain protein ( Borner et al . , 2005 ) . Nevertheless , the underlying mecha - nism and functional signi ﬁ cance of this plant protein , in the overall process of endocytosis , remains to be established . In this study , we provide several lines of evidence that Arab - idopsis Flot1 is localized to speci ﬁ c domains within both the plasma membrane and intracellular compartments . Subcellular localization experiments demonstrated that Flot1 and clathrin light chain ( CLC ) are present in discrete and separate regions of the cell . In addition , our analyses employing variable - angle total internal re ﬂ ection ﬂ uorescence microscopy ( VA - TIRFM ) revealed that the dynamic behavior of green ﬂ uorescent protein ( GFP ) - Flot1 puncta was different from that of CLC - mOrange puncta . Furthermore , it was found that seedling development of Flot1 arti ﬁ cial microRNA ( amiRNA ) knockdown transgenic lines was retarded . These ﬁ ndings support the hypothesis that , in plants , Flot1 participates in a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway and functions in seedling development . RESULTS Characterization of Transgenic Arabidopsis GFP - Flot1 Plant Lines To investigate the functional roles of Flot1 in plants , we ﬁ rst transformed wild - type Arabidopsis plants ( ecotype Columbia - 0 ) with a construct encoding full - length Flot1 fused with GFP under the control of its endogenous promoter . Since the ﬂ uorescence signals after expression using this promoter were too weak to be analyzed , we next employed the cauli ﬂ ower mosaic virus 35S promoter to express a ﬂ uorescently tagged construct for our studies ( see Supplemental Figure 1A online ) . Some 30 in - dependent transgenic plant lines were generated , and plants from T2 seeds were used for experimental analysis . Protein gel blot assays were ﬁ rst performed on membrane fractions ex - tracted from Arabidopsis seedlings to con ﬁ rm GFP - Flot1 ex - pression in these transgenic lines . As shown in Supplemental Figure 1B online , no signal was detected with preimmune serum for proteins extracted from either transgenic ( lane 1 ) or wild - type ( lane 2 ) seedlings . By contrast , anti - GFP antibodies detected a 78 - kD band , the predicted molecular mass of the full - length GFP - Flot1 fusion protein , in the membrane fraction from trans - genic plants ( lane 3 ) . No such band was detected with wild - type ( control ; lane 4 ) plants . Thus , the GFP - Flot1 fusion protein was successfully expressed in Arabidopsis seedlings with the correct molecular mass and membrane insertion . An anti - Flot1 monoclonal antibody was next tested for speci ﬁ city using protein gel blot assays ; here , a 51 - kD band , the expected size of Flot1 , was detected in membrane fractions prepared from both transgenic ( lane 5 ) and wild - type ( lane 6 ) seedlings ( see Supplemental Figure 1B online ) . Furthermore , a major band at 78 kD was also detected by the anti - Flot1 monoclonal antibody in transgenic Arabidopsis seedlings ex - pressing GFP - Flot1 ( lane 5 ) . Speci ﬁ city of the anti - Flot1 monoclonal antibody was further tested by performing confocal immuno ﬂ uorescence microscopy on chemically ﬁ xed wild - type Arabidopsis seedlings . No signal was detected when root cells were probed with preimmune serum ( see Supplemental Figures 1C and 1D online ) . By con - trast , the anti - Flot1 monoclonal antibody labeling showed that the protein was mostly localized at the plasma membrane of root cells ( see Supplemental Figures 1E and 1F online ) . Equiv - alent experiments performed on root hair cells yielded similar results ( see Supplemental Figures 1G and 1H online ) . In addi - tion , when compared on an equivalent protein basis , Flot1 showed a signi ﬁ cant enrichment in the DRMs fraction ( see Supplemental Figures 2 and 3 online ) , indicating that Flot1 was associated to membrane microdomains . Taken together , these results indicated that the anti - Flot1 monoclonal antibody could be used to examine the distribution of endogenous Flot1 . Subcellular Localization of GFP - Flot1 Fusion Protein and Flot1 in Arabidopsis Root Cells Subcellular localization of GFP - Flot1 was next examined in trans - genic Arabidopsis root cells . As shown in Figure 1A , strong ﬂ uo - rescent signal localized to the cell periphery was readily detected in cells expressing GFP - Flot1 ( Figure 1A , panels 1 and 2 ) . However , no signal was detected in wild - type Arabidopsis root cells ( data not shown ) . To determine whether these ﬂ uorescent signals were lo - calized to the plasma membrane , cell wall , or periplasmic space , transgenic Arabidopsis root hair and root epidermal cells were plasmolyzed by treatment with 100 mM sorbitol . In such plasmo - lyzed cells , strong ﬂ uorescent signal appeared to be retained in the 2 of 18 The Plant Cell plasma membrane ( Figure 1A , panels 3 and 4 ) . These results suggested that GFP - Flot1 is not localized to the cell wall of root cells . The similar patterns of ﬂ uorescence observed in root cells of wild - type ( Figures 1E and 1G ; anti - Flot1 monoclonal antibody - based detection ) and transgenic GFP - Flot1 Arabidopsis plants suggested that GFP - Flot1 localization to the plasma membrane was unlikely to be a result of overexpression ( see Supplemental Figure 4 online ) . Furthermore , our analysis of wild - type and GFP - Flot1 – expressing roots indicated no differences in ana - tomical features ( see Supplemental Figure 5 online ) . To test whether the Flot1 - containing dot structures could be an endosomal compartment , the localization of GFP - Flot1 was compared with that of the endosomal marker dye FM4 - 64 . Cells were stained with 5 m M FM4 - 64 on ice and then washed with cold medium , after which they were returned to room temperature to resume intracellular traf ﬁ cking . After a 5 - to 10 - min FM4 - 64 in - cubation , we observed that the GFP - Flot1 – labeled compart - ments were partially colocalized with dotted structures having FM4 - 64 signal ( Figure 1B ) . These results suggest that FM4 - 64 is rapidly internalized into plant cells , at room temperature , and is colocalized partially with Flot1 - positive structures . We next pretreated GFP - Flot1 – expressing root cells with brefeldin A to inhibit the secretory pathway . In response to this treatment , brefeldin A – induced aggregates derived from GFP - Flot1 – labeled punctuate structures were found to be partially colo - calized with internalized FM4 - 64 ( see Supplemental Figure 6 online ) . Furthermore , we performed immuno ﬂ uorescence stud - ies using a trans - Golgi network marker ( VHA - a1 - GFP ) ( Dettmer et al . , 2006 ) . The results showed that the signal for the anti - Flot1 antibody was partially colocalized with the VHA - a1 - GFP signal ( see Supplemental Figure 7 online ) , revealing that a portion of Figure 1 . Subcellular Localization of GFP - Flot1 in Roots of Transgenic Arabidopsis Seedlings . ( A ) Confocal images of GFP signal in root tissues expressing GFP - Flot1 . Control : root hair ( panel 1 ) and epidermal ( panel 2 ) cells . Plasmolysis experiment : roots treated with 100 mM sorbitol ; root hair ( panel 3 ) and epidermal ( panel 4 ) cells . CW , cell wall ; DIC , differential interference contrast microscopy ; PM , plasma membrane . ( B ) Seedlings expressing GFP - Flot1 ( green ) were incubated for 5 to 10 min with 5 µ M FM4 - 64 ( red ) . The merged image shows partial colocalization . Enlarged images of the boxed areas are presented in the right column . White arrows indicate examples of colocalizing punctate structures . Bars = 20 m m in ( A ) and 10 m m in ( B ) . Membrane Microdomain - Dependent Endocytic Pathway 3 of 18 the Flot1 - labeled structures re ﬂ ects an early endosomal com - partment . These results suggest that internal GFP - Flot1 – labeled structures likely represent an endosomal compartment in Arab - idopsis root cells . Localization of Flot1 in wild - type Arabidopsis root cells was further investigated by immunogold labeling experiments using electron microscopy . Preimmune controls showed no gold label - ing ( Figure 2A ) , whereas the anti - Flot1 monoclonal antibody clearly cross - reacted with protein localized to the plasma mem - brane ( Figure 2B ) , either in ﬂ at regions ( Figure 2C ) or invaginations ( Figure 2D ) . In addition , gold labeling was detected in the endo - plasmic reticulum membranes ( Figure 2E ) , in close proximity to the Golgi apparatus ( Figure 2E ) , and cytoplasmic vesicles ( Figures 2B and 2F ) . Based on these experiments , the size of the vesicles outlined by the gold particles was estimated to be ; 100 nm . Furthermore , we found that Flot1 is clustered in particular domains of the membrane ( see Supplemental Figure 8A online ) . Statistical analysis showed that 75 % of the gold particles appeared in a clustered pattern throughout the plasma membrane , whereas 25 % showed a random distribution ( see Supplemental Figure 8B online ) . Taken together , these studies demonstrated that Flot1 is localized to the plasma membrane and endosomal structures ; presumably , Flot1 is involved in the formation of membrane mi - crodomains , membrane invaginations , and vesicle budding . Figure 2 . Immunolocalization Studies Performed on Wild - Type Arabidopsis Root Apices Establish That Flot1 Is Localized to the Plasma Membrane and Endosomal Structures . ( A ) Preimmune controls showed no gold labeling in the cells . ( B ) Flot1 signal appeared to be clustered on regions of the plasma membrane ( PM ; arrows ) and to cytoplasmic structures ( arrowhead ) . ( C ) Flot1 localized to ﬂ at regions of the plasma membrane ( arrow ) . ( D ) Flot1 was detected in association with invaginations of the plasma membrane ( arrow ) . ( E ) Flot1 localized to the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) membranes and was in close proximity to the Golgi apparatus ( Ga ) . ( F ) Flot1 present in the plasma membrane ( arrow ) and cytoplasmic vesicle ( arrowhead ) . Bars = 100 nm . 4 of 18 The Plant Cell Time - Course Experiments Reveal That Flot1 Is Associated with Endocytic Vesicle Formation To provide further insight into the role of Flot1 in endocytosis , we next conducted time - course experiments in which we traced the path of GFP - Flot1 – positive vesicles in root cells . These studies demonstrated that GFP dots move quickly from the plasma membrane into the cytoplasm ( Figures 3A and 3B ; see Supplemental Movie 1 online ) . Morphological evidence of a role for Flot1 in endocytosis was also obtained from additional electron microscopy studies . The size distribution of vesicles was plotted in a histogram having spaced bins ( see Supplemental Figure 9 online ) . The data were ﬁ tted using Gaussian methods , the position of the peak ( noted as Ĝ ) being considered the characteristic size of vesicles . As shown in Supplemental Figure 9A online , in wild - type plants , the size of vesicles was distributed in two subpopulations with Ĝ values of 43 . 6 6 1 . 4 nm and 104 . 0 6 3 . 0 nm ( Figure 4A ) . By Figure 3 . Dynamics of GFP - Flot1 – Labeled Compartments in Transgenic Arabidopsis Root Cells . Confocal images were collected at the times indicated ( seconds ) from root cells expressing the GFP - Flot1 fusion protein . ( A ) Low - magni ﬁ cation confocal image ; inset shows the area imaged during the time course . ( B ) Ten consecutive images taken at 12 . 8 - s intervals . White arrows indicate an example of movement of a GFP - Flot1 – labeled compartment from the PM to the cytoplasm ( see Supplemental Movie 1 online ) . Bars = 10 m m . [ See online article for color version of this ﬁ gure . ] Figure 4 . Flot1 Participates in the Formation of Endocytic Vesicles . ( A ) Transmission electron micrographs showing that there are two types of vesicles in wild - type root cells , one being smaller ( black arrows ) and the other larger ( white arrows ) in size . ( B ) Root cells overexpressing Flot1 have a signi ﬁ cant increase in numbers of the large vesicles ( white arrows ) . ( C ) and ( D ) Plasma membrane ( PM ) invaginations observed in Arabidopsis root cells expressing GFP - Flot1 . CW , cell wall . ( E ) and ( F ) Sub – plasma membrane vesicles viewed in Arabidopsis root cells expressing GFP - Flot1 . ( G ) Clusters of putative endosomal vesicles that accumulated in Arabidopsis root cells expressing GFP - Flot1 . ( H ) Clusters of putative endosomal vesicles accumulated in the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) of Arabidopsis root cells expressing GFP - Flot1 . Bars = 500 nm in ( A ) and ( B ) , 100 nm in ( C ) to ( E ) , and 200 nm in ( F ) to ( H ) . Membrane Microdomain - Dependent Endocytic Pathway 5 of 18 contrast , root cells overexpressing Flot1 had a dramatic in - crease in the number of larger vesicles with a Ĝ value of 98 . 5 6 3 . 1 nm ( Figure 4B ; see Supplemental Figure 9B online ) . Here , the prominent features observed were plasma membrane in - vaginations ( Figures 4C and 4D ) , accumulation of vesicles in close proximity to the plasma membrane ( Figures 4E and 4F ) , and clusters of vesicles deeper within the cell interior ( Figure 4G ) . Furthermore , vesicles were also in association with the trans - Golgi network ( Figure 4H ) . In addition , the size of these vesicles was similar to the dimensions of the vesicle con ﬁ gu - ration outlined by the gold particles observed in our im - munogold studies ( Figure 2 ) . Furthermore , a clear decrease in Figure 5 . In Vivo Confocal Fluorescence Analysis and Double Immunogold Electron Microscopy Studies Establish That Flot1 and CLC Are Not Colocalized . ( A ) Confocal images of root epidermal cells within transgenic Arabidopsis plants expressing CLC - mOrange and GFP - Flot1 . Boxed regions examined under higher magni ﬁ cation reveal only limited colocalization of the mOrange and GFP signals in the cortical cytoplasm ( panel 1 to 3 ) . ( B ) to ( E ) Double immunogold labeling of Arabidopsis root epidermal cells performed using anti - Flot1 antibody ( 6 - nm gold - conjugated secondary ) and anti - CLC ( 15 - nm gold - conjugated secondary ) antibodies . ( B ) and ( C ) Boundaries between three adjacent cells showing a lack of colocalization between Flot1 ( white arrowheads ) and CLC ( black arrowheads ) . Inset in ( C ) : small vesicular structure ( inset : clathrin - coated vesicle ) located within the cytoplasm . CW , cell wall . ( D ) and ( E ) Regions covering two adjacent cells showing a lack of colocalization between Flot1 and CLC . Inset : Larger forming vesicular structure ( Flot1 - positive vesicle ) located just beneath the plasma membrane . Bars = 10 m m in ( A ) , 2 m m in panels 1 to 3 , and 200 nm in ( B ) to ( E ) . 6 of 18 The Plant Cell the number of larger vesicles was found in amiRNA root cells ( see Supplemental Figure 9C online ) . Collectively , these results provide support for the hypothesis that Flot1 is associated with the formation of large endocytotic vesicles in cells of Arabi - dopsis roots . Flot1 Does Not Colocalize with CLC Transgenic Arabidopsis plants expressing both CLC - mOrange and GFP - Flot1 were next employed to test whether Flot1 functions in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Confocal studies performed on root epidermal cells of these plants revealed that there was only a small degree of overlap between Flot1 - and CLC - tagged signals ( Figure 5A ; see Supplemental Figure 10 online ) . Double - labeling immunogold electron microscopy experiments performed on Arabidopsis root cells , using anti - Flot1 ( 6 - nm gold - conjugated secondary ) and anti - CLC ( 15 - nm gold - conjugated secondary ) monoclonal antibodies , provided further support that Flot1 and CLC are not colocalized either at the plasma membrane or in the cytoplasm ( Figures 5B to 5E ) . A typical small cytoplasmic vesicular con ﬁ guration ( clathrin - coated vesicle , 15 - nm gold ) is illustrated in Figure 5C , whereas a larger Flot1 - positive vesicle ( 6 - nm gold ) is shown in Figure 5E . These experiments demonstrate that Flot1 and CLC are rarely colocalized in Arab - idopsis root cells . Figure 6 . Flot1 - Positive Puncta Are Dynamic and Appear to Bud into Living Root Epidermal Cells . ( A ) Transgenic Arabidopsis root epidermal cell expressing GFP - Flot1 imaged by VA - TIRFM . Shown are green and red images from a time - lapse sequence taken 10 s apart . The merged image was used to identify puncta that disappeared during this 10 - s interval . ( B ) Individual budding event of a GFP - Flot1 – positive spot . Shown is a time series for the yellow boxed area marked in ( A ) ( see Supplemental Movie 3 online ) . ( C ) Fluorescence intensity pro ﬁ le for the tracked GFP - Flot1 – positive spot documented in ( B ) . ( D ) MSD of the budding GFP - Flot1 – positive spot plotted as a function of time . The resulting MSD - t curves ( black squares ) were ﬁ tted with restricted diffusion modes . Bars = 10 m m in ( A ) and 2 m m in ( B ) . Membrane Microdomain - Dependent Endocytic Pathway 7 of 18 Flot1 - and Clathrin - Positive Puncta Display Different Dynamic Properties VA - TIRFM or variable - angle epi ﬂ uorescence microscopy allows for imaging of the plant cell cortex with a high signal - to - noise ratio ( Konopka et al . , 2008 ; Konopka and Bednarek , 2008a , 2008b ) . VA - TIRFM was next employed to analyze the puncta dynamics asso - ciated with GFP - Flot1 . These studies were performed on cotyledon leaf pavement cells , guard cells , hypocotyl and root epidermal cells , and root hairs . In all cell types , GFP - Flot1 was prominently orga - nized into punctuate structures ( Figure 6A ; see Supplemental Figure 11 online ) . The Flot1 - positive punctate structures that formed at the plasma membrane were highly dynamic ( see Supplemental Movie 2 online ) ; the ﬂ uorescence signal associated with these membrane structures underwent gradual loss as individual structures budded off from the plasma membrane and entered the cytoplasm ( Figure 6B ; see Supplemental Movie 3 online ) . The budding event associated with individual Flot1 - positive punctate structures was characterized by a sharp decrease in the ﬂ uorescence intensity pro ﬁ le ( Figure 6C ) . This pattern dif - fered greatly from those obtained on equivalent Flot1 - positive punctate structures present in chemically ﬁ xed cells ( see Supplemental Figure 12 online ) . Here , a slow and gradual de - crease in ﬂ uorescence intensity was observed , re ﬂ ecting pho - tobleaching of the GFP signal . This difference in the time course of ﬂ uorescence intensity loss indicates that the change in signal illustrated in Figure 6C is not consistent with photobleaching . Next , we calculated the diffusion coef ﬁ cient for GFP - Flot1 puncta using a linear ﬁ t to the mean squared displacement ( MSD ) versus time plots . The resulting MSD - t curve of the tracked budding GFP - Flot1 – positive structures was best ﬁ tted using a restricted diffusion mode ( Figure 6D ) , indicating that diffusion of such structures was being con ﬁ ned within a limited area . Finally , simultaneous monitoring of GFP - Flot1 and FM4 - 64 in root cells ( Figures 7A and 7B ; see Supplemental Movie 4 online ) again re - vealed that , generally , these two signals were often colocalized . To rule out the possibility that the colocalization was due to random overlap of the highly dense foci in the root epidermal cells , the red channel image from ﬁ ve different cells was rotated 180° with respect to the green channel , a statistical analysis with a technique reported previously to show nonrandom colocaliza - tion ( Konopka et al . , 2008 ) . The average peak distance for the original image ( 3 . 13 6 0 . 89 pixels ; n = 290 from ﬁ ve cells ) was signi ﬁ cantly different from that of the rotated images ( 7 . 09 6 1 . 98 pixels ; n = 295 from ﬁ ve cells ; P < 0 . 0001 ) , indicating that the colocalization was statistically signi ﬁ cant . Plants expressing both GFP - Flot1 and CLC - mOrange were also imaged using dual ﬂ uorescence color VA - TIRFM ( Figures 8A and 8B ; see Supplemental Movie 5 online ) . The behavior of Flot1 - containing structures was compared with that of clathrin - coated pits . GFP - Flot1 puncta were more abundant than the CLC - mOrange – labeled pits ( Figure 8C ) , and they moved laterally with higher velocities ( Figure 8D ) . The motion characteristics of both kinds of endocytotic puncta were also compared through measurements of their diffusion coef ﬁ cients . Interestingly , both Flot1 - and CLC - labeled puncta had average diffusion co - ef ﬁ cients that were on the same order of magnitude ; Ĝ values for GFP - Flot1 and CLC - labeled puncta were 3 . 07 6 0 . 18 3 10 2 2 m m 2 s 2 1 and 7 . 94 6 0 . 88 3 10 2 2 m m 2 s 2 1 , respectively ( Figures 8E and 8F ) . Taken together , these data demonstrate that Flot1 - positive and clathrin - coated puncta can be differentiated based on their dynamic characteristics . Membrane Microdomains and Cytoskeleton Disruption Alter Flot1 - Positive Puncta Dynamics The sterol - depleting agent methyl - b - cyclodextrin ( m b CD ) was next employed to investigate the role of membrane micro - domains on the dynamics of Flot1 - positive puncta . A 30 - min exposure to 10 mM m b CD was found to cause an overall de - crease in the GFP - Flot1 diffusion coef ﬁ cient , with the Ĝ value being greatly reduced from the control value of 3 . 07 6 0 . 18 3 10 2 2 m m 2 s 2 1 to 3 . 88 6 0 . 26 3 10 2 4 m m 2 s 2 1 , which represents a 100 - fold reduction ( Figure 9A ) . Thus , disruption of sterol - rich membrane microdomains can cause a signi ﬁ cant alteration in the dynamics of Flot1 - positive structures . Figure 7 . GFP - Flot1 and FM4 - 64 Puncta Are Often Colocalized at the Plasma Membrane of the Root Epidermal Cells . ( A ) VA - TIRFM image of a root epidermal cell expressing GFP - Flot1 treated with FM4 - 64 . White arrows indicate examples of colocalized puncta . ( B ) Colocalization histogram of a plot for each pixel according to its red ( x axis ) and green ( y axis ) intensity . These data were analyzed using Man - ders coef ﬁ cients . Bars = 5 m m . 8 of 18 The Plant Cell We then investigated the effects of tyrphostin A23 ( TyrA23 ) , a well - characterized inhibitor of endocytic cargo recruitment into the clathrin - mediated pathway , both in vivo and in vitro ( Banbury et al . , 2003 ; Konopka et al . , 2008 ) on GFP - Flot1 movement . A 30 - min treatment of roots with 50 m M TyrA23 did not cause a signi ﬁ cant change in the diffusion coef ﬁ cient for GFP - Flot1 puncta ( Ĝ = 2 . 44 6 0 . 53 3 10 2 2 m m 2 s 2 1 ) ( Figure 9B ) . Taken together , these ﬁ ndings provide further support for the hypothesis that the Flot1 - positive endocytic process functions independently of clathrin and requires the integrity of sterol - rich membrane microdomains within the plasma membrane . Figure 8 . Flot1 - Positive Puncta Derived from the Plasma Membrane Can Be Differentiated from CLC - Positive Puncta by their Dynamic Characteristics . ( A ) and ( B ) VA - TIRFM image of a root cell expressing GFP - Flot1 and CLC - mOrange . ( C ) Number of GFP - Flot1 and CLC - mOrange labeled puncta observed in VA - TIRFM movies of transgenic double - labeled Arabidopsis root epidermal cells . ( D ) Histogram of mean velocity of tracked GFP - Flot1 and CLC - mOrange – labeled puncta in VA - TIRFM movies of transgenic double - labeled Arabidopsis root epidermal cells . ( E ) and ( F ) Distribution of diffusion coef ﬁ cients of tracked GFP - Flot1 and CLC - mOrange – labeled puncta in VA - TIRFM movies of transgenic double - labeled Arabidopsis root epidermal cells . Bars = 10 m m . Membrane Microdomain - Dependent Endocytic Pathway 9 of 18 The effects of m b CD and TyrA23 were also investigated in the same cells coexpressing CLC - mOrange . When the roots were pretreated with m b CD , the Ĝ value of CLC - mOrange underwent a small decrease to 1 . 69 6 0 . 23 3 10 2 2 m m 2 s 2 1 ( Figure 9C ) . However , when the roots were pretreated with TyrA23 , the CLC - mOrange Ĝ value decreased signi ﬁ cantly to 1 . 26 6 0 . 19 3 10 2 3 m m 2 s 2 1 ( Figure 9D ) . These results indicated that the dynamics of CLC - mOrange structures are less sensitive to disruption of sterol - rich membrane microdomains . The involvement of the cytoskeleton in Flot1 - positive endo - cytosis was also tested using two well - characterized agents . When treated with 1 m M latrunculin B ( Lat - B ) , a speci ﬁ c inhibitor of actin polymerization , the trajectories of Flot1 - positive puncta were found to be con ﬁ ned to smaller regions , in comparison to untreated control root cells . In addition , the Ĝ value of the GFP - Flot1 structures decreased by sixfold to 4 . 74 6 0 . 48 3 10 2 3 m m 2 s 2 1 ( Figure 9E ) . Treatment with 10 m M oryzalin , an inhibitor of microtubule polymerization , led to an even greater decrease in the GFP - Flot1 diffusion coef ﬁ cient , with the Ĝ value being reduced 120 - fold to 2 . 43 6 0 . 24 3 10 2 4 m m 2 s 2 1 ( Figure 9F ) . Flot1 amiRNA Mutant Lines Display Retarded Seedling Development To obtain insight into the physiological role of Flot1 , we sought to obtain knockout T - DNA insertion lines through the SALK collection . Unfortunately , seeds for presumptive knockouts ( e . g . , SALK - 034821 ) were found to be wild - type ( see Supplemental Figure 9 . Histograms Showing the Different Dynamic Character of GFP - Flot1 and CLC - mOrange Puncta . ( A ) Distribution of diffusion coef ﬁ cients for GFP - Flot1 puncta after a 30 - min treatment with 10 mM m b CD ( n = 193 spots analyzed ) . ( B ) Distribution of diffusion coef ﬁ cients for GFP - Flot1 puncta after a 30 - min treatment with 50 µ M TyrA23 ( n = 203 spots analyzed ) . ( C ) Histogram showing the distribution for diffusion coef ﬁ cients of CLC - mOrange puncta after a 30 - min treatment with 10 mM m b CD ( n = 208 spots analyzed ) . ( D ) Histogram showing the distribution for diffusion coef ﬁ cients of CLC - mOrange puncta after a 30 - min treatment with 50 µ M TyrA23 ( n = 218 spots analyzed ) . ( E ) Histogram showing the distribution of diffusion coef ﬁ cients for GFP - Flot1 puncta after treatment with 1 µ M Lat - B ( n = 163 spots analyzed ) . ( F ) Histogram showing the distribution of diffusion coef ﬁ cients for GFP - Flot1 puncta after treatment with10 µ M Oryzalin ( n = 122 spots analyzed ) . [ See online article for color version of this ﬁ gure . ] 10 of 18 The Plant Cell Figure 13A online ) . We next obtained mutant line GK - 357G06 from the GABI - Kat library ; this mutant has a T - DNA insertion in the Flot1 promoter . After backcrossing , homozygous T - DNA lines were identi ﬁ ed by PCR of genomic DNA ; however , RT - PCR using Flot1 - speci ﬁ c primers revealed that Flot1 transcript levels in these mutants were elevated above those of wild - type plants ( see Supplemental Figure 13B online ) . To resolve this situation , we developed amiRNA mutant lines expressing a 35S : amiRNA Flot1 construct . Both RT - PCR and real - time quantitative RT - PCR analysis of Flot1 showed that mRNA levels for Flot1a / b were decreased to varying levels in four amiRNA knockdown lines compared with wild - type plants ( Figure 10A ) . Seedling growth , as re ﬂ ected by root and hypo - cotyl lengths , was reduced in all four amiRNA knockdown lines compared with wild - type plants ( Figures 10B and 10C ) . A phe - notypic analysis performed on amiRNA15 - 5 , the line displaying the most substantial effect on Flot1a / b mRNA levels , revealed a delay in development throughout vegetative growth ( Figures 10D to 10F ) . Con ﬁ rmation that these phenotypic changes were caused by a reduction in Flot1a / b mRNA levels was provided by complementation experiments in which the wild - type phenotype was restored in amiRNA15 - 5 plants expressing 35S : Flot1 ( see Supplemental Figure 14 and Supplemental Table 1 online ) . These ﬁ ndings are consistent with the hypothesis that Flot1 is required for optimal growth of Arabidopsis . To investigate the basis for the observed stunted growth phenotype of our amiRNA lines , we next examined the effects of Flot1 mRNA reduction on cellular architecture within the shoot apical meristem ( SAM ) and root meristem ( RM ) . Median longi - tudinal sections of the SAM from wild - type and amiRNA15 - 5 transgenic plants revealed that , compared with the wild - type SAM , this knockdown line had a smaller SAM during seedling development ( Figures 11A to 11F ) . This difference was attrib - utable to fewer meristematic cells within the SAM of the knockdown lines ; in other words , the wild - type SAM contained 16 . 8 6 0 . 7 cells across the L1 or epidermal layer , whereas this number was reduced to 11 . 2 6 1 . 3 in amiRNA15 - 5 plants ( mean and SD , n = 5 plants ) . However , the overall structural organization of the SAM was not altered in these Flot1 amiRNA knockdown plant lines . A similar situation was observed between the RM of Figure 10 . RNA Interference – Mediated Knockdown of Flot1 Caused Growth Defects in Arabidopsis Seedlings . ( A ) Flot1a / b transcript levels measured from seedlings expressing an amiRNA construct and control ( wild - type [ WT ] ) plant lines . Quantitative RT - PCR assays were normalized to actin mRNA levels as an internal control ; mean 6 SD ( n = $ 10 seedlings per plant line ) . ( B ) Seedling ( 6 d old ) root and hypocotyl length measured on wild - type and amiRNA plant lines . Mean 6 SD ( n = $ 30 seedlings per plant line ) . ( C ) Comparative seedling growth characteristics between wild - type ( left ) and a homozygous amiRNA15 - 5 knockdown plant line ( right ) ; image taken 6 d after germination . ( D ) and ( E ) Phenotypes of a wild - type seedling ( D ) and a homozygous amiRNA15 - 5 knockdown transgenic plant line ( E ) ; 23 - d - old plants . ( F ) Photograph of 7 - week - old plants . Left , wild - type control plant ; right , amiRNA15 - 5 transgenic plant . Bars = 10 mm in ( C ) to ( E ) and 50 mm in ( F ) . Membrane Microdomain - Dependent Endocytic Pathway 11 of 18 wild - type and amiRNA15 - 5 plants ; here , the number of meri - stematic cells in these knockdown miRNA RMs was ; 67 % of that in wild - type RMs ( Figure 12A ) . To gain further insight into the basis for this retarded growth , we also compared the uptake of ﬁ lipin - sterol in wild - type and amiRNA15 - 5 seedlings . As shown in Figures 12B and 12C , less ﬁ lipin - sterol labeled intracellular puncta were observed in the amiRNA15 - 5 line compared with those in wild - type root cells , indicating that the internalization of sterols was affected in the Flot1 amiRNA knockdown plants . This ﬁ nding is consistent with the hypothesis that At - Flot1 is required for ef ﬁ cient endocytosis . However , we cannot discount the possibility for general im - pairment in membrane turnover in these amiRNA15 - 5 seedlings . DISCUSSION Flot1 Is Associated with Membrane Microdomains In recent years , the structure , composition , and possible functions of plant plasma membrane raft – like domains have been described ( Raffaele et al . , 2009 ; Haney and Long , 2010 ; Lefebvre et al . , 2010 ) . Some proteins involved in membrane traf ﬁ cking and signal transduction were reported to be associated with mem - brane microdomains ( Mongrand et al . , 2010 ) . A previous pro - teomic study revealed a tendency for Flot1 to partition into DRMs ( Borner et al . , 2005 ) . However , whether this corresponds to an enrichment in bona ﬁ de plasma membrane micro - domains remained to be determined . In our study , we found Flot1 was almost exclusively present in DRMs by immunoblotting , in - dicating that it was indeed a membrane microdomain – associated protein . Moreover , immunogold studies showed that Flot1 was clustered in particular domains of the membrane , further con - ﬁ rming the aforementioned conclusion . Based on these ﬁ ndings , we conclude that Flot1 is closely related to membrane micro - domains . Flot1 Participates in Non - Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis Plants appear to have at least four endocytic pathways . Apart from the well - studied clathrin - dependent endocytosis ( Chen et al . , 2011 ) , other entry pathways , including membrane raft – mediated endocytosis , also operate in plant cells ( Murphy et al . , 2005 ; Moscatelli et al . , 2007 ; Bandmann and Homann , 2011 ) . Recent studies suggested that plant ﬂ otillins play a critical role in symbiotic bacterial infection of M . truncatula ( Haney and Long , 2010 ; Haney et al . , 2011 ) , and the recycling of PIN proteins may depend on structural sterols and membrane rafts in Arabidopsis ( Grebe et al . , 2003 ; Willemsen et al . , 2003 ; Men et al . , 2008 ) . Although these studies have begun to provide insights into the role of endocytosis in plants , the molecular mechanisms un - derlying these events remain to be elucidated . In this study , we show that the membrane microdomain – associated protein Flot1 was localized to the plasma membrane and intracellular com - partments . In addition , GFP - Flot1 was also found to colocalize partially with FM4 - 64 . Given that this FM4 - 64 dye is internalized , via endocytosis from the plasma membrane , and is considered to be a bona ﬁ de marker for the endocytic pathway in plant cells ( Emans et al . , 2002 ; Chintagari et al . , 2006 ) , our ﬁ ndings offer strong support for the hypothesis that Flot1 participates in an endocytic pathway . Immunogold labeling with anti - Flot1 antibody provided strong con ﬁ rmation of our confocal immuno ﬂ uorescence ﬁ ndings , in that gold particles were clearly localized to plasma membrane invaginations and cytoplasmic vesicles in wild - type Arabidopsis root cells . Interestingly , we found the size of the vesicle con - ﬁ guration outlined by these gold particles to be on the order of 100 nm , which is different from the established 30 - nm size of clathrin - coated vesicles ( Dhonukshe et al . , 2007 ) . These ﬁ ndings suggest that the gold particle – labeled vesicles likely belong to a new type of endocytic vesicles . In agreement with the immunogold data , our transmission electron microscopy ob - servations performed on high - pressure - frozen GFP - Flot1 root cells led to the detection of all the morphological intermediates for Flot1 - positive vesicle formation at the plasma membrane , from invagination to internalization . These results offer strong support for the hypothesis that Flot1 is associated with the formation of these large endocytotic vesicles . The lack of spatial overlap between the ﬂ uorescent signals associated with GFP - Flot1 and CLC - mOrange structures within transgenic root cells Figure 11 . RNA Interference – Mediated Knockdown of Flot1 Retards SAM Development in Arabidopsis Seedlings . Apices were ﬁ xed , embedded , and stained with toluidine blue . Longitu - dinal sections were examined under a bright - ﬁ eld light microscope . ( A ) , ( C ) , and ( E ) Median longitudinal sections of SAMs of 3 - , 8 - , and 10 - d - old wild - type Arabidopsis seedlings , respectively . ( B ) , ( D ) , and ( F ) Median longitudinal sections of SAMs of 3 - , 8 - , and 10 - d - old transgenic amiRNA15 - 5 Arabidopsis seedlings , respectively . Bars = 20 m m . [ See online article for color version of this ﬁ gure . ] 12 of 18 The Plant Cell provided further support for the notion that Flot1 is associated with a separate endocytotic pathway in plants . Similarly , raft - associated endocytosis , de ﬁ ned as the cholesterol - sensitive and clathrin - independent internalization of cargoes from the plasma membrane , is considered to be a new endocytic path - way in mammalian cells ( Glebov et al . , 2006 ; Lajoie and Nabi , 2007 ; Simons and Gerl , 2010 ) . TIRFM or evanescent wave microscopy is a powerful imaging technique to study biological processes occurring at the cell membrane . This technique is particularly suitable for the in - vestigation of endocytosis and exocytosis , owing to its capacity to provide high signal - to - noise imaging of ﬂ uorescently labeled puncta located near the cover slip ( Simons and Gerl , 2010 ) . When the incident angle of the laser was adjusted , this tech - nique can be successfully extended to the quantitative analysis of membrane - associated events within intact plant cells ( Wang et al . , 2006 ; Konopka et al . , 2008 ; Konopka and Bednarek , 2008a , 2008b ; Li et al . , 2011 ; Wan et al . , 2011 ) . In our study , we used VA - TIRFM to clearly document the budding into the cell of GFP - Flot1 punctuate structures . Of equal importance , VA - TIRFM imaging revealed that the dynamic behavior of these Flot1 - positive structures was different from that of CLC - positive puncta . Finally , we could demonstrate that interference with clathrin - dependent endocytosis by TyrA23 treatment did not change the dynamics of the GFP - Flot1 puncta , further con ﬁ rming that Flot1 operates independently from clathrin - mediated endo - cytosis . Taken together , these ﬁ ndings offer strong support for the conclusion that Flot1 is involved in a different endocytic pathway in Arabidopsis . Membrane Microdomains and the Cytoskeleton Are Required for Normal Flot1 - Positive Puncta Dynamics Membrane microdomains that are involved in many different cellular functions and processes , such as signaling , protein transport , cell adhesion , and movement , need to be connected with the cytoskeleton ( Grzybek et al . , 2005 ) . Proteomic studies performed on membranes have shown that numerous cyto - skeletal proteins coisolate with the DRM fraction ( von Haller et al . , 2001 ; Nebl et al . , 2002 ; Bini et al . , 2003 ; MacLellan et al . , 2005 ; Yanagida et al . , 2007 ; Yu et al . , 2008 ) . In contrast with the situation in mammalian and yeast cells ( Langhorst et al . , 2007 ) , in which there is little evidence for microtubule involvement in ﬂ otillins , we found that microtubules were required for ef ﬁ cient GFP - Flot1 puncta dynamics . These ﬁ ndings are consistent with an earlier report that microtubules were required for ef ﬁ cient DRP1C and CLC dynamics ( Konopka et al . , 2008 ) . Given the connection between formin and microtubule plus - ends and the link between formin and micro ﬁ laments ( Cheung and Wu , 2004 ; Basu and Chang , 2007 ) , we suggest that alterations in micro - tubule dynamics led directly to a redistribution of Flot1 , which in turn would regulate the velocity and positioning of Flot1 - positive puncta . Role Played by Flot1 in Plant Growth Endocytosis and vesicle recycling play crucial roles in plant developmental processes , including polar growth of root hair cells ( Dhonukshe et al . , 2006 ) , cell - to - cell communication ( Lewis and Lazarowitz , 2010 ) , establishment of root cell polarity , and Figure 12 . RM Size and Uptake of Filipin - Sterols Are Reduced in Transgenic amiRNA Arabidopsis Knockdown Plants . ( A ) RMs of 3 - d - old wild - type ( left ) and amiRNA15 - 5 ( right ) seedlings were ﬁ xed , embedded , and stained with toluidine blue . Longitudinal sections were examined under a bright - ﬁ eld light microscope . Top black arrow indicates the transition zone between meristem and elongation differentiation zone ; bottom arrow marks the quiescent center of the RM . ( B ) Filipin - sterol ﬂ uorescence detected in wild - type ( WT ) Arabidopsis root cells . Pseudocolor images show the ﬂ uorescence intensity of ﬁ lipin ( right ) . ( Color code bar indicates the relative intensities . ) ( C ) Filipin - sterol ﬂ uorescence detected in amiRNA Arabidopsis knockdown root cells . Pseudocolor images show the ﬂ uorescence intensity of ﬁ lipin ( right ) . ( Color code bar indicates the relative intensities . ) Bars = 20 m m . Membrane Microdomain - Dependent Endocytic Pathway 13 of 18 other auxin - dependent processes ( Kleine - Vehn et al . , 2008 ) . As these studies have focused mainly on clathrin - dependent en - docytosis , little information is currently available on the role of the non - clathrin - mediated pathway in seedling development . In this study , we demonstrated that Flot1 amiRNA knockdown lines exhibited retarded growth characteristics . This growth phenotype may re ﬂ ect a limitation on recycling of plasma membrane proteins , which could then lead to a slowing of the cell cycle ; this could explain the reduction in SAM and RM size . This model is consistent with an earlier report that root hair elongation depends on the highly regulated process of vesicle traf ﬁ cking ( Ovecka et al . , 2010 ) . In summary , our study offers three novel ﬁ ndings : ( 1 ) Cellular and physiological data establish that Flot1 does not follow the prevailing endocytic pathway , as characterized by clathrin ; ( 2 ) VA - TIRFM analysis revealed that the dynamic behavior of the Flot1 - positive puncta differs from that of CLC - positive puncta ; and ( 3 ) seedling development in Flot1 amiRNA knockdown transgenic lines is retarded . Taken together , our ﬁ ndings dem - onstrate that Flot1 is involved in a membrane microdomain – dependent , but clathrin - independent , endocytic pathway required for optimal seedling development . METHODS Plant Materials and Growth Conditions Allexperimentswereperformedon Arabidopsisthaliana ecotypeColumbia - 0 . Seeds were surface - sterilized and strati ﬁ ed at 4°C for 2 d in the dark , and seedlings were then grown on half - strength Murashige and Skoog ( MS ) medium supplemented with 1 % Suc . Plants were grown under long - day ( 16 h light / 8 h dark ) conditions at a temperature of 20 to 22°C . Plasmid Construction and Plant Transformation Theexpressionvectorfor GFP - Flot1 wasconstructedasfollows : Thecoding sequence for Flot1 was PCR ampli ﬁ ed ( using primers 5 9 - CGCGGATCC - ATGTTCAAAGTTGCAAG - 3 9 and 5 9 - CCGGAATTCTTAGCTGCGAGTCA - CTT - 3 9 ) and subcloned as a Bam HI - Eco RI fragment into a modi ﬁ ed pCAMBIA1200 vector . Wild - type Arabidopsis was transformed with the GFP - Flot1 construct using the Agrobacterium tumefaciens – mediated ﬂ oral dip method ( Clough and Bent , 1998 ) . Transgenic plants were selected on half - strengthMSsolidmedium ( 1 % agar ) containing50 µ g / mLhygromycin . Generation of Anti - Flot1 Antibodies To generate polyclonal antibodies against Flot1 , a full - length coding sequence was inserted into the pET - 28a ( + ) expression vector ( Novagen ) . After expression in Escherichia coli strain BL21 , according to the man - ufacturer ’ s protocol ( NEB ) , recombinant protein containing a 6xHis tag was puri ﬁ ed using a nickel - nitrilotriacetic acid agarose column , according to the manufacturer ’ s instructions ( Qiagen ) . Af ﬁ nity - puri ﬁ ed recombinant proteins were used to immunize rabbits . The polyclonal antiserum was af ﬁ nity puri ﬁ ed and tested for speci ﬁ city using recombinant protein . To generate monoclonal antibodies against Flot1 , the recombinant proteins were used to immunize Balb / c mice ( female , 4 to 6 weeks old ) subcutaneously four times at 10 - to 14 - d intervals . Mice spleens were removed 3 d after the ﬁ nal immunization and cells isolated and fused with Sp2 / 0 myeloma cells at a ratio of 1 : 2 Sp2 / 0 cell / 10 spleen cells using polyethylene glycol 1500 . Fused cells were cultured in semisolid Iscove ’ s Modi ﬁ ed Dulbecco ’ s Medium containing 25 % newborn calf serum , 2 % methyl cellulose , and 2 % hypoxanthine - aminopterin - thymidine . Single hybridoma colonies were collected , individually , after 7 d of incubation . Appropriate amounts of supernatant generated from the hybridoma cell culture were used to screen for immune af ﬁ nity by ELISA . Positive hy - bridomas were selected for further culture and titer determination . Immunoblot Analysis To determine protein levels in transgenic GFP - Flot1 plant lines , plasma membrane proteins were extracted from wild - type and transgenic GFP - Flot1 seedlings grown vertically on half - strength MS medium ( 1 % agar ) . Twenty - day - old seedlings were homogenized in buffer ( 330 mM Suc , 50 mM MOPS - KOH , pH 7 . 5 , 5 mM EDTA , 0 . 2 % casein hydrolysate , 0 . 6 % polyvinylpolypyrrolidone , 5 mM ascorbate , and 5 mM DTT ) . The ho - mogenate was then ﬁ ltered through a 200 - m m nylon mesh and centri - fuged at 10 , 000 g for 15 min ; the supernatant was saved and centrifuged at50 , 000 g for60min . Theresultingmicrosomalpelletwasresuspendedin resuspension buffer ( 330 mM Suc , 5 mM K - phosphate , pH 7 . 8 , 0 . 1 mM EDTA , and1mMDTT [ freshlyadded ] ) . Theresuspendedmembraneswere added to a phase mixture to produce an aqueous polymer two - phase system with a ﬁ nal composition of 6 . 1 % ( w / w ) Dextran 500 , 6 . 1 % ( w / w ) polyethylene glycol 3350 , 5 mM K - phosphate , pH 7 . 8 , and 3 mM KCl . The ﬁ nal upper phases were diluted at least twofold with 330 mM Suc , 5 mM K - phosphate , pH 7 . 8 , and 0 . 1 mM EDTA , and plasma membranes were pelleted by centrifugation at 100 , 000 g for 1 h . PMs were further submitted to Triton X - 100 treatment ( ﬁ nal concentration 1 % [ v / v ] ) at 4°C for 30 min . Treated membranes were brought to a ﬁ nal concentration of 48 % Suc ( w / w ) , overlaid with successive 3 - mL steps of 40 , 35 , 30 , 10 , and 5 % Suc in TNE buffer ( 25 mM Tris - Cl , 150 mM NaCl , and 5 mM EDTA , pH 7 . 5 ) , and then centrifuged for 18 h at 230 , 000 g in a TST41 rotor ( Sorvall ) . DRMs could be recovered below the 30 to 35 % layers as an opaque band . This fraction was washed in TNE buffer to remove residual sucrose . Isolated plasma membrane proteins were then separated by SDS - PAGE and analyzed by immunoblotting using our anti - Flot1 monoclonal antibody , biotin - conjugatedanti - GFPantibody ( RocklandImmunochemicals , Gilbertsville , PA ) and anti - PM H + - ATPase antibody ( Agrisera ) . Immunolabeling was performed according to ( Konopka et al . , 2008 ) , with slight modi ﬁ cations . Horseradish peroxidase ( HRP ) - conjugated anti - mouse secondary anti - bodies ( GE Healthcare ) and HRP - conjugated streptavidin ( Rockland Im - munochemicals ) were used to detect the primary antibodies , respectively . Immuno ﬂ uorescence and Confocal Microscopy For indirect immunolocalization of Flot1 in wild - type or transgenic VHA - a1 - GFP ( Dettmer et al . , 2006 ) plants , 4 - d - old seedlings that were grown on half - strength MS medium ( 1 % agar ) were ﬁ xed in 4 % ( w / v ) formal - dehyde inPME ( 55 mMPIPES - KOH , 2 . 5mMMgSO 4 , and1mMEGTA , pH 6 . 9 ) for 1 h under vacuum . Fixed seedlings were washed in PME and then in PBS , incubated in 1 . 5 % ( w / v ) driselase for 40 min , and treated with permeabilization buffer ( 1 % Nonidet P - 40 and 10 % DMSO in PBS ) for 60 min . The roots were then washed in PBS . For immunolabeling , the roots were blocked with 2 % BSA ( w / v ) in PBS for 1 h and probed with anti - Flot1 antibodyinPBS + 2 % BSAovernightat4°C . RootswerethenwashedinPBS and incubated with tetramethylrhodamine - 5 - isothiocyanate – conjugated anti - mouse antibody ( Sigma - Aldrich ) in PBS + 2 % BSA for 3 h . Afterward , roots were washed with PBS and observed by confocal microscopy ( CLSM 510 ; Carl Zeiss ) . High - Pressure Freezing , Freeze Substitution , Immunogold Labeling , and Electron Microscopy Samples for transmission electron microscopy were prepared using high - pressure freezing . Three to four root apices ( 2 to 3 mm long ) were placed in gold platelet carriers pre ﬁ lled with 1 - hexadecene and immediately 14 of 18 The Plant Cell frozen in a high - pressure freezing apparatus ( HPM100 ; Bal - Tec ) . Freeze substitution in acetone , ﬁ xation in osmium , and embedding in Spurr ’ s resin were performed using a Leica EM AFS processor . Sections were poststained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate and then examined in a JEM - 1230 ( JEOL ) operated at 80 keV . Immunogold labeling was performed according to the procedure previously described ( Müller et al . , 2010 ) , with slight modi ﬁ cations . In brief , Arabidopsis roottipswere ﬁ xedusingahigh - pressurefreeze ﬁ xation device ( HPM010 ; Bal - Tec ) , cryo - substituted at 2 80°C , and embedded in Lowicryl HM20 ( Polysciences ) . Ultrathin sections were blocked and subsequently incubated in a moist chamber with primary antibodies diluted 1 : 100 ( anti - Flot1 ; polyclonal ) or 1 : 150 ( anti - CLC ; monoclonal ; Sigma - Aldrich ) overnight at 4°C . This step was followed by rinsing and incubation with secondary antibodies conjugated to 15 - nm ( - labeling CLC ) and6 - nm ( - labelingFlot1 ) goldparticles . Secondaryantibodieswere diluted 1 : 50 ( Aurion ) with PBS / BSA and incubated for 2 h at room tem - perature . Sections were extensively washed , stained with uranyl acetate , and examined with an LEO 912AB transmission electron microscope ( Zeiss ) . Controls were performed using preimmune serum . VA - TIRFM Imaging The 4 - d - old vertically grown GFP - Flot1 seedlings were stained with FM4 - 64 ( Invitrogen , Molecular Probes ; 2 . 5 m M ) in half - strength MS medium supplemented with 1 % Suc for 5 min on ice , washed twice with cold medium , and observed under VA - TIRFM . The data of GFP - Flot1 colocal - ization with FM4 - 64 were analyzed using Manders coef ﬁ cients ( Manders et al . , 1993 ; Arimura et al . , 2004 ) . Inhibitors , including m b CD , TyrA23 , Lat - B , and oryzalin , were pur - chased from Sigma - Aldrich . Vertically grown 4 - d - old Arabidopsis seed - lings were incubated in half - strength liquid MS medium containing 50 m M TyrA23 or 10 mM M b CD for 30 min . For treatment with Lat - B or oryzalin , seedlings were incubated in half - strength liquid MS medium containing 1 m M Lat - B or 10 m M oryzalin for 30 min , then observed under VA - TIRFM . An objective - type variable - angle total internal re ﬂ ection ﬂ uorescence microscope , which was based on an inverted microscope ( IX - 71 ; Olympus ) with a total internal re ﬂ ective ﬂ uorescence illuminator and a 3 100oil - immersionobjective ( Olympus ; numericalaperture = 1 . 45 ) , was used for ﬂ uorescence imaging . The 473 - nm / 561 - nm laser line from a diode laser ( Changchun New Industries Optoelectronics Technology ) was used to excite GFP and mOrange . Fluorescent signals were collected bytheobjectiveandpassedthroughtwo ﬁ lters , aBA510IFlong - pass ﬁ lter ( Chroma USA ) and a HQ525 / 50 band - pass ﬁ lter ( Chroma ) , before being directed using a back - illuminated electron - multiplying charge - coupled device ( EMCCD ) camera ( ANDOR iXon DV8897D - CS0 - VP , Andor Tech - nology ) and high - quality ﬁ lters ( band - pass 525 / 45 and 609 / 54 ) . We set the gain of our EMCCD camera at 300 throughout all single - molecule imaging experiments ; the setting was in the linear dynamic range of the EMCCD camera . Images were acquired with 100 - ms exposure time and analyzed with Image J software ( NIH ) . Cloning of 35S : amiRNA Flot1 The Flot1 - directedamiRNAconstructsweredesignedusingaWeb - based program ( http : / / wmd2 . weigelworld . org ) ( Schwab et al . , 2006 ; Ossowski et al . , 2008 ) . The pRS300 plasmid was used as a template to create the amiRNA hairpin with an intron ( Ossowski et al . , 2008 ) . Primer sequences are listed in Supplemental Table 2 online . The ﬁ nal amiRNA PCR product was digested at the Kpn I and Spe I sites ﬂ anking the sequence encoding the amiRNA hairpin . The resultant product was ligated into the PTCK309 vector using the Kpn I and Spe I sites . Transformation of Arabidopsis was conducted according to the ﬂ oral dip method ( Clough and Bent , 1998 ) . Transgenic plants were selected on half - strength MS medium containing 50 µ g / mL hygromycin . Real - Time Quantitative RT - PCR Total RNA was extracted from seedlings using Trizol according to the manufacturer ’ s protocol ( Invitrogen ) . Reverse transcription was per - formed using the First Strand cDNA Synthesis kit ( Invitrogen ) and an oligo ( dT ) primer . For Flot1 , we designed speci ﬁ c primers ( see Supplemental Table 3 online ) . PCR wasperformed using the SYBR Green Mix ( Takara ) in an optical 96 - well plate with the ABI PRISM 7300 system ( Applied Bio - systems ) . In each reaction , 0 . 3 M primer and 10 ng of cDNA were used . PCRforeachofthreebiological replicateswasperformed intriplicate . The initial denaturing time was 5 min , followed by 40 cycles of 95°C for 20 s , 54°C for 20 s , 72°C for 20 s , 84°C for 30 s , and 72°C for 10 min . A melting curve was run after the PCR cycles . Characterization of Growth Phenotype Seeds were treated at 4°C for 2 d and then grown for 6 d before measurements were taken of root and hypocotyl lengths . For adult plant phenotypes , wild - type and Flot1 amiRNA plants were grown side - by - side in a growth chamber . Mature plants ( 30 d old ) were examined for the growth phenotype and photographed . To investigate the cellular archi - tecture of the SAM and RM , shoot and root tips were ﬁ xed with 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde ( w / v ) in 0 . 1 M cacodylate buffer , pH 7 . 2 , for 48 h at 4°C . Samples were then rinsed in 0 . 1 M cacodylate buffer and dehydrated in a graded ethanol series , in ﬁ ltrated , and embedded using LR White resin ( Electron Microscopy Sciences ) . Resin blocks were polymerized for 24 h at 60°C . Thick sections ( 1 m m ) were cut using a Leica ultramicrotome . Sections were stained with 1 % toluidine blue in 1 % borax , and images were taken using a Zeiss Axioplan II compound microscope with an MRC digital camera and Axiovision software ( Carl Zeiss ) . Detection of Filipin - Sterol Fluorescence in Arabidopsis Roots The ﬁ lipin - sterol labeling was performed according to the procedure pre - viously described ( Boutté et al . , 2011 ) with slight modi ﬁ cations . Seedlings were transferred to 4 % paraformaldehyde , 150 m g / mL ﬁ lipin III ( Sigma - Aldrich ) ( from a 10 mg / mL stock in DMSO ) in microtubule - stabilizing buffer ( 50 mM PIPES , 5 mM EGTA , and 5 mM MgSO 4 $ 7H 2 O , pH 7 . 0 ) for 1 h under vacuum . Specimens were washed three times in microtubule - stabilizing buffer and imaged with a multiphoton laser scanning micro - scope ( FV 1000 MPE ; Olympus ) . Filipin was excited with a 715 - nm laser , and ﬂ uorescence was detected in an emission window at 460 to 500 nm . Fluorescence signals were collected by a 3 20 water immersion objective ( numerical aperture = 1 . 00 ) . To compare sterol uptake levels in wild - type and amiRNA root cells , imaging was performed in parallel using exactly the same acquisition parameters for all samples . To create a pseudocolor image that visualizes the ﬂ uorescence intensity of ﬁ lipin - stained struc - tures , the original images were transferred to index color format using ImageJ software ( NIH ) with the Rainbow - LUT spectral setting . Accession Numbers Sequence data from this article can be found in the Arabidopsis In - formation Resource database under the following accession numbers : Flot1 ( At5g25250 ) , CLC ( At2g40060 ) , and VHA - a1 ( At2g28520 ) . Supplemental Data The following materials are available in the online version of this article . Supplemental Figure 1 . Characterization of Transgenic Arabidopsis Seedlings Expressing GFP - Flot1 . Supplemental Figure 2 . Flot1 Was Detected in the Detergent - Resistant Membrane Fraction Isolated from a Plasma Membrane Preparation . Membrane Microdomain - Dependent Endocytic Pathway 15 of 18 Supplemental Figure 3 . Flot1 Is Enriched in the Detergent - Resistant Membrane Fraction . Supplemental Figure 4 . Localization of Flot1 Was Insensitive to Probe Level in a Range of Transgenic Lines . Supplemental Figure 5 . Anatomical Characterization of Overexpres - sion and Wild - Type Roots . Supplemental Figure 6 . Four - Day - Old Arabidopsis Seedlings Ex - pressing GFP - Flot1 or CLC - GFP Were Treated with 30 m M BFA . Supplemental Figure 7 . Immuno ﬂ uorescence Labeling with Anti - Flot1 Antibody in a Root Hair Cell Containing a TGN Marker ( VHA - a1 - GFP ) . Supplemental Figure 8 . Flot1 Is Localized in Plasma Membrane Microdomains . Supplemental Figure 9 . Size Distribution Histogram of Vesicles in TEM Images of Wild - Type , Flot1 Overexpression , and amiRNA Root Cells . Supplemental Figure 10 . Quantitative Assessment of the Number of Colocalizing Flot1 and CLC Compartments . Supplemental Figure 11 . Flot1 Forms Punctuate Structures in Epidermal Cells from Various Tissues . Supplemental Figure 12 . Fluorescence Intensity Pro ﬁ le for Photo - bleaching of a GFP - Flot1 Positive Punctate Structure in a Chemically Fixed Root Cell . Supplemental Figure 13 . Identi ﬁ cation of the Putative ﬂ ot1 Mutant by PCR and RT - PCR . Supplemental Figure 14 . Phenotypes for the Wild Type , Transgenic amiRNA15 - 5 , and Transgenic amiRNA15 - 5 Expressing 35S : GFP - rrFlot1 Plants . Supplemental Table 1 . PCR Primer Pairs Used for RNAi Resistant ( rr ) - Flot1 Cloning . Supplemental Table 2 . Primers Used for Cloning 35S : amiRNA Flot1 . Supplemental Table 3 . Primers Employed for qRT - PCR and RT - PCR Analyses of Flot1 Expression . Supplemental Movie 1 . Time - Lapse Video of Living Root Cells Expressing GFP - Flot1 Imaged by Laser Scanning Confocal Microscopy . Supplemental Movie 2 . Time - Lapse Video of an Expanding Root Epidermal Cell Expressing GFP - Flot1 Imaged with VA - TIRFM . Supplemental Movie 3 . Apparent Budding of GFP - Flot1 Shown by VA - TIRFM Imaging . Supplemental Movie 4 . Colocalization of GFP - Flot1 and FM4 - 64 in Root Epidermal Cells Imaged Simultaneously with VA - TIRFM . Supplemental Movie 5 . Time - Lapse Images of an Expanding Root Epidermal Cell Expressing CLC - mOrange and GFP - Flot1 Imaged with Simultaneous Dual - Color VA - TIRFM . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Sebastian Bednarek for kindly providing CLC - GFP / mOrange Arabidopsis seeds . This work was supported by the National Basic Research Program of China ( 973 Program 2011CB809103 and 2011CB944603 ) , the Chinese Academy of Sciences / State Administration of Foreign Experts Affairs InternationalPartnershipProgramfor CreativeResearchTeams ( 20090491019 ) , the National Natural Science Foundation of China ( 30730009 , 30821007 , 31000092 , 31121065 , and 30900072 ) , the Knowledge Innovation Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences ( KJCX2 - YW - L08 and KSCX2 - EW - J - 1 ) , the Centre of the Region Haná for Biotechnological and Agricultural Research ( ED0007 / 01 / 01 ) , and the Czech Science Foundation Grant Agency of the Czech Republic ( P501 / 11 / 1764 ) . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS R . L . and J . L . designed the research . R . L . , P . L . , and U . M . performed the experiments . R . L . , Y . W . , T . C . , Q . W . , and W . J . L analyzed data . X . F . contributed new analytic tools . R . L , F . B . , J . S . , W . J . L . , and J . L . wrote the article . W . J . L . and J . L . contributed equally in supervising this project . Received January 10 , 2012 ; revised April 7 , 2012 ; accepted April 20 , 2012 ; published May 15 , 2012 . REFERENCES Arimura , S . , Yamamoto , J . , Aida , G . P . , Nakazono , M . , and Tsutsumi , N . ( 2004 ) . Frequent fusion and ﬁ ssion of plant mito - chondria with unequal nucleoid distribution . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 101 : 7805 – 7808 . Banbury , D . N . , Oakley , J . D . , Sessions , R . B . , and Banting , G . ( 2003 ) . Tyrphostin A23 inhibits internalization of the transferrin receptor by perturbing the interaction between tyrosine motifs and the medium chain subunit of the AP - 2 adaptor complex . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 12022 – 12028 . Bandmann , V . , and Homann , U . ( December 23 , 2011 ) . Clathrin - independent endocytosis contributes to uptake of glucose into BY - 2 protoplasts . Plant J . http : / / dx . doi . org / . Basu , R . , and Chang , F . ( 2007 ) . Shaping the actin cytoskeleton using microtubule tips . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 19 : 88 – 94 . Benmerah , A . , and Lamaze , C . ( 2007 ) . Clathrin - coated pits : Vive la différence ? Traf ﬁ c 8 : 970 – 982 . Bhat , R . A . , Miklis , M . , Schmelzer , E . , Schulze - Lefert , P . , and Panstruga , R . ( 2005 ) . Recruitment and interaction dynamics of plant penetration resistance components in a plasma membrane microdomain . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 : 3135 – 3140 . Bini , L . , Pacini , S . , Liberatori , S . , Valensin , S . , Pellegrini , M . , Raggiaschi , R . , Pallini , V . , and Baldari , C . T . ( 2003 ) . Extensive temporally regulated reorganization of the lipid raft proteome fol - lowing T - cell antigen receptor triggering . Biochem . J . 369 : 301 – 309 . Borner , G . H . , Sherrier , D . J . , Weimar , T . , Michaelson , L . V . , Hawkins , N . D . , Macaskill , A . , Napier , J . A . , Beale , M . H . , Lilley , K . S . , and Dupree , P . ( 2005 ) . Analysis of detergent - resistant mem - branes in Arabidopsis . Evidence for plasma membrane lipid rafts . Plant Physiol . 137 : 104 – 116 . Boutté , Y . , Men , S . , and Grebe , M . ( 2011 ) . Fluorescent in situ visu - alization of sterols in Arabidopsis roots . Nat . Protoc . 6 : 446 – 456 . Brown , D . A . , and London , E . ( 2000 ) . Structure and function of sphingolipid - and cholesterol - rich membrane rafts . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 17221 – 17224 . Carmona - Salazar , L . , El Ha ﬁ di , M . , Enríquez - Arredondo , C . , Vázquez - Vázquez , C . , González de la Vara , L . E . , and Gavilanes - Ruíz , M . ( 2011 ) . Isolation of detergent - resistant membranes from plant photosynthetic and non - photosynthetic tissues . Anal . Bio - chem . 417 : 220 – 227 . Chen , X . , Irani , N . G . , and Friml , J . ( 2011 ) . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis : The gateway into plant cells . Curr . Opin . Plant Biol . 14 : 674 – 682 . Cheung , A . Y . , and Wu , H . M . ( 2004 ) . Overexpression of an Arabi - dopsis formin stimulates supernumerary actin cable formation from pollen tube cell membrane . Plant Cell 16 : 257 – 269 . Chintagari , N . R . , Jin , N . , Wang , P . , Narasaraju , T . A . , Chen , J . , and Liu , L . ( 2006 ) . Effect of cholesterol depletion on exocytosis of al - veolar type II cells . Am . J . Respir . Cell Mol . Biol . 34 : 677 – 687 . Clough , S . J . , and Bent , A . F . ( 1998 ) . Floral dip : A simpli ﬁ ed method for Agrobacterium - mediated transformation of Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant J . 16 : 735 – 743 . 16 of 18 The Plant Cell Conner , S . D . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2003 ) . Regulated portals of entry into the cell . Nature 422 : 37 – 44 . Dettmer , J . , Hong - Hermesdorf , A . , Stierhof , Y . D . , and Schumacher , K . ( 2006 ) . Vacuolar H + - ATPase activity is required for endocytic and secretory traf ﬁ cking in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 18 : 715 – 730 . Dhonukshe , P . , Aniento , F . , Hwang , I . , Robinson , D . G . , Mravec , J . , Stierhof , Y . D . , and Friml , J . ( 2007 ) . Clathrin - mediated constitutive endocytosis of PIN auxin ef ﬂ ux carriers in Arabidopsis . Curr . Biol . 17 : 520 – 527 . Dhonukshe , P . , Baluska , F . , Schlicht , M . , Hlavacka , A . , Samaj , J . , Friml , J . , and Gadella , T . W . Jr . ( 2006 ) . Endocytosis of cell surface material mediates cell plate formation during plant cytokinesis . Dev . Cell 10 : 137 – 150 . Dhonukshe , P . et al . ( 2008 ) . Generation of cell polarity in plants links endocytosis , auxin distribution and cell fate decisions . Nature 456 : 962 – 966 . Drab , M . et al . ( 2001 ) . Loss of caveolae , vascular dysfunction , and pulmonary defects in caveolin - 1 gene - disrupted mice . Science 293 : 2449 – 2452 . Emans , N . , Zimmermann , S . , and Fischer , R . ( 2002 ) . Uptake of a ﬂ uorescent marker in plant cells is sensitive to brefeldin A and wortmannin . Plant Cell 14 : 71 – 86 . Falk , J . , Thoumine , O . , Dequidt , C . , Choquet , D . , and Faivre - Sarrailh , C . ( 2004 ) . NrCAM coupling to the cytoskeleton depends on multiple protein domains and partitioning into lipid rafts . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 : 4695 – 4709 . Frick , M . , Bright , N . A . , Riento , K . , Bray , A . , Merri ﬁ ed , C . , and Nichols , B . J . ( 2007 ) . Coassembly of ﬂ otillins induces formation of membrane microdomains , membrane curvature , and vesicle bud - ding . Curr . Biol . 17 : 1151 – 1156 . Garcia , A . , Cayla , X . , Fleischer , A . , Guergnon , J . , Alvarez - Franco Cañas , F . , Rebollo , M . P . , Roncal , F . , and Rebollo , A . ( 2003 ) . Rafts : A simple way to control apoptosis by subcellular redistribution . Bio - chimie 85 : 727 – 731 . Glebov , O . O . , Bright , N . A . , and Nichols , B . J . ( 2006 ) . Flotillin - 1 de - ﬁ nes a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway in mammalian cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 8 : 46 – 54 . Grebe , M . , Xu , J . , Möbius , W . , Ueda , T . , Nakano , A . , Geuze , H . J . , Rook , M . B . , and Scheres , B . ( 2003 ) . Arabidopsis sterol endocy - tosis involves actin - mediated traf ﬁ cking via ARA6 - positive early endosomes . Curr . Biol . 13 : 1378 – 1387 . Grzybek , M . , Kozubek , A . , Dubielecka , P . , and Sikorski , A . F . ( 2005 ) . Rafts — The current picture . Folia Histochem . Cytobiol . 43 : 3 – 10 . Haney , C . H . , and Long , S . R . ( 2010 ) . Plant ﬂ otillins are required for infection by nitrogen - ﬁ xing bacteria . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 : 478 – 483 . Haney , C . H . , Riely , B . K . , Tricoli , D . M . , Cook , D . R . , Ehrhardt , D . W . , and Long , S . R . ( 2011 ) . Symbiotic rhizobia bacteria trigger a change in localization and dynamics of the Medicago truncatula receptor kinase LYK3 . Plant Cell 23 : 2774 – 2787 . Hansen , G . H . , Dalskov , S . M . , Rasmussen , C . R . , Immerdal , L . , Niels - Christiansen , L . L . , and Danielsen , E . M . ( 2005 ) . Cholera toxin entry into pig enterocytes occurs via a lipid raft - and clathrin - dependent mechanism . Biochemistry 44 : 873 – 882 . Keinath , N . F . , Kierszniowska , S . , Lorek , J . , Bourdais , G . , Kessler , S . A . , Shimosato - Asano , H . , Grossniklaus , U . , Schulze , W . X . , Robatzek , S . , and Panstruga , R . ( 2010 ) . PAMP ( pathogen - associated molecular pattern ) - induced changes in plasma membrane compart - mentalization reveal novel components of plant immunity . J . Biol . Chem . 285 : 39140 – 39149 . Kleine - Vehn , J . , Dhonukshe , P . , Sauer , M . , Brewer , P . B . , Wi ś niewska , J . , Paciorek , T . , Benková , E . , and Friml , J . ( 2008 ) . ARF GEF - dependent transcytosis and polar delivery of PIN auxin carriers in Arab - idopsis . Curr . Biol . 18 : 526 – 531 . Konopka , C . A . , Backues , S . K . , and Bednarek , S . Y . ( 2008 ) . Dy - namics of Arabidopsis dynamin - related protein 1C and a clathrin light chain at the plasma membrane . Plant Cell 20 : 1363 – 1380 . Konopka , C . A . , and Bednarek , S . Y . ( 2008a ) . Comparison of the dy - namics and functional redundancy of the Arabidopsis dynamin - related isoforms DRP1A and DRP1C during plant development . Plant Physiol . 147 : 1590 – 1602 . Konopka , C . A . , and Bednarek , S . Y . ( 2008b ) . Variable - angle epi - ﬂ uorescence microscopy : A new way to look at protein dynamics in the plant cell cortex . Plant J . 53 : 186 – 196 . Kurzchalia , T . V . , and Parton , R . G . ( 1999 ) . Membrane microdomains and caveolae . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 11 : 424 – 431 . Lafont , F . , Abrami , L . , and van der Goot , F . G . ( 2004 ) . Bacterial subversion of lipid rafts . Curr . Opin . Microbiol . 7 : 4 – 10 . Lajoie , P . , and Nabi , I . R . ( 2007 ) . Regulation of raft - dependent en - docytosis . J . Cell . Mol . Med . 11 : 644 – 653 . Lajoie , P . , and Nabi , I . R . ( 2010 ) . Lipid rafts , caveolae , and their en - docytosis . Int . Rev . Cell Mol . Biol . 282 : 135 – 163 . Langhorst , M . F . , Reuter , A . , Jaeger , F . A . , Wippich , F . M . , Luxenhofer , G . , Plattner , H . , and Stuermer , C . A . ( 2008 ) . Traf - ﬁ cking of the microdomain scaffolding protein reggie - 1 / ﬂ otillin - 2 . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 87 : 211 – 226 . Langhorst , M . F . , Solis , G . P . , Hannbeck , S . , Plattner , H . , and Stuermer , C . A . ( 2007 ) . Linking membrane microdomains to the cytoskeleton : Regulation of the lateral mobility of reggie - 1 / ﬂ otillin - 2 by interaction with actin . FEBS Lett . 581 : 4697 – 4703 . Lefebvre , B . , Furt , F . , Hartmann , M . A . , Michaelson , L . V . , Carde , J . P . , Sargueil - Boiron , F . , Rossignol , M . , Napier , J . A . , Cullimore , J . , Bessoule , J . J . , and Mongrand , S . ( 2007 ) . Characterization of lipid rafts from Medicago truncatula root plasma membranes : A proteomic study reveals the presence of a raft - associated redox system . Plant Physiol . 144 : 402 – 418 . Lefebvre , B . et al . ( 2010 ) . A remorin protein interacts with symbiotic receptors and regulates bacterial infection . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 : 2343 – 2348 . Lewis , J . D . , and Lazarowitz , S . G . ( 2010 ) . Arabidopsis synaptotagmin SYTA regulates endocytosis and virus movement protein cell - to - cell transport . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 : 2491 – 2496 . Li , X . , Wang , X . , Yang , Y . , Li , R . , He , Q . , Fang , X . , Luu , D . T . , Maurel , C . , and Lin , J . ( 2011 ) . Single - molecule analysis of PIP2 ; 1 dynamics and partitioning reveals multiple modes of Arabidopsis plasma membrane aquaporin regulation . Plant Cell 23 : 3780 – 3797 . Lingwood , D . , and Simons , K . ( 2010 ) . Lipid rafts as a membrane - organizing principle . Science 327 : 46 – 50 . MacLellan , D . L . , Steen , H . , Adam , R . M . , Garlick , M . , Zurakowski , D . , Gygi , S . P . , Freeman , M . R . , and Solomon , K . R . ( 2005 ) . A quantitative proteomic analysis of growth factor - induced compo - sitional changes in lipid rafts of human smooth muscle cells . Pro - teomics 5 : 4733 – 4742 . Manders , E . M . M . , Verbeek , F . J . , and Aten , J . A . ( 1993 ) . Measure - ment of co - localization of objects in dual - color confocal images . J . Microsc . 169 : 375 – 382 . Men , S . , Boutté , Y . , Ikeda , Y . , Li , X . , Palme , K . , Stierhof , Y . D . , Hartmann , M . A . , Moritz , T . , and Grebe , M . ( 2008 ) . Sterol - dependent endocytosis mediates post - cytokinetic acquisition of PIN2 auxin ef ﬂ ux carrier polarity . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 : 237 – 244 . Mongrand , S . , Morel , J . , Laroche , J . , Claverol , S . , Carde , J . P . , Hartmann , M . A . , Bonneu , M . , Simon - Plas , F . , Lessire , R . , and Bessoule , J . J . ( 2004 ) . Lipid rafts in higher plant cells : Puri ﬁ cation and characterization of Triton X - 100 - insoluble microdomains from tobacco plasma membrane . J . Biol . Chem . 279 : 36277 – 36286 . Membrane Microdomain - Dependent Endocytic Pathway 17 of 18 Mongrand , S . , Stanislas , T . , Bayer , E . M . , Lherminier , J . , and Simon - Plas , F . ( 2010 ) . Membrane rafts in plant cells . Trends Plant Sci . 15 : 656 – 663 . Morel , J . , Claverol , S . , Mongrand , S . , Furt , F . , Fromentin , J . , Bessoule , J . J . , Blein , J . P . , and Simon - Plas , F . ( 2006 ) . Proteomics of plant detergent - resistant membranes . Mol . Cell . Proteomics 5 : 1396 – 1411 . Morrow , I . C . , Rea , S . , Martin , S . , Prior , I . A . , Prohaska , R . , Hancock , J . F . , James , D . E . , and Parton , R . G . ( 2002 ) . Flotillin - 1 / reggie - 2 traf ﬁ cs to surface raft domains via a novel golgi - independent pathway . Identi ﬁ cation of a novel membrane targeting domain and a role for palmitoylation . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 48834 – 48841 . Moscatelli , A . , Ciampolini , F . , Rodighiero , S . , Onelli , E . , Cresti , M . , Santo , N . , and Idilli , A . ( 2007 ) . Distinct endocytic pathways iden - ti ﬁ ed in tobacco pollen tubes using charged nanogold . J . Cell Sci . 120 : 3804 – 3819 . Müller , J . , Beck , M . , Mettbach , U . , Komis , G . , Hause , G . , Menzel , D . , and Samaj , J . ( 2010 ) . Arabidopsis MPK6 is involved in cell di - vision plane control during early root development , and localizes to the pre - prophase band , phragmoplast , trans - Golgi network and plasma membrane . Plant J . 61 : 234 – 248 . Murphy , A . S . , Bandyopadhyay , A . , Holstein , S . E . , and Peer , W . A . ( 2005 ) . Endocytotic cycling of PM proteins . Annu . Rev . Plant Biol . 56 : 221 – 251 . Nebl , T . , Pestonjamasp , K . N . , Leszyk , J . D . , Crowley , J . L . , Oh , S . W . , and Luna , E . J . ( 2002 ) . Proteomic analysis of a detergent - resistant membrane skeleton from neutrophil plasma membranes . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 43399 – 43409 . Ossowski , S . , Schwab , R . , and Weigel , D . ( 2008 ) . Gene silencing in plants using arti ﬁ cial microRNAs and other small RNAs . Plant J . 53 : 674 – 690 . Ovecka , M . , Berson , T . , Beck , M . , Derksen , J . , Samaj , J . , Baluska , F . , and Lichtscheidl , I . K . ( 2010 ) . Structural sterols are involved in both the initiation and tip growth of root hairs in Arabidopsis thali - ana . Plant Cell 22 : 2999 – 3019 . Parton , R . G . ( 2003 ) . Caveolae — From ultrastructure to molecular mechanisms . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 4 : 162 – 167 . Pelkmans , L . , and Helenius , A . ( 2003 ) . Insider information : What vi - ruses tell us about endocytosis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 : 414 – 422 . Raffaele , S . et al . ( 2009 ) . Remorin , a Solanaceae protein resident in membrane rafts and plasmodesmata , impairs potato virus X movement . Plant Cell 21 : 1541 – 1555 . Razani , B . , Combs , T . P . , Wang , X . B . , Frank , P . G . , Park , D . S . , Russell , R . G . , Li , M . , Tang , B . , Jelicks , L . A . , Scherer , P . E . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 2002a ) . Caveolin - 1 - de ﬁ cient mice are lean , resistant to diet - induced obesity , and show hypertriglyceridemia with adi - pocyte abnormalities . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 8635 – 8647 . Razani , B . , Wang , X . B . , Engelman , J . A . , Battista , M . , Lagaud , G . , Zhang , X . L . , Kneitz , B . , Hou , H . , JrChrist , G . J . , Edelmann , W . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 2002b ) . Caveolin - 2 - de ﬁ cient mice show evi - dence of severe pulmonary dysfunction without disruption of cav - eolae . Mol . Cell . Biol . 22 : 2329 – 2344 . Salaün , C . , James , D . J . , and Chamberlain , L . H . ( 2004 ) . Lipid rafts and the regulation of exocytosis . Traf ﬁ c 5 : 255 – 264 . Schwab , R . , Ossowski , S . , Riester , M . , Warthmann , N . , and Weigel , D . ( 2006 ) . Highly speci ﬁ c gene silencing by arti ﬁ cial microRNAs in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 18 : 1121 – 1133 . Shahollari , B . , Peskan - Berghöfer , T . , and Oelmüller , R . ( 2004 ) . Receptor kinases with leucine - rich repeats are enriched in Triton X - 100 insoluble plasma membrane microdomains from plants . Physiol . Plant . 122 : 397 – 403 . Simons , K . , and Gerl , M . J . ( 2010 ) . Revitalizing membrane rafts : New tools and insights . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 : 688 – 699 . Simons , K . , and Toomre , D . ( 2000 ) . Lipid rafts and signal trans - duction . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 1 : 31 – 39 . Tanaka , H . , Kitakura , S . , De Rycke , R . , De Groodt , R . , and Friml , J . ( 2009 ) . Fluorescence imaging - based screen identi ﬁ es ARF GEF component of early endosomal traf ﬁ cking . Curr . Biol . 19 : 391 – 397 . Titapiwatanakun , B . et al . ( 2009 ) . ABCB19 / PGP19 stabilises PIN1 in membrane microdomains in Arabidopsis . Plant J . 57 : 27 – 44 . von Haller , P . D . , Donohoe , S . , Goodlett , D . R . , Aebersold , R . , and Watts , J . D . ( 2001 ) . Mass spectrometric characterization of proteins extracted from Jurkat T cell detergent - resistant membrane do - mains . Proteomics 1 : 1010 – 1021 . Wan , Y . , Ash , W . M . , IIIFan , L . , Hao , H . , Kim , M . K . , and Lin , J . ( 2011 ) . Variable - angle total internal re ﬂ ection ﬂ uorescence microscopy of intact cells of Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant Methods 7 : 27 . Wang , X . , Teng , Y . , Wang , Q . , Li , X . , Sheng , X . , Zheng , M . , Samaj , J . , Baluska , F . , and Lin , J . ( 2006 ) . Imaging of dynamic secretory vesicles in living pollen tubes of Picea meyeri using evanescent wave microscopy . Plant Physiol . 141 : 1591 – 1603 . Willemsen , V . , Friml , J . , Grebe , M . , van den Toorn , A . , Palme , K . , and Scheres , B . ( 2003 ) . Cell polarity and PIN protein positioning in Arabidopsis require STEROL METHYLTRANSFERASE1 function . Plant Cell 15 : 612 – 625 . Yanagida , M . , Nakayama , H . , Yoshizaki , F . , Fujimura , T . , Takamori , K . , Ogawa , H . , and Iwabuchi , K . ( 2007 ) . Proteomic analysis of plasma membrane lipid rafts of HL - 60 cells . Proteomics 7 : 2398 – 2409 . Yu , X . M . , Yu , X . D . , Qu , Z . P . , Huang , X . J . , Guo , J . , Han , Q . M . , Zhao , J . , Huang , L . L . , and Kang , Z . S . ( 2008 ) . Cloning of a putative hy - persensitive induced reaction gene from wheat infected by stripe rust fungus . Gene 407 : 193 – 198 . 18 of 18 The Plant Cell DOI 10 . 1105 / tpc . 112 . 095695 ; originally published online May 15 , 2012 ; Plant Cell Samaj , Xiaohong Fang , William J . Lucas and Jinxing Lin Ruili Li , Peng Liu , Yinglang Wan , Tong Chen , Qinli Wang , Ursula Mettbach , Frantisek Baluska , Jozef Clathrin - Independent Endocytic Pathway and Is Required for Seedling Development Flot1 , Is Involved in a Arabidopsis A Membrane Microdomain - Associated Protein , This information is current as of May 15 , 2012 Supplemental Data http : / / www . plantcell . org / content / suppl / 2012 / 05 / 10 / tpc . 112 . 095695 . DC1 . html Permissions https : / / www . copyright . com / ccc / openurl . do ? sid = pd _ hw1532298X & issn = 1532298X & WT . mc _ id = pd _ hw1532298X eTOCs http : / / www . plantcell . org / cgi / alerts / ctmain Sign up for eTOCs at : CiteTrack Alerts http : / / www . plantcell . org / cgi / alerts / ctmain Sign up for CiteTrack Alerts at : Subscription Information http : / / www . aspb . org / publications / subscriptions . cfm is available at : Plant Physiology and The Plant Cell Subscription Information for ADVANCING THE SCIENCE OF PLANT BIOLOGY © American Society of Plant Biologists