RESEARCH ARTICLE A master equation approach to actin polymerization applied to endocytosis in yeast Xinxin Wang 1 , Anders E . Carlsson 2 * 1 Departmentof Bioinformatics , UT Southwestern MedicalCenter , Dallas , Texas , United States of America , 2 Departmentof Physics and NSF Center for EngineeringMechanoBiology , Washington University , St . Louis , Missouri , United States of America * aec @ physics . wustl . edu Abstract We present a Master Equation approach to calculating polymerization dynamics and force generation by branched actin networks at membranes . The method treats the time evolu - tion of the F - actin distribution in three dimensions , with branching included as a directional spreading term . It is validated by comparison with stochastic simulations of force genera - tion by actin polymerization at obstacles coated with actin “nucleation promoting factors” ( NPFs ) . The method is then used to treat the dynamics of actin polymerization and force generation during endocytosis in yeast , using a model in which NPFs form a ring around the endocytic site , centered by a spot of molecules attaching the actin network strongly to the membrane . We find that a spontaneous actin filament nucleation mechanism is required for adequate forces to drive the process , that partial inhibition of branching and polymerization lead to different characteristic responses , and that a limited range of poly - merization - rate values provide effective invagination and obtain correct predictions for the effects of mutations in the active regions of the NPFs . Author summary Endocytosis is a dynamic process by which cells internalize substances from outside the cell . Especially in yeast , endocytosis is mechanically demanding due to the high pressure difference across the cell membrane , or turgor pressure . Polymerization of a branched actin network is the major process providing the mechanical force to overcome the turgor pressure . Understanding the kinetics of the actin network , and the mechanical interaction between the actin network and the cell membrane , is thus crucial for the study of endocy - tosis . We develop an efficient mathematical framework for actin dynamics that can realis - tically incorporate these two features , thus providing a practical method for quantitatively modeling actin dynamics during endocytosis . The resulting model mechanistically reveals that spontaneous nucleation at the center of the endocytic site is required for successful endocytosis , distinguishes the roles of branching and polymerization , and predicts several other experimentally testable outcomes . The accuracy and efficiency of the method , in describing both mechanics and chemistry , render it applicable to a broad field of mem - brane - bending processes . PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 December 14 , 2017 1 / 22 a1111111111a1111111111a1111111111a1111111111a1111111111 OPEN ACCESS Citation : Wang X , Carlsson AE ( 2017 ) A master equationapproach toactin polymerization applied to endocytosis in yeast . PLoS ComputBiol 13 ( 12 ) : e1005901 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 Editor : Anand R . Asthagiri , Northeastern University , UNITED STATES Received : June 12 , 2017 Accepted : November 27 , 2017 Published : December14 , 2017 Copyright : © 2017 Wang , Carlsson . This is an open access article distributedunder the terms of the Creative CommonsAttribution License , which permits unrestricted use , distribution , and reproductionin any medium , provided the original authorand source are credited . Data Availability Statement : All codes are available from Githubat https : / / github . com / wangxinxin8627 / DME _ endocytosis . Funding : This work was supported by the National Institute of General Medical Sciences ( https : / / www . nigms . nih . gov ) under GrantR01 GM107667 to AEC and the National Science Foundation ( https : / / www . nsf . gov ) underGrant AgreementCMMI : 15 - 458571to AEC . The fundershad norole in study design , data collection and analysis , decision to publish , or preparationof the manuscript . Introduction Forces exerted by polymerization of monomeric actin ( G - actin ) into filamentous actin ( F - actin ) are crucial for bending the cell membrane in many important cellular processes , includ - ing cytokinesis , cell migration , and , under some conditions , endocytosis [ 1 ] . Specifically , actin is required for yeast clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) , a central mechanism that controls cellular signaling , nutrient uptake and membrane recycling [ 2 ] . CME is driven by a transient protein patch , in which different proteins appear in a well - defined sequence [ 3 ] , including actin and its nucleators . The actin patch bends a small portion of the cell membrane into a highly curved invagination that encloses extracellular substances . The invagination is later sev - ered and its contents , as well as lipids and membrane proteins , are released into the cytoplasm . For this membrane - bending process , the actin network needs to exert both pulling forces and pushing forces ( see Fig 1 ) . The required pushing forces are several pN per filament [ 4 , 5 ] , mainly to overcome the large ( * 0 . 2 MPa ) osmotic pressure difference [ 6 ] ( turgor pressure ) across the membrane , because of the small number ( * 10 2 ) [ 7 ] of actin filaments at each endo - cytic site . The machinery driving CME constitutes a coupled mechanochemical network [ 8 ] . Force regulates protein dynamics via processes such as the slowing of actin polymerization by opposing force ; conversely polymerization of actin and assembly of curvature - generating pro - teins generate force . We are only beginning to understand the basic properties of this network . Protein dynamics during CME have been extensively studied via fluorescence imaging methods . Assembly of endocytic proteins ( EPs ) , including F - actin , was first quantified [ 3 , 9 ] using relative fluorescence intensities . Later , Ref . [ 10 ] developed a method for measurement of the absolute counts of the EPs in fission yeast ( Schizosaccharomyces pombe ) . In Ref . [ 7 ] , and later in Ref . [ 11 ] , absolute counts were measured in budding yeast ( Saccharomyces cerevisiae ) . Fig 1 . Model schematic . The membranedeformation is determined by a balanceof forces betweenturgor pressure , the membranebendingenergy , and actin pullingand pushingforces . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 . g001 Modelingactin polymerization with a master equation PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 December 14 , 2017 2 / 22 Competinginterests : The authorshave declared that no competinginterestsexist . These studies have suggested a count of about 6000 polymerized - actin subunits at the endocy - tic site [ 2 ] , with the counts of other proteins typically in the range of 50 to 300 . Actin nuclea - tors , or “NPFs” , precede actin polymerization , which proceeds over a period of about 15 seconds . These quantitative measurements have inspired several quantitative modeling studies of dynamics of the EPs [ 4 , 8 , 12 , 13 ] . The mechanical aspects of CME are less well understood due to the difficulties of measur - ing forces on a scale of tens of nanometers in vivo . Balance of forces on the actin network requires that inward pulling forces at the center of the endocytic site are opposed by equal pushing forces from the outer regions of the actin network [ 4 ] . The mechanics of bending the cell membrane in CME were studied in detail in a recent model [ 5 ] based on the “Hel - frich” free energy density [ 14 ] . The authors calculated the energy - minimizing shape func - tions of the membrane during endocytosis , using parameters fitted to electron microscopy tomography data [ 15 ] . However , the dynamics of the actin force were not included when obtaining the shape functions , so it was not possible to calculate a time - dependent shape nor to include the mechanochemical feedbacks driving the protein and shape dynamics . In Ref . [ 4 ] , one of us treated actin as an actively growing gel simulated using a finite element method ( FEM ) , and thus predicted endocytic invagination dynamics . However , the actin growth was modeled with a simple phenomenological description , which was not quantita - tively compared to experiment . It is thus unclear how well the growing gel represents the actual dendritic structure of the network [ 16 ] . The mechanics of stationary CME membrane profiles were also treated in Refs . [ 17 ] and [ 18 ] , but again neither treated the protein dynam - ics in the process . A mechanochemical model of CME was proposed in Ref . [ 8 ] . It contained several types of feedback interactions , which indirectly impacted actin polymerization . This model explained several traits of endocytic mutants . However , the treatment of actin polymerization was highly simplified , and the model used an extremely low value of the turgor pressure . A major challenge in developing a complete description of the mechanochemical network driving CME is to accurately model the actin network and its interaction with the cell mem - brane . In Ref . [ 12 ] , we and others developed a stochastic model of actin polymerization during CME . The F - actin in the model was modeled via a stochastic - growth method that gave an explicit three - dimensional actin network , with parameters fitted to experimental data . The force opposing actin polymerization was assumed to “kick in” when the network reached a certain size . This work revealed some important feedback mechanisms between actin and its nucleators , required for CME . But the membrane mechanics were oversimplifed by using a step - function force opposing actin polymerization , and the membrane profile was not obtained explicitly . Additionally , this stochastic model required a large ensemble of repeated calculations to produce meaningful results . It was thus difficult to quantitatively fit the model , for use in other potential applications . Furthermore , stochastic models are difficult to use in studying possible oscillatory behaviors and bifurcations of the actin network that require the recognition of subtle changes in the F - actin count . Deterministic rate - equation approaches , as in Ref . [ 19 ] and parts of Ref . [ 12 ] , would thus be more convenient for experimental fitting and capturing subtle effects . However , such rate equations cannot treat the mechanics and geometry of the actin network because they describe only the average F - actin count rather than the spatial distribution of F - actin . A number of deterministic reaction - diffusion approaches have improved on rate - equation approaches by modeling the spatial distribution of F - actin explicitly , using various assumptions about dynamics and the interaction of F - actin with the cell membrane [ 20 – 28 ] . However , such meth - ods have not explicitly included the oblique branched geometry of the network , and their Modelingactin polymerization with a master equation PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 December 14 , 2017 3 / 22 force - generation component has not been validated by comparison to stochastic - simulation results . Ref . [ 29 ] developed a two - dimensional treatment of the actin network from a spatially dependent rate equation , explicitly treating branching angles . The mesh size was small in comparison with the size of the cell , but still large enough to treat the coarse - grained density of F - actin . This method was shown to give promising results for global cell properties such as migration . However , it is not clear to what extent it can be applied to processes such as CME , which are fully three - dimensional and have significant structure at very small length scales . In this paper , we propose a Master Equation ( ME ) method to treat the reciprocal interac - tions of polymerizing actin and its nucleators with a bending membrane , and apply it to CME . The ME method describes the spatial distribution of F - actin using a single simulation for a given set of parameter values , while having nearly the realism of the stochastic - growth approach implemented with a large numbers of runs . The methodology explicitly includes the branching geometry , and is validated by comparison with stochastic simulations for the case of an actin network pushing an obstacle . It uses a mesh size smaller than the characteristic size of the actin network , to calculate a probability distribution function ( pdf ) of actin subunits at given points in time and space . It builds on the work of Ref . [ 29 ] by treating a three - dimen - sional geometry , using a smaller mesh size ( about 2 nm vs . 100 nm ) that allows better treat - ment of actin - based forces , and calculating the pdf rather than the coarse - grained actin density . It differs from the reaction - diffusion approaches above in its more complete descrip - tion of both the orientation and length of new branches in three dimensions , in its more accu - rate treatment of force generation , and in the use of a pdf . We apply the ME method to a mechanochemical model of CME in budding yeast that treats the time courses of F - actin , its nucleator Las17 , and the deformation of the membrane . The model integrates the chemical variables F - actin and Las17 ( slow ) , and the membrane shape variables ( fast ) into one dynami - cally interacting system , and shows how the actin network bends the cell membrane in real time . The model accomplishes several important goals : 1 ) a theory of dendritic actin polymeriza - tion that is mechanistically realistic , numerically accurate and computationally efficient , 2 ) a mechanochemical model of the dynamics of the cell membrane driven by the actin network during CME , and 3 ) a more accurate model of CME that quantitatively determines several core parameters that were “floating” ( not determined by experimental data ) in the previous model [ 12 ] . The results of the ME model are consistent with experimental data [ 7 , 12 ] for pro - tein dynamics and the effects of mutations . New predictions from the model include the fol - lowing : i ) a spontaneous nucleation mechanism is required in the central portion of the endocytic site , ii ) controlled inhibition of branching and / or polymerization lead to characteris - tic behaviors of the peak counts of actin and its main nucleator , and iii ) a certain range of poly - merization rates is required for robust invagination , and correct prediction of the peak counts of actin and its main nucleator in mutants . Methods Master equation ( ME ) approach Our model treats dendritic actin network growth in the presence of capping , with new fila - ments created as branches induced by a planar distribution of nucleation - promoting factors ( NPFs ) , as on a membrane or hard substrate . The model describes polymerization in three dimensions , but we introduce it in two dimensions first , for the sake of clarity . The dynamics of the F - actin probability distribution function ρ in the network are treated by a master Modelingactin polymerization with a master equation PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 December 14 , 2017 4 / 22 equation including branching , spontaneous nucleation and severing : @ r ð x ; y ; t Þ @ t ¼ Z l ð y ; t Þ 0 k br ð x ; y þ y 0 Þ 2 N t ð Þ r x (cid:0) y 0 ; y þ y 0 ; t ð Þ þ r x þ y 0 ; y þ y 0 ; t ð Þ ½ (cid:138) dy 0 | ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ { zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ } branching þ k nuc ð x ; y ; t Þ | ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ { zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ } nucleation (cid:0) k sev r ð x ; y ; t Þ | ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ { zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ } severing : ð 1 Þ Here k br ( x , y ) is the branching rate constant , which gives the rate of branching per unit length of F - actin , per molecule of NPF in the membrane . The rate k nuc ( r , y , t ) describes the amount of actin generated per unit time by spontaneous nucleation , while the decay rate k sev is assumed to be controlled by cofilin - driven severing ; l ( y , t ) is the projection onto the y - axis of the length of the filaments added at each time step . The coordinate x is in the plane of the membrane , y is perpendicular to the membrane , and t is the time variable . We use a frame of reference in which the existing actin filaments are stationary , so convective terms are not required . N ( t ) is the number of molecules of the NPF on the membrane . We assume that the NPFs are uni - formly distributed over the membrane , either because they diffuse rapidly in the membrane , or because their initial distribution is uniform . We do not explicitly treat the assembly of cur - vature - generating proteins . Rather , they are included as in Ref . [ 5 ] , as a contribution to the forces acting on the membrane . In the model , we take all the filaments to have either a 45˚ or −45˚ angle with respect to the y direction , in line with the oblique alignment generally found in dendritic networks . New filaments instantly polymerize to a final length , whose projection on the y - axis is l ( y , t ) ( the filament length multiplied by cos 45 (cid:14) ¼ 1 = ﬃﬃﬃ 2 p ) . The length is determined by the force - dependent polymerization rate and the capping rate . We assume that capping ( and thus the growth of a filament to its final length ) occurs on time scales faster than the evolution of the invagination . The validity of this approximation is discussed below . At a given time , only new filaments that branch from certain F - actin subunits can increase ρ ( x , y , t ) . These sub - units are included in the integral in Eq ( 1 ) . The two branching directions correspond to the x ± y 0 and y + y 0 terms in the integral in Eq ( 1 ) . In practice , considering Fig 2 as an example , we use the dimensionless length (cid:22) l ð y ; t Þ ¼ l ð y ; t Þ = ð a = ﬃﬃﬃ 2 p Þ normalized by the length of the actin monomer ( a ) projected onto the y - axis ; (cid:22) l ð y ; t Þ is thus the number of subunits in a given new filament . We discretize Eq 1 accordingly ( see Eq . S4 ) to describe the discrete spatial dis - tribution of F - actin in the network . Fig 2 illustrates the case (cid:22) l ð y ; t Þ ¼ 4 from Eq . S4 . This two - dimensional version of the model could be applied to actin networks growing on a long strip of NPF , as in Ref [ 30 ] . We extend Eq ( 1 ) into three dimensions using a cylindrical coordinate system ( see S1 Fig ) The spatial coordinates become r , θ and y , and Eq ( 1 ) becomes @ r ð r ; y ; t Þ @ t ¼ 1 2 p Z l ð y ; t Þ 0 dy 0 k br r ; y þ y 0 ð Þ N t ð Þ Z 2 p 0 r R ð r ; y Þ ; y þ y 0 ; t ½ (cid:138) d y (cid:0) k sev r ð r ; y ; t Þ þ k nuc ð r ; y ; t Þ ; ð 2 Þ where R ¼ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ y 0 2 þ r 2 (cid:0) 2 ry 0 cos y p is the radial coordinate of the base of a branch having its end at radius r . Again , we discretize the time and spatial dependence , as described in Eq . S5 . More details of the simulation procedure are described in the Supplementary Material . This azimuthally symmetric ME approach is directly applicable to templated - nucleation experi - ments of the type described in Ref . [ 31 ] . Modelingactin polymerization with a master equation PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 December 14 , 2017 5 / 22 Method validation We assess the validity of the ME by examining how it treats a basic mechanochemical problem : an actin network pushing an obstacle that exerts a constant force opposing polymerization . The obstacle is coated with a ring - like NPF region , mimicking the Las17 ring in Ref . [ 12 ] ; similar results are obtained for other NPF distributions , including a rectangle and a complete circle . In order to focus on the treatment of branched actin network growth , we ignore nega - tive - feedback effects [ 12 ] of actin onto the NPFs . We compare ME results with stochastic sim - ulation results . We start the calculation with 400 filaments , each of which has 50 subunits . For each force value , we run calculations for 200 seconds , and for the stochastic case run an ensem - ble of 100 simulation runs . The results , shown in Fig 3 , show that the ME method agrees quan - titatively with the stochastic simulations . We find that F - actin count depends linearly on the external force , and that the velocity is independent on the external force . Both findings are also consistent with the previous stochastic study in Ref . [ 32 ] . As mentioned above , key approximation of the ME is that filaments are assumed to grow instantaneously to their final lengths l ( y , t ) , controlled by capping and force . This approxima - tion is valid if the time scale of capping is much shorter than the characteristic time over which the actin count varies in the process of interest . The capping rate is on the order of 1 s −1 in bud - ding yeast [ 33 ] , so the approximation should hold reasonably well for processes occurring on Fig 2 . Schematic of discretized version of Eq 1 for the case of filaments having length four subunits ( l max ¼ 4 ) . The subunitsin solid circles can generatea branch of length l ð y ; t Þ that reachesthe open circle ð x ; y Þ . x and y are dimensionless coordinates normalized by a = ﬃﬃﬃ 2 p , where a is the step size per added subunit . See Eq . S30 for definitionof l ð y ; t Þ . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 . g002 Modelingactin polymerization with a master equation PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 December 14 , 2017 6 / 22 time scales of several seconds or more . This holds for the endocytosis system and model stud - ied in Ref . [ 12 ] , since the time scale of invagination is on the order of ten seconds . In addition , in our previous study , the assumption of instantaneous polymerization / capping gave results very similar to those of the explicit - polymerization methods when the same parameters were used , as shown by the “Four Variable” model in the Supplemental Material of [ 12 ] . Thus the range of validity of the ME approach includes the endocytosis model studied below , but other - wise will vary from case to case . Application to a mechanochemical model of endocytosis—Integrating actin dynamics with the cell membrane We apply the ME method to CME by solving the actin network dynamics described by Eq ( 2 ) , while simultaneously calculating membrane shape dynamics using the analysis of Ref . [ 5 ] . First , many possible mechanical equilibria corresponding to a range of force values are obtained as in Ref . [ 5 ] . These equilibria are given as a shape function for each value of the force . Then , the actin polymerization dynamics are calculated using the ME according to the shape function , and the process is repeated . Fig 3 . ME validation . We simulate ( A ) pushingof an obstacleby an actin network , using a stochastic method and the ME approach . We calculate ( B ) F - actin count and ( C ) velocity as functions of constant external force . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 . g003 Modelingactin polymerization with a master equation PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 December 14 , 2017 7 / 22 We focus on branching induced by the NPF Las17 , which is the strongest one in budding yeast . Thus N = Las17 count . Recent superresolution data indicate that the NPF Las17 accumu - lates in a ring - shaped region , while the protein Sla2 , which links F - actin to the cell membrane , accumulates at a spot inside the ring [ 34 ] . Therefore we divide the membrane into a ring of pushing forces corresponding to Las17 and a spot of pulling force corresponding to Sla2 . The pushing forces are generated by the growth of branched filaments in the network . The pulling forces act on spontaneously nucleated filaments , which are assumed to form a passive layer attached to both Sla2 and the branched network . Sla2 , with the membrane attached to it , is thus pulled back with the retrograde flow of the network ( see Fig 1 ) , as suggested in Ref . [ 11 ] . Actin polymerization also occurs mainly near the membrane [ 35 ] . We thus use the follow - ing form for the branching rate constant : k br ð r ; y Þ ¼ k maxbr exp (cid:0) ð y (cid:0) y L Þ 2 2 s 2 br (cid:20) (cid:21) if y L < y < y L þ y br and r inL < r < r outL 0 otherwise ð 3 Þ 8 > < > : where k maxbr is the maximum value of k br , σ br is the width of the branching region ( a precise definition is given in the Supplemental Material ) , y br is a cutoff imposed for numerical conve - nience , and r inL and r outL are the inner and outer radii of the Las17 ring . Eq . ( S33 ) gives the corre - sponding formula for k nuc . In practice , we use dimensionless rates (cid:22) k maxbr and (cid:22) k maxnuc , as in Eqs . S4 and S5 . The spatial branching and nucleation functions are shown in Fig 4 . Note that even though k br cuts off sharply at y = y L , the dynamics of Eq 2 will result in a small component of ρ penetrating past y L . This portion of the ρ is used to calculate the pushing force of the actin onto the membrane below . In our previous work [ 12 ] , we demonstrated a crucial negative - feedback effect of actin branching on the Las17 count , and here we treat the Las17 dynamics using a similar rate equa - tion : dN ð t Þ dt ¼ N ð t Þ 2 ½ N full (cid:0) N ð t Þ(cid:138) (cid:0) a N F br ð t Þ ; ð 4 Þ where N full is the maximum possible count of Las17 ( from 2 - d packing considerations ) , α is the probability that a branching event will cause Las17 to dissociate from the membrane ( thus Fig 4 . Spatial distribution of branching and spontaneous nucleation . ( A ) Branchingand spontaneous - nucleation layers , and the forbiddenzone , definedas the space inside the membranewhere the filaments cannot penetrate . ( B ) The Gaussiannucleation function , for k nuc ( r , y ) , Eq . ( S33 ) , definedin the black layer in ( A ) . ( C ) The Gaussian branching function for k br ( r , y ) , Eq ( 3 ) , definedin the red layer in ( A ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 . g004 Modelingactin polymerization with a master equation PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 December 14 , 2017 8 / 22 being inactivated ) , and F br t ð Þ ¼ 2 p Z y L þ y br y L dy Z r outL r inL a ﬃﬃﬃ 2 p (cid:18) (cid:19) k br r ; y ð Þ r r ; y ; t ð Þ rdr ; ð 5 Þ is the number of new branches created per unit time per Las17 molecule . The probability α reflects the strength of binding of the Las17 to the membrane , and a = 2 . 7 nm is the step size per added subunit . The factor of a = ﬃﬃﬃ 2 p is the projection of a onto the y - axis . The forces from actin polymerization deform the membrane from one mechanical equilib - rium to another , as indicated in Fig 5 . The use of equilibrium shape functions is justified , because the kinetics of the actin - membrane system are determined by the slowly varying actin network shape ( timescale > 1s ) , but relaxation of the membrane occurs much faster , at the speed of sound ( timescale * 0 . 001s ) . Because the net force on the actin network is exceedingly small [ 4 ] , the pushing force from the actin network must balance the pulling force , as shown in S2 Fig . The pushing force is gen - erated by network growth in the outer region comprising the Las17 ring , and is thus denoted f out . It is calculated by allowing the actin network to protrude slightly into the membrane , according to Eq 2 , and imposing a linear repulsive force between this portion of the actin and the cell membrane ( see Supplemental Material for details ) . The pulling force is exerted in the inner region corresponding to the Sla2 spot , and is thus denoted f in . The balancing forces f in and f out produce a deformation described by the membrane shape function y m [ r m ( s ) ] , where y m is membrane height and r m is the radial coordinate in the membrane . During each time step , actin first polymerizes according to Eq 2 . The membrane deforma - tion , or invagination depth y I is then determined from the extent of actin polymerization by a procedure implementing a “molecular clutch” based on the amount of F - actin . The possibility of such a mechanism is supported by findings [ 36 ] that a clutch transmits forces from the actin cytoskeleton to the extracellular matrix or other cells . A clutch should also be present in CME because there must be a transition in mechanical behavior with increasing F - actin count . When the F - actin count is small , there is very little actin material in the central region of the endocytic patch . Therefore there is almost nothing for the outer filaments , which are moving backwards in retrograde flow , to “grab” onto . This makes it impossible for the growing net - work to exert a pulling force . On the other hand , when the F - actin count is larger , there is enough material at the center to transmit the force generated by the growing filament to the endocytic coat proteins We implement the clutch as follows . Up to a certain minimum value of the F - actin count , F min , y I is taken to vanish ; for larger values of F , the actin network is assumed to be completely rigid , and y I is driven by the difference in polymerization rates between the outside and the inside . Details are given in the Supporting Information . Given y I , the deformation profile is chosen from the pretabulated set ( see S3 Fig ) as the one with invagination y preI closest to y I . The force is chosen by linear interpolation between the force of the profile with y preI and that of another profile with y preI (cid:6) 0 : 1 R P , so that y preI (cid:0) 0 : 1 R P < y I < y preI þ 0 : 1 R P . The updated shape function and force are used in the next step to determine the branching region , spontaneous - nucleation region and dynamics of actin polymerization ( see Fig 5 ) This approach should describe the dynamics of the mem - brane deformation well , since the differences between successive membrane shape functions are relatively small . The initial actin distribution is a ring of filaments represented by r ð r ; y ; 0 Þ ¼ ð 1 = 2 p r Þ d ð r (cid:0) r inL Þ y ð y (cid:0) y L Þ y ð y L þ l max (cid:0) y Þ , where r inL is the inner limit of the Las17 ring . Further , at the beginning of the simulation L ( 0 ) = 20 , y S = y L = 0 , and all forces vanish . Modelingactin polymerization with a master equation PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 December 14 , 2017 9 / 22 Fig 5 . Computational flow . The four functions ρ , k nuc , k br and r m have initial values at time t . Then ρ is updatedaccording to Eq . S5 . Next r m is updatedaccordingEq . S31 , using force balance ( Eq . S26 ) . Finally k nuc and k br are updatedaccording to Eqs . S33 and 3 . The process is repeatedat each time step . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 . g005 Modelingactin polymerization with a master equation PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 December 14 , 2017 10 / 22 Results Here we describe our procedure for fitting the model to measured properties of endocytosis in budding yeast . Then we present several experimentally testable predictions : First , a spontane - ous nucleation mechanism with a specific spatial location is required for adequate force gener - ation . A substantial fraction of the nucleated filaments must be near the middle of network in order to exert sufficient pulling force to overcome the turgor pressure , being dragged along by the rest of the network as indicated in Fig 1 . Second , we quantitatively predict the response of actin and NPF assembly to the drugs CK - 666 and Latrunculin A ( LatA ) , which suggests a new direction for quantitative experiments . Third , we constrain the values of key parameters . In our previous model [ 12 ] , we found that changes in some key parameters can be compensated by changes in other parameters . For instance , a broad range of values of the polymerization rate gave results consistent with experiments ; a lower polymerization rate could be compen - sated by higher branching rate , and vice versa . However , after including the membrane more completely in the new model , we find such compensation to be less effective , limiting the range of parameter values . A polymerization rate within a narrow range is required to suffi - ciently deform the membrane into “ O ” shapes and to correctly obtain the effects of NPF mutations . Model fitting We use the experimentally measured time courses of F - actin ( F ) and Las17 number ( N ) [ 12 ] as our fitting targets . We use the four quantities ( k 0 , (cid:22) k maxbr , k sev , and α ) ( see Table 1 ) as our fitting parameters , and regard the rest of parameters as “fixed” ( see Table 1 and S1 Table ) . The values of the fitting parameters are obtained by minimizing the mean - square difference between the measured F and N time courses on one hand , and the model and the experimental data on the other hand : (cid:15) ¼ 1 n N X n N i ¼ 1 ½ N mod ð t i Þ (cid:0) N exp ð t i Þ(cid:138) 2 ½ max ð N exp Þ(cid:138) 2 þ 1 n F X n F i ¼ 1 ½ F mod ð t i Þ (cid:0) F exp ð t i Þ(cid:138) 2 ½ max ð F exp Þ(cid:138) 2 ; ð 6 Þ while keeping the “fixed” parameters unchanged . Here n N and n F are the number of experi - mental data points of Las17 and F - actin in the time courses . F exp is obtained from measure - ments of the time course of Abp1 , as in Ref . [ 12 ] . At each step of the the fitting process , we randomly vary ( k 0 , (cid:22) k maxbr , k sev , α ) and calculate (cid:15) . The new values are accepted if (cid:15) is lower . The above computation is repeated until (cid:15) does not decrease despite a large number of attempts ( typically about 300 ) . Then the values of the fitting parameters are found for a given set of “fixed” parameters . This process requires a large number of trial calculations ( about 300 ) for Table 1 . Core parameter values in the default model . Note that the branching and nucleationrates are given as scaled parameters , definedin the Supple - mentary Material . Fitting parameters Fixed parameters parameter / units value parameter / units value estimation method k 0 ( 10 − 5 s − 1 ) 7 . 24 (cid:22) k maxbr ( 10 − 3 s − 1 ) 2 . 59 (cid:22) k maxnuc ( 10 − 3 s − 1 ) 15 constrained by pulling force and invagination depth k sev ( s − 1 ) 0 . 36 (cid:22) l max 60 5 . 3 μ M actin concentration [ 33 ] α 0 . 082 Other parameters are listed in S1 Table . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 . t001 Modelingactin polymerization with a master equation PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 December 14 , 2017 11 / 22 one set of the “fixed” parameters , which is nevertheless manageable within the ME method . In the stochastic simulations , one needs to repeat the calculation about 1000 times for the same fitting parameter values to obtain adequate statistics . Thus , a total in the range of 300 , 000 runs are needed for one set of “fixed” parameters , which is a very demanding computational load . In Ref . [ 12 ] , we estimated the fitting parameters by first pre - fitting a simplified four - variable rate - equation model to the experimental time courses , and then fitting the stochastic model to experimental maxima and lifetimes starting with the pre - fitted parameter values . This process is less efficient and accurate than the automatic fitting process used here , which is difficult to incorporate into the stochastic model . There are two additional “fixed” parameters that are estimated via either other experimen - tal data or physical constraints ( see Table 1 ) . The zero - force dimensionless filament length (cid:22) l max ( the maximal number of subunits ) in Table 1 is estimated as (cid:22) l max ¼ k on G = k cap , where k on = 11 . 6 μM − 1 s − 1 [ 37 ] is the on - rate constant , G = 5 . 3 μM [ 33 ] is the free - actin concentra - tion , and the capping rate k cap is taken to be 1 s − 1 [ 33 ] . The spontaneous nucleation rate parameter k maxnuc is fixed by a combination of two constraints : i ) that adequate pulling forces can be generated , and ii ) that sufficient invagination can be obtained . Additional parameters , including those describing the geometry , are given in S1 Table . Wild - type results Fig 6 shows how the actin network invaginates the membrane over time . The membrane forms an ‘ O ’ shaped invagination after 16 seconds into the simulation or about 5 seconds after actin polymerization starts , consistent with observations in electron micrographs [ 15 ] . The time courses of the F - actin count F and Las17 count N also reveal a good fit to the experimental data in Ref [ 12 ] , shown in Fig 7A . Note that the actin distribution extends slightly below the plane of the membrane , and outside the Las17 ring . This occurs because of the nonlocal dynamics of Eq 2 The spreading outside the Las17 ring is physically expected because of the nonzero filament length . The portion below the membrane plane is an approximation used to calculate the pushing force generated by the actin , as described in the Supplemental Material . The three - dimensional distributions predicted here could be tested by superresolution microscopy methods with resolution on the scale of tens of nanometers . Such methods [ 34 ] have found that F - actin forms a hemispherical shape , and Las17 forms a ring , as in the present model . Electron microscopy data in the literature [ 15 , 38 , 39 ] are also consistent with an F - actin hemisphere . Fig 6 . Time evolution of the F - actin distribution and the membrane profile . The F - actin density ρ ( r , y ) ( red ) at four time points during the time course of endocytosis in wild - typecells is shown by the heat map . The cell membraneis in green and the Las17is in blue . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 . g006 Modelingactin polymerization with a master equation PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 December 14 , 2017 12 / 22 Mutation of active region of Las17 The “acidic” regions of Las17 and other yeast NPFs are believed to control their binding to Arp2 / 3 complex , and therefore their NPF activity . The mutant containing mutations of both the Las17 and the NPF Pan1 , las17 pan1 Δ acidic ( abbreviated as LP Δ A ) should have a strong reduction in the Las17 branching activity . We choose this mutant to avoid possible compensa - tory effects from the nucleation - promoting activity of Pan1 . As in Ref . [ 12 ] , we model the mutation via a 40 % reduction in k maxbr . Fig 7B shows that the model matches the measured LP Δ A phenotype [ 7 ] well , with an accuracy comparable to that of our previous model [ 12 ] . Remarkably , the F - actin count is actually increased by reducing k br . This counter - intuitive phenotype results from a competition between a direct effect and an indirect effect . The direct effect is the reduction in branching rate per molecule of Las17 caused by the mutation . The indirect effect is the resulting increase in Las17 caused by the reduced branching rate , due to the negative - feedback effect described in Eq ( 4 ) . This increase will tend to increase the F - actin count . For the conditions considered here , the indirect effect outweighs the direct one . A spontaneous actin nucleation mechanism is required for adequate pulling forces As indicated in Fig 1 , actin filaments in the central region are required to exert pulling forces . We assume that these filaments arise from spontaneous nucleation ( not requiring NPFs at the endocytic site ) . Possible sources of the spontaneously nucleated actin filaments can be severed filament fragments [ 40 ] , or nucleation via Dip1 , which is independent of NPFs [ 41 ] . A mini - mum value of (cid:22) k maxnuc is required to exert adequate pulling force , since reducing (cid:22) k maxnuc reduces the number of filaments in the central region ( see Fig 8B – 8D ) . This increases the pulling force per filament , and eventually causes them to detach from the membrane . The maximum pulling force that a membrane - attached filament can sustain is not known . But Ref . [ 42 ] gives a quantitative measurement ( > 40 pN ) of the rupture force between a single Fig 7 . Time courses of F - actin ( F ) and Las17 ( N ) of wild - type and las17 pan1 Δ acidic ( LP Δ A ) cells . ( A ) Time courses of F and N obtainedfrom the ME model , comparedto experimental data [ 12 ] for wild - typecells . ( B ) Same comparisonfor LP Δ A cells , in which (cid:22) k maxbr is reducedby 40 % . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 . g007 Modelingactin polymerization with a master equation PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 December 14 , 2017 13 / 22 actin filament and the crosslinking proteins filamin and α - actinin in vitro , at low loading rates . In red blood cells [ 43 ] , the interaction force between the actin cytoskeleton and the membrane was found to be * 10 pN per filament in a model fitted to experimental data . However the cytoskeleton - membrane interactions in yeast could be very different from those in red blood cells . We thus based our estimate of the maximum actin filament pulling force on the mea - sured rupture force . To estimate the pulling force per filament in our model , we divided the total maximum pulling force of 725 pN obtained from the membrane - energetics analysis ( Sup - plementary Material ) by the number of pulling filaments , estimated as the total F - actin count inside r inL divided by ﬃﬃﬃ 2 p y nuc = a , a dimensionless measure of the height of the nucleation layer . In the default model , this procedure gave a pulling force of * 30 pN per filament , below the rupture force [ 42 ] . When spontaneous nucleation was suppressed by reducing (cid:22) k maxnuc , the pulling force exceeded the rupture force , as shown in Fig 8A . Thus a minimum rate of spontaneous fil - ament nucleation in the central region is required for the actin network to pull the membrane without rupture of the actin - membrane interactions . This prediction might be tested by deletion of the protein Dip1 , which could participate in an NPF - independent actin polymerization pathway [ 41 ] . If Dip1 nucleates filaments in the central region , its deletion should have two main effects . First , the actin hemisphere should be sparser in the middle . as shown in Fig 8B . This could be verified by superresolution images of dip1 Δ cells . Second , in the dip1 Δ cells , reduced nucleation should lower the number of pulling filaments ( see Fig 8A ) , causing rupture if the force per filament exceeds the rupture force . This would reduce the efficiency of invagination . Ref . [ 41 ] found that in dip1 Δ cells , only 40 % of the total patches were internalized , compared to * 90 % in WT cells . Internalization of 30 % of the patches was also delayed delayed by over 20 seconds . Both of these effects could be due to the reduced number of filaments in the central region . On the other hand , we find that too large a magnitude of (cid:22) k maxnuc also disrupts invagination . We increased (cid:22) k maxnuc by a factor of 2 and refitted . In comparison with the default invagination y maxl ¼ 54 nm , we obtained a maximum invagination y maxl ¼ 30 nm , which we consider to be a failed event . Therefore , possible values of (cid:22) k maxnuc are in a range limited by the constraints of i ) adequate pulling force and ii ) adequate invagination . Fig 8 . Time evolution of the pulling force per filament for different spontaneous nucleation rates , with representative ρ ( r , y ) plots . ( A ) Time courses of the pullingforce per filament for (cid:22) k maxnuc ¼ 33 % , 66 % and 100 % of the default value ( Table 1 ) . ( B ) - ( D ) Representative ρ ( r , y ) for each case ; ( D ) represents the default model . The representative time point is chosen when the pullingforce per filament reachesits maximum value while the invaginationis greater than zero . The actin network in the middle is significantly sparser in ( B ) than in ( D ) , causing the pullingforce per filament to exceed the rupture force measuredin Ref . [ 42 ] . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 . g008 Modelingactin polymerization with a master equation PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 December 14 , 2017 14 / 22 Partial inhibition of branching and polymerization cause different characteristic responses We investigate the responses of the actin - membrane system to the drugs CK - 666 , which inhib - its branching , and Latrunculin A ( LatA ) , which inhibits polymerization and to some extent branching . S4 Fig summarizes the effects on F max and y maxI of a broad range of combinations of parameter changes . Note than in S4 Fig frame D , breaking of pulling filaments bearing very large loads is not included . Inclusion of this effect will lead to failure of invagination at small (cid:22) k maxnuc , as discussed above . CK - 666 treatment . Fig 9A shows the effect on F max and N max of gradually reducing (cid:22) k maxbr , to mimic CK - 666 treatment . N monotonically increases as (cid:22) k maxbr is reduced , due to the negative feedback term in Eq 4 . F increases first and then dramatically decreases . This non - monotonic behavior , like the behavior for the LP Δ A mutant discussed above , results from the negative feedback effect of branching onto N . The reduction in branching per Las17 molecule increases N because the effect of the negative feedback from F - actin is reduced . The total extent of branching , depending on the product of N and (cid:22) k maxbr , also increases , until (cid:22) k maxbr is decreased by about 60 % , at which point it begins to decrease . This explains the increase in F max . These results cannot be directly compared to experiments , because the extent of reduction of (cid:22) k maxbr corresponding to a given concentration of CK - 666 is not known . For this reason , we replot our results in the N max - F max plane , where both of the axes can be experimentally measured . Fig 9 . Responses of F max and N max to treatment with the drugs CK - 666and LatA , and the corresponding phase diagrams . We assume that ( A ) CK - 666 reduces (cid:22) k maxbr , ( B ) LatA ( 1 ) reduces k on G only , and ( C ) LatA ( 2 ) reduces both (cid:22) k maxbr and k on G . The N max − F max plots in frames ( D ) - ( F ) can be directly compared to experiments . The wild - typedata points are denotedby blue open circles , and decreasing (cid:22) k maxbr and / or k on G correspondsto moving right in these frames . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 . g009 Modelingactin polymerization with a master equation PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 December 14 , 2017 15 / 22 Fig 9D shows such a plot , where (cid:22) k maxbr decreases to the right going from the default value indi - cated with a circle . With decreasing (cid:22) k maxbr , F max and N max first increase together . Then the curve flattens out , at F max * 8000 . With further reduction in (cid:22) k maxbr , F max drops sharply over a small range of N max . The non - monotonic asymmetric bell shape plot is directly testable by experiments . We also find that the maximum invagination length y maxI is slightly increased down to the critical value of (cid:22) k maxbr ( see S4 Fig frame C and D ) . We see no way of measuring this effect directly , but it suggests that the efficiency of endocytosis should not be impaired by small doses of CK - 666 . LatA treatment . LatA sequesters free monomers and thereby reduces the polymerization rate k on G , where k on is the on - rate constant and G is the actin concentration . It may also reduce k br , but it is not known by how much . We thus treat two different assumptions regard - ing its action , i ) that only the polymerization rate is increased , and ii ) that the branching rate and polymerization rate are reduced by the same amount . We take a reduction of only the polymerization rate into account by reducing (cid:22) l max , accord - ing to the relationship (cid:22) l max ¼ k on G = k cap obtained for a filament polymerizing over a time 1 / k cap . We plot our results in terms of the fractional reduction in k on G , which equals the fractional reduction in (cid:22) l max . Fig 9B shows that there is no increase in F max in this case . Rather , F max decreases and N max increases monotonically with decreasing k on G . There is a sudden jump in both F max and N max where k on G is reduced by 60 % . Fig 9E shows the corresponding N max - F max plot . The shape is much simpler than the one in Fig 9D . F max decreases nearly line - arly with N max . We also found that y maxI is significantly reduced upon reducing k on G ( see Fig 4C ) , an effect opposite to that seen for reduction of k br . We take simultaneous reduction of branching and polymerization into account by assum - ing that k on G and (cid:22) k maxbr are reduced by the same percentage relative to the default values . According to Ref . [ 44 ] , successful branching requires the binding between Arp2 / 3 and an actin monomer . Thus suggests a linear dependence of branching rate on the free - actin concentra - tion , the same as for k on G . We find that both the response curve and the N max - F max plot ( Fig 9C and 9F ) are similar to those for the CK - 666 treatment ( Fig 9A and 9D ) . In this case it is thus clear that the effect of reduced branching dominates that of reduced polymerization . Additionally , the maximum invagination length y maxI is slightly increased as (cid:22) k maxbr and k on G are jointly reduced , and decreases with further reduction ( see S4 Fig frame C ) . A limited range of polymerization - rate values predict effective invagination and a correct mutant phenotype Small values of the polymerization rate k on G lead to shallow invagination , which can not be compensated by increasing branching . We reduced k on G by 50 % and then refit the four fitting parameters . Although the modified model matches the time courses of F and N , its actin network can not effectively invaginate the membrane , as seen in Fig 10 . Only a shallow invagination is formed ( 20 nm compared to 54 nm from the default model ) , even though the refitted (cid:22) k maxbr ¼ 3 : 19 (cid:2) 10 (cid:0) 3 s (cid:0) 1 is significantly larger than the default (cid:22) k maxbr ( see Table 1 ) . Thus , we find that branching and polymerization are not functionally redundant . This prediction could be tested by actin underexpression [ 45 ] , or by capping protein over - expression [ 46 ] , which would reduce (cid:22) l max by increasing k cap . In either case , invagination should be reduced . Gradual treatment with Latrunculin A , as discussed above , would have some of the effects of reducing k on G , but might also change k maxbr . Modelingactin polymerization with a master equation PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 December 14 , 2017 16 / 22 Large k on G values lead to insensitivity to LP Δ A mutation . On the other hand , increas - ing k on G by 100 % leads to a prediction for the LP Δ A phenotype that is inconsistent with the one observed in Ref . [ 7 ] . The maximum values of F and N during their time courses , F max and N max , initially increase when (cid:22) k maxbr is reduced . However , F max does not increase as much as was experimentally observed [ 12 ] . Thus , we find that polymerization faster than our default value reduces the sensitivity of the actin network to NPF mutations . Therefore , a range of k on G values near the value in Table 1 is required by the constraints of proper invagination length and LP Δ A phenotype . This was not found by our previous model [ 12 ] , which had no explicit membrane treatment . Discussion Computational efficiency of ME The ME enables a “one - shot” approach to stochastic actin network dynamics by treating the pdf . It represents a statistical average of many ensembles of the same actin network calculated by the equivalent stochastic simulation , which is referred as “ the infinite population limit ” in Ref . [ 47 ] . We feel that the use of a statistical average is legitimate , because endocytosis in yeast is highly stereotypical . The behavior of the actin network typically displays a single mode value [ 7 ] ( the most likely value ) plus a range of fluctuations , instead of having multiple mode values . The “one - shot” nature of the ME simplifies the process of making modifications and refit - ting the model to experimental data . For both ME and stochastic methods , calculation of branching processes causes the largest computational load . The ME approach is most efficient when the branching region is small because it scans the physical space for possible branching events . The stochastic simulation , on the other hand , is most efficient when the total number of filaments is small , because it scans the subunits for possible branching sites . Thus , the ME is computationally most powerful for treating dense actin networks with relatively small regions of NPF , especially with spatial symmetry . Application range of ME approach The ME approach could be applied to many other problems involving branched network growth , as long as the branching is generated by a flat NPF region at a membrane or surface . For cell migration , the cytoskeleton can sometimes be simplified to a two dimensional network [ 48 ] or even a one dimensional network [ 49 ] with NPFs close to the cell membrane . The ME method is well suited to this type of problem . Notice that because the ME method is Fig 10 . Time evolution of the F - actin distribution and the membrane profile for low polymerization rate . In this model , we have reduced (cid:22) l max to 30 , half its default value ( see Table 1 ) . This corresponds to a reduction of 50 % in the polymerization rate . The actin network cannot effectively invaginatethe membrane . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 . g010 Modelingactin polymerization with a master equation PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 December 14 , 2017 17 / 22 mechanochemical , it could be used to describe mechanical feedback effects on cell migration , if combined with a “Helfrich” - type calculation of the cell membrane forces . The ME method is also well - suited for treating filopodium and lamellipodium geometries where the membrane forces can be calculated straightforwardly from the membrane geometry . Limits of ME approach In order to develop a practical method for treating a problem as complex as endocytosis , we have made several simplifying assumptions . Simplified treatment of mechanics . The actin network is treated as infinitely rigid when F > F min , so deformations arising from stresses , such as cytoskeletal tension , acting on semi - flexible filaments , are not treated . Although the absence of an actin cortex in yeast precludes cortical tension , tension and compression are both present inside the endocytic actin patch . Despite the semiflexible nature of the actin filaments , assuming infinite rigidity may be reason - able on the basis of our previous estimate [ 50 ] of the Young’s modulus of the actin patch in the range of 140 kPa to 500 kPa . These high values result from the large density of crosslinkers in the patch . However , the response of the network to stress , resulting from filament semiflexibility , could be added to the method by using a coordinate transformation . In our current approach of imposing a 45 degree angle in the actin network , the expression for the spatial coordinates in terms of the lattice coordinates has a cos ( f ) factor , where f = 45˚ . Semiflexibility could be included by allowing f to be force dependent . Under network compression , f would increase . The actin network would thus be squeezed by the force . Moderate levels of squeez - ing could to a positive feedback between actin growth and force , in two ways . First the actin density will be higher in the branching layer close to the membrane , thus increasing branch - ing . Second , because the cosine factor decreases under opposing force , polymerization will be enhanced . On the other hand , if the network becomes soft enough , invagination will fail [ 4 ] . Simplified treatment of actin turnover . Actin turnover is known to affect force genera - tion by cytoskeletal networks . It is treated in a simplified fashion here , using a first - order decay term with rate k sev . In reality , turnover is probably a higher - order process involving hydrolysis and binding of accessory proteins such as cofilin . However , regardless of the nature of the process , the main effect on CME within the present physical picture is the following : Too high a rate of turnover will reduce the F - actin count below the level required to sustain invagination . Too low a rate would result in excessive polymerization , which would reduce the available G - actin concentration either by global depletion or local depletion at the endocytic site by diffusion limitations . We have assumed that the turnover rate in wild - type cells is between these limits , allowing effective invagination . Absence of myosin - based contractility from model . Type II myosins , which in combina - tion with actin generate contractility , are absent at the endocytic patch . The Type I myosins present at the patch bind only one actin filament ( plus presumably the membrane ) , and it is not known whether they can generate contractile forces in yeast . However , Type I myosin motor activity is important for endocytosis in yeast [ 51 ] . Furthermore , in vitro experiments [ 52 ] have demonstrated that Type I myosins can tubulate giant unilamellar vesicles ( GUVs ) , against small opposing forces , by pulling out on the membrane while moving along preexisting actin filaments . It is not known whether such a mechanism could function against the larger force barrier caused by the turgor pressure in yeast . The ME method will lose its validity under conditions including i ) small system size , ii ) low values of the F - actin density , iii ) large opposing force per filament , and iv ) slow capping . If any Modelingactin polymerization with a master equation PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 December 14 , 2017 18 / 22 of i ) —iii ) occur , a fully stochastic calculation will produce bimodal or multimodal behavior ( which in the case of endocytosis could include a fraction of patches that fail to internalize ) , while the ME method will incorrectly predict a single type of behavior . If the capping is slow relative to polymerization , then the extent of branching may be overestimated because fila - ments can extend unrealistically fast into the branching region . Conclusion We have developed a computationally efficient deterministic master equation ( ME ) approach for calculating the spatial distribution of F - actin branched networks growing in the presence of mechanical forces . The approach was validated by comparison with stochastic - simulation results . It was then used to develop a mechanochemical model of clathrin - mediated endocyto - sis in yeast ( CME ) , which treats both the actin network and the cell membrane realistically . The mechanochemical model was used to reveal the time evolution of the actin - membrane system during CME , to quantitatively estimate unknown parameter values , and to predict sev - eral important mechanisms in CME that are unseen or omitted in previous models . These pre - dictions provide possible directions for experiments in CME , especially for superresolution microscopy and drug treatments . Beyond CME , the new ME approach provides possible applications to a wide range of problems involving the spatial distribution of branched actin polymerization . Supporting information S1 Supporting Information . Describes details of computational method and choice of parameter values . ( PDF ) S1 Fig . Illustration of the three dimensional ME , for the case l ¼ 4 . ( TIF ) S2 Fig . Illustration of the spatial and mechanical variables . ( TIF ) S3 Fig . Examples of pretabulated shapes . We calculate 80 shapes with heights of y preI ¼ 0 : 1 R P ; 0 : 2 R P : : : 8 : 0 R P , using the method of Ref . [ 5 ] . ( A ) Shallow shapes . ( B ) O ( deeply invaginated ) shapes . ( C ) Membrane force f in at each height y preI . ( TIF ) S4 Fig . Variation of F max and y maxI under combinations of parameter changes . ( A ) F max vs . k maxbr and k on G default . ( B ) F max vs . k maxbr and k maxnuc . ( C ) y maxI vs . k maxbr and k on G default . ( D ) y maxI vs . k maxbr and k maxnuc . Effects of breaking of pulling filaments occurring at small k maxnuc are not included . ( TIF ) S1 Table . Complete set of parameters and functions , and their physical interpretation . ( PDF ) Author Contributions Funding acquisition : Anders E . Carlsson . Investigation : Xinxin Wang . Methodology : Xinxin Wang . Modelingactin polymerization with a master equation PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 December 14 , 2017 19 / 22 Supervision : Anders E . Carlsson . Writing – original draft : Xinxin Wang . Writing – review & editing : Xinxin Wang , Anders E . Carlsson . References 1 . PollardTD , Cooper JA . Actin , a central player in cell shape and movement . Science . 2009 ; 326 ( 5957 ) : 1208 – 1212 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1175862PMID : 19965462 2 . Goode BL , Eskin JA , Wendland B . Actin and endocytosis in buddingyeast . Genetics . 2015 ; 199 ( 2 ) : 315 – 358 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1534 / genetics . 112 . 145540 PMID : 25657349 3 . KaksonenM , Toret CP , DrubinDG . A modulardesign for the clathrin - and actin - mediated endocytosis machinery . Cell . 2005 ; 123 : 305 – 320 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2005 . 09 . 024 PMID : 16239147 4 . CarlssonAE , Bayly PV . Force generationby endocytic actin patches in buddingyeast . Biophysical jour - nal . 2014 ; 106 ( 8 ) : 1596 – 1606 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2014 . 02 . 035 PMID : 24739159 5 . Dmitrieff S , Ne´de´lec F . Membranemechanicsof endocytosis in cells with turgor . PLoS Comput Biol . 2015 ; 11 ( 10 ) : e1004538 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1004538PMID : 26517669 6 . Goldenbogen B , Giese W , Hemmen M , Uhlendorf J , HerrmannA , Klipp E . Dynamics of cell wall elastic - ity pattern shapes the cell duringyeast mating morphogenesis . Open Biology . 2016 ; 6 ( 9 ) : 160136 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1098 / rsob . 160136 PMID : 27605377 7 . Galletta BJ , CarlssonAE , CooperJA . Molecularanalysisof Arp2 / 3 complexactivationin cells . Biophysi - cal journal . 2012 ; 103 ( 10 ) : 2145 – 2156 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2012 . 10 . 009 PMID : 23200048 8 . Liu J , Sun Y , DrubinDG , Oster GF . The mechanochemistry of endocytosis . PLoS Biol . 2009 ; 7 ( 9 ) : e1000204 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 1000204 PMID : 19787029 9 . KaksonenM , Sun Y , DrubinDG . A pathwayfor associationof receptors , adaptors , and actin during endocytic internalization . Cell . 2003 ; 115 ( 4 ) : 475 – 487 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 03 ) 00883 - 3 PMID : 14622601 10 . Wu JQ , Pollard TD . Countingcytokinesis proteinsgloballyand locallyin fission yeast . Science . 2005 ; 310 ( 5746 ) : 310 – 314 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1113230PMID : 16224022 11 . Picco A , Mund M , Ries J , Ne´de´lec F , KaksonenM . Visualizing the functionalarchitecture of the endocy - tic machinery . Elife . 2015 ; 4 : e04535 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 04535 12 . Wang X , Galletta BJ , CooperJA , CarlssonAE . Actin - regulator feedbackinteractions duringendocyto - sis . Biophysical journal . 2016 ; 110 ( 6 ) : 1430 – 1443 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2016 . 02 . 018PMID : 27028652 13 . Berro J , Sirotkin V , PollardTD . Mathematical modelingof endocyticactin patch kinetics in fission yeast : disassembly requiresrelease of actin filament fragments . Molecularbiologyof the cell . 2010 ; 21 ( 16 ) : 2905 – 2915 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E10 - 06 - 0494PMID : 20587776 14 . Helfrich W . Elastic propertiesof lipid bilayers : theory and possibleexperiments . Zeitschrift fu¨r Natur - forschungC . 1973 ; 28 ( 11 – 12 ) : 693 – 703 . 15 . Kukulski W , Schorb M , KaksonenM , Briggs JA . Plasma membranereshapingduringendocytosis is revealedby time - resolved electron tomography . Cell . 2012 ; 150 ( 3 ) : 508 – 520 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 05 . 046 PMID : 22863005 16 . Young ME , Cooper JA , BridgmanPC . Yeast actin patches are networksof branchedactin filaments . The Journalof cell biology . 2004 ; 166 ( 5 ) : 629 – 635 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200404159PMID : 15337772 17 . HassingerJE , Oster G , Drubin DG , RangamaniP . Designprinciplesfor robust vesiculationin clathrin - mediatedendocytosis . Proceedingsof the NationalAcademyof Sciences . 2017 ; 114 ( 7 ) : E1118 – E1127 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1617705114 18 . Zhang T , SknepnekR , Bowick M , Schwarz J . On the modelingof endocytosis in yeast . Biophysical jour - nal . 2015 ; 108 ( 3 ) : 508 – 519 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2014 . 11 . 3481 PMID : 25650919 19 . CarlssonA , Wear M , CooperJ . End versus side branching by Arp2 / 3 complex . Biophysical journal . 2004 ; 86 ( 2 ) : 1074 – 1081 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0006 - 3495 ( 04 ) 74182 - X PMID : 14747342 20 . Mogilner A , Edelstein - Keshet L . Regulation of actin dynamics in rapidlymoving cells : a quantitative analysis . Biophysical journal . 2002 ; 83 ( 3 ) : 1237 – 1258 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0006 - 3495 ( 02 ) 73897 - 6 PMID : 12202352 21 . RubinsteinB , JacobsonK , MogilnerA . Multiscaletwo - dimensional modelingof a motile simple - shaped cell . Multiscale Modeling & Simulation . 2005 ; 3 ( 2 ) : 413 – 439 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1137 / 04060370X Modelingactin polymerization with a master equation PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 December 14 , 2017 20 / 22 22 . Ditlev JA , Vacanti NM , Novak IL , Loew LM . An open model of actin dendriticnucleation . Biophysical journal . 2009 ; 96 ( 9 ) : 3529 – 3542 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2009 . 01 . 037 PMID : 19413959 23 . Joanny JF , Prost J . Active gels as a description of the actin - myosin cytoskeleton . HFSP journal . 2009 ; 3 ( 2 ) : 94 – 104 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2976 / 1 . 3054712 PMID : 19794818 24 . EnculescuM , Falcke M . Actin - based propulsionof spatiallyextendedobjects . New Journalof Physics . 2011 ; 13 ( 5 ) : 053040 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 1367 - 2630 / 13 / 5 / 053040 25 . Doubrovinski K , KruseK . Cellmotility resultingfrom spontaneous polymerization waves . PhysicalReview Letters . 2011 ; 107 ( 25 ) : 258103 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1103 / PhysRevLett . 107 . 258103 PMID : 22243118 26 . Holmes WR , Carlsson AE , Edelstein - Keshet L . Regimes of wave type patterningdriven by refractory actin feedback : transition from static polarizationto dynamic wave behaviour . Physical biology . 2012 ; 9 ( 4 ) : 046005 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 1478 - 3975 / 9 / 4 / 046005PMID : 22785332 27 . Khamviwath V , Hu J , Othmer HG . A continuummodel of actin waves in Dictyostelium discoideum . PloS one . 2013 ; 8 ( 5 ) : e64272 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0064272PMID : 23741312 28 . Camley BA , Zhao Y , Li B , Levine H , RappelWJ . Crawlingand turning in a minimalreaction - diffusion cell motility model : couplingcell shapeand biochemistry . Physical Review E . 2017 ; 95 ( 1 ) : 012401 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1103 / PhysRevE . 95 . 012401PMID : 28208438 29 . Mare´e AF , Jilkine A , Dawes A , GrieneisenVA , Edelstein - Keshet L . Polarizationand movement of kera - tocytes : a multiscalemodellingapproach . Bulletinof mathematical biology . 2006 ; 68 ( 5 ) : 1169 – 1211 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11538 - 006 - 9131 - 7PMID : 16794915 30 . Reymann AC , Boujemaa - PaterskiR , Martiel JL , Gue´rin C , Cao W , Chin HF , et al . Actin network archi - tecture can determine myosin motor activity . Science . 2012 ; 336 ( 6086 ) : 1310 – 1314 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1221708 PMID : 22679097 31 . GallandR , Leduc P , Gue´rin C , Peyrade D , Blanchoin L , The´ry M . Fabrication of three - dimensional elec - trical connections by means of directed actin self - organization . Nature materials . 2013 ; 12 ( 5 ) : 416 – 421 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmat3569 PMID : 23396247 32 . CarlssonAE . Growth of branchedactin networks againstobstacles . Biophysical journal . 2001 ; 81 ( 4 ) : 1907 – 1923 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0006 - 3495 ( 01 ) 75842 - 0 PMID : 11566765 33 . Kim K , YamashitaA , Wear MA , Mae´da Y , Cooper JA . Cappingprotein binding to actin in yeast . J Cell Biol . 2004 ; 164 ( 4 ) : 567 – 580 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200308061PMID : 14769858 34 . Mund M , Picco A , KaksonenM , Ries J . High - throughput superresolutionof clathrin - and actin - mediated endocytosisin yeast . Molec Biol Cell . 2016 ; 27 ( 25 ) : 3947 ( Abstract C391 ) . 35 . PollardTD , Borisy GG . Cellularmotility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin filaments . Cell . 2003 ; 112 ( 4 ) : 453 – 465 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 03 ) 00120 - X PMID : 12600310 36 . Case LB , Waterman CM . Integration of actin dynamics and cell adhesion by a three - dimensional , mechanosensitive molecularclutch . Nature cell biology . 2015 ; 17 ( 8 ) : 955 . PMID : 26121555 37 . PollardTD . Rate constants for the reactions of ATP - and ADP - actin with the ends of actin filaments . The Journal of cell biology . 1986 ; 103 ( 6 ) : 2747 – 2754 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 103 . 6 . 2747 PMID : 3793756 38 . Idrissi FZ , Gro¨tsch H , Ferna´ndez - Golbano IM , Presciatto - Baschong C , Riezman H , Geli MI . Distinct acto / myosin - I structures associate with endocytic profilesat the plasma membrane . The Journalof cell biology . 2008 ; 180 ( 6 ) : 1219 – 1232 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200708060 PMID : 18347067 39 . Idrissi FZ , Blasco A , Espinal A , Geli MI . Ultrastructural dynamics of proteins involvedin endocytic bud - ding . Proceedingsof the NationalAcademy of Sciences . 2012 ; 109 ( 39 ) : E2587 – E2594 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1202789109 40 . Chen Q , Pollard TD . Actin filament severingby cofilin dismantlesactin patches and producesmother fil - aments for new patches . Current Biology . 2013 ; 23 ( 13 ) : 1154 – 1162 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2013 . 05 . 005 PMID : 23727096 41 . Basu R , ChangF . Characterizationof dip1prevealsa switch in Arp2 / 3 - dependentactin assemblyfor fis - sion yeast endocytosis . Current Biology . 2011 ; 21 ( 11 ) : 905 – 916 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2011 . 04 . 047 PMID : 21620704 42 . Ferrer JM , Lee H , Chen J , Pelz B , Nakamura F , Kamm RD , et al . Measuring molecularrupture forces betweensingle actin filaments and actin - bindingproteins . Proceedingsof the NationalAcademy of Sci - ences . 2008 ; 105 ( 27 ) : 9221 – 9226 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0706124105 43 . Peng Z , Li X , Pivkin IV , Dao M , Karniadakis GE , Suresh S . Lipid bilayer and cytoskeletal interactions in a red blood cell . Proceedings of the NationalAcademy of Sciences . 2013 ; 110 ( 33 ) : 13356 – 13361 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1311827110 Modelingactin polymerization with a master equation PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 December 14 , 2017 21 / 22 44 . Zalevsky J , Lempert L , Kranitz H , MullinsRD . Different WASP family proteins stimulate different Arp2 / 3 complex - dependentactin - nucleating activities . Current Biology . 2001 ; 11 ( 24 ) : 1903 – 1913 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0960 - 9822 ( 01 ) 00603 - 0 PMID : 11747816 45 . Burke TA , Christensen JR , Barone E , Suarez C , Sirotkin V , Kovar DR . Homeostatic actin cytoskeleton networks are regulatedby assembly factor competitionfor monomers . Current Biology . 2014 ; 24 ( 5 ) : 579 – 585 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2014 . 01 . 072 PMID : 24560576 46 . AmatrudaJF , Gattermeir DJ , Karpova TS , CooperJA . Effects of null mutations and overexpression of cappingprotein on morphogenesis , actin distributionand polarizedsecretionin yeast . The Journalof Cell Biology . 1992 ; 119 ( 5 ) : 1151 – 1162 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 119 . 5 . 1151 PMID : 1447293 47 . Zhang XJ , Qian H , Qian M . Stochastic theory of nonequilibrium steady states and its applications . Part I . Physics Reports . 2012 ; 510 ( 1 ) : 1 – 86 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . physrep . 2011 . 09 . 002 48 . Wang X , Carlsson AE . Feedbackmechanisms in a mechanicalmodel of cell polarization . Physical biol - ogy . 2014 ; 11 ( 6 ) : 066002 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 1478 - 3975 / 11 / 6 / 066002PMID : 25313164 49 . LomakinAJ , Lee KC , Han SJ , Bui DA , DavidsonM , MogilnerA , et al . Competition for actin betweentwo distinct F - actin networks defines a bistableswitch for cell polarization . Nature cell biology . 2015 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb3246PMID : 26414403 50 . Tweten D , Bayly P , Carlsson A . Actin growth profile in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Physical Review E . 2017 ; 95 ( 5 ) : 052414 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1103 / PhysRevE . 95 . 052414PMID : 28618637 51 . Sun Y , Martin AC , DrubinDG . Endocytic internalization in buddingyeast requirescoordinatedactin nucleation and myosin motor activity . Developmental cell . 2006 ; 11 ( 1 ) : 33 – 46 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2006 . 05 . 008PMID : 16824951 52 . YamadaA , MamaneA , Di Cicco A , Pre´vost C , Le´vy D , Joanny Jf , et al . Catch - bondbehaviourfacilitates membranetubulationby non - processive myosin 1b . Nature communications . 2014 ; 5 : 3624 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomms4624 PMID : 24709651 Modelingactin polymerization with a master equation PLOS Computational Biology | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1005901 December 14 , 2017 22 / 22