Developing kindergarten students ’ game design skills by teaching game design through organized game design interventions George Kalmpourtzis 1 Received : 13 May 2018 / Revised : 8 January 2019 / Accepted : 19 February 2019 # Springer Science + Business Media , LLC , part of Springer Nature 2019 Abstract Developing students ’ game design skills and the process of teaching game design acquire increasing research interest . The aim of this study was to ( a ) examine the impact of game design teaching interventions to kindergarten students and ( b ) examine the design of such interventions for teaching game design to students of this age . In that regard , this paper presents a teaching experiment , conducted with students in the early childhood . The experiment followed a quasi - experimental design , with a pre - test and a post - test and a focus and control groups . For a period of three months , only the focus group was presented with participatory game design activities while the control group followed the standard curriculum . During those interventions , students of the focus group worked on designing educational games about teaching pre - algebraic patterning to their peers . A mixed methods analysis was applied to analyze the results , which suggest that the facilitation of participatory game design activities has a positive impact on the development of game design skills . Additionally , this paper elaborates on issues that emerged through the study related to collaborative and individual work of students , difficulties in focusing on designing educational games and diversity of game proposals . Keywords Gamedesign . Humancomputerinteraction . Participatorydesign . Designeducation . Serious games . Mathematics education 1 Introduction & theoretical background There is mounting interest for the potential of play and games in learning contexts . From one side , research focuses on the use of play and games and their impact on a variety of learning contexts [ 9 , 38 , 74 ] . From the other side , it examines the diverse and complex set of design challenges that this Multimedia Tools and Applications https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11042 - 019 - 7393 - y * George Kalmpourtzis gkalmpourtzis @ playcompass . com 1 Aristotle University of Thessaloniki , Thessaloniki , Greece multidisciplinary field presents [ 20 ] . The design of educational games presents several additional challenges on top of the already various design factors that accompany casual game design [ 4 ] . The lack of involvement of users in the design of games of all sorts has been a matter of criticism in the game design process [ 49 ] . Users offer their feedback at the very late stages , when a playable and almost final version of games has been delivered . This is also the case for educational game design [ 44 ] , where the involvement of users in the design process is not a common practice . On the contrary , players ’ impact on educational games is rather limited . However , there have been attempts to involve users in the process of designing games with educational purposes [ 52 ] . Since the 1970s with the Scandinavian labor movement [ 6 ] , the participation of users in the design process has been identified as important , having set the foundation of participatory design . In participatory design , end - users are involved in the creation of the technologies that they and their peers are supposed to use . The role of users can span from that of a mere tester to that of a an active stakeholder in the design process [ 25 ] . In the field of education , the increasing interest of this perspective has led to a continuous increase in the study of designing and developing games by or with the participation of learners [ 57 , 82 ] . Research indicates also that participatory design can be beneficial for children who take part in the design process both as a means of cognitive development [ 3 ] , critical thinking [ 68 ] but also as a competence development tool , with a positive impact on the entire design process [ 12 , 30 ] . For the field of early childhood and participatory design there are few studies that have focused on the approach , facilitation and structure of design sessions with the involvement of young designers [ 50 ] . However , there are more studies , involving students in some way in design processes for other fields , such as cognitive development [ 3 ] , STEM education [ 53 ] , literacy [ 15 ] , writing skills [ 14 ] as well as a problem solving and posing activities [ 49 ] . Mathematics education has been a topic addressed by several educational game design studies [ 37 ] . A part of this field focuses on what is identified as algebraic thinking , which can be considered as the process of finding and using generalizations [ 63 ] . Generalizations describe continuously valid mathematical relationships over isolated instances . Consequently , mathematical patterns can be considered as types of generalizations in the sense that they are based on relationships that remain the same in every occasion [ 83 ] . Generalizations for patterning in the early childhood are usually identified in the repetition of successive elements , spatial arrangements or the difference of materials and sizes of elements of patterns [ 61 ] . In early childhood , numbers are not often used in patterning activities . Hence , the term pre - algebraic patterning is used to describe generalizations of this sort and this type of age [ 63 ] . Considering the challenges and limited perspective in the field of participatory game design with students in the early childhood , this study focuses on the development and measurement of game design skills from this participation and lays ground work for future research on the potential structuring and running game design education sessions . As part of a broader study , where game design is approached as a problem posing activity [ 45 ] , this paper presents an empirical study on the design and facilitation of a series of interventions with students in early childhood over a three - month period . The aim of the game design interventions was the creation of games about teaching pre - algebraic patterning that both the young designers and their peers would later play with . The present study ( a ) examined the impact of game design interventions on early childhood students ’ game design skills and ( b ) examined the design and structure of those participatory design sessions for teaching game design through constant iterations for the duration of the study . Those two research questions were approached through a mixed methods analysis , including both quantitative and qualitative methodologies . A pilot study was conducted and Multimedia Tools and Applications previously published [ 47 ] , which presented a first analysis of the connection between problem posing and game design , while this study extensively presents and analyzes the impact of game design sessions on students ’ game design skills . This paper is structured : Section 1 provides an introduction to the subject and presents experimental and research findings on the fields of using games in educational contexts , designing and co - designing games , the connections between making problems and creating games , laying ground work for the methodology presentation of this study , which is presented in Section 2 . The Methodology section presents information about the study ’ s sample , the structure of the proposed interventions and their implementation as well as the definition of the skills that were examined in the study and their analysis . Section 3 presents the data analysis of the study . Section 4 offers a discussion and elaboration of the study results and Section 5 presents the limitations of this study and steps for future work . 1 . 1 Playing games Game - based learning has received attention from researchers during the previous years . Games have been studied as motivational tools for students ’ learning [ 5 , 66 ] , encouraging players ’ active learning [ 32 ] , fostering collaboration among learners [ 41 ] and the development of problem solving skills [ 40 ] . The task of creating games with learning impact though has presented game designers with challenges [ 39 , 51 ] , related to the combination of learning and gaming elements . Hence , this is the reason why several game design frameworks have been proposed [ 4 , 7 , 11 , 28 , 69 , 75 ] , each of which focuses on areas like the analysis , evaluation and facilitation of game design sessions . Each framework addresses games ’ individual components and attempts to result in educational gaming experiences . 1 . 2 Designing games Research on game design for young children has focused on students ’ roles in the design process [ 24 ] , their interaction with their peers , whether those are children or adults [ 8 , 23 ] , and the study of activities , concerns and abilities that stem from children ’ s interaction with technology [ 67 ] . Empha - sis has also been given to the process of organizing and facilitation of game design sessions . The practices and approaches of this area include design games [ 81 ] , design activities [ 43 ] , progressive presentation of challenge and scaffolding in the development of game design skills [ 50 ] and the presentation of learning concepts during the design process [ 56 ] . Especially in the field of design sessions partnering adults and children , the approach of Cooperative Inquiry has provided solutions grounded on previous research , which influenced this study . Cooperative Inquiry provides a set of design tools [ 23 ] that facilitate the design process and the communication between children and adults [ 36 ] and puts elaboration of ideas in the center of the design process . Like any other design approach though , Cooperative Inquiry presents its weaknesses , one of which is a great emphasis on the design process over subject - domain expertise [ 35 ] . This aspect has been addressed by previous research , elaborating on the connection between design and subject - domain expertise in participa - tory design sessions [ 85 ] , making the case that participatory design tools should account for both aspects in such contexts . Educational game design with children is not a new initiative . Kafai presented organized game design sessions in order to help students develop skills related to their mathematical thinking [ 42 ] . However , several challenges and issues have emerged from organizing partic - ipatory game design sessions , involving young children . Some of those include the difficulty Multimedia Tools and Applications of children to focus on set objectives and lose track of the initial learning objectives [ 80 ] while designing games and the high level of abstraction that such a complex and diverse process requires [ 58 ] . Those challenges suggest a particular need to approach the facilitation of such sessions with children . As a result , Khaled and Vasalou proposed modified tasks and activities in order to support children ’ s development of game design skills and make those activities approachable to them [ 50 ] . The process presents a higher complexity than casual games , since the aspects of play , domain content and context need to be taken into account [ 84 ] . Addition - ally , the diverse and multimodal nature of game design makes difficult the measurement of performance in such sessions [ 60 ] . Since different factors can affect the engagement and perception of children of what is being asked of them , loss of focus and confusion may appear during the process of game design [ 72 ] . 1 . 3 Posing problems & designing games The process of posing problems has been considered as a difficult and challenging process , leading to a decreased student motivation towards the subject matter [ 87 ] . Designing games has been identified as a tool for the development of problem posing skills with a positive impact on students ’ motivation on posing problems [ 13 ] . The connection between playing games and problem solving has been addressed by experts of different fields [ 62 ] , which underlines the multidisciplinary nature of designing games . Games have been presented as problems , presented in a playful way [ 71 ] , decision making [ 10 ] and goal oriented [ 46 ] activities . Since games are considered as problem solving activities , the connection between of problem solving and problem posing skills [ 33 ] , demonstrates a potential connection between game design and problem posing [ 13 , 82 ] . Working with kindergarten students , Kalmpourtzis [ 61 ] studied the impact of using game design activities in students ’ abilities to create mathematical problems on pre - algebraic patterning . The study showed that students that participated in game design activities showed statistically signifi - cantly higher performance in creating mathematical problems . Based on previous analysis of problem solving skills frameworks , Leung [ 54 ] and Stoyanova [ 77 ] proposed a set of six problem posing skills for the analysis and study of the field . Those skills are accuracy , correctness , originality , level of difficulty , fluency and flexibility of problems . In order to organize and facilitate problem posing situations , Stoyanova [ 77 ] proposed three problem posing situations : structured , semi - structured and free ones . In structured situations , students are provided with already known and formed problems and are asked to create similar ones . In semi - structured situations , students are provided with fragments of existing problems and are asked to create new problems based on those bases while in free - structured situations , students are not provided with additional help and are asked to come up with their own problems . 2 Methodology Based on the literature review , the study presented a series of participatory game design interventions for the teaching of pre - algebraic patterning . The proposed games would be later used by both the designers themselves and be presented to their peers . For the purposes of the study , game design was approached as a problem posing activity . The study was based on a quasi - experimental design mixed methods research methodology [ 18 ] with a pre - test and a post - test , featuring a focus and a control group . The study lasted for a period of twelve weeks , Multimedia Tools and Applications during which only the students of the focus group participated in a series of game design sessions aiming at helping them develop their game design skills . The students of the control group followed the standard curriculum and only participated in the pre and post - tests , without having joined any of the organized interventions . Sessions took place during school hours . Each participatory game design session lasted one hour . During each week , students of the focus group would participate in two game design sessions , conducted on different days . To provide answers to the two research questions , a mixed methods research methodology was selected . More specifically : ( a ) a quantitative study , examining students ’ performance on the pre and post tests for the proposed game design skills was proposed , while ( b ) a design research [ 26 ] qualitative methodology was selected in order to further investigate students ’ application of game design skills and help examine the process of designing and conducting the participatory design interventions . Research design was selected for its iterative focus on the structure of interventions , helping educators adapting and re - designing them based on their students ’ needs , an aspect relevant to the notion of Cooperative Inquiry and its tools [ 23 ] . 2 . 1 Participants The study was conducted in an urban area . The participants of both focus and control groups had the age of 5 to 6 years and came from diverse economic and social backgrounds , including local and immigrant families , with both low and high incomes . The groups were formed from two kindergarten classrooms of the same school , a convenient selection sample . The students of one classroom were assigned to the focus group and all students of the other classroom were assigned to the control group . The focus group consisted of eighteen participants , among which eight were girls and ten were boys . The control group consisted of sixteen students , among which eight were girls and eight were boys . All students were introduced to an experimental design with a pre - test and a post - test , related to the aims of the present study . 2 . 2 Setting 2 . 2 . 1 Game design sessions The main interventions of the study were based on game design sessions . Game design sessions were based on existing approaches and practices for the teaching of game design [ 21 , 81 ] , participatory design [ 50 , 86 ] and mathematical problem posing inquiry [ 17 , 22 ] . Viewing game design activities as problem posing opportunities , their design and structure was based on existing analysis and techniques of posing problems . Still , this analysis was not presented to students , who were instead asked to design their own games . The format of each session was structured on an iterative , process with four steps : understanding , designing , implementing and presenting & reflecting [ 48 ] . Understanding is connected to the analysis and reception of the activity ’ s givens , which may consist of resources , restrictions and design process . During this step , students would need to understand the instructions they would be given , identify or search for the materials they could use or consider restrictions on elements that they could not use during a session . Designing is connected to the process of using those resources to come up with suggestions for functional games . Implementing consists of the actual implementation of the proposed game concept or concepts , while Presentation & Reflecting is connected to the process of presenting the created games and looking back to the whole process to assess it and make it more efficient . Multimedia Tools and Applications During each session , students were asked to create their own games . For the structure of the design sessions , design challenges encountered both from a review of the literature and the pilot activity , related to students ’ understanding of the concepts of pre - algebraic patterning and game design , were taken into account . Consequently , aiming at making game design more approachable to students and gradually introducing the process to them , a scaffolding mech - anism , consisting of three game design situations was proposed . The mechanism was based on Stoyanova ’ s [ 77 ] relevant research on problem posing situations . The three game design situations that were proposed are structured , semi - structured , free ones . When participating in structured game design situations , students were provided with already known , fully constructed , games and were asked to alter or extend them . When participating in semi - structured game design situations , students were presented with half - made games or only a portion of sets of elements of existing and already known games . During those sessions , players were encouraged to take those elements into consideration in order to create their own game creations . During free structured situations on the other hand , students were not provided with any existing game or other gaming component , while they were asked to create their own games . Students were not restricted on the genre or type of games they could propose . Those design sessions were designed in order to help students get accustomed to both the notion of patterning and the design process by presenting different types of patterns , addressing at the same time known issues of previous experience in Cooperative Inquiry , like presentation and elaboration of ideas [ 36 ] , facilitation of communication and collaboration [ 23 ] , cross - generational team work [ 86 ] and familiarity with both the design and learning contexts [ 85 ] . The game design sessions were based primarily on low - tech prototyping sessions for both physical and digital games . In each session , students would be presented with instructions and materials , depending on the design situation , they would be asked to create their game prototypes and present them at the end of each session to the whole class . Physical games included board , card , outdoor , traditional and puzzle games while digital games included video games for computers and mobile devices . Digital games would be discussed in terms of feasibility with a team of three programmers that did join the design sessions when designing digital games . The programmers gave information about which mechanics are technically feasible and game prototypes that were possible to code , were implemented on Adobe AIR . In order to facilitate the design process , students were provided with a diverse set of materials , from stationery , toys , construction equipment and were frequently exposed to different types of technologies and platforms . A list of all the games and platforms presented in the study can be found in the Appendix . Students were divided into working groups [ 64 ] , the size of which varied from three to five participants . The work on the games was conducted in a collaborative manner , based on the approach of Cooperative Inquiry [ 31 ] . The facilitation of the sessions happened with the help of an adult observer . One observer was assigned to each working group and was responsible for the facilitation of the discussion and design process . Observers were advised to participate as little as possible in the design process and come up with questions when the team would have difficulty proceeding or would stumble upon obstacles . In order to facilitate the workflow , a series of games and tools was proposed . Figure 1 presents the case of a design session for the video game Forest Maths . During a structured design situation , students were presented with the game , which they had the time to play and explore . Both the content and the game mechanics of the game were then discussed inside the group . In order to facilitate this discussion , conversation and the design tools of Table 1 ( mainly Guiding questions ) were used . When a common understanding of the Multimedia Tools and Applications game was established , the group was asked to propose their own games based on Forest Maths . In the first sessions , the use of design tools was more frequent . Activities like Reflection board , Material overload ! And Presentation and reflection ateliers were used as a means for the facilitation of internal discussion , elaboration of ideas and workflow . The games and tools that were used are the following ones : 2 . 3 Game design skills For this study , six game design skills were examined [ 45 ] . The proposal of those skills was the result of the review of literature both on game design [ 79 , 81 ] and problem posing [ 1 , 54 , 55 , 76 , 78 ] . Those skills are : 1 . Accuracy is the game design skill that is connected to the precision in the language used for game elements . Three evaluation states were proposed in order to measure the skills of Fig . 1 The first image presents Forest Maths , an existing educational game , presented during a structured situation , while the second image presents a game proposal by a working group based on the provided materials Multimedia Tools and Applications accuracy . Those are precise , partially precise and not precise . Precise state describes the use of precise language for the creation and explanation of the game by the designer to players , without the need of additional explanations and questions on behalf of players . For instance , the instruction B The game is played in a football court ^ is enough for players to understand the location and size of their game space and thus is considered precise . Partially precise are game instructions that when provided , additional explanation or examples are required for the game to be understood by players . For instance , the instruction B Players shoot ^ offers information about players ’ action during a game but does not offer a complete view of the game ’ s instructions , like what instruments do they use to shoot and which targets they do shoot . So , it is considered as partially precise . Not precise are instructions that do not actually offer hints and information about a game ’ s structure and suggest designers ’ inability to describe a game or a game element . 2 . Correctness is the game design skill that is connected to the correctness of structure of a proposed game . Three evaluation states were proposed to measure the skill of correctness . Those are correct , partially correct and not correct . Correct instructions are connected to valid representation of a game ’ s logic , while the game has a final correct solution . This means that the proposed set of instructions lead to a final and precise end goal that is achievable either on its own or by the completion of other , smaller ones . Partially correct instructions require additional revision in order for the game to be playable . For example , Table 1 The presentation of games and activities , used to facilitate the design process Tool name Tool Description Guiding questions In order to help and facilitate students ’ design work , a set of questions was proposed . Those questions were based on previous problem posing practices [ 27 , 73 , 78 ] and include questions like : B Where is the game played ? ^ , B How many play in the game ? ^ , B When does somebody win ? ^ , B What happens if … ? ^ , B When does the game end ? ^ . The proposed questions for this study were based on a previous pilot study , focusing again on participatory game design [ 48 ] . Reflection board The reflection board offers a conceptual representation of games ’ individual components as addressed by this study . The components that were presented in the reflection board were : winning conditions , players , rules and materials [ 11 , 16 , 70 , 71 ] . Each category would later be analyzed to subcategories , depending on the nature of the proposed games . By using the reflection board , students participated in activities where they were asked to add , modify or remove gaming elements related to the categories of the board at different points of the design phase . The board was also used as an assessment tool and a base for discussion during the presentation & reflecting step . Material overload ! Material overload ! is an activity aiming at presenting students with a diverse set of materials for the development of their games . Based on similar practices on rapid prototyping sessions [ 23 ] , Material Overload ! presents students with physical and digital resources and opportunities for the design of their games . Through participating in this activity , students have the opportunity to explore and discover new materials and understand how they can be used or combined with other elements in order to be used in game design contexts . The exposure of students to Material Overload ! was accompanied with the presentation of games or game concepts related to the materials presented . Presentation and reflections ateliers Presentation ateliers present students with the opportunity of presenting their games to their peers and receive their feedback . The ateliers consist of three phases . In the first one , creators take the time to present their games to their peers and later observe them play their games . In the second phase , creators discuss with their peers the gaming experience and receive their feedback , while in phase three , creators use this opportunity to reflect on their projects . Multimedia Tools and Applications a treasure hunt game , consisting of four points of interest , each of which presents a riddle based on pre - algebraic patterning , some of which are incorrect , consists of partially correct instructions and components . Not correct components and instructions are identified when a game cannot advance or be completed because their logic is faulty . 3 . Originality is the game design skill that is connected to quality of game structure by considering the extent to which the formal structures of the posed games related to students ’ gaming experience . Original games are games that students were not familiar with and their proposal was the result of students ’ sole involvement in the game design process . Partially original are games whose structure was familiar to students but at least one aspect or component was new and not connected to any other game they already played in their school environment . Not original are games whose total structure was familiar to students in advance . 4 . Level of difficulty is the game design skill that is connected to the complexity of gameplay and underlying game problem solution structure . For the purposes of this study there were three evaluation states : Difficult , partially difficult and not difficult . Difficult games were the ones that after their design and presentation in classroom , less than the one third would manage to complete them . Partially difficult games were the ones that more that less than the two thirds of the classroom could complete while not difficult games were the ones that more than the two thirds of the classroom could complete . 5 . Fluency is the game design skill that is connected to the number of playable games related to a game design situation . Fluency is an integer number corresponding to the number of games produced by designers at a given session . 6 . Flexibility is the game design skill that is connected to the number of different types of games generated at a game design situation . For a game to be deemed different from another , at least one component should be different , including game content , rules , winning conditions , aesthetic representation , materials used and number of players . Flexibility is an integer number . 2 . 4 Data collection and analysis All participants of the study were presented with a pre - test and a post - test . The tests were administered before the study and a small period after the three month duration of the interventions . The test , which was proposed by the researcher , was a revised version of a similar test conducted during the study ’ s pilot activity [ 48 ] and had the form of a semi - structured interview . Both the pre - test and the post - test consisted of three items , based on the three game design situations presented earlier . Each item presented students with a game design situation , during which they needed to propose their own games . For the three game design items , students were provided with games or fragments of games and were asked , ( a ) in the structured situation , to describe the design and create new games , based on the provided completed games , ( b ) in the semi - structured game design situation to create games , based on the portions of games or game components that were provided and ( c ) in the free game design situation to create their own games , without any additional support or assistance . The pre and post - tests in the form of semi - interviews were individual . During the interviews , the researcher would present the three game design items of the tests to students and keep notes . The interviews were also recorded . After the interview data was transcribed , the skills of accuracy , originality , correctness and level of difficulty were assigned ordinal scale values from 0 to 3 . The Multimedia Tools and Applications value of 0 was assigned to students that showed great difficulty or inability to use the particular skills . The value of 1 was assigned to cases where the application of a skill was incorrect . The value of 2 was assigned to cases where a skill was applied partially successfully , while the value of 3 was assigned to cases where a skill was applied successfully in a given context . The skills of flexibility and fluency were assigned to integer numbers . A separate rubric document has been submitted along with this paper in order to present the exact qualification and assessment of students ’ performance during the sessions in regard to the development of game design skills . For instance , when the game of Fig . 2 was presented by a working group , the students showed difficulty understanding what they had worked on and were lost during the design process . They had presented a game where the main character , a frog , would need to collect pieces in order to complete a pattern . The game consisted of smaller components that the designers had encountered in the past , put them together but didn ’ t actually lead to a playable and explainable game . The game received an accuracy 1 rating , since the language and explanation used by designers was impossible to understand and further clarifications were required , a correctness 1 rating , since the game was not playable , an originality 2 rating , since the navigation of the main character and interaction with non - player characters was new to the designers . The level of difficulty was 0 , since the game was not playable , while fluency and flexibility were also 0 , since no playable game was proposed . The present study examined all six game design skills presented in the methodology section . The results of the three game design items of both the pre - test and post - test were taken into account for the analysis . A non - parametric analysis was used due to the ordinal nature of the data and the convenient selection nature of the sample . In order to examine if the level of mastery of the game design skills of the experimental group and control group were statistically significant during the before and after the interventions , a Mann - Whitney test was used [ 29 ] . At the same time , as part of the experimental research design that was applied , a Wilcoxon signed - ranks test was used in order to examine the development of game design skills before and after the interventions for the focus and control group individually . Fig . 2 A game prototype , presented by a working group during a free structured game design situation Multimedia Tools and Applications In order to offer better insights in the analysis of the qualitative data , the discussions of the members of each working group were recorded , transcribed and analyzed . For the qualitative analysis , a design research approach was selected [ 34 ] . This approach was deemed more appropriate because of its iterative nature and its focus on the role of design interventions for the purposes of learning . The main scope for this analysis in this study was to identify how the proposed design methodology in this study affects students ’ game design skills and offer insights on how those interventions could become more efficient . Recording transcriptions would be ongoing and taking place throughout the duration of the study . An initial line - by - line data assessment took place , giving birth to in - vivo codes . The data was later analyzed into labels . Data would be coded and interpreted in several iterations , taking into account new information coming from new sessions [ 19 ] . Labels were also grouped into categories . Constant iteration and reception of data led to constant revision , addition or deletion of categories . In every iteration , new themes might emerge , and others would be removed or re - formed in order to facilitate the research process . The qualitative study findings would also be used during the study in order to assess the design tools and re - shape some of their content in order to better support the students ’ needs , according to the approach of design research [ 26 , 34 ] . The data analysis was triangulated by two individual researchers , working separately [ 19 ] , in order to assess the validity of the findings . 3 Results 3 . 1 The impact of game design interventions on early childhood students ’ game design skills Since free structured design situations presented the greatest level of difficulty and complexity , the results of the free structured game design situations are presented extensively in this study , while the results for the structured and semi - structured situations are presented in the Appendix . Tables 2 presents the min , max values , medians and Mann - Whitney and Wilcoxon p values for game design skills for the free - structured game design situations . From the statistical analysis presented in Table 2 it can be concluded that the participatory game design sessions had a positive impact on the performance of the focus group for the skills of accuracy , correctness , originality , fluency and flexibility for the free - structured situations . All other results were statistically significant , with medium to big effect sizes and positive , contrary to the ones of the control group . The same impact was observed for students ’ performance of game design skills for structured and semi - structured situation , with the exception of the performance on the focus group ’ s on the skill of flexibility for the structured game design situations , which was partially successful . This can be concluded by the obser - vation that there is not statistically significant difference between the performance of the focus group for the pre and post - tests ( Wilcoxon p = 0 . 59 ) , while there is statistically significant difference between the scores of pre and post - tests among the focus and control groups ( Mann - Whitney p = 0 . 040 ) . In all non parametric hypotheses testing procedures the observed signif - icance level ( p value ) was calculated with the Monte - Carlo simulation method based on 10 , 000 random samples . This approach leads to safe inferential conclusions even in cases where the methodological presuppositions of the tests are not fulfilled ( e . g . random sampling , Multimedia Tools and Applications independent observations , large samples , symmetrical distributions , absence of B heavy ^ outliers ) [ 59 ] . In order to assess the tool ’ s reliability and reproducibility an inter - rater reliability test was performed based on the observers ’ ratings and the transcribed conversations of the pre and post tests by a separate researcher . There was substantial agreement between the two scores ( κ = 0 . 815 , p < 0 . 001 ) for the skill of accuracy , ( κ = 0 . 920 , p < 0 . 001 ) for the skill of correctness , ( κ = 0 . 826 , p < 0 . 001 ) for the skill of Originality , ( κ = 0 . 851 , p < 0 . 001 ) for the skill of level of difficulty , ( κ = 1 . 000 , p < 0 . 001 ) for the skill of fluency and ( κ = 1 . 000 , p < 0 . 001 ) for the skill of flexibility . For the skill of level of difficulty on the other hand , statistical tests suggest that participatory game design sessions did not have an observable impact on the skill of level of difficulty for the students of both the focus and control group . The scores of both groups before and after the interventions appear to be not statistically significant . This observation also called for addi - tional investigation from a qualitative research perspective . A collective representation of the effectiveness of the interventions on students ’ game design skills for different situations is presented in Table 3 . Table 2 Statistical analysis results about free - structured game designed situations for the six game design competencies of the study for the Focus and Control groups for both pre and post tests Group Focus Group Control Group Mann - Whitney p Mann - Whitney effect size Source Min Median Max Min Median Max Accuracy Pre - Test 0 . 000 0 . 000 3 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 1 . 000 0 . 200 Post - Test 0 . 000 2 . 000 3 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 3 . 000 0 . 002 − 0 . 539 Wilcoxon p 0 . 001 0 . 497 Wilcoxoneffectsize − 0 . 517 − 0 . 189 Correctness Pre - Test 0 . 000 0 . 000 3 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 2 . 000 0 . 251 Post - Test 0 . 000 2 . 000 3 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 3 . 000 0 . 002 − 0 . 540 Wilcoxon p 0 . 001 0 . 746 Wilcoxoneffectsize − 0 . 499 − 0 . 095 Originality Pre - Test 0 . 000 0 . 000 3 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 1 . 000 0 . 255 Post - Test 0 . 000 1 . 000 3 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 2 . 000 0 . 001 − 0 . 546 Wilcoxon p 0 . 020 1 . 000 Wilcoxoneffectsize − 0 . 393 − 0 . 067 Levelofdifficulty Pre - Test 0 . 000 0 . 000 2 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 1 . 000 0 . 097 Post - Test 0 . 000 1 . 000 2 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 2 . 000 0 . 005 − 0 . 480 Wilcoxon p 0 . 055 0 . 489 Wilcoxoneffectsize − 0 . 352 − 0 . 200 Fluency Pre - Test 0 . 000 0 . 000 2 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 1 . 000 0 . 110 Post - Test 0 . 000 1 . 000 2 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 2 . 000 0 . 004 − 0 . 519 Wilcoxon p 0 . 006 0 . 489 Wilcoxoneffectsize − 0 . 431 − 0 . 200 Flexibility Pre - Test 0 . 000 0 . 000 1 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 1 . 000 0 . 132 Post - Test 0 . 000 1 . 000 2 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 1 . 000 0 . 002 − 0 . 547 Wilcoxon p 0 . 003 0 . 610 Wilcoxoneffectsize − 0 . 468 − 0 . 177 Multimedia Tools and Applications 3 . 2 The design and structure of participatory design sessions as tools for teaching game design The qualitative analysis raised several points , which are addressed through the following thematic categories : ( a ) design & content focus , ( b ) individual & collaborative interaction and ( c ) deliverable focus . An analysis of those thematic categories follows : Design & content is a theme that describes students ’ focus on either design or content during design sessions . It was observed that students in several occasions , would find the task of designing a game based on patterns a complex process and would either focus on gaming aspects or mathematical patterns . For example , Fig . 3 presents two games presented by two different working groups . Those games that students proposed had great similarities with simple mathematical activities , previously presented in the classroom . When the group that designed those games was asked how they could differentiate their proposal from what they had previously seen in the exercises , three out of five students insisted on not changing their proposal because their patterns might be affected . On the other hand , in several occasions , students would not focus or disregard the use of patterns inside their game proposals , when it did not fit their ideas . For instance , an observer raised a point when she noticed that a group had moved forward with an idea that did not present any pre - algebraic patterning . One of the students replied : B We do not want to use patterns in our game ^ . The design moved forward without the integration of patterning . Figure 4 presents a board game proposed by students , not focusing on pre - algebraic patterning . The team decided that they wanted to build a linear board , where pawns would move when players roll the dice . The team focused on aspects like game mechanics and narratives , suggesting that the pawns are knights , princes and queens , wanting to reach a castle but did not want to deal with the educational aspect of the game . This observation led to restructuring the presentation of the activities and the delivery of additional Table 3 Comparative analysis and presentation of the impact of the participatory game design session on students ’ games design skills Game design skills Game Design Situations Structured Semi - structured Free Accuracy Successful Successful Successful Correctness Successful Successful Successful Originality Successful Successful Successful Level of difficulty Not successful Not successful Not successful Fluency Successful Successful Successful Flexibility Partially successful Successful Successful Fig . 3 Students ’ proposed games for the teaching of pre - algebraic patterning during structured situations Multimedia Tools and Applications information and instructions at the beginning of each session . However , even if those modifications seem to have positively affected the game design process , this theme did emerge even during the latest stages of the interventions : some students would focus more on the learning content and some others would focus more on the game design aspect . In the general workflow and facilitation of group work , this was handled through the collaboration of students and the facilitation of discussion in the group , which raised the second theme : individual & collaborative interaction . Individual & collaborative interaction describes the involvement of each student in the design process and the interactions between them . Previous research of participatory design indicated that designers of this age have difficulty collaborating with their peers and accepting their opinion [ 24 ] . The proposed design tools tried to address this aspect by facilitating the design process and focusing on collaborative work between children and the observers . There were several instances from the beginning till the end of the interventions that students , even if they were sitting around the same desks , would work individually , not paying attention to what their peers were doing . Another similar phenomenon would be that during presentation of individual ideas , students would state their ideas but not listen to their peers ’ ideas . As a result , observers would intervene at the beginning in order to facilitate the discussion and insist that students should synthesize their ideas into some game proposals . Those interventions by the observers led to an increase of collaborative instances throughout the duration of the study . After the first month of interventions , and having become accustomed to the design process , students would engage in collective brainstorming , expressing their ideas and waiting for the other students of each group to express theirs as well . Collaborative aspects were also observed during the implementation of the proposed games . Students would correct their peers if the proposed components that presented the mathematical patterns were incorrect . For instance , this conversation was recorded during a group session : S1 : What did you do here ? S2 : I put a triangle next to a heart and then I put a circle and then a square . S1 : This is not a pattern . If you want to create a pattern , the shapes must repeat themselves . Or in another conversation , three students are brainstorming on how to combine the learning content with game elements : S1 : You prepare red squares and you prepare blue ones . S2 : Why are we making squares ? Fig . 4 A board game proposed by students , not focusing on the educational aspect of the organized activity Multimedia Tools and Applications What game shall we make ? S1 : The game is this : You put red square , then blue square then red square , then blue square . S3 : Not again this game ! We will make a dominoes with squares . S2 : Yes ! And let ’ s put colors on the domino tiles ! In this conversation , the exchange of ideas led to a combination between the learning aspect that was presented by S1 and the game design aspect , presented by S2 and S3 . Deliverable focus provides information on students ’ approach to designing games with a focus on the skills of level of difficulty , fluency and flexibility . Throughout the duration of the interventions , students paid much greater emphasis on creating and finalizing games rather than coming up with multiple proposals . Even if diversity and generation of different ideas was a focus of the design tools of the study , students wanted to come up with a deliverable at the end of each session . Students did not show particular interest in making their games more complex or difficult to play but their greatest priority was to create a complete game prototype . The proposal of making games more difficult was explicitly proposed twice by students in working groups and was rejected in both cases by the other members of the group . The following conversation shows that such a proposal would conflict with students ’ priority of reaching the end goal , which was the completion of the prototype , no matter how difficult : S1 : Let ’ s make this game very difficult so that the others will not be able to finish ! S2 : No , no . Let ’ s finish what we are now doing . S3 : Yes , let ’ s finish what we are doing . Additionally , students found difficult to come up with multiple proposals after they had settled on an initial idea . This observation is also reflected on the scores of the skills of fluency and flexibility . The following conversation shows students ’ insistence on coming up with one final prototype : Observer : What you are making is very nice . What other games can we make with those materials ? S1 : We are making this game . Observer : Yes , this is fine ! Let ’ s propose some more ideas then . S2 : We can ’ t , we are making this game now . S3 : Another time , we will make anothergame . In this conversation , after finishing creating their game , students of another group didn ’ t want to work on new proposals for their game : Observer : Now that you finished your game , do you want to make another one or change this one ? S1 : No , we made this one . S2 : This is our game . Students showed a great focus on presenting a deliverable rather than coming with additional proposals or variations . 4 Discussion and conclusions The analysis of the results showed that the interventions had a positive impact on five out of six game design skills that were defined for the scope of this study . The statistical analysis showed a positive impact for both three game design situations on the skills of accuracy , correctness , originality and fluency . At the same time , the analysis showed that the interven - tions did not have a statistically significant impact on students ’ skill level of difficulty for none of three game design situations and on flexibility for structured game design situations . The study also shows that the interventions did not have a positive impact on students ’ skill of level of difficulty . This means that games that were created by students could easily be played , solved and finished by the great majority of players they were presented to . Even if the development of level of difficulty was addressed as part of the interventions , game design situations and sessions , students did not seem to be interested in creating difficult or complex games , as is also supported by the qualitative analysis of the transcribed data . On the contrary , it was observed that the number of game elements that students needed to consider while designing games made them focus more on the creation of playable and completed games that would be accepted and understood by their peers . Multimedia Tools and Applications The use of participatory design techniques seems to have a positive impact on the way that students approach the game design process . This is consistent with previous participatory design studies [ 36 , 56 , 86 ] of this field . In this study , students were able to present their ideas and elaborate on them , overcoming the previously raised issue of listening and accepting the opinion of one ’ s peers [ 24 ] . Even more , students were able to brainstorm together and collectively synthesize their proposals towards the creation of a joint game proposal . Those findings are consistent and in the same direction with previous studies [ 8 , 68 ] . The issue of familiarity with the particular learning content and the design process [ 85 ] was a point that came up during the analysis of results . Students that understood and were familiar with the process of designing games were more active designers and were more comfortable at interacting with the game design elements of the activities . On the other hand , when collab - oration was established , it did have an impact on the design process , since students with a focus on different aspects did interact towards the creation of a joint outcome . Another outcome of the analysis suggests that students ’ need to come up with a playable outcome was a strong reason why some of the proposed games were not necessarily difficult or complex . Students showed greater effort towards coming up with a playable deliverable than focusing on the difficulty and playability of theirgames . If this skill needs to be addressed in future research , special provisions need to be considered from the beginning of the interventions in order to make clear to students that diversity is as important as playability , if this is an objective . Taking into account challenges and difficulties related to the design process , involving young children , during this study the shift of learning focus encountered by Tan et al . [ 80 ] or the difficulty in assessing abstract thinking processes during design , proposed by Mazzone et al . [ 58 ] were also encountered . Following the example of Khaled & Vasalou [ 50 ] , the study proposed a modified design scaffolding process in order to make game design approachable to children in early childhood , which , from the statistical analysis , seems to have a positive impact on children ’ s design skills . The use of design games and activities like the ones of Triantafyllakos et al . [ 81 ] was a key aspect of the scaffolding game design mechanism and was expanded and revised in the scope of the current study in order to support the approach of game design as a problem posing activity . The approach of game design as a problem posing activity , can be considered to help students develop their game design skills in two ways : Through three game design situations , similar to the ones of Stoyanova ’ s problem posing situations [ 78 ] , students seem to have a gradual introduction into game design situations by getting familiar with the design process and the learning content that they needed to present . Both the qualitative and quantitative analyses suggest that structured game design situations pose a great challenge to young designers , since they present their first contact with the field of game design , easing them in the design process . The study provides additional empirical evidence of the impact of participatory game design sessions with children as the main stakeholders of the design process . In this study , the one adult , member of each working group , was acting more as a facilitator rather than a leader or the main designer . Children were responsible for the design decisions and the integration of the learning content in the design process . Even if there were several challenges and difficulties , as presented before , still the quantitative and qualitative analyses suggest that several benefits did stem from this process . Hence , it can be concluded that the interventions : & Had a positive impact on the game design skills of accuracy , correctness , originality and fluency . Multimedia Tools and Applications & Had a partially positive impact on the game design skill of flexibility . & Did not seem to have a positive impact on the game design skill of level of difficulty . Both quantitative and qualitative results demonstrate development in the use of game design skills as a result of students ’ participation . However , it is possible that mapping between mathematical problem posing and game design skills may not be absolute , due to the different nature of those two fields . Stoyanova ’ s and Leung ’ s [ 54 ] analysis of problem posing skills was used in order to propose a game design skillset that was studied in the prism of this study , suggesting that game design was approached as a problem posing activity . But the ineffec - tiveness of the interventions on students ’ skill of level of difficulty and the qualitative analysis on how children approach such game design sessions , raises the question on whether such game design sessions should actually focus on the development of this skill or not . Future research could investigate the connection between this game design skill and students ’ participation in design sessions . 5 Limitation and future work The small participant size of the focus group presents a limitation for the current study . The study targeted 34 students , 18 for the focus group and 16 for the control group . A bigger sample would offer greater insights that could provide tighter confidence intervals and additional qualitative data in order to provide a better understanding of this field . According to a literature review by Petri & von Wangenheim [ 65 ] , this use of sample sizes that correspond to the size of school classrooms has been observed in several studies of their analysis , while the use of focus and control groups is limited . According to All et al . [ 2 ] , in experimental designs a bigger sample size is recommended for statistically significant results . The application of the proposed interventions in different classrooms with different partic - ipants and possibly a bigger duration would provide research in the field with additional empirical data that could support the direction that is presented by this study . The study focused on a great variety of games , involving external stakeholders , like the programmers ’ team . A greater focus on either physical or digital games and an extension of time , preferably for one school year , would allow time for more activities and monitoring of students ’ development as well as provide external stakeholders time to adapt to the individual needs of cross - generational teams , like the ones of this study . Since this is a quasi - experimental study , the selection of participants and the environment might pose additional restrictions or interfere with the final outcomes , which reinforces the suggestion for additional research and assess - ment of the activities presented in this study . The use of participatory design techniques for the teaching of game design presents different alternatives in the field of game design education that could affect the proposed game design sessions . The use of different activities and sessions on behalf of the researchers is part of the future work that is connected to this study . Since the connection between game design and problem posing has been extensively addressed in this paper , it would be potentially interesting to investigate the connection between the development of game design and problem posing skills . Several aspects and comparisons can commence from this type of research like the development of mathematical problem posing skills because of students ’ participation in game design activities or the connection and possible correlation between the development of those two groups of skills . Multimedia Tools and Applications Acknowledgements I would like to thank professor George Menexes for serving as scientific advisor in the statistical analysis of the study ’ s data . Appendix Table 4 The games used in game design sessions Game name Used in design situation Type / Platform Brief description Memory Structured , Semi - structured Physical Players need to identify pairs by remembering the arrangement of a deck of flipped down cards Dominoes Structured Physical Players need to create the largest possible arrangement of domino tiles by identifying the shapes and figures presented on each tile Snakes & Ladders Structured , Semi - structured Physical Players engage in a race contest on a linear board . Falling on snake or ladders tiles causes players to either fall back or move forward on the race Hide & Seek Structured , Semi - structured Physical A team of players hide around the school area , while another team searches for them Treasure Map Semi - structured , Free Physical Players are asked to find a hidden treasure by visiting B Points of Interest ^ in the school area , each of which is revealed after they complete a challenge or solve a riddle Forest Maths Semi - structured Digital / Interactive Whiteboard A digital puzzle game , where players need to manipulate ground tiles in order to help a group of bugs move to the other side of the screen The Fantastic AdventuresofMaxSquared Semi - structured , Free Digital / Android & iOS tablets A linear storytelling game , presenting a set of mini - games around patterns PiBot : Math & Action Semi - structured , Free Digital / Windows & Kinect An endless runner motion - sensor control game , where one player controls a robot that needs to select tiles that complete a pre - defined pattern Tactileo Map Free Digital / Android Tablet A geolocation game , presenting an Augmented Reality experience of the Treasure Map game Multimedia Tools and Applications Table 5 Statistical analysis results about structured game design situations for the six game design competencies of the study for the Focus and Control groups for both pre and post tests Group Focus Group Control Group Mann - Whitney p Min Median Max Min Median Max Accuracy Pre - Test 0 . 000 1 . 000 3 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 2 . 000 0 . 426 Post - Test 0 . 000 2 . 000 3 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 500 3 . 000 0 . 002 Wilcoxon p 0 . 010 0 . 510 Correctness Pre - Test 0 . 000 1 . 000 2 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 3 . 000 0 . 356 Post - Test 0 . 000 3 . 000 3 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 500 3 . 000 0 . 017 Wilcoxon p 0 . 001 0 . 586 Originality Pre - Test 0 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 1 . 000 0 . 493 Post - Test 0 . 000 1 . 000 2 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 500 1 . 000 0 . 011 Wilcoxon p 0 . 017 1 . 000 Level of difficulty Pre - Test 0 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 1 . 000 0 . 098 Post - Test 0 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 500 1 . 000 0 . 061 Wilcoxon p 0 . 115 0 . 465 Fluency Pre - Test 0 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 1 . 000 0 . 098 Post - Test 0 . 000 1 . 000 2 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 500 1 . 000 0 . 02 Wilcoxon p 0 . 014 0 . 465 Flexibility Pre - Test 0 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 1 . 000 0 . 098 Post - Test 0 . 000 1 . 000 2 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 500 1 . 000 0 . 04 Wilcoxon p 0 . 059 0 . 465 Table 6 Statistical analysis results about semi - structured game designed situations for the six game design competencies of the study for the Focus and Control groups for both pre and post tests Group Focus Group Control Group Mann - Whitney p Source Min Median Max Min Median Max Accuracy Pre - Test 0 . 000 1 . 000 3 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 2 . 000 0 . 190 Post - Test 0 . 000 2 . 500 3 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 3 . 000 < 0 . 001 Wilcoxon p 0 . 001 1 . 000 Correctness Pre - Test 0 . 000 1 . 000 2 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 3 . 000 0 . 262 Post - Test 0 . 000 3 . 000 3 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 3 . 000 < 0 . 001 Wilcoxon p 0 . 001 0 . 928 Originality Pre - Test 0 . 000 1 . 000 2 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 1 . 000 0 . 121 Post - Test 0 . 000 1 . 000 2 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 2 . 000 0 . 001 Wilcoxon p 0 . 141 1 . 000 Level of difficulty Pre - Test 0 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 1 . 000 0 . 040 Post - Test 0 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 2 . 000 0 . 001 Wilcoxon p 0 . 054 0 . 732 Fluency Pre - Test 0 . 000 1 . 000 2 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 1 . 000 0 . 026 Post - Test 0 . 000 1 . 000 2 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 2 . 000 0 . 001 Wilcoxon p 0 . 023 0 . 732 Flexibility Pre - Test 0 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 1 . 000 0 . 040 Post - Test 0 . 000 1 . 000 1 . 000 0 . 000 0 . 000 1 . 000 0 . 001 Wilcoxon p 0 . 054 1 . 000 Multimedia Tools and Applications Problem posing & game design attributes Definition - ProblemPosing Definition - GameDesign States Game Design The examination of the attribute in this research Accuracy The precision of the mathematical language used The precision of the language used towards the creation and explanation of the game Precise Partially precise Not precise Precise : Use of precise language for the creation and explanation of the game and the underlying mathematical concept Partially precise : Use of game and content related language for its creation and explanation that does not accurately describe the underlying mathematical concept Not precise : Lack of language precision for the creation and solution of the given game In the context of game design Precise is a statement that does require further explanation in order to describe a rule or game attribute . For example : The game is played outside is a precise statement , explaining the allowed locations of play . However , the statement B Players run ^ needs additional explanation in order to specify what players , where they run and where is the objective , making it Partially Precise , if these questions get answered finally . Partially precise is a statement that is followed by more information that shed light and clarify a situation . The example B Players run ^ or B We do a memory game ^ , without more information and explanation by the kids shows inability to accurately describe a rule or a game attribute . Not precise is a statement that does not give any hint related to how a game is played or that indicates that a student shows inability to describe a gaming element Multimedia Tools and Applications Definition - Problem Posing Definition - Game Design States Game Design The examination of the attribute in this research or follow the process . Correctness Relates to the correctness of the problem structure Relates to the correctness of the game structure Correct Partially correct Not correct Correct : The proposed game structure correctly represents the underlying game logic and has a correct solution Partially correct : The proposed game structure proposes correctly the problem and game logic and structure up to a point or some intermediate solutions of the game are correct without resulting to a final correct / playable game Not correct : The final game is incorrect / non - playable in terms of structure and mathematical content with no obvious traces of comprehension of the situation and what needs to be done Correct is a game whose structure is clear and explainable and leads to a final end goal that is achievable either on its own or by the completion of other smaller ones . Partially correct is a game , which can be explained in terms of structure only with the help of an observer and objectives / obstacles / elements and rules need revision by the team in order to make the game playable . Ex . A treasure hunt game , consisting of 4 points of interest , each of which has a riddle related to patterns is partially correct , when the designed patterns by the kids do not actually depict a pattern . In this case the observer would need to discuss the outcome with the kids to discuss possible modifications . Not correct is a game that lacks structure and is impossible to explain and that even if it is explained , its elements / rules / obstacles do no help players actually finish it . Multimedia Tools and Applications Definition - Problem Posing Definition - Game Design States Game Design The examination of the attribute in this research Originality Quality of the problem structure by taking into account the extent to which the formal structures of the posed problems related to student ’ s problem solving experience Quality of the game structure by taking into account the extent to which the formal structures of the posed games related to students ’ gaming experience Original Partially Original Not Original Original : When the game structure is invented by students Partially original : If the game is a well - known one but its structure is discovery for the student Non - original : If the game can be linked directly to student ’ s mathematical experiences Original is a game whose at least two of the main structure elements ( rules , winning conditions , content and gaming elements ) do not relate to an already known game . Partially original is a game whose at least one of the main structure elements ( rules , winning conditions , content and gaming elements ) do not relate to an already known game . Non - original is a game whose structure is strongly related ( all structural elements are the same ) to an already known game . Level of difficulty Refers to the complexity of the problem solution structure needed for the posed problem Refers to complexity of the game gameplay and underlying game problem solution structure Difficult Partially difficult Not difficult Difficult : If the game can be played and understood by less than 1 / 3 of the classroom Partially difficult : If the game can be understood by a maximum of 2 / 3 of the classroom and more than 1 / 3 Non - difficult : If more than 2 / 3 of the classroom can understand and play the game Fluency Number of correct problems related to the problem posing situation Number of playable games related to the game situation Integer number of playable games Multimedia Tools and Applications Definition - Problem Posing Definition - Game Design States Game Design The examination of the attribute in this research Flexibility Number of different types of problems generated Number of different types of games generated Integer number of different types of games Publisher ’ s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . References 1 . Abramovich S , Cho EK ( 2012 ) Technology - Enabled Mathematical Problem Posing as Modeling . J Math Model Appl 1 : 22 – 32 2 . All A , Nuñez Castellar EP , Van Looy J ( 2016 ) Assessing the effectiveness of digital game - based learning : Best practices . Comput Educ 92 – 93 : 90 – 103 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compedu . 2015 . 10 . 007 3 . Allsop Y ( 2016 ) A reflective study into children ’ s cognition when making computer games . Br J Educ Technol 47 : 665 – 679 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / bjet . 12251 4 . Amory A ( 2007 ) Game object model version II : A theoretical framework for educational game develop - ment . Educ Technol Res Dev 55 : 51 – 77 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11423 - 006 - 9001 - x 5 . Arango - López J , Valdivieso CCC , Collazos CA et al ( 2018 ) CREANDO : Tool for creating pervasive games to increase the learning motivation in higher education students . Telemat Informatics . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tele . 2018 . 08 . 005 6 . Bjerknes G , Bratteteig T ( 1995 ) User Participation and Democracy : A Discussion of Scandinavian Research on Systems Development . Scand J Inf Syst 7 : 73 – 98 7 . Bodrova E ( 2008 ) Make - believe play versus academic skills : a Vygotskian approach to today ’ s dilemma of early childhood education . Eur Early Child Educ Res J 16 : 357 – 369 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 13502930802291777 8 . Bonsignore E , Hansen D , Pellicone A , et al ( 2016 ) Traversing Transmedia Together : Co - designing an Educational Alternate Reality Game For Teens , With Teens . In : Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children . ACM , New York , pp 11 – 24 9 . Braghirolli LF , Ribeiro JLD , Weise AD , Pizzolato M ( 2016 ) Benefits of educational games as an introduc - tory activity in industrial engineering education . Comput Hum Behav 58 : 315 – 324 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2015 . 12 . 063 10 . Brousseau G ( 1997 ) Theory of didactical situations in mathematics : Didactique des mathématiques , 1970 – 1990 . Kluwer Academic Publishing , Dordrecht 11 . Brousseau G ( 2002 ) Theory of Didactical Situations in Mathematics 12 . Burgos D , Tattersall C , Koper R ( 2007 ) Re - purposing existing generic games and simulations for e - learning . Comput Hum Behav 23 : 2656 – 2667 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2006 . 08 . 002 13 . Chang KE , Wu LJ , Weng SE , Sung YT ( 2012 ) Embedding game - based problem - solving phase into problem - posing system for mathematics learning . Comput Educ 58 : 775 – 786 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compedu . 2011 . 10 . 002 14 . Colby RS ( 2017 ) Game - based Pedagogy in the Writing Classroom . Comput Compos 43 : 55 – 72 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compcom . 2016 . 11 . 002 15 . Costa C , Tyner K , Henriques S , Sousa C ( 2018 ) Game Creation in Youth Media and Information Literacy Education . Int J Game - Based Learn 8 : 1 – 13 16 . Crawford C ( 1982 ) The Art of Computer Game Design by Chris Crawford . Computer ( Long Beach Calif ) 81 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 3183801 17 . CrespoS , SinclairN ( 2008 ) Whatmakes a problem mathematicallyinteresting ? Inviting prospectiveteachers to pose better problems . J Math Teach Educ 11 : 395 – 415 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10857 - 008 - 9081 - 0 18 . Creswell JW ( 2012 ) Educational research : Planning , conducting , and evaluating quantitative and qualitative research . In : Educational Research . p 208 19 . Creswell J ( 2013 ) Qualitative , quantitative , and mixed methods approaches . Res Des : 1 – 26 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 3152153 Multimedia Tools and Applications 20 . De Freitas S , Oliver M ( 2006 ) How can exploratory learning with games and simulations within the curriculum be most effectively evaluated ? Comput Educ 46 : 249 – 264 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compedu . 2005 . 11 . 007 21 . de Valk L , Bekker T , Eggen B ( 2014 ) Drawing up the rules : Encouraging children ’ s rule creation in interactive open - ended play . Int J Child - Computer Interact 2 : 120 – 129 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2015 . 07 . 002 22 . Dickman BM ( 2014 ) Conceptions of creativity in elementary school mathematical problem posing . 90 23 . Druin A ( 1999 ) Cooperative inquiry : Developing new technologies for children with children . Hum Factors Comput Syst 14 : 592 – 599 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 302979 . 303166 24 . Druin A ( 2002 ) The role of children in the design of new technology . Behav Inform Technol 21 : 1 – 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01449290110108659 25 . Druin A , Bederson B , Boltman A et al ( 1998 ) Children as Our Technology Design Partners . Des Child Technol : 51 – 60 26 . Eerde H ( 2013 ) Design research : Looking into the heart of mathematics education . Proceeding First South East Asia Des … 1 – 11 27 . Ellerton NF ( 2013 ) Engaging pre - service middle - school teacher - education students in mathematical prob - lem posing : Development of an active learning framework . Educ Stud Math 83 : 87 – 101 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10649 - 012 - 9449 - z 28 . Elverdam C , Aarseth E ( 2007 ) Game Classification and Game Design : Construction Through Critical Analysis . Games Cult 2 : 3 – 22 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1555412006286892 29 . Field A ( 2005 ) Discovering Statistics Using SPSS ( Introducing Statistical Methods S ) 30 . Fitton D , Read JC ( 2016 ) Primed Design Activities : Scaffolding Young Designers During Ideation . In : Proceedings of the 9th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction . ACM , New York , pp . 50 : 1 - 10 31 . Flick U ( 2009 ) An introduction to qualitative research . Sage 4th : 529 32 . Garris R , Ahlers R , Driskell J ( 2002 ) Games , motivation , and learning : A research and practice model . Simul Gaming 33 : 441 – 467 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1046878102238607 33 . Gonzales NA ( 1998 ) A Blueprint for Problem Posing . Sch Sci Math 98 : 448 – 456 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1949 - 8594 . 1998 . tb17437 . x 34 . Gravemeijer K , Van Eerde D ( 2009 ) Design research as a means for building a knowledge base for teachers and teaching in mathematics education . Elem Sch J 109 : 510 – 524 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1086 / 596999 35 . Guha ML , Druin A , Chipman G et al ( 2005 ) Working with young children as technology design partners . Commun ACM 48 : 39 – 42 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1039539 . 1039567 36 . Guha ML , Druin A , Fails JA ( 2013 ) Cooperative Inquiry revisited : Reflections of the past and guidelines for the future of intergenerational co - design . Int J Child - Computer Interact 1 : 14 – 23 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2012 . 08 . 003 37 . Hainey T , Connolly TM , Boyle EA et al ( 2016 ) A systematic literature review of games - based learning empirical evidence in primary education . Comput Educ 102 : 202 – 223 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compedu . 2016 . 09 . 001 38 . Hamlen KR ( 2011 ) Children ’ s choices and strategies in video games . Comput Hum Behav 27 : 532 – 539 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2010 . 10 . 001 39 . Huynh - kim - bang B , Wisdom J , Labat J ( 2010 ) Design Patterns in Serious Games : A Blue Print for Combining Fun and Learning Introduction : Making Learning Fun . J Comput Game Cult 1 – 18 40 . Hwang G - J , Chen C - H ( 2016 ) Influences of an inquiry - based ubiquitous gaming design on students ’ learning achievements , motivation , behavioral patterns , and tendency towards critical thinking and problem solving . Br J Educ Technol 48 : 950 – 971 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / bjet . 12464 41 . Jean S , Medema W , Adamowski J et al ( 2018 ) Serious games as a catalyst for boundary crossing , collaboration and knowledge co - creation in a watershed governance context . J Environ Manag 223 : 1010 – 1022 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jenvman . 2018 . 05 . 021 42 . Kafai YB ( 1996 ) Learning Design by Making Games . In : Constructivism in practice : Designing , thinking , and learning in a digital world . pp 35 – 46 43 . Kafai Y , Peppler K ( 2012 ) Developing Gaming Fluencies with Scratch . In : Steinkuehler C , Squire K , Barab S ( eds ) Games , Learning , and Society : Learning and Meaning in the Digital Age . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , pp 355 – 380 44 . Kalmpourtzis G ( 2014 ) Find the Jackalop : A Game Enhancing Young Children ’ s Spatial Thinking . In : CHI ‘ 14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , pp 1165 – 1170 45 . Kalmpourtzis G ( 2018 ) Connecting game design with problem posing skills in early childhood . Br J Educ Technol . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / bjet . 12607 46 . Kalmpourtzis G ( 2018 ) Educational Game Design Fundamentals : A journey to creating intrinsically motivating learning experiences . A K Peters / CRC Press , New York Multimedia Tools and Applications 47 . Kalmpourtzis G , Vrysis L , Ketsiakidis G ( 2018 ) The role of adults in giving and receiving feedback for game design sessions with students of the early childhood 48 . Kalmpourtzis G , Vrysis L , Veglis A ( 2016 ) Teaching game design to students of the early childhood through Forest Maths A pilot study . In : Semantic and Social Media Adaptation and Personalization ( SMAP ) , 2016 11th International Workshop . IEEE , pp 123 – 127 49 . Khaled R ( 2012 ) Muse - based Game Design . In : Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference . ACM , New York , pp 721 – 730 50 . Khaled R , Vasalou A ( 2014 ) Bridging serious games and participatory design . Int J Child - Computer Interact 2 : 93 – 100 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2014 . 03 . 001 51 . Klopfer E , Yoon S ( 2005 ) Developing Games and Simulations for Today and Tomorrow ’ s Tech Savvy Youth . { TechTrends } Link Res Pract to Improv Learn 49 : 33 – 41 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF02763645 52 . Lange - Nielsen F , Lafont XV , Cassar B , Khaled R ( 2012 ) Involving Players Earlier in the Game Design Process Using Cultural Probes . In : Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Fun and Games . ACM , New York , pp 45 – 54 53 . Leonard J , Buss A , Gamboa R et al ( 2016 ) Using Robotics and Game Design to Enhance Children ’ s Self - Efficacy , STEM Attitudes , and Computational Thinking Skills . J Sci Educ Technol 25 : 860 – 876 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10956 - 016 - 9628 - 2 54 . Leung S ( 2013 ) Teachers implementing mathematical problem posing in the classroom : Challenges and strategies . Educ Stud Math 83 : 103 – 116 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10649 - 012 - 9436 - 4 55 . Leung S , Silver E ( 1997 ) The role of task format , mathematics knowledge , and creative thinking on the Arithmetic Problem Posing of prospective elementary school teachers . Math Educ Res J 9 : 5 – 24 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF03217299 56 . Li Q ( 2010 ) Digital game building : learning in a participatory culture . Educ Res 52 : 427 – 443 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00131881 . 2010 . 524752 57 . Maertens M , Vandewaetere M , Cornillie F , Desmet P ( 2014 ) From pen - and - paper content to educational math game content for children : A transfer with added difficulty . Int J Child - Computer Interact 2 : 85 – 92 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2014 . 04 . 001 58 . Mazzone E , Read JC , Beale R ( 2008 ) Design with and for Disaffected Teenagers . In : Proceedings of the 5th Nordic Conference on Human - computer Interaction : Building Bridges . ACM , New York , pp 290 – 297 59 . Mehta CR , Patel NR ( 1998 ) Exact inference for categorical data . Encycl Biostat 2 : 1411 – 1422 60 . Moser C , Tscheligi M , Zaman B et al ( 2014 ) Editorial : Learning from failures in game design for children . Int J Child - Computer Interact 2 : 73 – 75 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2014 . 10 . 001 61 . Mulligan J , Mitchelmore M ( 2009 ) Awareness of pattern and structure in early mathematical development . Math Educ Res J 21 : 33 – 49 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF03217544 62 . Obikwelu C , Read J , Sim G ( 2013 ) Children ’ s problem - solving in serious games : The B Fine - Tuning System ( FTS ) ^ elaborated . Electron J e - Learning 11 : 49 – 60 63 . Papic MM , Mulligan JT , Mitchelmore MC ( 2011 ) Assessing the Development of Preschoolers . Mathematical Patterning 42 : 237 – 268 64 . Patton M ( 1990 ) Qualitative Evaluation and Research Methods . Qual Eval Res Methods : 169 – 186 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / nur . 4770140111 65 . Petri G , Gresse C , Wangenheim V ( 2017 ) Computers & Education How games for computing education are evaluated ? A systematic literature review . Comput Educ 107 : 68 – 90 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compedu . 2017 . 01 . 004 66 . Poppelaars M , Lichtwarck - Aschoff A , Kleinjan M , Granic I ( 2018 ) The impact of explicit mental health messages in video games on players ’ motivation and affect . Comput Hum Behav 83 : 16 – 23 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2018 . 01 . 019 67 . Read JC , Bekker MM ( 2011 ) The Nature of Child Computer Interaction . BCS - HCI ‘ 11 Proc 25th BCS Conf Human - Computer Interact 163 – 170 68 . Romero M ( 2016 ) Digital Game Design as a Complex Learning Activity for Developing the 4Cs Skills : Communication , Collaboration , Creativity and Critical Thinking . In : De Gloria A , Veltkamp R ( eds ) Games and Learning Alliance . Springer International Publishing , Cham , pp 90 – 99 69 . Romero M , Ouellet H , Sawchuk K ( 2017 ) Expanding the Game Design Play and Experience Framework for Game - Based Lifelong Learning ( GD - LLL - PE ) . In : Romero M , Sawchuk K , Blat J et al ( eds ) Game - Based Learning Across the Lifespan : Cross - Generational and Age - Oriented Topics . Springer International Publishing , Cham , pp 1 – 11 70 . Salen K , Zimmerman E ( 2004 ) Rules of Play : Game Design Fundamentals . MIT Press , Cambridge 71 . Schell J ( 2014 ) The Art of Game Design : A Book of Lenses . CRC Press , Amsterdam 72 . Schmidt JA ( 2010 ) Flow in education . Int Encycl Educ : 605 – 611 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 08 - 044894 - 7 . 00608 - 4 Multimedia Tools and Applications 73 . Selter C ( 2009 ) Creativity , flexibility , adaptivity , and strategy use in mathematics . ZDM - Int J Math Educ 41 : 619 – 625 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11858 - 009 - 0203 - 7 74 . Shute VJ , Ventura M , Ke F ( 2015 ) The power of play : The effects of Portal 2 and Lumosity on cognitive and noncognitive skills . Comput Educ 80 : 58 – 67 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compedu . 2014 . 08 . 013 75 . Siakavaras I , Papastergiou M , Comoutos N ( 2018 ) Mobile Games in Computer Science Education : Current State and Proposal of a Mobile Game Design that Incorporates Physical Activity . In : Mikropoulos TA ( ed ) Research on e - Learning and ICT in Education : Technological . Pedagogical and Instructional Perspectives . Springer International Publishing , Cham , pp 243 – 255 76 . Silver EA ( 2013 ) Problem - posing research in mathematics education : Looking back , looking around , and looking ahead . Educ Stud Math 83 : 157 – 162 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10649 - 013 - 9477 - 3 77 . Stoyanova E ( 1997 ) Extending and exploring students ’ problem solving via problem posing 78 . Stoyanova E , Ellerton N ( 1993 ) A framework for research into students ’ problem posing in school mathematics . Technol Math Educ Proc 19th Annu Conf Math Educ Res Gr Australas ( MERGA ) , June 30 - July 3 , 1996 Univ Melbourne , 1996 ( ISBN 0959684468 ) 79 . Tan JL , Goh DH - L , Ang RP , Huan VS ( 2011 ) Child - centered Interaction in the Design of a Game for Social Skills Intervention . Comput Entertain 9 ( 2 ) : 1 – 17 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1953005 . 1953007 80 . Tan JL , Goh DHL , Ang RP , Huan VS ( 2013 ) Participatory evaluation of an educational game for social skills acquisition . Comput Educ 64 : 70 – 80 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compedu . 2013 . 01 . 006 81 . Triantafyllakos G , Palaigeorgiou G , Tsoukalas IA ( 2011 ) Designing educational software with students through collaborative design games : The We ! Design & Play framework . Comput Educ 56 : 227 – 242 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compedu . 2010 . 08 . 002 82 . Umetsu T , Hirashima T , Takeuchi A ( 2002 ) Fusion method for designing computer - based learning game . Int Conf Comput Educ 2002 Proceedings 1 : 124 – 128 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / CIE . 2002 . 1185882 83 . Warren E ( 2003 ) Young children ’ s ability to generalise the pattern rule for growing patterns . 4 : 305 – 312 84 . Winn B ( 2008 ) The design , play , and experience framework . In : Handbook of Research on Effective Electronic Gaming in Education . IGI Global Publication , Hershey , Philadelphia , pp 1010 – 1024 85 . Yip J , Clegg T , Bonsignore E , et al ( 2013 ) Brownies or bags - of - stuff ? Domain Expertise in Cooperative Inquiry with Children . Proc 12th Int Conf Interact Des Child - IDC ‘ 13 201 – 210 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2485760 . 2485763 86 . Yip J , Druin A , Foss E et al ( 2013 ) Children initiating and leading cooperative inquiry sessions . Idc 2013 : 293 – 296 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2485760 . 2485796 87 . Yu F , Liu Y , Chan T ( 2005 ) A web - based learning system for question - posing and peer assessment . Innov Educ Teach Int 42 : 337 – 348 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14703290500062557 George Kalmpourtzis is an award - winning game designer and educator . Finding himself between the fields of education , game studies and user experience , he has been founder , director and board member of several European design studios . He has designed and produced numerous games for computers , consoles , virtual and augmented reality and he is constantly on a journey to discover new opportunities to play ! George has been working as a consultant for corporations and non - government institutions around the world , identifying play as a key aspect of human expression and communication . George also holds bachelor ' s degrees both in education and engineering , a master ' s degree in information systems and a PhD in design pedagogy . Multimedia Tools and Applications