Cell Stem Cell Article Conserved and Divergent Roles of FGF Signaling in Mouse Epiblast Stem Cells and Human Embryonic Stem Cells Boris Greber , 1 Guangming Wu , 1 Christof Bernemann , 1 Jin Young Joo , 1 Dong Wook Han , 1 Kinarm Ko , 1 Natalia Tapia , 1 Davood Sabour , 1 Jared Sterneckert , 1 Paul Tesar , 2 and Hans R . Scho¨ler 1 , 3 , * 1 Department of Cell and Developmental Biology , Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine , Ro¨ntgenstraße 20 , D - 48149 Mu¨nster , Germany 2 Department of Genetics , Center for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine , Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine , Cleveland , OH 44106 , USA 3 Medical Faculty , University of Mu¨nster , Domagkstr . 3 , D - 48149 Mu¨nster , Germany * Correspondence : ofﬁce @ mpi - muenster . mpg . de DOI 10 . 1016 / j . stem . 2010 . 01 . 003 SUMMARY Mouse epiblast stem cells ( EpiSCs ) are cultured with FGF2 and Activin A , like human embryonic stem cells ( hESCs ) , but the action of the associated pathways in EpiSCs has not been well characterized . Here , we show that activation of the Activin pathway promotes self - renewal of EpiSCs via direct activation of Nanog , whereas inhibition of this pathway induces neuroectodermal differentiation , like in hESCs . In contrast , the different roles of FGF signaling appear to be only partially conserved in the mouse . Our data suggest that FGF2 fails to cooperate with SMAD2 / 3 signaling in actively promoting EpiSC self - renewal through Nanog , in contrast to its role in hESCs . Rather , FGF appears to stabilize the epiblast state by dual inhibition of differentiation to neuroectoderm and of media - induced reversion to a mouse embryonic stem cell - like state . Our data extend the current model of cell fate decisions con - cerning EpiSCs by clarifying the distinct roles played by FGF signaling . INTRODUCTION hESCs , like mouse embryonic stem cells ( mESCs ) , are derived from the inner cell mass ( ICM ) tissue of preimplantation embryos . Hence , both share a number of cellular characteristics , such as pluripotency and self - renewal capability . The latter is controlled by a network of transcription factors that serves to maintain the undifferentiated ESC state , in part by promoting the expression of ESC - speciﬁc genes and suppressing that of differentiation - speciﬁc ones ( Boyer et al . , 2005 ; Chen et al . , 2008 ; Kim et al . , 2008 ) . The transcription factors OCT4 , NANOG , and SOX2 are of central importance in both human and mouse ESCs , because silencing of their gene expression usually has deleterious effects on the self - renewal machinery , i . e . , leads to cellular differentia - tion ( Fong et al . , 2008 ; Hay et al . , 2004 ; Ivanova et al . , 2006 ; Zaehres et al . , 2005 ) . However , hESCs and mESCs differ markedly in their responses to signaling pathways that support self - renewal ( see Figure S1 available online ) . mESCs require LIF / STAT3 signaling for self - renewal and beneﬁt from mimicking WNT / b - catenin signaling with small - molecule GSK3 b inhibitors ( Niwa et al . , 2009 ; Sato et al . , 2004 ) . The FGF / ERK cascade plays a role in the differentiation of mESCs , as evidenced , for example , by the inability of Erk2 (cid:2) / (cid:2) ESCs to differentiate along somatic cell lineages ( Kunath et al . , 2007 ) . Thus , mESCs can be maintained in culture in a highly undifferentiated state by manipulating these pathways : i . e . , by adding LIF , a GSK3 b inhibitor , and a MEK inhibitor to inactivate FGF / ERK signaling ( Figure S1 ; Guo et al . , 2009 ; Ying et al . , 2008 ) . In contrast , hESCs do not respond to LIF ( Dahe´ron et al . , 2004 ) . WNT / b - catenin signaling induces hESC differentiation under chemically deﬁned conditions ( Sumi et al . , 2008 ) , and FGF / ERK signaling promotes self - renewal . Virtually all hESC media described to date contain FGF2 ( e . g . , Dvorak et al . , 2005 ; Furue et al . , 2008 ; Levenstein et al . , 2006 ; Xu et al . , 2005 ; Yao et al . , 2006 ) . However , FGF2 supplementation has been associated with pleiotropic - positive effects : impeding spontaneous differentiation , increasing hESC proliferation , enhancing attachment / survival , inhibiting earliest neural induc - tion , and , more precisely , moderately stimulating NANOG gene expression ( Eiselleova et al . , 2009 ; Greber et al . , 2007 , 2008 ; Li et al . , 2007 ; Ludwig et al . , 2006 ; Wang et al . , 2009 ) . Furthermore , FGF2 also exerts its effects through indirect mechanisms , via cells cocultured with hESCs ( Bendall et al . , 2007 ; Greber et al . , 2007 ) . For instance , FGF2 may stimulate mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts ( MEFs ) —which are frequently used as feeder layers—to secrete Activin A ( ActA ; Greber et al . , 2007 ) . ActA belongs to the TGF - b family of ligands and promotes activation of the SMAD2 / 3 transcription factors , which is considered bene - ﬁcial for hESC self - renewal ( Figure S1 ; James et al . , 2005 ; Vallier et al . , 2005 ) . SMAD2 / 3 has been found to bind to the NANOG promoter and thereby activate NANOG gene transcription , es - tablishing a direct link between a signaling pathway and the self - renewal network in hESCs ( Greber et al . , 2008 ; Xu et al . , 2008 ) . EpiSCs are derived from the pluripotent epiblast tissue of early postimplantation mouse embryos ( Brons et al . , 2007 ; Tesar et al . , 2007 ) . These cells express Oct4 , Nanog , and Sox2 and Cell Stem Cell 6 , 215 – 226 , March 5 , 2010 ª 2010 Elsevier Inc . 215 exhibit features of pluripotency both in vitro and in teratoma assays . Moreover , they display ﬂattened colony morphology similar to that of hESCs . Furthermore , they are derived and main - tained under conditions that also support hESC self - renewal— with FGF2 on inactivated MEFs or with FGF2 and ActA under feeder - free conditions . These ﬁndings suggest that human ESCs may rather correspond to cells of a postimplantation / pregastrulation stage of mammalian development . Indeed , pathways driving directed hESC differentiation appear to be consistent with this concept ( Murry and Keller , 2008 ) . However , in addition to their blastocyst origin , hESCs share several molecular features with mESCs , but not with EpiSCs . These include the expression of the ICM marker gene REX1 as well as the lack of expression of the epiblast - speciﬁc FGF5 gene ( Adjaye et al . , 2005 ; Darr et al . , 2006 ; Pelton et al . , 2002 ) . Moreover , the transcription factor KLF4 has been shown to be vital for the direct reprogramming of human somatic cells to an ESC - like state , and KLF4 is expressed and functional in hESCs ( Chan et al . , 2009 ; Nakagawa et al . , 2008 ) . Klf4 is also expressed in mESCs but almost completely silenced in EpiSCs , and Klf4 overexpression has been shown to result in the reversion of EpiSCs back to an ESC - like state ( Guo et al . , 2009 ) . The mouse is the most important model organism for gener - ating hypotheses about how to maintain and differentiate human ESCs . And , because EpiSCs may represent an important link between human ESCs and the mouse embryo , signiﬁcant infor - mation can be gained by better deﬁning the relationship between hESCs and EpiSCs . To this end , we have characterized the roles of SMAD2 / 3 and FGF / ERK signaling in EpiSCs . We ﬁnd that SMAD2 / 3 signaling directly controls Nanog expression in EpiSCs , as in hESCs , despite the low conservation of SMAD2 / 3 / 4 binding sites in the mouse Nanog promoter . Surprisingly , with respect to FGF / ERK signaling , FGF2 fails to actively support self - renewal in EpiSCs via Nanog expression , in contrast to its role in hESCs . Rather , it supports the EpiSC state by inhibiting Figure 1 . Generation of Epiblast Stem Cells ( A ) Top : Oct4 - expressing outgrowth 3 days after plating day 5 . 5 epiblasts on MEFs . Bottom : Morphology of line 3 estab - lished from hybrid strain embryos . ( B ) Real - time RT - PCR analysis of marker gene expression in E3 EpiSCs and mouse ESCs . Bars reﬂect normalization error . ( C ) 4 - week - oldteratomageneratedfromline3andHE - stained sections showing in vivo differentiation along all three germ layers . ( D ) Global gene expression comparison of E3 EpiSCs , ESCs , and line 9 EpiSCs from Tesar et al . ( 2007 ) . Right : Dendogram based on linear correlation coefﬁcients ( r ) . lineage commitment . On the one hand , FGF2 appears to inhibit neural induction ; on the other hand , it helps impede reversion to an ESC - like state by suppressing Klf2 . RESULTS Generation of Epiblast Stem Cells EpiSCs were established from day 5 . 5 hybrid embryos under hESC culture conditions ( GOF18 - GFP 3 129Sv ; Amit et al . , 2004 ; Yoshimizu et al . , 1999 ) . One karyotypically normal line , termed E3 , was used for most further investigations ( Figure 1A ) . E3 expressed the pluripotency genes Oct4 , Nanog , and Sox2 at levels comparable to those in mouse ESCs . As expected , however , the epiblast marker Fgf5 was strongly upregulated , whereas the mESC - speciﬁc genes Rex1 , Esrrb , Klf4 , and others were expressed at much lower levels than in mESCs ( Figure 1B ) . Upon injection into immunocompro - mised mice , the E3 cells readily gave rise to teratomas contain - ing differentiated derivatives of all three germ layers ( Figure 1C ) . Furthermore , the cells preferentially used the epiblast - speciﬁc proximal enhancer to drive Oct4 expression , exhibited insensi - tivity to inhibition of the LIF / STAT3 pathway , yet displayed sensitivity to suppression of SMAD2 / 3 signaling ( see below ; Tesar et al . , 2007 ; Yeom et al . , 1996 ) . Finally , global gene expres - sion analysis revealed that E3 cells were very similar to EpiSCs that had been independently derived in a different laboratory ( Figure 1D ; Table S1 , line T9 ) . We therefore conclude that the E3 cells are bona ﬁde EpiSCs . Nanog Is a Direct Target of SMAD2 / 3 Signaling in EpiSCs Although SMAD2 / 3 directly regulates NANOG expression in human ESCs ( Greber et al . , 2008 ; Vallier et al . , 2009a ; Xu et al . , 2008 ) , most ( putative ) SMAD2 / 3 / 4 binding sites are not conserved in the mouse ( Figure S2D ) . We therefore sought to investigate this point in EpiSCs . We ﬁrst attempted to grow EpiSCs under feeder - free conditions in MEF - conditioned medium that contained physiological levels of ActA to stimulate SMAD2 / 3 signaling ( Figures S1 and S2A ) . E3 EpiSCs were found to grow robustly as ﬂat colonies , with minimal differentiation ( Figure 2A ) . Oct4 , Nanog , and Sox2 levels were comparable to those in cultures on MEFs . However , when SMAD2 / 3 signaling was blocked for 12 hr , by treatment with SB431542 ( SB ; Fig - ureS1 ) , NANOG , butnotOCT4orSOX2 , proteinlevelsdecreased substantially ( Figure 2B ) . To assess whether Nanog expression is Cell Stem Cell Roles of SMAD2 / 3 and FGF Signaling in EpiSCs 216 Cell Stem Cell 6 , 215 – 226 , March 5 , 2010 ª 2010 Elsevier Inc . supported in a paracrine manner by ActA , EpiSCs were trans - ferred to deﬁned medium at a low density and exposed to varying doses of ActA . Indeed , the Nanog expression level corre - lated with the ActA concentration in the medium ( Figure 2C ) . A direct connection between the activity of a signaling pathway and target gene expression can be elucidated by as - sessing corresponding transcriptional responses over the short term . In EpiSCs , Nanog expression was found to drop by 70 % within 3 hr of treatment with SB . Upon restimulation with ActA , Nanog expression was immediately induced . Oct4 , however , ex - hibited almost no short - term response ( Figure 2D ) . A very similar pattern was obtained with two other EpiSC lines ( Figure S2B ) . Moreover , Nanog expression in mouse ESCs was unaffected by SB treatment , suggesting that sensitivity to SMAD2 / 3 inhibi - tion is a deﬁning feature of EpiSCs ( Figure S2C ) . The short - term induction of Nanog in SB - starved EpiSCs did not require Figure 2 . Nanog Is a Direct Target of SMAD2 / 3 Signaling in EpiSCs ( A ) Undifferentiated morphology in MEF - conditioned medium . ( B ) Western blot of EpiSCs grown / treated as indicated . ( C ) RT - qPCR after growing EpiSCs in deﬁned medium with the indicated supplements . Bars reﬂect normalization error . ( D ) RT - qPCR of EpiSCs in KSR medium treated as indicated . ( E ) RT - qPCR of SB - starved and restimulated samples . Cycloheximide was added for 2 hr to both the control and restimulated samples . Bars reﬂect normalization error . ( F ) ChIP - qPCRwithtwoprimer pairs spanning aputativeSMAD2 / 3 bindingsite inthe Nanog promoter , asillustrated inFigureS2D . Left : EpiSCsharvested under SMAD2 / 3 - stimulating conditions . Right : Cells pretreated for 2 hr with SB . Bars reﬂect normalization error . ( G ) Luciferase assay with wild - type and mutated Nanog promoter fragments illustrated in Figure S2D . Note that SB treatment of EpiSCs signiﬁcantly reduced activity only when the putative SMAD2 / 3 binding site was intact . Bars : SEM between biological duplicates . ( H ) Conventional RT - PCR ( 30 cycles ) . ( I ) Western blot after Nodal knockdown in EpiSCs grown for 3 days in the indicated media . See also Figure S2 for additional data . Cell Stem Cell Roles of SMAD2 / 3 and FGF Signaling in EpiSCs Cell Stem Cell 6 , 215 – 226 , March 5 , 2010 ª 2010 Elsevier Inc . 217 new protein synthesis because it also occurred in the presence of cycloheximide ( Figure 2E ) . We therefore performed ChIP - qPCR with a phospho - SMAD2 / 3 antibody to determine whether control of Nanog expression is mediated by direct Nanog promoter occupancy . Two amplicons spanning the only putative SMAD2 / 3 / 4 binding site in the mouse Nanog promoter showed enrichment over input and over a downstream negative control region under SMAD2 / 3 - activating conditions ( Figure 2F ; Fig - ure S2D ) . Importantly , these signals were abolished under SMAD2 / 3 - inactivating conditions , conﬁrming their speciﬁcity ( Figure 2F ) . To assess the functionality of the putative SMAD2 / 3 / 4 binding site , wild - type and mutated Nanog promoter frag - ments ( Figure S2D ) driving luciferase expression were trans - fected into EpiSCs under SMAD2 / 3 - activating and - inactivating conditions . As expected , the wild - type construct exhibited signiﬁcantly higher activity than the mutated one under SMAD2 / 3 - activating conditions , but the difference in activity became insigniﬁcant under inactivating conditions , suggesting that the site is indeed SMAD2 / 3 responsive ( Figure 2G ) . When passaged as clumps , at a sufﬁcient density , E3 EpiSCs actually did not require ActA supplementation to remain in an undifferentiated state . Only when cells were plated as smaller clumps , at a low density , was Nanog expression reduced ( Fig - ure S2E ) . This suggested that autocrine signaling stimulating SMAD2 / 3 is operative in these cells . Nodal appears to be the factor most probably mediating this effect , because the ActA gene is not expressed in EpiSCs , in contrast to hESCs ( Fig - ure 2H ) . To conﬁrm this notion , we silenced Nodal expression , via RNA interference , and found that it resulted in Nanog down - regulation and EpiSC differentiation ( Figure S2F ) . Interestingly , Nodal knockdown appeared to affect terminal SMAD3 rather than SMAD2 phosphorylation , suggesting selective effector usage by autocrine Nodal ( Figure 2I , right ) . In contrast , when cells were grown in conditioned medium ( which contains ActA ) or unconditioned medium plus recombinant ActA , the knock - down phenotype was at least partially rescued , demonstrating that paracrine factors can substitute for autocrine Nodal ( Figure 2I , left ; Figure S2F ) . Taken together , these ﬁndings indi - cate that SMAD2 / 3 signaling directly controls Nanog expression in EpiSCs . FGF Signaling Inhibits Neural Commitment in EpiSCs WenextinvestigatedhowFGF2maysupportEpiSCself - renewal . In MEF - dependent culture , FGF2 induces ActA secretion from the feeder layer , which may overshadow its direct effects on EpiSCs ( Figure S2A ) . Alternatively , E3 EpiSCs could also be maintained in an undifferentiated state in deﬁned N2B27 medium supplemented with FGF2 alone ( Figure 3A ; Yao et al . , 2006 ) . Although the rates of spontaneous differentiation , particularly with lines T9 and E5 , appeared to be somewhat higher than in MEF - conditioned medium , N2B27 medium allowed assessment of FGF - mediated effects over the short term . To test whether FGF2 / ERK signaling enhances EpiSC survival , a cell attachment test was performed . Addition of a ROCK inhib - itor was found to increase survival by about 5 - fold ( Watanabe et al . , 2007 ) . However , FGF2 addition also signiﬁcantly enhanced attachment / survival after single - cell / small - clump dissociation , which EpiSCs do not tolerate well , and FGF pathway inhibition appeared to reduce cell survival to some extent ( Figure 3B ) . To assess whether FGF signaling also stimulates cell proliferation , cell growth was examined . No signiﬁcant difference between the numbers of cells grown with FGF2 versus those grown without FGF was observed , suggesting that FGF2 supplementa - tion has no effect on cell proliferation in EpiSCs ( Figure 3C ) . To test effects over a longer period , we exposed EpiSCs to FGF / ERK inhibitors ‘‘SU’’ or ‘‘PD’’ ( see Figure S1 ) continuously . In line with the data in Figure 3B , we noticed increased cell death and also differentiation in the presence of FGF / ERK inhibitors . Global transcription proﬁles were recorded at passage 2 to investigate differential gene expression in comparison with FGF2 - treated control cells . Gene ontology analysis revealed that the gene set upregulated with SU and PD was highly en - riched in terms associated with neural development , raising the possibility that FGF signaling in EpiSCs may act to inhibit differ - entiation into that lineage ( Figure S3A ) . Of note is that inhibition of neural induction by FGF signaling has also been observed in hESCs . In particular , PAX6 induction appeared to be repressed by the addition of FGF2 to the medium ( Greber et al . , 2008 ) . We have reproduced these data with a different hESC line , HuES6 ( Figure S3B ) . We therefore assessed whether a similar effect on the induc - tion of early neuroectodermal genes occurs in EpiSCs . When neuroectodermal differentiation was permitted by inhibiting SMAD2 / 3 signaling ( to suppress Nanog ) in the presence of FGF2 , the markers Sox2 and Sox1 were indeed clearly induced . However , without FGF2 addition , Sox2 and Sox1 upregulation was at least equally pronounced and , strikingly , Pax6 induction was signiﬁcantly stronger ( Figure 3D ) . A similar pattern was observed with inhibitors to completely inactivate FGF / ERK signaling ( Figure S3C ) . The preferred induction of Pax6 in the absence of FGF signaling was conﬁrmed at the protein level via immunocytochemistry ( Figure 3E ) . To assess whether terminal differentiation is also affected , induced cultures were left untreated for 2 more days and then stained for the neuronal marker b - III - Tubulin . Neurons readily formed after induction with SB + FGF2 or SB + PD . Their numbers , however , appeared to be higher after SB + PD pretreatment . Similar results were obtained with SU to suppress FGF signaling ( not shown ) . Moreover , many neurons formed even upon continuous SB + PD treatment and , again , the numbers were higher than those after exposure to SB + FGF2 ( Figure S3E ) . According to gene expression analysis , the difference in neuronal marker gene expression was several - fold ( Figure S3F ) . In conclusion , FGF signaling inhibits , but does not fully block , neuroectodermal induction in EpiSCs , similar to the situation in hESCs ( Figure S3B ) . FGF Signaling Does not Support Nanog Expression in EpiSCs The above FGF - mediated effects may be beneﬁcial for hESC / EpiSC maintenance , but they are not strictly associated with promoting self - renewal . For any bona ﬁde self - renewal factor , one may postulate a positive effect on the transcription factor network controlling self - renewal and pluripotency . Indeed , there are indications that this also applies to FGF2 signaling in hESCs and , interestingly , OCT4 has been suggested to control FGF2 expression ( data in Boyer et al . , 2005 ) . In contrast , it appears that Fgf2 is not expressed in EpiSCs ( Figure 4A ) . By using ChIP - qPCR , we conﬁrmed the binding of OCT4 to the FGF2 Cell Stem Cell Roles of SMAD2 / 3 and FGF Signaling in EpiSCs 218 Cell Stem Cell 6 , 215 – 226 , March 5 , 2010 ª 2010 Elsevier Inc . gene in human ESCs . However , there was no enrichment in the orthologous region in EpiSCs ( Figure 4B ; Figure S4A ) . It has been noted that in hESCs , not only does SMAD2 / 3 support NANOG expression , but so does FGF signaling , whereas the mechanism linking NANOG expression and FGF signaling is poorly understood ( data in Greber et al . , 2007 , 2008 ; Wang et al . , 2009 ) . This was conﬁrmed with independent batches of hESCs via short - term FGF / ERK inhibition and two sets of NANOG qPCR primers . Irrespective of the FGF / ERK cascade inhibitor or PCR amplicon used , FGF / ERK inhibition caused a 50 % decrease in NANOG mRNA levels within 12 hr . The effect of SMAD2 / 3 inhibition was stronger ( 85 % decrease ) , but additional FGF receptor blockage caused a further drop in NANOG expression , indicating cooperation between the two pathways ( Figure 4C ) . The dependence of NANOG expression on FGF / ERK signaling in hESCs was also conﬁrmed at the protein level ( Figure 4E ) . In stark contrast , no effect on Nanog expression was observed in similar experiments with EpiSCs ( Figures 4D and 4F ; Figure S4B ) . This was also conﬁrmed with an independent EpiSC line ( Figure S4B ) . We conclude that FGF signaling in cooperation with SMAD2 / 3 signaling mediates NANOG expression in hESCs , thereby actively promoting self - renewal . However , EpiSCs appear to respond only to SMAD2 / 3 activation . Dedifferentiation of EpiSCs to an ESC - like State Is Cooperatively Promoted by FGF / ERK Inhibition , GSK3 b Inactivation , and LIF / STAT3 Stimulation In addition to self - renewing or differentiating along somatic cell lineages , EpiSCs have another option in culture : they can revert back to an ESC - like state . This was ﬁrst shown by Klf4 overex - pression ( Guo et al . , 2009 ) . However , data in a recent report suggest that switching to stringent mESC culture conditions alone supports this reversion ( in Hanna et al . , 2009 ) . Interest - ingly , this medium contains—in addition to LIF and a GSK3 b inhibitor ( ‘‘CH’’ ) —a MEK inhibitor to inactivate the FGF / ERK Figure 3 . Characterization of Putative Effects of FGF Signaling in EpiSCs ( A ) Representative morphology and OCT4 immunostain of E3 EpiSCs grown in deﬁned medium with FGF2 ( passage 5 ) . Two other lines used showed more abundant spontaneous differentiation . ( B ) Cell attachment test in the presence of the indicated molecules . The right panel validates the assay . Bars : SEM between independent biological replicates . ( C ) Growth test in the presence and absence of exogenously added FGF2 . Bars : SEM between independent biological replicates . ( D ) RT - qPCR for early neuroectodermal markers after the indicated treatments . Note that Sox1 induction is mostly attributable to SB treatment , whereas Pax6 induction appears to be a preferential effect of FGF2 withdrawal . Bars : SEM between independent biological replicates . ( E ) Representative immunostains for PAX6 and class III b - Tubulin after the indicated treatments of E3 EpiSCs in N2B27 medium . See also Figure S3 for additional data . Cell Stem Cell Roles of SMAD2 / 3 and FGF Signaling in EpiSCs Cell Stem Cell 6 , 215 – 226 , March 5 , 2010 ª 2010 Elsevier Inc . 219 cascade ( PD , see Figure S1 ) . We hypothesized that this may in turn suggest another role for FGF / ERK signaling : to stabilize the epiblast state by preventing dedifferentiation . To assess this , E3 EpiSCs were seeded onto MEFs as small clumps and treated separately with PD , CH , and LIF . Cells treated with CH showed overt differentiation , whereas cultures treated with PD or LIF still formed ﬂat EpiSC - like colonies . How - ever , for each condition , small dome - shaped colonies were also seen to emerge within 3 days . Interestingly , when added in combination , many more—about one third of the total—demar - cated ESC - like colonies had formed ( Figure 5A ) . Splitting these PD / CH / LIF - treated cultures via single - cell dissociation enriched for these cells , whereas differentiated ones appeared to become outcompeted . After 1 or 2 passages , the cultures were homoge - neous and morphologically indistinguishable from those of mESCs ( Figure 5A ) . The new cells , termed E3R , could be grown on gelatin and stained strongly positive for alkaline phosphatase , in contrast to E3 EpiSCs ( Figures 5A and 5B ) . Via markers to distinguish mESCs and EpiSCs , these cells were found to display a typical mESC proﬁle ( Figure 5C ) . Like mESCs , E3R cells showed activity of the distal Oct4 enhancer , whereas parental E3 EpiSCs preferentially used the epiblast - speciﬁc proximal enhancer ( Figure 5D ; Yeom et al . , 1996 ) . EpiSCs were sensitive to inhibition of SMAD2 / 3 , whereas E3R and ESCs were not ( Figure 5E ) . In contrast , E3R and ESCs displayed downregulation of ESC markers upon LIF / STAT3 inhibition , whereas EpiSCs showed no response ( Figure 5F ) . Global gene expression analysis revealed that E3R cells clustered together with ESCs but not with parental EpiSCs ( Figure 5G ) . Finally , upon combination with preimplantation embryos , E3R cells gave rise to high - contribution coat color chimeras , followed by germline transmission , which demonstrates mESC - like pluripo - tency ( Figure 5H ) . We also performed similar experiments to revert T9 EpiSCs ( mostly 129 inbred background ) . The efﬁciency of reversion to ESC - like colonies was found to be substantially lower than that with E3 EpiSCs , but the reverted cells were robust in the sense that they could be maintained with LIF alone ( Figures S5A – S5C ) . We could also revert a third line , E5 , or replace PD by an alternative FGF inhibitor ( SU ) , suggesting that the procedure it - self is robust ( Figures S5D and S5E ) . In contrast to reverted T9 EpiSCs , E3R cells ( hybrid background ) required the continuous presence of PD , CH , and LIF to maintain the ESC state , consis - tent with observations with ESCs from so - called nonpermissive backgrounds ( Figure S5F ; Hanna et al . , 2009 ) . Taken together , these ﬁndings suggest that EpiSCs can be reverted to an ESC - like state at variable efﬁciency , simply by switching to stringent mouse ESC culture conditions . Klf2 Is a Repressed Target of FGF Signaling in EpiSCs and ESCs Because reversion of the E3 EpiSC line was very efﬁcient , we thought it should be possible to track the induction of ESC - speciﬁc gene expression after treatment with different mole - cules . First , we harvested samples from bulk cultures treated with PD , CH , and LIF alone or in combination for 3 days—i . e . , when ESC - like colonies ﬁrst become apparent ( Figure 5A ) . The induction of ESC - speciﬁc markers was indeed readily detect - able . At the same time , markers for somatic and extraembryonic differentiation were found to be upregulated . This was mostly attributable to the addition of CH , because EpiSCs with LIF alone did not exhibit much differentiation ( Figures 5A and 6A ) . In contrast , the three molecules appeared to cooperate in the induction of mESC - speciﬁc markers , consistent with the increase in ESC - like colony numbers when the molecules were used in combination ( Figures 5A and 6A ) . To quantify this coop - erativity and to conﬁrm that FGF / ERK inhibition also makes a contribution to the reversion of EpiSCs , ESC - like alkaline phos - phatase - positive colonies were scored after 4 days of treatment Figure 4 . Suppression of FGF Signaling Does Not Affect Nanog Expression in EpiSCs ( A ) Conventional RT - PCR ( 30 cycles ) . ( B ) OCT4 ChIP - qPCR with primers spanning a putative binding site in the human FGF2 locus , as illustrated in Figure S4A . Right : OCT4 fails to bind to the orthologous region in EpiSCs . Binding to the Nanog promoter was used asapositivecontrol . Bars : left , normalizationerror ; right , SEMoffourindepen - dent experiments . ( C ) Reduction of NANOG mRNA after short - term FGF / ERK suppression in hESCs ( H1 ) . Note that even upon suppression of SMAD2 / 3 signaling ( SB ) , FGF / ERKinhibitioncausesafurtherdecreaseinNANOGmessage . Incompar - ison , there was only a slight decrease in OCT4 expression ( not shown ) . Bars reﬂect normalization error . ( D ) Quantiﬁcation of Nanog mRNA in E3 EpiSCs grown in two different media . Bars : SEM between two or three independent replicates per treatment . ( E ) Western blot with hESCs treated as indicated in deﬁned medium . ( F ) Western blot with EpiSCs treated as indicated in deﬁned medium . See also Figure S4 for additional data . Cell Stem Cell Roles of SMAD2 / 3 and FGF Signaling in EpiSCs 220 Cell Stem Cell 6 , 215 – 226 , March 5 , 2010 ª 2010 Elsevier Inc . with various media . Irrespective of the presence or absence of CH or LIF , PD treatment signiﬁcantly enhanced reversion efﬁ - ciencies . In contrast , FGF treatment greatly diminished the formation of ESC - like colonies , suggesting that FGF / ERK sig - naling indeed serves to prevent the dedifferentiation of EpiSCs ( Figure S6 ) . To determine whether the three - molecule - mediated reversion of EpiSCs comprises an inductive rather than a selective process , we performed short - term treatment for just 3 hr and determined the effect on downstream gene expression . Alter - ation in the expression of direct target genes of the respective pathways was observed : Egr1 , downregulated with PD treat - ment ; T , upregulated with CH treatment ( Arnold et al . , 2000 ) ; and Socs3 , upregulated with LIF treatment ( Table S3 ) . Strikingly , Klf2 , a direct reprogramming factor ( Nakagawa et al . , 2008 ) , turned out to be induced by FGF / ERK inhibition but its upregula - tion was even stronger with PD / CH / LIF treatment ( Figure 6B ; Table S3 ) . We performed the same treatments for two more time points and assessed the results by array and real - time analysis to conﬁrm these ﬁndings . As shown in Figure 6C , Klf2 —but not Klf4 —became gradually induced over time . Intriguingly , the molecules appeared to synergize / cooperate in activating Klf2 : FGF / ERK inhibition had an immediate - early effect , whereas CH treatment accounted for activation at later time points ( Figures 6A and 6C ; Tables S3 and S4 ) . Considering that Klf2 can substitute for Klf4 in direct reprogramming ( Naka - gawa et al . , 2008 ) and that Klf4 or Klf2 overexpression is sufﬁ - cient to revert EpiSCs to an ESC - like state ( Guo et al . , 2009 ; Hall et al . , 2009 ) , these data suggest that there may be an induc - tive mechanism regulating medium switch - based EpiSC rever - sion . To substantiate this hypothesis , we silenced Klf2 in EpiSCs by using RNA interference , which did not interfere with EpiSC self - renewal , as expected . Compared with controls , the Klf2 knockdown cells indeed reverted at substantially lower efﬁ - ciency ( Figure 6D ) . Hence , induction of Klf2 by the PD / CH / LIF cocktail correlates with ESC - like colony formation efﬁciency and , moreover , endogenous Klf2 is required for PD / CH / LIF - mediated EpiSC reversion . The fact that EpiSCs could be reverted to ESC - like cells by manipulating the activities of three signaling pathways prompted us to ask whether the opposite treatments would support the formation of epiblast cells from ESCs . This question was also motivated by the fact that LIF treatment did not lead to induction of Klf4 expression in EpiSCs , although activation of this pathway has been found to sustain Klf4 expression in mESCs ( Figure 6C ; Hall et al . , 2009 ; Niwa et al . , 2009 ) . With an emphasis on the LIF / STAT3 and FGF / ERK pathways , we therefore carried out the complementary stimulation / inhibition experiments : To exclude autocrine effects , mESCs were grown in LIF plus PD and then treated for 12 hr with ( 1 ) FGF + LIF , ( 2 ) a JAK inhibitor + PD , and ( 3 ) a JAK inhibitor + FGF . Consistent with the ﬁnding that suppression of FGF / ERK signaling leads to Klf2 induction in EpiSCs , FGF / ERK stimulation in mESCs resulted in moderate but signiﬁcant Klf2 suppression ( Figure 7A ; Table S5 ) . In Figure5 . ReversionofE3EpiSCstoanESC - like State by Switching Culture Conditions Involving FGF / ERK Suppression ( A ) Morphology on MEFs after 3 days of the indi - cated treatments . Arrows point at colonies of domed ESC - like appearance . Bottom right : Morphology of E3R cells compared with mESCs , and under feeder - free conditions . ( B ) Alkalinephosphatasestain . Bothsampleswere incubated for the same time . ( C ) RT - qPCR marker expression analysis . ( D ) Luciferase assay for relative Oct4 enhancer activities . ( E ) RT - qPCR analysis after the indicated treat - ments . ( F ) RT - qPCR analysis after the indicated treat - ments . ( G ) Global expression proﬁles and clustering based on linear correlation coefﬁcients ( r ) . ( H ) Top : Chimeric mice obtained after morula aggregationwithE3Rcells . Chimerismisindicated bydark donorcoatcolor onwhite CFWhostback - ground . Six of nine offspring were obvious coat color chimeras . In contrast , after aggregation of parentalE3EpiSCs , only2outof31miceborndis - played ( very low ) coat color chimerism ( not shown ) . Bottom : Embryonic and live offspring of male chimera shown on top . Germline transmis - sion is indicated by Oct4 - GFP transgene - medi - ated ﬂuorescence , as well as coat color and PCR genotyping of the pup shown . See also Figure S5 for additional data . Cell Stem Cell Roles of SMAD2 / 3 and FGF Signaling in EpiSCs Cell Stem Cell 6 , 215 – 226 , March 5 , 2010 ª 2010 Elsevier Inc . 221 comparison , LIF stimulation did not lead to Klf4 induction in EpiSCs ( Figure 6C ) , but inhibition of the LIF / STAT3 pathway led to signiﬁcant Klf4 repression in mESCs ( Figure 7A ) . The same treatments were applied to cultures on feeder layers— which are compatible with both ESC and EpiSC growth . Both FGF treatment and inhibition of LIF / STAT3 signaling led to an EpiSC - like colony morphology—i . e . , ﬂattening of the mESC colonies—within 2 days , whereas combined treatment pro - duced this effect even earlier ( Figure 7B and not shown ) . Real - time PCR analysis revealed again that Klf2 suppression correlated with FGF / ERK stimulation and that Klf4 suppression correlated with LIF / STAT3 inhibition . Consistent with the above morphological changes , LIF / STAT3 inhibition led to a strong induction of the expression of epiblast marker Fgf5 , whereas FGF / ERK stimulation also contributed to this effect , resulting in highest Fgf5 levels with combined treatment ( Figures 7B and 7C ) . In conclusion , ES and epiblast cell states can be converted into each other in vitro by manipulating the activities of a set of signaling pathways . Figure 6 . Early Gene Expression Signatures in Reverting EpiSCs ( A ) RT - qPCR analysis in EpiSCs treated in KSR medium supplemented with the indicated molecules . Note the cooperativity between the three molecules in inducing ESC - speciﬁc gene expression . ( B ) Analysis of global gene expression changes in EpiSCsstimulatedwithPD , CH , andLIFaloneorin combination ( PCL ) for 3 hr . Gene symbols in gray areknowndownstreamtargetsofthemanipulated pathways . At this time point , Klf2 was induced by PD but not by CH or LIF treatment . ( C ) RT - qPCR analysis of EpiSCs stimulated for different time periods in the indicated ways . Note that Klf2 , but not Klf4 , consistently shows syner - gistic / cooperative induction at all time points . Bars reﬂect normalization error . ( D ) Reversion of E3 EpiSCs after Klf2 knockdown . Left : typical morphology 4 days after seeding on MEFs in PD / CH / LIF - containing medium . Middle : macroscopic view of AP - stained dishes at day 4 . Right : quantiﬁcation of reversion efﬁciency based on AP - positive colony numbers . EpiSC self - renewal was unaffected by the Klf2 knockdown as judged by unaltered Oct4 expression levels before seeding . The Klf2 knockdown efﬁciency in the ‘‘polyclonal’’ EpiSC population was about 65 % ( data not shown ) . DISCUSSION NANOG is a direct downstream target of SMAD2 / 3 signaling in hESCs . However , several ( putative ) binding sites in the Nanog promoter are not well conserved in the mouse ( Greber et al . , 2008 ; Vallier et al . , 2009a ; Xu et al . , 2008 ) . This led to speculation that there may be a species - speciﬁc difference in regulatory pathways ( in Greber et al . , 2008 ) . How - ever , one putative binding site , which has been overlooked in two independent studies , is present in the mouse Nanog promoter several bp upstream of the known SOX - OCT bipartite motif . Our data suggest that this site is func - tional in EpiSCs and that SMAD2 / 3 signaling occurs upstream of Nanog in EpiSCs , as in hESCs ( Figures 7D and 2 ) . SMAD2 / 3 signaling is likely to be a key mechanism in the self - renewal of EpiSCs , because inactivation of the pathway promotes neuroec - todermal differentiation in both hESCs and EpiSCs , which can be prevented by constitutive Nanog expression ( Greber et al . , 2008 ; Smith et al . , 2008 ; Tesar et al . , 2007 ; Vallier et al . , 2009a ) . Nodal is likely to be the major autocrine factor responsible for activating the SMAD2 / 3 pathway , which acts to maintain the pluripotent epiblast cell state , consistent with ﬁndings in vivo ( Figure 2 ; Camus et al . , 2006 ) . We ﬁnd that FGF2 addition has an inhibitory effect on neuroec - todermal induction—particularly on PAX6 / Pax6 expression—in both hESCs and EpiSCs , an effect that is nota bene totally distinct from the well - known role of FGF2 in supporting the self - renewal of neural stem cells ( Figures 3D and 3E ; Figure S3 ; Cell Stem Cell Roles of SMAD2 / 3 and FGF Signaling in EpiSCs 222 Cell Stem Cell 6 , 215 – 226 , March 5 , 2010 ª 2010 Elsevier Inc . Greber et al . , 2008 ) . Hence , the efﬁciency of neural induction in EpiSCs can be enhanced by inhibiting both SMAD2 / 3 and FGF / ERK signaling . In hESCs , but apparently not in EpiSCs , additional suppression of endogenous BMP signaling may be required to increase the differentiation speciﬁcity and fully reveal the inhibitory effect of FGF / ERK signaling ( Figure S3B and asso - ciated text , Figure S3D ) . FGF - mediated inhibition of neuroecto - dermal gene expression in hESCs and EpiSCs can contribute to the maintenance of the undifferentiated state ( Figure 7D ) . However , FGF2 supplementation of culture media cannot fully block neuroectodermal commitment , a fact that may help address the discrepancy between our conclusions and those drawn by others ( Vallier et al . , 2009a , 2009b ; Figure S3B and associated text ) . FGF / ERK signaling also plays a more positively acting role in hESCs : namely to support NANOG expression ( Figure 4 ) . The precise mechanism underlying this aspect of FGF2 action is not understood . Nonetheless , we believe that the previously recognized cooperation between FGF / ERK and SMAD2 / 3 path - ways in supporting hESC self - renewal ( Vallier et al . , 2005 ) culmi - nates in the activation of NANOG as a shared target . However , the effect of SMAD2 / 3 signaling on NANOG expression in hESCs is dominant , so that the contribution of FGF2 is overshadowed and becomes apparent only in deﬁned media lacking any SMAD2 / 3 - stimulating factors . Interestingly , the FGF2 gene Figure 7 . Early Gene Expression Signatures in mESCs Differentiating to an Epiblast - like State ( A ) Short - term stimulated feeder - free OG2 ESCs analyzed by expression microarrays . Gene symbols in gray are known downstream targets of the manipulated pathways . Klf4 ( represented by three different probes ) was downregulated by LIF / STAT3 inhibition rather than by FGF / ERK acti - vation , whereas Klf2 was repressed by FGF / ERK stimulation rather than by LIF / STAT3 inhibition . ( B ) Morphology of OG2 ESCs treated for 2 days in the indicated ways . ( C ) RT - qPCR analysis of samples treated as in ( B ) . Socs3 isaknownLIF / STAT3target gene , whereas Egr1 served as a control to monitor FGF / ERK activity . Bars : SEM between independent experi - ments . ( D ) Model summarizing the control of fate deci - sions in EpiSCs by signaling pathways . See text for discussion . The contribution of CH with - drawal / Wnt suppression in promoting epiblast differentiation from ESCs was not investigated . appears to be directly controlled by OCT4 , suggesting the presence of an autocrine loop that helps to sustain self - renewal in hESCs , which may involve all pleiotropic downstream effects of FGF2 signaling described to date ( Figure 4 ; Bendall et al . , 2007 ; Boyer et al . , 2005 ; Ei - selleova et al . , 2009 ; Greber et al . , 2007 ; Li et al . , 2007 ; Ludwig et al . , 2006 ) . In contrast , FGF2 signaling does not seem to actively promote self - renewal via Nanog expression in EpiSCs , according to our assays with feeder - free conditions . The situation is different when EpiSCs are grown on MEFs , because FGF2 enhances the secretion of ActA from these cells , thus acting indirectly through another pathway . However , our data suggest that the active and direct role of FGF2 signaling in supporting self - renewal through NANOG is speciﬁc to human ESCs and not shared with EpiSCs . The shear existence of a hESC - speciﬁc feature is , in principle , not very surprising considering that hESCs are equivalent to neither mESCs nor to EpiSCs ( they appear to share features with both cell types , see above ) and that there are notable differ - ences in early development between mouse and human ( Larsen , 2001 ; Nagy et al . , 2003 ) . We cannot rule out the possibility that FGF signaling may activate the expression of target genes other than Nanog to sustain self - renewal in EpiSCs . EpiSCs can be reverted back to an ESC - like state in vitro by the overexpression of Klf4 ( Guo et al . , 2009 ) . This is a very perspicuous ﬁnding , because ( 1 ) Klf4 is one of Yamanaka’s reprogramming factors ( Takahashi and Yamanaka , 2006 ) , ( 2 ) KLF4 is an integral component of the mESC self - renewal network ( Chen et al . , 2008 ; Jiang et al . , 2008 ) , and ( 3 ) EpiSCs virtually do not express Klf4 . Recent data by Hanna et al . ( 2009 ) suggested that a stringent mESC medium alone could be sufﬁcient to revert EpiSCs to an ESC - like state . It is probable that a MEF feeder layer facilitates this process , because it is Cell Stem Cell Roles of SMAD2 / 3 and FGF Signaling in EpiSCs Cell Stem Cell 6 , 215 – 226 , March 5 , 2010 ª 2010 Elsevier Inc . 223 a substrate supporting the growth of both ESCs and EpiSCs . We have reverted several EpiSC lines via PD / CH / LIF - containing medium and demonstrate that the resultant cells exhibit ESC - speciﬁc properties and developmental potential . Reversion efﬁciencies with the hybrid E3 line were sufﬁciently high to inves - tigate the medium - induced effects on gene expression . Irre - spective of the mechanism ( direct versus indirect ) , FGF / ERK suppression , GSK3 b inhibition , and LIF / STAT3 activation ap - peared to cooperate in reverting the EpiSCs . GSK3 b inhibition selected against the epiblast state by inducing ( mesendodermal ) differentiation in many , but not all , cells , consistent with the prominent role of WNT / b - catenin signaling in mammalian gastru - lation ( Figure 7D ; Murry and Keller , 2008 ; Sumi et al . , 2008 ) . LIF appeared to make a contribution at later stages , perhaps by stabilizing the reverted state , because LIF treatment alone did not immediately induce the expression of any ESC - speciﬁc genes but was most productive over the long term ( Figure 6A ) . However , cooperation between the three molecules was most evident in the induction of Klf2 , whereas FGF / ERK suppression had the strongest immediate - early effect on Klf2 expression ( Figure 7D ) . Klf2 can substitute for Klf4 in direct reprogramming experiments , and Klf4 or Klf2 overexpression enables EpiSC reversion ( Guo et al . , 2009 ; Hall et al . , 2009 ; Nakagawa et al . , 2008 ) . Moreover , knockdown of Klf2 in EpiSCs impaired rever - sion efﬁciencies ( Figure 6D ) . Given that ESCs tolerate Klf2 silencing ( Jiang et al . , 2008 ) , these data therefore suggest that medium switch - based reversion of EpiSCs may at least partly constitute an inductive process involving KLF2 . This would not be based on replacing the function of a reprogramming factor with small molecules but on inducing its endogenous expression by manipulating the activities of signaling pathways . Kru¨ppel - like transcription factors ( Klfs ) are upstream regula - tors of Nanog expression in ESCs ( Jiang et al . , 2008 ) . Because EpiSCs express much lower levels of Klf2 and Klf4 but rather depend on SMAD2 / 3 signaling to drive Nanog expression , it appears that a transition from the ES to the epiblast cell state must also involve a switch in Nanog regulation . The effect of FGF / ERK signaling on repressing Klf2 was consistent in EpiSCs and mESCs . In contrast , LIF stimulation had a positive effect on Klf4 expressiononlyinESCs . Consequently , LIF / STAT3suppres - sion and FGF / ERK stimulation had a cooperative effect in dimin - ishing both Klfs in ESCs ( Figure 7D ) . It is quite possible that withdrawal of the GSK3 b inhibitor is also a contributing factor ( data not shown ) . The levels of Fgf5 , a marker for the epiblast state , were also increased in a cooperative way . Interestingly , it has been revealed that the Fgf5 gene is a repressed direct target ofKlfsinmESCs ( Jiangetal . , 2008 ) , underscoringtheimportance of downregulation of Klfs during the ES - Epi cell transition . The model in Figure 7D suggests that there is an equilibrium between the ES and epiblast cell states , the precise position of which is dictated by the culture conditions . This may be more evident for so - called nonpermissive mouse strains than for 129 inbred cells ( Hanna et al . , 2009 ) . A recent report by Bao et al . ( 2009 ) describing the generation of mESC - like cells from EpiSCs grown under low - stringency mESC culture conditions supports the equilibrium concept . Our data conﬁrm that LIF treatment alone can give rise to ESC - like colonies . However , EpiSC rever - sion efﬁciencies were signiﬁcantly higher when blocking FGF / ERK and GSK3 b in addition , underscoring the idea of coopera - tion among the three molecules ( Figure 5A ; Figure S6 ) . The model further implies that somatic cell lineage commitment always commences from the epiblast and not from the ES cell state , in accordance with the in vivo situation . Work by Kunath et al . ( 2007 ) revealed that Fgf4 (cid:2) / (cid:2) or Erk2 (cid:2) / (cid:2) ESCs are deﬁcient in somatic cell lineage commitment . According to the model in Figure 7D , such cells could become stuck halfway between the ES and epiblast cell states . Finally , the model does not question data by Ying et al . ( 2003 ) suggesting that FGF / ERK signaling is required for neuroectodermal induction in ESCs , as this differen - tiation process appears to be composed of at least two steps ( J . S . , unpublished data ) : the ﬁrst step ( ES - Epi ) would be promoted by FGF / ERK , whereas the second ( Epi - Neuro ) would be inhibited , but not blocked , by FGF / ERK signaling ( Figure 7D ) . Taken together , our data are consistent with published ﬁndings and extend the current model of cell fate decisions concerning the epiblast cell state ( Tesar et al . , 2007 ) by elucidating the roles of FGF / ERK signaling . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Cell Culture Hybrid E3 EpiSCs were derived from day 5 . 5 epiblasts generated by mating homozygous GOF18 - EGFP male mice ( Yoshimizu et al . , 1999 ; C57Bl / 6 and DBA / 2 background ) with 129 / Sv female mice . The activity of the Oct4 - GFP transgene was gradually silenced over time for unknown reasons , whereas that of endogenous Oct4 was stable . After initial mechanical passaging on MEFs ( strainCF1 ) , cellsweresplitwithcollagenaseIV . KSRmediumcontained 20 % Knockout Serum Replacement and was supplemented with 5 ng / ml FGF2 to yield ‘‘unconditioned medium’’ ( UM ; Amit et al . , 2004 ) . For feeder - free culture , cells were adapted to grow in MEF - conditioned medium ( CM ; Xu et al . , 2001 ) on FCS - coated dishes . Some experiments were carried out in deﬁned N2B27 medium ( Yao et al . , 2006 ) . Human ESCs ( H1 , H9 , HuES6 ; Cowan et al . , 2004 ; Thomson et al . , 1998 ) were treated in N2B27 medium . Mouse ESCs or reverted EpiSCs were grown on MEFs or on gelatin - coated plates in KSR medium wherein the speciﬁed factors were added . Reverted E3 EpiSCs displayed reactivation of the Oct4 - GFP transgene . RT - qPCR and Microarray Analysis Cells for RNA isolation were usually lysed directly in the culture wells . Reverse transcription was done with MMLV enzyme ( USB ) and oligo dT 15 priming . qPCR was carried out with SYBR Green mix ( ABI ) . All qPCR primers were validated with respect to efﬁciency and speciﬁcity ( Table S6 ) . Calculations were based on the DD Ct method employing two housekeeping genes for normalization . cRNA samples for global gene expression analyses were prepared with the linear TotalPrep RNA Ampliﬁcation Kit ( Ambion ) . Hybridizations on mouse - 8 V2 chips ( Illumina ) were carried out as recommended by the manufacturer . Data analysis was done in BeadStudio and MS Excel . Immunoblotting and ChIP - qPCR Cells for western blotting were rapidly harvested by scraping in culture medium , pelleted , and lysed on ice , if necessary , to preserve the phosphory - lation status of the proteins . Electrophoresis , blotting , and antibody incuba - tions were carried out according to standard procedures . For ChIP - qPCR , we adopted and scaled down a published protocol ( Lee et al . , 2006 ) . Fold enrichment was calculated with the DD Ct method , by normalizing Ct values against two ( human ) or three ( mouse ) independent genomic reference loci and comparing them to the input sample set to 1 - fold . ACCESSION NUMBERS All raw and processed microarray data have been submitted to Gene Expres - sion Omnibus ( GEO ) database ( http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / gds ) under the accession number GSE17202 , in a MIAME - compliant format . Cell Stem Cell Roles of SMAD2 / 3 and FGF Signaling in EpiSCs 224 Cell Stem Cell 6 , 215 – 226 , March 5 , 2010 ª 2010 Elsevier Inc . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures , six ﬁgures , and six tables and can be found with this article online at doi : 10 . 1016 / j . stem . 2010 . 01 . 003 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Sandra Heising , Martina Bleidißel , Philipp Trepte , and Ba¨rbel Scha¨fer for technical assistance , as well as Rebekka Schneider , University HospitalAachen , forhelp withtheteratomaanalysis . Thisworkwassupported by theMax Planck Societyand partly funded by agrant of theGermanFederal Ministry of Education and Research BMBF ( 01GN0934 ) . Received : August 11 , 2009 Revised : November 30 , 2009 Accepted : January 11 , 2010 Published : March 4 , 2010 REFERENCES Adjaye , J . , Huntriss , J . , Herwig , R . , BenKahla , A . , Brink , T . C . , Wierling , C . , Hultschig , C . , Groth , D . , Yaspo , M . L . , Picton , H . M . , etal . ( 2005 ) . Primarydiffer - entiationinthehumanblastocyst : Comparativemolecularportraitsofinnercell mass and trophectoderm cells . Stem Cells 23 , 1514 – 1525 . Amit , M . , Shariki , C . , Margulets , V . , and Itskovitz - Eldor , J . ( 2004 ) . Feeder layer - and serum - free culture of human embryonic stem cells . Biol . Reprod . 70 , 837 – 845 . Arnold , S . J . , Stappert , J . , Bauer , A . , Kispert , A . , Herrmann , B . G . , and Kemler , R . ( 2000 ) . Brachyury is a target gene of the Wnt / beta - catenin signaling pathway . Mech . Dev . 91 , 249 – 258 . Bao , S . , Tang , F . , Li , X . , Hayashi , K . , Gillich , A . , Lao , K . , and Surani , M . A . ( 2009 ) . Epigenetic reversion of post - implantation epiblast to pluripotent embryonic stem cells . Nature 461 , 1292 – 1295 . Bendall , S . C . , Stewart , M . H . , Menendez , P . , George , D . , Vijayaragavan , K . , Werbowetski - Ogilvie , T . , Ramos - Mejia , V . , Rouleau , A . , Yang , J . , Bosse´ , M . , et al . ( 2007 ) . IGF and FGF cooperatively establish the regulatory stem cell niche of pluripotent human cells in vitro . Nature 448 , 1015 – 1021 . Boyer , L . A . , Lee , T . I . , Cole , M . F . , Johnstone , S . E . , Levine , S . S . , Zucker , J . P . , Guenther , M . G . , Kumar , R . M . , Murray , H . L . , Jenner , R . G . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Core transcriptional regulatory circuitry in human embryonic stem cells . Cell 122 , 947 – 956 . Brons , I . G . , Smithers , L . E . , Trotter , M . W . , Rugg - Gunn , P . , Sun , B . , Chuva de SousaLopes , S . M . , Howlett , S . K . , Clarkson , A . , Ahrlund - Richter , L . , Pedersen , R . A . , and Vallier , L . ( 2007 ) . Derivation of pluripotent epiblast stem cells from mammalian embryos . Nature 448 , 191 – 195 . Camus , A . , Perea - Gomez , A . , Moreau , A . , andCollignon , J . ( 2006 ) . Absenceof Nodal signaling promotes precocious neural differentiation in the mouse embryo . Dev . Biol . 295 , 743 – 755 . Chan , K . K . , Zhang , J . , Chia , N . Y . , Chan , Y . S . , Sim , H . S . , Tan , K . S . , Oh , S . K . , Ng , H . H . , and Choo , A . B . ( 2009 ) . KLF4 and PBX1 directly regulate NANOG expression in human embryonic stem cells . Stem Cells 27 , 2114 – 2125 . Chen , X . , Xu , H . , Yuan , P . , Fang , F . , Huss , M . , Vega , V . B . , Wong , E . , Orlov , Y . L . , Zhang , W . , Jiang , J . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Integration of external signaling pathways with the core transcriptional network in embryonic stem cells . Cell 133 , 1106 – 1117 . Cowan , C . A . , Klimanskaya , I . , McMahon , J . , Atienza , J . , Witmyer , J . , Zucker , J . P . , Wang , S . , Morton , C . C . , McMahon , A . P . , Powers , D . , and Melton , D . A . ( 2004 ) . Derivation of embryonic stem - cell lines from human blastocysts . N . Engl . J . Med . 350 , 1353 – 1356 . Dahe ´ ron , L . , Opitz , S . L . , Zaehres , H . , Lensch , M . W . , Lensch , W . M . , Andrews , P . W . , Itskovitz - Eldor , J . , and Daley , G . Q . ( 2004 ) . LIF / STAT3 signaling fails to maintainself - renewalofhumanembryonicstemcells . StemCells 22 , 770 – 778 . Darr , H . , Mayshar , Y . , and Benvenisty , N . ( 2006 ) . OverexpressionofNANOG in human ES cells enables feeder - free growth while inducing primitive ectoderm features . Development 133 , 1193 – 1201 . Dvorak , P . , Dvorakova , D . , Koskova , S . , Vodinska , M . , Najvirtova , M . , Krekac , D . , and Hampl , A . ( 2005 ) . Expression and potential role of ﬁbroblast growth factor 2 and its receptors in human embryonic stem cells . Stem Cells 23 , 1200 – 1211 . Eiselleova , L . , Matulka , K . , Kriz , V . , Kunova , M . , Schmidtova , Z . , Neradil , J . , Tichy , B . , Dvorakova , D . , Pospisilova , S . , Hampl , A . , and Dvorak , P . ( 2009 ) . A complex role for FGF - 2 in self - renewal , survival , and adhesion of human embryonic stem cells . Stem Cells 27 , 1847 – 1857 . Fong , H . , Hohenstein , K . A . , and Donovan , P . J . ( 2008 ) . Regulation of self - renewal and pluripotency by Sox2 in human embryonic stem cells . Stem Cells 26 , 1931 – 1938 . Furue , M . K . , Na , J . , Jackson , J . P . , Okamoto , T . , Jones , M . , Baker , D . , Hata , R . , Moore , H . D . , Sato , J . D . , and Andrews , P . W . ( 2008 ) . Heparin promotes the growth of human embryonic stem cells in a deﬁned serum - free medium . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 13409 – 13414 . Greber , B . , Lehrach , H . , and Adjaye , J . ( 2007 ) . Fibroblast growth factor 2 modulates transforming growth factor beta signaling in mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts and human ESCs ( hESCs ) to support hESC self - renewal . Stem Cells 25 , 455 – 464 . Greber , B . , Lehrach , H . , andAdjaye , J . ( 2008 ) . Controlofearlyfatedecisionsin humanEScellsbydistinctstatesofTGFbetapathwayactivity . StemCellsDev . 17 , 1065 – 1077 . Guo , G . , Yang , J . , Nichols , J . , Hall , J . S . , Eyres , I . , Mansﬁeld , W . , and Smith , A . ( 2009 ) . Klf4 reverts developmentally programmed restriction of ground state pluripotency . Development 136 , 1063 – 1069 . Hall , J . , Guo , G . , Wray , J . , Eyres , I . , Nichols , J . , Grotewold , L . , Morfopoulou , S . , Humphreys , P . , Mansﬁeld , W . , Walker , R . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Oct4 and LIF / Stat3 additively induce Kru¨ppel factors to sustain embryonic stem cell self - renewal . Cell Stem Cell 5 , 597 – 609 . Hanna , J . , Markoulaki , S . , Mitalipova , M . , Cheng , A . W . , Cassady , J . P . , Staerk , J . , Carey , B . W . , Lengner , C . J . , Foreman , R . , Love , J . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Metastable pluripotent states in NOD - mouse - derived ESCs . Cell Stem Cell 4 , 513 – 524 . Hay , D . C . , Sutherland , L . , Clark , J . , and Burdon , T . ( 2004 ) . Oct - 4 knockdown induces similar patterns of endoderm and trophoblast differentiation markers in human and mouse embryonic stem cells . Stem Cells 22 , 225 – 235 . Ivanova , N . , Dobrin , R . , Lu , R . , Kotenko , I . , Levorse , J . , DeCoste , C . , Schafer , X . , Lun , Y . , and Lemischka , I . R . ( 2006 ) . Dissecting self - renewal in stem cells with RNA interference . Nature 442 , 533 – 538 . James , D . , Levine , A . J . , Besser , D . , and Hemmati - Brivanlou , A . ( 2005 ) . TGFbeta / activin / nodal signaling is necessary for the maintenance of pluripo - tency in human embryonic stem cells . Development 132 , 1273 – 1282 . Jiang , J . , Chan , Y . S . , Loh , Y . H . , Cai , J . , Tong , G . Q . , Lim , C . A . , Robson , P . , Zhong , S . , and Ng , H . H . ( 2008 ) . A core Klf circuitry regulates self - renewal of embryonic stem cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 , 353 – 360 . Kim , J . , Chu , J . , Shen , X . , Wang , J . , and Orkin , S . H . ( 2008 ) . An extended transcriptional network for pluripotency of embryonic stem cells . Cell 132 , 1049 – 1061 . Kunath , T . , Saba - El - Leil , M . K . , Almousailleakh , M . , Wray , J . , Meloche , S . , and Smith , A . ( 2007 ) . FGF stimulation of the Erk1 / 2 signalling cascade triggers transition of pluripotent embryonic stem cells from self - renewal to lineage commitment . Development 134 , 2895 – 2902 . Larsen , W . J . ( 2001 ) . Human Embryology , Third Edition ( Philadelphia : Churchill Livingstone ) . Lee , T . I . , Johnstone , S . E . , and Young , R . A . ( 2006 ) . Chromatin immunoprecip - itation and microarray - based analysis of protein location . Nat . Protoc . 1 , 729 – 748 . Levenstein , M . E . , Ludwig , T . E . , Xu , R . H . , Llanas , R . A . , VanDenHeuvel - Kramer , K . , Manning , D . , and Thomson , J . A . ( 2006 ) . Basic ﬁbroblast growth factor support of human embryonic stem cell self - renewal . Stem Cells 24 , 568 – 574 . Cell Stem Cell Roles of SMAD2 / 3 and FGF Signaling in EpiSCs Cell Stem Cell 6 , 215 – 226 , March 5 , 2010 ª 2010 Elsevier Inc . 225 Li , J . , Wang , G . , Wang , C . , Zhao , Y . , Zhang , H . , Tan , Z . , Song , Z . , Ding , M . , and Deng , H . ( 2007 ) . MEK / ERK signaling contributes to the maintenance of human embryonic stem cell self - renewal . Differentiation 75 , 299 – 307 . Ludwig , T . E . , Levenstein , M . E . , Jones , J . M . , Berggren , W . T . , Mitchen , E . R . , Frane , J . L . , Crandall , L . J . , Daigh , C . A . , Conard , K . R . , Piekarczyk , M . S . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Derivation of human embryonic stem cells in deﬁned conditions . Nat . Biotechnol . 24 , 185 – 187 . Murry , C . E . , and Keller , G . ( 2008 ) . Differentiation of embryonic stem cells to clinically relevant populations : Lessons from embryonic development . Cell 132 , 661 – 680 . Nagy , A . , Gertsenstein , M . , Vintersten , K . , and Behringer , R . ( 2003 ) . Manipulating the Mouse Embryo : A Laboratory Manual , Third Edition ( Cold Spring Harbor , NY : Cold Spring Harbor Press ) . Nakagawa , M . , Koyanagi , M . , Tanabe , K . , Takahashi , K . , Ichisaka , T . , Aoi , T . , Okita , K . , Mochiduki , Y . , Takizawa , N . , and Yamanaka , S . ( 2008 ) . Generation of induced pluripotent stem cells without Myc from mouse and human ﬁbro - blasts . Nat . Biotechnol . 26 , 101 – 106 . Niwa , H . , Ogawa , K . , Shimosato , D . , and Adachi , K . ( 2009 ) . A parallel circuit of LIF signalling pathways maintains pluripotencyof mouse ES cells . Nature 460 , 118 – 122 . Pelton , T . A . , Sharma , S . , Schulz , T . C . , Rathjen , J . , and Rathjen , P . D . ( 2002 ) . Transient pluripotent cell populations during primitive ectoderm formation : Correlation of in vivo and in vitro pluripotent cell development . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 329 – 339 . Sato , N . , Meijer , L . , Skaltsounis , L . , Greengard , P . , and Brivanlou , A . H . ( 2004 ) . Maintenance of pluripotency in human and mouse embryonic stem cells through activation of Wnt signaling by a pharmacological GSK - 3 - speciﬁc inhibitor . Nat . Med . 10 , 55 – 63 . Smith , J . R . , Vallier , L . , Lupo , G . , Alexander , M . , Harris , W . A . , and Pedersen , R . A . ( 2008 ) . Inhibition of Activin / Nodal signaling promotes speciﬁcation of human embryonic stem cells into neuroectoderm . Dev . Biol . 313 , 107 – 117 . Sumi , T . , Tsuneyoshi , N . , Nakatsuji , N . , and Suemori , H . ( 2008 ) . Deﬁning early lineage speciﬁcation of human embryonic stem cells by the orchestrated balance of canonical Wnt / beta - catenin , Activin / Nodal and BMP signaling . Development 135 , 2969 – 2979 . Takahashi , K . , and Yamanaka , S . ( 2006 ) . Induction of pluripotent stem cells from mouse embryonic and adult ﬁbroblast cultures by deﬁned factors . Cell 126 , 663 – 676 . Tesar , P . J . , Chenoweth , J . G . , Brook , F . A . , Davies , T . J . , Evans , E . P . , Mack , D . L . , Gardner , R . L . , and McKay , R . D . ( 2007 ) . New cell lines from mouse epiblast share deﬁning features with human embryonic stem cells . Nature 448 , 196 – 199 . Thomson , J . A . , Itskovitz - Eldor , J . , Shapiro , S . S . , Waknitz , M . A . , Swiergiel , J . J . , Marshall , V . S . , and Jones , J . M . ( 1998 ) . Embryonic stem cell lines derived from human blastocysts . Science 282 , 1145 – 1147 . Vallier , L . , Alexander , M . , and Pedersen , R . A . ( 2005 ) . Activin / Nodal and FGF pathways cooperate to maintain pluripotency of human embryonic stem cells . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 4495 – 4509 . Vallier , L . , Mendjan , S . , Brown , S . , Chng , Z . , Teo , A . , Smithers , L . E . , Trotter , M . W . , Cho , C . H . , Martinez , A . , Rugg - Gunn , P . , et al . ( 2009a ) . Activin / Nodal signalling maintains pluripotency by controlling Nanog expression . Develop - ment 136 , 1339 – 1349 . Vallier , L . , Touboul , T . , Chng , Z . , Brimpari , M . , Hannan , N . , Millan , E . , Smithers , L . E . , Trotter , M . , Rugg - Gunn , P . , Weber , A . , and Pedersen , R . A . ( 2009b ) . Early cell fate decisions of human embryonic stem cells and mouse epiblast stem cells are controlled by the same signalling pathways . PLoS ONE 4 , e6082 . Wang , X . , Lin , G . , Martins - Taylor , K . , Zeng , H . , and Xu , R . H . ( 2009 ) . Inhibition of caspase - mediated anoikis is critical for basic ﬁbroblast growth factor - sustained culture of human pluripotent stem cells . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 34054 – 34064 . Watanabe , K . , Ueno , M . , Kamiya , D . , Nishiyama , A . , Matsumura , M . , Wataya , T . , Takahashi , J . B . , Nishikawa , S . , Nishikawa , S . , Muguruma , K . , and Sasai , Y . ( 2007 ) . A ROCK inhibitor permits survival of dissociated human embryonic stem cells . Nat . Biotechnol . 25 , 681 – 686 . Xu , C . , Inokuma , M . S . , Denham , J . , Golds , K . , Kundu , P . , Gold , J . D . , and Carpenter , M . K . ( 2001 ) . Feeder - free growth of undifferentiated human embry - onic stem cells . Nat . Biotechnol . 19 , 971 – 974 . Xu , C . , Rosler , E . , Jiang , J . , Lebkowski , J . S . , Gold , J . D . , O’Sullivan , C . , Delavan - Boorsma , K . , Mok , M . , Bronstein , A . , and Carpenter , M . K . ( 2005 ) . Basic ﬁbroblast growth factor supports undifferentiated human embryonic stem cell growth without conditioned medium . Stem Cells 23 , 315 – 323 . Xu , R . H . , Sampsell - Barron , T . L . , Gu , F . , Root , S . , Peck , R . M . , Pan , G . , Yu , J . , Antosiewicz - Bourget , J . , Tian , S . , Stewart , R . , and Thomson , J . A . ( 2008 ) . NANOG is a direct target of TGFbeta / activin - mediated SMAD signaling in human ESCs . Cell Stem Cell 3 , 196 – 206 . Yao , S . , Chen , S . , Clark , J . , Hao , E . , Beattie , G . M . , Hayek , A . , and Ding , S . ( 2006 ) . Long - term self - renewal and directed differentiation of human embry - onic stem cells in chemically deﬁned conditions . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 6907 – 6912 . Yeom , Y . I . , Fuhrmann , G . , Ovitt , C . E . , Brehm , A . , Ohbo , K . , Gross , M . , Hu¨bner , K . , and Scho¨ler , H . R . ( 1996 ) . Germline regulatory element of Oct - 4 speciﬁc for the totipotent cycle of embryonal cells . Development 122 , 881 – 894 . Ying , Q . L . , Stavridis , M . , Grifﬁths , D . , Li , M . , and Smith , A . ( 2003 ) . Conversion of embryonic stem cells into neuroectodermal precursors in adherent mono - culture . Nat . Biotechnol . 21 , 183 – 186 . Ying , Q . L . , Wray , J . , Nichols , J . , Batlle - Morera , L . , Doble , B . , Woodgett , J . , Cohen , P . , and Smith , A . ( 2008 ) . The ground state of embryonic stem cell self - renewal . Nature 453 , 519 – 523 . Yoshimizu , T . , Sugiyama , N . , De Felice , M . , Yeom , Y . I . , Ohbo , K . , Masuko , K . , Obinata , M . , Abe , K . , Scho ¨ler , H . R . , and Matsui , Y . ( 1999 ) . Germline - speciﬁc expression of the Oct - 4 / green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) transgene in mice . Dev . Growth Differ . 41 , 675 – 684 . Zaehres , H . , Lensch , M . W . , Daheron , L . , Stewart , S . A . , Itskovitz - Eldor , J . , and Daley , G . Q . ( 2005 ) . High - efﬁciency RNA interference in human embryonic stem cells . Stem Cells 23 , 299 – 305 . Cell Stem Cell Roles of SMAD2 / 3 and FGF Signaling in EpiSCs 226 Cell Stem Cell 6 , 215 – 226 , March 5 , 2010 ª 2010 Elsevier Inc .