This article was downloaded by : [ CDL Journals Account ] [ CDL Journals Account ] On : 26 March 2007 Access Details : [ subscription number 770849126 ] Publisher : Psychology Press Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number : 1072954 Registered office : Mortimer House , 37 - 41 Mortimer Street , London W1T 3JH , UK Thinking & Reasoning Publication details , including instructions for authors and subscription information : http : / / www . informaworld . com / smpp / title ~ content = t713685607 The impact of anxiety on analogical reasoning Jean M . Tohill ; Keith J . Holyoak To cite this Article : Jean M . Tohill and Keith J . Holyoak , ' The impact of anxiety on analogical reasoning ' , Thinking & Reasoning , 6 : 1 , 27 - 40 xxxx : journal To link to this article : DOI : 10 . 1080 / 135467800393911 URL : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 135467800393911 Full terms and conditions of use : http : / / www . informaworld . com / terms - and - conditions - of - access . pdf This article maybe used for research , teaching and private study purposes . Any substantial or systematic reproduction , re - distribution , re - selling , loan or sub - licensing , systematic supply or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden . The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents will be complete or accurate or up to date . The accuracy of any instructions , formulae and drug doses should be independently verified with primary sources . The publisher shall not be liable for any loss , actions , claims , proceedings , demand or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material . © Taylor and Francis 2007 D o w n l oaded B y : [ CD L J ou r na l s A cc oun t ] A t : 00 : 53 26 M a r c h 2007 ANXIETY AND ANALOGY 27 © 2000 Psychology Press Ltd http : / / www . tandf . co . uk / journals / pp / 13546783 . html THINKING AND REASONING , 2000 , 6 ( 1 ) , 27 – 40 The impact of anxiety on analogical reasoning Jean M . Tohill and Keith J . Holyoak University of California , Los Angeles , USA The effect of state anxiety on analogical reasoning was investigated by examining qualitative differences in mapping performance between anxious and non - anxious individuals reasoning about pictorial analogies . The working - memory restriction theory of anxiety , coupled with theories of analogy that link complexity of mapping with working - memory capacity , predicts that high anxiety will impair the ability to find correspondences based on relations between multiple objects relative to correspondences based on overlap of attributes between individual objects . Anxiety was induced in one condition by a stressful speeded subtraction task administered prior to the analogy task . Anxious participants produced fewer relational responses and more attribute responses than did non - anxious participants , both in the absence of explicit instructions to find relational mappings ( Experiment 1 ) and after receiving such instructions ( Experiment 2 ) . The findings support the postulated links among anxiety , working memory , and the ability to perform complex analogical mapping . A major cognitive mechanism for understanding new situations is analogical reasoning—the process of finding systematic correspondences between a novel target situation and a more familiar source situation , and then using knowledge of the source to derive inferences about the target . Analogical reasoning has an extraordinary range of uses , which include generation and comprehension of metaphors , scientific discovery , and decision making in politics , business , the law , and everyday social situations ( for reviews see Gentner & Markman , 1997 ; Holyoak & Thagard , 1995 , 1997 ) . It is therefore important to investigate factors that may influence the quality of people’s analogical reasoning in ways that may have implications for other cognitive processes . Address correspondence to Keith J . Holyoak , Dept . of Psychology , Franz Hall , UCLA , Los Angeles , CA 90095 - 1563 , USA . Email : holyoak @ lifesci . ucla . edu Preparation of this paper was supported by NSF Grant SBR - 9729023 . We thank Albert Lau for assistance in programming , Mirek Pilch for assistance in running the experiments , and Pieter Lessing for aid in computer graphics . Art Markman generously provided us with electronic versions of the pictures used by Markman and Gentner ( 1993 ) . We are grateful to Cindy Yee - Bradbury for advice on experimental manipulation of anxiety and for comments on an earlier draft . Experiment 1 was reported at the Twenty - first Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( Vancouver , August 1999 ) . D o w n l oaded B y : [ CD L J ou r na l s A cc oun t ] A t : 00 : 53 26 M a r c h 2007 28 TOHILL AND HOLYOAK One prominent factor that might influence everyday analogical reasoning is anxiety . Anxiety has been conceptualised both as a trait ( relatively stable individual differences in proneness to anxiety ) and a state ( a transitory emotional condition that can be induced in almost anyone given an appropriate trigger ) ( Spielberger , Gorsuch , & Lushene , 1970 ) . Trait and state anxiety are generally highly intercorrelated , and it has been argued that the level of state anxiety is the more direct determinant of task performance ( Eysenck & Calvo , 1992 ) ; accordingly , the present focus will be on anxiety as a state triggered by situational factors . One general type of situation that will typically engender anxiety is encountering a situation that is novel , poorly understood , and problematic . This , of course , is exactly the sort of situation in which analogical reasoning may be useful . The implication is that everyday analogical reasoning may typically be performed when the reasoner is in an anxious state , making the impact of anxiety on analogical reasoning an issue with both theoretical and applied implications . Anxiety has been linked to performance decrements in a wide variety of cognitive tasks ( MacLeod & Donnellan , 1993 ) , ranging from relatively simple free recall tests ( Hodges & Spielberger , 1969 ; Mueller , 1977 ) to complex cognitive processes such as strategic planning and decision making ( Mayer , 1977 ; Nichols - Hoppe & Beach , 1990 ) . There is some evidence that anxiety is associated with reduced accuracy in solving geometric ( Leon & Revelle , 1985 ) and verbal ( Keinan , 1987 ; Klein & Barnes , 1994 ) analogy tasks . However , methodological limitations render the findings in many of these studies inconclusive . For example , Leon and Revelle ( 1985 ) manipulated state anxiety by comparing conditions that required people to solve analogy problems with or without speed pressure . Not surprisingly , the differences between the two groups were clouded by speed – accuracy tradeoffs . Within the unspeeded condition , accuracy was lower for people who were more anxious as measured by the State - Trait Anxiety Inventory ( STAI ; Spielberger et al . , 1970 ) . However , this correlational link has no clear causal interpretation ( e . g . , people with lower analogy ability may have reported being more anxious during the task ) . Similarly , the study of Klein and Barnes ( 1994 ) involved only correlational analyses , and that of Keinan ( 1987 ) manipulated anxiety by changing the nature of the task ( introducing a threat of electric shock during the analogy task for some participants ) . To avoid such methodological problems , in the present study we manipulated state anxiety experimentally , rather than using correlational analyses ; and the manipulation of anxiety occurred prior to ( rather than during ) the analogy task , so that the nature of the target task itself was not confounded with anxiety level . In addition , we sought to go beyond demonstrations that anxiety reduces accuracy by examining qualitative shifts in participants‘ solutions to problems D o w n l oaded B y : [ CD L J ou r na l s A cc oun t ] A t : 00 : 53 26 M a r c h 2007 ANXIETY AND ANALOGY 29 requiring analogical mapping . Many theorists have argued that analogical mapping—the process of finding systematic correspondences between the source and target situation—can be based on information at different levels of structural complexity ( Gentner , 1983 ; Halford , 1993 ; Halford , Wilson , & Phillips , 1998 ; Holyoak & Thagard , 1995 ) . Gentner ( 1983 ) distinguished between mappings based on attributes of individual objects ( attribute mapping ) , mappings based on relations between objects ( relational mapping ) , and mappings based on higher - order relations between relations ( higher - order relational mapping ) . In some situations mappings at different levels of complexity may yield different responses . For example , Markman and Gentner ( 1993 ) showed college students pairs of pictures , such as ( 1 ) a man bringing groceries from a truck and giving them to a woman , who is thanking him , and ( 2 ) a different woman taking food from a bowl and giving it to a squirrel . Participants were asked to indicate which object in picture ( 2 ) corresponded to the woman in picture ( 1 ) . Based on attribute mapping , the woman in picture ( 1 ) would map to the woman in picture ( 2 ) ; but based on relations , the woman in picture ( 1 ) would map to the squirrel in picture ( 2 ) because each is the recipient of food . Markman and Gentner found that different participants gave different responses to such “cross - mapped” objects , some giving the attribute - based response and some giving the relation - based response . Manipulations that encouraged participants to build an integrated representation of the relations among the objects and of higher - order relations between relations increased the proportion of relational responses . For example , if participants were asked to match not just one object in the first picture ( the woman ) , but three ( the woman , man , and groceries ) to objects in the second picture , they were more likely to map the woman to the squirrel on the basis of their similar relational roles than were participants who mapped the woman alone . Active mapping of multiple objects seems to encourage people to process relations , which in turn changes the apparent correspondences between individual objects ( see also Gentner & Toupin , 1986 ; Medin , Goldstone , & Gentner , 1993 ) . As Halford ( 1993 ) has emphasised , relational processing imposes a heavier burden on working - memory capacity than does attribute processing ( see Baddeley , 1986 , 1992 , for a discussion of the components of human working memory ) . For example , mapping the woman in the first picture to the woman in the second picture can be done by focusing on only one object in each picture ; whereas mapping the woman to the squirrel requires representing multiple objects and relations in each picture in order to recognise the correspondences between the objects filling matching roles in a system of relations . Some computational models of analogical mapping , such as the STAR model of Halford et al . ( 1994 ) and the LISA model of Hummel and Holyoak ( 1997 ) , postulate inherent limitations on the complexity of possible mappings due to D o w n l oaded B y : [ CD L J ou r na l s A cc oun t ] A t : 00 : 53 26 M a r c h 2007 30 TOHILL AND HOLYOAK working - memory limits . Such models lead to the general prediction that any manipulation that reduces available working - memory capacity will make it more difficult for reasoners to compute relational mappings , and hence increase the proportion of less - complex attribute mappings in situations in which the mapping is ambiguous . A major factor that may restrict the working - memory capacity available for analogical mapping is state anxiety . A long - standing model of the cognitive impact of anxiety is Eysenck’s ( 1979 , 1985 ; Eysenck & Calvo , 1992 ) working - memory restriction theory . According to this theory , the cognitive component of anxiety involves self - preoccupation and concern over performance , which pre - empt part of the processing and storage resources of the working - memory system . Similarly , Selbert and Ellis ( 1991 ) have shown that people in either negative or positive moods frequently report irrelevant thoughts , which may interfere with reasoning ( Oaksford , Morris , Grainger , & Williams , 1996 ) . In Baddeley’s ( 1992 ) model of working memory , the system consists of three major components : a modality - free central executive that acts as an attentional controller and is used to integrate information and control action ; an articulatory loop used for the transient storage of phonological information ; and a visuospatial sketch pad for transient storage of spatial information . In Eysenck’s theory , the cognitive component of state anxiety impacts the executive controller and to a lesser degree the articulatory loop . Processes that require these working - memory resources will be impaired when anxiety causes the available system capacity to be exceeded , whereas automatic , low - level processes will be relatively unaffected by anxiety . ( See Eysenck & Calvo , 1992 , for a review of studies that support the working - memory restriction theory of anxiety over alternative accounts . ) When Eysenck’s ( 1979 ) working - memory restriction theory of anxiety is coupled with theories of analogy that specify links between working - memory capacity and the complexity of analogical mappings ( Halford et al . , 1994 ; Hummel & Holyoak , 1997 ) , a clear prediction follows : when mappings are inherently ambiguous ( objects are cross - mapped ) , an increase in state anxiety will yield a decrease in relational mappings and a concomitant increase in attribute mappings . The experiments reported here were designed to test this prediction . EXPERIMENT 1 Method Participants . The participants were 22 students ( 14 female and 8 male ) enrolled in an introductory psychology course at the University of California , Los Angeles ( UCLA ) . Students received partial course credit for participating in the experiment . The participants were randomly assigned in equal numbers to the D o w n l oaded B y : [ CD L J ou r na l s A cc oun t ] A t : 00 : 53 26 M a r c h 2007 ANXIETY AND ANALOGY 31 two experimental conditions while maintaining an equal ratio of female to male participants between the two groups . Materials . The stimuli were ten pairs of analogical pictures , eight pairs of which were used in experiments by Markman and Gentner ( 1993 ) . The other two pairs ( one of which is the example shown in Figure 1 ) were created by the first author using a computer graphics program . All of the pictures were black and white line drawings . The stimuli were presented using SuperLab computer software running on a Macintosh PowerPC computer with a 15 - inch Apple monitor . These analogical pictures are such that for a key object ( e . g . , the man in the top picture of Figure 1 ) , attribute mapping based on physical characteristics of individual objects would yield one response ( the man in the bottom picture ) , whereas relational mapping based on roles linking multiple objects would yield Figure 1 . Analogical picture - pair with cross - mapping : man in top picture may be mapped to bottom picture as the man ( attribute mapping ) or the tree ( relational mapping ) . D o w n l oaded B y : [ CD L J ou r na l s A cc oun t ] A t : 00 : 53 26 M a r c h 2007 32 TOHILL AND HOLYOAK an alternative response ( the tree , as it also plays the role of something a dog is breaking away from ) . Design and procedure . Participants were tested individually . They were assigned randomly to one of two conditions , the Anxious and Non - anxious groups . For participants in the Anxious condition , anxiety was induced by the introduction of a stressful task at the beginning of the experimental session . Specifically , their first task was to perform a serial subtraction task aloud . The participant was instructed to count aloud backwards , beginning at 1000 in increments of 13 . One experimenter corrected any mistakes , while a second experimenter indicated to the participant at a predetermined time that their counting speed was too slow . The participant was instructed to stop when 45 seconds had elapsed . The experimenter then informed the participant that they would be asked to repeat the counting task at the end of the experiment . This serial subtraction task has been used successfully to induce anxiety in previous studies ( Sgoutas - Emch et al . , 1994 ; White & Yee , 1997 ) . In the Non - anxious condition , the participant was asked to count aloud ( forward ) beginning at 1 for 45 seconds . Participants were told that they were not being evaluated in any way and to count at a pace that felt relaxed for them . For the remainder of the experiment , the procedure was identical for both groups . Each participant was told that they would be shown a pair of pictures on the computer screen , and that after having time to examine the pictures , the experimenter would then point to one of the objects in the top picture , at which time they were to state ( and point to ) the object in the bottom picture that “it goes with” . Participants were told that it was entirely up to them to interpret the pictures . Each pair of pictures appeared for a fixed duration before the participant was queried for their response . Specifically , the picture - pair was programmed to appear for 15 seconds , after which the screen flashed , at which point the experimenter pointed to the pre - determined cross - mapped object in the top picture . This procedure was used to avoid participants giving premature re - sponses while allowing ample time to process the pictures relationally . If more than approximately 4 seconds elapsed before the participant responded , the experimenter prompted the participant for an immediate answer . After the participant indicated the object of their choice , the experimenter recorded the response on an answer sheet . The procedure was repeated for each of the ten picture analogies . After the analogical reasoning task , participants completed the state form of the STAI ( Spielberger et al . , 1970 ) , and then were debriefed . Results and discussion Mean STAI and mapping scores ( percentage of relational mappings ) for the Anxious and Non - anxious conditions of Experiment 1 are reported in Table 1 . D o w n l oaded B y : [ CD L J ou r na l s A cc oun t ] A t : 00 : 53 26 M a r c h 2007 ANXIETY AND ANALOGY 33 The anxiety manipulation was successful , as the mean STAI state - anxiety rating for the Anxious group was significantly higher than that for the Non - anxious group , F ( 1 , 20 ) = 8 . 90 , MSE = 65 . 21 , p = . 008 ( means of 43 . 0 and 32 . 7 , respectively ; maximum = 80 ) . As predicted by the hypothesis that anxiety will restrict working memory , which is required for relational mappings , participants in the Anxious condition produced a significantly lower percentage of relational mappings than did those in the Non - anxious condition , F ( 1 , 20 ) = 5 . 78 , MSE = 4 . 92 , p = . 026 ( means of 45 % and 68 % , respectively ) . In both conditions , the remaining responses were primarily attribute mappings ( 51 % and 24 % , respectively , for the Anxious and Non - anxious conditions ) ; only about 8 % of responses in each condition were neither the relational nor the attribute mapping . Thus the impact of anxiety was not to produce random errors , but rather to systematically shift the dominant basis for mapping from the more complex relational level to the simpler attribute level . EXPERIMENT 2 The results of Experiment 1 support the hypothesis that anxiety will cause reasoners to shift the basis of analogical mapping from the relational to the attribute level . Although this result can be explained by Eysenck’s ( 1979 ) theory of anxiety - induced working - memory restriction , an alternative possibility is that for some reason anxiety triggered a shift in preference towards processing of local characteristics of the pictures . That is , anxious participants may not have suffered an actual reduction in working - memory capacity , and may have been able to find relational mappings , but nonetheless may have chosen to produce attribute mappings instead . As the experimenter did not specify any criterion for selecting a “best” answer , participants were free to follow any preferences they might have had . To test this possibility , Experiment 2 replicated the design and procedure of Experiment 1 with the addition of specific instructions to choose the relational TABLE 1 Mean STAI scores and percentage of relational mappings in Experiment 1 Condition STAI a Percent Relational Mappings Anxious 43 . 0 45 . 4 ( 8 . 1 ) ( 23 . 4 ) Non - anxious 32 . 7 68 . 2 ( 8 . 1 ) ( 20 . 9 ) Values enclosed in parentheses represent standard deviations . a State score of the Spielberger State Trait Anxiety Inventory ( Spielberger et al . , 1970 ) . D o w n l oaded B y : [ CD L J ou r na l s A cc oun t ] A t : 00 : 53 26 M a r c h 2007 34 TOHILL AND HOLYOAK match . Unlike Experiment 1 , the procedure in Experiment 2 defined a “correct” answer to participants . If the decrease in relational responses observed in the Anxious condition of Experiment 1 was simply a preference , then the effect of anxiety on relational mapping should be eliminated in Experiment 2 . On the other hand , if the effect was indeed due to a restriction in working memory , then even specific instructions to produce relational responses should not eliminate the negative impact of anxiety . It is possible , however , that the impact of anxiety may be attenuated , without being eliminated . According to Eysenck and Calvo’s ( 1992 ) processing - efficiency theory , anxiety may lead both to restriction of working memory and to initiation of processing strategies intended to improve task performance . It follows that if anxious participants are given a clear goal to generate relational mappings , they may focus their attention in a way that improves their ability to find such mappings . Nonetheless , their continued working - memory restriction would limit their ability to perform relational mapping relative to non - anxious participants . Method Participants . The participants were 22 students ( 12 female and 10 male ) enrolled in an introductory psychology course at UCLA . Students received partial course credit for participating in the experiment . The participants were randomly assigned to the two treatment conditions . Materials . The stimuli and computer presentation from Experiment 1 were again used . In addition , the first author created an additional analogical picture pair ( see Figure 2 ) for the purpose of instructing participants to use relational mapping . Design and procedure . The design was identical to that of Experiment 1 , as was the manipulation to induce differential anxiety in the two groups of participants . The mapping task was modified by first presenting participants with instructions to select relational responses . As in Experiment 1 , participants were told that they would be shown a pair of pictures on the computer screen , and that after having time to examine them , the experimenter would then point to one of the objects in the top picture , at which time they were to point to the object in the bottom picture that “it goes with” . The experimenter then explained what was meant by “what object another object goes with” . Using Figure 2 as an example , the experimenter explained that the two robots that are using the weapons “go with each other” , because they are playing similar roles . Participants in the Non - anxious group were then given additional instructions that were not communicated to the Anxious group . Specifically , participants in the Non - anxious group were told that they were not being tested in any way , and that the reason they were being asked to participate in the pictorial reasoning task D o w n l oaded B y : [ CD L J ou r na l s A cc oun t ] A t : 00 : 53 26 M a r c h 2007 ANXIETY AND ANALOGY 35 was because “…we are considering using these pictures in a series of experiments , and we want to determine if the pictures are adequate . ” These instructions were added for the Non - anxious group after analysing the results of a pilot study , which indicated that the anxiety level of participants in the Non - anxious group was elevated in relation to the comparable group in Experiment 1 . The elevated anxiety was presumably due to the fact that in Experiment 2 participants were made aware that there is actually a “right answer” in the pictorial reasoning task , which in turn appeared to evoke test anxiety for many participants . The revised instructions were an attempt to mitigate the anxiety of participants in the Non - anxious group . The remainder of the procedure was identical to that used in Experiment 1 . In addition to recording the mappings given by the participant , the time from the onset of the prompt to the participants’ stated answer was recorded . This elapsed Figure 2 . Analogical picture - pair used in Experiment 2 to instruct participants to map relationally . D o w n l oaded B y : [ CD L J ou r na l s A cc oun t ] A t : 00 : 53 26 M a r c h 2007 36 TOHILL AND HOLYOAK time was electronically recorded by the computer program—specifically , time was recorded from the flashing of the screen ( which initiated the query prompt from the experimenter ) to the pressing of the space bar which occurred im - mediately upon a participant’s response . Thus , response time in this context includes the experimenter’s prompt . Results and discussion Mean STAI scores and percentage of relational mappings for the Anxious and Non - anxious conditions of Experiment 2 are reported in Table 2 . As in Experiment 1 , the anxiety manipulation was successful , with the STAI state - anxiety rating for the Anxious group being significantly higher than that for the Non - anxious group , F ( 1 , 20 ) = 5 . 71 , MSE = 82 . 85 , p = . 03 ( means of 42 . 6 and 33 . 4 , respectively ) . These scores are very similar to those of the comparable two groups in Experiment 1 , indicating that the instructions meant to mitigate test anxiety for participants in the Non - anxious condition of Experiment 2 achieved their intended effect . Despite the explicit instructions to find relational matches , the anxiety manipulation continued to have an impact on the likelihood of generating relational rather than attribute mappings . Participants in the Anxious condition gave significantly fewer relational mappings than did those in the Non - anxious condition , F ( 1 , 20 ) = 5 . 09 , MSE = 1 . 51 , p = . 04 ( means of 72 % and 84 % , respectively ) . The difference in relational mapping between the two anxiety groups was less in Experiment 2 than in Experiment 1 ( 12 % versus 23 % , respectively ) , and the overall rate of relational responses was higher for both groups in Experiment 2 than Experiment 1 , suggesting that direct instructions to provide relational mappings did increase the frequency of such responses . However , the fact that anxiety continued to have a negative impact on relational mapping even in the face of instructions to find relational matches supports the TABLE 2 Mean STAI scores and percentage of relational mappings in Experiment 2 Condition STAI a Percent Relational Response Mappings Time b Anxious 42 . 6 71 . 8 4628 ( 10 . 6 ) ( 13 . 3 ) ( 883 ) Non - anxious 33 . 4 83 . 6 4934 ( 7 . 2 ) ( 11 . 2 ) ( 977 ) Values enclosed in parentheses represent standard deviations . a State score of the Spielberger State Trait Anxiety Inventory ( Spielberger et al . , 1970 ) . b Values are in milliseconds and represent time elapsed between the onset of the query for participants’ response and their stated answer . D o w n l oaded B y : [ CD L J ou r na l s A cc oun t ] A t : 00 : 53 26 M a r c h 2007 ANXIETY AND ANALOGY 37 hypothesis that anxiety restricts working memory , which is needed to perform relational mapping successfully . There was no significant difference in response times for answer generation between the Anxious and Non - anxious groups , F ( 1 , 20 ) = 0 . 59 , MSE = 866652 , p > . 40 . Thus the observed difference in the generation of relational mappings could not be attributed to differences in the amount of time participants in the two conditions took to generate a response . As in Experiment 1 , the non - relational responses in both groups were primarily attribute mappings ( 19 % and 10 % in the Anxious and Non - anxious conditions respectively ) , rather than other responses ( 9 % and 4 % , respectively ) . Thus once again “errors” in mapping were highly systematic , reflecting a shift from relation - based to attribute - based responses . GENERAL DISCUSSION The results of these two experiments support the hypothesised linkage of anxiety , working memory , and analogical mapping . In accord with Eysenck’s ( 1979 ) working - memory restriction theory of anxiety , coupled with computational models of analogical mapping that emphasise that more complex bases for mapping require more working - memory capacity ( Halford et al . , 1994 ; Hummel & Holyoak , 1997 ) , we found that increasing state anxiety led to a reduction in relational mappings and a concomitant increase in simpler attribute mappings . Our results do not allow for a direct analysis of which specific components of working memory are impaired , although the executive controller is a clear candidate given that integration of information is central to relational mapping . The negative impact of anxiety on relational mapping appears to reflect more than a preference operating in the absence of a clear response criterion , as a reliable effect of anxiety was obtained both in the absence of explicit instructions to find relational mappings ( Experiment 1 ) and after receiving such instructions ( Experiment 2 ) . The detrimental impact of anxiety appeared to be attenuated ( although not eliminated ) when a clear relational criterion for responding was specified , perhaps reflecting the use of strategies intended to improve goal attainment under conditions of high state anxiety ( Eysenck & Calvo , 1992 ) . The present study provides stronger evidence concerning the impact of anxiety on higher - cognitive processing than do most previous studies of this nature . State anxiety was manipulated experimentally , so that correlational analyses were avoided . Furthermore , the anxiety manipulation ( a serial subtraction task ) took place immediately before the critical picture - mapping task , rather than during it . The differences in mapping performance as a function of anxiety thus could not be attributed to variations in the nature of the target task itself . Moreover , our findings go beyond simply demonstrating that anxiety leads to a general increase in errors . In Experiment 1 there was no experimentally defined “correct” answer ; nonetheless , anxiety led to a systematic shift from relation - based to attribute - based responses . A similar shift was observed in Experiment 2 when participants D o w n l oaded B y : [ CD L J ou r na l s A cc oun t ] A t : 00 : 53 26 M a r c h 2007 38 TOHILL AND HOLYOAK were explicitly asked to find relational mappings . In both experiments , participants’ responses overwhelmingly consisted of those that would be generated by either relational or attribute mapping , rather than random errors . Thus the impact of anxiety was not to utterly block analogical reasoning , but to reduce the relative focus on relations between multiple objects relative to the attributes of individual objects ( Gentner , 1983 ; Gentner , Rattermann , Markman , & Kotovsky , 1995 ) . As we noted at the outset , the apparent negative impact of anxiety on relational mapping has important implications for everyday cognition . For example , there is considerable evidence that people often use analogies to understand social situations and make decisions in circumstances that are novel , poorly understood , complex , and problematic ( e . g . , Lockwood & Kunda , 1997 ; Read & Cesa , 1991 ; Spellman & Holyoak , 1992 ) . Such circumstances are also likely to provoke state anxiety . It follows that everyday analogical reasoning about social cognition will be prone to suffer from the negative effects of anxiety . In particular , reasoners may focus on common attributes shared by individuals or social groups , rather than common relations that involve multiple persons or groups playing different roles with respect to one another . It follows that techniques for reducing or coping with anxiety can potentially enable people to make deeper use of analogy , allowing them to process the implications of shared roles rather than focusing solely on more superficial similarities in the social environment . The hypothesis that the impact of anxiety on analogical reasoning is mediated by restriction of working memory serves to integrate the influence of anxiety with a wide range of other evidence indicating that relational processing is closely linked to working memory . Reducing working - memory capacity by imposing a concurrent processing load can affect both reaction time and accuracy in reasoning tasks ( Gilhooly , Logie , Wetherick , & Wynn , 1993 ; Toms , Morris , & Ward , 1993 ) . Using the same materials employed in the present study , Waltz , Lau , Grewal , and Holyoak ( in press ) have shown that a concurrent task ( e . g . , remembering a string of digits ) triggers a shift from relation - based to attribute - based responding , much as does an increase in anxiety . Recent work in neuropsychology and neuroimaging indicates that the working - memory system on which relational reasoning depends is subserved by neural circuitry in the prefrontal cortex . Waltz et al . ( 1999 ) have found that integration of multiple relations is profoundly impaired in patients with severe degeneration of prefrontal cortex , which includes brain areas that have been implicated in working memory ( Cohen et al . , 1997 ; Smith & Jonides , 1997 ) . Neuroimaging studies have found prefrontal activation during analogical mapping ( Wharton et al . , 1998 ) and similar forms of relational reasoning ( Prabhakaran et al . , 1997 ) . Manuscript received 23 March 1999 Revised manuscript received 17 December 1999 D o w n l oaded B y : [ CD L J ou r na l s A cc oun t ] A t : 00 : 53 26 M a r c h 2007 ANXIETY AND ANALOGY 39 REFERENCES Baddeley , A . D . ( 1986 ) . Working memory . Oxford : Clarendon Press . Baddeley , A . D . ( 1992 ) . Working memory . Science , 255 , 556 – 559 . Cohen , J . D . , Perlstein , W . M . , Braver , T . S . , Nystrom , L . E . , Noll , D . C . , Jonides , J . , & Smith , E . E . ( 1997 ) . Temporal dynamics of brain activation during a working memory task . Nature , 386 , 604 – 608 . Eysenck , M . W . ( 1979 ) . Anxiety , learning , and memory : A reconceptualization . Journal of Research in Personality , 13 , 363 – 385 . Eysenck , M . W . ( 1985 ) . Anxiety and cognitive - task performance . Personality and Individual Differences , 6 , 579 – 586 . Eysenck , M . W . , & Calvo M . G . ( 1992 ) . Anxiety and performance : The processing efficiency theory . Cognition and Emotion , 6 , 409 – 434 . Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) . Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework for analogy . Cognitive Science , 7 , 155 – 170 . Gentner , D . , & Markman , A . B . ( 1997 ) . Structure mapping in analogy and similarity . American Psychologist , 52 , 45 – 56 . Gentner , D . , Rattermann , M . J . , Markman , A . , & Kotovsky , L . ( 1995 ) . Two forces in the development of relational similarity . In T . J . Simon & G . S . Halford ( Eds . ) , Developing cognitive competence : New approaches to process modeling ( pp . 263 – 313 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc . Gentner , D . , & Toupin , C . ( 1986 ) . Systematicity and surface similarity in the development of analogy . Cognitive Science , 10 , 277 – 300 . Gilhooly , K . J . , Logie , R . H . , Wetherick , N . E . , & Wynn , V . ( 1993 ) . Working memory and strategies in syllogistic - reasoning tasks . Memory & Cognition , 21 , 115 – 124 . Halford , G . S . ( 1993 ) . Children’s understanding : The development of mental models . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc . Halford , G . S . , Wilson , W . H . , Guo , J . , Gayler , R . W . , Wiles , J . , & Stewart , J . E . M . ( 1994 ) . Connectionist implications for processing capacity limitations in analogies . In K . J . Holyoak & J . A . Barnden ( Eds . ) , Advances in connectionist and neural computation theory , Vol . 2 : Analogical connections ( pp . 363 – 415 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Halford , G . S . , Wilson , W . H . , & Phillips , S . ( 1998 ) . Processing capacity defined by relational complexity : Implications for comparative , developmental , and cognitive psychology . Brain and Behavioral Sciences , 21 , 803 – 864 . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . ( 1995 ) . Mental leaps : Analogy in creative thought . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . ( 1997 ) . The analogical mind . American Psychologist , 52 , 35 – 44 . Hummel , J . E . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1997 ) . Distributed representations of structure : A theory of analogical access and mapping . Psychological Review , 104 , 427 - 466 . Keinan , G . ( 1987 ) . Decision making under stress : Scanning of alternatives under controllable and uncontrollable threats . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 52 , 639 – 644 . Klein , K . , & Barnes , D . ( 1994 ) . The relationship of life stress to problem solving : Task complexity and individual differences . Social Cognition , 12 , 187 – 204 . Leon , M . R . , & Revelle , W . ( 1985 ) . Effects of anxiety on analogical reasoning : A test of three theoretical models . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 49 , 1302 – 1315 . Lockwood , P . , & Kunda , Z . ( 1997 ) . Superstars and me : Predicting the impact of role models on the self . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 73 , 91 – 103 . MacLeod , C . , & Donnellan , A . M . ( 1993 ) . Individual differences in anxiety and the restriction of working memory capacity . Personality and Individual Differences , 15 , 163 – 173 . Markman , A . B . , & Gentner , D . ( 1993 ) . Structural alignment during similarity comparisons . Cognitive Psychology , 23 , 431 – 467 . D o w n l oaded B y : [ CD L J ou r na l s A cc oun t ] A t : 00 : 53 26 M a r c h 2007 40 TOHILL AND HOLYOAK Mayer , R . E . ( 1977 ) . Problem - solving performance with task overload : Effects of self - pacing and trait anxiety . Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society , 9 , 283 – 286 . Medin , D . , Goldstone , R . , & Gentner , D . ( 1993 ) . Respects for similarity . Psychological Review , 100 , 254 – 278 . Mueller , J . H . ( 1977 ) . Test anxiety , input modality , and levels of organization in free recall . Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society , 9 , 67 – 69 . Nichols - Hoppe , K . T . , & Beach , L . R . ( 1990 ) . The effects of test anxiety and task variables on predecisional information search . Journal of Research in Personality , 2 , 163 – 172 . Oaksford , M . , Morris , F . , Grainger , B . , & Williams , J . M . G . ( 1996 ) . Mood , reasoning , and central executive processes . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 22 , 476 – 492 . Prabhakaran , V . , Smith , J . A . L . , Desmond , J . E . , Glover , G . , & Gabrieli , J . D . E . ( 1997 ) . Neural substrates of fluid reasoning : An fMRI study of neocortical activation during performance of the Raven’s Progressive Matrices Test . Cognitive Psychology , 33 , 43 – 63 . Read , S . J . , & Cesa , I . L . ( 1991 ) . This reminds me of the time when . . . : Expectation failures in reminding and explanation . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 27 , 1 – 25 . Seibert , P . S . , & Ellis , H . C . ( 1991 ) . Irrelevant thoughts , emotional mood states , and cognitive task performance . Memory & Cognition , 19 , 507 – 513 . Sgoutas - Emch , S . A . , Cacioppo , J . T . , Uchino , B . N . , Malarkey , W . , Pearl , D . , Kiecolt - Glaser , J . K . , & Glaser , R . ( 1994 ) . The effects of an acute psychological stressor on cardiovascular , endocrine , and cellular immune response : A prospective study of individuals high and low in heart rate reactivity . Psychophysiology , 31 , 264 – 271 . Smith , E . E . , & Jonides , J . ( 1997 ) . Working memory : A view from neuroimaging . Cognitive Psychology , 33 , 5 – 42 . Spellman , B . A . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1992 ) . If Saddam is Hitler then who is George Bush ? : Analogical mapping between systems of social roles . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 62 , 913 – 933 . Spielberger , C . D . , Gorsuch , R . L . , & Lushene , R . ( 1970 ) . STAI manual for the State - Trait Anxiety Inventory . Palo Alto , CA : Consulting Psychologists Press . Toms , M . , Morris , N . , & Ward , D . ( 1993 ) . Working memory and conditional reasoning . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 46 A , 469 – 699 . Waltz , J . A . , Knowlton , B . J . , Holyoak , K . J . , Boone , K . B . , Mishkin , F . S . , de Menezes Santos , M . , Thomas , C . R . , & Miller , B . L . ( 1999 ) . A system for relational reasoning in human prefrontal cortex . Psychological Science , 10 , 119 – 125 . Waltz , J . A . , Lau , A . , Grewal , S . K . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( in press ) . The role of working memory in analogical mapping . Memory & Cognition . Wharton , C . , Grafman , G . , Flitman , S . , Hansen , E . , Brauner , J . , Marks , A . , & Honda , M . ( 1998 ) . The neuroanatomy of analogical reasoning . In K . J . Holyoak , D . Gentner & B . Kokinov ( Eds . ) , Advances in analogy research : Integration of theory and data from the cognitive , computational , and neural sciences ( pp . 260 – 268 ) . Sofia , Bulgaria : New Bulgarian University . White , P . M . , & Yee , C . M . ( 1997 ) . Effects of attentional and stressor manipulations on the P50 gating response . Psychophysiology , 34 , 703 – 711 .